### Accession
PXD031420

### Title
Decoding the absolute stoichiometric composition and structural plasticity of α-carboxysomes

### Description
Carboxysomes are anabolic bacterial microcompartments that play an essential role in carbon fixation in cyanobacteria and some chemoautotrophs. This self-assembling organelle encapsulates the key CO2-fixing enzymes, Rubisco, and carbonic anhydrase using a polyhedral protein shell that is constructed by hundreds of shell protein paralogs. The α-carboxysome from the chemoautotroph Halothiobacillus neapolitanus serves as a model system in fundamental studies and synthetic engineering of carboxysomes. Here we adopt a QconCAT-based quantitative mass spectrometry approach to determine the stoichiometric composition of native α-carboxysomes from H. neapolitanus. We further performed an in-depth comparison of the protein stoichiometry of native and recombinant α-carboxysomes heterologously generated in Escherichia coli to evaluate the structural variability and remodeling of α-carboxysomes. Our results provide insight into the molecular principles that mediate carboxysome assembly, which may aid in rational design and reprogramming of carboxysomes in new contexts for biotechnological applications

### Sample Protocol
Native and synthetic carboxysomes preparations, 4 replicates of each, were diluted to a final protein concentration of 2.5 μg in 25 mM NH4HC03 (40 μL). QconCAT (approx. 5 pmol) was added and samples were denatured using 2.5 µL of 1% (w/v) RapiGest™ (Waters, Manchester, UK) in 25 mM NH4HC03 and followed by incubation at 80 °C for 10 minutes. Samples were reduced by the addition of 2.5 μL of 12 mM dithiothreitol in 25 mM NH4HC03 and incubation at 60C for 10 min. Alkylation was carried out by the addition of 2.5 μL of 36 mM iodoacetamide in 25 mM NH4HC03 and incubation at room temperature for 30 min in the dark. Trypsin 2.5 μL (200 ng in 25 mM NH4HC03; E:P 1:10) was added to each sample in a final digest volume of 50 μL. Samples were incubation at 37C overnight. To remove residual Rapigest ,digests were acidified by the addition of 0.5 μL of TFA followed by incubation at 37C for 45 min. Samples were centrifuged at 17,200 x g for 30 min and transferred to fresh low-bind tubes.  LC-MS: LC-MS analyses were conducted on a QExactive HF quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer coupled to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano-liquid chromatograph (Thermo Fisher, UK). Sample digest (2 μL) was loaded onto a trapping column (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, 75 µm x 2 cm, 3 µm packing material, 100 Å) using a loading buffer of 0.1% (v/v) TFA, 2 % (v/v) acetonitrile in water for 7 min at a flow rate of 12 µL min-1.  The trapping column was then set in-line with an analytical column (EASY-Spray PepMap RSLC C18, 75 µm x 50 cm, 2 µm packing material, 100 Å) and the peptides eluted using a linear gradient of 96.2 % A (0.1 % [v/v] formic acid):3.8 % B (0.1 % [v/v[ formic acid in water:acetonitrile [80:20] [v/v]) to 50 % A:50 % B over 30 min at a flow rate of 300 nL min-1, followed by washing at 1% A:99 % B for 5 min and re-equilibration of the column to starting conditions. The column was maintained at 40°C, and the effluent introduced directly into the integrated nano-electrospray ionization source operating in positive ion mode. A data dependent acquisition method was used consisting of a 60,000 resolution full-scan MS scan with AGC set to 3e6 ions with a maximum fill time of 100ms. The 16 most abundant peaks per full scan were selected for HCD MS/MS (30,000 resolution, AGC set to 1e5 ions with a maximum fill time of 45 ms) with an ion selection window of 2 m/z and normalised collision energy of 30 %.  Ion selection excluded singularly charged ions and ions with equal to or a greater than +6 charge state. To avoid repeated selection of peptides for fragmentation the program used a 60-second dynamic exclusion window.

### Data Protocol
The raw data files were imported into Progenesis QI for Proteomics v4 (Nonlinear Dynamics, UK). The chromatograms are aligned and normalised prior to label-free quantification. Peptide identification was performed by Mascot (v2.7, Matrix Science, UK) against the Uniprot reference Halothiobacillus neapolitanus (UP000009102) database (2353 sequences). A precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.01 Da were applied with dynamic modifications of 13C6 15N2 K, 13C6 15N4 R and Oxidation (M) and with the static modification of carbamidomethylation (C).

### Publication Abstract
Carboxysomes are anabolic bacterial microcompartments that play an essential role in carbon fixation in cyanobacteria and some chemoautotrophs. This self-assembling organelle encapsulates the key CO<sub>2</sub>-fixing enzymes, Rubisco, and carbonic anhydrase using a polyhedral protein shell that is constructed by hundreds of shell protein paralogs. The &#x3b1;-carboxysome from the chemoautotroph Halothiobacillus neapolitanus serves as a model system in fundamental studies and synthetic engineering of carboxysomes. In this study, we adopted a QconCAT-based quantitative mass spectrometry approach to determine the stoichiometric composition of native &#x3b1;-carboxysomes from H. neapolitanus. We further performed an in-depth comparison of the protein stoichiometry of native &#x3b1;-carboxysomes and their recombinant counterparts heterologously generated in Escherichia coli to evaluate the structural variability and remodeling of &#x3b1;-carboxysomes. Our results provide insight into the molecular principles that mediate carboxysome assembly, which may aid in rational design and reprogramming of carboxysomes in new contexts for biotechnological applications. <b>IMPORTANCE</b> A wide range of bacteria use special protein-based organelles, termed bacterial microcompartments, to encase enzymes and reactions to increase the efficiency of biological processes. As a model bacterial microcompartment, the carboxysome contains a protein shell filled with the primary carbon fixation enzyme Rubisco. The self-assembling organelle is generated by hundreds of proteins and plays important roles in converting carbon dioxide to sugar, a process known as carbon fixation. In this study, we uncovered the exact stoichiometry of all building components and the structural plasticity of the functional &#x3b1;-carboxysome, using newly developed quantitative mass spectrometry together with biochemistry, electron microscopy, and enzymatic assay. The study advances our understanding of the architecture and modularity of natural carboxysomes. The knowledge learned from natural carboxysomes will suggest feasible ways to produce functional carboxysomes in other hosts, such as crop plants, with the overwhelming goal of boosting cell metabolism and crop yields.

### Keywords
Carboxysomes

### Affiliations
University of Liverpool
Institute of Systems, Molecular and Integrative Biology University of Liverpool Liverpool UK

### Submitter
Philip Brownridge

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Luning Liu
Institute of Systems, Molecular and Integrative Biology University of Liverpool Liverpool UK


