### Accession
PXD041645

### Title
The effect of Y145C mutation in AHCY-1 on the total proteome of young adults C.elegans

### Description
Supplementation with S-adenosylhomocysteine (SAH) extends the lifespan of model organisms. To explore the impact of SAH on aging, we generated a Caenorhabditis elegans model with increased SAH levels through pathogenic mutation in the S-adenosylhomocysteine hydrolase (AHCY-1), which impairs SAH hydrolysis to adenosine and homocysteine. This submission contains results of the quantitative (TMT) measurements of the proteins in whole worm extracts originated from AHCY-1 Y143C mutant (equivalent to the human pathogenic variant) and control worms.

### Sample Protocol
C. elegans were solubilized in concentrated TFA ((cell pellet/TFA 1:2-1:4 (v/v)) and incubated for 2-10 minutes at room tempertaure. Samples were neutralized with 2 M Tris-Base buffer using 10× volume of TFA and further incubated at 95°C for 5 min after adding Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (final concentration 10 mM) and 2-chloroacetamide (final concentration 40 mM). Protein concentrations were determined by turbidity measurements at 360 nm, adjusted to the same concentration using a sample dilution buffer (2M TrisBase/TFA 10:1 (v/v)) and then diluted 1:4-1:5 with water. Digestion was carried out overnight at 37°C using trypsin at a protein/enzyme ratio of 100:1. TFA was added to a final concentration of 2% to stop digestion. The resulting peptides were labeled using an on-column TMT labeling protocol. TMT-labeled samples were compiled into a single TMT sample and concentrated. Peptides in the compiled sample were fractionated (6 fractions) using the bRP fractionation. Prior to LC-MS measurement, the peptide fractions were reconstituted in 0.1% TFA, 2% acetonitrile in water. Chromatographic separation was performed on an Easy-Spray Acclaim PepMap column 50 cm long × 75 µm inner diameter (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 55 °C by applying 90 min acetonitrile gradients in 0.1% aqueous formic acid at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. An UltiMate 3000 nano-LC system was coupled to a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer via an easy-spray source (all Thermo Fisher Scientific). The Q Exactive HF-X was operated in TMT mode with survey scans acquired at a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 200. Up to 18 of the most abundant isotope patterns with charges 2-5 from the survey scan were selected with an isolation window of 0.7 m/z and fragmented by higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) with normalized collision energies of 32, while the dynamic exclusion was set to 35 s. The maximum ion injection times for the survey scan and the MS/MS scans (acquired with a resolution of 30,000 at m/z 200) were 50 and 150 ms, respectively. The ion target value for MS was set to 3e6 and for MS/MS to 1e5, and the minimum AGC target was set to 1e3.

### Data Protocol
The data were processed with MaxQuant v. 1.6.17.0, and the peptides were identified from the MS/MS spectra searched against Uniprot C. elegans reference proteome (UP000001940) using the build-in Andromeda search engine. Raw files obtained from the LC-MS/MS measurements of 6 tryptic peptide fractions were analyzed together. Reporter ion MS2-based quantification was applied with reporter mass tolerance = 0.003 Da and min. reporter PIF = 0.75. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation, glutamine/asparagine deamination, as well as protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. For in silico digests of the reference proteome, cleavages of arginine or lysine followed by any amino acid were allowed (trypsin/P), and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. The FDR was set to 0.01 for peptides, proteins and sites. Match between runs was enabled. Other parameters were used as pre-set in the software. Unique and razor peptides were used for quantification enabling protein grouping.

### Publication Abstract
Supplementation with S-adenosylhomocysteine (SAH) extends the lifespan of model organisms. To explore the impact of SAH on aging, we generated a Caenorhabditis elegans model by introducing the S-adenosylhomocysteine hydrolase (AHCY-1) variant Y145C, corresponding to the human AHCY Y143C pathogenic mutation. This mutation is anticipated to impair SAH hydrolysis, resulting in its increased levels. Our findings revealed that animals with this endogenous mutation exhibited delayed aging, accompanied by decreased S-adenosylmethionine (SAM) and moderately increased SAH levels. The extended lifespan of these worms depends on the AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK), its activator Vaccinia virus-related kinase (VRK-1), and the DAF-16 transcription factor. The results underline the complex nature of SAH's influence on aging, proposing that the balance between SAM and SAH might play a pivotal role in defining the lifespan of C. elegans. Moreover, our partial AHCY-1 deficiency model offers a tool for studying the intersection of methionine metabolism and aging.

### Keywords
Caenorhabditis elegans, Ahcy-1 y145c mutant, S-adenosylhomocysteine hydrolase, Aging, S-adenosylhomocysteine

### Affiliations
The International Institute of Molecular Mechanisms and Machines, Polish Academy of Sciences
Laboratory of Protein Metabolism, International Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology in Warsaw, Poland

### Submitter
Remigiusz Serwa

### Lab Head
Dr Wojciech Pokrzywa
Laboratory of Protein Metabolism, International Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology in Warsaw, Poland


