### Accession
PXD002454

### Title
Global quantitative proteomic analysis of human glioma cells profiled host protein expression in response to enterovirus type 71 infection

### Description
Enterovirus 71 (EV71) is one of the leading causes of hand, foot and mouth disease with neurological complications in some cases. To study the pathogenesis of EV71 infection, large scale analyses of EV71 infected cells have been performed. However, most of these studies employed rhabdomyosarcoma (RD) cells or used transcriptomic strategy. Here, we performed SILAC-based quantitative proteomic analysis of EV71-infected U251 cells, a human glioma cell line. A total of 3,125 host proteins were quantified, 451 of which were differentially regulated as a result of EV71 infection at 8 hpi or 20 hpi or both.

### Sample Protocol
Quantitative proteomic analysis of EV71 infected U251 cells was conducted as follows . Differentially SILAC labeled U251 cells were mock treated or EV71 infected, and these cells were harvested and intracellular EV71 mRNA was detected. Equal number of three kinds of differently treated cells was mixed at 1:1:1 ratio. Proteins in mixed cells were extracted, in-solution digested. Digested peptides were fractionated into 5 fractions with SCX. Each fraction was desalted and subjected to RPLC-MS/MS (5600) analysis. Three independent biological replicates were performed.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS spectras generated by TripleTOF 5600+ System were submitted to Proteinpilot 5.0 software (AB SCIEX, Mississauga, ON) to perform protein identification and quantitation. A concatenated database contain EV71 protein sequence (derived from Genbank) and Uniprot Human (reviewed)_201412 database (downloaded from UniProt) was used. SILAC was set as the sample type; trypsin was set in digestion column; iodoacetamide was set in Cys alkylation column; 5600 was set as the instruction. The cutoff for peptide conf. score was >95%, and FDR analysis was performed.

### Publication Abstract
Enterovirus 71 (EV71) is one of the leading causes of hand, foot and mouth disease with neurological complications in some cases. To study the pathogenesis of EV71 infection, large-scale analyses of EV71 infected cells have been performed. However, most of these studies employed rhabdomyosarcoma (RD) cells or used transcriptomic strategy. Here, we performed SILAC-based quantitative proteomic analysis of EV71-infected U251 cells, a human glioma cell line. A total of 3125 host proteins were quantified, in which 451 were differentially regulated as a result of EV71 infection at 8 or 20 hpi or both. Gene Ontology analysis indicates the regulated proteins were enriched in "metabolic process", "biological regulation" and "cellular process", implying that these biological processes were affected by EV71 infection. Furthermore, functional study indicated that TRAF2 and TRAF6 among the up-regulated proteins could inhibit the replication of EV71 at the early phase post infection, and the anti-EV71 function of both proteins was independent of interferon &#x3b2;. Our study not only provided an overview of cellular response to EV71 infection in a human glioma cell line, but also found that TRAF2 and TRAF6 might be potential targets to inhibit the replication of EV71. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD002454 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD002454).

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, Traf6, Silac, Ev71, Traf2

### Affiliations
Wuhan Institute of Virology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
Wuhan Institute of Virology, Chinese Academy of Sciences


### Submitter
Lei-Ke Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Lei-Ke Zhang
Wuhan Institute of Virology, Chinese Academy of Sciences


