### Accession
PXD024491

### Title
Mitochondria shed large SPOTs during infection-induced import stress to remodel their outer membrane

### Description
Despite the essential role of the outer mitochondrial membrane (OMM) in cellular homeostasis, little is known of the mechanisms that remodel it during naturally occurring stresses. Here, we report a previously undescribed structure we term SPOT (structure positive for outer mitochondrial membrane) that is up to 10 m in diameter and emerges from the OMM during infection with the human parasite Toxoplasma gondii. SPOTs are distinct from mitochondria-derived vesicles and compartments, and mediate the depletion of the OMM proteins MFN1 and MFN2 that restrict parasite growth. The formation of SPOTs depends on the parasite effector protein TgMAF1 and the host mitochondrial import receptor TOM70, which is required for optimal parasite proliferation. TOM70 enables TgMAF1 to interact with host SAM50, a major translocase of the OMM, and SAM50 inhibition or acute mitochondrial import stress are sufficient to promote SPOT formation independently of infection. We propose that Toxoplasma exploits SPOTs, a cellular response to OMM import stress, to promote its growth.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics sample preparation For preparing mitoIP samples were lysed using 20 to 25 μl of 6M Guanidinium chloride or eluted from the beads and desalted as described (49) and analyzed using LC-MS/MS. For preparing samples from immunoprecipitation, on-beads digestion was performed to elute the proteins off the beads. Before adding the elution buffer, the beads were washed with detergent-free buffer (50mM Tris-HCl pH7.5) four times to remove any detergents used previously. Then 100 µl of the elution buffer (5ng/µl trypsin, 50mM Tris-HCl pH7.5, 1mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine), 5mM chloroacetamide) was added to the beads and incubated at room temperature by vortexing from time to time, or rotating on a rotator. After 30 min, the supernatant was transferred to a 0.5 ml tube and incubated at 37oC overnight to ensure a complete tryptic digest. The digestion was stopped in the next morning by adding formic acid to the final concentration of 1%. The resulted peptides were cleaned with home-made StageTips. Alternatively, four micrograms of the eluted peptides were dried out and reconstituted in 9 µL of 0.1M TEAB and labeled with tandem mass tags (TMTpro, Thermo Fisher Scientific cat. No A44522). Labeling was carried out according to manufacturer’s instruction with the following changes: 0.5 mg of TMTPro reagent was re-suspended with 33 µL of anhydrous ACN.  Seven microliters of TMTPro reagent in ACN was added to 9 µL of clean peptide in 0.1M TEAB. The final ACN concentration was 43.75% and the ratio of peptides to TMTPro reagent was 1:20. After 60 min of incubation the reaction was quenched with 2 µL of 5% hydroxylamine. Labelled peptides were pooled, dried, re-suspended in 200 µL of 0.1% formic acid (FA), split into two equal parts, and desalted using home-made STAGE tips. One of the two parts was fractionated on a 1 mm x 150 mm ACQUITY column, packed with 130 Å, 1.7 µm C18 particles (Waters cat. no SKU: 186006935), using an Ultimate 3000 UHPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated at a flow of 30 µL/min with a 88  min segmented gradient from 1% to 50% buffer B for 85 min and from 50% to 95% buffer B for 3  min; buffer A was 5% ACN, 10mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC), buffer B was 80% ACN, 10mM ABC. Fractions were collected every three minutes, pooled in two passes (1 + 17, 2 + 18 … etc.), and dried in a vacuum centrifuge (Eppendorf). LC-MS/MS analysis For label-free quantification, pPeptides were separated on a 75 cm, 75 μm internal diameter Acclaim™ PepMap™ analytical column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, catalogue number 164939) using an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The column was maintained at 50°C. Buffer A and B were 0.1% formic acid in water and 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile. Peptides derived from whole cells were separated on a segmented gradient from 6% to 31% buffer B for 230 min and from 31% to 50% buffer B for 10 min at 250 nl / min. Peptides derived from enriched mitochondria were separated on a segmented gradient from 6% to 31% buffer B for 110 min and from 31% to 50% buffer B for 10 min at 250 nl / min. Eluting peptides were analyzed on a QExactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide precursor m/z measurements were carried out at 60000 resolution in the 300 to 1800 m/z range. The top ten most intense precursors with charge state from 2 to 7 only were selected for HCD fragmentation using 25% normalized collision energy. The m/z values of the peptide fragments were measured at 30000 resolution using a minimum AGC target of 1e4 and 55 ms maximum injection time for the whole cell samples or 15000 resolution, minimum AGS target of 1e4, and 120 ms maximum injection time for the enriched mitochondria samples. Upon fragmentation, precursors were put on a dynamic exclusion list for 45 sec. TMT labeled peptides were and separated on a 50 cm, 75 µm Acclaim PepMap column (Thermo Fisher Scientific , Product No. 164942) and analysed on a Orbitrap Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a FAIMS device (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The FAIMS device was operated in two compensation voltages, -50 V and -70 V. Synchronous precursor selection based MS3 was used for the acquisition of the TMTPro reporter ion signals. Peptide separations were performed on an EASY-nLC1200 using a 90 min linear gradient from 6% to 31% buffer; buffer A was 0.1% FA, buffer B was 0.1% FA, 80% ACN. The analytical column was operated at 50°C. Raw files were split based on the FAIMS compensation voltage using FreeStyle (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
TheLabel-free quantification raw data were analyzed with MaxQuant version 1.6.0.13 (50) using the integrated Andromeda search engine (51). Peptide fragmentation spectra were searched against the canonical sequences of the human reference proteome, proteome ID UP000000589, and toxoplasma reference proteome, proteome ID UP000005641, downloaded from UniProt. Methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications; cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification. The digestion parameters were set to “specific” and “Trypsin/P,” The minimum number of peptides and razor peptides for protein identification was 1; the minimum number of unique peptides was 0. Protein identification was performed at a peptide spectrum matches and protein false discovery rate of 0.01. The “second peptide” option was on. Successful identifications were transferred between the different raw files using the “Match between runs” option. Exploratory data analysis and visualization was done using tidyverse (52) in R (53). TMT data was analyzed using MaxQuant, version 1.6.17.0. The isotope purity correction factors, provided by the manufacturer, were included in the analysis. Differential expression analysis was performed using limma, (Ritchie, Phipson et al. 2015 ) in R.

### Publication Abstract
The outer mitochondrial membrane (OMM) is essential for cellular homeostasis. Yet little is known of the mechanisms that remodel it during natural stresses. We found that large &#x201c;SPOTs&#x201d; (structures positive for OMM) emerge during <i>Toxoplasma gondii</i> infection in mammalian cells. SPOTs mediated the depletion of the OMM proteins mitofusin 1 and 2, which restrict parasite growth. The formation of SPOTs depended on the parasite effector TgMAF1 and the host mitochondrial import receptor TOM70, which is required for optimal parasite proliferation. TOM70 enabled TgMAF1 to interact with the host OMM translocase SAM50. The ablation of SAM50 or the overexpression of an OMM-targeted protein promoted OMM remodeling independently of infection. Thus, <i>Toxoplasma</i> hijacks the formation of SPOTs, a cellular response to OMM stress, to promote its growth.

### Keywords
Toxoplasma, Mitochondria, Tmt, Label-free

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Biology of Aging
Lena Pernas Max Planck Institute for Biology of Ageing, Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 9b, 50931, Cologne, Germany  Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases (CECAD), University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany

### Submitter
Ilian  Atanassov

### Lab Head
Dr Lena Pernas
Lena Pernas Max Planck Institute for Biology of Ageing, Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 9b, 50931, Cologne, Germany  Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases (CECAD), University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany


