### Accession
PXD026064

### Title
Dried human cervico vagnial fluid on FTA-cards LC-MS/MS

### Description
Cervical cancer is the fourth most common cancer among women worldwide and screening pro-grams increase detection rate and survivability. Molecular screening of presence of human papil-loma viruses (HPV) as alternatives to physical examinations offers cost-efficient solutions and can be performed on self-collected samples. A persistent infection with HPV is necessary but not sufficient to develop cancer and additional biomarkers are needed to increase the precision. We have analyzed protein biomarkers found in self-collected dried cervico-vaginal fluid (CVF) from both controls and women with cervical cancer pre-stages.

### Sample Protocol
The MS-analysis including bioinformatic analysis of the raw data were performed by the Mass Spectrometry facility at the Biomedical Centre, Uppsala, Sweden. In brief, FTA cards where punched, and one (replication cohort) or two (discovery cohort) 3.5 mm discs per patient sample was used. The proteins were processed with a previously described on-filter digestion protocol [20] using 3 kDa centrifugal filters (Millipore). The samples were reduced and alkylated in 1.5 mL protein low bind Eppendorf tubes prior the on-filter desalting and digestion. Centrifugation was carried out using a centrifugal force of 14,000 x g throughout the protocol. A volume of 10 µL of 4 5mM aqueous DTT was added to all samples and the mixtures were incubated for 15 min at 50 C to reduce the disulfide bridges. The samples were cooled down to RT and 10 µL of 100 mM aqueous IAA was added and the mixtures were incubated for an additional 15 min at RT in darkness to carabamidomethylate the cysteines. The samples were transferred to spin filters that had been pre-washed with 250 µL of 20 % ACN for 15 min and then 500 µL of MQ water for 20 min. The samples were then centrifuged for 10 min to remove the added salts, detergents, and other interfering substances. An additional volume of 150 µL of 20 % ACN in 50 mM NH4HCO3 was added and the filters were spun for 10 min followed by 200 µL of 50mM NH4HCO3, and centrifugation for another 10 min. Finally, a volume of 100 µL of 50mM NH4HCO3 was added together with trypsin to yield a final trypsin/protein concentration of 5% (w/w). The tryptic digestion was performed at 37◦C in darkness. The samples were then centrifuged for 20 min to collect the tryptic peptides. An additional volume of 100 µL of 20% ACN, 1% HAc was added and the filters were spun for 10 min and pooled with the first tryptic peptide filtrate. The collected peptide filtrate was then vacuum centrifugated to dryness using a Speedvac system ISS110 (ThermoFisher Scientific). The dried peptides were resolved in 60 µL of 0.1% formic acid and further diluted five times prior nano-LC-MS/MS. The resulted peptides were separated in reverse phase on a C18- column with 90 minutes gradient and electrosprayed on-line to a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Finnigan). Tandem mass spectrometry was performed applying higher-energy collisional dissociation. The samples were analyzed using a Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a nano-electrospray ion source. The peptides were separated by reversed-phase LC using an EASY-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). A set-up of pre-column and analytical column was used. The pre-column was a 2-cm EASY-Column (ID 100 µm, 5 µm C18; Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the analytical column was a 10-cm EASY-Column (ID 75 µm, 3 µm, C18; Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were eluted with a 90 min linear gradient from 4% to 100% acetonitrile at 250 nL min−1. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode, acquiring a survey mass spectrum with resolving power 70,000 (full width half maximum), m/z = 400-1750, using an automatic gain control target of 3×106. The 10 most intense ions were selected for higher-energy collisional dissociation fragmentation (25% normalized collision energy) and MS/MS spectra were generated with an automatic gain control target of 5×105 at a resolution of 17,500. The mass spectrometer operated in data-dependent mode.

### Data Protocol
The acquired data (RAW files) were processed by MaxQuant software, version 1.6.3.4 and 1.6.10.43, and database searches were performed using the implemented Andromeda search engine. MS/MS spectra were correlated to a FASTA database containing proteins from Homo sapiens extracted from the UniProt database (release date: September 2018). A decoy search database, including common contaminants and a reverse database, was used to estimate the identification false discovery rate where a rate of 1% was accepted. The search parameters included: maximum 10 ppm and 0.6 Da error tolerances for the survey scan and MS/MS analysis, respectively; enzyme specificity was trypsin; maximum one missed cleavage site allowed; cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as static modification; and oxidation of methionine was set as variable modification. The search criteria for protein identification were set to at least two matching peptides of 95% confidence level per protein.

### Publication Abstract
Molecular screening programs for cervical cancer detect the presence of human papilloma virus (HPV) in cell material or vaginal fluids. Persistent infection with high-risk HPV is a necessary pre-requisite, but the majority of infections do not lead to pathological states. Additional biomarkers are needed to increase the specificity of the molecular tests. Here, we have investigated the possibility of detecting protein biomarkers using mass spectrometry from dried self-sampled cervico-vaginal fluid deposited on FTA cards. We found significant intra-individual correlations (<i>p</i> &lt; 2.2 &#xd7; 10<sup>-16</sup>), although heterogenous protein profiles were obtained between individuals. Out of 3699 proteins found in total, 169 were detected in at least 95% of the samples. Using a discovery/replication design, 18 proteins were found to be significant in the discovery cohort, with higher values in those cases compared to controls. All of these were found to also have higher levels among the cases in the replication cohort, with one protein (DEAD-Box Helicase) remaining statistically significant. Finally, a predictive 7-protein multivariate model was developed with a sensitivity and specificity of 0.90 and 0.55, respectively. Our results demonstrate that robust measurements of protein biomarkers can be obtained from self-sampled dried CVF and that these could be used to predict cervical cancer pre-stages.

### Keywords
Cvf, Lc-ms/ms, Fta-card, Cerivcal cancer

### Affiliations
NBIS (National Infrastructure for Bioinformatics in Sweden), Stockholm University
MS based Proteomics, Dept of Chemistry - BMC, Uppsala University

### Submitter
Yvonne Kallberg

### Lab Head
Dr Jonas Bergquist
MS based Proteomics, Dept of Chemistry - BMC, Uppsala University


