### Accession
PXD010583

### Title
UmPit2 processing by Maize AF -  A fungal substrate mimicking molecule suppresses plant immunity via an inter-kingdom conserved motif

### Description
Ustilago maydis is a biotrophic fungus causing corn smut disease in maize. To downregulate immune responses and promote host colonization, U. maydis secretes a set of effector proteins into the plant apoplast. An effector essential for U. maydis virulence is Pit2, an inhibitor of papain-like cysteine proteases (PLCPs). Pit2 virulence function relies on a 14 amino acids motif (PID14). While sequence of the Pit2 effector is highly diverse amongst related pathogen species, the PID14 motif is highly conserved. Interestingly, synthetic PID14 peptides act more efficiently as PLCP inhibitors than the full-length Pit2 effector. In line with this finding, mass spectrometry showed processing of Pit2 by maize PLCPs, which releases an inhibitory core motif of the PID14. Mutational analysis demonstrated that two residues of the released inhibitor peptide are essential for Pit2 function and, consequently, for U. maydis virulence. Based on these findings, we propose a model, in which the Pit2 effector functions as a decoy: Pit2 represents a favorable substrate for apoplastic PLCPs, which are central hubs of the maize immune system. Processing of Pit2 releases the inhibitor peptide, which in turn efficiently blocks PLCPs to modulate host immunity.

### Sample Protocol
Recombinant UmPit2 (1 µg) and PID14 peptide (20 µM) were incubated with F24 fractions for 30 min at RT. Samples were pre-incubated with E-64 for inhibition of PLCPs or alternative inhibitor mix (EDTA 1mM, Pepstatin A 30 µM, DCI 30 µM) for 10 min. After addition of final 3M Guanidiniumhydrochloride, samples were precipitated with 10% v/v trichloroacetic acid (TCA) o/N at 4 °C. Peptide fraction was recovered as supernatants by centrifugation at 21 500 g for 15 min. at 4 °C. Supernatants were purified by C18 StageTips and injected onto a nano-HPLC system (Ultimate 3000 nano-RSLC, Thermo) operated in a two-column setup (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, ID 75 µm, trap column length 2 cm, particle size 3 µm, analytical column length 50 cm, particle size 2 µm, Thermo) coupled online to a high resolution Q-TOF mass spectrometer (ImpactII, Bruker). Peptides were separated with a binary gradient from 5-40% B for 40 minutes (A: H2O + 0.1% FA, B: ACN + 0.1% FA), followed by washing and re-equilibration steps to a total runtime of 1 h per sample. Line-mode MS spectra were acquired in a mass range from 150-2000 m/z at an acquisition rate of 4 Hz. For each MS spectrum, the Top14 most intense ions were selected for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant was used to identify peptides with the help of the UniProt Zea mays protein database, additionally supplemented with the PID14 or recombinant UmPit2 FASTA sequences. Validation of the peptide identifications required at least a quantification in 2 out of 3 biological replicates.

### Publication Abstract
Ustilago maydis is a biotrophic fungus causing corn smut disease in maize. The secreted effector protein Pit2 is an inhibitor of papain-like cysteine proteases (PLCPs) essential for virulence. Pit2 inhibitory function relies on a conserved 14 amino acids motif (PID14). Here we show that synthetic PID14 peptides act more efficiently as PLCP inhibitors than the full-length Pit2 effector. Mass spectrometry shows processing of Pit2 by maize PLCPs, which releases an inhibitory core motif from the PID14 sequence. Mutational analysis demonstrates that two conserved residues are essential for Pit2 function. We propose that the Pit2 effector functions as a substrate mimicking molecule: Pit2 is a suitable substrate for apoplastic PLCPs and its processing releases the embedded inhibitor peptide, which in turn blocks PLCPs to modulate host immunity. Remarkably, the PID14 core motif is present in several plant associated fungi and bacteria, indicating the existence of a conserved microbial inhibitor of proteases (cMIP).

### Keywords
Maize af umpit2 plcps protemics

### Affiliations
Forschungszentrum Juelich ZEA-3 Analytics Wilhelm-Johnen-Str D-52425 Juelich Germany
Forschungszentrum Juelich
ZEA-3 Analytics
Wilhelm-Johnen-Str
D-52425 Juelich

### Submitter
Fatih Demir

### Lab Head
Dr Pitter Florian Huesgen
Forschungszentrum Juelich ZEA-3 Analytics Wilhelm-Johnen-Str D-52425 Juelich Germany


