### Accession
PXD019887

### Title
A heme-binding domain in a voltage gated porassium channel

### Description
Heme-affinity pull-down assays and proteomics of lysates from primary cortical neurons identified and EAG channel, hERG3 (Kv11.3) binds to heme.

### Sample Protocol
Heme-agarose affinity purification was performed on neuronal lysates, proteomic  analyses were performed to identify candidates using a Waters hybrid Q-Tof mass  spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Data was acquired using Masslynx 4.0 (Waters), PLGS v2.5.1, Mascot (Matrix Science) v2.2.1, and Scaffold (Proteome Software) v4.1.4. The data was searched against a Swissprot (mus musculus) db v53.0

### Publication Abstract
The EAG (<i>ether-&#xe0;-go-go</i>) family of voltage-gated K<sup>+</sup> channels are important regulators of neuronal and cardiac action potential firing (excitability) and have major roles in human diseases such as epilepsy, schizophrenia, cancer, and sudden cardiac death. A defining feature of EAG (Kv10-12) channels is a highly conserved domain on the N terminus, known as the eag domain, consisting of a Per-ARNT-Sim (PAS) domain capped by a short sequence containing an amphipathic helix (Cap domain). The PAS and Cap domains are both vital for the normal function of EAG channels. Using heme-affinity pulldown assays and proteomics of lysates from primary cortical neurons, we identified that an EAG channel, hERG3 (Kv11.3), binds to heme. In whole-cell electrophysiology experiments, we identified that heme inhibits hERG3 channel activity. In addition, we expressed the Cap and PAS domain of hERG3 in <i>Escherichia coli</i> and, using spectroscopy and kinetics, identified the PAS domain as the location for heme binding. The results identify heme as a regulator of hERG3 channel activity. These observations are discussed in the context of the emerging role for heme as a regulator of ion channel activity in cells.

### Keywords
Waters q-tof, Heme, Domain, Eag channel, Ether-a-go-go

### Affiliations
School of Chemistry, University of Bristol, Bristol, UK
MRC Toxicology Unit

### Submitter
Rebekah Jukes-Jones

### Lab Head
Dr Emma Raven
School of Chemistry, University of Bristol, Bristol, UK


