### Accession
PXD022452

### Title
Molecular sexual identity of chicken in vitro derived pre-gonadal primordial germ cells

### Description
In poultry, in vitro derived primordial germ cells (PGCs) represent an important tool for management of genetic resources. However, several studies have highlighted sexual differences exhibited by PGCs through in vitro steps, which may compromise their reproductive capacities. To understand this phenomenon, we compared the proteome of pregonadal chicken male (ZZ) and female (ZW) PGCs expanded in vitro by quantitative proteomic analysis using a GeLC-MS/MS strategy. The proteins found to be differentially abundant in chicken male and female PGCs indicated their early sexual identity.  Many of the proteins up-accumulated in male PGCs were encoded by genes strongly enriched in the sexual chromosome Z. This suggests that the known lack of dosage compensation of the transcription of Z-linked genes between sexes persists at protein level in PGCs, and that this may be a key factor of their autonomous sex differentiation. Male and female PGCs up-accumulated protein sets were associated with differential biological processes, and contained proteins biologically relevant for male and female germ cell development respectively. This study presents first evidence on early predetermined sex specific cell fate of chicken PGCs that will help to understand their sexual physiological specificities and enable more precise sex-specific adaptation of in vitro culture conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from samples (10 biological replicates, 5 ZZ and 5 ZW) containing 2-3x106 cells in 250 µL of 6M Urea, 4% SDS, 50 mM pH 8.8 Tris-HCl containing protease inhibitors by sonication on ice. Extracted proteins were allowed to solubilize for 20 min at room temperature under shaking. After centrifugation at 10,000g for 10 min, protein concentration was quantified from protein extracts (Thermo Scientific Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit). Proteins of each sample were pooled for male and female PGCs respectively, and each pooled sample (50 µg) was loaded in a 12 % SDS-PAGE. After separation of proteins by SDS-PAGE and Coomassie Blue staining, each lane was cut into 10 slices. Gel pieces were washed in water, acetonitrile (1:1). Cysteine reduction and alkylation were performed by successive incubations with 10 mM dithiothreitol in 50 mM NH4HCO3 (30 min, at 56°C) and 55 mM iodoacetamide in 50 mM NH4HCO3 (20 min, at room temperature, in the dark). Gel pieces were incubated with 50 mM NH4HCO3 and acetonitrile. Digestion was carried out overnight using 25 mM NH4HCO3 with Trypsin (Sequencing grade, Roche diagnostics, Paris, France) at 12.5 ng/µl. Peptides were extracted and dried using a SPD1010 speedvac system (ThermoSavant, Thermofisher Scientific). For each protein band, the resultant peptide mixture was reconstituted with 30 µl of 0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile, sonicated for 10 min, and analysed by nanoLC-MS/MS in triplicate. All experiments were performed on an LTQ Orbitrap Velos Mass Spectrometer coupled to an Ultimate® 3000 RSLC chromatographer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Samples were loaded on a trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, 100 mm i.d. x 2 cm long, 3 mm particles) and desalted. Separation was conducted using a nano-column (Acclaim PepMap C18, 75 mm i.d x 50 cm long, 3 mm particles) at 300 nl/min. MS and MS/MS spectra were acquired using Xcalibur software (version 2.1; Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). The instrument was operated in positive ion mode using data-dependent acquisition mode in 300–1800 m/z range with a targeted resolution set at 60,000. The 20 most intense ions with charge states ≥2 were sequentially isolated (2 m/z isolation width ; 1 micro scan) and fragmented using CID (collision-induced dissociation) mode (normalized collision energy of 35% and wideband-activation enabled). Internal calibration was applied using a lock mass with Polydimethylcyclosiloxane (m/z, 445.1200025) ions.

### Data Protocol
Protein data identification was performed using Mascot search engine version 2.3.2 (Matrix Science, London, UK) combined to Proteome Discoverer 2.1 software (ThermoFisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). MS and MS/MS data were matched against the “chordata” section of a locally maintained copy of NCBI nr (download January 2018, 9 822 753 sequences). The search parameters included trypsin as a protease with two allowed missed cleavages and carbamidomethylcysteine, methionine oxidation and acetylation of N-term protein as variable modifications. The tolerance of the ions was set to 5 ppm for parent and 0.8 Da for fragment ion matches. Identified proteins were subjected to Scaffold Q+ v4.8.4 software (Proteome Software Inc., Portland, USA) for validation using protein cluster analysis. Protein identification was validated when at least two peptides were identified and when the probability was at least 95% and 95%, as specified by the PeptideProphet and ProteinProphet algorithms, respectively (FDR < 0.01% for proteins). Proteins were quantifified using Spectral Counting (Weighed Spectra option) and Average Precursor Intensity method. Differences were considered statistically significant for t-test with a p-value < 0.05, a fold change/ratio of  ≥ 2 and a limit on average normalized weighted spectra (NWS) of ≥ 3 were included.

### Publication Abstract
In poultry, in vitro propagated primordial germ cells (PGCs) represent an important tool for the cryopreservation of avian genetic resources. However, several studies have highlighted sexual differences exhibited by PGCs during in vitro propagation, which may compromise their reproductive capacities. To understand this phenomenon, we compared the proteome of pregonadal migratory male (ZZ) and female (ZW) chicken PGCs propagated in vitro by quantitative proteomic analysis using a GeLC-MS/MS strategy. Many proteins were found to be differentially abundant in chicken male and female PGCs indicating their early sexual identity. Many of the proteins more highly expressed in male PGCs were encoded by genes localised to the Z sex chromosome. This suggests that the known lack of dosage compensation of the transcription of Z-linked genes between sexes persists at the protein level in PGCs, and that this may be a key factor of their autonomous sex differentiation. We also found that globally, protein differences do not closely correlate with transcript differences indicating a selective translational mechanism in PGCs. Male and female PGC expressed protein sets were associated with differential biological processes and contained proteins known to be biologically relevant for male and female germ cell development, respectively. We also discovered that female PGCs have a higher capacity to uptake proteins from the cell culture medium than male PGCs. This study presents the first evidence of an early predetermined sex specific cell fate of chicken PGCs and their sexual molecular specificities which will enable the development of more precise sex-specific in vitro culture conditions for the preservation of avian genetic resources.

### Keywords
Sex differentiation, Primordial germ cells, Chicken

### Affiliations
INRAE Val de Loire France
INRAE

### Submitter
Valerie LABAS

### Lab Head
Dr Marina Govoroun
INRAE Val de Loire France


