### Accession
PXD045585

### Title
The proteome of dinoflagellate symbionts (Breviolum minutum) during symbiosis establishment in a model cnidarian

### Description
Cellular mechanisms responsible for the regulation of nutrient exchange, immune responses, and symbiont population growth in the cnidarian-dinoﬂagellate symbiosis are poorly resolved, particularly with respect to the dinoflagellate symbiont. Here, we characterised proteomic changes in the native symbiont Breviolum minutum during colonisation of its host sea anemone Exaiptasia diaphana (‘Aiptasia’). We also compared the proteome of this native symbiont in the established symbiotic state with that of a non-native symbiont, Durusdinium trenchii. The onset of symbiosis between Aiptasia and B. minutum induced increased accumulation of symbiont proteins associated with acquisition of inorganic carbon and photosynthesis, nitrogen metabolism, micro- and macronutrient starvation, suppression of the host immune responses, tolerance to low pH, and management of oxidative stress. Such responses are consistent with a functional, persistent symbiosis. In contrast, D. trenchii predominantly showed elevated levels of immunosuppressive proteins, consistent with the view that this symbiont is an opportunist that forms a less beneficial, less well-integrated symbiosis with this model anemone. By adding this analyses of the symbiont proteins to the already known responses of the host proteome, our results provide a more holistic view of cellular processes that determine host-symbiont specificity and how differences in symbiont partners, native versus non-native symbionts, may impact the fitness of the cnidarian-dinoflagellate symbiosis in response to thermal stress. This PRIDE entry contains the Breviolum minutum data; Durusdinium trenchii data are uploaded in a separate entry with identical parameters.

### Sample Protocol
Exaiptasia diaphana were inoculated with either Breviolum minutum or Durusdinium trenchii and maintained for 14 weeks. Anemones were sampled at weeks 4, 8 and 14 by pooling n ∼5 anemones from each container separately and rapidly freezing them in liquid nitrogen. Anemones were then homogenized using a 5 mL glass tissue homogenizer at 4 °C in 2 mL FSW, and symbionts were separated from the host by centrifugation at 500 × g for 5 min at 4 C. Algal pellets of were washed with 500 µL cold HPLC-grade water (Sigma-Aldrich) at 4 C to remove salts and then resuspended in 500 μL 1% sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDC) in HPLC-grade water. The algal suspension was passed five times through a 23-gauge needle to dislodge any remaining host cell debris or protein of host origin from the algal cells. All the samples were centrifuged again at 500 x g for 5 min at 4 C and the host-containing supernatant discarded. The algal pellets were resuspended in 500 µL 5% SDC in HPLC-grade water, and the cells disrupted with an ultrasonic homogenizer (Vibra-Cell™ Ultrasonic VCX 500)and incubated at 85 C for 20 min with 1% β-mercaptoethanol (BME). Residual hydrophobic pigments were removed by ethyl acetate phase transfer. Samples were washed three times with 50 mM Tris pH 8.2 using a 30 kDa molecular mass cutoff filter (14,000 g × 20 min), resuspended in 400 µL the 50 mM Tris pH 8.2 buffer, and digested overnight with 2 µg trypsin  overnight  at 37 oC. Digested peptides were separated by centrifugation through the 30 kDa molecular mass cutoff filter  before formic acid (final concentration 1%) was used to terminate trypsin activity and precipitate the remaining SDC. Peptides were then desalted using 50% and 30% acetonitrile (ACN) and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid at 37 oC for 30 min, as described in Oakley et al. (2016). Symbiont cell densities in anemones hosting D. trenchii at weeks  4 and 8 were insufficient to provide enough protein, so only samples for week 0 (i.e., prior to inoculation) and week 14 were processed for this species. Liquid chromatography-electrospray ionization-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-ESI-MS/MS) was used for peptide analysis. A total of 200 ng of peptides per sample were separated by liquid chromatography (Ultimate 3000, Dionex) on a 15 cm PepMap C18 column (#160321, Thermo Scientific) at 35 C, with a non-linear gradient from 96% to 50% buffer A (0.1% formic acid) to buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) and a flow rate of 0.3 μL for 90 min. An Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) was used to analyse peptides ionized by electrospray at 1.8 kV. The orbitrap (resolution 120,000 and scan range 375-1599 m/z) was used for acquiring parent MS spectra. Sequencing was performed via higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation on the top 20 precursors, and fragment ion spectra were acquired in the linear ion trap with dynamic exclusion enabled for 60 s. Thermo Xcalibur (v4.3) was used to control LC-ESI-MS/MS instruments.

### Data Protocol
The Andromeda algorithm in MaxQuant v1.6.17.0 was used to search the resulting tandem MS spectra separately against a B. minutum protein database (included here as a .fasta file), with standard genetic code for translation. A built-in contaminants database from MaxQuant was included. A maximum of two missed cleavages of trypsin digestion, a minimum of two matching peptides per protein, and a minimum peptide length of seven amino acids, all with a false discovery rate of 0.01, were required for peptide and protein validations. Variable modifications were set as N-terminus acetylation and oxidation of methionine, and fixed modifications were specified as cysteine carbamidomethylation. Match between runs was enabled with a 0.7 min time window. All spectra from in hospite treatments were also searched against Aiptasia protein sequences to confirm that host contamination was minimal.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Symbiosis, Dinoflagellate, Exaiptasia, Durusdinium, Breviolum, Symbiont

### Affiliations
Victoria University of Wellington
School of Biological Sciences, Victoria University of Wellington, New Zealand

### Submitter
Clinton Oakley

### Lab Head
Dr Simon K
School of Biological Sciences, Victoria University of Wellington, New Zealand


