### Accession
PXD028862

### Title
Public T cell epitopes shared among SARS-CoV-2 Public T cell epitopes shared among SARS-CoV-2 variants are presented on prevalent HLA class I alleles variants are presented on prevalent HLA class I alleles

### Description
In this project, we used MS-based immunopeptidomics and T-cell screening assays to identify SARS-CoV-2 epitopes. The MS identified epitopes were further valdiated for CD8 T cell immunogenecity. PBMC from a large number of patients infected with SARS-CoV-2 were used for valdiation of MS identifed and predected CD 8 T cell epotipes.

### Sample Protocol
HLA mono-allelic B721.221 cells transduced with SARS-CoV-2 proteins were expanded to 100 x 106 cells and expression of the target proteins was induced by culturing the cells in the presence of doxycycline (1 µg/mL; replenished every 24 h) for 48 h. The cells were then lysed in 1 mL of lysis buffer (PBS containing 1% lauryl maltoside, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM PMSF and 1:200Sigma protease inhibitor) for 1 h on ice. The clarified cell lysates were subjected to immunoprecipitation with HLA Class I antibody by incubating them for 3 h at 4°C with 200 µL of AminoLink plus beads (ThermoFisher Scientific) coated with pan HLA class I specific antibody (5 mg antibody (clone W6/32) for 1 mL slurry; BioXcell; Cat no BE0079). Beads were then washed and eptides were eluted with 3 x 1 mL of 1% TFA. All peptide elutions were pooled and then loaded onto a Discovery DSC-18 SPE column for desalting the peptides before MS analysis.The peptides were vacuum concentrated and dissolved in 25 µL of 3% acetonitrile containing 0.1% FA and subsequenctly analysed by MS using a QExactive mass spectrometer connected online to a Ultimate 3000 nano-UHPLC system.

### Data Protocol
The raw data was then analyzed with PEAKS software (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc). The tandem mass spectra were matched against the Uniport homo sapiens database appended with the SARS-CoV-2 proteins. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm, methione oxidation was considered as variable modification, enzyme specificity was set to none and a product ion tolerance of 0.05 Da was used. SARS-CoV-2 peptides identified from the discovery approach were further validated using the synthetic peptide analogs and raw data were analyzed using the XcalliburTM software.

### Publication Abstract
The emergence of SARS-CoV-2 variants of concern (VOC) is driven by mutations that mediate escape from neutralizing antibodies. There is also evidence that mutations can cause loss of T&#xa0;cell epitopes. However, studies on viral escape from T&#xa0;cell immunity have been hampered by uncertain estimates of epitope prevalence. Here, we map and quantify CD8 T&#xa0;cell responses to SARS-CoV-2-specific minimal epitopes in blood drawn from April to June 2020 from 83 COVID-19 convalescents. Among 37 HLA ligands eluted from five prevalent alleles and an additional 86 predicted binders, we identify 29 epitopes with an immunoprevalence ranging from 3% to 100% among individuals expressing the relevant HLA allele. Mutations in VOC are reported in 10.3% of the epitopes, while 20.6% of the non-immunogenic peptides are mutated in VOC. The nine most prevalent epitopes are conserved in VOC. Thus, comprehensive mapping of epitope prevalence does not provide evidence that mutations in VOC are driven by escape of T&#xa0;cell immunity.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Lc-ms, Immunopeptidomics

### Affiliations
Department of Cancer Immunology, Institute for Cancer Research, Oslo University Hospital Radiumhospitalet, Oslo, Norway Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway
University of Oslo

### Submitter
Ravi Chand Bollineni

### Lab Head
Dr Johanna Olweus
Department of Cancer Immunology, Institute for Cancer Research, Oslo University Hospital Radiumhospitalet, Oslo, Norway Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway


