### Accession
PXD029963

### Title
Computational Prediction, Validation and Repurposing of Existing Drug as Inhibitor of Vascular Calcification

### Description
This study aimed to identify small molecules that inhibit vascular calcification with computational approach. To examine the mechanism of calcification inhibition, proteomics analysis was performed using aorta tissue samples to clarify therapeutic target.

### Sample Protocol
Eight to 10-week-old male Ldlr-/- mice (Cat No. 002207) were purchased from the Jackson Laboratories. Animals were fed with a high-fat and high-cholesterol diet (HFD; D12108CO, Research diet Inc) for 15 weeks to induce cardiovascular atherosclerosis and calcification. Niclosamide (N3510, Sigma Aldrich Co.) is mixed into HFD at 750 ppm concentration (Research diet Inc). The dose and duration for Niclosamide treatment were determined based on the results from our pilot study, which showed 750 ppm treatment for 8 weeks after 7 weeks of HFD suppressed vascular calcification, but 250 ppm of Niclosamide did not show substantial changes (Supplemental Figure IA and IB).  Mice were randomly assigned to three groups of 10-12 animals per group: 1. normal chow diet, 2. HFD and 3. HFD containing Niclosamide for 10 weeks after 5 weeks of HFD treatment. Aorta sample tissues from arch region were collected at terminal sacrifice for proteomic analysis.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were prepared using an iST Kit (Preomics, P.O.00027) in which 10 µg of protein per sample was used as per manufacturer’s directions. Prepared peptide samples were diluted 5-fold to acquire a constant ion current.  For global proteomics, the 15 mass spectral files were queried against the mice UniProt database (n=63,703 entries; downloaded September 09, 2020) using the SEQUEST-HT search algorithm, via the Proteome Discoverer (PD) Package (version 2.2, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Trypsin (full) was set as the digestion enzyme, allowing up to 4 missed cleavages and a minimum peptide length of 4 amino acids. A 10 ppm tolerance window was used in the MS1 search space, and a 0.6 Da fragment tolerance window was used for CID. Methionine oxidation and n-terminal acetylation were set as dynamic modifications, and carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a static modification. Peptides were filtered based on a 1% FDR based on the reverse database results. In order to quantify peptide precursors detected in the MS1 but not sequenced from sample to sample, we enabled the ‘Feature Mapper’ node to quantify proteins across 15 datasets. Chromatographic alignment was done with a maximum retention time (RT) shift of 10 minutes and a mass tolerance of 10 ppm. Feature linking and mapping settings were, RT tolerance minimum of 0 minutes, mass tolerance of 10 ppm and signal-to-noise minimum of five. Precursor peptide abundances were based on their chromatographic intensities and total peptide amount was used for normalization. Unique and razor peptides were used for quantification. Peptides assigned to a given protein group, and not present in any other protein group, were considered as unique. Consequently, each protein group is represented by a single master protein (PD Grouping feature). The final protein list was filtered for 2 or more unique peptides. Targeted CROT data were quantified with Skyline# (version 21.1.0.146). Peak area ratio (total area of CROT fragments/total area of YWHAB and VDAC1 fragments) was calculated using the following fragments: ILNDVSQAK (CROT), y5 m/z 532.31, y6 m/z 647.34, y5 m/z 532.31; SGNTPLDMNQFR (CROT, M8-oxidized), y5 m/z 711.32, y6 m/z 826.35, y7 m/z 939.44; YLSEVASGENK (YWHAB), y6 m/z 605.29, y7 m/z 704.36, y8 m/z 833.40; YLILNATQAESK (YWHAB), y7 m/z 734.37, y8 m/z 848.41, y9 m/z 961.49; VTQSNFAVGYK (VDAC1), y6 m/z 684.37, y7 m/z 798.41, y8 m/z 885.45; VTQSNFAVGYK (VDAC1), y7 m/z 750.38, y8 m/z 837.41, y9 m/z 924.44.

### Publication Abstract
Vascular calcification is a cardiovascular disorder with no therapeutic options. We recently reported that <i>o</i>-octanoyltransferase (CROT) suppression can inhibit vascular calcification <i>in vivo</i> and <i>in vitro</i> through amelioration of mitochondrial function and fatty acid metabolism. Inhibiting calcification with a small molecule compound targeting CROT-associated mechanisms will be a promising non-invasive treatment of vascular calcification. Here we used a computational approach to search for existing drugs that can inhibit vascular calcification through the CROT pathway. For screening of the compounds that reduce CROT expression, we utilized the Connectivity Map encompassing the L1000 computational platform that contains transcription profiles of various cell lines and perturbagens including small molecules. Small molecules (<i>n</i> = 13) were identified and tested in human primary smooth muscle cells cultured in osteogenic media to induce calcification. Niclosamide, an FDA-improved anthelmintic drug, markedly inhibited calcification along with reduced alkaline phosphatase activity and <i>CROT</i> mRNA expression. To validate this compound <i>in vivo</i>, LDL receptor (<i>Ldlr</i>)-deficient mice fed a high fat diet were given oral doses of niclosamide (0 or 750 ppm admixed with diet) for 10 weeks. Niclosamide treatment decreased aortic and carotid artery calcification as determined by optical near infrared molecular imaging (OsteoSense680) and histological analysis. In addition, niclosamide improved features of fatty liver, including decreased cholesterol levels along with decreased Crot expression, while plasma total cholesterol levels did not change. Proteomic analysis of aortic samples demonstrated that niclosamide affected wingless/integrated (Wnt) signaling pathway and decreased runt-related transcription factor 2 (Runx2) expression, an essential factor for calcification. Our target discovery strategy using a genetic perturbation database with existing drugs identified niclosamide, that in turn inhibited calcification <i>in vivo</i> and <i>in vitro</i>, indicating its potential for the treatment of vascular calcification.

### Keywords
Wnt signaling, Proteomics, Vascular calcification, Drug repurposing, Mice, Drug discovery

### Affiliations
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School
Brigham Women's Hospital, Harvard medical school

### Submitter
Sasha  Singh

### Lab Head
Dr Elena Aikawa
Brigham Women's Hospital, Harvard medical school


