### Accession
PXD016384

### Title
Acetylome analysis of Bordetella pertussis reveals possible targets of novel BP0960 gene-encoded lysine deacetylase

### Description
Acetylation on ε-amino groups of lysine residues (N-ε-lysine acetylation) represents an important mechanism of post-translational regulation of protein function. However, its role and extent in the whooping cough agent Bordetella pertussis remain unknown. In this study, we analyzed the acetylomes of two bacterial mutants lacking putative lysine deacetylases encoded by genes BP0960 and BP3063 and compared them with the acetylome of wild-type B. pertussis. The results suggest that acetylation on lysine residues may modulate the activities of proteins involved in bacterial virulence and of multiple histone-like proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Liquid cultures of Bordetella pertussis Tohama I strain were harvested and bacterial pellets were dissolved in 8M urea/50mM ammonium bicarbonate. Bacterial lysates containing 6 mg of protein were reduced by dithiotreitol, alkylated by iodoacetamide, and diluted to reach 2M urea. Lysates were digested by trypsin (Sigma) at 1:40 ratio (trypsin:proteins) and incubated overnight at 37 °C. Digested samples were acidified by TFA and desalted. Peptides were eluted by 60% ACN/0.1% TFA and volumes corresponding to 50 µg of peptide material were dried in Speed-Vac for proteome analysis. The rest of eluates was frozen at -80 °C overnight and then lyophilized for at least 2 days. Lyophilized digest were processed and enriched for peptides containing acetylated lysine residues (AcK) by PTMScan Acetyl-Lysine Motif [Ac-K] Kit (Cell Signaling) according to protocol supplied by manufacturer. For biological replicate consisting of three digests (one for each bacterial strain), one vial with immunoaffinity beads was split into three parts and the respective amounts were used for the immunoprecipitation of each digest. AcK-containing peptides eluted from immunoaffinity beads were desalted on StageTips and dried in Speed-Vac. Acetylome samples were analyzed by reversed-phase nano LC-MS/MS (Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano connected to Q-Exactive Plus) employing DDA approach (Top10). MS spectra of 300-1700 m/z range were acquired at resolution of 70,000. Only multiply charged precursor ions with minimal AGC target of 2.5×10^4 counts, which were not fragmented during previous 20 s were admitted for higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD). Tandem mass spectra were acquired with following settings: resolution was set at 35,000, AGC target value at 1×10^6, maximum ion injection time at 120 ms and normalized collision energy was set to 28. Proteome samples were acquired using Top12 setup and collected MS spectra were in range of 350–1600 m/z. Minimal AGC target for triggering MS/MS was 1.2×10^4 and resulting spectra were acquired at 17,500 resolution.

### Data Protocol
Acetylome and proteome data sets were processed by MaxQuant ver. 1.6.5.0. Data were searched against FASTA database of reference proteome for Bordetella pertussis Tohama I strain/ATCC BAA-589/NCTC 13251, downloaded from Uniprot on July 29, 2019. MaxQuant-implemented database was used for the identification of contaminants. AcK site identification was performed using these MaxQuant parameters: mass tolerance for the first search was set to 20 ppm, for the second search from recalibrated spectra then 4.5 ppm (with individual mass error filtering enabled) with maximum of 3 missed cleavages; maximal charge per peptide was z = 7; minimal length of peptide was set to seven amino acids, maximal mass of peptide 4,600 Da; carbamidomethylation (C) was set as fixed modification, acetylation (K and protein N-term) and oxidation (M) were then set as variable modifications with the maximum number of variable modifications per peptide set to five. Trypsin was set as a protease without cleavage restriction. Mass tolerance for fragments in MS/MS was set to 20 ppm, taking the 12 most intensive peaks per 100 Da for search (with enabled possibility of cofragmented peptide identification). Minimal Andromeda score for modified peptides was set to 40 and minimal delta score for modified peptides was six. FDR filtering on peptide spectrum match was set to 0.01, the same as for separate FDR filtering of each modification. MaxQuant parameters for processing of proteome data were identical except that only oxidation (M) and acetylation (protein N-term) were allowed as variable modifications and maximal number of missed cleavages was set to two. All hits identified in searches as contaminants were filtered out. Proteins were quantified using MaxLFQ function with at least two peptide ratios required for pair-wise comparisons of protein abundance between samples.

### Publication Abstract
Post-translational modifications of proteins enable swift physiological adaptation of cells to altered growth conditions and stress. Aside from protein phosphorylation, acetylation on &#x3b5;-amino groups of lysine residues (<i>N</i>-&#x3b5;-lysine acetylation) represents another important post-translational modification of proteins. For many bacterial pathogens, including the whooping cough agent <i>Bordetella pertussis</i>, the role and extent of protein acetylation remain to be defined. We expressed in <i>Escherichia coli</i> the BP0960 and BP3063 genes encoding two putative deacetylases of <i>B. pertussis</i> and show that BP0960 encodes a lysine deacetylase enzyme, named Bkd1, that regulates acetylation of a range of <i>B. pertussis</i> proteins. Comparison of the proteome and acetylome of a &#x394;<i>bkd1</i> mutant with the proteome and acetylome of wild-type <i>B. pertussis</i> (PRIDE ID. PXD016384) revealed that acetylation on lysine residues may modulate activities or stabilities of proteins involved in bacterial metabolism and histone-like proteins. However, increased acetylation of the BvgA response regulator protein of the <i>B. pertussis</i> master virulence-regulating BvgAS two-component system affected neither the total levels of produced BvgA nor its phosphorylation status. Indeed, the &#x394;<i>bkd1</i> mutant was not impaired in the production of key virulence factors and its survival within human macrophages <i>in vitro</i> was not affected. The &#x394;<i>bkd1</i> mutant exhibited an increased growth rate under carbon source-limiting conditions and its virulence in the <i>in vivo</i> mouse lung infection model was somewhat affected. These results indicate that the lysine deacetylase Bkd1 and <i>N</i>-&#x3b5;-lysine acetylation primarily modulate the general metabolism rather than the virulence of <i>B. pertussis</i>.

### Keywords
Deacetylase activity, Acetylome, Bordetella pertussis

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Molecular Biology of Bacterial Pathogens, Institute of Microbiology of the Czech Academy of Sciences, Prague, Czech Republic
Biomedical Research Center, University Hospital Hradec Kralove

### Submitter
Ivo Fabrik

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Peter Sebo, PhD.
Laboratory of Molecular Biology of Bacterial Pathogens, Institute of Microbiology of the Czech Academy of Sciences, Prague, Czech Republic


