### Accession
PXD010153

### Title
Quantification and discovery of sequence determinants of protein per mRNA amount in 29 human tissues

### Description
We analyzed the contribution of known sequence determinants of protein synthesis and degradation and novel mRNA and protein sequence motifs that we found by association testing. In order to investigate the functional understanding of novel mRNA motifs, an RNA competitive-binding assay was developed to systematically identify motif-specific RNA binding proteins and to measure interaction strength thereof.

### Sample Protocol
Cell extraction and preparation of the lysate for the competition-binding assay were performed as described (Medard et.al 2014). The preparation of RNA-beads for affinity purification of RNA-binding proteins was performed as follows: NHS-Sepharose beads (Amersham Biosciences) were washed with DMSO (4 × 10 mL/mL beads) and reacted with RNA oligos with 5’ amino modified C6 (50 nmol/mL beads; Integrated DNA Technologies, Inc.) for 20 h on an end-over-end shaker in the dark in the presence of triethylamine (30 μL/mL beads) in DMSO and H2O (1.8 mL of DMSO and 0.2 mL ddH2O for 1 mL of beads). Next, aminoethanol (50 μL/mL beads) was added and the mixture was kept shaking for an extra 20 h in the dark. The beads were washed with DMSO (10 mL/mL beads) and ethanol (3 × 10 mL/mL beads) and stored in ethanol (1 mL/mL beads) at 4 °C. The competition binding assay itself, quantitative label-free LC-MS/MS analysis as well as curve fitting were also developed according to kinobead pulldowns (Medard et.al 2014). Briefly, the diluted cell lysates (2.5 mg of total proteins/well) were incubated for 1h at 4 °C in an end-over-end shaker with 0 nM (water control), 0.3 nM, 1 nM, 3 nM, 10 nM, 30 nM, 100 nM, 300 nM, 1 μM, 3 μM, 10 μM and 30 μM of the free RNA oligos dissolved in RNase free water. The preincubation step was followed by incubation with 20 μL settled beads for 30 min at 4 °C. The water control lysate was recovered and incubated similarly with RNA oligo beads as a pulldown of pulldown experiment to calculate the depletion factor. The  beads were then washed  three  times  with  1  mL CP-0.4 % and  twice  with  1  mL  CP-0.2 (50 mM Tris/HCl, pH 7.5, 5% glycerol, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 1 mM Na3VO4, 0.2% NP40).The bound proteins were subsequently eluted with 60 μL of 2× NuPAGE LDS sample buffer (Invitrogen, Darmstadt, Germany) containing 50 mM DTT. Eluates were alkylated with CAA and in-gel digestion was performed for following LC-MS/MS measurement.

### Data Protocol
Peptide and protein identification and quantification were performed using MaxQuant  v1.5.3.30 by searching the tandem MS data against a human Uniprot reference database using the embedded search engine Andromeda. The peptide FDR and protein FDR were set at 0.01. Label free quantification (LFQ) and match between runs were enabled.

### Publication Abstract
Despite their importance in determining protein abundance, a comprehensive catalogue of sequence features controlling protein-to-mRNA (PTR) ratios and a quantification of their effects are still lacking. Here, we quantified PTR ratios for 11,575 proteins across 29 human tissues using matched transcriptomes and proteomes. We estimated by regression the contribution of known sequence determinants of protein synthesis and degradation in addition to 45 mRNA and 3 protein sequence motifs that we found by association testing. While PTR ratios span more than 2 orders of magnitude, our integrative model predicts PTR ratios at a median precision of 3.2-fold. A reporter assay provided functional support for two novel UTR motifs, and an immobilized mRNA affinity competition-binding assay identified motif-specific bound proteins for one motif. Moreover, our integrative model led to a new metric of codon optimality that captures the effects of codon frequency on protein synthesis and degradation. Altogether, this study shows that a large fraction of PTR ratio variation in human tissues can be predicted from sequence, and it identifies many new candidate post-transcriptional regulatory elements.

### Keywords
Rna pulldown

### Affiliations
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technical University of Munich
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technische Universität München, Germany

### Submitter
Dongxue Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Bernhard Küster
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technische Universität München, Germany


