### Accession
PXD020205

### Title
Erastin induced protein expression change in H1975 cells

### Description
H1975 cells were treated with DMSO and erastin, respectively. Protein was extracted and separated using SDS-PAGE electrophoresis. MS analysis was performed and protein was identified and quantified using Proteome Discoverer™ 1.3 software using the SEQUEST® search engine.

### Sample Protocol
H1975 cells were cultured in DMEM, and treated with DMSO or erastin. Cells were centrifuged and digested using Western/IP lysis buffer, and the supernatant was extracted. SDS-PAGE electrophoresis was performed to separate different protein components. Then protein was reduced using iodoacetamide, blocked using cysteine and digested using trypsin.

### Data Protocol
TMT was labeled for the sample and protein was analyzed using MS analysis. Finally, protein was identified and quantified using Proteome Discoverer™ 1.3 software using the SEQUEST® search engine.

### Publication Abstract
<b>Rationale:</b> Ferroptosis, a newly identified form of regulated cell death, can be induced following the inhibition of cystine-glutamate antiporter system X<sub>C</sub><sup>-</sup> because of the impaired uptake of cystine. However, the outcome following the accumulation of endogenous glutamate in lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD) has not yet been determined. Yes-associated protein (YAP) is sustained by the hexosamine biosynthesis pathway (HBP)-dependent O-linked beta-N-acetylglucosaminylation (O-GlcNAcylation), and glutamine-fructose-6-phosphate transaminase (GFPT1), the rate-limiting enzyme of the HBP, can be phosphorylated and inhibited by adenylyl cyclase (ADCY)-mediated activation of protein kinase A (PKA). However, whether accumulated endogenous glutamate determines ferroptosis sensitivity by influencing the ADCY/PKA/HBP/YAP axis in LUAD cells is not understood. <b>Methods:</b> Cell viability, cell death and the generation of lipid reactive oxygen species (ROS) and malondialdehyde (MDA) were measured to evaluate the responses to the induction of ferroptosis following the inhibition of system X<sub>C</sub><sup>-</sup>. Tandem mass tags (TMTs) were employed to explore potential factors critical for the ferroptosis sensitivity of LUAD cells. Immunoblotting (IB) and quantitative RT-PCR (qPCR) were used to analyze protein and mRNA expression. Co-immunoprecipitation (co-IP) assays were performed to identify protein-protein interactions and posttranslational modifications. Metabolite levels were measured using the appropriate kits. Transcriptional regulation was evaluated using a luciferase reporter assay, chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP), and electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA). Drug administration and limiting dilution cell transplantation were performed with cell-derived xenograft (CDX) and patient-derived xenograft (PDX) mouse models. The associations among clinical outcome, drug efficacy and ADCY10 expression were determined based on data from patients who underwent curative surgery and evaluated with patient-derived primary LUAD cells and tissues. <b>Results:</b> The accumulation of endogenous glutamate following system X<sub>C</sub><sup>-</sup> inhibition has been shown to determine ferroptosis sensitivity by suppressing YAP in LUAD cells. YAP O-GlcNAcylation and expression cannot be sustained in LUAD cells upon impairment of GFPT1. Thus, Hippo pathway-like phosphorylation and ubiquitination of YAP are enhanced. ADCY10 acts as a key downstream target and diversifies the effects of glutamate on the PKA-dependent suppression of GFPT1. We also discovered that the protumorigenic and proferroptotic effects of ADCY10 are mediated separately. Advanced-stage LUADs with high ADCY10 expression are sensitive to ferroptosis. Moreover, LUAD cells with acquired therapy resistance are also prone to higher ADCY10 expression and are more likely to respond to ferroptosis. Finally, a varying degree of secondary labile iron increase is caused by the failure to sustain YAP-stimulated transcriptional compensation for ferritin at later stages further explains why ferroptosis sensitivity varies among LUAD cells. <b>Conclusions:</b> Endogenous glutamate is critical for ferroptosis sensitivity following the inhibition of system X<sub>C</sub><sup>-</sup> in LUAD cells, and ferroptosis-based treatment is a good choice for LUAD patients with later-stage and/or therapy-resistant tumors.

### Keywords
Lung cancer, Erastin, Ferroptosis

### Affiliations
tongji university
Shanghai Institute of Thoracic Tumors, Shanghai Chest Hospital, Shanghai, 200030, China. (lab head)

### Submitter
zhang xiao

### Lab Head
Dr Zhang Xiao
Shanghai Institute of Thoracic Tumors, Shanghai Chest Hospital, Shanghai, 200030, China. (lab head)


