### Accession
PXD002148

### Title
An integrative analysis of post-translational histone modifications in the marine diatom Phaeodactylum tricornutum

### Description
Nucleosomes are the building blocks of chromatin where gene regulation takes place. Chromatin landscapes have been profiled for several species, providing insights into the understanding of fundamental mechanisms of chromatin-mediated transcriptional regulation of gene expression. However, knowledge is missing from several major and deep-branching eukaryotic groups, such as the marine model diatom Phaeodactylum tricornutum. Diatoms are highly diverse and ubiquitous species of phytoplankton that play a key role in global biogeochemical cycles. Dissecting chromatin-mediated regulation of genes in diatoms will help understand the ecological success of these organisms in contemporary oceans.  Here, we use high resolution mass spectrometry to identify a full repertoire of post-translational modifications on P. tricornutum histones, including eight novel modifications. We map five histone marks coupled with expression data and show that P. tricornutum displays both unique and broadly conserved chromatin features, reflecting the chimeric nature of its genome. Combinatorial analysis of histone marks and DNA methylation demonstrates the presence of an epigenetic code defining active or repressive chromatin states. We further profile three specific histone marks under conditions of nitrate depletion and show that the histone code is dynamic and targets specific sets of genes.  This study is the first genome-wide characterization of the histone code from a Stramenopile and a marine phytoplankton. The work represents an important initial step for understanding the evolutionary history of chromatin and how epigenetic modifications affect gene expression in response to environmental cues in marine environments.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were separated by 14% SDS–PAGE gels and stained with colloidal Coomassie blue (LabSafe Gel Blue™, AGRO-BIO) reagent that does not contain methanol or acetic acid. Histone bands were excised and washed and proteins were reduced with 10 mM DTT prior to alkylation with 55 mM iodoacetamide or chloroacetamide for ubiquitylation studies. After washing and shrinking of the gel pieces with 100% acetonitrile, propionylation or in-gel digestion was performed. All digestions were performed overnight in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate at 30°C, by adding 10-20 µL endoproteinase (12.5 ng/µL) trypsin (Promega) or 12.5 ng/µL Chymotrypsin (Promega) or 12.5 ng/µL ArgC (Promega) or 20 ng/µL Elastase (Sigma-Aldrich). The shrunken gel bands were chemically derivatized by treatment with propionic anhydride before and after trypsin digestion. Briefly, this reaction mixture was created using ¾ propionyl anhydride (Sigma-Aldrich) and ¼ methanol. 20 µL of propionylation reagent and 100 µL of 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate were added to each band, adjusted to pH 8.0, and allowed to react at 51 °C for 20 min and reduced to dryness using a SpeedVac concentrator for removal of reaction remnants before trypsin digestion. A second round of propionylation was performed to propionylate the newly created peptide N-termini. Peptides were extracted by ultrasonic with extraction solution (60% acetonitrile/5% formic acid). The extraction was dried in a vacuum concentrator at room temperature and re-dissolved in solvent A (2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). Peptides were then subjected to MS analysis.   Samples were analyzed by nano-HPLC/MS/MS using an Ultimate3000 system (Dionex S.A.) coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Samples are loaded on a C18 pre-column (300 µm inner diameter x 5 mm; Dionex) at 20 µL/min in 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. After 3 min of desalting, the pre-column was switched on line with the analytical C18 column (75 µm inner diameter x 50 cm; C18 PepMapTM, Dionex) equilibrated in 100% solvent A. Bound peptides were eluted using a 0 to 30% gradient of solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.085% formic acid) during 157 min, then 30 to 50% gradient of solvent B during 20 min at a 150 nL/min flow rate (40°C). Data-dependent acquisition was performed on the LTQ-Orbitrap mass spectrometer in the positive ion mode. Survey MS scans were acquired in the Orbitrap on the 400-1200 m/z range with the resolution set to a value of 100 000. Each scan was recalibrated in real time by co-injecting an internal standard from ambient air into the C-trap (‘lock mass option’). The five most intense ions per survey scan were selected for CID fragmentation and the resulting fragments were analyzed in the linear trap (LTQ). Target ions already selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 20 s.

### Data Protocol
Data were acquired using the Xcalibur software (version 2.0.7) and the resulting spectra were then analyzed via the MascotTM Software created with Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4, Thermo Scientific) using the in-house database containing the sequence of histone proteins from P. tricornutum (PtH3_50695, PtH3_21239, PtH4_26896, PtH2A_34798, PtH2A_28445, PtH2B_11823, PtH1_54381) or  the UniProtKB  Phaeodactylum tricornutum database (15832 proteins) with a mascot score of 1% FDR (or < 5%) shown in bold) in Table S5. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine, oxidation of methionine, acetylation of lysine and protein N-terminal, methylation, dimethylation of lysine, arginine and trimethylation of lysine, methylation of aspartic and glutamic acid, di-glycine of lysine, propionylation of lysine and N-terminal of peptides, phosphorylated histidine, serine, threonine and tyrosine were set as variable modifications for Mascot searches. The mass tolerances in MS and MS/MS were set to 5 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. The resulting Mascot files were further processed using myProMS

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
H3k27me3, Epigenetics, Phaeodactylum tricornutum, Evolution, Histone modifications

### Affiliations
Institut Curie
LSMP Institut Curie FRANCE

### Submitter
Guillaume Arras

### Lab Head
Dr Damarys Loew
LSMP Institut Curie FRANCE


