### Accession
PXD028578

### Title
Stable isotope probing with 13C-labeled bicarbonate/proteomics of cyanobacterial consortium collected from photobioreactors enriched from soda lake microbial mats in BC, Canada

### Description
In this work we used stable isotope probing/proteomics to study uptake of carbon sources by members of the cyanobacterial consortium. The database for protein identification was obtained from assembled metagenomes.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics was carried out on the stirred bioreactor cyanobacterial consortia in June of 2019. 2.0 ml of consortia was transferred from 2 L stirred bioreactors into 100 ml glass bottles containing 50 ml of culture media in duplicate. 2.68ml of 0.1 M NaH13CO3 was added for a total concentration of 0.536 M NaHCO3 containing 2% 13C (including the ~1% natural abundance, background 13C). Cultures were subjected to day/night cycles of 16:8hr, using full spectrum LED lights (Model T5H0; 6400K, Sunblaster Holdings ULC, Langley, BC, Canada). The initial sample was taken directly from the 2L stirred bioreactor. Time course samples were taken at 14hr (end of day 1), 22 hr (end of night 1), 36 hr (end of day2) and 44 hr (end of night 2). The 1 ml sample was centrifuged, supernatant media was removed, and the resulting pellet was frozen at -80C for ~10 days until protein extraction. Protein extraction was carried out as described in Ataeian et al 2021. All samples with technical quadruplicates were lysed in SDT-lysis buffer (4% (w/v) SDS, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6, 0.1 M DTT). SDT lysis buffer was added in a 1:10 sample/buffer ratio to the sample pellets. Cells were disrupted in lysing matrix tubes A (MP Biomedicals, Cat. No. 116910050) for 45 seconds at 6 m/s using a OMNI bead ruptor bead mill (Omni International, https://www.omni-inc.com/) and subsequently incubated at 95° C for 10 minutes followed by pelleting of debris for 5 min at 21,000 x g. We prepared tryptic digests following the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol described by Wisniewski et al. (2009, Nat. Meth. 6(5)). In brief, 30 µl of the cleared lysate were mixed with 200 µl of UA solution (8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris/HCl pH 8.5) in a 10 kDa MWCO 500 µl centrifugal filter unit (VWR International) and centrifuged at 14,000 x g for 40 min. 200 µl of UA solution were added again and centrifugal filter spun at 14,000 x g for 40 min. 100 µl of IAA solution (0.05 M iodoacetamide in UA solution) were added to the filter and incubated at 22° C for 20 min. The IAA solution was removed by centrifugation and the filter was washed three times by adding 100 µl of UA solution and then centrifuging. The buffer on the filter was then changed to ABC (50 mM Ammonium Bicarbonate), by washing the filter three times with 100 µl of ABC. 1 to 2 µg of MS grade trypsin (Thermo Scientific Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA) in 40 µl of ABC were added to the filter and filters incubated overnight in a wet chamber at 37° C. The next day, peptides were eluted by centrifugation at 14,000 x g for 20 min, followed by addition of 50 µl of 0.5 M NaCl and again centrifugation. Peptides were desalted using Sep-Pak C18 Plus Light Cartridges (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) according to the manufacturers instructions. Approximate peptide concentrations were determined using the Pierce Micro BCA assay (Thermo Scientific Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA) following the manufacturers instructions.  Extracted peptides were separated by an RSLC-nano Liquid Chromatograph (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA), and subsequently analyzed on a QExatcive Plus hybrid quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Quadruplicate technical replicates were run as described in Ataeian et al 2021.  The samples were analyzed by 1D-LC-MS/MS (1x 260 min and 3x 460 min runs for each) using a block-randomized design. Two blank runs were done between samples to reduce carry over. For each run, 1200 ng of extracted peptides were loaded onto a 5 mm, 300 µm ID C18 Acclaim® PepMap100 pre-column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using an UltiMateTM 3000 RSLCnano Liquid Chromatograph (Thermo Fisher  Scientific) and desalted on the pre-column. Peptides were transferred to a 50 cm x 75 µm analytical EASY-Spray column packed with PepMap RSLC C18, 2µm material (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and heated to 45° C. The analytical column was connected directly to the Q Exactive Plus hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) via an Easy-Spray source. Peptides were separated on the analytical column at a flow rate of 225 nL/min using a 260 minute gradient and mass spectra acquired in the Orbitrap as described by Petersen et al (Petersen et al 2016).

### Data Protocol
Identification and quantification of detected proteins were carried out in Proteome Discover version 2.2.0.388 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using the SEQUEST HT node. False discovery rates (FDR) were estimated at the peptide and protein level with Percolator Node and FidoCT, respectively and proteins and peptides with FDR >5% discarded from further analysis. Proteins without protein-unique peptides were discarded. Protein database consisted of metagenome assembled genomes from the cyanobacterial consortia in this study. The 13C/12C of detected peptides were determined with Calis-p 2.0 software (Kleiner et al. 2021), using scored peptide spectra match (PSM) tables and raw MS data (in mzML format) as input (https://sourceforge.net/p/calis-p/wiki/Home/).  To correct on observed offset in protein-SIP measurements to IRMS values, a value of 0.00077 was added to the calculated median peptide isotope ratios. The 13C/12C ratio for each peptide mapping to a single MAG was attributed to the Taxonomy for that MAG. For peptides mapping to multiple MAGs the ratio was attributed to the most specific taxonomic level common to the protein taxonomic assignments. E.g. Peptides assigned to Verrucomicrobiota, Opitutales consist of MAGs 7A and 56, peptides assigned to Verrucomicrobiota, Kritimatiellae consist of MAGs 17 and 41 and peptides assigned to Saccharospirillaceae consist of MAGs 5A and 23.  The 13C/12C ratio for each taxon at a given time point was calculated as the median ratio of all peptides mapping to a given taxa weighted by the spectral intensity of that peptide in that sample using Hmisc 3.6.3 in R 3.6.2. Weighting of the ratio by spectral intensity accounts for the amount of that peptide detected, better reflecting the abundance of peptides with a given ratio. For numerically abundant MAGs, Cyanobacteria, Planctomycetota (MAG 34) and Wenzhouxiangella (MAG 57) box plots showing average 13C/12C ratio and the low and upper quantiles. For lower abundance MAGs individual points showing the 13C/12C ratio for detected peptides at each time point were plotted with an overlay of the boxplot, to visualize the distribution and number of peptides detected.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Stable isotope probing, Cyanobacteria, Heterotrophs

### Affiliations
University of Calgary
Energy Bioengineering and Geomicrobiology Group, Department of Geoscience, University of Calgary

### Submitter
Angela Kouris

### Lab Head
Dr Marc Strous
Energy Bioengineering and Geomicrobiology Group, Department of Geoscience, University of Calgary


