### Accession
PXD026467

### Title
Analysis of the effect of Bacillus velezensis culture filtrate on the growth and proteome of Cladobotryum mycophilum

### Description
Cladobotryum mycophilum, the causative agent of cobweb disease on Agaricus bisporus results in significant crop losses for mushroom growers worldwide. Cobweb disease is treated through strict hygiene control methods and the application of chemical fungicides but an increase in fungicide resistant Cladobotryum strains has resulted in a need to develop alternative biocontrol treatment methods. The aim of the work presented here was to evaluate the response of C. mycophilum to a Bacillus velezensis isolate to assess its potential as a novel biocontrol agent. Exposure of 48 hr C. mycophilum cultures to 25% v/v 96h B. velezensis culture filtrate resulted in a 57% reduction in biomass (P < 0.0002), a disruption in hyphal structure and morphology, and the appearance of aurofusarin in culture medium. Proteomic analysis of B. velezensis culture filtrate revealed the presence of peptidase 8 (subtilisin), peptide deformylase and probable cytosol aminopeptidase which are known to induce cell disruption. Characterisation of the proteomic response of C. mycophilum following exposure to B. velezensis culture filtrate revealed an increase in the abundance of a variety of proteins associated with stress response (ISWI chromatin-remodelling complex ATPase ISW2 (+24 fold), carboxypeptidase Y precursor  (+3 fold) and calmodulin (+2 fold).  There was also a decrease in the abundance of proteins associated with transcription (40S ribosomal protein S30 (-26 fold), 40S ribosomal protein S21 (-3 fold) and carbohydrate metabolism, (L-xylulose reductase (-10 fold). The results presented here indicate that B. velezensis culture filtrate is capable of inhibiting the growth of C. mycophilum and inducing a stress response, thus indicating its potential to control this important pathogen of mushrooms.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from Cladobotryum mycophilum mycelium which was grown for 48hrs before it was supplemented either with 12.5ml/50ml Bacillus velezensis 96hr culture filtrate (treatment 1), 6.25ml/50ml B. velezensis 96hr CF (treatment 2), or 12.5ml/50 ml nutrient both (NB) (control). Fungal hyphae were crushed in liquid nitrogen. Cell lysis buffer (8 m urea, 2 m thiourea, and 0.1 m Tris-HCl (pH 8.0) dissolved in 25ml ddH2O) which had been supplemented with protease inhibitors (leupeptin, pepstatin A and Phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF) was applied to the hyphae to collect cell lysate. Samples were sonicated three times using a probe at 40% power for 20 secs. Samples were centrifuged at 13,000 × g for 5 minutes. Samples were quantified using the Bradford method. Samples (100ng) were acetone (sigma) precipitated overnight. The following day, samples were centrifuged at 10,000 × g for 10mins to pellet the proteins. The acetone was removed, and samples were resuspended in 25μl resuspension buffer (8 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 0.1 M Tris-HCl (pH 8.0) dissolved in 25ml ddH2O). 3μl aliquots were used to run a 1D SDS gel. 2μl aliquots were used to quantify proteins using a QubitTM quantification system (Invitrogen). Ammonium bicarbonate (125 μl) was added to the remaining 20 μl of each sample. Samples were reduced using dithiothreitol (DTT), followed by an incubation at  56 °C for 20 min. Samples we alkylated with 0.55 m iodoacetamide (IAA) at room temperature, in the dark for 15 min. Samples were then digested with Protease Max Surfactant Trypsin Enhancer (Promega) (1 μl) and Sequence Grade Trypsin (Promega) (1μl). This was followed by an incubation at 37 °C for 18 h. Digestion was inhibited with TFA (1 μl, 100%) (Sigma Aldrich) and samples were then incubated at room temperature for 5mins. Following this, samples were centrifuged for 10 min at 14,500 × g and purified for mass spectrometry with C18 Spin Columns (Pierce), following the manufacturer's instructions. Samples were then dried in a SpeedyVac concentrator (Thermo Sciecntific Savant DNA 120) and were then resuspended in 2% v/v acetonitrile and 0.05% v/v TFA to give a final peptide concentration of 1 μg/μl. Samples were then placed in a ultrasonic bath for 5 mins and centrifuged at 13,000 × g for 5 mins. The supernatant was then used for mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Purified samples (2ul containing 0.75ug of protein) were applied onto a QExactive (ThermoFisher Scientific, USA) high resolution accurate mass spectrometer connected to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 (RSLCnano) chromatography system. Peptides were separated by an increasing acetonitrile gradient from 2%–40% on a Biobasic C18 Picofrit column (100 mm length, 75 mm ID), using a 120-min reverse phase gradient at a low rate of 250nl/min. A full MS scan of range 200–2000 was followed to select the 15 most intense ions prior to MS/MS. Quantitative analysis was preformed using Andromeda search engine in Max-Quant (version 1.6.17 https://www.maxquant.org/). Max-Quant was used to identify the proteins within the sample and to correlate them against the Trichoderma harzianum proteome (ACCESSION #MBGI01000000) downloaded from www.uniprot.org. There is no Cladobotryum database currently available on UniProt, hence why a closely related species, T. harzianum was chosen. The search parameter included a first search peptide tolerance of 20 ppm and a main search peptide tolerance of 4.5 with cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification and N-acetylation of protein and oxidation of methionine as variable modifications. A maximum of two cleavage sites were permitted. Peptides and proteins were set at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%. Perseus (version 1.6.14.0) was employed for data and statistical analysis. The quantitative measurement of protein abundance for subsequent analysis looked at normalized LFQ intensity values. The matrix of data was filtered to remove contaminants and peptides identified by site. LFQ intensity values were log2 transformed and each sample was assigned to its corresponding group, i.e. control, treatment 1 or treatment 2. Proteins not found in four out of four replicates in at least one group were omitted from the analysis. A data-imputation step was conducted to replace missing values with values that simulate signals of low abundant proteins chosen randomly from a distribution specified by a downshift of 2 times the mean standard deviation (S.D.) of all measured values and a width of 0.3 times this S.D.A principal component analysis (PCA) was generated with the resulting dataset. Gene ontology (GO) mapping was performed in Perseus, the UniProt gene IDs for all identified proteins were quired against a T. harzianum annotation file generated from Blast 2 Go tool (https://www.blast2go.com/) and uploaded to Perseus. This provided terms for gene ontology biological process (GOBP), gene ontology cellular component (GOCC), gene ontology molecular function (GOMF) and UniProt name for each protein. ANOVA of significance and t-tests between the treated groups was performed using a p-value of 0.05. Volcano plots were generated by plotting the log2 fold change on the x axis against the log p values on the y axis for each pairwise comparison. Statistically significant and differentially abundant (SSDA) proteins (ANOVA, p<0.05) with a relative fold change greater than +/- 0.58 were retained for analysis. SSDA proteins were Z-score normalised and then used for hierarchical clustering to produce a heat map.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Agaricus bisporus, Cladobotryum, Proteomics, Bacillus velezensis

### Affiliations
Maynooth University
Medical Mycology Laboratory, Biology department, Maynooth University, Co. Kildare, Ireland

### Submitter
Joy Clarke

### Lab Head
Dr Kevin Kavanagh
Medical Mycology Laboratory, Biology department, Maynooth University, Co. Kildare, Ireland


