### Accession
PXD030108

### Title
Human saliva glycoproteins LC-MS to screen different glycopatterns in patients with DN or NDRD

### Description
Discriminating between diabetic nephropathy (DN) and non-diabetic renal disease (NDRD) can help provide more specific treatments. However, there are no ideal biomarkers for their differentiation. Thus, the aim of this study was to identify biomarkers for diagnosing and predicting the progression of DN by investigating different salivary glycopatterns. LC-MS/MS were used to screen different glycopatterns in patients with DN or NDRD. Bioinformatics analyses were used to identify corresponding glycoproteins and predict their function

### Sample Protocol
In short, between 9 am and 11 am, unstimulated saliva was collected at least 3 h after the last meal. Saliva samples were collected immediately after oral rinsing with sterile saline, placed on ice, and centrifuged at 10,000 × g at 4 °C for 15 min to remove insoluble precipitates. The 1mL of supernatant was transferred to a new tube, and 10 μL protease cocktail inhibitor (1: 100 [v/v], Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) was added. Bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assays (Beyotime Biotechnology, China) were used to measure the protein concentration of each saliva sample in triplicate. The treated saliva specimens were stored at −80 °C until use

### Data Protocol
The Proteome Discovery version 2.4.1.15 with Sequest HT search engine was used to analyse the raw LS-MS/MS data and identify the corresponding proteins. Data from saliva samples were used to search the Uniprot human protein database (updated on 09/2018). The proteolytic enzyme used was trypsin, and two missed cleavages were allowed. The tolerance level of precursor was 10 ppm for MS and the product ions tolerance was 0.02 Da for MS. Fixed modifications were the carbamidomethylation of cysteines and the variable modifications was methionine oxidation. FDR analysis was performed with Percolator with the setting of FDR <1% for protein identification. The areas of identified peptides were used for label-free protein quantification on Proteome Discovery. Only unique and razor peptides of proteins were selected for relative quantification. Normalisation mode was selected as total peptide amount to correct for experimental bias.

### Publication Abstract
Discriminating between diabetic nephropathy (DN) and non-diabetic renal disease (NDRD) can help provide more specific treatments. However, there are no ideal biomarkers for their differentiation. Thus, the aim of this study was to identify biomarkers for diagnosing and predicting the progression of DN by investigating different salivary glycopatterns. Lectin microarrays were used to screen different glycopatterns in patients with DN or NDRD. The results were validated by lectin blotting. Logistic regression and artificial neural network analyses were used to construct diagnostic models and were validated in in another cohort. Pearson's correlation analysis, Cox regression, and Kaplan-Meier survival curves were used to analyse the correlation between lectins, and disease severity and progression. Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) and bioinformatics analyses were used to identify corresponding glycoproteins and predict their function. Both the logistic regression model and the artificial neural network model achieved high diagnostic accuracy. The levels of <i>Aleuria aurantia</i> lectin (AAL), <i>Lycopersicon esculentum</i> lectin (LEL), <i>Lens culinaris</i> lectin (LCA), <i>Vicia villosa</i> lectin (VVA), and <i>Narcissus pseudonarcissus</i> lectin (NPA) were significantly correlated with the clinical and pathological parameters related to DN severity. A high level of LCA and a low level of LEL were associated with a higher risk of progression to end-stage renal disease. Glycopatterns in the saliva could be a non-invasive tool for distinguishing between DN and NDRD. The AAL, LEL, LCA, VVA, and NPA levels could reflect the severity of DN, and the LEL and LCA levels could indicate the prognosis of DN.

### Keywords
Human, Saliva，lc-ms

### Affiliations
Department of Nephrology, the First Medical Centre, Chinese PLA General Hospital
Chinese PLA General Hospital

### Submitter
Hanyu Zhu

### Lab Head
Dr Hanyu Zhu
Chinese PLA General Hospital


