### Accession
PXD022882

### Title
Metaproteome analysis of two synthetic bacterial consortia

### Description
Two synthetic bacterial consortia (SC) composed by bacterial strains isolated from a natural phenanthrene-degrading consortium (CON), Sphingobium sp. AM, Klebsiella aerogenes B, Pseudomonas sp. Bc-h and T, Burkholderia sp. Bk and Inquilinus limosus Inq were grown in LMM supplemented with 200 mg/L of phenanthrene (PHN) during 72 hours in triplicate.

### Sample Protocol
Cells from 500 mL of culture were collected by centrifugation at 8000 rpm for 10 min, washed and resuspended in MilliQ water with 5 mM phenylmethylsulfonylfluoride (PMSF) as a protease inhibitor. The cell suspension was disrupted with a Precellys 24-bead beater (Bertin Technologies, location) and solubilized an hour in a solubilization solution holding Amberlite. The protein concentration was determined by Bradford using the Bio-Rad Protein Assay Dye Reagent. Protein digestion and Mass Spectrometry analysis were performed at the Proteomics Core Facility CEQUIBIEM, at the University of Buenos Aires/ CONICET (National Research Council) as follows: Protein samples were reduced with dithiotreitol (DTT) in 50mM of ammonium bicarbonate at a final concentration of 10 mM (45 min, 56°C) and alkylated with iodoacetamide in the same solvent at a final concentration of 30 mM (40 min, RT, in darkness). Proteins were digested with trypsin (Promega V5111). The peptides were purified and desalted with ZipTip C18 columns (Millipore). The digests were analysed by nanoLC-MS/MS in a Thermo Scientific Q Exactive Mass Spectrometer coupled to a nanoHPLC EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific). For the LC-MS/MS analysis, approximately 1 μg of peptides was loaded onto the column and eluted for 120 minutes using a reverse phase column (C18, 2 µm, 100A, 50 µm x 150 mm) Easy-Spray Column PepMap RSLC (P/N ES801) suitable for separating protein complexes with a high degree of resolution. The MS equipment has a high collision dissociation cell (HCD) for fragmentation and an Orbitrap analyzer (Thermo Scientific, Q-Exactive). A voltage of 3,5 kV was used for Electro Spray Ionization (Thermo Scientific, EASY-SPRAY).

### Data Protocol
XCalibur 3.0.63 (Thermo Scientific) software was used for data acquisition and equipment configuration that allows peptide identification at the same time of their chromatographic separation. Full-scan mass spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap analyser. The scanned mass range was 400-1800 m/z, at a resolution of 70000 at 400 m/z and the twelve most intense ions in each cycle, were sequentially isolated, fragmented by HCD and measured in the Orbitrap analyser. Peptides with a charge of +1 or with unassigned charge state were excluded from fragmentation for MS2. Q Exactive raw data was processed using Proteome Discoverer software (version 2.1.1.21 Thermo Scientific) and searched against Draft genome sequences databases with accession numbers: LRUK01 (AM), NHOM01 (Bk), NHON01 (Inq), MTLB01 (B), MUIN01 (Bc-h) and MUHV01 (T) with trypsin specificity and a maximum of one missed cleavage per peptide. The data obtained for the area for each protein were processed with the Perseus program (Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, 1.5.5.3 version).

### Publication Abstract
Two synthetic bacterial consortia (SC) composed of bacterial strains <i>Sphingobium</i> sp. (AM), <i>Klebsiella aerogenes</i> (B), <i>Pseudomonas</i> sp. (Bc-h and T), <i>Burkholderia</i> sp. (Bk) and <i>Inquilinus limosus</i> (Inq) isolated from a natural phenanthrene (PHN)-degrading consortium (CON) were developed and evaluated as an alternative approach to PHN biodegradation in bioremediation processes. A metabolic network showing the potential role of strains was reconstructed by <i>in silico</i> study of the six genomes and classification of dioxygenase enzymes using RHObase and AromaDeg databases. Network analysis suggested that AM and Bk were responsible for PHN initial attack, while Inq, B, T and Bc-h would degrade PHN metabolites. The predicted roles were further confirmed by physiological, RT-qPCR and metaproteomic assays. SC-1 with AM as the sole PHN degrader was the most efficient. The ecological roles inferred in this study can be applied to optimize the design of bacterial consortia and tackle the biodegradation of complex environmental pollutants.

### Keywords
Burkholderia sp. (bk), Pseudomonas sp (bc-h), Synthetic bacterial consortia (sc), Klebsiella aerogenes (b), Sphingobium sp. (am), Shotgun proteomics, Pseudomonas sp. (t), Inquilinus limosus (inq)

### Affiliations
CINDEFI-UNLP
CINDEFI-CONICET-UNLP

### Submitter
Marianela Macchi

### Lab Head
Dr Bibiana Marina Coppotelli
CINDEFI-CONICET-UNLP


