### Accession
PXD023162

### Title
Large-scale identification of RNA-binding proteins

### Description
We developed a method, which enables unbiased, systematic identification of RBPs. Applying this method, we identified a large number of RBPs, adding hundreds of candidate RBPs to those previously known. In addition, we plotted the first large-scale distribution profile of RBPs after inhibition of RNA synthesis by AtcD treatment.

### Sample Protocol
The cells were cross-linking, followed by lysis. The cell lysates were treated with probe, followed by irradiation on ice. Precleared streptavidin magnetic beads were added to and then incubated. The RBPs were eluted from the beads by RNase treatment, and then digested with trypsin. The samples were loaded into an in-house made reverse phase column. The eluted peptides were sprayed into an Orbitrap Fusion™ Tribrid™ mass spectrometer equipped with a nanoelectrospray ionization source. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode with a full MS scan (300-1,400 M/z) at a resolution of 120,000, followed by Higher-energy Collision Dissociation (HCD).

### Data Protocol
The raw data files were searched using MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.8) against UniProt database. Trypsin was set as the digestion enzyme with maximum of two missed cleavages and the minimal peptide length was set to 6 amino acids. Carbamidomethyl cysteine was set as fixed modification and methionine oxidation and acetyl N-terminal were set as variable modifications. The mass tolerances were 20 ppm for initial precursor ions and 0.5 Da for fragment ions. The “ match between runs ” functions were used. Using Persus (version 1.5.8.5) for differential analysis. For RBP filtering, proteins with a minimum of two identified unique peptides in at least two tests and a fold change of two or greater with P < 0.01 in the experimental groups comparing with the control groups were considered as RBPs.

### Publication Abstract
RNA-protein interactions play key roles in epigenetic, transcriptional and posttranscriptional regulation. To reveal the regulatory mechanisms of these interactions, global investigation of RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) and monitor their changes under various physiological conditions are needed. Herein, we developed a psoralen probe (PP)-based method for RNA tagging and ribonucleic-protein complex (RNP) enrichment. Isolation of both coding and noncoding RNAs and mapping of 2986 RBPs including 782 unknown candidate RBPs from HeLa cells was achieved by PP enrichment, RNA-sequencing and mass spectrometry analysis. The dynamics study of RNPs by PP enrichment after the inhibition of RNA synthesis provides the first large-scale distribution profile of RBPs bound to RNAs with different decay rates. Furthermore, the remarkably greater decreases in the abundance of the RBPs obtained by PP-enrichment than by global proteome profiling suggest that PP enrichment after transcription inhibition offers a valuable way for large-scale evaluation of the candidate RBPs.

### Keywords
Rna-binding proteins(rbps); lc-msms;  large-scale

### Affiliations
National Center for Protein Sciences Beijing, State Key Laboratory of Proteomics, Beijing Proteome Research Center, Beijing Institute of Lifeomics, Beijing 102206, China
National Center for Protein Sciences Beijing

### Submitter
tong liu

### Lab Head
Dr Weijie Qin
National Center for Protein Sciences Beijing, State Key Laboratory of Proteomics, Beijing Proteome Research Center, Beijing Institute of Lifeomics, Beijing 102206, China


