### Accession
PXD026379

### Title
Alteration of DAMPs and regulated cell death under hyperlipidemic stress

### Description
We hypothesize that DAMPs and non-apoptotic regulated cell death processes are critical players of artery plaque progression with inadequate response to lipid-lowering treatment. Using high performant LC-MS/MS proteomic analysis we aim to uncover the silent mechanisms that govern the existing residual risk of cardiovascular-related mortality in an experimental atherosclerotic model.

### Sample Protocol
The study was conducted using liquid chromatography experiments coupled with mass spectrometry, western blot and RT-PCR assays performed on tissue isolated from the ascending aorta and blood harvested from rabbits exposed to hyperlipidemic diet. The experimental animals were divided in four groups: : the control (C), which received standard diet for twelve weeks; the (Ae), fed a high fat diet for eight weeks followed by standard food for the next four weeks; the (As) which received hyperlipidemic diet for the first eight weeks, and standard food combined with lipid-lowering treatment for the next four weeks and the last group (Au) of rabbits fed with hyperlipidemic food for twelve weeks. Homogenates were prepared on ice from 30-mg tissue harvested from the ascending thoracic aorta in a lysis buffer containing 8M urea, 1% DOC and 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5) using a mechanical homogenizer. The protein rich supernatant was separated from the tissue debris following a powerful centrifugation (20,000 x g, 20 min, 4 °C). Protein quantification was performed using BCA Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific). All protein extracts were subsequently used for biochemical assays, mass spectrometry analysis and Western blot (WB) experiments. Equal amounts of protein samples (50 µg) were purified by acetone precipitation, using a 1:4 volume ratio (protein sample to ice cold acetone) and incubation at −28 °C for 2h. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was achieved by incubation with reducing buffer containing 8M urea, 0.1M Tris-HCl, 0.1mM EDTA and 20mM DTT, pH 8.8, followed by alkylation buffer (80mM IAA in 0.1M Tris-HCl and 0.1mM EDTA). A NAC-containing buffer (80mM NAC in 0.1M Tris-HCl and 0.1mM EDTA) was after that used to quench excess IAA from the sample. Urea dilution to < 1 M, DOC addition (1% final concentration) and pH adjustment (~8.5) using 1M ammonium bicarbonate preceded overnight proteolysis (1:50 enzyme to substrate ratio). Formic acid was afterwards used to shift the pH to 2.5, for trypsin inactivation and DOC precipitation, which was discarded a following a 20 min, 20000 x g centrifugation. Desalting using solid phase extraction on C18 sorbent columns (Sep-Pak, Waters) was employed and the resulting purified peptides were vacuum dried and suspended in 5% ACN, 0.1% TFA containing buffer. Peptide quantification was achieved by 280 nm absorbance measurements using the Pherastar FS system (BMG Labtech).

### Data Protocol
The raw files were qualitatively and quantitatively analyzed using the Proteome Discoverer 2.4 software (Thermo Scientific). UniProt 9986 Oryctolagus cuniculus reference proteome was used for protein inference, with methionine oxidation set as a dynamic modification and cysteine carbamidomethylation as a static one, while a maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed. A reverse database searching was performed for strict protein and peptide FDR settings (<1%). Label-free relative quantification was performed on the precursor intensity level, with 90% of replicate features and ANOVA hypothesis test enabled. Normalization was engaged in the total peptide amount on controls average. Proteins with a SequestHT score > 10, quantified based on at least two peptides, that were significantly differentially abundant amongst the compared groups (>1.5-fold ratio and p-value <0.05) were retained for further analysis. STRING database algorithm (v. 11.0) was applied for computational prediction of protein-protein interaction based on genomic context, high-throughput lab experiments, automated text mining and accumulated database knowledge. STRING was also used for gene ontology and KEGG signaling pathways over-representation.

### Publication Abstract
Non-apoptotic regulated cell death (ferroptosis and necroptosis) leads to the release of damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs), which initiate and perpetuate a non-infectious inflammatory response. We hypothesize that DAMPs and non-apoptotic regulated cell death are critical players of atherosclerotic plaque progression with inadequate response to lipid-lowering treatment. We aimed to uncover the silent mechanisms that govern the existing residual risk of cardiovascular-related mortality in experimental atherosclerosis. Proteomic and genomic approaches were applied on the ascending aorta of hyperlipidemic rabbits and controls with and without lipid-lowering treatment. The hyperlipidemic animals, which presented numerous heterogeneous atherosclerotic lesions, exhibited high concentrations of serum lipids and increased lipid peroxidation oxidative stress markers. The analyses revealed the significant upregulation of DAMPs and proteins implicated in ferroptosis and necroptosis by hyperlipidemia. Some of them did not respond to lipid-lowering treatment. Dysregulation of five proteins involved in non-apoptotic regulated cell death proteins (VDAC1, VDAC3, FTL, TF and PCBP1) and nine associated DAMPs (HSP90AA1, HSP90AB1, ANXA1, LGALS3, HSP90B1, S100A11, FN, CALR, H3-3A) was not corrected by the treatment. These proteins could play a key role in the atherosclerotic silent evolution and may possess an unexplored therapeutic potential. Mass spectrometry data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD026379.

### Keywords
Regulated cell death, Proteomics, Damps, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Institute of Cellular Biology and Pathology "N. Simionescu"
Proteomics Department, Institute of Cellular Biology and Pathology

### Submitter
Felicia Antohe

### Lab Head
Dr Felicia Antohe
Proteomics Department, Institute of Cellular Biology and Pathology


