### Accession
PXD005634

### Title
Correlation profiling of synaptic sub-fraction proteomes of the mouse brain hippocampus, cortex and cerebellum

### Description
Synaptic transmission forms the main mode of signaling and information integration in the nervous system. Here, we identified and quantified proteins from three brain regions and five biochemical synapse sub-fractions. We identified around 4500 proteins in total, of which about 2000 proteins each were quantified from microsome, P2 fraction, synaptosome, synaptic membrane, and postsynaptic density (PSD). Correlation profiling using these data sets identified synaptic functional groups and showed enrichment of canonical presynaptic proteins in synaptosome, and canonical postsynaptic proteins in PSD. In addition, we detected profound brain region specific differences in the extent of enrichment for some functionally associated proteins, exemplified by different AMPAR subunits and the large differences in spatial distribution of their potential interactors. Furthermore, we revealed novel PSD proteins PLEKHA5 and ADGRA1, which using super-resolution microscopy on primary neuronal culture were confirmed to reside in the PSD.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of synapse sub-fractions All animal experiments were performed in accordance with relevant guidelines and regulations of the VU University. The animal ethics committee of the VU University approved the experiments. Subcellular fractions were prepared from 3-month-old C57BL6 mice as described in (35). In brief, mouse hippocampi, cortex and cerebellum were dissected and stored at -80oC until used. The brain regions were pottered separately in homogenization buffer (0.32 M Sucrose, 5 mM HEPES, Protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche)) on a dounce homogenizer (potterS; 12 strokes, 900 rpm) and spun at 1000xg for 10 min at 4oC. Supernatant 1 (S1) was centrifuged at 20,000xg for 20 min to obtain pellet 2 (P2) and supernatant 2 (S2). The S2 fraction was ultracentrifuged at 100,000xg for 2 hrs; the pellet was recovered as microsomal fraction. S1 was subjected to ultracentrifugation in a 0.85/1.2 M sucrose density gradient at 100,000xg for 2 hrs. Synaptosomes were recovered at the interface of 0.85/1.2 M sucrose. The hypotonic shock of synaptosomes in 5 mM HEPES with protease inhibitor for 15 min yielded the synaptic membrane fraction, which was subsequently isolated by sucrose gradient ultracentrifugation as stated above at the interface of 0.85/1.2M fraction. To obtain the PSD, the synaptosome fraction was extracted in 1% Tx-100 for 30 min, layered on top of 1.2/1.5/2 M sucrose, centrifuged at 100,000xg for 2 hrs, and recovered as PSD-I at the interface of 1.5/2 M sucrose. PSD-I was subjected to second extraction in 2% Tx-100 for 30 min, subjected to sucrose gradient ultracentrifugation as stated above, and recovered at the 1.5/2M sucrose interface. The PSD-II fraction was then pelleted in 5 mM HEPES by centrifuging at 100,000xg for 30 min.   Gel separation and in-gel digestion The classic gel digest protocol was followed (36, 37). Unless otherwise stated, unless otherwise stated, was dissolved in Laemmlli buffer and boiled at 98°C for 5 min; 5 µl 30% acrylamide was then added and vortexed for 30 min at room temperature to form a fixed modification of Cys-S-beta-propionamide. Samples were run on a 10% SDS-PAGE gel, which was stopped when the front reached halfway of the gel. The gel was fixed overnight in 40% ethanol/3% phosphoric acid, and stained briefly for about 30 min with colloidal coomassie blue. Each lane was cut into two slices, chopped into 1 mm by 1 mm pieces followed by a sequential incubation in 50% acetonitrile/50 mM NH3HCO3 – 100% acetronitrile – 50 mM NH3 HCO3 - 50% acetonitrile/50 mM NH3HCO3 – 100% acetronitrile. The gel pieces were dried in a speedvac, rehydrated in trypsin solution in 50 mM NH3HCO3 (500 ng per gel slice) at 370C overnight, extracted with 200 µL 0.1M acetic acid, and the supernatant was transferred to an Eppendorf tube and dried in a speedvac. The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 17 µL 0.1M acetic acid and analyzed by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
The MS raw data were imported into MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.8) (39), and searched against the UniProt mouse proteome (SwissProt+Trembl February 2016 release) with Cys-S-beta-propionamide as the fixed modification and Methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. For both peptide and protein identification a false discovery rate of 0.01 was set, MaxLFQ normalisation was enabled with a LFQ minimal ratio count of 1. The minimal peptide length was set to 6, further MaxQuant settings were left at default.

### Publication Abstract
Protein correlation profiling might assist in defining co-assembled proteins and subcellular distribution. Here, we quantified the proteomes of five biochemically isolated mouse brain cellular sub-fractions, with emphasis on synaptic compartments, from three brain regions, hippocampus, cortex and cerebellum. We demonstrated the expected co-fractionation of canonical synaptic proteins belonging to the same functional groups. The enrichment profiles also suggested the presence of many novel pre- and post-synaptic proteins. Using super-resolution microscopy on primary neuronal culture we confirmed the postsynaptic localization of PLEKHA5 and ADGRA1. We further detected profound brain region specific differences in the extent of enrichment for some functionally associated proteins. This is exemplified by different AMPA receptor subunits and substantial differences in sub-fraction distribution of their potential interactors, which implicated the differences of AMPA receptor complex compositions. This resource aids the identification of proteins partners and subcellular distribution of synaptic proteins.

### Keywords
Synapse, Post synaptic density, Proteomics, Correlation profiling

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular and Cellular Neurobiology, Center for Neurogenomics and Cognitive Research, Amsterdam Neuroscience, VU University, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
VU University

### Submitter
Frank Koopmans

### Lab Head
Dr Ka Wan Li
Department of Molecular and Cellular Neurobiology, Center for Neurogenomics and Cognitive Research, Amsterdam Neuroscience, VU University, Amsterdam, The Netherlands


