### Accession
PXD013102

### Title
Systematic characterization of BAF mutations explains intra-complex synthetic lethalities

### Description
Aberrations in genes coding for subunits of the BAF chromatin remodeling complex are highly abundant in human cancers. Currently, it is not understood how these loss-of-function mutations contribute to cancer development and how they can be targeted therapeutically. The cancer type specific occurrence patterns of certain subunit mutations suggest subunit-specific effects on BAF complex function, possibly by the formation of aberrant residual complexes. Here, we systematically characterize the effects of individual subunit loss on complex composition, chromatin accessibility and gene expression in a panel of knock-out cell lines deficient for 22 targetable BAF subunits. We observe strong, specific and often discordant alterations dependent on the targeted subunit and show that these explain intra-complex co-dependencies, including the novel synthetic lethal interactions SMARCA4-ARID2, SMARCA4-ACTB and SMARCC1-SMARCC2. These data provide insights into the role of different BAF subcomplexes in genome-wide chromatin organization and suggest novel approaches to therapeutically target BAF mutant cancers.

### Sample Protocol
Immuno-precipitated samples were processed for MS analyses either using ‘Filter Aided Sample Preparation’ (FASP) according to the procedure described by Wisniewski et al. (Nature methods, 20019) or ‘Single-Pot solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation’ (SP3) methodology published by Hughes et. al. (MolSystBiol, 2014). In general, samples were denatured by addition of 2% SDS, reduced with DTT, alkylated with iodacetamide and digested with trypsin over night at 37°C. Peptides were cleaned up using C18 solid phase extraction (SPE) and either used for single injection ‘shotgun’ LC-MS/MS analysis (reconstituted in 5% formic acid) or derivatized with TMT reagents for multiplexing experiments. For the later, labeled peptides were pooled, cleaned up with SPE and fractionated off-line into 10 fractions using high pH RP-HPLC (Gemini-NX C18 column [150 × 2 mm, 3 μm, 110 Å, Phenomenex, USA]; 20 mM ammonia formate buffer, pH 10; Agilent 1200 HPLC system [Agilent Biotechnologies, USA]). After solvent removal, peptides were reconstituted in 5% formic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis.  Mass spectrometry was performed on different Orbitrap instruments (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA): I) Hybrid linear trap quadrupole (LTQ) Orbitrap Velos; II) Q Exactive™ or III) Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ mass spectrometer as specified in the different result files. MS was coupled to either an Agilent 1200 (Agilent Biotechnologies, USA) or Dionex U3000 RSLC U/HPLC nanoflow system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, USA)  via Nanospray Flex™ Ion source interface. TMT-labeled and fractionated samples were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ mass spectrometer coupled to an Agilent 1200 HPLC nanoflow applying a 120 min gradient with the following MS settings: DDA mode;  MS1 scan range of 375 - 1650 m/z; orbitrap resolution of 120000 (at m/z 200); AGC target of 2E5, maximum injection time of 50 ms; 3 sec cycle time; MS2/MS3 acquisition in linear quadrupole ion trap (IT); quadrupole isolation window of 0.7 Da; CID fragmentation with NCE of 35%; AGC target of 1E4; maximum injection time of 50 msec. MS3 quantitative scans settings were: Quadrupole isolation window of 2 Da; 5 notches; HCD fragmentation with NCE of 65%; AGC target of 1E5; maximum injection time of 150 msec and orbitrap detection with resolution of 50000 (at m/z 200). Dynamic exclusion for selected ions was 20 sec. Single lock mass at m/z 445.120024 was set. Xcalibur version 4.0.0 and Tune 2.1.1565.24 were used to operate the instrument. For single injection ‘shotgun’ analysis the following settings were used for the different instruments: I) LTQ-Orbitrap Velos coupled to Agilent 1200 nano (column dimensions as stated before): 60 min gradient (3-40% acetonitrile, 0.4%FA ); 250 nl/min flow rate; MS1 scan range of 350 - 1800 m/z; orbitrap resolution of 60000 (at m/z 400); AGC target of 1E6, maximum injection time of 500 msec; MS2 acquisition in linear quadrupole ion trap (IT); isolation window of 2.0 Da; CID fragmentation with NCE of 30%; AGC target of 1E4; maximum injection time of 50 msec, dynamic exclusion set to 60 sec, single lock mass of 445.120024 enabled; II) Q Exactive coupled to Agilent 1200 nano: 90 min gradient (4-36% acetonitrile, 0.4% FA); 230 nl/min flow rate; MS1 scan range of 375 - 1650 m/z; orbitrap resolution of 70000 (at m/z 200); AGC target of 1E6, maximum injection time of 50 msec; MS2 acquisition in orbitrap (FT); isolation window of 2.0 Da; HCD fragmentation; NCE of 28%; AGC target of 1E5; maximum injection time of 110 msec, dynamic exclusion set to 20 sec, single lock mass of 445.120024 enabled; and III) Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ coupled to Dionex U3000 RSLCnano: 90 min gradient (4-36% acetonitrile, 0.4%FA ); 230 nl/min flow rate; MS1 scan range of 375 - 1650 m/z; orbitrap resolution of 120000 (at m/z 200); AGC target of 2E5, maximum injection time of 50 msec; MS2 acquisition in linear quadrupole ion trap (IT); isolation window of 1.6 Da; HCD fragmentation with NCE of 28%; AGC target of 1E4; maximum injection time of 50 msec, dynamic exclusion set to 60 sec, single lock mass of 445.120024 enabled.

### Data Protocol
Acquired raw data files were processed using the Proteome Discoverer 2.2.0.388 platform, utilizing the database search engine Sequest HT. Percolator V3.0 was used to remove false positives with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% on peptide and protein level under strict conditions. Searches were performed with full tryptic digestion against the human SwissProt database v2017.07 (20,158 sequences appended with known contaminants and rabbit IgG protein sequence) with up to two miscleavage sites. Oxidation (+15.9949 Da) of methionine, phosphorylation (+79.966 Da) of serine, threonine, and tyrosine, and acetylation (+42.011 Da) of protein N-termini were set as variable modifications, whilst carbamidomethylation (+57.0214 Da) of cysteine residues and TMT 6-plex labelling of peptide N-termini and lysine residues were set as fixed modifications. Data was searched with mass tolerances of ±10 ppm and 0.6 Da on the precursor and fragment ions (CID), respectively. Results were filtered to include peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) with Sequest HT cross-correlation factor (Xcorr) scores of ≥ 1 and high peptide confidence (1% FDR in Percolator). PSMs with precursor isolation interference values of ≥ 50% and average TMT-reporter ion signal-to-noise values (S/N) ≤ 10 were excluded from quantification, moreover peptides containing a phosphorylated and acetylated residue were not used for quantitation of proteins. Isotopic impurity correction was applied and the TMT channels were normalized to yield equal bait abundance. The total abundance of each protein summed across all TMT channels were estimated using intensity-based absolute quantification, iBAQ algorithm (the MS1 intensities of the unique and razor precursor peptides that mapped to each protein were summed and divided by the number of theoretically observable peptides). The numbers of theoretically observable peptides were calculated by isobar package. For comparison of protein abundancies across immunoprecipitated samples with different baits, the Top3 methodology published by Silva et al. (MCP, 2006) was applied. For statistical analysis, the empirical distribution of observed log ratios between two WT.R replicates was fitted by a normal distribution. The ratio WT.R1/WT.R2 can be calculated by utilizing the common WT channel (WT pool¬) present in each TMT experiment as WT.R1/WT.R2 = (WT.R1/WT pool)/(WT.R2/WT pool). P-values of observed TMT-ratios were calculated from the corresponding distribution function of the fitted normal distribution. P-values from the two TMT experiments were then combined using Fisher’s method and corrected for FDR by Benjamini-Hochberg procedure. To identify potential new interactors of BAF complex, the following interaction score for a protein P was used:  score(P) = min(0.1 + 3(1-cor(rA,rB)), max(0.1, sqrt(sum((rA_i-rB_i)^2)/N)))   (1) where rA and rB are vectors of observed ratios of the protein P across N knockout conditions against the corresponding WT.R abundance of the protein P in replicate A or B, respectively. The lower the score, the more likely the protein P is an interactor of BAF complex. By the definition (1), the minimum possible interaction score is 0.1.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Chromatin accessibility, Chromatin binding, Mammalian swi/snf complex, Interaction proteomics, Transcriptomics, Atac-seq, Synthetic lethality, Baf complex, Chromatin remodeling

### Affiliations
CeMM  Research Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Sciences  Christian Doppler Laboratory for Chemical Epigenetics and Anti-Infectives  Lazarettgasse 14, AKH BT 25.3 1090 Vienna, Austria
CeMM, Reserach Center for Molecular Medicine

### Submitter
Peter Májek

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan Kubicek
CeMM  Research Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Sciences  Christian Doppler Laboratory for Chemical Epigenetics and Anti-Infectives  Lazarettgasse 14, AKH BT 25.3 1090 Vienna, Austria


