### Accession
PXD033945

### Title
Study of the migration of Fasciola hepatica juveniles across the intestinal barrier of the host by quantitative proteomics in an ex vivo model

### Description
The project presents the set-up of an ex vivo model coupled with quantitative SWATH-MS proteomics to study the early events following the passage of Fasciola hepatica Newly Excysted Juveniles (NEJ) though the host’s intestinal wall, assessing the proteomic changes in their surface (tegument) and soma in response to host stimuli.

### Sample Protocol
Each sample was resuspended in Laemmli Sample Buffer (Bio-Rad) and denatured at 95°C for 5 min, after which they were loaded onto an Any kD precast 1D PAGE gel (Bio-Rad) and run at 200 V for 5 min. After separation, proteins were fixed with 40% ethanol/10% acetic acid. Each lane of the gel was cut into pieces and treated with reducing and alkylating agents (dithiothreitol and iodoacetamide, respectively), after which the proteins were digested with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega). The digestion was stopped with 1% trifluoroacetic acid and the resulting peptides were extracted with acetonitrile. Finally, each sample was dried on a rotary evaporator and resuspended in 2% ACN; 0.1% TFA. For the library construction, all samples were pooled and loaded onto an analytical column (LC Column, 3 μ C18-CL, Nikkyo) equilibrated in 5% ACN 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were eluted in a linear gradient of 5-35% solvent B (A: 0.1% FA; B: ACN, 0.1% FA) and analysed in a mass spectrometer nanoESI qQTOF (5600 TripleTOF, ABSCIEX). Analysis was carried out in a data-dependent mode (DDA). Survey MS1 scans were acquired from 350–1250 m/z for 250 ms, whereas the quadrupole resolution was set to “UNIT” for MS2 experiments, which were acquired 100–1500 m/z for 150 ms in high sensitivity mode. For individual sample acquisition, the tripleTOF was operated in SWATH mode (DIA), in which a 0.050-s TOF MS scan from 350–1250 m/z was performed, followed by 0.080-s product ion scans from 350–1250 m/z on the 32 defined windows (3.05 sec/cycle).

### Data Protocol
Protein Pilot v5.0 (SCIEX) was used to generate a peak list directly from 5600 TripleTof .wiff files corresponding to the peptide library. Database used contained the predicted proteome of F. hepatica (PRJEB25283), appended to the cRAP contaminant database. The Paragon algorithm was applied to the database with the following parameters: trypsin specificity, IAM cys-alkylation, taxonomy no restricted. Only proteins with at least 2 identified peptides and < 1% FDR were considered for subsequent analysis.  The .wiff files obtained from the SWATH experiment were analysed using PeakView 2.1 (SCIEX) and MarkerView 3.0 (SCIEX). Protein areas calculated were normalized by the total sum of the areas of all the quantified proteins, and proteins matching the contaminant database were removed from the dataset prior to the differential expression analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Fasciola hepatica is a trematode parasite that infects animals and humans causing fasciolosis, a worldwide-distributed disease responsible for important economic losses and health problems. This disease is of growing public health concern since parasite isolates resistant to the current treatment (triclabendazole) have increasingly been described. F. hepatica infects its vertebrate host after ingestion of the encysted parasite (metacercariae), which are found in the water or attached to plants. Upon ingestion, newly excysted juveniles of F. hepatica (FhNEJ) emerge in the intestinal lumen and cross the intestinal barrier, reach the peritoneum and migrate to the biliary ducts, where adult worms fully develop. Despite the efforts made to develop new therapeutic and preventive tools, to date, protection against F. hepatica obtained in different animal models is far from optimal. Early events of host-FhNEJ interactions are of paramount importance for the infection progress in fasciolosis, especially those occurring at the host-parasite interface. Nevertheless, studies of FhNEJ responses to the changing host environment encountered during migration across host tissues are still scarce. Here, we set-up an ex vivo model coupled with quantitative SWATH-MS proteomics to study early host-parasite interaction events in fasciolosis. After comparing tegument and somatic fractions from control parasites and FhNEJ that managed to cross a mouse intestinal section ex vivo, a set of parasite proteins whose expression was statistically different were found. These included upregulation of cathepsins L3 and L4, proteolytic inhibitor Fh serpin 2, and a number of molecules linked with nutrient uptake and metabolism, including histone H4, H2A and H2B, low density lipoprotein receptor, tetraspanin, fatty acid binding protein a and glutathione-S-transferase. Downregulated proteins in FhNEJ after gut passage were more numerous than the upregulated ones, and included the heath shock proteins HSP90 and alpha crystallin, amongst others. This study brings new insights into early host-parasite interactions in fasciolosis and sheds light on the proteomic changes in FhNEJ triggered upon excystment and intestinal wall crossing, which could serve to define new targets for the prevention and treatment of this widespread parasitic disease.

### Keywords
Fasciola hepatica; newly excysted juveniles; gut passage; swath-ms; quantitative proteomics; differential expression

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Parasitology, Institute of Natural Resources and Agrobiology of Salamanca (IRNASA-CSIC), C/Cordel de Merinas 40-52, 37008 Salamanca, Spain
CSIC

### Submitter
David Becerro Recio

### Lab Head
Dr Mar Siles-Lucas
Laboratory of Parasitology, Institute of Natural Resources and Agrobiology of Salamanca (IRNASA-CSIC), C/Cordel de Merinas 40-52, 37008 Salamanca, Spain


