### Accession
PXD008606

### Title
BCL11B_AP-MS -  The N-terminal CCHC zinc finger motif mediates homodimerization of the transcription factor BCL11B

### Description
This study investigates whether the N-terminal CCHC zinc finger motif is necessary and sufficient for the formation of BCL11B dimers, using fluorescence microscopy and Förster resonance energy transfer-assisted fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACSFRET). The role of the CCHC motif in homodimer assembly was further investigated using affinity purification followed by mass spectrometry (AP-MS). Functional studies investigated the role of dimerization in the induction of cell cycle arrest and protection against DNA damage-induced apoptosis.

### Sample Protocol
Human T-cell lymphoma huT-78 cells were transduced with lentiviral particles according to the protocol described above. After 48 h of incubation, thetransduced cells were harvested by centrifugation at 400   g for 10 min at 4°C. Nuclear extractpreparation was performed according to the Nuclear Complex co-IP kit protocol (Active Motif Europe,Belgium; catalog no. 54001). The nuclear isolates (100  l) were precleared with 40  l mouse IgG agarose(Sigma-Aldrich) for 90 min at 4°C on a roller shaker, and the agarose beads were removed bycentrifugation at 8,000   g for 30 s at 4°C. The cleared lysates were incubated with 40  l of EZview Redanti-FLAG M2 affinity gel (Sigma-Aldrich) for 90 min at 4°C on a roller shaker. The protein-bound beadswere collected by centrifugation at 8,000   g for 30 s at 4°C and then washed seven times with 1 mlice-cold Tris-buffered saline (TBS) with an incubation of 10 min per wash on a roller shaker.   Theprotein-bound beads were transferred to a new tube for the 1st and 7th washing steps.The protein-bound beads were then washed twicewith 100  l of 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate at room temperature. Next, 40  l of trypsin (sequencinggrade modified trypsin; Promega, Mannheim, Germany) solution (10 ng/ l trypsin in 20 mM ammoniumbicarbonate) was added to the protein-bound beads and incubated on a roller shaker overnight at roomtemperature. The supernatant containing peptides was collected by centrifugation at 8,000   g for 30s, and 20  l of 5% acetic acid was added to the supernatant to stop the trypsin digestion. The resultingpeptide mixtures were desalted using 5  g C18 ZipTip columns (Millipore, Bedford). The desalted peptidemixtures were lyophilized and resuspended in 50  l of buffer A (0.1% acetic acid, 2% acetonitrile [ACN])and subsequently used for global proteomics workflow and targeted validation proteomics via SRM

### Data Protocol
The global proteome raw data files obtained from data dependent acquisition were searched using MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.8) (47) against the Human UniProt database (January 2016, July) with default settings using methionine oxidation as variable modification, carbamidomethylation of cysteine as static modification, and 2 missed cleavages.  The raw data from SRM acquisition were analyzed with Skyline software version 2.5, quantification was performed by a pair of coeluting heavy and light peptides identified, and the corresponding peak areas were used to calculate the ratio between the endogenous light peptide and the spiked-in heavy peptide. Peptides that exhibited missed cleavage and bad chromatographic properties were excluded from quantification of the corresponding protein. Relative protein abundance was calculated by averaging 2 or 3 peptide ratio values for the corresponding protein.

### Publication Abstract
The <i>BCL11B</i> gene encodes a Kr&#xfc;ppel-like, sequence-specific zinc finger (ZF) transcription factor that acts as either a repressor or an activator, depending on its posttranslational modifications. The importance of <i>BCL11B</i> in numerous biological processes in multiple organs has been well established in mouse knockout models. The phenotype of the first <i>de novo</i> monoallelic germ line missense mutation in the <i>BCL11B</i> gene (encoding N441K) strongly implies that the mutant protein acts in a dominant-negative manner by neutralizing the unaffected protein through the formation of a nonfunctional dimer. Using a F&#xf6;rster resonance energy transfer-assisted fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS-FRET) assay and affinity purification followed by mass spectrometry (AP-MS), we show that the N-terminal CCHC zinc finger motif is necessary and sufficient for the formation of the BCL11B dimer. Mutation of the CCHC ZF in BCL11B abolishes its transcription-regulatory activity. In addition, unlike wild-type BCL11B, this mutant is incapable of inducing cell cycle arrest and protecting against DNA damage-driven apoptosis. Our results confirm the BCL11B dimerization hypothesis and prove its importance for BCL11B function. By mapping the relevant regions to the CCHC domain, we describe a previously unidentified mechanism of transcription factor homodimerization.

### Keywords
Co-immuno precipitation, Ap-ms, Ppin, Lc-ms/ms, Srm

### Affiliations
komm. Direktor for Innere Medizin mit Schwerpunktbezeichnung Hämatologie und internistische Onkologie, Universitätsmedizin Greifswald.
Universitätsmedizin Greifswald

### Submitter
Praveen Sappa

### Lab Head
Dr Christian Schmidt
komm. Direktor for Innere Medizin mit Schwerpunktbezeichnung Hämatologie und internistische Onkologie, Universitätsmedizin Greifswald.


