### Accession
PXD011749

### Title
Plasma proteome profiling to detect and avoid sample-related biases in biomarker studies

### Description
Blood-based protein tests inform medical decision-making, but despite major investments, few new biomarkers reach the clinic. Plasma and serum are rich sources of information about an individual’s health state and mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics now allows highly specific and quantitative read-out of the plasma proteome. Here we employ plasma proteome profiling to define marker panels assessing the quality of plasma and serum samples and the likelihood that suggested biomarkers are instead artifacts related to sample handling and processing. We acquired reference proteomes of erythrocytes, platelets, plasma and whole blood of 20 individuals (>6000 proteins), and compared serum and plasma proteomes. Based on spike-in experiments we defined a panels of contamination-associated proteins, many of which have been reported as biomarker candidates. We provide sample preparation guidelines and an online resource (www.plasmaproteomeprofiling.com) to assess overall sample-related bias in clinical studies and to prevent costly miss-assignment of biomarker candidates.

### Sample Protocol
High abundant protein depletion for building a matching library We built up a matching library and applied a consecutive depletion strategy, in which the top 6 and top 14 most abundant plasma proteins were depleted by using a combination of two immunodepletion kits (Geyer et al., 2016a). The Agilent Multiple Affinity Removal Spin Cartridge was used for the depletion of the top six high-abundant proteins (albumin, IgG, IgA, antitrypsin, transferrin, haptoglobin), followed by Seppro Human 14 Sigma immunodepletion for the 14 highest abundant proteins (Albumin, IgG, IgA, IgM, IgD, transferrin, fibrinogen, α2-macroglobulin, α1-antitrypsin, haptoglobin, α1-acid glycoprotein, ceruloplasmin, apolipoprotein A-I, apolipoprotein A-II, apolipoprotein B, complement C1q, complement C3, complement C4, plasminogen, prealbumin). Following depletion, we fractionated our samples using our recently developed high-pH reversed-phase “Spider fractionator” into 24 fractions (Kulak et al., 2017).  Sample preparation: Protein digestion and in-StageTip purification Sample preparation of plasma samples of proteomic studies in our group were carried out according to our Plasma Proteome Profiling pipeline as described in (Geyer et al., 2016a; Geyer et al., 2016b) with an automated set-up on an Agilent Bravo liquid handling platform. In brief, plasma samples were diluted 1:10 with ddH2O and 10 µl of the sample were mixed with 10 µl PreOmics lysis buffer (P.O. 00001, PreOmics GmbH, Martinsried, Germany) for reduction of disulfide bridges, cysteine alkylation and protein denaturation at 95°C for 10 min (Kulak et al., 2014). Trypsin and Lys-C were added to the mixture after a 5 min cooling step at room temperature, at a ratio of 1:100 micrograms of enzyme to micrograms of protein ratio. Digestion was performed at 37 °C for 1 h. An amount of 20 µg of peptides was loaded on two 14-gauge StageTip plugs, followed by consecutive purification steps according to the PreOmics iST protocol. The StageTips were centrifuged using a 3D-printed in-house-made StageTip centrifugal device at 1500 g. The collected material was completely dried using a SpeedVac centrifuge at 60 °C (Eppendorf, Concentrator plus). Peptides were suspended in buffer A* and sonicated (Branson Ultrasonics, Ultrasonic Cleaner Model 2510).

### Data Protocol
Data analysis MS raw files were analyzed by the MaxQuant software version 1.5.6.8 (Cox and Mann, 2008) and peptide lists were searched against the human Uniprot FASTA database. A contaminant database generated by the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011) was configured with cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification and N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. We set the false discovery rate (FDR) to 0.01 for protein and peptide level with a minimum length of 7 amino acids for peptides and the FDR was determined by searching a reverse database. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to arginine and lysine as expected using trypsin and Lys-C as proteases. A maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Peptide identification was performed with an initial precursor mass deviation up to 7 ppm and a fragment mass deviation of 20 ppm. The ‘match between run algorithm’ in the MaxQuant quantification (Nagaraj et al., 2012) was performed after constructing a matching library consistent of depleted and all the undepleted plasma samples from the weight loss study. All proteins and peptides matching to the reversed database were filtered out. Label-free protein quantitation (LFQ) was performed with a minimum ratio count of 2 (Cox et al., 2014).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Plasma, Biomarker, Plasma proteome profiling, Quality, Pre-analytics

### Affiliations
Proteomics and Signal Transduction Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry Am Klopferspitz 18 D-82152 Martinsried
Proteomics

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Proteomics and Signal Transduction Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry Am Klopferspitz 18 D-82152 Martinsried


