### Accession
PXD031981

### Title
Phytopathogenic protist Albugo candida secretes cationic intrinsically disordered peptides with antimicrobial activity against plant-associated bacteria

### Description
Positive and negative ecological interactions shape the dynamics and composition of natural microbial communities. The mechanisms behind microbe-microbe interactions, particularly those protein-based, are not well understood and only a small percentage of such interactions has been studied. We hypothesize that secreted proteins are a powerful and highly specific toolset to shape and defend a favorable plant niche. Here, we have studied Albugo candida, an obligate plant parasite from the protist Oomycota phylum, for its potential to inhibit and promote the growth of bacteria through secretion of proteins into the apoplast. Amplicon sequencing and network analysis of Albugo-infected and uninfected samples revealed an abundance of negative correlations between Albugo and other phyllosphere microbes. Analysis of the secreted proteome of Albugo candida combined with machine-learning predictors enabled the selection of candidates for heterologous expression and study of their inhibitory activity in vitro. We found that three of the candidate proteins showed a selective antimicrobial activity on several gram-positive bacterial strains isolated from Arabidopsis thaliana. We could ascribe the antibacterial activity of the candidates to their intrinsically disordered regions and positively correlate it with their net charge. This is the first report of protist proteins that have an antimicrobial activity under apoplastic conditions and therefore are potential biocontrol tools for a targeted manipulation of the microbiome.

### Sample Protocol
We extracted apoplast samples from Albugo-infected and uninfected A. thaliana leaves at 10 dpi using vacuum pump infiltration at ~100 Pa with 180 mM MES buffer (pH 5.5). We collected the infiltrate through centrifugation in a swinging-bucket centrifuge at 1000 RCF for 20 min. We performed acetone–methanol precipitation overnight at −20 ºC. We resuspended the protein pellets in a denaturation buffer (6 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 10 mM Tris, pH 8), and determined their concentration by Bradford assay. Disulfide bonds were reduced with 10 mM DTT before alkylation with 55 mM iodoacetamide, for 1 h each. We used trypsin (Promega Corporation) for digestion, and purified the peptides on Sep-Pak C18 Cartridges (Waters).  The Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (kit no.: 84868; Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used to fractionate 150 μg of triple dimethyl-labeled and mixed proteome. Spin columns were conditioned twice with ACN and 0.1% TFA according to the vendor. We loaded the acidified peptides on columns and washed them once with water prior to elution. Peptides were eluted stepwise with 5%, 7.5%, 10%, 12.5%,13.3%, 15%, 17.5%, 20% and final 50% ACN/ammonia. We acidified the fractions to pH 2 to 3 and desalted them on C18 StageTips before starting LC–MS/MS measurement. In total, we collected nine fractions per replicate. We labeled the peptides with dimethyl (L: uninfected, M: Nc2 and H: Nc14 treatments) on Sep-Pak C18 Cartridges. We mixed triple dimethyl sets at an equal peptide ratio of 1:1:1. We inspected label efficiency and mixing in separate LC–MS/MS runs.  We analyzed the samples on a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and on an Exploris mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). An online-coupled Easy-nLC 1200 UHPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used to separate the peptides on a 20 cm analytical column, 75 μm ID PicoTip fused silica emitter (New Objective). This column was in-house packed with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 μm resin (Dr Maisch GmbH Ltd). We generated a gradient by solvent A (0.1% FA) and solvent B (0.1% FA in 80% ACN), at 40 ºC and a 200 nl/min flow rate. We eluted the peptide fractions using a 90-min segmented linear gradient. We electrosprayed and analyzed eluted peptides in a positive ion, data-dependent acquisition mode. We selected the top 12 most intense peptides. Full mass spectrometry was acquired in a scan range of 300 to 1750 m/z at a resolution of 60,000.

### Data Protocol
We processed raw data files with the MaxQuant software suite version 1.6.7.0 . We searched the MS/MS data against the UniProt A. thaliana database (18,218 entries), the Albugo strains Nc2 and Nc14 predicted proteomse, assembly accessions: GCA_001078535.1 and GCA_902706625.1, as well as commonly observed contaminants. We kept the search parameters to default values except for the dimethylation for light (28.03 Da), intermediate (32.06 Da), and heavy (36.08 Da) labels on lysine residues and peptide N-termini. We set oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications and allowed carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues as fixed modification. All searches were performed in trypsin/P-specific digestion mode. Maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. We considered an Albugo protein as present in the apoplast with a high confidence when it had at least one predicted peptide match with an Andromeda score higher than ten. We assessed the relative abundance of proteins in the apoplast by the normalized ratio of the peptide intensities between infected and non-infected treatments.

### Publication Abstract
Biotic and abiotic interactions shape natural microbial communities. The mechanisms behind microbe-microbe interactions, particularly those protein based, are not well understood. We hypothesize that released proteins with antimicrobial activity are a powerful and highly specific toolset to shape and defend plant niches. We have studied Albugo candida, an obligate plant parasite from the protist Oomycota phylum, for its potential to modulate the growth of bacteria through release of antimicrobial proteins into the apoplast. Amplicon sequencing and network analysis of Albugo-infected and uninfected wild Arabidopsis thaliana samples revealed an abundance of negative correlations between Albugo and other phyllosphere microbes. Analysis of the apoplastic proteome of Albugo-colonized leaves combined with machine learning predictors enabled the selection of antimicrobial candidates for heterologous expression and study of their inhibitory function. We found for three candidate proteins selective antimicrobial activity against Gram-positive bacteria isolated from A.&#x2009;thaliana and demonstrate that these inhibited bacteria are precisely important for the stability of the community structure. We could ascribe the antibacterial activity of the candidates to intrinsically disordered regions and positively correlate it with their net charge. This is the first report of protist proteins with antimicrobial activity under apoplastic conditions that therefore are potential biocontrol tools for targeted manipulation of the microbiome.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis, Apoplast, Albugo

### Affiliations
University of Tuebingen
Center for Plant Molecular Biology, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany

### Submitter
Daniel Gomez Perez

### Lab Head
Dr Eric Kemen
Center for Plant Molecular Biology, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany


