### Accession
PXD031710

### Title
Mitochondrially targeted tamoxifen alleviates markers of obesity and type 2 diabetes mellitus in mice

### Description
Type 2 diabetes mellitus represents a major health problem with increasing prevalence worldwide. Limited efficacy of current therapies have prompted a search for novel therapeutic options. Here we show that treatment of pre-diabetic mice with mitochondrially targeted tamoxifen, a potential anti-cancer agent with senolytic activity, improves glucose tolerance and reduces body weight with most pronounced reduction of visceral adipose tissue due to reduced food intake, suppressed adipogenesis and elimination of senescent cells. Glucose-lowering effect of mitochondrially targeted tamoxifen is linked to improvement of type 2 diabetes mellitus-related hormones profile and is accompanied by reduced lipid accumulation in liver. Lower senescent cell burden in various tissues, as well as its inhibitory effect on pre-adipocyte differentiation, results in lower level of circulating inflammatory mediators that typically enhance metabolic dysfunction. Targeting senescence with mitochodrially targeted tamoxifen thus represents an approach to the treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus and its related comorbidities, promising a complex impact on senescence-related pathologies in aging population of patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus with potential translation into the clinic.

### Sample Protocol
Tissues were homogenised and lysed by boiling at 95 °C for 10 min in 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) containing 2 % sodium deoxycholate, 40 mM chloroacetamide, 10 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and further sonicated (Sonopuls Mini 20, MS 1.5, Bandelin, Electronic, Berlin, Germany). Protein concentration was determined using the BCA protein assay kit (Thermo), and 30 µg of protein per sample was used for MS sample preparation. Samples were further processed using SP3 beads 1. Briefly, 5 µl of SP3 beads was added to 30 µg of protein in lysis buffer and filled to 50 µL with 100 mM TEAB. Protein binding was induced by addition of ethanol to 60 % (v/v) final concentration. Samples were mixed and incubated for 5 min at RT. The tubes were then placed into a magnetic rack and the unbound supernatant discarded. Beads were subsequently washed two times with 180 µL of 80 % ethanol. Samples were digested with trypsine (trypsin/protein ratio, 1/30) and reconstituted in 100 mM TEAB at 37 °C overnight. Samples were then acidified with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to 1 % final concentration and peptides were desalted using in-house made stage tips packed with C18 disks (Empore, Oxford, PA, USA) 2. Nano Reversed phase columns (EASY-Spray column, 50 cm x 75 µm ID, PepMap C18, 2 µm particles, 100 Å pore size) were used for LC/MS analysis. Mobile phase buffer A was composed of water and 0.1% formic acid. Mobile phase B was composed of acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Samples were loaded onto the trap column (C18 PepMap100, 5 μm particle size, 300 μm x 5 mm, Thermo Scientific) for 4 min at 18 μl/min loading buffer was composed of water, 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. Peptides were eluted with Mobile phase B gradient from 4% to 35% B in 120 min. Eluted peptide cations were converted to gas-phase ions by electrospray ionization and analyzed on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion (Q-OT-qIT, Thermo Scientific). Survey scans of peptide precursors from 350 to 1400 m/z were performed in the Orbitrap at 120K resolution (at 200 m/z) with a 5x105 ion count target. Tandem MS was performed by isolation at 1,5 Th with the quadrupole, HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 30, and rapid scan MS analysis in the ion trap. The MS2 ion count target was set to 104 and the maximum injection time was 35 ms. Only those precursors with charge state 2–6 were sampled for MS2. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 45 s with a 10 ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. Monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on. The instrument was run in top speed mode with 2 s cycles 3.

### Data Protocol
All data were analyzed and quantified with the MaxQuant software (version 1.6.3.4) 4. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1 % for both proteins and peptides, and we specified a minimum peptide length of seven amino acids. The Andromeda search engine was used for the MS/MS spectra search against the Mus musculus dabase (downloaded from Uniprot on July 2019, containing 22 267 entries). Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to Arg and Lys, also allowing cleavage at proline bonds and a maximum of two missed cleavages. Dithiomethylation of cysteine was selected as fixed modification and N- terminal protein acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. The “match between runs” feature of MaxQuant was used to transfer identifications to other LC-MS/MS runs based on their masses and retention time (maximum deviation 0.7 min), and this was also used in quantification experiments. Quantifications were performed with the label-free algorithm in MaxQuant 5. Data analysis was performed using the Perseus 1.6.1.3 software 6.

### Publication Abstract
Type 2 diabetes mellitus represents a major health problem with increasing prevalence worldwide. Limited efficacy of current therapies has prompted a search for novel therapeutic options. Here we show that treatment of pre-diabetic mice with mitochondrially targeted tamoxifen, a potential anti-cancer agent with senolytic activity, improves glucose tolerance and reduces body weight with most pronounced reduction of visceral adipose tissue due to reduced food intake, suppressed adipogenesis and elimination of senescent cells. Glucose-lowering effect of mitochondrially targeted tamoxifen is linked to improvement of type 2 diabetes mellitus-related hormones profile and is accompanied by reduced lipid accumulation in liver. Lower senescent cell burden in various tissues, as well as its inhibitory effect on pre-adipocyte differentiation, results in lower level of circulating inflammatory mediators that typically enhance metabolic dysfunction. Targeting senescence with mitochodrially targeted tamoxifen thus represents an approach to the treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus and its related comorbidities, promising a complex impact on senescence-related pathologies in aging population of patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus with potential translation into the clinic.

### Keywords
Obesity, Mitochodnria, Mice, Tamoxifen

### Affiliations
Institute of Biotechnology, Czech Academy of Sciences, Prague-West, Czech Republic.
BIOCEV, Faculty of Science, Charles University in Prague

### Submitter
Pavel Talacko

### Lab Head
Dr Sona Stemberkova Hubackova
Institute of Biotechnology, Czech Academy of Sciences, Prague-West, Czech Republic.


