### Accession
PXD004334

### Title
Role for KDM3A in ciliogenesis

### Description
Cilia are dynamic antennae that sense the extracellular environment adjusting their length to maintain homeostasis. Mutant mouse models for the lysine demethylase KDM3A (JMJD1A, JMHD2A) share phenotypic features with human ciliopathies, including obesity and metabolic syndrome. Here we show that cilia of Kdm3a mutants are unstable with dysregulated length ranges accumulating intraflagellar transport proteins (IFTs) at the ciliary tip. RNA sequencing and mass-spectrometry identified actin cytoskeleton as the most miss-regulated feature during the ciliary cycle of KDM3A null cells and revealed that IFT81 contains Nε-methylated lysines in vivo to which recombinant KDM3A binds without subsequent demethylation. Mutations in these IFT81 methyl-lysine residues however stabilize KDM3A null cilia and potentiate ciliogenesis surpassing wild type cells; a synergism phenocopied by wild type cultures through the simultaneous destabilization of the actin cytoskeleton when over-expressing IFT81 lysine-mutants. Our work reveals that ciliogenesis requires the coordinated release of cytoskeletal constrains and the presence of intraflagellar transport proteins which KDM3A integrates aided by post-translationally modifiable lysine residues in IFT81.

### Sample Protocol
KDM3A interacting proteins from RPE1 cells were immunopurified with pAb N-KDM3A; on-bead purified complexes were trypsin digested and analyzed as described (turriziani 2014)

### Data Protocol
Databases were searched with MaxQuant/Andromeda, with mas modifications, carbamylation C (fixed) and M oxidation

### Publication Abstract
Cilia assembly and disassembly are coupled to actin dynamics, ensuring a coherent cellular response during environmental change. How these processes are integrated remains undefined. The histone lysine demethylase KDM3A plays important roles in organismal homeostasis. Loss-of-function mouse models of <i>Kdm3a</i> phenocopy features associated with human ciliopathies, whereas human somatic mutations correlate with poor cancer prognosis. We demonstrate that absence of KDM3A facilitates ciliogenesis, but these resulting cilia have an abnormally wide range of axonemal lengths, delaying disassembly and accumulating intraflagellar transport (IFT) proteins. KDM3A plays a dual role by regulating actin gene expression and binding to the actin cytoskeleton, creating a responsive "actin gate" that involves ARP2/3 activity and IFT. Promoting actin filament formation rescues <i>KDM3A</i> mutant ciliary defects. Conversely, the simultaneous depolymerization of actin networks and IFT overexpression mimics the abnormal ciliary traits of <i>KDM3A</i> mutants. KDM3A is thus a negative regulator of ciliogenesis required for the controlled recruitment of IFT proteins into cilia through the modulation of actin dynamics.

### Keywords
Cilia/ intraflagellar transport/ histone demethylase/ kdm3a/ lysine methylation/ actin dynamics

### Affiliations
university  of Edinburgh
University of Edinburgh

### Submitter
Alex von kriegsheim

### Lab Head
Dr alex von kriegsheim
university  of Edinburgh


