### Accession
PXD037059

### Title
The Legionella protein VpdC is a ubiquitin-activated phospholipase effector

### Description
The goal of this project was to identify the host factor(s) required for allosteric activation of the phospholipase VpdC from the intracellular pathogen Legionella pneumophila. For that reason, we performed co-precipitation analyses from lysate of transiently transfected HEK293T cells producing either Red Fluorescent Protein (RFP)-tagged VpdC(257-884) or RFP-VpdC(257-610) as bait.

### Sample Protocol
Protein retention from transiently transfected cells was conducted using RFP-trap magnetic agarose (Chromotek) following manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, cell lysate from ~4x107 HEK293T cells producing mRFP-mcVpdC or mRFP-MD were incubated with 100 mL magnetic agarose at 4ºC for 3 hours. RFP-trap magnetic agarose beads were washed with Urea buffer (2.5 mM Tris, 10 mM hydroxylproline, 1 M Urea), column purified PBS and H2O, eluted with 1% dodecanoate (DODEC) and analyzed by LC-MS/MS using a "reductive dimethylation" approach.

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed using MaxQuant using dimethyl labeling quantitation with the requantify setting on and limiting to zero missed sites to reduce variation due to small differences in digestion extent. All other parameters were default settings.

### Publication Abstract
Intravacuolar pathogens need to gradually expand their surrounding vacuole to accommodate the growing number of bacterial offspring during intracellular replication. Here we found that <i>Legionella pneumophila</i> controls vacuole expansion by fine-tuning the generation of lysophospholipids within the vacuolar membrane. Upon allosteric activation by binding to host ubiquitin, the type IVB (Dot/Icm) effector VpdC converts phospholipids into lysophospholipids which, at moderate concentrations, are known to promote membrane fusion but block it at elevated levels by generating excessive positive membrane curvature. Consequently, <i>L. pneumophila</i> overproducing VpdC were prevented from adequately expanding their surrounding membrane, trapping the replicating bacteria within spatially confined vacuoles and reducing their capability to proliferate intracellularly. Quantitative lipidomics confirmed a VpdC-dependent increase in several types of lysophospholipids during infection, and VpdC production in transiently transfected cells caused tubulation of organelle membranes as well as mitochondria fragmentation, processes that can be phenocopied by supplying cells with exogenous lysophospholipids. Together, these results demonstrate an important role for bacterial phospholipases in vacuolar expansion.

### Keywords
Host-pathogen interaction; intracellular pathogen; legionnaires' disease; translocated effector; host cell;

### Affiliations
Section on Microbial Pathogenesis, NICHD, NIH, Department of Health and Human Services, US Government
NIH/NIDDK

### Submitter
David Anderson

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Peter Machner
Section on Microbial Pathogenesis, NICHD, NIH, Department of Health and Human Services, US Government


