### Accession
PXD007995

### Title
Quantifying extracellular matrix turnover in human lung scaffold cultures

### Description
Tissue engeneering using biological scaffolds are a promising technique for solving the shortage of donor organs for patients suffering of end stage organ faliure. We introduced stable isotope labeling with amino acids in a tissue culture setting, which enabeled us to distinguish between the biological scaffold and the proteome of the reppulating cells. Our study gives new insight into ECM turnover in repopulating lung scaffolds and the technique will be a valuble tool for future studies of cell-ECM interaction in tissue engeneering.

### Sample Protocol
Lyophilized samples were homogenized using a beadbeater and a consecutive extraction protocol were used with fractionation into soluble fractions, SDS released fractions and urea-digested fractions. Reduced and alkylated samples were trypsin digested, soluble and urea digested samples were desalted with C18 reversed phase spin columns and SDS released sample fractions were cleared from SDS using SP3 beads. All samples were desalted and resuspended in 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid before LC-MS/MS analysis on a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide separation was performed on an EASY-nLC 1000 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected to an EASY-spray column (Thermo Scientific, ID 75 µm x 25 cm). Sampeles were run on an acetonitrile gradient. A full mass scan at mass range 400-1,600 m/z (resolution 70,000 @ 200 m/z) was followed by MS/MS scans (70,000 @ 200 m/z). The top 15 most abundant ions were selected for fragmentation. The dynamic exclusion window was set to 20 s and a MS precursor value above 1.7e4 was required for triggering MS/MS scans.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.30) were used to analyze raw files. Resulting peak lists were searched in Andromeda against UniProt human database (Swiss-prot downloaded 2015-11-17), complemented with the standard MaxQuant contaminant database. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and a maximum of two missed cleavages. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm and fragment ion mass tolerance to 20 ppm. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% at both the peptide and protein level.

### Publication Abstract
Remodelling of the extracellular matrix is accomplished by altering the balance between matrix macromolecule production and degradation. However, it is not well understood how cells balance production of new matrix molecules and degradation of existing ones during tissue remodelling and regeneration. In this study, we used decellularized lung scaffolds repopulated with allogenic lung fibroblasts cultured with stable isotope labelled amino acids to quantify the balance between matrix production and degradation at a proteome-wide scale. Specific temporal dynamics of different matrisome proteins were found to correspond to the proliferative activity of the repopulating cells and the degree of extracellular deposition. The remodeling of the scaffold was characterized by an initial phase with cell proliferation and high production of cell adhesion proteins such as emilin-1 and fibronectin. Extended culture time resulted in increased levels of core matrisome proteins. In a comparison with monolayer cultures on plastic, culture in lung scaffolds lead to a pronounced accumulation of proteoglycans, such as versican and decorin, resulting in regeneration of an extracellular matrix with greater resemblance to native lung tissue compared to standard monolayer cultures. Collectively, the study presents a promising technique for increasing the understanding of cell- extracellular matrix interactions under healthy and diseased conditions.

### Keywords
Human, Lung, Silac, Ecm

### Affiliations
Lung Biology, Department Experimental Medical Science, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.
Lung Biology, Department of Experimental Medical Science, Lund University, Sweden

### Submitter
Oskar Rosmark

### Lab Head
Dr Gunilla Westergren-Thorsson
Lung Biology, Department of Experimental Medical Science, Lund University, Sweden


