### Accession
PXD002719

### Title
Quantitative proteomic analysis of duck lung tissue during infection of avian influenza

### Description
Ducks and wild aquatic birds are the natural reservoirs of avian influenza viruses. However, the host proteome response that causes disease in vivo during infection by the highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) H5N1 virus is still not well understood. In the present study, we compared the proteome response in Muscovy duck lung tissue during 3 day of infection with either a highly virulent or an avirulent H5N1 virus. During infection, proteins involved in immune response of neutrophils and size of cells were increased markedly in the lung by the virulent strain, while the avirulent strain evoked a distinct response, characterized by an increase in proteins involved in cell movement, maturation of dendritic cells, adhesion of phagocytes, and immune response of macrophages.

### Sample Protocol
Lung tissue was collected and proteins were extracted by RIPA reagent. The peptides digested by trypsin were then labeled by iTRAQ 8-plex reagents. iTRAQ labeled samples were redissolved used for reversed-phase column separation. A linear gradient was operated for peptide separation. The eluted peptides were performed on a TripleTOF 5600 system (AB Sciex) in Information Dependent Mode. TripleTOF 5600 system performs automatic recalibration such that typical mass errors for MS and MS/MS data were below 10 ppm.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were converted to Protein PilotTM 4.5 (AB Sciex) equipped with ParagonTM Algorithm (Revision Number: 4.5.0.0, 1654) for deep proteome analysis and protein quantitation. The Anas platyrhynchos database (May 7, 2014, 16588 sequences) was downloaded from NCBI and then combined with common contaminants and used for database searching. The parameters for database searching were as follows: iTRAQ 4-plex (peptide labeled) was set as sample type; methylmethanethiosulfonate (MMTS) was set as the cysteine alkylation; trypsin was set as the digestion enzyme; biological modifications and amino acid substitutions were set as ID focus; search effort was set as “thorough”. Only peptide and protein identifications with FDR 1% were retained. In addition, a strict cutoff for protein identification was controlled with an unused ProtScore ≥1.3, which corresponds to a confidence limit of 95%, to minimize false positive results. For iTRAQ quantitation, only peptides that were marked as “Auto” in Protein PilotTM 4.5 contributed to calculation of protein ratio. Bias correction was set as “Auto” and background correction was set as “Yes” for protein quantitation results. In biological replicates and experimental replicates, CV (coefficient of variance) was calculated to assess the iTRAQ reliability. Proteins with iTRAQ ratio higher than 20 or lower than 0.05 were not considered as quantified, only proteins with at least two unique peptides and reasonable ratios across all channels were considered as quantified.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Avian influenza, Duck, Lung tissue

### Affiliations
College of Veterinary Medicine, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou, China
south china agricultural university

### Submitter
ming liao

### Lab Head
Dr Ming Liao
College of Veterinary Medicine, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou, China


