### Accession
PXD013484

### Title
O-GalNAc–glycosylated nuclear proteins

### Description
Biological functions of nuclear proteins are regulated by post-translational modifications (PTMs) that modulate gene expression and cellular physiology. However, the role of O-linked glycosylation (O-GalNAc) as a PTM of nuclear proteins in the human cell has not been previously reported. Here, we examined the initiation of O-GalNAc glycan biosynthesis, representing a novel PTM of nuclear proteins in the nucleus of human cells, with an emphasis on HeLa cells. Using affinity chromatography and MS analyses, we identified O-GalNAc glycosylated proteins in the nucleus and present solid evidence for O-GalNAc glycan synthesis in this organelle. The demonstration of O-GalNAc glycosylation of nuclear proteins in mammalian cells reported here has important implications for cell and chemical biology.

### Sample Protocol
O-GalNAc glycoproteins from HeLa nucleoplasm (endogenous glycosylation) and nucleoplasm from OG nuclei were purified by affinity chromatography using VVL–biotin/streptavidin–agarose column (+VVL column). +VVL column was prepared by incubation of 100 μg of biotin–VVL with 100 μl of streptavidin–agarose CL-4B (85881; Sigma) for 1 h at 4 °C, washed with 10 volumes TBS, and divided into two 50-μl parts. To obtain nucleoplasm, 2 × 107 HeLa-purified nuclei or OG nuclei (preincubated with UDP-GalNAc for 1 h at 37 °C) were lysed in high-salt solubilization buffer as described previously (15). Each nucleoplasm was pre-adsorbed with 50 μl of streptavidin–agarose column for 1 h at 4 °C. Resulting nucleoplasms were divided into two equal parts, which were incubated, respectively, with 50 μl of VVL-biotin/streptavidin–agarose column (+VVL column) and with 50 μl of streptavidin–agarose column without VVL (−VVL column) for 1 h at 4 °C. Columns were washed with 20 volumes of TBS, resuspended in Laemmli sample buffer, and heated at 90 °C for 10 min. Samples were loaded onto SDS-PAGE (12% acrylamide), run until 1-cm front separation, and gel stained with colloidal CBB G (B1131; Sigma). Gel regions corresponding to +VVL and −VVL columns were analyzed at a MS facility (Centro de Estudios Químicos y Biológicos por Espectrometría de Masa, Universidad de Buenos Aires, Argentina). Samples were digested with trypsin, and peptides were purified by nano-LC-MS/MS in a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). A H2O/acetonitrile gradient at a flow rate of 33 nl/min was used with a C18 2-mm EASY-Spray Accucore (ES801; ThermoFisher Scientific) coupled to Q-Exactive–Orbitrap hybrid spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). The top 12 peaks in each cycle were fragmented by the data-dependent MS2 method.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using the Proteome Discoverer software program, version 1.4. Based on the results, the following criterion was established. Proteins were considered O-GalNAc–glycosylated for those hits in the +VVL column having ≥ 2 high-quality peptides and peptide spectrum matches ratio (PSM ratio) of ≥3. PSM ratio was calculated as PSM for a hit identified in the +VVL column divided by PSM of the same hit in the −VVL column. Thus, the criterion was PSM ratio (+VVL column PSM/−VVL column PSM) of ≥3.

### Publication Abstract
Biological functions of nuclear proteins are regulated by post-translational modifications (PTMs) that modulate gene expression and cellular physiology. However, the role of <i>O-</i>linked glycosylation (<i>O</i>-GalNAc) as a PTM of nuclear proteins in the human cell has not been previously reported. Here, we examined in detail the initiation of <i>O-</i>GalNAc glycan biosynthesis, representing a novel PTM of nuclear proteins in the nucleus of human cells, with an emphasis on HeLa cells. Using soluble nuclear fractions from purified nuclei, enzymatic assays, fluorescence microscopy, affinity chromatography, MS, and FRET analyses, we identified all factors required for biosynthesis of <i>O-</i>GalNAc glycans in nuclei: the donor substrate (UDP-GalNAc), nuclear polypeptide GalNAc -transferase activity, and a GalNAc transferase (polypeptide GalNAc-T3). Moreover, we identified <i>O-</i>GalNAc glycosylated proteins in the nucleus and present solid evidence for <i>O-</i>GalNAc glycan synthesis in this organelle. The demonstration of <i>O-</i>GalNAc glycosylation of nuclear proteins in mammalian cells reported here has important implications for cell and chemical biology.

### Keywords
Hela, Nuclear glysosylation, O-galnac

### Affiliations
SCHOOL OF PHARMACY AND PHARM SCI
Centro de Investigaciones en Química Biológica de Córdoba, CIQUIBIC, CONICET, and Departamento de Química Biológica Ranwel Caputto, Facultad de Ciencias Químicas, Universidad Nacional de Córdoba, Ciudad Universitaria, X5000HUA Córdoba, Argentina

### Submitter
ROMINA CEJAS

### Lab Head
Dr FERNANDO J IRAZOQUI
Centro de Investigaciones en Química Biológica de Córdoba, CIQUIBIC, CONICET, and Departamento de Química Biológica Ranwel Caputto, Facultad de Ciencias Químicas, Universidad Nacional de Córdoba, Ciudad Universitaria, X5000HUA Córdoba, Argentina


