### Accession
PXD034086

### Title
Structural- and Site-specific N-glycosylation Characterization of COVID-19 Virus Spike with StrucGP

### Description
Spike (S) protein plays a key role in COVID-19 (SARS-CoV-2) infection and host-cell entry. Previous studies have systematically analyzed site-specific glycans compositions of S protein. Here, we further provide structure-clear N-glycosylation of S protein at site-specific level by using our recently developed structure- and site-specific N-glycoproteomics sequencing algorithm StrucGP. In addition to the common N-glycans as detected in previous studies, many uncommon glycosylation structures such as LacdiNAc structures, Lewis structures, Mannose 6-Phosphate (M6P) residues and bisected core structures were unambiguously mapped at a total of 20 glycosites in the S protein trimer and protomer. These data further supports the glycosylation structural-functional investigations of COVID-19 virus Spike.

### Sample Protocol
Spike proteins and other materials.  The full length and active trimer (His-tag) recombinant spike proteins expressed in the HEK 293 cell line were purchased from ACRO Biosystems (Beijing, China), with the purity of >85% and >90%, separately. Trypsin, Glu-C and chymotrypsin, Sequencing Grade, were purchased from Promega (Madison, WI). All other chemical reagents were purchased from Sigma Aldrich or Thermo Fisher Scientific. Protein Digestion.  About 10μg spike proteins were dissolved in 1 M ammonium bicarbonate/ 100 mM phosphate buffer (pH 8)/ 100 mM Tris-HCl with 10mM calcium chloride (pH 7.6) severally. 8 M urea was added to denature the protein. The protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 1 h at 37 °C, alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 min in the dark, followed by a 10 min incubation with 2.5 mM DTT to eliminate residual IAA. Then the alkylated spike proteins in 100 mM phosphate buffer (pH 8)/ 100 mM Tris-HCl with 10mM calcium chloride (pH 7.6) buffer were diluted 9 times for Glu-C and chymotrypsin digestion overnight separately. The alkylated spike proteins in 1 M ammonium bicarbonate were diluted 2 times for trypsin digestion 2h first and then diluted to 8 times digested overnight. The next day, the (glyco)peptides were dried and extracted using HyperSepTM C18 tip (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Then dried, re-suspended in 0.1% formic acid for mass spectrometry analysis. Mass spectrometry analysis.  Each sample (including the protomer and trimer of spike protein digested by trypsin, Glu-C and chymotrypsin) underwent three LC–MS/MS runs on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). About 200ng of glycopeptides were separated by an Easy-nLC 1200 system with a 75 µm × 50 cm Acclaim PepMap-100 C18 separating column protected by a 75 µm × 2 cm guarding column. Mobile phase flow rate was 200 nl/ min and consisted of 0.1% FA in water (A) and 80% ACN/0.1% FA (B). For trypsin digested samples, gradient profile for LC separation was set as follows: 3–40% B for 203 min, 40–68% B for 20 min, 68–99% B for 4 min and 99% B for 13 min. For Glu-C and chymotrypsin digested samples, gradient profile for LC separation was set as follows: 3–40% B for 195 min, 40–68% B for 20 min, 68–99% B for 5 min and 99% B for 20 min. The spray voltage (+) was set at 2,400 V, spray voltage (−) was set at 600 V. Orbitrap spectra (AGC 4 × 105) were collected from 800–2,000 m/z at a resolution of 120,000 followed by oxonium ions triggered data-dependent HCD MS/MS at a resolution of 30,000 using an isolation width of 0.7 m/z for 20% collision energy and 2 m/z for 33% collision energy. Charge state screening was enabled to reject unassigned and singly charged ions. A dynamic exclusion time of 20 s was used to discriminate against previously selected ions.

### Data Protocol
Identification of intact glycopeptides by StrucGP.  The identification of intact glycopeptides was performed by StrucGP. Briefly, all MS data were first converted into ‘mzML’ format by the trans-proteomic pipeline (TPP, v.5.0.0) . The intact glycopeptide analyses were performed using the built-in glycan branch structure database from StrucGP and the UniProtKB of human protein databases (downloaded from http://www.uniprot.org May 2020) with the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein sequence from ACRO Biosystems (Beijing, China). The protein enzymatic digestion was set as trypsin/ Glu-C/ chymotrypsin separately with a maximum of two missed cleavage sites and the potential glycosite-containing peptides were screened with the N-X-S/T motif (X is any amino acid except Proline). The carbamidomethylation (C, +57.0215 Da) was as a fixed modification, and oxidization (M, +15.9949 Da) as a dynamic modification. The mass tolerances for MS1 and MS2 were set at 10 and 20 ppm, respectively. For the Y ions determination, an optional mass shift of ±1 or 2 Da was allowed in addition to the 20-ppm mass tolerance in MS2. Finally, both peptide and glycan portions required <1% FDR for the intact glycopeptide identification. Visualization of StrucGP results.  GlycoVisualTool was used to visualize the results of StrucGP automatically. The function of showed all glycan structures on a given glycopeptide greatly simplified data analysis. StrucGP and GlycoVisualTool can be downloaded at Zenodo database (https://zenodo.org/record/5558658#.YWL2HzFByUk).

### Publication Abstract
The spike (S) protein plays a key role in COVID-19 (SARS-CoV-2) infection and host-cell entry. Previous studies have systematically analyzed site-specific glycan compositions as well as many important structural motifs of the S protein. Here, we further provide structural-clear <i>N-</i>glycosylation of the S protein at a site-specific level by using our recently developed structural- and site-specific <i>N-</i>glycoproteomics sequencing algorithm, StrucGP. In addition to the common <i>N-</i>glycans as detected in previous studies, many uncommon glycosylation structures such as LacdiNAc structures, Lewis structures, Mannose 6-phosphate (M6P) residues, and bisected core structures were unambiguously mapped at a total of 20 glycosites in the S protein trimer and protomer. These data further support the glycosylation structural-functional investigations of the COVID-19 virus spike.

### Keywords
Spike, Covid-19, Lc-msms, Strucgp, Glycopeptides

### Affiliations
Northwest University
College of Life Sciences, Northwest University, Xi’an 710069, China

### Submitter
Bojing Zhu

### Lab Head
Dr Shisheng Sun
College of Life Sciences, Northwest University, Xi’an 710069, China


