### Accession
PXD044434

### Title
Trichothiodystrophy-associated MPLKIP maintains DBR1 levels for correct mRNA splicing and ectodermal differentiation

### Description
The brittle hair syndrome Trichothiodystrophy (TTD) is characterized by variable clinical features, including photosensitivity, ichthyosis, growth retardation, microcephaly, intellectual disability, hypogonadism, and anemia. TTD-associated mutations typically cause unstable mutant proteins involved in various steps of gene-expression, severely reducing steady-state mutant protein levels. However, to date, no such link to instability of gene expression factors for TTD-associated mutations in MPLKIP/TTDN1 has been established. Here, we present seven additional TTD individuals with MPLKIP mutations from five consanguineous families, with a newly identified MPLKIP variant in one family. By mass spectrometry-based interaction proteomics we demonstrate that MPLKIP interacts with core splicing factors and the lariat debranching protein DBR1. MPLKIP-deficient primary fibroblasts have reduced steady-state DBR1 protein levels. Using Human Skin Equivalents (HSEs), we observed impaired keratinocyte differentiation associated with compromised splicing and eventually, an imbalanced proteome affecting skin development and, interestingly, also the immune system. Our data show that MPLKIP, through its DBR1 stabilizing role, is implicated in mRNA splicing, which is of particular importance in highly differentiated tissue.

### Sample Protocol
Identification of MPLKIP interactors by SILAC-based MS analysis Sample treatment was performed as previously described (Pines et al, 2018). For SILAC, cells were cultured at 37°C, 20% O2 and 5% CO2 in DMEM containing 10% dialyzed FBS (Gibco), 10% GlutaMAX (Life Technologies), 1% penicillin-streptomycin (P0781, Sigma-Aldrich), unlabelled L-arginine-HCl and L-lysine-HCL (control, “light”) or 13C6,15N4l-arginine-HCl and 13C6,15N2l-lysine-2HCl (MPLKIP-GFP, “heavy”) (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories). For immunoprecipitation, cells were incubated for 10 min on ice in HEPES buffer containing 30mM HEPES pH 7.5; 130mM NaCl; 1mM MgCl2; 0.5% Triton X-100; 1x EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche). After 10 cycles of sonication using the Bioruptor Sonicator (Diagenode) (15 sec on; 45 sec off) at 4°C, 500 U Benzonase® nuclease (Merck Millipore) was added and samples were kept in rotation for 1-2 hours at 4°C. The insoluble fraction was pelleted at 13,200 r.p.m. for 10 min at 4 °C, and the soluble fraction was applied for immunoprecipitation for 90 min at 4 °C, using 25 μl slurry GFP-Trap®A beads (Chromotek). Bound proteins were eluted with SDS–PAGE loading buffer and separated on 4–12% Bis-Tris NuPAGE® gels (Invitrogen). Lanes were cut into 2-mm slices and subjected to in-gel reduction with dithiothreitol, alkylation with iodoacetamide (98%; D4, Cambridge Isotope Laboratories) and digested with trypsin (sequencing grade; Promega). To perform nanoflow liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS), an 1100 series capillary liquid chromatography system (Agilent Technologies) coupled to a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) operating in positive mode was used. ReproSil C18 reversed phase column (1.5 cm × 100 μm) at a rate of 8 μl/min was used to trap the peptide mixtures that was then separated by a linear gradient of 0–80% acetonitrile (in 0.1% formic acid) during 60 min at a rate of 200 nl/min using a splitter. The eluate was sprayed into the electrospray ionization (ESI) source of the mass spectrometer and spectra were acquired in continuum mode while a data-dependent mode was used to perform fragmentation of the peptides.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant software (version 1.5.4.1) and Perseus software (version 1.6.14.0) was used to analyse the data.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Splicing, Ttd, Mplkip

### Affiliations
Proteomics Center, Erasmus MC
Proteomics Center, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Jeroen Demmers

### Lab Head
Dr Jeroen Demmers
Proteomics Center, Erasmus MC


