### Accession
PXD000493

### Title
Proteomics dataset for interphase chromatin probabilities

### Description
Chromatin proteins mediate replication, regulate expression and ensure integrity of the genome. So far, a comprehensive inventory of interphase chromatin has not been determined. This is largely due to its heterogeneous and dynamic composition, which makes conclusive biochemical purification difficult, if not impossible. As a fuzzy organelle it defies classical organellar proteomics and cannot be described by a single and ultimate list of protein components. Instead we propose a new approach that provides a quantitative assessment of a protein’s probability to function in chromatin. We integrate chromatin composition over a range of different biochemical and biological conditions. This resulted in interphase chromatin probabilities for 7635 human proteins, including 1840 previously uncharacterized proteins. Quantitative protein ontologies may provide a general alternative to list-based investigations of organelles and complement Gene Ontology.

### Sample Protocol
This dataset represents the 35 SILAC experiments which form the basis for interphase chromatin probabilities. Chromatin was enriched using the ChEP protocol (Chromatin Enrichment for Proteomics; see manuscript for method details). Experiments either compare chromatin from different biological conditions or chromatin with other subcellular fractions. Protein mixtures were digested in-gel with trypsin and peptides were fractionated by strong cation exchange chromatography. Peptide fractions were desalted on C18 StageTips and analyzed on an LTQ-Orbitrap or LTQ-Orbitrap Velos.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were processed using MaxQuant 1.3.0.5 using default settings, except that ratio count was set to 1, minimum peptide length was set to 6 and only unique peptides were used for quantitation. Data were searched against the Homo sapiens complete proteome subset of the Uniprot database, with canonical and isoform sequences downloaded on 13.07.2012.

### Publication Abstract
Chromatin proteins mediate replication, regulate expression, and ensure integrity of the genome. So far, a comprehensive inventory of interphase chromatin has not been determined. This is largely due to its heterogeneous and dynamic composition, which makes conclusive biochemical purification difficult, if not impossible. As a fuzzy organelle, it defies classical organellar proteomics and cannot be described by a single and ultimate list of protein components. Instead, we propose a new approach that provides a quantitative assessment of a protein's probability to function in chromatin. We integrate chromatin composition over a range of different biochemical and biological conditions. This resulted in interphase chromatin probabilities for 7635 human proteins, including 1840 previously uncharacterized proteins. We demonstrate the power of our large-scale data-driven annotation during the analysis of cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) regulation in chromatin. Quantitative protein ontologies may provide a general alternative to list-based investigations of organelles and complement Gene Ontology.

### Keywords
Human, Chromatin, Interphase, Icps

### Affiliations
Wellcome Centre for Cell Biology
Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell Biology

### Submitter
Georg Kustatscher

### Lab Head
Dr Juri Rappsilber
Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell Biology


