### Accession
PXD012552

### Title
XAB2 depletion induces intron retention in POLR2A to impair global transcription and promote cellular senescence

### Description
XAB2 is a multi-functional protein participating processes including transcription, splicing, DNA repair and mRNA export. Here we report POLR2A as a major target gene down-regulated after XAB2 depletion. XAB2 depletion led to severe splicing defects of POLR2A with significant intron retention. Such defects resulted in substantial loss of POLR2A at RNA and protein levels, which further impaired global transcription. Treatment of splicing inhibitor madrasin induced similar reduction of POLR2A. Screen using TMT identified several proteins involved in mRNA surveillance including Dom34 with elevated expression. Inhibition of translation or depletion of Dom34 rescued the expression of POLR2A by stabilizing its mRNA. Immuno-precipitation further confirmed that XAB2 associated with spliceosome components important to POLR2A expression. Domain mapping revealed that TPR motifs 2-4 and 11-12 of XAB2 were critical for POLR2A expression. Finally we showed POLR2A mediated cell senescence caused by XAB2 deficiency. Depletion of XAB2 or POLR2A induced cell senescence by up-regulation of p53 and p21, re-expression of POLR2A after XAB2 depletion alleviated cellular senescence. These data together support that XAB2 serves as a guardian of POLR2A expression to ensure global gene expression and antagonize cell senescence.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa cells were plated in 6-well plate and transfected with control or XAB2 siRNA-1 for 48 h. Then cells were harvested, and subjected to TMT-based quantitative proteome analysis by Jingjie PTM Biolabs (China). In brief, cell pellets were sonicated in lysis buffer (8M urea, 1% protease inhibitor cocktail), and the extracted protein was quantified with BCA kit. Then the protein solution was digested with trypsin for two times, and labeled with TMT kit (Thermo) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The tryptic peptides were fractionated into 60 fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC, combined into 9 fractions, and then analyzed by EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system and Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo).

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were analyzed using MaxQuant software (version 1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against SwissProt Human database (20,130 protein entries). TMT-6plex was specified as fixed modifications, and the false discovery rate was set at 0.01 for both protein and peptide identification.

### Publication Abstract
XAB2 is a multi-functional protein participating processes including transcription, splicing, DNA repair and mRNA export. Here, we report POLR2A, the largest catalytic subunit of RNA polymerase II, as a major target gene down-regulated after XAB2 depletion. XAB2 depletion led to severe splicing defects of POLR2A with significant intron retention. Such defects resulted in substantial loss of POLR2A at RNA and protein levels, which further impaired global transcription. Treatment of splicing inhibitor madrasin induced similar reduction of POLR2A. Screen using TMT-based quantitative proteomics identified several proteins involved in mRNA surveillance including Dom34 with elevated expression. Inhibition of translation or depletion of Dom34 rescued the expression of POLR2A by stabilizing its mRNA. Immuno-precipitation further confirmed that XAB2 associated with spliceosome components important to POLR2A expression. Domain mapping revealed that TPR motifs 2-4 and 11 of XAB2 were critical for POLR2A expression by interacting with SNW1. Finally, we showed POLR2A mediated cell senescence caused by XAB2 deficiency. Depletion of XAB2 or POLR2A induced cell senescence by up-regulation of p53 and p21, re-expression of POLR2A after XAB2 depletion alleviated cellular senescence. These data together support that XAB2 serves as a guardian of POLR2A expression to ensure global gene expression and antagonize cell senescence.

### Keywords
Xab2, Polr2a, Hela cell

### Affiliations
Institute of Cancer Stem Cell, Cancer Center, Dalian Medical University, Dalian, China
Dalian Medical University

### Submitter
Shuai Hou

### Lab Head
Dr Haixin Lei
Institute of Cancer Stem Cell, Cancer Center, Dalian Medical University, Dalian, China


