### Accession
PXD028934

### Title
Analysis of newly synthesized proteins more sensitive to Proteinase K using pulse SILAC and control sample for pulse SILAC experiment in which yeast cells were heat shock for 15 min and supernatant fractions analyzed (Experiment 1)

### Description
Accurate and efficient folding of nascent protein sequences into their native state requires support from the protein homeostasis network. Herein we probed which newly translated proteins are thermo-sensitive to infer which polypeptides require more time to fold within the proteome. Specifically, we determined which of these proteins were more susceptible to misfolding and aggregation under heat stress using pulse SILAC coupled mass spectrometry. These proteins are abundant, short, and highly structured. Notably these proteins display a tendency to form β-sheet secondary structures, a configuration which typically requires more time for folding, and were enriched for Hsp70/Ssb and TRiC/CCT binding motifs, suggesting a higher demand for chaperone-assisted folding. These polypeptides were also more often components of stable protein complexes in comparison to other proteins. Combining this evidence suggests that a specific subset of newly translated proteins in the cell requires more time following synthesis to reach a state less prone to aggregation upon stress.

### Sample Protocol
For the pulse SILAC Experiment 1, cells were grown in light labeled (0.03mg/ml Lys-0, 0.02mg/ml Arg-0) amino acids in SD medium with 2% dextrose for at least 7 generations. The equivalent of 80 OD600 of cells were taken and washed with heavy labeled SILAC medium (0.03mg/ml D4 Lys-4 and 0.02mg/ml 13C6 Arg-6) twice at room temperature and then resuspend in 100ml heavy SILAC medium and incubated at 25°C for 15 minutes before heat shock for 20 minutes at 45°C. For pulse SILAC Cell harvests were done by centrifugation at 3,220xg for 5 minutes at 4˚C, washed twice with cold 1×TBS (50mM Tris pH 7.5, 150mM NaCl), mixed, and re-suspended in equal volume of 2×Native lysis buffer (200mM Tris pH 7.5, 150mM NaCl, 2mM PMSF, 2×Protease Inhibitor Cocktails (Sigma-Aldrich)). Re-suspended cells were snap-frozen drop by drop in liquid nitrogen. The resulting cells pellets were lysed by cryo-grinding, thawed on ice and further diluted 3 times by adding ice-cold 1×Native lysis buffer with 1% NP40. Total cell lysates were pre-cleared twice by centrifugation at 1,000×g at 4˚C for 15min. Pellet fractions were separated from the resulting supernatant by centrifugation at 16,100×g at 4˚C for 15min. The insoluble protein pellet was washed twice with ice-cold 1×Native lysis buffer containing 1% NP40 and re-solubilized in 1×Laemmli Sample Buffer. For the LiP experiment cells were grown in light labeled amino acids in synthetic defined (SD) medium with 2% dextrose for at least 7 generations. The equivalent of 80 OD600 of exponentially growing cells were taken and washed with heavy labeled SILAC medium (0.03mg/ml D4 Lys-8 and 0.02mg/ml 13C6 Arg-10) twice at room temperature and then resuspend in 100ml heavy SILAC medium and incubated at 25°C for 15 minutes. In parallel, cells were grown in medium labeled SILAC medium (0.03mg/ml D4 Lys-4 and 0.02mg/ml 13C6 Arg-6) for at least 7 generations to the equivalent of 80 OD600 of cells. The lysis was done in absence of PMSF and protease inhibitor and 0, 0.05, 0.2, 1, 5, and 20ng of Proteinase K (SIGMA P2308-100MG) per µg of lysate was added for a 5 min incubation at 20°C. SDS was added to 1% and sample boiled at 5°C for 5 min. No PK was added to medium SILAC labeled cells in which SDS was directly added following lysis. 200μg of protein samples from pellet or total cell lysate fractions were cleaned up and trypsin digested using Single-Pot Solid-Phase-enhanced Sample Preparation (SP3) method as previously described (Hughes et al., 2019). The resulting peptides were desalted with high-capacity C18 (Phenomenex) STAGE Tips before an offline high pH reversed-phase chromatography fractionation as previously described (Udeshi et al., 2013). Fractions were collected at 2 minutes intervals. The resulting 40 fractions were pooled in a non-contiguous manner into 12 fractions per SILAC experiment. Each fraction was then dried in a Vacufuge plus (Eppendorf). Prior to mass spectrometry analysis each sample was resuspended in 0.1% formic acid with 2 % acetonitrile in water. For the LiP experiment, 5µg of lysates treated with Proteinase K were mixed 1:1 with the medium labeled extract and subjected to SP3 method. A single fraction was analyzed per dilution of Proteinase K.  Mass spectrometry spectra were acquired on an Impact II (Bruker) on-line coupled to either an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific) or a nanoElute (Bruker) liquid chromatography (LC). The LC was equipped with a 2-cm-long, 100-μm-inner diameter trap column packed with 5 μm-diameter Aqua C-18 beads (Phenomenex) and a 40-cm-long, 50-μm-inner diameter fused silica analytical column packed with 1.9 μm-diameter Reprosil-Pur C-18-AQ beads (Dr. Maisch) and it was heated to 50°C using taped heater (SRMU020124, Omega.com and in-house build temperature controller). Samples were run with a 120 minutes gradient from 10% Buffer B to 17% Buffer B during the first 45 min, then Buffer B was increased to 35% by 90 min and to 80% at 95 min. The scanning range was from m/z 200 to 2000 Th. The Impact II was set to acquire in a data-dependent auto-MS/MS mode with inactive focus fragmenting the 20 most abundant ions (one at the time at 18 Hz rate) after each full-range scan from m/z 200 Th to m/z 2000 Th (at 5 Hz rate). The isolation window for MS/MS was 2 to 3 Th depending on parent ion mass to charge ratio and the collision energy ranged from 23 to 65 eV depending on ion mass and charge (Beck et al., 2015). Parent ions were then excluded from MS/MS for the next 0.3 min and reconsidered if their intensity increased more than 5 times. Singly charged ions were excluded since in ESI mode peptides usually carry multiple charges. Strict active exclusion was applied. Mass accuracy: error of mass measurement is typically within 5 ppm and is not allowed to exceed 10 ppm. The nano ESI source was operated at 1900 V capillary voltage, 0.25 Bar nanoBuster pressure with methanol in the nanoBooster, 3 L/min drying gas and 150°C drying temperature.

### Data Protocol
The results were analyzed against SGD_orf_trans_all_20150113 released from the Saccharomyces Genome Database (yeastgenome.org) using MaxQaunt (version 1.6.14) with built-in common contaminants. The searches were done using the following parameters: multiplicity matching specific SILAC experiment design for Lys and Arg isotope type, trypsin enzyme specificity, fixed modifications - carbamidomethyl, variable modifications - methionine oxidation and N-acetyl peptides with default software instrument specific search settings, plus match-between-runs and re-quantification and an FDR set below 0.01

### Publication Abstract
Accurate and efficient folding of nascent protein sequences into their native states requires support from the protein homeostasis network. Herein we probe which newly translated proteins are thermo-sensitive, making them susceptible to misfolding and aggregation under heat stress using pulse-SILAC mass spectrometry. We find a distinct group of proteins that is highly sensitive to this perturbation when newly synthesized but not once matured. These proteins are abundant and highly structured. Notably, they display a tendency to form &#x3b2; sheet secondary structures, have more complex folding topology, and are enriched for chaperone-binding motifs, suggesting a higher demand for chaperone-assisted folding. These polypeptides are also more often components of stable protein complexes in comparison with other proteins. Combining these findings suggests the existence of a specific subset of proteins in the cell that is particularly vulnerable to misfolding and aggregation following synthesis before reaching the native state.

### Keywords
Yeast, Pulse silac, Limited proteolysis, Protein homeostasis

### Affiliations
The University of British Columbia
University of British Columbia

### Submitter
Thibault Mayor

### Lab Head
Dr Thibault Mayor
The University of British Columbia


