### Accession
PXD005405

### Title
Comparative evaluation of small molecular additives and their effects on peptide/protein identification

### Description
Detergents and salts are widely used in lysis buffer to enhance protein extraction from biological samples, facilitating in-depth proteome analysis, however, to efficiently remove these detergent and salt additives from the digested peptides is essential for generating high quality mass spectra in LC-MS/MS analysis. The sample preparation methods, such as Filter-Aided Sample Preparation (FASP), acetone precipitation followed by in-solution digestion (AP), strong cation exchange-based centrifugal proteomic reactor (CPR), are commonly used for proteomic sample process, but the additives removal efficiency and the application scope of these methods need to be further investigated. In this study, we demonstrated an integrative work flow for systematical small molecular additives quantification as well as peptide/protein identification to provide a comprehensive evaluation for additive cleanup effect of proteomic sample preparation pipelines. The multiple reaction monitoring (MRM)-based LC-MS approach was developed for six additives (i.e., Tris, Urea, CHAPS, SDS, SDC and Triton X-100) quantification. For the peptide and protein identification, although FASP outperformed the other two methods, these three methods were complementary to each other, in terms of peptide/ protein identification, as well as GRAVY index and amino acids distributions. By integrating analysis of small molecular quantification and protein identification datasets, we first bridged the quantitative influence of additive concentration to the peptide analysis performance. Our results provide a valuable dataset for appropriate sample preparation method selection and a guideline for evaluation of small molecular additives cleanup efficiency in the sample preparation procedures.

### Sample Protocol
Targeted Mass Spectrometry for additives quantification All of the MRM measurements were performed on a TSQ Quantiva mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific, San Jose, CA). Chromatographic separation of additives was carried out on a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLC system (Thermo Scientific) equipped with an XSelect HSS T3 XP Column (Waters, 100Å, 2.5µm, 3.0mm x 100mm) maintained at 40°C. Target molecules were separated by a 26min at 400μL/min gradient elution (started and held with 5% B for 1.5min, changed to 60% B within 7.5min, then to 70% B in 8.0min; further to 90% B in 1.0min and held for 3min, returned to 5% B within 0.5min and maintained for 5.5min). The mass spectrometer was operated in the heated electrospray (H-ESI) mode with a capillary temperature of 350 °C, a spray voltage of 3500V in positive mode and 3000V in negative mode, and a collision gas pressure of 1.5 mTorr. Nitrogen was used as sheath gas at 40Arb, auxiliary gas at 6Arb, and sweep gas at 1Arb. MRM transitions were monitored with a mass window of 0.4 half-maximum peak width (unit resolution) in Q1 and Q3. Standard solution (10μg/mL) was infused to optimizing the MS/MS parameters for individual target in both positive and negative ionization mode. For each target, the ionization mode and MRM parameters were selected for optimal signal-to-noise ratio. All of the measurements were performed in scheduled mode (Supplementary Table S2). All of the samples were assayed in technical triplicates.  Shotgun Mass Spectrometry for peptide identification The LC-MS/MS analysis of the peptide sample was carried out on a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific, San Jose, CA) interfaced with a nanoelectrospay ion source and coupled online to an Easy nLC1000 UPLC system (both from Thermo Electron). The peptides were separated by reverse phase HPLC using an in-house packed column (75 μm × 15cm, ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 3-μm diameter, 120 Å pore; Dr.Maisch GmbH). The applied linear gradient started at 5% solvent A (100% water, 0.1% formic acid) and reached 90% solvent B (100% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) after 90 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The Q-Exactive mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent acquisition mode using a full scan in the range of 400–1600 m/z, with resolution 70,000 (defined at m/z 200) followed by MS/MS scans of the ten most intense ions with resolution 17,500. MS/MS spectra were acquired with high-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) mode by applying a normalized collision energy of 28%. Only precursor ions matching to a charge state of 2 or higher were selected for fragmentation. Monoisotopic precursor selection and dynamic exclusion at duration of 30s was enabled.

### Data Protocol
Data Analysis Calculations for additives quantification were carried out using the Xcalibur® software version 3.0.63 (Thermo). Calibration curves (1/x weighted) were constructed from peak areas of the reference standards versus their concentrations. The number of smoothing points was set at 5; baseline window was set at 60; area noise factor was set at 10; peak noise factor was set at 40. For shotgun proteomics analysis, MS raw data were searched using MaxQuant software(version 1.5.1.0)[22] against a decoyed mouse database downloaded from Uniprot (3AUP000000589； 2015.05.10 download). The search criteria were set as follows: Trypsin/P was selected as the digestive enzyme with two potential missed cleavages; carbamidomethyl (C) was set as a fixed modification; acetyl (Protein N-term) and oxidation (M) were set as variable modifications. The first search peptide tolerance was set at 20ppm and main search peptide tolerance was set at 4.5ppm, respectively. The false discovery rates of peptides and proteins were both set at 1%. Protein abundance was calculated according to the normalized spectral protein intensity (LFQ intensity). Data were further processed in the open-source statistical language R[23] and GraphPad Prism (Version 5.01) software. The overlapping rate of the unique peptides and protein groups identified by between methods was calculated using the formula described in the previous research[24]. The identified peptides were grouped according to their grand average of hydropathy (GRAVY) index[25]. Positive GRAVY values indicate the hydrophobic peptides, while negative GRAVY values indicate the hydrophilic peptides. As for pI analysis, the identified peptides were grouped according to their theoretical pI calculated by Compute pI/Mw (www.expasy.ch). Venn diagrams were generated with the VennDiagram package and heatmaps were visualized with the Pheatmap package; both are based on language R.

### Publication Abstract
Detergents and salts are widely used in lysis buffers to enhance protein extraction from biological samples, facilitating in-depth proteomic analysis. However, these detergents and salt additives must be efficiently removed from the digested samples prior to LC-MS/MS analysis to obtain high-quality mass spectra. Although filter-aided sample preparation (FASP), acetone precipitation (AP), followed by in-solution digestion, and strong cation exchange-based centrifugal proteomic reactors (CPRs) are commonly used for proteomic sample processing, little is known about their efficiencies at removing detergents and salt additives. In this study, we (i) developed an integrative workflow for the quantification of small molecular additives in proteomic samples, developing a multiple reaction monitoring (MRM)-based LC-MS approach for the quantification of six additives (i.e., Tris, urea, CHAPS, SDS, SDC, and Triton X-100) and (ii) systematically evaluated the relationships between the level of additive remaining in samples following sample processing and the number of peptides/proteins identified by mass spectrometry. Although FASP outperformed the other two methods, the results were complementary in terms of peptide/protein identification, as well as the GRAVY index and amino acid distributions. This is the first systematic and quantitative study of the effect of detergents and salt additives on protein identification. This MRM-based approach can be used for an unbiased evaluation of the performance of new sample preparation methods. Data are available via ProteomeXchange under identifier PXD005405.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Lc-mrm quantification, Small molecular additive

### Affiliations
Department of Analytical Chemistry and CAS Key Laboratory of Receptor Research, Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences
Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 201203, China

### Submitter
Chengli Yu

### Lab Head
Dr Hu Zhou
Department of Analytical Chemistry and CAS Key Laboratory of Receptor Research, Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences


