### Accession
PXD031032

### Title
Re-analysis of glycoproteomics data with Glyco-Decipher

### Description
Reanalysis of submissions PXD005411, PXD005413, PXD005412, PXD005553, PXD005555, PXD005565 and PXD019937 using Glyco-Decipher. Identification results of peptide-spectrum matches supporting Glyco-Decipher manuscript (Glyco-Decipher: glycan database-independent peptide matching enables discovery of new glycans and in-depth characterization of site-specific N-glycosylation). Recently, several elegant bioinformatics tools have been developed to identify glycopeptides from tandem mass spectra for site-specific glycoproteomics studies. These glycan database-dependent tools have substantially improved glycoproteomics analysis but fail to identify glycopeptides with unexpected glycans. We present a platform called Glyco-Decipher to interpret the glycoproteomics data of N-linked glycopeptides. It adopts a glycan database-independent peptide matching scheme that allows the unbiased profiling of glycans and the discovery of new glycans linked with modifications. Reanalysis of several large-scale datasets showed that Glyco-Decipher outperformed the open search method in glycan blind searching and the popular glycan database-dependent software tools in glycopeptide identification. Our glycan database-independent search also revealed that modified glycans are responsible for a large fraction of unassigned glycopeptide spectra in shotgun glycoproteomics.

### Sample Protocol
For datasets of mouse tissues and yeast: Briefly, mouse tissues including brain, heart, kidney, liver and lung and yeast were homogenized, reduced (dithiothreitol), alkylated (iodoacetamide) at room temperature in dark and digested with trypsin. Peptides were ZIC-HILIC enriched and analyzed by stepped-energy HCD LC-MS/MS on Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid (Thermo Scientific) with collision energy of 30% and energy difference of +/-10%. For datasets of SARS-CoV-2 and ACE2: Briefly, four aliquots of SARS-CoV-2 spike protein were reduced by dithiothreitol and alkylated by iodoacetamide at room temperature in dark. The four aliquots of proteins were then digested respectively using alphalytic protease, chymotrypsin, a combination of trypsin and Glu-C, or a combination of Glu-C and AspN. Three aliquots of ACE2 protein were reduced (dithiothreitol) and alkylated (iodoacetamide) at room temperature in dark. The three aliquots of proteins were then digested respectively using alpha lytic protease, chymotrypsin, or a combination of trypsin and Lys-C. The peptides were separated on an Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 column and eluted into the nano-electrospray ion source of an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer. Full MS scans were acquired from m/z 200 to 2000 at 60k resolution, and MS/MS scans following higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with stepped collision energy (15%, 25%, 35%) were collected in the Orbitrap at 15k resolution.

### Data Protocol
For datasets of mouse tissues and yeast: Raw files from PXD005411, PXD005413, PXD005412, PXD005553, PXD005555 and PXD005565 were converted to the open source format mzML by using ProteoWizard (version: 3.0.21105) with 32-bit precision and the “1-” peak picking option. mzML files were searched using Glyco-Decipher, StrucGP (v1.0.0), pGlyco 3.0 (build20210615), Byonic (version: 3.11.3) and MSFragger-Glyco (version: 3.1.1) with parameter as follows: precursor tolerance: 5 ppm; fragmentation tolerance: 20 ppm; enzyme: full trypsin with 3 maximum missed cleavages; carbamidomethylation at C was set as fixed modification; and oxidation at M was set as variable modification. The Mus Musculus protein database (containing 25,243 entries) and the Schizosaccharomyces pombe protein database (containing 5,149 entries) for peptide identification and the GlyTouCan database (containing 1,766 entries) for glycan identification were used. For open seach of mouse tissues datasets using MSFragger (version: 3.1.1), the search parameters were as follows: precursor window: lower mass was set to 0 Da, upper mass was set to 3,000 Da or 6,000 Da; fragmentation tolerance: 20 ppm; enzyme: full trypsin with 3 maximum missed cleavages; carbamidomethylation at C was set as fixed modification; and oxidation at M was set as variable modification. In MSFragger, the labile search mode was provided for the N-glycan search. The labile search was off for the traditional open search, and it was set to be on for the N-glycan mode open search. For datasets of SARS-CoV-2 and ACE2: Raw files from PXD019937 were converted to the open source format mzML by using ProteoWizard (version: 3.0.21105) with 32-bit precision and the “1-” peak picking option. mzML Files were searched using Glyco-Decipher. For the long chromatography gradient used in the original research, a time window of 4,000 s was adopted in spectrum expansion during Glyco-Decipher searching. The search parameters were the same as those in the original research: precursor tolerance: 5 ppm; fragmentation tolerance: 20 ppm; for data from SARS-CoV-2 spike, enzyme settings including a-LP, chymotrypsin, a combination of trypsin and GluC, and a combination of GluC and AspN; for data from ACE2, enzyme settings including a-LP, chymotrypsin, and a combination of trypsin and LysC; cleavage was set to be semispecific; carbamindomethylation at C was set as a fixed modification; and oxidation at M was set as a variable modification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Glycoproteomics; glycopeptide; reanalysis; glycosylation; n-glycosylation

### Affiliations
CAS Key Laboratory of Separation Sciences for Analytical Chemistry, National Chromatographic R&A Center, Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), Dalian 116023, China
Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Zheng Fang

### Lab Head
Dr Mingliang Ye
CAS Key Laboratory of Separation Sciences for Analytical Chemistry, National Chromatographic R&A Center, Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), Dalian 116023, China


