### Accession
PXD028979

### Title
Proteomic and phosphoproteomic profilings in fibroblasts of 11 common mammalian species

### Description
A central goal of modern biology is to understand the molecular basis of phenotype evolution between species. Previously, the evolutionary profiling at the molecular level has been largely limited to the nucleotide level. Nevertheless, the genotype is translated to proteotype through comprehensive and gene-specific post-transcriptional regulations. Harnessing recently emerged consistent proteomic quantification methods, we here investigate the co-evolution processes across the transcriptomic, proteomic, and phosphoproteomic layers in skin fibroblasts from 11 common mammalian species. Altogether, we have generated a multi-species, multi-omics resource, the analysis of which significantly facilitates the understanding of gene expression, proteotype co-evolution, and biodiversity in mammals.

### Sample Protocol
Human skin fibroblast cells (SF) were purchased. Cow (Bos taurus), dog (Canis lupus), horse (Equus caballus), cat (Felis catus), monkey (Mucaca mulatta), opossum (Monodelphis domestica), rabbit (Oryctolagus cuniculus), sheep (Ovis aries), rat (Rattus norvegicus), and pig (Sus scrofa) SFs were obtained from fresh skin tissue.Fibroblasts emerged from the explants and grew to confluency in growth media with extra tissue removed. Fibroblast cell cultures were then established in 10-cm dishes with in DMEM with high glucose supplemented with 10% FBS at 5% CO2.   The fibroblast cell proteomes were harvested. Cells were washed with PBS twice and scaped off from the dish using the lysis buffer containing 8M urea containing complete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche) and Halt™ Phosphatase Inhibitor (Thermo). The cell pellets were then ultrasonically lysed at 4 °C for 2 min using a VialTweeter device (Hielscher-Ultrasound Technology) and centrifuged at 18,000 × g for 1 hour to remove the insoluble material. Protein concentrations were then determined with a Bradford assay (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA). The supernatant protein samples were reduced with 10 mM Dithiothreitol (DTT) for 1 h at 57 °C and alkylated by 20 mM iodoacetamide in the dark for 1 h at room temperature. All samples were further diluted by 5 times using 100 mM NH4HCO3 and were digested in-solution with sequencing-grade porcine trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37 °C. The phosphopeptide enrichment was performed using the High-Select™ Fe-NTA kit (Thermo Scientific, A32992) according to the manufacturer's instructions.  The LC used was an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA) harboring a 75 µm × 50 cm C18 column packed with 100A C18 material. A 150-min LC separation was configured based on the mix of buffer A (0.1% formic acid in H2O) and buffer B (80% acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid): Buffer B was made to increase from 4% to 34% in 139 mins, then to surge to 100% in 3 mins, and then kept at 100% for 8 mins. The LC-MS flow rate was kept at 300 nL/min with the temperature-controlled. The Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) instrument coupled to a nanoelectrospray ion source (NanoFlex, Thermo Scientific) was used as the DIA-MS platform for both proteomic and phosphoproteomic analyses. Spray voltage was set to 2,000 V and heating capillary temperature at 275 °C. All the DIA-MS methods consisted of one MS1 scan and 33 MS2 scans of variable windows by quadrupole isolation.

### Data Protocol
DIA-MS data procession were performed using Spectronaut v14, with the “DirectDIA”. The fasta files include:Bos_taurus.ARS-UCD1.2.pep.all.fa (for “cow”),,Canis_lupus_familiaris.CanFam3.1.pep.all.fa (for “dog”), Cavia_porcellus.Cavpor3.0.pep.all.fa (for “opossum”), Equus_caballus.EquCab3.0.pep.all.fa (for “horse”), Felis_catus.Felis_catus_9.0.pep.all.fa (for “cat”), Homo_sapiens.GRCh38.pep.all.fa (for “human”) Macaca_mulatta.Mmul_10.pep.all.fa (for “monkey”), Oryctolagus_cuniculus.OryCun2.0.pep.all.fa (for “rabbit”), Ovis_aries.Oar_v3.1.pep.all.fa (for “sheep”), Rattus_norvegicus.Rnor_6.0.pep.all.fa (for “rat”), Sus_scrofa.Sscrofa11.1.pep.all.fa (for “pig”). Particularly, for the total proteomic identification in each species, the possibilities of Oxidation at methionine and Acetylation at the protein N-terminals were set as variable modifications, whereas Carbamidomethylation at cysteine was set as a fixed modification. For the phosphoproteomic identification, the additional possibility of Phosphorylation at serine/threonine/tyrosine (S/T/Y) was enabled as the variable modification. For both proteomic and phosphoproteomic datasets per species, both peptide- and protein- FDR (based on Qvalue) were both controlled at 1%. In particular, the PTM localization option in Spectronaut v14 was enabled to locate phosphorylation sites.  All the other Spectronaut settings for identification and quantification were kept as default.

### Publication Abstract
Evolutionary profiling has been largely limited to the nucleotide level. Using consistent proteomic methods, we quantified proteomic and phosphoproteomic layers in fibroblasts from 11 common mammalian species, with transcriptomes as reference. Covariation analysis indicates that transcript and protein expression levels and variabilities across mammals remarkably follow functional role, with extracellular matrix-associated expression being the most variable, demonstrating strong transcriptome-proteome coevolution. The biological variability of gene expression is universal at both interindividual and interspecies scales but to a different extent. RNA metabolic processes particularly show higher interspecies versus interindividual variation. Our results further indicate that while the ubiquitin-proteasome system is strongly conserved in mammals, lysosome-mediated protein degradation exhibits remarkable variation between mammalian lineages. In addition, the phosphosite profiles reveal a phosphorylation coevolution network independent of protein abundance.

### Keywords
Multiple species, Quantitative proteomics, Phosphoproteomics, Dia-ms

### Affiliations
Yale University
Department of Pharmacology, Yale University School of Medicine

### Submitter
Wenxue Li

### Lab Head
Dr Yansheng Liu
Department of Pharmacology, Yale University School of Medicine


