### Accession
PXD010210

### Title
DIA+: A novel data-independent acquisition method combines multiple precursor charges to boost peptide signal.

### Description
Data-independent acquisition (DIA) methods aim to expand the benefits of low-throughput targeted proteomics to proteome-wide analyses. These methods rely on the use of several broadband isolation windows that select and fragment all peptide ions within a cycle. Isolation windows differ in that (I) they exhibit different widths, (ii) they are acquired either sequentially or in a non-consecutive order, and (iii) they are either juxtaposed or overlapped. Here we present DIA+, a novel DIA multiplexing scheme with isolation windows that combine signals from identical peptides with different charges. DIA+ is based on the co-isolation of charge +2 and +3 precursor ions from identical peptide sequences to combine their signal and therefore, increase the number of MS2 peptide fragment ions detected. DIA+ combines three non-consecutive m/z ranges, based on the mass difference between charge +2 and +3 peptides, into a composite 24 Da isolation window. Forty of these combined 24 Da windows cover a range of 400-1350 m/z. The performance of DIA+ was compared with other reference methods in the field, and with a DIA+ control method in which each 24 Da isolation window results from the combination of three consecutive m/z ranges. The combination of improved signal-to-noise and sequence coverage increases the confidence on peptide identification and results in a significant increase in the number of identified peptides and proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Peptide mixtures derived from digested HeLa cell extracts were injected in triplicates in an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer equipped with a chromatographic nano-UPLC system (Proxeon-1000) and a 50-cm C18 column (EASY-Spray; 75µm, PepMap RSLC C18, 2µm particles, 45ºC) using 120-min chromatographic gradients (ACN:H2O, 1% FA). All DIA methods were acquired with a first MS1 scan (Orbitrap detection at 60K) followed by different quadrupole isolation schemes, HCD fragmentation (28% CE) and MS2 detection in the Orbitrap at 30K.

### Data Protocol
Data was analyzed using DIA Umpire v2.1 with the search engine Comet. Peptides and proteins were filtered at 1% FDR and their quantification was based on the sum of the six most intense fragment ions and the six most intense peptides respectively.

### Publication Abstract
Data-independent acquisition methods that acquire fragment ions from virtually any peptide in a sample have expanded the benefits of low-throughput targeted proteomics to proteome-wide analyses. While these methods have increased the reproducibility of peptide quantification across multiple samples, their sensitivity is still limited, and the quantification of complete proteomes remains a challenge. Here we present DIA+, a DIA method that combines signals from identical peptides with different charge states, resulting in improved signal-to-noise, additional number of fragments, and therefore in a higher number of identified and quantified peptides in complex samples.

### Keywords
Hela, Dia

### Affiliations
Centre de Regulació Genòmica
Proteomics Unit Centre for Genomic Regulation University Pompeu Fabra Dr Aiguader 88, 08003 Barcelona, Spain

### Submitter
Eduard Sabidó

### Lab Head
Dr Eduard Sabidó
Proteomics Unit Centre for Genomic Regulation University Pompeu Fabra Dr Aiguader 88, 08003 Barcelona, Spain


