### Accession
PXD002297

### Title
Large scale site-specific mapping of the Arabidopsis ubiquitinome

### Description
Post-translational modification of amino acids changes the properties of a protein and increases the functional diversity of the proteome. For example, protein ubiquitination influences almost all cellular processes and can remodel the proteome in a matter of minutes. However, mostly due to technical limitations, global profiling of the plant ubiquitinome and proteome-wide identification of specific ubiquitinated residues remains challenging. Here, we made use of the COFRADIC technology to map ubiquitination sites in Arabidopsis thaliana. Across two biological replicates, we identified a total of 3,009 ubiquitination sites in 1,607 proteins. Our data increases the number of reported ubiquitin conjugation sites in Arabidopsis by a factor of 10. It contains well-known ubiquitination targets, including cell cycle proteins and key transcriptional regulators of phytohormone signaling as well as yet unreported targets, such as the Glutaredoxin S17 for which we provide here evidence of proteasomal degradation Finally, we could detect N-terminal ubiquitin conjugation on 19 proteins, a less commonly described type of protein modification.

### Sample Protocol
Arabidopsis thaliana (L.) Heyhn[I1] . (Accession Columbia-0) cell suspension cultures (PSB-D) were maintained as described previously (Van Leene et al., 2007)and grown in two biological repeats. Three g of wet weight material were harvested after 3 weeks growth in continuous light. Harvested material was flash frozen in liquid nitrogen and manually ground into a fine powder with a pestle and mortar. The material was re-suspended in 10 mL of homogenization buffer containing 290 mM sucrose, 250 mM Tris-HCL (pH 8), 25 mM EDTA and 500 mM in milliQ water. The material was vigorously agitated to re-suspend and on ice sonicated using a 1 cm probe for 10 s, five times to disrupt cell walls. Samples were centrifuged for 15 min at 1,500 × g and 4°C to remove debris. Supernatants were collected and a methanol/chloroform precipitation was carried out adding 3 parts of methanol, 1 part of chloroform and 4 parts of water. Samples were centrifuged for 10 min at 5,000 × g (room temperature). The upper (aqueous) phase was removed and 4 parts methanol was added onto the interface and lower phase remaining in each tube to give rise to a precipitation. Pellets were washed 3 times with acetone and re-suspended in 4M guanidinium hydrochloride in 50mM sodium phosphate buffer (pH 8). Ubiquitin COFRADIC was then carried out as described previously (Stes et al., 2014). To reduce LC−MS/MS analysis time, peptide fractions eluting 15 min apart were pooled, dried, and re-dissolved in 15 μL of 2% acetonitrile with 0.1% TFA. In total, 60 samples were analyzed via LC−MS/MS on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano LC (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) in-line connected to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Settings and machine configurations were as described in Stes et al. 2014.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched with the MAXQUANT Andromeda search engine against The Arabidopsis Information Resource (TAIR10_pep_20101214 containing 27,416 protein-coding genes) database with the MAXQUANT software (version 1.4.0.3), with a precursor mass tolerance set to 20 ppm for the first search (used for nonlinear mass recalibration) and set to 4.5 ppm for the main search. ArgC was selected as enzyme setting as cleavage after lysine residues was obstructed by acylation of their side-chains. Cleavages between arginine and proline residues and up to one missed cleavage were allowed. Methionine oxidation and carbamidomethylation of cysteines were searched as fixed modifications, whereas N-terminal protein acetylation, lysine acetylation, N-terminal pyroglutamate, Lys-ε-Gly, and Gly on protein N-termini were set as variable modifications. The false discovery rate for peptide, protein, and site identification was set to 1%, and the minimum peptide length was set to 7. The minimum score threshold for both modified and unmodified peptides was set to 30

### Publication Abstract
Ubiquitination, the covalent binding of the small protein modifier ubiquitin to a target protein, is an important and frequently studied posttranslational protein modification. Multiple reports provide useful insights into the plant ubiquitinome, but mostly at the protein level without comprehensive site identification. Here, we implemented ubiquitin combined fractional diagonal chromatography (COFRADIC) for proteome-wide ubiquitination site mapping on Arabidopsis thaliana cell cultures. We identified 3009 sites on 1607 proteins, thereby greatly increasing the number of known ubiquitination sites in this model plant. Finally, The Ubiquitination Site tool (http://bioinformatics.psb.ugent.be/webtools/ubiquitin_viewer/) gives access to the obtained ubiquitination sites, not only to consult the ubiquitination status of a given protein, but also to conduct intricate experiments aiming to study the roles of specific ubiquitination events. Together with the antibodies recognizing the ubiquitin remnant motif, ubiquitin COFRADIC represents a powerful tool to resolve the ubiquitination maps of numerous cellular processes in plants.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis ubiquitin site

### Affiliations
VIB-UGent
VIB

### Submitter
Alan Walton

### Lab Head
Dr Kris Gevaert
VIB-UGent


