### Accession
PXD010061

### Title
Mutations in disordered regions cause disease by creating dileucine motifs - BioID

### Description
Many disease-causing missense mutations affect intrinsically disordered regions (IDRs) of proteins. Since these mutations do not affect protein structure, the molecular mechanism of their pathogenicity is enigmatic. Here, we employ a peptide-based proteomic screen to investigate the impact of mutations in IDRs on protein-protein interactions. We find that mutations in disordered cytosolic regions of three transmembrane proteins (GLUT1, ITPR1 and CACNA1H) lead to an increased binding of clathrin. In all three cases, the mutation creates a dileucine motif known to mediate clathrin-dependent trafficking. Follow-up experiments on full length GLUT1 (SLC2A1), the glucose transporter causative of GLUT1 deficiency syndrome, revealed that the mutated protein mislocalizes to intracellular compartments in a model cell line and in patient-derived induced pluripotent stem cells. Mutant GLUT1 interacts with adaptor proteins (APs) in vitro, and knocking-down AP-2 reverts the cellular mislocalization. A systematic analysis of other known disease-causing variants revealed a significant and specific overrepresentation of gained dileucine motifs in structurally disordered cytosolic domains of transmembrane proteins. Thus, several mutations in disordered regions appear to cause “dileucineopathies”.

### Sample Protocol
Medium-heavy and heavy labelled T-REx™-293 cells have been induced for 24 h with 0.1 µg/ml Doxycycline to induce expression of GLUT1 or GLUT1_P485L. Light labelled cell lines from both GLUT1 and GLUT1_P485L have been left uninduced and served as a control for background binding. SILAC labeling allowed for quantitative comparison of proteins that have been proximity labelled by the transiently expressed constructs (Forward experiment: Light - Control, Medium-heavy - wt, Heavy - mut; Label swap experiment:  Light - Control, Medium-heavy - mut, Heavy - wt). During the induction period all cell lines have been incubated for 24 h in cell culture medium containing biotin. BioID experiment has been performed essentially as in (Couzens et al., 2013), with minor adaptations. Mass spec setup and analysis was done similarly as to samples from peptide pull-downs, but on bead digested peptides were separated on a 2,000 mm monolithic column with a 100 µm inner diameter filled with C18 material that was kindly provided by Yasushi Ishihama (Kyoto University) using a 4 h linear gradient with a 300 nl/min flow rate of increasing Buffer B concentration on a High Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC) system (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The resulting raw files were analyzed using MaxQuant software version 1.5.2.8 (Cox and Mann, 2008). Default settings were kept except that ‘match between runs’ and ‘re-quantify’ was turned on. Lys4 and Arg6 or Lys8 and Arg10 were set as labels and oxidation of methionines and n-terminal acetylation were defined as variable modifications. Carbamidomethyl of cysteines was set as fixed modification. The in silico digests of the human Uniprot database (2015-12), a fasta file containing the sequence of BirA-FLAG-GLUT1 and a database containing common contaminants were done with Trypsin/P. The false discovery rate was set to 1% at both the peptide and protein level and was assessed by in parallel searching a database containing the reversed sequences from the Uniprot database. Experiment B (BioID2): data in paper, Experiment A (BioID1): replicate with comparable outcome

### Publication Abstract
Many disease-causing missense mutations affect intrinsically disordered regions (IDRs) of proteins, but the molecular mechanism of their pathogenicity is enigmatic. Here, we employ a peptide-based proteomic screen to investigate the impact of mutations in IDRs on protein-protein interactions. We find that&#xa0;mutations in disordered cytosolic regions of three transmembrane proteins (GLUT1, ITPR1, and CACNA1H) lead to an increased clathrin binding. All three mutations create dileucine motifs known to mediate clathrin-dependent trafficking. Follow-up experiments on GLUT1 (SLC2A1), the glucose transporter causative of GLUT1 deficiency syndrome, revealed that the mutated protein mislocalizes to intracellular compartments. Mutant GLUT1 interacts with adaptor proteins (APs) in&#xa0;vitro, and knocking down AP-2 reverts the cellular mislocalization and restores glucose transport. A systematic analysis of other known disease-causing variants revealed a significant and specific overrepresentation of gained dileucine motifs in structurally disordered cytosolic domains of transmembrane proteins. Thus, several mutations in disordered regions appear to cause "dileucineopathies."

### Keywords
Bioid, Proximity labeling

### Affiliations
Proteome Dynamics, Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine, Robert-Rössle-Str. 10, D-13092 Berlin, Germany  Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 10117 Berlin, Germany
MDC

### Submitter
Katrina Meyer

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Selbach
Proteome Dynamics, Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine, Robert-Rössle-Str. 10, D-13092 Berlin, Germany  Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 10117 Berlin, Germany


