### Accession
PXD006641

### Title
Quantitative proteomic analysis of oocytes from high-fat diet (HFD)-fed and  normal diet mice

### Description
In order to establish an obese mouse model, female mice were continuously fed with a high-fat diet (HFD) or a normal diet (control) for 16 weeks beginning at three weeks of age. In this paper, these mice are termed ‘HFD mice’ and ‘control mice’, respectively. Accordingly, we call their oocytes ‘HFD oocytes’ and ‘control oocytes’. Substantial evidence indicates that the effects of maternal obesity on embryo/offspring development can be attributed to factors within the oocyte (9). To identify such potential effectors, we performed a comparative proteomic analysis of ovulated MII oocytes from control and HFD mice.

### Sample Protocol
Female mice were superovulated with 5 IU Pregnant Mares Serum Gonadotropin (PMSG) by intraperitoneal injection, and 48 hours later, cumulus-oocyte complexes oocytes were collected by manual rupturing of antral follicles. With gentle washes by pipetting, cumulus cells were removed and denuded GV oocytes were obtained. For in vitro maturation, fully-grown GV oocytes were cultured in M16 medium under mineral oil at 37°C in a 5% CO2 incubator. To collect ovulated MII oocytes, mice received an injection of 5 IU human Chorionic Gonadotropin (hCG) after PMSG priming. Oocytes were retrieved from oviduct ampullae 13.5 h post-hCG, and freed of cumulus cells by exposure to 1 mg/ml hyaluronidase.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed using MaxQuant (Version 1.2.2.5), and searched against the mouse protein sequence database form UniProt (release 2013_12; 87187 sequences), combined with the standard contaminants database embedded in MaxQuant. The false discovery rate (FDR) of the identification was estimated by searching against the databases with the reversed protein sequences. The FDR values for peptide and protein were both set to 0.01. Enzyme specificity was considered to be full cleavage by trypsin, with two maximum missed cleavage sites. The minimum peptide length required was six amino acids. Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as a fixed modification. Variable modifications included Oxidation (M) and Acetyl (Protein N-term). The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set to 20 ppm at the first search as applied in Maxquant for initial mass recalibration. For the main search, the mass tolerance for precursor ions was set to 6 ppm. The mass tolerance for fragment ions was set to 0.5 Da. For label free quantification, protein expression levels were estimated using the iBAQ (Intensity Based Absolute Quantification) algorithm embedded in MaxQuant.

### Publication Abstract
Maternal obesity has been reported to impair oocyte quality in mice, however, the underlying mechanisms remain unclear. In the present study, by conducting a comparative proteomic analysis, we identified a reduced expression of TIGAR (TP53-induced glycolysis and apoptosis regulator) protein in ovulated oocytes from high-fat diet (HFD)-fed mice. Specific depletion of TIGAR in mouse oocytes results in the marked elevation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) levels and the failure of meiotic apparatus assembly. Importantly, forced expression of TIGAR in HFD oocytes not only attenuates ROS production, but also partly prevents spindle disorganization and chromosome misalignment during meiosis. Meantime, we noted that TIGAR knockdown in oocytes induces a strong activation of autophagy, whereas overexpression of TIGAR significantly reduces the LC3 accumulation in HFD oocytes. By anti-oxidant treatment, we further demonstrated that such an autophagic response is dependent on the TIGAR-controlled ROS production. In summary, our data indicate a role for TIGAR in modulating redox homeostasis during oocyte maturation, and uncover that loss of TIGAR is a critical pathway mediating the effects of maternal obesity on oocyte quality.

### Keywords
High-fat diet, Hfd, Quantitative, Oocytes

### Affiliations
Nanjing medical university
Nanjing Med Univ, State Key Lab Reprod Med, Dept Histol & Embryol, 140 Hanzhong Rd, Nanjing 210029, Jiangsu, Peoples R China.

### Submitter
hao zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Guo, Xuejiang
Nanjing Med Univ, State Key Lab Reprod Med, Dept Histol & Embryol, 140 Hanzhong Rd, Nanjing 210029, Jiangsu, Peoples R China.


