### Accession
PXD028633

### Title
Isolation of mouse and human MHC class I- and II-associated peptides for the analysis of immunopeptidomes by mass spectrometry

### Description
Immunopeptidomics is an emerging field that fuels and guides the development of vaccines and immunotherapies. More specifically, it refers to the science of investigating the composition of peptides presented by major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I and class II molecules using mass spectrometry (MS) technology platforms. Among all the steps in a MS-based immunopeptidomic workflow, sample preparationis critically important for capturing high-quality data of therapeutic relevance. Here, we describe step-by-step instructions to isolate MHC class I and II-associated peptides by immunoaffinity purification from quality control (QC) samples. Our QC samples are MHC class I and class II peptides isolated from mouse (EL4 and A20) and human (JY) cell lines. We thoroughly describe the various reagents and specfic antibodies that are used too isolate MHC-associated peptides from these cell lines, including the steps to verify the beads-binding efficiency of the antibody and the elution efficiency of the MHC-peptide complexes from the beads. QC samples generated using the described protocol can be used to establish and standardize immunopeptidomic workflow, as well as to benchmark new protocols. We anticipate that the visualized protocol provided in this report will represent a great starting point for any non-expert in addition to foster the instra- and inter-laboratory reproducibility of the sample preparation procedure in immunopeptidomics.

### Sample Protocol
Antibodies (anti-MHC I and anti-MHC-II) were coupled to sepharose CNBr-activated beads. Cells were lysed using 0.5% chaps buffer. Acidic elution of MHC-peptide complexes using 1% TFA followed by desalting and elution of MHC peptides using 28% ACN/0.1% TFA.

### Data Protocol
Data files from the three injections/sample are processed using PEAKS X software (Peaks Pro V10.6, Bioinformatics Solutions, Waterloo, ON) using the mouse and human databases (UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot (2019_09)). ‘Unspecified enzyme digestion’ is selected for the enzyme parameter and mass tolerances on precursor and fragment ions are 10 ppm and 0.01 Da, respectively. Variable modifications are deamidation (NQ) and oxidation (M). All other search parameters are the default values. Final peptide lists are filtered using ALC of 80% and with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1 % using the PEAKS software. To visualize the data and assess their overall quality, composition and MHC-specificity, MhcVizPipe (MVP) software tool (https://github.com/CaronLab/MhcVizPipe) was used.

### Publication Abstract
Immunopeptidomics is an emerging field that fuels and guides the development of vaccines and immunotherapies. More specifically, it refers to the science of investigating the composition of peptides presented by major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I and class II molecules using mass spectrometry (MS) technology platforms. Among all the steps in an MS-based immunopeptidomics workflow, sample preparation is critically important for capturing high-quality data of therapeutic relevance. Here, step-by-step instructions are described to isolate MHC class I and II-associated peptides by immunoaffinity purification from quality control samples, from mouse (EL4 and A20), and human (JY) cell lines more specifically. The various reagents and specific antibodies are thoroughly described to isolate MHC-associated peptides from these cell lines, including the steps to verify the beads-binding efficiency of the antibody and the elution efficiency of the MHC-peptide complexes from the beads. The protocol can be used to establish and standardize an immunopeptidomics workflow, as well as to benchmark new protocols. Moreover, the protocol represents a great starting point for any non-experts in addition to foster the intra- and inter-laboratory reproducibility of the sample preparation procedure in immunopeptidomics.

### Keywords
Human, Mouse, Immunopeptidome, Mhc class i associated peptides, Mass spectrometry, Mhc class ii associated peptides

### Affiliations
1CHU Sainte-Justine Research Center, Montreal, QC H3T 1C5, Canada  2 Department of Pathology and cellular biology, Faculty of Medicine, Universite de Montreal, QC H3T 1J4, Canada
Centre de recherche Hôpital Sainte-Justine

### Submitter
isabelle sirois

### Lab Head
Dr Etienne Caron
1CHU Sainte-Justine Research Center, Montreal, QC H3T 1C5, Canada  2 Department of Pathology and cellular biology, Faculty of Medicine, Universite de Montreal, QC H3T 1J4, Canada


