### Accession
PXD036449

### Title
Metabolic clogging of mannose in human cancer cells triggers genome instability via dNTP loss

### Description
Mannose is an anti-cancer sugar that inhibits cell proliferation and enhances chemotherapy. How mannose exerts its anti-cancer activities, however, remains poorly understood. Here, using genetically engineered human cancer cells that permit the precise control of mannose metabolic flux, we demonstrate that the large influx of mannose exceeding its metabolic capacity induced a global metabolic remodeling, leading to the generation of slow-cycling cells with limited deoxyribonucleoside triphosphate (dNTP) pools. This metabolic remodeling impaired dormant origin firing required to rescue stalled forks by cisplatin, thus exacerbating replication stress. Importantly, a pharmacological inhibition of de novo dNTP biosynthesis was sufficient to sensitize the non-engineered cells to cisplatin and inhibit dormant origin firing, suggesting the dNTP loss-induced genome instability as a major mechanism for the anti-cancer activities of mannose.

### Sample Protocol
Cells (5  105 cells/10-cm dish) were cultured for 24 h in 10 mL of complete medium supplemented with 20 M Man. The cells were further incubated for 1, 2 and 6 days in 10 mL of complete medium supplemented with 50 M Man (1 and 2 days) or 5 mM Man (1, 2 and 6 days). For 6-day incubation, the medium was replaced every other day. The cells were washed two times with PBS and scraped in 1 mL of PBS. After the cells were pelleted by a centrifugation at 200  g for 5 min at 4°C, the cell pellets were flash frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C until use. Protein precipitates were obtained by adding 10% trichloroacetic acid to freeze-thawed cells and centrifuging at 12,000xg for 20 minutes. After washing the precipitates three times with acetone, they were dissolved with 7 M guanidine, 1 M Tris-HCl (pH 8.5), 10 mM EDTA and 50 mM DTT. After alkylation with iodoacetic acid, samples were desalted using PAGE Clean Up Kit (Nacalai Ttesque Inc.). The resultant precipitates were dissolved with 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 0.03% (w/v) n-Dodecyl-β-D-maltoside, and digested with trypsin (tosyl phenylalanyl chloromethyl ketone treated; Worthington Biochemical Co) at 37°C overnight. The concentration of the peptide mixture was quantified by amino acid analysis. One μg of each peptide mixture was subjected to analysis by LC-MSMS. Solvent A (0.1% formic acid) and solvent B (80% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid) were used as eluents. Peptides were separated using an Easy nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nano-ESI spray column (NTCC-360, 0.075 mm internal diameter × 105 mm length, 3 μm, Nikkyo Technos Co) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min under a linear gradient condition over 250 min. The separated peptides were analyzed with an online coupled Q Exactive HF-X Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using the data-dependent Top 10 method.

### Data Protocol
The acquired data were processed using MASCOT 2.8 (Matrix Science) and Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The MASCOT search was conducted as follows: Database, NCBIprot; taxonomy, Homo sapiens (human) (438,061 sequences); type of search, MS/MS ion; enzyme, trypsin; fixed modification, none; variable modifications, acetyl (protein N-term), Gln->pyro-Glu (N-term Q), oxidation (M), carboxymethyl (C); mass values, monoisotopic; peptide mass tolerance, ± 15 ppm; fragment mass tolerance, ± 30 mmu; max missed cleavages, 3; instrument type, ESI-TRAP. Label-free quantitation was performed using the quantification method based on the ion intensity of peptides in Proteome Discoverer 2.4.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mannose cancer

### Affiliations
RIKEN Center for Sustainable Resource Science
Biomolecular characterization unit, Center for Sustainable Resource Science, RIKEN

### Submitter
Takehiro Suzuki

### Lab Head
Dr Naoshi Dohmae
Biomolecular characterization unit, Center for Sustainable Resource Science, RIKEN


