### Accession
PXD012432

### Title
MSI-1 knockdown in MB002 medulloblastoma cell line

### Description
MSI-1 is a RNA-binding protein that is required for normal neural stem cell and brain cancer stem cells. To understand its molecular mechanisms in medulloblastoma, we peroformed whole-cell proteomic analysis in MB002 medulloblastoma cells, after knockdown of MSI-1.

### Sample Protocol
We infected and selected (using puromycin) MB002 cells in biological replicates with lentivirus that express a scramble short-hairpin RNA (shRNA), or one of two sequences that target MSI-1. All six cell pellets were then lysed with 8M urea in 100mM fresh ammonium bicarbonate, followed by 5mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and 10mM iodoacetamide incubation, separately. Samples were then diluted 5-fold in fresh ammonium bicarbonate and were trypsin digested (enzyme:protein = 1:50) overnight at 37C. After C18 desalting, 50ug tryptic peptides from each sample was used for TMT-6plex labeling, followed by quenching in hydroxylamine. These labeled peptides were then mixed, speedvac dried, and injected for fractionation at pH=10 on a Thermo Acclaim PA2 C18 column. The resuled 38 fractions were collected mannualy and injected for nano LC-MS analysis, using a home-made 50cm x 50micron Picofrit capillary column  and Thermo QExactive HF mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Raw files from all 38 fractions were searched together using Thermo Proteome Discoverer. Search parameters are: presursor mass 10ppm, fragment mass 0.02Da, max 2 missed trypsin cleavages. 1% FDR is used to filter peptide identification, protein  group identification, and protein identification. TMT reporter ion intensities were normalized by total reporter intenties in each of the channel.

### Publication Abstract
Alternative splicing in Tau exon 10 generates 3&#xa0;R- and 4&#xa0;R-Tau proteoforms, which have equal abundance in healthy adult human brain. Aberrant alternative splicing in Tau exon 10 leads to distortion of the balanced 3&#xa0;R- and 4&#xa0;R-Tau expression levels, which is a causal factor to trigger toxic Tau aggregation, neuron dysfunction and patient death in a group of neurodegenerative diseases known as tauopathies. Hence, identification of regulators upstream of the Tau exon 10 splicing events are crucial to understanding pathogenic mechanisms driving tauopathies. In this study, we used RNA Antisense Purification with Mass Spectrometry (RAP-MS) analysis to identify RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) that interact with the Tau pre-mRNA near exon 10. Among the newly identified RBP candidates, we show that knockdown of hnRNPC induces Tau exon 10 skipping whereas overexpression of hnRNPC promotes Tau exon 10 inclusion. In addition, we show that hnRNPC interacts with the poly-uridine (U-tract) sequences in introns 9 and 10 of Tau pre-mRNA. Mutation of these U-tract motifs abolished binding of hnRNPC with Tau pre-mRNA fragment and blocked its impact on Tau exon 10 inclusion. These findings indicate that hnRNPC binds and utilizes these U-tract motifs located in introns 9 and 10 of Tau pre-mRNA to promote Tau exon 10 inclusion. Intriguingly, high hnRNPC expression level is associated with progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP), a sporadic tauopathy with pathological accumulation of Tau species that contain exon 10, which suggests a putative therapeutic role of hnRNPC for PSP treatment. [Figure: see text].

### Keywords
Human, Msi-1, Medulloblastoma

### Affiliations
McMaster University
Stem Cell and Cancer Research Institute McMaster University

### Submitter
Yu Lu

### Lab Head
Dr Yu Lu
Stem Cell and Cancer Research Institute McMaster University


