### Accession
PXD009127

### Title
Transcriptomic and Proteomic Insight into the Mechanism of Cyclooctasulfur- versus Thiosulfate-Oxidation by the Chemolithoautotroph Sulfurimonas denitrificans

### Description
Chemoautotrophic bacteria belonging to the genus Sulfurimonas in the class Campylobacteria (formerly classified as Epsilonproteobacteria) play a key role in the sulfur cycle in a variety of oxygen-deficient or –limited and sulfide-rich marine and terrestrial environments. Previously, they were identified as key players in the turnover of zero-valence sulfur, a central intermediate in the marine sulfur cycle, and S. denitrificans was further shown to be able to oxidize cyclooctasulfur. However, at present the mechanism involved in the activation and metabolism of cyclooctasulfur is not known. To this end, we assessed the transcriptome and proteome of S. denitrificans grown with either thiosulfate or cyclooctasulfur as the electron donor. While the overall profiles under the two growth conditions were rather similar, distinct differences were observed that could be attributed to the utilization of cyclooctasulfur. This included a higher abundance of expressed genes and proteins related to attachment in the presence of cyclooctasulfur and the differential expression of the sulfur-oxidation multienzyme complex (SOX). S. denitrificans uses the SOX system for the oxidation of reduced sulfur compounds, including two copies of the sulfur-binding SoxYZ proteins, encoded in two gene clusters: soxABXYZ1 and soxCDYZ2. While the proteins of both operons of the SOX system were detected in the presence of thiosulfate, only proteins of the soxCDYZ2 operon were detected when grown with cylcooctasulfur. Based on these findings a model for the oxidation of cylcooctasulfur is being proposed that might also apply to other Campylobacteria that share the same arrangement of the SOX system. Our results have implications for interpreting metatranscriptomic and -proteomic data and for the observed high level of diversification of soxYZ2 among sulfur-oxidizing Campylobacteria.

### Sample Protocol
For the isolation of proteins, cell pellets were resuspended in 1 mL 1x Tris-EDTA (TE) buffer (pH 8; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA), containing cOmpleteTM Protease inhibitor (Roche, Basel, Switzerland). To lyse cells, the suspensions were sonicated three times for 30 sec at 5 x 10% amplitude using the Sonoplus HD2070 sonication probe (Bandelin, Berlin, Germany). The obtained crude extracts were centrifuged for 10 min at 15,500 x g at 4°C. The raw protein extracts (supernatants) were concentrated by means of Amicon tubes (Ultra-15 3 kDa cutoff Merck Millipore, Kenilworth, NJ, USA), which were centrifuged for 30-60 min at 5,000 x g and 4°C as described in the manufactures instructions. Protein concentrations were determined using the Roti-Nanoquant protein assay (Carl Roth, Karlsruhe, Germany) as instructed by the manufacturer. Subsequently, 4 x loading buffer (bromophenol blue) was added to aliquots of ~25 µg protein, and samples were denatured for 10 min at 90°C. The denatured extracts and a Roti-Mark standard (Roti-Mark STANDARD, Carl Roth, Kalsruhe, Germany) were transferred onto a polyacrylamide SDS mini gel (10% Mini-PROTEAN, TGX Stain-free, BioRad, Hercules, CA, USA) and run approximately 20 min at 50 V and another 35 min at 150 V. The gel was fixed for 30 min in an ethanol: acetic acid: water (40:10:50) solution. The gel was stained overnight in a Coomassie Brilliant Blue (CBB) staining solution and further de-stained in distilled water. On a glass plate, cleaned with methanol and double distilled water (ddH2O), 10 gel bands of equal height were cut out for each sample. Each band was cut in small pieces and transferred into 2 mL Eppendorf cups. CBB was removed by incubating the gel pieces multiple times (until unstained) in a wash solution containing 200 mmol L-1 NH4HCO3 and 30% acetonitril at 37°C for 30 min. Destained gel pieces were dried for 15 min in an Eppendorf Concentrator plus at 1,400 rpm, ambient temperature and 20 mbar vacuum. For protein digestion, 2 µg mL-1 trypsin solution (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) was added to dried gel pieces until covered (~50 µL) and incubated at room temperature for 30 min. Additional trypsin was added to cover rehydrated gel pieces, and incubated at 37°C for 14-16 h. Thereafter, 50 µL ddH2O was added to the incubated gel pieces. These were further sonicated for 15 min in an ultrasound bath (37 kHz, 600W \ FB15054 Fisherbrand). After sonication, the sample was centrifuged at 5,000 x g for 10 s. The supernatants were transferred into new tubes, and to reduce the sample volume to 10 µL centrifuged at 250 x g under vacuum in an Eppendorf Concentrator. The 10 µL peptide mixes were stored at -80 °C until measurement. Peptide mixes were separated via chromatography on a reversed phase C18 column in a nano-ACQUITY-UPLC (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA, USA) as described by Otto et al. (2010). Mass spectrometry (MS) and MS/MS data were recorded with an online-coupled LTQ-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Waltham, MA, USA). MS data were searched against a forward-decoy S. denitrificans protein database (Refseq Genome NCBI [National Center for Biotechnology Information]) using Sequest (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA; v 27.11).

### Data Protocol
Protein identifications were filtered in Scaffold (http://www.proteomesoftware.com) using the Sequest filter settings described by (Heinz et al., 2012)[Parameter: deltaCn scores of greater than 0.10 and XCorr scores of greater than 2.2, 3.3 and 3.8 for doubly, triply and quadruply charged peptides]. The total spectral count values of all proteins were exported for calculation of the normalized spectral abundance factors (NSAF, Zybailov et al., 2006). As only two biological replicates were grown on thiosulfate (T-1, T-2), spectral counts for two separately prepared technical replicates of sample T-1 were combined including the standard deviation before statistical analysis. We used two tools provided by NCBI, PSI-BLAST and DELTA-BLAST (Boratyn et al., 2012) for domain analysis of hypothetical proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Chemoautotrophic bacteria belonging to the genus Sulfurimonas (class Campylobacteria) were previously identified as key players in the turnover of zero-valence sulfur, a central intermediate in the marine sulfur cycle. S. denitrificans was further shown to be able to oxidize cyclooctasulfur (S<sub>8</sub> ). However, at present the mechanism of activation and metabolism of cyclooctasulfur is not known. Here, we assessed the transcriptome and proteome of S. denitrificans grown with either thiosulfate or S<sub>8</sub> as the electron donor. While the overall expression profiles under the two growth conditions were rather similar, distinct differences were observed that could be attributed to the utilization of S<sub>8</sub> . This included a higher abundance of expressed genes related to surface attachment in the presence of S<sub>8</sub> , and the differential regulation of the sulfur-oxidation multienzyme complex (SOX), which in S. denitrificans is encoded in two gene clusters: soxABXY <sub>1</sub> Z <sub>1</sub> and soxCDY <sub>2</sub> Z <sub>2</sub> . While the proteins of both clusters were present with thiosulfate, only proteins of the soxCDY <sub>2</sub> Z <sub>2</sub> were detected at significant levels with S<sub>8</sub> . Based on these findings a model for the oxidation of S<sub>8</sub> is proposed. Our results have implications for interpreting metatranscriptomic and -proteomic data and for the observed high level of diversification of soxY <sub>2</sub> Z <sub>2</sub> among sulfur-oxidizing Campylobacteria.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Epsilonproteobacteria, Campylobacteria, Oxidation, Sulfur

### Affiliations
Department of Biology,Watson Building 207, MS #52, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, Woods Hole, MA 02543, USA
Phd-candidate

### Submitter
Florian Goetz

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan M. Sievert
Department of Biology,Watson Building 207, MS #52, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, Woods Hole, MA 02543, USA


