### Accession
PXD007981

### Title
Inhibiting sphingolipid synthesis improves outcomes and survival in GARP-mutant wobbler mouse, an ALS model

### Description
Defects of the endosomal and lysosomal systems have been increasingly linked to adult neurodegenerative diseases1,2. Deficiencies in the retrograde trafficking pathway between endosomes and the Golgi apparatus lead to forms of Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s diseases in the case of retromer mutations, or to the rare progressive cerebello-cerebral atrophy type 2 (PCCA2) for mutations of the Golgi-associated retrograde protein (GARP) complex3. Mutations in GARP subunits lead to abnormal cellular lipid metabolism, with accumulation of sterol esters and sphingoid bases, and concomitant lysosomal dysfunction in yeast, murine, or human cells4,5. However, whether these lipid changes cause neurodegeneration and if so, which lipids are toxic, is unknown. Here, we show that GARP defects lead to global changes of cellular protein distribution, including missorting of numerous disease-linked enzymes of sphingolipid metabolism, and to the accumulation of sphingolipid intermediates in wobbler fibroblasts. Inhibiting sphingolipid synthesis in wobbler mice, a murine model of GARP deficiency with features of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), improved wellness scores and grip strength, and increased lifespan. Our findings indicate that regulation of sphingolipids by the GARP complex is essential for neuronal health and suggest that inhibition of sphingolipid synthesis might provide a therapeutic strategy for treatment of neurodegenerative diseases due to defects in retrograde endosome-to-Golgi membrane trafficking.

### Sample Protocol
Stable isotope labeling of amino acid (SILAC) labeled cell lysate were reduced using 5 mM dithiothreitol (Sigma-Aldrich) at 37°C for 1 h, followed by alkylation of cysteine residues using 15 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) in the dark at room temperature for 1 h. Excessive iodoacetamide were quenched using 10 mM dithiothreitol. Proteins were precipitated by the addition of 9 volumes of ice-cold acetone and 1 volume of methanol and incubated at -80°C for 2 h. Precipitated proteins were centrifuged for 1h at 4500 x g and 4°C.  After washing with methanol, proteins were resolubilized in 100 mM NaOH aided by sonication at 4°C and the solution was brought to pH 7.5 with 200mM HEPES free acid. Protein concentrations were determined using bicinchoninic acid assay kit (Pierce), followed by equal mixing of proteins at 1:1 ratio (light:heavy labels). Proteins were trypsinized using sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) at 37°C for 16 h. Digested peptides were subsequently desalted using self-packed C18 STAGE tips (3M EmporeTM)28, and analyzed on an Orbitrap Q-Exactive HF (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer coupled to an Easy nanoLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific) with a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Stationary phase buffer was 0.5 % formic acid, and mobile phase buffer was 0.5 % (v/v) formic acid in acetonitrile. A gradient of increasing organic proportion was used for peptide separation (5–40 % (v/v) acetonitrile over 265 min. Peptides were separated on self-packed analytical column using PicoTipTM emitter (New Objective) using Reprosil Gold 120 C18 (Dr. Maisch) 1.9 μm particle size resin. The mass spectrometer operated in data dependent acquisition mode with a top ten method at a mass range of 300–2000 Da.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry files were analyzed by MaxQuant29 version 1.5.2.8 with the Uniprot mouse database downloaded on November 2016, counting 52,026 protein entries. MaxQuant analysis included an initial search with a precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm for mass recalibration. In the main Andromeda search, precursor mass and fragment mass were searched with initial mass tolerance of 4.5 ppm. The search included variable modifications of methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation, and fixed modification of carbamidomethyl cysteine. Minimum peptide length was set to six amino acids, and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.05 for peptide and protein identifications; however proteins that were independently identified in at least three replicates (n≥3) were considered in the final analysis. For comparison between samples we used a labeling scheme based on multiplicity two: Arg0/Lys0 (light label) and Lys8/Arg10 (heavy label), respectively. A minimum of two ratio counts was used to determine the normalized protein intensity. Protein table were filtered to eliminate the identifications from the reverse database, and common contaminants.

### Publication Abstract
Numerous mutations that impair retrograde membrane trafficking between endosomes and the Golgi apparatus lead to neurodegenerative diseases. For example, mutations in the endosomal retromer complex are implicated in Alzheimer's and Parkinson's diseases, and mutations of the Golgi-associated retrograde protein (GARP) complex cause progressive cerebello-cerebral atrophy type 2 (PCCA2). However, how these mutations cause neurodegeneration is unknown. GARP mutations in yeast, including one causing PCCA2, result in sphingolipid abnormalities and impaired cell growth that are corrected by treatment with myriocin, a sphingolipid synthesis inhibitor, suggesting that alterations in sphingolipid metabolism contribute to cell dysfunction and death. Here we tested this hypothesis in <i>wobbler</i> mice, a murine model with a homozygous partial loss-of-function mutation in <i>Vps54</i> (GARP protein) that causes motor neuron disease. Cytotoxic sphingoid long-chain bases accumulated in embryonic fibroblasts and spinal cords from <i>wobbler</i> mice. Remarkably, chronic treatment of <i>wobbler</i> mice with myriocin markedly improved their wellness scores, grip strength, neuropathology, and survival. Proteomic analyses of <i>wobbler</i> fibroblasts revealed extensive missorting of lysosomal proteins, including sphingolipid catabolism enzymes, to the Golgi compartment, which may contribute to the sphingolipid abnormalities. Our findings establish that altered sphingolipid metabolism due to GARP mutations contributes to neurodegeneration and suggest that inhibiting sphingolipid synthesis might provide a useful strategy for treating these disorders.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Silac, Mef

### Affiliations
Harvard T. H. Chan School of Public Health

### Submitter
Zon Weng Lai

### Lab Head
Dr Tobias Walther
Harvard T. H. Chan School of Public Health


