### Accession
PXD034845

### Title
Oxonium Ion-Guided Ion Mobility-Assisted Glycoproteomics on the timsTOF Pro

### Description
Spatial separation of ions in the gas-phase, providing information about their size as collisional cross-sections, can readily be achieved through ion mobility. The timsTOF Pro combines a trapped ion mobility device with a quadrupole, collision cell and a time-of-flight analyser to enable the analysis of ions at great speed. Here, we show that the timsTOF Pro is capable of physically separating N-glycopeptides from non-modified peptides and producing high-quality fragmentation spectra, both beneficial for glycoproteomics analyses of complex samples. The glycan moieties enlarge the size of glycopeptides compared to non-modified peptides, yielding a clear cluster in the mobilogram that, next to increased dynamic range from the physical separation of glycopeptides and non-modified peptides, can be used to make an effective selection filter for directing the mass spectrometer to analytes of interest. This new approach was applied to selected glycoproteins, human plasma- and neutrophil-derived glycopeptides. We show that the achieved physical separation, combined with the focussing of the mass spectrometer, allows for improved extraction of information from the samples, even at shorter LC gradients of 15 min. We validated our approach on human neutrophil and plasma samples of known make-up, in which we captured the anticipated glycan heterogeneity (paucimannose, phosphomannose, high mannose, hybrid and complex glycans) from diverse biological samples (plasma and neutrophils) at the expected abundances. As the method is compatible with off-the-shelve data acquisition routines and data analysis software, it can readily be applied by any laboratory with a timsTOF Pro and is reproducible as demonstrated by an inter-laboratory comparison between two laboratories.

### Sample Protocol
10 µL of pooled human plasma (nondepleted) was mixed with 50 volumes of SDC buffer (1 % SDC, 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5), 10 mM TCEP, 30 mM CAA and boiled for 10 minutes at 95 ℃. The samples were cooled and digested with a combination of Lys-C (1:75 enzyme to protein) for 4 hours followed by trypsin (1:20 enzyme to protein) at 37 ℃ overnight. The samples were quenched with 10 % TFA to a final concentration of 1 % TFA and SDC was precipitated after centrifugation at 14,000 rpm for 10 min. The supernatant was transferred to a new tube and desalted using the µElution HLB plate. The desalted samples were lyophilized and stored at -80 ℃ before MS analysis.   Pooled human neutrophils from healthy donors were enriched by Percoll (GE Healthcare, Sweden) density gradient centrifugation. Neutrophil cell pellets were resuspended in 100 µL lysis buffer containing 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5), 7 M urea, 5 mM TCEP, 30 mM CAA, Triton X-100 (1 %), 2 mM magnesium sulfate, phosphoSTOP and cOmplete Mini EDTA-free protease inhibitor. Then, cells were disrupted by sonication for 10 min (alternating 20 s off and 40 s off) using a Bioruptor Plus (Diagenode, Seraing, Belgium). Cell debris was removed by centrifugation at 14,000 rpm for 1 h at 4 ℃ and the supernatant was retained. Impurities were removed by methanol/chloroform protein precipitation as follows: 100 µL of supernatant was mixed with 400 µL of methanol, 100 µL chloroform and 300 µL of ultrapure water with thorough vortexing after each addition. The mixture was then centrifuged for 10 min at 5000 rpm at room temperature. The upper layer was discarded, and 300 µL of methanol was added. After sonication and centrifugation (5000 rpm, 10 min at room temperature), the solvent was removed, and the precipitate was allowed to dry in air inside a chemical hood. The pellet was resuspended in SDC buffer. 133 ng GluC was then added to digest proteins for 3 h at an enzyme to protein ratio of 1:75 at 37 ℃. The resulting peptide mixtures were further digested overnight at 37 ℃ by 500 ng trypsin (1:20 enzyme to protein ratio). The next day the SDC was precipitated via acidification to a final 1 % TFA concentration. The peptides in the supernatant were desalted by using Oasis PRiME HLB plate and lyophilized and stored at – 80 ℃ prior to MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The fragmentation spectra from all precursors with charge-state >2 were extracted from the recorded Bruker .d format files and stored in Mascot Generic Format (MGF) files with the in-house developed tool HlxlToolchain. First, the spectra of the same precursor were combined into a single spectrum with the following tolerances: precursor m/z ± 20 ppm, retention time ± 60 s, and mobility ± 5 %. Spectral data in “quasi-profile” mode were extracted using the timsDATA 2.17.1.2-beta API obtained from Bruker. Combination of the spectra was achieved by summing peak intensities of all spectra across complete “quasi-profile” m/z grid. The final summed spectrum was generated through removal of zero intensity peaks by binning summed “quasi-profile” spectrum in m/z bins of 50 ppm. In the second step, each combined spectrum was de-isotoped (isotopes were reduced to a single peak at m/z of charge state of 1), and TopX filtered at 20 peaks per 100 Th. Together with the conversion procedure, an MGF-meta file was automatically created that contained information on the precursor intensity, mobility (1/K0), CCS, and monoisotopic mass. The CCS values ware calculated according to the Mason-Schamp equation, with temperature being set to 305 K and the molecular weight of N2 as the TIMS gas. The MGF files were searched with another in-house tool, HlxlGlyco, that searched specifically for 8 glycan-oxonium ions (H14C8N1O5 (204.0872), H12C6O8P1 (243.0270), H16C11N1O7 (274.0927), H18C11N1O8 (292.1032), H24C14N1O10 (366.1400), H34C20N1O14 (512.198), H34C20N1O15 (528.1928) and H41C25N2O18 (657.2354)) in the MSMS spectra to pre-select the precursors that were likely N-glycopeptides from the large number of spectra. Together with the search, each precursor was associated with a glycan M-score, i.e., weighted based on the intensity of the oxonium ions present in the MSMS spectra.. An oxonium ion meta file was generated containing the information on precursor m/z, mobility, CCS and glycan M-score. The individual CE data files for the human plasma (with and without glyco polygon) were converted to mgf format and single combined mgf files were created where all spectra originating from the same precursor using: precursor m/z ± 20 ppm, retention time ± 60 s, and mobility ± 5 %, and the intensities were summed together in the final spectrum. The MGF files were searched and processed with MSFragger (version 3.4), Fragpipe (version 17.1) and Philosopher (version 4.1.0) for N-glycopeptides. Briefly, MFG files were searched against the human Uniport FASTA (UP000005640 reviewed with 20,371 entries, downloaded from Uniprot on July 30, 2021) with the glyco-N-HCD workflow. The search parameters were as follows: precursor window: lower mass was set to 400 Da, upper mass was set to 5000 Da; precursor and fragment mass tolerance: ± 20 ppm; enzyme: full trypsin digestion with two maximum missed cleavages; carbamidomethylation at Cys was set as fixed modification and oxidation at Met and protein N-term acetylation were set as variable modifications. Peptide filtering at 1 % false discovery rate (FDR) was applied through PeptideProphet. Default parameters for N-glycan analysis with glycan FDR< 1% and glycan mass tolerance 50 ppm were used. The human neutrophil samples were first searched against the same human FASTA file, using Mascot version 2.7.0.0, using precursor mass tolerance ± 20 ppm and fragment mass tolerance ± 50 ppm; enzyme: semi-specific trypsin + Glu-C digestion; carbamidomethylation at Cys was set as fixed modification and oxidation at Met and protein N-term acetylation were set as variable modifications. This subsequently yield the top 500 proteins. The human neutrophil MGF files were searched in MSFragger against the top 500 protein database with the glyco-N-HCD workflow, together with semi-specific digestion (trypsin-GluC) at a maximum of two missed cleavages at Lys/Arg/Asp/Glu. The output was filtered for the N-glycopeptides, spectrum scan numbers of annotated spectra were merged with glycan-oxonium result from HlxlGlyco tool.

### Publication Abstract
Spatial separation of ions in the gas phase, providing information about their size as collisional cross-sections, can readily be achieved through ion mobility. The timsTOF Pro (Bruker Daltonics) series combines a trapped ion mobility device with a quadrupole, collision cell, and a time-of-flight analyzer to enable the analysis of ions at great speed. Here, we show that the timsTOF Pro is capable of physically separating N-glycopeptides from nonmodified peptides and producing high-quality fragmentation spectra, both beneficial for glycoproteomics analyses of complex samples. The glycan moieties enlarge the size of glycopeptides compared with nonmodified peptides, yielding a clear cluster in the mobilogram that, next to increased dynamic range from the physical separation of glycopeptides and nonmodified peptides, can be used to make an effective selection filter for directing the mass spectrometer to analytes of interest. We designed an approach where we (1) focused on a region of interest in the ion mobilogram and (2) applied stepped collision energies to obtain informative glycopeptide tandem mass spectra on the timsTOF Pro:glyco-polygon-stepped collision energy-parallel accumulation serial fragmentation. This method was applied to selected glycoproteins, human plasma- and neutrophil-derived glycopeptides. We show that the achieved physical separation in the region of interest allows for improved extraction of information from the samples, even at shorter liquid chromatography gradients of 15&#xa0;min. We validated our approach on human neutrophil and plasma samples of known makeup, in which we captured the anticipated glycan heterogeneity (paucimannose, phosphomannose, high mannose, hybrid and complex glycans) from plasma and neutrophil samples at the expected abundances. As the method is compatible with off-the-shelve data acquisition routines and data analysis software, it can readily be applied by any laboratory with a timsTOF Pro and is reproducible as demonstrated by a comparison between two laboratories.

### Keywords
Plasma, N-glycopeptides, Ion mobility, Neutrophils, Tims, Oxonium ions

### Affiliations
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Utrecht

Netherlands Proteomics Center

Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Utrecht  Netherlands Proteomics Center, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Andris Jankevics

### Lab Head
Dr Albert J.R. Heck
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Utrecht  Netherlands Proteomics Center, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands


