### Accession
PXD000049

### Title
Comparative phosphoproteome of Trypanosoma brucei bloodstream & procyclic form

### Description
Comparative phosphoproteomic analysis of SILAC labelled cultured bloodstream and procyclic form Trypansoma brucei. Phosphopeptide enrichement via SCX and TiO2, acquired on Oribtrap Velos using MSA. Triplicate biological replicate for each lifecycle stage (as unmixed, and two SILAC label swap expreiments), eight fraction injected in technical triplicate. For the SILAC labelled samples, the corresponding changes in the proteome were measured using unenriched peptides sperated by SCX. Data was processed using MaxQuant version 1.3.0.5 which incorporates the Andromeda search engine. Proteins were identified by searching a protein sequence database containingT. brucei brucei 927 annotated proteins (Version 4.0, downloaded from TriTrypDB http://www.tritrypdb.org/ supplemented with the VSG221 sequence and frequently observed contaminants (porcine trypsin, bovine serum albumins and mammalian keratins) that contains a total of 10,081 protein sequences. Search parameters specified an MS tolerance of 6 ppm, an MS/MS tolerance at 0.5 Da and full trypsin specificity, allowing for up to two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionines, N-terminal protein acetylation and N-pyroglutamate were allowed as variable modifications. Phosphoproteomic analysis included phosophorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine as additional variable modifications. Peptides were required to be at least 7 amino acids in length and a MaxQuant score >5, with false discovery rates (FDRs) of 0.01 calculated at the levels of peptides, proteins and modification sites based on the number of hits against the reversed sequence database.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
We report a global quantitative phosphoproteomic study of bloodstream and procyclic form Trypanosoma brucei using SILAC labeling of each lifecycle stage. Phosphopeptide enrichment by SCX and TiO2 led to the identification of a total of 10096 phosphorylation sites on 2551 protein groups and quantified the ratios of 8275 phosphorylation sites between the two lifecycle stages. More than 9300 of these sites (92%) have not previously been reported. Model-based gene enrichment analysis identified over representation of Gene Ontology terms relating to the flagella, protein kinase activity, and the regulation of gene expression. The quantitative data reveal that differential protein phosphorylation is widespread between bloodstream and procyclic form trypanosomes, with significant intraprotein differential phosphorylation. Despite a lack of dedicated tyrosine kinases, 234 phosphotyrosine residues were identified, and these were 3-4 fold over-represented among site changing &gt;10-fold between the two lifecycle stages. A significant proportion of the T. brucei kinome was phosphorylated, with evidence that MAPK pathways are functional in both lifecycle stages. Regulation of gene expression in T. brucei is exclusively post-transcriptional, and the extensive phosphorylation of RNA binding proteins observed may be relevant to the control of mRNA stability in this organism.

### Keywords
Silac, Phosphoproteome, Trypanosoma brucei

### Affiliations
Lancaster University

### Submitter
Michael Urbaniak

### Lab Head


