### Accession
PXD024683

### Title
Rational correction of pathogenic conformational defects in HTRA1

### Description
Loss-of-function mutations in the homotrimeric serine protease HTRA1 cause cerebral vasculopathy. Here, we show that disease-causing mutations targeting the protomer-protomer interface impair trimerization. Focusing on a prototypical interface mutation (R274Q), we designed an HTRA1 variant that complemented pathogenic HTRA1 and reconstituted its multimeric assembly and enzymatic activity in vitro. Genetic experiments in Htra1R274Q mice further demonstrated that expression of this protein-based corrector in trans was sufficient to stabilize HTRA1-R274Q and restore the cerebrovascular proteome. As an alternative approach to achieve repair of pathogenic interface mutants, we generated supramolecular chemical ligands that shifted the monomer-trimer equilibrium by stabilizing proteolytically active trimers. Moreover, we identified a peptidic ligand that activated HTRA1 monomers. Collectively, our findings open novel perspectives for tailored protein repair strategies.

### Sample Protocol
Dissection of ventral pial cerebral vessels: Mice were anesthetized with Ketamine (100 mg/kg) and Xylazine (10 mg/kg) and transcardially perfused with 20 ml PBS, followed by 2 ml of 2% Evan’s blue (w/v) prepared in PBS. After brain harvest, pial vessels were collected from the ventral face of the brain with micro forceps under a M205 A dissection microscope (Leica) and snap frozen on dry ice. Lysis of cerebral vessels. Vessels were mixed with 4% (w/v) SDS, 100 mM dithiothreitol, 100 mM Tris–HCl, pH 7.6 and homogenized in a TissueLyser LT bead mill (Qiagen, 2 x 3 min at 50 Hz). After heating for 3 min at 95°C, samples were sonicated 5 times for 30 s at 4°C in a VialTweeter sonicator (Hielscher, amplitude 100%, duty cycle 50%), then centrifuged at 16,000 g for 15 min. The supernatant was stored at -80°C before further processing. For MS analysis, proteins were precipitated overnight at -80°C after adding NaCl and ethanol to a final concentration of 50 mM and 90% (v/v), respectively. Precipitated proteins were washed once with 90% EtOH and the precipitate was dissolved in 50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 2 mM EDTA, 1% Triton X-100. LC–MS/MS: An amount of 25 units Benzonase (Sigma-Aldrich) was added to the entire sample volume and samples were incubated for 30 min at 37°C at 1,400 rpm in a Thermomixer (Eppendorf, Germany) to remove remaining DNA. Afterwards, samples were digested with LysC and trypsin, using single-pot solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation (SP3)42. Proteolytic peptides were dried by vacuum centrifugation and dissolved in 20 µl 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. 1.2 µg of peptide mixture was separated on a nanoLC system (EASY-nLC 1200, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using an in-house packed C18 column (30 cm × 75 µm ID, ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 µm, Dr. Maisch GmbH) with a binary gradient of water and 80% acetonitrile (ACN) containing 0.1% formic acid (0 min, 3% ACN; 3.5 min, 6% ACN; 137.5 min, 30% ACN; 168.5 min, 44% ACN; 182.5 min, 75% ACN; 185 min, 99% ACN; 200 min, 99% ACN) at 50 °C column temperature. The nanoLC was coupled online via a nanospray flex ion source equipped with a column oven (Sonation) to a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Full MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 120,000 and a m/z range from 300 to 1,400. The top 15 peptide ions were chosen for collision induced dissociation (resolution: 15,000, isolation width 1.6 m/z, AGC target: 1E+5, NCE: 26%). A dynamic exclusion of 120 s was used for peptide fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Proteomic data analysis: The raw data were analyzed with the Maxquant software (maxquant.org, Mack-Planck Institute Munich) version 1.5.5.1 and searched against a modified, reviewed isoform FASTA database of Mus musculus (UniProt, 26.11.2018, 25,217 entriesWhere indicated, the FASTA file was implemented with the sequences of HTRA1-R274Q and HTRA1-D174R-S328A (for analysis of individual tryptic peptides) or was modified as follows : the canonical HTRA1 sequence was replaced with Pan-HTRA1 sequence (excluding Arg274); LTBP4 was replaced with two sequences, which separately depict its N- and C-terminal parts (aa 1-143 and aa 144-1,666, respectively); PRSS23 sequence was shortened (aa 50-382) to only include its C-terminal part. Two missed trypsin cleavages were allowed. Oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable, carbamidomethylation of cysteine as static modifications. For the main search peptide and peptide fragment mass tolerances were set to 4.5 and 20 ppm, respectively. The false discovery rate (FDR) for both peptides and proteins was adjusted to less than 1% using a target and decoy (reversed sequences) search strategy. Label free quantification (LFQ) of proteins required at least two ratio counts of unique peptides. Unique and razor peptides were used for quantification. Relative quantification and statistical analysis were performed for all proteins identified in at least 3 samples of each group. LFQ intensities were log2-transformed and a two-sided Student’s t test was used to evaluate the significance of proteins with changed abundance. A log2 fold change <-0.4 or >0.4 and a p-value <0.05 were set as significance thresholds. A permutation-based FDR estimation was used to account for multiple hypotheses (p=5%; s0=0.1) using the software Perseus (version 1.6.2.1).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse, Podocytes, Kidney

### Affiliations
DZNE Munich Neuroproteomics
DZNE - German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases Munich Neuroproteomics Feodor-Lynen Str. 17 D-81377 Munich Germany

### Submitter
Stephan Mueller

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan F. Lichtenthaler
DZNE - German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases Munich Neuroproteomics Feodor-Lynen Str. 17 D-81377 Munich Germany


