### Accession
PXD028318

### Title
Serum amyloid A correlates with the osteonecrosis of femoral head

### Description
We observed 21 prominent protein spots that differed between the two groups. Three of these proteins were upregulated and the rest 18 proteins were downregulated in patients with steroid-induced ONFH. The spots determined in the steroid-induced ONFH and health control groups were replicable.The spot no. 21 corresponding to an upregulated protein in patients with steroid-induced ONFH was identified as SAA.

### Sample Protocol
2.1.2 Preparation of serum samples A total of 5 mL of peripheral venous blood was withdrawn from patients and healthy volunteers from outpatient section or in operation room before general anesthesia. The blood samples were coagulated at 37℃ for 15 min and centrifuged at 2,000 ×g for 15 min. The supernatant was collected as serum and stored at -80℃. 2.1.3 Elimination of highly abundant proteins and quantification The serum samples were thawed and attenuated at 37℃. The attenuated serum samples were percolated with filter membranes (0.22 μm pore size). The 14 most abundant proteins were depleted from the plasma using the multiple affinity removal column system (MARS, Agilent Technologies spin columns, US) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The depleted sample was buffer exchanged with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate using Vivaspin concentrator (5,000 molecular weight cut-off, Sartorius Group, Germany). The proteins from the processed serum samples were quantified using a protein assay reagent kit (Bio-Rad Laboratories Inc, Hercules, CA) and stored at -80℃. 2.1.4 Two-dimensional gel electrophoresis The serum samples were subjected to two-dimensional gel electrophoresis. Briefly, 100 μg of each serum sample was loaded onto an immobilized pH gradient (IPG) strip (GE Amersham, UK) with pH variation from 3 to 10. The first dimensional isoelectric focusing was implemented as follows: 30 V for 12 h, 500 V for 1 h, 1,000 V for 1 h, 8,000 V for 8 h, and 500 V for 4 h using Ettan IPGphor Isoelectric Focusing System (GE Amersham, UK). The proteins after iso-electrophoresis were separated with second dimensional sodium dodecyl sulphate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) using Hofer SE 600 (GE Amersham, UK). The second-dimension gel electrophoresis was performed on the 12.5% SDS-polyacrylamide slab gels at 15 mA for 30 min and 30 mA until the trace of bromophenol blue was 0.5 cm away from the bottom of the gel. 2.1.5 Silver staining The silver staining of the gels after electrophoresis was performed according to the modified silver-staining protocol with the Silver Stain PlusOne kit (GE Amersham, UK). The gels were fixed with 50% methanol and 5% ethyl alcohol for 1 h, sensitized with a sensitizing solution comprising 0.2% sodium thiosulphate, 30% methanol, and 68 g/L sodium acetate for 5 min, washed thrice with distilled water for 5 min, incubated with 0.25% silver nitrate for 20 min, and rinsed thrice with distilled water for 1 min. The gels were developed with 0.04% formaldehyde and 2% sodium carbonate by vigorous shaking and the reaction was terminated with 5% acetic acid till the coloration was moderate. 2.1.6 Gel imaging The silver-stained gels were scanned with UMax Powerlook 2110XL (GE Amersham, UK) and the spot patterns of the gel images were matched using Image Master 2D system (Amersham Biosciences). The densities of all the matched spots were standardized with the total protein amount in the gel.

### Data Protocol
Different groups of spots were excised from the gel and rinsed with de-ionised water. The washed gommures were destained with 50 μL of a solution containing 30 mmol/L potassium ferricyanide (K3Fe(CN)6) and 100 mmol/L of sodium thiosulfate (Na2S2O3) at a ratio of 1:1. After lyophilization, digestion was performed with 5 μL of trypsin (Promega, USA) at 37℃ for 20 h. The enzymatic hydrolysate was subsequently extracted, and the residual was treated with 100 μL of 60% acetonitrile (ACN) and 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). The samples were ultrasonically washed for 15 min and the cleaned solution obtained was merged with the enzymatic hydrolysate. The collected fluid was desalted with ZipTip (Millipore, USA) and freeze dried. 2.1.8 Matrix-assisted laser desorption ionisation time-of-flight mass spectrometry The dried samples were dissolved in 2 μL of 20% acetonitrile and treated with supersaturated α-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid (CHCA) matrix solution. The solvent composed of 0.5% TFA and 50% ACN. All the samples were analyzed on 4800 Plus MALDI TOF/TOFTM Analyzer (Applied Biosystems, USA) at a scan range of 800 to 4,000 Da with UV light at 355 nm using Nd:YAG laser. The data were searched against the International Protein Index human protein database with Mascot search engine.

### Publication Abstract
Osteonecrosis of femoral head (ONFH) is a progressive hip joint disease without disease-modifying treatment. Lacking understanding of the pathophysiological process of ONFH has become the humper to develop therapeutic approach. Serum amyloid A (SAA) is an acute phase lipophilic protein during inflammation and we found that SAA is increased for the first time in the serum of ONFH patients through proteomic studies and quantitatively verified by ELISA. Treating rBMSCs with SAA inhibited the osteogenic differentiation <i>via</i> Wnt/&#x3b2;-catenin signaling pathway deactivation and enhanced the adipogenic differentiation <i>via</i> MAPK/PPAR&#x3b3; signaling pathway activation. Finally, bilateral critical-sized calvarial-defect rat model which received SAA treated rBMSCs demonstrated reduction of bone formation when compared to untreated rBMSCs implantation control. Hence, SAA is a vital protein in the physiological process of ONFH and can act as a potential therapeutic target to treat ONFH.

### Keywords
Saa onfh serum

### Affiliations
Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Shanghai Jiao Tong University Affiliated Sixth People’s Hospital

### Submitter
Xiaoyuan Peng

### Lab Head
Dr Yong Feng
Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Shanghai Jiao Tong University Affiliated Sixth People’s Hospital


