### Accession
PXD011513

### Title
Proteomics-based identification of ISG15 modification sites during Listeria monocytogenes infection

### Description
ISG15 is an interferon-stimulated, ubiquitin-like protein, with anti-viral and anti-bacterial activity, however its precise mechanism of action during viral or bacterial infection remains elusive. We previously found that ISG15 restricts Listeria infection both in vitro and in vivo and identified ISGylated proteins that could be responsible for the protective effect. Here, we endeavored to map the in vivo ISGylome following Listeria infection to mechanistically elucidate the function of ISG15 in host defense. To do so we combined a genetic approach employing a murine model of deregulated ISGylation with quantitative proteomics of immune-enriched endogenous ISG15 modification sites. In this way, we mapped 930 ISG15 sites in 438 proteins. In addition, we also quantified protein level changes in the host proteome following infection. Gene ontology analysis revealed that ISGylated proteins were mostly enriched in proteins which alter cellular metabolic processes, including four upstream modulators of the catabolic and antibacterial pathway of autophagy. Structural analysis further revealed that a number of ISG15 modifications can occur at catalytic sites or dimerization interfaces of enzymes. Finally, we showed that animals and cells with deregulated ISGylation have increased infection-induced autophagy through the modification of mTOR, WIPI2, and AMBRA1. Taken together, these findings ascribe a putative role of ISGylation to temporarily reprogram organismal metabolism following infection through direct modification of a variety of enzymes in the liver.

### Sample Protocol
WT mice, ISG15-/- mice and mice with catalytic inactive USP18 (USP18C61A) were challenged with Listeria monocytogenes EGD or treated with DMEM (control). Mice were sacrificed and whole livers were collected and flash frozen in liquid nitrogen. The livers were homogenized in 10 ml urea lysis buffer containing 9 M urea, 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM ß-glycerophosphate. Samples were sonicated by 3 pulses of 10 s at an amplitude of 20% and centrifuged for 15 minutes at 16,000 x g at room temperature to remove insoluble components. The protein concentration in the supernatants of each replicate was measured using a Bradford assay (Biorad) and equal protein amounts, each containing 10 mg total protein, were used for further analysis. Proteins in each sample were reduced by adding 5 mM DTT and incubation for 30 minutes at 55˚C. Alkylation of the proteins was done by addition of 10 mM chloroacetamide for 15 minutes at room temperature in the dark. The samples were diluted with 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0 to a urea concentration of 2 M and the proteins were digested with 50 µg trypsin (Promega) (1/200, w/w) overnight at 37 ˚C.  Immunocapture of GG-modified peptides was then performed using the PTMScan® Ubiquitin Remnant Motif (K-ε-GG) Kit (Cell Signaling Technology) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Briefly, peptides were purified on Sep-Pak C18 cartridges (Waters), lyophilized for two days and re-dissolved in 1.4 ml 1x immunoprecipitation buffer supplied with the kit. Note that at this point aliquots corresponding to 100 µg of digested protein material were taken for shotgun proteomics analysis. Peptides were incubated with the antibody-bead slurry for 2 hours on a rotator at 4˚C and after several wash steps, GG-modified peptides were eluted in 100 µl 0.15% TFA and desalted on reversed phase C18 OMIX tips (Agilent), all according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Purified GG-modified peptides were dried under vacuum in HPLC inserts and stored at -20˚C until LC-MS/MS analysis. Purified GG-modified peptides were re-dissolved in 20 µl loading solvent A (0.1% TFA in water/ACN (98:2, v/v)) of which 8 µl was injected for LC-MS/MS analysis on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system in-line connected to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo). Trapping was performed at 10 μl/min for 4 min in loading solvent A on a 20 mm trapping column (made in-house, 100 μm internal diameter (I.D.), 5 μm beads, C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch, Germany) and the sample was loaded on a 400 mm analytical column (made in-house, 75 µm I.D., 1.9 µm beads C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch). Peptides were eluted by a non-linear increase from 2 to 56% MS solvent B (0.1% FA in water/acetonitrile (2:8, v/v)) over 140 minutes at a constant flow rate of 250 nl/min, followed by a 15-minutes wash reaching 99% MS solvent B and re-equilibration with MS solvent A (0.1% FA in water/acetonitrile (98:2, v/v)). The column temperature was kept constant at 50°C in a column oven (CoControl 3.3.05, Sonation). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 16 most abundant ion peaks per MS spectrum. Full-scan MS spectra (375-1500 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 in the orbitrap analyser after accumulation to a target value of 3,000,000. The 16 most intense ions above a threshold value of 13,000 were isolated for fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 32% after filling the trap at a target value of 100,000 for maximum 80 ms. MS/MS spectra (200-2000 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 15,000 in the orbitrap analyser. From the aliquots for shotgun proteomics analysis approximately 3 µg of peptides was injected on the same LC-MS/MS system, using similar settings as described above. Here, the 16 most intense ions above a threshold value of 22,000 were isolated for fragmentation after filling the trap at a target value of 100,000 for maximum 45 ms.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.4.1) using the Andromeda search engine with default search settings including a false discovery rate set at 1% on both the peptide and protein level. Two different searches were performed to analyze the spectra from the GG-enriched samples and the shotgun samples. In both searches spectra were interrogated against mouse proteins in the Uniprot/Swiss-Prot database (database release version of May 2016 containing 16,789 mouse protein sequences, www.uniprot.org) as well as proteins from L. monocytogenes strain EGD (Taxonomy ID 1334565, containing 2,806 Listeria sequences, http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/) with a mass tolerance for precursor ions of 4.5 ppm, and a mass tolerance for fragment ions of 20 ppm and 0.5 Da for the GG-enriched and the shotgun samples, respectively. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to arginine and lysine (trypsin), also allowing cleavage at arginine/lysine-proline bonds with a maximum of three missed cleavages for the GG-enriched samples and a maximum of two missed cleavages for the shotgun samples. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification in both searches and variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionine (to sulfoxides) and acetylation of protein N-termini. The minimum score for modified peptides was set to 30 and for the GG-enriched samples, GlyGly modification of lysine residues was set as an additional variable modification. In both searches, matching between runs was enabled with an alignment time window of 20 minutes and a matching time window of 1 minute. From the shotgun analysis, only proteins with at least one unique or razor peptide were retained leading to the identification of 4,146 mouse proteins (listed in the protein groups table), while from the GG-enriched samples 5,461 potential ISG15 or ubiquitin sites were identified.  Further data analysis of the GlyGly sites was performed with the Perseus software (version 1.5.5.3) after loading the GlyGly (K)Sites table from MaxQuant. Reverse database hits were removed as well as potential contaminants. The site table was expanded, intensities were log2 transformed and normalized for each sample by subtracting the median intensity. Replicate samples were grouped, sites with less than three valid values in at least one group were removed and missing values were imputed from a normal distribution around the detection limit. To reveal sites that were significantly regulated, sample groups were defined based on infection (uninfected vs. EGD) and genotype (WT vs. ISG15 KO vs. USP18C61A) and a two-way ANOVA test was performed to compare the intensities of the sites in the infection group with the genotype group. For each GlyGly site, this test calculated a p-value (actually -log p-value) for infection and a p-value for genotype. 2,166 sites with a p-value < 0.01 in at least one of both groups were considered to be significantly regulated. The intensities of these sites were further shown in a heatmap after non-supervised hierarchical clustering. Similarly, data analysis of the protein shotgun analysis was performed in Perseus after loading the proteinGroups table from MaxQuant. Reverse database hits and proteins only identified by site were removed. LFQ protein intensities were log2 transformed, normalized for each sample by subtracting the median and replicate samples were grouped. Proteins with less than three valid values in at least one group were removed and missing values were imputed from a normal distribution around the detection limit. To reveal proteins that were significantly regulated, sample groups were defined based on infection (uninfected vs. EGD) and genotype (WT vs. ISG15 KO vs. USP18C61A) and a two-way ANOVA test was performed to compare the intensities of the proteins in the infection group with the genotype group. For each protein, this test calculated a p-value (actually -log p-value) for infection and a p-value for genotype. 1,725 proteins with a p-value < 0.01 in at least one of both groups were considered to be significantly regulated. The intensities of these proteins were further shown in a heatmap after non-supervised hierarchical clustering.

### Publication Abstract
ISG15 is an interferon-stimulated, ubiquitin-like protein, with anti-viral and anti-bacterial activity. Here, we map the endogenous in vivo ISGylome in the liver following Listeria&#xa0;monocytogenes infection by combining murine models of reduced or enhanced ISGylation with quantitative proteomics. Our method identifies 930 ISG15 sites in 434 proteins and also detects changes in the host ubiquitylome. The ISGylated targets are enriched in proteins which alter cellular metabolic processes, including upstream modulators of the catabolic and antibacterial pathway of autophagy. Computational analysis of substrate structures reveals that a number of ISG15 modifications occur at catalytic sites or dimerization interfaces of enzymes. Finally, we demonstrate that animals and cells with enhanced ISGylation have increased basal and infection-induced autophagy through the modification of mTOR, WIPI2, AMBRA1, and RAB7. Taken together, these findings ascribe a role of ISGylation to temporally reprogram organismal metabolism following infection through direct modification of a subset of enzymes in the liver.

### Keywords
Ubiquitin-like modification, Mice, Isg15, Listeria infection

### Affiliations
VIB Proteomics Core VIB-UGent Center for Medical Biotechnology UGent Department of Biomolecular Medicine
VIB Proteomics Core
Ghent University

### Submitter
Impens Francis

### Lab Head
Dr Francis Impens
VIB Proteomics Core VIB-UGent Center for Medical Biotechnology UGent Department of Biomolecular Medicine


