### Accession
PXD007769

### Title
SILAC-based quantitative tyrosine phosphoproteomic profiling identifies alternative therapeutic targets to erlotinib in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma

### Description
Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), a receptor tyrosine kinase  is overexpressed in 90% of Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) patients. Clinical trials with EGFR-targeted tyrosine kinase inhibitors such as erlotinib have shown a modest activity in HNSCC alternate mechanisms of resistance are acquired. To investigate these acquired mechanisms of resistance and identify novel therapeutic targets we employed SILAC-based tyrosine phosphoteomic analysis of an isogenic pair of erlotinib sensitive (SCC-S) and resistant (SCC-R) HNSCC cell line. Quantitative phosphotyrosine profiling revealed 98 phosphopeptides belonging to 64 proteins and 66 phosphopeptides belonging to 52 proteins to be hyper and hypophosphorylated (≥2 fold) in SCC-R cells, respectively. Several proteins such MET proto-oncogene, receptor tyrosine kinase (MET) and CRK like proto-oncogene, adaptor protein (CRKL) known to mediate erlotinib resistance in HNSCC and lung cancer were found to be dysregulated. Bioinformatics analysis of differentially phosphorylated proteins showed enrichment of proteins involved in focal adhesion kinase (FAK) pathway downstream of EGFR. We identified and validated activation of several phosphorylation sites of protein tyrosine kinase 2 (PTK2) in SCC-R cells and its downstream targets. We further demonstrated that CUB-domain containing protein 1 (CDCP1), an upstream regulator of PTK2 activity and PTK2 can be targeted in combination as an alternative to erlotinib in HNSCC.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC labelling: Isogenic human oral cancer cell line SCC-R (resistant to erlotinib) and SCC-S (sensitive to erlotinib) derived from UMSCC1 were used for the study. For SILAC-based proteomics experiments SCC-S cells were adapted to DMEM-SILAC media supplemented with L‐lysine‐2HCL (13C6, 15N2, 98% isotopic purity) and L –arginine‐HCL (13C6, 98% isotopic purity). SCC-R cells were maintained in regular media. Sample processing: For quantitative tyrosine phosphoproteomics experiment both SCC-S and SCC-R cells we grown to a confluency of 70% and were maintained in serum free media for 12 hours prior to harvesting in urea lysis buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 9 M urea, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM phosphoglycerophosphate). Protein concentration was determined using BCA assays and normalised using SDS-PAGE gel and 10mg equivalent of lysate from each of the conditions were mixed. The mixture was reduced with 45mM dithiothreitol at 60oC for 30 mins and alkylated using 100mM iodoacetamide for 10 mins at room temperature. Concentration of urea was brought to 2M using HEPES buffer and digested overnight at 37oC using modified trypsin (Promega). The protein digests were desalted using Sep-Pak C18 column (with 40% ACN with 0.1% TFA as the final elution buffer) and lyophilized.  Immunoaffinity purification (IAP) of tyrosine phosphopeptides The lyophilized peptide mixtures were dissolved in IAP buffer containing 50 mM MOPS pH 7.2, 10 mM sodium phosphate and 50 mM NaCl. Prior to phospho-tyrosine enrichment, the P-Tyr-1000 beads (Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA) were washed twice with IAP buffer at 4°C. The peptide mixture was then incubated with P-Tyr-1000 beads for 30 min with gentle rotation. The supernatant was discarded and the beads were washed thrice with ice cold IAP buffer and twice with ice cold water to remove non-specifically bound peptides. The enriched tyrosine phosphopeptides were eluted from beads using 0.15 % TFA at room temperature. This step was repeated twice. This was followed by clean up of the samples using C18 StageTips as described earlier and lyophilized prior to LC-MS/MS analysis  LC-MS/MS analysis  LTQ-Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific, Bermen, Germany) interfaced with Proxeon Easy nLC system (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) was used for LC-MS/MS analysis. Precursor MS scan (m/z 350–1800) and MS/MS (m/z 350–1400) was acquired with a mass resolution of 120K and 30K at 200 m/z in the orbitrap mass analyzer. Automatic gain control (AGC) target was set to 500K for MS and 50K for MS/MS and maximum ion injection time was set to 60ms for MS and 200ms for MS/MS scan events. In each duty cycle 10 most intense peaks were selected for MS/MS fragmentation using higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) mode at 32% normalized collision energy and isolation width was set to 2.0 m/z. Singly charged and unassigned charge precursor were rejected. Dynamic exclusion was set for 30 seconds with a 10 ppm mass window. The lock mass option was enabled using polysiloxane ion (m/z= 445.12002) from ambient air for internal calibration. The data was acquired in technical duplicates.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data obtained from all LC-MS/MS analysis was searched against Human RefSeq database (Version 65 and known contaminants) using SequestHT and Mascot (version 2.2) search algorithms through Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Enzyme specificity was set as trypsin with maximum two missed cleavage allowed. Oxidation of methionine, phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine (S, T, Y), and SILAC labels 13C6, 15C2-Lysine (K8); 13C6-Arginine (R6) were set as dynamic modifications. Carbamidomethylation at cysteine was set as static modification. The mass error of parent ions was set to 10 ppm and 0.05 Da for fragment ions. The data was also searched against a decoy database and MS/MS identifications of 1% false discovery rate (FDR) score threshold was considered for further analysis. Precursor ion quantifier node with a mass precision of 3ppm was used for peptide and protein quantification. PhosphoRS node (version 3.1) was used for calculation of phosphosite probabilities. Further phosphopeptides with phosphosite probabilities ≥75% were used for identification of protein phosphorylation  sites.

### Publication Abstract
Resistance to cancer chemotherapy is a major global health burden. Epidermal growth factor receptor (<i>EGFR</i>) is a proven therapeutic target for multiple cancers of epithelial origin. Despite its overexpression in &gt;90% of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) patients, tyrosine kinase inhibitors such as erlotinib have shown a modest response in clinical trials. Cellular heterogeneity is thought to play an important role in HNSCC therapeutic resistance. Genomic alterations alone cannot explain all resistance mechanisms at play in a heterogeneous system. It is thus important to understand the biochemical mechanisms associated with drug resistance to determine potential strategies to achieve clinical response. We investigated tyrosine kinase signaling networks in erlotinib-resistant cells using quantitative tyrosine phosphoproteomics approach. We observed altered phosphorylation of proteins involved in cell adhesion and motility in erlotinib-resistant cells. Bioinformatics analysis revealed enrichment of pathways related to regulation of the actin cytoskeleton, extracellular matrix (ECM)-receptor interaction, and endothelial migration. Of importance, enrichment of the focal adhesion kinase (PTK2) signaling pathway downstream of <i>EGFR</i> was also observed in erlotinib-resistant cells. To the best of our knowledge, we present the first report of tyrosine phosphoproteome profiling in erlotinib-resistant HNSCC, with an eye to inform new ways to achieve clinical response. Our findings suggest that common signaling networks are at play in driving resistance to EGFR-targeted therapies in HNSCC and other cancers. Most notably, our data suggest that the PTK2 pathway genes may potentially play a significant role in determining clinical response to erlotinib in HNSCC tumors.

### Keywords
Signaling pathways, Quantitative proteomics, Head and neck cancer, Mass spectrometry, Egfr-tyrosine kinase inhibitor resistance

### Affiliations
QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute
Institute of Bioinformatics , International Technology Park, Bangalore, India.

### Submitter
Harsha Gowda

### Lab Head
Dr Harsha Gowda
Institute of Bioinformatics , International Technology Park, Bangalore, India.


