### Accession
PXD024420

### Title
Proteomic Consequences of the Deletion of Cytochrome P450 (CYP450) Reductase in Mice

### Description
Microsomal cytochrome P450 (CYP450) reductase enzymes play a major role in drug and xenobiotic metabolism. Mice which are deficient in hepatic CYP450 reductase serve as excellent models in understanding CYP450 drug metabolism and alterations in the underlying biology. A reversed-phase nano-bore UPLC-MS-based proteomic analysis, using an untargeted data independent approach (DIA), has been utilized for liver tissue extracts to evaluate differences between the proteomes of wild type (C57Bl6) and hepatic P450 reductase mice (HRNTM). Statistically curated, differential expressed protein groups highlighted a variety of molecular and biological functions, including binding and catalytic related activities. Pathway enrichment analysis resulted in perturbation of lipid and energy related pathways, which included bile acid biosynthesis, fatty acid omega oxidation and tricarbonic acid (TCA) cycle as examples.

### Sample Protocol
Livers from 5 male, wild type C57BL6J (7-8 weeks of age, Charles River, UK) and 4 hepatic CYP reductase null (HRN) mice (7-11 weeks of age, Taconic Farms Inc., Germantown, NY, USA). Frozen liver tissue (ca. 20 mg) was weighed and placed into pre-chilled bead-beater tubes containing 100 µL, 1 mm zirconium beads. Samples were homogenised at 6,500 Hz for two 40 s cycles. Samples were incubated at 95°C for 3 min and sonicated for 5 min before centrifugation at 15,000 g for 10 min at 20 °C. Protein extracts were digested using 1% RapiGest (Waters Corp., Milford, MA, USA) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and heated at 80°C for 45 min. Each sample was reduced and alkylated with 0.55 µL of 100 mM dithiothreitol (30 min, 60°C) and 0.6 µL of 200 mM iodoacetamide (30 min, RT in the dark) respectively. Proteolytic digestion was then conducted using 1:50 (w/w) trypsin (Gold mass spectrometry grade, Promega, Madison, WI, USA) and left overnight at 37°C. TFA was added to a final concentration of 0.5% (v/v) to hydrolyse the RapiGest and heated at 37°C for 45 min before being vortexed and centrifuged for 20 min at 18,000 g. The supernatant was collected and diluted with water to provide a working concentration of 200 ng/µL liver extract. The peptides obtained from the tissue extracts were analyzed by one dimensional nanoscale reversed-phase (RP) chromatography. Peptides were loaded onto a pre-column before being eluted and and separated over a 90 min gradient. The gradient consisted of 3-40% mobile phase B over 60 min at a flow rate of 400 nL/min, whilst maintaining the analytical column temperature at 35°C. MS data were collected on a Synapt G2-Si mass spectrometer (Waters Corp., Wilmslow, UK) operated in positive electrospray ionisation (ESI) mode with a nominal resolution of 25,000 FWHM (V optics). The capillary voltage was 3.2 kV, cone voltage was 35 V and source temperature was set at 100 °C. Data were acquired over 50-2000 Da mass range with a scan time of 0.5 s. All mass spectral data were acquired in continuum mode using UDMSE to obtain fragmentation data simultaneously.

### Data Protocol
Progenesis QI for Proteomics (Nonlinear Dynamics, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK) was used to process all data. Retention time alignment, peak picking and normalization were conducted to produce peak intensities for retention time (RT) and m/z data pairs. Data were searched against reviewed entries of a Mus musculus UniProt database (17,048 reviewed entries, release 2020_05) to provide protein identifications with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%. Peptide and fragment ion tolerances were determined automatically and searches allowed for one missed cleavage site, carbamidomethyl of cysteines (fixed modification) and oxidation of methionines (variable modification). Outputs from Progenesis QI for Proteomics were used for pathway enrichment analysis using MetaCore (Clarivate Analytics, London, UK). Biological and molecular functionality by means of gene ontology (GO) were derived from the online classification tool PANTHER (Protein ANalysis THrough Evolutionary Relationships). Statistical analysis and additional data visualization were conducted using MetaboAnalyst, whilst protein-protein association networks were also evaluated using STRING.

### Publication Abstract
Microsomal cytochrome P450 (CYP450) reductase enzymes play a major role in drug and xenobiotic metabolism. Mice which are deficient in hepatic CYP450 reductase serve as excellent models in understanding CYP450 drug metabolism and alterations in the underlying biology and function of these enzymes. A reversed-phase nano-bore UPLC-MS-based proteomic analysis, using an untargeted data independent approach (DIA), has been utilized for liver tissue extracts to evaluate differences between the proteomes of C57Bl6 wild type (WT) and hepatic P450 reductase mice (HRN&#x2122;). Statistically curated, differentially expressed protein groups highlighted a variety of molecular and biological functions, including binding and catalytic related activities. Thus, elevations were seen for a number of CYP450 enzymes (Cyp2a5; Cyp2b10; Cyp2b19; Cyp2d26; Cyp2a5, Cyp2e1) in the liver extracts of HRN animals. In addition, the major urinary protein 2 (Mup2) was found to be present only in the livers of the HRN group, whilst enoyl-CoA hydratase domain-containing protein 2 (Echdc2) was similarly unique to the the WT livers. Pathway enrichment analysis of the WT liver data indicated perturbations of lipid and energy related pathways, which included bile acid biosynthesis, fatty acid omega oxidation and tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle as examples.

### Keywords
Tca cycle., Proteomics; cytochrome p450; lipid metabolism; bile acids; glutathione

### Affiliations
Scientific Operations, Waters
Waters Corporation

### Submitter
Lee Gethings

### Lab Head
Dr Lee Gethings
Scientific Operations, Waters


