### Accession
PXD030077

### Title
A comparative proteomics analysis identified differentially expressed proteins in pancreatic cancer–associated stellate cell small extracellular vesicles

### Description
Human pancreatic stellate cells (HPSCs) are an essential stromal component and are the mediators of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) progression. Small extracellular vesicles (sEVs) are membrane-enclosed nanoparticles released from stellate cells adjacent to the PDAC. sEVs are believed to play a key role in cell-cell communications and may play a critical role in disease progression. The role of membrane proteins of HPSC sEVs in the PDAC tumor microenvironment is unclear and to date, there has not been a quantitative proteomic comparison of sEVs from normal pancreatic stellate cells (HPaStec) and from PDAC-associated stellate cells (HPSCs). We hypothesized there would be differences in sEVs secretion and membrane protein expression between the 2 conditions that might contribute to PDAC biology. To test these hypotheses, we isolated sEVs using ultracentrifugation followed by characterization by electron microscopy and Nanoparticle Tracking Analysis. HPSCs secreted more sEVs compared to HPaStec, and these sEVs were enriched with exosomal markers, which was confirmed by Western blotting and flow cytometry. HPSC-sEVs also restore the activation of normal stellate cells. Next, we showed that intact membrane-associated proteins may be essential for sufficient uptake of stellate cell sEVs by both normal epithelial and cancer cells. Importantly, we demonstrated that stellate cells in general modulate the cellular proliferations of pancreatic cancer cells although stellate cell sEVs did not change the proliferation of cancer cells. We then compared sEV proteins isolated from HPSCs and HPaStecs cells using liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry. Most of the 1,481 protein groups identified were shared with the exosome database, ExoCarta (http://exocarta.org/; curated by the Mathivanan Lab). Eighty-seven protein groups were differentially expressed (selected by 2-fold difference and adjusted P value ≤ 0.05) between HPSC and HPaStec sEVs. HPSC sEVs contained dramatically more CSE1L, a poor prognostic marker for pancreatic cancer. In conclusion, our findings using mass spectrometry–based proteomics may direct further studies to understand the biology and role of protein composition of HPSC sEVs in PDAC progression  or to develop novel strategies based on delivery of exosome cargo to PDAC tumor cells.

### Sample Protocol
Equal amounts of sEV proteins (10 µg) were lysed in denaturing buffer containing 8 M urea, 20 mM HEPES (pH 8), 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, and 1 mM β-glycerophosphate. A Bradford assay was carried out to determine the protein concentration. The proteins were reduced with 4.5 mM DTT and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide. Trypsin digestion was carried out at room temperature overnight, and tryptic peptides were then acidified with 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and desalted with C18 MicroSpin Columns (The Nest Group, Inc. Southborough, MA) according to the manufacturer’s procedure. LC-MS/MS A nanoflow ultra-high-performance liquid chromatograph (RSLC, Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA) interfaced with an electrospray bench top quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive HF-X, Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) was used for tandem mass spectrometry peptide sequencing experiments. The sample was first loaded onto a precolumn (100 µm ID × 2 cm in length packed with C18 reversed-phase resin, 5 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size) and washed for 8 minutes with aqueous 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. The trapped peptides were eluted onto the analytical column (C18, 75 µm ID × 50 cm in length, 2 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size, Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA). The 120-minute gradient was programmed as: 95% solvent A (aqueous 2% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid) for 8 minutes, solvent B (aqueous 90% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid) from 5% to 38.5% in 90 minutes, then solvent B from 50% to 90% B in 7 minutes and held at 90% for 5 minutes, followed by solvent B from 90% to 5% in 1 minute and re-equilibration for 10 minutes. The flow rate on the analytical column was 300 nl/minute. MS resolution was set at 60 000, and MS/MS resolution was set at 15 ,000 with maxIT maximum ion accumulation of 50 ms.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.10) was used for protein identification and quantification. Description of the parameters has provided in the supplementary table 1. At least 7 amino acids per peptide were required, and as many as 2 missed cleavages were allowed. A false discovery rate of 0.01 was used for both peptides and proteins. The match between runs option was selected using a time window of 4 minutes. N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were both modifications allowed in protein quantification. We used the R programming language (version 4.0.2) with RStudio (version 1.3.1093) to analyze the MaxQuant proteinGroups.txt output containing 1,597 rows of protein groups (see supplementary materials, R_session_info). Filtering out the protein groups that consisted of entirely of reverse entries, entirely non-human contaminant entries, or that were identified but not quantified resulted in 1,481 protein groups for further analysis. Sample intensities were log2-transformed and normalized using iterative rank order normalization (IRON). Missing values were left as NA. We performed Welch’s t tests to test for differences in the relative expression of protein groups between HPSC and HPaStec samples. T test values were adjusted using the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure. We defined differentially expressed protein groups as those ≥ 2-fold differences (or ±1 log2 ratio of HPSC to HPaStec) with an adjusted P value ≤ 0.05. Ratios were calculated for HPSC over HPaStec, so positive values indicate higher expression in HPSC whereas negative values indicated lower expression. Pathway enrichment was performed using the Enrichr R package. For protein groups comprised of more than one protein, the first protein was used for enrichment analysis. ExoCarta Protein/mRNA data (ExoCarta Download - 5 [release date: July 29, 2015]) were downloaded (http://www.exocarta.org; accessed 2020/09/02). The web-based tool Oncolnc (http://www.oncolnc.org/; accessed 2020/10/28), which provides an interface for multivariate Cox regression, was used to perform a survival analysis on 174 pancreatic adenocarcinomas from The Cancer Genome Data Atlas. Patients were stratified into low and high groups based on median CSE1L expression.  Significantly different proteins were queried with the STRING protein-protein interaction database. Homo sapiens was selected as the organism, and the minimum required interaction score was set to 0.400. The network was exported as a tab separated variable file and imported into Cytoscape version 3.8.2. Circular layout and degree sorted circular layout options were used to organize the nodes and edges.  Similar database search parameters were used for Mascot to support this data upload.

### Publication Abstract
Human pancreatic stellate cells (HPSCs) are an essential stromal component and mediators of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) progression. Small extracellular vesicles (sEVs) are membrane-enclosed nanoparticles involved in cell-to-cell communications and are released from stromal cells within PDAC. A detailed comparison of sEVs from normal pancreatic stellate cells (HPaStec) and from PDAC-associated stellate cells (HPSCs) remains a gap in our current knowledge regarding stellate cells and PDAC. We hypothesized there would be differences in sEVs secretion and protein expression that might contribute to PDAC biology. To test this hypothesis, we isolated sEVs using ultracentrifugation followed by characterization by electron microscopy and Nanoparticle Tracking Analysis. We report here our initial observations. First, HPSC cells derived from PDAC tumors secrete a higher volume of sEVs when compared to normal pancreatic stellate cells (HPaStec). Although our data revealed that both normal and tumor-derived sEVs demonstrated no significant biological effect on cancer cells, we observed efficient uptake of sEVs by both normal and cancer epithelial cells. Additionally, intact membrane-associated proteins on sEVs were essential for efficient uptake. We then compared sEV proteins isolated from HPSCs and HPaStecs cells using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry. Most of the 1481 protein groups identified were shared with the exosome database, ExoCarta. Eighty-seven protein groups were differentially expressed (selected by 2-fold difference and adjusted p&#x2009;value &#x2264;0.05) between HPSC and HPaStec sEVs. Of note, HPSC sEVs contained dramatically more CSE1L (chromosome segregation 1-like protein), a described marker of poor prognosis in patients with pancreatic cancer. Based on our results, we have demonstrated unique populations of sEVs originating from stromal cells with PDAC and suggest that these are significant to cancer biology. Further studies should be undertaken to gain a deeper understanding that could drive novel therapy.

### Keywords
Human, Stellate cells, Pancreatic cancer, Exosomes

### Affiliations
Moffitt Cancer Center, Tampa, FL, USA
Moffitt Cancer Center

### Submitter
John Koomen

### Lab Head
Dr Paul Stewart
Moffitt Cancer Center, Tampa, FL, USA


