### Accession
PXD004664

### Title
Genome-wide functional analysis of AreA and AreB

### Description
"Background: The ascomycete Fusarium fujikuroi causes “bakanae” disease of rice due to its ability to produce gibberellins (GA), but is also known for producing a broad spectrum of other secondary metabolites, (SM) such as pigments and harmful mycotoxins. Biosynthesis of multiple SM is regulated by nitrogen availability. The global GATA transcription factors (TF) AreA and AreB were shown to play key roles in this nitrogen-dependent regulation. Recently, we have shown that AreA activates the transcription of AREB, but not vice versa. Both regulators interact in the nucleus, indicating a complex regulatory interplay between both regulators. Results: We performed transcriptome and proteome analyses of the wild type and ΔAREA and ΔAREB mutants under nitrogen limiting and sufficient conditions. Microarray analysis revealed that each transcription factor regulates a total set of about 4,200 genes under nitrogen limiting conditions. Gene enrichment analysis revealed that significantly up- and down-regulated genes belong to functional classes of primary/secondary metabolism, transporters, cell defense/virulence and transcription. Under nitrogen excess, AreA is not active as a transcriptional regulator, while AreB affects expression of about 4,400 genes. Both transcription factors regulate a common set of about 2,100 genes, often coordinately either as positive or as negative regulators. Our proteomics analysis identified 446 AreA-regulated and 386 AreB-regulated proteins under nitrogen limitation and 138 AreA-regulated and 447 AreB-regulated proteins under nitrogen sufficiency, respectively. Comparison of the proteome and transcriptome data indicates that both GATA-factors not only regulate expression of target genes but also affect protein abundance by post-transcriptional regulations, for example on enzymes involved in glutamate cycling, as well as histone acetylation at some of the target SM gene clusters. Conclusion: This study provides novel insights into the AreA- and AreB-mediated regulation network on a cellular scale. Microarray analysis clearly demonstrated that both GATA-factors are major regulators of alternate nitrogen assimilatory pathways and secondary metabolism. Moreover, proteome analysis of the AREA and AREB deletion mutants showed that both TF are global players interconnecting carbon and nitrogen regulation. They mainly act as mutualistic, but also antagonistic regulators and operate by transcriptional and post-transcriptional regulations and epigenetic modifications." (Abstract taken from manuscript)

### Sample Protocol
"Chromatographic separation of peptides was performed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano System (Dionex, part of Thermo Fisher Scientific). The mobile phases for the loading pump consisted of 0.05 % (v/v) TFA in ultrapure water (A) and 80 % acetonitrile/0.05 % TFA in ultrapure water (B). The sample (1 µl) was loaded on a trapping column (C18 PepMap 100, 300 µM x 5 mm, 5 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size; Thermo Scientific) and desalted for 5 min using eluent A at a flow rate of 20 µl/min. Then the trap column was switched online with the separation column (Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 75 µm x 15 cm, 2 µM particle size, 100 Å pore size, Thermo Scientific). The mobile phases for elution of the peptides from the column consisted of 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid in ultrapure water (A*) and 80 % acetonitrile/0.08 % formic acid in ultrapure water (B*). Peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 300 nl/min and employing the following gradient profile: 0-40 % B* over 90 min, 40-100 % B* over 5 min, 100 % B* for 10 min. Afterwards the column was re-equilibrated with 99 % A* for 20 min.  The LC system was coupled via a nanospray source to an LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Finnigan). The general mass spectrometric conditions were: spray voltage, 1.5 kV; no sheath and auxiliary gas flow; ion transfer tube temperature : 200 °C. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode and a data-dependent automatic switch was employed between MS and MS/MS acquisition modes. MS full scans (m/z 375-1600) were acquired in positive ion mode by FT-MS in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 60,000 (FWHM) with internal lock mass calibration on m/z 445.12003. The 12 most intense ions were fragmented in the linear ion trap by CID (35 % normalized collision energy). ). For standard samples, automatic gain control (AGC) was enabled with target values of 5 x 105 and 5 x 104 for MS full scans and MS/MS, respectively. One microscan was acquired per MS/MS spectrum and maximum ion trap fill time was 100 ms (Kalli and Hess, 2012). Ion selection thresholds were: 500 counts for MS2. An activation q = 0.25 and activation time of 30 ms were applied in MS2 acquisitions. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with an exclusion duration of 90s, repeat count of 1, list size of 500 and exclusion mass width of +/- 5 ppm. Unassigned charge states and charged state 1 were rejected. To improve the fragmentation of phosphopeptides, multi-stage activation (MSA) in the Xcalibur software was enabled for each MS/MS spectrum. The 5 most intense ions were fragmented in the linear ion trap by CID (35 % normalized collision energy). For the Multi Stage Activation (MSA), an MSA for further fragmention of the ions was triggered if in the 5 most intense peaks of a MS2 event a neutral loss peak at -98, -49 or -32.7 Da was observed. Automatic gain control (AGC) was enabled with target values of 5 x 105 and 5 x 104 for MS full scans and MS/MS, respectively. Two microscans were acquired per MS/MS spectrum and maximum ion trap fill time was 150 ms. Ion selection thresholds were: 500 counts for MS2. An activation q = 0.25 and activation time of 30 ms were applied in MS2 acquisitions. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with an exclusion duration of 120s, repeat count of 1, list size of 500 and exclusion mass width of +/- 5 ppm. Unassigned charge states and charged state 1 were rejected. Additionally, Phosphopeptide-enriched samples (FT, E1 and E2) were measured with the following adjustments: Automatic gain control (AGC) was enabled with target values of 5 x 105 and 5 x 104 for MS full scans and MS/MS, respectively. Two microscans were acquired per MS/MS spectrum and maximum ion trap fill time was 150 ms." (Taken from manuscript)

### Data Protocol
“Data analysis was performed as described previously (Bergner et al., 2015). LC-MS/MS data was converted from RAW format (Thermo scientific) to the open mzML format (Martens et al. 2011) using msconvert (Proteowizard version 2.0.1885 Kessner et al. 2008). Then, mzML files were converted to the mascot generic format (mgf) if required using pymzML (Bald et al. 2012). Peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) and statistical post processing was performed using Ursgal (Kremer et al. 2016). The following peptide database search algorithms were employed: OMSSA (Geer et al. 2004), X! Tandem(Craif and Beavis 2004), and MS-GF+ (version 9979, Kim et al. 2010) using default values for most parameters (see http://ursgal.readthedocs.io/). A shuffled-peptide based target-decoy database was generated as described previously (Barth et al. 2014) based on Fusarium fujikuroi database (p3_i2_t5127_Fus_fujik_v21.prot version 21) and the contaminant database (cRAP). Variable modifications were set as follows: oxidation of methionine (+15.9949 Da), acetylation of the N-terminus (+42.0106 Da), phosphorylation of serine, tyrosine and threonine (+79.966331). Additionally, X! Tandem considers the loss of water (-18.0106 Da) and deamidation (-17.0265 Da) by default. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification. Two missed cleavage sites were permitted. Statistical post-processing and the estimation of posterior error probabilities (PEP) for individual PSMs was performed using Percolator (Käll et al. 2007). All PSMs were filtered on database search engine level with a cutoff ≤ 1% PEP. A total of 19658 unique peptides were identified (PEP ≤ 1%). Quantification was performed using pyQms with default parameters (Höhner et al. 2013, Barth et al. 2014). Retention time was aligned as described previously (Höhner et al. 2013, Barth et al. 2014). Intensity alignment and ratio calculation was performed as described previously (Bergner et al. 2015).” (Taken from manuscript)

### Publication Abstract
The biosynthesis of multiple secondary metabolites in the phytopathogenic ascomycete Fusarium fujikuroi is strongly affected by nitrogen availability. Here, we present the first genome-wide transcriptome and proteome analysis that compared the wild type and deletion mutants of the two major nitrogen regulators AreA and AreB. We show that AreB acts not simply as an antagonist of AreA counteracting the expression of AreA target genes as suggested based on the yeast model. Both GATA transcription factors affect a large and diverse set of common as well as specific target genes and proteins, acting as activators and repressors. We demonstrate that AreA and AreB are not only involved in fungal nitrogen metabolism, but also in the control of several complex cellular processes like carbon metabolism, transport and secondary metabolism. We show that both GATA transcription factors can be considered as master regulators of secondary metabolism as they affect the expression of more than half of the 47 putative secondary metabolite clusters identified in the genome of F. fujikuroi. While AreA acts as a positive regulator of many clusters under nitrogen-limiting conditions, AreB is able to activate and repress gene clusters (e.g. bikaverin) under nitrogen limitation and sufficiency. In addition, ChIP analyses revealed that loss of AreA or AreB causes histone modifications at some of the regulated gene clusters.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Fusarium fujikuroi, Label-free quantification

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Molecular Biomedicine
RNA biology laboratory
Von-Esmarch-Straße 54
48149 Münster
Germany
Molecular Biology and Biotechnology of Fungi Institut für Biologie und Biotechnologie der Pflanzen Schlossplatz 8 48143 Münster

### Submitter
Johannes Leufken

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Bettina Tudzynski
Molecular Biology and Biotechnology of Fungi Institut für Biologie und Biotechnologie der Pflanzen Schlossplatz 8 48143 Münster


