### Accession
PXD044180

### Title
FAM111A regulates replication origin activation and cell fitness

### Description
FAM111A is a replisome associated protein and dominant mutations within its trypsin-like peptidase domain are linked to severe human developmental syndrome, the Kenny-Caffey syndrome. However, FAM111A functions remain unclear. Here, we show that FAM111A facilitates efficient activation of DNA replication origins. Upon replication fork stalling, FAM111A promotes dormant origin activation and ssDNA exposure. Furthermore, unrestrained expression of FAM111A wild-type as well as patient mutants causes accumulation of DNA damage and cell death, only when the peptidase domain remains intact. The peptidase domain is responsible for ssDNA exposure during S phase, which is not caused by caspase dependent apoptosis. Altogether, these data unveil how FAM111A promotes DNA replication in normal conditions and becomes harmful in a disease context.

### Sample Protocol
All samples were lysed in 2x LSB buffer (4% SDS, 14% glycerol, 200 mM DTT in 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 6.8) to extract proteins, with 1x Pierce™ Protease Inhibitor Mini Tablets and 1x Phosphatase Inhibito added. 200 uL lysis buffer was extract proteins. After being sonicated for 10 cycles (30s on/off) using the Bioruptor® Pico, the protein samples were centrifuged at 15,000g for 15 min. The supernatant proteins were denatured at 95 ℃ for 10 min, and then alkylated with 400 mM IAA (final concentration) in dark at room temperature for 40 min. Proteins from each sample were further processed using SP3 protocol. The phosphopeptides were enriched using the Fe-NTA Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit (A32992, Thermo Fisher) by following the manual.

### Data Protocol
For phosphoproteomics MS data analysis, the data from all samples were analysed together using MaxQuant v. 1.6.10.43, searched against the homo sapiens database from UniProt (SwissProt February 2023). The FDR threshold was set to 1% for each of the respective Peptide Spectrum Match (PSM) and Protein levels. The data was searched with the following parameters: stable modification of carbamidomethyl (C), variable modifications, oxidation (M), acetylation (protein N terminus), and phosphorylation (STY), with maximum of 2 missed tryptic cleavages threshold. Lable-free quantification (LFQ) was selected.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Peptidase, Genome stability, Dna replication, Developmental syndrome

### Affiliations
Molecular Cell and Developmental Biology, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee
University of Dundee

### Submitter
Constance Alabert

### Lab Head
Dr Constance Alabert
Molecular Cell and Developmental Biology, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee


