### Accession
PXD032137

### Title
Identification of plasma proteins associated with oesophageal cancer chemotherapeutic treatment outcomes using SWATH-MS

### Description
Oesophageal adenocarcinoma (OAC) is an aggressive cancer with a five-year survival of <15%, and the incidence is predicted to double within the next 20 years. Current neo-adjuvant chemotherapy treatment strategies only benefit a minority (20-30%) of patients and there are currently no methods available to differentiate between responders and non-responders. Here we performed quantitative proteomics using Sequential Window Acquisition of all THeoretical fragment-ion spectra-Mass Spectrometry (SWATH-MS) on albumin/IgG-depleted and non-depleted plasma samples from 23 patients with locally advanced OAC or oesophageal gastric junction cancers prior to treatment. Individuals were grouped based on tumour regression (TRG) score (TRG1-3 vs TRG4 and 5) after chemotherapy and differentially abundant proteins were compared using univariate and multivariate analyses. Protein depletion led to the identification of around twice as many proteins in the samples compared to non-depletion. SWATH-MS revealed significant quantitative differences in the abundance of several proteins (p<0.05) between the two groups. These included all three c1q subunit proteins, C1QA, C1QB and C1QC, which were of higher abundance in the low TRG group (higher degree of regression in response to treatment). Of those that were found to be of higher abundance in the high TRG group, GSTP1 was found to exhibit the lowest p-value (univariate analysis) and highest accuracy and Cohen’s kappa value (multivariate analysis). The concentrations of c1q complex and GSTP1 were further examined and validated using ELISA-based assays. This study provides quantitative information relating to differences in the plasma proteome that underpin response to chemotherapeutic treatment in oesophageal cancers.

### Sample Protocol
Plasma containing 30 μg of total protein was digested for mass spectrometric analysis. For this, plasma proteins were denatured in a final concentration of 5 M urea, 2% sodium deoxycholate and 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate.  Proteins were reduced and alkylated with 5 mM tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine followed by 5 mM iodoacetamide. The reaction was quenched with 10 mM dithiothreitol. Samples were diluted with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate to a final urea concentration of 1.5 M. The resulting samples were then digested with trypsin (0.2 µg/μl trypsin, 1:50 ratio (w/w); Promega, Southampton, UK) overnight at 30°C. Finally, 0.5% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was added. Peptides were desalted using a C18 SepPak cartridge (Waters, Elstree, UK). An aliquot of the peptides in each sample was kept separate for the SWATH analysis. The remaining peptides were pooled for a spectral library generation. The solvent in each sample was removed using a SpeedVac (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Loughborough, UK).

### Data Protocol
The data was searched against SwissProt restricted to human proteins (accessed January 2019, 42407 proteins) using the Mascot Algorithm with the following search parameters: trypsin as the cleavage enzyme (/K-\P and /R-\P) and carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification of cysteines and oxidation as variable modification. Peptide mass tolerance was set to 20ppm with fragment mass tolerance set to 0.1Da. Note that the iRT peptides were included in this database. Identified proteins within Mascot were imported into Skyline 21.10.146 (38) for spectral library generation. SWATH-MS results were mapped against this library. Skyline parameters were chosen as follows:  Peptide settings (trypsin digestion with 1 missed cleavage, human as background proteome, carbamidomethylation (C) and oxidation (M) as modifications); Transition settings (2+ and 3+ precursor charges, 1+ and 2+ ion charges, b and y ions and precursor. Six transitions were selected per peptide. The peak area was normalized based on the median value. The empirical Bayes method (eBayes) is applied to the relative protein expression level to construct moderated t-tests using R (version 4.1.1) with the limma (version 3.48.3) package [16]. The implementation of the LDA classifier with repeated stratified K-fold cross-validation was implemented with a scikit-learn python package (version 0.24.1)

### Publication Abstract
Oesophageal adenocarcinoma (OAC) is an aggressive cancer with a five-year survival of &lt;15%. Current chemotherapeutic strategies only benefit a minority (20-30%) of patients and there are no methods available to differentiate between responders and non-responders. We performed quantitative proteomics using Sequential Window Acquisition of all THeoretical fragment-ion spectra-Mass Spectrometry (SWATH-MS) on albumin/IgG-depleted and non-depleted plasma samples from 23 patients with locally advanced OAC prior to treatment. Individuals were grouped based on tumour regression (TRG) score (TRG1/2/3 vs TRG4/5) after chemotherapy, and differentially abundant proteins were compared. Protein depletion of highly abundant proteins led to the identification of around twice as many proteins. SWATH-MS revealed significant quantitative differences in the abundance of several proteins between the two groups. These included complement c1q subunit proteins, C1QA, C1QB and C1QC, which were of higher abundance in the low TRG group. Of those that were found to be of higher abundance in the high TRG group, glutathione S-transferase pi (GSTP1) exhibited the lowest p-value and highest classification accuracy and Cohen's kappa value. Concentrations of these proteins were further examined using ELISA-based assays. This study provides quantitative information relating to differences in the plasma proteome that underpin response to chemotherapeutic treatment in oesophageal cancers. SIGNIFICANCE: Oesophageal cancers, including oesophageal adenocarcinoma (OAC) and oesophageal gastric junction cancer (OGJ), are one of the leading causes of cancer mortality worldwide. Curative therapy consists of surgery, either alone or in combination with adjuvant or neoadjuvant chemotherapy or radiation, or combination chemoradiotherapy regimens. There are currently no clinico-pathological means of predicting which patients will benefit from chemotherapeutic treatments. There is therefore an urgent need to improve oesophageal cancer disease management and treatment strategies. This work compared proteomic differences in OAC patients who responded well to chemotherapy as compared to those who did not, using quantitative proteomics prior to treatment commencement. SWATH-MS analysis of plasma (with and without albumin/IgG-depletion) from OAC patients prior to chemotherapy was performed. This approach was adopted to determine whether depletion offered a significant improvement in peptide coverage. Resultant datasets demonstrated that depletion increased peptide coverage significantly. Additionally, there was good quantitative agreement between commonly observed peptides. Data analysis was performed by adopting both univariate as well as multivariate analysis strategies. Differentially abundant proteins were identified between treatment response groups based on tumour regression grade. Such proteins included complement C1q sub-components and GSTP1. This study provides a platform for further work, utilising larger sample sets across different treatment regimens for oesophageal cancer, that will aid the development of 'treatment response prediction assays' for stratification of OAC patients prior to chemotherapy.

### Keywords
Oesophageal cancer, Chemotherapy, Quantitative proteomics, Magic regimen, Data-independent acquisition

### Affiliations
University of St Andrews
School of Medicine, University of St Andrews, St Andrews, KY16 9TF, United Kingdom.

### Submitter
Sally Shirran

### Lab Head
Dr Swati Arya
School of Medicine, University of St Andrews, St Andrews, KY16 9TF, United Kingdom.


