### Accession
PXD016258

### Title
Wheat grain cell wall enriched proteome

### Description
The aim of this project is to highlight cell wall proteome of wheat developing at two key stage of its development (150 GDD : middle of endosperm cellularisation and 250 GDD : start of grain filling with storage compounds).  It's the first study of wheat grain cell wall proteome in which endosperm were separated of outer layers in order to gain more information about the mechanisms of cell wall assembly and remodeling.

### Sample Protocol
A cell wall enrichment is done on endosperm and outer layers sample, which consists of several centrifugations in a buffer with increasing sucrose gradient. After that protein extracts were loaded on 1DE precast gels (12%) and briefly separated. Then, each lane was cut in five fragments prior to an “in-gel” tryptic digestion. MS/MS acquisition were performed using an LTQ-Orbitrap VELOS mass spectrometer coupled to a nanoscale LC system

### Data Protocol
Data were processed using X!Tandem pipeline to do the inference of proteins.  The Uniprot databank restricted to "Triticum aestivum" was used to do proteins identification. To identify cell wall proteins (CWPs) the pipeline "ProtAnnDB" was used (http://www.polebio.lrsv.ups-tlse.fr/ProtAnnDB/). This pipeline gather several softwares to annotate proteins as "SignalP" or "TargetP" and "PFAM" or "Interpro".

### Publication Abstract
The cell wall is an important compartment in grain cells that fulfills both structural and functional roles. It has a dynamic structure that is constantly modified during development and in response to biotic and abiotic stresses. Non-structural cell wall proteins (CWPs) are key players in the remodeling of the cell wall during events that punctuate the plant life. Here, a subcellular and quantitative proteomic approach was carried out to identify CWPs possibly involved in changes in cell wall metabolism at two key stages of wheat grain development: the end of the cellularization step and the beginning of storage accumulation. Endosperm and outer layers of wheat grain were analyzed separately as they have different origins (maternal and seed) and functions in grains. Altogether, 734 proteins with predicted signal peptides were identified (CWPs). Functional annotation of CWPs pointed out a large number of proteins potentially involved in cell wall polysaccharide remodeling. In the grain outer layers, numerous proteins involved in cutin formation or lignin polymerization were found, while an unexpected abundance of proteins annotated as plant invertase/pectin methyl esterase inhibitors were identified in the endosperm. In addition, numerous CWPs were accumulating in the endosperm at the grain filling stage, thus revealing strong metabolic activities in the cell wall during endosperm cell differentiation, while protein accumulation was more intense at the earlier stage of development in outer layers. Altogether, our work gives important information on cell wall metabolism during early grain development in both parts of the grain, namely the endosperm and outer layers. The wheat cell wall proteome is the largest cell wall proteome of a monocot species found so far.

### Keywords
Grain, Cereal, Wheat, Cell wall

### Affiliations
INRA BIA - équipe PVPP
INRA

### Submitter
Mehdi CHERKAOUI

### Lab Head
Dr Fabienne Guillon
INRA BIA - équipe PVPP


