### Accession
PXD036246

### Title
Comparative protein profiles of differentially temperature tolerant maize genotypes

### Description
Two maize genotypes exhibiting differential tolerance towards LT including the temperate grown Gurez local and its tropical counterpart GM6 were dissected for analysing and characterizing the functions of differentially regulated proteins (DRPs) in response to LT stress.

### Sample Protocol
Leaf proteome analysis at three-leaf stage of maize seedlings subjected to LT stress of 6 °C for a total of 12h duration was performed using two dimensional gel electrophoresis (2D-PAGE) followed by subsequent identification of the proteins involved. After MALDI-TOF and bioinformatics analysis, 19 proteins were successfully identified in Gurez local, while as 10 proteins were found to get successful identification in GM6.

### Data Protocol
The protein digest samples (in-gel digestion) were subjected for MS/MS analysis by 4800 Plus MALDI-TOF/TOF Analyzer (AB Sciex Pte Ltd.). MALDI-MS and MS/MS spectrum were obtained using standard operating software 4000 Series Explorer™ Remote Client. All raw mass spectrometry data in the form of LC-MS/MS files were transformed into mgf (mascot generated files) using Mascot distiller software (www.matrixscience.com). Protein identification was done through maize protein database (UP7305_Z_ mays (AA); accessed on 02 December 2021) using the Mascot search engine (version 2.3.02; Matrix Science, London, UK). The identified peptide sequences were queried against BLASTp-NCBI (protein-protein BLAST with E-value cut-off of 1e-10) under RefSeq protein of Zea mays (https://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi?PAGE=Proteins; Zea mays taxid: 4577) for further identification and annotation of identified maize proteins. 3D models for each identified protein was developed using Phyre2 web portal for protein modelling, prediction and analysis. The enrichment analysis of all proteins was carried out through ShinyGO graphical tool, and protein-protein interaction was studied using STRING database (Search Tool for Retrieval of Interacting Genes/Proteins; Version 11.0). In addition, online web server CLAP (Classification of Proteins) was employed for classification of identified protein sequences, and Blast2GO (now OmicsBox) was exercised to generate gene ontology representation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Protein abundance, 2d-page, Low temperature stress, Maize

### Affiliations
Senior Assistant Professor Department of Botany University of Kashmir Hazratbal, Srinagar-190006
University of Kashmir

### Submitter
Salika Ramazan Naik

### Lab Head
Dr Riffat John
Senior Assistant Professor Department of Botany University of Kashmir Hazratbal, Srinagar-190006


