### Accession
PXD033698

### Title
Biochemical and structural insights into SARS-CoV-2 polyprotein processing by Mpro (HDX-MS continuous labeling)

### Description
SARS-CoV-2, a human coronavirus, is the causative agent of the COVID-19 pandemic, entailing enormous disruption worldwide. Its ~30 kb RNA genome is translated into two large polyproteins subsequently cleaved by viral papain-like protease and main protease (Mpro/nsp5). Polyprotein processing is essential yet incompletely understood. We studied Mpro-mediated processing of the nsp7-10/11 polyprotein, whose mature products are cofactors of the viral replicase, identifying the order of cleavages: 1) nsp9-10, 2) nsp8-9/nsp10-11, and 3) nsp7-8. Integrative modeling based on mass spectrometry (including hydrogen-deuterium exchange and cross-linking) and X-ray scattering yielded three-dimensional models of the nsp7-10/11 polyprotein, and the data suggest that the nsp7-10/11 structure in complex with Mpro strongly resembles the unbound polyprotein. Our array of techniques supports the notion that interplay between polyprotein conformation and junction accessibility determine the preference and order of cleavages. Finally, we leveraged assays of limited proteolysis by Mpro of nsp7-11 using a series of inhibitors/binders to characterize Mpro inhibition using a polyprotein substrate.

### Sample Protocol
Experiments with continuous labeling were carried out on a fully automated system (CTC HTS PAL, LEAP Technologies, Carrboro, NC; housed inside a 4 °C cabinet) as previously described with the following modifications. For differential HDX, protein-protein complexes were pre-formed and allowed to incubate 30 min at room temperature prior to analysis. The reactions (5 μL) were mixed with 20 μL of D2O-containing HDX buffer (50 mM HEPES, 500 mM NaCl, 1 mM TCEP, pD 8.4) and incubated at 4 °C for 0 s, 10 s, 30 s, 60 s, 900 s, or 3600 s. Following on-exchange, unwanted forward- or back-exchange was minimized, and the protein was denatured by the addition of 25 μL of a quench solution (5 M urea, 1% TFA, pH 2) before being immediately passed along for online digestion.  Samples were digested through an immobilized pepsin column (prepared in-house) at 50 μL/min (0.1% v/v TFA, 4 °C) and the resulting peptides were trapped and desalted on a 2 mm × 10 mm C8 trap column (Hypersil Gold, ThermoFisher). The bound peptides were then gradient-eluted (4-40% CH3CN v/v and 0.3% v/v formic acid) on a 2.1 mm × 50 mm C18 separation column (Hypersil Gold, ThermoFisher) for 5 min. Sample handling and peptide separation were conducted at 4 °C. The eluted peptides were then subjected to electrospray ionization directly coupled to a high-resolution Orbitrap mass spectrometer (QExactive, ThermoFisher).

### Data Protocol
The intensity weighted mean m/z centroid value of each peptide envelope was calculated and subsequently converted into a percentage of deuterium incorporation. This is accomplished by determining the observed averages of the undeuterated and fully deuterated spectra using the conventional formula described elsewhere (77). The fully deuterated control, 100% deuterium incorporation, was calculated theoretically, and corrections for back-exchange were made on the basis of an estimated 70% deuterium recovery and accounting for 80% final deuterium concentration in the sample (1:5 dilution in D2O HDX buffer). Statistical significance for the differential HDX data is determined by an unpaired t-test for each time point, a procedure that is integrated into the HDX Workbench software.  The HDX data from all overlapping peptides were consolidated to individual amino acid values using a residue averaging approach. Briefly, for each residue, the deuterium incorporation values and peptide lengths from all overlapping peptides were assembled. A weighting function was applied in which shorter peptides were weighted more heavily and longer peptides were weighted less. Each of the weighted deuterium incorporation values were then averaged incorporating this weighting function to produce a single value for each amino acid. The initial two residues of each peptide, as well as prolines, were omitted from the calculations. Deuterium uptake for each peptide is calculated as the average of %D for all on-exchange time points and the difference in average %D values between the unbound and bound samples is presented as a heat map with a color code given at the bottom of the figure (warm colors for deprotection and cool colors for protection). Peptides are colored by the software automatically to display significant differences, determined either by a >5% difference (less or more protection) in average deuterium uptake between the two states, or by using the results of unpaired t-tests at each time point (p-value < 0.05 for any two time points or a p-value < 0.01 for any single time point). Peptides with non-significant changes between the two states are colored gray. The exchange at the first two residues for any given peptide is not colored. Each peptide bar in the heat map view displays the average Δ %D values, associated standard deviation, and the charge state. Additionally, overlapping peptides with a similar protection trend covering the same region are used to rule out data ambiguity.

### Publication Abstract
SARS-CoV-2, a human coronavirus, is the causative agent of the COVID-19 pandemic. Its genome is translated into two large polyproteins subsequently cleaved by viral papain-like protease and main protease (Mpro). Polyprotein processing is essential yet incompletely understood. We studied Mpro-mediated processing of the nsp7-11 polyprotein, whose mature products include cofactors of the viral replicase, and identified the order of cleavages. Integrative modeling based on mass spectrometry (including hydrogen-deuterium exchange and cross-linking) and x-ray scattering yielded a nsp7-11 structural ensemble, demonstrating shared secondary structural elements with individual nsps. The pattern of cross-links and HDX footprint of the C145A Mpro and nsp7-11 complex demonstrate preferential binding of the enzyme active site to the polyprotein junction sites and additional transient contacts to help orient the enzyme on its substrate for cleavage. Last, proteolysis assays were used to characterize the effect of inhibitors/binders on Mpro processing/inhibition using the nsp7-11 polyprotein as substrate.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Hdx-ms, Continuous labeling, Mpro, Polyprotein

### Affiliations
Scripps Research
Professor, Molecular Medicine  Scientific Director UF Scripps Biomedical Research University of Florida

### Submitter
Valentine Courouble

### Lab Head
Dr Patrick R Griffin
Professor, Molecular Medicine  Scientific Director UF Scripps Biomedical Research University of Florida


