### Accession
PXD023565

### Title
Multi-omics analyses reveal that HIV-1 alters CD4 T cell immunometabolism to fuel virus replication

### Description
Human Immunodeficiency Virus type-1 (HIV-1)-infected individuals show metabolic alterations of CD4 T cells through unclear mechanisms with undefined consequences.  We analyzed the transcriptome of CD4 T cells from HIV-1 patients and revealed that elevated oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) pathway is associated with poor outcomes. Inhibition of OXPHOS by the FDA-approved drug metformin, which targets mitochondrial respiratory chain complex I, suppresses HIV-1 replication in human CD4 T cells and humanized mice. In patients, HIV-1 peak viremia positively correlates with the expression of NLRX1, a mitochondrial innate immune receptor. Quantitative proteomics and metabolic analyses reveal that NLRX1 enhances OXPHOS and glycolysis during HIV-1-infection of CD4 T cells to promote viral replication. At the mechanistic level, HIV infection induces the association of NLRX1 with the mitochondrial protein, FASTKD5, to promote the expression of mitochondrial respiratory complex components. This study uncovers the OXPHOS pathway in CD4 T cells as a target for HIV-1 therapy.

### Sample Protocol
AACT/SILAC labeling of cells In brief, the growth media in depletion of lysine and arginine were supplemented with either D4-L-lysine (K4)/13C6-L-arginine (R6) or 13C615N2-L-arginine (K8)/13C615N4-L-arginine (R10), and dialyzed FBS respectively (Sigma-Aldrich cat#616192, cat#643440, cat#608041, cat#608033). Cells were cultured in SILAC medium for at least 5 or more passages to obtain >98% labeling efficiency which was checked by MS before proceeding with experiments.  Protein extraction and in-solution digestion Cells were harvested and lysed in 5x volume of the cell pellets in RIPA buffer (50mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 150mM NaCl, 1% IGEPAL CA630, 0.5% Sodium Deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS, 1 mM EDTA, plus phosphatase inhibitor cocktail, PMSF). Briefly sonicate the lysate (5 x 1s at level 3). Spin down the sample at max speed (14000rpm) for 10 min at 40C and carefully transfer the supernatant into a fresh tube. Protein concentration was  measured by BCA assay. Equal amount of SILAC labeled proteins from different conditions were mixed as one set of 3plex SILAC sample, 3 sets in total. proteins were precipitated by adding 4x volume of cold acetone and stored at -800C for a couple of hours to overnight. The precipitates were brought down at max speed for 10 min at 4 0C. Carefully discard the supernatant. The pellet was washed with 1 ml cold acetone and air-dried at room temperature for 5 min. Then protein pellet was solubilized with 50mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 8M Urea. Shake sample on MateMix for about one hour or until there is no visible precipitation. The mixed protein was first reduced with DTT followed by cysteine alkylation with iodoacetamide, and then diluted fourfold by 25 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 1 mM CaCl2. The diluted protein mixture was digested with  trypsin (Promaga V5113) at a 1:100 ratio overnight at room temperature.  Peptides were desalted with a Sep-Pak C18 Light column (Waters) and dried in speedvac; then peptides were dissolved in 1ml mobile phase A(10mM ammonium formate PH10), and loaded on to a C18 column (Waters, XBridge C18, 250 x 4.6mm, 5µM with 4.6 x 20mm guard column) for high PH reverse phase HPLC fractionation with a 60 min linear gradient from 5%B to 70%B (90% acetonitrile, 10m ammonium formate PH10) at flow rate of 0.5ml/min; 60 fractions were collected and combined into 15 samples which were spin dried in speed vac and cleaned-up with a C18 stage tips. Mass spectrometry analysis  Peptide samples were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid and subjected to nanoLC-MS/MS analysis by using an Easy nLc-1000 system (Thermo) coupled with a Q Exactive Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo). The peptides were loaded on to a 15-cm long, 75µm inner diameter, 3.5µm, 300-Å particle C18 analytical column. Analytical separation of all the tryptic peptides was achieved with a linear gradient of 2–30% buffer B over 180 min at a 250 nl/min flow rate, where buffer A was aqueous 0.1% formic acid, and buffer B was acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. LC-MS experiments were performed in a data-dependent mode with full MS followed by high energy collision-activated dissociation-MS/MS of the top 20 most intense ions.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were processed, and peptide identification was performed using the Andromeda search engine found in MaxQuant software version 1.5.3.17 (Max Planck Institute, Germany). All searches were conducted with a defined modification of cysteine carbamidomethylation, with methionine oxidation and protein amino-terminal acetylation as dynamic modifications. Peptides were confidently identified using a target-decoy approach with a peptide false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% and a protein FDR of 1%. A minimum peptide length of 7 amino acids was required, maximally two missed cleavages were allowed, initial mass deviation for precursor ion was up to 4.5 ppm, and the maximum allowed mass deviation for fragment ions was 0.5 Da. Data processing and statistical analysis were performed on Perseus (Version 1.5.5.1) (Cox and Mann, 2011), functional analysis was performed on IPA (Ingenuity Pathway Analysis)

### Publication Abstract
Individuals infected with human immunodeficiency virus type-1 (HIV-1) show metabolic alterations of CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells through unclear mechanisms with undefined consequences. We analyzed the transcriptome of CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells from patients with HIV-1 and revealed that the elevated oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) pathway is associated with poor outcomes. Inhibition of OXPHOS by the US Food and Drug Administration-approved drug metformin, which targets mitochondrial respiratory chain complex-I, suppresses HIV-1 replication in human CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells and humanized mice. In patients, HIV-1 peak viremia positively correlates with the expression of NLRX1, a mitochondrial innate immune receptor. Quantitative proteomics and metabolic analyses reveal that NLRX1 enhances OXPHOS and glycolysis during HIV-1-infection of CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells to promote viral replication. At the mechanistic level, HIV infection induces the association of NLRX1 with the mitochondrial protein FASTKD5 to promote expression of mitochondrial respiratory complex components. This study uncovers the OXPHOS pathway in CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells as a target for HIV-1 therapy.

### Keywords
Nlrx1, Hiv-1, Oxidative phosphorylation, Fastkd5, Cd4 t cell, Virus replication

### Affiliations
William R. Kenan,JR. distinguished professor, Genetics co-director, Inflammatory diseases institute director, Center for translational immunology,University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Postdoctoral Research Associate

### Submitter
Li Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Jenny PY Ting
William R. Kenan,JR. distinguished professor, Genetics co-director, Inflammatory diseases institute director, Center for translational immunology,University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill


