### Accession
PXD036542

### Title
Succinate mediates inflammation-induced adrenocortical dysfunction

### Description
Inflammation leads the hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis activation and increased production of glucocorticoids, which produced by the adrenal cortex, exert potent anti-inflammatory effects. The use of omics, including proteomics revealed metabolic changes in steroidogenic adrenocortical cells, including downregulation of the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle and oxidative phosphorylation, decreased ATP production and induction of oxidative stress after lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced inflammation.

### Sample Protocol
Adrenocortical cells from 12 animals were sorted as CD31-negative / CD45-negative, in PBS + 0.5% BSA + 2mM EDTA, and samples were randomized. The gel-based sample preparation protocol was followed, and proteins were digested using trypsin/Lys-C mix O/N.After drying, peptides were redissolved in 0.1% Formic acid, 75ng were loaded into EvoTips And run on a 15 cm x 75 µm, 1.9 µm Performance Column. Peptides were analyzed by the TimsTof pro2 mass spectrometer with the diaPASEF method

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed using DIA-NN using the mouse_UP000000589_10090 fasta database from uniport. Deep learning was used to generate the in silico spectral library and the Mass Spectrometry Downstream Analysis Pipeline (MS-DAP) (version beta 0.2.5.1) was used for quality control and candidate discovery with an FDR of 0.01. Differential abundance analysis between groups was performed on log transformed protein abundances.

### Publication Abstract
The hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis is activated in response to inflammation leading to increased production of anti-inflammatory glucocorticoids by the adrenal cortex, thereby representing an endogenous feedback loop. However, severe inflammation reduces the responsiveness of the adrenal gland to adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), although the underlying mechanisms are poorly understood. Here, we show by transcriptomic, proteomic, and metabolomic analyses that LPS-induced systemic inflammation triggers profound metabolic changes in steroidogenic adrenocortical cells, including downregulation of the TCA cycle and oxidative phosphorylation, in mice. Inflammation disrupts the TCA cycle at the level of succinate dehydrogenase (SDH), leading to succinate accumulation and disturbed steroidogenesis. Mechanistically, IL-1&#x3b2; reduces SDHB expression through upregulation of DNA methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1) and methylation of the <i>SDHB</i> promoter. Consequently, increased succinate levels impair oxidative phosphorylation and ATP synthesis and enhance ROS production, leading to reduced steroidogenesis. Together, we demonstrate that the IL-1&#x3b2;-DNMT1-SDHB-succinate axis disrupts steroidogenesis. Our findings not only provide a mechanistic explanation for adrenal dysfunction in severe inflammation, but also offer a potential target for therapeutic intervention.

### Keywords
Tca cycle, Glucocorticoids, Succinate, Proteomics, Adrenal gland, Lipopolysaccharide (lps)

### Affiliations
Center of Neurogenomics and Cognitive Research (CNCR), Department of Molecular and Cellular Neurobiology, Vrije Universiteit, Amsterdam, Netherlands
Center for Neurogenomics and Cognitive Research, Department of Molecular and Cellular Neurobiology, Amsterdam Neuroscience, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, 1081 HV Amsterdam, The Netherlands.


### Submitter
Evangelia Thanou

### Lab Head
Dr Ka Wan Li
Center of Neurogenomics and Cognitive Research (CNCR), Department of Molecular and Cellular Neurobiology, Vrije Universiteit, Amsterdam, Netherlands


