### Accession
PXD020808

### Title
Mass spectrometric detection of proteins associated with lymph node metastasis in T1/2 colorectal cancer from FFPE archival specimens

### Description
Surgical resection of colorectal cancers (CRC) that have not invaded beyond the bowel wall (i.e. Stage I) can achieve 5-year patient survival rates exceeding 90%. In the majority of Stage I cases with T1 (submucosal) or T2 (not beyond the muscularis propria) depth of tumour invasion, surgery alone is curative. However, for approximately 10% of resected T1/2 CRC, even though histopathology inspection of the tumour deems it to be restricted to the bowel wall, malignant cells are identified in draining lymph nodes, signifying local metastasis. These patients are classified with Stage IIIA disease and are at greater risk than Stage I patients whose tumours show similar invasive depth, but lack lymph node involvement. To counter the risk of distant malignant dissemination, Stage IIIA patients require more extensive treatment with adjuvant chemotherapy, while Stage I patients do not.  In this study we aim to get a better understanding of the underlying biological pathways linked to lymph node metastasis (LNM) using discovery based MS (DIA) and RNASeq as well as IHC and PRM to verify possible protein marker. All of this was done on archival tissue samples (FFPE).

### Sample Protocol
FFPE tumour blocks  were cut into 10 µm sections and mounted on uncharged glass slides. The number of sections per sample was determined based on the size of tumour area, this ranged from 4-10 slides. The first section of each sample was stained with H&E and examined by a pathologist who marked the tumour area. Following this, tumour sections were  macrodissected on slides using a scalpel and collected.  To remove the paraffin, 1 mL xylene was added to each tube, agitated for 5 min and xylene discarded. 1 mL 100% ethanol was added and agitated for 5 min and discarded. The tissue pellet was briefly airdried before adding 250 µL lysis buffer (0.2M Tris-HCl pH 8). The samples were sonicated using a probe sonicator at 35% power for 30 sec. After sonication SDS was added to a final concentration of 2% w/v. The sonicated samples were incubated at 100 °C for 60 min. Samples were reduced using 25 mM final concentration Dithiothreitol (DTT) and incubated at 56 °C for 30 min. After cooling to room temperature Iodoacetamide (IAA) was added to a final concentration of 75 mM and incubated for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Lysates were further processed using the SP3 protocol. Briefly, magnetic beads were added at a ratio of 10:1 ug beads:protein to each sample under the assumption that each sample contained 50 µg protein. Samples were incubated for 10 min in a thermomixer at 24 °C at 1000 rpm. 100% ethanol was added to a final concentration of 50%. Samples were incubated on a magnetic rack for 2 min and the supernatant discarded. 200 µL 80% ethanol was added to each sample and agitated. Samples were incubated for 2 min on a magnetic rack and the supernatant discarded. This washing step was repeated an additional two times. After the last washing step the beads were briefly airdried before adding 100 µL digestion buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, with 1:25 µg Trypsin:protein). Samples were digested over night at 37 °C. Supernatants were transferred to new tubes with an equal  volume of 4M KCl solution added to precipitate any remaining SDS. The samples were filtered through a 30 kDa MWCO filter before desalting using HLB columns as described by the manufacturer.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were transformed into mzml files and demultiplexed using msconvert (Proteowizard). The following analysis was done using these mzml-files. EncyclopeDIA v.0.9 was used to generate a list of theoretical peptides using 33 NCE (this is the equivalent of 27 NCE on a QExactive HF-X system) and a default charge state of 2 from a human protein FASTA database generated in August 2019 from UniProt and allowing a maximum of 1 missed cleavage. The list was used to predict peptides and their fragments based on the Prosit algorithm to generate a spectral library. EncyclopeDIA was used to generate a chromatogram library based on the 6 gas-phase fractionations of the pooled sample using the Prosit library and the corresponding human FASTA database as background. The target decoy approach was set to normal, non-overlapping DIA was set as acquisition type, Trypsin was set as enzyme, fragmentation type was set to HCD using y- and b-ions, precursor-, fragment- and library mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm, FDR was determined using Percolator v3-01, the number of quantitative ions was set to 5 and the minimum number of quantitative ions was set to 3. The generated chromatogram library was then used to analyse the 21 quantitative wide-window DIA data of each sample using the same parameters in EncyclopeDIA as stated above. The analysed data was saved as .elib file which was imported together with the 21 mzml files into Skyline v.20.1.0.155. ProteinProphet was used to determine the quantitative FDR of each peptide. MSStats was used to filter out peptides with more than 1% quantitative FDR and generate protein abundances using the quantitative values of peptides from Skyline. Statistical analysis of the protein abundances for each sample was done in Perseus v.1.6.5.0 and the computational environment R v.3.6.3 as well as in Excel 2016.

### Publication Abstract
Histological risk factors for lymph node metastasis (LNM) in early-stage colorectal cancers (CRC) have been described, although the predictive utility of these factors varies. Improved LNM risk assessment based on findings in endoscopic colon and rectal excisions is necessary for optimal surgical management of CRC patients with pathologic T1- /T2-staged invasive depth (i.e., tumor not invading beyond the muscularis propria layer); as the current system is overly conservative, and results in many unnecessary radical surgeries. To identify molecular features in early CRC with elevated LNM potential, we carried out proteomic and gene expression profiling to compare T1 lymph node (LN) negative with T1/2 LN positive CRC tumors from formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) specimens. Using a data-independent acquisition mass spectrometry workflow, we detected over 7400 proteins and quantified over 4400 in all 21 specimens. Proteins from tumors with LN metastasis were enriched with effectors of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and gene expression profiling confirmed activation of key transcription factors, SNAI1 and ZEB1, as well as a reduction in E-cadherin expression. Toward an implementation pathway, we investigated immunohistochemistry assays targeting four EMT-related proteins. While MS could reliably discern twofold protein abundance changes, we found the semiquantitative nature of IHC scoring limited confirmation of this degree of protein expression difference. This study demonstrated that EMT effectors are associated with locoregional metastasis in T1/T2 CRC and could be used to augment metastatic risk assessment, although further developments are required to enable routine implementation.

### Keywords
Ffpe, Colorectal cancer, Prm, Dia

### Affiliations
The University of Sydney
The University of Sydney, Department of Medicine & Health, Kolling Institute

### Submitter
Pascal Steffen

### Lab Head
Dr Mark P. Molloy
The University of Sydney, Department of Medicine & Health, Kolling Institute


