### Accession
PXD039426

### Title
Analysis of CDPK1 targets identifies a trafficking adaptor complex that regulates microneme exocytosis in Toxoplasma

### Description
Apicomplexan parasites use Ca2+-regulated exocytosis to secrete essential virulence factors from specialized organelles called micronemes. Ca2+-dependent protein kinases (CDPKs) are required for microneme exocytosis; however, the molecular events that regulate trafficking and fusion of micronemes with the plasma membrane remain unresolved. Here, we combine sub-minute resolution phosphoproteomics and bio-orthogonal labeling of kinase substrates in Toxoplasma gondii to identify 163 proteins phosphorylated in a CDPK1-dependent manner. In addition to known regulators of secretion, we identify uncharacterized targets with predicted functions across signaling, gene expression, trafficking, metabolism, and ion homeostasis. One of the CDPK1 targets is a putative HOOK activating adaptor. In other eukaryotes, HOOK homologs form the FHF complex with FTS and FHIP to activate dynein-mediated trafficking of endosomes along microtubules. We show the FHF complex is partially conserved in T. gondii, consisting of HOOK, an FTS homolog, and two parasite-specific proteins (TGGT1_306920 and TGGT1_316650). CDPK1 kinase activity and HOOK are required for the rapid apical trafficking of micronemes as parasites initiate motility. Moreover, parasites lacking HOOK or FTS display impaired microneme protein secretion, leading to a block in the invasion of host cells. Taken together, our work provides a comprehensive catalog of CDPK1 targets and reveals how vesicular trafficking has been tuned to support a parasitic lifestyle.

### Sample Protocol
T. gondii tachyzoites from the CDPK1-AID strain were used to infect 15 cm dishes. Approximately 24 hrs later, the media was replaced with media containing 1 µM compound 1 to synchronize parasites. On day 2, compound 1-treated dishes were washed once with warm PBS and incubated with 10 mL of warm FluoroBrite for 10 min at 37°C. Infected HFFs were scraped and passed through a 27G needle to mechanically liberate parasites and passed through a 5 µm filter. Parasites were pelleted and resuspended in 10 mL of FluoroBrite and counted (2.25 x 10^9  parasites). Parasites were pelleted in 2 mL of FluoroBrite. 1 mL of parasites were diluted into a total volume of 40 mL of FluoroBrite containing either auxin or vehicle of PBS and incubated at 37°C for 3.5 hrs. After confirming depletion of CDPK1 by flow cytometry, parasites were pelleted and resuspended in 210 µL of 500 µM auxin or vehicle of PBS diluted in FluoroBrite. To obtain a time course, the 0 sec time point was first collected by mixing 16 µL of parasites with 4 µL of 5X DMSO (0.5% DMSO in FluoroBrite) and immediately lysed with 20 µL of 2X Lysis Buffer (10% SDS, 100 mM TEAB pH 7.5, 2 mM MgCl2, and 2X HALT protease and phosphatase inhibitors). To obtain the 9, 30, and 300 sec time points, 80 µL of parasites in 1.5 mL tubes were incubated in a ThermoMixer (Eppendorf) set to 37°C. The parasites were stimulated by adding 20 µL of warmed 5X zaprinast (500 µM zaprinast in FluoroBrite) or a vehicle of 5X DMSO. At each time point, 20 µL of stimulated parasites were transferred directly into 20 µL of 2X Lysis Buffer to quench the reaction. Lysates were treated with benzonase at a final concentration of 5 units/µL to remove DNA and were immediately subjected to protein cleanup and digestion. Proteins were prepared for mass spectrometry using a modified version of the S-trap protocol (Protifi). Proteins in lysates were reduced with 5 mM TCEP for 10 min at 55°C and alkylated with 15 mM MMTS for 10 min at room temperature. The lysates were acidified to a final concentration of 1.2% v/v phosphoric acid. A 6X volume of S-trap binding buffer (90% methanol, 100 mM TEAB, pH 7.55) was mixed to each sample to precipitate proteins. The solution was loaded onto S-trap micro columns (Protifi) until all the solution had passed through the column. The columns were washed four times with 150 µL of S-trap binding buffer and centrifuged between each wash. Proteins were digested on-column with 0.75 µg of trypsin (Promega) in 50 mM TEAB pH 8.5 overnight at 37°C in a humidified incubator. Digested peptides were eluted in three steps at 4,000 x g for 1 min: 40 µL of 50 mM TEAB, 40 µL of 0.2% formic acid, and 35 µL of 50% acetonitrile/0.2% formic acid. The peptide concentrations of eluted peptides were quantified using the Pierce Fluorometric Peptide Assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to manufacturer’s instructions. The remaining samples were frozen in liquid nitrogen and lyophilized. Lyophilized peptides were resuspended in 100 mM TEAB pH 8.5 to peptide concentrations of 1.6 µg/µL. TMTpro reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific; A44522 LOT# VI306829) were resuspended in acetonitrile to 25 µg/µL. 80 µg of peptides in 50 µL were combined with 250 µg of TMTpro reagent in 10 µL to achieve approximately a 3:1 label:peptide weight/weight ratio. The TMTpro labels were assigned to minimize reporter ion interference and inter batch variability in the following scheme: Replicate 1 auxin: 0, 9, 30, 300 sec (126, 128C 130C, 132C); Replicate 1 vehicle: 0, 9, 30, 300 sec (127N, 129N, 131N, 133N); Replicate 2 auxin: 0, 9, 30, 300 sec (127C, 129C, 131C, 133C); Replicate 2 vehicle: 0, 9, 30, 300 sec (128N, 130N, 132N, 134). The zaprinast and DMSO samples were incubated for 1 hr at room temperature shaking at 400 rpm. Unreacted TMTpro reagent was quenched with hydroxylamine at a final concentration of 0.2%. The samples were pooled, acidified to 3% with formic acid, and were processed using the EasyPep Maxi Sample Prep column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. 5% of the eluate volume was reserved as the unenriched proteome sample. The remaining eluted peptides were frozen in liquid nitrogen and lyophilized. The enriched and unenriched samples were fractionated with the Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to manufacturer instructions for TMT-labeled peptides. The acetonitrile wash was omitted for enriched samples to prevent loss of phosphopeptides. The eluted peptides from the High-Select TiO2 Phosphopeptide Enrichment and High-Select Fe-NTA Phosphopeptide Enrichment were pooled prior to fractionation. 100 µg of unenriched samples were fractionated. 8 fractions were collected for each TMTpro set: zaprinast phosphoproteome (enriched) [1], zaprinast proteome (unenriched) [2], DMSO phosphoproteome (enriched) [3], and DMSO proteome (unenriched) [4]. The fractions were frozen in liquid nitrogen and lyophilized.

### Data Protocol
Lyophilized peptides were resuspended in approximately 15 µL (enriched) or 50 µL (unenriched) of 0.1% formic acid and were analyzed on an Exploris 480 Orbitrap mass spectrometer equipped with a FAIMS Pro source (Bekker-Jensen et al., 2020) connected to an EASY-nLC 1200 chromatography system using 0.1% formic acid as Buffer A and 80% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid as Buffer B. Peptides were loaded onto a heated analytical column (ES900, Thermo, PepMap RSLC C18 3 µm, 100 Å, 75 µm x 15 cm, 40°C) via trap column (164946, Thermo, Acclaim PepMap C18 3 µm, 100 Å, 75 µm x 20 mm nanoViper). Peptides were separated at 300 nL/min. Enriched samples were separated on a gradient of 5–20% B for 110 min, 20–28% B for 10 min, 28–95% B for 10 min, 95% B for 10 min, 95–2% B for 2 min, 2% B for 2 min, 2–98% B for 2 min, 98% B for 2 min, 98–2% B for 2 min, and 2% B for 2 min. Unenriched samples were separated on a gradient of 5–25% B for 110 min, 25–40% B for 10 min, 40–95% B for 10 min, 95% B for 10 min, 95–2% B for 2 min, 2% B for 2 min, 2–98% B for 2 min, 98% B for 2 min, 98–2% B for 2 min, and 2% B for 2 min. The orbitrap and FAIMS were operated in positive ion mode with a positive ion voltage of 1800V; with an ion transfer tube temperature of 270°C; using a standard FAIMS resolution and compensation voltage of -50 and -65V, an inner electrode temperature of 100°C and outer electrode temperature 80°C with 4.5 mL/min carrier gas. DDA analysis was performed with a cycle time of 1.5 sec. Full scan spectra were acquired in profile mode at a resolution of 60,000, with a scan range of 400–1400 m/z, 300% AGC target, maximum injection time of 50 msec, intensity threshold of 5 x 104, 2–5 charge state, dynamic exclusion of 30 sec, mass tolerance of 10 ppm, purity threshold of 70%, and purity window of 0.7. MS2 spectra were generated with a HCD collision energy of 32 at a resolution of 45,000 using TurboTMT settings with a first mass at 110 m/z, an isolation window of 0.7 m/z, 200% AGC target, and maximum injection time of 120 msec. Raw files were analyzed in Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) to generate peak lists and protein and peptide IDs using Sequest HT (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the ToxoDB release 49 GT1 protein database. The maximum missed cleavage sites for trypsin was limited to 2. Precursor and fragment mass tolerances were 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively. The following modifications were included in the search: dynamic oxidation (+15.995 Da; M), dynamic phosphorylation (+79.966 Da; S,T,Y), dynamic acetylation (+42.011 Da; N-terminus), static TMTpro (+304.207 Da; any N-terminus), static TMTpro (+304.207 Da; K), and static methylthio (+45.988 Da; C). TMTpro 16plex isotope correction values were accounted for (Thermo Fisher Scientific; A44522 LOT# VI306829). Peptides identified in each sample were filtered by Percolator to achieve a maximum FDR of 0.01 (Käll et al., 2008a, 2008b, 2007). Site localization scores were generated using ptmRS, with phosphoRS and use of diagnostic ions set to true (Taus et al., 2011). Reporter ion quantification used an integration tolerance of 20 ppm on the most confident centroid. For reporter ion quantification, unique peptides were quantified using a co-isolation threshold of 50, and average reporter signal-to-noise ratio of 10. Abundances were normalized on the total protein amount. Protein level and peptide level ratios were generated for each time point relative to 0 sec vehicle-treated parasites stimulated with DMSO.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
T. gondii, Signaling, Vesicular trafficking

### Affiliations
Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research
Department of Biology, Massachusetts Insitute of Technology
Associate Professor, Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Whitehead Institute of Biomedical Research (lab head)

### Submitter
Alex Chan

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Sebastian Lourido
Associate Professor, Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Whitehead Institute of Biomedical Research (lab head)


