### Accession
PXD014665

### Title
MKLP2 walks along microtubules and takes the CPC along for a ride

### Description
The mitotic kinesin-like Protein 2 (MKLP2, KIF20A) is essential for the proper execution of cytokinesis and required to ‘passage’ the chromosomal passenger complex (CPC) from the chromosomes in (pro)metaphase to the spindle midzone and equatorial cortex in anaphase. Together with MKLP1 (KIF23) and MPP1 (KIF20B), MKLP2 forms the kinesin-6 subfamily of motor proteins. Whilst MKLP1 and MPP1 are both plus-end directed processive motors, the typical structure of the MKLP2 motor domain along with the extended neck-linker region, suggested that MKLP2 might not be able to function as a transport motor but is more likely to act as a microtubule bundler. This notion contradicts the prevailing hypothesis that MKLP2 can transport the CPC in anaphase, but appears to be in line with in vitro and in cellulo studies showing that recombinant MKLP2 efficiently bundles microtubules, and that knock-down of MKLP2, disturbs the organization of the anaphase spindle midzone. Using TIRF microscopy and purified fluorescent proteins, we here demonstrate that MKLP2 is a plus-end directed processive motor that can transport the CPC along microtubules in vitro. Live imaging of MKLP2::GFP and INCENP::GFP in early anaphase cells revealed that a fraction of both MKLP2 and INCENP displays directed movements towards the (equatorial) cortex. In line, inhibition of MKLP2 ATPase activity at the start of anaphase disturbed the localization of MKLP2 and CPC at the equatorial cortex. Our data suggest that MKLP2 is a processive microtubule-based motor that transports itself and the CPC to the equatorial cortex.

### Sample Protocol
After purification, proteins were on‐bead digested in 2M Urea, 50 mM Ammonium BiCarbonate (ABC) containing 10 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP) and 40mM 2-chloro-acetamide and finally desalted with homemade C-18 stagetips (3M, St Paul, MN). Peptides were separated on a 30 cm pico-tip column (75µm ID, New Objective) in-house packed with 1.9 µm aquapur gold C-18 material (dr. Maisch) using 240 gradient (7% to 80% ACN 0.1% FA), delivered by an easy-nLC 1000 (Thermo), and electro-sprayed directly into a Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The latter was set in data dependent Top speed mode with a cycle time of 1 second, in which the full scan over the 400-1500 mass range was performed at a resolution of 240000. Most intense ions (intensity threshold of 5000 ions) were isolated by the quadrupole and fragmented with a HCD collision energy of 30%. The maximum injection time of the ion trap was set to 50 milliseconds with injection of ions for all available parallelizable time.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed with Maxquant software, version 1.6.3.4. For identification, the mouse Uniprot database was searched with oxidation of and carbamidomethylation of cysteine set as fixed modification, while peptide and protein false discovery rates were set to 1%.

### Publication Abstract
During cytokinesis, signals from the anaphase spindle direct the formation and position of a contractile ring at the cell cortex [1]. The chromosomal passenger complex (CPC) participates in cytokinesis initiation by signaling from the spindle midzone and equatorial cortex [2], but the mechanisms underlying the anaphase-specific CPC localization are currently unresolved. Accumulation of the CPC at these sites requires the presence of microtubules and the mitotic kinesin-like protein 2, MKLP2 (KIF20A), a member of the kinesin-6 family [2-7], and this has led to the hypothesis that the CPC is transported along microtubules by MKLP2 [3-5, 7]. However, the structure of the MKLP2 motor domain with its extended neck-linker region suggests that this kinesin might not be able to drive processive transport [8, 9]. Furthermore, experiments in Xenopus egg extracts indicated that the CPC might be transported by kinesin-4, KIF4A [10]. Finally, CPC-MKLP2 complexes might be directly recruited to the equatorial cortex via association with actin and myosin II, independent of kinesin activity [4, 8]. Using microscopy-based assays with purified proteins, we demonstrate that MKLP2 is a processive plus-end directed motor that can transport the CPC along microtubules in&#xa0;vitro. In cells, strong suppression of MKLP2-dependent CPC motility by expression of an MKLP2 P-loop mutant perturbs CPC accumulation at both the spindle midzone and equatorial cortex, whereas a weaker inhibition of MKLP2 motor using Paprotrain mainly affects CPC localization to the equatorial cortex. Our data indicate that control of cytokinesis initiation by the CPC requires its directional MKLP2-dependent transport.

### Keywords
Motor proteins, Mklp2, Chromosomal passenger complex

### Affiliations
Oncode Institute and Center for Molecular Medicine, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
University Medical Center Utrecht
Dept. Molecular Cancer Research




### Submitter
Harmjan Vos

### Lab Head
Dr Susanne M. A. Lens
Oncode Institute and Center for Molecular Medicine, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands.


