### Accession
PXD014865

### Title
Phosphoproteomic analysis of neonatal regenerative myocardium revealed important roles of CHK1 via activating mTORC1/P70S6K pathway

### Description
Restoring the regenerative capacity of myocardium, which presents shortly in the newborns but lost in adulthood, is one of the therapeutic options for myocardial repair post various insults. In this work, we performed the phosphoproteomic analysis on neonatal regenerative myocardium and explored the Kinase-substrate network in neonatal myocardium to define potential signaling, which might be responsible for the transient regenerative capacity in the newborn mice.

### Sample Protocol
For MI group, myocardium of infarct border zone from 8 mice at 6dpi was prepared. For Sham group, myocardium of the similar zone from 8 mice at 6 days post-operation was prepared. All samples for quantitative proteomics and phosphoprotemics were lysed in urea lysis buffer. After sonication and centrifugation, disulfide bonds were reduced at 56 °C for 25 min in 5 mM DTT, then alkylated in the dark at room temperature for 30 min in 14 mM iodoacetamide. The proteins were digested at 37 °C with trypsin in a 1:200 enzyme to protein ratio for 16 hours and subsequently quenched by trifluoroacetic acid. The digested peptides were desalted by tC18 Sep-Pak column. For TMT 6-Plex labeling, purified peptides from each biological replicate were resuspended in 200 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate and subsequently labeled by TMT 6-Plex labeling reagent. After labeling, all six samples were mixed and desalted by tC18 Sep-Pak column. For quantitative proteomics, TMT-labeled peptide mixture was reconstituted and subjected to fractionation by a XBridge BEH C18 column with the UltiMate 3000 HPLC system, 30 fractions were collected by using nonadjacent pooling scheme. For quantification of phosphopeptide, TMT-labeled peptide mixture was reconstituted and subjected to fractionation by a XBridge BEH C18 column with the Agilent 1260 system, 15 fractions were collected by using nonadjacent pooling scheme and dried by vacuum concentration for further enrichment of phosphopeptide. TMT-labeled phosphopeptides were enriched through IMAC (Immobilized metal affinity chromatography) and consecutive TiO2 (Titanium dioxide) methods. The eluates of phosphopeptides were dried and desalted by C18 StageTips. For MS analyses, peptides were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid and analyzed using a LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) coupled to the Easy-nLC 1000.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were searched against the mouse protein sequences obtained from the Universal Protein Resource (UniProt) database by MaxQuant software (version 1.3.0.5). False discovery rates (FDR) cut-offs were set to 0.01 for proteins, peptides and sites. 

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Quantitative phosphoproteomics; neonatal myocardium; regeneration; chk1; cardiac myocyte.

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Department of Histology and Embryology, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China.
Nanjing Medical University

### Submitter
Yiwei Cheng

### Lab Head
Dr Xuejiang Guo
State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Department of Histology and Embryology, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China.


