### Accession
PXD029417

### Title
Interactomic analysis of PEAK3 pseudo-kinase

### Description
The aim of the project was to identify the interactome of PEAK3 pseudokinase that was expressed in various cancer cells.

### Sample Protocol
U2OS, HeLa and THP1 cell lines that stably express GFP- and Strep-tagged (ST)-PEAK3 were obtained by transfection of the pBABE-GFP-PEAK3 and pSBbi-PUR-ST-PEAK3 constructs, respectively, with TurboFect™, followed by puromycin selection. Cell-lystaes were incubated with streptavidin beads (Lifescience) overnight, and washed three times with lysis buffer and once with washing buffer (50mM Tris pH7.5 and 50mM NaCl). PEAK3 complexes were eluted with 2.5mM biotin in 50mM Tris pH8 and 0.5 mM EDTA, and processed for mass spectrometry (MS) analysis. Peptides obtained after digestion were analyzed using a Qexactive-HFX system coupled with a RSLC-U3000 nano HPLC. Desalting and pre-concentration of the samples were performed on-line on a Pepmap® precolumn (0.3 mm x 10 mm). A gradient consisting of 6-25% B for 100 min, 25-40% in 20 min, 40-90% in 2 min (A = 0.1% formic acid ; B = 0.1 % formic acid in 80% acetonitrile) at 300 nl/min was used to elute peptides from the capillary (0.075 mm x 250 mm) reverse-phase column (Pepmap®, ThermoFisherScientific), fitted with a stainless steel emitter (Thermo Sientific). Spectra were acquired with the instrument operating in the data-dependent acquisition mode throughout the HPLC gradient. MS scans were acquired with resolution set at a value of 60,000. Up to twelve of the most intense ions per cycle were fragmented and analyzed using a resolution of 30,0000. Peptide fragmentation was performed using nitrogen gas on the most abundant and at least doubly charged ions detected in the initial MS scan and an dynamic exclusion time of 20 s.

### Data Protocol
Analysis was performed using the MaxQuant software (version 1.5.5.1). All MS/MS spectra were searched using Andromeda against a decoy database consisting of a combination of Homo sapiens reference proteome (release 2019_02 www.uniprot.org) and 250 classical contaminants, containing forward and reverse entities. A maximum of 2 missed cleavages were allowed. The search was performed allowing the following variable modifications: Oxidation (M) and Acetyl (Protein N-term). Carbamidomethyl (C) was use as fixed modification. FDR was set at 0.01 for peptides and proteins and the minimal peptide length at 7.

### Publication Abstract
The PEAK1 and Pragmin/PEAK2 pseudo-kinases have emerged as important components of the protein tyrosine kinase pathway implicated in cancer progression. They can signal using a scaffolding mechanism that involves a conserved split helical dimerization (SHED) module. We recently identified PEAK3 as a novel member of this family based on structural homology; however, its signaling mechanism remains unclear. In this study, we found that, although it can self-associate, PEAK3 shows higher evolutionary divergence than PEAK1/2. Moreover, the PEAK3 protein is strongly expressed in human hematopoietic cells and is upregulated in acute myeloid leukemia. Functionally, PEAK3 overexpression in U2OS sarcoma cells enhanced their growth and migratory properties, while its silencing in THP1 leukemic cells reduced these effects. Importantly, an intact SHED module was required for these PEAK3 oncogenic activities. Mechanistically, through a phosphokinase survey, we identified PEAK3 as a novel inducer of AKT signaling, independent of growth-factor stimulation. Then, proteomic analyses revealed that PEAK3 interacts with the signaling proteins GRB2 and ASAP1/2 and the protein kinase PYK2, and that these interactions require the SHED domain. Moreover, PEAK3 activated PYK2, which promoted PEAK3 tyrosine phosphorylation, its association with GRB2 and ASAP1, and AKT signaling. Thus, the PEAK1-3 pseudo-kinases may use a conserved SHED-dependent mechanism to activate specific signaling proteins to promote oncogenesis.

### Keywords
Pseudo-kinase, Signalling protein, Adhesive protein, Oncogene

### Affiliations
Centre de Recherche en Biologie Cellulaire de Montpellier, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Université de Montpellier, Montpellier, France.
FPP CNRS

### Submitter
Functional Proteomics Platform FPP

### Lab Head
Dr Serge Roche
Centre de Recherche en Biologie Cellulaire de Montpellier, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Université de Montpellier, Montpellier, France.


