### Accession
PXD027964

### Title
Nicotinamide N-methyltransferase promotes metastatic colonisation via cancer cell stromal mimicry

### Description
Nicotinamide N-methyltransferase promotes metastatic colonisation via cancer cell stromal mimicry.

### Sample Protocol
SUM159PT cells were collected and lysed in 50 µl lysis buffer (1% sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 0.1 M TRIS, 10 mM TCEP, pH = 8.5) using strong ultra-sonication (10 cycles, Bioruptor, Diagnode). Protein concentration was determined by BCA assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a small sample aliquot. Sample aliquots containing 50 µg of total proteins were reduced for 10 min at 95 °C and alkylated at 15 mM chloroacetamide for 30 min at 37 °C. Proteins were digested by incubation with sequencing-grade modified trypsin (1/50, w/w; Promega, Madison, Wisconsin) overnight at 37°C. Then, the peptides were cleaned up using iST cartridges (PreOmics, Munich, Germany) according to the manufacturer’s instructions using an RESOLVEX® A200 positive pressure workstation (Tecan Group Ltd., Männedorf, Switzerland). Samples were dried under vacuum and stored at -80 °C until further use. Sample aliquots comprising 5 μg of peptides were labeled with isobaric tandem mass tags (TMTpro 16-plex, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were resuspended in 10 μl labeling buffer (2 M urea, 0.2 M HEPES, pH 8.3) by sonication and 2.5 μL of each TMT reagent were added to the individual peptide samples followed by a 1 h incubation at 25°C shaking at 500 rpm. To control for ratio distortion during quantification, a peptide calibration mixture consisting of six digested standard proteins mixed in different amounts was added to each sample before TMT labeling as previously described72. To quench the labelling reaction, 0.75 μL aqueous 1.5 M hydroxylamine solution was added and samples were incubated for another 5 min at 25°C shaking at 500 rpm followed by pooling of all samples. The pH of the sample pool was increased to 11.9 by adding 1 M phosphate buffer (pH 12) and incubated for 20 min at 25°C shaking at 500 rpm to remove TMT labels linked to peptide hydroxyl groups. Subsequently, the reaction was stopped by adding 2 M hydrochloric acid until a pH < 2 was reached. Finally, peptide samples were further acidified using 5 % TFA, desalted using Sep-Pak Vac 1cc (50 mg) C18 cartridges (Waters) according to the manufacturer’s instructions and dried under vacuum. TMT-labeled peptides were fractionated by high-pH reversed phase separation using a XBridge Peptide BEH C18 column (3,5 µm, 130 Å, 1 mm x 150 mm, Waters) on an Agilent 1260 Infinity HPLC system. Peptides were loaded on column in buffer A (20 mM ammonium formate in water, pH 10) and eluted using a two-step linear gradient from 2% to 10% in 5 minutes and then to 50% buffer B (20 mM ammonium formate in 90% acetonitrile, pH 10) over 55 minutes at a flow rate of 42 µl/min. Elution of peptides was monitored with a UV detector (215 nm, 254 nm) and a total of 36 fractions were collected, pooled into 12 fractions using a post-concatenation strategy as previously described76 and dried under vacuum. Dried peptides were resuspended in 0.1% aqueous formic acid and subjected to LC–MS/MS analysis using a Q Exactive HF Mass Spectrometer fitted with an EASY-nLC 1000 (both Thermo Fisher Scientific) and a custom-made column heater set to 60°C. Peptides were resolved using a RP-HPLC column (75μm × 30cm) packed in-house with C18 resin (ReproSil-Pur C18–AQ, 1.9 μm resin; Dr. Maisch GmbH) at a flow rate of 0.2 μLmin-1. The following gradient was used for peptide separation: from 5% B to 15% B over 10 min to 30% B over 60 min to 45 % B over 20 min to 95% B over 2 min followed by 18 min at 95% B. Buffer A was 0.1% formic acid in water and buffer B was 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in water. The mass spectrometer was operated in DDA mode with a total cycle time of approximately 1 s. Each MS1 scan was followed by high-collision-dissociation (HCD) of the 10 most abundant precursor ions with dynamic exclusion set to 30 seconds. For MS1, 3e6 ions were accumulated in the Orbitrap over a maximum time of 100 ms and scanned at a resolution of 120,000 FWHM (at 200 m/z). MS2 scans were acquired at a target setting of 1e5 ions, maximum accumulation time of 100 ms and a resolution of 30,000 FWHM (at 200 m/z). Singly charged ions and ions with unassigned charge state were excluded from triggering MS2 events. The normalized collision energy was set to 30%, the mass isolation window was set to 1.1 m/z and one microscan was acquired for each spectrum.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw-files were analysed using the SpectroMine software (Biognosis AG, Schlieren, Switzerland). Spectra were searched against a human database consisting of 20,350 protein sequences (SwissProt entries downloaded from Uniprot on 2020/4/17) and 392 commonly observed contaminants. Standard Pulsar search settings for TMT 16 pro (“TMTpro_Quantification”) were used and resulting identifications and corresponding quantitative values were exported on the PSM level using the “Export Report” function. Acquired reporter ion intensities in the experiments were employed for automated quantification and statistical analysis using our in-house developed SafeQuant R script72 (v2.3). This analysis included adjustment of reporter ion intensities, global data normalization by equalizing the total reporter ion intensity across all channels, summation of reporter ion intensities per protein and channel, calculation of protein abundance ratios and testing for differential abundance using empirical Bayes moderated t-statistics. Finally, the calculated p-values were corrected for multiple testing using the Benjamini−Hochberg method.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Nnmt, Breast cancer, Tmt

### Affiliations
Proteomics Core Facility
Proteomics Core Facility, Biozentrum, University of Basel, Switzerland

### Submitter
Alexander Schmidt

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Schmidt
Proteomics Core Facility, Biozentrum, University of Basel, Switzerland


