### Accession
PXD010824

### Title
Characterizing of Haloferax volcanii Hvo_0405 as a Tat substrate

### Description
In order to test the hypothesis that Hvo_0405 is a Tat substrate, samples from the membrane and cytoplasm of strains expressing Hvo_0405RR or the mutated Hvo_0405KK were analyzed by mass spectrometry. A semi-enzymatic peptid corresponding to the cleavage of the signal peptide could only be identified in for Hvo_0405RR, indicating that Hvo_0405 is indeed a Tat substrate.

### Sample Protocol
H. volcanii transformants were cultured in CA liquid medium supplemented with tryptophan to an OD600 of approximately 0.5. Cells were separated from the supernatant by centrifugation at 6,000 g for 5 min; subsequently, supernatants were spun a second time and frozen at 80°C along with the cell pellets. Cell pellets were fractionated further by first lysing the cells in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) with 1 mM 4-(2-aminoethyl) benzenesulfonyl fluoride hydrochloride (AEBSF) (Sigma), 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF) (Sigma) and 10 mM EDTA (Invitrogen) protease inhibitors. The cell lysate was centrifuged at 6,000 g for 10 min to pellet unlysed cells, and the cleared cell lysate was then centrifuged at approximately 303,500 g for 30 min in an Optima MAX-TL ultracentrifuge (Beckman). Subsequently, the membrane-rich pellet was resuspended in PBS. Both the membrane and cytoplasm fractions were centrifuged again at 303,500 g for 30 min. Proteins in both the cytoplasm and culture supernatant fractions were precipitated using 10% trichloroacetic acid (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Proteins from membrane fractions were solubilized with 2% SDS in 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.6). 50 ug of protein were loaded onto Amicon ultracentrifugal filters (0.5 ml; 30-kDa molecular mass cutoff; Millipore) for tryptic digestion using the filter-aided sample preparation method (Wisniewski et al, 2008, Nat Methods 6, Esquivel et al, 2016, J Biol Chem 291). Peptides were dried in a vacuum centrifuge and stored at 20°C. Two biological replicates were processed and analyzed by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS).  After reconstitution of the peptides in 2% (vol/vol) acetonitrile and 0.1% (vol/vol) formic acid in ultrapure water, chromatographic separation was performed on an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Scientific). The sample was desalted on a trap column (C 18 PepMap 100, 300 m by 5 mm, 5 mm particle size, 100-Å pore size; Thermo Scientific) for 5 min using 0.05% (vol/vol) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and 2% (vol/vol) acetonitrile in ultrapure water, at a flow rate of 10 ul/min. The trap column was then switched in line with the separation column (Acclaim PepMap100 C 18, 75 mm by 15 cm, 2 mm particle size, 100-Å pore size; Thermo Scientific). For chromatographic separation, the mobile phases were composed of 0.1% (vol/vol) formic acid in ultrapure water and 80% acetonitrile (A) and 0.08% formic acid in ultrapure water (B), and the following gradient was employed using a flow rate of 300 nl/min: 5 min of 2.5% B, increase to 7.5% B over 4 min, increase to 40% B over 26 min, increase to 99% B over 1 min, and 10 min of 99% B. The column was reequilibrated with 2.5% B for 25 min. The LC system was coupled via a nanospray source to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) operating in positive-ion mode. MS data were acquired from 375 m/z to 2,000 m/z at a resolution of 70,000 for MS1. The automatic gain control (AGC) target was set to 1e6 and maximum injection time to 100 ms. The 12 most abundant precursor ions were triggered for fragmentation by higher-energy C-trap dissociation with a normalized collision energy of 27. MS2 spectra were acquired in a dynamic scan range with a fixed first mass of 150 m/z at a resolution of 17,500, with an AGC target of 1e5 and a maximum injection time of 120 ms. Precursor ions with an unassigned charge state as well as charge of 1 or greater than 5 were rejected. Fragmented ions were dynamically excluded for 15 s.

### Data Protocol
Peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) were identified with the Python framework Ursgal (version 0.4.0)(Kremer et al, 2016, J Proteome Res 15) using the database search engines X! Tandem, MS-GF+ and OMSSA. The database consisted of the UniProt H. volcanii proteome (proteome ID UP000008243) merged with sequences from the Common Repository of Adventitious Proteins (http://www.thegpm.org/crap/), resulting in a total database of 4,103 proteins. Decoy sequences were generated by peptide shuffling and included for all proteins. The Ursgal profile Q Exactive was used, including a precursor ion tolerance of 5 ppm and a fragment ion tolerance of 20 ppm. Additionally, carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine as well as N-terminal acetylation as potential modifications. Three missed cleavages and semienzymatic peptides were allowed. Statistical postprocessing of unified results was performed with Percolator. Since the error probability for each PSM should be controlled in order to validate the presence of certain peptides, filtering by posterior error probability (PEP) (>= 0.01) was chosen instead of a global false-discovery rate. Results from all search engines for both replicates were combined.

### Publication Abstract
N-Glycosylation is a post-translational modification common to all three domains of life. In many archaea, the oligosacharyltransferase (AglB)-dependent N-glycosylation of flagellins is required for flagella assembly. However, whether N-glycosylation is required for the assembly and/or function of the structurally related archaeal type IV pili is unknown. Here, we show that of six Haloferax volcanii adhesion pilins, PilA1 and PilA2, the most abundant pilins in pili of wild-type and &#x394;aglB strains, are modified under planktonic conditions in an AglB-dependent manner by the same pentasaccharide detected on H. volcanii flagellins. However, unlike wild-type cells, which have surfaces decorated with discrete pili and form a dispersed layer of cells on a plastic surface, &#x394;aglB cells have thick pili bundles and form microcolonies. Moreover, expressing PilA1, PilA2, or PilA6 in &#x394;pilA[1-6]&#x394;aglB stimulates microcolony formation compared with their expression in &#x394;pilA[1-6]. Conversely, expressing PilA3 or PilA4 in &#x394;pilA[1-6] cells results in strong surface adhesion, but not microcolony formation, and neither pilin stimulates surface adhesion in &#x394;pilA[1-6]&#x394;aglB cells. Although PilA4 assembles into pili in the &#x394;pilA[1-6]&#x394;aglB cells, these pili are, unlike wild-type pili, curled, perhaps rendering them non-functional. To our knowledge, this is the first demonstration of a differential effect of glycosylation on pilus assembly and function of paralogous pilins. The growth of wild-type cells in low salt media, a condition that decreases AglB glycosylation, also stimulates microcolony formation and inhibits motility, supporting our hypothesis that N-glycosylation plays an important role in regulating the transition between planktonic to sessile cell states as a response to stress.

### Keywords
Haloferax volcanii, Archaea, Twin-arginine translocation, Archaeosortase

### Affiliations
University of Pennsylvania
Department of Biology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA

### Submitter
Stefan Schulze

### Lab Head
Dr Mechthild Pohlschroder
Department of Biology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA


