### Accession
PXD021992

### Title
Large-scale identification of ubiquitination sites on membrane-associated proteins in Arabidopsis thaliana seedlings

### Description
Protein phosphorylation and ubiquitination are two of the most abundant forms of post-translational modifications in eukaryotes, regulated by thousands of protein kinases, phosphatases, E3 ubiquitin ligases, and ubiquitin proteases. Although previous studies have catalogued several ubiquitinated proteins in plants (Walton et al., 2016), few membrane-localized proteins have been identified. Receptor kinases (RKs) initiate phosphorylation signal relays that regulate plant growth, development, and stress responses. While the regulatory role of phosphorylation on protein kinase function is well-documented (Couto and Zipfel, 2016), considerably less is known about the role of ubiquitination on protein kinase function, even though protein turnover is critical to their signaling competence and cellular homeostasis. Here we describe the large-scale identification of ubiquitination sites on Arabidopsis proteins associated with or integral to the plasma membrane, including over 100 protein kinases.

### Sample Protocol
Seedlings were incubated with 50 μM MG-132 (Sigma Aldrich, UK) for 1 h with shaking, and then vacuum infiltrated with water (mock) or 1 μM elf18 peptide (EZ Biolabs, USA) for 10 min. Samples were flash frozen and ground to a coarse powder with a mortar and pestle in liquid N2, then homogenized in urea lysis buffer (8 M urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM P9599 protease inhibitor (Sigma Alrich), 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF), 50 μM PR-619 (Sigma Aldrich)) using equal volume-to-tissue ratio in a Potter tube for 10 min at 1,000 rpm. An aliquot of 1 mL was removed and kept for quick analysis of elf18-induced MAPK activation by immunoblot as previously described (Monaghan et al., 2014) (data not shown). The remaining homogenate was centrifuged at 5,856 x g for 1 h at 4°C. The supernatant was transferred to a polycarbonate tube and centrifuged at 110,000 x g for 1 h at 4°C. The pellet was resuspended in 2 mL of lysis buffer with PMSF, and protein concentration was determined using the Bradford Assay according to the manufacturer’s instructions (BioRad). Three mg of protein in 2 mL lysis buffer was incubated with 5 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) at  ambient temperature for 45 min. Iodoacetamide (10mM) was added, and samples were incubated in the dark for 30 min at ambient temperature. Finally, samples were diluted to 10 mL in 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0 and digested with 30 μg of trypsin (Pierce, UK) at 30°C overnight.  Following trypsin digestion, samples were acidified with aliquots of 50% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to pH 3.0. Precipitate was removed by centrifugation at 1,600 x g, and the peptides in the supernatant were purified using 2.5 mL C18 silica reversed-phase chromatography Sep-Pak columns (Waters). Prior to use, the columns were equilibrated sequentially with 1 column volume (CV) MeOH, then 1 CV activation buffer (80% acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1% TFA), and then 5 CV of wash buffer (2% ACN, 0.1% TFA). Sample was added to the column and allowed to drip by gravity flow, collected, and applied to the column a second time before application of 5 CV wash buffer. Trypsin-digested peptides were eluted in 2 CV elution buffer (40% ACN, 0.1% TFA) and lyophilized.  The PTMScan® Ubiquitin Remnant Motif K-ε-GG antibody (Cell Signaling Technologies, UK) was first crosslinked to the agarose beads by washing each tube 3 times with 1 mL of 100 mM sodium borate pH 9.0, with centrifugation at 2,000 x g between each wash. The beads were then resuspended in 20 mM dimethyl pimelimidate (DMP) crosslinker and 100 mM sodium borate, and incubated for 1 h at room temperature with end-over-end rotation. The beads were washed twice with 1 mL of 200 mM ethanolamine pH 8.0, resuspended in 200 mM ethanolamine, and incubated overnight at 4°C with end-over-end rotation.  Prior to immunoaffinity purification (IP), crosslinked beads were washed 3 times with 1.5 mL IAP buffer (50 mM MOPS pH 7.2, 10 mM sodium phosphate, 50 mM NaCl). Lyophilized peptide samples were resuspended in 1.5 mL IAP buffer, sonicated for 10 min, and centrifuged at 16,000 x g for 5 min. A volume of 1,300 μL of peptide sample was added to 300 μL of K-ε-GG beads in IAP buffer, and the remaining 200 μL was reserved as ‘input’ sample. The IP was conducted for 2 h at 4°C with end-over-end rotation, followed by centrifugation for 1 min at 2,000 x g. The supernatant was kept as the ‘unbound’ sample to test the efficiency of di-Gly enrichment. Beads were washed twice with 1.5 mL IAP buffer, then 3 times with high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) grade water prior to elution with 100 μL of 0.15% TFA, and centrifugation 1 min at 2,000 x g. The supernatant was kept as the ‘elution’ sample for analysis by LC-MS/MS.  Input, unbound, and elution samples were partially purified using C18 Micro-Spin Stagetips columns (The Nest Group Inc.). The samples were acidified with 50% TFA to a pH of 3.0, and the columns were placed in 2 mL microcentrifuge tubes and equilibrated by washing 3 times with 200 μL MeOH and centrifuged at 135 x g for 30 s between each wash. Equilibration continued with 3 washes of 200 μL equilibration buffer (80% ACN, 0.1% TFA) and centrifugation for 2 min at 185 x g, followed by washing 6 times with wash buffer (2% ACN, 0.1% TFA). Peptide solutions were loaded twice into the equilibrated columns and centrifuged for 4 min at 240 x g. Columns were then washed 6 times with Wash Buffer as above, followed by tandem elutions in 150 μL elution buffer (40% ACN, 0.1% TFA).  To prepare for mass spectrometry, the input, unbound, and eluted samples were dehydrated using vacuum centrifugation (SpeedVac), and then resuspended in 2% ACN and 0.1% Formic Acid (FA), followed by vortexing and sonication for 10 min prior to a final centrifugation at 10,000 xg for 10 min. Samples were then loaded into a 96-well plate for analysis on an Orbitrap Fusion Mass Spectrometer (ThermoFisher).

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis was performed as described in (Bender et al., 2017) with the following modifications. On the Orbitrap Fusion MS/MS spectra were triggered with data dependent acquisition method using ‘top 20’ and ‘most intense ion’ settings. Peak lists in Mascot generic file format (.mgf files) were generated from raw files by using the MSConvert package (Matrix Science). Peak lists were searched using Mascot server v.2.4.1 (Matrix Science) against TAIR database (version 10), a separate in-house constructs database, and an in-house contaminants database. Tryptic peptides with up to 2 possible mis-cleavages and charge states +2, +3, +4, were allowed in the search. The following modifications were included in the search: oxidized methionine, diGly on lysine as variable modification and carbamido-methylated cysteine as static modification. Data were searched with a monoisotopic precursor and fragment ions mass tolerance 10ppm and 0.6 Da respectively. Mascot results were combined in Scaffold v. 4 (Proteome Software) and exported in Excel (Microsoft Office).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Plant, Arabidopsis, Immunity, Membrane-associated

### Affiliations
the Sainsbury laboratory
The Sainsbury laboratory University of East Anglia Norwich

### Submitter
FRank Menke

### Lab Head
Dr Frank L.H. Menke
The Sainsbury laboratory University of East Anglia Norwich


