### Accession
PXD018661

### Title
Olaparib based photo-affinity probes for PARP-1 detection in living cells

### Description
The poly-ADP-ribose polymerase (PARP) is a protein from the family of ADP-ribosyltransferases that catalyzes poly adenosine diphosphate ribose (ADPR) formation in order to attract the DNA repair machinery to DNA damage sites. Inhibition of PARP activity by olaparib can cause cell death which is of clinical relevance in some tumor types. This demonstrates that quantification of PARP activity in the context of living cells is of great importance. In this work we present the design, synthesis and biological evaluation of photo-activatable affinity probes inspired by the olaparib molecule which are equipped with a diazirine for covalent attachment upon activation by UV light and a ligation handle for the addition of a reporter group of choice. SDS-PAGE, western blotting and label-free LC-MS/MS quantification analysis show that the probes target the PARP-1 protein and are selectively outcompeted by olaparib suggesting binding in the same enzymatic pocket.

### Sample Protocol
Raji cells were incubated with 10 uM photo-activatable probe for 3 hr. several controles were done as: no probe control, no UV cointrol and a competition between Olaparib and the probe. excess reagents was washed with PBS and the cells were irradiated with UV to create a covalent bond with its target protein. the cells were lysed in 8M urea/PBS and biotin was installed by Cu catalysed click reaction. excess biotin was removed by protein precipitation that were reconstitutedin SDS/PBS prior to affinity purification (AP) with streptavidin beads. after the AP the beads were washed, on bead digestion was done using trypsin, the peptides were desalted by stage tips and analysed by LC-MS/MS on a nano-Acquity SynaptG2Si system.

### Data Protocol
raw data were searched against the uniprot human database for peptide identification using the PLGS software. for protein quantification the Isoquant software was used folowed by Excel for statistical t-test

### Publication Abstract
The poly-ADP-ribose polymerase (PARP) is a protein from the family of ADP-ribosyltransferases that catalyzes polyadenosine diphosphate ribose (ADPR) formation in order to attract the DNA repair machinery to sites of DNA damage. The inhibition of PARP activity by olaparib can cause cell death, which is of clinical relevance in some tumor types. This demonstrates that quantification of PARP activity in the context of living cells is of great importance. In this work, we present the design, synthesis and biological evaluation of photo-activatable affinity probes inspired by the olaparib molecule that are equipped with a diazirine for covalent attachment upon activation by UV light and a ligation handle for the addition of a reporter group of choice. SDS-PAGE, western blotting and label-free LC-MS/MS quantification analysis show that the probes target the PARP-1 protein and are selectively outcompeted by olaparib; this suggests that they bind in the same enzymatic pocket. Proteomics data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD018661.

### Keywords
Olaparib; parp-1; bioorthogonal chemistry; chemical proteomics; photoaffinity probes

### Affiliations
Leiden Institute for Chemistry
dept of Bioorganic synthesis, Leiden Institute for Chemistry, Leiden University, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Bogdan Florea

### Lab Head
Dr Bogdan Iulius Florea
dept of Bioorganic synthesis, Leiden Institute for Chemistry, Leiden University, The Netherlands


