### Accession
PXD028415

### Title
HAP40 orchestrates huntingtin structure for differential interaction with polyglutamine expanded exon 1

### Description
Huntington’s disease results from expansion of a glutamine-coding CAG tract in the huntingtin (HTT) gene, producing an aberrantly functioning form of HTT. Both wildtype and disease-state HTT form a hetero-dimer with HAP40 of unknown functional relevance. We demonstrate in vivo and in cell models that HTT and HAP40 cellular abundance are coupled. Integrating data from a 2.6 Å cryo-electron microscopy structure, cross-linking mass spectrometry, small-angle X-ray scattering, and modeling, we provide a near-atomic-level view of HTT, its molecular interaction surfaces and compacted domain architecture, orchestrated by HAP40. Native mass-spectrometry reveals a remarkably stable hetero-dimer, potentially explaining the cellular inter-dependence of HTT and HAP40. The exon 1 region of HTT is dynamic but shows greater conformational variety in the polyglutamine expanded mutant than wildtype exon 1. Our data provide a foundation for future functional and drug discovery studies targeting Huntington’s disease and illuminate the structural consequences of HTT polyglutamine expansion.

### Sample Protocol
Cross-linking of HTT-HAP40 samples with PhoX For cross-linking experiments, HTT-HAP40 samples (HTTQ23-HAP40, HTTQ54-HAP40, HTT Δexon 1-HAP40) were diluted to a protein concentration of 1 mg/1 mL using cross-linking buffer (20 mM Hepes pH 7.4, 300 mM NaCl, 2.5 % glycerol, 1 mM TCEP). HTT-HAP40 samples were treated with an optimised concentration of PhoX cross-linker to avoid protein aggregation (Supplementary Figure 4a). After incubation with PhoX (0.5 mM) for 30 min at RT, the reaction was quenched for additional 30 min at RT by the addition of Tris HCl (1 M, pH 7.5) to a final concentration of 50 mM. Protein digestion was performed in 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5, 1 % SDC, 5 mM TCEP and 30 mM CAA, with the addition of Lys-C and Trypsin proteases (1:25 and 1:100 ratio (w/w)) overnight at 37 °C. The reaction was stopped by addition of TFA to a final concentration of 0.1 % or until pH ~ 2. Next, peptides were desalted using an Oasis HLB plate, before IMAC enrichment of cross-linked peptides like previously described. Four technical replicates were completed for each form of HTT-HAP40.  For LC-MS analysis, the samples were re-suspended in 2 % formic acid and analyzed using an UltiMate™ 3000 RSLCnano System (Thermo Fischer Scientific) coupled on-line to either a Q Exactive HF-X (Thermo Fischer Scientific), or an Orbitrap Exploris 480 (Thermo Fischer Scientific). Firstly, peptides were trapped for 5 min in solvent A (0.1 % FA in water), using a 100-µm inner diameter 2-cm trap column (packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 3 µm) prior to separation on an analytical column (50 cm of length, 75 µM inner diameter; packed in-house with Poroshell 120 EC-C18, 2.7 µm). Peptides were eluted following a 45 or 55 min gradient from 9-35 % solvent B (80 % ACN, 0.1 % FA), respectively 9- 41 % solvent B. On the Q Exactive HF-X a full scan MS spectra from 375-1600 Da were acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 60,000 with the AGC target set to 3 x 106 and maximum injection time of 120 ms. For measurements on the Orbitrap Exploris 480, a full scan MS spectra from 375-2200 m/z were acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 60,000 with the AGC target set to 2 x 106 and maximum injection time of 25 ms. Only peptides with charged states 3-8 were fragmented, and dynamic exclusion properties were set to n = 1, for a duration of 10 s (Q Exactive HF-X), respectively 15 s (Orbitrap Exploris 480). Fragmentation was performed using in a stepped HCD collision energy mode (27, 30, 33 % Q Exactive HF-X; 20, 28, 36 % Orbitrap Exploris 480) in the ion trap and acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 30,000 after accumulating a target value of 1 x 105 with an isolation window of 1.4 m/z and maximum injection time of 54 ms (Q Exactive HF-X), respectively 55 ms Orbitrap Exploris 480.

### Data Protocol
Raw files for cross-linked HTT-HAP40 samples were analyzed using the XlinkX node 53 in Proteome Discoverer (PD) software suit 2.5 (Thermo Fischer Scientific), with signal to noise threshold set to 1.4.  Trypsin was set as a digestion enzyme (max. two allowed missed cleavages), the precursor tolerance set to 10 ppm and the maximum FDR set to 1 %. Additionally, carbamidomethyl modification (Cystein) was set as fixed modification and acetylation (protein N-terminus) and oxidation (Methionine) were set as dynamic modifications. Cross-links obtained for respective HTTQ-HAP40 samples were filtered (only cross-links identified with an XlinkX score > 40 were considered) and further validated using our recently deposited structure of HTTQ23-HAP40 (PDBID: 6X9O) (EMD-22106).

### Publication Abstract
Huntington's disease results from expansion of a glutamine-coding CAG tract in the huntingtin (HTT) gene, producing an aberrantly functioning form of HTT. Both wildtype and disease-state HTT form a hetero-dimer with HAP40 of unknown functional relevance. We demonstrate in vivo and in cell models that HTT and HAP40 cellular abundance are coupled. Integrating data from a 2.6&#x2009;&#xc5; cryo-electron microscopy structure, cross-linking mass spectrometry, small-angle X-ray scattering, and modeling, we provide a near-atomic-level view of HTT, its molecular interaction surfaces and compacted domain architecture, orchestrated by HAP40. Native mass&#xa0;spectrometry reveals a remarkably stable hetero-dimer, potentially explaining the cellular inter-dependence of HTT and HAP40. The exon 1 region of HTT is dynamic but shows greater conformational variety in the polyglutamine expanded mutant than wildtype exon 1. Our data provide a foundation for future functional and drug discovery studies targeting Huntington's disease and illuminate the structural consequences of HTT polyglutamine expansion.

### Keywords
Huntingtin, Xl-ms, Cryo-em, Integrative modeling, Saxs

### Affiliations
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Johannes Hevler

### Lab Head
Dr Albert J. R. Heck
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands


