### Accession
PXD034541

### Title
Plasma proteomics reveals gilthead sea bream (Sparus aurata) impairment evoked by Sparicotyle chrysophrii

### Description
Sparicotylosis is an endemic parasitic disease across the Mediterranean Sea caused by the polyopisthocotylean monogenean Sparycotyle chrysophrii, which affects the gills of gilthead sea bream (Sparus aurata). Current disease-management, mitigation and treatment strategies are scarce against sparicotylosis. In order to successfully develop more efficient therapeutic strategies against this disease, understanding which molecular mechanisms and metabolic pathways are altered in the host is critical. This study aims to elucidate how S. chrysophrii infection modulates giltheadd seea bream physiological status and to identify the main altered biological processes through plasma proteomics of the host.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation For albumin depletion, 12 μl of every individual sample were precipitated with cold ethanol at a final concentration of 40%. The precipitation was left overnight at 5 °C and centrifuged at 15,000 x g for 1 hour. The albumin-containing supernatant was then removed, and the pellets air-dried. Subsequently, the pellets were dissolved in 50 L of 0.5% sodium dodecyl sulfate in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. The proteins were quantified with a protein quantification assay kit (Macherey – Nagel, Germany) according to manufacturer instructions. Due to the presence of lipids in the samples, 7 μg of protein were loaded in a 1D PAGE without resolving and in-gel digested. The gel slices of each sample were cut into small cubes and sequentially dehydrated with 50% acetonitrile in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 100% acetonitrile. Cysteine residues were reduced by 10 mM dithiothreitol in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer at 60 °C for 20 min and sulfhydryl groups were alkylated with 5.5 mM iodoacetamide in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate in the dark at room temperature for 30 min. Gel cubes were incubated overnight at 37 °C in 100 L of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution with 400 ng of trypsin. The digestions were quenched with trifluoroacetic acid (final concentration 1%). The supernatants were removed and the gel plugs were dehydrated with neat acetonitrile. The acetonitrile peptide solutions were recombined with the previous supernatants. The digestion mixture was dried in a vacuum centrifuge and resuspended in 20 L of 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. SWATH-MS analysis For every mixture of digested peptide, 2 μl of peptide mixture sample was loaded by an Ekspert nanoLC 425 (Eksigent, US) liquid chromatograph onto a trap column (3μ C18-CL, 350 m x 0.5mm) and desalted with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid at 5 μl min-1 during 5 min. Then, the peptides were loaded onto an analytical column (3μ C18-CL 120 Ᾰ, 75 m x 150 mm; Eksigent) equilibrated in 5% acetonitrile 0.1% formic acid. Peptide elution was carried out with a linear gradient of 7-40% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 300 nL min-1. Peptides were analysed in a nanoESI qQTOF mass spectrometer (6600plus TripleTOF, ABSCIEX). The samples were ionised in a Source Type: Optiflow < 1 μL Nano applying 3.0 kV to the spray emitter at 200 °C. The TripleTOF was operated in swath mode, in which a 0.050-s TOF-MS scan from 350–1250 m z-1 was performed. After, 0.080 s product ion scans were acquired in 100 variable windows from 400 to 1250 m z-1. The total cycle time was 2.79 sec. The individual SWATH injections were randomised to avoid bias in the analysis. Previously, a pooled sample was injected to determine the best gradient and sample amount. Spectral library building Plasma aliquots of all the samples were pooled to build the spectral library by in-gel digestion and LC-MS/MS with data-dependent acquisition (DDA) in order to separate and identify the proteins present in the samples. After resolving the 1D-SDS-PAGE, the gel career corresponding to the library was cut into pieces, each of which was digested with trypsin, extracted with acetonitrile, dried and resuspended as described above. Exactly as described before, each library sample was first loaded into a trap column and then into an analytical column, before loading the eluted peptides in the nanoESI qTOF mass spectrometer for analysis in DDA mode. Survey MS1 scans were acquired from 350–1400 m/z for 250 ms. The quadrupole resolution was set to ‘LOW’ for MS2 experiments, which were acquired 100–1500 m/z for 25 ms in ‘high sensitivity’ mode. The following switch criteria were used: charge: 2+ to 4+; minimum intensity; 100 counts per second (cps). Up to 100 ions were selected for fragmentation after each survey scan. Dynamic exclusion was set to 15 s.

### Data Protocol
The obtained DDA data files were processed by means of the ProteinPilot v5.0 (ABSciex) search engine and a single list of peaks was generated using the default parameters and combining the acquired information of all gel fragments. The Paragon algorithm (ProteinPilot) was used to search against 279,921 sequences available in GSB protein databases (NCBI, UniProt and transcriptome from our genome assembly (Pérez-Sánchez et al. 2019). A false discovery rate (FDR) correction was applied for the validation of the data. The identified proteins were grouped based on MS/MS spectra by the ProteinPilot Pro Group Algorithm to avoid using the same spectral evidence for more than one protein. The protein within each group that could explain more spectral data with a 95% confidence threshold was depicted as the primary protein of the group. To increase the spectral data with DIA information the data from the pooled samples were analysed by DIA Umpire as previously published by (Tsou et al. 2015). Protein quantification The SCIEX.wiff data-files obtained from SWATH runs of individual plasma samples, were loaded into PeakView v2.1 (SCIEX) with the generated spectral library consisting of a combination of data-dependent and independent acquisition information, obtained from the pooled sample interrogated in the available protein databases at a peptide confidence threshold of 95% confidence and an FDR < 1. The extracted ion chromatograms were integrated, and peak areas were used to calculate the total protein quantity.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sparicotyle chrysophrii; sparus aurata; haemoglobin; blood; immune system; host-parasite interaction; cholesterol; swath ms

### Affiliations
Universitat de Valencia
Fish Pathology Group, Institute of Aquaculture Torre de la Sal (IATS-CSIC), Ribera de Cabanes, Castellón (Spain)

### Submitter
Luz Valero

### Lab Head
Dr Ariadna Sitjà-Bobadilla
Fish Pathology Group, Institute of Aquaculture Torre de la Sal (IATS-CSIC), Ribera de Cabanes, Castellón (Spain)


