### Accession
PXD034329

### Title
Pulldown of proteins interacting with SGOL1-AS1 in AML

### Description
Epigenetic dysregulation is a common feature of acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Recently it has become clear that long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) can play a key role in epigenetic regulation, and consequently also dysregulation. Currently, our understanding of the requirements and roles of lncRNAs in AML is still limited. Using CRISPRi screening, we identified the lncRNA SGOL1-AS1 as an essential regulator of survival in THP-1 AML cells. We use RNA affinity purification using a biotinylated bait to pull down binding partners of the lncRNA, SGOL1-AS1. The identified proteins show a signficant enrichment for chromatin-modifying proteins involved in gene repression and chromosome organization.

### Sample Protocol
Sense and antisense versions of biotinylated SGOL1-AS1 were produced by in vitro transcription and incubated with nuclear lysates (fractionated using protocol from Gagnon et al., 2014 and lysed in RIPA with sonication) from THP-1 cells. Biotin pulldown was performed with Streptavidin C1, magnetic beads. Beads were buffer exchanged with 5 x 900 μl 50 mM TEAB followed by digestion with addition of 500 ng sequencing grade trypsin in 100ul 50mM TEAB. Supernatant was decanted to another tube and acidified by addition of formic acid to a final concentration of 0.5%. The isolated supernatant was dried in a vacuum centrifuge at 40°C for 30 minutes before peptides were resuspended in 10 μl 0.1% (v/v) formic acid and 1% (v/v) acetonitrile. Peptides were separated utilizing an RSLCnano UPLC system (Thermo). Each sample was loaded directly onto a Thermo PepMap reverse phase Easy Spray column [75 μm internal diameter (ID), 2 μm particles 50 cm long] in 0.1% (v/v) acetonitrile and 0.1% (v/v) formic acid at a flow rate of 180 nl/min for 5 per min. Peptides were subsequently separated using with a gradient of 1–15% (v/v) of acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid over 30 min at a flow rate followed with a gradient of 15–25% (v/v) of acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid over 9 min at a flow rate of 180 nl/min. The nano liquid chromatography (nLC) effluent was sprayed directly into a Orbitrap Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo) aided by the Proxeon nano source at a voltage offset of 1.5 kV. To map phosphorylation sites on Dis2 and Sds21, the mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode where the MS survey scan was performed at a nominal resolution of 120,000 [at mass/charge (m/z) 200] in the Orbitrap analyzer in an m/z range of 350–1200. Subsequently detected multiply charged precursors were selected for HCD utilising a 1.5m/z quadrupole isolation and HCD at a normalised collision energy of 30% with product ions measured in the orbitrap detector at a nominal resolution of 30,000 [at mass/charge (m/z) 200] with a maximum injection time of 54ms. The instrument was permitted to isolate as many ions for MS2 within a window of 3s before returning to the MS1 scan to repeat. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with low and high mass tolerances of 10ppm for 10s. This analysis was performed with 3 biological repeats and 4 technical repeats per sample.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry results files were exported into Proteome Discoverer (PD) for identification and quantification. All searches included the fixed modification for carbamidomethylation on cysteine residues resulting from IAA treatment to prevent cysteine bonding. The variable modifications included in the search were oxidised methionine (monoisotopic mass change, +15.955 Da) and phosphorylation of threonine, serine and tyrosine (79.966 Da). A maximum of 2 missed cleavages per peptide was allowed. The minimum precursor mass was set to 350Da with a maximum of 5000. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 10ppm, fragment mass tolerance was 0.02Da and minimum peptide length was 6. Peptides were searched against the Swissprot database using Sequest HT with a maximum false discovery rate of 1%. Proteins required a minimum FDR of 1% and were filtered to remove known contaminants and to have at least 2 unique peptides. Missing values were assumed to be due to low abundance. Fold changes were compared using students t-tests with Benjamini-Hochberg correction.

### Publication Abstract
Epigenetic dysregulation is a key feature of most acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Recently, it has become clear that long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) can play a key role in epigenetic regulation, and consequently also dysregulation. Currently, our understanding of the requirements and roles of lncRNAs in AML is still limited. Here, using CRISPRi screening, we identified the lncRNA SGOL1-AS1 as an essential regulator of survival in THP-1 AML cells. We demonstrated that SGOL1-AS1 interacts with chromatin-modifying proteins involved in gene repression and that SGOL1-AS1 knockdown is associated with increased heterochromatin formation. We also observed that loss of SGOLl-AS1 results in increased apoptosis and the downregulation of pro-inflammatory genes. In AML patients, high expression of SGOL1-AS1 correlates with both pro-inflammatory gene expression and poor survival. Altogether, our data reveal that SGOL1-AS1 is an essential regulator of cell survival in AML cell lines and a possible regulator of pro-inflammatory signaling in AML patients.

### Keywords
Aml, Lncrna, Acute myeloid leukemia, Long non-coding rna

### Affiliations
University of Manchester
Stem Cell Biology Group, Cancer Research UK Manchester Institute, The University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.

### Submitter
Anna Hoyle

### Lab Head
Dr Georges Lacaud
Stem Cell Biology Group, Cancer Research UK Manchester Institute, The University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.


