### Accession
PXD000542

### Title
Label free HiRIEF deep proteomics of A431 human vulvar cancer cell line.

### Description
Human A431 cells were lysed. Protein extracts were trypsinized, peptides separated by HiRIEF (high resolution isoelectric focusing) and analysed by LC-MS.

### Sample Protocol
Clinical tumor samples were obtained from the Karolinska University Hospital in Solna, Sweden. The samples were surgical specimens collected between 2003 and 2006, in accordance to the Helsinki Declaration and with approval from the regional ethics committee in Stockholm 2003 (d.nr 02–222). The samples were snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored in an internal biobank. Representative tumor samples from 14 patients diagnosed with VSCC (7 HPV positive and 7 HPV negative tumors) were selected from a cohort of 37 samples and matched in sample pairs based on the 14 clinical variables listed in supplemental Table S1. Sample selection was performed by a pathologist, independently verified by a second pathologist and inspected regarding percentage of tumor cell content to minimize intra-sample heterogeneity. Classification of tumors as HPV negative or positive was performed based on PCR test results. General and type specific primers for HPV DNA were used on DNA extracts from selected parts of the tumor as previously described (10). Six of the HPV positive tumors were positive for HPV-16, whereas one tumor was positive for the HPV-53 variant. The samples were selected so that relapse status was an independent clinical factor, which made it possible to classify the samples according to relapse status independently of HPV status. Tumors from patients who remained disease free for 3 years were defined as relapse free. Paraffin-embedded formalin-fixed tumor tissues from nine of the 14 samples analyzed by MS; plus three additional tumor samples; were used for immunohistochemistry (IHC) validation. The added samples were selected from the cohort of 37 samples to create matched pairs based on the same clinical variables as in the original sample cohort. In total, 12 samples were analyzed by IHC.

### Data Protocol
Protein Identification and Quantification: All MS/MS spectra were searched by Mascot (26) 2.2 (Matrix Science Limited, London, UK) under the software platform Proteome Discoverer 1.1 (Thermo) against the NCBI non redundant human target-decoy protein database (20090118, 32118 sequences). The reversed sequences were used as decoy. Searches against a human protein database with added protein sequences of HPV-16 and HPV-53 gave no identifications of viral peptides. Subsequent searches were performed against a database composed of only human sequences. Prior to searching the data, we used a threshold of signal-to-noise ratio 1.5 on MS1 data. Charge states 2–7 were considered. Precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and product mass tolerances of 0.02 Da for HCD-FTMS and 0.8 Da for CID-ITMS were used. Additional settings were: trypsin with 1 missed cleavage; carbamidomethylation on cysteine and iTRAQ-8plex on lysine and N-terminal as fixed modifications; and oxidation of methionine as variable modification. Quantification of iTRAQ-8plex reporter ions was performed by Proteome Discoverer (version 1.2) on HCD-FTMS tandem mass spectra using an integration window tolerance of 20 ppm. The quantification was performed based on the peak intensities of the reporter ions in the MS/MS spectra. The relative abundances among samples between the sample sets were calculated by normalizing each peptide signal to the corresponding peptide signal of the pooled internal standard. Data Curation: By MAYU algorithm (27) we identified the peptide score limits (34/33 for sample set 1/2) for the protein identification confidence of 5% false discovery rate (FDR). Protein identifications were based on at least one unique peptide above the score. The protein quantities from Proteome Discoverer were further curated using the in-house developed software PQPQ (28). PQPQ checks all the peptides matched to a protein by analyzing the quantitative pattern over samples. Based on the assumption that peptides originating from the same protein should show a correlating pattern, PQPQ can eliminate outlier peptides and detect possible protein variants. The peptide data was also normalized so that the median peptide intensities were equal between samples. Further, all proteins quantified by PQPQ had an identification based on at least two unique peptides, with at least one of the peptides being above the score limit. No noise limits were defined for reporter ion intensities.

### Publication Abstract
Vulvar squamous cell carcinoma (VSCC) is the fourth most common gynecological cancer. Based on etiology VSCC is divided into two subtypes; one related to high-risk human papilloma virus (HPV) and one HPV negative. The two subtypes are proposed to develop via separate intracellular signaling pathways. We investigated a suggested link between HPV infection and relapse risk in VSCC through in-depth protein profiling of 14 VSCC tumor specimens. The tumor proteomes were analyzed by liquid-chromatography tandem mass spectrometry. Relative protein quantification was performed by 8-plex isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification. Labeled peptides were fractionated by high-resolution isoelectric focusing prior to liquid-chromatography tandem mass spectrometry to reduce sample complexity. In total, 1579 proteins were regarded as accurately quantified and analyzed further. For classification of clinical groups, data analysis was performed by comparing protein level differences between tumors defined by HPV and/or relapse status. Further, we performed a biological analysis on individual tumor proteomes by matching data to known biological pathways. We here present a novel analysis approach that combines pathway alteration data on individual tumor level with multivariate statistics for HPV and relapse status comparisons. Four proteins (signal transducer and activator of transcription-1, myxovirus resistance protein 1, proteasome subunit alpha type-5 and legumain) identified as main classifiers of relapse status were validated by immunohistochemistry (IHC). Two of the proteins are interferon-regulated and on mRNA level known to be repressed by HPV. By both liquid-chromatography tandem mass spectrometry and immunohistochemistry data we could single out a subgroup of HPV negative/relapse-associated tumors. The pathway level data analysis confirmed three of the proteins, and further identified the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway as altered in the high risk subgroup. We show that pathway fingerprinting with resolution on individual tumor level adds biological information that strengthens a generalized protein analysis.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Hirief, Human, Isoelectric focusing, Cancer, A431

### Affiliations
Clinical Proteomics Unit, Dep. of Oncology-Pathology
Clinical Proteomics Mass Spectrometry, Department of Oncology-Pathology, Science for Life Laboratory and Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden

### Submitter
Rui Branca

### Lab Head
Dr Janne Lehtiö
Clinical Proteomics Mass Spectrometry, Department of Oncology-Pathology, Science for Life Laboratory and Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden


