### Accession
PXD001478

### Title
Proteome analysis of NGF stimulated PC12 cells

### Description
We used quantitative mass spectrometry-based proteomics to unravel global nerve growth factor (NGF)-induced changes in protein abundance using the rat PC12 cell line. Cells were stimulated with NGF for 0, 24 and 48 h in a triple SILAC setup (Light: Lys0,Arg0; Medium: Lys4,Arg6; and Heavy: Lys8,Arg10). All experiments were performed as biological replicates.

### Sample Protocol
For the proteome analysis cells were lysed, proteins fractionated by SDS-PAGE, gel lanes were excised and cut into 10 fractions and in-gel digested with trypsin.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were analyzed using MaxQuant software version 1.4.1.4 using the Andromeda search engine.

### Publication Abstract
SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells respond to nerve growth factor (NGF)-mediated activation of the tropomyosin-related kinase A (TrkA) with neurite outgrowth, thereby providing a model to study neuronal differentiation. We performed a time-resolved analysis of NGF-TrkA signaling in neuroblastoma cells using mass spectrometry-based quantitative proteomics. The combination of interactome, phosphoproteome, and proteome data provided temporal insights into the molecular events downstream of NGF binding to TrkA. We showed that upon NGF stimulation, TrkA recruits the E3 ubiquitin ligase Cbl-b, which then becomes phosphorylated and ubiquitylated and decreases in abundance. We also found that recruitment of Cbl-b promotes TrkA ubiquitylation and degradation. Furthermore, the amount of phosphorylation of the kinase ERK and neurite outgrowth increased upon Cbl-b depletion in several neuroblastoma cell lines. Our findings suggest that Cbl-b limits NGF-TrkA signaling to control the length of neurites.

### Keywords
Rat, Q exactive, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health & Medical Sciences University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3B, DK-2200 Copenhagen N, Denmark
NNF Center for Protein Research, Proteomics Program, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen.

### Submitter
Kristina Bennet Emdal

### Lab Head
Dr Jesper Velgaard Olsen
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health & Medical Sciences University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3B, DK-2200 Copenhagen N, Denmark


