### Accession
PXD013092

### Title
Sperm proteome of CMTM4-deficient mice

### Description
Cmtm4 Knockout mouse was constructed by CRISPR-Cas9 technology, and the KO mice showed male infertility. A proteomic anlaysis of sperm proteins was performed by comparing KO and WT mice.

### Sample Protocol
Spermatozoa protein samples from the wild and Cmtm4 KO mice were separately pooled. The pH was adjusted to 8.5 by adding 25 μl triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) buffer and samples were treated with 20 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 56°C for 60 min and 50 mM iodoacetamide in dark for 30 min. After digestion with 3 μg trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega, Madison, WI, USA) at 37 °C overnight, the peptides were labeled with iTRAQ tags and dried.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were processed by using the proteomic workflow of Proteome Discoverer 1.3. The fragmentation spectra were searched against the UniProt reviewed mouse database (2017_12, 16950 sequences) by the Mascot search engine (version 2.2.06) with the precursor and fragment mass tolerances set to 15 ppm and 20 milli-mass units (mmu), respectively. The algorithm was set to use trypsin as the enzyme, allowing for two missed cleavage sites. The fixed modification was carbamidomethylation (cysteine), and the variable modifications were oxidation (methionine), acetylation (protein N terminus), and iTRAQ labeling (tyrosine and lysine, N-terminal residues). Peptide ions were filtered from the cut off scores of Percolator based on p＜0.01. The false discovery rate was set to 1% for peptide identifications. An additional filter was applied with the removal of spectrum matches with scores lower than 10. The iTRAQ quantization values were automatically calculated on the basis of the intensity of the iTRAQ reporter ions in the dissociation scans with higher collision energy using Proteome Discoverer. All protein iTRAQ ratios were exported to an Excel file, the Gaussian distribution of ratios was recalculated manually, and all ratios were transformed to base 10 logarithm values. A confidence interval of 99% (testis proteome, 0.754-1.24; sperm proteome, 0.84-1.19 ) was used to determine the cut off values for statistically significant changes.

### Publication Abstract
The chemokine-like factor (CKLF)-like MARVEL transmembrane domain-containing family (CMTM) is a gene family that has been implicated in male reproduction. CMTM4 is an evolutionarily conserved member that is highly expressed in the testis. However, its function in male fertility remains unknown. Here, we demonstrate that CMTM4 is associated with spermatogenesis and sperm quality. Using Western blotting and immunohistochemical analyses, we found CMTM4 expression to be decreased in poor-quality human spermatozoa, old human testes, and testicular biopsies with nonobstructive azoospermia. Using CRISPR-Cas9 technology, we knocked out the <i>Cmtm4</i> gene in mice. These <i>Cmtm4</i> knockout (KO) mice showed reduced testicular daily sperm production, lower epididymal sperm motility and increased proportion of abnormally backward-curved sperm heads and bent sperm midpieces. These mice also had an evident sub-fertile phenotype, characterized by low pregnancy rates on prolonged breeding with wild type female mice, reduced <i>in vitro</i> fertilization efficiency and a reduced percentage of acrosome reactions. We then performed quantitative proteomic analysis of the testes, where we identified 139 proteins to be downregulated in Cmtm4-KO mice, 100 (71.9%) of which were related to sperm motility and acrosome reaction. The same proteomic analysis was performed on sperm, where we identified 3588 proteins with 409 being differentially regulated in <i>Cmtm4</i>-KO mice. Our enrichment analysis showed that upregulated proteins were enriched with nucleosomal DNA binding functions and the downregulated proteins were enriched with actin binding functions. These findings elucidate the roles of CMTM4 in male fertility and demonstrates its potential as a promising molecular candidate for sperm quality assessment and the diagnosis or treatment of male infertility.

### Keywords
Cmtm4, Sperm, Proteome, Knockout

### Affiliations
Department of Immunology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Peking University Health Science Center
Department of Immunology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Peking University

### Submitter
Liu FuJun

### Lab Head
Dr Liu FuJun
Department of Immunology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Peking University


