### Accession
PXD003455

### Title
Zebrafish embryo Kac -  Global proteomic analysis of lysine acetylation in zebrafish (Danio rerio) embryos

### Description
Zebrafish (Danio rerio) model system have used widespread vertebrate investigations for genetic and cell biological analyses, and is suitable for small molecular screens such as chemical, toxicity and drug in order to use for human diseases and drug discovery . Recently, These powerful zebrafish model increasingly apply to human metabolic disease such as obesity and diabetes and toxicology. Despite a lot of advantages, proteomics research at zebrafish has received little interest in comparison with genetic and biological research using histology and in situ hybridization.  Protein lysine acetylation is one of the most known post-translational modifications with dynamic and reversibly controlled by lysine acetyltransferase such as histone acetyltransferases and lysine deacetylase such as histone deacetylases and sirtuins family.Also, during the past year, global lysine acetylome studies using MS-based proteomics approach was in diverse species such as human, mouse,  E. coli, Yeast and plants. Based on global acetylome data, our understanding of the roles of lysine acetylation in various cellular processes has increased. . The aim of this study was to identify Lysine acetylation in zebrafish embryos and determine the homology from Human at modified site level. Here we showed the global lysine acetylation study in Zebrafish embryos using MS-based zebrafish embryos.

### Sample Protocol
* D. rerio cultures The wild type zebrafish (D. rerio) were obtained from the Korean Zebrafish Organogenesis Mutant Bank at Kyungpook National University (Daegu, Korea). Zebrafish were maintained under the 14 hr light and 10 hr dark cycle at 28.5°C as described previously (6) and were fed with baby brine shrimp (Advanced Hatchery Technology Inc.) twice per daily. Developmental stages are provided as hpf based on standard developmental stages(5). Wild type embryos were produced by pair matings and kept at 28.5°C in embryos media (0.3 mg/mL of sea salt and 1 µg/mL of methylene blue).  * Protein extract from embryos Embryos were grown until 5 days hpf in embryos media and collected. Embryos were manually dechorionated and deyolked with deyolking buffer (55 mM NaCl, 1.8 mM KCl, and 1.25 mM NaHCO3) and deyolking washing buffer (110 mM NaCl, 3.5 mM KCl, 2.7 mM CaCl2, 10 mM Tris, pH 8.5) by pipetting as previously described (24). And then deyolked embryos were sonicated in lysis buffer (25 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6, 150 mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, 1% sodium deoxycholate and 0.1% SDS) with protease inhibitor cocktail (10 M sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM sodium fluoride, 1 mM β-glycerophosphate and 1 mM sodium orthovanadata), and sodium butyrate and nicotinamide as HDAC inhibitors 4 times at 20% for 10s on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz). Sonicated embryos were centrifuged at 14,000 ×g for 10 min at 4°C and supernatants were transferred to new tubes. For protein precipitation, embryonic proteins were added precipitated with cold 10% trichloroacetic acid in acetone supplemented with 50 mM DTT, 0.1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail Set IV (Millipore) and PVPP powder for 2 h at -20 °C. After centrifugation at 20,000g at 4 °C for 10 min, the supernatant was discarded. The remaining precipitate was washed with cold acetone supplemented with 50 mM DTT, 1mM PMSF for three times. After air drying, the precipitate was resuspended in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 2mM EDTA, 10 mM DTT and 0.1% Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail Set II). The resuspended sample was sonicated 3 times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor. The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 20,000g at 4 °C for 10 min.  * In solution trypsin digestion Trypsin (Promega) was added into protein solution with ratio of trypsin to protein at 1:50 (w/w) for digestion at 37 °C for 16 hours. Dithiothreitol was then added to final concentration 5 mM followed by incubation at 50 °C for 30 min. After that, Iodoacetamide was added to alkylate proteins with final concentration 15 mM followed by incubation at room temperature in dark for 30 min. The alkylation reaction was quenched by 30 mM of cysteine at room temperature for another 30 min. Trypsin was then added again with ratio of trypsin to protein at 1:100 (w/w) for digestion at 37 oC for 3 hours to complete the digestion cycle.  * Affinity enrichment of Lysine acetylation peptides To enrich Lysine acetylation peptides, tryptic peptides dissolved in NETN buffer (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0) were incubated with pre-washed antibody beads (PTM Biolabs) at 4°C overnight with gentle shaking. The beads were washed four times with NETN buffer and twice with H2O. The bound peptides were eluted from the beads with 0.1% TFA and vacuum-dried followed by analyzing by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
* LC-MS/MS analysis Enriched peptides were dissolved in solvent A (water in 0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile), directly loaded onto a reversed-phase pre-column (Acclaim PepMap 100, Thermo Scientific). Peptide separation was performed using a reversed-phase analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, Thermo Scientific) with a linear gradient of 5–35% solvent B (acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid and 2% water) for 30 min and 35-80% solvent B for 10 min at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) coupled online to the UPLC. Intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were selected for MS/MS using 28% NCE; ion fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 10 MS/MS scans was applied for the top 10 precursor ions above a threshold ion count of 2E4 in the MS survey scan with 5.0s dynamic exclusion. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. Automatic gain control (AGC) was used to prevent overfilling of the ion trap; 5E4 ions were accumulated for generation of MS/MS spectra. For MS scans, the m/z scan range was 350 to 1600 Da.  * Database Search The resulting MS/MS data were processed using MaxQuant with integrated Andromeda search engine (v.1.4.1.2). Tandem mass spectra were searched against UniProt/Swiss-Prot database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages, 4 modifications per peptide and 5 charges. Mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethylation on Cys was specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met, acetylation on lysine and acetylation on protein N-terminal were specified as variable modifications. False discovery rate (FDR) thresholds for protein, peptide and modification site were specified at 1%. Minimum peptide length was set at 7.

### Publication Abstract
Lysine acetylation is an important post-translational modification (PTM). Since the development of MS-based proteomics technology, important roles of lysine acetylation beyond histones have focused on chromatin remodeling during the cell cycle and regulation of nuclear transport, metabolism, and translation. Zebrafish (Danio rerio) is a widely used vertebrate model in genetics and biologic studies. Although studies in several mammalian species have been performed, the mechanism of lysine acetylation in D. rerio embryos is incompletely understood. Here, we investigated the global acetylome in D. rerio embryos by using an MS-based proteomics approach. We identified 351 acetylated peptides and 377 nonredundant acetylation sites on 189 lysine-acetylated proteins in 5-day postfertilization (hpf) embryos of D. rerio. Among lysine-acetylated peptides, 40.2% indicated three motifs: (ac)KxxxK, (ac)KxxxxK, and Lx(ac)K. Of 190 acetylated proteins, 81 (42.6%) were mainly distributed in the cytoplasm. Gene ontology enrichment and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes pathway analyses showed that lysine acetylation in D. rerio was enriched in metabolic pathways. Additionally, 17 of 30 acetylated ribosomal proteins were evolutionarily conserved between zebrafish and humans. Our results indicate that acetyllysine might have regulatory effects on ribosomal proteins involved in protein biosynthesis.

### Keywords
Lysine acetylation, Zebrafish, Ptms, Embryos

### Affiliations
Kyungpook National University
College of Pharmacy, Research Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kyungpook National University, South Korea

### Submitter
Oh Kwang Kwon

### Lab Head
Dr Sangkyu Lee
College of Pharmacy, Research Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kyungpook National University, South Korea


