### Accession
PXD001874

### Title
Human Hepatocyte Proteome -  In-depth quantitative analysis and comparison of the human hepatocyte and hepatoma cell line HepG2 proteomes

### Description
Here we report a comprehensive proteomic analysis of purified human hepatocytes and a human hepatoma cell line HepG2. The complete dataset comprises 9,400 proteins and provides quantitative depiction of the proteomes of hepatocytes and HepG2 cells at the protein titer and copy number dimensions.

### Sample Protocol
Filter aided sample preparation (FASP), Strom anion exchemge (SAX), LC-MS/MS on QExactive mass spectrometers

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using MaxQuant version 1.2.6.20 using Anromeda search engine.

### Publication Abstract
Hepatocytes play a pivotal role in human homeostasis. They are essential in regulation of glucose and lipid levels in blood and play a central role in metabolism of amino acids, lipids, drugs and xenobiotic-compounds. In addition, hepatocytes produce a major portion of proteins circulating in the blood. Hepatocytes were isolated from liver tissue obtained from surgical resections. Proteins were extracted and processed using filter aided sample preparation protocol and were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using high accuracy mass spectrometry. Proteins were quantified by the 'Total Protein Approach' and 'Proteomic Ruler'. We report a comprehensive proteomic analysis of purified human hepatocytes and the human hepatoma cell line HepG2. The complete dataset comprises 9400 proteins and provides a comprehensive and quantitative depiction of the proteomes of hepatocytes and HepG2 cells at the protein titer and copy number dimensions. We describe basic cell organization and in detail energy metabolism pathways and metabolite transport. We provide quantitative insights into protein synthesis and drug and xenobiotics catabolism. Our data delineate differences between the native human hepatocytes and HepG2 cells by providing for the first time quantitative data at protein concentrations and copy numbers.

### Keywords
Human hepatocyte

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Biochemistry
Proteomics

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Wisniewski Jacek R.
Max Planck Institute for Biochemistry


