### Accession
PXD027740

### Title
Enhancer recruitment of transcription repressors RUNX1 and TLE3 by mis-expressed FOXC1 blocks differentiation in acute myeloid leukemia

### Description
Despite absent expression in normal hematopoiesis, the Forkhead factor FOXC1, a critical  mesenchymal differentiation regulator, is highly expressed in ~30% of HOXAhigh AML to confer blocked  monocyte/macrophage differentiation. Through integrated proteomics and bioinformatics, we  discovered that FOXC1 and RUNX1 interact through Forkhead and Runt domains respectively and cooccupy primed and active enhancers distributed close to differentiation genes. FOXC1 stabilises  association of RUNX1, HDAC1 and Groucho repressor TLE3 to limit enhancer activity: FOXC1  knockdown induced loss of repressor proteins, gain of CEBPA binding, enhancer acetylation and  upregulation of nearby genes, including KLF2. Furthermore, it triggered genome-wide redistribution of  RUNX1, TLE3 and HDAC1 from enhancers to promoters leading to repression of self-renewal genes  including MYC and MYB. Our studies highlight RUNX1 and CEBPA transcription factor swapping as a  feature of leukemia cell differentiation, and reveal that FOXC1 prevents this by stabilising enhancer  binding of a RUNX1/HDAC1/TLE3 transcription repressor complex, to oncogenic effect.

### Sample Protocol
RIME  samples were prepared and analysed by mass spectrometry as described (Mohammed et al., 2016;  Papachristou et al., 2018; Glont et al., 2019). Briefly, the proteins bound to the beads were digested by  adding trypsin prepared in 100mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer. Samples were incubated overnight  at 37C followed by a second-step of digestion the next day for four hours. Samples were acidified with  the addition of 5% formic acid and purified using C18 columns according to manufacturer’s instructions  (Harvard Apparatus, Cambridge, UK). After purification, samples were dried with SpeedVac and  reconstituted in 15µl of 0.1% formic acid. A volume of 5µl of each sample was injected on the Dionex  Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system coupled with the Q-Exactive mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
For the HCD data processing, the SequestHT search engine  implemented on Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software was used with Precursor Mass Tolerance 20ppm  and Fragment Mass Tolerance 0.02Da. Dynamic modifications were oxidation of M (+15.995Da) and  deamidation of N/Q (+0.984Da).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tle3, Foxc1, Groucho, Acute myeloid leukemia, Runx1

### Affiliations
Leukaemia Biology Laboratory, Cancer Research UK Manchester Institute, The University of  Manchester, Manchester, M20 4GJ, United Kingdom;
Senior Scientific Assistant

### Submitter
Evangelia Papachristou

### Lab Head
Dr Tim Somervaille
Leukaemia Biology Laboratory, Cancer Research UK Manchester Institute, The University of  Manchester, Manchester, M20 4GJ, United Kingdom;


