### Accession
PXD040613

### Title
S-palmitoylation during retinoic acid induced neuronal differentiation of SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells

### Description
S-palmitoylation is the covalent attachment of palmitic acid to cysteine residues through a thioester bond. S-palmitoylation is highly abundant in neurons, where it plays a fundamental role in neuronal development. In addition, S-palmitoylation is associated with many neurodegenerative diseases, including Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, and Huntington's disease. However, knowledge of S-palmitoylation in neurodevelopment is limited due to technological challenges in analysing this highly hydrophobic modification of proteins. Here, we use two orthogonal methods, acyl-biotin exchange and lipid metabolic labelling, to identify S-acylated proteins and sites in neuronal cells. We identified 650 S-palmitoylated proteins by both methods, including proteins that are well-known for their role in neuronal differentiation. Importantly, significant changes in the abundance of S-palmitoylated proteins were detected during neuronal differentiation. Overall, the combination of methods described here provides the advantage of cross-validation of the identified S-palmitoylated proteins and should be used further to study S-palmitoylation in the central nervous system to understand physiology and neurodegenerative diseases.

### Sample Protocol
SH-SY5Y cells were differentiated with retinoic acid over a 7-day period. For lipid metabolic labelling, HEK293T and SH-SY5Y cells were treated with an alkyne-functionalised fatty acid probe, which is metabolically incorporated. After lysis, probe-modified proteins were ligated by copper-catalysed alkyne-azide cycloaddition to an azide-biotin conjugate followed by streptavidin affinity purification. For acyl-biotin exchange, HEK293T and SH-SY5Y cell lysates were treated with a cysteine-reactive alkylation agent to block all free cysteines. Then, thioesters were selectively hydrolysed by hydroxylamine under neutral conditions. These newly-released thiols were labelled with a cysteine-reactive biotinylation reagent. The biotinylated proteins were enriched with streptavidin. The enriched samples were digested with trypsin overnight and desalted using a C18 stagetip. For total proteome analysis, SH-SY5Y lysates were digested on S-trap columns according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

### Data Protocol
Data was processed using MaxQuant. Search outputs were analysed and visualised using Perseus, Excel, Graphpad Prism and Adobe illustrator.

### Publication Abstract
<i>S</i>-Palmitoylation is the covalent attachment of C14:0-C22:0 fatty acids (mainly C16:0 palmitate) to cysteines via thioester bonds. This lipid modification is highly abundant in neurons, where it plays a role in neuronal development and is implicated in neurodegenerative diseases, such as Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, and Huntington's disease. The knowledge of <i>S</i>-palmitoylation in neurodevelopment is limited due to technological challenges in analyzing this highly hydrophobic protein modification. Here, we used two orthogonal methods, acyl-biotin exchange (ABE) and lipid metabolic labeling (LML), to identify <i>S</i>-palmitoylated proteins and sites during retinoic acid-induced neuronal differentiation of SH-SY5Y cells. We identified 2002 putative <i>S</i>-palmitoylated proteins in total, of which 650 were found with both methods. Significant changes in the abundance of <i>S</i>-palmitoylated proteins were detected, in particular for several processes and protein classes that are known to be important for neuronal differentiation, which include proto-oncogene tyrosine-protein kinase receptor (RET) signal transduction, SNARE protein-mediated exocytosis, and neural cell adhesion molecules. Overall, <i>S</i>-palmitoylation profiling by employing ABE and LML in parallel during RA-induced differentiation of SH-SY5Y cells revealed a subset of high confidence bona fide <i>S</i>-palmitoylated proteins and suggested an important role for <i>S</i>-palmitoylation in neuronal differentiation.

### Keywords
Sh-sy5y differentiation, Lipid metabolic labelling, Protein s-palmitoylation, Retinoic acid, Mass spectrometry-based proteomics, Acyl-biotin exchange

### Affiliations
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Utrecht, Padualaan 8, Utrecht 3584 CH, The Netherlands

Netherlands Proteomics Center, Padualaan 8, Utrecht 3584 CH, The Netherlands
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Utrecht, Padualaan 8, Utrecht 3584 CH The Netherlands Netherlands Proteomics Center, Padualaan 8, Utrecht 3584 CH, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Samiksha Sardana

### Lab Head
Dr Marc Pieter Baggelaar
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Utrecht, Padualaan 8, Utrecht 3584 CH The Netherlands Netherlands Proteomics Center, Padualaan 8, Utrecht 3584 CH, The Netherlands


