### Accession
PXD003798

### Title
Studying the core circuitry of pluripotency by selective isolation of chromatin-associated proteins

### Description
Here we have developed a method to identify chromatin-bound partners of a protein of interest by selective isolation of chromatin-associated proteins (SICAP) followed by mass spectrometry. We applied SICAP to identify chromatin-binding proteins associated to Oct4, Sox2 and Nanog in mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells.

### Sample Protocol
SICAP starts from cross-linked and sheared chromatin using established ChIP procedures. Addition of a suitable antibody and protein-A beads then allows capture of the protein of interest, irrespective whether this is in its DNA-bound (i.e. crosslinked) or soluble form. The key step of SICAP is then the end-labeling of DNA-fragments with biotin by terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase (TdT) in the presence of biotinylated nucleotides, while the protein-DNA complex is still on the protein-A beads. TdT is a template-independent DNA-polymerase extending DNA 3’-end regardless of the complementary strand. Next, addition of ionic detergents (7.5% SDS) and a reducing agent disassembles all protein interactions (except those crosslinked to DNA), denatures the antibody, and releases chromatin fragments. Biotinylated DNA-protein complexes are then captured by streptavidin beads, followed by subsequent stringent washes (1% SDS, 2M NaCl, 20% iso-propanol, 40% acetonitrile) to effectively remove hitchhiker proteins and the antibody. Finally, protein-DNA cross-linking is broken by heating and proteins are proteolytically digested for mass spectrometric identification.

### Data Protocol
The MS spectra were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and the proteins were identified using MASCOT search engine (Matrix Science) against the Mus musculus proteome of the Uniprot database. The Perculator algorithm was used to limit FDR rates to a q-value<0.01

### Publication Abstract
Maintenance of pluripotency is regulated by a network of transcription factors coordinated by Oct4, Sox2, and Nanog (OSN), yet a systematic investigation of the composition and dynamics of the OSN protein network specifically on chromatin is still missing. Here we have developed a method combining ChIP with selective isolation of chromatin-associated proteins (SICAP) followed by mass spectrometry to identify chromatin-bound partners of a protein of interest. ChIP-SICAP in mouse embryonic stem cells (ESCs) identified over 400 proteins associating with OSN, including several whose interaction depends on the pluripotent state. Trim24, a previously unrecognized protein in the network, converges with OSN on multiple enhancers and suppresses the expression of developmental genes while activating cell cycle genes. Consistently, Trim24 significantly improved efficiency of cellular reprogramming, demonstrating its direct functionality in establishing pluripotency. Collectively, ChIP-SICAP provides a powerful tool to decode chromatin protein composition, further enhanced by its integrative capacity to perform ChIP-seq.

### Keywords
Chromatin, Mouse embryonic stem cell, Mass spectrometry, Sicap

### Affiliations
EMBL & DKFZ
Prof. Jeroen Krijgsveld  Genome Biology, EMBL & German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ) & University of Heidelberg, Medical Faculty

### Submitter
Mahmoud Reza Rafiee

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Jeroen Krijgsveld
Prof. Jeroen Krijgsveld  Genome Biology, EMBL & German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ) & University of Heidelberg, Medical Faculty


