### Accession
PXD010293

### Title
Seminal fluid and sperm proteomics of Aedes aegypti

### Description
Sperm samples were extracted from adult A. aegypti male seminal vesicles. Semen samples were extracted from bursa of recently mated bursa of N15 labeled females. The goal was to differentiate between the contribution of seminal fluid proteins and sperm proteins in the semen transfered to the female. Our results yield insights into the molecular function, genome organization, regulation, and evolution of sperm proteins and SFPs in this important disease vector.

### Sample Protocol
Sperm samples were extracted from adult A. aegypti male seminal vesicles. Semen samples were extracted from bursa of recently mated bursa of N15 labeled females. Solubilized proteins were separated on a 1-Dimension SDS-PAGE gel and split into 6 fractions, with biological replicates run in parallel. Gel fractions were reduced in dithiothreitol, alkylated with iodoacetamide, and digested with trypsin. Lyophilized, digested proteins were reconstituted in 0.5% formic acid and subjected to nanoLC-ESI-MS/MS analysis using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
RAW files were converted to mzML and searched against the Aedes aegypti L5.0 RefSeq genome using X!Tandem and Comet. Search results were processed using peptideProphet, interProphet and proteinProphet.

### Publication Abstract
The yellow fever mosquito, <i>Aedes aegypti,</i>, transmits several viruses causative of serious diseases, including dengue, Zika, and chikungunya. Some proposed efforts to control this vector involve manipulating reproduction to suppress wild populations or to replace them with disease-resistant mosquitoes. The design of such strategies requires an intimate knowledge of reproductive processes, yet our basic understanding of reproductive genetics in this vector remains largely incomplete. To accelerate future investigations, we have comprehensively catalogued sperm and seminal fluid proteins (SFPs) transferred to females in the ejaculate using tandem mass spectrometry. By excluding female-derived proteins using an isotopic labeling approach, we identified 870 sperm proteins and 280 SFPs. Functional composition analysis revealed parallels with known aspects of sperm biology and SFP function in other insects. To corroborate our proteome characterization, we also generated transcriptomes for testes and the male accessory glands-the primary contributors to <i>Ae. aegypti</i>, sperm and seminal fluid, respectively. Differential gene expression of accessory glands from virgin and mated males suggests that transcripts encoding proteins involved in protein translation are upregulated post-mating. Several SFP transcripts were also modulated after mating, but &gt;90% remained unchanged. Finally, a significant enrichment of SFPs was observed on chromosome 1, which harbors the male sex determining locus in this species. Our study provides a comprehensive proteomic and transcriptomic characterization of ejaculate production and composition and thus provides a foundation for future investigations of <i>Ae. aegypti</i>, reproductive biology, from functional analysis of individual proteins to broader examination of reproductive processes.

### Keywords
Mosquito, Sperm, Semen, Aedes aegypti, Ejaculate, N15 labeled

### Affiliations
Syracuse University
Department of Entomology, Cornell University, USA

### Submitter
Kirill Borziak

### Lab Head
Dr Laura C. Harrington
Department of Entomology, Cornell University, USA


