### Accession
PXD022114

### Title
Tandem mass spectrometry of buffalo sperm-surface extracted proteins

### Description
The buffalo sperm surface proteins which are bound by either non-covalent (electrostatic)interactions or by a GPI-anchor were extracted and subjected to LC-MS/MS. The results revealed that proteins involved in the immune response and reproductive processes adorn the buffalo sperm surface.

### Sample Protocol
a) Elevated salt extraction of surface proteins: The post-swim-up collected sperm pellets were divided, washed in DPBS and resuspended in either 2X or 4X DPBS for 30 min and 60 min at 37°C (2X-30, 2X-60, 4X-30 and 4X-60) and then pelletized by centrifugation for 10 min at 280 x g. The tubes were shaken gently during the period of incubation. The supernatants were filtered through a 0.22µ filter and pooled extractions (representing the buffalo sperm surface) from 10 ejaculates were acetone precipitated (1:9). The precipitated proteins were then suspended in 200-400µl of the dissolution buffer (Appendix IV), concentrated and subjected to SDS-PAGE after quantification (explained below).  b) PI-PLC extraction of GPI-linked Proteins:  The post-swim-up 10 x 106 spermatozoa (counted on a Neubauer chamber) were incubated with three different concentrations of Phospholipase C enzyme, Phosphatidylinositol-specific (PI-PLC from Bacillus cereus) (1U, 1.5U and 2U/ml) for 2 hrs at 37°C in a siliconized tube. The B. cereus PI-PLC provides an efficient means of releasing most GPI-anchored proteins from cell surfaces. GPI-linked proteins are released under conditions in which the cells remain viable, allowing isolation of the GPI-linked proteins in a non-invasive manner. The PI-PLC enzyme at the concentration of 100 enzyme units/ml in 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 1 mM EDTA, 0.01% sodium azide and 50% glycerol was used for realizing the working concentrations used in the experiments. The siliconized tubes were shaken gently during the period of incubation. Thereafter, the samples were centrifuged at 1000 x g for 10 min and the supernatants were acetone precipitated (1:9). The precipitated proteins were then suspended in 200-400µl of the dissolution buffer, concentrated and subjected to sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) after quantification (explained below).

### Data Protocol
The seven samples were processed and the generated raw files were analyzed using Trans-Proteomic Pipeline TPP v5.1 (Syzygy) rev 0 (Deutsch et al., 2015), against an “in-house” generated proteome database from UniProt knowledgebase (Bos taurus, Bubalus bubalis and beta-defensin, downloaded January 3, 2019; www.uniprot.org) using the Comet search engine (Eng et al., 2015). The precursor and fragment mass tolerances were set at 10 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. The protease used to generate peptides, i.e. enzyme specificity was set for trypsin, along with maximum missed cleavages value of two. Carbamidomethyl on cysteine (C) was considered as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation was considered as variable modifications for database search. The peptide spectrum match and protein false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01. The proteins with iProphet (Shteynberg et al., 2011) probability greater than 0.99 were only considered because the number of incorrectly identified proteins at p>0.99 were essentially zero.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Beta-defensin, Sperm, Buffalo

### Affiliations
NATIONAL DAIRY RESEARCH INSTITUTE
Animal Genomics Lab, Animal Biotechnology Centre, National Dairy Research Institute, Karnal, Haryana, India

### Submitter
VIPUL BATRA

### Lab Head
Dr Tirtha Kumar Datta
Animal Genomics Lab, Animal Biotechnology Centre, National Dairy Research Institute, Karnal, Haryana, India


