### Accession
PXD021143

### Title
Interactome of S65 phosphorylated NEDD8 and Ub

### Description
In this project we present for the first time a proteome-wide interaction study of S65 phosphorylated NEDD8 and ubiquitin (Ub). By using cell extracts and affinity enrichment coupled to mass spectrometry, we show that pNEDD8 and pUb have different interactomes that are also distinct from those of the non-modified forms. Among the preferential pNEDD8 interactors are HSP70 family members and, indeed, pNEDD8 stimulates HSP70 ATPase activity more pronouncedly than non-modified NEDD8. Our findings provide evidence that phosphorylation of Ub and NEDD8 at S65 is involved in stress response signaling and underscore the importance of studying non-covalent interactions of NEDD8 in particular and post-translational modifications of Ubls in general.

### Sample Protocol
AP-MS using S65 phosphorylated/ non-hydrolyzably phosphorylated NEDD8/Ub and HEK293/SHSY5Y whole cell extract (triplicate). Enriched proteins were eluted, following in-solution tryptic digest and LC-MS/MS measurement in technical duplicate. Data were analyzed using MaxQuant and Perseus.

### Data Protocol
For label-free quantification, the raw files from LC-MS/MS measurements were analyzed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.8) with default settings, match between runs and label-free quantification (LFQ) enabled, and searching against the UniProt human proteome. For further data processing Perseus software (version 1.6.10.50) was used.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Phosphorylation, Interactome, Nedd8

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Cellular Biochemistry, Department of Biology, University of Konstanz, Germany
Scheffner Group, Department of Biology, University of Konstanz

### Submitter
Katrin  Stuber

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Martin Scheffner
Laboratory of Cellular Biochemistry, Department of Biology, University of Konstanz, Germany


