### Accession
PXD017964

### Title
A truncated MRE11 form induced by SPRTN is deficient in DNA repair and radiosensitises cancer cells

### Description
he human MRE11/RAD50/NBS1 (MRN) complex plays a crucial role in sensing and repairing DNA DSB. MRE11 possesses 3’-5’ exonuclease and endonuclease activity and forms the core of the multifunctional MRN complex. We previously identified a C-terminally truncated form of MRE11 (TR-MRE11) associated with post-translational MRE11 degradation. Here we identified the approximate cleavage site of TR-MRE11 at 559-580 amino acids, its DNA damage repair function and the factors regulating TR-MRE11 accumulation. The nuclease enzymatic activity of TR-MRE11 was dramatically reduced, associated with a lack of DNA binding efficiency, whilst TR-MRE11 still interacted efficiently with RAD50 and NBS1. Lack of the MRE11 C-terminal resulted in deficient HR repair and increased cellular radiosensitivity. Knockdown of SprT-like N-terminal domain (SPRTN), an essential metalloprotease for DNA-protein crosslink repair, resulted in failure of MRE11 cleavage, with TR-MRE11 protein levels being positively correlated with SPRTN protein expression. The presence of this DNA repair-defective C-terminal truncation could explain the finding of high MRE11 expression, by immunohistochemistry using an antibody against MRE11 prior to the C-terminal, being associated with survival following radical radiotherapy in cancer patients. Ultimately, understanding the functional differences between intact and repair-defective MRE11 may lead to improvements in patient outcomes through a more informed choice of treatment.

### Sample Protocol
RT112 cells (2 x 107 cells per dish) were plated in five 15 cm dishes and harvested 2 days later. Total protein concentration was determined by BCA assay (Thermo Fisher, Waltham, CA). For immunoprecipitations, 10 mg lysate was precleared with protein A/G dynabeads (Thermo Fisher, Waltham, CA) at 4°C for 60 minutes. Lysates were incubated overnight with anti-MRE11 antibody (ab214) then added to protein A/G beads (40 µl) at 4°C for 2 hours. Beads were washed six times in PBS and binding proteins eluted by boiling for 10 min at 95 °C in 40 µl Laemmli buffer before running on an 4-20% SDS-PAGE gel. After instant blue staining, bands corresponding to FL- or TR-MRE11 were excised and in-gel digestion carried out with trypsin or elastase. MRE11 eluted peptides were separated on a 4-20% SDS-PAGE. MRE11 bands were excised from the gel, cut into small pieces and subjected to an in-gel-digest process [14]. In brief, gel bands were destained, incubated with 10 mM DTT and 50 mM iodacetamide before incubating them with 60ng of trypsin or elastase overnight at 37˚C. Peptides were extracted and dried down. Dried peptides were reconstituted in 98% LC-MS/MS water, 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% TFA. Fifty to fifty-eight percent of the tryptic or elastase peptides were analysed over 1 h gradient from 2-35% acetonitrile in 5% dimethyl sulfoxide, 0.1% formic acid (at 250 nl/min) using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UPLC connected to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos trihybrid operated in data-dependent acquisition mode (both instruments from Thermo). Data were acquired with the universal method as described previously [15]. Briefly, full MS scans were acquired in the Orbitrap at 120 k resolution over a m/z range 400 -1500, AGC target of 4e5 and S-lens RF of 30. Fragment ion spectra (MS/MS) were acquired in the Orbitrap (15K resolution) with a Quad isolation window of 1.2, AGC target of 5e4 and a maximum injection time of 40 ms, with HCD activation and 28% collision energy.

### Data Protocol
MASCOT (vs2.4, Matrix Science) was used for peptide and protein identification. Data were searched against the human SwissProt database (downloaded 2017_08 for TR MRE11 and 2017_07 for FL MRE11). The decoy function was enabled, as enzyme “trypsin” was selected for the tryptic digest (allowing up to two missed cleavages) and “None” for the elastase digests. In both cases, the precursor ion mass tolerance (MS1) was set up at 10ppm and the fragment mass tolerance (MS/MS) at 0.05Da. Oxidation on methionine, acetylation on Lys, N-terminal protein acetylation and deamidation on Asn and Gln were set up as variable modification whilst carboamidomethylation on Cys was chosen as fixed modification. An ion score cut off of 20 and a 1% FDR above identity or homology threshold was applied to the MASCOT outputs.

### Publication Abstract
The human MRE11/RAD50/NBS1 (MRN) complex plays a crucial role in sensing and repairing DNA DSB. MRE11 possesses dual 3'-5' exonuclease and endonuclease activity and forms the core of the multifunctional MRN complex. We previously identified a C-terminally truncated form of MRE11 (TR-MRE11) associated with post-translational MRE11 degradation. Here we identified SPRTN as the essential protease for the formation of TR-MRE11 and characterised the role of this MRE11 form in its DNA damage response (DDR). Using tandem mass spectrometry and site-directed mutagenesis, the SPRTN-dependent cleavage site for MRE11 was identified between 559 and 580 amino acids. Despite the intact interaction of TR-MRE11 with its constitutive core complex proteins RAD50 and NBS1, both nuclease activities of truncated MRE11 were dramatically reduced due to its deficient binding to DNA. Furthermore, lack of the MRE11 C-terminal decreased HR repair efficiency, very likely due to abolished recruitment of TR-MRE11 to the sites of DNA damage, which consequently led to increased cellular radiosensitivity. The presence of this DNA repair-defective TR-MRE11 could explain our previous finding that the high MRE11 protein expression by immunohistochemistry correlates with improved survival following radical radiotherapy in bladder cancer patients.

### Keywords
Mre11, C-terminal truncation, Dna repair, Sprtn, Mre11 cleavage

### Affiliations
CRUK/MRC Oxford Institute for Radiation Oncology, Department of Oncology, University of Oxford, Oxford, OX3 7DQ, UK
CRUK-MRC Oxford Institute for Radiation Oncology, Oxford University

### Submitter
iolanda Vendrell

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Anne Kiltie
CRUK/MRC Oxford Institute for Radiation Oncology, Department of Oncology, University of Oxford, Oxford, OX3 7DQ, UK


