### Accession
PXD016137

### Title
Streptococcus pneumoniae infection and murine hearat proteome

### Description
For the last two decades, the three most common causes of death world-wide have been ischemic heart disease, cerebrovascular disease and respiratory tract infections; the latter being caused mainly by the influenza virus and the bacterial pathogen Streptococcus pneumoniae (Spn). Reports through this period of time have shown that elderly patients admitted to the hospital for severe community-acquired pneumonia (CAP), experience ~10-25% mortality rates and up to 40% of them expired within one year. A key contributing factor for the observed high mortality rate are the major adverse cardiac events (MACE) that occur during hospitalization and convalescence9. Notably, during severe pneumococcal infections, Spn, the most common cause of CAP, has been shown to be capable of myocardial invasion, induction of cardiomyocyte death, and disruption of cardiac contractility. In addition, changes to heart functionality have also been reported after influenza infection in humans, however the mechanisms for this remain unclear.

### Sample Protocol
Heart tissues were first homogenize and then lysed using SDS buffer; proteins were digested using Suspension Trapping (STrap) method with the self-assembled filters. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using Ultimate 3000 nanoLC and Q Exactive mass spec (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Label-free quantitation by MaxQuant (v1.6); downstream bioinformatics analyses were performed on Perseus software (v1.6).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Heart; proteome; remodeling; streptococcus pneumoniae

### Affiliations
University of Delaware
J. Craig Venter Institute, Rockville, MD 20850

### Submitter
Yanbao Yu

### Lab Head
Dr Yanbao Yu
J. Craig Venter Institute, Rockville, MD 20850


