### Accession
PXD005953

### Title
Extended multiplexing of TMT labeling reveals age and high fat diet specific proteome changes in mouse epididymal adipose tissue

### Description
Age-related and/or high caloric intake driven changes in visceral adipose tissue contribute to the development of diabetes and cardiovascular disease.  The lack of reliable, high-throughput methods to analyze the adipose tissue protein composition has limited our understanding of the protein networks responsible for metabolic regulation of various adipose depots.  We have developed a proteomic approach using multiple-dimension liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry and multiplexed TMT labeling to analyze protein composition of epididymal adipose tissues isolated from mice fed either low or high fat diet for a short (8 weeks) or a long (18 weeks) term, and from mice that aged (26 weeks old) on low vs. high fat diets.  Advancing age and high-fat diet feeding led to graded deterioration, with long-term high fat diet exposure being the worst of all measures of peripheral metabolic health such as body weight, adiposity, plasma fasting glucose, insulin, triglycerides, total cholesterol levels, and glucose and insulin tolerance tests.  Epididymal adipose depot proteomic analysis identified >3300 proteins per sample.  In response to short-term high fat diet, 43 proteins representing lipid metabolism (e.g., AACS, ACOX1, ACLY) and red-ox pathways (e.g., CPD2, CYP2E, SOD3) were significantly altered (FDR < 10%). Long-term high fat diet significantly altered 55 proteins associated with immune response (e.g., IGTB2, IFIT3, LGALS1) and rennin angiotensin system (e.g. ENPEP, CMA1, CPA3, ANPEP). Age-related changes on low fat diet significantly altered only 18 proteins representing mainly urea cycle (e.g., OTC, ARG1, CPS1), and amino acid biosynthesis (e.g., GMT, AKR1C6).  Surprisingly, high fat diet driven age-related changes culminated with alterations in 155 proteins involving primarily the urea cycle (e.g., ARG1, CPS1), immune response/complement activation (e.g., C3, C4b, C8, C9, CFB, CFH, FGA), extracellular remodeling (e.g., EFEMP1, FBN1, FBN2, LTBP4, FERMT2, ECM1, EMILIN2, ITIH3) and apoptosis (e.g., YAP1, HIP1, NDRG1, PRKCD, MUL1) pathways.    Our unbiased mass spectrometry method, tailored to adipose tissue, identified both age-related and high fat diet specific proteomic signatures. In addition to well-described immune and extracellular remodeling response to high fat feeding, we have uncovered the pronounced involvement of arginine metabolism in response to advancing age, and branched chain amino acid metabolism in early response to high fat feeding.  We were able to uncouple age-related metabolic responses from those associated with caloric intake, a task otherwise difficult to achieve.

### Sample Protocol
MICE Studies were approved by the UW Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee.  C57Bl/6J male mice (Jackson Labs, #000664) were housed (3−5 mice per cage) at 22C, a 12h light/dark cycle, and free access to food and water.  At 8 wks, the mice were fed either a low-fat (Wayne Rodent BLOX 8604; Harlan Teklad Laboratory), or a high-fat (60% calories from fat, Bioserve, #F1850) diet and were analyzed at 16 wks and 26 wks of age.  Before necropsy, mice were fasted for 4h, blood collected, and euthanized by isofluorane inhalation.  Whole epididymal adipose tissue (EAT) depots were collected, snap frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at −80C until analysis.   ADIPOSE TISSUE PROTEIN ISOLATION 100 – 300 mg of EAT from individual mice was homogenized on ice in 1ml buffer (150mM NaCl, 50mM HEPES pH 8.5, 1x GBiosciences ProteaseArrest) using a polytron tissue homogenizer.  Homogenates were spun at 10,000g for 10m at 4C and the top lipid layer removed.  Supernatant and pellet were lysed by addition of SDS to a final concentration of 2.5% and sonicated 3 times at 2 watts for 5s with 30s rests. To further eliminate lipids, 4 parts methanol, 2 parts chloroform, and 3 parts water was added to each sample, mixed, and spun down. The top fraction was removed and the protein pellet  washed 4 times with 100% methanol. Proteins were vacuum dried and stored at -80C.  TRYPTIC DIGEST EAT samples were reconstituted in 50 mM HEPES with brief sonication and protein assayed with the Pierce BCA protein assay with BSA standard (Thermo Fisher). Steps below used 100ug protein of each sample in 0.1% Rapigest (Waters). Disulfide bonds were reduced with 5mM TCEP for 30m at 37C. Cysteines were alkylated with 15mM iodoacetamide for 30m at room temperature (RT) in the dark.  Excess iodoacetamide was quenched with 5mM DTT for 15m at RT in the dark. Protein was digested with LysC and Trypsin (Cat # V5071, Promega) at a 1:100 w/w protease:protein ratio for 3h at 37C, then at a 1:50 w/w ratio overnight at 37C. Digestion was terminated with TFA to 0.5%.  Particulates were removed by spinning at 12,000g for 15m, and peptides solid phase extracted using Waters Sep-Pak tC18 cartridges, dried, and stored at -80C.  TMT LABELING Peptides were reconstituted in 100mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) and a pooled standard for normalization was prepared by combining 6.25ug of peptide from each individual sample. Samples were randomly distributed between three 10plex label sets, along with 2 pooled samples per set.  TMT 10plex labeling reagents (0.8mg) were each dissolved in 52ul anhydrous acetonitrile (ACN). Each sample or standard containing 25ug of peptide in 25ul of TEAB buffer was combined with 12ul of its respective 10plex TMT reagent and incubated for 1h at RT. 2ul of each reaction mixture was combined, 2ul of 5% hydroxylamine added, and incubated for a further 15m. The normalization mixture was dried down, dissolved in 5% formic acid, and 2ug of peptide analyzed by a 2h LC-MS/MS run. This run assayed the total reporter ion intensity of each sample and checked labeling efficiency. The remaining samples were quenched by addition of 2ul of 5% hydroxylamine as above, then combined in an equimolar ratio based on total reporter ion intensities from the normalization run, and dried down before the 2D-LC-MS/MS analyses.  LC-MS/MS ANALYSIS Labeled samples were reconstituted in 5% formic acid and separated by 2D reverse-phase LC using a Dionex NCS-3500RS UltiMate RSLCnano UPLC system.  Samples (40ug) were injected onto a NanoEase 5um XBridge BEH130 C18 300um x 50mm column (Waters) at 3ul/min in mobile phase containing 10mM ammonium formate (pH 9).  Peptides were eluted by sequential injection of 20 uls of 14, 20, 22, 24, 26, 28, 30, 40, and 90% ACN in 10mM ammonium formate (pH 9) at 3ul/min flow rate. Eluted peptides were diluted with mobile phase containing 0.1% formic acid at 24ul/min and delivered to an Acclaim PepMap 100um x 2cm NanoViper C18, 5um trap on a switching valve.  After 10m of loading, the trap column was switched to a PepMap RSLC C18, 2um, 75um x 25cm EasySpray column (Thermo Scientific).  Peptides were separated at low pH using a 7.5–30% ACN gradient over 90m in mobile phase containing 0.1% formic acid at 300nl/min flow rate.  Each LC run required 2h for separation and re-equilibration. Mass spectrometry data was collected on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid instrument (Thermo Scientific).  Survey scans were performed in the Orbitrap (resolution 120,000), and data-dependent MS2 scans performed in the linear ion trap using CID (collision energy 35) following isolation with the instrument’s quadrupole. Reporter ion detection was performed in the Orbitrap (resolution 60,000) using MS3 scans following synchronous precursor isolation of the top 10 ions in the linear ion trap, and HCD in the ion-routing multipole (collision energy 65).

### Data Protocol
TMT DATA ANALYSIS RAW instrument files were processed using Proteome Discoverer version 1.4.1.14 (Thermo Scientific). For each of the TMT experiments, raw files from the 9 fractions were merged and searched with the SEQUEST HT search engine with a Mus musculus Swiss-Prot protein database downloaded July 2015 (16,716 entries). Searches were configured with static modifications for the TMT reagents (+229.163 Da) on lysines and N-termini, carbamidomethyl (+57.021 Da) on cysteines, dynamic modifications for oxidation of methionine residues (+15.9949 Da), parent ion tolerance of 1.25 Da, fragment mass tolerance of 1.0005 Da, monoisotopic masses, and trypsin cleavage (max 2 missed cleavages). The large parent ion tolerance was used to increase the number of peptides being scored to improve discrimination of true versus false identifications. Searches used a reversed sequence decoy strategy to control peptide false discovery and identifications were validated by Percolator software. Only peptides with q scores < 0.05 were accepted, and one or more unique peptides were required for matching a protein entry for its identification.    Search results and TMT reporter ion intensities were exported as text files and processed with in-house scripts. A median reporter ion intensity peak height cutoff of 700 was used, and all reporter ion intensities for unique peptides matched to each respective protein were summed to create total protein intensities. We employed two normalization procedures to handle the 30-plex experiment (3 TMT experiments with 10 channels each). The first was applied within each 10-plex experiment. The grand total reporter ion intensity for each channel was multiplied by a global scaling factor to adjust its total intensity to the average total intensity across the 10 channels. This corrects for small sample loading and labeling reaction efficiency differences.    MS2 scans are selected stochastically by the mass spectrometer for each peptide. Two identical peptides in two different TMT experiments having identical concentrations would be extremely unlikely to have similar reporter ion signals, since their sampled intensities would depend on the peptide concentration at the time of MS2 generation. Therefore, common, pooled internal standards were used to normalize reporter ion intensities of proteins between different TMT experiments. This allowed preservation of individual intensity-scale measurements and avoided calculation of relative intensity measures such as ratios or percentages within each TMT experiment. To accomplish this, the duplicate summed reporter ion measurements for each protein in the common pool channels within each TMT experiment were averaged and used to create reference values for each protein. The three reference values for each protein in each TMT experiment were then averaged (geometric mean), and scaling factors calculated for each protein to adjust its reference value to the geometric mean value.  These scaling factors were then used to adjust the summed reporter ion intensities for each protein in the remaining 8 experimental samples in each TMT experiment. We call this procedure internal reference scaling (IRS).   Differential protein abundance between groups was then determined by comparing the IRS-normalized total reporter ion intensities between groups using the Bioconductor package edgeR, which uses quasi negative binomial and the quantile-adjusted conditional maximum likelihood (qCML) method for experiments with single factor.  Additional data normalizations, multiple testing corrections, and calculation of false discovery rates were performed within edgeR.

### Publication Abstract
The lack of high-throughput methods to analyze the adipose tissue protein composition limits our understanding of the protein networks responsible for age and diet related metabolic response. We have developed an approach using multiple-dimension liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry and extended multiplexing (24 biological samples) with tandem mass tags (TMT) labeling to analyze proteomes of epididymal adipose tissues isolated from mice fed either low or high fat diet for a short or a long-term, and from mice that aged on low <i>versus</i> high fat diets. The peripheral metabolic health (as measured by body weight, adiposity, plasma fasting glucose, insulin, triglycerides, total cholesterol levels, and glucose and insulin tolerance tests) deteriorated with diet and advancing age, with long-term high fat diet exposure being the worst. In response to short-term high fat diet, 43 proteins representing lipid metabolism (<i>e.g.</i> AACS, ACOX1, ACLY) and red-ox pathways (<i>e.g.</i> CPD2, CYP2E, SOD3) were significantly altered (FDR &lt; 10%). Long-term high fat diet significantly altered 55 proteins associated with immune response (<i>e.g.</i> IGTB2, IFIT3, LGALS1) and rennin angiotensin system (<i>e.g.</i> ENPEP, CMA1, CPA3, ANPEP). Age-related changes on low fat diet significantly altered only 18 proteins representing mainly urea cycle (<i>e.g.</i> OTC, ARG1, CPS1), and amino acid biosynthesis (<i>e.g.</i> GMT, AKR1C6). Surprisingly, high fat diet driven age-related changes culminated with alterations in 155 proteins involving primarily the urea cycle (<i>e.g.</i> ARG1, CPS1), immune response/complement activation (<i>e.g.</i> C3, C4b, C8, C9, CFB, CFH, FGA), extracellular remodeling (<i>e.g.</i> EFEMP1, FBN1, FBN2, LTBP4, FERMT2, ECM1, EMILIN2, ITIH3) and apoptosis (<i>e.g.</i> YAP1, HIP1, NDRG1, PRKCD, MUL1) pathways. Using our adipose tissue tailored approach we have identified both age-related and high fat diet specific proteomic signatures highlighting a pronounced involvement of arginine metabolism in response to advancing age, and branched chain amino acid metabolism in early response to high fat feeding. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD005953.

### Keywords
Epididymal adipose tissue, Mouse, Extended multiplexing, Low fat diet, Proteomics, Aging, Tandem mass tags, Protein expression, Mudpit, Internal reference scaling normalization, High fat diet, Orbitrap fusion

### Affiliations
Oregon Health & Science University
Department of Medicine, Knight Cardiovascular Institute, Oregon Health & Sciences University, Portland, Oregon, USA

### Submitter
Nathalie Pamir

### Lab Head
Dr Nathalie Pamir
Department of Medicine, Knight Cardiovascular Institute, Oregon Health & Sciences University, Portland, Oregon, USA


