### Accession
PXD021834

### Title
Phosphorylation in synaptic plasticity

### Description
Homeostatic synaptic scaling is a compensatory mechanism that allows adjustment of the strength of synaptic connections up or down in response to changes in input to maintain global network stability. To characterize the molecular changes on the level of protein modification that contribute to synaptic scaling, we examined changes of the proteome and phosphoproteome in response to activity manipulation. For this purpose, we pharmacologically induced up- or down-scaling in primary cultured cortical neurons for different time spans ranging from minutes (5 min, 15 min) up to one day. Temporal snapshots of the neuronal proteome and phosphoproteome were obtained using high-resolution LC-MS/MS analyses. Our data cover 45,395 phosphorylated peptide species that map to 26,642 unique phosphorylation sites. Activity manipulation elicited significant regulation of 3,382 phosphorylation events on proteins predominantly located at the synaptic compartment or involved in organization of the cytoskeleton. With respect to the temporal regulation, we discovered that phosphomodulation during scaling was not only achieved by time-limited phosphorylation, but for a quarter of initial sites also by persistent regulation. Persistence in phosphorylation was associated with reciprocity in the sign of its regulation, reflecting the two different scaling polarities.

### Sample Protocol
Dissociated cortical neurons were prepared and maintained as previously described (Aakalu et al., 2001). Cortices from postnatal day one old rat pups (RRID:RGD_734476; strain Sprague-Dawley, both male and female) were dissected, dissociated by incubating with L-cysteine-papain solution at 37°C and plated onto 10 cm Petri dishes (MatTek, Ashland, MA) previously coated with poly-D-lysine. Cultured cells were kept in Neurobasal-A medium (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) supplemented with B-27 (Invitrogen) and Glutamax (Invitrogen) at 37°C and 5% CO2 for 19-20 days. Nine dishes (3 million cells/ dish) were prepared for each experiment. Three dishes were each treated with either 20 µM Bicuculline, 1 µM Tetrodotoxin or no drug (control) for 5 min, 15 min or 24 hrs. Afterwards, the cells were harvested by briefly washing with ice-cold DPBS (Invitrogen) supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail (cOmplete EDTA-free; Roche, Basel, Switzerland) and phosphatase inhibitors (PhosStop; Roche), followed by scraping and pelleting by centrifugation. Cell pellets were lysed using lysis buffer (5% SDS, 25 mM Tris, pH 7.55, supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitor), disruption with a pipette and four sonication cycles for 30 s at 4°C. Lysates were incubated with Benzonase (1 µl; 250 units/mL stock solution; Sigma, St. Louis, MO) for 10 min at room temperature. To clear the samples from debris, they were centrifuged for 8 min at 13,000 x g. Protein concentration was determined by a BCA assay (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA).  For bottom-up MS analysis, protein digestion was performed according to an adapted version of the suspension trapping protocol as described by the manufacturer (S-Trap, ProtiFi, Huntington, NY). In brief, 350 µg of protein in lysis buffer was reduced by DTT addition in a final concentration of 20 mM for 10 min. Then proteins were alkylated using iodoacetamide in a final concentration of 40 mM and incubated for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Afterwards, the sample was acidified by addition of phosphoric acid to a final concentration of 1.2%. Binding buffer (90% methanol, 50 mM TRIS, pH 7.55) was added in a 1:7 lysate to buffer ratio. The mixture was loaded onto the S-Trap filter (mini) by centrifugation for 30 s at 4,000 x g in 450 µl-steps and washed with 400 µl binding buffer for four times. Sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) was added in 150 µl digestion buffer (40 mM ammonium bicarbonate) in an enzyme-to-protein ratio of 1:50. The protease buffer was briefly (1-3 s) spun into the trap. Digestion was carried overnight at room temperature under gentle agitation. To elute peptides, the filter was rinsed in three consecutive steps by centrifugation at 1,000 x g for 60 s starting with 80 µl digestion buffer and two 80 µl washes with 0.2% formic acid (FA) in MS grade water.  After digestion, the peptides were desalted using C18-SepPak columns (50 mg sorbent; Waters, Milford, MA) as previously described (Schanzenbächer et al., 2016). Desalted peptides were separated for analysis of the total proteome (5% v/v) and subsequent enrichment for phosphorylated peptides (95% v/v). All samples were dried in vacuo using a Speed Vac (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany) and stored at -20°C. Enrichment for phosphorylated peptides was performed using Titanium dioxide beads (TiO2; kit: #432993; ThermoFisher Scientific) as described in the manufacturer’s protocol. Eluted peptides were dried in vacuo and stored at -20°C until LC-MS analysis. Each experiment was carried out in four independent biological replicates. Dried peptides or phosphorylated peptides were reconstituted in 5% acetonitrile (ACN) with 0.1% FS or 2% ACN with 0.1% FA, respectively. Peptides were loaded onto a C18-PepMap 100 trapping column (particle size 3 µm, L = 20 mm) and separated on a C18-EasySpray analytical column (particle size = 2 µm, ID = 75 µm, L = 50 cm, ThermoFisher Scientific) using a nano-HPLC (Dionex U3000 RSLCnano). Temperature of the column oven was maintained at 55°C. Trapping was carried out for 6 min with a flow rate of 6 μl/min using loading buffer (100% H2O with 0.05% triflouroacetic acid). Peptides were separated by a gradient of water (buffer A: 100% H2O and 0.1% FA) and acetonitrile (buffer B: 80% ACN, 20% H2O and 0.1% FA) with a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min. The gradient for unmodified peptides was running from 4% to 48% buffer B in 180 min. The gradient for phosphorylated peptides was running from 4% to 30% buffer B in 110 min and to 45% buffer B in 10 min. Eluting peptides were analyzed in a data-dependent acquisition mode on a Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) coupled to the nano-HPLC by an EASY Spray ESI source. All samples were measured in triplicate LC-MS/MS runs.

### Data Protocol
MS raw data were processed using the MaxQuant software (ver. 1.6.6.0; RRID:SCR_014485; Cox and Mann, 2008) with customized parameters for the Andromeda search engine as. For all searches, spectra were matched to the Rattus norvegicus database downloaded from the UniProtKB (RRID:SCR_004426; Proteome_ID: UP000002494; downloaded on 23 August 2019), a contaminant and decoy database. Tryptic peptides with a minimum length of seven amino acids and a maximum of two missed cleavage sites were included. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm and fragment ion tolerance to 0.5 Da. Carboxyamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as a static modification. Acetylation (Protein-N-term.) and oxidation of methionine residues were assigned as variable modifications. Analysis of the phosphoproteome included the assignment of phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine residues as variable modification. With the use of a decoy strategy, a false discovery rate (FDR) below 1% at protein, peptide and modification level was applied. The “match between runs” option was enabled (matching time window = 0.7 min, alignment time window = 20 min). Only proteins identified by at least one unique peptide were considered for further analysis. Label-free quantification of proteins was performed by pair-wise ratio determination using at least two common peptides in at least three consecutive full scans (Cox et al., 2014).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tetrodotoxin, Phosphoproteomics, Neurons, Synaptic plasticity, Homeostatic scaling, Bicuculline

### Affiliations
MPIs for Biophysics and Brain Research
MPIs for Brain Research and Biophysics

### Submitter
Julian Langer

### Lab Head
Dr Julian Langer
MPIs for Brain Research and Biophysics


