### Accession
PXD021020

### Title
iTRAQ-based Quantitative Proteomics Analysis Screen for Critical Proteins during Temperature-Responsive Flowering of Crocus sativus

### Description
To uncover the underlying mechanism of temperature-responsive flowering in Crocus sativus and unveil flowering regulatory proteins, iTRAQ (isobaric tags for relative or absolute quantitation)-based proteomics were applied to study the differences in protein expression profiles in flowering and non-flowering saffron grown at room- and low-temperatures, respectively. A total of 5,624 proteins were identified，and 201 proteins showed differential accumulations between the flowering and non-flowering groups.

### Sample Protocol
Saffron plants were cultivated at a research farm at South Tai Lake Agricultural Park, Huzhou (longitude 120.6° E, latitude: 30.52° N, elevation 0 m), using a two-stage cultivation method: corms planted in soil to allow them to grow outdoors and cultivated indoors without soil (Han， 2019). In May 2018, dormant corms (≈25 g) were excavated from the field and divided into 2 groups, one cultivated at room-temperature (20-25 °C, flowering phenotype) and the other exposed to low-temperature (10 °C, non-flowering phenotype) for 30 days. Corms (≈25 g) and the top buds (≈1 cm) from them were collected individually from the 2 groups. Three replicates were prepared in each group. All samples were frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80 °C for iTRAQ and real-time PCR analysis.  The 1~2 grams plant tissues with 10% PVPP were grounded into powder in liquid nitrogen and then sonicated on ice for 5 min in Lysis buffer 3(8 M Urea and 40 mM Tris-HCl containing 1 mM PMSF, 2 mM EDTA and 10 mM DTT, pH 8.5) with 5 volume of samples. After centrifugation with 25,000 g at 4℃ for 20 min, the supernatant was treated by adding 5 volume of 10%TCA/acetone with 10 mM DTT to precipitate proteins at -20℃ for 2 hours/overnight. Repeat the precipitation step with acetone alone until there is no color in supernatant. The proteins were air dried and resuspended in Lysis buffer 3 (8 M Urea and 40 mM Tris-HCl containing 10 mM DTT, 1 mM PMSF and 2 mM EDTA, pH 8.5). Ultrasonication on ice for 5 minutes (2 sec/3 sec) was used to improve protein dissolving. After centrifuge, the supernatant was incubated at 56℃ for 1 hour for reduction and alkylated by 55 mM iodoacetamide (IAM) in the dark at room temperature for 45 min. Five volumes of acetone to samples were used to precipitate proteins at -20℃ for 2 hours/overnight. Lysis buffer 3 was used to dissolve the proteins with the help of sonication on ice for 5 minutes (2 sec/3 sec). The protein solution (100 μg) with 8 M urea was diluted 4 times with 100 mM TEAB. Trypsin Gold (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) was used to digest the proteins with the ratio of protein: trypsin =40: 1 at 37°C overnight. After trypsin digestion, peptides were desalted with a Strata X C18 column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried according to the manufacturer's protocol. The peptides were dissolved in 30 μL 0.5 M TEAB with vortexing. After the iTRAQ labeling reagents were recovered to ambient temperature, they were transferred and combined with proper samples. Peptide labeling was performed by iTRAQ Reagent 8-plex Kit according to the manufacturer's protocol. The labeled peptides with different reagents were combined and desalted with a Strata X C18 column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried according to the manufacturer's protocol. The peptides were separated on a Shimadzu LC-20AB HPLC Pump system coupled with a high pH RP column. The peptides were reconstituted with buffer A (5% ACN, 95% H2O, adjust pH to 9.8 with ammonia) to 2 mL and loaded onto a column containing 5-μm particles (Phenomenex). The peptides are separated at a flow rate of 1 mL/min with a gradient of 5% buffer B (5% H2O, 95% ACN, adjust pH to 9.8 with ammonia) for 10 min, 5-35% buffer B for 40 min, 35-95% buffer B for 1 min. The system is then maintained in 95% buffer B for 3 min and decreases to 5% within 1 min before equilibrating with 5% buffer B for 10 min. Elution is monitored by measuring absorbance at 214 nm, and fractions are collected every 1 min. The eluted peptides are pooled as 20 fractions and vacuum-dried. Each fraction was resuspended in buffer A (2% ACN, 0.1%FA) and centrifuged at 20,000 g for 10 min. The supernatant was loaded on Thermo Scientific™ UltiMate™ 3000 UHPLC system equipped with a trap and an analytical column. The samples were loaded on a trap column at 5 μL/min for 8 min, and then eluted into the homemade nanocapillary C18 column (ID 75 μm×25 cm, 3 μm particles) at a flow rate 300 nl/min. The gradient of buffer B (98%ACN, 0.1%FA) was increased from 5% to 25% in 40 min, and then increased to 35% in 5 min, followed by 2 min linear gradient to 80%, then maintenance at 80% B for 2 min, and finally returned to 5% in 1 min and equilibrated for 6 min. The peptides separated from nanoHPLC were subjected into the tandem mass spectrometry Q EXACTIVE HF X (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) for DDA (data-dependent acquisition) detection by nano-electrospray ionization. The parameters for MS analysis are listed as following: electrospray voltage: 2.0 kV; precursor scan range: 350-1500 m/z at a resolution of 60,000 in Orbitrap; MS/MS fragment scan range: >100 m/z at a resolution of 15,000 in HCD mode; normalized collision energy setting: 30%; dynamic Exclusion time: 30 s; Automatic gain control (AGC) for full MS target and MS2 target: 3e6 and1e5, respectively; The number of MS/MS scans following one MS scan: 20 most abundant precursor ions above a threshold ion count of 10,000.

### Data Protocol
A complete pipeline for iTRAQ (Quantification) project was shown in Supplemental Fig. S1. The raw MS/MS data is converted into MGF format by the corresponding tool, and the exported MGF files are searched by the local Mascot server against the database described above. In addition, quality control (QC) is performed to determine if a reanalysis step is needed. An automated software, named IQuant (Wen et al., 2014), was applied to the quantification of proteins. All the proteins with a false discovery rate (FDR) less than 1% will proceed with downstream analysis including Gene Ontology (GO) (http://www.geneontology.org/), Eukaryotic orthologous groups (KOG) (the eukaryotic KOG set accessible at ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/pub/COG/KOG) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) (http://www.genome.jp/kegg/pathway.html). Further, we also can perform deep analysis based on differentially expressed proteins, including GO enrichment analysis, KEGG pathway enrichment analysis, KOG function annotation, cluster analysis (Heatmap), protein interaction analysis (STRING, http://string-db.org/) and subcellular localization analysis (WoLF PSORT, https://wolfpsort.hgc.jp/).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Crocus sativus itraq

### Affiliations
Huzhou Cent Hosp, Affiliated Cent Hosp HuZhou University 
Huzhou Cent Hosp, Affiliated Cent Hosp HuZhou University

### Submitter
Liqin Li

### Lab Head
Dr Liqin Li
Huzhou Cent Hosp, Affiliated Cent Hosp HuZhou University


