### Accession
PXD013477

### Title
Assessing the relationship between mass window width and retention time scheduling on protein coverage for data-independent acquisition

### Description
Due to the technical advances of mass spectrometers especially the high scanning speed and high MS/MS resolution, the data independent acquisition mass spectrometry (DIA-MS) began to be widely used, which enables high reproducibility in both proteomic identification and quantification. The current DIA-MS methods normally cover a wide mass range, with the aim to target and identify as many peptides and proteins as possible and therefore regularly generates MS/MS spectra of high complexity. In this report, we assessed the performance and benefits of using small windows with e.g. 5-Da width across the peptide elution time. We also devised a new DIA method named RTwinDIA that schedules the small isolation windows in different retention time blocks. We applied Maxquant and pFind database searching tools, and further used Spectronaut with an external comprehensive spectral library of human proteins to perform the direct proteomic identification. We conclude that softwares like pFind have potential in directly analyzing DIA data acquired with small windows, and that the instrumental time and DIA cycle time should be preferably spend on small windows rather than on covering a broad mass range by large windows, to improve the proteome coverage for new biological samples and to increase the quantitative precision. These results further provide perspectives for the future emerge between DDA and DIA on faster MS analyzers.

### Sample Protocol
Ovarian cancer cell A2780 (part no. 93112519-1VL) was purchased from Sigma and cultured in RPMI 1640 media in 10% fetal bovine serum. For SILAC experiment, the SILAC RPMI 1640 media lacking L-Arginine, L-Lysine (Thermo Scientific, part no. 88365) was supplemented with either light or heavy isotopically labeled lysine and arginine and 10% dialyzed fetal bovine serum (Thermo Fisher, part no. 26400044).  Cell pellets were suspended in 10 M urea lysis buffer and complete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche), ultrasonically lysed by sonication at 4 °C for 2 min using a VialTweeter device (Hielscher-Ultrasound Technology) [1], and then centrifuge at 18,000 × g for 1 h to remove the insoluble material. The supernatant protein mixtures were reduced by 10 mM tris-(2-carboxyethyl)-phosphine (TECP) for 1 h at 37 °C and 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in dark for 45 min at room temperature. All the samples were future diluted by 1:6 (v/v) with 100 mM NH4HCO3 and digested with sequencing grade porcine trypsin (Promega) at a protease/protein ratio of 1:20 overnight at 37 °C.  The peptide elution was performed on EASY-nLC 1200 systems (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA) using a self-packed analytical PicoFrit column (New Objective, Woburn, MA, USA) (75 µm × 50 cm length) using C18 material of ReproSil-Pur 120A C18-Q 1.9 µm (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany). Peptides separation was conducted by a 1h or 2 h gradient with buffer B (80% acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid) from 5% to 37% with flow rate 300 nl/min at 60 °C with column oven (PRSO-V1, Sonation GmbH, Biberach, Germany). Buffer A was composed of 0.1% formic acid in water. The Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) instrument coupled with a nanoelectrospray ion source (NanoFlex, Thermo Scientific) was calibrated using Tune (version 3.0) instrument control software. Spray voltage was set to 2,000 V and heating capillary at 275 °C. The DIA-MS method consisted of a MS1 scan and 40 variant windows. The mass window settings for BroadDIA, NarrowDIA and TetrisDIA method were described in Figure 1, with the exception of NarrowDIA mass range in plasma samples (Figure S1). All the DIA-MS methods consisted of one MS1 scan and 40 MS2 scans of isolated windows. The MS1 scan range is 350 - 1650 m/z and the MS1 resolution is 120,000 at m/z 200. The MS1 full scan AGC target value was set to be 2.0E5 and the maximum injection time was 100 ms. The MS2 resolution was set to 30,000 at m/z 200 and the normalized HCD collision energy was 28%. The MS2 AGC was set to be 5.0E5 and the maximum injection time was 50 ms. The default peptide charge state was set to 2. Both of MS1 and MS2 spectra were recorded in profile mode.

### Data Protocol
Spectronaut: All the DIA data were also analyzed by Spectronaut (Biognosys AG,Switzerland, version 12.0.20491.17.26268). The spectra library was built with the published paper pancreas cancer proteomics, namely panHuman library, which has 210,921 peptide precursors. The optimized non-linear retention time calibration was used and handled by Spectronaut using iRT space. Both precursor and protein FDR were controlled at 1%. As for quantification, interference correction function was enabled, and top 3 peptide precursors were summed for protein quantification. Both peptide and protein FDR were controlled at 1%, as previously described. All the other parameters in Spectronaut are kept as default unless mentioned. For SILAC data analysis, the panHuman library was labeled using the Generate Labeled Library option (Lys8, Arg10) in the Library perspective in Spectronaut. C-terminal peptides were removed from the library. DIA data analysis was performed using the Labeled workflow using the default Biognosys Factory Settings.  Only y-ions were used for H/L ratio calculation for each peptide precursor ion.

### Publication Abstract
Due to the technical advances of mass spectrometers, particularly increased scanning speed and higher MS/MS resolution, the use of data-independent acquisition mass spectrometry (DIA-MS) became more popular, which enables high reproducibility in both proteomic identification and quantification. The current DIA-MS methods normally cover a wide mass range, with the aim to target and identify as many peptides and proteins as possible and therefore frequently generate MS/MS spectra of high complexity. In this report, we assessed the performance and benefits of using small windows with, e.g., 5-m/z width across the peptide elution time. We further devised a new DIA method named RTwinDIA that schedules the small isolation windows in different retention time blocks, taking advantage of the fact that larger peptides are normally eluting later in reversed phase chromatography. We assessed the direct proteomic identification by using shotgun database searching tools such as MaxQuant and pFind, and also Spectronaut with an external comprehensive spectral library of human proteins. We conclude that algorithms like pFind have potential in directly analyzing DIA data acquired with small windows, and that the instrumental time and DIA cycle time, if prioritized to be spent on small windows rather than on covering a broad mass range by large windows, will improve the direct proteome coverage for new biological samples and increase the quantitative precision. These results further provide perspectives for the future convergence between DDA and DIA on faster MS analyzers.

### Keywords
Window size, Oribtrap fusion lumos, Scheduling, Dia-ms, Rtwindia

### Affiliations
Department of Pharmacology Cancer Biology Institute Yale University School of Medicine
Yale University School of Medicine

### Submitter
Yansheng Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Yansheng Liu
Department of Pharmacology Cancer Biology Institute Yale University School of Medicine


