### Accession
PXD022332

### Title
Y Box Binding Protein 1 Inhibition as a Targeted Therapy for Ovarian Cancer

### Description
A azopodophyllotoxin small molecule, SU056, was identified as a novel inhibitor of Y Box Binding Protein 1 and may inhibit progression of ovarian cancer.

### Sample Protocol
TMT shotgun proteomics - OVCAR8 cells were treated with vehicle or SU056. Cells were washed and lysed. Samples were processed and labeled with TMT using the manufacturer’s protocol. Samples were analyzed using LC-MS/MS in triplicates as previously described on an LTQ-Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer.  Cellular Thermal Shift Assay (CETSA) - OVCAR8 cells were treated with vehicle (DMSO) or SU056. Cells were harvested and washed with PBS. Cells were pelleted and resuspended in PBS. 10 different PCR tubes with 1 x 106 cells/tube (in PBS) were prepared. Tubes were exposed to respective temperatures (37, 41, 44, 47, 50, 53, 56, 59, 63, 67 C) followed by incubation at room temperature. Each tube was snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen. Cells were lysed and centrifuged.. An equal amount of soluble fraction for each temperature of both groups was labeled with Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) using the manufacturer’s protocol. TMT labeled samples were analyzed using LC-MS/MS in triplicate on a LTQ-Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were quantified from individual peptide spectra by a sum-based bootstrap algorithm using each corresponding TMT reporter ion intensity after correcting for isotope impurities using MaxQuant. The lowest temperature was used as reference to calculate the log2 ratio of signal of the soluble fraction in each temperature, and each signal was compared with the highest temperature to estimate the percentage of signal lost in the soluble fraction. A fitting model of the curves to the S-curves with the Boltzmann Equation was used to describe the statistical behavior in a thermodynamic system not in a state of equilibrium, like a denaturalization curve. To this end, the sum of squares difference between the original and Bolztmann adjusted curve was minimized using a brute-force algorithm with R, solving the Bolztmann equation to calculate the slope of the melting curve and the half-value and the temperature in which half of the protein has been denatured. The melting point differences between the fitted curves with correlations above 0.75 and p-value less than 0.01 were considered as specific interactors of the drug.

### Publication Abstract
Y box binding protein 1 (YB-1) is a multifunctional protein associated with tumor progression and the emergence of treatment resistance (TR). Here, we report an azopodophyllotoxin small molecule, SU056, that potently inhibits tumor growth and progression via YB-1 inhibition. This YB-1 inhibitor inhibits cell proliferation, resistance to apoptosis in ovarian cancer (OC) cells, and arrests in the G1 phase. Inhibitor treatment leads to enrichment of proteins associated with apoptosis and RNA degradation pathways while downregulating spliceosome pathway. In&#xa0;vivo, SU056 independently restrains OC progression and exerts a synergistic effect with paclitaxel to further reduce disease progression with no observable liver toxicity. Moreover, in&#xa0;vitro mechanistic studies showed delayed disease progression via inhibition of drug efflux and multidrug resistance 1, and significantly lower neurotoxicity as compared with etoposide. These data suggest that YB-1 inhibition may be an effective strategy to reduce OC progression, antagonize TR, and decrease patient mortality.

### Keywords
Human, Therapeutics, Ovarian cancer

### Affiliations
Stanford University
Stanford University, Canary Center at Stanford for Cancer Early Detection, USA

### Submitter
Sharon Pitteri

### Lab Head
Dr Sharon Pitteri
Stanford University, Canary Center at Stanford for Cancer Early Detection, USA


