### Accession
PXD024643

### Title
TDFragMapper: Evaluating experimental parameters for confident intact protein characterization in top-down proteomics

### Description
New software-tool allowing an easy visualization of fragment ions and thus a rapid evaluation of key experimental parameters on the sequence coverage obtained for the MS/MS analysis of intact proteins. Our tool can deal with multiple fragmentation methods. We demonstrate that TDFragMapper can rapidly highlight the experimental fragmentation parameters that are critical to the characterization of intact proteins of various size using top-down proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
The Thermo ScientificTM PierceTM Intact Protein standard mix is composed of the six following intact proteins: human IGF-I LR3 (9,111.47 Da), human Thioredoxin (11,865.52 Da), Streptococcus dysgalactiae Protein G (21,442.61 Da), Bovine Carbonic Anhydrase II (28,981.29), Streptococcus Protein AG (50,459.74 Da) and Escherichia coli Exo Klenow (68,001.15 Da). 76 µg of lyophilized protein mixture were reconstituted in 380 µL of solvent A (98% H2O, 2% ACN, 0.1% FA) to a final concentration of 0.2 µg/µL. A Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLC Nano System coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ mass spectrometer fitted with a nano-electrospray ionization source (Thermo-Scientific) was used. Five µL of protein sample were loaded at a flow rate of 10 µL.min-1 onto an in-house packed C4 (5µm, Reprosil) trap column (0.150 mm i.d. x 30 mm) and separated at a flow rate of 1 µL.min-1 using a C4 (5 µm, Reprosil) column (0.150 mm i.d. x 400 mm). The following gradient was used: 2% solvent B (20% H2O, 80% ACN, 0.1% FA) from 0–5 min; 20% B at 6 min.; 35% B at 7 min.; 60% B at 16 min.; 99% B from 17–20 min.; and 2% B from 20.2–40 min. A first LC-MS experiment was acquired at 15,000 resolving power (at m/z 400) with a scan range set to 550-2,000 m/z, 5 microscans (µscans) per MS scan, an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 5x105 and maximum injection time of 50 ms. Fragmentation data were recorded using targeted LC-MS/MS experiments. Four precursor charge states were chosen for each protein across their respective charge state distribution and isolated by the quadrupole and subjected to fragmentation with a maximum of two charge states per chromatographic run for each protein. MS/MS scans were acquired at 120,000 resolving power (at m/z 400) with an isolation width of 1.6 m/z, 5 µscans, an AGC target value of 5x105 and maximum injection time of 246 ms. Higher-energy collisional dissociation with NCE of 10, 15 and 20% (HCD), electron transfer dissociation with 5, 10 and 15 ms of reaction time and a supplemental higher-energy collisional dissociation with NCE of respectively 5, 10 and 15% (EThcD), ultraviolet photodissociation at 213 nm with 40, 50 and 60 ms of reaction time (UVPD) were used for the fragmentation of intact proteins.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectral data were first deconvoluted and deisotoped using the Xtract algorithm embedded in FreeStyleTM v1.6.75.20 (Thermo-Scientific) using a fit factor of 80%, a remainder threshold of 25% and a S/N threshold of 3. Scans were averaged across the width of the chromatographic peak. Deconvoluted ion masses were then exported as *.xls files and uploaded into ProSight Lite v1.4 with the appropriate protein sequence. Assigned fragments were finally exported as *.xlsx files. Both *.xls and *.xlsx files were used as input data for TDFragMapper.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Top-down proteomics, Visualization tool

### Affiliations
Mass Spectrometry for Biology Unit CNRS USR2000 Institut Pasteur France
Mass Spectrometry for Biology Unit
Institut Pasteur
Paris

### Submitter
Jonathan Dhenin

### Lab Head
Dr Julia Chamot-Rooke
Mass Spectrometry for Biology Unit CNRS USR2000 Institut Pasteur France


