### Accession
PXD022724

### Title
Wnt signaling recruits KIF2A to the spindle to ensure chromosome congression during mitosis

### Description
Canonical Wnt signaling plays critical roles in development and tissue renewal by regulating β-catenin target genes. Recent evidence showed that β-catenin-independent Wnt signaling is also required for faithful execution of mitosis. This mitotic Wnt signaling functions through Wnt-dependent stabilization of proteins (Wnt/STOP), as well as through components of the LRP6 signalosome. However, the targets and specific functions of mitotic Wnt signaling still remain uncharacterized. Using phosphoproteomics, we identified that Wnt signaling regulates the microtubule depolymerase KIF2A during mitosis. We found that Dishevelled recruits KIF2A via its N-terminal and motor domains, which is further promoted upon LRP6 signalosome formation during mitosis. We show that Wnt signaling modulates KIF2A interaction with PLK1, which is critical for KIF2A localization and the assembly of a bipolar mitotic spindle. Accordingly, Wnt signaling promotes chromosome congression during metaphase by monitoring KIF2A protein levels at the spindle poles both in somatic cells and in pluripotent stem cells. Our findings highlight a novel function of Wnt signaling during cell division, which could have important implications for genome maintenance, notably in stem cells.

### Sample Protocol
RPE1 were cultured in either Medium or Heavy SILAC media (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories) as previously described. The experiment also included Light SILAC media labeled cells, which were not used for the downstream analysis. Cells were seeded in 15 cm dishes, synchronized in prometaphase, and treated with in-house produced control (Medium) or DKK1 (Heavy) SILAC media for 1.5 h before harvesting. Phosphoproteome analysis was performed as described previously. Briefly, cells were lysed in modified RIPA buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 650 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1% NP-40, 0.1% sodium deoxycholate) supplemented with protease inhibitors (Complete protease inhibitor cocktail tablets, Roche Diagnostics), 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 5 mM β-glycerophosphate, and 5 mM sodium flouride (Sigma). After sonication, the lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 16,000 × g for 15 min and protein concentrations were estimated using QuickStart Bradford Protein assay (BioRad). After combining the same amount of proteins from each label, the proteins were precipitated in fourfold excess of ice-cold acetone and subsequently re-dissolved in denaturation buffer (6 M urea, 2 M thiourea in 10 mM HEPES pH 8.0). Cysteines were reduced with 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and alkylated with 5.5 mM chloroacetamide. Proteins were digested with endoproteinase Lys-C (Wako Chemicals) and sequencing grade-modified trypsin (Sigma). Protease digestion was stopped by addition of trifluoroacetic acid to 0.5% and precipitates were removed by centrifugation. Peptides were purified using reversed-phase Sep-Pak C18 cartridges (Waters) and eluted in 50% acetonitrile. For the enrichment of phosphorylated peptides, 5 mg of peptides in binding buffer (50% acetonitrile, 6% trifluoroacetic acid in H2O) were incubated with 10 mg of TiO2 spheres (GL Sciences) for 1 h. The supernatant was used for a second enrichment step. The beads were washed twice in binding buffer, twice in wash buffer (0.5% TFA, 50% ACN) and subsequently peptides were eluted using elution buffer (10% NH4OH, 25% acetonitrile in H2O). The eluates were concentrated to remove NH4OH and peptides were fractionated in five fractions using micro-columnbased strong-cation exchange chromatography and desalted on reversed-phase C18 StageTips. Peptide fractions were analyzed on a quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive Plus, Thermo Scientific) equipped with a UHPLC system (EASY-nLC 1000, Thermo Scientific) . Peptide samples were loaded onto C18 reversed phase columns (15 cm length, 75 _m inner diameter, 1.9 _m bead size) and eluted with a linear gradient from 8 to 40% acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid in 2h. The mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS2 acquisition. Survey full-scanMS spectra (m/z 300–1650) were acquired in the Orbitrap.The ten most intense ions were sequentially isolated and fragmented by higher energy C-trap dissociation (HCD). Peptides with unassigned charge states, as well as with charge states less than +2 were excluded from fragmentation. Fragment spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were analyzed using MaxQuant (development version 1.5.2.8). Parent ion and MS2 spectra were searched against a database containing 92,578 human protein sequences obtained from the UniProtKB released in December 2016 using Andromeda search engine. Spectra were searched with a mass tolerance of 6 ppm in MS mode, 20 p.p.m. in HCD MS2 mode, strict trypsin specificity and allowing up to two miscleavages. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was searched as a fixed modification, whereas cysteine modification with n-ethylmaleimide, protein Nterminal acetylation, methionine oxidation, and phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine were searched as variable modifications. Site localization probabilities were determined by MaxQuant using the PTM scoring algorithm as described previously. The dataset was filtered based on posterior error probability to arrive at a false discovery rate below 1% estimated using a target-decoy approach. For downstream analysis, only phosphorylated peptides with a localization probability ≥ 0.75 were used. Fold-changes > 2 in both replicate experiments were considered significant.

### Publication Abstract
Canonical Wnt signaling plays critical roles in development and tissue renewal by regulating &#x3b2;-catenin target genes. Recent evidence showed that &#x3b2;-catenin-independent Wnt signaling is also required for faithful execution of mitosis. However, the targets and specific functions of mitotic Wnt signaling still remain uncharacterized. Using phosphoproteomics, we identified that Wnt signaling regulates the microtubule depolymerase KIF2A during mitosis. We found that Dishevelled recruits KIF2A via its N-terminal and motor domains, which is further promoted upon LRP6 signalosome formation during cell division. We show that Wnt signaling modulates KIF2A interaction with PLK1, which is critical for KIF2A localization at the spindle. Accordingly, inhibition of basal Wnt signaling leads to chromosome misalignment in somatic cells and pluripotent stem cells. We propose that Wnt signaling monitors KIF2A activity at the spindle poles during mitosis to ensure timely chromosome alignment. Our findings highlight a function of Wnt signaling during cell division, which could have important implications for genome maintenance, notably in stem cells.

### Keywords
Wnt signaling, Dishevelled, Plk1, Chromosome congression, Kif2a, Mitosis, Stem cell, Wnt/stop, Kinesin-13

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Biology, Mainz, Germany
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB), Mainz, Germany

### Submitter
Petra Beli

### Lab Head
Dr Petra Beli
Institute of Molecular Biology, Mainz, Germany


