### Accession
PXD013221

### Title
Massive Proteome Remodelling by HIV Vpr

### Description
Viruses target host proteins for degradation to enhance their replication and transmission, and identifying these targets has provided key insights into the host-pathogen interaction1-3. Here, we use complementary unbiased mass spectrometry-based approaches to dissect the widespread proteomeic remodelling seen in HIV-1 infected T-cells. Remarkably, the HIV accessory protein Vpr is both necessary and sufficient to cause the vast majority of these changes. Protein regulation requires recruitment of the DCAF1/DDB1/CUL4 E3 ubiquitin ligase complex, and pulsed-Stable Isotope Labelling with Amino Acids in Cell Culture (SILAC) and immunoprecipitation-mass spectrometry (IP-MS) identified at least 38 cellular proteins directly targeted for degradation by Vpr. Whilst other HIV-1 accessory proteins downregulate a small number of specific host factors, Vpr depletes multiple protein targets, causing systems-level changes to the cellular proteome. A subset of the novel cellular targets identified in this study are depleted by Vpr variants from across HIV-1/SIVcpz and other primate lentiviral lineages, confirming their biological importance in vivo.

### Sample Protocol
Digestion was by SDC facilitated FASP based trypsin digestion, Preomics IST sample preparation kit or SP3 magnetic beads protocols. Quantiative methods were either SILAC, TMT or label free, depending on the experiment. All whole cell proteomics samples subjected to high pH reverse phase fractionation prior to Low pH nLC-MS. All samples acquired on an Orbitrap fusion mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
For TMT labelled samples data were searched by Mascot within Proteome Discoverer 2.1 in two rounds of searching. First search was against the UniProt Human reference proteome (26/09/17), the HIV proteome and compendium of common contaminants (GPM). The second search took all unmatched spectra from the first search and searched against the human trEMBL database (Uniprot, 26/09/17). The following search parameters were used. MS1 Tol: 10 ppm, MS2 Tol: 0.6 Da. Enzyme: Trypsin (/P). MS3 spectra were used for reporter ion based quantitation with a most confident centroid tolerance of 20 ppm. PSM FDR was calculated using Mascot percolator and was controlled at 0.01% for ‘high’ confidence PSMs and 0.05% for ‘medium’ confidence PSMs. Normalisation was automated and based on total s/n in each channel. Protein/peptide abundance was calculated and output in terms of ‘scaled’ values, where the total s/n across all reporter channels is calculated and a normalised contribution of each channel is output. Proteins/peptides satisfying at least a ‘medium’ FDR confidence were taken forth to statistical analysis in R. This consisted of a moderated T-test (Limma) with Benjamini-Hochberg correction for multiple hypotheses to provide a q value for each comparison (Schwammle et al., 2013). MS-IPs were submitted to a similar search workflow with quantitative data being derived from MS1 spectra via proteome discover minora feature detector node. For pSILAC experiments data were processed in MaxQuant and searched using Andromeda with similar search parameters (PMID: 19029910). MaxQuant output was uploaded into Perseus for calculation of significance B (PMID: 27348712)

### Publication Abstract
HIV-1 encodes four "accessory proteins" (Vif, Vpr, Vpu, and Nef), dispensable for viral replication in&#xa0;vitro but essential for viral pathogenesis in&#xa0;vivo. Well characterized cellular targets have been associated with Vif, Vpu, and Nef, which counteract host restriction and promote viral replication. Conversely, although several substrates of Vpr have been described, their biological significance remains unclear. Here, we use complementary unbiased mass spectrometry-based approaches to demonstrate that Vpr is both necessary and sufficient for the DCAF1/DDB1/CUL4 E3 ubiquitin ligase-mediated degradation of at least 38 cellular proteins, causing systems-level changes to the cellular proteome. We therefore propose that promiscuous targeting of multiple host factors underpins complex Vpr-dependent cellular phenotypes and validate this in the case of G2/M cell cycle arrest. Our model explains how Vpr modulates so many cell biological processes and why the functional consequences of previously described Vpr targets, identified and studied in isolation, have proved elusive.

### Keywords
Hiv, Vpr, Tmt

### Affiliations
Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, Univeristy of Cambridge
University of Cambridge

### Submitter
James Williamson

### Lab Head
Dr Paul Lehner
Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, Univeristy of Cambridge


