### Accession
PXD011015

### Title
Characterizing N-Glycosylation of Pilins and Flagellins from Haloferax volcanii

### Description
Mass spectrometric analysis of cesium chloride purified flagellins and pilins confirmed previously identified N-glycopeptides for FlgA1, revealed additional N-glycopeptides for FlgA1 and FlgA2 and characterized N-glycosylation of PilA1 and PilA2. Analyses were performed using different MS methods (with and withoout applying IS-CID) for samples from wildtype as well as aglB knockout strains.

### Sample Protocol
H. volcanii flagella and type IV pili were isolated from supernatant fractions by cesium chloride (CsCl) gradient purification (Tripepi et al, 2013, Microbiology 159). Proteins from fractions 4 and 5 from CsCl density gradients were digested with Glu-C or trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega) according to the filter-aided sample preparation method (Wiśniewski et al, 2009, Nat. Methods 6) with slight changes. The complete fraction was loaded onto a centrifugal filter unit with a 30-kDa molecular mass cutoff (Amicon ultra centrifugal filters, 0.5 ml, Millipore). Centrifugation at 14,000 × g for 15 min was performed between each step. The filter unit was washed with 200 μl of UA buffer (6 m urea and 2 m thiourea in 10 mm HEPES (pH 6.5)), followed by incubation for 20 min with 50 mm iodoacetamide in UA in the dark for carbamidomethylation of thiol groups. After washing twice with UA, samples were washed five times with 300 μl of either 10 mm phosphate buffer (pH 8.0) for Glu-C or 50 mm ammonium bicarbonate for trypsin digests, respectively. Digestion with 1 μg of either Glu-C or trypsin in 50 μl of the respective buffer was performed overnight at 37 °C. Peptides were eluted two times with 50 μl of H2O, dried in a vacuum centrifuge, and reconstituted in 6 μl of 2% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in ultrapure water.  Chromatographic separation was performed on an Ultimate 3000 nanoflow HPLC system (Dionex) directly coupled via a nanospray source to a Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer. The mobile phases were composed of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in ultrapure water (A) and 80% acetonitrile, 0.08% formic acid in ultrapure water (B). The sample (1 μl of reconstituted peptides) was desalted on a trap column (C18 PepMapTM 5 mm × 300 μm, 5-μm particle size, 100-Å pore size) for 5 min at a flow rate of 10 μl/min using 0.05% (v/v) TFA in ultrapure water followed by separation on an Acclaim PepMapTM RSLC C18 capillary column (75 μm × 15 cm, 2-μm particle size, 100-Å pore size). The following gradient was applied using a flow rate of 0.3 μl/min: 2.5% buffer B (5 min); 2.5–7.5% buffer B (4 min); 7.5–40% buffer B (26 min); 40–99% buffer B (1 min); and 99% buffer B (10 min).  The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode using two different methods. In the first method, in-source collision-induced dissociation (IS-CID) was performed similarly as described by previously (Mathieu-Rivet et al, 2013, Mol. Cell. Proteomics 12) by applying an IS voltage of 80 V. Some samples were reanalyzed using 60, 70, and 90 V. MS1 scans were obtained from 400 to 2,000 m/z at a resolution of 70,000 full width at half-maximum, an AGC target of 1e6, and a maximum ion injection time of 100 ms. IS-CID of N-glycopeptides leads to the fragmentation of glycosidic bonds, which results in a series of neutral losses on MS1 level. The “Mass Tags” option (accuracy of 5 ppm) was enabled to select ion pairs differing by the mass of a monosaccharide (hexose, 162.0528 Da; hexuronic acid, 176.0321 Da; charges 1–4) for further fragmentation by higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD). The six most intense ion pairs were fragmented by HCD with 30% normalized collision energy. Unassigned charge states and charge states of >4 were rejected. MS2 spectra were then acquired at a resolution of 17,500 full width at half-maximum with a fixed first m/z 150, an AGC target of 5e5, and a maximum ion injection time of 120 ms. Fragmented ions were dynamically excluded for 5 s with a tolerance of 5 ppm.  In the second method, no IS-CID was applied. MS1 scans were obtained with the same parameters from 375 to 3,000 m/z. The 12 most intense ions were selected for HCD fragmentation with 27% normalized collision energy. Unassigned charge states as well as charge state 1 and >6 were rejected. MS2 spectra were acquired with the same parameters as before. Dynamic exclusion was enabled for 15 s. Some samples were reanalyzed using an inclusion list with the mass of intact glycopeptides as identified in the IS-CID experiments.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified using the search engine X! Tandem Sledgehammer (Craig et al, 2004, Bioinformatics 20) incorporated into Proteomatic (Specht et al, 2011, Bioinformatics 27). Obtained MS2 spectra were matched against a target-decoy database consisting of the UniProt H. volcanii proteome (proteome ID UP000008243, download date April 21, 2015) merged with sequences from the Common Repository of Adventitious Proteins (January 30, 2015) resulting in a total database of 4,984 proteins. Reverse protein sequences were used as decoy sequences. Search parameters included a mass accuracy of 5 ppm for MS1 precursor ions, 20 ppm for MS2 product ions, a maximum number of missed cleavages of three, carbamidomethylation of cysteine (static modification), and oxidation of methionine (variable). The mass of N-glycans ranging from mono- to pentasaccharide (162.0528, 338.0849, 514.117, 704.1647, and 866.2176 Da) was added as a variable modification of asparagine in separate identification runs. A statistical evaluation of peptide spectral matches was carried out using Quality (version 2.02) (Käll et al, 2008,  J. Proteome Res. 7) with a q-value threshold of 0.05. In addition, all peptide spectral matches were filtered by a mass accuracy of 5 ppm.  If IS-CID was applied, MS2 spectra were used for the identification of peptide sequences, and the corresponding MS1 spectra of N-glycopeptides were manually annotated to identify the glycan composition. If intact N-glycopeptides were only fragmented by HCD, the identification of peptide sequences and glycan composition was based on MS2 peptide spectral matches. Peptide spectral counts were only analyzed if no IS-CID was applied, and no inclusion list was used. Peptide spectral counts from analyzing fractions 4 and 5 of CsCl gradients were summed up, as well as, on the protein level, spectral counts of glycopeptides with varying N-glycan length.

### Publication Abstract
N-Glycosylation is a post-translational modification common to all three domains of life. In many archaea, the oligosacharyltransferase (AglB)-dependent N-glycosylation of flagellins is required for flagella assembly. However, whether N-glycosylation is required for the assembly and/or function of the structurally related archaeal type IV pili is unknown. Here, we show that of six Haloferax volcanii adhesion pilins, PilA1 and PilA2, the most abundant pilins in pili of wild-type and &#x394;aglB strains, are modified under planktonic conditions in an AglB-dependent manner by the same pentasaccharide detected on H. volcanii flagellins. However, unlike wild-type cells, which have surfaces decorated with discrete pili and form a dispersed layer of cells on a plastic surface, &#x394;aglB cells have thick pili bundles and form microcolonies. Moreover, expressing PilA1, PilA2, or PilA6 in &#x394;pilA[1-6]&#x394;aglB stimulates microcolony formation compared with their expression in &#x394;pilA[1-6]. Conversely, expressing PilA3 or PilA4 in &#x394;pilA[1-6] cells results in strong surface adhesion, but not microcolony formation, and neither pilin stimulates surface adhesion in &#x394;pilA[1-6]&#x394;aglB cells. Although PilA4 assembles into pili in the &#x394;pilA[1-6]&#x394;aglB cells, these pili are, unlike wild-type pili, curled, perhaps rendering them non-functional. To our knowledge, this is the first demonstration of a differential effect of glycosylation on pilus assembly and function of paralogous pilins. The growth of wild-type cells in low salt media, a condition that decreases AglB glycosylation, also stimulates microcolony formation and inhibits motility, supporting our hypothesis that N-glycosylation plays an important role in regulating the transition between planktonic to sessile cell states as a response to stress.

### Keywords
Haloferax volcanii, Archaea, Type iv pili, Flagella, N-glycosylation

### Affiliations
Department of Biology, University of Pennsylvania
University of Pennsylvania

### Submitter
Stefan Schulze

### Lab Head
Dr Mechthild Pohlschroder
Department of Biology, University of Pennsylvania


