### Accession
PXD021210

### Title
Quantitative TMT proteomics of brainstem in spontaneously hypertensive rats

### Description
The brainstem, the core of the central nervous system, plays a vital role in controlling arterial blood pressure and its elevation of hypertension subtypes, especially essential hypertension. Integrative metabolic and proteomic profiling was performed on the brainstem samples of 11-week-old spontaneously hypertensive rats (SHRs) and age-matched normotensive Wistar rats, using hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography-quadrupole/time-of-flight mass spectrometry (HILIC-Q/TOFMS) and nano-liquid chromatography-high-resolution-mass spectrometry (nano-LC-high-resolution-MS) combined with quantitative tandem mass tags (TMT).

### Sample Protocol
The proteins were digested, and the peptide mixture obtained was labeled using the TMT reagent kit. Normal control tissue was labeled with 128 isobaric tag, and SHR tissue was labeled with 129 isobaric tag from the TMT reagent kit. The labeled samples were combined and completely dried in vacuo of Eppendorf Concentrator Plus (San Diego, CA, USA) at 1500 g at -80℃ for 8 h. Biological triplicates were performed in the proteomics profiling analysis in this study.

### Data Protocol
Database searching Tandem mass spectra were extracted, charge state deconvoluted and deisotoped using ProteoWizard version 3.0.5126. All MS/MS samples were analyzed with Mascot (version 1.4.0.288, Matrix Science, London, UK), with the software configured to search the International Protein Index (IPI) database (version 3.64, 39871 entries) based on the digestion enzyme strict trypsin. The fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.050 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 ppm were used to search with Mascot. Fixed modifications were specified to carbamidomethyl of cysteine and TMT6plex of lysine and the n-terminus in Mascot. A variable modification was specified to oxidation of methionine in Mascot.  Quantitative data analysis  Scaffold Q+ (version Scaffold_4.3.4, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR, USA) was used to quantitate peptide and protein identifications with label-based quantitation (TMT, iTRAQ, etc.). The threshold of peptide identifications was set to those greater than 85.0% probability to achieve a false discovery rate (FDR) of less than 1.0% by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Accepted protein identifications were those greater than 95.0% probability and containing at least two identified peptides. Protein probabilities were according to the ProteinProphet algorithm 9. Proteins having similar peptides and not differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped in order to meet the requirement of the parsimony principle. Clusters were grouped with proteins having significant peptide evidence. The obtained intensity of the identified feature in the experiment was normalized globally across all acquisition runs. Individual quantitative samples were normalized within each acquisition run. Intensities for each peptide identification were normalized within the assigned protein. The reference channels were normalized to produce a fold change of 1:1. All normalization calculations were performed using medians to multiplicatively normalize data. Differentially expressed proteins (>1.2-fold and p<0.05) were determined using the student’s t-test and fold change.

### Publication Abstract
The brainstem, the core of the central nervous system, plays a vital role in controlling arterial blood pressure and its elevation of hypertension subtypes, especially essential hypertension. Integrative metabolic and proteomic profiling was performed on the brainstem samples of 11 week old spontaneously hypertensive rats (SHRs) and age-matched normotensive Wistar rats, using hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography quadrupole/time-of-flight mass spectrometry (HILIC-Q/TOFMS) (PeptideAtlas: PASS01621) and nano-liquid chromatography-high-resolution-MS (nano-LC-high-resolution) combined with quantitative tandem mass tags (ProteomeXchange: PXD021210). The results showed a potentially significant measure of metabolic disorders in the brainstem of SHRs, including purine and pyrimidine metabolism and carnitine and acylcarnitine deficiency. By integrating the differential metabolites (VIP &gt; 1 and <i>p</i> &lt; 0.1) with the differentially expressed proteins (&gt;1.2-fold and <i>p</i> &lt; 0.05), the results revealed aberrant insulin signaling in the brainstem of SHRs, including reduced carnitine and acetylcarnitine; increased arginine; and increased flotillin-1 (FLOT1), hemoglobin subunit alpha-1/2, and hemoglobin subunit beta-2 proteins verified by the parallel reaction monitoring analysis (PeptideAtlas: PASS01622). The aberrant insulin signaling pathway in the brainstem of SHRs might help explain the correlation between essential hypertension and insulin resistance. These findings on the brainstem of SHRs could provide new insights into the dysregulation of the central nervous system in hypertension, especially as it relates to metabolite and protein levels.

### Keywords
Quantitative proteome, Brainstem, Spontaneously hypertensive rats/shr rats, Tmt

### Affiliations
Institute of Interdisciplinary Medicine, Shanghai University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Shanghai 201203, China
Shanghai Jiao Tong University

### Submitter
Cheng Yu

### Lab Head
Dr Yu Cheng
Institute of Interdisciplinary Medicine, Shanghai University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Shanghai 201203, China


