### Accession
PXD039839

### Title
Biochemical characterisation of Mer3 helicase interactions and the protection of meiotic recombination intermediates

### Description
Crossing over between homologs is critical for the stable segregation of chromosomes during the first meiotic division. S. cerevisiae Mer3 (HFM1 in mammals) is a SF2 helicase and member of the ZMM group of proteins, that facilitates the formation of the majority of crossovers during meiosis. Here we describe the structural organisation of Mer3 and using AlphaFold modelling and XL-MS we further characterise the previously described interaction with Mlh1-Mlh2. We find that Mer3 also forms a previously undescribed complex with the recombination regulating factors Top3 and Rmi1 and that this interaction is competitive with Sgs1BLM helicase in a phospho-dependent manner. Using in vitro reconstituted D-loop assays we show that Mer3 inhibits the anti-recombination activity of Sgs1 helicase, but only in the presence of Dmc1. Thus we provide a mechanism whereby Mer3 interacts with a network of proteins to protect Dmc1 derived D-loops from dissolution.

### Sample Protocol
Mer3 was purified form insect cells wo treatment or ocadaic acid treatment. Purified Mer3 was subjected to lambda phosphatase treatment and all three conditions (wo treatment, ocadaic acid treatment or lambda phosphatase treatment) were measured from at least three independent purifications and phospho sites analysed by MS.  In a second experiment, 500 ug of meiotic yeast cellular lysates were used to enrich for phosphopeptides using the EasyPhos protocol.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (version 1.6.1.14) was used for the MS raw data processing with. Oxidized methionine (M), acetylation (protein N-terminus) and phosphor (STY) were set as variable modifications, and carbamidomethyl (C) as fixed modification. For the downstream bioinformatics analysis, the Perseus platform (version 1.6.10.50) was used.

### Publication Abstract
Crossing over between homologs is critical for the stable segregation of chromosomes during the first meiotic division. Saccharomyces cerevisiae Mer3 (HFM1 in mammals) is a SF2 helicase and member of the ZMM group of proteins, that facilitates the formation of the majority of crossovers during meiosis. Here, we describe the structural organisation of Mer3 and using AlphaFold modelling and XL-MS we further characterise the previously described interaction with Mlh1-Mlh2. We find that Mer3 also forms a previously undescribed complex with the recombination regulating factors Top3 and Rmi1 and that this interaction is competitive with Sgs1BLM helicase. Using in vitro reconstituted D-loop assays we show that Mer3 inhibits the anti-recombination activity of Sgs1 helicase, but only in the presence of Dmc1. Thus we provide a mechanism whereby Mer3 interacts with a network of proteins to protect Dmc1 derived D-loops from dissolution.

### Keywords
Yeast, Phospho proteomics, Meiosis, Crossover, Mer3

### Affiliations
LMU Munich
Friedrich Miescher Laboratory of the Max Planck Society, Max-Planck-Ring 9, 72076 Tübingen, Germany.

### Submitter
Tanja Bange

### Lab Head
Dr John R. Weir
Friedrich Miescher Laboratory of the Max Planck Society, Max-Planck-Ring 9, 72076 Tübingen, Germany.


