### Accession
PXD013719

### Title
RAB18 impacts autophagy via lipid droplet-derived lipid transfer and is rescued by ATG9A

### Description
Autophagy is a lysosomal degradation pathway that mediates protein and organelle turnover and maintains cellular homeostasis. Autophagosomes transport cargo to lysosomes and their formation is dependent on an appropriate lipid supply. Here, we show that the knockout of the RAB GTPase RAB18 interferes with lipid droplet (LD) metabolism, resulting in an impaired fatty acid mobilization. The reduced LD-derived lipid availability influences autophagy and provokes adaptive modifications of the autophagy network, which include increased ATG2B expression and ATG12-ATG5 conjugate formation as well as enhanced ATG2B and ATG9A phosphorylation. Phosphorylation of ATG9A directs this transmembrane protein to the site of autophagosome formation and this particular modification is sufficient to rescue autophagic activity under basal conditions in the absence of RAB18. However, it is incapable of enabling an increased autophagy under inductive conditions. Thus, we illustrate the role of RAB18 in connecting LDs and autophagy, further emphasize the importance of LD-derived lipids for the degradative pathway, and characterize an ATG9A phosphorylation-dependent autophagy rescue mechanism as an adaptive response that maintains autophagy under conditions of reduced LD-derived lipid availability.

### Sample Protocol
Phosphoproteome analysis was performed as described. Proteins were precipitated in 4-fold excess of ice-cold acetone and subsequently re-dissolved in denaturation buffer (6 M urea, 2 M thiourea in 10 mM HEPES pH 8.0). Cysteines were reduced with 1 mM dithiothreitol and alkylated with 5.5 mM chloroacetamide. Proteins were digested with endoproteinase Lys-C (Wako Chemicals) and sequencing grade modified trypsin (Sigma). Protease digestion was stopped by addition of trifluoroacetic acid to 0.5% and precipitates were removed by centrifugation. Peptides were purified using reversed-phase Sep-Pak C18 cartridges (Waters) and eluted in 50% acetonitrile. For the enrichment of phosphorylated peptides, 5 mg of peptides in binding buffer (50% acetonitrile, 6% trifluoroacetic acid in H2O) were incubated with 10 mg of TiO2 spheres (GL sciences) for 1 hour. The beads were washed twice in binding buffer and subsequently peptides were eluted using elution buffer (10% NH4OH, 25% acetonitrile in H2O). The eluates were concentrated to remove NH4OH and peptides were fractionated in 6 fractions using micro-column-based strong-cation exchange chromatography (SCX) and desalted on reversed phase C18 StageTips. Peptide fractions were analyzed on a quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive Plus, Thermo Scientific) equipped with a UHPLC system (EASY-nLC 1000, Thermo Scientific) as described. Peptide samples were loaded onto C18 reversed phase columns (15 cm length, 75 µm inner diameter, 1.9 µm bead size) and eluted with a linear gradient from 8 to 40% acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid in 2-hours. The mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS2 acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (m/z 300 – 1700) were acquired in the Orbitrap. The 10 most intense ions were sequentially isolated and fragmented by higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD). An ion selection threshold of 5,000 was used. Peptides with unassigned charge states, as well as with charge states less than +2 were excluded from fragmentation. Fragment spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were analyzed using MaxQuant (development version 1.5.2.8). Parent ion and MS2 spectra were searched against a database containing 95,057 human protein sequences  obtained from the UniProtKB released in June 2016 using Andromeda search engine54. Spectra were searched with a mass tolerance of 6 ppm in MS mode, 20 ppm in HCD MS2 mode, strict trypsin specificity and allowing up to 3 miscleavages. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was searched as a fixed modification, whereas protein N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation, and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine were searched as variable modifications. Site localization probabilities were determined by MaxQuant using the PTM scoring algorithm as described previously. The dataset was filtered based on posterior error probability (PEP) to arrive at a false discovery rate of below 1% estimated using a target-decoy approach. Phosphorylated peptides with a minimum score of 40 and delta score of 6 are reported and used for the analyses.

### Publication Abstract
Autophagy is dependent on appropriate lipid supply for autophagosome formation. The regulation of lipid acquisition and the autophagy network response to lipid-limiting conditions are mostly elusive. Here, we show that the knockout of the RAB GTPase RAB18 interferes with lipid droplet catabolism, causing an impaired fatty acid release. The resulting reduced lipid-droplet-derived lipid availability influences autophagy and provokes adaptive modifications of the autophagy network. These adjustments include increased expression and phosphorylation of ATG2B as well as augmented formation of the ATG12-ATG5 conjugate. Moreover, ATG9A shows an enhanced phosphorylation at amino acid residues tyrosine 8 and serine 14, resulting in an increased ATG9A trafficking. Via pharmacological inhibition of Y8 phosphorylation, we demonstrate that this ATG9A modification is important to maintain basal autophagy under RAB18 knockout conditions. However, while the network adaptations are sufficient to maintain basal autophagic activity, they are incapable of ensuring autophagy induction upon starvation, which is characterized by an enhanced lipid demand. Thus, here, we define the molecular role of RAB18 in connecting lipid droplets and autophagy, emphasize the significance of lipid droplets as lipid sources for the degradative pathway, and uncover a remarkable autophagy network plasticity, including phosphorylation-dependent ATG9A activation, to compensate reduced lipid availability in order to rescue basal autophagic activity.

### Keywords
Human, Atg9a, Lc-ms/ms, Rab18, Atg2b

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB), Mainz, Germany

### Submitter
Petra Beli

### Lab Head
Dr Petra Beli
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB), Mainz, Germany


