### Accession
PXD032082

### Title
Metabolomic and Proteomic and Revealed Differences in the  Distribution and Synthesis Mechanism of Aroma Precursors in Tobacco Leaf, Stem, and Root at Seedling Stage

### Description
Tobacco, as an important cash crop and model plant, has been studied and explored in various aspects. In China, Yunyan 87 was recognized as a flue-cured tobacco variety and had been widely concerned due to its excellent product quality characteristics. The quality of tobacco products depends on the compound collection of tobacco leaves, including pigments, carbohydrates, amino acids, polyphenols and alkaloids. Present study investigated tobacco seedlings, with the assistant of the untargeted metabonomic technology and the label-free proteomic technology to analyze  metabolites and proteins differences in leaf, stem, and root groups respectively. From 298 metabolites and 4993 proteins obtained, there were significant differences in both primary and secondary metabolism involved aroma precursors biosynthesis in seedling tobacco leaves, stems, and roots, such as carbohydrate metabolism, energy metabolism, and amino acid biosynthesis, and secondary metabolism phenylpropanoids, flavonoids and alkaloid biosynthesis in this study. Especially alkaloids metabolites identification results showed nornicotine, anatabine, anatalline, and myosmine, were significantly higher in tobacco roots than in leaves, and stems at seedling stage.

### Sample Protocol
Plant material Seedlings of tobacco variety Yunyan87 were provided by the Anhui Wannan Tobacco Co., Ltd. (Anhui, China). Leaves, stems and roots from each group were collected from 60-days N. tobacum seedling for all the experimental analyses, and snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and then stored in a refrigerator at -80 oC for subsequent analyze.  Protein extraction The protein extraction process reference Carpentier et al. [21] with slightly modified. Fresh materials (50 mg) were ground in liquid nitrogen and then was resuspended in 500 mL of ice-cold extraction buffer, then 500 μL of ice-cold Tris-phenol (pH>7.8) was added and the sample was mixed for 15 min at 4 °C. After centrifugation (6000 ×g, 3 min, 4°C), the phenolic phase was collected and precipitated overnight with five volumes 100 mM ammonium acetate in methanol at -20 °C. After precipitation, the pellet was rinsed twice in ice-cold acetone. And the pellet was air-dried, resuspended in 100 μL lysis buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4% CHAPS, 2mM EDTA, 10mM DTT, 1mM PMSF). The protein concentration was determined by Bradford method with bovine serum albumin as the standard. Three biological replicates were performed.   Protein purification and enzymolysis Protein purification and enzymolysis were performed in accordance with the methods described by Zhu et al. [19]. Peptides were desalted with a ZipTip column (MilliporeSigma, Temecula, CA, USA).  Protein analysis using nano LC-MS/MS The tryptic peptides were analyzed on an Easy-nLC 1000 system coupled with an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific Inc., San Jose, CA, USA). Peptides in 0.1% formic acid were loaded onto an Acclaim Pep Map 100 C18 column (250 mm × 75 μm, 2 μm-C18) (Thermo Scientific Inc., San Jose, CA, USA). And mobile phases A was ddH2O, mobile phases B was 80 % acetonitrile, a linear gradient: 0 - 1 min: from 3% B to 8 % B; 1 - 102 min, from 8% B to 45 % B, 102 - 106 min: from 45 % B to 95 % B; 106 - 115 min: 95 % B. And the flow rate was 300 nL min-1. The eluted peptides were ionized by a nanoelectrospray flex source and analyzed in data-dependent acquisition mode with Thermo Xcalibur software.  Full-scan mass spectra was acquired in the MS over 350-1500 m/z with resolution of 60,000. The ten most intense precursor ions were selected for collision-induced (CID) fragmentation in the linear ion trap at normalized collision energy of 30%. The MS2 ions were detected using a normal ion trap scan rate.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification The raw data was analyzed within Proteome Discoverer (PD) (version 2.4, Thermo Scientific). Identified proteins were searched against the UniProtKB database (nicotiana tabacum, 77079 entries, downloaded 2021.05.21). Mass tolerance values of MS and MS/MS were set to 10 ppm and 0.2 Da, respectively. The enzyme digestion method is set as Trypsin. Peptides with fewer than two unique peptides were excluded from further analysis. Proteomics bioinformatic analysis KOBAS 3.0 online software were used to process KEGG pathway enrichment analysis and GO enrichment analysis. The Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database (http://www.kegg.jp/) was used to annotate proteins and metabolites pathways. MapMan bin codes were used to process proteins pathways mapping. And, the micro-bioinformation platform (http://www.bioinformatics.com.cn) was used to complete the visualization of some data analysis results.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Metabolomics, Tobacco seedling, Proteomics, Yunyan87, Aroma precursor

### Affiliations
The Cancer Hospital of the University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (Zhejiang Cancer Hospital), Institute of Basic Medicine and Cancer (IBMC), Chinese Academy of Sciences, Hangzhou 310002, PR China
Zhejiang university

### Submitter
Amin Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Wei Zhu
The Cancer Hospital of the University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (Zhejiang Cancer Hospital), Institute of Basic Medicine and Cancer (IBMC), Chinese Academy of Sciences, Hangzhou 310002, PR China


