### Accession
PXD040439

### Title
PQBP1-associated proteins spectrums in HEK-293 cells

### Description
Our study shows that deletion of the alternative splicing regulator PQBP1 in striatal progenitors resulted in defective striatal development due to impaired neurogenesis of spiny projection neurons (SPNs). Therefore, we further reveal that PQBP1 associated with components in splicing machinery by LC-MS/MS. These findings identify PQBP1 as a novel regulator in balancing striatal progenitor proliferation and differentiation.

### Sample Protocol
The cDNA encoding full-length protein of PQBP1 was inserted into the pFLAG-CMV2 vector HEK-293 cells were transfected with plasmids using X-treme GENE HP DNA transfection reagent (Roche) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. After 36 h, the transfected cells were harvested and lysed in cold HNTG buffer (50 mM HEPES pH7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 10% glycerol, 0.1% Triton X-100, 1mM DTT, 1% w/v protein inhibitor, 1% w/v PhosStop) for 30 min on ice. The lysates were centrifuged at 12,000 g for 10 min at 4 ℃; the supernatant was incubated with beads conjugated with anti-Flag antibody (Sigma) overnight at 4 ℃. After washing three times with lysis buffer, the bound complexes were eluted with 2x SDS sample buffer and subjected to SDS-PAGE and Mass spectrum.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were searched against the human proteome sequences obtained from the UniProt database using MaxQuant software (version 1.5.2.8). False discovery rates (FDR) were estimated using the target-decoy strategy, and FDR cut-offs were set to 0.05 for sites, peptides and proteins. Enzyme specificity was considered to be full cleavage by trypsin, and two maximum missed cleavage sites were permitted. The minimum required peptide length was set to 6 residues.

### Publication Abstract
The balance between cell proliferation and differentiation is essential for maintaining the neural progenitor pool and brain development. Although the mechanisms underlying cell proliferation and differentiation at the transcriptional level have been studied intensively, post-transcriptional regulation of cell proliferation and differentiation remains largely unclear. Here, we show that deletion of the alternative splicing regulator PQBP1 in striatal progenitors results in defective striatal development due to impaired neurogenesis of spiny projection neurons (SPNs). Pqbp1-deficient striatal progenitors exhibit declined proliferation and increased differentiation, resulting in a reduced striatal progenitor pool. We further reveal that PQBP1 associates with components in splicing machinery. The alternative splicing profiles identify that PQBP1 promotes the exon 9 inclusion of Numb, a variant that mediates progenitor proliferation. These findings identify PQBP1 as a regulator in balancing striatal progenitor proliferation and differentiation and provide alternative insights into the pathogenic mechanisms underlying Renpenning syndrome.

### Keywords
Pqbp1; hek-293 cells; lc-msms

### Affiliations
School of Life Science and Technology, Southeast University, Nanjing, Jiangsu Province, China
Southeast University

### Submitter
Hao Xie

### Lab Head
Dr Junhai Han
School of Life Science and Technology, Southeast University, Nanjing, Jiangsu Province, China


