### Accession
PXD030539

### Title
thermal proteome profiling of hypomethylating agents in infant ALL

### Description
thermal proteome profiling of hypomethylating agents in infant ALL for elucidation of their mode of action.

### Sample Protocol
ALL-PO cells were distributed into T25 flasks to a density of 10*106 cells/mL in 10 mL medium. Cells were incubated with 100 μM azacitidine, decitabine or DMSO (vehicle) at a final DMSO concentration of 0.2% for 1.5 hours at 37°C and 5% CO2. The viability of the cells was checked after the incubation and was 95% throughout the conditions. Cells were pelleted at 400 g and RT for 3 min and washed two times with 37°C Hank’s balanced salt solution. Cells were resuspended to a density of 100*10e6 cells/mL and distributed as 100 μL aliquots into 0.2-mL PCR tubes. One of each of the compounds and vehicle containing tubes was heated in parallel for 3 min to the respective temperatures (37, 41, 44, 47, 50, 53, 56, 59, 63, 67°C), followed by a 3-min incubation time at RT. Afterwards, cells were flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen. Cells were thawed at 25°C and lysed by this freeze-thawing cycle repeated for another two times. Cell debris and precipitated proteins were removed by centrifugation at 21000 g and 4°C for 40 min. Supernatants were transferred to new tubes and protein concentrations were determined. Equal volumes of each condition that correspond to 140 μg protein in the 37°C sample were transferred to new tubes and subjected to the following digestion. First, the samples were diluted to contain 50 mM TEAB, 0.1% SDS and 5 mM TCEP. Reduction was performed at 65°C for 30 min. The samples were then cooled down to RT and alkylated with 15 mM of chloroacetamide for 30 min. The proteins were digested overnight with 1 to 40 Lys-C to protein-ratio and consecutively with Trypsin at a 1 to 25 enzyme to protein ratio. The digested peptides were labeled by 10-plex TMT-tags using 0.6 mg of the respective label for each sample. Of note, the labelling efficiency was determined by LC-MS/MS before pooling of the samples. For the sample clean-up step, a solid phase extraction (SPE strata-X-C, Phenomenex, Torrance, CA, USA) followed by SP3 was performed and purified samples were dried in a vacuum centrifuge. An aliquot of approximately 10 µg was suspended in LC mobile phase A (3% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid) and 1 µg was injected on the LC-MS/MS system. Labeled peptide extracts were combined to a single sample per experiment (azacitidine, decitabine, DMSO) and pre-fractionated by means of high pH reversed-phase chromatography (XBridge BEH C18 (2.1mm x 250 mm) 300 A, 3.5 μm, Waters, Milford, MA, USA) using a 63 min gradient from 3% to 80% acetonitrile in 20 mM ammonia. Collected fractions were pooled into 14 samples, dried using a vacuum centrifuge and subjected to an LC-MS/MS measurement. Online LC-MS was performed as previously described 73 using a Dionex UltiMate™ 3000 RSLCnano System coupled to a Q-Exactive-HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Each of the samples was dissolved in 20 μL solvent A and 10 μL were injected. Samples were trapped on a C18 guard-desalting column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 75μm x 2 cm, nanoViper, C18, 5 µm, 100Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA), and separated on a 50 cm long C18 column (Easy spray PepMap RSLC, C18, 2 μm, 100Å, 75 μm x 50 cm, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The nano capillary solvent A was 95% water, 5%DMSO, 0.1% FA; and solvent B was 5% water, 5% DMSO, 95% acetonitrile, 0.1% FA. At a constant flow of 0.25 μl min−1, a curved gradient from 3 to 8% B (in 2 min, curve of 4) and from 8% to 45% B (in 148 min, curve of 5) was used followed by a steep increase to 99% B in 2 min. FTMS master scans were performed in a mass range of 3000-1500 m/z applying a resolution of 60 000 (and mass range 300-1500 m/z), followed by data-dependent MS/MS (35 000 resolution) on the top 5 ions using higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) at 30% normalized collision energy. Precursors were isolated with a 2 m/z window and 0.5 m/z isolation offset. Automatic gain control (AGC) targets were 1e6 for MS1 and 1e5 for MS2. Maximum injection times were 100 ms for MS1 and 100 ms for MS2. The entire duty cycle lasted ~2.5 s. Dynamic exclusion was used with 30 s duration. Precursors with unassigned charge state or charge state 1 were excluded.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS data was searched using isobarquant and data analsysis was performed according to Nat Protoc 10, 1567–1593 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1038/nprot.2015.101 and Mol Cell Proteomics 2019 Dec;18(12) DOI: 10.1074/mcp.TIR119.001481 against the uniprot human reference proteome database (42130 entries) downloaded from uniprot.org on 2016-10-24.

### Publication Abstract
Infants with KMT2A-rearranged B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) have a dismal prognosis. Survival outcomes have remained static in recent decades despite treatment intensification and novel therapies are urgently required. KMT2A-rearranged infant ALL cells are characterized by an abundance of promoter hypermethylation and exhibit high BCL-2 expression, highlighting potential for therapeutic targeting. Here, we show that hypomethylating agents exhibit in vitro additivity when combined with most conventional chemotherapeutic agents. However, in a subset of samples an antagonistic effect was seen between several agents. This was most evident when hypomethylating agents were combined with methotrexate, with upregulation of ATP-binding cassette transporters identified as a potential mechanism. Single agent treatment with azacitidine and decitabine significantly prolonged in vivo survival in KMT2A-rearranged infant ALL xenografts. Treatment of KMT2A-rearranged infant ALL cell lines with azacitidine and decitabine led to differential genome-wide DNA methylation, changes in gene expression and thermal proteome profiling revealed the target protein-binding landscape of these agents. The selective BCL-2 inhibitor, venetoclax, exhibited in vitro additivity in combination with hypomethylating or conventional chemotherapeutic agents. The addition of venetoclax to azacitidine resulted in a significant in vivo survival advantage indicating the therapeutic potential of this combination to improve outcome for infants with KMT2A-rearranged ALL.

### Keywords
Human, Azacitidine, Tpp, Lc-ms/ms, Decitabine

### Affiliations
Karolinska Institutet, Department of Oncology-Pathology (OnkPat)
Karolinska Institutet

### Submitter
Rozbeh Jafari

### Lab Head
Dr Rozbeh Jafari
Karolinska Institutet, Department of Oncology-Pathology (OnkPat)


