### Accession
PXD001586

### Title
Pathogen or enemy release in invasive wasps?

### Description
No evidence of enemy release in pathogen and microbial communities of common wasps (Vespula vulgaris) in their native and introduced range

### Sample Protocol
Wasp sample preparation Wasps used here were those collected for a separate study on the population genetics of common wasps in their native and invaded range (Lester et al. 2014). Twenty individual wasps were taken from each of two countries in the invaded range (Argentina and New Zealand), and from each of two countries within the native range where invasive populations appear likely to have originated (i.e. Belgium and England) (Fig. 1; Lester et al. 2014). The samples of foraging workers or workers from nests were collected into 90% ethanol prior and either being sent to New Zealand or frozen immediately. When wasps were taken from nests, only one worker from each nest was used. Wasp samples were in storage < 12 months when used for this analysis.  The twenty wasps were combined and crushed to a fine powder in liquid nitrogren using a mortar and pestle. Lysis buffer (7M Urea, 2M Thiourea, 4% Chaps, 0.2% Triton X-100, 0.1% SDS, 40 mM Tris pH 8.5 supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich, P8340, MO, USA), 4-5 w/v) was added to the powdered sample, vortexed at room temperature for 2 h and centrifuged at 15,000 × g for 30 min at 4°C. The supernatant containing the wasp proteins was collected and stored at -20°C for further analysis. Protein concentration was determined by Bradford assay (Bio-Rad, Auckland, NZ).  SDS-PAGE and gel slicing and dicing We then loaded 20 μg of each sample into duplicate wells in a 4-12% gradient SDS-PAGE gel (NuPage Novex 4-12% Bis-Tris Gels, Life Technologies, Auckland, NZ), which was run at 200 V for 60 min. The gel was removed immediately following electrophoresis and fixed (50% ethanol and 3% phosphoric acid) for 30 min. The gel was washed with milliQ H2O and incubated in staining solution (34% methanol, 17% ammonium sulfate and 3% phosphoric acid) for 60 min. A small spatula (approx 10 mg) of Coomassie Brilliant Blue G-250 (#161-0604, Bio-Rrad, Auckland, NZ) was added to the solution and left for 3 days to completely stain. Following staining, quick washes with milliQ H2O were performed and gels were scanned using the GE ImageScanner III with LabScan software. The stained gel was washed twice with distilled H2O, and the gel lanes were excised. Each gel lane was cut into 20 slices and each slice was diced into approximately 1×1 mm pieces.  The gel pieces from duplicate gel lanes of each sample were combined, de-stained in 50% acetonitrile in 50 mM NH4HCO3, reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol in 0.1 M NH4HCO3 for 30 min at 56 °C, and alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide in 0.1 M NH4HCO3 for 40 min at room temperature in the dark as previously described (Peng et al., 2011). The reduced and alkylated proteins were in-gel digested with trypsin (Roche-modified sequencing grade) in 50 mM NH4HCO3 at 37 °C overnight. The resulting tryptic peptides were sequentially extracted with 2 volumes of 25 mM NH4HCO3, acetonitrile, 5% formic acid and then acetonitrile again for 15 min at 37 °C with shaking, respectively. The extracts were pooled and dried under vacuum to approximately 5 µl. The tryptic peptides were purified with PerfectPure C18 tips (Eppendorf AG, Germany) according to the manufacturer’s instruction, and then eluted into 5 μl of 70% ACN, 0.1% formic acid solution. The eluted peptides were raised to 75 μl with 0.1% formic acid (buffer A of the LC gradient) that are required for two injections for duplicate LC-MS/MS analyses.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS spectra were converted to Mascot generic files (MGFs) for Mascot searches. MGFs contain mass peak lists, and the peak lists were extracted using Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with the following parameters: minimum mass 350 Da, maximum mass 5000, precursor mass tolerance 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance 0.6 Da, intensity threshold 100, minimum ion count 1, S/N threshold 1.5. MGFs were searched using the Mascot search algorithm (version 2.5.0, Matrix Science, UK) against the Q114 LudwigNR protein sequence database with all taxonomies comprising 32769651 entries (http://www.ludwig.edu.au/archive/LudwigNR/LudwigNR.pdf). The Mascot search parameters were as follows: carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.021 Da) as a fixed modification; N-terminal acetylation (+ 42.011 Da), N-terminal carbamylation (+43.066), N-terminal Q Gln->pyro-Glu (- 17.026) and methionine oxidation (+15.995 Da) as variable modifications.  A peptide precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, #13C defined as 1, and fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.5 Da were used. The automatic decoy (random) database sequence option was enabled to allow false-discovery rate estimation. Protein identification was performed using Scaffold (version 4.3.4, Proteome Software Inc., USA) against the Q114 LudwigNR protein sequence database with Mascot as the search engine. The Mascot search result files (.DAT files) derived from the duplicate LC-MS/MS runs of the gel slices of a single SDS-PAGE gel lane were uploaded into Scaffold in combination to generate the overall protein list of a wasp sample. Proteins detected with ≥ 95% probability as assigned by ProteinProphet (Nesvizhskii et al., 2003) containing at least one peptide that was detected with ≥ 95% probability as assigned by PeptideProphet (Keller et al., 2002) were considered as positive identifications.

### Publication Abstract
When invasive species move to new environments they typically experience population bottlenecks that limit the probability that pathogens and parasites are also moved. The invasive species may thus be released from biotic interactions that can be a major source of density-dependent mortality, referred to as enemy release. We examined for evidence of enemy release in populations of the common wasp (Vespula vulgaris), which attains high densities and represents a major threat to biodiversity in its invaded range. Mass spectrometry proteomic methods were used to compare the microbial communities in wasp populations in the native (Belgium and England) and invaded range (Argentina and New Zealand). We found no evidence of enemy release, as the number of microbial taxa was similar in both the introduced and native range. However, some evidence of distinctiveness in the microbial communities was observed between countries. The pathogens observed were similar to a variety of taxa observed in honey bees. These taxa included Nosema, Paenibacillus, and Yersina spp. Genomic methods confirmed a diversity of Nosema spp., Actinobacteria, and the Deformed wing and Kashmir bee viruses. We also analysed published records of bacteria, viruses, nematodes and fungi from both V. vulgaris and the related invader V. germanica. Thirty-three different microorganism taxa have been associated with wasps including Kashmir bee virus and entomophagous fungi such as Aspergillus flavus. There was no evidence that the presence or absence of these microorganisms was dependent on region of wasp samples (i.e. their native or invaded range). Given the similarity of the wasp pathogen fauna to that from honey bees, the lack of enemy release in wasp populations is probably related to spill-over or spill-back from bees and other social insects. Social insects appear to form a reservoir of generalist parasites and pathogens, which makes the management of wasp and bee disease difficult.

### Keywords
Lcms, Wasp

### Affiliations
Centre for Biodiscovery
Victoria University of Wellington

### Submitter
Danyl Mclauchlan

### Lab Head
Dr Phil Lester
Victoria University of Wellington


