### Accession
PXD015757

### Title
Engineered fibre enables targeted activation of butyrate-producing microbiota in the distal gut

### Description
Beneficial modulation of the gut microbiome has high-impact implications not only in humans, but also in livestock that sustain our current societal needs.  In this context, we have engineered an acetylated galactoglucomannan (AcGGM) fibre from spruce trees to match unique enzymatic capabilities of Roseburia and Faecalibacterium species, both renowned butyrate-producing gut commensals. The accuracy of AcGGM was tested in an applied pig feeding trial, which resolved 355 metagenome-assembled genomes together with quantitative metaproteomes. In AcGGM-fed pigs, both target populations differentially expressed AcGGM-specific polysaccharide utilization loci, including novel, mannan-specific esterases that are critical to its deconstruction. We additionally observed a “butterfly effect”, whereby numerous metabolic changes and interdependent cross-feeding pathways were detected in neighboring non-mannolytic populations that produce short-chain fatty acids. Our findings show that intricate structural features and acetylation patterns of dietary fibre can be customized to specific bacterial populations, with the possibility to create greater modulatory effects at large.

### Sample Protocol
AcGGM oligosaccharides produced from Norway spruce chips were milled and used for feeding trials in piglets (1, 2 and 4% inclusion level). Fecal samples were collected during the timeframe of the study and at the end of the trial, piglets were sacrificed and samples collected from the lumen of the duodenum, jejunum, ileum, cecum, and colon. Metagenome sequencing were done using two lanes of HiSeq 4000. For metaproteomics, cells were lysed by beat beating, proteins precipitated by TCA, separated by SDS-PAGE and trypsinated.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were analyzed using a Q-Exactive and proteins identified and quantified using MaxQuant version 1.4.1.2 using a sample-specific metagenomics database (602.947 entries) generated from 355 MAGs.

### Publication Abstract
Beneficial modulation of the gut microbiome has high-impact implications not only in humans, but also in livestock that sustain our current societal needs. In this context, we have tailored an acetylated galactoglucomannan (AcGGM) fibre to match unique enzymatic capabilities of Roseburia and Faecalibacterium species, both renowned butyrate-producing gut commensals. Here, we test the accuracy of AcGGM within the complex endogenous gut microbiome of pigs, wherein we resolve 355 metagenome-assembled genomes together with quantitative metaproteomes. In AcGGM-fed pigs, both target populations differentially express AcGGM-specific polysaccharide utilization loci, including novel, mannan-specific esterases that are critical to its deconstruction. However, AcGGM-inclusion also manifests a "butterfly effect", whereby numerous metabolic changes and interdependent cross-feeding pathways occur in neighboring non-mannanolytic populations that produce short-chain fatty acids. Our findings show how intricate structural features and acetylation patterns of dietary fibre can be customized to specific bacterial populations, with potential to create greater modulatory effects at large.

### Keywords
Porcine colon microbiome, Metaproteomics, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Norwegian University of Life Sciences
Faculty of Chemistry, Biotechnology and Food Science Norwegian University of Life Sciences Post Office Box 5003 1432, Ås Norway

### Submitter
Magnus Arntzen

### Lab Head
Dr Bjørge Westereng
Faculty of Chemistry, Biotechnology and Food Science Norwegian University of Life Sciences Post Office Box 5003 1432, Ås Norway


