### Accession
PXD000045

### Title
LC-MS/MS of cultured Mycobacterium tuberculosis in a hypoxia/reaeration timecourse

### Description
Mycobacterium tuberculosis samples were collected during oxygen starvation and reaeration. The samples were solubized with urea, digested with trypsin, then desalted with a C18 96-well plate prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
We have taken the first steps towards a complete reconstruction of the Mycobacterium tuberculosis regulatory network based on ChIP-Seq and combined this reconstruction with system-wide profiling of messenger RNAs, proteins, metabolites and lipids during hypoxia and re-aeration. Adaptations to hypoxia are thought to have a prominent role in M. tuberculosis pathogenesis. Using ChIP-Seq combined with expression data from the induction of the same factors, we have reconstructed a draft regulatory network based on 50 transcription factors. This network model revealed a direct interconnection between the hypoxic response, lipid catabolism, lipid anabolism and the production of cell wall lipids. As a validation of this model, in response to oxygen availability we observe substantial alterations in lipid content and changes in gene expression and metabolites in corresponding metabolic pathways. The regulatory network reveals transcription factors underlying these changes, allows us to computationally predict expression changes, and indicates that Rv0081 is a regulatory hub.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Hypoxia

### Affiliations
Bioinformatic

### Submitter
Gingras Olivier

### Lab Head


