### Accession
PXD009468

### Title
Surface proteome of Lactobacillus casei GCRL163 under heat adaptation

### Description
Cell surface proteins are constatntly impacted by environmental stresses. To understand the imapct of heat adaptation on the Lactobacillus casei GCRL163, trypsin shaving technique was used to extract the surface proteins of the strain and the protein fraction obtained analysed using gel-free proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets, harvested from mid-exponential phase of 100 mL culture from the bioreactor units at 9000 rpm for 10 min at 15oC, were washed once with 20 mL Tris-HCl buffer (0.04M, pH 6.8). The pellets were then resuspended in 2 mL 0.05M Tris buffer containing 40% sucrose at pH 7.4. Added as a reducing agent was 10 uL of 5M DDT followed by enzymatic digestion with 2 µg porcine trypsin/mg of cells. Cell suspension with no trypsin added was used as control. Incubation was done for 15 min at 37oC with 50 rpm agitation (Innova 44 Incubator shaker series; New Brunswick Scientific). Cells were pelleted at 9000 rpm for 10 min at 4oC and supernatant fluids containing proteins and peptides filtered using 0.22μm nitrocellulose membranes (Millipore, Australia). The supernatant fluids were concentrated and desalted by filtering through ZipTip with 0.6 µL C18 resin (Sigma-Aldrich) and additional 2 µg of trypsin added and incubated for 24 h at 37oC. The trypsin digestion was then stopped by storing in -20oC. Digests were analysed using Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano and LTQ-Orbitrap MS.

### Data Protocol
Andromeda search engine in the MaxQuant environment used for searching the Lactobacillus casei strain W56 (ID UP000003734) database comprising 3092 protein entries, using default parameters for Orbitrap data.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Lactobacillus casei</i> group bacteria improve cheese ripening and may interact with host intestinal cells as probiotics, where surface proteins play a key role. Three complementary methods [trypsin shaving (TS), LiCl-sucrose (LS) extraction, and extracellular culture fluid precipitation] were used to analyze cell surface proteins of <i>Lactobacillus paracasei</i> GCRL163 by label-free quantitative proteomics after culture to the mid-exponential phase in bioreactors at pH 6.5 and temperatures of 30-45 &#xb0;C. A total of 416 proteins, including 300 with transmembrane, cell wall anchoring, and secretory motifs and 116 cytoplasmic proteins, were quantified as surface proteins. Although LS caused significantly greater cell lysis as growth temperature increased, higher numbers of extracytoplasmic proteins were exclusively obtained by LS treatment. Together with the increased positive surface charge of cells cultured at supra-optimal temperatures, proteins including cell wall hydrolases Msp1/p75 and Msp2/p40, &#x3b1;-fucosidase AlfB, SecA, and a PspC-domain putative adhesin were upregulated in surface or secreted protein fractions, suggesting that cell adhesion may be altered. Prolonged heat stress (PHS) increased binding of <i>L. paracasei</i> GCRL163 to human colorectal adenocarcinoma HT-29 cells, relative to acid-stressed cells. This study demonstrates that PHS influences cell adhesion and relative abundance of proteins located on the surface, which may impact probiotic functionality, and the detected novel surface proteins likely linked to the cell cycle and envelope stress.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Heat adaptation, Surface proteins, Lactobacillus

### Affiliations
University of Tasmania
Proteomics Mass Spectrometry, University of Tasmania

### Submitter
Richard Wilson

### Lab Head
Dr Richard Wilson
Proteomics Mass Spectrometry, University of Tasmania


