### Accession
PXD038310

### Title
Coalescence of endoplasmic reticulum fragments form a new quality-control compartment in adipocytes

### Description
Using a combination of state-of-the-art (ultra-) imaging, biochemical and biophysical techniques, this study not only uncover a new cellular quality-control compartment, but demonstrate a profound cellular adaptation capability and plasticity in dealing with misfolded proteins or protein aggregates in the ER.

### Sample Protocol
For LPL IP-MS, frozen WAT collected from 7 DKO, 5 WT and Sel1LAdipCre  mice at the age of 12 weeks under ad-libitum condition was pooled and lysed in cold IP buffer (1% Triton X-100, 150mM NaCl, 25mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5), supplemented with protease inhibitor and phosphatase inhibitor as described above in western blot section. For SEL1L IP-MS, BAT from WT, Sel1LUcp1-Cre and HRD1Uc1p-Cre mice housed at room temperature under ad-libitum condition was used. The concentration and volume of samples were normalized using Bradford assay. In total, 5mg of protein in each sample was used for IP. Tissue lysate was pre-cleared with Protein G (for LPL-IP, Roche) or Protein A (for SEL1L IP, ThermoFisher) agarose beads for 4 hr at 4 °C. IgG control samples were prepared by mixing pre-cleared protein lysates from WT and DKO (for LPL IP) or WT and HRD1Ucp-Cre (for SEL1L IP) groups.  The samples were then incubated with LPL antibody (2.427 mg/ml, gift from Dr. Andre Bensadoun) or SEL1L antibody (2.37mg/ml, homemade) overnight at 4 °C  using a 1:1.5 ratio of protein (mg): antibody (µl). Samples incubated with normal goat IgG (MBL, PM094) or rabbit IgG (Cell Signaling, #2729) were included as negative controls for LPL and SEL1L IP, respectively. Immunocomplexes were precipitated by mixing sample with 150 µl Protein G or Protein A agarose beads under gentle rocking for 2 hr at 4℃. The beads were washed with cold IP buffer followed by cold PBS for three times at 4℃. The beads containing immunocomplexes were stored at -80 °C until further analysis. The samples were submitted to the Proteomics Resource Facility at the University of Michigan Medical School for mass-spectrometry on a fee-for-service basis.

### Data Protocol
For BAT: 1. No keratin protein,  and PSM (HRD1Ucp1-Cre) ≥ 2   2. PSM (HRD1Ucp1-Cre) ≥ 4 x PSM  (IgG ), and PSM  (HRD1Ucp1-Cre) ≥ 4 x PSM  (SEL1LUcp1-Cre)         3. PSM (HRD1Ucp1-Cre)  >2 x WT   For WAT: 1. No keratin protein 2. PSM (IgG) = 0                      3. PSM (WT) ≥2

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sel1l-hrd1 erad, Cerfs, Protein aggregation, Phase separation, Er-phagy, Bip, Soluble-to-insoluble phase transition, Lipoprotein lipase, Tryptophan loop, Autophagy

### Affiliations
University of Michigan
Department of Molecular & Integrative Physiology,University of Michigan Medical School, 5325 Brehm Tower, 1000 Wall St., Ann Arbor, MI, 48105

### Submitter
Xiaoqiong Wei

### Lab Head
Dr Ling Qi
Department of Molecular & Integrative Physiology,University of Michigan Medical School, 5325 Brehm Tower, 1000 Wall St., Ann Arbor, MI, 48105


