### Accession
PXD006396

### Title
Proteomics reveals NNMT as a master metabolic regulator of cancer associated fibroblasts

### Description
High-grade serous carcinoma has a poor prognosis, owing primarily to its early dissemination throughout the abdominal cavity. Genomic and proteomic approaches have provided snapshots of the proteogenomics of ovarian cancer, but a systematic examination of both the tumour and stromal compartments is critical in understanding ovarian cancer metastasis. We developed a label- free proteomic workflow to analyse as few as 5,000 formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded cells microdissected from each compartment. The tumour proteome was stable during progression from in situ lesions to metastatic disease; however, the metastasis-associated stroma was characterized by a highly conserved proteomic signature, prominently including the methyltransferase nicotinamide N-methyltransferase (NNMT) and several of the proteins that it regulates. Stromal NNMT expression was necessary and sufficient for functional aspects of the cancer-associated fibroblast (CAF) phenotype, including the expression of CAF markers and the secretion of cytokines and oncogenic extracellular matrix. Stromal NNMT expression supported ovarian cancer migration, proliferation and in vivo growth and metastasis. Expression of NNMT in CAFs led to depletion of S-adenosyl methionine and reduction in histone methylation associated with widespread gene- expression changes in the tumour stroma. This work supports the use of ultra-low-input proteomics to identify candidate drivers of disease phenotypes. NNMT is a central, metabolic regulator of CAF differentiation and cancer progression in the stroma that may be therapeutically targeted.

### Sample Protocol
FFPE tissue lysis was adapted and optimized from previously described workflows. Microdissected tissue was collected by pipetting 50 μl of lysis buffer (50% 2,2,2-trifluoroethanol (TFE) and 5 mM dithiothreitol in 25 mM NH4HCO3 buffer) and centrifuged for 5 min at maximum speed to collect all remaining tissue. Samples were boiled at 90 °C for 60 min and briefly centrifuged every 10 min to avoid drying out during lysis. Subsequently, samples were sonicated for 10 min (level 5, Bioruptor Plus, Diagenode). After centrifugation for 10 min at maximum speed, supernatants were transferred to new tubes and alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark. Samples were vacuum-concentrated for 30 min at 45 °C (until approxi- mately 10 μl buffer remained). 40 μl of fresh digestion buffer (10% TFE and trypsin in 50 mM NH4HCO3) was added in a trypsin (Promega) to total protein ratio of approximately 1:50. Digestion was carried out at 37 °C overnight and digestion stopped by addition of 1% TFA. Samples were vacuum-evaporated to a volume of 5–10 μl and resuspended in 100 μl 0.2% TFA and 2% acetonitrile before desalting with C18 StageTips. Samples were stored at −20 °C until MS analysis. Liquid chromatography (LC)-mass spectrometry (MS) analysis: Quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometers (Q Exactive and Q Exactive HF, Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) via a nano-electrospray source were operated in data dependent mode for LC–MS analysis of peptides. LC columns (75 μm inner diameter, 50 cm length) were packed in-house with C18 particles (1.9 μm, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany). Peptides were separated with a 250 min HPLC gradient from 2% to 60% in buffer B (80% acetoni- trile, 0.5% formic acid) at a flow-rate of 200 nl min−1. We employed a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200 (60,000 for Q Exactive HF) for survey scans. The scan range was set to 300 to 1,650 m/z. Up to the three most abundant MS1 features (charge ≥ 2) were selected for high-energy collisional dissociation fragmentation at a resolution of 17,500 at m/z 200 (15,000 for Q Exactive HF). Dynamic exclusion of sequenced peptides was set to 45 s. Ion injection times and ion target values were set to 20 ms and 3 × 106 for the survey scans and 220 ms and 1 × 105 for the MS/MS scans, respectively. Data was acquired using Xcalibur software (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were processed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.15). The Andromeda search engine36 of MaxQuant was used for peptide and protein identification. Andromeda is a probability-based search engine that employs a target-decoy approach to identify peptides and proteins at a false-discovery rate (FDR) of less than 1%. The UniProtKB database release (August 2015) was used as the forward database. MaxQuant automati- cally generated a reverse decoy database based on the provided forward database. Proteins which could not be distinguished based on the identified peptides were grouped into protein groups. The MaxLFQ algorithm was used for label-free proteome quantification. MaxLFQ is a peptide intensity-based algorithm that makes use of high-resolution 3D peptide features in mass-to-charge, retention time and intensity space.

### Publication Abstract
High-grade serous carcinoma has a poor prognosis, owing primarily to its early dissemination throughout the abdominal cavity. Genomic and proteomic approaches have provided snapshots of the proteogenomics of ovarian cancer<sup>1,2</sup>, but a systematic examination of both the tumour and stromal compartments is critical in understanding ovarian cancer metastasis. Here we develop a label-free proteomic workflow to analyse as few as 5,000 formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded cells microdissected from each compartment. The tumour proteome was stable during progression from in situ lesions to metastatic disease; however, the metastasis-associated stroma was characterized by a highly conserved proteomic signature, prominently including the methyltransferase nicotinamide N-methyltransferase (NNMT) and several of the proteins that it regulates. Stromal NNMT expression was necessary and sufficient for functional aspects of the cancer-associated fibroblast (CAF) phenotype, including the expression of CAF markers and the secretion of cytokines and oncogenic extracellular matrix. Stromal NNMT expression supported ovarian cancer migration, proliferation and in vivo growth and metastasis. Expression of NNMT in CAFs led to depletion of S-adenosyl methionine and reduction in histone methylation associated with widespread gene&#xa0;expression changes in the tumour stroma. This work supports the use of ultra-low-input proteomics to identify candidate drivers of disease phenotypes. NNMT is a central, metabolic regulator of CAF differentiation and cancer progression in the stroma that may be therapeutically targeted.

### Keywords
Ovarian cancer proteomics laser microdissection

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry Department of Proteomics and Signaltransduction Am Klopferspitz 18 D-82152 Martinsried
Proteomics

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry Department of Proteomics and Signaltransduction Am Klopferspitz 18 D-82152 Martinsried


