### Accession
PXD019911

### Title
Multi-Omics interrogation of soil microcosms amended with condensed tannins

### Description
Investigating soil microbiome responses to polyphenols under anoxia

### Sample Protocol
Samples were digested with trypsin, then analyzed by LC-MS/MS

### Data Protocol
Data was searched with MS-GF+ using PNNL's DMS Processing pipeline.

### Publication Abstract
Microorganisms play vital roles in modulating organic matter decomposition and nutrient cycling in soil ecosystems. The enzyme latch paradigm posits microbial degradation of polyphenols is hindered in anoxic peat leading to polyphenol accumulation, and consequently diminished microbial activity. This model assumes that polyphenols are microbially unavailable under anoxia, a supposition that has not been thoroughly investigated in any soil type. Here, we use anoxic soil reactors amended with and without a chemically defined polyphenol to test this hypothesis, employing metabolomics and genome-resolved metaproteomics to interrogate soil microbial polyphenol metabolism. Challenging the idea that polyphenols are not bioavailable under anoxia, we provide metabolite evidence that polyphenols are depolymerized, resulting in monomer accumulation, followed by the generation of small phenolic degradation products. Further, we show that soil microbiome function is maintained, and possibly enhanced, with polyphenol addition. In summary, this study provides chemical and enzymatic evidence that some soil microbiota can degrade polyphenols under anoxia and subvert the assumed polyphenol lock on soil microbial metabolism.

### Keywords
Anoxic response, Polyphenols, Soil microbiome

### Affiliations
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory
Colorado State University

### Submitter
Matthew Monroe

### Lab Head
Dr Kelly Wrighton
Colorado State University


