### Accession
PXD022613

### Title
Characterization of biomarkers in Colorectal Cancer Liver Metastases as a prognostic tool

### Description
In this study we aimed to explore the molecular landscape of hepatic metastases and adjacent tissue in order to delineate a potential molecular signature that may be predictive for clinical benefit of CRCLM resection. Consecutive patients who underwent CRCLM resection between 2008 and 2015 at RMC, and for whom pathological specimen was available were included in the study. Cases were divided into two cohorts based on the interval between resection of liver metastases and disease recurrence- patients with less than 12-month interval were defined as ״poor prognosis״ (PP) and patients with more than 12 months as ״good prognosis״ (GP). Clinical data was retrieved from the medical records. Proteomic analysis was performed on the pathological bio specimen and correlated to demographics and clinical outcomes. Fifty-eight patients were included in the study. 29 in the GP cohort and 29 in the PP cohort. Proteomic analysis of the two-cohort revealed 99 proteins that were 38 differentially expressed, about a third of them associate with the extracellular matrix (ECM) pathways as the matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs).

### Sample Protocol
Five slides from each FFPE sample were micro-dissected to isolate and collect only the tumor cells of interest for analysis. The micro-dissected FFPE tumor tissue was then subjected to Liquid Tissue® processing to solubilize the tumor tissues. Tissues were

### Data Protocol
The data was analyzed by the maxquant software with the andromeda search emgine.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Prognosis, Hepatic surgery, Colorectal cancer liver metastasis, Biomarkers, Molecular signature.

### Affiliations
Technion
Division of Oncology, Rambam Health Care Campus & Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Technion, Haifa, Israel

### Submitter
Tamar Ziv

### Lab Head
Dr Irit Ben-Aharon
Division of Oncology, Rambam Health Care Campus & Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Technion, Haifa, Israel


