### Accession
PXD010887

### Title
micro-proteomics experiment for single meiotic-phase barley anthers

### Description
We describe here a new micro-proteomics workflow for the analysis of individual barley anthers. The workflow detects more than 4000 proteins from small amounts of material representing single or paired anther samples, covering a dynamic range of protein expression levels across five orders of magnitude.  We consistently identified ~2800 proteins in a single 0.6mm anther and ~4000 proteins in a paired-anther sample.  This demonstrates an important technological advance in plant proteomics, considering the limited amount of starting material.  We employed our micro-proteomics workflow to investigate the proteome of the developing barley anther containing male gametes in the early stages of meiosis.  We successfully identified several low abundant meiosis-related proteins, proving that our approach is highly sensitive and consequently powerful.  To date, no work has been published previously on precisely staged individual plant anthers.

### Sample Protocol
Plant Material Plants used were all barley (Hordeum vulgare) cv. Golden Promise.  Plants were grown under 16h of light at 18–20°C and 8h of dark at 16°C until they reached early meiosis (6-7 weeks) in a controlled environment growth room.  For anther collection, 0.8-1.4cm in length whole spikes (i.e. developing barley inflorescences) were collected and 0.6mm anthers dissected manually with insulin syringes on a plastic Petri dish under a stereoscopic microscope.  Each barley spikelet contains three developmentally synchronised anthers.  Meiosis was monitored in one anther from each spikelet by squashing, staining with a solution of 2% acetocarmine and observation under a Microtec light microscope according to Colas et al. (2008).  The remaining two staged anthers were retained.  For label-free micro-proteomics single 0.6mm anthers were dissected, placed on a cavity glass slide in a drop of 1xPBS including protease inhibitor cocktail prepared according to the manufacturer’s instructions, and squashed with an insulin needle.  Samples were placed immediately in an Eppendorf tube containing LDS NuPage buffer including one tenth volume of NuPAGE sample reducing agent.   For the macro-proteomic experiment approximately 1000 staged anthers at the leptotene/zygotene stage of meiosis (within a size range of 0.6-0.8mm) were collected, immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -20°C until use.  These were subsequently sub-divided into 7 biological repeats, each consisting of approximately 140 anthers.  Preparation of protein extracts for macro-proteomic analysis Frozen barley anthers were suspended in extraction buffer (50 mM Tris HCl pH 7.6, 0.33M sucrose, 1 mM MgCl2, 1 mM DTT, 1% (w/v) C7BzO, protease inhibitor cocktail) and meiocytes released by crushing anthers with a glass rod.  Meiocyte enriched samples were collected with an insulin syringe into a fresh tube and extracted for 45 minutes on ice.  The lysates were then centrifuged for 10 min at 4000×g at 4°C.  Supernatants were collected in fresh tubes and centrifuged again for 10 min at 16000×g at 4°C.  Supernatants were collected in fresh tubes and pellets containing insoluble proteins extracted again with 20 µl of extraction buffer for 45 minutes on ice.  Supernatants from both extractions were then pooled.  A Bicinchoninic Acid Assay (BCA) was performed on the supernatants to determine protein concentration. Sample preparation by 1D SDS/PAGE gel fractionation For micro-proteomics, individual whole anthers were extracted with the LDS NuPage buffer.  Size fractionation of protein extracts was achieved by quick SDS-PAGE analysis on 4–12% (w/v) Bis-Tris NuPage gels using MES running buffer (50 mM MES, 50 mM Tris Base, 0.1% SDS, 1 mM EDTA, pH 7.3).  Electrophoresis was run for only 10-15 mins.  Gels were stained with InstantBlue according to manufacturer’s instructions.  Each gel track was cut into 3 fractions.  Gel pieces were de-stained by immersion in 50% acetonitrile and proteins reduced by incubation with 10 mM DTT in 20 mM Ammonium Bicarbonate and alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide in 20 mM Ammonium Bicarbonate by incubating for 30 minutes in the dark.  The gel slices were then digested with trypsin 12.5 µg/mL in 20 mM Ammonium Bicarbonate overnight at 30°C, shaking at 300 rpm on an Eppendorf Thermomixershaker and peptides were extracted the next day by incubating the gel pieces with 50% acetonitrile.  Samples were dried to approximately 10 µl by vacuum centrifugation in an Eppendorf speedvac. For Macro-proteomics, size fractionation of the combined proteins was achieved by SDS-PAGE analysis, as above.  A maximum of 25 µg of protein was loaded per lane and the electrophoresis was run until the full resolution of proteins along the gel.  Each lane from the gel was cut into 8 fractions.  Gel staining, destaining, reduction and alkylation was performed as above.  The gel slices were double digested with 2 µg/mL trypsin in 50 mM Ammonium Bicarbonate (with one digest done overnight at 37°C, followed by fresh trypsin aliquot addition, 4 hours shaking at 37°C).  Peptides were extracted as described above then cleaned over an in-house C18 (POROS R2, Applied Biosystems) column as follows: The column was first activated with 70% acetonitrile: 0.1% Trifluoro acetic acid (TFA) and then washed with 0.1% TFA.  The whole sample was loaded onto the column and washed with 0.1% TFA.  Bound peptides were eluted from the column using 70% acetonitrile: 0.1% TFA.  Samples were dried down to approximately 10 µl using vacuum centrifugation as before.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS and MaxQuant Analysis A Dionex Ultimate 3000 nanoHPLC system was used with 2 µg of peptides injected onto an Acclaim PepMap C18 nano-trap column (Dionex).  After washing with 2% (vol/vol) acetonitrile 0.1% (vol/vol) formic acid peptides were resolved on a 150 mm × 75 µm Acclaim PepMap C18 reverse phase analytical column over a 200 min organic gradient with a flow rate of 300 nl min−1.  The chromatography performed for these samples was as follows.  The gradient commenced with 6 minutes of 95% buffer A (0.1% formic acid)/5% buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.08% formic acid), followed by a linear gradient to 35% buffer B over 130 minutes, then an increase to 98% buffer B for 22 minutes duration, and completed with a return to 2% buffer B at minute 153 for 17 minutes.  Ions accepted for MS/MS were 2+ and greater.  Dynamic exclusion was set to 45 seconds, and the inclusion mass width for precursor ions was 10 ppm.  Peptides were transferred to the mass spectrometer via an Easy-Spray source with temperature set at 50˚C and a source voltage of 2.0 kV. Tandem mass spectrometry analysis was carried out on a LTQ-Velos Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) using data-dependent acquisition, measuring and sequencing the top 15 ions for each cycle. The resulting raw files were processed and searched using MaxQuant version 1.5.6.5 and the Andromeda peptide search engine (Cox et al. 2011; Cox and Mann, 2008), with searching against the Uniprot Hordeum vulgare database (March 2017).  The variable modifications were set as oxidation of methionine and acetylation of the protein N-terminus.  Fixed modifications were set to carbamidomethylation of cysteines only.  The MS tolerance was set to 7 ppm with the MS/MS tolerance set to 0.5 Da.  The peptide and protein False Discovery Rate (FDR) were both set to 1% (Cox and Mann, 2008.), and the proteins used for further analysis had 2 or more peptides assigned to them.

### Publication Abstract
Meiosis is a highly dynamic and precisely regulated process of cell division, leading to the production of haploid gametes from one diploid parental cell. In the crop plant barley (<i>Hordeum vulgare</i>), male meiosis occurs in anthers, in specialized cells called meiocytes. Barley meiotic tissue is scarce and not easily accessible, making meiosis study a challenging task. We describe here a new micro-proteomics workflow that allows sensitive and reproducible genome-wide label-free proteomic analysis of individual staged barley anthers. This micro-proteomic approach detects more than 4,000 proteins from such small amounts of material as two individual anthers, covering a dynamic range of protein relative abundance levels across five orders of magnitude. We applied our micro-proteomics workflow to investigate the proteome of the developing barley anther containing pollen mother cells in the early stages of meiosis and we successfully identified 57 known and putative meiosis-related proteins. Meiotic proteins identified in our study were found to be key players of many steps and processes in early prophase such as: chromosome condensation, synapsis, DNA double-strand breaks or crossover formation. Considering the small amount of starting material, this work demonstrates an important technological advance in plant proteomics and can be applied for proteomic examination of many size-limited plant specimens. Moreover, it is the first insight into the proteome of individual barley anther at early meiosis. The proteomic data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange with the accession number PXD010887.

### Keywords
Barley, Anther, Micro-proteomics

### Affiliations
The James Hutton Institute

### Submitter
Runxuan Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Robbie Waugh
The James Hutton Institute


