### Accession
PXD009674

### Title
A novel bactericidal mechanism of silver nanoparticles as a catalyst

### Description
iTRAQ based proteomics analysis revealed that proteins in E. coli might be oxidative damaged in AgNPs-L group.

### Sample Protocol
E. coli at early log phase were treated with 5 μg/mL AgNPs in light and in dark for 30 min and 1 h. Subsequently E. coli were centrifugated and washed with PBS. The sample preparations processes are performed as previous describe. Simply, bacteria were lysed using SDS lysis buffer. BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo, USA) was employed to protein concentration measure. The protein samples were digested with trypsin, and the collected peptides (150 μg) of each group were labeled with three different isobaric iTRAQ regenta. The labeled peptides were mixed and separated to six groups according to polarity using reverse-phase UPLC with an Ultremex SCX column (4.6 mm × 250 mm, 5 μm, Phenomenex, USA). The collected fractions were dried and resolved with buffer A (5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). 4 μl solution of each fraction containing about 0.5 μg/mL peptides   was detected by Thermo ScientificTM Orbitrap FusionTM lumous.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were searched against E. coli K12 database by Protein Discoverer software. The parameters are set as follows: sample type, iTRAQ 4 plex (peptide labeled); Cys alkylation, iodoacetic acid; digestion, trypsin; database, E. coli K12_.fasta; unique peptide ≥ 1，FDR < 0.01. The proteins identified in two repeated experiments were used to qunatify. The Proteins with fold changes above 1.2 or below 0.83 were selected as different expressed proteins. GO enrichment of the different expressed proteins was performed by DAVID program.

### Publication Abstract
Silver nanoparticles (AgNPs) are known for their broad-spectrum antibacterial properties, especially against antibiotic-resistant bacteria. However, the bactericidal mechanism of AgNPs remains unclear. In this study, we found that the bactericidal ability of AgNPs is induced by light. In contrast to previous postulates, visible light is unable to trigger silver ion release from AgNPs or to promote AgNPs to induce reactive oxygen species (ROS) in <i>Escherichia coli</i> In fact, we revealed that light excited AgNPs to induce protein aggregation in a concentration-dependent manner in <i>E. coli</i>, indicating that the bactericidal ability of AgNPs relies on the light-catalyzed oxidation of cellular proteins via direct binding to proteins, which was verified by fluorescence spectra. AgNPs likely absorb the light energy and transfer it to the proteins, leading to the oxidation of proteins and thus promoting the death of the bacteria. Isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ)-based proteomics revealed that the bacteria failed to develop effective resistance to the light-excited AgNPs. This direct physical mechanism is unlikely to be counteracted by any known drug resistance mechanisms of bacteria and therefore may serve as a last resort against drug resistance. This mechanism also provides a practical hint regarding the antimicrobial application of AgNPs-light exposure improves the efficacy of AgNPs.<b>IMPORTANCE</b> Although silver nanoparticles (AgNPs) are well known for their antibacterial properties, the mechanism by which they kill bacterial cells remains a topic of debate. In this study, we uncovered the bactericidal mechanism of AgNPs, which is induced by light. We tested the efficacy of AgNPs against a panel of antimicrobial-resistant pathogens as well as <i>Escherichia coli</i> under conditions of light and darkness and revealed that light excited the AgNPs to promote protein aggregation within the bacterial cells. Our report makes a significant contribution to the literature because this mechanism bypasses microbial drug resistance mechanisms, thus presenting a viable option for the treatment of multidrug-resistant bacteria.

### Keywords
Itraq proteomics，agnps，e. coli

### Affiliations
Key Laboratory of Functional Protein Research of Guangdong Higher Education Institutes, Institute of Life and Health Engineering, College of Life Science and Technology, Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632, China
Jinan university

### Submitter
tianyuan shi

### Lab Head
Dr Qing-Yu He
Key Laboratory of Functional Protein Research of Guangdong Higher Education Institutes, Institute of Life and Health Engineering, College of Life Science and Technology, Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632, China


