### Accession
PXD025800

### Title
Integrative multi-omics analysis in sepsis-associated liver dysfunction

### Description
we conducted integrative multiple levels of omics data including transcriptome, phosphoproteome, proteome and metabolome in different time-course of sepsis-associated liver dysfunction (SALD). This is the first trial to suggest the statistical pathway of integrative multi-omics data in sepsis. Given the increasing number of studies collecting multi-omics data but limited overview of the methodological framework for integrative analyses (Liu, Ding et al. 2013, Petersen, Zeilinger et al. 2014, Shah, Bonder et al. 2015), integrative approach in sepsis with liver dysfunction in this study will provide novel insights into the development of sepsis and ultimately offer new tools for overcoming the present diagnostic limitation. Therefore, a combined multi-omics dataset will give better accessibility of adoption in disease, and insight to identify the promising candidates for therapeutic strategies.

### Sample Protocol
Extracted protein samples from liver tissue were reduced by 15 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) in 25 mM ABC (ammonium bicarbonate) at 56 °C for 30 min and alkylated in the 25 mM immediately alkylated by 60 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in 25 mM ABC at 25 oC for 30 min. Purified protein with trichloroacetic acid (TCA) precipitation were quantified by BCA kit (Thermofisher science). For enzyme digestion, trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) was added as a ratio of 1:50 (w/w, trypsin:protein) and incubated in the 37 oC for overnight. CLP group was labeled by oxygen exchange of 18O enriched water during trypsin reaction, then mixed with equal amounts of a control group. 100 ug of peptides were fractionated by different pH elution buffer using pH reverse-phase column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA), refer to the manual’s instructions. Finally eluted peptides were desalted using a C18 ziptip and dried in the speed-vacuum.

### Data Protocol
All MS2 spectra were searched against MaxQ 1.5 with mice database (released Dec. 2018). The parameters of search were set up as follow: tryptic cleavage with two missed cleavage sites; C- termini (+ 2.0042 Da, + 4.0084 Da) for 18O labels and TMT label; as well as fixed modification on Carbamidomethyl (C) and variable modification on Acetyl (Protein N-term, + 42.0105 Da), Methione (+ 15.9949 Da), phsophorylation (STY, + 79.9663 Da). This software used calculation of 18O/16O ratios, allowing for accurate quantitative measurements of relative pepetide/protein ratio. For TMT label, TMT-6plex on the peptide N-terminus and lysine residues as isobaric labels; a minimum ratio count of 2. The search results were filtered with a FDR of below 0.01, a MaxQuant score more than 40, discarding potential contaminants, and those only identified by a site modification. In addition, the site localization probability of phophoprotein sites were cutoff greater than 0.75. After database searches, David Bioinformatics resources 6.8 (https://david.ncifcrf.gov/), String v.11.0 (https://string-db.org/) and Perseus v. 1.6 were utilized to identify and visualize bioinformatics analysis.  False discovery rate was limited to less than 0.01. Venny v.2.1.0. (https://bioinfogp.cnb.csic.es/tools/venny/) was used to visualize the venn diagram. While the ratio of a protein was mean of ratios of all quantified peptides, all experiments were performed independently of biological duplicate.

### Publication Abstract
The recently developed technologies that allow the analysis of each single omics have provided an unbiased insight into ongoing disease processes. However, it remains challenging to specify the study design for the subsequent integration strategies that can associate sepsis pathophysiology and clinical outcomes. Here, we conducted a time-dependent multi-omics integration (TDMI) in a sepsis-associated liver dysfunction (SALD) model. We successfully deduced the relation of the toll-like receptor (TLR4) pathway with SALD. Although TLR4 is a critical factor in sepsis progression, it is not specified in single omics results but only in the TDMI analysis. This result indicates that the TDMI-based approach is more advantageous than single omics analysis in terms of exploring the underlying pathophysiological mechanism of this disease. Furthermore, this approach can be an ideal paradigm for insightful biological interpretations of multi-omics datasets that will potentially reveal novel insights into basic biology, health, and diseases, thus allowing the identification of promising candidates for therapeutic strategies.

### Keywords
Liver dysfunction, Integrative omics, Sepsis, Multiomics

### Affiliations
Kyungpook national university
kyungpook national university

### Submitter
Ann-Yae Na

### Lab Head
Dr Sangkyu Lee
Kyungpook national university


