### Accession
PXD025018

### Title
Mass spectrometry analysis of estrogen receptor α -interacting proteins.

### Description
Quantitative mass spectrometry analysis using tandem mass tags (TMT) labelling of estrogen receptor α (ERα) pull downs. Co-immunoprecipitated proteins using a anti Erα antibody were compared quantitatively with material recovered in a mock to identify ERα-interacting proteins.

### Sample Protocol
MCF7 cells were collected by scraping, then centrifuged to pellet. The pellets were then resuspended in hypotonic buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 10 mM KCl, 5 mM MgCl2 and 1X protease inhibitors), incubated on ice for 15 minutes, supplied with 0.5% IGEPAL CA-630, homogenized for 10 strokes and spun for 10 minutes at 2000 x g at 4°C. The supernatant was collected (cytosolic fraction). Immunoprecipitation of ERα was carried out using anti-ERα and rabbit IgG antibodies with dynabeads (Invitrogen), all according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The cytosolic lysates were then incubated with antibody-conjugated beads with end-over-end rotation at 4°C overnight. The beads were then washed three times with ice-cold hypotonic buffer containing 0.5% IGEPAL CA-630, and then three times with ice-cold PBS. Mock pull downs prepared omitting anti-ERα were prepared in parallel as controls for non-specific binding. Proteins were eluted from beads with 1X LDS loading dye and partially separated on TGX Stain-free protein gels (Bio-Rad), allowing the bromophenol blue marker to reach 1 cm inside the gel. Gel was stained using ProtoBlue Safe Colloidal Coomassie Blue G-250 stain. The upper portion of the lanes containing the proteins was excised and digested in-gel with trypsin. The extracted digests were vacuum-evaporated and dried samples were labeled with TMT 6-plex. Labelling of the samples: Mock IP: 128 (mock);  ER-α IP: 130. After that, the labelling reactions were combined and desalted using a ZipTip C18 (Millipore)

### Data Protocol
Data were searched against the human subset of the SwissProt database (2015.12.1 release), using Protein Prospector with the following parameters: Enzyme specificity was set as Trypsin, and up to 2 missed cleavages per peptide were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues, and TMT labeling of lysine residues and N-terminus of the protein were allowed as fixed modifications. N-acetylation of the N-terminus of the protein, loss of protein N-terminal methionine, pyroglutamate formation from of peptide N-terminal glutamines, oxidation of methionine were allowed as variable modifications. Mass tolerance was 20 ppm in MS and 30 ppm in MS/MS. The false positive rate was estimated by searching the data using a concatenated database which contains the original SwissProt database, as well as a version of each original entry where the sequence has been randomized. TMT reporter ions intensities were extracted by Protein Prospector, and used to quantify relative levels of the proteins in real vs mock pulldowns. Labelling of the samples: Mock IP: 128 (mock);  ER-α IP: 130.

### Publication Abstract
Estrogen receptor &#x3b1; (ER&#x3b1;) is a hormone receptor and key driver for over 70% of breast cancers that has been studied for decades as a transcription factor. Unexpectedly, we discover that ER&#x3b1; is a potent non-canonical RNA-binding protein. We show that ER&#x3b1; RNA binding function is uncoupled from its activity to bind DNA and critical for breast cancer progression. Employing genome-wide cross-linking immunoprecipitation (CLIP) sequencing and a functional CRISPRi screen, we find that ER&#x3b1;-associated mRNAs sustain cancer cell fitness and elicit cellular responses to stress. Mechanistically, ER&#x3b1; controls different steps of RNA metabolism. In particular, we demonstrate that ER&#x3b1; RNA binding mediates alternative splicing of XBP1 and translation of the eIF4G2 and MCL1 mRNAs, which facilitates survival upon stress conditions and sustains tamoxifen resistance of cancer cells. ER&#x3b1; is therefore a multifaceted RNA-binding protein, and this activity transforms our knowledge of post-transcriptional regulation underlying cancer development and drug response.

### Keywords
Estrogen receptor, Immunoprecipitation, Mrna binding, Tmt

### Affiliations
Department of Urology, Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology and Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center.University of California, San Francisco
UCSF

### Submitter
Juan Oses-Prieto

### Lab Head
Dr Davide Ruggero
Department of Urology, Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology and Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center.University of California, San Francisco


