### Accession
PXD001976

### Title
p53-regulated networks of protein, mRNA, miRNA and lncRNA expression revealed by integrated pSILAC and NGS analyses

### Description
We determined the effect of p53 activation on de novo protein synthesis using quantitative proteomics of newly synthesized proteins (pulsed stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture, pSILAC) in combination with mRNA and non-coding RNA expression analyses by next generation sequencing (RNA-, miR-Seq) in the colorectal cancer (CRC) cell line SW480. Furthermore, genome-wide DNA binding of p53 was analyzed by chromatin-immunoprecipitation (ChIP-Seq). Thereby, we identified differentially regulated mRNAs (1258 up, 415 down), miRNAs (111 up, 95 down), lncRNAs (270 up, 123 down) and proteins (542 up, 569 down). Changes in mRNA and protein expression levels showed a positive correlation (r = 0.50, p < 0.0001). More transcriptionally induced genes displayed occupied p53 binding sites (4.3% mRNAs, 7.2% miRNAs, 6.3% lncRNAs, 5.9% proteins) than repressed genes (2.4% mRNAs, 3.2% miRNAs, 0.8% lncRNAs, 1.9% proteins), suggesting indirect mechanisms of repression. Around 50% of the downregulated proteins displayed seed-matching sequences of p53-induced miRNAs in the corresponding 3’-UTRs. Moreover, proteins repressed by p53 significantly overlapped with those previously shown to be repressed by miR-34a. We confirmed upregulation of the novel direct p53 target genes LINC01021, MDFI, ST14 and miR-486 and showed that ectopic LINC01021 expression inhibited proliferation in SW480 cells. Furthermore, HMGB1, KLF12 and CIT mRNAs were confirmed as direct targets of the p53-induced miR-34a, miR-205 and miR-486-5p, respectively. In line with the loss of p53 function during tumor progression, elevated expression of HMGB1, KLF12 and CIT was detected in advanced stages of cancer. This study provides new insights and a comprehensive catalogue of p53-mediated regulations and p53 DNA binding in CRC cells.

### Sample Protocol
For preparation of samples for pSILAC experiments, 5E5 SW480/pRTR-p53-VSV cells were seeded on 10 cm dishes and grown in light DMEM supplemented with light L-arginine (84 mg/l) and L-lysine (40 mg/l), 10% dialyzed FBS, 100 units/ml penicillin and 0.1 mg/ml streptomycin. After p53 induction for 16 hours with 100 ng/ml DOX (Sigma), cells were shifted to heavy SILAC medium (84 mg/l 13C6 15N4-L-arginine and 40 mg/l 13C6 15N2-L-lysine). The noninduced control samples were shifted to medium-heavy media (84 mg/l 13C6-L-arginine, 40 mg/l 2H4-L-lysine). To minimize arginine-to-proline conversion, the light, medium-heavy and heavy medium was supplemented with 100 mg/l of unlabeled proline. All reagents (DMEM, dialyzed FBS and amino acids) were purchased from Cambridge Isotope Laboratories. After 24 hours, cells were harvested with urea buffer (30 mM Tris base, 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, pH 8.5). In total, six independent pSILAC analyses were performed, including two with a label-swap.  Following cell lysis, proteins (30 µg per replicate) were separated by SDS-PAGE using 4–12% NuPage Bis-Tris gradient gels (Life Technologies) and visualized by colloidal Coomassie Brilliant Blue. Gel lanes were cut into 20 slices. Following reduction of disulfide bonds (10 mM DTT in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 30 min at 65°C) and subsequent alkylation (55 mM iodoacetamide in 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 30 min at 22°C in the dark), proteins were subjected to in-gel digestion using trypsin and the resulting peptide mixtures used for mass spectrometric analyses.  LC-MS/MS analyses were performed using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system (Thermo Scientific) and an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptide mixtures were washed and pre-concentrated for 5 min on a 5 mm × 0.3 mm PepMapTM C18 µ-precolumn (Thermo Scientific) followed by separation on a 50 cm × 75 µm C18 reversed-phase nano LC column (Acclaim PepMapTM RSLC column; 2 µm particle size; 100 pore size; Thermo Scientific) at a temperature of 40°C using a 45 min linear gradient ranging from 4 to 36% (v/v) acetonitrile [ACN; in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid] followed by 36 to 82% (v/v) ACN in 5 min and 5 min at 82% ACN at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated using a Nanospray Flex ion source with stainless steel emitters (Thermo Scientific) and externally calibrated using standard compounds. Full MS scans (m/z 370 – 1,700) were acquired in the orbitrap at a resolution of 60,000 (at m/z 400) with an automatic gain control (AGC) of 1E6 ions and a maximum fill time of 200 ms. Up to 25 of the most intense multiple charged precursor ions above a signal threshold of 2,500 were fragmented by collision-induced dissociation in the linear ion trap at a normalized collision energy of 35%, an activation q of 0.25, an activation time of 10 ms, an AGC of 5E3 ions, and a maximum fill time of 150 ms. The dynamic exclusion time for previously fragmented precursor ions was 45 s.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometric raw data were processed with Andromeda/Max-Quant (version 1.3.0.5). Peaklists of MS/MS spectra were generated by MaxQuant using default settings and searched against the organism-specific UniProt human protein database including protein isoforms (version 2013_04; 87,656 entries) and the set of common contaminants provided by MaxQuant. The MaxQuant search was restricted to human proteins since all experiments were performed with the human cell line SW480. Database searches were performed with tryptic specificity allowing two missed cleavages, mass tolerances of 20 ppm for the first, 6 ppm for the main search of precursor ions and 0.5 Da for fragment ions; oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N-termini as variable modification; carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification. A false discovery rate of 1% calculated as described previously  was applied for filtering both the peptide identifications and the list of proteins. For protein identification, at least one unique peptide with a minimum length of seven amino acids was required. Proteins identified by the same set of peptides were combined to a single protein group by MaxQuant. SILAC-based relative protein quantification was based on unique peptides, Arg6 and Lys4 as medium-heavy (M) and Arg10 and Lys8 as heavy (H) labels. The variability of individual protein abundance ratios was calculated by MaxQuant and is the standard deviation of the natural logarithms of all peptide ratios used to determine the protein ratio multiplied by 100. Only proteins quantified in at least two biological replicates were included in the subsequent statistical analysis. Protein abundance ratios reported as induced/non-induced (H/M or M/H) and normalized to the median of the respective replicate by MaxQuant to account for systematic deviations such as mixing errors were log2-transformed and the mean log2 ratios were calculated across all replicates with valid values for individual protein groups. A one-sample student’s T-test (unpaired, two-tailed) was performed comparing the log2-transformed abundance ratio (in replicates) to the value of 0 to determine whether a protein group showed a significant regulation (p-value < 0.05). Reproducibility of the results was further assessed by correlating log2 ratios and computing p-values as described before, but for pairs of replicates (see supplemental Figure S1). In nine out of 15 pairwise comparisons between all six replicates, a set of proteins appeared to be downregulated in one replicate but unregulated in the other. In order to account for this effect, proteins exhibiting log2 fold changes < -0.3 or > 0.3 with a p-value ≤ 0.05 across all replicates but showing p-values > 0.3 in more than half of the pairwise comparisons of replicates indicative of a heterogeneous regulation were separately marked in the list of candidates (class II hits in supplemental Table S2A; marked with an asterisk (*) in Fig. 5, Table 1, supplemental Tables S3, S4, S14, S15). Further information about protein and peptide identifications and quantification are provided in supplemental Tables S2B and S2C.

### Publication Abstract
We determined the effect of p53 activation on de novo protein synthesis using quantitative proteomics (pulsed stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture/pSILAC) in the colorectal cancer cell line SW480. This was combined with mRNA and noncoding RNA expression analyses by next generation sequencing (RNA-, miR-Seq). Furthermore, genome-wide DNA binding of p53 was analyzed by chromatin-immunoprecipitation (ChIP-Seq). Thereby, we identified differentially regulated proteins (542 up, 569 down), mRNAs (1258 up, 415 down), miRNAs (111 up, 95 down) and lncRNAs (270 up, 123 down). Changes in protein and mRNA expression levels showed a positive correlation (r = 0.50, p &lt; 0.0001). In total, we detected 133 direct p53 target genes that were differentially expressed and displayed p53 occupancy in the vicinity of their promoter. More transcriptionally induced genes displayed occupied p53 binding sites (4.3% mRNAs, 7.2% miRNAs, 6.3% lncRNAs, 5.9% proteins) than repressed genes (2.4% mRNAs, 3.2% miRNAs, 0.8% lncRNAs, 1.9% proteins), suggesting indirect mechanisms of repression. Around 50% of the down-regulated proteins displayed seed-matching sequences of p53-induced miRNAs in the corresponding 3'-UTRs. Moreover, proteins repressed by p53 significantly overlapped with those previously shown to be repressed by miR-34a. We confirmed up-regulation of the novel direct p53 target genes LINC01021, MDFI, ST14 and miR-486 and showed that ectopic LINC01021 expression inhibits proliferation in SW480 cells. Furthermore, KLF12, HMGB1 and CIT mRNAs were confirmed as direct targets of the p53-induced miR-34a, miR-205 and miR-486-5p, respectively. In line with the loss of p53 function during tumor progression, elevated expression of KLF12, HMGB1 and CIT was detected in advanced stages of cancer. In conclusion, the integration of multiple omics methods allowed the comprehensive identification of direct and indirect effectors of p53 that provide new insights and leads into the mechanisms of p53-mediated tumor suppression.

### Keywords
Human, Psilac, Biomarker, Tumor-suppressor, Transcriptional network, P53

### Affiliations
Functional Proteomics Lab, Faculty of Biology, University of Freiburg, Germany
AG Warscheid
Biologie II
Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg
Schänzlestr. 1
79104 Freiburg
Germany


### Submitter
Friedel Drepper

### Lab Head
Dr Bettina Warscheid
Functional Proteomics Lab, Faculty of Biology, University of Freiburg, Germany


