### Accession
PXD043054

### Title
Neddylation of phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase 1 controls glucose metabolism

### Description
Neddylation is a post-translational mechanism that adds a ubiquitin-like protein, namely neural precursor cell expressed developmentally down-regulated protein 8, to target proteins, with yet-unknown consequences. Here we show in mice that neddylation in liver is modulated by nutrient availability. Inhibition of neddylation in mouse liver (either pharmacologically or genetically) reduces gluconeogenic capacity and the hyperglycemic actions of counterregulatory hormones (glucagon, adrenaline and glucocorticoids). Further, people with obesity and type 2 diabetes (compared to people with obesity and normoglycemia) display elevated hepatic neddylation levels that correlate positively with fasting glucose levels. Mechanistically, we determined that fasting or caloric restriction of mice leads to neddylation of phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase 1 (PCK1) at three lysine residues—K278, K342 and K387. PCK1 is a key control point for gluconeogenesis regulation that can be post-translationally modified by acetylation and phosphorylation, but to date no modifications are known to affect its gluconeogenic capacity. Of note, we find that mutating the three PCK1 lysines that are neddylated reduces its gluconeogenic activity rate. Molecular dynamics simulations show that neddylation of PCK1 could re-position two loops surrounding the catalytic center into an open configuration, rendering the catalytic center more accessible. Our study reveals that neddylation of PCK1 provides a finely-tuned mechanism of controlling glucose metabolism by linking whole nutrient availability to metabolic homeostasis.

### Sample Protocol
IP assay:  Mass spectrometric analysis by LC-MSMS of PCK1 Inmunoprecipitation and neddylation site determination The analysis was performed as described previously by our group [3]–[6] Digested peptides were separated using Reverse Phase Chromatography. Gradient was created using a micro liquid chromatography system (Eksigent Technologies nanoLC 400, sciex) coupled to high speed Triple TOF 6600 mass spectrometer (sciex) with a micro flow source as described previously in Library creation. Pull-down assay Protein quantification by SWATH-MS (Sequential Window Acquisition of all Theoretical Mass Spectra) in pull-down experiments.  The analysis was performed as described previously by our group [3]–[6]. Briefly the method used were: spectral library creation The MS/MS spectral libraries was built using  pools from Input, flow thought (FT), and elute samples from Fed and CR conditions analyzed by a shotgun data-dependent acquisition (DDA) approach in a micro-LC-MS/MS system. 4 μL of each pool was separated into a micro-LC system Ekspert nLC425 (Eksigen, Dublin, CA, USA) using an YCM-TriartC18 column (150μm × 0.3mm, 12 nmm, s-3m) (YMC CO.Japan) at a flow rate of 5L/min. The gradient run is of 40 min. As the peptides eluted, they were directly injected into a hybrid quadrupole-TOF mass spectrometer Triple TOF 6600 (Sciex, Redwood City, CA, USA) operated with a data-dependent acquisition system in positive ion mode. The peptide and protein identifications were performed using Protein Pilot software (version 5.0.1, Sciex) with a Data were searched using a Mouse specific Uniprot database, specifying iodoacetamide as Cys alkylation. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1 for both peptides and proteins. The MS/MS spectra of the identified peptides were then used to generate the spectral library for SWATH peak extraction using the add-in for PeakView Software (version 2.2, Sciex) MS/MSALL with SWATH Acquisition MicroApp (version 2.0, Sciex). Peptides with a confidence score above 99% (as obtained from Protein Pilot database search) were included in the spectral library). Relative quantification by SWATH acquisition  SWATH (Sequential Window Acquisition of all Theoretical Mass Spectra) – MS acquisition was performed on a TripleTOF® 6600 LC-MS/MS system (Sciex). Samples from all independent samples (3 replicates per sample and condition) were analyzed using a data-independent acquisition (DIA) method. Each sample (4 μL) was analysed using the LC-MS equipment and LC gradient described above for building the spectral library but instead using the SWATH-MS acquisition method. The method consisted of repeating a cycle that consisted of the acquisition of 100 TOF MS/MS scans (400 to 1500 m/z, high sensitivity mode, 50 ms acquisition time) of overlapping sequential precursor isolation windows of variable width (1 m/z overlap) covering the 400 to 1250 m/z mass range with a previous TOF MS scan (400 to 1500 m/z, 50 ms acquisition time) for each cycle. Total cycle time was 6.3 s. [1] E. Bonzon-Kulichenko et al., “A robust method for quantitative high-throughput analysis of proteomes by 18O labeling.,” Molecular & cellular proteomics : MCP, vol. 10, no. 1, p. M110.003335, Jan. 2011, doi: 10.1074/mcp.M110.003335. [2] A. Shevchenko et al., “A strategy for identifying gel-separated proteins in sequence databases by MS alone,” Biochem Soc Trans, vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 893–896, 1996. [3] M. del P. Chantada-Vázquez, M. García Vence, A. Serna, C. Núñez, and S. B. Bravo, “SWATH-MS Protocols in Human Diseases,” in Methods in Molecular Biology, vol. 2259, Humana Press Inc., 2021, pp. 105–141. [4] G.-V. M et al., “Protein Extraction From FFPE Kidney Tissue Samples: A Review of the Literature and Characterization of Techniques,” Frontiers in medicine, vol. 8, May 2021, doi: 10.3389/FMED.2021.657313. [5] M. del Pilar Chantada-Vázquez et al., “Proteomic investigation on bio-corona of Au, Ag and Fe nanoparticles for the discovery of triple negative breast cancer serum protein biomarkers,” Journal of Proteomics, vol. 212, Feb. 2020, doi: 10.1016/j.jprot.2019.103581. [6] M. D. P. Chantada-Vázquez, A. C. López, M. García-Vence, B. Acea-Nebril, S. B. Bravo, and C. Núñez, “Protein corona gold nanoparticles fingerprinting reveals a profile of blood coagulation proteins in the serum of her2-overexpressing breast cancer patients,” International Journal of Molecular Sciences, vol. 21, no. 22, pp. 1–18, Nov. 2020, doi: 10.3390/ijms21228449.

### Data Protocol
IP Assay: Proteomic Data Analysis After MS/MS analysis, data files were processed using ProteinPilotTM 5.0.1 software from Sciex which uses the algorithm ParagonTM for database search and ProgroupTM for data grouping. Data were searched using a Mouse specific Uniprot database. False discovery rate was performed using a non lineal fitting method displaying only those results that reported a1% Global false discovery rate or better. [7] Neddylation site determination. The acquired raw files using a DDA method were analyzed with PEAKS 8 studio software (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, Canada) using a mouse uniprot database. The peptide mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and 0.01 Da for MS/MS. Variable modifications included were as follows: Oxidation of M, carbamidomethylation of C, and Glygly of K  (neddylation of cysteines) as described previously[8]–[10] . For high-confidence peptide identification a FDR (False Discover Rate) of 1% and a minimum of 2 ranked peptides were used for peptide filtering.  Pull-down assay SWATH data analysis  The targeted data extraction of the fragment ion chromatogram traces from the SWATH runs was performed by PeakView (version 2.2, sciex) using the SWATH Acquisition MicroApp(version 2.0, sciex). This application processed the data using the spectral library created from the shotgun data. Up to ten peptides per protein and seven fragments per peptide were selected, based on signal intensity; any shared and modified peptides were excluded from the processing. Five minute windows and 30 ppm widths were used to extract the ion chromatograms; SWATH quantitation was attempted for all proteins in the ion library that were identified by ProteinPilot with an FDR below 1%. Protein quantitation was calculated by adding the peak areas of the corresponding peptides.  The integrated peak areas (processed. mrkvw files from PeakView) were directly exported to the MarkerView software (sciex) for relative quantitative analysis. The average MS peak area of each protein was derived from the replicates of the SWATH-MS of each sample followed by Student’s t-test analysis using the MarkerView software for comparison among the samples based on the averaged area sums of all the transitions derived for each protein. The t-test will indicate how well each variable distinguishes the two groups, reported as a p-value. For each library, its set of differentially expressed proteins (p-value <0.05) with a 1.5 fold in- or decrease was selected   [7] I. V. Shilov et al., “The Paragon Algorithm, a Next Generation Search Engine That Uses Sequence Temperature Values and Feature Probabilities to Identify Peptides from Tandem Mass Spectra,” Molecular & Cellular Proteomics, vol. 6, no. 9, pp. 1638–1655, Sep. 2007, doi: 10.1074/mcp.T600050-MCP200. [8] S. Lobato-Gil et al., “Proteome-wide identification of NEDD8 modification sites reveals distinct proteomes for canonical and atypical NEDDylation,” Cell Reports, vol. 34, no. 3, 2021, doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2020.108635. [9] X. Zhang et al., “Hepatic neddylation targets and stabilizes electron transfer flavoproteins to facilitate fatty acid β-oxidation,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, vol. 117, no. 5, pp. 2473–2483, 2020, doi: 10.1073/pnas.1910765117. [10] A. M. Vogl et al., “Global site-specific neddylation profiling reveals that NEDDylated cofilin regulates actin dynamics,” Nature Structural and Molecular Biology, vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 210–220, 2020, doi: 10.1038/s41594-019-0370-3.

### Publication Abstract
Neddylation is a post-translational mechanism that adds a ubiquitin-like protein, namely neural precursor cell expressed developmentally downregulated protein 8 (NEDD8). Here, we show that neddylation in mouse liver is modulated by nutrient availability. Inhibition of neddylation in mouse liver reduces gluconeogenic capacity and the hyperglycemic actions of counter-regulatory hormones. Furthermore, people with type 2 diabetes display elevated hepatic neddylation levels. Mechanistically, fasting or caloric restriction of mice leads to neddylation of phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase 1 (PCK1) at three lysine residues-K278, K342, and K387. We find that mutating the three PCK1 lysines that are neddylated reduces their gluconeogenic activity rate. Molecular dynamics simulations show that neddylation of PCK1 could re-position two loops surrounding the catalytic center into an open configuration, rendering the catalytic center more accessible. Our study reveals that neddylation of PCK1 provides a finely tuned mechanism of controlling glucose metabolism by linking whole nutrient availability to metabolic homeostasis.

### Keywords
Neddylation, Glucose, Pck1

### Affiliations
FIDIS
Instituto de Investigaciones Sanitarias de Santiago de Compostela

### Submitter
Susana Bravo

### Lab Head
Dr Susana Belén Bravo López
Instituto de Investigaciones Sanitarias de Santiago de Compostela


