### Accession
PXD011885

### Title
Proteomics of Mouse Syngeneic Models

### Description
The cell line-derived xenografts and patient derived xenografts have limited use in cancer immunotherapy evaluation because an immune compromised host is required for xenotransplantation. Syngeneic mouse models are derived by transplanting established mouse cell lines or tumor tissues to strain matched mouse hosts, which are better suited to study the interplay between immune and tumor cells. We investigated the differences as well as similarities  of a panel of ten mouse syngeneic models to features of human tumors by proteomics, which will provide valuable information to assist experimental biologists in model selection.

### Sample Protocol
4T1, A20, CT26, RENCA, EMT6, B16F10, and F9 cells were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection, Manassas, Virginia.  MC38 cells were obtained from the laboratory of Antoni Ribas’ laboratory at UCLA, Los Angeles, California.  LLCsr (Lewis lung carcinoma) cells were obtained from the laboratory of Shahin Rafii, Department of Genetic Medicine, Ansary Stem Cell Institute, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY. For all models except the breast cancer model 4T1 and the colorectal model CT26, cells were injected in a 200 ul cell suspension in PBS in the right flank of 7-10 week old female mice.  To establish the colorectal syngeneic model, MC38, 1 x 106 cells were implanted into C57BL/6J mice.  To establish the lung cancer model LLCsr, the melanoma model B16F10, or the T cell lymphoma model EL4, 0.5 x 106 cells were implanted into C57BL/6J mice.  To establish the colorectal model CT26, 2 x 106 cells in 50% Matrigel (Corning) were implanted into the right flank of 7-10 week old female BALB/cAnNCrl mice.  To establish the breast cancer model EMT6, the B cell lymphoma model A20, or the renal cancer model RENCA, 1 x 106 cells were implanted into BALB/cAnNCrl mice.  To establish the 4T1 breast cancer model, 0.5 x 106 cells were implanted subcutaneously into the right mammary fat pad of 7-10 week old female BALB/cAnNCrl mice.  To establish the teratocarcinoma model F9, 2.0 x 106 cells were implanted into 129S6/SvEvTac mice.   All tissues were dissociated in 100 mM sodium carbonate using TissueLyzer II (QIAGEN) for 0.5 min at a rate of 0.30 repetitions three times and stored on ice for 30 sec between the dissociation cycles. For cell lines, the cells were detached with CellStripper (Mediatech), washed with cold PBS twice and cell pellets were collected. 100 mM sodium carbonate containing 1 mM DTT, pH 11.5 was used to lyse cells by incubating the cell suspension on ice for 60 min. For all tissue and cell protein lysates the pH was adjusted to pH 8 by the addition of Tris-HCl buffer at pH 7.0 and a final concentration of 2 mM MgCl2. Universal Nuclease (ThermoFisher) was used to dechromatinize nuclear DNA for 30 min on ice. The membrane fraction was isolated by centrifugation at 20,000 g for 60 min at 4oC and the supernatant was transferred to a fresh tube as the soluble fraction. The precipitated fraction following this centrifugation is membrane-protein enriched and is referred to as the "membrane" fraction, whereas supernatant is referred to as the “soluble” proteome fractions. The resulting membrane fraction (pellet) was solubilized using RIPA buffer (25 mM TrisHCl, pH7.6, 150 mM NaCl, 1% SDS, 1% sodium deoxycholate, 1% NP-40 and 1X protease inhibitor) to solubilize membrane proteins, whereas the soluble fraction was used directly for subsequent processing following determination of protein concentration by BCA assay.  Each fraction was processed separately using filter-assisted sample proteolysis (FASP). Briefly, 50μg of protein was loaded on to a PES 100 KDa filter, washed 4 times with 8 M Urea in 100 mM Tris-HCl buffer, pH 8.5.  Proteins were reduced with 5 mM DTT (freshly prepared) and alkylated with 10 mM idoacetamide in the dark.  Samples were then washed three times with freshly prepared 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer and digested with trypsin/LysC with protein:enzyme at a 25:1 weight ratio overnight.   Following digestion, the peptides were captured by centrifugation at 15,000 g for 20 min, followed by adjusting the solution pH to acidic by adding 10% formic acid to the final concentration of 0.25% formic acid. Each sample was acquired on a Thermo Scientific™ Q Exactive™ Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer fitted with a Dionex nano liquid chromatography and EASY-Spray™ Ion source. The tryptic digest was loaded onto a reversed-phase pre-column (C18 trap column, Acclaim PepMap 100, 100 μm x 2 cm, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc.). Peptide separation was conducted via nano-LC using a 75 μm x 150 mm PepMap C18 EASY-Spray column (3 um, 100 Å particles, Thermo Scientific, Inc.). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 2 to 35% mobile phase B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) over 160 min, followed by 35 to 80% B over 10 min and a hold at 80% B for the last 10 min, all at a fixed flow rate of 300 nl/min in an UltiMat 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc.). Q Exactive runs were operated with data dependent top 10 method and the parameters were as follows: resolution 70,000 at m/z 200 for MS1 with a scan range of 300-1650 m/z, a predictive AGC target of 3 x 106 and a maximum injection time of 100 ms; 17,500 at m/z 200 for dd-MS2 with a predictive AGC target of 2 x 105, maximum injection time 120 ms , NCE of 25, 20s dynamic exclusion and underfill ratio 3%.

### Data Protocol
For soluble and membrane fractions, peptides were identified and quantified for label-free protein quantification from raw mass spectrometric files using MaxQuant software (version: 1.6.1.0), respectively. Database searching was performed in MaxQuant using the Andromeda search engine against the mouse Uniprot database (57208 entries, May 2017 version) supplemented with our internal non-redundant virus protein sequences containing 903 ENA and 260 GenBank entries. Andromeda search parameters for protein identification were set as follows: maximum mass tolerance of 20 ppm for the first search, 4.5 ppm for the precursor ions after non-linear recalibration and 20 ppm for fragment ions; digestion was set to specific “Trypsin/P” allowing max missed cleavage events of two. Oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications.   Carboxyamidomethylation of cysteines was specified as a fixed modification. A total of three modifications were allowed per peptide.  Minimal required peptide length was seven amino acids. MaxQuant LFQ “match between run” option was enabled with a match time window of 0.7 minutes after retention time alignment. “Requires MS/MS for label-free quantification (LFQ) comparisons” was not enabled to allow maximum MS peak features. Confidently identified proteins were required to have a minimum of two matched peptides with one peptide being uniquely matched at a false discovery rate (FDR) of less than 1%. Proteins were quantified by delayed normalization computed in MaxQuant’s label-free quantification option.   LFQ intensity data by protein group was further analyzed in Perseus (version: 1.6.0.7). All proteins “identified by site”, “reverse” and contaminants were removed. LFQ intensity value was log2 transformed and the resulting data matrix was further filtered requiring minimal values of 100% in at least one model.    Proteins that are significantly over-expressed in CT26 tumor were obtained by pairwise comparison of  the log2 transformed LFQ value of CT26 tumor from membrane fraction or soluble fraction to one of the other tumor models by applying a filter requiring a valid value of >=75% in at least one pair and using student t-test within Persues. Proteins with FDR (Benjamini-Hochberg) <= 0.05 and fold change >= 2 in all comparisons as well as CT26 tumor vs. CT26 cells were selected for further pathway and function enrichment analysis. If proteins were detected in both membrane and soluble fractions, the identification from the fraction with the higher LFQ values of the proteins will be kept.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse sygeneic, Tumor, Immuno-oncology

### Affiliations
Pfizer Inc.
Oncology Research and Development, Pfizer Inc.

### Submitter
Jeremy Myers

### Lab Head
Dr Jeremy S. Myers
Oncology Research and Development, Pfizer Inc.


