### Accession
PXD014381

### Title
Redox proteome analysis identifies reversible oxidized proteins in retinoic acid differentiated SH-SY5Y cells

### Description
Retinoic acid stimulated SH-SY5Y cells are a common model system to study the initial phases of neuronal differentiation. Although these processes are associated with redox-sensitive processes, no comprehensive analysis of oxidative modified cysteines, as one of the main targets for reactive oxygen species, was available.  Here, we used quantitative and differential proteomics and redox proteomics, to fill this gap. Our results indicate, that alterations in the redox state very early in the differentiation process, affect the expression of marker proteins and the extension of neurites. The spatiotemporal analysis of reactive oxygen species, suggests a NOX-dependent peak in cytoplasmic O2.-/H2O2 level 2h after retinoic acid stimulation. At the same timepoint 241 out of 275 proteins with an altered cysteine redox state appeared to be reversibly oxidised in the retinoic acid treated samples. Our analyses suggest that redox alterations affect proteins involved in the retinoic acid homeostasis and cytoskeletal dynamics.

### Sample Protocol
Two different protocols were used to prepare cell culture samples. On the one hand, a standard protocol was applied as described (PMID 29322779): After preparing protein lysates, samples were shortly separated by a gel, proteins reduced with dithiothreitol and alkylated with iodoacetamide. After that, samples were digested with trypsin and resulting peptides analysed by LC-MS. Here, peptides were separated by an Ultimate 3000 RSLC and after nano-elektrospray ionisation analysed with an Orbitrap Elite in a data dependent mode. On the other hand, a redox specific sample preparation adapted from PMID 24336471. After enrichment of reversibly oxidised proteins, proteins were prepared as described above and resulting peptides analysed after separation by an Ultimate 3000 RSLC on a QExactive plus mass spectrometer in data dependent mode.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometric data was processed with MaxQuant (version 15.3.30 or version 1.4.1.2) using essential standard parameters. The match between runs function was enabled.

### Publication Abstract
The initial phases of neuronal differentiation are key to neuronal function. A particularly informative model to study these initial phases are retinoic acid-stimulated SH-SY5Y cells. Although these progressions are associated with redox-sensitive processes, it is largely undefined how the cellular proteome underpins redox dynamics and the management of reactive oxygen species. Here, we map the global cysteine-based redox landscape of SH-SY5Y cells using quantitative redox proteomics. We find evidence that redox alterations occurred early in differentiation and affect the expression of neuronal marker proteins and the extension of neurites. The spatiotemporal analysis of reactive oxygen species suggests a NOX2-dependent peak in cytoplasmic superoxide anions/hydrogen peroxide generation 2 h after retinoic acid stimulation. At the same time point, 241 out of 275 proteins with an altered cysteine redox state are reversibly oxidized in response to retinoic acid. Our analyses pinpoint redox alterations of proteins involved in the retinoic acid homeostasis and cytoskeletal dynamics.

### Keywords
Redox proteomics, Dynamics, Neuronal differentiation, Redox

### Affiliations
Molecular Proteomics Laboratory (MPL) Biologisch-Medizinisches Forschungszentrum (BMFZ) Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf Universitätsstraße 1 40225 Düsseldorf Germany
Molecular Proteomics Laboratory

### Submitter
Gereon Poschmann

### Lab Head
Dr Gereon Poschmann
Molecular Proteomics Laboratory (MPL) Biologisch-Medizinisches Forschungszentrum (BMFZ) Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf Universitätsstraße 1 40225 Düsseldorf Germany


