### Accession
PXD035170

### Title
Proteomic analysis of UFC1 knockdown in mouse skeletal muscle

### Description
All mouse experiments were approved by The University of Melbourne Animal Ethics Committee (AEC ID1914940) and conformed to the National Health and Medical Research Council of Australia guidelines regarding the care and use of experimental animals. C57BL/6J mice (JAX 000664) were obtained from Animal Resource Centre (WA, Australia). Mice were housed at 22°C (+/-1°C) in groups of five/cage and maintained on a Standard Chow diet (Specialty Feeds, Australia) with a 12-hour light/dark cycle and ad libitum access to food and water. For intramuscular injections of rAAV6, mice were anesthetized with isoflurane (4% in oxygen at 1L/min) and then transferred to a dissecting microscope stage with heat pad and isoflurane inhalation nose piece (2% in oxygen at 1 L/min). Unconsciousness was assessed via the lack of leg and optical reflexes for at least one minute to ensure head position does not affect normal breathing. Mice received subcutaneous analgesic injection of meloxicam between the shoulder blades (5mg/kg) and the surface of the hindlimbs were sterilized with 80% ethanol. The TA/EDL muscles were injected with 2 x 10^10 vector genomes / 30 µl of rAAV6 harbouring either a scramble shRNA or an shRNA targeting UFC1 using a 32G needle. Mice were returned to cages and body weights monitored daily for the first 3 days and then weekly.

### Sample Protocol
Muscle tissue was lysed in 6 M guanidine HCL (Sigma; #G4505), 100 mM Tris pH 8.5 containing 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (Sigma; #75259) and 40 mM 2-chloroacetamide (Sigma; #22790) by tip-probe sonication. The lysate was heated at 95°C for 5 min and centrifuged at 20,000 x g for 10 min at 4°C. The supernatant was diluted 1:1 with water and precipitated overnight with 5 volumes of acetone at -20°C. The lysate was centrifuged at 4,000 x g for 5 min at 4°C and the protein pellet was washed with 80% acetone. The lysate was centrifuged at 4,000 x g for 5 min at 4°C and the protein pellet was resuspended in Digestion Buffer (10% 2,2,2-Trifluoroethanol (Sigma; #96924)) in 100 mM HEPEs pH 8.5). Protein was quantified with BCA (ThermoFisher Scientific) and normalized in Digestion Buffer to a final concentration of 2 µg/µl. Protein was digested with sequencing grade trypsin (Sigma; #T6567) and sequencing grade LysC (Wako; #129-02541) at a 1:50 enzyme:substrate ratio overnight at 37°C with shaking at 2000 x rpm. Eight micrograms of peptide was directly labelled with 32 µg of 10-plex TMT in 20 µl at a final concentration of 50% acetonitrile for 1.5 h at room temperature. The reaction was de-acylated with a final concentration of 0.3% (w/v) hydroxylamine and quenched with a final concentration of 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Following labelling, the peptides were pooled and purified directly by Styrene Divinylbenzene - Reversed-Phase Sulfonate (SDB-RPS) microcolumns, washed with 99% isopropanol containing 1% TFA and eluted with 80% acetonitrile containing 2% ammonium hydroxide followed by vacuum concentration. Peptides were resuspended in 2% acetonitrile containing 0.1% TFA and thirty micrograms of peptide was fractionated on an in-house fabricated 25 cm x 320 µm column packed with C18BEH particles (3 µm, Waters). Peptides were separated on a gradient of 0 – 30% acetonitrile containing 10 mM ammonium formate (pH 7.9) over 60 min at 6 µl/min using Dionex 3500 and detection at 210 nm with a total of 48 fractions collected and concatenated down to 12 fractions.

### Data Protocol
Briefly, peptides were separated using a Dionex ultra-high pressure liquid chromatography system using the identical chromatography configuration but detection was achieved with a Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometer. Electrospray ionisation was performed at 1.9 kV with 30% RF lens and positively charged peptides detected via a full scan MS (350-1550 m/z, 2e6 AGC, 60K resolution, 50 ms injection time) followed data-dependent MS/MS analysis performed with HCD of 36% normalised collision energy (NCE) (1e5 AGC, 86 ms injection time, 0.7 m/z isolation) with a 2.5 sec cycle time and dynamic exclusion was enabled for 60 s. Data were processed with Proteome Discoverer v2.3 and searched against the Mouse UniProt database (February 2022) using SEQUEST (Eng et al., 1994). The precursor MS tolerance were set to 20 ppm and the MS/MS tolerance was set to 0.02 Da with a maximum of 2 miss-cleavage. The peptides were searched with oxidation of methionine set as variable modification, and TMT tags on peptide N-terminus / lysine and carbamidomethylation of cysteine set as a fixed modification. All data was searched as a single batch and the peptide spectral matches (PSMs) of each database search filtered to 1% FDR using a target/decoy approach with Percolator (Kall et al., 2007). The filtered PSMs from each database search were grouped and q-values generated at the peptide level with the Qvality algorithm (Käll et al., 2009). Finally, the grouped peptide data was further filtered to 1% protein FDR using Protein Validator. Quantification was performed with the reporter ion quantification node for TMT quantification based on MS2 scans in Proteome Discoverer. TMT precision was set to 20 ppm and corrected for isotopic impurities. Only spectra with <50% co-isolation interference were used for quantification with an average signal-to-noise filter of >10. The data was filtered to retain Master proteins that were measured in at least 50 mice.

### Publication Abstract
Improving muscle function has great potential to improve the quality of life. To identify novel regulators of skeletal muscle metabolism and function, we performed a proteomic analysis of gastrocnemius muscle from 73 genetically distinct inbred mouse strains, and integrated the data with previously acquired genomics and &gt;300 molecular/phenotypic traits via quantitative trait loci mapping and correlation network analysis. These data identified thousands of associations between protein abundance and phenotypes and can be accessed online (https://muscle.coffeeprot.com/) to identify regulators of muscle function. We used this resource to prioritize targets for a functional genomic screen in human bioengineered skeletal muscle. This identified several negative regulators of muscle function including UFC1, an E2 ligase for protein UFMylation. We show UFMylation is up-regulated in a mouse model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, a disease that involves muscle atrophy. Furthermore, in vivo knockdown of UFMylation increased contraction force, implicating its role as a negative regulator of skeletal muscle function.

### Keywords
Ufmylation, Ufc1, Skeletal muscle

### Affiliations
The University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Benjamin Parker

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin Parker
The University of Melbourne


