### Accession
PXD006587

### Title
Pre-histopathological and sex-biased hippocampal pathology in the 5XFAD mouse model of Alzheimer's disease: a multi-omic analysis

### Description
Like many neurological disorders, Alzheimer’s disease has a sex-biased epidemiological profile, affecting approximately twice as many women as men. The cause of this sex difference has yet to be elucidated. To identify molecular correlates of this sex bias, we investigated molecular pathology in females and males using the 5XFAD genetic mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. We profiled the transcriptome and proteome of the mouse hippocampus during early stages of disease development (1, 2, and 4 months) with RNA-sequencing and Liquid-chromatography mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction was performed via a modified FASP protocol (Wiśniewski et al. 2009) as described previously (Bundy et al. 2016). Briefly, hippocampal tissue was mechanically disrupted in extraction buffer with a mortar and pistil, sonicated, and subsequently boiled.  Cellular debris was then removed via centrifugation, and the supernatant was serially washed in ultra-0.5 centrifugal filter devices (Amicon, catalog #UCF 501024) to remove mass-spectrometry incompatible reagents. Samples were quantified with a Qubit fluorometer (Life Technologies) and 200 ug of protein extract for each sample was digested with trypsin overnight. Digested lysates were isoelectrically focused into 12 fractions using an Agilent 3100 offgel fractionator as described in (Bundy et al. 2016). These 12 fractions were then pooled into 4 fractions to reduce experimental size and reduce analysis time. Subsequent to pooling, peptides were lyophilized and submitted to the Florida State University Translational Science Laboratory for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw spectral data (.raw files) were uploaded into Proteome Discoverer (Thermo Scientific, version 1.4.0.288) with the MuDPIT setting engaged. Database searches were performed with both Sequest HT and Mascot (version 2.4.0) using the target-reverse Mus musculus Swissprot reference proteome with the hAPP and hPSEN1 amino acid sequences added (mutations included). Search result files in .msf format were then uploaded to the Scaffold software (Proteome Software, version 4.4.1.1). In Scaffold, the X!Tandem search option was selected. The following were used to select against spurious protein identifications in Scaffold: protein FDR = 1%, minimum # peptides = 2, peptide FDR = 1%. Spectral counts were normalized for protein length and sample loading with the NSAF option, and count data were exported as .csv files. Ensembl gene IDs were downloaded for proteins detected in the experiment using the biomart tool on the Ensembl website (Yates et al. 2016) and added to data files. Spectral count were matched with RNA-seq derived count data using Ensembl gene IDs.

### Publication Abstract
Alzheimer's disease is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder and the most common form of dementia. Like many neurological disorders, Alzheimer's disease has a sex-biased epidemiological profile, affecting approximately twice as many women as men. The cause of this sex difference has yet to be elucidated. To identify molecular correlates of this sex bias, we investigated molecular pathology in females and males using the 5XFamilial Alzheimer's disease mutations (5XFAD) genetic mouse model of Alzheimer's disease. We profiled the transcriptome and proteome of the mouse hippocampus during early stages of disease development (1, 2, and 4&#x2009;months of age). Our analysis reveals 42 genes that are differentially expressed between disease and wild-type animals at 2&#x2009;months of age, prior to observable plaque deposition. In 4-month-old animals, we detect 1,316 differentially expressed transcripts between transgenic and control 5XFAD mice, many of which are associated with immune function. Additionally, we find that some of these transcriptional perturbations are correlated with altered protein levels in 4-month-old transgenic animals. Importantly, our data indicate that female 5XFAD mouse exhibit more profound pathology than their male counterparts as measured by differences in gene expression. We also find that the 5XFAD transgenes are more highly expressed in female 5XFAD mice than their male counterparts, which could partially account for the sex-biased molecular pathology observed in this dataset.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Sex differences, Alzheimer's disease, Hippocampus

### Affiliations
Department of Biomedical Sciences College of Medicine Florida State University
Florida State University College of Medicine

### Submitter
Joseph Bundy

### Lab Head
Dr Richard S. Nowakowski
Department of Biomedical Sciences College of Medicine Florida State University


