### Accession
PXD020046

### Title
Cysteamine-bicalutamide combination therapy restores α-ketoglutarate and corrects proximal tubule phenotype in nephropathic cystinosis

### Description
Nephropathic cystinosis is a severe monogenetic kidney disorder caused by mutations in CTNS, encoding the lysosomal transporter cystinosin, resulting in lysosomal cystine accumulation. The sole treatment, cysteamine, slows down the disease progression, but does not correct the established proximal tubulopathy. Here, we developed a new therapeutic strategy by applying an omics-based strategy to expand our knowledge on the complexity of the disease and prioritize drug targets in cystinosis. We identified alpha-ketoglutarate as a key metabolite linking cystinosin loss, lysosomal autophagy defect and proximal tubular impairment in cystinosis. This insight offered a bicalutamide-cysteamine combination treatment as a novel dual target pharmacological approach for the phenotypical correction of cystinotic proximal tubule cells, patient-derived kidney tubuloids and cystinotic zebrafish.

### Sample Protocol
CiPTEC pellets were lysed in boiling guanidinium lysis buffer containing 6 M guanidinium HCl(GuHCl), 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP), 10 mM chloroacetamide, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5, supplemented with protease inhibitor (cOmplete mini EDTA-free, Roche). Pellets were boiled for 10 min at 99 °C, sonicated for 12 rounds of 5 seconds (Bioruptor Plus, Diagenode), and spun down at 20,000 x g for 15 min. Protein concentration was determined using Pierce™ BCA protein assay kit. Equal amounts of protein per condition were digested with Lys-C (1:100, Wako)for 4 hrs at 37 °C, diluted to a final concentration of 2 M GuHCl, followed by trypsin digestion (1:100, Sigma Aldrich) overnight at 37 °C. Tryptic peptides were acidified to a final concentration of 1% formic acid (FA) (Merck), cleaned up using SepPak cartridges (Waters), and dried in vacuo. Peptide samples were analyzed with an UHPLC 1290 system (Agilent technologies) coupled to an Orbitrap Q Exactive HF X mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were trapped (Dr Maisch Reprosil C18, 3 μm, 2 cm x 100 μm) and then separated on an analytical column (Agilent Poroshell EC-C18, 2.7 μm, 50 cm x 75 μm). Trapping was performed for 5 min in solvent A (0.1% FA) and eluted with following gradient: 4 - 8% solvent B (0.1% FA in 80% acetonitrile) in 4 min, 8 - 24% in 158 min, 24 - 35% in 35 min, 35 - 60% in 17 min, 60 - 100% in 4 min and finally 100 % for 1 min. Flow was passively split to 300 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in datadependent mode. At a resolution of 35.000 m/z at 400 m/z, MS full scan spectra were acquired from m/z 375–1600 after accumulation to a target value of 3e6. Up to 15 most intense precursor ions were selected for fragmentation. HCD fragmentation was performed at normalised collision energy of 27% after the accumulation to a target value of 1e5. MS/MS was acquired at a resolution of 30,000. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with an exclusion duration of 32s.

### Data Protocol
RAW data files were processed with MaxQuant (v1.6.0.16 (Cox, Mann 2008)) and MS2 spectra were searched with the Andromeda search engine against the Swissprot protein database of Homo Sapiens (20,259 entries, downloaded 31/01/2018) spiked with common contaminants. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation and protein Nterm acetylation were set as variable modifications. Trypsin was specified as enzyme and up to two miss cleavages were allowed. Filtering was done at 1% false discovery rate (FDR) at the protein and peptide level. Label-free quantification (LFQ) was performed, and “match between runs” was enabled. The data was further processed using Perseus 1.6.0.7.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cystinosis, Crispr/cas9, Renal fanconi syndrome, Alpha-ketoglutarate, Cysteaminebicalutamide combination therapy, Autophagy

### Affiliations
Professor
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Charlotte van Gelder

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Maarten Altelaar
Professor


