### Accession
PXD037584

### Title
GPI-glycan structures of human Prion (M232R) from knock-in mice_LC-MSMS

### Description
To determine glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) structures of human prion proteins with M232R mutation isolated from knock-in mice those express human prion protein instead of mouse one.

### Sample Protocol
We generated a Ki-Hu232R/R moue line expressing human prion protein with M232R mutation using knock-in mouse termed Ki-Hu129M/M which expresses human prion protein with the 129M/M genotype. We affinity purified human prion from Ki-Hu232R/R mouse brains by anti-prion antibody after phosphatidylinositol-specific phospholipase C treatment to remove GPI lipid portion. Then, we treated the purified sample with peptide-N-glycosidase F to remove the N-glycans. Sample was separated by SDS-PAGE and the gel corresponding to prion was excised. Excised gel was reduced with 10 mM DTT and alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide followed by the digestion with trypsin. The resulted peptide sample was purified with Nu-Tip polyHydroxyethylA (HILIC) (purchased from glygen) according to the manufacture’s protocol. Purified peptides were dried and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid, generating a measurement sample. Sample was separated by forward-phase HPLC with nanoLC using HILIC column (Capillary EX-Nano Inert Sustain Amide 3 µm 0.1 x 150 mm from GL Science). Data was obtained by LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Xcalibur Software was used for analysis of mass data. In the MS/MS profiles, those that contain characteristic fragments derived from GPI anchors, such as fragment ions of m/z 422+ and 477+, were selected, and fragments in the selected profiles were assigned to determine the GPI structures.

### Publication Abstract
A missense variant from methionine to arginine at codon 232 (M232R) of the prion protein gene accounts for&#x2009;~&#x2009;15% of Japanese patients with genetic prion diseases. However, pathogenic roles of the M232R substitution for the induction of prion disease have remained elusive because family history is usually absent in patients with M232R. In addition, the clinicopathologic phenotypes of patients with M232R are indistinguishable from those of sporadic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease patients. Furthermore, the M232R substitution is located in the glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)-attachment signal peptide that is cleaved off during the maturation of prion proteins. Therefore, there has been an argument that the M232R substitution might be an uncommon polymorphism rather than a pathogenic mutation. To unveil the role of the M232R substitution in the GPI-attachment signal peptide of prion protein in the pathogenesis of prion disease, here we generated a mouse model expressing human prion proteins with M232R and investigated the susceptibility to prion disease. The M232R substitution accelerates the development of prion disease in a prion strain-dependent manner, without affecting prion strain-specific histopathologic and biochemical features. The M232R substitution did not alter the attachment of GPI nor GPI-attachment site. Instead, the substitution altered endoplasmic reticulum translocation pathway of prion proteins by reducing the hydrophobicity of the GPI-attachment signal peptide, resulting in the reduction of N-linked glycosylation and GPI glycosylation of prion proteins. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first time to show a direct relationship between a point mutation in the GPI-attachment signal peptide and the development of disease.

### Keywords
Human, Gpi, Brain, Knock-in mouse, Gpi side chain, Prion

### Affiliations
Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, Osaka University
Department of Biochemistry, Duke University School of Medicine

### Submitter
Tetsuya Hirata

### Lab Head
Dr Taroh Kinoshita
Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, Osaka University


