### Accession
PXD002772

### Title
Structural determinants of heparin–transforming growth factor-β1 interactions and their effects on signalling

### Description
Transforming growth factor-ß1 (TGF-ß1, Uniprot: P01137) is a heparin-binding protein that has been implicated in a number of  physiological processes, including the initiation of chondrogenesis by human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs). Here, we identify  the molecular features in the protein and in heparin required for binding and their effects on the potentiation of TGF-ß1’s activity on hMSCs. Using a proteomics “Protect and Label” approach, lysines K291, K304, K309, K315, K338, K373, K375 and K388 were  identified as being directly involved in binding heparin. Competition assays in an optical biosensor demonstrated that TGF-ß1 does require N- and 6-O-sulfate groups for binding but that 2-O-sulfate groups are unlikely to underpin the interaction. Heparin-derived  oligosaccharides as short as degree of polymerization (dp) 4 have a weak ability to compete for TGF-ß1 binding to heparin, which increases with the length of the oligosaccharide to reach a maximum between dp18 and dp24. In cell-based assays, heparin, 2-O-,  6-O- and N-desulfated re-N-acetylated heparin and oligosaccharides 14–24 saccharides (dp14–24) in length all increased the  phosphorylation of SMAD2 after 6 h of stimulation with TGF-ß1. The results provide the structural basis for a model of  heparin/heparan sulfate binding to TGF-ß1 and demonstrate that the features in the polysaccharide required for binding are not  identical to those required for sustaining the signaling by TGF-ß1 in hMSCs.

### Sample Protocol
Structural proteomics: “Protect and label” technique The heparin-binding sites on TGF-β1 were identified by the “Protect and Label” approach, as described by Ori et al. (2009) for FGF-2, except that 1 nmol of TGF-β1 proteinwas employed and 0.1% (w/v) RapiGest ™ SF Surfactant (Waters Corporation, MA) was used to elute the protein from the mini-column, because 2 M NaCl proved inadequat. Digested and biotinylated peptides were purified on a C18 ZipTip (Merck Millipore, MA) and then analyzed by MS/MS. Up to 2 μg of  the biotinylated peptides were injected into an LTQ Velos instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA) using an EASY-nLC (Proxeon,  Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptideswere separated on a PicoFrit™ column (HALO, C18, 90 Å, 2.7, 75 μm (internal diameter) × 100 mm length) (New Objectives, MA) using a 60-min linear gradient (2–40% (v/v) acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid). Data acquisition was  performed using a TOP-10 strategy where survey MS scans were acquired in the dual pressure linear ion trap; MS scans ranged  from 310 to 1400 m/z, with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3 × 104 and a maximum injection time of 10 ms. The 31 most intense ions with an ion intensity of >1000 and a charge state excluding 1 were sequentially isolated to a maximum AGC target value of 4 × 104 for a maximal 100 ms and fragmented by collision-induced dissociation using a normalized collision energy of 30%. A  dynamic exclusion list was applied using an exclusion list size of 500, one repeat count, repeat duration of 45 s, exclusion duration of 30 s as well as a mass width of 1.0 low and 1.5 high. Expiration was disabled.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using Mascot search (version 2.3, Matrix Science) using the ipi.HUMAN.v3.86.decoy database (183,568 sequences) and applying the following parameters: Digest, chymotrypsin (FWYL/P); maximum missed cleavages, 2; fixed modifications, carbamidomethyl (Cys); possible modifications, acetyl (Lys), acetyl (protein N-term), biotin (Lys), oxidation (Met); parental ion tolerance, 2 Da; fragment ion tolerance, 0.8 Da. Biotinylated peptides with a Mascot score of >20 were manually validated.

### Publication Abstract
Transforming growth factor-&#x3b2;1 (TGF-&#x3b2;1, Uniprot: P01137) is a heparin-binding protein that has been implicated in a number of physiological processes, including the initiation of chondrogenesis by human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs). Here, we identify the molecular features in the protein and in heparin required for binding and their effects on the potentiation of TGF-&#x3b2;1's activity on hMSCs. Using a proteomics "Protect and Label" approach, lysines K291, K304, K309, K315, K338, K373, K375 and K388 were identified as being directly involved in binding heparin (Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD002772). Competition assays in an optical biosensor demonstrated that TGF-&#x3b2;1 does require N- and 6-O-sulfate groups for binding but that 2-O-sulfate groups are unlikely to underpin the interaction. Heparin-derived oligosaccharides as short as degree of polymerization (dp) 4 have a weak ability to compete for TGF-&#x3b2;1 binding to heparin, which increases with the length of the oligosaccharide to reach a maximum between dp18 and dp24. In cell-based assays, heparin, 2-O-, 6-O- and N-desulfated re-N-acetylated heparin and oligosaccharides 14-24 saccharides (dp14-24) in length all increased the phosphorylation of mothers against decapentaplegic homolog 2 (SMAD2) after 6 h of stimulation with TGF-&#x3b2;1. The results provide the structural basis for a model of heparin/heparan sulfate binding to TGF-&#x3b2;1 and demonstrate that the features in the polysaccharide required for binding are not identical to those required for sustaining the signaling by TGF-&#x3b2;1 in hMSCs.

### Keywords
Heparan sulfate, Proteoglycans, Transforming growth factor-β1, Heparin

### Affiliations
IMCB
Glycotherapeutics, IMB, A-star, Singapore

### Submitter
Rachel Li

### Lab Head
Dr Victor Nurcombe; Simon COOL
Glycotherapeutics, IMB, A-star, Singapore


