### Accession
PXD040210

### Title
The C-terminal tail of polycystin-1 suppresses cystic disease in a mitochondrial enzyme-dependent fashion

### Description
Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) is the most prevalent potentially lethal monogenic disorder. Mutations in the PKD1 gene, which encodes polycystin-1 (PC1), account for approximately 78% of cases. PC1 is a large 462-kDa protein that undergoes cleavage in its N and C-terminal domains. C-terminal cleavage produces fragments that translocate to mitochondria. We show that transgenic expression of a protein corresponding to the final 200 amino acid (aa) residues of PC1 in two Pkd1-KO orthologous murine models of ADPKD suppresses cystic phenotype and preserves renal function. This suppression depends upon an interaction between the C-terminal tail of PC1 and the mitochondrial enzyme Nicotinamide Nucleotide Transhydrogenase (NNT). This interaction modulates tubular/cyst cell proliferation, the metabolic profile, mitochondrial function, and the redox state. Together, these results suggest that a short fragment of PC1 is sufficient to suppress cystic phenotype and open the door to the exploration of gene therapy strategies for ADPKD.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins recovered by anti-HA antibody immunoprecipitation from the Pkd1F/H-BAC kidneys were eluted in SDS-PAGE sample buffer and loaded onto an SDS-PAGE gel. In order to identify all interacting proteins, the SDS-PAGE gel was run only until the total sample volume had entered the gel to a distance of 5mm below the base of the well and prior to any further separation occurred. The gel was then fixed, and a band containing the entire sample was excised and subjected to mass spectrometric analysis performed by the Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Resource of the W.M. Keck Foundation Biotechnology Resource Laboratory at Yale according to their standard operating procedures. The excised gel bands in 1.5ml Eppendorf tubes were washed 4 times; first with 1 mL H2O, then 1 mL 50:50 acetonitrile (CH3CN):water, then 800 µL 50% H2O/50% CH3CN containing 100 mM NH4HCO3, then 800 µL 50% H2O/50% acetonitrile containing 25 mM NH4HCO3.  The final wash was removed, and the gel pieces were dried in a SpeedVac.  Proteins in the gel were reduced with DTT at 37 ºC for 30 minutes, then washed with CH3CN and allowed to dry again.  Proteins in gel were then alkylated with iodoacetamide, then washed with 50% CH3CN/50% H2O containing 25 mM NH4HCO3, and gel were allowed to dry again.  100 µL of a 0.1 mg/mL stock solution of trypsin (Promega Trypsin Gold MS grade) with 20uL of 25 mM NH4HCO3 was then added to the gel and digestion was carried out at 37 ºC for overnight.  Supernatant was transferred to the injection vial for LC MS/MS analyses.

### Data Protocol
Data Dependent Acquisition (DDA) LC MS/MS data collection for was performed on a Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Fusion connected to a Waters nanoACQUITY UPLC system equipped with a Waters Symmetry® C18 180 μm × 20 mm trap column and a 1.7-μm, 75 μm × 250 mm nanoACQUITY UPLC column (35 °C).  To ensure a high level of identification and quantitation integrity, a resolution of 120,000 and 60,000 was utilized for MS and MS/MS data collection, respectively. MS and MS/MS (from Higher-energy C-Trap Dissociation (HCD)) spectra were acquired using a three second cycle time with Dynamic Exclusion on. All MS (Profile) and MS/MS (centroid) peaks were detected in the Orbitrap. Trapping was carried out for 3 min at 5 μL/min in 99 % Buffer A (0.1 % FA in water) and 1 % Buffer B [(0.075 % FA in acetonitrile (ACN)] prior to eluting with linear gradients that reach 5 % B at 5 min, 20 % B at 90 min, 35 % B at 125 min, and 97 % B at 130 min for 5 minutes; then back down to 3% at 136 min. Four blank injections (1st 100 % ACN, 2nd and 3rd are 50:50 ACN:Water, and 4th is Buffer A) followed each sample injection to ensure there was no sample carry over. The LC–MS/MS Xcalibur “.raw” acquired data was processed with Proteome Discoverer (v. 2.0, Thermo Fisher Scientific) software and the protein identification carried out using the Mascot search algorithm (Matrix Science, v. 2.6; Ref 1 below). The data was searched against the SWISSPROT Mus musculus protein database (2017), with peptide mass tolerance of +/-10ppm, fragment mass tolerance of +/-0.02 Da, max missed cleavages of 2, Decoy setting on with significant threshold at 0.05, and variable modification set with oxidation of Methionine, carbamidomethyl of Cysteine, and propionamide of Cysteine. Proteins were considered identified when Mascot lists it as significant (False Discovery Rate of 1%) and more than 2 unique peptides match the same protein.    The results were then uploaded to Yale Protein Expression Database (YPED, Ref 2 below) for visualization and further analysis.  Reference:  1) Hirosawa, M., et al. (1993). "MASCOT: multiple alignment system for protein sequences based on three-way dynamic programming." Computer applications in the biosciences: CABIOS 9(2): 161-167.  2) Colangelo, C. M.; Shifman, M.; Cheung, K. H.; Stone, K. L.; Carriero, N. J.; Gulcicek, E. E.; Lam, T. T.; Wu, T.; Bjornson, R. D.; Bruce, C.; Nairn, A. C.; Rinehart, J.; Miller, P. L.;Williams, K. R., YPED: an integrated bioinformatics suite and database for mass spectrometry-based proteomics research. Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 2015, 13 (1), 25-35. PMC4411476

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Polycystin-1 (pc1), Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (adpkd), Mitochondria, Metabolism, Nicotinamide nucleotide transhydrogenase (nnt), C-terminal tail (ctt)

### Affiliations
Yale University
Keck MS & Proteomics Resource Yale School of Medicine

### Submitter
TuKiet Lam

### Lab Head
Dr TuKiet Lam
Keck MS & Proteomics Resource Yale School of Medicine


