### Accession
PXD031995

### Title
Novel peptidomics-based evaluation of pork freshness via a potential peptide biomarker

### Description
This study applied peptidomics to investigate potential biomarkers for evaluating pork-meat freshness. Meat samples stored at -2, 4, 10, and 25 °C were collected at specific time points to evaluate meat freshness indicators (color, total viable count, pH, and total volatile basic nitrogen). The sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) profile was analyzed, and substantial protein degradation (myosin heavy chain, paramyosin, troponin) was detected at the end of storage, regardless of the temperature. Peptidomics analysis was performed using a UHPLC-LTQ-Orbitrap mass spectrometer, and the potential peptide marker MVHMASKE was filtered via multivariate analysis and quantified by parallel reaction monitoring combined with external standard quantitation. In addition, the relationship between peptide content and change in meat freshness was verified using real-life samples and the content of MVHMASKE showed an obvious decline during storage, presenting a period of pork meat from fresh to spoilage. This study provides favorable evidences to evaluate pork meat freshness by mass spectrometry-based pep-tidomics.

### Sample Protocol
Peptide extraction was performed as described by Azkargorta et al. [22], with mi-nor changes. Meat samples (0.1 g) collected in the fresh, accelerated freshness reduc-tion, and spoiled states (five samples per state) at each temperature group were ho-mogenized (8500 rpm, 5×20 s) with 0.2% formic acid (FA; ROE, Newark, New Castle, DE, USA) containing 0.2% acetonitrile (ACN; Merck, Pittsburgh, PA, USA) to precipi-tate high-abundance proteins. After centrifugation (12000 g, 30 min, 4 °C), 300 μL of supernatant was diluted with 900 μL ACN. The mixture was incubated for a further 30 min at 4 °C followed by centrifugation (12000 g, 10 min). The resulting supernatant was evaporated and re-dissolved in 0.2% FA containing 0.2% ACN and then centri-fuged (12000 g, 10 min, 4 °C). Thereafter, 2 and 5 μL of each sample solution were used for peptide and quality control (QC) analyses, respectively.

### Data Protocol
A UHPLC-LTQ-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) was used to determine the untargeted peptide profiles, as described by Miao et al. [23], with minor modifications. Gradient elution was conducted between 100% ACN (A) and water (B) containing 0.1% (v/v) FA, as follows: 0-5 min, 3-3% B; 5-45 min, 3-35% B; 45-46 min, 35-95% B; 46-56 min, 95-95% B; 56-57 min, 95-3% B; 57-63 min, 3-3% B. The flow rate was 0.2 mL/min. The temperature of the C18 column (250 mm × 3 mm × 5 μm) was maintained at 35 °C. The column outlet was directly coupled to electron spray ionization (ESI) with an ionization voltage set at 3 kV for the positive scan. Nitrogen was used as the sheath (35 arb) and aux (10 arb) gas. The scanning range of the primary mass spectrum was 200-1200 m/z, and the resolution was 60,000. A data-dependent acquisition (DDA) scan was conducted for collision-induced disso-ciation (CID) model. The 10 ions with the highest intensity were selected for secondary fragmentation analysis with a collision energy of 35 eV.  The acquired raw data were imported into PEAKS software (Bioinformatics Solu-tions, Waterloo, Canada) for peptide sequencing and quantification. The parameters were as follows: parent mass error tolerance (15.0 ppm), fragment mass error tolerance (0.6 Da), database (UniProt Sus scrofa), and filter charge (1-3). A label-free algorithm integrated into the peak quantified the relative abundance of peptides. The normalized peak area of each peptide after log2 conversion was imported into SIMCA-P 14.0 soft-ware (Umetrics, Umea, Sweden) for overall variable analysis. To identify potential markers, variable importance projection parameter value >1, fold-change >1.3 or <0.77, and p < 0.05 [24], were used as the screening criterion to compare the OPLS-DA data in a pairwise manner. The identified peptide sequence was then submitted to Genscript (Jiangsu, Nanjing, China) for synthesis. 5 μL of each sample treated as detailed above was injected. LC analysis was per-formed using a UHPLC system (DIONEX, Thermo Scientific, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) equipped with an auto-sampler, a vacuum degasser unit, a quaternary pump, and a column compartment. Samples were separated using a Gemini® 5 μm NX-C18 Col-umn (250 × 3 mm, 110 Å, Phenomenex, Torrance, CA, USA) at 35 °C. The mobile phas-es consisted of acetonitrile (A) and water containing 0.1% FA (B), and the elution gra-dient was set as follows: 3% A (0-0.5 min), 3-35% A (0.5-8.5 min), 35-95% A (8.5-9 min), 95% A (9-14 min), 95-3% A (14-14.1 min), and 3% A (14.1-20 min). The flow rate was fixed at 0.2 mL/min. MS analysis was performed using an LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron, San Jose, CA, USA) equipped with a heated elec-trospray ionization interface. The ionization voltage was set at 3 kV for the positive scan. The capillary temperature was fixed at 300 °C. Nitrogen served as both the sheath (35 arb) and auxiliary (10 arb) gas. From 0 to 20 min, the results of PEAKS software were imported into Skyline 3.0 software (MacCoss, Washington, USA) to se-lect the parent-fragment ion pairs of the potential peptide. The precursor ion was se-lected using CID model with normalized collision energy of 35%.

### Publication Abstract
This study applied peptidomics to investigate potential biomarkers for evaluating pork-meat freshness. The spoilage time points of pork meat stored at -2, 4, 10, and 25 &#xb0;C were defined by evaluating meat freshness indicators (color, total viable count, pH, and total volatile basic nitrogen). Peptide MVHMASKE was identified as a potential peptide marker via multivariate analysis. Pearson correlation revealed a negative correlation between intensity of MVHMASKE and total viable count/total volatile basic nitrogen. In addition, the correlation between peptide content and the change in pork-meat freshness was verified using real-life samples, and the content of MVHMASKE showed a significant decline during storage under 4 and 25 &#xb0;C, correspondingly reflecting the change of pork meat from fresh to spoiled. This study provides favorable evidence to evaluate pork-meat freshness by monitoring the change of peptide MVHMASKE in content based on mass spectrometry-based peptidomics.

### Keywords
Pork meat; freshness; biomarker; peptidomics; peptide

### Affiliations
Nanjing Agricultural University

### Submitter
Chong Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Zhenqian Wei
Nanjing Agricultural University


