### Accession
PXD001764

### Title
The dataset to discover ESCC related proteins

### Description
To discover ESCC related proteins, we used SWATH to quantify the protein abundance between ESCC and adjacent tissues. Briefly, we pooled 10 ESCCtissues and their corresponding adjacent tissues for SWATH acquisition with three replicates.Three DDA repeats were also acquired with the pooled 10-paired ESCC tissue.The trypsin digested peptide mixture was analyzed by AB SCIEX 5600 (AB SCIEX).The database searching procedure was achieved using ProteinPilot v4.5 (AB Sciex). The database is IPI_homo_sapiens_V3.87.

### Sample Protocol
The frozen tissues were crashed in the grinder with liquid nitrogen, and the powdered tissues were homogenized by sonication in the lysis buffer containing 2% SDS, 7M Urea, 10 mM EDTA, 10 mM PMSF, 10 mM DTT and 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 7.6. The homogenized tissues were centrifuged at 20,000g, and the resulted supernatants were reduced by 10 mM DTT and alkylated by 55 mM iodoacetamide. The treated proteins were tryptic digested followed the FASP protocol as described by Mann. The protein content was measured using the Bradford assay.  The serum preparation was followed by the instruction from the Proteominer Kit(Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA). Briefly, the equilibrated Proteominer resin was mixed with 100ul serum and incubated for two hours at room temperature with rotation. After removing the unbound proteins by washing for three times, all the bound proteins were eluted by the elution buffer containing 8M Urea, 2% CHAPS. The eluted proteins were treated for reduction with 10 mM DTT and alkylation with 55 mM iodoacetamide, and the treated proteins were precipitated by acetone in -20 oC followed by centrifuge 20,000g. The sediment was re-natured in 8M urea and the dissolved proteins were diluted to urea concentration at 1M. After serum proteins were quantified by the Bradford assay, approximate 50 ug was taken for tryptic digestion using FASP protocol.

### Data Protocol
On the basis of MS data acquired at DDA mode in 5600 TripleTOFTM, ProteinPilot (Version 4.5), setting at through mode was used for peptide searching against the database (IPI human v3.87).  The search result of the three DDAs were used as reference spectral libraries for targeted extraction. This library was used to interrogate each SWATH run, enabling peptide quantification across all SWATH samples, even if a given peptide was not identified in the matched DDA run. The PeakView SWATH Processing Micro App (AB Sciex) was used to identify the correct peak group in a set of fragment chromatograms with peaks at the same retention time with parameters setting as, 1) 5000 proteins and 1000 peptides/proteins, 2) 75 ppm m/z tolerance and 30 min extraction window, 3) confidence setting 50%, 4) FDR (false discovery rate) as 5%, 5) shared peptides excluded for SWATH analysis and 6) modified peptides included. Peak-group scoring was similar to that described previously17 and used a combination of chromatographic correlation (related peaks should have the same shape, width and retention time), mass error and additional predicted fragments ions; a decoy strategy was used to select most likely peak groups for export and quantitative analysis. For RT correction, the RTs from different data sources were implemented by linear regression as the equation of y=ax+b, in which y represents the RTs in DDA data and x represents the RTs from the SWATH data. All the retention times of the identified peptides from DDA were globally corrected, and a new ion library was constructed consisted by the peptides with corrected RTs, against which the SWATH data were analyzed using Peakview SWATH Processing Micro App (AB Sciex).

### Publication Abstract
We propose an efficient integration of SWATH with MRM for biomarker discovery and verification when the corresponding ion library is well established. We strictly controlled the false positive rate associated with SWATH MS signals and carefully selected the target peptides coupled with SWATH and MRM. We collected 10 samples of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) tissues paired with tumors and adjacent regions and quantified 1758 unique proteins with FDR 1% at protein level using SWATH, in which 467 proteins were abundance-dependent with ESCC. After carefully evaluating the SWATH MS signals of the up-regulated proteins, we selected 120 proteins for MRM verification. MRM analysis of the pooled and individual esophageal tissues resulted in 116 proteins that exhibited similar abundance response modes to ESCC that were acquired with SWATH. Because the ESCC-related proteins consisted of a high percentile of secreted proteins, we conducted the MRM assay on patient sera that were collected from pre- and postoperation. Of the 116 target proteins, 42 were identified in the ESCC sera, including 11 with lowered abundances postoperation. Coupling SWATH and MRM is thus feasible and efficient for the discovery and verification of cancer-related protein biomarkers.

### Keywords
Dda, Tissue, Swath, Escc

### Affiliations
BGI-Shenzhen,China
BGI

### Submitter
Xue Hou

### Lab Head
Dr siqi liu
BGI-Shenzhen,China


