### Accession
PXD018909

### Title
Proteomics of Galápagos marine iguanas links function of femoral gland proteins to the immune system

### Description
Communication between individuals via molecules, termed chemosignaling, is widespread among animal and plant species. However, we lack knowledge on the specific functions of the substances involved for most of such systems. The femoral gland is an organ secreting a waxy substance, which is involved in chemical communication in lizards. While the lipids and volatile substances secreted by the femoral glands have been investigated in several biochemical studies, the protein composition and functions of secretions are completely unknown. Applying a proteomic approach, we provide the first attempt to comprehensively characterize the protein composition of femoral gland secretions from the Galápagos marine iguana. Using samples from several organs, the marine iguana proteome was assembled by next generation sequencing and mass spectrometry, resulting in 7,513 proteins; 4305 proteins were present in the femoral gland, including keratins, small serum proteins and fatty acid-binding proteins. Surprisingly, no proteins with obvious roles in partner recognition or inter-species communication could be identified. However, we found several proteins with direct associations to the innate immune system, such as lysozyme C, antileukoproteinase (ALP), pulmonary surfactant protein (SFTPD) and galectin (LGALS1), suggesting the femoral glands function as an important barrier to infection. The identification of previously unrecognized effective anti-microbial peptides from the femoral gland show similar activities against E.coli and B. subtilis compared to oncocin. This proteomics dataset is a valuable resource for future functional protein analysis and demonstrates that femoral glands secretions covers also functions of the innate immune system.

### Sample Protocol
Gland secretions and tissue samples were separated by SDS-PAGE and subsequently in-gel digested with LysC and trypsin for proteomic analysis. Peptides were extracted from gel pieces with acetonitril and desalted on stage tips. Mass spectrometric analysis was performed using an Easy nLC 1000 UHPLC coupled to a QExactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). Peptides were fractionated using in-house made 50 cm columns packed with 1.9 µm C18 beads using a binary buffer system, consisting of Buffer A (0.1% FA) and Buffer B (80% ACN in 0.1% FA). Peptides were eluted from the C18 column by applying a linear gradient from 5–35% buffer B over 150 min.

### Data Protocol
The raw data acquired were analyzed using MaxQuant software (1.5.3.8) {Cox, 2011 #14} using the endoprotease trypsin as digestion enzyme and allowing a maximum of two missed cleavages. Oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were selected as variable modifications and carbamidomythylation of cysteine as a fixed modification. The maximum mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm, initial precursor ion mass deviation to 7 ppm, and MS/MS tolerance to 0.5 Da.

### Publication Abstract
Communication between individuals via molecules, termed chemosignaling, is widespread among animal and plant species. However, we lack knowledge on the specific functions of the substances involved for most systems. The femoral gland is an organ that secretes a waxy substance involved in chemical communication in lizards. Although the lipids and volatile substances secreted by the femoral glands have been investigated in several biochemical studies, the protein composition and functions of secretions remain completely unknown. Applying a proteomic approach, we provide the first attempt to comprehensively characterize the protein composition of femoral gland secretions from the Gal&#xe1;pagos marine iguana. Using samples from several organs, the marine iguana proteome was assembled by next-generation sequencing and MS, resulting in 7513 proteins. Of these, 4305 proteins were present in the femoral gland, including keratins, small serum proteins, and fatty acid-binding proteins. Surprisingly, no proteins with discernible roles in partner recognition or inter-species communication could be identified. However, we did find several proteins with direct associations to the innate immune system, including lysozyme C, antileukoproteinase (ALP), pulmonary surfactant protein (SFTPD), and galectin (LGALS1) suggesting that the femoral glands function as an important barrier to infection. Furthermore, we report several novel anti-microbial peptides from the femoral glands that show similar action against <i>Escherichia coli</i> and <i>Bacillus subtilis</i> such as oncocin, a peptide known for its effectiveness against Gram-negative pathogens. This proteomics data set is a valuable resource for future functional protein analysis and demonstrates that femoral gland secretions also perform functions of the innate immune system.

### Keywords
Iguana proteomics galapagos femoral gland immune

### Affiliations
Institute for Genetics, University of Cologne
CECAD Research Center, Institute for Genetics, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany

### Submitter
Frederik Tellkamp

### Lab Head
Dr Marcus Krüger
CECAD Research Center, Institute for Genetics, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany


