### Accession
PXD011782

### Title
A mass spectrometry survey of chromatin-associated proteins in pluripotency and early lineage commitment

### Description
Pluripotent Embryonic Stem Cells (ESCs) can be captured in vitro in different states, ranging from unrestricted ‘naïve’ to more developmentally constrained ‘primed’ pluripotency. Complexes involved in epigenetic regulation and key transcription factors have been shown to be involved in specifying these distinct states. In this study, we use proteomic profiling of the chromatin landscape in naive pluripotent ESCs, Epistem cells (EpiSCs) and early differentiated ESCs to survey the chromatin in naïve and primed pluripotency and during differentiation. We provide a comprehensive overview of epigenetic complexes situated on the chromatin and identify proteins associated with the maintenance and loss of pluripotency. The findings presented here indicate major compositional alterations of epigenetic complexes starting from ESC priming onwards. Our results contribute to the understanding of ESC differentiation and provide a framework for future studies of lineage commitment of ESCs.

### Sample Protocol
Chromatin was enriched using a method described in Kustatscher et al, 2014. In brief, Serum ESCs, EpiSCs, and END cells were cross-linked and lysed to isolate nuclear pellets. Nuclear pellets were lysed using SDS and subsequently suspended in a buffer containing 8M Urea, in order to precipitate DNA and proteins that were cross-linked to it. Cross-links were then removed by boiling in SDS and β-mercaptoethanol. Decross-linked extracts were processed using filter-aided sample preparation (FASP). Digested and desalted using StageTips (as described in Rappsilber et al, 2007). Trypsin-digested peptide mixtures were measured using a 4 hour gradient on an LTQ-Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed with MaxQuant version 1.5.1.0 with default settings and the following alterations: match between runs enabled and LFQ values calculated. Potential contaminants and reverse hits were filtered using Perseus. Significant proteins were determined using Perseus multiple sample significance testing(ANOVA). Downstream analysis was performed using Python3 and Jupyter Notebook.

### Publication Abstract
Pluripotency can be captured in vitro in the form of Embryonic Stem Cells (ESCs). These ESCs can be either maintained in the unrestricted "na&#xef;ve" state of pluripotency, adapted to developmentally more constrained "primed" pluripotency or differentiated towards each of the three germ layers. Epigenetic protein complexes and transcription factors have been shown to specify and instruct transitions from ESCs to distinct cell states. In this study, proteomic profiling of the chromatin landscape by chromatin enrichment for proteomics (ChEP) is used in mouse naive pluripotent ESCs, primed pluripotent Epiblast stem cells (EpiSCs), and cells in early stages of differentiation. A comprehensive overview of epigenetic protein complexes associated with the chromatin is provided and proteins associated with the maintenance and loss of pluripotency are identified. The data reveal major compositional alterations of epigenetic complexes during priming and differentiation of na&#xef;ve pluripotent ESCs. These results contribute to the understanding of ESC differentiation and provide a framework for future studies of lineage commitment of ESCs.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Chromatin, Mouse, Naïve pluripotency, Differentiation, Primed pluripotency

### Affiliations
Radboud University
Molecular Biology, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences (RIMLS), Nijmegen, the Netherlands

### Submitter
Guido van Mierlo

### Lab Head
Dr Hendrik Marks
Molecular Biology, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences (RIMLS), Nijmegen, the Netherlands


