### Accession
PXD037900

### Title
Proteomics of Human Breast-TMG LC-MS/MS

### Description
Type I, II, III and V collagens were commonly identified in human, pig, and mouse breast ECM. Mammary epithelial cells were able to form acini on certain types or combinations of the four collagens at normal breast tissue stiffness levels. Comparison of the collagen species in mouse normal breast and breast tumor ECM revealed common and distinct sets of collagens within the two types of tissues. Elevated collagen type I alpha 1 chain expression was found in human breast cancers. Collagen type XXV alpha 1 chain was identified in mouse breast tumors but not in normal breast tissues. Our data provide insights into modeling human breast pathophysiological structures and functions using native tissue-derived hydrogels and potential contributions of different collagen types or their monomers in breast cancer development.

### Sample Protocol
Briefly, normal breast tissues were diced, homogenized in ice cold deionized water, decellularized in 1% Triton X-100 at RT for 5-7 days, washed in deionized water for at least 3 times to remove the detergent. The decellularized ECM was freeze-dried. ECM powder extract was partially solubilized in 1.5ml tube with 1ml of 8M Urea containing 0.1% ProteaseMAX (Promega) and 50mM NH4HCO3 (pH8.5). Samples were sonicated twice for 30sec each with a sonication probe, cooled on ice in between, then stored overnight at 4°C to facilitate further solubilization. Another round of sonication as previously described was executed and 40µl of homogenously reconstituted samples was taken for the downstream 200µl digestion, where sample was diluted to 120μl for reduction step with: 5μl of 25mM DTT and 75μl 25mM NH4HCO3 (pH8.5). Incubated at 56°C for 15 minutes, cooled on ice to room temperature then 6μl of 55mM CAA (Chloroacetamide) was added for alkylation and incubated in darkness at room temperature for 15 minutes. Reaction was quenched by adding 16μl of 25mM DTT. For protease digestion, 30μl of Trypsin/LysC mix solution [50ng/μl Trypsin from PROMEGA and 50ng/μl LysC from WAKO in 25mM NH4HCO3] and 28μl of 25mM NH4HCO3 (pH8.5) was added to 200µl final volume. The digestion was conducted at 37°C overnight and terminated by acidification with 2.5% Trifluoroacetic Acid (TFA). ProteaseMAX was removed by centrifugation (maximum speed) at room temperature for 10 minutes. Digested sample was cleaned up using OMIX C18 SPE cartridges (Agilent, Palo Alto, CA) per manufacturer protocol and eluted in 20µl of 60/40/0.1% ACN/H2O/TFA, dried to completion in the speed-vac and finally reconstituted in 80µl of 0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile.  Peptides were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS using the Agilent 1100 nanoflow system (Agilent) connected to a hybrid linear ion trap-orbitrap mass spectrometer (LTQ-Orbitrap Elite™, Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with an EASY-Spray™ electrospray source.  Chromatography of peptides prior to mass spectral analysis was accomplished using capillary emitter column (PepMap® C18, 3µM, 100Å, 150x0.075mm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) onto which 2µl of extracted peptides was automatically loaded. NanoHPLC system delivered solvents A: 0.1% (v/v) formic acid, and B: 99.9% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid at 0.50 µL/min to load the peptides (over a 30 minute period) and 0.3µl/min to elute peptides directly into the nano-electrospray with gradual gradient from 0% (v/v) B to 30% (v/v) B over 250 minutes and concluded  with 10 minute fast gradient from 30% (v/v) B to 50% (v/v) B at which time a 7 minute flash-out from 50-95% (v/v) B took place. As peptides eluted from the HPLC-column/electrospray source survey MS scans were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 120,000 followed by MS2 fragmentation of 30 most intense peptides detected in the MS1 scan from 350 to 1800 m/z; redundancy was limited by dynamic exclusion.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS/MS data were converted to mgf file format using MSConvert (ProteoWizard: Open Source Software for Rapid Proteomics Tools Development). Resulting mgf files were used to search against Homo sapiens amino acid sequence database with a decoy reverse entries and a list of common contaminants (97,184 total entries from UniProt UP5640 database downloaded 08_11_2020) using in-house Mascot search engine 2.7.0 (Matrix Science) with fixed cysteine carbamidomethylation plus variable Methionine, Proline oxidation and Asparagine, Glutamine deamidation. Peptide mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm and fragment masses at 0.6 Da. Protein annotations, significance of identification and spectral based quantification was done with help of Scaffold software (version 4.11.0, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR). Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability within 1% False Discovery Rate and contained at least 2 identified peptides.  Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii, AI Anal Chem. 2003 Sep 1;75(17):4646-58). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.

### Publication Abstract
Modeling human breast tissue architecture is essential to study the pathophysiological conditions of the breast. We report that normal mammary epithelial cells grown in human breast extracellular matrix (ECM) hydrogel formed acini structurally similar to those of human and pig mammary tissues. Type I, II, III and V collagens were commonly identified in human, pig, and mouse breast ECM. Mammary epithelial cells formed acini on certain types or combinations of the four collagens at normal levels of breast tissue elasticity. Comparison of the collagen species in mouse normal breast and breast tumor ECM revealed common and distinct sets of collagens within the two types of tissues. Elevated expression of collagen type I alpha 1 chain (Col1a1) was found in mouse and human breast cancers. Collagen type XXV alpha 1 chain (Col25a1) was identified in mouse breast tumors but not in normal breast tissues. Our data provide strategies for modeling human breast pathophysiological structures and functions using native tissue-derived hydrogels and offer insight into the potential contributions of different collagen types in breast cancer development.

### Keywords
Tissue matrix gel, Human breast, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Washington State University
Washington State University Spokane

### Submitter
Weimin Li

### Lab Head
Dr Weimin Li
Washington State University


