### Accession
PXD011466

### Title
Mass-spectrometry-based analysis of the secretome of M. tuberculosis mutants

### Description
The ESX-1, type VII, secretion system represents the major virulence determinant of Mycobacterium tuberculosis, one of the most successful intracellular pathogens. Here we study the proteme of various ESX-1 knock-out mutants.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were digested by Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) (1) with minor modifications. Dithiothreitol (DTT) was replaced by Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) as reducing agent and Iodoacetamide by Chloracetamide as alkylating agent. A combined proteolytic digestion was performed using Endoproteinase Lys-C and Trypsin. Acidified peptides were desalted on C18 StageTips (2) and dried down by vacuum centrifugation. For LC MS/MS analysis, peptides were resuspended and separated by reversed-phase chromatography on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nanoUPLC system in-line connected with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Mass-Spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific). 1- Wiśniewski JR, Zougman A, Nagaraj N, Mann M. Universal sample preparation method for proteome analysis.Nat Methods. 2009 May;6 (5):359-62. doi: 10.1038/nmeth.1322. Epub 2009 Apr 19. 2- Rappsilber J, Mann M, Ishihama Y. Protocol for micro-purification, enrichment, pre-fractionation and storage of peptides for proteomics using StageTips. Nature Protocols 2, - 1896 - 1906 (2007) Published online: 2 August 2007.doi:10.1038/nprot.2007.261.  For the analysis of the culture filtrates, M. tuberculosis cultures were grown in 7H9 to mid-logarithmic phase. The culture medium was then replaced by Sauton’s supplemented with 0.05% Tween 80 and growth was continued for 3 d. Finally, bacteria were pelleted and resuspended in Sauton’s medium without Tween 80 for collection of the culture filtrates. These were filtered through 0.22 mm Steriflip Millipore Express Plus Membranes (Millipore), concentrated 100x using Amicon Ultracel-3K centrifugal filters (Millipore), quantified by using the Pierce BCA Protein Assay kit and 30 mg were submitted for mass spectrometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
Database search was performed using MaxQuant 1.6.0.1 (3) against the TubercuListR27 database (http://tuberculist.epfl.ch/). Carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification, whereas oxidation (M), phosphorylation (S,T,Y) and acetylation (Protein N-term) were considered as variable modifications. Label Free Quantification (MaxLFQ) was performed by MaxQuant using the standard settings (4). Perseus (5) was used to highlight differentially quantified proteins. Reverse proteins, contaminants and proteins only identified by sites were filtered out. Biological replicates were grouped together and protein groups. Descritpion of the samples (in the experimentalDesignTemplate.txt): Name Experiment Description CS_180220_Lumos_A Rv_01  —> wild-type strain, replicate 1 CS_180220_Lumos_B Rv_02  —> wild-type strain, replicate 2 CS_180220_Lumos_C Rv_03  —> wild-type strain, replicate 3 CS_180220_Lumos_D DeltaDelta_01  —> Delta delta RD1 strain (deletion of the extended RD1 locus), replicate 1 CS_180220_Lumos_E DeltaDelta_02  —> Delta delta RD1 strain (deletion of the extended RD1 locus), replicate 2 CS_180220_Lumos_F DeltaDelta_03  —> Delta delta RD1 strain (deletion of the extended RD1 locus), replicate 3 CS_180220_Lumos_G DeltaL_01  —> Delta espL mutant, replicate 1 CS_180220_Lumos_H DeltaL_02  —> Delta espL mutant, replicate 2 CS_180220_Lumos_I DeltaL_03  —> Delta espL mutant, replicate 3 CS_180220_Lumos_J DeltaLDeltaL_01  —> Delta espL mutant, complemented with espL in trans, replicate 1 CS_180220_Lumos_K DeltaLDeltaL_02  —> Delta espL mutant, complemented with espL in trans, replicate 2 CS_180220_Lumos_L DeltaLDeltaL_03  —> Delta espL mutant, complemented with espL in trans, replicate 3 CS_180220_Lumos_M DeltaLDeltaW_01  —> Delta espL mutant, expressing whiB6 in trans, replicate 1 CS_180220_Lumos_N DeltaLDeltaW_02  —> Delta espL mutant, expressing whiB6 in trans, replicate 2 CS_180220_Lumos_O DeltaLDeltaW_03  —> Delta espL mutant, expressing whiB6 in trans, replicate 3

### Publication Abstract
The ESX-1, type VII, secretion system represents the major virulence determinant of Mycobacterium tuberculosis, one of the most successful intracellular pathogens. Here, by combining genetic and high-throughput approaches, we show that EspL, a protein of 115 amino acids, is essential for mediating ESX-1-dependent virulence and for stabilization of EspE, EspF and EspH protein levels. Indeed, an espL knock-out mutant was unable to replicate intracellularly, secrete ESX-1 substrates or stimulate innate cytokine production. Moreover, proteomic studies detected greatly reduced amounts of EspE, EspF and EspH in the espL mutant as compared to the wild type strain, suggesting a role for EspL as a chaperone. The latter conclusion was further supported by discovering that EspL interacts with EspD, which was previously demonstrated to stabilize the ESX-1 substrates and effector proteins, EspA and EspC. Loss of EspL also leads to downregulation in M. tuberculosis of WhiB6, a redox-sensitive transcriptional activator of ESX-1 genes. Overall, our data highlight the importance of a so-far overlooked, though conserved, component of the ESX-1 secretion system and begin to delineate the role played by EspE, EspF and EspH in virulence and host-pathogen interaction.

### Keywords
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Esx-1

### Affiliations
EPFL
Global Health Institute, EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland (lab head)

### Submitter
Andrej Benjak

### Lab Head
Dr Stewart Thomas Cole
Global Health Institute, EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland (lab head)


