### Accession
PXD018910

### Title
Structure of the helicase core of Werner Helicase, a key target in microsatellite instability cancers

### Description
Loss of WRN, a DNA repair helicase, was identified as a strong vulnerability of microsatellite instable(MSI) cancers, making WRN a promising drug target. We show that ATP binding and hydrolysis are required for genome integrity and viability of MSI cancer cells. We report a 2.2 Å crystal structure of the WRN helicase core (517-1093), comprising the two helicase subdomains and winged helix domain but not the HRDC domain or nuclease domains. The structure highlights unusual features: First, an atypical mode of nucleotide binding that results in unusual relative positioning of the two helicase subdomains. Second, an additional β-hairpin in the second helicase subdomain and an unusual helical hairpin in the Zn2+ binding domain. Modelling of the WRN helicase in complex with DNA suggests roles for these features in the binding of alternative DNA structures. NMR analysis of shows a weak interaction between the HRDC domain and the helicase core, indicating a possible biological role for this association. Together, this study will facilitate the structure-based development of inhibitors against WRN helicase.

### Sample Protocol
Deuterium labelling: Deuterium labelling was initiated by diluting 3 uL of WRN (16.66uM; 15 mM HEPES and 150 mM NaCl, at pH 7.3) 16-fold in deuterated buffer at room temperature. The labelling reactions were quenched by decreasing the temperature to 0°C and the pH to 2.5 by adding 48 uL of quench buffer. Quench buffer 1 (100 mM potassium phosphate, pH 2.1) was used for the AMP-PNP experiments and quench buffer 2 (4 M guanidine hydrochloride, 200 mM potassium phosphate, 200 mM sodium chloride, 100 mM tris (2-carboxyethl) phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP-HCl), pH 2.2) was used for binding experiments where ssDNA was present. Samples were taken at five time points (10 seconds, 1 minute, 10 minutes, 1 hour, 4 hours). The sequence of the ssDNA used in the experiments was as follows: 5’- CCA GGT CGA TAG GTT CGA ATT GGT T - 3’. Complexes with AMP-PNP and ssDNA were analyzed in a similar way. WRN was incubated with AMP-PNP or ssDNA individually. Mixing ratios protein: AMP-PNP of 1 : 200 and protein : ssDNA 1 : 2.5 were used. The protein was allowed to equilibrate with the ligands for 2 min at room temperature before D2O labelling which was allowed to proceed from 10 seconds up to 4 hours for each condition. LC/MS: Upon quenching, the samples were injected immediately into a Waters nanoACQUITY UPLC equipped with HDX technology. The samples were digested online using a Waters Enzymate™ BEH Pepsin Column (2.1 x 30 mm, 5 μm) at 15 °C. The cooling chamber of the UPLC system which housed all the chromatographic elements was held at 0.0 ± 0.1 °C for the entire time of the measurements. Peptides were trapped and desalted on a VanGuard Pre-Column trap (2.1 mm × 5 mm, ACQUITY UPLC BEH C18, 1.7 μm (Waters, 186003975) for 3 minutes at 100 μL/min. Peptides were then eluted from the trap using a 8%–35% gradient of acetonitrile (with 0.1 % formic acid) over 8 minutes at a flow rate of 40 μL/min, and separated using an ACQUITY UPLC C18 HSS T3 1.8 μm, 1.0 mm × 50 mm column (Waters, 186003535). The back pressure averaged ~7,500 psi at 0 °C and 5% acetonitrile 95% water. The error of determining the deuterium levels was ± 0.15 Da in this experimental setup. To eliminate peptide carryover, a wash solution of (1.5 M guanidinium chloride, 0.8% formic acid and 4% acetonitrile) was injected over the pepsin column during each analytical run. Mass spectra were acquired using a Waters Synapt G2-Si HDMSE mass spectrometer. The mass spectrometer was calibrated with direct infusion of a solution of glu-fibrinopeptide (Sigma, F3261) at 200 femtomole/μL at a flow rate of 5 μL/min prior to data collection. A conventional electrospray source was used, and the instrument was scanned at 0.4 scans/second over the range 50 to 2000 m/z with ion mobility engaged. The instrument configuration was the following: capillary voltage 3.2 kV, trap collision energy 4 V, sampling cone 40 V, source temperature 80 °C and desolvation temperature 175 °C. All comparison experiments were done under identical experimental conditions such that deuterium levels were not corrected for back-exchange and are therefore reported as relative.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified using PLGS 3.0.1 (Waters, RRID: SCR_016664, 720001408EN) using three replicates of undeuterated control samples. Raw MS data were imported into DynamX 3.0 (Waters, 720005145EN) and filtered as follows: minimum consecutive products: 2; minimum number of products per amino acid: 0.3. Peptides meeting these filtering criteria were further processed automatically by DynamX followed by manual inspection of all processed data. The relative amount of deuterium in each peptide was determined by subtracting the centroid mass of the undeuterated form of the peptide from the deuterated form at each time point and for each condition. These deuterium uptake values were used to generate uptake graphs and difference maps.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Helicase, Dna binding, Deuterium exchange, Hdx

### Affiliations
Department of Cancer Cell Signaling, Boehringer Ingelheim Vienna
Boehringer Ingelheim RCV GmbH & Co KG

### Submitter
Klaus Rumpel

### Lab Head
Dr Klaus Rumpel
Department of Cancer Cell Signaling, Boehringer Ingelheim Vienna


