### Accession
PXD042269

### Title
Impact of asialoglycoprotein receptor and mannose receptor deficiency on murine plasma N-glycome profiles

### Description
The asialoglycoprotein receptor (ASGPR) and the mannose receptor 1 (MRC1) are C-type lectins that identify and remove glycoproteins from circulation. ASGPR recognizes terminal galactose and N-acetylgalactosamine, whereas MRC1 recognizes terminal mannose, fucose, and N-acetylglucosamine. The effects of ASGPR and MRC1 deficiency on the N-glycosylation of individual circulating proteins have been studied. However, the impact on the homeostasis of the major plasma glycoproteins is debated and their glycosylation has not been mapped with high molecular resolution in this context. Therefore, we evaluated the total plasma N-glycome and plasma proteome of ASGR1 and MRC1 deficient mice.

### Sample Protocol
Blood samples from mice were collected by intracardiac puncture with disodium EDTA as anticoagulant, and plasma was separated by centrifugation at 7800 x g for 10min. Plasma samples (n=4) were pooled, and the concentration was measured using a NanoDropTM A280 nm (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany). 20 ul of plasma were combined with 40 ul of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution (final pH=8.5). Proteins were reduced by incubating them for 30 minutes at 55°C in 3 l DTT 100 mM. Protein alkylation was then carried out at room temperature by incubating 6 l of iodoacetamide 150mM in the dark for 20 minutes. Trypsin digestion (1:20 enzyme to protein ratio) was carried out overnight at 37°C and was terminated by acidification with trifluoroacetic acid (final percentage 1%).

### Data Protocol
The MS raw data files, obtained from Orbitrap FusionTM Tribrid™ Mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nano electrospray ion source, were converted to mzML format for proteomics using the MSconvert tool of the ProteoWizard software (version 3.0.1957). Converted mzML files were analyzed afterwards with OpenMS ver. 2.4, which was operating on the open-source software platform KNIME® ver. 4.1.1 42. The peptide identification was done using an approach combining the search engines as previously described in project PXD030365.

### Publication Abstract
The asialoglycoprotein receptor (ASGPR) and the mannose receptor C-type 1 (MRC1) are well known for their selective recognition and clearance of circulating glycoproteins. Terminal galactose and N-Acetylgalactosamine are recognized by ASGPR, while terminal mannose, fucose, and N-Acetylglucosamine are recognized by MRC1. The effects of ASGPR and MRC1 deficiency on the N-glycosylation of individual circulating proteins have been studied. However, the impact on the homeostasis of the major plasma glycoproteins is debated and their glycosylation has not been mapped with high molecular resolution in this context. Therefore, we evaluated the total plasma N-glycome and plasma proteome of ASGR1 and MRC1 deficient mice. ASGPR deficiency resulted in an increase in O-acetylation of sialic acids accompanied by higher levels of apolipoprotein D, haptoglobin, and vitronectin. MRC1 deficiency decreased fucosylation without affecting the abundance of the major circulating glycoproteins. Our findings confirm that concentrations and N-glycosylation of the major plasma proteins are tightly controlled and further suggest that glycan-binding receptors have redundancy, allowing compensation for the loss of one major clearance receptor.

### Keywords
Asialoglycoprotein receptor, Glycomics, Proteomics, Mannose receptor, Clearance

### Affiliations
Department of Pharmacological and Biomolecular Sciences, University of MIlan
Department of environmental science and policy

### Submitter
Giangiacomo Beretta

### Lab Head
Dr Giuseppe Danilo Norata
Department of Pharmacological and Biomolecular Sciences, University of MIlan


