### Accession
PXD022423

### Title
Arabidopsis FTSH12 mutant terminomics

### Description
DEgradomic analysis of  protein termini  in Arabidopsis thaliana mutants expressing altered abundance of the chloroplast protease FTSH12.

### Sample Protocol
Plant material from shotgun measurements were used and additional for replicates grown and isolated in the same way. Termini enrichment was performed by a method utilizing hydrophobic tagging with the aldehyde undecanal in a manner similar to (Chen et al., 2016). In brief, miRNA, overexpressor and Col-0 material were differentially dimethyl-labelled with formaldehyde derivates on protein level (Rinschen et al., 2017). Trypsin-generated peptide termini were labelled hydrophobically with undecanal and depleted by sample clean-up on a commercially available SPE cartridge (Macherey-Nagel HR-X, Dueren, Germany).

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant was used for analysis of the spectra with the same search strategy as in (Rinschen et al., 2017). Significance was determined by the R limma package as previously published (Gomez-Auli et al., 2016) with a significance cut-off of p < 0.05. Subsequent data evaluation was performed using an in-house Perl script for annotation of the identified entries

### Publication Abstract
The ATP-dependent metalloprotease FtsH12 (filamentation temperature sensitive protein H 12) has been suggested to participate in a heteromeric motor complex, driving protein translocation into the chloroplast. FtsH12 was immuno-detected in proplastids, seedlings, leaves, and roots. Expression of Myc-tagged FtsH12 under its native promotor allowed identification of FtsHi1, 2, 4, and 5, and plastidic NAD-malate dehydrogenase, five of the six interaction partners in the suggested import motor complex. Arabidopsis thaliana mutant seedlings with reduced FTSH12 abundance exhibited pale cotyledons and small, deformed chloroplasts with altered thylakoid structure. Mature plants retained these chloroplast defects, resulting in slightly variegated leaves and lower chlorophyll content. Label-free proteomics revealed strong changes in the proteome composition of FTSH12 knock-down seedlings, reflecting impaired plastid development. The composition of the translocon on the inner chloroplast membrane (TIC) protein import complex was altered, with coordinated reduction of the FtsH12-FtsHi complex subunits and accumulation of the 1 MDa TIC complex subunits TIC56, TIC214 and TIC22-III. FTSH12 overexpressor lines showed no obvious phenotype, but still displayed distinct differences in their proteome. N-terminome analyses further demonstrated normal proteolytic maturation of plastid-imported proteins irrespective of FTSH12 abundance. Together, our data suggest that FtsH12 has highest impact during seedling development; its abundance alters the plastid import machinery and impairs chloroplast development.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Degradomics, Metalloprotease, Chloroplast, Ftsh12

### Affiliations
Forschungszentrum Jülich
Pitter Huesgen Forschungszentrum Juelich ZEA-3 Analytics

### Submitter
Pitter Huesgen

### Lab Head
Dr Pitter Huesgen
Pitter Huesgen Forschungszentrum Juelich ZEA-3 Analytics


