### Accession
PXD043248

### Title
Proximal proteomics connects NRF2 suppression to ZNF746/PARIS-driven oxidative stress and apoptosis in Parkinson’s disease

### Description
The nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 (NRF2) transcription factor activates cytoprotective and metabolic gene expression in response to various electrophilic stressors. In disease, constitutive NRF2 activity promotes cancer progression while decreased NRF2 function contributes to neurodegenerative diseases. In contrast to the regulation of NRF2 protein stability in the cytoplasm, co-complexed proteins that govern NRF2 activity on chromatin are less clear. Using biotin proximity proteomics, we report networks for NRF2 and its family members NRF1, NRF3 and the NRF2 heterodimer MAFG. We found that the Parkinson’s disease zinc finger transcription factor ZNF746 (PARIS) physically associated with NRF2 and MAFG, resulting in suppression of NRF2-driven transcription. ZNF746 expression increased oxidative stress and apoptosis, phenotypes that were reversed by chemical and genetic hyperactivation of NRF2. This study presents a functionally annotated proximity network for NRF2 and suggests that ZNF746 overexpression in Parkinson’s disease directly inhibits NRF2-driven neuroprotection.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed in Urea lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris pH 8.0, and 70 mM NaCl) containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors and benzonase. Protein concentrations were determined using the BCA Protein Assay Kit for equal protein loading. Samples were reduced with 5 mM DTT at 37°C for 45 min and alkylated with 50 mM chloroacetamide at room temp for 20 min. Lysates were first digested with 20 mAu LysC at 30°C for 2 h and then digested with 20 µg of trypsin (Promega) per 1 mg of protein at 37°C for 18 h. Lysates were diluted to 3 M urea prior to LysC digestion and 1.5 M urea prior to trypsin digestion with 50 mM Tris pH 8.0. The trypsin was neutralized with 1% formic acid and high spin cleared. The peptides were de-salted using Strata-X 10 mg/mL columns (Phenomenex), dried in a speed vac, and then resuspended in 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid.  Endogenous peptides were injected at 1 ug/uL with 150 fmol stable isotopically labeled (SIL) peptides per injection. In sum, 218 SIL peptides were obtained in array-purity from Vivitide and were synthesized with 15N and 13C-labeled lysine and arginine residues.  Tryptic peptides were separated by reverse phase nano-HPLC using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano System (Thermo Fisher) coupled to a 25 cm x 75 um i.d. EASY-Spray™ HPLC column (Thermo Scientific) packed with 2 um C18 particles and heated to 40C. For peptide separation and elution, solvent A was 0.1% FA in water and Solvent B was 0.1% FA in ACN. Samples were loaded by a user defined program for a 1 uL full-loop injection. The gradient was 4 %B at 1 min, 15.4 %B at 31 min, 24.5 %B at 46 min, and 98 %B at 48 min. Each method included a wash step with three ramps between 2% and 98% solvent B followed by 24 minutes of re-equilibration at 2% B and 300 nL/min flow. During the gradients the flow was 250 nL/min. Internal Standard Triggered-Parallel Reaction Monitoring (IS-PRM) methods leverage SIL internal standard peptides to direct efficient acquisition of endogenous, unlabeled peptides.(104) We implemented a customized IS-PRM algorithm through the Thermo ScientificTM TribridTM IAPI (79). Once per cycle the method looks for MS1 detection of any features that match the expected m/z of one of the SIL peptides to within 5 ppm. MS1 detection at sufficient intensity triggers a subsequent “watch” scan. Detection of at least five of six characteristic transitions to within 20 ppm confirms the presence of a SIL peptide. Confirmation triggers a high-resolution “quant” scan targeting the endogenous counterpart.

### Data Protocol
IS-PRM identification was based on the six most abundant transitions for each peptide excluding precursor, y1, y2, and b1 ions. For each run, an active IAPI instance generated a text file consisting of all centroided MS2 scans with their respective retention time and precursor m/z annotations. Custom python scripts were used to analyze the data as follows. The three most abundant transitions were used for quantification, but spectral angle contrast between light and heavy transition areas was used to exclude noisy or interfered transitions from consideration. Peak area ratios obtained by IS-PRM were normalized by global extraction from PRM (GXPRM) as proposed by Chambers et al (108). Briefly, the intensities of commonly identified peptides that were co-isolated with the targeted peptides are used to derive a multiplicative normalization factor for each sample. Peptide abundances are summarized to the protein level by their geometric mean.

### Publication Abstract
The nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 (NRF2) transcription factor activates cytoprotective and metabolic gene expression in response to various electrophilic stressors. Constitutive NRF2 activity promotes cancer progression, whereas decreased NRF2 function contributes to neurodegenerative diseases. We used proximity proteomic analysis to define protein networks for NRF2 and its family members NRF1, NRF3, and the NRF2 heterodimer MAFG. A functional screen of co-complexed proteins revealed previously uncharacterized regulators of NRF2 transcriptional activity. We found that ZNF746 (also known as PARIS), a zinc finger transcription factor implicated in Parkinson's disease, physically associated with NRF2 and MAFG, resulting in suppression of NRF2-driven transcription. ZNF746 overexpression increased oxidative stress and apoptosis in a neuronal cell model of Parkinson's disease, phenotypes that were reversed by chemical and genetic hyperactivation of NRF2. This study presents a functionally annotated proximity network for NRF2 and suggests a link between ZNF746 overexpression in Parkinson's disease and inhibition of NRF2-driven neuroprotection.

### Keywords
Oxidative stress, Parkinson's disease, Nrf2, Znf746, Prm, Paris

### Affiliations
Washington University in St. Louis
Cell Biology and Physiology, Washington University in St. Louis, United States

### Submitter
Kyle LaPak

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Ben Major
Cell Biology and Physiology, Washington University in St. Louis, United States


