### Accession
PXD030754

### Title
Histidine Kinase Inhibitors Impair Shoot Regeneration in Arabidopsis thaliana via Cytokinin Signalling and SAM Patterning Determinants

### Description
Reversible protein phosphorylation is a post-translational modification involved in virtually all plant processes, as it mediates protein activity and signal transduction. Here, we probe dynamic protein phosphorylation during de novo shoot organogenesis in Arabidopsis thaliana. We find that application of three kinase inhibitors in various time intervals has different effects on root explants. We furthermore show that short exposures to the putative His kinase inhibitor TCSA during the initial days on shoot induction medium (SIM) are detrimental for regeneration in seven natural accessions. Investigation of ahk and ahp mutants, as well as reporter lines for shoot markers and hormone responses suggests that TCSA at least partially works by impeding cytokinin signal transduction via AHK3, AHK4, AHP2, AHP3, and AHP5. A mass spectrometry-based phosphoproteome analysis further reveals profound deregulation of Ser/Thr/Tyr phosphoproteins related to protein modification, transcriptional regulation, vesicle trafficking, organ morphogenesis, and cation transport. Among TCSA-responsive factors are prior candidates with a role in shoot apical meristem patterning, such as AGO1, BAM1, PLL5, FIP37, TOP1ALPHA, and RBR1, but also proteins involved in polar auxin transport (e.g., PIN1) and brassinosteroid signalling (e.g., BIN2). Potentially novel regeneration determinants regulated by TCSA include RD2, AT1G52780, PVA11, and AVT1C, while NAIP2, OPS, ARR1, QKY, and aquaporins exhibit differential phospholevels on control SIM.

### Sample Protocol
For sampling, 200-300 seeds were sown in a line and subjected to the regeneration assay described above. Instead of transferring individual root explants, the lower 2 cm of all root systems was cut with a razor and transferred between media. Harvesting was done by pooling ~250 mg of roots and flash freezing them in liquid nitrogen before grinding in a Retch® mill for 1 minute at 20 Hz, followed by 30 seconds at 30 Hz. Protein extraction, digestion, phosphopeptide enrichment and LC-MS/MS analysis were carried out according to Vu et al. Tris-HCl homogenization buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8, 0.1M KCl, 5 mM EDTA, 500 mM DTT, 30% sucrose), supplemented with 1 tablet/50mL Protease Inhibitor Cocktail Tablet (Roche) and 1 tablet/50mL Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail Tablet PhosSTOP (Roche),was added to the samples and debris was removed by sonication and centrifugation (4 °C for 15 min at 2500 × g). Next, proteins were precipitated by methanol/chloroform extraction and after centrifugation, 20 mL methanol was added to mix with the lower phase remaining in each tube. After another centrifugation, pellets were washed with 80% acetone and resuspended in 6 M guanidinium hydrochloride in 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) buffer (pH 8). Alkylation of cysteines was carried out by adding a combination of tris(carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP, Pierce) and iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) to final concentrations of 15 mM and 30 mM, respectively, and the reaction was allowed for 15 min at 30 °C in the dark. 2.5 mg of each sample and was pre-digested with EndoLysC (Wako) in 1:100 (w:w, 1 aliquot of 10 μg ) at 37°C while mixing for, 2.5h in the dark and the samples were diluted 8x with 50 mM TEAB, followed by a digestion with trypsin overnight (Promega Trypsin Gold, mass spectrometry grade), and both digestions occurred at 37 °C at an enzyme-to-substrate ratio of 1:100 (w:w). Finally, the solution was adjusted to pH ≤ 3 with TFA to arrest digestion and desalted with SampliQ C18 SPE cartridges (Agilent) according to the manufacturer’s guidelines. The digests were acidified, desalted, vacuum-dried and redissolved in loading solvent for enrichment of phosphopeptides using Ti-IMAC beads. After elution, samples were acidified, vacuum-dried and resuspended in an acetonitrile solution for liquid chromatography on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano LC (Thermo Fisher Scientific). This was coupled in-line to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) operated in data-dependent, positive ionization mode and using HCD collision to acquire MS/MS scans for the 10 most abundant precursor ions in each MS1 spectrum.

### Data Protocol
Identification and quantification of (phospho)peptides from MS/MS spectra was done in MaxQuant (version 1.6.11.0). Methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation and phosphorylation of S, T, and Y residues were chosen as variable modifications, and cysteine carbamidomethylation was included as fixed modification (with maximum 5 modifications per peptide). Trypsin was selected for digestion, allowing cleavage at lysine or arginine residues followed by proline, and up to 2 missed cleavages. Respective precursor mass tolerances of 20 and 4.5 ppm were used for the first and main search, intensity thresholds for MS1 and MS2 were set to 500, and DIA quantification and feature quantification methods were respectively set to “Top fragments by annotation” and “Scan” (using the top 3 fragments and a top MS/MS intensity quantile of 0.8). DIA mass window factor, background subtraction quantile and factor were all set to 0, and DIA XGBoost sub sample was set to 0.65, with a binary logistic learning objective and minimum child weight of 3. Default values (in ppm) were used for other instrument settings. Database searches were done against a FASTA file with protein sequences for all predicted transcripts in Arabidopsis thaliana Ws-0, derived from the 19 Genomes Project. Decoy mode was kept at “Revert” and default parameters were used under the protein quantification, label-free quantification, and MS/MS analyser tabs. An FDR filter of 1 % was applied to peptide spectrum matches, protein identifications, and modification sites, and the “Match between runs” feature was used (with a match time window of 0.7 min, match ion mobility window of 0.05, alignment time window of 20 min, and alignment ion mobility of 1). The Phospho (STY)Sites.txt table produced by MaxQuant was uploaded in Perseus (version 1.6.10.50) to remove potential contaminants and reverse hits. Also, rows were filtered to have a localization probability ≥ 0.75, site multiplicities were expanded, and intensity values were log2 transformed. Next, the data were uploaded in R for statistical analysis with the DEqMS package.

### Publication Abstract
Reversible protein phosphorylation is a post-translational modification involved in virtually all plant processes, as it mediates protein activity and signal transduction. Here, we probe dynamic protein phosphorylation during <i>de novo</i> shoot organogenesis in <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i>. We find that application of three kinase inhibitors in various time intervals has different effects on root explants. Short exposures to the putative histidine (His) kinase inhibitor TCSA during the initial days on shoot induction medium (SIM) are detrimental for regeneration in seven natural accessions. Investigation of cytokinin signaling mutants, as well as reporter lines for hormone responses and shoot markers, suggests that TCSA impedes cytokinin signal transduction <i>via</i> AHK3, AHK4, AHP3, and AHP5. A mass spectrometry-based phosphoproteome analysis further reveals profound deregulation of Ser/Thr/Tyr phosphoproteins regulating protein modification, transcription, vesicle trafficking, organ morphogenesis, and cation transport. Among TCSA-responsive factors are prior candidates with a role in shoot apical meristem patterning, such as AGO1, BAM1, PLL5, FIP37, TOP1ALPHA, and RBR1, as well as proteins involved in polar auxin transport (e.g., PIN1) and brassinosteroid signaling (e.g., BIN2). Putative novel regeneration determinants regulated by TCSA include RD2, AT1G52780, PVA11, and AVT1C, while NAIP2, OPS, ARR1, QKY, and aquaporins exhibit differential phospholevels on control SIM. LC-MS/MS data are available <i>via</i> ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD030754.

### Keywords
Regeneration, Phosphoproteomics, Cytokinin signalling, Kinase inhibitors, Organogenesis

### Affiliations
Ive De Smet - Group leader Functional Phosphoproteomics VIB-UGent Center for Plant Systems Biology Ghent University Technologiepark-Zwijnaarde 71 - 9052 Ghent - Belgium Tel. +32(0)9 331 39 30 www.psb.ugent.be
PSB-VIB

### Submitter
Xiangyu Xu

### Lab Head
Dr Ive De Smet
Ive De Smet - Group leader Functional Phosphoproteomics VIB-UGent Center for Plant Systems Biology Ghent University Technologiepark-Zwijnaarde 71 - 9052 Ghent - Belgium Tel. +32(0)9 331 39 30 www.psb.ugent.be


