### Accession
PXD024160

### Title
Nse5/6 inhibits the Smc5/6 ATPase and modulates DNA substrate binding

### Description
Eukaryotic cells employ three SMC complexes to control DNA folding and topology. The Smc5/6 complex plays roles in DNA repair and in preventing the accumulation of deleterious DNA junctions. To elucidate how specific features of Smc5/6 govern these functions, we reconstituted the yeast holo-complex. We found that the Nse5/6 sub-complex strongly inhibited the Smc5/6 ATPase by preventing productive ATP binding. This inhibition was relieved by plasmid DNA binding but not by short linear DNA, while opposing effects were observed without Nse5/6. We uncovered two binding sites for Nse5/6 on Smc5/6, based on an Nse5/6 crystal structure and cross-linking mass spectrometry data. One binding site is located at the Smc5/6 arms and one at the heads, the latter likely exerting inhibitory effects on ATP hydrolysis. Cysteine cross-linking demonstrated that the interaction with Nse5/6 anchored the ATPase domains in a non-productive state, which was destabilized by ATP and DNA. Under similar conditions, the Nse4/3/1 module detached from the ATPase. Altogether, we show how DNA substrate selection is modulated by direct inhibition of the Smc5/6 ATPase by Nse5/6.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation  To denature the cross-linked proteins (125 µg in each sample), 4 M Urea and 50 mM Tris was added and the samples were ultrasonicated two times for 2 minutes with 0.5-second pulses (50% intensity) and 0.2-second pauses (Sonopuls, Bandelin). Next, 1mM MgCl2 and 1% benzonase was added and the mixture was incubated for 1 h at 37 °C. For reduction and alkylation of the proteins, 40 mM 2-cloroacetamide (CAA, Sigma-Aldrich) and 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP; Thermo Fisher Scientific), and 100 mM Tris at pH 8.0 was added.  After incubation for 20 min at 37 °C, the samples were diluted 1:2 with MS grade water (VWR). Proteins were digested overnight at 37 °C by addition of 3 µg trypsin (Promega) and 2 µg LysC (Promega). After digestion, the solution was acidified with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA; Merck) to a final concentration of 1% and a pH of < 2. The peptide mixtures were purified via Sep-Pak C18 1cc vacuum cartridges (Waters) and the elution finally vacuum dried. Cross-linked peptides were enriched with Fe(III)-NTA cartridges (Agilent Technologies; Santa Clara, Ca) using the AssayMAP Bravo Platform (Agilent Technologies; Santa Clara, Ca) in an automated fashion (Post et al., 2017; Steigenberger et al., 2019). Cartridges were primed at a flow rate of 100 μL/min with 250 μL of priming buffer (0.1% TFA, 99.9% ACN) and equilibrated at a flow-rate of 50 μL/min with 250 μL of loading buffer (0.1% TFA, 80% ACN). The flow-through was collected into a separate plate. Dried samples were dissolved in 200 μL of loading buffer and loaded at a flow-rate of 5 μL/min onto the cartridge. Cartridges were washed with 250 μL of loading buffer at a flow-rate of 20 μL/min and cross-linked peptides were eluted with 35 μL of 10% ammonia directly into 35 μL of 10% formic acid. Samples were dried down and stored at -20 °C prior to further use. Before to LC–MS/MS analysis, the samples were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid.  LC-MS/MS data acquisition Enriched peptides were loaded onto a 30-cm analytical column (inner diameter: 75 microns; packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9-micron beads, Dr. Maisch GmbH) by the Thermo Easy-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with buffer A (0.1% (v/v) Formic acid) at 400 nl/min. The analytical column was heated to 60 °C. Using the nanoelectrospray interface, eluting peptides were sprayed into the benchtop Orbitrap Q Exactive HF (Thermo Fisher Scientific) (Hosp et al., 2015; Scheltema et al., 2014). As gradient, the following steps were programmed with increasing addition of buffer B (80% Acetonitrile, 0.1% Formic acid): linear increase from 8 to 30% over 60 minutes, followed by a linear increase to 60% over 5 minutes, a linear increase to 95% over the next 5 minutes, and finally maintenance at 95% for another 5 minutes. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode with survey scans from m/z 300 to 1650 Th (resolution of 60k at m/z = 200 Th), and up to 15 of the most abundant precursors were selected and fragmented using stepped Higher-energy C-trap Dissociation (HCD with a normalized collision energy of value of 19, 27, 35) (Olsen et al., 2007). The MS2 spectra were recorded with dynamic m/z range (resolution of 30k at m/z = 200 Th). AGC target for MS1 and MS2 scans were set to 3E6 and 1E5 respectively within a maximum injection time of 100 and 60 ms for the MS1 and MS2 scans respectively. Charge state 2 was excluded from fragmentation to enrich the fragmentation scans for cross-linked peptide precursors.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw data were processed using Proteome Discoverer (version 2.5.0.400) with the XlinkX/PD nodes integrated (Klykov et al., 2018). To identify the cross-linked peptide pairs, a database search was performed against a FASTA containing the sequences of the proteins under investigation. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification and methionine oxidation and protein N-term acetylation were set as dynamic modifications. Trypsin/P was specified as protease and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Furthermore, identifications were only accepted with a minimal score of 40 and a minimal delta score of 4. Otherwise, standard settings were applied. Filtering at 1% false discovery rate (FDR) at peptide level was applied through the XlinkX Validator node with setting simple.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Atpase, Loop extrusion, Genome maintenance, Xl-ms, Smc, Smc6, Smc5, Cohesin, Condensin, Chromosome segregation

### Affiliations
MPI of Biochemistry
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands  Netherlands Proteomics Centre, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

### Submitter
Barbara Steigenberger

### Lab Head
Dr R. A. Scheltema
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands  Netherlands Proteomics Centre, Utrecht, The Netherlands.


