### Accession
PXD024673

### Title
Analysis of mouse liver secretome and proteome during nonalcoholic steatohepatitis

### Description
Non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) and type 2 diabetes are closely linked, yet the pathophysiological mechanisms underpinning this bidirectional relationship remain unresolved. Using proteomic approaches, we interrogated hepatocyte protein secretion in two models of murine NASH to reveal striking hepatokine remodelling that is associated with insulin resistance and maladaptive lipid metabolism.

### Sample Protocol
For assessment of hepatocyte-secreted factors, conditioned media was concentrated using Amicon Ultra-4 Centrifugal Filters at 4000g for 45 min, the concentrated sample washed in 2mL 50mM Tris, pH 8.0 + 150mM NaCl at 4000g for 45 min, transferred to Eppendorf tubes and the protein content determined. Disulphide bonds were reduced through addition of 10mM TCEP (Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine) at 65⁰C for 20min. The sample was mixed with 6.6x volume of 5M Urea, added to Microcon-30kDa Centrifugal Filter (Sigma Aldrich) and spun at 14,000g and 10⁰C for 15min. This was followed by addition of 200µl Urea, centrifugation at 14,000g and 10⁰C for 15min, and discarding of flow-through. Chloroacetamide was added to a final concentration of 10mM for the spin filters to alkylate proteins, samples incubated for 20min in the dark, and spun again. Proteins were washed 3x with 100µL urea and 3x with 100µL 50mM ammonia bicarbonate (pH 8.5), each wash step followed by centrifugation at 14,000g and 10⁰C for 15min, and discarding of flow-through. After the last wash step, a digestion solution was added to the spin filter (1µg trypsin/100µg protein in 75µL of 50mM ammonia bicarbonate) and samples incubated at 37⁰C overnight. The following day peptides were eluted by addition of 2x 40µL of 50mM ammonia bicarbonate, and 1x 0.5M NaCl, each step followed by centrifugation at 14,000g and 10⁰C for 15min. Elute peptide was acidified with formic acid to final pH 3.0, and peptides purified with Millipore® C18 Ziptips (Sigma Aldrich). This purification step involved activation of Ziptips with methanol, washing with 0.1% formic acid, binding of peptides to Ziptips, a second wash step in 0.1% formic acid, and final elution into 200µL 50% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid. Samples were dried in a SpeedVac concentrator (Eppendorf Concentrator Plus), resuspended in 20µL 0.1% formic acid, sonicated for 10 min at room temperature, centrifuged at 16,000g for 10min, and transferred into HPLC vials for analysis. For assessment of the liver and lipid raft proteome, samples were homogenized in 50mM Tris, pH 8.0 + 150mM NaCl, followed by assessment of protein content and reduction of disulphide bonds as above. All subsequent steps were as above for conditioned media processing.

### Data Protocol
All samples/peptides were analysed by LC-MS/MS using a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) coupled online to a RSLC nano HPLC (Ultimate 3000, UHPLC ThermoFisher Scientific). Samples were loaded onto a 100 µm, 2 cm nanoviper Pepmap100 trap column, eluted and separated on a RSLC nano column 75 µm x 50 cm, Pepmap100 C18 analytical column (ThermoFisher Scientific). The eluent was nebulised and ionised using a nano electrospray source (ThermoFisher Scientific) with a distal coated fused silica emitter (New Objective). The capillary voltage was set at 1.7 kV. The Q Exactive mass spectrometer was operated in the data dependent acquisition mode to automatically switch between full MS scans and subsequent MS/MS acquisitions. Survey full scan MS spectra (m/z 375–1575) were acquired in the Orbitrap with 70,000 resolution (at m/z 200) after accumulation of ions to a 3 x 106 target value with a maximum injection time of 54 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set to 15 s. The 12 most intense multiply charged ions (z ≥ 2) were sequentially isolated and fragmented in the collision cell by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with a fixed injection time of 54 ms, 17,500 resolution and automatic gain control (AGC) target of 2 x 105. All generated files were analysed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.30) [81] and its implemented Andromeda search engine to obtain protein identifications as well as their label-free quantitation (LFQ) intensities. Database searching was performed with the following parameters: cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification; up to 2 missed cleavages permitted; mass tolerance of 20 ppm; 1% protein false discovery rate (FDR) for protein and peptide identification; and minimum 2 peptides for pair-wise comparison in each protein for label-free quantitation. The MaxQuant result output was further processed with Perseus (Version 1.5.0.40) [82], a module from the MaxQuant suite. After removing reversed and known contaminant proteins, the LFQ values were log2 transformed and the reproducibility across the biological replicates was evaluated by a Pearson’s correlation analysis. The replicates were grouped accordingly, and all proteins were removed that had less than two “valid value” in each group. The missing values were replaced by imputation and two sample t-test (FDR < 5%) were performed to obtain a list of significantly regulated proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hepatokines, Liver, Secretome, Nash

### Affiliations
The University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Benjamin Parker

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin Parker
The University of Melbourne


