### Accession
PXD030336

### Title
The nitrobenzoxadiazole derivative NBDHEX behaves as Plasmodium falciparum gametocyte selective inhibitor with malaria parasite transmission blocking activity

### Description
This work describes the activity of 6-((7-nitrobenzo[c][1,2,5]oxadiazol-4-yl)thio)hexan-1-ol (NBDHEX) and of its newly identified carboxylic acid metabolite on human malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum. NBDHEX has been previously identified as a potent cytotoxic agent against murine and human cancer cells as well as towards the protozoan parasite Giardia duodenalis. We show here that NBDHEX is active in vitro against all blood stages of P. falciparum, with the rare feature of killing the parasite stages transmissible to mosquito, the immature and the mature gametocytes, with a 4-fold higher activity than that on the pathogenic asexual stages. This activity importantly translates into blocking parasite transmission through the Anopheles vector in mosquito experimental infections. A mass spectrometry analysis identified covalent NBDHEX modifications in specific cysteine residues of five gametocyte proteins, possibly associated to its antiparasitic effect. The carboxylic acid metabolite of NBDHEX retains the gametocyte preferential inhibitory activity of the parent compound, making this novel P. falciparum transmission blocking chemotype at least as a new tool to uncover biological processes targetable by gametocyte selective drugs. Both NBDHEX and its carboxylic acid metabolite show very limited in vitro cytotoxicity on VERO cells. This result and previous evidence that NBDHEX shows an excellent in vivo safety profile in mice and is orally active against human cancer xenografts make these molecules potential starting points to develop new P. falciparum transmission blocking agents, enriching the repertoire of drugs needed to eliminate malaria.

### Sample Protocol
Approximatively 1x107 purified stage III-IV gametocyte-infected RBC (iRBC) were incubated at 37°C with DMSO or with 100 µM of either NBDHEX and its nitro reduced derivative for 2h. As control, 1x107 uninfected RBC were treated in parallel. Following incubation, RBC or iRBC were collected and washed twice with PBS, pelleted and frozen at -80°C until use. For protein extraction, RBC or iRBC pellets were resuspended in 50µl of PBS/Triton-X100 1% supplemented with protease/phosphatese inhibitors (Halt™ Protease and Phosphatase Inhibitor Single-Use Cocktai, ThermoFisher Scientific) to approximately 2x105 cells/µl, lysed by incubation on ice for 1h and supernatant collected following centrifugation at 13000 rpm for 15 min at 4°C. The insoluble pellets were resuspended in 30 µl Laemlie buffer (BioRad) and solubilized by incubation at 75°C for 10 min. Proteins from the supernantants and insoluble pellets were separated on a NuPAGE 4-12% (Novex, Invitrogen) in MOPS buffer. Gel was stained with Colloidal Blue Staining kit (Invitrogen) and gel slices containing protein bands in the range 250-30 KDa were excised and digested with trypsin (Promega Corporation, France). Nanoflow reversed-phase liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (RP-LC-MS/MS) analyses of peptide mixtures were performed on three independent biological replicates using an HPLC Ultimate 3000 (DIONEX, Sunnyvale, CA U.S.A) coupled with a linear ion trap (LTQ, Thermo Electron, San Jose, CA) mass spectrometer equipped with a nano source. Briefly, peptides were desalted in a trap column and separated in a 10cm long fused silica capillary (Silica Tips FS 360-75-8, New Objective) slurry packed in house with 5 μm, 200 Å pore size C18 resin (Michrom BioResources, Auburn, CA, USA). Mass spectra were acquired in positive mode (HV potential 1.7-1.8 kV) and MS/MS spectra were acquired in data dependent mode with the top 5 most intense precursor ions selected for the fragmentation in each cycle time using 35% normalized collision ion energy.

### Data Protocol
Acquired data were analysed matching the tandem mass spectra against the P. falciparum 3D7A protein database (PlasmoDB version 31) using the software Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Electron). Precursor and fragment ions were searched with 2 and 0.8 Da tolerance, respectively. The following match parameters were taken into account: fully tryptic cleavage constraints (two miss-cleavage allowed); static cysteine carbamidomethylation, and variable methionine oxidation.  Putative adducts on cysteine or lysine residues with NBDHEX were searched by taking into account NBDHEX as intact, partially, or completely nitro-reduced as well as addition of fragmented or oxidized NBDHEX. Only proteins identified with at least 2 peptides were taken into account. False discovery rate was set to 1% and determined by searching the reverse database using Percolator node, based on q values. All the spectra relative to peptides modified by NBDHEX were also manually reviewed.

### Publication Abstract
This work describes the activity of 6-((7-nitrobenzo[<i>c</i>][1,2,5]oxadiazol-4-yl)thio)hexan-1-ol (NBDHEX) and of its newly identified carboxylic acid metabolite on the human malaria parasite <i>Plasmodium falciparum</i>. NBDHEX has been previously identified as a potent cytotoxic agent against murine and human cancer cells as well as towards the protozoan parasite <i>Giardia duodenalis</i>. We show here that NBDHEX is active in vitro against all blood stages of <i>P. falciparum</i>, with the rare feature of killing the parasite stages transmissible to mosquitoes, the gametocytes, with a 4-fold higher potency than that on the pathogenic asexual stages. This activity importantly translates into blocking parasite transmission through the <i>Anopheles</i> vector in mosquito experimental infections. A mass spectrometry analysis identified covalent NBDHEX modifications in specific cysteine residues of five gametocyte proteins, possibly associated with its antiparasitic effect. The carboxylic acid metabolite of NBDHEX retains the gametocyte preferential inhibitory activity of the parent compound, making this novel <i>P. falciparum</i> transmission-blocking chemotype at least as a new tool to uncover biological processes targetable by gametocyte selective drugs. Both NBDHEX and its carboxylic acid metabolite show very limited in vitro cytotoxicity on VERO cells. This result and previous evidence that NBDHEX shows an excellent in vivo safety profile in mice and is orally active against human cancer xenografts make these molecules potential starting points to develop new <i>P. falciparum</i> transmission-blocking agents, enriching the repertoire of drugs needed to eliminate malaria.

### Keywords
Malaria; plasmodium falciparum transmission; nbdhex; mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Istituto Superiore di Sanità
Italian NationalInstitute of Health

### Submitter
Marialuisa Casella

### Lab Head
Dr Marialuisa Casella
Italian NationalInstitute of Health


