### Accession
PXD044767

### Title
How Myosin VI Traps its Off-State, is Activated and Dimerizes

### Description
Myosin VI (Myo6) is the only minus-end directed nanomotor on actin, allowing it to uniquely contribute to numerous cellular functions. As for other nanomotors, proper functioning of Myo6 relies on precise spatio-temporal control of motor activity via a poorly defined off-state and interactions with partners. Our structural, functional, and cellular studies reveal key features of myosin regulation and indicate that not all partners can activate Myo6. TOM1 and Dab2 cannot bind the off-state while, GIPC1 binds Myo6, releases its auto-inhibition and triggers proximal dimerization. Myo6 partners thus differentially recruit Myo6. We solved a crystal structure of the proximal dimerization domain, and show that its disruption compromises endocytosis in HeLa cells, emphasizing the importance of Myo6 dimerization. Finally, we show that the L926Q deafness mutation disrupts Myo6 auto-inhibition and indirectly impairs proximal dimerization. Our study thus demonstrates the importance of partners in the control of Myo6 auto-inhibition, localization, and activation.

### Sample Protocol
Protein cross linking reactions were carried out at room temperature for 60 minutes at a 1:300 protein to DSSO ratio and quenched with the addition of Tris buffer to a final concentration of 50 mM. The quenched solution was reduced with 5 mM DTT and alkylated with 20 mM idoacetamide. SP3 protocol as described in [1][2] was used to clean-up and buffer exchange the reduced and alkylated protein, shortly; proteins are washed with ethanol using magnetic beads for protein capture and binding. The proteins were resuspended in 100 mM NH4HCO3 and were digested with trypsin (Promega, UK) at an enzyme-to-substrate ratio of 1:20, and protease max 0.1% (Promega, UK). Digestion was carried out overnight at 37 °C. Clean-up of peptide digests was carried out with HyperSep SpinTip P-20 (ThermoScientific, USA) C18 columns, using 80% Acetonitrile as the elution solvent. Peptides were then evaporated to dryness via Speed Vac. Dried peptides were suspended in 3% Acetonitrile and 0.1 % formic acid and analysed by nano-scale capillary LC-MS/MS using a Ultimate U3000 HPLC (ThermoScientific, USA) to deliver a flow of approximately 250 nl/min. Peptides were trapped on a C18 Acclaim PepMap100 5 μm, 100 μm x 20 mm nanoViper (ThermoScientific, USA) before separation on PepMap RSLC C18, 2 μm, 100 A, 75 μm x 50 cm EasySpray column (ThermoScientific, USA). Peptides were eluted on a 90 minute gradient with acetonitrile an interfaced via an EasySpray ionisation source to a quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q-Exactive HFX, ThermoScientific, USA). MS data were acquired in data dependent mode with a Top-25 method, high resolution scans full mass scans were carried out (R = 120,000, m/z 350 – 1750) followed by higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) with stepped collision energy range 21, 27, 33 % normalised collision energy. The tandem mass spectra were recorded (R=30,000, isolation window m/z 1.6, dynamic exclusion 50 s).

### Data Protocol
Cross linking data analysis: Xcalibur raw files were converted to MGF files using ProteoWizard[3] and cross links were analysed by MeroX[4]. Searches were performed against a database containing known proteins within the complex to minimise analysis time with a decoy data base based on peptide sequence shuffling/reversing. Search conditions used 3 maximum missed cleavages with a minimum peptide length of 5, cross linking targeted residues were K, S, T, and Y, cross linking modification masses were 54.01056 Da and 85.98264 Da. Variable modifications were carbmidomethylation of cysteine (57.02146 Da) and Methionine oxidation (15.99491 Da). False discovery rate was set to 1 %, and assigned cross linked spectra were manually inspected.

### Publication Abstract
Myosin VI (Myo6) is the only minus-end directed nanomotor on actin, allowing it to uniquely contribute to numerous cellular functions. As for other nanomotors, the proper functioning of Myo6 relies on precise spatiotemporal control of motor activity via a poorly defined off-state and interactions with partners. Our structural, functional, and cellular studies reveal key features of myosin regulation and indicate that not all partners can activate Myo6. TOM1 and Dab2 cannot bind the off-state, while GIPC1 binds Myo6, releases its auto-inhibition and triggers proximal dimerization. Myo6 partners thus differentially recruit Myo6. We solved a crystal structure of the proximal dimerization domain, and show that its disruption compromises endocytosis in HeLa cells, emphasizing the importance of Myo6 dimerization. Finally, we show that the L926Q deafness mutation disrupts Myo6 auto-inhibition and indirectly impairs proximal dimerization. Our study thus demonstrates the importance of partners in the control of Myo6 auto-inhibition, localization, and activation.

### Keywords
Myosin vi, Human, Cross linking mass spectromety, Clms

### Affiliations
MRC-LMB
Structural Motility, UMR 144 CNRS/Curie Institute, PSL Research University, 26 rue d’Ulm, 75258 Paris cedex 05, France

### Submitter
Tomos Morgan

### Lab Head
Dr Anne Houdusse
Structural Motility, UMR 144 CNRS/Curie Institute, PSL Research University, 26 rue d’Ulm, 75258 Paris cedex 05, France


