### Accession
PXD004267

### Title
Identification of poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation targets reveals a role of DAWDLE in Arabidopsis immunity

### Description
Our stardy uncovers many previously unknown PARylation targets and points to the distinct functions of small RNA biogenesis respectively

### Sample Protocol
identify PArylation substrates by a high density Arabidopsis protein microarray coupled with in vitro PAPylation assay and identified 54 proteins as putative substrated of PARP2.

### Data Protocol
Our study uncivers many previously unknow PARylation targets and points to the distinct functions of small RNA biogenesis.

### Publication Abstract
Protein poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation (PARylation) primarily catalyzed by poly(ADP-ribose) polymerases (PARPs) plays a crucial role in controlling various cellular responses. However, PARylation targets and their functions remain largely elusive. Here, we deployed an Arabidopsis protein microarray coupled with in&#xa0;vitro PARylation assays to globally identify PARylation targets in plants. Consistent with the essential role of PARylation in plant immunity, the forkhead-associated (FHA) domain protein DAWDLE (DDL), one of PARP2 targets, positively regulates plant defense to both adapted and non-adapted pathogens. Arabidopsis PARP2 interacts with and PARylates DDL, which was enhanced upon treatment of bacterial flagellin. Mass spectrometry and mutagenesis analysis identified multiple PARylation sites of DDL by PARP2. Genetic complementation assays indicate that DDL PARylation is required for its function in plant immunity. In contrast, DDL PARylation appears to be dispensable for its previously reported function in plant development partially mediated by the regulation of microRNA biogenesis. Our study uncovers many previously unknown PARylation targets and points to the distinct functions of DDL in plant immunity and development mediated by protein PARylation and small RNA biogenesis, respectively.

### Keywords
Poly(adp-ribosyl)ation, Dawdle, Arabdopsis immunity

### Affiliations
UF
university of florida

### Submitter
Ning Zhu

### Lab Head
Dr Ning Zhu
university of florida


