### Accession
PXD015155

### Title
GABARAP-L2 WT, S87/88D or A interactomes

### Description
TBK1 phosphorylates GABARAP-L2 S87/88. In order to test if this phosphomimetic mutation in GABARAP-L2 changes its binding to other proteins a mass spectrometry based interactome study was performed.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293T cells were transfected with control plasmid, HA-GABARAP-L2 WT, HA-GABARAP-L2 S87/88A or HA-GABARAP-L2 S87/88D plasmids and immunoprecipitated. Bound proteins were eluted in NuPAGE LDS Sample Buffer (Life Technologies) supplemented with 1 mM DTT, boiled at 70°C for 10 minutes, alkylated and loaded onto 4-20% gradient SDS-PAGE gels. Proteins were stained using InstantBlue and digested in-gel with trypsin. Peptides were desalted on reversed phase C18 StageTips and analyzed on an Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher).

### Data Protocol
The raw data was analyzed using MaxQuant 1.6.5.0 with standard settings and activated LFQ quantification. The database used to identify the peptides was the human reference protein database (uniprot downloaded december 2017) and the FDR was set to 1% on protein, PSM and site decoy level. Statistical analysis was done with Perseus 1.6.5.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Gabarap-l2

### Affiliations
IBC2, Goethe University Frankfurt
Institute of Biochemistry 2, Goethe University Frankfurt, Germany

### Submitter
Lina Herhaus

### Lab Head
Dr Ivan Dikic
Institute of Biochemistry 2, Goethe University Frankfurt, Germany


