### Accession
PXD027425

### Title
Data-independent acquisition mass spectrometry for site-specific glycoproteomics characterization of SARS-CoV-2 spike protein

### Description
The spike protein of SARS-CoV-2, the virus responsible for the global pandemic of COVID-19, is an abundant, heavily glycosylated surface protein that plays a key role in receptor binding and host cell fusion, and is the focus of all current vaccine development efforts. Variants of concern are now circulating worldwide that exhibit mutations in the spike protein. Protein sequence and glycosylation variations of the spike may affect viral fitness, antigenicity, and immune evasion. Global surveillance of the virus currently involves genome sequencing, but tracking emerging variants should include quantitative measurement of changes in site-specific glycosylation as well. In this work, we used data-dependent acquisition (DDA) and data-independent acquisition (DIA) mass spectrometry to quantitatively characterize the five N-linked glycosylation sites of the glycoprotein standard alpha-1-acid glycoprotein (AGP), as well as the 22 sites of SARS-CoV-2 spike protein. We found that DIA compared favorably to DDA in sensitivity, resulting in more assignments of low abundance glycopeptides. However, the reproducibility across replicates of DIA-identified glycopeptides was lower than that of DDA, possibly due to the difficulty of reliably assigning low abundance glycopeptides confidently. The differences in the data acquired between the two methods suggest that DIA out-performs DDA in terms of glycoprotein coverage but that overall performance is a balance of sensitivity, selectivity, and statistical confidence in glycoproteomics. We assert that these analytical and bioinformatics methods for assigning and quantifying glycoforms would benefit the process of tracking viral variants as well as for vaccine development.

### Sample Protocol
Recombinant spike protein from SARS-CoV-2 (BetaCoV/Wuhan/IVDC-HB-05/2019), purified from 293 cell culture, with the furin cleavage site removed, was purchased from Immune Technology Corp. (prod. # IT-002-032p). Alpha-1-acid glycoprotein (AGP), purified from human serum (Sigma-Aldrich; prod. # G9885), was prepared in parallel with spike and used as a control. Glycoprotein samples were denatured and reduced with 100 mm ammonium bicarbonate (J.T. Baker), 2-2-2 trifluoroethanol (TFE) (Sigma-Aldrich), and 200 mm dithiothreitol (DTT) (Sigma-Aldrich), for 1 h at 65 °C. We added 200 mm iodoacetamide (Bio-Rad), incubating for 1 h at room temperature in the dark to alkylate the cysteine residues. After alkylation, DTT was added to quench the iodoacetamide, 1 h at room temperature in the dark. The amount of TFE in each tube was diluted to 5% by volume adding a 3:1 solution of water/100 mm ammonium bicarbonate. Three equal aliquots of the spike protein solution were digested each with alpha-lytic protease (aLP) (New England Biolabs), sequencing-grade chymotrypsin, trypsin (Promega) at an enzyme/substrate ratio of 1:20. Two aliquots of AGP were digested with chymotrypsin and trypsin. Digestion solutions were incubated overnight at 37 °C, after which the enzymes were inactivated by heating the samples for 10 min at 95 °C.  An aliquot from each spike protein digestion was reserved for deglycosylation, and the remainders were enriched using iSPE-HILIC solid-phase extraction columns (HILICON), as follows. (For AGP, the entirety of the tryptic and chymotryptic digestions were HILIC-enriched, and the aliquots meant for deglycosylation were reserved after subsequent to the following HILIC enrichment steps.) Samples were evaporated to dryness, and the HILIC columns were conditioned with water, then acetonitrile, and equilibrated with 80% acetonitrile/1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Immediately before loading onto HILIC SPE columns, samples were resuspended in loading buffer (80% acetonitrile/1% TFA). Columns were washed in sample loading buffer, and then eluted with 1% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid. Eluates were evaporated to dryness, and then cleaned using PepClean C18 spin columns (Pierce). These enriched glycopeptide samples were used for glycoproteomics LC-MS/MS analysis. The reserved aliquots (unenriched for spike protein and enriched for AGP) were incubated with 500 units PNGase F (New England Biolabs) for every 20 μg of glycoprotein overnight at 37 °C to remove N-glycans. Deglycosylated samples were cleaned using PepClean C18 spin columns; the eluate containing the deglycosylated peptides were used for proteomics LC-MS/MS analysis.  All acquisitions were performed on a Q Exactive HF (Thermo-Fisher) mass spectrometer in positive mode, with a nanoAcquity UPLC system, nanoAcquity NPLC Symmetry C18 trap column and ACQUITY UPLC Peptide BEH C18 analytical column (Waters), and a Triversa Nanomate source (Advion), the column at 37 °C. Mobile phase A was 1% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid, and mobile phase B was 99% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid. Peptides were trapped for 4 min at 4 μL/min in A, and then separated with the gradient 0–3 min: 2–5% B, 3–93 min: 5–40% B, 93–98 min: 40% B, 98–100 min: 40–98% B, 100–105 min: 98% B, 105–106 min: 98–2% B, and 106–120 min: 2% B, at flow rate 0.5 μL/min. We ran 3 DDA and 3 DIA replicates for all AGP samples. We ran 3 DDA replicates and 4 DIA replicates for all spike samples. We ran 2 replicates for all deglycosylated peptide samples. Replicates of all samples and acquisition methods were queued in randomized order to minimize any batch effect bias. DDA was performed as follows. MS1 spectra were acquired at 60,000 resolution at m/z 400, scan range m/z 350-1800, 1 microscan per spectrum, AGC target of 3e6 (1e6 for deglycosylated peptides), and maximum injection time 64  ms. Tandem mass spectra were acquired at 30,000 resolution at m/z 400, 2 microscans per spectrum, AGC target 2e5 (1e6 for deglycosylated peptides), maximum injection time 64 ms, isolation window 2.0 m/z, isolation offset 0.4 m/z, scan range m/z 200-2000, fixed first mass of m/z 110, and NCE 35 (NCE 27 for deglycosylated peptides)  Intensity threshold was 3.1e5, unassigned charge states and charge states 1 were excluded, and dynamic exclusion was 20 s, The 20 most abundant precursor ions per scan were fragmented. Profile data were recorded for both MS1 and MS2 scans. DIA was performed as follows. MS1 spectra were acquired at 30,000 resolution at m/z 400, scan range m/z 350-1800, 1 microscan per spectrum, AGC target of 3e6, and maximum injection time 32 ms. For MS2 acquisition, the range of m/z 800-1600 was divided into 50 non-overlapping windows, each with an isolation width of m/z 16. Resolution was 30,000 at m/z 400, and we acquired 2 microscans per spectrum, AGC target 1e6, maximum injection time 32 ms, and NCE 35. Profile and centroid data were recorded for MS1 and MS2 scans, respectively.

### Data Protocol
All raw files were first converted to mzML format [29] using MSConvert [30] from ProteoWizard version 3.0.11252 with no additional filters. Proteomics data from deglycosylated samples were processed using the “Peaks PTM Search” function of the Peaks Studio 8.5 software (Bioinformatics Solutions, Waterloo, ON) [31]. AGP was searched against the entire Uniprot Swiss-Prot [32] database (release 2017_04) with a valid protein count of  555,085; the species taxonomy was set to Homo sapiens. The database for SARS-CoV-2 spike protein was created by concatenating the spike protein sequence [33] (Fig. S1) with the human proteome (UP000005640 9606; release 2017_04). This database had a valid protein count of 21,043 entries. We searched technical replicates together. For tryptic and chymotryptic digestions, trypsin or chymotrypsin was specified from the available Peaks Studio enzyme menu as the proteolytic enzyme. For the aLP digestion, cleavage sites after Thr, Ala, Ser, and Val were specified. For all digestions, we allowed a maximum of 3 missed cleavages and one nonspecific cleavage. Cysteine carbamidomethylation and methionine oxidation were specified as fixed and variable modifications, respectively. The precursor ion (MS1) mass error tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment ion (MS/MS) error tolerance to 0.02 Da. We required a minimum of two unique peptides for protein identification. Default parmaeters were used for setting the threshold score for accepting individual spectra. The target-decoy false discovery threshold was set at 1% at the peptide level. Peaks Studio search results were exported in mzIdentML [34] format. Both DDA and DIA raw files for all intact HILIC-enriched glycopeptides were processed using the GlycReSoft search engine, a complete open-source software package that assigns glycopeptides from tandem mass spectra [21].  Mixture spectrum splitting. GlycReSoft preprocessing was accomplished in the following way for DIA files. Following deisotoping and charge state deconvolution, we limited MS2 spectra with co-isolating precursor ions based on their retention time patterns, using methodology described by DIA-Umpire [35]. Precursors with an apex retention time more than 0.6 min away from the product ion were excluded. Remaining precursors were correlated with the product ions using a Pearson correlation, and up to the top 20 co-isolating precursors were retained. For each precursor matching these criteria, we created a duplicate MS2 spectrum containing information for a single precursor, while retaining all of the product ion information. Default parameters were used for preprocessing for the DDA files.  Glycopeptide search space. The glycopeptide search space was built from the proteomics mzIdentML file, exported from the Peaks Studio search results, and a glycan search space presented in Supplemental File 1, which was generated by glypy [36] and consists of biosynthetically feasible glycan compositions and up to 1 sulfation, The same glycan hypothesis was used for both AGP and spike protein samples. Up to 1 ammonium adduct was considered. When there were two different glycosylation sites on the same peptide, GlycReSoft used a parsimony filter to weight and report the score towards the localization with the fewest missing ions. Scoring. Scoring was accomplished using default GlycReSoft parameters, with false discovery rate threshold of 0.05 for positive detection. We used a peptide-centric scoring method to evaluate glycopeptide-spectrum-matches, building on our previous coverage-weighted binomial model [37]. We masked all peaks matching theoretical peptide+Y ions, not allowing them to participate in scoring. Due to the relatively high single collision energy used in these experiments and lack of calibration of collision energy for specific precursor m/z and charge state, we did not observe peptide+Y ions consistently for all glycopeptides, making their inclusion in the scoring function problematic. In cases where more than one precursor ion existed in a precursor isolation window, GlycReSoft attributed the product ions to each of the co-isolated precursors separately.

### Publication Abstract
The spike protein of SARS-CoV-2, the virus responsible for the global pandemic of COVID-19, is an abundant, heavily glycosylated surface protein that plays a key role in receptor binding and host cell fusion, and is the focus of all current vaccine development efforts. Variants of concern are now circulating worldwide that exhibit mutations in the spike protein. Protein sequence and glycosylation variations of the spike may affect viral fitness, antigenicity, and immune evasion. Global surveillance of the virus currently involves genome sequencing, but tracking emerging variants should include quantitative measurement of changes in site-specific glycosylation as well. In this work, we used data-dependent acquisition (DDA) and data-independent acquisition (DIA) mass spectrometry to quantitatively characterize the five N-linked glycosylation sites of the glycoprotein standard alpha-1-acid glycoprotein (AGP), as well as the 22 sites of the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein. We found that DIA compared favorably to DDA in sensitivity, resulting in more assignments of low-abundance glycopeptides. However, the reproducibility across replicates of DIA-identified glycopeptides was lower than that of DDA, possibly due to the difficulty of reliably assigning low-abundance glycopeptides confidently. The differences in the data acquired between the two methods suggest that DIA outperforms DDA in terms of glycoprotein coverage but that overall performance is a balance of sensitivity, selectivity, and statistical confidence in glycoproteomics. We assert that these analytical and bioinformatics methods for assigning and quantifying glycoforms would benefit the process of tracking viral variants as well as for vaccine development.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Glycoproteomics, Spike protein, Glycosylation, Dia, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Boston University School of Medicine
Boston University Medical Campus 670 Albany St., Rm. 509 Boston, MA 02118 USA

### Submitter
Deborah Chang

### Lab Head
Dr Joseph Zaia
Boston University Medical Campus 670 Albany St., Rm. 509 Boston, MA 02118 USA


