### Accession
PXD035041

### Title
A molecular study of Italian ryegrass grown on Martian regolith simulant

### Description
The International Space Exploration Coordination Group has set a roadmap whose long-range strategy envisions the first human settlements on Mars by 2040. In this scenario, finding ways to exploit the local resources for the provision of food, construction materials, propellants, pharmaceuticals is an urgent need. Plants are important resources for deep space manned missions because they produce phytochemicals of pharmaceutical relevance, are sources of food and perform photosynthesis, thus providing oxygen which is crucial in bioregenerative life support systems (BLSS). Growth analysis and plant biomass yield have been previously evaluated on Martian regolith simulants, but molecular studies, such as gene expression analysis and protein profiling are still missing. The present work aims at filling this gap by providing molecular data on a representative member of the Poaceae, Lolium multiflorum Lam., grown on normal soil and Martian regolith simulant (MMS-1). The molecular data were complemented with optical microscopy of root/leaf tissues and soil physico-chemical analyses.

### Sample Protocol
Seeds of L. multiflorum were germinated for one week on four muslin layers imbibed. Two sets of nine tubes were filled to the top with normal soil and Martian regolith simulant (MMS-1), respectively. After 1 week, two plantlets were transferred to each tube and grown in a climatic chamber (Fitotron, Weiss Technik, Reiskirchen, Germany) under controlled conditions for a total of 14 days. Each sample type consisted of three biological replicates composed of 3 plants each. The leaf and root tissues were ground and approximately fifty mg of ground leaf and root tissues were taken for each sample and dissolved in 100 µl of Lyse buffer provided in the PreOmics iST Kit (PreOmics GmbH; Martinsried, Germany). The samples were incubated at 70 °C for 10 min and continuously shaken at 1000 rpm. Then the samples were transferred into a BeatBox tissue homogenizer (PreOmics) to favour the complete lysis of the material. The roots and leaves were homogenized for 10 min using 2 different intensities, i.e., high for the roots and standard for the leaves because these parameters gave the best results in terms of number of proteins identified in the two tissues, according to initial analyses. The extracted proteins were quantified using the Bradford method (Bradford, 1976), with BSA for the standard curve. Fifty µg of total proteins of each sample were digested and processed following the manufacturer’s protocol (BeatBox and iST Tissue Kit 96x, PreOmics). LC-MS analysis was performed on a NanoLC-425 Eksigent system coupled to TripleTOF® 6600+ mass spectrometer and carried out as previously reported (Guerriero et al., 2021; Xu et al., 2021).

### Data Protocol
The acquired MS and MS/MS data were imported in Progenesis QI for Proteomics software (version 4, Nonlinear Dynamics, Waters, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK). The protein and peptide identification were done by searching the Pooideae database on UniprotKB via Mascot Daemon (version 2.6.0. Matrix Science, London, UK) and matched to the peptide spectra. The Mascot parameters were: peptide tolerance of 20 ppm, fragment mass tolerance of 0.3 Da, max two missed cleavages, carbamido-methylation of cysteine as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine, N-terminal protein acetylation and tryptophan to kynurenine as variable modifications. The three biological replicates were merged. Only the proteins identified with a significance Mascot-calculated confidence of 95%, two peptides and at least one unique per proteins were retained. Data were log2-transformed and analyzed with IBM SPSS Statistics v20 (IBM SPSS, Chicago, IL, USA).

### Publication Abstract
In the last decade, the exploration of deep space has become the objective of the national space programs of many countries. The International Space Exploration Coordination Group has set a roadmap whose long-range strategy envisions the expansion of human presence in the solar system to progress with exploration and knowledge and to accelerate innovation. Crewed missions to Mars could be envisaged by 2040. In this scenario, finding ways to use the local resources for the provision of food, construction materials, propellants, pharmaceuticals is needed. Plants are important resources for deep space manned missions because they produce phytochemicals of pharmaceutical relevance, are sources of food and provide oxygen which is crucial in bioregenerative life support systems. Growth analysis and plant biomass yield have been previously evaluated on Martian regolith simulants; however, molecular approaches employing gene expression analysis and proteomics are still missing. The present work aims at filling this gap by providing molecular data on a representative member of the Poaceae, Lolium multiflorum Lam., grown on potting soil and a Martian regolith simulant (MMS-1). The molecular data were complemented with optical microscopy of root/leaf tissues and physico-chemical analyses. The results show that the plants grew for 2 weeks on regolith simulants. The leaves were bent downwards and chlorotic, the roots developed a lacunar aerenchyma and small brownish deposits containing Fe were observed. Gene expression analysis and proteomics revealed changes in transcripts related to the phenylpropanoid pathway, stress response, primary metabolism and proteins involved in translation and DNA methylation. Additionally, the growth of plants slightly but significantly modified the pH of the regolith simulants. The results here presented constitute a useful resource to get a comprehensive understanding of the major factors impacting the growth of plants on MMS-1.

### Keywords
Martian regolith simulants, Microscopy, Lolium multiflorum, Proteomics, Qpcr

### Affiliations
LIST-ERIN-ERTP-BEAP-HAU platform
LIST_ERIN_BEAP Bascharage, Luxembourg

### Submitter
Céline LECLERCQ

### Lab Head
Dr Celine LECLERCQ
LIST_ERIN_BEAP Bascharage, Luxembourg


