### Accession
PXD000066

### Title
In-depth membrane proteomic study of breast cancer tissues

### Description
Proteomics on Human breast cancer tissue samples. 9 patients with high risk or 9 patiens low risk MammaPrint breast cancer. Membran fraction. Proteins were reduced, alkylated, digested with Lys-C and Trypsin, and labelled with iTRAQ4plex: 114; high risk; 115; low risk.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
The Chromosome-centric Human Proteome Project (C-HPP) aims to define all proteins encoded in each chromosome and especially to identify proteins that currently lack evidence by mass spectrometry. The C-HPP also prioritizes particular protein subsets such as membrane proteins, post-translational modifications, and low-abundance proteins. In this study, we aimed to generate deep profiling of the membrane proteins of human breast cancer tissues on a chromosome-by-chromosome basis using shotgun proteomics. We identified 7092 unique proteins using membrane fractions isolated from pooled breast cancer tissues with high confidence. A total of 3282 proteins were annotated as membrane proteins by Gene Ontology analysis, which covered 45% of the membrane proteins predicted in 20,859 protein-coding genes. Furthermore, we were able to identify 851 membrane proteins that currently lack evidence by mass spectrometry in neXtProt. Our results will contribute to the accomplishment of the primary goal of the C-HPP in identifying so-called "missing proteins" and generating a whole protein catalog for each chromosome.

### Keywords
Human, Membrane protein, Breast cancer

### Affiliations
Proteome Research Center

### Submitter
satoshi muraoka

### Lab Head


