### Accession
PXD025622

### Title
Deep Succinylproteomics of Brain Tissues of Intracerebral Hemorrhage with inhibition of Toll-like receptor 4 signaling

### Description
The details of Toll-like receptor (TLR) 4 signaling affects protein succinylation in intracerebral hemorrhage (ICH) brains remains completely unclear. In this study, we constructed mice ICH models to investigate the changes in ICH-associated brain protein succinylation with the treatment of TLR4 antagonist, TAK242, using a high-resolution mass spectrometry-based, quantitative succinyllysine proteomics approach. We characterized a concentration of approximately 6700 succinylation events and quantified approximately 3500 sites, highlighting 139 succinyllysine site changes in 40 pathways. Further analysis showed that TAK242 treatment induced an increase in 29 succinyllysine sites of 28 succinylated proteins and reduction of 24 succinyllysine sites on 23 succinylated proteins in ICH brains. Both the TAK242 treatment induced hypersuccinylated and hyposuccinylated proteins in ICH brains were mainly located in mitochondria and cytoplasm. GO analysis showed that TAK242 treatment induced changes in ICH-associated succinylated proteins were mostly located in synapse, membrane, vesicle, etc., and enriched in many processes, such as metabolism, synapse, myeline, etc.. KEGG analysis showed that TAK242 induced downregulation of succinylation was significantly linked to fatty acid metabolism and lysosome. Moreover, a combination analysis of our succinylproteomic data with previously published transcriptome data identified that most of the differentially succinylated proteins induced by TAK242 treatment were mainly distributed into neurons, astrocytes and endothelial cells; and 7 and 3 of these succinylated proteins significantly high express in neurons and astrocytes, respectively. In conclusion, our analyses uncover a number of TLR4 signaling affected succinylation processes and pathways in mouse ICH brains and provide new insights for understanding ICH pathophysiological processes.

### Sample Protocol
C57BL/6 mice (male, 8-week-old, 20-24g) were purchased from Byrness Weil Biotech. Ltd. (Chengdu, China). All mice were bred in a temperature-controlled environment and specific-pathogen-free (SPF) conditions with a 12-hour light/dark cycle and free access to water and food. All procedures and animal experiments were approved and conducted in accordance with the Animal Ethics Committee of the Chengdu University of Traditional Chinese Medicine. The ICH model was conducted according to our previously developed method (Pan et al. 2018). Briefly, mice were immobilized on the stereotaxic apparatus (RWD Life Science Co, Shenzhen, China) after being anesthetized with 3% isoflurane for induction and 1.5% for maintenance. 0.5 μl of 0.075 IU type VII collagenase (Sigma Aldrich) was injected into the left striatum (0.8 mm anterior and 2 mm lateral of bregma, at a depth of 3.5 mm) using a syringe pump (Hamilton, Bonaduz, AG) at a rate of 0.0625ul/min. The control (sham) group was injected with 0.5 μl saline. During this surgical operation, the animal’s body temperature was maintained at 37℃. Unsuccessful ICH models, such as asymptomatic or dead, evaluated by on a behavioral test (Corner task) were excluded from this study.  According to our previous report (Wang et al. 2013; Xiong et al. 2016), TAK242 (CLI-095, MedChemExpress) was formulated with 1% dimethyl sulfoxide (σ) and double-distilled water to a final concentration of 0.4 mg/mL and then injected intraperitoneally at a dose of 3 mg/kg once daily for 3 successive days beginning 6 hours after ICH. Mice were randomly assigned into 3 groups: sham operation group (sham group), ICH + vehicle group (administration of the same volume of solvent used to formulate the TAK242 solution), and ICH + TAK242. The perihematomal and contralateral brain tissues at 3 days after ICH were collected for succinylproteomic analysis. The brain samples were grinded by liquid nitrogen and transferred to centrifuge tube with 4 volumes of lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, 3 μM TSA, 50 mM NAM), and followed by sonication three times on ice. Then, the remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min to collect the supernatant. The protein concentration was determined with the BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For digestion, each brain protein sample had a final concentration of 20%, and incubated in ice water for 2 hours. Subsequently, to get the peptides mixes for LC/LC MS analysis, the protein digestion was performed just as previously research described (Guo et al. 2017).  The tryptic peptides were dissolved in NETN buffer (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0) and Affinity Enrichment of succinylpeptides was carried out according to previous reports (Colak et al. 2013). Briefly, total peptides incubated with pre-washed succinyllysine antibody beads (PTM-402, PTM Bio, China) at 4°C overnight with gentle shaking. The bound peptides were eluted from the beads with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and the eluted fractions were combined and vacuum-dried. For LC-MS/MS analysis, the resulting peptides were desalted with C18 ZipTips (Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis was performed according to previously described protocols (Jin and Wu 2016). The tryptic peptides were dissolved in solution A (0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile) and separated with a gradient from 9% to 25% solution B (0.1% formic acid in 90% acetonitrile) within 36 min at a constant flowrate of 500 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1200 UPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The separated peptides were analyzed in Q ExactiveTM HF-X (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a nano-electrospray ion source. The electrospray voltage was 2.2 kV. The full MS scan resolution was set to 120,000 for a scan range of 350-1600 m/z. The HCD fragmentation was performed at a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 28%. The fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 15,000. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z. The automatic gain control (AGC) target was set at 1E5, with an intensity threshold of 5E4 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. MaxQuant (v1.6.15.0) was used to retrieve the secondary mass spectral data in this experiment. Trypsin/P was specified as a cleavage enzyme, and up to 4 missing cleavages were allowed. The mass tolerance for precursor ions in the first search and the main search were set as 20 ppm and 4.5 ppm, respectively, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set at 0.02 Da. A carbamidomethyl on Cys was set as a fixed modification, and succinylation modification and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1%. The analysis was carried out with the WGCNA R package (Langfelder and Horvath 2008). Pearson correlation matrix (with direction, i.e., for building signed correlation network) was calculated using the brain samples (Sham, TAK242 + ICH and Vehicle + ICH), and an adjacency matrix was calculated by raising the correlation matrix to a power of 16 using the scale-free topology criterion (Zhang and Horvath 2005) with modifications. Correlation clusters were defined by hybrid dynamic tree-cutting method (Langfelder and Horvath 2008) with the minimum height for merging modules at 0.2 and manually merged if necessary. For each cluster, a consensus trend was calculated based on the first principal component (i.e., eigengene). Succinylproteins were assigned to the most correlated cluster with a cutoff of Pearson correlation coefficient (R) at least 0.7. Succinylproteins in each Cluster were superimposed onto a composite PPI database by combining STRING (v10) (Szklarczyk et al. 2015), BioPlex (Huttlin et al. 2017), and In Web_IM (Li et al. 2017). The details of the PPI network analysis were according to previous reported methods (Bai et al. 2020). Integrative analysis was performed by comparing the succinylproteome data with a previously published transcriptome data (Zhang et al. 2014). FPKM (fragments per kilobase of transcript per million mapped reads) was used as a proxy for mRNA abundance. Based on this transcriptome data, four most studied neural cells (neuron, astrocyte, microglia, and endothelial cell) in stroke were focused, and the relatively high expression genes of neural cells were defined in this analysis as that the gene expression in one of the four neural cell types is higher than all the other three cellular types, that is the ratio > 1.0, when the ratio > 10 define as specificity high expression in this study. Then, we matched these differentially succinyllysine sites with the transcripts to localize the cellular information of protein succinylations.

### Publication Abstract
It is unclear how Toll-like receptor (TLR) 4 signaling affects protein succinylation in the brain after intracerebral hemorrhage (ICH). Here, we constructed a mouse ICH model to investigate the changes in ICH-associated brain protein succinylation, following a treatment with a TLR4 antagonist, TAK242, using a high-resolution mass spectrometry-based, quantitative succinyllysine proteomics approach. We characterized the prevalence of approximately 6700 succinylation events and quantified approximately 3500 sites, highlighting 139 succinyllysine site changes in 40 pathways. Further analysis showed that TAK242 treatment induced an increase of 29 succinyllysine sites on 28 succinylated proteins and a reduction of 24 succinyllysine sites on 23 succinylated proteins in the ICH brains. TAK242 treatment induced both protein hypersuccinylations and hyposuccinylations, which were mainly located in the mitochondria and cytoplasm. GO analysis showed that TAK242 treatment-induced changes in the ICH-associated succinylated proteins were mostly located in synapses, membranes and vesicles, and enriched in many cellular functions/compartments, such as metabolism, synapse, and myelin. KEGG analysis showed that TAK242-induced hyposuccinylation was mainly linked to fatty acid metabolism, including elongation and degradation. Moreover, a combined analysis of the succinylproteomic data with previously published transcriptome data revealed that most of the differentially succinylated proteins induced by TAK242 treatment were mainly distributed throughout neurons, astrocytes, and endothelial cells, and the mRNAs of seven and three succinylated proteins were highly expressed in neurons and astrocytes, respectively. In conclusion, we revealed that several TLR4 signaling pathways affect the succinylation processes and pathways in mouse ICH brains, providing new insights on the ICH pathophysiological processes. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD025622.

### Keywords
Intracerebral hemorrhage; brain injury; succinylation; toll-like receptor 4

### Affiliations
Acupuncture and Tuina School/Third Teaching Hospital, Chengdu University of Traditional Chinese Medicine

### Submitter
Xiao-Yi Xiong

### Lab Head
Dr Xiaoyi Xiong
Acupuncture and Tuina School/Third Teaching Hospital, Chengdu University of Traditional Chinese Medicine


