### Accession
PXD014960

### Title
An Integrated Transcriptome and Proteome Analysis Reveals New Insights of Fruit Russeting Formation in ‘Golden Delicious’ Apple

### Description
Russeting of apple fruit is a non-invasive physiological disorder. It occurs mainly in 'Golden Delicious' apple and its hybrids, while understanding of its molecular mechanism is still limited. In this study, we used mRNA sequencing and an isobaric tag for relative and absolute quantitation-based quantitative (iTRAQ) proteomic analysis to detect changes in the expression levels of genes and proteins during russeting formation in russeted and non-russeted skin of 'Golden Delicious' apple. We set up three comparison groups representing the three developmental stages in the russeting formation process. With the formation of fruit russeting, there were 2856 differentially expressed genes and 942 differentially expressed proteins in the comparison groups as detected at the transcript level and protein level, respectively. A correlation analysis of the transcriptome and proteome data revealed related-genes involved in lignin biosynthesis are significant changes at different developmental stages during apple russeting formation. Some other transcription factors, such as MYBs, NACs and LIMs were also involved in apple russeting formation. In this study, one LIM transcription factor was preliminarily determined to be involved in lignin biosynthesis by combining to PAL-box element. Studying the identified genes and proteins will provide further insights into the molecular mechanisms controlling apple russeting formation.

### Sample Protocol
Fruits of ‘Golden Delicious’ apple were collected in 2018 from the Liaoning Institute of Pomology of Xiongyue (40°10' N, 122°07' E; elevation 15 m), Liaoning province, China. The trees were 8-year-old and growing potential were almost identical without pests and diseases. The apples were bagged at DAF 20 according to Sun[88], 100-150 exposed fruits per tree were selected for the control group (short for CK), and 50 well fruits were bagged with light impermeable double layer (the outer layer is yellow outside and black inside, and the inner layer is red) paper bags 1202 KM-2 (KOBAYASHI (QINGDAO) CO., LTD, China) for the treatment group (short for T). Three trees were used as replicates for each group. Then collected samples at DAF 30, DAF 60, and DAF 150. In these three sampling periods, DAF30 and DAF60 were the two high outbreak period of apple russeting, and DAF 150 was the fruit ripening stage. The samples were marked as CK1 and T1, CK2 and T2, CK3 and T3, respectively.

### Data Protocol
The plant materials used for the iTRAQ analysis were the same as those for RNA sequencing. Protein was extracted using a plant total protein extraction kit (PE0230, Sigma) following the manufacturer’s protocol. The quantitation of protein was determined by Bradford assay, and protein integrity was tested by 12% sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. The peptide labeling was performed with iTRAQ tags 113−121 (Supplementary Table S6) by iTRAQ Reagent 8-plex Kit (Applied Biosystems, USA) according to the manufacturer's protocol after the protein was digested by Trypsin Gold (Promega, Madison, WI, USA). The labeled peptides with different reagents were combined and desalted with a Strata X C18 column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried according to the manufacturer's protocol. Then the peptides were separated on a Shimadzu LC-20AB HPLC Pump system coupled with a high pH RP column, the eluted peptides are pooled as 20 fractions and vacuum-dried. Each fraction was resuspended and the supernatant was loaded on Thermo Scientific™ UltiMate™ 3000 UHPLC system equipped with a trap and an analytical column for testing. After that, the peptides separated from nanoHPLC were subjected into the tandem mass spectrometry Q EXACTIVE HF X (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) for DDA (data-dependent acquisition) detection by nano-electrospray ionization. The raw MS/MS data is converted into MGF format by the corresponding tool, and the exported MGF files are searched by the local Mascot server against the database of Malus × domestica described above. In addition，an automated software IQuant[89], was applied to the quantification of the labeled peptides with isobaric tags. All the proteins with a false discovery rate (FDR) less than 1% will proceed with downstream analysis including GO, COG/KOG and Pathway. Then based on the "simple principle" (The parsimony principle), identified peptide sequences are assembled into a set of confident proteins. In order to control the rate of false-positive at protein level, a protein FDR at 1%, which is based on Picked protein FDR strategy[90], will also be estimated after protein inference (Protein-level FDR ≤ 0.01). The differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were defined by the fold change ≥ 1.20, and Q-value < 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Apple skin russeting naturally occurs in many varieties, particularly in "Golden Delicious" and its pedigree, and is regarded as a non-invasive physiological disorder partly caused by excessive deposition of lignin. However, the understanding of its molecular mechanism is still limited. In this study, we used iTRAQ (isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation) and RNA-seq to detect the changes in the expression levels of genes and proteins in three developmental stages of russeting formation, in russeted (non-bagging) and non-russeted (bagging) skin of "Golden Delicious" apple. 2856 differentially expressed genes and 942 differentially expressed proteins in the comparison groups were detected at the transcript level and protein level, respectively. A correlation analysis of the transcriptomics and proteomics data revealed that four genes (MD03G1059200, MD08G1009200, MD17G1092400, and MD17G1225100) involved in lignin biosynthesis are significant changed during apple russeting formation. Additionally, 92 transcription factors, including 4 LIM transcription factors, may be involved in apple russeting formation. Among them, one LIM transcription factor (MD15G1068200) was capable of binding to the PAL-box like (CCACTTGAGTAC) element, which indicated it was potentially involved in lignin biosynthesis. This study will provide further views on the molecular mechanisms controlling apple russeting formation.

### Keywords
Fruit russeting formation; transcriptome; proteome; ‘golden delicious’ apple; lignin biosynthesis

### Affiliations
13942982858
13998905918

### Submitter
Gao-peng Yuan

### Lab Head
Dr Pei-hua Cong
13998905918


