### Accession
PXD041262

### Title
Heat and Cold Shock Response in Pyrococcus furiosus

### Description
We designed an experimental setup to investigate the transcriptomic and proteomic responses of the hyperthermophilic  archaeon Pyrococcus furiosus to heat and cold shock. P. furiosus is a model organism for studying microbial adaptation to extreme environments, including deep-sea hydrothermal vents with temperature gradients ranging from 1°C to 400°C. We  aimed to simulate critical conditions where P. furiosus cannot grow and to examine the immediate response to thermal  stress as well as the recovery process.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were purified by running them a short distance into a 4-12% NuPAGE Novex Bis-Tris Minigel (Invitrogen), Coomassie staining and in-gel digestion with trypsin (Atanassov and Urlaub, 2013). For generation of a peptide library, equal amount aliquots from each sample were pooled to a total amount of 200 µg, and separated into twelve fractions using a basic pH reversed phase C18 separation on an FPLC system (äkta pure, Cytiva) and a staggered pooling scheme. All samples were spiked with a synthetic peptide standard used for retention time alignment (iRT Standard, Schlieren, Schweiz).  Protein digests were analyzed on a nanoﬂow chromatography system (nanoElute) hyphenated to a hybrid timed ion mobility-quadrupole-time of flight mass spectrometer (timsTOF Pro, all Bruker). In brief, 400 ng equivalents of peptides were dissolved in loading buffer (2% acetonitrile, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in water), enriched on a reversed-phase C18 trapping column (0.3 cm × 300 µm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated on a reversed-phase C18 column with an integrated CaptiveSpray Emitter (Aurora 25 cm × 75 µm, IonOpticks) using a 60 min linear gradient of 5-35 % acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid (v:v) at 300 nl min-1, and a column temperature of 50⁰C. DDA analysis was performed in PASEF mode (Meier et al., 2018) with 10 PASEF scans per topN acquisition cycle. Multiply charged precursors were selected based on their position in the m/z–ion mobility plane and isolated at a resolution of 2 Th for m/z≤700 and to 3 Th for m/z>700 for MS/MS to a target value of 20,000 arbitrary units. Dynamic exclusion was set to 0.4min. Two technical replicates per C18 fraction were acquired. DIA analysis was performed in diaPASEF mode (Meier et al., 2020) using 32×25 Th isolation windows from m/z 400 to 1,200 to include the 2+/3+/4+ population in the m/z–ion mobility plane. The collision energy was ramped linearly as a function of the mobility from 59 eV at 1/K0=1.6Vs cm−2 to 20 eV at 1/K0=0.6Vs cm−2. Two technical replicates per biological replicate were acquired.

### Data Protocol
Protein identiﬁcation was achieved with the Pulsar algorithm in Spectronaut Software 15.6 (Biognosys) using default settings against the UniProtKB Pyrococcus furiosus reference proteome (revision 09-2021) augmented with a set of 51 known common laboratory contaminants. For quantitation, up to the 6 most abundant fragment ion traces per peptide, and up to the 10 most abundant peptides per protein were integrated and summed up to provide protein area values. Mass and retention time calibration as well as the corresponding extraction tolerances were dynamically determined. Both identification and quantification results were trimmed to a False Discovery Rate of 1% using a forward-and-reverse decoy database strategy.

### Publication Abstract
Facing rapid fluctuations in their natural environment, extremophiles, like the hyperthermophilic archaeon <i>Pyrococcus furiosus</i>, exhibit remarkable adaptability to extreme conditions. However, our understanding of their dynamic cellular responses remains limited. This study integrates RNA-sequencing and mass spectrometry data, thereby elucidating transcriptomic and proteomic responses to heat and cold shock stress in <i>P. furiosus</i>. Our results reveal rapid and dynamic changes in gene and protein expression following these stress responses. Heat shock triggers extensive transcriptome reprogramming, orchestrated by the transcriptional regulator Phr, targeting a broader gene repertoire than previously demonstrated. For heat shock signature genes, RNA levels swiftly return to baseline upon recovery, while protein levels remain persistently upregulated, reflecting a rapid but sustained response. Intriguingly, cold shock at 4&#xb0;C elicits distinct short- and long-term responses at both RNA and protein levels. Cluster analysis identified gene sets with either congruent or contrasting trends in RNA and protein changes, representing well-separated arCOG groups tailored to their individual cellular responses. Particularly, upregulation of ribosomal proteins and significant enrichment of 5'-leadered sequences in cold-shock responsive genes suggest that translation regulation is important during cold shock adaption. Further investigating transcriptomic features, we reveal that thermal stress genes are equipped with basal sequence elements, such as strong promoter and poly(U)-terminators, facilitating a regulated response of the respective transcription units. Our study provides a comprehensive overview of the cellular response to temperature stress, advancing our understanding of stress response mechanisms in hyperthermophilic archaea and providing valuable insights into the molecular adaptations that facilitate life in extreme environments.IMPORTANCEExtreme environments provide unique challenges for life, and the study of extremophiles can shed light on the mechanisms of adaptation to such conditions. <i>Pyrococcus furiosus</i>, a hyperthermophilic archaeon, is a model organism for studying thermal stress response mechanisms. In this study, we used an integrated analysis of RNA-sequencing and mass spectrometry data to investigate the transcriptomic and proteomic responses of <i>P. furiosus</i> to heat and cold shock stress and recovery. Our results reveal the rapid and dynamic changes in gene and protein expression patterns associated with these stress responses, as well as the coordinated regulation of different gene sets in response to different stressors. These findings provide valuable insights into the molecular adaptations that facilitate life in extreme environments and advance our understanding of stress response mechanisms in hyperthermophilic archaea.

### Keywords
Archaebacteria, Archaea, Proteome, Heat shock, Pyrococcus

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry
University Medical Center Goettingen, Department of Clinical Chemistry, Core Facility Proteomics, Göttingen, Germany

### Submitter
Christof Lenz

### Lab Head
Dr Christof Lenz
University Medical Center Goettingen, Department of Clinical Chemistry, Core Facility Proteomics, Göttingen, Germany


