### Accession
PXD029569

### Title
Loggerhead sea turtle (Caretta caretta) TMT-based plasma proteomics

### Description
The aim of the study was to monitor and analyse injured and diseased loggerhead sea turtles (Caretta caretta) plasma proteome profiles during their recovery period in rescue centre within different age and recovery period groups, and determine the potential biomarkers that can be used in diagnostics.

### Sample Protocol
The blood sample collection was carried in the first week upon arrival, and for the loggerheads retained in rescue centre for a longer period periodically, every 12 to 14 weeks during their stay, concluding the sampling campaign a few days before release of recovered individuals into the natural environment. 2-3 ml of blood from the loggerhead sea turtles dorsal cervical sinus were taken by syringe and G23 needle, and collected into BD Microtainer® blood collection tubes containing lithium heparin (BD Diagnostics, NJ, USA). The tubes were slightly shaken and swung a few times, left at room temperature for 15 min and then centrifuged at 6800 g for 10 minutes at room temperature (Pro-VetHE Veterinary Centrifuge, Centurion Scientific Ltd., Chichester, West Sussex, UK). The supernatant, blood plasma, were carefully harvested and stored at -80 °C prior sample preparation and analysis.  An amount of 35 μg plasma proteins were diluted to a volume of 100 mM TEAB buffer pH 8.5. The protein reduction was provided by addition of 2.5 μl of 200 mM DTT and incubation for 60 minutes at 55 °C. Following reduction 2.5 μl 375 mM IAA were added and incubated in dark for 30 minutes at room temperature. Final addition of 300 μl ice-cold aceton and overnight incubation at -20 °C allowed protein precipitation. Afterwards centrifugation at 8000 g for 10 minutes at 4 °C, acetone-precipitated pellets were dried on the and resuspended in 50 μl 50 mM TEAB buffer pH 8.5, and 1 μl of trypsin solution (1 mg/ml; trypsin-to-protein ratio 1:35) was added for digestion at 37 °C. Peptide labelling was performed using TMTsixplex Isobaric Label Reagent Set (Thermo Scientific Pierce Biotechnology, Rockford, IL, USA) according to manufacturer instructions.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identiﬁcation and the TMT reporter ion-based relative quantiﬁcation were performed using the SEQUEST algorithm implemented into Proteome Discoverer (version 2.3., Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc). Protein database search against reptilia FASTA ﬁles (11/12/2018, 652887 entries) downloaded from National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI, Bethesda, Maryland, USA) was conducted. Protein identification was carried out using parameters as follows: two trypsin missed cleavage sites, precursor, and fragment mass tolerances of 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively; carbamidomethyl (C) ﬁxed peptide modiﬁcation, oxidation (M), and TMT sixplex (K, peptide N-terminus) dynamic modiﬁcations. The false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide identiﬁcation was calculated using the Percolator algorithm in the Proteome Discoverer workﬂow and was set at 1%. Only proteins with at least two peptides (one unique) and 5% FDR were reported as reliable identiﬁcation. The internal standard was used to compare relative quantiﬁcation results among the TMT experiments (sixplexes).

### Publication Abstract
The aim of the study was to monitor and analyse injured and diseased loggerhead sea turtles (Caretta caretta) plasma proteome profiles and biochemistry parameters during their recovery period in rescue centre within different age and recovery period groups, and determine the potential biomarkers that can be used in diagnostics. The plasma biochemical parameters of total protein and glucose content, accompanied by aspartate aminotransferase (AST) and N-acetyl-cystein-activated creatinine kinase (CK-NAC) are highlighted as valuable and potential biomarkers of turtle's health status and condition. Using high throughput tandem mass tag (TMT)-based proteomic approach we identified 913 plasma proteins, 12 of which shown to be modulated in loggerheads age groups, and identified as a part of (i) platelet degranulation, (ii) neutrophil degranulation, and (iii) innate immune system pathways. The neurofascin (NFASC) is shown to be differentially abundant among all the age groups, and alpha-1-acid glycoprotein 2-like (ORM2) and alpha-1-antitrypsin-like (SERPINA1) proteins were recognized as members of all three above mentioned REACTOME pathways. Furthermore, 29 of plasma proteins were significantly differentially abundant in loggerheads age and recovery period groups. Out of 15 recognized pathways, those proteins were mostly included in three specific REACTOME pathways: (i) post-translational phosphorylation, (ii) regulation of Insulin-like Growth Factor (IGF) transport and uptake by Insulin-like Growth Factor Binding Proteins (IGFBPs), and (iii) platelet degranulation. The alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) was the only protein which showed statistically significant up-regulation patterns in all loggerhead age groups before release from the rescue centre, and the complement component 3 (C3) protein was the only protein modulated in all recovery period groups. Furthermore, C3 protein takes part in 9; and followed up with apolipoprotein A-I (APOA1) in 7; complement component 4 (C4), complement component 5 (C5) and kininogen-1 (KNG1) in 6 REACTOME pathways. Thereby, those proteins are highlighted and recommended as potential biomarkers of turtle's health status. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD029569. Finally, based on our results, we believe that comprehensive omics approach and routine plasma biochemical analysis, accompanied by proteins of acute phase, acid-base status and immune-response indicator analysis may significantly and reliably improve assessment of captive loggerheads rehabilitation and medication. SIGNIFICANCE: Monitoring and comparison of loggerhead sea turtles (C. caretta) blood plasma biochemistry parameters and plasma proteome profiles in relation to the age, and recovery period pointed out significantly differentially abundant proteins, along with certain biochemical parameter contents as potential biomarkers of turtle's fitness, health status and physiology.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Caretta caretta, Plasma proteomics, Tmt, Loggerhead sea turtle

### Affiliations
University of Zagreb, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine
VetMedZg Laboratory,Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia             Institute of Biodiversity, Animal Health & Comparative Medicine, College of Medicine, Veterinary Medicine and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK

### Submitter
Anita Horvatic

### Lab Head
Dr Peter David Eckersall
VetMedZg Laboratory,Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia             Institute of Biodiversity, Animal Health & Comparative Medicine, College of Medicine, Veterinary Medicine and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK


