### Accession
PXD030384

### Title
Heterologous Expression of MBP-AtABC1K6-His in E. coli

### Description
Heterologous E. coli expression of AtABC1K6 tagged with maltose binding protein (MBP) and 6xHis tags revealed a spontaneous cleavage event of the recombinant protein during purification. Resulting bands were resolved on SDS-PAGE and excised for MS/MS identification. Mass spec-based identification of the individual bands determined the cleavage event as ocurring after Lysine-443. The results demonstrate that the resulting ca. 80 kD band, showing kinase activity, comprises the AtABC1K6-6xHis fragment lacking the first 71 residues of AtABC1K6.

### Sample Protocol
The mature coding sequence (without chloroplast transit peptide, i.e. without residues 1-19) of AtABC1K6 (At3G24190) was cloned into pMALc5x which provides an N-terminal MBP tag with Factor Xa cleavage site and a C-terminal 6xHis tag. This construct was used to over-express the recombinant protein MBP-AtABC1K6-His in E. coli and subsequently purify using Ni-NTA beads. A single biological replicate of the recombinant protein MBP-AtABC1K6-His was eluted with 20 mM Tris pH 7.5 and 500 Imidazole. The protein was then dialyzed against 20 mM Tris pH 7.5. Expressed and purified protein was re-suspended in SDS-PAGE sample buffer and heated at 60oC for 10 minutes. Samples were cooled and loaded onto a 12.5% pre-cast BioRad Criterion 1D gel and electrophoresed until the dye front began to run off the bottom of the gel. Electrophoresis was stopped and the gel fixed in 40% Methanol/20% Acetic Acid for 4 hours and stained with colloidal Coomassie Blue overnight. The gel was then de-stained using 10% Acetic Acid until the background was clear. Gel bands were digested in-gel according to Shevchenko, et. al. (60) with modifications.  Briefly, gel bands were dehydrated using 100% acetonitrile and incubated with 10 mM dithiothreitol in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH ~8, at 56oC for 45 min, dehydrated again and incubated in the dark with 50 mM iodoacetamide in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 20min. Gel bands were then washed with ammonium bicarbonate and dehydrated again. Sequencing grade modified trypsin was prepared to 0.01 µg/µL in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and ~100uL was added to each gel band so that the gel was completely submerged. Bands were then incubated at 37oC overnight.  Peptides were extracted from the gel by water bath sonication in a solution of 60% Acetonitrile/1% Trifluoroacetic acid and vacuum dried to ~2 µL. An injection of 5 µL was automatically made using a Thermo (www.thermo.com) EASYnLC 1000 onto a Thermo Acclaim PepMap RSLC 0.1mm x 20mm C18 trapping column and washed for ~5 min with Buffer A. Bound peptides were then eluted over 35 min onto a Thermo Acclaim PepMap RSLC 0.075 mm x 250 mm resolving column with a gradient of 5% B to 40% B in 24 min, ramping to 90% B at 25 min and held at 90% B for the duration of the run (Buffer A = 99.9% Water/0.1% Formic Acid, Buffer B = 80% Acetonitrile/0.1% Formic Acid/19.9% Water) at a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min. Column temperature was maintained at a constant temperature of 50oC using an integrated column oven (PRSO-V1, Sonation GmbH, Biberach, Germany). Eluted peptides were sprayed into a ThermoScientific Q-Exactive mass spectrometer using a FlexSpray spray ion source.  Survey scans were taken in the Orbitrap (70000 resolution, determined at m/z 200) and the top 15 ions in each survey scan were then subjected to automatic higher energy collision induced dissociation (HCD) with fragment spectra acquired at 17,500 resolution.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS spectra were processed with the MaxQuant software program, version 1.16.11.0. Peak lists were searched with the embedded Andromeda search engine against the Escherichia coli UNIPROT database (last modified June 2021) concatenated with the MBP-AtABC1K6-His heterologous protein sequence plus the common contaminant list appended by MaxQuant. Oxidation of methionine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications, carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification. Digestion mode was Trypsin/P with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Label free quantification employed the LFQ quantification setting in the MaxQuant software. MS/MS tolerance of the first search was 20 ppm, and main search was 4.5 ppm, with individualized peptide mass tolerance selected. False discovery rate (FDR) at peptide spectrum match and protein levels was set as 0.01, using the target-decoy strategy as described by Elias & Gygi, 2007. Filtering of resulting protein groups was performed manually at a fixed FDR of 0% by accepting protein IDs with the highest MaxQuant Scores until the first decoy protein ID was reached.

### Publication Abstract
The Absence of bc<sub>1</sub> Complex (ABC1) is an ancient, atypical protein kinase family that emerged prior to the archaeal-eubacterial divergence. Loss-of-function mutants in ABC1 genes are linked to respiratory defects in microbes and humans and to compromised photosynthetic performance and stress tolerance in plants. However, demonstration of protein kinase activity remains elusive, hampering their study. Here, we investigate a homolog from Arabidopsis thaliana, AtABC1K6, and demonstrate in&#xa0;vitro autophosphorylation activity, which we replicate with a human ABC1 ortholog. We also show that AtABC1K6 protein kinase activity requires an atypical buffer composition, including Mn<sup>2+</sup> as a divalent cation cofactor and a low salt concentration. AtABC1K6 associates with plastoglobule lipid droplets of A.&#xa0;thaliana chloroplasts, along with five paralogs. We show that the protein kinase activity associated with isolated A.&#xa0;thaliana plastoglobules was inhibited at higher salt concentrations, but could accommodate Mg<sup>2+</sup> as well as Mn<sup>2+</sup>, indicating salt sensitivity, but not the requirement for Mn<sup>2+</sup>, may be a general characteristic of ABC1 proteins. Finally, loss of functional AtABC1K6 impairs the developmental transition from vegetative to reproductive growth. This phenotype was complemented by the wild-type sequence of AtABC1K6, but not by a kinase-dead point mutant in the unique Ala-triad of the ATP-binding pocket, demonstrating the physiological relevance of the protein's kinase activity. We suggest that ABC1s are bona fide protein kinases with a unique regulatory mechanism. Our results open the door to detailed functional and mechanistic studies of ABC1 proteins and plastoglobules.

### Keywords
Abc1, Spontaneous cleavage, Coq8, Kinase, Ubib

### Affiliations
Michigan State University
Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Michigan State Univeristy

### Submitter
Peter Lundquist

### Lab Head
Dr Peter K Lundquist
Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Michigan State Univeristy


