### Accession
PXD000552

### Title
Deep and precise quantification of the mouse synaptosomal proteome reveals substantial remodeling during postnatal maturation

### Description
In order to understand the molecular underpinnings of the functional and morphological heterogeneity of synapses and their regulation during development it is essential to identify the set of proteins that form these structures. Here, we prepared cortical synaptosomal fractions from juvenile and adult mice, processed them using a multidimentional protein identification technology approach, applied iTRAQ labelling and used mass spectroscopy to identify a comprehensive set of synaptic proteins and to quantitatively analyze changes in protein expression during development. We obtained a dataset tracking expression levels of 3424 proteins during development. The inclusion of biological replicates in a single mass spectrometry analysis demonstrated a high accuracy of our method. A gene ontology analysis confirmed the synaptic nature of a large fraction of identified proteins. Furthermore, developmental regulation of eight proteins identified in our analysis was confirmed independently using Western blotting. In summary, we provide a comprehensive dataset describing the developmental regulation of synaptosomal proteins, which serves as an essential foundation for the investigation of synaptic function and maturation.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
During postnatal murine maturation, behavioral patterns emerge and become shaped by experience-dependent adaptations. During the same period, the morphology of dendritic spines, the morphological correlates of excitatory synapses, is known to change, and there is evidence of concurrent alterations of the synaptosomal protein machinery. To obtain comprehensive and quantitative insights in the developmental regulation of the proteome of synapses, we prepared cortical synaptosomal fractions from a total of 16 individual juvenile and adult mouse brains (age 3 or 8 weeks, respectively). We then applied peptide-based iTRAQ labeling (four pools of 4 animals) and high-resolution two-dimensional peptide fractionation (99 SCX fractions and 3 h reversed-phase gradients) using a hybrid CID-HCD acquisition method on a Velos Orbitrap mass spectrometer to identify a comprehensive set of synaptic proteins and to quantify changes in protein expression. We obtained a data set tracking expression levels of 3500 proteins mapping to 3427 NCBI GeneIDs during development with complete quantification data available for 3422 GeneIDs, which, to the best of our knowledge, constitutes the deepest coverage of the synaptosome proteome to date. The inclusion of biological replicates in a single mass spectrometry analysis demonstrated both high reproducibility of our synaptosome preparation method as well as high precision of our quantitative data (correlation coefficient R = 0.87 for the biological replicates). To evaluate the validity of our data, the developmental regulation of eight proteins identified in our analysis was confirmed independently using western blotting. A gene ontology analysis confirmed the synaptosomal nature of a large fraction of identified proteins. Of note, the set of the most strongly regulated proteins revealed candidates involved in neurological processes in health and disease states. This highlights the fact that developmentally regulated proteins can play additional roles in neurological disease processes. All data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD000552.

### Keywords
Synapse proteome ageing

### Affiliations
Service

### Submitter
Michael Schutzbier

### Lab Head


