### Accession
PXD003579

### Title
Characterization of the porcine seminal plasma proteome

### Description
This proteomic study provides the major characterization of a complex and diverse protein composition of the boar SP-proteome with more than 250 proteins first reported. This proteomic profiling allows the creation of a publicly accessible database of the boar SP-proteome, as a first step for further understanding the role of SP-proteins in reproductive outcomes as well as for identification of biomarkers for sperm quality and fertility.

### Sample Protocol
Individual SP-samples (n = 33) were thawed at room temperature, centrifuged at 16,100 xg at 4 °C for 1 min and the supernatants pooled into one sample. The protein concentration of the pooled SP-sample was measured using a Qubit fluorometer  according to manufacturer instructions. The dominant proteins were analyzed using in-solution digestion. Here 3 µl of the pooled SP, containing 10 µg of proteins, were digested with Sequencing Grade Trypsin to generate peptides of each individual protein according to the following steps: (1) the proteins were reduced using 2 mM DTT reducing reagent in 50 mM NH4HCO3 (Sigma-Aldrich) to a final volume of 25 µl and the mixture incubated for 20 min at 60 °C; (2) the proteins were alkylated using 5.5 mM iodoacetamide (IAM) alkylating reagent in 50 mM NH4HCO3 to a final volume of 30 µl and incubated for 30 min in the dark; (3) 10 mM DTT in 50 mM NH4HCO3 were added to a final volume of 60 µl and sample was vortex and incubated for 30 min at room temperature; (4) trypsin was added in a 1:20 ratio (Trypsin:Protein, w:w) to a final volume of 70 µl, sample was carefully mixed and digestion carried out over night at 37 °C. The digestion was stopped on the following morning by acidifying the solution (pH<6) with 7 μL 10% TFA. The final concentration of protein in the digested sample was 0.13 µg/µl. The portion of the 1-D SDS PAGE containing proteins with a molecular weight higher than 38 kDa was destined to in-gel digestion. Following washing in MilliQ water , the gel was dehydrated in ACN , reduced with DTT and alkylated with IAM.  Sequencing Grade Trypsin digestion of the sliced gel was performed following the protocol used by Shevchenko et al. [19]. Briefly, for protein digestion 200 µl of trypsin digestion buffer were added to each dried gel piece and digestion was set at 37 °C overnight. The trypsin digestion was stopped with 10% TFA. Peptide mixture was carefully withdrawn and dried in a speed vacuum  for 20 min and re-suspended in 7 µl of 2% ACN and 0.1% TFA prior to LC and MS analysis. 5 µl from each digested sample were trapped on a NanoLC pre-column (3 μm particles size C18-CL, 350 µm diameter x 0.5 mm long; Eksigent®) and desalted with 0.1% TFA at 3µl/min during 5 min. Then, the digested peptides present in the samples were separated using an analytical LC column (3 μm particles size C18-CL, 75 µm diameter x 12 cm long, Nikkyo Technos Co®, Tokyo, Japan) equilibrated in 5% ACN 0.1% formic acid (FA) (Fisher Scientific). Peptide elution was performed by applying a mixture of solvents A and B; solvent A being 0.1% FA in water and solvent B being 0.1% FA in ACN. The peptides were eluted from the column with a linear gradient from 5% to 35% of solvent B at a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min over 50 min.  The eluted peptides were thereafter direction-ionized using an ESI Nanospray III (AB SCIEX) and then analyzed on an AB SCIEX TripleTOF 5600 mass spectrometer coupled to the NanoLC system. The samples were ionized applying 2.8 kV to the spray emitter and the TripleTOF was operated in data-dependent mode, in which a TOF MS scan was made from 350 to 1259 m/z, accumulated for 250 ms TOF followed by 150 ms TOF with the same scan rage for MS, and the 25 most abundant multiply charged (2+, 3+, 4+ or 5+) precursor peptide ions automatically selected.

### Data Protocol
The SCIEX.wiff data-files were processed using ProteinPilot v5.0 search engine (AB SCIEX). The Paragon algorithm (4.0.0.0, 4767) of ProteinPilot was used to search against the National Center for Biotechnology Information non-redundant (NCBInr; 70353186 proteins searched) protein sequence database with the following parameters: trypsin specificity, cys-alkylation (IAM), no taxonomy restricted, and the search effort set to through. The analysis was also made for Sus scrofa taxonomy. To avoid using the same spectral evidence in more than one protein, the identified proteins were grouped based on MS/MS spectra by the Protein-Pilot Progroup algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Porcine, Proteome, Ejaculate, Seminal plasma

### Affiliations
Department of Medicine and Animal Surgery, Faculty of Veterinary Science, University of Murcia, E-30100 Murcia, Spain
Universitat de Valencia

### Submitter
Luz Valero

### Lab Head
Dr Jordi Roca
Department of Medicine and Animal Surgery, Faculty of Veterinary Science, University of Murcia, E-30100 Murcia, Spain


