### Accession
PXD032280

### Title
Metaproteomics analysis of the Caprino Nicastrese cheese

### Description
This is the first metaproteomics-based featuring of the microbial community harbured in the traditional raw milk Caprino Nicastrese cheese

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial fraction isolated from the Rind and Core of the cheese wheel, at diverse ripening stages, has been subjected to FASP sample preparation protocol, trypsin digestion and SPE purification prior to the measurements at the Orbitrap Lumos MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Obtained raw data have been subjected to database dependent search using Andromeda search engine implemented in MaxQuant software (v1.6.17.0) and using an in-house database built by merging the most likely bacterial families as by previous metataxonomic analysis data.

### Publication Abstract
Goat cheese is an important element of the Mediterranean diet, appreciated for its health-promoting features and unique taste. A pivotal role in the development of these characteristics is attributed to the microbiota and its continuous remodeling over space and time. Nevertheless, no thorough study of the cheese-associated microbiota using two metaomics approaches has previously been conducted. Here, we employed 16S rRNA gene sequencing and metaproteomics to explore the microbiota of a typical raw goat milk cheese at various ripening timepoints and depths of the cheese wheel. The 16S rRNA gene-sequencing and metaproteomics results described a stable microbiota ecology across the selected ripening timepoints, providing evidence for the microbiologically driven fermentation of goat milk products. The important features of the microbiota harbored on the surface and in the core of the cheese mass were highlighted in both compositional and functional terms. We observed the rind microbiota struggling to maintain the biosafety of the cheese through competition mechanisms and/or by preventing the colonization of the cheese by pathobionts of animal or environmental origin. The core microbiota was focused on other biochemical processes, supporting its role in the development of both the health benefits and the pleasant gustatory nuances of goat cheese.

### Keywords
Microbiota, Metaproteomics, Traditional dairy products

### Affiliations
University "Magna Graecia" of Catanzaro
Department of Health Science, University "Magna Graecia" of Catanzaro

### Submitter
Bruno Tilocca

### Lab Head
Dr Paola Roncada
Department of Health Science, University "Magna Graecia" of Catanzaro


