### Accession
PXD010966

### Title
FUS pathology in ALS is linked to alterations in multiple ALS-associated proteins and rescued by drugs stimulating autophagy

### Description
Unraveling the mechanistic link connecting the multiple RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) associated with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is critical for identifying novel therapeutics. Mutations in the RBP FUS cause the third most common genetic form of ALS. Here, we show that motor neurons (MNs) of FUS-ALS patients manifest heterogeneous levels of cytoplasmic FUS. Using neurons differentiated from induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) carrying a FUS-eGFP reporter, we demonstrate that pronounced cytoplasmic FUS mislocalization is linked to aberrant protein degradation. We also show that the P525L FUS mutation reduces the interaction of FUS with RBPs, including hnRNPA1, hnRNPA2B1, EWSR1, and TAF15, facilitating FUS aggregation. Additionally, RBP levels are decreased, inducing neurodegeneration. We use patient spinal cord to demonstrate that MNs containing aggregated FUS have reduced RBP content compared to MNs lacking FUS aggregates. Finally, we demonstrate that small molecules inducing autophagy, including PQR309, a brain penetrant compound in clinical trials, restore proteostasis.

### Sample Protocol
For immunoprecipitation of FUS-eGFP fusion protein, the GFP-Trap® Kit from Chromotek was used. Proteins elutes from beads were first acetone-precipitated. Protein pellets were then dissolved in 8M urea, 10 mM HEPES, pH 7.5, reduced and alkylated, followed by predigestion with 0.5 µg endopeptidase LysC ( Wako Chemicals, Neuss) at 37°  C for 3-4 hours. After diluting the urea concentration to 2M, 0.5 µg trypsin was added (Promega) and the digest continued at 37° C overnight.  The digest was stopped by TFA addition and desalted using Stage tips as previously described . All samples were prepared as biological replicates (n=3) for label free quantification and stored at 4° C until subjected to LC-MSMS analysis. Peptides were analyzed by LC MS/MS on a Q Exative HF mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific), equipped with an Easy nano-LC 1200 system and a EasyFlex electrospray source (ThermoFisher Scientific). Briefly, peptides were online-separated by reversed-phase chromatography on fused silica capillary chromatography columns (25 cm length, ID 75 µm; NanoSeparations) that were packed in-house with Reprosil pur C18 material (3 µm; Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany), using a gradient from 2 to 40 % of buffer B (80 % acetonitril, 0.1 % formic acid) in 220 min and from 40 – 60 % B in 20 min at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. After additional 12 min at 90 % B the column was re-equilibrated at starting conditions. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode (source voltage 2.1 kV) automatically switching between a survey scan (mass range m/z = 300-1750, resolution R = 60 K; AGC target value 3e6, maximum IT 100 ms) and MS/MS acquisition of the 17 most intense peaks by higher-energy collisional dissociation (resolution 15K; AGC target 1e5; max IT 50 ms; isolation width m/z = 1.6; normalized collision energy 27 %; dynamic exclusion enabled for 30.0 s; double charge and higher charges were allowed).

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed by MaxQuant software (1.6.0.13) involving the built-in Andromeda search engine . The search was performed against the human uniprotKB database UP000005640_9606.fasta (version from 12/2015) supplemented with common contaminants with a 1 % FDR at the peptide and protein level. Parameters defined for the search were: Trypsin as digesting enzyme, allowing two missed cleavages; a minimum length of 7 amino acids; carbamidomethylation at cysteine residues as fixed modification, oxidation at methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation. Maximum allowed mass deviation was 20 ppm for MS and 0.5 Da for MS/MS scans. Peptide identiﬁcations by MS/MS were allowed to be transferred between runs after retention time alignment to minimize the number of missing values for the subsequent label free quantiﬁcation process, performed with the MaxLFQ algorithm using a minimum ratio count of 1. Mass spectrometry data were deposited to the PRIDE repository via ProteomeXchange (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org ). Perseus software (version 1.6.0.7) was used for statistical and bioinformatics analysis. Proteins that were identiﬁed in the decoy reverse database or only by a site modiﬁcation, as well as common lab contaminants were excluded from further data analysis. In additon, a minimum of 2 peptides was required for protein identification, one of which had to be unique to the proteingroup.  Log2 transformed LFQ values were further ﬁltered to ensure that expression values were present in at least 2 biological replicates of at least one experimental group. Missing values were substituted by imputation (down shift = 1.8 and width = 0.3). For binary comparisons of experimental groups Student´s T-test was used with a p-value of 0.05 as truncation value. Significantly altered proteins were normalized by z-scoring and analyzed by hierarchial clustering using Euclidian distance for column and row clustering.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rna-binding proteins, Label free quantification, Proteostasis, Lc-msms, Induced pluripotent stem cells, Fus, Proteomics, Als, Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, Autophagy

### Affiliations
Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry
Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry, Max Planck Institute for Molecular Biomedicine, Röntgenstr. 20, 48149 Münster, Germany

### Submitter
Hannes Drexler

### Lab Head
Dr Hannes C. A. Drexler
Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry, Max Planck Institute for Molecular Biomedicine, Röntgenstr. 20, 48149 Münster, Germany


