### Accession
PXD024015

### Title
Understanding condensation domain selectivity in non-ribosomal peptide biosynthesis: structural characterization of the acceptor bound state

### Description
Non-ribosomal peptide synthetases are important enzymes for the assembly of complex peptide natural products. Within these multi-modular assembly lines, condensation domains perform the central function of chain assembly, typically by forming a peptide bond between two peptidyl carrier protein (PCP)-bound substrates. In this work, we report the first structural snapshots of a condensation domain in complex with an aminoacyl-PCP acceptor substrate. These structures allow the identification of a mechanism that controls access of acceptor substrates to the active site in condensation domains. The structures of this previously uncharacterized complex also allow us to demonstrate that condensation domain active sites do not contain a distinct pocket to select the side chain of the acceptor substrate during peptide assembly but that residues within the active site motif can instead serve to tune the selectivity of these central biosynthetic domains.

### Sample Protocol
Non-ribosomal peptide synthetases are important enzymes for the assembly of complex peptide natural products. Within these multi-modular assembly lines, condensation domains perform the central function of chain assembly, typically by forming a peptide bond between two peptidyl carrier protein (PCP)-bound substrates. In this work, we report the first structural snapshots of a condensation domain in complex with an aminoacyl-PCP acceptor substrate. These structures allow the identification of a mechanism that controls access of acceptor substrates to the active site in condensation domains. The structures of this previously uncharacterized complex also allow us to demonstrate that condensation domain active sites do not contain a distinct pocket to select the side chain of the acceptor substrate during peptide assembly but that residues within the active site motif can instead serve to tune the selectivity of these central biosynthetic domains.

### Data Protocol
High resolution mass spectrometry measurements were performed on an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled online to a nano-LC (Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano; Thermo Scientific) via a nanospray source. Peptides were separated on a 50 cm reverse-phase column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, 75 μm × 50 cm, nanoViper, C18, 2 μm, 100 Å; Thermo Scientific) after binding to a trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 100 μm × 2 cm, nanoViper, C18, 5 μm, 100 Å; Thermo Scientific). Elution was performed on-line with a gradient from 6% MeCN to 30% MeCN in 0.1% formic acid over 30 min at 250 nL min−1. Full scan MS was performed in the Orbitrap at 60 000 nominal resolution, with targeted MS2 scans of peptides of interest acquired at 15 000 nominal resolution in the Orbitrap using HCD with stepped collision energy (24 ± 5% NCE). QualBrowser (XCalibur 3.0.63, Thermo Scientific) was used to view spectra and generate extracted ion chromatograms for the singly charged species at 20 ppm. Predicted MS2 fragments were generated with MS-Product (ProteinProspector v5.22.1, UCSF) and manually assigned to spectra. See SI Fig 25 – 30 for the analysis of WT enzyme activity assay, the result from the rest of the mutant were analyzed in the same way as WT.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Non-ribosomal peptide; biosynthesis; condensation domain; peptidyl carrier protein; biocatalysis

### Affiliations
Monash University
Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Monash University, Clayton 3800, Victoria, Australia

### Submitter
Ralf Schittenhelm

### Lab Head
Dr Max Cryle
Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Monash University, Clayton 3800, Victoria, Australia


