### Accession
PXD014147

### Title
The muscular, hepatic and adipose tissues proteomes in Muskox (Ovibos moschatus): differences between males and females

### Description
The proteomes of the muskox muscle, hepatic and adipose tissues are characterized for the first time. In addition, the effect of sex on tissue protein abundance is studied. Our results reveal that sex dimorphism goes from morphology to the molecular level in this species, affecting protein, lipid and carbohydrate metabolism. This contributes for an in-depth look into sex dimorphism using proteomics which is lacking in most mammals, apart from model species. Moreover, this information has been related to nutritional status, which is particularly important when managing the muskox population and the transformation of its habitat in relation to external factors such as climate changes that can severely affect ecosystems.

### Sample Protocol
The animals were culled during the annual hunting season in West Greenland. According the tissue, protein extraction was performed using TCA/ phenol SDS protocol (protocol was optimized for adipose tissue). Two approaches were considered for protein analysis, gel-based (2D-DIGE) no significant results and gel-free (nanoLC-MS/MS) proteomics.  For gel-free proteomics, 20µg of proteins were loaded on a 1D-Gel to fractionate each sample in two groups and to perform in-gel digestion. The extracted peptides were separated with a nanoLC425 Eksigent coupled to a TripleTOF MS 6600 Sciex.

### Data Protocol
The MS data was imported in Progenesis QIP v.4. The protein and peptide identification were searched on Mascot Daemon (v2.6.0, Matrix Science) with the Mascot research parameters following: peptide tolerance =20 ppm, fragment mass tolerance= 0.5 Da, Cys CAM as fixed modification and Met oxidation, Nter acetylation and Trp --> Kyn as variables and confidence >= 0.95. The researches were done in Caprinae database. Differentially expressed proteins were considered significantly different between sexes when the following applied filters were combined: p-value<0.05, at least 1 unique peptide per identified protein, at least 2 significant peptides per protein, and a fold change higher than 1.5. Proteome characterization and functional annotation was performed using Blast2GO software.

### Publication Abstract
The muskox (Ovibos moschatus) is a ruminant highly adapted to arctic conditions. The objective of this work is to study liver, muscle and adipose tissues proteomes in muskoxen highlighting sex differences. Ten animals (5 per sex) were sampled in Western Greenland during the winter hunting season. During carcass processing, muscle, liver and rump fat samples were obtained. Proteomic analyses were conducted using both gel-based and gel-free approaches. Gel-free data are available (ProteomeXchange; PXD014147). For gel-free analysis, 729, 853 and 792 proteins were identified for fat, liver and muscle, respectively. Several proteins were detected with differential abundance between male and female tissues: 77, 15 and 12 proteins using gel-free for adipose tissue, liver and muscle respectively while 3 differential proteins were identified in the gel-based analysis of the adipose tissue. Females have higher abundance of proteins involved in tissue structural stability in the muscle, while males have higher abundance of proteins related to muscle development. In the liver and adipose tissue, females have higher abundance of proteins related to oxidative-stress resistance. Proteins accumulated in the adipose tissue of males highlight higher adipogenic potential. Sex dimorphism is inherent to this species, with higher abundance of proteins in specific metabolic pathways. SIGNIFICANCE: The proteomes of the muskox muscle, hepatic and adipose tissues are characterized for the first time. In addition, the effect of sex on tissue protein abundance is studied. Our results reveal that sex dimorphism goes from morphology to the molecular level in this species, affecting protein, lipid and carbohydrate metabolism. This contributes for an in-depth look into sex dimorphism using proteomics which is lacking in most mammals, apart from model species. Moreover, this information has been related to nutritional status, which is particularly important when managing the muskox population and the transformation of its habitat in relation to external factors such as climate changes that can severely affect ecosystems.

### Keywords
Muskox, Liver, Sex, Fat, Lc-ms/ms, Longissimus dorsi

### Affiliations
LIST-ERIN dept ERTP-GreenTech
LIST-ERIN-ERTP-BEAP-HAU platform

### Submitter
Céline LECLERCQ

### Lab Head
Dr Céline LECLERCQ
LIST-ERIN dept ERTP-GreenTech


