### Accession
PXD036035

### Title
Homologous genes shared between probiotics and pathogens affected the adhesion of probiotics and exclusion of pathogens in gut mucus

### Description
Clarifying mechanisms underlying the selective adhesion of probiotics and competitive exclusion of pathogens in the intestine is a central theme of maintaining host health.

### Sample Protocol
The bacterial pellets were collected by centrifugation (12,000 g) at 4°C for 10 min, then transferred to 1.5 mL centrifuge tube with SDT lysis buffer (4% SDS, 10 mM DL-DTT, 100 mM TEAB) before ultrasonication for 5 min on ice. The lysate was centrifuged at 12,000 g for 15 min at 4°C for collecting the supernatant, which was then reduced with 10 mM DTT for 1 h at 56°C. Sufficient iodoacetamide was added to alkylate for 1 h at room temperature in the dark. Subsequently, four volumes pre-cold acetone were added and mixed completely, and the mixture were incubated at -20°C overnight. The protein precipitation was washed with 1 mL pre-cold acetone and then dissolved in dissolution buffer (8 M Urea, 100 mM TEAB, pH=8.5). The protein concentration of the lysate was determined by the Bradford method62. For each sample, 20 μg protein was loaded on the 12% SDS-PAGE. After a concentration with 80 V for 20 min, the protein was separated by 120V for 90 min, and then visualized using coomassie brilliant blue R-250. The trypsin treatment and desalted were performed as previous study63.  The peptides were analyzed on a EASY-nLCTM 1200 nano UHPLC system coupled with an Q ExactiveTM HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) with ion source of Nanospray FlexTM (ESI). The mass spectrometer was performed in data dependent mode, automatically switching between MS1 and MS2 spectra. MS1 spectra had a full scan mass-to-charge (m/z) range from 350 to 1500 using a maximum injection time of 20 ms and an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 3×106. Top 40 abundant precursors were isolated, fragmented by higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) using 27% normalized collision energy (NCE) and analyzed at a resolution of 15,000 with a scan range from 200 to 2000 m/z with an AGC target value of 1×105. The raw data of MS detection was obtained by set the intensity threshold of 2.2×104 and the dynamic exclusion parameter of 20 s.

### Data Protocol
Peptide/protein identification and quantification were performed with Proteome Discover 2.2 (PD2.2, Thermo) by searching the raw data against database consisting of 22110 sequences of L. pentosus obtained from Uniprot (794070-X101SC21061420-Z01-Lactobacillus+pentosus-uniprot.fasta). The search parameters were as follows: mass tolerance for precursor ion and product ion was 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively; fixed modification with carbamidomethyl; dynamic modification with methionine oxidation; N-Terminal modification with acetylation; allowance of 2 missed cleavage; identified peptides spectrum matches with a credibility of more than 99% and at least one unique peptide; false discovery rate set as 0.01. The mutant strains with fold changes ≥ 1.5 or ≤ 0.67, and P value ≤ 0.05 (t-test) were considered as significantly differentially expressed proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Clarifying mechanisms underlying the selective adhesion of probiotics and competitive exclusion of pathogens in the intestine is a central theme for shrimp health. Under experimental manipulation of probiotic strain (i.e., <i>Lactiplantibacillus plantarum</i> HC-2) adhesion to the shrimp mucus, this study tested the core hypothesis that homologous genes shared between probiotic and pathogen would affect the adhesion of probiotics and exclusion of pathogens by regulating the membrane proteins of probiotics. Results indicated that the reduction of FtsH protease activity, which significantly correlated with the increase of membrane proteins, could increase the adhesion ability of <i>L. plantarum</i> HC-2 to the mucus. These membrane proteins mainly involved in transport (glycine betaine/carnitine/choline ABC transporter <i>choS</i>, ABC transporter, ATP synthase subunit a <i>atpB</i>, amino acid permease) and regulation of cellular processes (histidine kinase). The genes encoding the membrane proteins were significantly (<i>p</i>&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.05) up-regulated except those encoding ABC transporters and histidine kinases in <i>L. plantarum</i> HC-2 when co-cultured with <i>Vibrio parahaemolyticus</i> E1, indicating that these genes could help <i>L. plantarum</i> HC-2 to competitively exclude pathogens. Moreover, an arsenal of genes predicted to be involved in carbohydrate metabolism and bacteria-host interactions were identified in <i>L. plantarum</i> HC-2, indicating a clear strain adaption to host's gastrointestinal tract. This study advances our mechanistic understanding of the selective adhesion of probiotics and competitive exclusion of pathogens in the intestine, and has important implications for screening and applying new probiotics for maintaining gut stability and host health.

### Keywords
Lactobacillus pentosus, Probiotics

### Affiliations
Dezhou University

### Submitter
Yujie Sha

### Lab Head
Dr Yujie Sha
Dezhou University


