### Accession
PXD033071

### Title
E. coli toxin YjjJ (HipH) is a Ser/Thr protein kinase that impacts cell division, carbon metabolism and ribosome assembly

### Description
Protein Ser/Thr kinases are post-translational regulators of key molecular processes in bacteria, such as cell division and antibiotic tolerance. Here we characterize the E. coli toxin YjjJ (HipH), a putative protein kinase annotated as a member of the family of HipA-like Ser/Thr kinases which are involved in antibiotic tolerance. Using SILAC-based phosphoproteomics we provide experimental evidence that YjjJ is a Ser/Thr protein kinase and its primary protein substrates are the ribosomal protein RpmE (L31) and the carbon storage regulator CsrA. YjjJ activity impacts ribosome assembly, cell division and central carbon metabolism but it does not increase antibiotic tolerance as does its homologue HipA. Intriguingly, overproduction of YjjJ and its kinase-deficient variant can activate HipA and other kinases, pointing to a crosstalk between Ser/Thr kinases in E. coli.

### Sample Protocol
For quantitative phosphoproteomic experiments, E. coli cells were differentially labeled using stable isotope–labeled lysine derivatives: 4,4,5,5-D4 l-lysine, 13C6 15N2 l-lysine and l-lysine. Precultures and main cultures were grown in M9 minimal medium. For the quantitative measurement of proteome dynamics, digested samples were on-stage tip dimethylation labeled. In brief, 1ml of the respective labeling solutions with and NaBH3CN for light- and CD2O and NaBH3CN for medium- labeling were flushed with 2 – 5 min contact time through the stage tip. Labeled peptides were washed with 200 µl HPLC Solvent Aand eluted with HPLC Solvent B. Pre-cultures were grown overnight in liquid medium (Luria-Broth or M9 minimal medium). Day culture were inoculated at 0.08 OD600 and once reached 0.3 OD600, arabinose was added at the desired concentration. Cultures were harvested at specific time points by centrifugation at 4°C and stored at −80°C. The cell pellets were resuspended in a lysis buffer and sonicated till clearness. The cellular debris was pelleted by centrifugation at 13,000g for 30 min, and the crude protein extract was precipitated from the supernatant with methanol and chloroform. Protein pellet was resuspended in a denaturation buffer. In each SILAC experiment, differently labeled protein extracts were mixed in equal amounts corrected by the ratios determined by measuring mixing checks to a total of 12 mg. Proteins were reduced using 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 1 hour and subsequently alkylated with 5.5 mM iodoacetamide for 1 hour. One-half of the protein mixture was diluted with four volumes of 62.5 mM tris and 12.5 mM CaCl2 and digested with chymotrypsin overnight at RT. The other half was predigested with endoproteinase Lys-C for 3 hours, then diluted with four volumes of 62.5 mM tris, and supplemented with endoproteinase Lys-C for overnight digestion at RT. The reaction was stopped by acidification with trifluoroacetic acid to pH 2. An aliquot of 10 µg was purified by StageTips, and 2 µg was used for direct proteome measurement with 230-min LC gradient. For dimethyl-labelling experiment, samples were digested with trypsin, predigested with endoproteinase Lys-C. Digested peptides were desalted by the solid-phase extraction using Sep-Pak C18 Vac 100 mg column. Column was activated with methanol and equilibrated with solvent A* and peptides were eluted with 1.8 ml of 80% acetonitrile and 6% TFA. Phosphopeptides were enriched using MagReSyn® Ti4+-IMAC beads. Beads were washed twice with ethanol 70%, followed by an additional wash step with elution buffer. Beads were then equilibrated three times with loading. Samples were incubated with equilibrated beads for 20 minutes at constant shake at RT. Supernatant was discarded and the unbound samples was washed away with loading buffer. Three washing steps with wash buffer I removed non-specific bound peptides. One additional washing step was performed with an aqueous solution of 10% acetonitrile and 0.2% trifluoroacetic acid. Three rounds of elution of bound peptides was performed using incubating the beads with elution buffer for 15 minutes. Purified peptide samples were separated by an EASY-nLC system coupled online to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer. Chromatographic separation was performed on a 20-cm-long, 75–µm–inner diameter analytical column packed in-house with reversed-phase ReproSilPur C18-AQ 1.9 µm particles. Peptides were ionized by nanoelectrospray ionization at 2.3 kV and 275°C. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode, with MS/MS scans of either 12 or 7 most abundant peaks selected with an isolation window of 1.4 m/z. Full-scan MS spectra were acquired in a mass range from 300 to 1650 m/z at a target value of 3 × 106 charges with the maximum injection time of 25 ms, 45 ms for in vitro kinase assay, and a resolution of 60,000. To prevent repeated fragmentation, the masses of sequenced precursors were dynamically excluded for 30 s, reduced to 20 s for in vitro kinase assay. The higher-energy collisional dissociation MS/MS spectra were recorded with the maximum injection time of 45 or 220 ms (for phosphoproteome and in vitro kinase measurements) at a target value of 1 × 105 and a resolution of 30,000, or 60,000 for phosphoproteome and in vitro kinase measurements. The normalized collision energy was set to 27%, and the intensity threshold was kept at 1 × 105 for proteome, 5 × 104 for phosphoproteome measurement or 4.5 x 104. The masses of sequenced precursor ions were dynamically excluded from MS/MS fragmentation for 30 s. Ions with single, unassigned, or six and higher charge states were excluded from fragmentation selection.

### Data Protocol
For all SILAC based experiment we performed same pipeline. Acquired raw data were processed using the MaxQuant software suite (version 1.5.2.8). Raw files of the different experiments were processed separately. The derived peak list was searched using Andromeda search engine integrated in MaxQuant against a reference E. coli K-12 proteome (taxonomy ID 83333) obtained from UniProt (4403 protein entries, released in October 2020), and a file containing 245 common laboratory contaminants. During the first search, peptide mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm (parts per million) and, in the main search, to 4.5 ppm. For triple-label SILAC experiments, multiplicity was set to three with Lys4 and Lys8 specified as medium and heavy labels, respectively. Methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation, and Ser-Thr-Tyr phosphorylation were defined as variable modifications, and carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification. The minimum required peptide length was set to seven amino acids with the maximum of two missed cleavages allowed for endoproteinase Lys-C that was set to specifically cleave at lysine C terminus. Chymotrypsin was set to specifically cleave at phenylalanine, tryptophan, tyrosine, leucine, and methionine C terminus with maximum five missed cleavages allowing for maximum of four labeled amino acids. ﻿To increase the number of quantified features, the “match between runs” option was enabled with a match time window set to 0.7 min. ﻿Requantify option was enabled to allow for quantification of SILAC and dimethyl-labelled pairs that result in extreme ratio values. All (phospho)peptide and protein identifications were filtered using a target-decoy approach with a false discovery rate (FDR) set to 0.01 at peptide and protein level. Proteins identified by the same set of peptides were combined to a single protein group. Protein groups identified by a single peptide were kept in the data set. For protein quantification, a minimum of two peptide ratio counts was required. To increase the number of quantified features, the “match between runs” option was enabled with a match time window set to 0.7 min. This allows the transfer of peptide identifications across LC-MS/MS runs based on the mass and the retention time of the peptide identified by MS/MS. Re-quantify option was enabled to allow for quantification of SILAC pairs that result in extreme ratio values. For proteome dynamic analysis under low YjjJ induction and in vitro kinase assay, MaxQuant settings were slightly changed: for double dimethyl-labelling, multiplicity was set to two (DimethylLys0 and DimethylLys4), no phosphorylation was defined as variable modification and maximum missed cleavage for trypsin was set to 2; for in vitro kinase experiment, no multiplicity was defined. Statistical analysis of MaxQuant output data was performed by using Perseus software (version 1.6.5.0), and figures were edited in Adobe Illustrator. All contaminants and reverse hits were removed. Phosphorylation sites were additionally filtered for posterior error probability scores of <0.01. Minimal score of 40 was required for phosphorylation site and 20 for protein identifications. Changes in phosphorylation events were normalized to differences in protein abundances, unless otherwise stated. For that, phosphorylation site SILAC ratios were divided with the protein SILAC ratios of corresponding proteins. Normalized phosphorylation site ratios were log2-transformed and plotted against the log10-transformed phosphopeptide intensities summed for each of two SILAC channels observed. Statistically significantly regulated phosphorylation sites were determined by applying an arbitrary ratio threshold of 2 in log2 scale (fourfold). Statistically significantly regulated proteins were determined by using significance B test with a P value of 0.05. For Volcano plots, log2-transformed ratios of three independent experiments were grouped into one group and compared to the group containing only zero values using t test with FDR of 0.1 and the minimal fold change S0 of 0. Based on majority protein ID, identified hits were annotated (GOBP, GOMF, GOCC and Reactome). Dataset was then filtered based on t-test significance >1, Fisher exact test was performed (FDR of 0.1) and the generated matrix was visualized with in-house software. For dynamic-proteome analysis, proteins present in at least 2 replicates in one time point were selected and an analyzed via ANOVA (FDR of 0.1 and the minimal fold change S0 of 0). On significant proteins, Post-hoc test was performed (FDR of 0.1) and results plot as heat map. As for SILAC-based experiment, proteins were then annotated, followed by Fisher exact test and then visualized.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Escherichia coli, Kinases, Toxin yjjj

### Affiliations
Quantitative Proteomics, Interfaculty Institute of Cell Biology, University of Tuebingen, Germany
Tuebingen University

### Submitter
Nicolas Nalpas

### Lab Head
Dr Boris Macek
Quantitative Proteomics, Interfaculty Institute of Cell Biology, University of Tuebingen, Germany


