### Accession
PXD039925

### Title
Extracting proteins from microscopic biominerals:    a reproducible method development using oyster larvae

### Description
Method development for protein extraction from microscopic biominerals. The method was developed using Hong Kong oyster larval shells

### Sample Protocol
Briefly, samples were resuspended in 8 M urea and incubated at room temperature for 30 min. Sample concentration was measured using a BCA protein assay kit (23227, Thermo Scientific). Samples were reduced for 1 h with 5mM TCEP-HCl (20490, ThermoFisher Scientific Pierce) at room temperature, alkylated for 1 h with 10 mM iodoacetamide (I6125, Sigma-Aldrich) at room temperature, and quenched for 1 h with 10 mM dithiothreitol (D1532, ThermoFisher Scientific) at 37ºC. All solutions were prepared in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate in sterile Milli-Q water, and the given concentrations are the final concentrations in the solution. Samples were diluted to 1 M urea and digested with trypsin (MS grade, ThermoFisher Scientific Pierce) (1/20 enzyme/substrate ratio) for 20 h at 37ºC. After desalting on C18 cartridges (1 cc Sep-Pak Vac, Waters), peptides were dried in a vacuum concentrator at 30ºC and stored at -20ºC until further processing. Eluted peptides were analyzed with a Dionex Ultimate3000 nanoRSLC system coupled to Thermo Fisher Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid Lumos mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were searched against the M. hongkongensis protein FASTA database (Li et al. 2020), containing 45,308 entries. Oxidized methionine and acetylation (protein N-term) were selected as dynamic modifications and carbamidomethyl as fixed modification. Proteins were identified using a target-decoy approach with a reversed database and a strict false-discovery rate of 1% at the peptide and peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) level. The minimum peptide length was set at 8 amino acids.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Larval shell protein, Magallana hongkongensis, Biomineral proteomics, Hong kong oyster, Bivalve shell protein, Bivalve larva

### Affiliations
The University of Hong Kong
The Swire Institute of Marine Science and School of Biological Sciences, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region

### Submitter
Alessia Carini

### Lab Head
Dr Thiyagarajan Vengatesen
The Swire Institute of Marine Science and School of Biological Sciences, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region


