### Accession
PXD010303

### Title
Sulfurospirillum_fermentation - The experiments were done to investigate fermentation and hydrogen production by the Epsilonproteobacterium Sulfurospirillum multivorans and Sulfurospirillum cavolei. they were grown on pyurvate with or without the electron acceptor fumarate. S. multivorans was cultivated additionally with lactate and fumarate to gather information on lactate oxidation.

### Description
The experiments were done to investigate fermentation and hydrogen production by the Epsilonproteobacterium Sulfurospirillum multivorans and Sulfurospirillum cavolei. they were grown on pyurvate with or without the electron acceptor fumarate. S. multivorans was cultivated additionally with lactate and fumarate to gather information on lactate oxidation.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial cells were harvested and lyzed. Proteins were separated very shortly on an SDS-gel to purify the samples. Gel pieces were excised, reduced with DTT, treated with iodoacetamide and trypsin digested. Then ZipTip desalting was done before samples were measured by an Orbitrap Fusion

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analyzed by proteome discoverer 2.2 (Thermo) using SequestHT as search engine.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sulfurospirillum hydrogenase hydrogen fermentation

### Affiliations
Dept. Isotope Biogeochemistry, Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ, Leipzig, Germany
Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ

### Submitter
Lorenz Adrian

### Lab Head
Dr Lorenz Adrian
Dept. Isotope Biogeochemistry, Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ, Leipzig, Germany


