### Accession
PXD023134

### Title
Human Neutrophils in Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension by LC-MSMS

### Description
Neutrophil elastase (NE) is implicated in pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) but the role of neutrophils in the pathogenesis of PAH is unclear. Here we show that neutrophils from PAH vs. control subjects produce and release increased NE associated with enhanced extracellular trap formation. PAH neutrophils are highly adherent and show decreased migration consistent with increased vinculin, identified on proteomic analysis and  previously linked to an antiviral response. This was substantiated by a transcriptomic interferon signature in PAH neutrophils and an increase in human endogenous retrovirus (HERV-K) envelope protein.  NE and interferon genes are induced by HERV-K envelope and vinculin is increased by HERV-K dUTPase that is elevated in PAH plasma. Neutrophil exosomes from PAH plasma contain increased NE and HERV-K envelope and induce pulmonary hypertension in mice, that is mitigated by the NE inhibitor and antiviral agent, elafin.  Thus elevated HERVs explain pathological neutrophils linked to PAH induction and progression.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics was evaluated using neutrophils isolated from 6 healthy control subjects and 12 PAH patients. Human neutrophils (5x106) were lysed in 10 mM Tris-HCI and 1% SDS, and 40 µg of protein loaded and concentrated by SDS-PAGE at 100 volts for 10 min. After Coomassie blue staining, the protein bands from each sample were excised with a clean razor blade. Proteins were reduced, alkylated and digested overnight using Trypsin/Lys-C and peptides were extracted from the gel. Peptide extracts were then dried in a speed vac, reconstituted in 100 mM TEAB and protein concentrations were measured using the BCA method. Peptides were labeled with TMT 10plex reagent (Thermo Fisher) as instructed by the vendor and subsequently combined at equal amount. Each pool contained 9 samples and one reference pool sample.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using Proteome Discoverer software PD2.1 (Thermo) with precursor and fragment ion mass tolerance of 10 ppm and 0.6 Dalton, respectively, for database search. The search included cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification. Acetylation at protein N-terminus, methionine oxidation and TMT at peptide N-terminus and lysine were used as variable modifications. Up to two missed cleavages were allowed for trypsin digestion. Only unique peptides with a minimum of six amino acids were considered for protein identification. The peptide false discovery rate (FDR) was set at 1%. Data was searched against the uniprot human proteome database. Quantitative results at the protein level were reported relative to the reference pool sample. Batch effect was corrected by applying median-normalization and proteins detected in less than 2/3 of the samples were discarded.

### Publication Abstract
<b>Rationale:</b> The role of neutrophils and their extracellular vesicles (EVs) in the pathogenesis of pulmonary arterial hypertension is unclear. <b>Objectives:</b> To relate functional abnormalities in pulmonary arterial hypertension neutrophils and their EVs to mechanisms uncovered by proteomic and transcriptomic profiling. <b>Methods:</b> Production of elastase, release of extracellular traps, adhesion, and migration were assessed in neutrophils from patients with pulmonary arterial hypertension and control subjects. Proteomic analyses were applied to explain functional perturbations, and transcriptomic data were used to find underlying mechanisms. CD66b-specific neutrophil EVs were isolated from plasma of patients with pulmonary arterial hypertension, and we determined whether they produce pulmonary hypertension in mice. <b>Measurements and Main Results:</b> Neutrophils from patients with pulmonary arterial hypertension produce and release increased neutrophil elastase, associated with enhanced extracellular traps. They exhibit reduced migration and increased adhesion attributed to elevated &#x3b2;1-integrin and vinculin identified by proteomic analysis and previously linked to an antiviral response. This was substantiated by a transcriptomic IFN signature that we related to an increase in human endogenous retrovirus K envelope protein. Transfection of human endogenous retrovirus K envelope in a neutrophil cell line (HL-60) increases neutrophil elastase and IFN genes, whereas vinculin is increased by human endogenous retrovirus K deoxyuridine triphosphate diphosphatase that is elevated in patient plasma. Neutrophil EVs from patient plasma contain increased neutrophil elastase and human endogenous retrovirus K envelope and induce pulmonary hypertension in mice, mitigated by elafin, an elastase inhibitor. <b>Conclusions:</b> Elevated human endogenous retroviral elements and elastase link a neutrophil innate immune response to pulmonary arterial hypertension.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Neutrophils, Pulmonary arterial hypertension

### Affiliations
Stanford University
Stanford University, Department of Genetics, United States

### Submitter
Shalina Taylor

### Lab Head
Dr Lihua Jiang
Stanford University, Department of Genetics, United States


