### Accession
PXD020985

### Title
Combinatorial native MS and LC-MS/MS approach reveals high intrinsic phosphorylation of human Tau

### Description
Abnormal changes in the neuronal microtubule-associated protein Tau, such as high phosphorylation and aggregation, are considered hallmarks of cognitive deficits in Alzheimer disease. Abnormal phosphorylation is thought to take place before aggregation, and therefore it is often assumed that phosphorylation predisposes Tau towards aggregation. However, the nature and extent of phosphorylation has remained ill-defined. Tau protein contains up to 85 potential phosphorylation sites (80 Ser/Thr, and 5 Tyr P-sites), many of which can be phosphorylated by various kinases because the unfolded structure of Tau makes them accessible. However, limitations in methods (e.g. in mass spectrometry of phosphorylated peptides, or antibodies against phospho-epitopes) have led to conflicting results regarding the overall degree of phosphorylation of Tau in cells. Here we present results from a new approach, that is based on native mass spectrometry analysis of intact Tau expressed in a eukaryotic cell system (Sf9) which reveals Tau in different phosphorylation states. The extent of phosphorylation is remarkably heterogeneous with up to ~20 phosphates (Pi) per molecule and distributed over 51 sites (including all P-sites published so far and additional 18 P-sites). The medium phosphorylated fraction Pm showed overall occupancies centered at 8 Pi (± 5 Pi) with a bell-shaped distribution, the highly phosphorylated fraction Ph had 14 Pi (± 6 Pi). The distribution of sites was remarkably asymmetric (with 71% of all P-sites located in the C-terminal half of Tau). All phosphorylation sites were on Ser or Thr residues, but none on Tyr. Other known posttranslational modifications of Tau were near or below our detection limit (e.g. acetylation, ubiquitination).

### Sample Protocol
Tau protein (clone htau40, largest isoform in human CNS, 441 residues, Uniprot Id P10636 isoform F) expressed in E. coli or Sf9 cells, prepared and purified as described in (Tepper et al., 2014). Expression in either system yielded Tau concentrations up to ~230 µM without causing aggregation. In the case of Sf9 cells the expressed Tau protein was purified from cell extracts by making use of the heat stability of Tau. Sf9 Cells were incubated for 3 days  at 27 °C and collected directly for preparation of phosphorylated hTau40 protein in lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, 500 mM NaCl, 10% glycerol, 1% Nonidet P-40, 5mM DTT, 10mM EGTA, 20mM NaF, 1 mM  orthovanadate, 5 µM microcystin, 10 µg/ml each of protease inhibitors leupeptin, aprotinin, and pepstatin) in a ratio of 1 g of Sf9 pellet to 10 ml of lysis buffer. This procedure yielded “Pm-Tau” (alias P12-Tau in Tepper, 2014; or  P-Tau in Mair, 2016). To increase the phosphorylation even further, Sf9 cells were treated before harvesting for 1 h with 0.2 µM okadaic acid (OA; a phosphatase inhibitor, Enzo-LifeScience). Next, after centrifugation the cells were resuspended in lysis buffer and boiled in a water bath at 100°C for 10 min. By this treatment nearly all proteins were denatured and precipitated, except for Tau which stays soluble. The cell debris was removed by centrifugation.  The supernatant containing soluble Tau protein was concentrated in Millipore Amicon Ultra-4-centrifugal filter units (molecular mass cutoff of 3 kDa). This procedure yielded “Ph-Tau” (alias P20-Tau in (Tepper et al., 2014), or PP-Tau in (Mair et al., 2016)). The material was then applied to a size exclusion column Superdex G200 (GE Healthcare) and eluted with PBS buffer (pH 7.4; 1 mM DTT). For further experiments, the fractions containing Tau protein were pooled and concentrated again in Amicon Ultra-4-centrifugal filter units. Finally, the concentrated protein was rebuffered into 200 mM ammonium acetate, pH 7,6.   In-solution tryptic digestion of proteins was performed as described previously (Morgenstern et al., 2017). In brief, Tau protein samples were subjected to reduction of cysteine residues with 5 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine, alkylation of free thiol groups with 50 mM iodoacetamide/50 mM NH4HCO3 and digested with trypsin overnight at 37°C. Peptide mixtures were analyzed by nano-HPLC-ESI-MS/MS using a Q Exactive instrument directly coupled to an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system (both Thermo Fisher Scientific, Dreieich, Germany) equipped with a Nanospray Flex ion source with DirectJunction (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were washed and preconcentrated on PepMapTM C18 precolumns (5 mm x 300 μm inner diameter; Thermo Scientific) and separated using AcclaimPepMapTM RSLC columns (50 cm x 75 μm inner diameter; pore size, 100 Å; particle size, 2 μm) at a flow rate of 250 nl/min and 40 - 43°C. For peptide elution, binary solvent systems were used consisting of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (FA) (solvent A) and 0.1% (v/v) FA/86% (v/v) acetonitrile (solvent B) with a gradient of 4- 42% solvent B in 50 min, 42 - 95% in 5 min and 5 min at 95%. The Q Exactive was operated with the following parameters: MS survey scans ranging from m/z 375 - 1,700 at a resolution (R) of 70,000 (at m/z 200), an automatic gain control (AGC) of 3 x 106 ions, and a maximum injection time (IT) of 60 ms. A TOP12 method was used for higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) of precursor peptides (z ≥ 2) in the orbitrap applying a normalized collision energy of 28%, an AGC of 1 x 105 ions and max. IT of 120 ms. The dynamic exclusion time for previously fragmented precursors was set to 45 s.

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed using Maxquant software version 1.5.5.1 (Tyanova et al., 2016) searching against the sequence of human Tau-F (Uniprot Id P10636-8) and Uniprot organism specific sequence databases for E. coli and Spodoptera frugiperda (version 2018_08, 4,344 and 26,434 entries, respectively) allowing a maximum of four missed cleavages of trypsin, a mass tolerance of 4.5 ppm for precursor and 20 ppm for fragment ions. Methionine oxidation, acetylation of lysine and protein N-terminus as well as phosphorylation at serine, threonine and tyrosine residues were specified as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification. Additional searches were performed with an extended range of variable modifications including ubiquitination (diglycine at lysine) and O-GlcNAc modification of serine and threonine. However, these modifications were observed only sporadically and in low intensity and borderline significance and were therefore excluded from the final search. The lists of both peptide and protein identifications were filtered applying thresholds for the false discovery rate of <0.01 and for the localisation probability of 0.75.

### Publication Abstract
Abnormal changes of neuronal Tau protein, such as phosphorylation and aggregation, are considered hallmarks of cognitive deficits in Alzheimer's disease. Abnormal phosphorylation is thought to precede aggregation and therefore to promote aggregation, but the nature and extent of phosphorylation remain ill-defined. Tau contains &#x223c;85 potential phosphorylation sites, which can be phosphorylated by various kinases because the unfolded structure of Tau makes them accessible. However, methodological limitations (<i>e.g.</i> in MS of phosphopeptides, or antibodies against phosphoepitopes) led to conflicting results regarding the extent of Tau phosphorylation in cells. Here we present results from a new approach based on native MS of intact Tau expressed in eukaryotic cells (Sf9). The extent of phosphorylation is heterogeneous, up to &#x223c;20 phosphates per molecule distributed over 51 sites. The medium phosphorylated fraction P<sub>m</sub> showed overall occupancies of &#x223c;8 P<sub>i</sub> (&#xb1; 5) with a bell-shaped distribution; the highly phosphorylated fraction P<sub>h</sub> had 14 P<sub>i</sub> (&#xb1; 6). The distribution of sites was highly asymmetric (with 71% of all P-sites in the C-terminal half of Tau). All sites were on Ser or Thr residues, but none were on Tyr. Other known posttranslational modifications were near or below our detection limit (<i>e.g.</i> acetylation, ubiquitination). These findings suggest that normal cellular Tau shows a remarkably high extent of phosphorylation, whereas other modifications are nearly absent. This implies that abnormal phosphorylations at certain sites may not affect the extent of phosphorylation significantly and do not represent hyperphosphorylation. By implication, the pathological aggregation of Tau is not likely a consequence of high phosphorylation.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Tau protein, Alzheimer disease, Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry, Native mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Functional Proteomics Lab, Faculty of Biology, University of Freiburg, Germany
AG Warscheid
Biologie II
Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg
Schänzlestr. 1
79104 Freiburg
Germany


### Submitter
Friedel Drepper

### Lab Head
Dr Bettina Warscheid
Functional Proteomics Lab, Faculty of Biology, University of Freiburg, Germany


### SDRF

