### Accession
PXD027306

### Title
A Metaproteomic Workflow for Sample Preparation and Data Analysis Applied to Mouse Faeces: 5

### Description
The intestinal microbiota plays a key role in shaping host homeostasis by regulating metabolism, immune responses and behaviour. Its dysregulation has been associated with metabolic, immune and neuropsychiatric disorders and is accompanied by changes in bacterial metabolic regulation. Although proteomic is well suited for analysis of individual microbes, metaproteomic of faecal samples is challenging due to the physical structure of the sample, presence of contaminating host proteins and coexistence of hundreds of species. Furthermore, there is a lack of consensus regarding preparation of faecal samples, as well as downstream bioinformatic analyses following metaproteomic data acquisition. Here we assess sample preparation and data analysis strategies applied to mouse faeces in a typical LC-MS/MS metaproteomic experiment. We show that low speed centrifugation (LSC) of faecal samples leads to high protein identification rates but possibly enriched for a subset of taxa. During database search, two-step search strategies led to dramatic and underestimated accumulation of false positive protein identifications. Regarding taxonomic annotation, the MS-identified peptides of unknown origin were annotated with highest sensitivity and specificity using the Unipept software. Comparison of matching metaproteome and metagenome data revealed a positive correlation between protein and gene abundances. Notably, nearly all functional categories of detected protein groups were differentially abundant in the metaproteome compared to what would be expected from the metagenome, highlighting the need to perform metaproteomic when studying complex microbiome samples.

### Sample Protocol
Samples from the study by Kleiner and colleagues were reanalysed here. Please see the publication Kleiner et al. Nat Commun 2017 and the pride submission PXD006118.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.8). The protein sequence databases used for database search consisted of the protein sequence database from all organisms present in the artificial samples (122,972 sequences) and frequently observed contaminants (248 entries), as well as the mouse microbiome catalogue (~2.6 million proteins). Several processings were performed differing in the number of microbiome catalogue entries included, this led to inflation of the "true" database from 0.5 up to 20 times. The database search was conducted using four different strategies in order to compare the results obtained from single-step search strategy against: (1) “two-step protein” search to keep identified proteins (Jagtap, Proteomics 2013), (2) “two-step taxa” search to keep identified taxa (Tanca, Microbiome 2016), and (3) “two-step two sections” search to keep identified proteins after sectioned search (Kumar, J Proteome Res 2020). A maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed and full tryptic enzyme specificity was required. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was defined as ﬁxed modiﬁcation, while methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modiﬁcations.

### Publication Abstract
Intestinal microbiota plays a key role in shaping host homeostasis by regulating metabolism, immune responses and behavior. Its dysregulation has been associated with metabolic, immune and neuropsychiatric disorders and is accompanied by changes in bacterial metabolic regulation. Although proteomics is well suited for analysis of individual microbes, metaproteomics of fecal samples is challenging due to the physical structure of the sample, presence of contaminating host proteins and coexistence of hundreds of taxa. Furthermore, there is a lack of consensus regarding preparation of fecal samples, as well as downstream bioinformatic analyses following metaproteomics data acquisition. Here we assess sample preparation and data analysis strategies applied to mouse feces in a typical mass spectrometry-based metaproteomic experiment. We show that subtle changes in sample preparation protocols may influence interpretation of biological findings. Two-step database search strategies led to significant underestimation of false positive protein identifications. Unipept software provided the highest sensitivity and specificity in taxonomic annotation of the identified peptides of unknown origin. Comparison of matching metaproteome and metagenome data revealed a positive correlation between protein and gene abundances. Notably, nearly all functional categories of detected protein groups were differentially abundant in the metaproteome compared to what would be expected from the metagenome, highlighting the need to perform metaproteomics when studying complex microbiome samples.

### Keywords
Mus musculus, Metaproteomics, Taxonomy, Metagenome

### Affiliations
Quantitative Proteomics Proteome Center Tübingen Universität Tübingen Auf der Morgenstelle 15 72076 Tübingen
Tuebingen University

### Submitter
Nicolas Nalpas

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Boris Macek
Quantitative Proteomics Proteome Center Tübingen Universität Tübingen Auf der Morgenstelle 15 72076 Tübingen


