### Accession
PXD006879

### Title
Analysis of the early cellular and humoral responses of Galleria mellonella larvae to infection by Candida albicans

### Description
Galleria mellonella larvae were administered an inoculum of Candida albicans and the cellular and proteomic response to infection over the first 24 hours was monitored. The yeast cell density in infected larvae declined initially but replication commenced six hours post-infection. The hemocyte density decreased from 5.2 × 106/ml to 2.5 × 106/ml at 2 hours but increased to 4.2 × 106 at 6 hours but decreased subsequently. Administration of β - glucan to larvae also resulted in an increase in hemocyte density (5.1 ± 0.22 × 106/ml to 6.25 ± 0.25 × 106/ml, p < 0.05) and the population showed an increase in the density of small, granular type cells at 24 hours (p < 0.05). Hemocytes from larvae inoculated with β - glucan showed faster killing of C. albicans cells (53 ± 4.1% (p < 0.01), 64 ± 3.7%, (p < 0.01), respectively) than hemocytes from control larvae (24 ± 11%) at 60 min. Proteomic analysis indicated increased abundance of immune related proteins cecropin-A (5 fold) and prophenoloxidase-activating proteinase-1 (5 fold) 6 hours post infection but by 24 hours there was elevated abundance of muscle (tropomyosin 2 (141 fold), calponin (66 fold), troponin I (62 fold), troponin T (61 fold)) and proteins indicative of cellular stress (glutathione-S-transferase-like protein (114 fold)), fungal dissemination (muscle protein 20-like protein (174 fold)) and tissue breakdown (mitochondrial cytochrome c (10 fold)). Proteins decreased in abundance at 24 hour included β - 1,3 - glucan recognition protein precursor (29 fold), prophenoloxidase subunit 2 (25 fold) and lysozyme-like protein 1 (5 fold). By characterizing the early responses to infection, G. mellonella larvae may be used to model the initial stages of infection processes in mammals.

### Sample Protocol
Label free shotgun semi-quantitative proteomics was conducted on hemocyte-free hemolymph from larvae (n = 5) at 0, 6 and 24 hours post infection with C. albicans (5 × 105/ larvae). Protein (75 μg) was reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT; 200 mM) (Sigma-Aldrich), alkylated with iodoacetamide (IAA; 1 M) (Sigma-Aldrich) and digested with sequence grade trypsin (Promega, Ireland) at a trypsin:protein ratio of 1:40, overnight at 37 °C. Tryptic peptides were purified for mass spectrometry using C18 spin filters (Medical Supply Company, Ireland) and 1 μg of peptide mix was eluted onto a Q-Exactive (ThermoFisher Scientific, U.S.A) high resolution accurate mass spectrometer connected to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 (RSLCnano) chromatography system. Peptides were separated by an increasing acetonitrile gradient on a Biobasic C18 Picofrit™ column (100 mm length, 75 mm ID), using a 65 min reverse phase gradient at a flow rate of 250 nL /min. All data was acquired with the mass spectrometer operating in automatic data dependent switching mode. A high resolution MS scan (300-2000 Dalton) was performed using the Orbitrap to select the 15 most intense ions prior to MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification from the MS/MS data was performed using the Andromeda search engine in MaxQuant (version 1.2.2.5; http://maxquant.org/) to correlate the data against a 6-frame translation of the EST contigs for G. mellonella.52,53 The following search parameters were used: first search peptide tolerance of 20 ppm, second search peptide tolerance 4.5 ppm, carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification, while oxidation of methionines and acetylation of N-terminals were set as variable modifications and a maximum of 2 missed cleavage sites allowed. False Discovery Rates (FDR) were set to 1% for both peptides and proteins and the FDR was estimated following searches against a target-decoy database. Peptides with minimum length of seven amino acid length were considered for identification and proteins were only considered identified when more than one unique peptide for each protein was observed.  Results processing, statistical analyses and graphics generation were conducted using Perseus v. 1.5.5.3. LFQ intensities were log2-transformed and ANOVA of significance and t-tests between the hemolymph proteomes of 0, 6 and 24 hours C. albicans treated larvae was performed using a p-value of 0.05 and significance was determined using FDR correction (Benjamini-Hochberg). Proteins that had non-existent values (indicative of absence or very low abundance in a sample) were also used in statistical analysis of the total differentially expressed group following imputation of the zero values using a number close to the lowest value of the range of proteins plus or minus the standard deviation. After data imputation these proteins were included in subsequent statistical analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Galleria mellonella larvae were administered an inoculum of Candida albicans and the response to infection over 24&#xa0;hours was monitored. The yeast cell density in infected larvae declined initially but replication commenced six hours post-infection. The hemocyte density decreased from 5.2 &#xd7; 10<sup>6</sup>/ml to 2.5 &#xd7; 10<sup>6</sup>/ml at 2&#xa0;hours but increased to 4.2 &#xd7; 106 at 6&#xa0;hours and decreased subsequently. Administration of &#x3b2; - glucan to larvae also caused a fluctuation in hemocyte density (5.1 &#xb1; 0.22 &#xd7; 10<sup>6</sup>/ml (0 hour) to 6.25 &#xb1; 0.25 &#xd7; 106/ml (6 hour) (p &lt; 0.05) to 5 &#xb1; 2.7 &#xd7; 106 (24 hour)) and the population showed an increase in the density of small, granular cells at 24&#xa0;hours (p &lt; 0.05). Hemocytes from larvae inoculated with &#x3b2; - glucan for 6 or 24&#xa0;hours showed faster killing of C. albicans cells (53 &#xb1; 4.1% (p &lt; 0.01), 64 &#xb1; 3.7%, (p &lt; 0.01), respectively) than hemocytes from control larvae (24 &#xb1; 11%) at 60&#xa0;min. Proteomic analysis indicated increased abundance of immune related proteins cecropin-A (5 fold) and prophenoloxidase-activating proteinase-1 (5 fold) 6&#xa0;hours post infection but by 24&#xa0;hours there was elevated abundance of muscle (tropomyosin 2 (141 fold), calponin (66 fold), troponin I (62 fold)) and proteins indicative of cellular stress (glutathione-S-transferase-like protein (114 fold)), fungal dissemination (muscle protein 20-like protein (174 fold)) and tissue breakdown (mitochondrial cytochrome c (10 fold)). Proteins decreased in abundance at 24&#xa0;hour included &#x3b2; - 1,3 - glucan recognition protein precursor (29 fold) and prophenoloxidase subunit 2 (25 fold).

### Keywords
Infection, Q-exactive, Mini-model, Quantatitive, Candida; galleria, Ms/ms, Immunity, In vivo screening

### Affiliations
Maynooth University
Department of Biology, Maynooth University, Co. Kildare, Ireland.  Phone: + 353 - 1- 708 3859. Fax: + 353 - 1- 708 3845.

### Submitter
Gerard Sheehan

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Kevin Kavanagh
Department of Biology, Maynooth University, Co. Kildare, Ireland.  Phone: + 353 - 1- 708 3859. Fax: + 353 - 1- 708 3845.


