### Accession
PXD035195

### Title
A core UPS molecular complement implicates unique endocytic compartments at the parasite-host interface in Giardia lamblia – crosslinking IP conditions

### Description
Affinity purification and mass spectrometry coupled to microscopy-based subcellular localization and signal correlation quantification techniques were employed to investigate protein complexes of eleven reported unconventionally-secreted putative and confirmed virulence factors of Giardia lamblia, all predicted to be cytosolic.

### Sample Protocol
Protocols for co-immunopreciptation (CoIP) under cross-linking conditions were adapted from previous studies (Cernikova et al., 2020; Zumthor et al., 2016). Giardia trophozoites expressing tagged reporter constructs (minimal two independent biological replicates per line) as well as wild-type control WBA were grown in one T-25 flask per line and harvested and resuspended in PBS to reach a final volume of 10ml. For protein cross linking, the cells were pelleted and resuspended in 2.25% formaldehyde in PBS with a total volume of 10ml and incubated for 30mins at room temperature on a rotating shaker. Following crosslinking cells were washed in PBS and incubated for 15min with 10ml PBS + glycine 100mM for quenching. Cells were then resuspended in 5 ml RIPA-SDS buffer (50mM Tris (pH 7.4), 150mM NaCl, 1% IGEPAL, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS, and 10mM EDTA. 100μL) with added 0.1M phenylmethylsulphonyl fluoride (PMSF) and 50 µl protease inhibitor solution (Sigma). For controlled cell rupture, the resulting cell mixture was sonicated twice for 30 seconds (60 pulses, 4 output control, 40% duty cycle) in the cold. After sonication the samples were incubated at 4°C on a rotating shaker for ca. 2h and then centrifuged and filtered (0.2μm WWPTFE membrane). To the filtrate 5ml RIPA-Triton solution (50mM Tris pH7.4, 150mM NaCl, 1% IGEPAL, 0.5% Na deoxycholate, 1% Triton x100, 10mM EDTA) and 40ul anti-HA agarose bead slurry (Thermo Fisher) were added and incubated over night at 4°C on a rotating shaker. The beads were then washed, three times in TBS + 0.1% Triton x100 and then three times in PBS and stored dry at -20°C.  Mass spectrometry was performed for all affinity pulldown beads by the Proteomics & Mass Spectrometry Core Facility (PMSCF) of the University of Bern. In a first step the samples were resuspended in 8M Urea with 50mM Tris-HCl at pH 8 and then reduced at 37°C with DTT 0.1M with 100mM Tris-HCl at pH 8 and alkylated at 37°C in the dark with IAA 0.5M and 100mM Tris-HCl for 30 mins. The so generated slurry was then diluted four times with 20mM Tris-HCl with 2mM CaCl2 before digestion overnight with 100 ng sequencing grade trypsin (Promega). The samples were acidified with 1% TFA, then centrifuged for peptide extraction in the supernatant. Three aliquots of 5 μL each were then subjected to nano-liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (EASY-nLC1000 coupled to a QExactive mass spectrometer, Thermo Fisher Scientific). µPrecolumn C18 PepMap100 (5μm, 100 Å, 0.3×5mm, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Reinach, Switzerland) was used to trap the peptides and then they were separated by backflush on a C18 column (3 μm, 100 Å, 75 μm×15 cm, Nikkyo Technos, Tokyo, Japan) by applying a 40-minute gradient of 5% acetonitrile to 40% in water, 0.1% formic acid, at a flow rate of 350 nl/min. Full Scan was set at a resolution of 70 000, an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 1E06, and a maximum ion injection time of 50 ms. The following settings were applied with the data-dependent method for precursor ion fragmentation: resolution 17,500, AGC of 1E05, maximum ion time of 110 milliseconds, mass isolation window 2 m/z, collision energy 27, under fill ratio 1%, charge exclusion of unassigned and 1+ ions, and peptide match preferred, respectively.   References Cernikova, L., Faso, C., & Hehl, A. B. (2020). Phosphoinositide-binding proteins mark, shape and functionally modulate highly-diverged endocytic compartments in the parasitic protist Giardia lamblia. PLoS Pathogens, 16(2). https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.ppat.1008317  Zumthor, J. P., Cernikova, L., Rout, S., Kaech, A., Faso, C., & Hehl, A. B. (2016). Static Clathrin Assemblies at the Peripheral Vacuole—Plasma Membrane Interface of the Parasitic Protozoan Giardia lamblia. PLoS Pathogens, 12(7). https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.ppat.1005756

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (v. 1.6.14.0) was used for MS data interpretation against a Giardia lamblia database (Giardiadb v. 47) using the default MaxQuant settings. Transgenic lines were compared to wild type samples to be aware of possible contaminants. MS hits were sorted by their abundance according to the intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) values. Relative abundance was then calculated from the total iBAQ for each hit (%iBAQ= iBAQ/ΣiBAQ*100). To validate the hits, the replicate/s from each line were intersected and only hits found in both/all the data sets in similar relative abundance were further analysed. The average relative iBAQ was calculated by adding the relative iBAQ values for each hit and dividing them by the number of replicates. Average relative iBAQ was then sorted from highest to lowest.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Giardia lamblia, Interactome, Virulence, Unconventional protein secretion, Peripheral endocytic compartments

### Affiliations
Institute of Cell Biology, University of Bern, CH-3012 Bern, Switzerland
Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry Core Facility, Department for BioMedical Research (DBMR), University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland

### Submitter
Manfred Heller

### Lab Head
Dr Carmen Faso
Institute of Cell Biology, University of Bern, CH-3012 Bern, Switzerland


