### Accession
PXD036664

### Title
Three types of Leishmania mexicana amastigotes: proteome comparison by quantitative proteomic analysis

### Description
Leishmania is the unicellular parasite transmitted by phlebotomine sand fly bite. It exists in two different forms; extracellular promastigotes, occurring in the gut of sand flies, and intracellular, round-shaped amastigotes residing mainly in vertebrate macrophages. As amastigotes originating from infected animals are often present in insufficient quality and quantity, two alternative types of amastigotes were introduced for laboratory experiments: axenic amastigotes and amastigotes from macrophages infected in vitro. Nevertheless, there is very little information about the degree of similarity/difference among these three types of amastigotes on proteomic level, whose comparison is crucial for assessing the suitability of using alternative types of amastigotes in experiments. In this study, L. mexicana amastigotes obtained from lesion of infected BALB/c mice were proteomically compared with alternatively cultivated amastigotes (axenic and macrophage-derived ones). Amastigotes of all three types were isolated, individually treated and analysed by LC-MS/MS proteomic analysis with quantification using TMT10-plex isobaric labeling. Significant differences were observed in the abundance of metabolic enzymes, virulence factors and proteins involved in translation and condensation of DNA. The most pronounced differences were observed between axenic amastigotes and lesion-derived amastigotes, macrophage-derived amastigotes were mostly intermediate between axenic and lesion-derived ones.

### Sample Protocol
100 μg of peptides of pooled sample were injected on to C18 column (YMC 1.9 μm, C18, 300x0.3 mm) and separated with linear gradient from 0% A (of 20 mM ammonium formate, 2% acetonitrile pH 10) to 50% B (of 20 mM ammonium formate, 80% acetonitrile pH 10) in 60 minutes, flow 3μl/min. 64 Fractions were collected and pooled in to 8 fractions (Kulak et al., 2017). The resulting fractions were dried and resuspended in 20μl of 1% TFA. Peptides were separated and analyzed by an UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano system coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (both from Thermo Scientific). Peptides were firstly loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap300 trap column (300 µm x 5 mm) packed with C18 (5 µm, 300 Å) in loading buffer (0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in 2% acetonitrile) for 4 min at 15 μL/min and then separated in an EASY-Spray column (75 µm x 50 cm) packed with C18 (2 µm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Mobile phase A (0.1% formic acid in water) and mobile phase B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) were used to establish a 60-min gradient from 4 % to 35 % B. Eluted peptides were ionized by electrospray. Spectra were acquired by Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) with 3 seconds duty cycle. Full MS spectra were acquired in orbitrap within mass range 350- 1400 m/z with resolution 120 000 at 200 m/z and maximum injection time 50 ms. Most intense precursors were isolated by quadrupole with 1.6 m/z isolation window and fragmented using collision induced dissociation (CID) with collision energy set to 30 %. Fragment ions were detected in ion trap with scan range mode set to normal and scan rate set to rapid with maximum injection time 50 ms. Fragmented precursors were excluded from fragmentation for 60 seconds. For quantificative information of TMT label, 10 most intense fragments were isolated (simultaneous precursor selection) and fragmented in higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) on 65% energy, max accumulation time 140 ms, and fragments were measured in orbitrap on 60 K resolution (McAlister et al., 2014).

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed in MaxQuant 2.1. TMT reporter ions ratios were used for estimation of relative amount of each protein. The search was done against Mus musculus (Uniprot, 16981 entries), L. mexicana protein database (NCBI, 16299 entries), and common contaminant database. Modification was set: peptide N terminus, lysine (unimod nr:737) and cysteine (unimod nr:39) as static, and methionine oxidation (unimod: 1384), and protein N terminus acetylation (unimod : 1) as a variable. Proteins from mice and common contaminants were filtered off from the results. After filtering data were normalized to the median and transferred into binary logarithm. The differences between the individual samples (axenic – lesion-derived, axenic – macrophage-derived, macrophage-derived – lesion-derived) were investigated. Furthermore, only proteins whose content in the samples differed significantly by at least two-fold were selected. Unidentified peptides were searched for amino acid sequence similarity using a database https://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Leishmania</i> is the unicellular parasite transmitted by phlebotomine sand fly bite. It exists in two different forms; extracellular promastigotes, occurring in the gut of sand flies, and intracellular, round-shaped amastigotes residing mainly in vertebrate macrophages. As amastigotes originating from infected animals are often present in insufficient quality and quantity, two alternative types of amastigotes were introduced for laboratory experiments: axenic amastigotes and amastigotes from macrophages infected <i>in vitro</i>. Nevertheless, there is very little information about the degree of similarity/difference among these three types of amastigotes on proteomic level, whose comparison is crucial for assessing the suitability of using alternative types of amastigotes in experiments. In this study, <i>L. mexicana</i> amastigotes obtained from lesion of infected BALB/c mice were proteomically compared with alternatively cultivated amastigotes (axenic and macrophage-derived ones). Amastigotes of all three types were isolated, individually treated and analysed by LC-MS/MS proteomic analysis with quantification using TMT<sup>10</sup>-plex isobaric labeling. Significant differences were observed in the abundance of metabolic enzymes, virulence factors and proteins involved in translation and condensation of DNA. The most pronounced differences were observed between axenic amastigotes and lesion-derived amastigotes, macrophage-derived amastigotes were mostly intermediate between axenic and lesion-derived ones.

### Keywords
Amastigotes, L. mexicana

### Affiliations
Charles University
Laboratory of Mass Spectrometry, BIOCEV, Faculty of Science Charles University in Prague

### Submitter
Karel Harant

### Lab Head
Dr Karel Harant
Laboratory of Mass Spectrometry, BIOCEV, Faculty of Science Charles University in Prague


