### Accession
PXD008032

### Title
Differential activity of treatment with protein kinase inhibitors on tumor phosphotyrosine profiles in patients with advanced cancer

### Description
Mass spectrometry-based phosphoproteomics of tumor tissue lysates provides a potential personalized medicine approach based on its ability to identify activated signaling pathways and novel drug targets. We performed a pilot study (NCT01636908) to determine the effect of protein kinase inhibitors (PKIs) on tyrosine-(pTyr)-phosphoproteomic profiles of serial tumor biopsies in patients with advanced cancer. Tumor needle biopsies were analyzed from 31 patients with advanced cancer before and after 2 weeks treatment with sorafenib (SOR), erlotinib (ERL), dasatinib (DAS), vemurafenib (VEM), sunitinib (SUN) or everolimus (EVE). pTyr-Phosphoproteomics of pre- and on-treatment biopsies was performed by phosphotyrosine immunoprecipitation followed by LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
Needle biopsy, lysis and digestion Needle biopsies with ≥ 30% tumor cells were considered representative and selected for further processing. Biopsies were cryotome cut in 10 um sections. After lysis in 9M urea buffer containing 20 mM HEPES pH 9.0 and phosphatase inhibitors, lysates were cleared, aliquotted and stored at -80 °C until further use. The BCA protein assay (ThermoPierce, Rockford, IL) was used to determine protein concentration. Protein digests were made from tumor biopsy lysates, with matched pre- and on-treatment protein input per patient. Lysates were reduced in 4 mM dithiotreitol (DTT) for 20 min at 60°C, cooled to room temperature and subsequently alkylated in 10 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min in the dark. After dilution to 2M urea using 20 mM HEPES buffer pH 8.0, the lysate was digested with 20 µg Sequencing Grade Modified trypsin/mg protein by overnight incubation at RT. Digestion was then halted by adding TFA to a final concentration of 1%. Samples were then incubated for 15 min on ice, centrifuged for 5 min at 1800 x g and transferred to a new tube. Tryptic digests were desalted using 6 ml Sep-Pak C18 cartridges (Waters, Milford, MA) placed on a vacuum system. Bound peptides were washed with 0.1% TFA before elution in glass vials in 40% ACN/0.1% TFA. Eluates were lyophilized for 48 hours and stored at -80 ºC until further use.  pTyr Phosphopeptide enrichment. Enrichment for tyrosine phosphorylated phosphopeptides was performed using the anti-phosphotyrosine antibody P-Tyr-1000 coupled to agarose beads (PTMScan, Cell Signaling Technology). Briefly, lyophilized phosphopeptides were dissolved in IAP buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.2, 10 mM sodium phosphate and 50 mM NaCl) and incubated with 2 µl P-Tyr-1000 beads per mg protein at 4 ºC for 2 hours. After washing in cold IAP buffer and MQ, peptides were eluted from the beads in two steps in 0.15% TFA, desalted in 20 ul StageTips using 0.1% TFA  and eluted with 80% ACN/0.1% TFA into glass-lined autosampler vials. Eluates were dried in a speedvac and redissolved in 20µl loading solvent (4% acetonitrile in 0.5% TFA)  and stored at 4˚ C until LC-MS/MS measurement on the same day. LC-MS/MS Peptides were separated by an Ultimate 3000 nanoLC-MS/MS system (Dionex LC-Packings, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) equipped with a 20 cm × 75 μm ID fused silica column custom packed with 3 μm 120 Å ReproSil Pur C18 aqua (Dr Maisch GMBH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). After injection, peptides were trapped at 6 μl/min on a 10 mm × 100 μm ID trap column packed with 5 μm 120 Å ReproSil Pur C18 aqua at 2% buffer B (buffer A: 0.5% acetic acid (Fischer Scientific), buffer B: 80% ACN, 0.5% acetic acid) and separated at 300 nl/min in a 10–40% buffer B gradient in 90 min (120 min inject-to-inject). Eluting peptides were ionized at a potential of +2 kVa into a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany). Intact masses were measured at resolution 70.000 (at m/z 200) in the orbitrap using an AGC target value of 3E6 charges. The top 10 peptide signals (charge-states 2+ and higher) were submitted to MS/MS in the HCD (higher-energy collision) cell (1.6 amu isolation width, 25% normalized collision energy). MS/MS spectra were acquired at resolution 17.500 (at m/z 200) in the orbitrap using an AGC target value of 2E5 charges and an underfill ratio of 0.1%. Dynamic exclusion was applied with a repeat count of 1 and an exclusion time of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Peptide and Protein identification MS/MS spectra were searched against the Uniprot human reference proteome FASTA file (2014_01 42104 entries) using MaxQuant 1.5.2.8. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Cysteine carboxamidomethylation (Cys, +57.021464 Da) was treated as fixed modification and serine, threonine and tyrosine phosphorylation (+79.966330 Da), methionine oxidation (Met,+15.994915 Da) and N-terminal acetylation (N-terminal, +42.010565 Da) as variable modifications. Peptide precursor ions were searched with a maximum mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and fragment ions with a maximum mass deviation of 20 ppm. Peptide, protein and site identifications were filtered at an FDR of 1% using the decoy database strategy. The minimal peptide length was 7 amino-acids and the minimum Andromeda score for modified peptides was 40 and the corresponding minimum delta score was 17 (default MaxQuant settings). Peptide identifications were propagated across samples using the match between runs option checked.   Label-free phosphopeptide quantification Phosphopeptides were quantified by counting MS/MS spectra (spectral counts) or by their extracted ion intensities (‘Intensity’ in MaxQuant). For each sample the phosphopeptide intensities were normalized (‘normalised intensity’) on the median of the log10 transformed intensity distribution.

### Publication Abstract
Identification of predictive biomarkers for targeted therapies requires information on drug exposure at the target site as well as its effect on the signaling context of a tumor. To obtain more insight in the clinical mechanism of action of protein kinase inhibitors (PKIs), we studied tumor drug concentrations of protein kinase inhibitors (PKIs) and their effect on the tyrosine-(pTyr)-phosphoproteome in patients with advanced cancer. Tumor biopsies were obtained from 31 patients with advanced cancer before and after 2 weeks of treatment with sorafenib (SOR), erlotinib (ERL), dasatinib (DAS), vemurafenib (VEM), sunitinib (SUN) or everolimus (EVE). Tumor concentrations were determined by LC-MS/MS. pTyr-phosphoproteomics was performed by pTyr-immunoprecipitation followed by LC-MS/MS. Median tumor concentrations were 2-10 &#xb5;M for SOR, ERL, DAS, SUN, EVE and &gt;1 mM for VEM. These were 2-178 &#xd7; higher than median plasma concentrations. Unsupervised hierarchical clustering of pTyr-phosphopeptide intensities revealed patient-specific clustering of pre- and on-treatment profiles. Drug-specific alterations of peptide phosphorylation was demonstrated by marginal overlap of robustly up- and downregulated phosphopeptides. These findings demonstrate that tumor drug concentrations are higher than anticipated and result in drug specific alterations of the phosphoproteome. Further development of phosphoproteomics-based personalized medicine is warranted.

### Keywords
Human, Tyrosine kinase, Phosphoproteomics, Protein kinase inhibitor, Label-free, Single-shot

### Affiliations
OncoProteomics Laboratory, Dept of Medical Oncology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
OncoProteomics Laboratory, dept of Medical Oncology, VUmc Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Sander Piersma

### Lab Head
Dr Connie Ramona Jimenez
OncoProteomics Laboratory, Dept of Medical Oncology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands


