### Accession
PXD011488

### Title
UBQLN4 regulates double-strand break repair by repressing homologous recombination and is overexpressed in aggressive tumors

### Description
The ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS) plays a crucial role in cellular homeostasis and its major role in genome stability and maintenance is rapidly emerging. Here, we identify the proteasomal shuttle factor ubiquilin-4 (UBQLN4) as a major component of the DNA damage response. We found a homozygous truncating mutation in the UBQLN4 gene in families with a pleiotropic autosomal recessive syndrome with clinical and cellular characteristics of genome instability disorders. UBQLN4 loss leads to cellular hypersensitivity to genotoxic stress and delayed repair of DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs). Furthermore, ATM-dependent phosphorylation of UBQLN4 on S318 is required for cellular protection against DNA damage and proper DSB repair. We demonstrate that UBQLN4 specifically interacts with ubiquitylated MRE11, which mediates early steps of the DSB response. Loss of UBQLN4 leads to retention of MRE11 at DSB sites, which in turn drives a non-physiological initiation of DNA end resection thereby enhancing homologous recombination-mediated DSB repair (HRR). Concomitantly, UBQLN4 depletion is associated with increased HRR activity in vitro and in vivo. In contrast, UBQLN4 over-expression represses HRR and favors DSB repair through non-homologous end joining. Moreover, we find that UBQLN4 is overexpressed in aggressive tumors, including high-risk neuroblastoma. In line with an HRR defect in such tumors, we observe that cell lines derived from these lesions display an actionable PARP1 inhibitor sensitivity. Abnormal UBQLN4 expression thus underlies genome instability-associated morbidity on the one hand and serve as a cancer biomarker on the other hand. Moreover, UBQLN4 may be a promising target for PARP1 inhibition in aggressive cancer.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysates were precipitated with acetone and resuspended in 8 M Urea. After reduction with DTT and carbamidomethylation with IAA, proteins were digested overnight at 37°C, using the proteases LysC (Wako) and, after dilution with 50 mM potassium phosphate buffer pH 5.8, trypsin (Promega) and GluC (Promega). Samples were desalted using SepPak C18 cartridges (Waters) and phosphorylated peptides enriched with the High-Select TiO2 Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit (Thermo Fisher). Proteomic analysis was performed using an Easy nLC 1200 UHPLC coupled to a QExactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). Peptides were resuspended in Solvent A (0.1% FA), picked up with an autosampler and loaded onto in-house made 50 cm fused silica columns (internal diameter (I.D.) 75 μm, C18 1.7 μm, Dr. Maisch beads) at a flow rate of 1.5 µL/min. A 90 min segmented gradient of 4-55% Solvent B (80% ACN in 0.1% FA) over 81 min and 55-95% Solvent B over 9 min at a flow rate of 250 nL/min was used to elute peptides. Eluted peptides were sprayed into the heated transfer capillary of the mass spectrometer using a nano-electrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode, where the Orbitrap acquired full MS scans (350-1650 m/z) at a resolution (R) of 60,000 with an automated gain control (AGC) target of 3×106 ions collected within 20 ms. The dynamic exclusion time was set to 20 s. From the full MS scan, the 15 most intense peaks (z≥2) were fragmented in the high-energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) cell. The HCD normalized collision energy was set to 28%. MS/MS scans with an ion target of 1.5×105 ions were acquired with R = 30,000, with a maximal injection time of 54 ms and an isolation width of 1.3 m/z.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were processed using MaxQuant software (version 1.5.3.8) and its implemented viewer and Andromeda search engine. Parameters were set to default values and Phospho (STY) was added as variable modification. Statistical analysis was performed using Perseus software. Graphs were generated using Instant Clue.

### Publication Abstract
Genomic instability can be a hallmark of both human&#xa0;genetic disease and cancer. We identify a&#xa0;deleterious UBQLN4 mutation in families with an&#xa0;autosomal recessive syndrome reminiscent of genome instability disorders. UBQLN4 deficiency leads to increased sensitivity to genotoxic stress and delayed DNA double-strand break (DSB) repair. The proteasomal shuttle factor UBQLN4 is phosphorylated by ATM and interacts with ubiquitylated MRE11 to mediate early steps of homologous recombination-mediated DSB repair (HRR). Loss of UBQLN4 leads to chromatin retention of MRE11, promoting non-physiological HRR activity in&#xa0;vitro and in&#xa0;vivo. Conversely, UBQLN4 overexpression represses HRR and favors non-homologous end joining. Moreover, we find UBQLN4 overexpressed in aggressive tumors. In line with an HRR defect in these tumors, UBQLN4 overexpression is associated with PARP1 inhibitor sensitivity. UBQLN4 therefore curtails HRR activity through removal of MRE11 from damaged chromatin and thus offers a therapeutic window for PARP1 inhibitor treatment in UBQLN4-overexpressing tumors.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Dna-damage, Cancer

### Affiliations
Department of Internal Medicine I, Center of IntegratedOncology, Cologne-Bonn Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Response in Aging-Associated Diseases (CECAD), University of Cologne
Institute for Genetics/CECAD (AG Krüger)

### Submitter
Janica  Wiederstein

### Lab Head
Dr H. Christian Reinhardt
Department of Internal Medicine I, Center of IntegratedOncology, Cologne-Bonn Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Response in Aging-Associated Diseases (CECAD), University of Cologne


