### Accession
PXD038391

### Title
Ribonucleotide synthesis by NME6 fuels mitochondrial gene expression

### Description
Replication and expression of the mitochondrial genome depend on the sufficient supply of
nucleotide building blocks to mitochondria. Dysregulated nucleotide metabolism is detrimental to
mitochondrial genomes and can destabilise mitochondrial DNA and trigger inflammation. Here, we
report that a mitochondrial nucleoside diphosphate kinase, NME6, supplies mitochondria with
pyrimidine ribonucleotides to drive the transcription of mitochondrial genes. Perturbation of NME6
leads to the depletion of mitochondrial transcripts, destabilisation of the electron transport chain
and impaired oxidative phosphorylation. These deficiencies are rescued upon supplementation with
pyrimidine ribonucleosides. Moreover, NME6 is required for the maintenance of mitochondrial DNA
when the access to cytosolic pyrimidine deoxyribonucleotides is limited. Our results, therefore, shed
light on the importance of mitochondrial ribonucleotide salvage for the synthesis of RNA and
mitochondrial gene expression.

The repository contains two internal projects which are identified by the internal IDs: 0187 and 0196. The raw files are indicated by the internal ID, and each Supplementary Table contains a reference to the internal ID. The project with the ID 0187 contains whole cell (WC) and immunoprecipitation (IP) data. Please see the file: SampleNamesForProjects.xlsx for more details.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitation  
Mitochondria-enriched pellets of HeLa WT and NME6 KO + NME6-MycFlag expressing cells (500 µg) were resuspended in 500 µl IP buffer (60 mM Tris-HCl  and 300 mM KAc-KOH pH 7.4) Mitochondria were solubilized with digitonin (5 g/g protein) for 30 min at 4°C while shaking on a ThermoMixer (shaking: 550 rpm) . Mitochondrial lysates were spun down at 20000 xg for 15 min at 4°C. The supernatant was mixed with Flag-agarose beads (Sigma) and incubated for 2 h at 4°C. After 2 h, the supernatant was removed by centrifugation at 500 xg for 30 s and the remaining beads were washed three times with wash buffer (IP buffer containing 0.1% digitonin). Bound proteins were eluted from the beads using 60 µl of 1x Laemmli buffer, samples were incubated for 10 min at 40°C. The eluate was separated from the beads by centrifugation at 1000 xg for 3 min. Eluates were used for SDS-PAGE, immunoblot analysis and LC-MS based proteomics Sample preparation for mass spectrometry-based proteomics For whole proteome analysis, 60 µl of 4% SDS in 100 mM HEPES-KOH (pH=8.5) was pre-heated to 70°C and added to the cell pellet for further 10 min incubation at 70°C on a ThermoMixer (shaking: 550 rpm).  The protein concentration was determined using the 660 nm Protein Assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific, #22660). 20 µg of protein was subjected to tryptic digestion. For immunoprecipitation analysis, the LDS buffer eluate was directly used. Proteins were reduced (10 mM TCEP) and alkylated (20 mM CAA) in the dark for 45 min at 45°C. Samples were subjected to an SP3-based digestion (Hughes et al., 2014). Washed SP3 beads ( (Sera-Mag(TM) Magnetic Carboxylate Modified Particles (Hydrophobic, GE44152105050250), Sera-Mag(TM) Magnetic Carboxylate Modified Particles (Hydrophilic, GE24152105050250) from Sigma Aldrich) were mixed equally, and 3 µl of bead slurry were added to each sample. Acetonitrile was added to a final concentration of 50% and washed twice using 70% ethanol (V=200 µl) on an in-house made magnet. After an additional acetonitrile wash (V=200µl), 5 µl digestion solution (10 mM HEPES-KOH pH=8.5 containing trypsin (0.5 µg, Sigma) and LysC (0.5 µg, Wako)) was added to each sample and incubated overnight at 37°C. Peptides were desalted on a magnet using 2 x 200 µl acetonitrile. Peptides were eluted in 10 µl 5% DMSO in LC-MS water (Sigma Aldrich) in an ultrasonic bath for 10 min. Formic acid and acetonitrile were added to a final concentration of 2.5% and 2%, respectively. Samples were stored at -20°C before subjection to LC-MS/MS analysis.  Liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry LC-MS/MS instrumentation consisted of an Easy-LC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled via a nano-electrospray ionization source to an Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). An in-house packed column (inner diameter: 75 µm, length: 40 cm) was used for peptide separation. A binary buffer system (A: 0.1% formic acid and B: 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile) was applied as follows: Whole proteome analysis: Linear increase of buffer B from 4% to 27% within 70 min, followed by a linear increase to 45% within 5 min. The buffer B content was further ramped to 65% within 5 min and then to 95% within 5 min. 95% buffer B was kept for a further 5 min to wash the column.  Immunoprecipitation analysis: Linear increase of buffer B from 4% to 27% within 40 min, followed by a linear increase to 45% within 5 min. The buffer B content was further ramped to 65% within 5 min and then to 95% within 5 min. 95% buffer B was kept for a further 5 min to wash the column.  Prior to each sample, the column was washed using 5 µl buffer A and the sample was loaded using 8 µl buffer A. The RF Lens amplitude was set to 55%, the capillary temperature was 275°C and the polarity was set to positive. MS1 profile spectra were acquired using a resolution of 120000 (at 200 m/z) at a mass range of 320-1150 m/z and an AGC target of 1 × 106.  For MS/MS independent spectra acquisition, 48 equally spaced windows were acquired at an isolation m/z range of 15 Th, and the isolation windows overlapped by 1 Th. The fixed first mass was 200 m/z. The isolation center range covered a mass range of 357–1060 m/z. Fragmentation spectra were acquired at a resolution of 15000 at 200 m/z using a maximal injection time of 22 ms and stepped normalized collision energies (NCE) of 26, 28, and 30. The default charge state was set to 3. The AGC target was set to 3e6 (900% - Exploris 480). MS2 spectra were acquired in centroid mode.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics data analysis DIA-NN (Data-Independent Acquisition by Neural Networks) v 1.8 (Demichev et al., 2020) was used to analyse data-independent raw files. The spectral library was created using the reviewed-only Uniport reference protein (Homo sapiens, 20350 entries, downloaded September 2019) with the ‘Deep learning-based spectra and RTs prediction’ turned on. Protease was set to trypsin and a maximum of 1 miss cleavage was allowed. N-term M excision was set as a variable modification and carbamidomethylation at cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification. The peptide length was set to 7–30 amino acids and the precursor m/z range was defined from 340 – 1200 m/z. The option ‘Quantitative matrices’ was enabled. The FDR was set to 1% and the mass accuracy (MS2 and MS1) as well as the scan window was set to 0 (automatic inference via DIA-NN). Match between runs (MBR) was enabled. The Neuronal network classifier worked in ‘double pass mode’ and protein interference was set to ‘Isoform IDs’. The quantification strategy was set to ‘robust LC (high accuracy)’ and cross-run normalization was defined as ‘RT-dependent’.  The ‘pg’ (protein group) output (MaxLFQ intensities (Cox et al., 2014)) was further processed using Instant Clue (Nolte et al., 2018) including and pairwise comparison using an unpaired two-sided t-test or one-way ANOVA followed by a permutation-based FDR correction (5%). MitoCarta 3.0 (Rath et al., 2021) and Uniprot-based Gene Ontology annotations were used for filtering. Hierarchical clustering, heatmaps and volcano plots were generated using the InstantClue software (Nolte et al., 2018) v. 0.10.10.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Nme6, Lc-ms/ms, Rntps, Ribonucleotide

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Biology of Ageing, 50931 Cologne, Germany
Max-Planck-Institute for Biology of Ageing Department of Mitochondrial Proteostasis Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 9b 50931 Cologne

### Submitter
Hendrik Nolte

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Langer
Max-Planck-Institute for Biology of Ageing Department of Mitochondrial Proteostasis Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 9b 50931 Cologne


