### Accession
PXD021197

### Title
COVID-19 proteome profiling reveals resolution of inflammatory pathways and respiratory distress after DNase treatment

### Description
Severe COVID-19 can result in pneumonia and acute respiratory failure. Accumulation of mucus in the airways is a hall mark of the disease and can result in hypoxemia. Here, we show that quantitative proteome analysis of the sputum from severe COVID-19 patients reveal high levels of neutrophil extracellular trap(s) (NETs) components, which was confirmed by microscopy. Degrading pulmonary NETs using clinically approved aerosolized recombinant human DNase (rhDNase/Pulmozyme) improved pulmonary function, reversed hypoxemia, and aided in the rapid recovery of severely ill COVID-19 patients. Immunofluorescence and proteome analysis of sputum and blood plasma samples after treatment revealed a marked reduction of NETs and a set of statistically significant proteome changes that indicate local reduction of haemorrhage, plasma leakage and inflammation in the airways, and a reversion of the systemic inflammatory state in the blood plasma. Taken together, the results show that NETs contribute to acute respiratory failure in COVID-19 and that degrading NETs may reduce dependency on external high flow oxygen therapy. Targeting NETs may have significant therapeutic implications in COVID-19 disease and warrants further studies.

### Sample Protocol
Protein trypsin digestion  Peptide C18 solid-phase extraction  High pH reversed-phase peptide fractionation

### Data Protocol
OpenSwath Docker container openswath/openswath:0.2.1 (https://www.openswath.org) msproteomicstools v0.11 (https://github.com/msproteomicstools/msproteomicstools) FragPipe 12.2 (https://github.com/Nesvilab/FragPipe)

### Publication Abstract
Severe coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) can result in pneumonia and acute respiratory failure. Accumulation of mucus in the airways is a hallmark of the disease and can result in hypoxemia. Here, we show that quantitative proteome analysis of the sputum from severe patients with COVID-19 reveal high levels of neutrophil extracellular trap (NET) components, which was confirmed by microscopy. Extracellular DNA from excessive NET formation can increase sputum viscosity and lead to acute respiratory distress syndrome. Recombinant human DNase (Pulmozyme; Roche) has been shown to be beneficial in reducing sputum viscosity and improve lung function. We treated five patients pwith COVID-19 resenting acute symptoms with clinically approved aerosolized Pulmozyme. No adverse reactions to the drug were seen, and improved oxygen saturation and recovery in all severely ill patients with COVID-19 was observed after therapy. Immunofluorescence and proteome analysis of sputum and blood plasma samples after treatment revealed a marked reduction of NETs and a set of statistically significant proteome changes that indicate reduction of hemorrhage, plasma leakage and inflammation in the airways, and reduced systemic inflammatory state in the blood plasma of patients. Taken together, the results indicate that NETs contribute to acute respiratory failure in COVID-19 and that degrading NETs may reduce dependency on external high-flow oxygen therapy in patients. Targeting NETs using recombinant human DNase may have significant therapeutic implications in COVID-19 disease and warrants further studies.

### Keywords
Human plasma dia swath-ms covid-19 hf-x

### Affiliations
Lund University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Clinical Sciences Lund, Division of Infection Medicine, Lund, Sweden
Lund University

### Submitter
Christofer Karlsson

### Lab Head
Dr Johan Malmström
Lund University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Clinical Sciences Lund, Division of Infection Medicine, Lund, Sweden


