### Accession
PXD003263

### Title
Proteomics analysis of B3 pre-B cell line from STATegra Project

### Description
"The main goal of the project is to develop a new generation of bioinformatics resources for the integrative analysis of multiple types of omics data. These resources include both novel statistical methodologies as well as user-friendly software implementations. STATegra methods address many aspects of the omics data integration problem such as the design of multiomics experiments, integrative transcriptional and regulatory networks, integrative variable selection, data fusion, integration of public domain data, and integrative pathway analysis. To support method development STATegra uses a model biological system, namely the differentiation process of mouse pre-B-cells.  The STATegra consortium generated data focused on a critical step in the differentiation of B lymphocytes, which are key components of the adaptive immune system. Transcription factors of the Ikaros family are central to the normal differentiation of B cell progenitors and their expression increases in response to developmental stage-specific signals to terminate the proliferation of B cell progenitors and to initiate their differentiation. In particular, a novel biological system that models the transition from the pre-BI stage to the pre-BII subsequent stage, where B cell progenitors undergo growth arrest and differentiation, was used. The approach involves a pre-B cell line, B3 , and an inducible version of the Ikaros transcription factor, Ikaros-ERt2. Ikaros factors act to down-regulate genes that drive proliferation and to simultaneously up-regulate the expression of genes that promote the differentiation of B cell progenitors. Hence, in the B3 system, before induction of Ikaros, cells proliferate and their gene expression pattern is similar to proliferating B cell progenitors in vivo. Following Ikaros induction, B3 cells undergo gene expression changes that resemble those that occur in vivo during the transition from cycling to resting pre-B cells, followed by a marked reduction in cellular proliferation and by G1 arrest.  On this system the consortium has created a high-quality data collection consisting of a replicated time course using seven different omics platforms: RNA-seq, miRNA-seq, ChIP-seq, DNase-seq, Methyl-seq, proteomics and metabolomics, which is used to assess and to validate STATegra methods."

### Sample Protocol
The STATegra experimental design consists of a 6 points time course that captures the differentiation of B3 cells containing Ikaros-ERt2 upon Ikaros induction within a 24 hours period. The process was sampled at 0h, 2h, 6h, 12h, 18h and 24h after Ikaros induction by Tamoxifen. As control, B3 cells transfected with an empty vector were treated and sampled in the same way as the inducible line. Eight different omic technologies were measured on this system: RNA-seq, miRNA-seq, DNase-seq, RRBS-seq, ChIP-seq, scRNA-seq, Proteomics and Metabolomics. Generally, three biological replicates were obtained per platform and were processed as independent batches. B3 cells containing inducible Ikaros or Control vector-ERt2 B3 cells were plated at a density of 0.5 million cells/ml in IMDM medium supplemented with 10% FCS and 1% penicillin/streptomycin. Time point samples were collected by 5 min centrifugation at 1200 rpm. Cell pellets were washed 2 times in PBS, frozen in liquid nitrogen and storaged at -80. Control or stimulated cells were aliquoted to 1e7 cells. Immediatly before cell lysis the same number (1e7) of heavy-labeled reference cells was added to each sample. Protein extracts were prepared using a filter-aided sample preparation protocol (FASP) and digested usig trypsin. Peptides were desalted on C18 stage tips before analysis by HPLC-MS/MS.   Peptides were analyzed by HPLC-MSMS using an Ultimate 3000 nano-chromatography system coupled to an LTQ orbitrap classic mass spectrometer. Peptide separation was achieved on a nano-RP-C18 column (AcclaimPepMap, 50cmx75umx3um, 100A, Thermo-Fisher) using a trap column setup. Before RP-separation, peptides were loaded onto a trapping colum (PepMap, 5 x 0.3 mm, C18 5 um, Thermo-Fischer) and washed for 10 min at 25 ul/min. For peptide separation, a 4 h gradient from 4 to 60% B at a flow rate of 280 nl/min. The HPLC was directly coupled to the Orbitrap mass spectrometer for onliine detection and fragmentation of eluting peptides. MS detection of peptides was achieved by a duty cycle allowing for detection of the peptide precursor and up to 7 tandem MS scans of most abundant precursors with defined charge >1 in positive ionization mode. Previously fragmetned precursor ions were excluded from reanalysis for 90 sec using dynamic exclusion.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry raw data were processed with MaxQuant vs. 1.5.0.0 and mapped against a swissprot mouse protein sequence database containing canonical mouse protein sequencs and common contaminants. All proteins with at least one razor peptide within an FDR of 1% for peptides or 2% of proteins were accepted. For quantitation, differences between different analysis batches were corrected by the heavy SILAC label before application of a conditional quantile normalization in R. Missing values were conservatively imputed when at tleast two out of three replicates showed real values using the mean of the two observed values plus a random number of a 30% confidenc interval.  Differential analysis was performed in R using Limma and MaSigpro for linear and time course modelling of the obtained protein abundance data.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse blood cells, Blood cell differentiation, Ikaros signaling

### Affiliations
CECAD, University of Cologne, AG Krüger
Histon Modifications Group BioMedical Center  Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität Großhadernerstr. 9 82152 Planegg-Martinsried  Tel: +49 89 2180 75775

### Submitter
Andreas Schmidt

### Lab Head
Dr Axel Imhof
Histon Modifications Group BioMedical Center  Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität Großhadernerstr. 9 82152 Planegg-Martinsried  Tel: +49 89 2180 75775


