### Accession
PXD024373

### Title
Screening HIF-1 Cofactors in Breast Cancer Cells by RIME

### Description
Hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) is a transcription factor that acts as a master regulator of oxygen homeostasis in metazoan species by binding to hypoxia response elements (HREs) and activating the transcription of hundreds of genes in response to reduced O2 availability. RNA polymerase II (Pol II) initiates transcription of many HIF target genes under non-hypoxic conditions, but pauses after 20-100 nucleotides and requires HIF-1 binding for release. Here we report that in hypoxic breast cancer cells, HIF-1 recruits TRIM28 and DNA-dependent protein kinase (DNA-PK) to HREs to release paused Pol II. We show that HIF-1α and TRIM28 assemble the catalytically-active DNA-PK heterotrimer, which phosphorylates TRIM28 at serine-824, enabling recruitment of CDK9, which phosphorylates serine-2 of the Pol II large subunit C-terminal domain and the negative elongation factor to release paused Pol II, thereby stimulating productive transcriptional elongation. Our studies have revealed a critical molecular mechanism by which HIF-1 stimulates gene transcription and suggest that the anticancer effects of drugs targeting DNA-PK in breast cancer may be due in part to their inhibition of HIF-dependent transcription.

### Sample Protocol
Chromatin immunoprecipitated proteins on beads in 30 ul of 100 mM ammonium hydrogen carbonate were reduced in 2.5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), at 60C for 1hr then alkylated with 5 mM iodoacetomide in the dark at RT for 15min. Proteins proteolyzed of the beads with 20ng/uL Trypsin/LysC (Promega, www.promega.com) at 37C overnight. Peptides desalted on Oasis u-HLB plates (Waters), eluted with 65% acetonitrile/0.1%TFA and dried by vacuum centrifugation.  Desalted tryptic peptides were analyzed by liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry (LCMS/MS) on Thermo nano-Easy LC 1000 interfaced with a Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer. Peptides were resuspended in 20 ul of loading buffer (2% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid), loaded onto a C18 trap (S-10µM, 120Å, 75 µm x 2 cm, YMC, Japan) and subsequently separated by reverse-phase chromatography on an in-house packed PicoFrit column (75um x 200mm, 15u, +/-1um tip, New Objective) with C18 phase (ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 3µm, 120Å, www.dr-maisch.com) using 2%-90% acetonitrile/0.1% FA gradient over 120 min at 300nl/min. Eluting peptides were sprayed into the mass spectrometer at 2.2 kV. Survey scans (MS1) were acquired within 400-1600Da m/z.  The top 15 precursor ions were monitored in data dependent mode with a dynamic exclusion of 15s. Each precursor ion was isolated in 0.6 m/z window and fragmented using HCD activation collision energy 32. Precursor ions were analyzed at 120,000 resolution, AGC target 2xe5, max IT 50ms. Fragment ions were analyzed at 30,000 resolution, AGC target 5xe4, max IT 200ms.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra (MS2) were extracted by Proteome Discoverer (v2.3 ThermoFisher Scientific) searched against the SwissProt_Full_Synchronized_2018_08 database  (20395 entries) using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.6.2). Selected criteria for Mascot searches were Homo sapiens for species, trypsin as enzyme, 0.0100 Da fragment ion mass tolerance, 5.0 ppm parent ion tolerance, carbamidomethyl of cysteine as a fixed modification, oxidation of methionine and deamidated of asparagine and glutamine as variable modifications. Mascot “.dat” files complied in Scaffold (version 3, Proteome Software Inc.) to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if probability to achieve an False Discovery Rate (FDR) less than 1.0%, based on a concatenated decoy database search, by the Peptide Prophet algorithm (Keller, A et al Anal. Chem. 2002;74(20):5383-92) with Scaffold delta-mass correction. Protein identifications were accepted if the probability to achieve an FDR less than 1.0% and contained at least 1 identified peptide also by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii, Al et al Anal. Chem. 2003;75(17):4646-58). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS2 analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.

### Publication Abstract
Hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) is a transcription factor that acts as a regulator of oxygen (O<sub>2</sub>) homeostasis in metazoan species by binding to hypoxia response elements (HREs) and activating the transcription of hundreds of genes in response to reduced O<sub>2</sub> availability. RNA polymerase II (Pol II) initiates transcription of many HIF target genes under non-hypoxic conditions but pauses after approximately 30-60 nucleotides and requires HIF-1 binding for release. Here we report that in hypoxic breast cancer cells, HIF-1 recruits TRIM28 and DNA-dependent protein kinase (DNA-PK) to HREs to release paused Pol II. We show that HIF-1&#x3b1; and TRIM28 assemble the catalytically-active DNA-PK heterotrimer, which phosphorylates TRIM28 at serine-824, enabling recruitment of CDK9, which phosphorylates serine-2 of the Pol II large subunit C-terminal domain as well as the negative elongation factor to release paused Pol II, thereby stimulating productive transcriptional elongation. Our studies reveal a molecular mechanism by which HIF-1 stimulates gene transcription and reveal that the anticancer effects of drugs targeting DNA-PK in breast cancer may be due in part to their inhibition of HIF-dependent transcription.

### Keywords
Human, Rime, Breast cancer, Hif-1

### Affiliations
Institute for Cell Engineering, Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, Department of Biological Chemistry, McKusick-Nathans Department of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, USA
Johns Hopkins University

### Submitter
Chelsey Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Gregg Leonard Semenza
Institute for Cell Engineering, Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, Department of Biological Chemistry, McKusick-Nathans Department of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, USA


