### Accession
PXD011447

### Title
CD44 regulates epigenetic plasticity by mediating iron endocytosis - part 1

### Description
The biological process termed Epithelial-to-Mesenchymal Transition (EMT) plays a central role in cancer cell invasion, metastasis, self-renewal and resistance to therapy. Here, we characterize using quantitative LC-MS/MS the global changes in proteins levels occurring during EMT induced by epidermal growth factor in breast cancer MDA-MB-468 cells.

### Sample Protocol
For sample preparation, human breast cancer MDA-MB-468 cells were grown to  70% confluence in growth media (DMEM, High glucose, GlutaMAX supplement,10% FBS) on 140 cm2 dishes and treated with EGF (100 ng mL-1) for 72 hours in biological triplicate. Untreated cells were used as an appropriate control. Whole cell extracts were collected by centrifugation at 500 x g for 5 min at 4°C, washed twice in ice-cold PBS and lysed using lysis buffer (8 M urea, 50 mM NH4HCO3 and Roche complete protease inhibitor cocktail). The global proteome was quantitatively analyzed with a Q Exactive HF-X quadrupole-Oribitrap mass spectrometry using a label free approach. About 30 µg of total protein cell lysates were diluted with 90 µL of 25 mM NH4HCO3. Proteins were reduced by incubation with 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 57 °C for 1 h and then alkylated with 9 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at RT in the dark. Trypsin/LysC (Promega) was added at 1:100 (wt:wt) enzyme:substrate. Digestion was performed overnight at 37 °C. Samples were then loaded onto a homemade C18 StageTips for desalting. Peptides were eluted from beads by incubation with 40/60 MeCN/H2O + 0.1 % formic acid. Peptides were dried in a Speedvac and reconstituted in 15 µL 2/98 MeCN/H2O + 0.3 % trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) prior to liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis. Samples (4 µL) were chromatographically separated using an RSLCnano system (Ultimate 3000, Thermo Scientific) coupled online to a Q Exactive HF-X with a Nanosrpay Flex ion source (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were first loaded onto a C18-reversed phase precolumn (75-μm inner diameter × 2 cm; nanoViper Acclaim PepMapTM 100, Thermo Scientific), with buffer A (2/98 MeCN/H2O + 0.1 % formic acid) at a flow rate of 2.5 µL/min over 4 min and then switched for separation to an analytical column (75-μm inner diameter × 50 cm; nanoViper C18, 2 μm, 100 Å, Acclaim PepMapTM RSLC, Thermo Scientific) regulated to a temperature of 50 °C with a linear gradient of 2% to 35% buffer B ( 100 % MeCN and 0.1 % formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 µL/min over 211 min. MS full scans were performed in the ultrahigh-field Orbitrap mass analyzer in ranges m/z 375–1500 with a resolution of 120 000 at m/z 200, the maximum injection time (MIT) was 50 ms and the automatic gain control (AGC) was set to 3 × 106. The top 20 intense ions were subjected to Orbitrap for further fragmentation via high energy collision dissociation (HCD) activation and a resolution of 15 000 with the intensity threshold kept at 3.2 × 105. We selected ions with charge state from 2+ to 6+ for screening. Normalized collision energy (NCE) was set at 27. For each scan, the AGC was set at 1 × 105, the MIT was 25 ms and the dynamic exclusion of 40s.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification, the data were searched against the UniProt human canonical (downloaded on 22/08/2017) database using Sequest HF through proteome discoverer (version 2.0). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and a maximum of two missed cleavage sites were allowed. Oxidized methionine, N-terminal acetylation, and carbamidomethyl cysteine were set as variable modifications. Maximum allowed mass deviation was set to 10 ppm for monoisotopic precursor ions and 0.02 Da for MS/MS peaks. The resulting files were further processed using myProMS (Poullet P et al., 2007) v3.6 (work in progress). FDR calculation used Percolator and was set to 1 % at the peptide level for the whole study. The label free quantification was performed by peptide Extracted Ion Chromatograms (XICs) computed with MassChroQ version 2.2.2 (Valot B et al., 2011). For protein quantification, XICs from proteotypic peptides shared between compared conditions (TopN matching) with up to two missed cleavages and carbamidomethyl modifications were used. Median and scale normalization was applied on the total signal to correct the XICs for each biological replicate. To estimate the significance of the change in protein abundance, a linear model (adjusted on peptides and biological replicates) was performed and p-values were adjusted with a Benjamini–Hochberg FDR procedure with a control threshold set to 0.05. Fold change-based GO enrichment analysis was performed as in Kowal J et al., 2016.

### Publication Abstract
CD44 is a transmembrane glycoprotein linked to various biological processes reliant on epigenetic plasticity, which include development, inflammation, immune responses, wound healing and cancer progression. Although it is often referred to as a cell surface marker, the functional regulatory roles of CD44 remain elusive. Here we report the discovery that CD44 mediates the endocytosis of iron-bound hyaluronates in tumorigenic cell lines, primary cancer cells and tumours. This glycan-mediated iron endocytosis mechanism is enhanced during epithelial-mesenchymal transitions, in which iron operates as a metal catalyst to demethylate repressive histone marks that govern the expression of mesenchymal genes. CD44 itself is transcriptionally regulated by nuclear iron through a positive feedback loop, which is in contrast to the negative regulation of the transferrin receptor by excess iron. Finally, we show that epigenetic plasticity can be altered by interfering with iron homeostasis using small molecules. This study reveals an alternative iron-uptake mechanism that prevails in the mesenchymal state of cells, which illuminates a central role of iron as a rate-limiting regulator of epigenetic plasticity.

### Keywords
Proteins expression, Lc-ms/ms, Breast cancer, Emt

### Affiliations
Institut Curie
Laboratoire de Spectrometrie de Masse Proteomique  Institut Curie  PSL Research University

### Submitter
Guillaume Arras

### Lab Head
Dr Damarys Loew
Laboratoire de Spectrometrie de Masse Proteomique  Institut Curie  PSL Research University


