### Accession
PXD001793

### Title
Proteome response in maize to methyl jasmonate

### Description
Jasmonic acid (JA) and methyl jasmonate (MeJA) regulate plant development, resistance to stress, and insect attack by inducing specific gene expression. However, little is known about the mechanism of plant defense against herbivore attack at a protein level. Using a high-resolution 2-DE gel, we identified 60 MeJA-responsive proteins and measured protein expression level changes. Among these 62 proteins, 43 proteins levels were increased while 11 proteins were decreased. We also found eight proteins uniquely expressed in response to MeJA treatment. The proteins identified in this study have important biological functions including photosynthesis and energy related proteins (38.4%), protein folding, degradation and regulated proteins (15.0%), stress and defense regulated proteins (11.7%), and redox-responsive proteins (8.3%).  We found MeJA could not only induce plant defense mechanisms to insects, it also enhanced toxic protein production that potentially can be used for bio-control of Asian corn borer.

### Sample Protocol
Seeds of Zea mays L. Dongnong 250 were used in this study. The seeds were sown into plastic basins (10 cm × 15 cm) and kept at room temperature. The plants were grown at 27 + 1°C with a 14:10 hour (light:dark) photoperiod with 80% relative humidity. When the maize plants developed to the interior leaf period, they were treated with 225 µM of MeJA for 12 hours. One batch of leaves were frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C for protein extraction. Three batches of biological replicates were collected for both control and treated samples.  After MeJA treatment, corn leaves were grounded into powder in liquid nitrogen. The protein was precipitated in a 10% TCA, cold acetone solution (w/v) containing 0.07% (v/v) β-mercaptoethanol at -20°C for two hours. After centrifugation at 40,000 ×g at 4°C for one hour, the supernatant was discarded and the pellet was rinsed with -20°C cold acetone containing 0.07% (v/v) β-mercaptoethanol. The final pellet was vacuum-dried and solubilized in 3 mL of 7 M (w/v) urea containing 2 M (w/v) thiourea, 40 mM DTT, and 1% (v/v) protease inhibitor mixture (GE Healthcare, USA) on ice for about one hour. Insoluble material was removed by centrifugation at 100,000 rpm for one hour. The protein concentration was determined using the 2-D Quant kit (GE Healthcare, USA) with BSA as a standard. Samples were frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C for further analysis.  The proteins from the control group and MeJA-treated plants were compared by using 2-D gel image analysis. The isoelectric points (pI) of the spots ranged from 4 to 7, and the molecular mass ranged from 10 to 120 kDa. For each sample, 1 mg total protein in 450 µL rehydration buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 2% CHAPS, 0.5% IPG buffer with PH 4-7, and 0.04 M DTT) was loaded onto a 24 cm, pH 4-7 linear gradient IPG strip (GE Healthcare, USA). Isoelectric focusing was performed using an Ettan IPGphor 3 isoelectric focusing system according to the manufacturer’s instruction. The focusing conditions were as follows: active rehydration was carried out at low voltage liquefied for 12 h, followed by 300 V for 1 h, 600 V for 1 h, 1000 V for 1 h, with a linear increase of voltage to 8000 V for 12 h at 20°C. The voltage was held at 10,000 V until the total voltage hours reached 80,000. After IEF, the strips were equilibrated with an equilibration solution (50 mM Tris with pH 8.8, 6 M urea, 30% glycerol, 1% DTT, and 2% SDS) followed by 2.5% iodoacetamide in the equilibration solution, each for 15 min. The second dimension was performed on 12.5% polyacrylamide gels using an Ettan DALT Six Electrophoresis Unit (GE Healthcare, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The 2-D gel electrophoresis experiments were repeated three times using protein samples prepared independently from MeJA treated and control maize.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were visualized by Coomassie brilliant blue R250 and gel images were acquired using an ImageScanner (GE Healthcare, USA). Replicate gels from control and MeJA treatment were analyzed with ImageMaster 2-D Platinum Software Version 7.0 (Amersham Biosciences, USA). Experimental molecular weight (kDa) of each protein was estimated by comparison with the protein markers, and experimental isoelectric points were determined by its migration on the IPG strip. The abundance of each protein spot was estimated by the percentage volume (%vol). Only those spots with significant and reproducible changes were considered to be differentially expressed proteins. The normalized volumes of the spots from replicate gels were subjected to student's ANOVA test (p < 0.05) and only statistically significant data were considered. Protein in-gel tryptic digestion and nanoESI MS/MS analysis were carried out on a QSTAR XL MS/MS system (AB Sciex Inc., USA). The peptide MS/MS spectra were searched against an NCBI non-redundant fasta database using Mascot search engine (http://www.matrixscience.com). Mascot was set up to search green plants only, assume trypsin digestion and one allowed miscleavage. The mass tolerance for both parent ion and fragment ion mass was set to be 0.2 Da. Iodoacetamide derivatization of Cys, deamidation of Asn and Gln, and oxidation of Met were specified as variable modifications. Unambiguous identification was judged by the number of peptides, sequence coverage, Mascot score and the quality of MS/MS spectra.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bio-control, Asian corn borer, Maize; 2-de, Mass spectrometry, Methyl jasmonate, Qrt-pcr

### Affiliations
Rutgers University
Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey

### Submitter
Guohua Yin

### Lab Head
Dr Guohua Yin
Rutgers University


