### Accession
PXD010433

### Title
The Antarctic Chlamydomonas spp. UWO241 and ICE-MDV exhibit differential restructuring of Photosystem I in response to iron

### Description
Past studies have shown that the photosynthetic apparatus of a psychrophilic alga C. sp. UWO241 is remodeled to support high rates of Photosystem I (PSI)-associated cyclic electron flow (CEF). Iron levels in ELB are in the nanomolar range; therefore, we hypothesized that PSI restructuring in C. sp. UWO241 may reflect a strategy to survive long-term Fe-deficiency. We studied the effect of Fe availability in C. sp. UWO241, a mesophile, C. reinhardtii, and a second ELB psychrophile, Chlamydomonas sp. ICE-MDV. Under Fe-deficient conditions (2 µM Fe), abundance of the PSI reaction center protein, PsaA, as well as levels of photooxidizable P700 (ΔA820/A820) were significantly reduced in both psychrophiles relative to C. reinhardtii. In response to increased Fe, C. sp. ICE-MDV exhibited increases in PSI 77K Chl a fluorescence and ΔA820/A820 which matched that of C. reinhardtii, while C. sp. UWO241 exhibited moderate restoration of PSI function. Our results indicate that PSI functional organization in C. sp. UWO241 is unique. The unique physiological traits in PSI photochemistry exhibited by the psychrophiles may reflect adaptation to the stratified physicochemical conditions present the shallow vs. deep photic zones of a chemically Antarctic lake.

### Sample Protocol
Algal cells were lysed by bead beating with non-ionic detergent supplemented in the lysis buffer. Proteins were denatured in 8M urea and trypsin digested. 75 ug of digested peptides were loaded onto a SCX capillary precolumn, and further separated by a 15 cm C18 capillary column with several fractions before injecting into the Thermo LTQ XL for peptide analysis.

### Data Protocol
The two dimensional (2D)-LC-MS/MS was conducted on a LTQ ion trap mass spectrometer operated in the data-dependent acquisition mode by recording the full ass spectra of 300-1700 m/z, and fragment the 5 most abundant peaks of each scan for MS/MS analysis. The MS/MS raw data was analyzed by first converting into MS2 files, followed by database search using ProLuCID. The UWO 241 protein database was generated based on our transcriptomics data supplemented with 37 common contaminants, and their reversed sequences as quality control system to restrain false positive discovery to 0.05. Differentially expressed proteins were analyzed using PatternLab for Proteomics.

### Publication Abstract
Chlamydomonas sp. UWO241 is a psychrophilic alga isolated from the deep photic zone of a perennially ice-covered Antarctic lake (east lobe Lake Bonney, ELB). Past studies have shown that C. sp. UWO241 exhibits constitutive downregulation of photosystem I (PSI) and high rates of PSI-associated cyclic electron flow (CEF). Iron levels in ELB are in the nanomolar range leading us to hypothesize that the unusual PSI phenotype of C. sp. UWO241 could be a response to chronic Fe-deficiency. We studied the impact of Fe availability in C. sp. UWO241, a mesophile, C. reinhardtii SAG11-32c, as well as a psychrophile isolated from the shallow photic zone of ELB, Chlamydomonas sp. ICE-MDV. Under Fe-deficiency, PsaA abundance and levels of photooxidizable P700 (&#x394;A<sub>820</sub>/A<sub>820</sub>) were reduced in both psychrophiles relative to the mesophile. Upon increasing Fe, C. sp. ICE-MDV and C. reinhardtii exhibited restoration of PSI function, while C. sp. UWO241 exhibited only moderate changes in PSI activity and lacked almost all LHCI proteins. Relative to Fe-excess conditions (200&#xa0;&#xb5;M Fe<sup>2+</sup>), C. sp. UWO241 grown in 18&#xa0;&#xb5;M Fe<sup>2+</sup> exhibited downregulation of light harvesting and photosystem core proteins, as well as upregulation of a bestrophin-like anion channel protein and two CEF-associated proteins (NdsS, PGL1). Key enzymes of starch synthesis and shikimate biosynthesis were also upregulated. We conclude that in response to variable Fe availability, the psychrophile C. sp. UWO241 exhibits physiological plasticity which includes restructuring of the photochemical apparatus, increased PSI-associated CEF, and shifts in downstream carbon metabolism toward storage carbon and secondary stress metabolites.

### Keywords
Psychrophile, Photosystem i, Antarctica, Iron

### Affiliations
Department of Microbiology Miami University, Oxford OH 45056
Miami University

### Submitter
XIN WANG

### Lab Head
Dr Xin Wang
Department of Microbiology Miami University, Oxford OH 45056


