### Accession
PXD015558

### Title
An optimized apoplastic fluid extraction method for the simultaneous characterization of the proteome and metabolome of grapevine leaves.

### Description
The study of different cellular compartments also allows a broader conception of cell dynamics. Plant apoplast is the cellular compartment external to the plasma membrane including the cell wall. Despite our knowledge on apoplast involvement on several processes from cell growth to biotic and abiotic stress response, its dynamics is yet still poorly studied due to the need for adaptation of the extraction process according to the plant system and consequently, the difficulty to perform a comprehensive profiling of proteins, metabolites and lipids within a single experiment. Moreover, when looking at woody plants as grapevine, more challenges are raised leading to only few studies published so far focusing on apoplast characterization. Being grapevine one of the most important fruit crops worldwide, a wider characterization of this compartment may unveil the importance of grapevine’s secretome.  Here, we describe an optimized vacuum-infiltration-centrifugation method for the simultaneous extraction of apoplastic proteins and metabolites from the grapevine leaf on a single experiment, compatible with high-throughput mass spectrometry analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Two grapevine cultivars V. vinifera ‘Trincadeira’ and ‘Regent’ with different phenological characteristics were used. The apoplastic fluid (APF) was obtained from 25g of fresh material (corresponding to approximately 30 young fully expanded leaves) of 7 different clonal plants. The leaves were vacuum infiltrated as previously described but using a different infiltration solution.  The proteins from APF extracts were precipitated using 5 volumes of 0.1 M ammonium acetate in 100% methanol and kept overnight at -20 °C. After centrifugation, the pellets were washed several times then dried and resuspended in a specific buffer. For proteomics analysis, 20µg of proteins were loaded on a 1D-Gel to fractionate each sample in two groups and to perform in-gel digestion with trypsin. The extracted peptides were separated with a nanoLC425 Eksigent coupled to a TripleTOF MS 6600 Sciex.

### Data Protocol
The MS data was imported in Progenesis QIP v.4.1. The protein and peptide identification were searched on Mascot Daemon (v2.6.0, Matrix Science) in NCBIprot Vitis vinifera with the Mascot research parameters following: peptide tolerance = 20 ppm, fragment mass tolerance= 0.3 Da, Cys CAM as fixed modification and Met oxidation, Nter acetylation and Trp --> Kyn as variables and confidence >= 0.95. Only the proteins identified with a significance MASCOT-calculated threshold p value < 0.05, at least two significant peptides per proteins and one unique peptide per proteins were accepted. Proteome characterization and functional annotation was performed using Blast2GO software and Mapman “bincode”. The subcellular localization prediction of the proteins was performed using SignalP 5.0, TargetP 1.1 and SecretomeP 2.0 servers, ApoplastP, BUSCA, LocTree3, Mercator and Blast2GO with default parameters.

### Publication Abstract
The analysis of complex biological systems keeps challenging researchers. The main goal of systems biology is to decipher interactions within cells, by integrating datasets from large scale analytical approaches including transcriptomics, proteomics and metabolomics and more specialized 'OMICS' such as epigenomics and lipidomics. Studying different cellular compartments allows a broader understanding of cell dynamics. Plant apoplast, the cellular compartment external to the plasma membrane including the cell wall, is particularly demanding to analyze. Despite our knowledge on apoplast involvement on several processes from cell growth to stress responses, its dynamics is still poorly known due to the lack of efficient extraction processes adequate to each plant system. Analyzing woody plants such as grapevine raises even more challenges. Grapevine is among the most important fruit crops worldwide and a wider characterization of its apoplast is essential for a deeper understanding of its physiology and cellular mechanisms. Here, we describe, for the first time, a vacuum-infiltration-centrifugation method that allows a simultaneous extraction of grapevine apoplastic proteins and metabolites from leaves on a single sample, compatible with high-throughput mass spectrometry analyses. The extracted apoplast from two grapevine cultivars, Vitis vinifera cv 'Trincadeira' and 'Regent', was directly used for proteomics and metabolomics analysis. The proteome was analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS and more than 700 common proteins were identified, with highly diverse biological functions. The metabolome profile through FT-ICR-MS allowed the identification of 514 unique putative compounds revealing a broad spectrum of molecular classes.

### Keywords
Proteins, Carbohydrates, Comprehensive analysis, Lipids, Mass spectrometry, Vitis vinifera, Extracellular space

### Affiliations
LIST-ERIN-ERTP-BEAP-HAU platform
LIST-ERIN-ERTP-Green Tech  Integrative biology platform Belvaux, LUXEMBOURG

### Submitter
Céline LECLERCQ

### Lab Head
Dr Céline LECLERCQ
LIST-ERIN-ERTP-Green Tech  Integrative biology platform Belvaux, LUXEMBOURG


