### Accession
PXD000762

### Title
Phosphoproteomic analyses reveal that  galectin-1 augments the dynamics of B-cell receptor signaling

### Description
we applied label-free quantitative phosphoproteomic analysis to delineate the dynamics of galectin-1-induced signaling in comparison with the first systematic phosphorylation-mediated signaling network in B cell activation by anti-IgM treatment.

### Sample Protocol
to gain phosphoproteome-wide comparisons between rGal-1 and anti-IgM-activated signaling pathways. A total of 5x107 splenic B cells were purified from 10 mice and each 107 cells was The purified mouse splenic B cell lysates underwent activation with rGal-1 or anti-IgM for 10 or 30 min, in comparison with one untreated cell population as a control to show basal levels of phosphorylation, The extracted proteins were subjected to gel-assisted digestion, pH/acid controlled IMAC for phosphopeptide purification. , and followed by tTriplicate LC-MS/MS analysis analyses were performed on each sample, resulting in 15 runs, to obtain confident identification and quantification.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS/MS data were converted into peak lists (MGF file) using Raw2MSM with default parameters. The resulting peak lists were searched against the IPI_MOUSE database (version 3.87, 68161 entries) via an in-house Mascot search engine (version 2.2.1; Matrix Science Ltd.). Searching parameters were as follows: peptide mass tolerance, 10 ppm Da; MS/MS ion mass tolerance, 0.6 Da; enzyme was trypsin, with up to two missed cleavages allowed; variable modifications included oxidation on methionine and phosphorylation on serine, threonine, and tyrosine residues; peptide charge, 2+ and 3+. Phosphopeptides were accepted only if the Mascot score was greater than that equivalent to p < 0.05 and ranked as the top match. The identification results were exported as eXtensive Markup Language data (.XML) format. The raw data were converted into mzXML format. XML files along with mzXML files were used for quantitative analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Galectin-1, Phosphoproteome, B-cell activation, B-cell receptor

### Affiliations
National Taiwan University
Institute of Chemistry, Academia Sinica, Taiwan

### Submitter
Hsin-Yi Wu

### Lab Head
Dr Yu-Ju Chen
Institute of Chemistry, Academia Sinica, Taiwan


