### Accession
PXD021189

### Title
usp11 overexpression in neuron derived from mESCs for proteome and ubiquitylome analyses

### Description
Using unbiased mass spectrometry-based screen to identify differences in ubiquitinated proteins in the overexpression of Usp11. To focus on potential substrates relevant for Usp11’s role in neurogenesis, we performed experiments with mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells, in which NPC and neurons are derived at Day8.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were treated with 5 uM MG132 for 1 h and then lysed in buffer containing 8 M urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 2 ug/ml aprotinin, 10 ug/ml leupeptin, and 1 mM PMSF. 10 mg lysates for K-k-GG peptide enrichment and 100 ug lysates for proteome analysis were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol (Sigma-Aldrich) at 37℃ for 45 min followed by alkylation with 10 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Lysates were diluted to 4 M urea with 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0) and digested with Lys-C (WAKO) for 4 h at 37℃. The peptide mixture was further diluted to 2 M urea and digested with trypsin (Promega) for overnight at 37℃. The resulting peptides were acidified with fluroacetic acid, desalted using a tC18 sep-Pak SPE cartridge (Waters), and lyophilized.  For K-k-GG peptide enrichment, lyophilized peptides were resuspended in IAP buffer (Cell Signaling) and incubated with PTMScan Ubiquitin Remnant Motif (K-k-GG) Antibody Bead Conjugate (Cell signaling) for overnight at 4℃. The beads were washed twice with ice cold IAP buffer, followed by 3 times with ice cold water. Ubiquitinated peptides were eluted with 80 ul of 0.15% trifluroacetic acid twice. The eluent was cleaned up by C18 Stage Tips (Millipore) and then lyophilized.  For TMT labeling, peptides before and after K-k-GG peptide enrichment were reconstituted in 100 mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate and incubated with TMT labeling reagent (0.8 mg TMT-129 or TMT-131 in 41 ul of anhydrous acetonitrile) for 1 h at room temperature. The reaction was quenched by adding 8 ul 4% hydroxylamine. The solution was cleaned up with C18 Zip-Tip and lyophilized.  After TMT labeling, peptides for proteome analysis were fractionated by strong cation exchange (SCX) chromatography. Briefly, peptides were resuspended in SCX buffer A (7 mM KH2PO4, pH 2.65 and 30% acetonitrile) and separated on a Polysulfoethyl A column (200 x 4.6 mm, 5um, 200 Å) using an Agilent 1100 system. A 160 min SCX gradient was used for separation at a flow rate of 1 ml/min. The gradient consisted of a 20 min equilibration phase with 100% buffer A, a linear increase to 20% buffer B (7 mM KH2PO4, pH 2.65, 350 mM KCl and 30% acetonitrile) within 20 min, a second linear increase to 50% buffer B in 40 min, a third linear increase to 75% buffer B in 10 min, and 100% buffer B for 10 min.

### Data Protocol
NanoLC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Thermo Scientific UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system connected to a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a PicoView nanospray interface (New Objective, Woburn, MA). Peptide mixtures were loaded onto a 75 μm ID, 25 cm length Acclaim® PepMap™ RSLC packed with 2 μm particles with a pore width of 100 Å and were separated using a segmented gradient in 150 min from 5% to 40% solvent B (acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min and a column temperature of 40°C. Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid in water. The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent mode. Briefly, survey scans of peptide precursors from 350 to 1600 m/z were performed at 120K resolution with a 2 × 105 ion count target. Tandem MS was performed by isolation window at 2 Da with the quadrupole, HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 38, and scan MS analysis in the Orbitrap. The minimum MS signal for triggering MS/MS was set to 50000. The MS2 ion count target was set to 105 and the max injection time was 200 ms. Only those precursors with charge state 2–7 were sampled for MS2. The instrument was run in top speed mode with 3 s cycles, the dynamic exclusion duration was set to 60 s with a 10 ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes, and the monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Usp11, Mescs, Ubiquitylome analyses

### Affiliations
Institute of Biological Chemistry, Academia Sinica, Nankang, Taipei 115, Taiwan
Institute of Biological Chemistry, Academia Sinica

### Submitter
Shang Yin Chiang

### Lab Head
Dr Ruey-Hwa Chen
Institute of Biological Chemistry, Academia Sinica, Nankang, Taipei 115, Taiwan


