### Accession
PXD015315

### Title
Single-cell transcriptomics identifies an effectorness gradient shaping the response of CD4+ T cells to cytokines

### Description
Naïve CD4+ T cells coordinate the immune response by acquiring an effector phenotype in response to cytokines. However, the cytokine responses in memory T cells remain largely understudied. We used quantitative proteomics, bulk RNA-seq and single-cell RNA-seq of over 40,000 human naïve and memory CD4+ T cells to generate a detailed map of cytokine-regulated gene expression programs. We demonstrated that cytokine response differs substantially between naïve and memory T cells and showed that memory cells are unable to differentiate into the Th2 phenotype. Moreover, memory T cells acquire a Th17-like phenotype in response to iTreg polarization. At the single-cell level, we demonstrated that T cells form a continuum which progresses from naïve to effector memory T cells. This continuum is accompanied by a gradual increase in the expression levels of chemokines and cytokines and thus represents an effectorness gradient. Finally, we found that T cell cytokine responses are determined by where the cells lie in the effectorness gradient and identified genes whose expression is controlled by cytokines in an effectorness-dependent manner. Our results shed light on the heterogeneity of T cells and their responses to cytokines, provide insight into immune disease inflammation and could inform drug development.

### Sample Protocol
We isolated pellets formed of up to 3 x 106 cells. Cell pellets were washed twice with PBS and stored at -80 ̊C until protein extraction. The pellets were then lysed in 150 μl 0.1 M triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) buffer (Sigma Aldrich) supplemented with 0.1% SDS and Halt protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (100X) (Thermo, #78442). Pulse probe sonication (40% power, 4˚C and 20 seconds) was performed twice using EpiShear™, after which the samples were incubated for 10 minutes at 95 ̊C. Protein from cell lysates was quantified using the quick start Bradford protein assay (Bio-Rad) as specified by the manufacturer’s instructions. Protein samples were finally divided into aliquots of up to 100 μg. Protein aliquots were reduced with 5 mM tris-2-carboxyethyl phosphine (TCEP) buffer (Sigma Aldrich) for 1 hour at 60˚C. Iodoacetamide (IAA) was added to a final concentration of 10 mM and samples were incubated for 30 minutes at room temperature in dark. Pierce Trypsin (Thermo Scientific) was then added at a mass ratio of 1:30, and samples were incubated overnight for peptide digestion. Digested protein samples were diluted to a total volume of 100 μl in 0.1 M TEAB buffer. TMT reagents (Thermo Scientific) supplemented with 41 μl anhydrous acetonitrile were added to the corresponding protein samples. After 1 hour, the reaction was quenched using 8 μl 5% hydroxylamine. Samples were then combined into a single tube and dried using a speedvac concentrator. Dry samples were stored at -20˚C until fractionation. High pH Reverse Phase (RP) peptide fractionation was performed with the Waters XBridge C18 column (2.1 x 150 mm, 3.5 μm) on a Dionex™ UltiMate 3000 HPLC system. A 0.1% solution of ammonium hydroxide was used as mobile phase A, while mobile phase B was composed of acetonitrile with 0.1% ammonium hydroxide. The TMT-labelled samples were reconstituted in 100 μl mobile phase A, centrifuged and injected into the column, which operated at 0.2 ml/min. The fractions collected from the column were dried with the SpeedVac concentrator and stored at -20˚C until the MS analysis. Liquid Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS) was performed using a Dionex™ UltiMate 3000 HPLC system (Thermo Scientific) coupled with the Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Dried samples were reconstituted in 40 μl 0.1% formic acid, of which 7 μl were loaded to the Acclaim PepMap 100 trapping column (100 μm x 2 cm, C18, 5 μm, 100Ӓ) at a flow rate of 10 μl/min. Multi-step gradient elution was performed at 45  ̊C using the Dionex™ Acclaim PepMap RSLC capillary column (75 μm x 50 cm, 2 μm, 100Ӓ). A 0.1% solution of formic acid was used as mobile phase A, and a 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid solution as mobile phase B. Precursors were selected with mass resolution of 120k, AGC 4 x 105 and IT 50 ms for CID fragmentation with quadrupole isolation width of 0.7 Th. Collision energy was set at 35%. Furthermore, MS3 quantification spectra were acquired with 50k resolution via further fragmentation for the top 7 most abundant CID fragments in the Synchronous Precursor Selection (SPS) mode. Targeted precursor ions were dynamically excluded for 45 sec.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed in Proteome Discoverer 2.2 with the SequestHT search engine (Thermo Scientific) using reviewed UniProt human protein entries for protein identification and quantification. The precursor mass tolerance was set at 20 ppm and the fragment ion mass tolerance was 0.02 Da. Spectra were searched for fully tryptic peptides with maximum 2 miss-cleavages. TMT6plex at N-terminus/K and Carbamidomethyl at C were used as static modifications. Dynamic modifications included oxidation of M and Deamidation of N/Q. Peptide confidence was estimated with the Percolator node. Peptide FDR was set at 0.01 and validation was based on q-value and decoy database search. The reporter ion quantifier node included a TMT10plex quantification method with an integration window tolerance of 15 ppm and integration method based on the most confident centroid peak at the MS3 level. Only unique peptides for the protein groups were used for quantification. Peptides with average reporter signal-to-noise less than 3 were excluded from protein quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Na&#xef;ve CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells coordinate the immune response by acquiring an effector phenotype in response to cytokines. However, the cytokine responses in memory T cells remain largely understudied. Here we use quantitative proteomics, bulk RNA-seq, and single-cell RNA-seq of over 40,000 human na&#xef;ve and memory CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells to show that responses to cytokines differ substantially between these cell types. Memory T cells are unable to differentiate into the Th2 phenotype, and acquire a Th17-like phenotype in response to iTreg polarization. Single-cell analyses show that T cells constitute a transcriptional continuum that progresses from na&#xef;ve to central and effector memory T cells, forming an effectorness gradient accompanied by an increase in the expression of chemokines and cytokines. Finally, we show that T cell activation and cytokine responses are influenced by the effectorness gradient. Our results illustrate the heterogeneity of T cell responses, furthering our understanding of inflammation.

### Keywords
Human, Tmt, Ms/ms

### Affiliations
Institute of Cancer Research, London & Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge
Functional Proteomics, Institute Cancer Research
&
Proteomic Mass Spectrometry, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute

### Submitter
James Wright

### Lab Head
Dr Jyoti Choudhary
Institute of Cancer Research, London & Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge


