### Accession
PXD019481

### Title
Phosphoproteomic Effects of Acute Depletion of PP2A Regulatory Subunit Cdc55

### Description
Protein phosphatase regulatory subunits are increasingly recognized as promising drug targets. In the absence of an existing drug, inducible degradation provides a means of predicting candidate targets. We here employed auxin-inducible degradation of S. cerevisiae PP2A regulatory subunit Cdc55 in combination with quantitative phosphoproteomics. A prevalence of hyperphosphorylated phosphopeptides and enrichment of proteins containing the PP2A consensus sequence indicates that the approach successfully identified direct PP2ACdc55 targets.

### Sample Protocol
Lysates were diluted to 3 mg/ml and 2 mg protein subjected to in-solution digestion. They were incubated with 5 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine‎ (TCEP) and 5 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) simultaneously for 30 min at room temperature (RT). Samples were diluted to an urea concentration of 5.5 M with 50 mM ABC and digested with LysC protease (Wako) at a 1:100 w/w protein ratio for 3 hours at 37°C. They were further diluted to 1 M urea before incubation with trypsin at a 1:100 w/w protein ratio o/n at 37°C. The digestion reaction was quenched by adding 10% tri-fluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final of 2% v/v and debris cleared by centrifugation. Samples were desalted on SepPak Plus cartridges (Waters) using a vacuum manifold in aliquots corresponding to 1 mg protein: Briefly, cartridges were conditioned with 65% acetonitrile (MeCN), 0.1% TFA, equilibrated in 2% MeCN, 0.1% TFA, samples loaded into an additional aliquot of equilibration solution and pulled slowly into the cartridges. After washing with the same solution, peptides were eluted in 2x 600 µl 65% MeCN, 0.1% TFA and lyophilized to dryness. Lyophilized peptides were resuspended in 20 µl 2% MeCN, 0.1% formic acid (FA) and supplemented with retention time standard peptides (iRT, Biognosys). Two runs of data dependent MS analysis using 1 µl injections were acquired for each sample: Peptides were separated by nano-UPLC (nLC-1000; Thermo) using a 50 cm C18 column (EASYspray; 75 µm I.D.) at 35°C and a flow rate of 300 nl/min and mobile phases of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water (A) and 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in acetonitrile (B). The percentage of solvent B was ramped from 5% to 35% within 90 min.  The analyte was electrosprayed into an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer in positive ionisation mode and analysed with data-dependent acquisition (DDA). MS spectra were acquired at 120 000 resolution at an ion target at 200 000 and 50 s maximum fill time (scan range of 250 to 2000 Th). The most intense precursor peaks with charges 2-7 and intensity above 5000 within 3 s cycle time were selected for HCD fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 30% (quadrupole isolation window: 1.6 Th). Fragment scans were acquired in the ion trap in rapid scan mode with an ion target of 10 000 and a maximum accumulation time of 50 ms (scan range of 200 to 2,000 Th). Dynamic exclusion of 60 s was enabled.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data were processed using MaxQuant v. 1.6.6.0. The following search settings were used: enzyme was trypsin/P+LysC with 2 allowed missed cleavages. For precursor ions the first search tolerance was set to 10 ppm and the main search tolerance to 4.5 ppm and for fragment ions the tolerance was set to 0.5 Th. Phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine residues, oxidation of methionine, acetylation of protein N-termini were used as variable modifications (maximal 5 modifications per peptide). Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was used as fixed modification. Arg6; Lys4 and Arg10; Lys8 were set as medium and heavy isotope labels respectively. A database of SwissProt entries for Saccharomyces cerevisiae S288c taxonomy from 04/2018 supplemented with iRT peptides was used to match the spectra. Finally, a peptide and modification site FDR of 0.01 was applied to filter peptide spectrum matches (PSMs).

### Publication Abstract
Protein phosphatase regulatory subunits are increasingly recognized as promising drug targets. In the absence of an existing drug, inducible degradation provides a means of predicting candidate targets. Here auxin-inducible degradation of Saccharomyces cerevisiae PP2A regulatory subunit Cdc55 in combination with quantitative phosphoproteomics is employed. A prevalence of hyperphosphorylated phosphopeptides indicates that the approach successfully identified direct PP2A<sup>Cdc55</sup> targets. PRM follow up of data-dependent acquisition results confirmed that vacuolar amino acid transporters are among the proteins most strongly affected by Cdc55 depletion.

### Keywords
Degron, Phosphoproteomics, Lc-msms, Pp2a, Protein phosphatase, Silac

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Biology University of Geneva
University of Arizona

### Submitter
Michael Plank

### Lab Head
Dr Robbie Joseph Loewith
Department of Molecular Biology University of Geneva


