### Accession
PXD011226

### Title
Potato ATG8 interactome -  N-terminal β-strand underpins biochemical specialization of an ATG8 isoform

### Description
GFP-IP based interactome of potato ATG8 isoforms following transient expression in Nicotiana benthamiana.

### Sample Protocol
Nicotiana benthamiana leaves were harvested three days post infiltration. GFP-IPs were performed according to manufacturer’s protocol. Following the IP, samples were washed eight times (four times with buffer containing 0.1% Igepal, and four times without detergent). Beads were then submitted for mass spectrometry analyses. The nano HPLC system used was an UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Amsterdam, Netherlands) coupled to a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany), equipped with a Proxeon nanospray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Odense, Denmark). Peptides were loaded onto a trap column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Amsterdam, Netherlands, PepMap C18, 5 mm × 300 μm ID, 5 μm particles, 100 Å pore size) at a flow rate of 25 μL min-1 using 0.1% TFA as mobile phase. After 10 min, the trap column was switched in line with the analytical column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Amsterdam, Netherlands, PepMap C18, 500 mm × 75 μm ID, 2 μm, 100 Å). Peptides were eluted using a flow rate of 230 nl min-1, and a binary 3h gradient, respectively 225 min. The gradient starts with the mobile phases: 98% A (water/formic acid, 99.9/0.1, v/v) and 2% B (water/acetonitrile/formic acid, 19.92/80/0.08, v/v/v), increases to 35%B over the next 180 min, followed by a gradient in 5 min to 90%B, stays there for 5 min and decreases in 2 min back to the gradient 98%A and 2%B for equilibration at 30°C. The Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, using a full scan (m/z range 350-1500, nominal resolution of 60,000, target value 1E6) followed by MS/MS scans of the 10 most abundant ions. MS/MS spectra were acquired using normalized collision energy of 28, isolation width of 1.0 m/z, resolution of 30.000 and the target value was set to 1E5. Precursor ions selected for fragmentation (exclude charge state 1, 7, 8, >8) were put on a dynamic exclusion list for 60 s. Additionally, the minimum AGC target was set to 5E3 and intensity threshold was calculated to be 4.8E4. The peptide match feature was set to preferred and the exclude isotopes feature was enabled.

### Data Protocol
For peptide identification, the RAW-files were loaded into Proteome Discoverer (version 2.1.0.81, Thermo Scientific). All hereby created MS/MS spectra were searched using MSAmanda v2.1.5.9849, Engine version v2.0.0.9849 (Dorfer V. et al., J. Proteome Res. 2014 Aug 1;13(8):3679-84). For the 1st step search the RAW-files were searched against a nicotiana benthamiana genome database called Nicotiana_Benthamiana_Nbv6trPAplusSGNUniq_20170808 (398,682 sequences; 137,880,484 residues), supplemented with common contaminants, using the following search parameters: The peptide mass tolerance was set to ±5 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance to 15ppm. The maximal number of missed cleavages was set to 2, using tryptic enzymatic specificity. The result was filtered to 1 % FDR on protein level using Percolator algorithm integrated in Thermo Proteome Discoverer. A sub-database was generated for further processing.  For the 2nd step the RAW-files were searched against the created sub-database (36,152 sequences; 16,892,506 residues), using the following search parameters: Beta-methylthiolation on cysteine was set as a fixed modification, oxidation on methionine, deamidation on asparagine and glutamine, acetylation on lysine, phosphorylation on serine, threonine and tyrosine, methylation and di-methylation on lysine and arginine, tri-methylation on lysine, ubiquitination on lysine were set as variable modifications. Monoisotopic masses were searched within unrestricted protein masses for tryptic enzymatic specificity. The peptide mass tolerance was set to ±5 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance to ±15 ppm. The maximal number of missed cleavages was set to 2. The result was filtered to 1% FDR on peptide level using Percolator algorithm integrated in Thermo Proteome Discoverer. The localization of the post-translational modification sites within the peptides was performed with the tool ptmRS, based on the tool phosphoRS (Taus T. et al., J. Proteome Res. 2011, 10, 5354-62). Peptide areas have been quantified using in-house-developed tool APQuant (publication under review).

### Publication Abstract
Autophagy-related protein 8 (ATG8) is a highly conserved ubiquitin-like protein that modulates autophagy pathways by binding autophagic membranes and a number of proteins, including cargo receptors and core autophagy components. Throughout plant evolution, ATG8 has expanded from a single protein in algae to multiple isoforms in higher plants. However, the degree to which ATG8 isoforms have functionally specialized to bind distinct proteins remains unclear. Here, we describe a comprehensive protein-protein interaction resource, obtained using in planta immunoprecipitation (IP) followed by mass spectrometry (MS), to define the potato ATG8 interactome. We discovered that ATG8 isoforms bind distinct sets of plant proteins with varying degrees of overlap. This prompted us to define the biochemical basis of ATG8 specialization by comparing two potato ATG8 isoforms using both in vivo protein interaction assays and in vitro quantitative binding affinity analyses. These experiments revealed that the N-terminal &#x3b2;-strand-and, in particular, a single amino acid polymorphism-underpins binding specificity to the substrate PexRD54 by shaping the hydrophobic pocket that accommodates this protein's ATG8-interacting motif (AIM). Additional proteomics experiments indicated that the N-terminal &#x3b2;-strand shapes the broader ATG8 interactor profiles, defining interaction specificity with about 80 plant proteins. Our findings are consistent with the view that ATG8 isoforms comprise a layer of specificity in the regulation of selective autophagy pathways in plants.

### Keywords
Plant, Nicotiana benthamiana, Atg8, Autophagy

### Affiliations
IMBA - Institute of Molecular Biotechnology
Gregor Mendel Institute (GMI) Austrian Academy of Sciences Vienna BioCenter (VBC) Dr. Bohr-Gasse 3 1030 Vienna, Austria

### Submitter
Richard Imre

### Lab Head
Dr Yasin Dagdas
Gregor Mendel Institute (GMI) Austrian Academy of Sciences Vienna BioCenter (VBC) Dr. Bohr-Gasse 3 1030 Vienna, Austria


