### Accession
PXD008649

### Title
Proteome characterization of Paracoccidioides lutzii conidia by using label free proteomics

### Description
Paracoccidioidomycosis (PCM) is an endemic mycosis in Latin America. The PCM is a systemic disease caused by the thermo dimorphic fungus Paracoccidioides spp, which can exist as mycelia and yeast forms. The mycelia form can be found in environment at temperatures between 18 °C and 25 °C and produces spores or conidia. The PCM infection route occurs by the inhalation of conidia. Once in the lungs, these particles are converted into yeasts pathogenic form. Until now, metabolic aspects and virulence factors related to Paracoccidioides lutzii infective propagule are little understood. In this concern, a global proteomic study of P. lutzii conidia was performed. For conidia production, the mycelia of the isolate Pb01 were cultured in potato agar medium during 90 days at 18 °C. Obtained conidia were collected and purified. The proteins were extracted and subjected to tryptic digestion followed by identification by NanoUPLC-MSE approach. We identified a total of 242 proteins in P. lutzii conidia which were subjected to in silico functional analysis Proteins putatively acting as adhesins, such as GAPDH, enolase, and the glycoprotein β-1,3-glucanosyltransferase (gel2) were identified during our analysis. We also identified proteins related to signal transduction pathways, such as Ras and RhoA GTPases, previously demonstrated to be required for morphologic changes in pathogenic fungi. Proteins related to evasion, defense and virulence were also identified. Proteins acting during temperature shifts or oxidative stress provided by the host environment such as HSP90, catalase, mitochondrial peroxiredoxin Prx1 were identified. It were also identified proteins related to energy production and protein biosynthesis, which can provide important aspects to survival of this resting cells. These results highlight that P. lutzii conidia contain proteins that can contribute to its maintenance in the environment and also molecules related to host-pathogen interactions.

### Sample Protocol
The digests were dried and the peptides were resuspended in 20 mM ammonium formate pH 10. The obtained peptides were further separated by RPRP-HPLC using a nanoACQUITYTM system (Waters Corp). Each sample was run in three technical replicates. The column loads were 5 µg of protein digests for the analysis of samples in triplicate. First, the samples were separated in 5 fractions in the mobile phase at pH 10. Each fraction was further separated by reverse phase chromatography with a mobile phase at pH 2.5. Label-free data-independent scanning (MSE) experiments were performed with a Synapt HDMS mass spectrometer (Waters, Manchester, UK), which switched between low collision energy MS (3 eV) and elevated collision energies MSE (12–40 eV) applied to the trap “T-wave” CID cell with argon gas.

### Data Protocol
The ProteinLynx Global server v.2.4 (PLGS) with ExpressionE informatics v.2.5.2 was used to proper spectral processing, database searching conditions and quantitative comparisons. The database was randomized to access the false-positive rate of identification (4%). Trypsin was the primary digest reagent, allowing for 1 missed cleavage. Carbamidomethyl-C was specified as fixed modification and phosphorylation STY and oxidation M were used as variable modifications. The minimum fragment ion matches per peptide, the minimum fragment ion matches per protein, and the minimum peptide matches per protein were, respectively set as 2, 5 and 1. It was used 50 ppm as mass variation tolerance. A protein detected in all replicates presenting a variance coefficient less than 10% was used to normalize the expression data to compare the protein levels between control and argentilactone-treated conditions.

### Publication Abstract
Fungi of the genus Paracoccidioides are the etiological agents of Paracoccidioidomycosis (PCM), the most prevalent mycosis in Latin America. Paracoccidioidomycosis infection is acquired by inhalation of Paracoccidioides conidia, which have first contact with the lungs and can subsequently spread to other organs/tissues. Until now, there have been no proteomic studies focusing on this infectious particle of Paracoccidioides. In order to identify the Paracoccidioides lutzii conidia proteome, conidia were produced and purified. Proteins were characterized by use of the nanoUPLC-MS<sup>E</sup> approach. The strategy allowed us to identify a total of 242 proteins in P.&#xa0;lutzii conidia. In the conidia proteome, proteins were classified in functional categories such as protein synthesis, energy production, metabolism, cellular defense/virulence processes, as well as other processes that can be important for conidia survival. Through this analysis, a pool of ribosomal proteins was identified, which may be important for the initial processes of dimorphic transition. In addition, molecules related to energetic and metabolic processes were identified, suggesting a possible basal metabolism during this form of resistance of the fungus. In addition, adhesins and virulence factors were identified in the P.&#xa0;lutzii conidia proteome. Our results demonstrate the potential role that these molecules can play during early cell-host interaction processes, as well as the way in which these molecules are involved in environmental survival during this form of propagation.

### Keywords
Virulence factors, Paracoccidioidomycosis, Proteome, Conidia

### Affiliations
Biochemistry and molecular biology department, Universidade Federal de Goias, Brazil 
Biochemistry and molecular biology department, Universidade Federal de Goias, Brazil

### Submitter
CLAYTON BORGES

### Lab Head
Dr CLAYTON LUIZ BORGES
Biochemistry and molecular biology department, Universidade Federal de Goias, Brazil


