### Accession
PXD000063

### Title
iTRAQ MS of mouse LbetaT2 cells transfected with Galphas siRNA vs. scrambled siRNA

### Description
Twenty million LbetaT2 cells were transfected with either control or Galphas siRNA, then were seeded in 100-mm cell culture plates in DMEM + 10% FBS. Two days later, cells were washed twice with pre-warmed PBS. Conditioned media was harvested another 24 h later, and centrifuged at 20,000 g for 10 min at 4°C to remove cell debris. To enrich secreted proteins in the conditioned media, conditioned media samples were centrifuged using Amicon centrifugal filters with a 3kDa cutoff (Millipore, Billerica, MA). A total of 8 concentrated conditioned media samples were independently prepared: 4 samples from control siRNA-treated cells, and 4 samples from Galphas siRNA-treated cells. Samples were stored at –70°C until they were sent to the Mount Sinai Proteomics Core Facility.HPLC-isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation mass-spectrometry (iTRAQ MS) - Data analysis ProteinPilot 3.0 (AB Sciex) was used to search the MS/MS spectra for protein identification and quantitation with its searching algorithm Paragon 3.0.0.0 (*Reference). The protein database used for searching was Uniprot mouse fasta file (release-2010_11). The search parameters include quantitation for iTRAQ 8-plex (peptide-labeled), MMTS for cysteine alkylation, trypsin for enzyme digestion, biological modifications for ID focus, and taxonomy set for Mus musculus. The detected protein threshold was set to 1.3 (95% confidence). Additionally, we converted our AB Sciex mass spectral data (TOF/TOF data) into an mzML format, using the AB Sciex MS Data Converter (beta version 1.3) tool. Finally, we used the command line tool group2xml, which is included with ProteinPilot Software, to convert the .group search engine result file to an XML file.

### Sample Protocol
Conditioned media preparation and HPLC-isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation mass-spectrometry (iTRAQ MS). Twenty million cells were transfected with either control or Gαs siRNA, then were seeded in 100-mm cell culture plates in DMEM + 10% FBS. Two days later, cells were washed twice with pre-warmed PBS. Conditioned media was harvested another 24 h later, and centrifuged at 20,000 g for 10 min at 4°C to remove cell debris. To enrich for secreted proteins in the conditioned media, conditioned media samples were centrifuged using Amicon centrifugal filters with a 3kDa cutoff (Millipore, Billerica, MA). A total of 8 concentrated conditioned media samples were independently prepared: 4 samples from control siRNA-treated cells, and 4 samples from Gαs siRNA-treated cells. Samples were stored at –70°C until they were analyzed by iTRAQ labeling and LC-MS/MS. iTRAQ labeling – Total protein concentration of each sample was measured using the Bradford assay. A quantity of 100 µg was taken from each sample, denatured in 0.1% SDS, reduced in 50 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP), alkylated in 200 mM methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS), and digested overnight with trypsin. Each sample’s peptides were labeled with different iTRAQ reagents (AB Sciex, Framingham, MA) following the manufacturer’s protocol, combined, dried down to a 50 µL volume, acidified with 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), and desalted with a 100 mg-C18 SepPak cartridge (Waters, Milford, MA). Peptide fractionation – Combined iTRAQ labeled peptides were first separated into 12 fractions using a 3100 OFFGEL Fractionator (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA) with a 12-well setup and a 12-cm pH 3–10 immobilized pH-gradient (IPG) strip, according to manufacturer’s recommendations. Peptides were collected after the focusing voltage reached a maximum plateau (> 50 kVh). The recovered fractions were lyophilized. LC-MALDI-TOF/TOF analysis – All solvents used in this section were aqueous unless specified and obtained from ThermoFisher Scientific (San Jose, CA). Dried samples were reconstituted in 30 µL of solvent A (2% v/v acetonitrile [ACN], 0.1% v/v TFA), and 10 µL of the resulting solution was injected into an Ultimate™ HPLC system with UV detection (LC Packings, Sunnyvale, CA). Solvent B contained 98% v/v ACN, 0.1% v/v TFA. A C18 trap (5.0 mm x 300 µm ID, LC Packings) and a 15 cm x 100 µm ID column packed in-house with Magic C18 5 µm beads (Michrom Bioresources, Auburn, CA) were used for chromatography. Solvent flow rate was set to 0.700 µL/min. After injection, each sample was loaded and washed with solvent A for 5 min at a flow rate of 0.030 mL/min, followed by a 10% to 50% gradient over 55 min, then ramped to 90% by 65 min. Each sample run was maintained in 90% solvent B until 75 min, returned to 10% at 75.1 min, followed by a 10 min equilibration in 10% solvent B. The HPLC system is connected to a modified Probot™ automated MALDI spotter (LC Packings) to spot eluates on an LC MALDI plate with on-line mixing of α-Cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid (CHCA) matrix (7.5 mg/mL in 70% ACN). Considering the dead time for the HPLC and spotting system, spot collection time was started 10 min from injection time with a spotting time of 0.33 min per spot. A total of 176 spots were collected. The sample plate with the resulting spots was loaded onto a 5800 MALDI time-of-flight/time-of-flight (TOF/TOF) mass spectrometer (AB Sciex, Framingham, MA) for MS and MS/MS analysis. Batch-mode mass calibration with plate alignment were done before data acquisition, thus a separate plate calibration file was generated for each individual plate containing sample spots. Full scan MS spectra were obtained with a total of 1000 laser shots per spectrum. From each spot, the top 20 most intense peaks, weakest precursor first, that were above a signal-to-noise threshold of 10, were selected for successful MS/MS analysis. Each MS/MS spectrum was an average of 1600 laser shots. MS/MS spectra were acquired in the presence of collision gas. The sequence of the VGF-NERP1 peptide was confirmed using the LTQ-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, San Jose, CA).

### Data Protocol
Data analysis – ProteinPilot 3.0 (AB Sciex) was used to search the MS/MS spectra for protein identification and quantitation with its searching algorithm Paragon 3.0.0.0. The protein database used for searching was Uniprot mouse fasta file (release-2010_11). The search parameters include quantitation for iTRAQ 8-plex (peptide-labeled), MMTS for cysteine alkylation, trypsin for enzyme digestion, biological modifications for ID focus, and taxonomy set for Mus musculus. The detected protein threshold was set to 1.3 (95% confidence).

### Publication Abstract
Reproductive function is controlled by the pulsatile release of hypothalamic gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH), which regulates the expression of the gonadotropins luteinizing hormone and FSH in pituitary gonadotropes. Paradoxically, Fshb gene expression is maximally induced at lower frequency GnRH pulses, which provide a very low average concentration of GnRH stimulation. We studied the role of secreted factors in modulating gonadotropin gene expression. Inhibition of secretion specifically disrupted gonadotropin subunit gene regulation but left early gene induction intact. We characterized the gonadotrope secretoproteome and global mRNA expression at baseline and after G&#x3b1;<sub>s</sub> knockdown, which has been found to increase Fshb gene expression (1). We identified 1077 secreted proteins or peptides, 19 of which showed mRNA regulation by GnRH or/and G&#x3b1;<sub>s</sub> knockdown. Among several novel secreted factors implicated in Fshb gene regulation, we focused on the neurosecretory protein VGF. Vgf mRNA, whose gene has been implicated in fertility (2), exhibited high induction by GnRH and depended on G&#x3b1;<sub>s</sub> In contrast with Fshb induction, Vgf induction occurred preferentially at high GnRH pulse frequency. We hypothesized that a VGF-derived peptide might regulate Fshb gene induction. siRNA knockdown or extracellular immunoneutralization of VGF augmented Fshb mRNA induction by GnRH. GnRH stimulated the secretion of the VGF-derived peptide NERP1. NERP1 caused a concentration-dependent decrease in Fshb gene induction. These findings implicate a VGF-derived peptide in selective regulation of the Fshb gene. Our results support the concept that signaling specificity from the cell membrane GnRH receptor to the nuclear Fshb gene involves integration of intracellular signaling and exosignaling regulatory motifs.

### Keywords
Ab sciex tof/tof 5800, Pituitary gonadotrope-derived lbetat2 cells, Mouse

### Affiliations
Neurology
Department of Neurology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York, NY 10029, and Center for Advanced Research on Diagnostic Assays, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York, NY 10029

### Submitter
Hanna Pincas

### Lab Head
Dr Stuart C. Sealfon
Department of Neurology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York, NY 10029, and Center for Advanced Research on Diagnostic Assays, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York, NY 10029


