### Accession
PXD028390

### Title
Proteomic phenotyping of stimulated Müller cells uncovers profound pro-inflammatory signaling and antigen-presenting capacity

### Description
Müller cells are the main macroglial cells of the retina exerting a wealth of functions to maintain retinal homoeostasis. Upon pathological changes in the retina, they become gliotic with both protective and detrimental consequences. Accumulating data also provide evidence for a pivotal role of Müller cells in the pathogenesis of diabetic retinopathy (DR). While microglial cells, the resident immune cells of the retina are considered as main players in inflammatory processes associated with DR, the implication of activated Müller cells in chronic retinal inflammation remains to be elucidated. In order to assess the signaling capacity of Müller cells and their role in retinal inflammation, we performed in-depth proteomic analysis of Müller cell proteomes and secretomes after stimulation with INFγ, TNFα, IL-4, IL-6, IL-10, TGFβ1, TGFβ2 and TGFβ3. We used both, primary porcine Müller cells and the human Müller cell line MIO-M1 for our hypothesis generating approach. Our results point towards an intense signaling capacity of Müller cells, which reacted in a highly discriminating manner upon treatment with different cytokines. Stimulation of Müller cells results in a primarily pro-inflammatory phenotype with secretion of cytokines and components of the complement system. Furthermore, we observed evidence for mitochondrial dysfunction, implying oxidative stress after treatment with the various cytokines. Finally, both MIO-M1 cells and primary porcine Müller cells showed several characteristics of atypical antigen-presenting cells, as they are capable of inducing MHC class I and MHC class II with co-stimulatory molecules. In line with this, they express proteins associated with formation and maturation of phagosomes. Thus, our findings underline the importance of Müller cell signaling in the inflamed retina, indicating an active role in chronic retinal inflammation underlying the pathogenesis of diabetic retinopathy.

### Sample Protocol
Supernatants were collected 24 h after treatment, passed through medium equilibrated 0.2 µm Millex-GP filter units (Merck Chemicals GmbH, Darmstadt, Germany), and transferred into 2 mL Lo-Bind tubes (Eppendorf AG, Hamburg, Germany). Afterwards, cells were washed once with DPBS. 200 µL RIPA buffer containing Roche cOmplete Mini Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Merck Chemicals GmbH) was applied directly into each well and cells were detached with a cell scraper. Lysates were transferred into freshly prepared 1.5 mL Lo-Bind tubes (Eppendorf AG). Protein concentration of the lysates was determined by Pierce BCA assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Ten µg protein per lysate or 400 µL supernatant per sample were digested with Lys-C and trypsin using a modified FASP procedure as described elsewhere. LC-MSMS analysis was performed on a QExactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) online coupled to a UItimate 3000 RSLC nano-HPLC (Dionex, Sunnyvale, USA). Samples were automatically injected and loaded onto a C18 trap column for 5 min. Afterwards, samples were eluted and separated on a C18 analytical column (Acquity UPLC M-Class HSS T3 Column, 1.8 μm, 75 μm × 250 mm; Waters, Milford, USA). Samples were separated by a 95 min non-linear acetonitrile gradient at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. Resolution of the MS spectra was recorded at 60,000 with an AGC target of 3×106 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms from 300 to 1,500 m/z. The 10 most abundant peptide ions were selected from the MS scan and fragmented via HCD. Thereby, the normalized collision energy was 27 with an isolation window of 1.6 m/z, and a dynamic exclusion of 30 s. MS/MS spectra were recorded at a resolution of 15,000 with an AGC target of 105 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Spectra with unassigned charges, and charges of +1 and >8 were excluded from the precursor selection.

### Data Protocol
The four datasets (lysates of pRMG and MIO-M1 cells, and secretomes of pRMG and MIO-M1 cells) were analyzed separately. The Proteome Discoverer 2.4 SP1 software (version 2.4.1.15; Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used for peptide and protein identification via a database search (Sequest HT search engine) against the SwissProt Human (MIO-M1) and Ensembl Pig (pRMG). Database search was performed with full tryptic specificity, allowing for up to one missed tryptic cleavage site, a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, and fragment mass tolerance of 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethylation of Cys was set as a static modification. Dynamic modifications included deamidation of Asn and Gln, oxidation of Met, and a combination of Met loss with acetylation on protein N-terminus. Peptide spectrum matches and peptides were validated with the Percolator algorithm (42). Only the top-scoring hits for each spectrum were accepted with a false discovery rate (FDR) <1% (high confidence). The final list of proteins satisfying the strict parsimony principle included only protein groups passing an additional protein confidence filter FDR <5% filter (target/decoy concatenated search validation). Quantification of proteins, after precursor recalibration, was based on intensity values (at RT apex) for all unique peptides per protein. Peptide abundances were normalized to the total peptide amount. The protein abundances were calculated summing the normalised abundance values of corresponding unique peptides. These protein abundances were used for calculation of enrichment ratios of proteins in the stimulated samples to the untreated samples, resulting in single ratios for every quantified protein in every treated sample. Significance of the ratios was tested using a background-based t-test with correction for multiple testing according to Benjamini-Hochberg (adjusted P-value)

### Publication Abstract
M&#xfc;ller cells are the main macroglial cells of the retina exerting a wealth of functions to maintain retinal homoeostasis. Upon pathological changes in the retina, they become gliotic with both protective and detrimental consequences. Accumulating data also provide evidence for a pivotal role of M&#xfc;ller cells in the pathogenesis of diabetic retinopathy (DR). While microglial cells, the resident immune cells of the retina are considered as main players in inflammatory processes associated with DR, the implication of activated M&#xfc;ller cells in chronic retinal inflammation remains to be elucidated. In order to assess the signaling capacity of M&#xfc;ller cells and their role in retinal inflammation, we performed in-depth proteomic analysis of M&#xfc;ller cell proteomes and secretomes after stimulation with INF&#x3b3;, TNF&#x3b1;, IL-4, IL-6, IL-10, VEGF, TGF&#x3b2;1, TGF&#x3b2;2 and TGF&#x3b2;3. We used both, primary porcine M&#xfc;ller cells and the human M&#xfc;ller cell line MIO-M1 for our hypothesis generating approach. Our results point towards an intense signaling capacity of M&#xfc;ller cells, which reacted in a highly discriminating manner upon treatment with different cytokines. Stimulation of M&#xfc;ller cells resulted in a primarily pro-inflammatory phenotype with secretion of cytokines and components of the complement system. Furthermore, we observed evidence for mitochondrial dysfunction, implying oxidative stress after treatment with the various cytokines. Finally, both MIO-M1 cells and primary porcine M&#xfc;ller cells showed several characteristics of atypical antigen-presenting cells, as they are capable of inducing MHC class I and MHC class II with co-stimulatory molecules. In line with this, they express proteins associated with formation and maturation of phagosomes. Thus, our findings underline the importance of M&#xfc;ller cell signaling in the inflamed retina, indicating an active role in chronic retinal inflammation.

### Keywords
Diabetic retinopathy, Immune response, Müller cells, Pro-inflammatory, Complement system, Cytokines. retina, Atypical antigen-presenting cell

### Affiliations
Research Unit Protein Science, Helmholtz Zentrum München
1Research Unit Protein Science and Metabolomics and Proteomics Core, Helmholtz Zentrum München, German Research Center for Environmental Health, D-85764 Neuherberg, Germany

### Submitter
Stefanie Hauck

### Lab Head
Dr Stefanie M. Hauck
1Research Unit Protein Science and Metabolomics and Proteomics Core, Helmholtz Zentrum München, German Research Center for Environmental Health, D-85764 Neuherberg, Germany


