### Accession
PXD039981

### Title
Nsp1 guides ribosomal start site selection to promote SARS-CoV-2 infection

### Description
Host-directed antivirals remain a promising therapeutic approach for many viruses, including SARS-CoV-2 (CoV2), but development of such interventions requires a deeper understanding of virus-host interactions. Here, we use subcellular proteomics to detect CoV2-induced changes in host protein synthesis networks. We identify molecular chaperones required for CoV2 infection and show that their inhibition reduces infection without major toxicity. We also find that the untranslated regions of CoV2 genomic RNA (gRNA) are inefficient drivers of translation initiation, and that the viral non-structural protein Nsp1 suppresses cellular mRNA but enhances viral gRNA translation. Nsp1 preferentially interacts with pre-initiation complexes containing translation factor EIF1A, which is required for accurate start site selection on CoV2 gRNA. Without EIF1A, more ribosomes initiate translation from an alternative start codon, resulting in lower Orf1 translation and reduced viral titers. Together, our work describes multiple dependencies of CoV2 on host biosynthetic networks and identifies druggable targets for antiviral development.

### Sample Protocol
A total of 1-5x10^7 Vero E6 cells in T175 flasks were washed twice with and scraped into ice-cold PBS with calcium and magnesium. Cells were pelleted at 1,200 RCF for 5 min at 4oC, and supernatants were removed. Pellets were resuspended in 220 µl polysome buffer (25 mM HEPES pH=7.5, 100 mM NaCl, 10 mM MgCl2, 2 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and Complete EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail (Millipore Sigma). Triton X-100 and sodium deoxycholate were added to a final concentration of 1% each and the samples were incubated on ice for 20 min and centrifuged at 20,000 RCF for 10 min at 4oC to remove cell debris. 250 µl lysates were transferred to fresh tubes, combined with 125 µl 12% formaldehyde, and incubated on ice for 30 min. To quench the crosslinking reaction, samples were incubated with 125 µl 4M Tris pH=8.0 on ice for 20 min, followed by flash freezing. Frozen lysates were thawed on ice and loaded on 10-50% sucrose gradients in Polysome buffer and subjected to ultracentrifugation at 36,000 rpm in an SW41.Ti swinging bucket rotor (Beckman Coulter) for 150 min at 4oC. 15 Equal volume fractions were collected using Gradient Station (BioComp) with continuous monitoring of rRNA at UV254. Fractions were pooled as follows: 1-4 for free RNP; 5 for 80S monosomes; 6-8 for light polysomes, and 9-15 for heavy polysomes. For polysome profiles of cells transfected with nanoluciferase reporters, the above protocol was followed without formaldehyde fixation or pooling of gradient fractions. Sample preparation for proteomic analysis   Pooled gradient fractions were diluted 1:2 with ice-cold PBS and tumbled overnight at 4oC with 50 µl Strataclean resin (Agilent). Beads were pelleted at 600 RCF for 5 min at 4oC, and supernatant was removed. Beads were resuspended in 100 µl PBS supplemented with 2% SDS and incubated at 95oC for 15 min to elute proteins from beads and reverse formaldehyde crosslinks. Beads were pelleted at 600 RCF for 5 min at room temperature, and supernatants were transferred to fresh tubes. Protein was extracted using methanol-chloroform precipitation: 400 µl methanol, 100 µl chloroform and 350 µl water were added sequentially to each 100 µl sample, followed by centrifugation at 14,000 RCF for 5 min at room temperature. The top phase was removed, and the protein interphase was precipitated by addition of 400 µl methanol, followed by centrifugation at 14,000 g for 5 min at room temperature. Pellets were air dried and resuspended in 8M urea, 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 7.5). Protein concentration was determined by BCA (Thermo Fisher) and 1-2 µg total protein were subjected to reduction and alkylation by incubation with 10 mM DTT for 1 h at room temperature followed by 5 mM iodoacetamide for 45 min at room temperature, in the dark. The samples were then incubated with 1:50 enzyme to protein ratio of sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37 oC. Peptides were desalted with μC18 Ziptips (Millipore Sigma), dried and resuspended in 10 μL 0.1% formic acid in water.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS acquisition    Digested peptides were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid and 40% of each specimen was analyzed on an LTQ Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled with a Dionex Ultimate 3000 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  Peptides were separated by capillary reverse-phase chromatography for 120 min on a 24-cm reversed-phase column (inner diameter of 100 μm, packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 3.0 m resin (Dr. Maisch)). A multi-step linear gradient was applied as follows: 96% A + 4% B to 75% A + 25% B over 70 min;  75% A + 25% B to 60% A + 40% B over 20 min; 60% A + 40% B to 2% A + 98% B over 2 min and maintain this proportion for 2 min before returning to 98% A + 2% B and holding this proportion for 24 min. Buffer A is 0.1% formic acid in water and buffer B is 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile; flow rates were maintained at 300 nl/min throughout the gradient. Full MS scans of intact peptide precursor ions were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyser at a resolution of 120,000 (FWHM) and m/z scan ranges of 400–1,500 in a data-dependent mode. The automatic gain control (AGC) target was 4 × 10^5, the maximum injection time was 50 ms, and the isolation width was 1.6 Da. The most intense ions recorded in full MS scans were then selected for MS2 fragmentation in the Orbitrap mass analyser using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy of 30% and resolution of 15,000 (FWHM). Monoisotopic precursor selection was enabled, and singly charged ion species and ions with no unassigned charge states were excluded from MS2 analysis. Dynamic exclusion was enabled, preventing repeated MS2 acquisitions of precursor ions within a 10 ppm m/z window for 15 s. AGC targets were 5 × 10^4 and the maximum injection time was 100 ms.    Mass spectrometry data processing   Raw MS data were processed using MaxQuant version 1.6.7.0 ​38​. MS/MS spectra searches were performed using the Andromeda search engine​39​ against the forward and reverse human and mouse Uniprot databases (downloaded August 28, 2017 and November 25, 2020, respectively). Cysteine carbamidomethylation was chosen as fixed modification and methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. Parent peptides and fragment ions were searched with maximal mass deviation of 6 and 20 ppm, respectively. Mass recalibration was performed with a window of 20 ppm. Maximum allowed false discovery rate (FDR) was <0.01 at both the peptide and protein levels, based on a standard target-decoy database approach. The “calculate peak properties” and “match between runs” options were enabled. All statistical tests were performed with Perseus version 2.0.7.0 using either ProteinGroups or Peptides output tables from MaxQuant. Potential contaminants, proteins identified in the reverse dataset and proteins only identified by site were filtered out. For proteins not annotated in the Chlorocebus sabaeus proteome, we manually added the human ortholog gene symbol where similarity was >90%. Human ortholog Uniprot IDs were added based on gene symbol. Intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) was used to estimate absolute protein abundance. Data was log2 transformed and median adjusted. Two-sided Student’s t-test with a permutation-based FDR of 0.01 and S0 of 0.1 with 250 randomizations was used to determine statistically significant differences between grouped replicates. Categorical annotation was based on Gene Ontology Biological Process (GOBP), Molecular Function (GOMF) and Cellular Component (GOCC), as well as protein complex assembly by CORUM.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Translation, Proteostasis, Ribosomes, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Chan Zuckerberg Biohub San Francisco
Chan Zuckerberg Biohub

### Submitter
Ranen Aviner

### Lab Head
Dr Ranen Aviner
Chan Zuckerberg Biohub San Francisco


