### Accession
PXD032902

### Title
Combining recombinase-mediated cassette exchange strategy with quantitative proteomic and phosphoproteomic analyses to inspect intracellular functions of the tumor supressor galectin-4 in colorectal cancer cells.

### Description
In order to systematically explore Galectin-4 function in CRC we established a CRC cell line where Gal4 expression can be regulated via doxycycline (dox)-inducible expression of a single copy wildtype LGALS4 transgene generated by recombinase-mediated cassette exchange (RMCE). Using this model and applying in depth proteomic and phosphoproteomic analyses we systematically screened for intracellular changes induced by Gal4 expression by.

### Sample Protocol
Generated dox-inducible colorectal cancer cell line (HCT116-Gal4 #5) was cultured in SILAC Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s Medium (Silantes) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS), 1 mM L-glutamine, 200 µg/ml L-proline and L-[13C6, 15N4] arginine (R10); L-[13C6, 15N2] lysine (K8) (‘heavy’) or L-[12C6,14N4] arginine (R0); L-[12C6,14N2] lysine (K0) (‘light’) for 8 days at 37 oC in a 5 % CO2 atmosphere. ‘Heavy’ labeled cells were then treated for 72 h with doxycycline (500 ng/ml) to induce Gal-4 expression, whereas control cell populations were exposed to dox-free medium (heavy and light label still present in the medium). The experiment was performed in triplicate. For protein extraction, cells were suspended in RIPA buffer supplemented with fresh protease (cOmplete Mini; Roche) and phosphatase (PhosSTOP, Roche) inhibitors, and treated with benzonase (125 U; Merck) on an orbital shaker (at 300 rpm) on ice for 1 h. After centrifugation at 13 000 xg for 30 min at 4°C protein concentration of the extracts was measured by using 2D Quant Kit reagents (GE Healthcare) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Protein lysates from both culture conditions (‘heavy’ and ‘light’) were mixed in a 1:1 ratio based on their protein concentration (in total 410 µg). Quantitative protein precipitation using a methanol-chloroform-water mixture was performed prior to tryptic digestion. Precipitated protein samples were redissolved in 150 µl digestion buffer (6M urea, 100mM NH4HCO3) by incubation at 25 oC for at least 1 h. Then samples were first treated with 5 µl 1 M dithiothreitol (DTT) in digestion buffer at 45 oC for 1 h to completely reduce disulfide bonds, followed by alkylation of thiol groups by adding 7 µl 0.5 M iodoacetamide (IAA) in digestion buffer and 30 min incubation in the dark at 25 oC. Remaining free IAA was blocked by adding 5 μl of 1M DTT-containing solution and incubation for 15 min at 37 oC. Pre-digestion was performed with 2.5 μg Lys-C (Promega) in 100 mM NH4HCO3 overnight incubation at 37 oC with constant gentle shaking. Then the samples were diluted with 700 µl 100 mM NH4HCO3, 0.125 mM CaCl2 to achieve UREA concentration (~1M) required for perseverance of tryptic activity. Tryptic digestion was conducted overnight at 37 oC wih 6.5 μg trypsin (Promega). After digestion, 10 µg of the protein digest were subjected to shot-gun mass spectrometry analysis, while 400 µg protein digest underwent phosphopeptide enrichment for phosphorylation analysis. In order to clean and concentrate peptide mixtures after tryptic digestion, StageTip procedure was applied using C18 material and the reversed phase material (Oligo™ R3, Thermo Fisher Scientific) packed into a pipette tip (volume up to 200 µl). Briefly, binding was performed with 2.5% formic acid followed by washing with 2.5% formic acid and elution with 2 times 100 μl of 0.6% acetic acid in 80% acetonitrile. The samples were dried in a vacuum centrifuge. Each sample was then resuspended in 300 µl Binding Buffer (80% acetonitrile (ACN), 5% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and 0.2% glycolic acid) by sonication and 30 min incubation on a Thermoshaker (250 rpm, RT) and added to 100 µl of freshly prepared 5% PureCube Fe3+-NTA MagBeads (Cube Biotechm 31505-Fe) in Binding Buffer. Samples were incubated with the beads for 1.5 h on a rotator at RT. Subsequently, the beads were washed twice with 80% ACN/1% TFA, followed by a wash with 10% ACN/0.2% TFA. Phosphopeptides were eluted by 30 min incubation with 80 µl of 1% ammonium hydroxide (250 rpm, RT). The samples were then purified by StageTip procedure as described above. Each solution was dried completely in a vacuum centrifuge and frozen.  Dried peptides were reconstituted prior to LC-MS/MS analysis in 2.5% Hexafluoro-2-propanol, 0.1% TFA in water. First, the peptides were loaded on a trapping cartridge (Acclaim PepMap300 C18, 5µm, 300Å wide pore, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and desalted for 3 min using 0.05% TFA. Peptide separation was performed using a multistep gradient of buffer A (0.1% formic acid in water) and buffer B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) with the main step ramping buffer B concentration from 5% to 30% (28% for phospho peptides) over 132 min on a nanoEase MZ Peptide analytical column (300Å, 1.7 µm, 75 µm x 200 mm, Waters) using an UltiMate 3000 UHPLC system (60 min total analysis time). Eluting peptides were subsequently analysed by an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) running in data-dependent acquisition mode where one full scan (380-1400 m/z, 300% AGC target, maxIT 45 ms) at 120k resolution was followed by MS/MS scans for 2 sec cycle time. Precursors were isolated with 1.4 m/z (1.2 m/z), peptides were fragmented using 26 NCE (28 NCE) and MS/MS scans were recorded at 15k resolution (100% AGC target, maxIT 22 ms; 200% AGC, maxIT 54 mst). Unassigned and signals were excluded from fragmentation and dynamic exclusion was set to 35 sec for 2-6x charged features.

### Data Protocol
The MS files were processed with the MaxQuant software (version 1.6.14) and searched with Andromeda search engine against the human UniProt database (sequences 74830 entries). Enzyme specificity was set to that of trypsin, allowing for cleavage N-terminal to proline residues and up to 2 missed cleavage sites (for proteome) or up to 4 missed cleavage sites (for phosphopeptides). A minimum peptide length of 7 amino acids was required. Carbamidomethylation (C) was set as fixed modification, whereas oxidation (M), deamidation (NQ), protein N-terminal acetylation and if necessary, phosphorylation (STY) were considered as variable modifications. No labeling or double SILAC labeling was defined according to a maximum of 3 or 5 labeled amino acids. Mass tolerances were defined for precursor and fragmented ions as follows: MS first search – 20 ppm, MS main search – 6 ppm and MS/MS deisotoping tolerance - 7 ppm. The false discovery rates (FDRs) at the protein and peptide level were set to 1%. SILAC-based quantification was based on unique and razor peptides only, and a minimum of two ratio counts was required. Peptide ratios were calculated and normalized for each arginine- and/or lysine-containing peptide. In addition, the “match between the runs” feature was implemented with default settings to increase the number of quantified peptides. Samples _01-03 - proteome and Samples _05-07 - Phosphsopeptides.

### Publication Abstract
Galectin-4 (Gal4) has been suggested to function as a tumor suppressor in colorectal cancer (CRC). In order to systematically explore its function in CRC, we established a CRC cell line where Gal4 expression can be regulated via the doxycycline (dox)-inducible expression of a single copy wildtype <i>LGALS4</i> transgene generated by recombinase-mediated cassette exchange (RMCE). Using this model and applying in-depth proteomic and phosphoproteomic analyses, we systematically screened for intracellular changes induced by Gal4 expression. Overall, 3083 cellular proteins and 2071 phosphosites were identified and quantified, of which 1603 could be matched and normalized to their protein expression levels. A bioinformatic analysis revealed that most of the regulated proteins and phosphosites can be localized in the nucleus and are categorized as nucleic acid-binding proteins. The top candidates whose expression was modulated by Gal4 are PURB, MAPKAPK3, BTF3 and BCAR1, while the prime candidates with altered phosphorylation included ZBTB7A, FOXK1, PURB and CK2beta. In order to validate the (phospho)proteomic data, we confirmed these candidates by a radiometric metabolic-labelling and immunoprecipitation strategy. All candidates exert functions in the transcriptional or translational control, indicating that Gal4 might be involved in these processes by affecting the expression or activity of these proteins.

### Keywords
Galectin, Colorectal cancer

### Affiliations
Applied Tumor Biology, Institute of Pathology, Heidelberg University Hospital

### Submitter
Malwina Michalak

### Lab Head
Dr Juergen Kopitz
Applied Tumor Biology, Institute of Pathology, Heidelberg University Hospital


