### Accession
PXD011525

### Title
Global redox proteome and phosphoproteome analysis reveals novel mode of Akt regulation

### Description
A major knowledge gap in cell signalling is defining the crosstalk between multiple types of post-translational modification (PTM). Here, we take a multi-omic approach (redox proteome, phosphoproteome and total proteome) to delineate signalling networks in adipocytes modulated by reactive oxygen species (ROS) and protein phosphorylation. Our integrative analysis of these datasets revealed widespread and complex crosstalk between oxidative stress-induced cysteine oxidation and phosphorylation-based signalling. In particular, we demonstrate dysregulation in the kinase substrate relationships of Akt, mTOR and AMPK. Furthermore, we identify that Cys60 and Cys77 in the pleckstrin homology (PH) domain of Akt are required for its recruitment to the plasma membrane, its subsequent activation, and its regulation by redox. These multi-omics datasets provide insight into how redox signalling driven by oxidative stress interacts with protein phosphorylation and should serve as a useful resource for dissecting oxidative stress-induced PTMs and understanding their contribution to a variety of diseases.

### Sample Protocol
redox proteome: Adipocytes were incubated with ice-cold PBS containing 10% TCA for 1 min on ice, and washed once. Cells were then harvested in buffer containing 50 mM HEPES, 1 mM EDTA, 0.1% SDS and 10% TCA. Proteins were precipitated at 4 °C for 2 h. Samples were then centrifuged at 16,000 g for 20 min at 4 °C, and the pellets were washed once using pre-chilled acetone. Protein pellets were resuspended in buffer containing 6 M Urea, 50 mM HEPES (pH 8.5) and alkylated with 100 mM IAA at room temperature for 40 min in the dark. Excess IAA was removed by using 30 k filters and proteins were re-suspend in HES buffer (50 mM HEPES, 1 mM EDTA, 0.1% SDS, pH 8.0). Protein concentrations were determined by BCA protein assay and adjusted to 1 μg/μL. To each 100 μg sample, 5 mM TCEP was used for reducing at 50 °C for 1 h, and then iodoTMT quantitative tags were added and incubated at 37 °C for another 1 h in darkness. After adding 20 mM DTT to quench the reaction, equal amounts of each labelled sample were combined and precipitated using pre-chilled acetone overnight. Protein pellets were resuspended in buffer containing 6 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 25 mM TEAB, and protein mixture was digested using LysC (enzyme:substrate 1:100) at 30 ºC for 2 h. The protein solution was then diluted 1:5 using 25 mM TEAB and further digested with trypsin (enzyme:substrate 1:50) at 37 ºC overnight. The peptide mixture was desalted using stage-tips and separated by HILIC system for mass spectrometry analysis. In redox proteomic study, 4 replicates were performed including 2 forward labelling assays and 2 reverse labelling assays. Phsophoproteome: Samples selected for MS analysis were processed using the recently described EasyPhos workflow 31. Briefly, cells were washed 3 times with TBS, scraped in SDC lysis buffer (4% (w/v) SDC, 100 mM Tris HCl, pH 8.5) and boiled immediately (95 °C, 5 min). Lysates were cooled on ice, sonicated (2 x 30 s), and centrifuged at 20,000 g for 15 min at 4 °C until a layer of fat formed. Clarified protein was carefully collected without disturbing the upper fat layer, and protein concentration was determined by BCA assay. 200 µg of protein was reduced and alkylated in a single step using TCEP and 2-Chloroacetamide respectively, and protein was digested in a 96-well plate by the addition of Trypsin and LysC (1:100 enzyme-protein ratio) overnight at 37 °C. Phosphopeptides were enriched in parallel using TiO2 beads as described 31. Total proteome: For total proteomic study, adipocytes were triple SILAC labelled. Briefly, adipocytes were washed with ice-cold PBS and harvested in lysis buffer containing 6 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 25 mM TEAB, 0.1% SDS. After sonication, cell lysates were centrifuged at 15,000 g for 30 min at room temperature. The supernatant was precipitated using pre-chilled acetone overnight. Protein pellets were resuspended in buffer containing 6 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 25 mM TEAB. After reduction with 10 mM DTT at room temperature for 60 min and alkylation with 25 mM IAA at room temperature for 30 min in the dark, the protein mixture was digested using LysC (enzyme:substrate 1:100) at 30 ºC for 2 h. The protein solution was then diluted 1:5 using 25 mM TEAB and further digested with trypsin (enzyme:substrate 1:50) at 37 ºC overnight. The peptide mixture was desalted using stage-tips and separated by HILIC system for mass spectrometry analysis. In this study, 3 replicates were performed. Non-reducing IP-MS: HEK293 cells were transfected with FLAG-Akt2 using Lipofectamine 2000 and all studies were performed 48 h post-transfection. Prior to IP, transfected HEK293 cells were incubated with or without 100 μM BCNU and 1 μM auranofin for 2 h. Overexpressed FLAG-Akt2 protein was purified as described previously 62, but here the pH of all buffers was adjusted to 6.5 to minimize artificial oxidation. Briefly, cells were washed with ice-cold PBS (pH 6.5) once and lysed in 1 mL of NP-40 buffer (1% NP-40, 10% glycerol, 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 6.5) using a 22-gauge needle 6 times and then a 27-gauge needle 3 times followed by centrifugation at 16,000 g for 10 min at 4 ºC to remove cellular debris. Each cell lysate was incubated with 40 μL slurry of protein G beads (GE Life Sciences) and 1 μL of anti-FLAG antibody (Sigma-Aldrich) for 2 h at 4 ºC with rotation. The beads were washed 3 times with NP-40 buffer and twice with PBS (pH 6.5), and then were resuspended in 40 μL of PBS (pH 6.5) containing 3xFLAG peptide (0.2 μg/μL, Sigma-Aldrich) to elute FLAG-Akt2. The purified FLAG-Akt2 solution was diluted using 25 mM TEAB and digested with 1 μg trypsin at 37 ºC overnight. The peptide mixture was desalted using stage-tips. In this study, 3 replicates were performed.

### Data Protocol
Redox proteome: Raw data was processed using MaxQuant (v1.6.1.2) 41 against a Uniprot mouse database (06/2017, 59,581 entries) with default settings and minor changes: Oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N-terminus were set as variable modifications. IodoTMT6-plex of isobaric labels was enabled and reporter mass tolerance was set to 0.01 Da. The “second peptides searching” was enabled. The peptide match tolerance was set to 20 ppm and 4.5 pm for first and main searches respectively and MS/MS match tolerance set to 20 ppm. Both peptide spectral match (PSM) and protein FDR were set to 1%.  Phosphoproteome: Raw data was processed using MaxQuant (v1.6.1.2) against the same Uniprot mouse database (06/2017, 59,581 entries). Oxidation of methionine, acetylation of protein N-terminus and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine were set as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification. The “re-quantify”, “second peptides searching” and “match between runs” were enabled. The peptide match tolerance was set to 20 ppm and 4.5 pm for first and main searches respectively and MS/MS match tolerance set to 20 ppm. Peptide spectral match (PSM), protein FDR and site decoy fraction were set to 1%.  Total proteome: Raw data was processed using MaxQuant (v1.6.1.2) against the same Uniprot mouse database (06/2017, 59,581 entries). Oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N-terminus were set as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification, as well as triple SILAC labels (Lys0/Arg0, Lys4/Arg6, and Lys8/Arg10). The “re-quantify”, “second peptides searching” and “match between runs” were enabled. Unique and razor peptides were used for protein quantification and the minimum ratio count was set to 2. The peptide match tolerance was set to 20 ppm and 4.5 pm for first and main searches respectively and MS/MS match tolerance set to 20 ppm. Both peptide spectral match (PSM) and protein FDR were set to 1%.  Non-reducing IP-MS: Disulfide bonds were identified using pLink-SS as described previously 40. Five missed cleavages for trypsin digestion were allowed. Oxidation of methionine, acetylation of protein N-terminus and “Gln to pyro-Glu” were set as variable modifications. The searching results were filtered by requiring precursor tolerance < 10 ppm. Only human Akt2 protein sequence was used for searching, and all identified MS2 spectra were manually checked and labelled.  To identify the other reversible oxidative modifications on cysteines, raw data was processed using MaxQuant (v1.5.2.10) against a Uniprot human database (09/2014) with default setting of 4.5 ppm and 20 ppm for main search precursor and fragment ions tolerance, respectively. Oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N-terminus were set as variable modifications, as well as S-Acylation, S-Glutathionylation, S-Nitrosylation, S-Sulfenylation, S-Sulfhydration and Sulfinic acid of cysteines. Two missed cleavages of specific trypsin digestion were permitted. Both peptide spectral match (PSM) and protein FDR were set to 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Protein oxidation sits at the intersection of multiple signalling pathways, yet the magnitude and extent of crosstalk between oxidation and other post-translational modifications remains unclear. Here, we delineate global changes in adipocyte signalling networks following acute oxidative stress and reveal considerable crosstalk between cysteine oxidation and phosphorylation-based signalling. Oxidation of key regulatory kinases, including Akt, mTOR and AMPK influences the fidelity rather than their absolute activation state, highlighting an unappreciated interplay between these modifications. Mechanistic analysis of the redox regulation of Akt identified two cysteine residues in the pleckstrin homology domain (C60 and C77) to be reversibly oxidized. Oxidation at these sites affected Akt recruitment to the plasma membrane by stabilizing the PIP<sub>3</sub> binding pocket. Our data provide insights into the interplay between oxidative stress-derived redox signalling and protein phosphorylation networks and serve as a resource for understanding the contribution of cellular oxidation to a range of diseases.

### Keywords
Redox proteome, Crosstalk, Phosphoproteome, Akt

### Affiliations
The University of Sydney
Leonard P Ullmann Chair in Metabolic Systems Biology, The Charles Perkins Centre School of Life and Environmental Sciences and Sydney Medical School D17 - Charles Perkins Centre | The University of Sydney | NSW | 2006

### Submitter
Zhiduan Su

### Lab Head
Dr David E. James
Leonard P Ullmann Chair in Metabolic Systems Biology, The Charles Perkins Centre School of Life and Environmental Sciences and Sydney Medical School D17 - Charles Perkins Centre | The University of Sydney | NSW | 2006


