### Accession
PXD019155

### Title
In-depth investigation of low-abundant proteins in matured and filling stages seeds of Glycine max by a combination of protamine sulfate precipitation and TMT-based quantitative proteomic analysis

### Description
The presence of seed storage proteins is a major bottleneck in soybean seed proteome analysis despite the significant technical advancements in mass spectrometry and data analysis software. Our previous studies have shown that effective ways to improve the detection of low-abundance proteins in soybean seeds using protamine sulfate (PS) with 2-DGE analysis. Besides, verification of the PS precipitation method revealed broad application to other leguminous plants like pea, broad bean, and peanut. Nonetheless, it is difficult to overcome the poor reproducibility and limitation of the dynamic range of identification during 2-DGE analysis. Thus, to elucidate the suitability and efficacy of protamine sulfate precipitation method for shotgun proteome approach, we performed TMT-based quantitative analysis using matured and filling stages seeds by application of two-way pre-fractionation using PS and chromatographic methods. Interestingly, this approach led to the identification of 2,200 and 924 differential proteins in the matured and filling stage of soybean seeds, respectively. These results revealed enrichment of various proteins related to major metabolism in soybean seeds including amino acid, major carbohydrate, lipid metabolism, and among others. Taken together, results provided the new insight into current complexity and limitation of soybean seed proteomics through two-way pre-fractionation combined with TMT-based quantitative analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Total proteins from matured and seed filling stage soybean seeds were isolated using the protamine sulfate (PS) precipitation method with trichloroacetic acid (TCA)/acetone precipitation. Briefly, for PS precipitation method, one gram of each seed powder was homogenized with 10 mL of ice-cold Tris-Mg/NP-40 extraction buffer (0.5 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.3, 2% (v/v) NP-40, 20 mM MgCl2) and centrifuged at 15,922 g for 10 min at 4°C. The sequentially collected clear homogenate was incubated on ice for 30 min with 0.15% (w/v) PS stock solution. The extract was centrifuged at 15,922 g for 10 min at 4°C to divide the PS-supernatant (PS-S) and PS-pellet (PS-P) fractions as described in previous reports. Pellet fraction was dissolved in an equal volume of Tris-Mg/NP-40 extraction buffer and proteins were precipitated using TCA/acetone precipitation method. Finally, all three fractions that designated as total, PS-S, and PS-P were dissolved in 80% acetone containing 0.07% β-mercaptoethanol and stored -20 °C until further analysis. Protein digestion was carried out using a filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) approach as described in a previous study. Briefly, acetone-precipitated proteins (300 μg) were dissolved in 30 μL of denaturation buffer (4% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) and 100 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) in 0.1 M tetraethylammonium tetrahydroborate (TEAB), pH 8.5). After sonication of the sample for 3 min and heating at 99°C for 30 min, denatured proteins were loaded onto a 30-kDa spin filter (Merck Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany) and diluted with UA buffer (8 M urea in 0.1 M TEAB, pH 8.5) to a final volume of 300 μL. The buffer was washed and exchanged three times using 300 μL of UA buffer by centrifugation at 14,000 g for removal of SDS. After removing SDS from the samples, cysteine alkylation was accomplished through the addition of 200 μL of alkylation buffer (50 mM iodoacetamide (IAA), 8 M urea in 0.1 M TEAB, pH 8.5) for 1 hour at room temperature in the dark. Then, the buffer was exchanged with UA buffer to TEAB buffer (50 mM TEAB, pH 8.5) in a spin filter unit. The protein was digested with trypsin (enzyme-to-substrate ratio [w/w] of 1:100) dissolved in 50 mM TEAB buffer containing 5% acetonitrile (ACN) at 37°C overnight. After overnight digestion, the digested peptides were collected by centrifugation, and the filter device was rinsed with 50 mM TEAB and 50 mM NaCl. The peptide concentrations were measured using the Pierce Quantitative Fluorometric Peptide Assay (Thermo Scientific, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Moreover, we performed further sample preparation including peptides labeling and fractionation for MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The MaxQuant software (version 1.5.3.30) was used to apply for a database search as described previously. All the three replicates of matured and seed filling stage samples were cross-referenced against the UniProt Glycine max database (75,674 entries, UP000008827, http://www.uniprot.org). TMT data processing of two different data was performed using default precursor mass tolerances set by the Andromeda search engine, which is set to 20 ppm for the first search and 4.5 ppm for the main search. Reporter mass tolerance has to set the minimum as 0.003 Da and the minimum reporter precursor ion fraction (PIF) was set as 0.5. The product mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da and a maximum of two missed tryptic cleavage were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues and acetylation of lysine residues and oxidation of methionine residues were specified as fixed and variable modifications respectively. A reverse nonsense version of the original database was generated and used to determine the FDR which was set to 1% for peptide identifications. Statistical analysis was carried out using Perseus software (ver. 1.5.8.5). The normalization of reporter ion intensities followed by the IRS_TMM methods as described previously. Briefly, We employed the multiple normalizations through Bioconductor of R program in which first sample loading (SL) normalization among the samples was conducted for corrections of sample loading errors using calculating by mean from sum value of each column and second internal reference scaling (IRS) method with trimmed mean of M values (TMM) normalization was applied among the technical replicates represented by separate MS runs as introduced previously. Missing values imputation was carried out from a normal distribution (width: 0.3, downshift: 1.8) using Perseus software. Multiple Sample test controlled by the Benjamini-Hochberg FDR threshold of 0.05, was applied to identify the significant differences in the protein abundance (≥ 1.5-fold change). The functional classification and pathway analysis were carried out using AgriGO v2.0 and REVIGO web-based software for GO enrichment analysis and MapMan software, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
Despite the significant technical advancements in mass spectrometry-based proteomics and bioinformatics resources, dynamic resolution of soybean seed proteome is still limited because of the high abundance of seed storage proteins (SSPs). These SSPs occupy a large proportion of the total seed protein and hinder the identification of low-abundance proteins. Here, we report a TMT-based quantitative proteome analysis of matured and filling stages seeds of high-protein (Saedanbaek) and low-protein (Daewon) soybean cultivars by application of a two-way pre-fractionation both at the levels of proteins (by PS) and peptides (by basic pH reverse phase chromatography). Interestingly, this approach led to the identification of more than 5900 proteins which is the highest number of proteins reported to date from soybean seeds. Comparative protein profiles of Saedanbaek and Daewon led to the identification of 2200 and 924 differential proteins in mature and filling stages seeds, respectively. Functional annotation of the differential proteins revealed enrichment of proteins related to major metabolism including amino acid, major carbohydrate, and lipid metabolism. In parallel, analysis of free amino acids and fatty acids in the filling stages showed higher contents of all the amino acids in the Saedanbaek while the fatty acids contents were found to be higher in the Daewon. Taken together, these results provide new insights into proteome changes during filling stages in soybean seeds. Moreover, results reported here also provide a framework for systemic and large-scale dissection of seed proteome for the seeds rich in SSPs by two-way pre-fractionation combined with TMT-based quantitative proteome analysis.

### Keywords
Maxquant, Protamine sulfate precipitation, Perseus, Filter-aided sample preparation, Tandem mass tags, Low-abundant proteins, Glycine max, Basic ph reversed phase

### Affiliations
Department of Plant Bioscience, Pusan National University, Miryang, 50463, Republic of Korea
Pusan National University

### Submitter
Sun Tae Kim

### Lab Head
Dr Sun Tae Kim
Department of Plant Bioscience, Pusan National University, Miryang, 50463, Republic of Korea


