### Accession
PXD013130

### Title
Sensing and signalling of DNA breaks in extracts of preblastoderm Drosophila embryos

### Description
Preblastoderm Drosophila embryos replicate their genomes at maximal speed. The assembly of chromatin on the newly synthesized chromosomes relies entirely on high concentrations of maternal nucleosome assembly and remodelling factors. Extracts from preblastoderm embryos can be turned into a system for highly efficient assembly of complex chromatin. We serendipitously discovered that this chromatin assembly system contains numerous activities that recognise unprotected DNA ends and initiate DNA damage signalling cascades. Within minutes the phosphorylation of H2A.V (homologous to H2A.X) initiates from DNA breaks and spreads over tens of thousands DNA base pairs. The phosphorylation of H2A.V remains tightly associated with the damaged DNA in cis and does not spread to intact DNA circles in the same reaction. The ultrafast cycles of syncytial nuclei divisions of cleavage-stage embryos do not allow sufficient time to repair DNA breaks. Rather, fatally damaged nuclei are eliminated by a programmed ‘mitotic catastrophe’. Our descriptions of the damage-related proteome and DNA break-dependent phospho-proteome suggest that certain aspects of the DNA damage checkpoint that leads to the elimination of nuclei can be studied in this cell-free system. Our data provide a rich resource for in-depth mechanistic analyses of the DNA break response in this model system.

### Sample Protocol
Drosophila embryo extract (DREX) was prepared from preblastoderm embryos within 90 min after egg laying as described (Becker,P.B.P. and Wu,C.C. Mol Cell Biol, 1992), with modifications. One ug of DNA were added to 60 ul DREX supplied with 10 mM 3-glycerophosphate (f.c.), and 12 ul of a 10x ATP-regenerating system (30 mM ATP, 300 mM creatine phosphate, 100 μg/ml creatine kinase, 30 mM MgCl2, 10 mM DTT) and filled up to a total volume of 120 ul with EX50 buffer (10 mM HEPES, pH 7.6, 50 mM KCI, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 0.5 mM EGTA, 10% glycerol, 10 mM 3-glycerophosphate; 1 mM DTT, 0.2 mM PMSF, 1 mM Aprotinin, 1 mM Leupeptin, 1 mM Pepstatin). Chromatin was assembled at 26°C for 6 h (for nucleosome mapping) or 1 h (for mass spectrometry). For MNase digestion 1.5 mM f.c. CaCl2 and 1.4 x 10-3 units MNase were added and incubated at 30°C for 15 min.  After reaction with linear or circular DNA, a total of 1.5 mg of Drosophila embryo extracts (15mg/ml) were sonicated for 10 min in a bioruptor (4°C) and treated with Benzonase before acetone precipitation. Phosphopeptides were then enriched using the EasyPhos method as previously described (Humphrey,S.J. et al., Nat Protoc, 2018). Briefly, pellets were resuspended in 500 µl TFE digestion buffer and digestion enzymes (trypsin and LysC) were added in a 1:100 ratio (enzyme:protein). After overnight incubation at 37°C with rapid agitation (1,500 rpm), aliquots for proteome analysis (10 ug) were taken. For phosphopeptide enrichment, a buffer containing 150 µl 3.2 M KCl, 55 µl of 150 mM KH2PO4, 800 µl 100% acetonitrile (ACN), and 95 µl 100% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was added to the peptides and incubated at RT for 5 min at 1,600 rpm prior to centrifugation. After centrifugation, the peptide supernatant was incubated with TiO2 beads (ratio 10:1; beads:protein) at 40°C for 5 min at 2,000 rpm. Beads were then resuspended in wash buffer (60% ACN and 1% TFA), transferred to a clean 2 ml tube and washed further four times with 1ml of washing buffer. After the last wash, beads were transfered in transfer buffer (80% ACN and 0.5% acetic acid) on top of C8 StageTips. After centrifugation phosphopeptides were eluted with 60 µl elution buffer (40% ACN and 15% NH4OH [25%, HPLC grade]), collected in clean PCR tubes and concentrated in a SpeedVac for 15 min at 45°C. Peptides from the enrichment and from the proteome were acidified with TFA (1% final concentration) and then concentrated and desalted using stageTips with two layers of styrenedivinylbenzene–reversed phase sulfonated (SDB-RPS; 3M Empore). StageTips were washed twice with wash buffer (0.2% TFA) and one with isopropanol containing 1% TFA. Peptides were eluted by adding 60 µl SDB-RPS elution buffer (80% ACN, 1.25% NH4OH (25% HPLC grade)) and immediately concentrated in a SpeedVac for 30 min at 45°C. Concentrated peptides were then resuspended in a buffer containing 2% ACN and 0.1% TFA prior to chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis. For every condition (control, circular or linear DNA) four phospho-enriched and proteome replicates were prepared. Phosphopeptides were loaded onto a 50 cm reversed-phase column (diameter 75 µM; packed in-house with 1.9 µM C18 ReproSil particles [Dr. Maisch GmbH]; column oven temperature was set to 60°C). The column was mounted to an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides were eluted from the column with a gradient consisting of buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and buffer B (80% ACN and 0.1% formic acid). Gradient length was 130 min from 5%-65% buffer B with a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Peptides were analyzed in a Q ExactiveTM HF-X mass spectrometer (MS) (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to the nLC, obtaining full scans (300-1,600 m/z, R = 60,000 at 200 m/z) at a target of 3e6 ions and maximum injection time of 120 ms. The 10 most abundant ions were selected and fragmented with higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) (target 1e5 ions, maximum injection time 120 ms, isolation window 1.6 m/z, normalized collision energy 28%) followed by the detection in the Orbitrap (R = 15,000 at 200 m/z). Proteome samples were measured with slight modifications in the method using a 25 cm column, sequencing the 15 most abundant peptides and a maximum injection time of 28 ms for full scan acquisition.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data files were processed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.1.13, (23) with the Andromeda search engine with FDR < 0.01 at protein, peptide, and modification level. The default settings were used with the following modifications:  variable modification methionine (M), acetylation (protein N-term), as well as phospho (STY) and the fixed modification carbamidomethyl (C) were selected, only peptides with a minimal length of seven amino acids were considered. For protein and peptide identification the FlyBase (dmeI-all-translation-r6.25) was used.

### Publication Abstract
Preblastoderm Drosophila embryo development is characterized by fast cycles of nuclear divisions. Extracts from these embryos can be used to reconstitute complex chromatin with high efficiency. We now discovered that this chromatin assembly system contains activities that recognize unprotected DNA ends and signal DNA damage through phosphorylation. DNA ends are initially bound by Ku and MRN complexes. Within minutes, the phosphorylation of H2A.V (homologous to &#x3b3;H2A.X) initiates from DNA breaks and spreads over tens of thousands DNA base pairs. The &#x3b3;H2A.V phosphorylation remains tightly associated with the damaged DNA and does not spread to undamaged DNA in the same reaction. This first observation of long-range &#x3b3;H2A.X spreading along damaged chromatin in an in vitro system provides a unique opportunity for mechanistic dissection. Upon further incubation, DNA ends are rendered single-stranded and bound by the RPA complex. Phosphoproteome analyses reveal damage-dependent phosphorylation of numerous DNA-end-associated proteins including Ku70, RPA2, CHRAC16, the exonuclease Rrp1 and the telomer capping complex. Phosphorylation of spindle assembly checkpoint components and of microtubule-associated proteins required for centrosome integrity suggests this cell-free system recapitulates processes involved in the regulated elimination of fatally damaged syncytial nuclei.

### Keywords
D.melanogaster, Dna repair, Dna damage response

### Affiliations
CECAD, University of Cologne, AG Krüger
Protein Analysis Unit ZfP BioMedical Center, LMU Munich Grosshaderner Strasse 9 82152 Planegg-Martinsried Tel. +49 89 2180 75420

### Submitter
Andreas Schmidt

### Lab Head
Dr Axel Imhof
Protein Analysis Unit ZfP BioMedical Center, LMU Munich Grosshaderner Strasse 9 82152 Planegg-Martinsried Tel. +49 89 2180 75420


