### Accession
PXD020774

### Title
Transcriptome and secretome analysis of mechanically stretched osteocytic cells reveals activation of signalling pathways implicated in bone regeneration and DNA-repair systems

### Description
Prescribed exercise has the potential to ameliorate tissue repair or regeneration and therefore is gaining increasing importance in regenerative rehabilitation. Osteocytes are an appealing type of bone cell to target by regenerative rehabilitation protocols due to their mechanosensitive and secretory nature. Making use of tandem liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MSMS) as well as curated bioinformatics, we examined the secretome of mouse and human osteocytic bone cells cultured under cyclic tension delivered by a computer-controlled bioreactor. Quantitative SWATH MS analysis of the secretome secreted by mechanically stimulated cells revealed differential expression of 13 out of 759 secreted factors in mouse and 16 out of 276 in human osteocytic cells. GO enrichment analysis suggested that response to oxidative stress was the most predominant biological process in mouse and cholesterol or lipoprotein-related in human cells. Ossification and bone remodelling and manganese transport were 2 overrepresented process networks common to both mouse and human osteocytic cells

### Sample Protocol
Human and mouse osteocytic cells were plated in a collagen coated flexible bottom 6-well plate (Biopress, Flexcell) with a density of 150,000 viable cells/cm2 for 24 h. The plates were transferred to the bioreactor (Flexcell) to initiate the mechanical loading protocol, 34,000 μS, 2Hz for 5 h. Cells seeded on the same plates but cultured under static conditions were used as control. Mechanically loaded and static osteocyte-like cells were cultured in a humidified incubator at 37°C and 5% CO2. Culture medium (secretome) was collected immediately after the mechanical loading, centrifuged at 300 x g for 5 min to pellet cells and debris, filtered through a 0.22 µm filter and concentrated using a 5kDa cut-off centrifugal concentrator unit (Sartorius). One hundred micrograms of protein was incubated with 8.5 M urea, 2%DDT and 1% N-octyl-  beta-glucopyranoside for 30 min at room temperature. 50 μg of protein were processed and digested (trypsin) using S-trap micro methodology (Protifi). Samples were dried and kept at -80°C until analysis. On the day of analysis, samples were resusupended in 5% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid.

### Data Protocol
Peptides/proteins were analysed by quantitative mass spectrometry (TripleTOF 6600, SCIEX) using SWATH and IDA and processed using OneOmics (SCIEX) software..

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human osteocyte, Swath, Secretome, Mechanically stimulated, Tissue regeneration, Mouse osteocyte

### Affiliations
John van Geest Cancer Research Centre, Nottingham Trent University
Nottingham Trent University

### Submitter
David Boocock

### Lab Head
Dr David John Boocock
John van Geest Cancer Research Centre, Nottingham Trent University


