### Accession
PXD006138

### Title
Ovarian high grade serous carcinoma ascites cell proteoms

### Description
Tumor cells, macrophages and T cells from high grade serous ovarian carcinoma from the ascites of patients undergoing primary surgery were analysed without culturing (ex vivo) via obitrap.

### Sample Protocol
TAM and TAT were isolated by density gradient centrifugation followed by magnetic cell sorting (MACS) of CD14+ cells as described (Finkernagel et al, 2016). Tumor spheroids were separated by filtration as previously reported (Finkernagel et al, 2016). Isolated and pelleted tumor spheroids, TAM and TAT were lysed in SDS buffer (4% SDS in 0.1 M Tris/HCl pH 7.6) prior to heating samples at 95°C for 5 minutes. DNA was shared by sonification and cell debris was removed by centrifugation at 16.000 g for 10 minutes. DC protein assay (BioRad) was used to determine concentration of solubilized proteins in supernatants after centrifugation. Equal amounts of proteins (40 µg each) were loaded on a gradient gel (NuPAGE 4-12% Bis-Tris gel, Invitrogen) and separated by SDS-PAGE prior to in-gel digestion (Shevchenko et al, 1996). In brief, gel lanes were cut in 10 pieces and proteins were reduced (10 mM dithiothreitol), alkylated (55 mM iodoacetamide) and digested by trypsin (Promega) in 1:100 enzyme to protein ratio. After overnight incubation, peptides were gradually eluted by increasing amount of acetonitrile prior to sample desalting by stop and go extraction tips (Rappsilber et al, 2003). For mass spectrometry (MS) analysis, peptides were eluted from STAGE tips by solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid), dried down in a SpeedVac Concentrator (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and dissolved in solvent A (0.1% formic acid). A naon Ultra-High Performance Liquid Chromatography device (EASY-nLC 1000, Thermo Fisher Scientific) was coupled to a quadrupole-based, high-resolution mass spectrometer (Q-Exactive HF, Thermo Fisher Scientific) via an electrospray ionization source. Peptides were separated based on hydrophobicity by reversed phased chromatography using 20 cm, in-house packed C18 silica columns (1.9 µm C18 beads, Dr. Maisch GmbH) and a 75-minute gradient with linearly increasing concentration of solvent B for 60 minutes, followed by washing with 95% of solvent B for 5 minutes and re-equilibration with 5% of solvent B. Full MS spectra were acquired in a mass range of 300 to 1750 m/z with a resolution of 60,000 at 200 m/z. AGC target was set to 3 x 106 and maximum injection time to 20 ms. Ions were fragmented in the HCD cell using 27 normalized collision energy. Tandem mass spectra (MS/MS) were acquired with a resolution of 15,000 at 200 m/z using data dependent mode with a loop count of 15 (top15). AGC target for MS/MS scans was set to 1.0 x 105 with a maximum injection time of 25 ms.

### Data Protocol
Raw OrbiTrap data from 27 ex vivo samples (matching TU, TAM and TAT samples from 9 patients) was analyzed using MaxQuant 1.5.5.1 (Cox & Mann, 2008). Parameters different from default were as follows: minUniquePeptides=1, matchingTiweWindow=0.7, alignmentTimeWidow=20, matchBetweenRuns=true, 22 ibaq=true, ibaqLogFit=true.

### Publication Abstract
Ovarian cancer is characterized by early transcoelomic metastatic spread via the peritoneal fluid, where tumor cell spheroids (TU), tumor-associated T cells (TAT), and macrophages (TAM) create a unique microenvironment promoting cancer progression, chemoresistance, and immunosuppression. However, the underlying signaling mechanisms remain largely obscure. To chart these signaling networks, we performed comprehensive proteomic and transcriptomic analyses of TU, TAT, and TAM from ascites of ovarian cancer patients. We identify multiple intercellular signaling pathways driven by protein or lipid mediators that are associated with clinical outcome. Beyond cytokines, chemokines and growth factors, these include proteins of the extracellular matrix, immune checkpoint regulators, complement factors, and a prominent network of axon guidance molecules of the ephrin, semaphorin, and slit families. Intriguingly, both TU and TAM from patients with a predicted short survival selectively produce mediators supporting prometastatic events, including matrix remodeling, stemness, invasion, angiogenesis, and immunosuppression, whereas TAM associated with a longer survival express cytokines linked to effector T-cell chemoattraction and activation. In summary, our study uncovers previously unrecognized signaling networks in the ovarian cancer microenvironment that are of potential clinical relevance.

### Keywords
Ovca, Human, Ovarian carcinoma, High grade serous ovarian carcinoma, Macrophages, T cells, Cancer, Hgsoc

### Affiliations
Institute for molecular biology and tumor research, Philipps University Marburg Marburg, Germany
Institute for molecular and tumor biology, Philipps University Marburg, Germany

### Submitter
Florian Finkernagel

### Lab Head
Dr Rolf Mueller
Institute for molecular biology and tumor research, Philipps University Marburg Marburg, Germany


