### Accession
PXD031198

### Title
New insight into sclerotial generation in medicinal fungus Polyporus umbellatus

### Description
Polyporus umbellatus sclerotia are medicinal tissue, but little is known about acetylome of sclerotia generated from hyphae. Based on acetylome analysis results and expression levels of targeted protein that associated with sclerotia generation were verified by PRM using Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) mass spectrometer equipped with a nanospray Flex Ion Source and the UltiMate3000 RSLC nano (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA).

### Sample Protocol
Fresh tissues were ground into powder to extract proteins in P. umbellatus, and then the crude proteins were purified, reduced and alkylated following digestion with sequencing grade modified trypsin subsequently. The final concentrations of peptides for each sample were 1μg/μL. The PRM data were acquired on Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, CA) mass spectrometer and the PRM data were processed using Skyline (v.3.6).

### Data Protocol
The PRM data were processed using Skyline (v.3.6). Peptide settings: the enzyme: trypsin [KR/P]; the maximum number of missed cleavages: 2; Peptide length: 8-25; the variable modifications: carbamidomethyl on Cys and oxidationon Met; the maximum number of variable modifications: 3. Transition settings: the precursor charges: 2+, 3 and 4+; the ion charges: 1 and 2; and the ion types: b and y. The product ions: 3 to the last ion, and the ion match tolerance: 0.02 Da.

### Publication Abstract
Sclerotium-forming fungi are ecologically diverse and possess notable pathogenic or medicinal properties. The sclerotial generation mechanism is still elusive though Polyporus umbellatus sclerotia are typical Traditional Chinese Medicine with diuretic and antitumor effects. Protein acetylation displays a crucial role in several biological processes, but the functions of acetylation in this valuable fungus are unknown at present. In this study, acetylome of P. umbellatus was studied using nano LC-Triple TOF mass spectrometry system following immune-affinity-based enrichment. Totally, 648 acetylated sites in 342 proteins were identified and nine motifs were found to be conserved in P. umbellatus including K<sup>ac</sup>Y, K<sup>ac</sup>A, K<sup>ac</sup>L, K<sup>ac</sup>G, M<sup>ac</sup>S, M<sup>ac</sup>A, R<sup>ac</sup>A, R<sup>ac</sup>L, and R<sup>ac</sup>G. Acetylated proteins taken part in types of biological processes, particularly to those in biological processes associated with reactive oxygen species (ROS) metabolism. Inhibitors complement tests were carried out to verify the role of ROS in acetylation modification. It was concluded that oxidative stress regulated sclerotial generation via proteins acetylation in P. umbellatus. The present study presents new insight into the essential roles of acetylation in sclerotial formation, which may also be applicable for other sclerotium-forming fungi.

### Keywords
Polyporus umbellatus, Ultimate3000 rslc nano

### Affiliations
Institute of Medicinal Plant Development, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College

### Submitter
Bing Li

### Lab Head
Dr Bing Li
Institute of Medicinal Plant Development, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College


