### Accession
PXD041634

### Title
Comparative Proteomics of Calcitriol-treated high- and no-responding Glioma stem-like cells

### Description
Glioblastoma is the most common primary brain cancer and is associated with poor survival and high rates of recurrent diseases. The median survival using standard radio-chemotherapy is 15 months and the 5-year survival rate is below 5%. It is hypothesized that treatment resistance, diffuse infiltration of the brain and disease recurrence is, at least in part, due to cancer cells that can obtain a transient, stem-like phenotype. These so-called glioma stem-like cells (GSCs) display pluripotency, express marker proteins associated with stem-cells and can replenish the tumor after treatment. Recently, we have shown that the hormonally active form of vitamin D3, calcitriol (1α,25(OH)2-vitamin D3), is active in a subset of GSCs and reduces traits of stemness. Here, we have employed a set of 8 GSCs that do not respond to calcitriol-treatment (No-responder) and the 8 strongest responders to calcitriol (High-responder) and compared to proteomes after treatment with 50 nM calcitriol for 48h.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for mass spectrometry GBM cell lines were collected by trypsinization and washed 3 times with PBS before sample preparation. Further sample preparation was performed as described previously (1). The cells were lysed and denatured with 2% SDS, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, 150 mM NaCl, 10 mM TCEP, 40 mM chloroacetamide and protease inhibitor cocktail tablet (EDTA-free, Roche) at 95oC for 10 min, then sonicated for 1 min (1s ON/ 1s OFF pulse, 45% amplitude) and boiled again for 5 min at 95°C. Pure proteins were obtained with methanol/chloroform precipitation. Protein pellets were then resuspended in Urea. 100 μg of protein per samples were digested overnight at 37oC. with LysC (Wako Chemicals) at 1:50 (w/w) ratio and Trypsin (Promega, V5113) at 1:100 (w/w) ratio. Digested peptides are purified using Sep-Pak tC18 cartridges (Waters, WAT054955). Peptide concentrations were determined with a μBCA assay (ThermoFisher Scientific, 23235) and 10 μg of peptide per sample was labeled with TMTpro reagents (Thermo Scientific, A44520). TMT labeled samples were adjusted to equal amounts and pooled. Then the pool was fractionated into 24 fractions using the High pH micro-flow fractionation method.  High pH micro-flow fractionation Peptides were fractionated using high-pH liquid-chromatography on a micro-flow HPLC (Dionex U3000 RSLC, Thermo Scientific). 45µg of pooled and purified TMT labelled peptides resuspended in Solvent A (5mM ammonium-bicarbonate, 5%ACN) were separated on a C18 column (XSelect CSH, 1mm x 150mm, 3.5 µm particle size; Waters) using a multistep gradient from 3-60% Solvent B (5mM ammonium-bicarbonate, 90% ACN) over 65 minutes at a flow rate of 30 µl/min. Eluting peptides were collected every 43 seconds from minute 2 for 69 minutes into a total of 96 fractions, which were cross-concatenated into 24 fractions. Pooled fractions were dried in a vacuum concentrator and resuspended in 2% ACN, 0.1% TFA for LC-MS analysis.  Mass spectrometry (LC-MS3) Fractions were resuspended in 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid and separated on an Easy nLC 1200 (ThermoFisher Scientific) and a 22 cm long, 75 μm ID fused-silica column, which had been packed in house with 1.9 μm C18 particles (ReproSil-Pur, Dr. Maisch) and kept at 50 °C using an integrated column oven (Sonation). HPLC solvents consisted of 0.1% Formic acid in water (Buffer A) and 0.1% Formic acid, 80% acetonitrile in water (Buffer B). Assuming equal amounts in each fraction, 500 ng of peptides were eluted by a non-linear gradient from 7 to 40% B over 90 minutes followed by a step-wise increase to 75% ACN in 6 minutes which was held for another 9 minutes. After that, peptides directly sprayed into an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer equipped with a nanoFlex ion source (ThermoFisher Scientific). Sprayed peptides were analysed Multi-Notch MS3-based TMT method in order to minimize ratio compression and ion interference as previously described (2) for total proteomics. Full scan MS spectra (350-1400 m/z) were acquired with a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200, maximum injection time of 100 ms and AGC target value of 4 x 105. The most intense precursors with a charge state between 2 and 6 per full scan were selected for fragmentation (“Top Speed” with a cycle time of 1.5 seconds) and isolated with a quadrupole isolation window of 0.7 Th. MS2 scans were performed in the Ion trap (Turbo) using a maximum injection time of 50ms, AGC target value of 1.5 x 104 and fragmented using CID with a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 35%. SPS-MS3 scans for quantification were performed on the 10 most intense MS2 fragment ions with an isolation window of 0.7 Th (MS) and 2 m/z (MS2). Ions were fragmented using HCD with an NCE of 50% and analysed in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 50,000 at m/z 200, scan range of 100-500 m/z, AGC target value of 1.5 x105 and a maximum injection time of 86ms. Repeated sequencing of already acquired precursors was limited by setting a dynamic exclusion of 45 seconds and 7 p.p.m and advanced peak determination was deactivated.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics data analysis Raw data was analyzed with Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (ThermoFisher Scientific). SequenceHT node was selected for database searches of MS2-spectra. Human trypsin digested proteome (Homo sapiens SwissProt database (TaxID:9606, version 12 March 2020)) was used for protein identifications. Contaminants (MaxQuant “contamination.fasta”) were determined for quality control. TMTpro (+304.207) at the N-terminus, TMTpro (K, +304.207) at lysine and carbamidomethyl (C, +57.021) at cysteine residues were set as fixed modifications. Methionine oxidation (M, +15.995) and acetylation (+42.011) at the protein N-terminus were set for dynamic modifications. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 7 ppm and fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da. Default percolator settings in PD were used to filter perfect spectrum matches (PSMs). Reporter ion quantification was achieved with default settings in consensus workflow. Protein file from PD was then exported to Excel for further processing. Normalized abundances from protein file were used for statistical analysis after contaminations and complete empty values were removed. Significantly altered proteins were determined by a two-sided, unpaired Student’s t-tests (p-value < 0.05), adding minimum log2 fold-change cut-off (≥ 0.5) with R version 4.0.2 (3) in RStudio (4). Correlation matrix analysis was performed using the Instant Clue software (5).

### Publication Abstract
Glioblastoma is the most common primary brain cancer in adults and represents one of the worst cancer diagnoses for patients. Suffering from a poor prognosis and limited treatment options, tumor recurrences are virtually inevitable. Additionally, treatment resistance is very common for this disease and worsens the prognosis. These and other factors are hypothesized to be largely due to the fact that glioblastoma cells are known to be able to obtain stem-like traits, thereby driving these phenotypes. Recently, we have shown that the in vitro and ex vivo treatment of glioblastoma stem-like cells with the hormonally active form of vitamin D<sub>3</sub>, calcitriol (1&#x3b1;,25(OH)<sub>2</sub>-vitamin D<sub>3</sub>) can block stemness in a subset of cell lines and reduce tumor growth. Here, we expanded our cell panel to over 40 different cultures and can show that, while half of the tested cell lines are sensitive, a quarter can be classified as high responders. Using genetic and proteomic analysis, we further determined that treatment success can be partially explained by specific polymorphism of the vitamin D<sub>3</sub> receptor and that high responders display a proteome suggestive of blockade of stemness, as well as migratory potential.

### Keywords
Vitamin d3, Glioma, Glioma stem-like cells, Calcitriol, Glioblastoma

### Affiliations
Institute of Biochemistry II, Faculty of Medicine, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany Frankfurt Cancer Institute, Frankfurt am Main, Germany Cardio-Pulmonary Institute, Frankfurt am Main, Germany
Goethe University Frankfurt

### Submitter
Christian Münch

### Lab Head
Dr Christian Münch
Institute of Biochemistry II, Faculty of Medicine, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany Frankfurt Cancer Institute, Frankfurt am Main, Germany Cardio-Pulmonary Institute, Frankfurt am Main, Germany


