### Accession
PXD021297

### Title
N-glycoproteomic profiling reveals new therapeutic targets against coronavirus infestation which may be involved in Cepharanthine’s intervention

### Description
N-glycosylation is an important post-translational modification involved in protein folding, signal transduction, extracellular matrix (ECM) organization and immune response. Recent evidence shows that SARS-CoV-2 Spike protein is highly glycosylated and it may be potential target in viral pathology and drug/vaccine design. Therefore, the N-glycoproteomic profiling of coronavirus and its infected cells are of great importance in therapeutic targets screening for drug discovery. Here, we carried out 4D label-free LC-MS/MS-based N-glycoproteomics using a well-established SARS-CoV-2 cellular model, pangolin GX_P2V virus-infected Vero E6 cells, to study the mechanism of coronavirus infestation and potential drug targets. Meanwhile, we investigated the effect of Cepharanthine (CEP) on viral-induced aberrant N-glycoprotein changes in affected cells and on the viral proteins. The results showed that coronavirus GX_P2V could cause aberrant glycosylation of cell proteins at multiple levels, including extracellular matrix (ECM) and related signal transduction, whereas CEP can maintain 12 out of 69 GX_P2V-induced aberrant glycoproteins at normal glycosylation state. Functional enrichment and PPI analyses revealed that LAMB1 and FN1 were the pivotal proteins in regulating the aberrant glycosylation caused by coronavirus in presence of CEP, indicating that CEP might achieve its therapeutic intervention via these potential targets. Besides, CEP can regulate the glycosylation of viral proteins S, M and N. Nevertheless, there were still 57 out of 69 glycoproteins which cannot be significantly affected by CEP, indicating the combination of CEP with other drugs against the rest of targets should be considered.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture and coronavirus  Vero E6 cells (American Type Culture Collection, Manassas, VA, USA) (ATCC, No. 1586) were grown in high-glucose containing DMEM medium (Gibco) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) in 37 °C incubator with 5% CO2. SARS-CoV-2 related coronavirus GX_P2V/pangolin/2017/Guangxi was isolated from Vero E6 cells from a dead smuggled pangolin in 2017, and its complete genome has been submitted to GenBank 23. The compound Cepharanthine (CEP) was purchased from TOPscience (Shanghai, China).   Cepharanthine (CEP) and GX_P2V treatment  Vero E6 cells were cultured in T175 flask and treated with or without GX_P2V (MOI of 0.01) in presence or absence of CEP. Group 1 (Vero): normal control; group 2（Vero_C）: CEP only treatment for 72 hours; group 3 (Vero_P): GX_P2V treatment for 72 hours; group 4 (Vero_C_P)：GX_P2V and CEP GX_P2V treatment for 72 hours. The cytotoxicity of CEP to Vero E6 cells was measured by CellTiter blue according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Promega, Catalog Number: PR-G8081; Madison, WI, USA). Cell samples were harvested according to the protocol for Glycoproteomics analysis from PTM-Biolab (Hangzhou, China), and stored in -80℃ refrigerator for further analysis.   Protein extraction and trypsin digestion Samples stored in -80°C refrigerator were thawed on ice and centrifuged at 12,000 g at 4°C for 10 min to remove cell debris. The supernatant was transferred to a new centrifuge tube for protein concentration determination using BCA kit. Equal amount of each protein sample was enzymatically lysed with same volume of lysis buffer containing the appropriate amount of reference protein. The protein samples were mixed with five times of the sample volume and precipitated with pre-cooled acetone at -20℃ for 2 h, followed by centrifugation at 4500 g for 5 min, the precipitate was collected and washed twice with pre-cooled acetone. The protein precipitate from each sample was dried, and then sonicated in buffer containing 200 mM Triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB). The digestion was performed by incubation with trypsin at a ratio of 1: 50 (enzyme: protein, m/m) with protein samples for overnight. Finally, the samples were desalted according to the C18 ZipTips instructions, and vacuum freeze-dried for HPLC analysis.   The enrichment of glycosylation modification of peptides The peptide fragments were dissolved in 40 μL of enrichment buffer (80% acetonitrile/1% trifluoroacetic acid) and transferred to a hydrophilic micro-column. The enrichment was completed by centrifugation at 4000 g for approximately 15 min in HILIC. The hydrophilic micro-column was washed for 3 times with enrichment buffer. The glycopeptides were eluted with 10% acetonitrile, then the eluate was collected and vacuum dried. After drying, the eluate was reconstituted in 50 μL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer dissolved in 50 μL of hydrogen peroxide with 2 μL of water. The glycopeptides were incubated with PNGase F glycosidase overnight at 37 °C. Finally, salt was removed according to the C18 ZipTips instructions and vacuum freeze-dried for liquid-liquid analysis.   Liquid Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS)  The peptides were dissolved in liquid chromatography mobile phase A (0.1% (v/v) formic acid aqueous solution) and then separated using NanoElute ultra-efficient liquid phase system. Mobile phase A is an aqueous solution containing 0.1% formic acid; mobile phase B is an acetonitrile solution containing 0.1% formic acid. Liquid phase gradient setting: 0-50 min, 2%~22%B; 50-52 min, 22%~35%B; 52-55 min, 35%~90%B; 55-60 min, 90%B, the flow rate is maintained at 450 nL/min. The peptides were separated by an ultra-high-performance liquid phase system and injected into a capillary ion source. Then the peptide segments are analyzed by a TIMS-TOF Pro mass spectrometer. The ion source voltage was set to 1.6 kV and both the peptide parent ion and its secondary fragments were detected and analyzed using TOF. The secondary mass spectrometry scan range was set to 100-1700 m/z. The data acquisition mode used parallel cumulative serial fragmentation (PASEF) mode. One primary mass spectrometry acquisition followed by 10 PASEF mode acquisitions of secondary spectra with parent ion charge numbers in the range 0-5. The dynamic exclusion time of the tandem mass spectrometry scan was set to 30 seconds to avoid repeated scans of the parent ion.

### Data Protocol
Retrieval parameter settings: the database was FA105LPNg_ Chlorocebus_sabaeus_60711_Ensembl_GX_P2V_protein_TX_combine_20200413 (19267 sequences), an anti-library was added to calculate the false positive rate (FDR) caused by random matching, and a common pollution library was added to the database to eliminate the contamination protein in the identification results Impact; the digestion method was set to Trypsin/P; the number of missed cleavage sites was set to 2; the minimum length of the peptide was set to 7 amino acid residues; the maximum modification number of the peptide was set to 5. The mass error tolerance of the primary precursor ions in First search and Main search was respectively set to 20 ppm and 20 ppm, and the mass error tolerance of the secondary fragment ions was 0.02 Da. The cysteine alkylation was set as a fixed modification, and the variable modification was the oxidation of methionine, the acetylation of the N-terminus of the protein, and the deamination of asparagine (18O). The FDR for protein identification and PSM identification was set to 1%.

### Publication Abstract
The Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) has posed a serious threat to global health and the world economy. Antiviral therapies targeting coronavirus are urgently required. The Cepharanthine (CEP) is a traditional Chinese herbal extract. Our previous research revealed that CEP has a very potent anti-coronavirus effect, but its mechanism of action was not fully understood. To investigate the effect of novel coronavirus on protein glycosylation in infected cells and to further investigate the mechanism of action of CEP against coronavirus, a cellular model using coronavirus GX_P2V infection of Vero E6 cells was established. The effect of coronavirus GX_P2V on host cell protein glycosylation was investigated by N-glycoproteomic analysis, and the antagonistic effect of CEP on the abnormal protein glycosylation caused by coronavirus was analyzed. The results showed that GX_P2V could cause abnormal changes in protein glycosylation levels in host cells, while CEP could partially antagonize the abnormal protein glycosylation caused by GX_P2V. In addition, we also found that CEP could regulate the glycosylation level of coronavirus S protein. In conclusion, this article provides important ideas about the infection mechanism of novel coronaviruses, providing evidence for CEP as a promising therapeutic option for coronavirus infection.

### Keywords
N-glycoproteomic；cepharanthine；sars-cov-2；gx_p2v; cellular model; therapeutic target

### Affiliations
College of Life Science and Technology, Beijing University of Chemical Technology
College of Life Science and Technology, Beijing University of Chemical Technology, Beijing 100029, China.

### Submitter
Wenlin An

### Lab Head
Dr Wenlin An
College of Life Science and Technology, Beijing University of Chemical Technology, Beijing 100029, China.


