### Accession
PXD033798

### Title
Metabolic enhancement of developmental pausing (TS cells)

### Description
Embryonic stem (ES) cells and embryos reversibly pause via chemical mTOR inhibition. In this study, we investigate the tissue-specific response to mTORi-induced pausing in ES and trophoblast stem (TS) cells. To resolve the sequential rewiring of the proteome, we conducted a time-series proteomics experiment at 1, 3, 6, 12, 24, and 48 hours upon induction of pausing, and at 1, 3, 6, 12, 24, and 48 hours upon release of pausing in ES and TS cells. We find that ES, but not TS cells pause reversibly. To optimise developmental pausing conditions, we reasoned that by understanding the difference in pausing response of ES and TS cells, we could identify which pathways are essential for pausing. We found that KEGG pathways related to amino acid degradation, fatty acid degradation, and DNA repair are upregulated in ES cells, but downregulated in TS cells during entry into pausing. Moreover, by targeted metabolomics, we found a depletion of short chain carnitines in the paused ES cells. To extend the length of developmental pausing, we supplemented paused embryos with L-carnitine. The L-carnitine supplementation facilitates lipid usage and prolongs the pausing length by 19 days through the establishment of a more dormant state.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation: Proteomics sample preparation was done according to a published protocol with minor modifications (Kulak et al., 2014). In brief, 5 million cells in biological duplicates of 2 days and 7 days hypoxia treatment and normoxia controls were lysed under denaturing conditions in 500 µl of a buffer containing 3 M guanidinium chloride (GdmCl), 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine, 40 mM chloroacetamide, and 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5. Lysates were denatured at 95°C for 10 min shaking at 1000 rpm in a thermal shaker and sonicated in a water bath for 10 min. 100 µl lysate was diluted with a dilution buffer containing 10% acetonitrile and 25 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, to reach a 1 M GdmCl concentration. Then, proteins were digested with LysC (Roche, Basel, Switzerland; enzyme to protein ratio 1:50, MS-grade) shaking at 700 rpm at 37°C for 2 hours. The digestion mixture was diluted again with the same dilution buffer to reach 0.5 M GdmCl, followed by tryptic digestion (Roche, enzyme to protein ratio 1:50, MS-grade) and incubation at 37°C overnight in a thermal shaker at 700 rpm. Peptide desalting was performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Pierce C18 Tips, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA). Desalted peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid in water and further separated into four fractions by strong cation exchange chromatography (SCX, 3M Purification, Meriden, CT). Eluates were first dried in a SpeedVac, then dissolved in 5% acetonitrile and 2% formic acid in water, briefly vortexed, and sonicated in a water bath for 30 seconds prior injection to nano-LC-MS/MS. Run parameters: LC-MS/MS was carried out by nanoflow reverse-phase liquid chromatography (Dionex Ultimate 3000, Thermo Scientific) coupled online to a Q-Exactive HF Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Briefly, the LC separation was performed using a PicoFrit analytical column (75 μm ID × 50 cm long, 15 µm Tip ID; New Objectives, Woburn, MA) in-house packed with 3-µm C18 resin (Reprosil-AQ Pur, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany).

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data were processed with MaxQuant software (v1.6.0.1) and searched against the mouse proteome database UniProtKB with 22,286 entries, released in December 2018. The MaxQuant processed output include peptide and protein identification, accession numbers, % sequence coverage of the protein, q-values, and label-free quantification (LFQ) intensities.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Embryonic stem cells, Pluripotency, Embryonic diapause, Mtor inhibition

### Affiliations
Mass Spectrometry Facility MPIMG
Max Plank Institute for Molecular Genetics

### Submitter
David Meierhofer

### Lab Head
Dr Aydan Karslioglu
Max Plank Institute for Molecular Genetics


