### Accession
PXD017316

### Title
Harnessing the power of electrophoresis and chromatography: Offline coupling of reverse phase liquid chromatography-capillary zone electrophoresis-tandem mass spectrometry for peptide mapping for monoclonal antibodies

### Description
RPLC-MS/MS is the present workhorse for bottom-up proteomics-based characterization. However it suffers from limited peak capacity and challenges with respect to detection of small and hydrophilic peptides. CZE-MS/MS offers an orthogonal alternative to RPLC-MS/MS but has limited sensitivity due to low sample loading. In the present work, for the first time, offline coupling of an RPLC-CZE-MS/MS has been demonstrated for peptide mapping of a monoclonal antibody-based therapeutic product. The performance of this platform has been compared to the state-of-the-art RPLC-MS/MS and CZE-MS/MS approaches. Fifteen fractions were isolated from a mAb tryptic digest using RPLC, and each fraction was analyzed by CZE-ESI-MS/MS. Results indicate that not only the RPLC-CZE-MS/MS platform identify a larger number of distinct peptides (372) than the RPLC-MS/MS (219) and CZE-MS/MS (177) platforms, it also offered significantly superior sequence coverage (99.55% vs. 89.76% and 94.21% for the heavy chain and 98.6% vs. 92.06% and 95.79% for the light chain). Also, the distribution of amino acid residues with post translational modifications was 413 for RPLC-CZE-MS/MS, 150 for RPLC-MS/MS and 94 for CZE-MS/MS. In fact, the RPLC-CZE-MS/MS system performed better than the combined datasets from RPLC-MS/MS or CZE-MS/MS. Our study shows that the traditionally used one-dimensional (1D) RPLC-MS/MS and CZE-MS/MS-based platforms may not be enough for characterization of complex molecules such as monoclonal antibodies. The proposed approach should be an essential addition to the analytical toolkit for in-depth primary structural characterization of mAbs.

### Sample Protocol
mAb samples (~1 mg) were dried using CentriVap (Labconco, Kansas City, MA, US) and resuspended in 100µl of 6M urea in 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.8) for solubilization and denaturation by gentle pipetting. About 5µl of 200 mM DTT was added to the sample for reduction and the sample was incubated for 1hr at room temperature (RT, 25˚C), followed by addition of 20µl of 200mM IAM for alkylation and then by incubation for 1hr in the dark at RT. Excess IAM was quenched with the addition of 20μl of 200 mM DTT. The samples were mixed by gentle vortex and allowed to stand at RT for 1hr. The whole volume was passed through 10 kDa cut off filter and buffer exchanged with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate. MS grade proteolytic enzyme trypsin was added (1µg/µl) in the ratio of 1:50, and the mixture was incubated for 16h at 37°C. The reaction was arrested by lowering the pH to less than 6 by adding 1µl of FA. The digest was concentrated by vacuum evaporation using CentriVap and stored at -20°C until further use.

### Data Protocol
Data were acquired in IDA mode with 100 ms TOF-MS survey scan, and 50 ms IDA on the top 20 ions which exceed 100 cps. Fragmentation was induced via rolling collision energy with a dynamic exclusion time of 3 s and total cycle time of 1.2996 s. Optimization of IDA parameters was performed to allow the duty cycle of MS to support high-speed CE separation adequately. The instrument was calibrated once every two runs to ensure maximum mass measurement accuracy. MS scans a range of 200 – 1600 m/z and MS/MS scan range of 100-2000 m/z were used for peptide fragmentation. Raw data was processed on Protein Pilot 5.2.0 software (SCIEX, Framingham, MA, US) using Paragon method at 10% detection threshold, along with biological modifications at 1% FDR.  The peptide sequences were matched with the FASTA sequence of the mAb downloaded from IMGT database. Only peptides with a minimum best confidence score of 99 were considered for analysis. Wherever required, qualitative analysis of MS/MS spectra was performed using PeakView 2.0 software (SCIEX, Framingham, MA, US).

### Publication Abstract
RPLC-MS/MS is the present workhorse for bottom-up proteomics-based characterization. However it suffers from limited peak capacity and challenges with respect to detection of small and hydrophilic peptides. CZE-MS/MS offers an orthogonal alternative to RPLC-MS/MS but has limited sensitivity due to low sample loading. In the present work, for the first time, offline coupling of an RPLC-CZE-MS/MS has been demonstrated for peptide mapping of a monoclonal antibody-based therapeutic product. The performance of this platform has been compared to the state-of-the-art RPLC-MS/MS and CZE-MS/MS approaches. Fifteen fractions were isolated from a mAb tryptic digest using RPLC, and each fraction was analyzed by CZE-ESI-MS/MS. Results indicate that not only the RPLC-CZE-MS/MS platform identified a larger number of distinct peptides (372) than the RPLC-MS/MS (219) and CZE-MS/MS (177) platforms, it also offered significantly superior sequence coverage (99.55% vs. 89.76% and 94.21% for the heavy chain and 98.6% vs. 92.06% and 95.79% for the light chain). Also, the distribution of amino acid residues with post translational modifications was 413 for RPLC-CZE-MS/MS, 150 for RPLC-MS/MS and 94 for CZE-MS/MS. In fact, the RPLC-CZE-MS/MS system performed better than the combined datasets from RPLC-MS/MS or CZE-MS/MS. Our study shows that the traditionally used one-dimensional (1D) RPLC-MS/MS and CZE-MS/MS-based platforms may not be enough for characterization of complex molecules such as monoclonal antibodies. The proposed approach should be an essential addition to the analytical toolkit for in-depth primary structural characterization of mAbs.

### Keywords
Biotherapeutics, Czemsms, Peptide mapping, Rplcmsms

### Affiliations
Professor of Chemical Enginnering Department  Indian Institute of Technology Delhi
Professor Chemical Engineering Department.
Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi.

### Submitter
Anurag Singh Rathore

### Lab Head
Dr Anurag Singh Rathore
Professor of Chemical Enginnering Department  Indian Institute of Technology Delhi


