### Accession
PXD031424

### Title
Calpain Cleavage of Junctophilin-2 generates a Spectrum of Calcium-dependent Cleavage Products and DNA-rich NT1-Fragment Domains in Cardiomyocytes - PRM Dataset

### Description
Calpains are calcium (Ca2+) activated neutral proteases that are involved in several essential  signaling pathways. One Calpain-specific proteolytic target is Junctophilin-2 (JP2), an important structural protein of Ca2+ release units required for the excitation-contraction coupling in cardiomyocytes. While downregulation of JP2 by Calpain cleavage in mouse models of heart failure has been reported previously, the precise molecular identity of the Calpain cleavage sites and the (patho-) physiological roles of the JP2 proteolytic products remain controversial. We systematically analyzed the JP2 cleavage fragments as function of Calpain-1 versus Calpain-2 proteolytic activities, revealing that both Calpain isoforms preferentially cleave mouse JP2 at R565, but subsequently also at three additional secondary Calpain cleavage sites. We identified the Calpain-specific primary cleavage products not only in mouse but also in human iPSC-derived cardiomyocytes (hiPSC-CMs). Knockout of RyR2 in hiPSC-CMs destabilized JP2 resulting in an increase of the Calpain-specifc cleavage fragments. The primary N-terminal cleavage product (NT1) accumulated in the nucleus of mouse and human cardiomyocytes in a Ca2+ dependent manner, closely associated with DNA-rich chromosomal regions, where NT1 is proposed to function as a cardioprotective transcriptional regulator in heart failure. Taken together, our data suggest that stabilizing NT1 by preventing secondary cleavage events by Calpain and other proteases could be an important therapeutic target for future studies.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were subjected to SDS-PAGE on 4 to 12% bis-tris minigels followed by Coomassie Blue R250 staining. Detected gel slices were cut out, reduced with 1,4-dithiothreitol, alkylated with 2-iodoacetamide, and digested overnight with trypsin. Trypsinized peptides were extracted and dried using SpeedVac (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were enriched on a reversed- phase pillar array trapping column (µPAC Trapping Column, Pharmafluidics), followed by separation on an analytical reversed-phase pillar array column (µPAC G1 50 cm, Pharmafluidics) using a 30 min linear gradient of 5 to 35% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid (v:v) at 300 nl min−1. The eluent was analyzed using a TripleTOF 5600+ Hybrid Quadrupole/Time-of-Flight (Sciex) in data-dependent acquisition mode. For protein identification, each experimental cycle consisted of an MS scan (350-1250 resolution 35.000 FWHM, 400 ms) and up to 15 MS/MS experiments (180-1500 m/z, resolution 17.500 FWHM, 125 cps trigger threshold, 30 s dynamic exlusion, 0.7 FWHM isolation width, default rolling collision energy settings, 125 ms accumulation). For PRM, an additional retention time-coded inclusion list of 15 previously detected human JP2 peptides was used and dynamic exclusion disabled. Two technical replicates per sample were acquired.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed for peptide and protein identification in ProteinPilot software version 5.0 (Sciex) against the UniProtKB human reference proteome (revision 02-2020, 75069 entries) augmented with a set of 52 known common laboratory contaminants at using ‘thorough’ settings. Peptide quantitation from PRM data was achieved using Skyline software v20.2 (MacCoss Group, University of Washington) by extracting up to 6 fragment ion traces per peptide. Peak areas were normalized to the FL band in the same lane for each peptide.

### Publication Abstract
Calpains are calcium-activated neutral proteases involved in the regulation of key signaling pathways. Junctophilin-2&#xa0;(JP2)&#xa0;is a Calpain-specific proteolytic target and essential structural protein inside Ca<sup>2+</sup> release units required for excitation-contraction coupling in cardiomyocytes. While downregulation of JP2 by Calpain cleavage in heart failure has been reported, the precise molecular identity of the Calpain cleavage sites and the (patho-)physiological roles of the JP2 proteolytic products remain controversial. We systematically analyzed the JP2 cleavage fragments as function of Calpain-1 versus Calpain-2 proteolytic activities, revealing that both Calpain isoforms preferentially cleave mouse JP2 at R565, but subsequently at three additional secondary Calpain cleavage sites. Moreover, we identified the Calpain-specific primary cleavage products for the first time in human iPSC-derived cardiomyocytes. Knockout of RyR2 in hiPSC-cardiomyocytes destabilized JP2 resulting in an increase of the Calpain-specific cleavage fragments. The primary N-terminal cleavage product NT<sub>1</sub> accumulated in the nucleus of mouse and human cardiomyocytes in a Ca<sup>2+</sup>-dependent manner, closely associated with euchromatic chromosomal regions, where NT<sub>1</sub> is proposed to function as a cardio-protective transcriptional regulator in heart failure. Taken together, our data suggest that stabilizing NT<sub>1</sub> by preventing secondary cleavage events by Calpain and other proteases could be an important therapeutic target for future studies.

### Keywords
Junctophilin, Ryanodine, Calcium, Cardiomyocyte, Calpain

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry
Bioanalytics, Department of Clinical Chemistry, University Medical Center Goettingen

### Submitter
Christof Lenz

### Lab Head
Dr Christof Lenz
Bioanalytics, Department of Clinical Chemistry, University Medical Center Goettingen


