### Accession
PXD037342

### Title
P bodies coat germ granules to promote transgenerational gene silencing in C. elegans

### Description
Formation of biomolecular condensates have emerged as a critical mechanism for compartmentation in living cells. Despite interactions between distinct condensates have been reported, the biological relevance of such interactions remains elusive. In germ cells, small RNA silencing factors are enriched in germ granules, which distinct factors are organized into sub-compartments with specific functions linked to genome surveillance or transgenerational gene silencing. Here we showed that perinuclear germ granules are coated by P body, another condensate known for housing untranslated mRNAs and mRNA degradation factors. Disruption of P body factors, including CGH-1/DDX6 and CAR-1/LSM14, lead to dispersal of small RNA factors from perinuclear germ granules and disorganization of sub-compartments within germ granules. We further showed that CAR-1 promote the interactions between CGH-1 with germ granule factors and such interactions are critical for CGH-1’s ability to promote piRNA-mediated gene silencing. Importantly, we observed that cgh-1 mutants are competent in triggering gene silencing but exhibit defects in maintaining gene silencing effects in the subsequent generations. Small RNA sequencing further showed that cgh-1 mutants exhibit defects in amplifying secondary small RNAs, a known carrier of gene silencing memory. Together, our results uncover the function of P body factors in small RNA-mediated transgenerational gene silencing and highlight how the formation and function of one condensate can be regulated by an adjacent, interacting condensate in cells.

### Sample Protocol
The samples were subjected to SDS PAGE gel electrophoresis experiments, and gel slices were subjected to in-gel digestion with Trypsin (Promega) at 37°C overnight. Purified peptides were desalted using a C18 Stage Tip column (Pierce), concentrated and dried. Then the peptides are reconstituted with 0.1% formic acid aqueous solution for subsequent liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis using a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a nanoliter flow rate Easy-nLC 1200 chromatography system (Thermo Scientific). The buffers used in the liquid chromatography separation consisted of buffer A [0.1% formic acid]and buffer B [80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid]. The liquid chromatography separation was achieved by linear gradient elution at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The related liquid phase gradient was as follows: 0-3minutes, linear gradient ofliquid B from 2% to 8%; 3-43minutes,linear gradient of liquid B from 8% to 28%; 43-51minutes, linear gradient of liquid B from 28% to 40%; 51-52minutes, linear gradient of liquid B from 40% to 100%; 52-60minutes, linear gradient of liquid B maintained at 100%. The Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer was used in the data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. The full scan survey mass spectrometry analysis was performed as detection mode of positive ion, analysis time of 60 minutes, scan range of 350-1800 m/z, resolution of 60,000 at m/z 20, AGC target of 3e6, and maximum injection time (IT) of 50ms. The 20 highest intensity precursor ions were analyzed by the secondary mass spectrometry (MS2) with resolution of 15,000 at m/z 200, AGC target of 1e5, and maximum IT of 25ms, activation type of HCD, isolation window of 1.6 m/z, and normalized collision energy of 28.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometry data were analyzed using MaxQuant 1.6.1.0 and used the database from Uniprot Protein Database (species: Caenorhabditis elegans).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rnai inheritance, P body, Cgh-1, Germ granule

### Affiliations
Huazhong University of Science and Technology

### Submitter
Donglei Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Donglei Zhang
Huazhong University of Science and Technology


