### Accession
PXD007933

### Title
Ricin-Like Proteins from the Castor Plant Do Not Influence Liquid Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry Detection of Ricin in Forensically Relevant Samples

### Description
The toxic protein ricin (also known as RCA60), found in the seed of the castor plant (Ricinus communis) is frequently encountered in law enforcement investigations. The ability to detect ricin by analyzing its proteolytic (tryptic) peptides by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) is well established. However, ricin is just one member of a family of proteins in R. communis with closely related amino acid sequences, including R. communis agglutinin I (RCA120) and other ricin-like proteins (RLPs). Inferring the presence of ricin from its constituent peptides requires an understanding of the specificity, or uniqueness to ricin, of each peptide. Here we describe the set of ricin-derived tryptic peptides that can serve to uniquely identify ricin in distinction to closely-related RLPs and to proteins from other species. Other ricin-derived peptide sequences occur only in the castor plant, and still others are shared with unrelated species. We also characterized the occurrence and relative abundance of ricin and related proteins in an assortment of forensically relevant crude castor seed preparations. We find that whereas ricin and RCA120 are abundant in castor seed extracts, other RLPs are not represented by abundant unique peptides. Therefore, the detection of peptides shared between ricin and RLPs (other than RCA120) in crude castor seed extracts most likely reflects the presence of ricin in the sample.

### Sample Protocol
We used four different methods to prepare crude castor seed extracts in this study, which we designate M0, M1, M2, and M4. M0 consisted simply of mashing the seeds, including the seed coat, to a semi-uniform consistency. M1 involves soaking the seeds in sodium hydroxide solution, removing and discarding the seed coats, and then grinding the peeled seeds. M2 entails washing the product from M1 with acetone. M3 and M4 are protein precipitation methods using magnesium sulfate or acetone as the precipitant, respectively. Aliquots of each crude castor preparation (25-30 mg) were weighed in microcentrifuge tubes, and ground with a micropestle in 500 µL of PBS pH 7.4 containing 0.01% Tween-20. Samples were then centrifuged and the resulting aqueous layer was pipetted to a new microcentrifuge tube. Urea was added to a final concentration of ~8 M and DTT was added to a final concentration of 5 mM. The samples were then incubated at 37 °C for 60 minutes and allowed to cool. Iodoacetamide (Thermo Scientific) was added to a final concentration of 15 mM, and the samples were incubated in the dark at 37 °C for 60 minutes. The samples were then diluted 10-fold with ammonium bicarbonate buffer (100 mM, pH ~8) and calcium chloride was added to a final concentration of 1 mM. Trypsin was added in a ratio of 1 µg of trypsin to 50 µg protein in sample. Samples were digested overnight at 30 °C with gentle shaking. After digestion, samples were acidified with 0.1% final concentration trifluoroacetic and desalted by solid phase extraction with Strata C-18 cartridges on a vacuum manifold. Cartridges were conditioned with 1 mL methanol and equilibrated with 1 mL of 0.1% TFA. Sample was applied to the column, and the cartridge washed with 1 mL of 0.1% TFA /5% ACN. Peptides were eluted from the cartridge with 1 mL of 0.1% TFA /80% ACN. Samples were concentrated by vacuum centrifugation, assayed for total protein content by the BCA assay, diluted to 0.01 µg/µL with HPLC-grade water or 94.95% HPLC water, 4.95% ACN, 0.1% formic acid, and transferred to vials for LC-MS/MS analysis.Peptides were separated on a Waters NanoAcquity dual pump LC system. The fused silica capillary column consisted of a trapping column (4 cm x 150 µm inner diameter) and an analytical column (70 cm x 75 µm inner diameter, 360 µm outer diameter). The columns were packed in-house with Jupiter C18 media (5 µm particle size for the trapping column, 3 µm particle size for the analytical column) using 1-cm sol-gel stabilized glass fiber frits for retention of the stationary phase medium. Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water. Mobile phase B consisted of 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. The injection volume was 5 µL (at 0.01 µg/µL peptide concentration) with a flow rate of 3 µL/min. The flow rate for the analytical column was 300 nL/min. The gradient program was: 0 min, 2% B; 2 min, 8% B; 20 min, 12% B; 75 min, 30% B; 97 min, 45% B; 100 min, 95% B; 110 min, 95% B; 115 min, 1% B; 150 min, 1% B. The LC was interfaced to either a Thermo Q Exactive Plus or Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer by a home-built nano-electrospray ionization source using etched fused silica capillary emitters. The electrospray voltage was 2.3 kV and the ion transfer tube temperature was 325 °C. Data were collected for 100 minutes, starting 15 minutes after the beginning of the chromatographic gradient. Both precursor and MS/MS spectra were collected in the Orbitrap mass analyzer to yield high-resolution MS/MS spectra. On the Q Exactive Plus precursor spectra were acquired at 35,000 resolution (mass resolving power) for precursor spectra and MS/MS spectra at 17,500 resolution. On the Q Exactive HF, the resolution settings were 60,000 for precursor spectra and 15,000 for MS/MS spectra. For data-dependent acquisition of MS/MS scans, the twelve highest-intensity precursors were selected with the following parameters: repeat count, 1; exclusion time, 30 s; isolation window, 2.0 Da; normalized collision energy, 30 (higher energy C-trap dissociation mode).

### Data Protocol
Database searches were conducted using MS-GF+ as implemented in PNNL’s PRISM data management system using the following parameters: precursor mass tolerance, ±20 ppm; isotope error range, -1 to 1; semitryptic digestion rules; minimum peptide length 6; maximum peptide length 50; fragmentation method, HCD; and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residue as a static modification and methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. Precursor masses were recalibrated after data acquisition but prior to MS-GF+ search using the DTARefinery software, resulting in an average mass measurement error of -2.3 ppm (-0.5 ppm for filter-passing peptide spectrum matches). The searched database consisted of the R. communis proteome database from UniProt plus a set of common laboratory contaminants (human skin keratins, trypsin, common laboratory reagent proteins, etc.) The results files in mzML format were downloaded from PRISM and converted to a tab-separated value format using the MzIDToTsv utility of the command-line implementation of MS-GF+ with the “-unroll 0” option. We controlled the false discovery rate for detected peptides to approximately 1% by retaining only those peptide-spectrum matches with an MS-GF+ spectral probability value less than 1.8x10-10 and mass measurement errors between -10 ppm and 10 ppm. An additional database search using the Sequest HT algorithm and the Percolator post-processing algorithm as implemented in Thermo Scientific’s Proteome Discoverer software yielded qualitatively similar results. For simplicity, we present only the MS-GF+ results. Custom R scripts were employed to filter peptide-spectrum matches, count the number of ricin-derived peptides for each sample type, and determine the list of RLP-specific peptides and their presence in our datasets. A small number of spectra had two (very similar) peptide-spectrum matches with equal scores. These spectra were disregarded. Spectra and extracted ion chromatograms of peptides of interest were examined further in Skyline.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Forensics, Ricin-like proteins, Ricin, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory

### Submitter
Owen Leiser

### Lab Head
Dr Karen Wahl
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory


