### Accession
PXD028088

### Title
Unsupervised mining of HLA-I peptidomes reveals unsuspected false positives and new binding motifs

### Description
Modern antigen vaccine designs and studies of human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-mediated immune responses rely heavily on the knowledge of HLA allele-specific binding motifs and computational prediction of antigen-HLA binding affinity. Breakthroughs in HLA peptidomics have considerably expanded the databases of natural HLA antigens and enabled detailed characterizations of antigen-HLA binding specificity. However, cautions must be made when analyzing HLA peptidomics data because identified peptides may be contaminants or may weakly bind to the HLA molecules. Here, a hybrid de novo peptide sequencing approach was applied to large-scale mono-allelic HLA peptidomics datasets to uncover new antigens and refine current knowledge of HLA binding motifs. Up to 12-40% contaminations in the form of tryptic peptides were identified in the peptidomics data of HLA alleles whose binding motifs do not involve an arginine or a lysine at the C-terminus. Thousands of these peptides were reported in a community database as positive antigens and might be erroneously used to train prediction models. Furthermore, unsupervised clustering of identified antigens not only revealed additional binding motifs for several HLA class I alleles but also effectively isolated outliers which were confirmed to be false positives in a binding experiment. Overall, our findings expanded the knowledge of HLA binding specificity and indicated that a more careful HLA peptidomics data interpretation protocol is needed to ensure the high quality of community antigen databases.

### Sample Protocol
B-lymphoblastoid cell line (BLCL1408-1038) expressing HLA-A*01:01, HLA-B*08:01, HLA-C*07:01, HLA-DPA1*01:03, HLA-DPB1*04:01/02:01, HLADQA1*05:01/05:01, HLA-DQB1*02:01/02:01, and HLADRB1*03:01/03:01 was purchased from Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Washington, USA. Cells were cultured in RPMI 1640 media supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, 50 U/ml penicillin in a humidified incubator at 37C with 5% CO2. Purified pan HLA-A, -B, -C and pan HLA-DR, -DP, -DQ antibodies were generated from W6/32 (ATCC, USA) and IVA12 (provided by the lab of Professor Anthony Purcell, Monash University, Australia) hybridoma cells cultured in RPMI 1640 media supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, 50 U/ml penicillin and expanded in roller bottles at 37C with 5% CO2. Secreted monoclonal antibodies were harvested from spent media and purified using Protein A resin with ÄKTA purification system (Cytiva, USA).  Immunoprecipitation of HLA class I and class II complexes  BLCL1408-1038 cell pellets (1 x 108) were pulverised using an MM400 Retsch Mixer Mill (Retsch, Germany) and lysed with 0.1% IGEPAL CA-630, 100 mM Tris, 300 mM NaCl, pH 8.0 Complete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche, Switzerland). The supernatant was passed through a Protein G resin pre-column (500 L) to remove non-specific binding materials. HLA class I and II immunoaffinity purification was performed as previously described30. Briefly, the pre-cleared supernatant was incubated with 10 mg of pan HLA-A, -B, and -C antibodies or 10 mg of pan HLA-DR, -DP, and -DQ antibodies coupled to Protein G resin with rotation overnight at 4C. After conjugation, the resins were washed with 10 ml of ice-cold wash buffer 1 (0.005% IGEPAL, 50 mM Tris, pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA), 10 ml of ice-cold wash buffer 2 (50 mM Tris, pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl), and 10 ml of ice-cold wash buffer 3 (50 mM Tris, pH 8.0, 450 mM NaCl). Bound complexes were eluted from the column using 5 column volumes of 10% acetic acid. Eluted peptides were fractionated by reverse-phase high-performance liquid chromatography (Shimadzu, Japan) on a 4.6 mm diameter Chromolith SpeedROD RP-18 (Merck, USA). The optimized conditions were as follows: mobile phase A (0.05% v/v TFA, 2.5% v/v ACN in water), mobile phase B (0.045% v/v TFA, 90% v/v ACN in water), flow rate of 1 mL/minute, temperature of 30C, and injection volume of 200 L. The elution program was set as follows: 0-5% of mobile phase B over 1 minute, 5-15% of mobile phase B over 4 minutes, 15-45% of mobile phase B over 30 minutes, 45-100% of mobile phase B over 15 minutes, and 100% of mobile phase B over 4 minutes. Fractions were collected in 1 mL each. Consecutive fractions were pooled into 6 fractions for HLA class I and 8 fractions for HLA class II. Pooled fractions were concentrated by vacuum centrifugation and reconstituted in 0.1% FA.  LC-MS/MS analysis of HLA peptidome  Eleven pooled peptide fractions were analyzed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). Peptide samples were separated at a flow rate of 300 L/minute of buffer B (80% ACN, 0.1% FA). The gradient was set at 4-20% of buffer B over 30 minutes, 20-28% of buffer B over 40 minutes, 28-40% of buffer B over 5 minutes, 40-95% of buffer B over 3 minutes, washing with 95% of buffer B over 8 minutes, re-equilibration with buffer A (2% ACN/0.1% FA) over 5 minutes

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra resolutions were set at 70,000 for full MS scans and 17,500 for MS/MS scans. The normalized collision energy for HCD fragmentation was set at 30%. The m/z scan range was set at 350-1,400. Dynamic exclusion was set at 15 seconds. For HLA class I samples, the maximum injection times were set at 120 ms for full MS scan and 120 ms for MS/MS scans. Precursor ions with charge states +2, +3, +4, and +5 were accepted. For HLA class II samples,  the maximum injection times were set at 200 ms for full MS scan and 120 ms for MS/MS scans. Precursor ions with charge states +2, +3, +4, +5, and +6 were accepted.  Collection of published HLA class I peptidomics and antigen data  A combined dataset of mass spectrometry raw data of mono-allelic HLA class I peptidomes (399 raw files, 88 HLA alleles) were obtained from two prior studies8,17 (MSV000080527 and MSV000084172). List of reported antigen-HLA pairs were obtained from the Immune Epitope Database15 (IEDB, downloaded December 2020), the HLA Ligand Atlas31 (downloaded June 2020), and from peptidomics analyses of multi-allelic patient samples8,32. It should be noted that these recent studies of patient samples not only reported new data but also provided compilations of multi-allelic peptidomics data from earlier studies.  Peptide sequencing of MS/MS data  For de novo peptide sequencing with SMSNet20, MS/MS spectra and precursor masses were extracted from raw MS files using ProteoWizard33 with the following parameters: Peak Picking = Vendor for MS1 and MS2, Zero Samples = Remove for MS2, MS Level = 2-2, and the default Title Maker. Charge state deconvolution was not performed. The SMSNet-M model which treats carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine as variable modification was used. Target amino acid-level false discovery rate was set at 5%. Precursor mass tolerance of 30 ppm was applied to discard identified peptides with high mass deviations. Partially identified peptides were searched against a UniProt34 reference human proteome (downloaded August 2020) and a GRCh38 RefSeq35

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hla-i, Smsnet, Peptidome

### Affiliations
Center of Excellence in Systems Biology, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University, Pathum Wan, Bangkok, Thailand 10330
Chulalongkorn university

### Submitter
Poorichaya Somparn

### Lab Head
Dr Poorichaya somparn
Center of Excellence in Systems Biology, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University, Pathum Wan, Bangkok, Thailand 10330


