### Accession
PXD019008

### Title
Discovery of biomarker candidates associated with the risk of short- and long-term relapse after infliximab withdrawal in Crohns patients: a proteomics-based study

### Description
Objective: A subset of Crohns disease (CD) patients experiences long-term remission after infliximab withdrawal. Biomarkers are needed to identify those patients.Design: New biomarkers of relapse were searched in the baseline serum of CD patients stopping infliximab when they were under combined therapy (antimetabolite and infliximab) and stable clinical remission (STORI cohort, n=102). From shotgun proteomics experiment (discovery step), biomarker candidates were identified and further targeted by selected reaction monitoring (verification step). The dataset was stratified to search for markers of short- (<6 months) or long-term relapse (>6 months). The risk of relapse and the predicting capacity associated with biomarker candidates were evaluated using univariate Cox model and log-rank statistic, respectively. To test their complementary predicting capacity, biomarker candidates were systematically combined in pairs. Results: Distinct biomarker candidates were associated with the risk (hazard ratio: HR) of short- (15 proteins, 2.9<HR<16.1, p<0.05) and long-term (17 proteins, 2<HR<4.4, p<0.05) relapse, they reflect different pathophysiological processes. In stratified and non-stratified datasets, novel marker combinations exhibited a high predicting capacity as shown by their higher Z-scores (FDR<0.001) than CRP and faecal calprotectin (current references in predicting relapse). Conclusion: We identified for the first time circulating biomarker candidates associated with the risk of long-term relapse in CD patients stopping infliximab. We also highlight a sequence of pathophysiological processes leading to relapse, this could help to better understand the disease progression. Our findings may pave the way for a better non-invasive evaluation of the risk of relapse when contemplating anti-TNFα withdrawal in CD patients.

### Sample Protocol
The serum samples were collected during the STORI clinical trial described previously (doi:10.1053/J.GASTRO.2011.09.034).  An identical volume of each serum sample (n=102) were mixed in 7 and 6 pools of non-relapsers (NR) and relapsers (R) patients, respectively. These sample pools were depleted of the 20 most abundant proteins of human plasma (ProteoPrepTM 20 Plasma kit, Sigma, USA) as previously described (doi:10.1016/J.EUPROT.2015.07.009). The protein concentration was determined using the RCDC Protein Assay Kit (BioRad, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Total protein (20 µg) was precipitated using the 2D-clean up assay (GE Healthcare, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Then, samples were reduced, alkylated and digested as previously described (doi:10.1016/J.JPROT.2010.06.003). Finally, 3.5 µg of the protein digests were purified on ZipTip C18 (Merck, USA), dried in a vacuum centrifuge and stored at -20 C°. The dried samples were reconstituted using 100 mM ammonium formate adjusted to pH 10. Each sample was spiked with a commercial mixture of protein digest standards, the MassPREP™ Digestion Standard Mixture (MPDSmix, Waters, USA). The MPDSmix contains four non-human proteins digested: yeast alcohol dehydrogenase 1 (ADH1, P00330), bovine serum albumin (BSA, P02769), yeast enolase 1 (ENO1, P00924), rabbit glycogen phosphorylase b (GPB, P00489). To check the quality of the instrumental set-up, two different concentrations of MPDSmix (MPDSmix 1 and MPDSmix 2) were spiked in the R and NR pools. The sample pools were analysed on a 2D-nanoAquity UPLC chromatography (Waters) coupled online with the Q-TOF Synapt HDMSTM G2 instrumental system (Waters) using ion mobility as supplementary separation.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using ProteinLynx Global SERVERTM (PLGS) 3.01 (Waters). The processing parameters were set as follows: the MS TOF resolution and the chromatographic peak width were set to automatic, the low and elevated energy detection threshold were set to respectively 15 and 150 counts, the identification intensity threshold was 500 counts and the lock mass window at 785.84206 m/z was set to 0.3 Da. Proteins were searched in the Uniprot-human database (reviewed entries, with insoforms, release 2014_10) enriched with the 4 proteins of the MPDSmix. The search parameters were set as follows: carbamidomethylation (C) as fixed modification, oxidation (M) and phosphorylation (S, T, Y) as variable modifications, maximum 2 miscleavages, minimum 3 fragments ion matches per peptide, minimum 7 fragments ion matches per protein, minimum 2 peptides per protein and a false discovery rate (FDR) of 4% for protein identification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Relapse prediction, Serum, Crohn’s disease

### Affiliations
GIGA-R - Translational Gastroenterology, Liège University
University Hopital of Liege(CHU of Liege)  and Translational gastroenterology laboratory, GIGA institute, University of Liege (Uliege)

### Submitter
nicolas Pierre

### Lab Head
Dr Edouard LOUIS
University Hopital of Liege(CHU of Liege)  and Translational gastroenterology laboratory, GIGA institute, University of Liege (Uliege)


