### Accession
PXD007045

### Title
PafA AEBSF-2 -  Identification of Serine 119 as an Effective Inhibitor Binding Site of M

### Description
Identified AEBSF binding site of PafA by LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Sample Protocol
PafA (0.5 μM) was incubated with AEBSF (0.5 mM) for 1 h in pupylation buffer at 23 ℃.Samples were analyzed by SDS-PAGE, followed by Coomassie brilliant blue (CBB) staining.Bands excised from protein gels were destained by incubation in the mixture of 25mM NH4HCO3 and 50% acetonitrile. After destained, the gel pieces were reduced by incubation in a solution of 10 mM DTT at 60°C for 20 min，followed by alkylating in a solution of 25 mM iodacetamide（IAM）at room temperature for 15 min. The pieces were digested in-gel with trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) overnight at 37°C. The produced peptides were extracted with 60% acetonitrile containing 5% formic acid and 100% acetonitrile successively, dried by SpeedVac, and was re-dissolved in 2% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were extracted, charge state deconvoluted and deisotoped by Compass Data Analysis version 4.1 (Bruker Daltonics). The peak list was directly generated from raw data using centroid algorithm with peak width set as 0.1 m/z and intensity above 100. No peak smooth or filter process was applied. After the charge states were calculated, the de-isotoped. peak list was exported as mgf file for further mascot search. Mascot (version 2.4, Matrix Science) was set up to search Mycobacterium tuberculosis H37Rv (2,118 sequences) database. The following parameters were considered for the searches: peptide mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm, fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.05 Da, and a maximum of two missed cleavage of trypsin was chosen. Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as fixed modification, and oxidation (M), were set as variable modifications. For modification of AEBSF（4-(2-aminoethyl)benzenesulfonyl fluoride hydrochlorideanalysis）,+183.0354 Da was set as a variable modiﬁcation on serine.

### Publication Abstract
Owing to the spread of multidrug resistance (MDR) and extensive drug resistance (XDR), there is a pressing need to identify potential targets for the development of more-effective anti-M. tuberculosis (Mtb) drugs. PafA, as the sole Prokaryotic Ubiquitin-like Protein ligase in the Pup-proteasome System (PPS) of Mtb, is an attractive drug target. Here, we show that the activity of purified Mtb PafA is significantly inhibited upon the association of AEBSF (4-(2-aminoethyl) benzenesulfonyl fluoride) to PafA residue Serine 119 (S119). Mutation of S119 to amino acids that resemble AEBSF has similar inhibitory effects on the activity of purified Mtb PafA. Structural analysis reveals that although S119 is distant from the PafA catalytic site, it is located at a critical position in the groove where PafA binds the C-terminal region of Pup. Phenotypic studies demonstrate that S119 plays critical roles in the function of Mtb PafA when tested in M. smegmatis. Our study suggests that targeting S119 is a promising direction for developing an inhibitor of M. tuberculosis PafA.

### Keywords
Pafa aebsf

### Affiliations
Shanghai Center for Systems Biomedicine  Shanghai Jiao Tong University
shanghai jiaotong university 

### Submitter
jiang hewei

### Lab Head
Dr Sheng-ce Tao
Shanghai Center for Systems Biomedicine  Shanghai Jiao Tong University


