### Accession
PXD025401

### Title
Quantitative proteomics upon CARP3 knock down in Trypanosoma brucei bloodstream forms

### Description
How flagellar signaling regulates the host interaction of parasites remains a challenge due to poor conservation of signaling systems with those in cilia of higher organisms. The trypanosome-specific cAMP response protein 3 (CARP3) shows developmentally regulated localization at the flagellar tip membrane, where it is essential for parasite swarming and colonization of the tsetse fly insect vector. This project describes a label-free, quantitative proteomics approach that identifies proteins changing in abundance upon inducible CARP3 knock down in bloodstream stage Trypanosoma brucei.

### Sample Protocol
3 × 107 T. brucei MiTat 1.2 13-90 bloodstream stage cells with tetracycline-inducible CARP3 RNAi knock-down were induced or not with 5 µg/mL tetracycline for 24 h (n = 4 replicates). Cell lysis, protein digestion, peptide purification and MS/MS analysis were performed as described by Humphrey et al. (Humphrey et al., 2018). Purified peptides were injected in an RSLCnano system (Thermo) and separated in a 25-cm analytical Aurora C18 nanocolumn (75 μm ID 120 Å, 1.6 μm, Ion Opticks) with a 120-min gradient from 4 to 40% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. The effluent from the HPLC was directly electrosprayed into a Q Exactive HF (Thermo), operated in data dependent mode to automatically switch between full scan MS and MS/MS acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (from m/z 375–1600) were acquired with resolution R = 60000 at m/z 400 (AGC target of 3x106). The ten most intense peptide ions with charge states between 3 and 5 were sequentially isolated to a target value of 1x105 and fragmented at 27% normalized collision energy. Typical mass spectrometric conditions were: spray voltage, 1.5 kV; no sheath and auxiliary gas flow; heated capillary temperature, 250°C; ion selection threshold, 33000 counts.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification (LFQ) was performed using MaxQuant version 1.6.10.43 (Cox and Mann, 2008) with the following parameters: Database, TriTrypDB-46_TbruceiTREU927_AnnotatedProteins; MS tol, 10 ppm; MS/MS tol, 20 ppm; Peptide FDR, 0.1; Protein FDR, 0.01 Min. peptide Length, 5; Variable modifications, Oxidation (M); Fixed modifications, Carbamidomethyl (C); Peptides for protein quantitation, razor and unique; Min. peptides, 1; Min. ratio count, 2. Statistical analysis was performed using Perseus 1.6.7.0 (Tyanova et al., 2016) with the following workflow: Peptides only identified by site, reverse hits or potential contaminants were filtered out. Only proteins that were identified in at least three of the four non-induced replicate samples were considered for further analysis. The LFQ values of the remaining proteins were log2 transformed and missing values were replaced from normal distribution. Statistical significance was evaluated with a two-sided Student’s t-test with FDR ≤ 0.05 and s0 = 0.1.

### Publication Abstract
Signaling from ciliary microdomains controls developmental processes in metazoans. Trypanosome transmission requires development and migration in the tsetse vector alimentary tract. Flagellar cAMP signaling has been linked to parasite social motility (SoMo) in vitro, yet uncovering control of directed migration in fly organs is challenging. Here we show that the composition of an adenylate cyclase (AC) complex in the flagellar tip microdomain is essential for tsetse salivary gland (SG) colonization and SoMo. Cyclic AMP response protein 3 (CARP3) binds and regulates multiple AC isoforms. CARP3 tip localization depends on the cytoskeletal protein FLAM8. Re-localization of CARP3 away from the tip microdomain is sufficient to abolish SoMo and fly SG colonization. Since intrinsic development is normal in carp3 and flam8 knock-out parasites, AC complex-mediated tip signaling specifically controls parasite migration and thereby transmission. Participation of several developmentally regulated receptor-type AC isoforms may indicate the complexity of the in vivo signals perceived.

### Keywords
Adenylate cyclase, Camp response protein, Carp3, Cyclase-interacting protein

### Affiliations
Biomedical Center-LMU
Biocenter, Faculty of Biology, Genetics Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich (LMU)  82152 Martinsried, Germany

### Submitter
Ignasi Forne

### Lab Head
Dr Boshart, Michael
Biocenter, Faculty of Biology, Genetics Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich (LMU)  82152 Martinsried, Germany


