### Accession
PXD009179

### Title
A proteomics of gills approach to understanding salinity adaptation of Scylla paramamosain

### Description
Scylla paramamosain (Crustacea) is a commercially important euryhaline species distributed along the coast of southern China and other Indo-Pacific countries. However, a sudden variation in salinity will cause injury or even death of S. paramamosain. In this paper, we simulated a sudden decrease in salinity due to heavy precipitation in crab ponds. Comparison of gill microstructures of individuals in the control group and decreased salinity group showed gills became shorter and thicker, while the top of the filaments became swollen and then returned to normal after 120 h. A total of 3962 proteins were identified by proteomic sequencing of gills after 120 h under conditions of decreased salinity. 845 proteins were differentially expressed proteins: 371 up-regulated and 474 down-regulated. Of the enriched KEGG pathways, 20 were up-regulated and 14 were down-regulation (p<0.05). Among the significantly enriched up-regulated pathways, six were associated with amino acid metabolism and three were associated with Na+-K+-ATPase enzymatic activities. Pathways associated with redox metabolism and energy metabolism were identified. These results showed that in response to a decrease in salinity, S. paramamosain could adapt to the environment after 120 h. Molecular mechanism of this adaptation involved amino acid metabolism and Na+-K+-ATPase ion transport. Meanwhile, energy metabolism and redox metabolism were critical to the adaptation to a sudden decrease in salinity. This study, for the first time at the protein level, revealed the molecular mechanisms underlying salinity adaption of S. paramamosain and provides theoretical guidelines for the cultivation of S. paramamosain and other marine crustaceans.

### Sample Protocol
Crabs and tissue preparation；Hematoxylin and eosin (HE) staining；Protein extraction；Quality control；Protein digestion；Peptide labeling；Peptide fractionation；HPLC and mass spectrometer detection；

### Data Protocol
Crabs and tissue preparation；Hematoxylin and eosin (HE) staining：he gills were set in paraffin and sliced into sections with a thickness of 5–10 μm. Then, the sections were de-waxed using xylene and rehydrated in an ethanol series. Sections were stained with HE (Invitrogen Corporation, Carlsbad, CA, USA)；Protein extraction：Total protein was extracted with lysis buffer 3 (8 M urea, 40 mM Tris-HCl or triethylamonium bicarbonate, pH 8.5) containing 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride and 2 mM ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (final concentration).；Protein quantitation by the Bradford method；Sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE)；Protein digestion：The protein solution (100 µg) with 8 M urea was serially diluted four times with 100 mM triethylamonium bicarbonate；Peptide labeling：The peptides were dissolved in 30 µL of 0.5 M triethylamonium bicarbonate with vortexing. After recovery to an ambient temperature, the ITRAQ labeling reagents were transferred and combined with the appropriate samples；Peptide fractionation：The peptides were separated on an LC-20AB high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) system (Shimadzu Corporation, Kyoto, Japan) coupled with a high pH reverse-phase column and reconstituted with 2 mL of buffer A (5% acetonitrile [ACN], 95% H2O, adjusted to pH 9.8 with ammonia) and loaded onto a column containing 5-μm particles (Phenomenex). The peptides were separated at a flow rate of 1 mL/min with a gradient of 5% buffer B (5% H2O, 95% ACN, adjusted to pH 9.8 with ammonia) for 10 min, 5%–35% buffer B for 40 min, and 35%–95% buffer B for 1 min. The system was then maintained in 95% buffer B for 3 min and decreased to 5% within 1 min before equilibrating with 5% buffer B for 10 min. Elution was monitored by measuring absorbance at 214 nm and fractions were collected every 1 min. The eluted peptides were pooled as 20 fractions and vacuum-dried. HPLC and mass spectrometer detection；The peptides separated with the nanoHPLC system were subjected to tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) using the Q Exactive™ Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) for data-dependent acquisition detection by nano-electrospray ionization. The parameters for MS analysis were as follows: electrospray voltage, 1.6 kV; precursor scan range, 350–1600 m/z at a resolution of 70,000 in Orbitrap; MS/MS fragment scan range, >100 m/z at a resolution of 17,500 in HCD mode; normalized collision energy setting, 27%; dynamic exclusion time, 15 s; automatic gain control for the full MS and MS2 targets, 3e6 and 1e5, respectively; number of MS/MS scans following one MS scan, 20 most abundant precursor ions above a threshold ion count of 20,000.

### Publication Abstract
Scylla paramamosain (Crustacea) is a commercially important euryhaline species distributed along the coast of southern China and other Indo-Pacific countries. However, a sudden variation in salinity will cause injury or even death to S. paramamosain. In this paper, we simulated a sudden decrease in salinity due to heavy precipitation in crab ponds. Comparison of gill microstructures of individuals in the control group and decreased salinity group showed gills became shorter and thicker, while the top of the filaments became swollen and then returned to normal after 120&#x202f;h. A total of 3962 proteins were identified by proteomic sequencing of gills after 120&#x202f;h under conditions of decreased salinity. 845 proteins were differentially expressed: 371 up-regulated and 474 down-regulated. Of the enriched KEGG pathways, 20 were up-regulated and 14 were down-regulation (P&#x202f;&lt;&#x202f;0.05). Among the significantly enriched up-regulated pathways, six were associated with amino acid metabolism and three were associated with Na<sup>+</sup>-K<sup>+</sup>-ATPase enzymatic activities. Pathways associated with redox metabolism and energy metabolism were identified. These results showed that in response to a decrease in salinity, S. paramamosain could adapt to the environment after 120&#x202f;h. Molecular mechanism of this adaptation involved amino acid metabolism and Na<sup>+</sup>-K<sup>+</sup>-ATPase ion transport. Meanwhile, energy metabolism and redox metabolism were critical to the adaptation to a sudden decrease in salinity. This study, for the first time at the protein level, revealed the molecular mechanisms underlying salinity adaption of S. paramamosain and provides theoretical guidelines for the cultivation of S. paramamosain and other marine crustaceans.

### Keywords
Gill, Itraq protein profile, Scylla paramamosain, Adaptive mechanism, Sudden decrease in salinity

### Affiliations
Key Laboratory of Applied Marine Biotechnology, Ministry of Education, Ningbo University, Ningbo 315211, Zhejiang, China
honglingwei

### Submitter
wang huan

### Lab Head
Dr Chunlin Wang
Key Laboratory of Applied Marine Biotechnology, Ministry of Education, Ningbo University, Ningbo 315211, Zhejiang, China


