### Accession
PXD023143

### Title
Immunopeptidome of isolated patient- derived hepatocytes in Hepatitis B viral infection and hepatocellular carcinoma

### Description
Objective: Antigen-specific immunotherapy is a promising strategy to treat hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection and (HBV-related) hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). To facilitate killing of malignant and/or infected hepatocytes, it is vital to know which T cell targets are presented by HLA-I complexes on patient-derived hepatocytes. Here, we aimed to reveal the hepatocyte-specific HLA-I peptidome with emphasis on peptides derived from HBV proteins and tumor associated antigens (TAAs) to guide development of antigen-specific immunotherapy. Design: Primary human hepatocytes were isolated with high purity from (HBV infected) non-tumor and HCC tissues using a newly designed perfusion-free procedure. Subsequently, hepatocyte-derived HLA-bound peptides were identified by mass spectrometry after which source proteins were subjected to gene ontology and pathway analysis. Finally, all HBV-antigen and TAA-derived HLA-peptides were extracted and a selection was tested for immunogenicity. Results: We acquired a high quality HLA-I peptidome of 2x105 peptides, of which source proteins were associated with hepatocyte function. Importantly, we demonstrated HLA-I presentation of HBV-derived and TAA-derived peptides for the first time in immune cell-depleted primary liver cell isolates. The peptidome included 8 HBV-derived peptides and 14 peptides from 8 known HCC-associated TAAs that were exclusively identified in tumor eluates. Of these, immunogenicity was demonstrated for 5 HBV-derived and 3 TAA-derived peptides. Conclusion: We present a first HLA-I immunopeptidome of isolated primary human hepatocytes, devoid of immune cells. Our results directly aid development of antigen-specific immunotherapy for HBV infection and HCC. Described methodology can also be applied to personalize immunotherapeutic treatment of liver diseases in the future.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation and LC-MS/MS data acquisition  HLA-I peptides were eluted from the beads with 500 µl 0.15% TFA at RT. This elution was repeated three times and eluates per sample were combined. The eluted HLA peptides were lyophilized and stored at -20C until mass spectrometry analysis. In order to separate HLA peptides from contaminating proteins, lyophilized peptides were first dissolved in 400 µl 0.1% TFA and then filtered using a 10 kD MWCO spin column (Amicon). The filtered peptide fraction was desalted using a 1 ml Sep-Pak column containing 10 mg C18 and 10 mg HLB resin that was prepared in-house. Peptides were eluted with 28% acetonitrile containing 0.1% TFA and the solvent was removed by vacuum centrifugation. Nanoflow liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (nLC-MS/MS) was performed on an EASY-nLC 1200 coupled to an Orbitrap Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) operating in positive mode. Peptide mixtures were trapped on a 2 cm x 100 μm Pepmap C18 column (ThermoFisher Scientific) and then separated on an in-house packed 50 cm x 75 μm capillary column with 1.9 μm Reprosil-Pur C18 beads (Dr. Maisch) at a flowrate of 250 nL/min, using a linear gradient of 032% acetonitrile (in 0.1% formic acid) during 2 h. Mass spectra were acquired from 375 to 1200 m/z in the Orbitrap at 120,000 resolution. Upon selection peptides were fragmented by HCD with a collision energy of 30% and MS/MS spectra were recorded in the Orbitrap at 30,000 resolution.

### Data Protocol
Bioinformatics analysis  Mass spectrometry data were analyzed with Peaks Studio v 10.5 (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc.) with the following parameters set: fragmentation mode: high energy CID (y and b ions); acquisition mode: DDA; MS Scan Mode and MS/MS Scan Mode: FT-ICR/Orbitrap; centroiding in MS/MS mode only; charge options 2-8. The PEAKS modules used were: 1) data refine, 2) de novo (parent mass error tolerance: 15 ppm; fragment mass error tolerance: 0.02 Da; enzyme: none); 3) Peaks (parent mass error tolerance: 15 ppm; fragment mass error tolerance: 0.02 Da; variable modifications: Oxidation (M) 15.99). The digest mode was set to unspecific (no enzyme), while the error tolerances for parent mass and fragment masses were 10.0 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Immunopeptidome, Hla peptides, Hla-i immunoprecipitation

### Affiliations
Proteomics Center, Erasmus MC
Proteomics Center, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Jeroen Demmers

### Lab Head
Dr Jeroen Demmers
Proteomics Center, Erasmus MC


