### Accession
PXD014574

### Title
Large-Scale Profiling of Protein Methylation

### Description
Develop a novel de-glyco-assisted methylation site identification (DOMAIN) strategy which enables straightforward, fast, and reproducible analysis of protein methylation in a proteome-wide manner. Combining multidimensional fractionation and multiprotease digestion, our method enabled the identification of 573 methylated forms in 270 proteins, including 311 new methylation forms, in A549 cells. Combining this technique with stable isotope labeling quantitative proteomics and RNA interference, we determined the differential regulation of several putative methylated sites that are related to the protein arginine N-methyltransferase 3 (PRMT3). Collectively, our integrated proteomics workflow for comprehensive mapping of methylation sites enables a better understanding of protein methylation, while providing a rapid and effective approach for global protein methylation analysis in biomedical research.

### Sample Protocol
Sample lysed in 9 M urea buffers with protease inhibitor cocktail.Lysates were sonicated three times at 15% power for 15 s each with intermittent cooling on ice, followed by centrifugation at 20000g for 15 min at room temperature. The supernatant was transferred into a new tube and measured concentration using the BCA Protein Assay kit (Solarbio). Subsequently, proteins were digested with multienzyme using the FASP protocol. After that, 100ug trypsin- digestion peptides was used to enrich methylation peptides through an at home HILIC-tip combined with sRP-stage-tip.

### Data Protocol
All raw MS files were processed with MaxQuant software suite version 1.5.2.8 supported by the Andromeda search engine.For global methylproteomics, three technical replicates were searched individually against the UniProt human proteome database (downloaded on March 7, 2017, encompassing 20180 protein sequence entries).Significantly enriched Gene Ontology terms were determined using the Functional Annotation Tool of the DAVID Bioinformatics database.Sequence motif analyses were performed using the Motif-X and iceLogo

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hydrophilic, Mutliprotease, Methylation, Lysarginase

### Affiliations
UW madison
University of Wisconsin-Madison

### Submitter
Min Ma

### Lab Head
Dr Lingjun Li
University of Wisconsin-Madison


