### Accession
PXD043328

### Title
Primary Cilia-Mediated Regulation of Microglial Secretion in Alzheimer's Disease

### Description
Proteomic approaches revealed that primary cilia, small hair-like structures found on cells, played a role in the regulation of microglial secretory function. Notably, primary cilia were transiently observed in less than 10% of microglia, and their presence was significantly reduced in microglia from Alzheimer's disease (AD) mice. We observed significant changes in the expression and distribution of secretomes after inhibiting the primary cilia gene intraflagellar transport particle 88 (Ift88) in microglia. Intriguingly, inhibiting primary cilia in the SEM of AD mice resulted in the expansion of extracellular amyloid plaques and damage to adjacent neurites. These results indicate that DAM-like microglia are present in the septumLS, a critical target region for hippocampal nerve bundles, and that the primary ciliary signaling system regulates microglial secretion, affecting extracellular proteostasis. Age-related primary ciliopathy probably contributes to the selective sensitivity of microglia, thereby exacerbating AD. To elucidate the dynamic changes in microglial proteomics resulting from silenced Ift88 and Aβ treatment, we performed an analysis of BV2 cell lysates and extracellular vesicles (EVs) by downregulating Ift88 expression. To investigate the specific proteomic alterations in EVs associated with CD63 and CD81, we conducted a proteomic characterization of CD63- or CD81-bound EVs in the lysate and EVs secreted from BV2 cells transfected with siIft88 and treated with Aβ, utilizing co-immunoprecipitation (Co-IP) with anti-CD63 or anti-CD81 antibodies.

### Sample Protocol
BV2 cells (kindly provided by Dr. Hoe, Hyang-Sook) were maintained in DMEM high glucose (Thermo Fisher) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and 1% penicillin/streptomycin (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Subculturing of the cells was performed every 3 days, and the cells were incubated at 37°C in a humidified atmosphere with 5% CO2. SiRNA transfection was conducted using Lipofectamine RNAiMAX Transfection Reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific). BV cells were transfected with 80 nM of mouse siIft88 or a negative control siRNA (Bioneer). The RNA sequence of the mouse siIft88 siRNA used was ACUGGGAGAGUUAUACGAU. Following siRNA transfection, BV2 cells were treated with a final concentration of 1 μM Aβ (1-42), pHrodo-Aβ (1-42), or 50 nM LysoTracker (Invitrogen).  The conditioned medium was collected from BV2 cells 24 hours after transfection with siIft88 or siCon and subsequent treatment with Aβ. EVs present in the conditioned medium were isolated using the ExoQuick® ULTRA EV Isolation Kit (SBI System Biosciences) following the manufacturer's instructions. The precipitated EVs were then resuspended in HBSS buffer for nanoparticle tracking analysis (NTA). For Co-IP (co-immunoprecipitation), EV pellets were resuspended in lysis buffer containing 1% Nonidet P-40 (Sigma-Aldrich), 50 mM Tris-HCl, 150 mM sodium chloride (pH 7.4), and Halt™ Protease and Phosphatase Inhibitor Single-Use Cocktail (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  Cells and EVs were lysed using a lysis buffer composed of 1% Nonidet P-40 (Sigma-Aldrich), 50 mM Tris-HCl, 150 mM sodium chloride (pH 7.4), and Halt™ Protease and Phosphatase Inhibitor Single-Use Cocktail (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The cell lysates were then subjected to immunoprecipitation by incubating them overnight at 4 °C with either anti-CD63 (Sicgen) or anti-CD81 (Novus) antibodies. Subsequently, the mixtures were incubated with Dynabeads Protein G (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 4 hours at room temperature. After several washes with PBST containing 0.01% Tween20 in PBS, the immunoprecipitated proteins bound to the beads were eluted using 2x sample buffer (BioRad) for subsequent western blot analysis, or the beads containing the binding proteins were directly analyzed using LCMS.  Protein samples and beads containing immunoprecipitated proteins were subjected to reduction by adding 2 μl of 500 mM DL-dithiothreitol and incubated for 30 minutes at 55°C. Alkylation was then accomplished by adding 4 μl of 500 mM iodoacetamide and incubating at room temperature in the dark for 20 minutes. Trypsin digestion was carried out overnight at 37°C using an enzyme/substrate ratio of 1:50. For label-free proteomics, the samples were purified using a PierceTM C18 spin column (Thermo Fisher Scientific), followed by vacuum drying and storage at -20°C until further use. Prior to analysis, the dried peptides were resuspended in 20 μl of 0.1% formic acid. Nano-liquid chromatography (UltiMate 3000, Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Q-Exactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was utilized for peptide analysis. All analyses utilized a binary solvent system comprising 0.1% formic acid in water and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. Peptide fractions were separated using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a PepMap 100 C18 LC column (#164535, Thermo Fisher Scientific) as a loading column, followed by a PepMap RSLC C18 (#ES903, Thermo Fisher Scientific) analytical column, at a flow rate of 0.3μl/min for a duration of 135 minutes. From 350 to 2000 m/z, a full scan MS with data-dependent MS/MS acquisition was performed.

### Data Protocol
The PD3.0 software (Thermo Fishser Scientific) was used to generate lists of identified peptides from subsequent LC-MS/MS analyses. Lists of identified peptides with a fold-change value and a p-value were exported as a text file. The text file was transferred to Jupyter environment with R kernel (version 4.3.0) and analyzed following the analysis workflow in the Differential Enrichment Analysis of Proteomics data (Zhang et al., 2018). An adjusted p-value less than 0.1 and an enrichment threshold greater than 0.25 were used as cut-off criteria. The abundance values of identified proteins were log-transformed and normalized according to the algorithms of PD3.0. A comparison of differentially expressed proteins between two types of experimental groups is shown in Venn diagrams (Gao et al., 2021).  The differential expression protein analysis was visualized in a volcano plot using ggplot2 package (Wickham, 2016). For further functional pathway enrichment analysis of the differentially expressed proteins, the Enrichr browser (https://maayanlab.cloud/Enrichr/) with Reactome, KEGG, and Gene Ontology datasets was employed. Cytoscape (version 3.9.1) (Shannon et al., 2003) was used to generate a network of these proteins by mapping protein data onto a PPI network. The network was constructed in Cytoscape’s public database section using the STRING database (Doncheva et al., 2019).

### Publication Abstract
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a brain disorder manifested by a gradual decline in cognitive function due to the accumulation of extracellular amyloid plaques, disruptions in neuronal substance transport, and the degeneration of neurons. In affected neurons, incomplete clearance of toxic proteins by neighboring microglia leads to irreversible brain inflammation, for which cellular signaling is poorly understood. Through single-cell transcriptomic analysis, we discovered distinct regional differences in the ability of microglia to clear damaged neurites. Specifically, microglia in the septal region of wild type mice exhibited a transcriptomic signature resembling disease-associated microglia (DAM). These lateral septum (LS)-enriched microglia were associated with dense axonal bundles originating from the hippocampus. Further transcriptomic and proteomic approaches revealed that primary cilia, small hair-like structures found on cells, played a role in the regulation of microglial secretory function. Notably, primary cilia were transiently observed in microglia, and their presence was significantly reduced in microglia from AD mice. We observed significant changes in the secretion and proteomic profiles of the secretome after inhibiting the primary cilia gene intraflagellar transport particle 88 (Ift88) in microglia. Intriguingly, inhibiting primary cilia in the septal microglia of AD mice resulted in the expansion of extracellular amyloid plaques and damage to adjacent neurites. These results indicate that DAM-like microglia are present in the LS, a critical target region for hippocampal nerve bundles, and that the primary ciliary signaling system regulates microglial secretion, affecting extracellular proteostasis. Age-related primary ciliopathy probably contributes to the selective sensitivity of microglia, thereby exacerbating AD. Targeting the primary ciliary signaling system could therefore be a viable strategy for modulating neuroimmune responses in AD treatments.

### Keywords
Primary cilia, Alzheimer's disease, Microglia

### Affiliations
Korea Brain Research Institute, Daegu, 41068, Korea
Korea Brain Research Institute

### Submitter
Jaemyung Jang

### Lab Head
Dr Youngshik Choe
Korea Brain Research Institute, Daegu, 41068, Korea


