### Accession
PXD026116

### Title
Rintatolimod induces antiviral activities in human pancreatic cancer cells: opening for an anti-COVID-19 opportunity in cancer patients?

### Description
Severe acute respiratory virus-2 (SARS-CoV2) has spread globally leading to a devastating loss of life. Large registry studies have begun to shed light on the epidemiological and clinical vulnerabilities of cancer patients who succumb to or endure poor outcomes of SARS-CoV-2. Specific treatment for COVID-19 infections in cancer patients is lacking while the demand for treatment is increasing. Therefore, we explored the effect of Rintatolimod (Ampligen), a Toll-like receptor 3 (TLR3) agonist, to treat uninfected human pancreatic cancer cells (HPACs). The direct effect of Rintatolimod was measured by targeted gene expression profiling and by proteomics measurements. Our results showed that Rintatolimod induces an antiviral effect in HPACs by inducing RNase L- dependent and independent pathways of the innate immune system. Treatment with Rintatolimod activated the interferon signaling pathway, leading to the overexpression of several cytokines and chemokines in epithelial cells. Furthermore, Rintatolimod treatment increased the expression of angiogenesis-related genes without promoting fibrosis, which is the main cause of death in COVID-19 infected patients. We conclude that Rintatolimod could be considered an early additional treatment option for cancer patients who are infected with SARS-CoV-2 to prevent the complicated severity of the disease.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lines and treatment  Two pancreatic cancer cell lines were used in the study; BxPC-3 and CFPAC-1. Cells were cultured using RPMI-1640 media supplemented with 25% FBS and 10% DMSO. Cells were treated overnight with three different concentrations of Rintatolimod: 0.5, 1.25, and 2.5 mg/ml, and with PBS as a control. Cell culturing and treatment were performed twice, for RNA and protein measurements separately. Cell pellets were collected, washed three times with PBS, and snapped frozen on dry ice and stored at -80 °C until the time of preparation.  RNA extraction and gene expression profile  RNeasy FF Macro kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) was used to extract RNA from the cell pellets following the manufacture's instructions. RNA quality and quantity were examined using the Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, California, USA). RNA concentration was corrected to include the percentage of the sample that was >300 base pairs. Because interferon pathway-related genes are included in the PanCancer Immune profile panel of NanoString, the panel was used to profile the samples. A total of 200 ng of RNA samples were hybridized with the panel probes at 65°C for 17 hours. RNA expression levels were measured using the nCounter® FLEX Instrument. The counting of the genes was done by scanning 490 Fields Of Views (FOV). Protein extraction and proteomic profile Cells were thawed and prepared to be measured on nano-Liquid Chromatography (nano-LC) as described previously (32). In short, 0.1% RapiGest (Waters, Milford, MA) in 50 mm NH4HCO3 pH 8.0 was used and the cells were disrupted by external sonication to ensure cell rupturing. For protein solubilization and denaturation, the samples were incubated at 37 and 100 °C for 5 and 15 min, respectively. Gold grade Trypsin was used to fragment proteins into small peptides. After preparation, the protein extracted samples were diluted 1:20 and transferred to LC-vials and measured by nano-LC Orbitrap Mass Spectrometry (MS) (LTQ Orbitrap XL; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Raw mass spectrometer data files, tandem MS (MS/MS) spectra were extracted by Mascot Deamon (Matrix Science, London, UK). Peptide identifications were accepted if they exceeded a peptide probability of 95.0%. Protein identifications were accepted if protein probability exceeded 99.0% and at least two peptides were identified. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped.

### Data Protocol
nSolver™ software was used to analyze the expression profiles. The expression of 19 housekeeping genes was used to normalize the profiled data. A two-tailed Student’s t-test was used to determine the differentially expressed genes or proteins between cell lines that were not treated (controls, n=2) and those that were treated with various concentrations of Rintatolimod (n=6), with P ≤ 0.01 being considered statistically significant. The heat maps were generated in R software (4.0.3).

### Publication Abstract
Severe acute respiratory virus-2 (SARS-CoV-2) has spread globally leading to a devastating loss of life. Large registry studies have begun to shed light on the epidemiological and clinical vulnerabilities of cancer patients who succumb to or endure poor outcomes of SARS-CoV-2. Specific treatment for COVID-19 infections in cancer patients is lacking while the demand for treatment is increasing. Therefore, we explored the effect of Rintatolimod (Ampligen<sup>&#xae;</sup>) (AIM ImmunoTech, Ocala, FL, USA), a Toll-like receptor 3 (TLR3) agonist, to treat uninfected human pancreatic cancer cells (HPACs). The direct effect of Rintatolimod was measured by targeted gene expression profiling and by proteomics measurements. Our results show that Rintatolimod induces an antiviral effect in HPACs by inducing RNase-L-dependent and independent pathways of the innate immune system. Treatment with Rintatolimod activated the interferon signaling pathway, leading to the overexpression of several cytokines and chemokines in epithelial cells. Furthermore, Rintatolimod treatment increased the expression of angiogenesis-related genes without promoting fibrosis, which is the main cause of death in patients with COVID-19. We conclude that Rintatolimod could be considered an early additional treatment option for cancer patients who are infected with SARS-CoV-2 to prevent the complicated severity of the disease.

### Keywords
Human, Covid-19

### Affiliations
Erasmus medical center 
Pathology department, The tumor immuno-pathology lab, Erasmus medical center, the netherlands

### Submitter
Lona Zeneyedpour

### Lab Head
Dr Dana Adel Mustafa
Pathology department, The tumor immuno-pathology lab, Erasmus medical center, the netherlands


