### Accession
PXD038230

### Title
BtuB TonB-dependent transporters and BtuG surface lipoproteins form stable complexes for vitamin B12 uptake in gut Bacteroides.

### Description
Vitamin B12 (cobalamin) is the most complex vitamin and essential for many human gut microbes. However, cobalamin is synthesized only by a limited number of bacteria, making many gut microbes dependent on scavenging to meet their cobalamin requirements. Since bacterial densities in the gut are extremely high, competition for cobalamin is severe, making it a keystone micronutrient that shapes human gut microbial communities. Contrasting with Enterobacteria like Escherichia coli which only have one outer membrane (OM) transporter dedicated to B12 uptake (BtuB), members of the dominant genus Bacteroides often encode several vitamin B12 OM transporters together with a conserved array of surface-exposed B12-binding lipoproteins. Here we show, via X-ray crystallography, cryogenic electron microscopy (cryoEM) and molecular dynamics (MD) simulations, that the BtuB1 and BtuB2 transporters from the prominent human gut bacterium Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron form stable complexes with the surface-exposed lipoproteins BtuG1 and BtuG2. The lipoproteins cap the external surface of their cognate BtuB transporter and, when open, capture B12 via electrostatic attraction. After B12 capture, the BtuG lid closes, with concomitant transfer of the vitamin to the BtuB transporter and subsequent transport. We propose that TonB-dependent, lipoprotein-assisted small molecule uptake is a general feature of Bacteroides spp. that is important for the success of this genus in colonising the human gut.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation and mass spectrometry for proteomics. Five independent cultures were grown in minimal media with 0.4 nM or 40 nM CNCbl and grown for 18 hours. Cells were collected by centrifugation at 11,000g for 30 minutes. The pellets were resuspended in TBS and sonicated. The membrane fraction was harvested by centrifugation (45 minutes at 45,000 r.p.m. using a 45 Ti Beckman rotor). The fractions were washed two times with water (resuspended in water followed by 45 minutes at 42,000 r.p.m. using a 70 Ti Beckman rotor). Finally, they were stored at -80°C until needed.  Membrane fractions were subjected to denaturation and tryptic digest using a suspension trapping-S-trap (Protifi) protocol. Briefly, this included resuspension in 5 % SDS, 50 mM Tris pH 7.4, denaturation with 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) at 60 °C for 15 minutes, alkylation with 10 mM N-ethylmaleimide (NEM) at room temperature (~20 °C) for 15 minutes, and acidification to a final concentration of 2.7 % phosphoric acid. Samples were then diluted eightfold with 90 % MeOH 10 % TEAB (pH 7.2) and added to the S-trap micro columns. The manufacturer-provided protocol was then followed, with a total of five washes in 90 % MeOH 10 % TEAB (pH 7.2), and trypsin added at a ratio of 1:10 enzyme:protein (2 ug : 20 ug) and digestion performed for 2 h at 47 °C. Peptides were dried and stored at -80 °C, and immediately before mass spectrometry were resuspended in 0.1 % formic acid. LC-MS/MS was performed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano System (ThermoFisher Scientific) in line with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). Peptides (1 μg) were injected onto a PepMap100 C18 LC trap column (300 μm ID x 5 mm, 5μm, 100 Å), and separated with an EASY-Spray nanoLC C18 column (75 μm ID x 50 cm, 2 μm, 100 Å) at a flow rate of 250 nl/min, column temperature 45 °C. Solvent A was 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid in HPLC water, and solvent B was 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid and 80 % (v/v) acetonitrile in HPLC water. LC-MS/MS runs were preceded by a 2 minute equilibration with solvent A and solvent B at 98 % and 2 %, which was maintained for 5 minutes following sample injection, then the gradient increased solvent B to 35 % over the next 120 minutes. Solvent B was increased to 90 % in 30 seconds for 4 minutes, then decreased to 2 % in 30 seconds to allow further equilibration for 10 minutes. Data were acquired by the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos in positive ion mode, with data dependent acquisition. MS1 was performed at 120,000 resolution, in the scan range 400-1600 m/z, charge states 2-7, AGC target of 200,000, with a maximum injection of 50 ms with repeat count 1. Peptides were fragmented using HCD (30 % collision energy). The ion trap was selected as the detector type, set to rapid scan rate, mass range and scan range mode set to normal and auto, AGC target set to standard, maximum injection time set to dynamic. The entire duty cycle lasted 3 seconds, during which time “TopSpeed” analysis was performed.

### Data Protocol
Proteome data analysis. Raw files from mass spectrometry were matched against the B. thetaiotaomicron reference proteome (UP000001414, downloaded from UniProt on 01/12/2021), and proteins quantified using MaxQuant V 2.0.3.0 67. NEM alkylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification, oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N-termini were set as variable modifications. Digestion was trypsin/p specific, LFQ and matching between runs was selected. All other parameters were left as defaults. The output from MaxQuant was processed in Perseus 68, where contaminants and decoys were removed and iBAQ was used to rank protein expression within each condition. Processing was also performed using the Limma package 69 in the R programming environment, where LFQ intensity values were used to quantify relative protein abundance between different conditions. Proteins were filtered to remove contaminants and decoys, and those identified by <2 unique peptides. Changes in protein abundance between conditions were considered significant where there was a difference of at least twofold, and when Student’s T-test p-value =<0.05 after Benjamin-Hochberg correction for multiple comparisons. We used the R70 package Ggplot271 to generate proteomic analysis graphs. Morpheus (https://software.broadinstitute.org/morpheus) was used to generate the heatmap.

### Publication Abstract
Vitamin B<sub>12</sub> (cobalamin) is required for most human gut microbes, many of which are dependent on scavenging to obtain this vitamin. Since bacterial densities in the gut are extremely high, competition for this keystone micronutrient is severe. Contrasting with Enterobacteria, members of the dominant genus Bacteroides often encode several BtuB vitamin B<sub>12</sub> outer membrane transporters together with a conserved array of surface-exposed B<sub>12</sub>-binding lipoproteins. Here we show that the BtuB transporters from Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron form stable, pedal bin-like complexes with surface-exposed BtuG lipoprotein lids, which bind B<sub>12</sub> with high affinities. Closing of the BtuG lid following B<sub>12</sub> capture causes destabilisation of the bound B<sub>12</sub> by a conserved BtuB extracellular loop, causing translocation of the vitamin to BtuB and subsequent transport. We propose that TonB-dependent, lipoprotein-assisted small molecule uptake is a general feature of Bacteroides spp. that is important for the success of this genus in colonising the human gut.

### Keywords
B12, Fusion-lumos, Gut, Bacteria, Orbitrap, Bacteroides

### Affiliations
Newcastle University
Newcastle University Biosciences Institute Faculty of Medical Sciences Framlington Place Newcastle upon Tyne NE2 4HH UK

### Submitter
Matthias Trost

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Trost
Newcastle University Biosciences Institute Faculty of Medical Sciences Framlington Place Newcastle upon Tyne NE2 4HH UK


