### Accession
PXD011740

### Title
Translational regulation contributes to the secretory response of chondrocytic cells following exposure to Interleukin-1B

### Description
Chondrocytes undergo changes to their protein translational capacity during osteoarthritis progression, but a study of how disease-relevant signals affect chondrocyte protein translation at the transcriptomic level has not previously been performed. In this study we describe how the inflammatory cytokine IL-1B rapidly affects protein translation in the chondrocytic cell line SW1353. Using ribosome profiling we demonstrate that IL-1B induced altered translation of inflammatory-associated transcripts, as well as a number of ribosome-associated transcripts, through differential translation and the use of multiple open reading frames. Proteomic analtsis of the cell layer and conditioned media of these cells identified that proteins which were differentially translated were most readily detected in the secretome. We have produced combined ribosome profiling and proteomic datasets which provide a valuble resource in understanding the processes that are occoring during cytokine stimulation of chondrocytic cells.

### Sample Protocol
SW1353 were treated for 24 hours with and without IL-1B. Media was then harvested for secretome analysis and the cell layer was harvested for cellular proteomic analysis. SW1353 were also treated for 3 hours with and without IL-1B. Cells were then harvested for ribosome profiling analysis.

### Data Protocol
For secretome analysis, media was collected and subjected to in-solution trypsin digestion and LC-MS/MS was performed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC Nano system coupled to a QExtractive masss spectrometer. Label-free relative quantification software PEAKS was used to analyse RAW data files for identifications with Mascot. For the cell layer, protein lysates were digested with trypsin and mass spectrometry was also performed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC Nano system couples to a QExtractive mass spectrometer. Proteins were considered significantly changed using a -10logP score >20 (eqivalent to a P value of <0.01), a fold change >2 and at least 3 unique peptides. For ribosome profiling, smaples were prepared according to instructions for the ARTseq Ribosome Profiling Kit (Mammalian). Successfully amplified PCR libraries were quantified using a Qubit dsDNA High Sensitivity Kit and a Bioanalyser DNA High Sensitivity Kit. The size selected pooled library was assessed by Bioanalyser and subsequently by qPCR using the Illumina Library Quantification Kit on a Roche Light Cycler LC48II. FASTQ files were uploaded to the RiboGalaxy server where adapter and ribosomal RNA sequences were removed. riboSeqR was used via RiboGalaxy to align remaining reads to the human genome (GRCh38) before performing differential translation analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Osteoarthritis is a chronic disease characterized by the loss of articular cartilage in synovial joints through a process of extracellular matrix destruction that is strongly associated with inflammatory stimuli. Chondrocytes undergo changes to their protein translational capacity during osteoarthritis, but a study of how disease-relevant signals affect chondrocyte protein translation at the transcriptomic level has not previously been performed. In this study, we describe how the inflammatory cytokine interleukin 1-&#x3b2; (IL-1&#x3b2;) rapidly affects protein translation in the chondrocytic cell line SW1353. Using ribosome profiling we demonstrate that IL-1&#x3b2; induced altered translation of inflammatory-associated transcripts such as NFKB1, TNFAIP2, MMP13, CCL2, and CCL7, as well as a number of ribosome-associated transcripts, through differential translation and the use of multiple open reading frames. Proteomic analysis of the cellular layer and the conditioned media of these cells identified changes in a number of the proteins that were differentially translated. Translationally regulated secreted proteins included a number of chemokines and cytokines, underlining the rapid, translationally mediated inflammatory cascade that is initiated by IL-1&#x3b2;. Although fewer cellular proteins were found to be regulated in both ribosome profiling and proteomic data sets, we did find increased levels of SOD2, indicative of redox changes within SW1353 cells being modulated at the translational level. In conclusion, we have produced combined ribosome profiling and proteomic data sets that provide a valuable resource in understanding the processes that occur during cytokine stimulation of chondrocytic cells.

### Keywords
Human, Secretion, Interleukin-1b, Chondrocytes, Inflammation, Ribosome profiling

### Affiliations
University of Liverpool
Comparative Musculoskeletal Sciences Research Group Departmemt of Musculoskeletal Biology Institute of Ageing and Chronic Disease University of Liverpool

### Submitter
Ben McDermott

### Lab Head
Dr Simon Tew
Comparative Musculoskeletal Sciences Research Group Departmemt of Musculoskeletal Biology Institute of Ageing and Chronic Disease University of Liverpool


