### Accession
PXD041226

### Title
From Volcanos to the Bench: Advantages of Novel Hyperthermoacidic Archaeal Proteases for Proteomics Workflows

### Description
Here we introduce novel hyperthermoacidic archaeal proteases (HTA-Proteases) isolated from organisms that thrive in nearly boiling acidic volcanic springs and investigate their use for bottom-up proteomic experiments. We find that HTA-Proteases have novel cleavage specificities, show no autolysis, function in dilute formic acid, and store at ambient temperature for years. HTA-Proteases function optimally at 70-90°C and pH of 2-4 with rapid digestion kinetics. The extreme reaction conditions actively denature sample proteins, obviate the use of chaotropes, and allow for a one-step/five-minute sample preparation protocol without sample manipulation, dilution, or additional cleanup. We find that brief one-step HTA-Protease protocols significantly increase proteome and protein sequence coverage with datasets orthogonal to trypsin. Importantly, HTA-Protease digests markedly increase coverage and identifications for ribonucleoproteins, histones, and mitochondrial membrane proteins as compared to tryptic digests. In addition to increased coverage in these classes, HTA-Proteases and simplified one-step protocols are expected to reduce technical variability and advance the fields of clinical and high-throughput proteomics. This work reveals significant utility of heretofore unavailable HTA-Proteases for proteomic workflows. We discuss some of the potential for these remarkable enzymes to empower new proteomics methods, approaches, and biological insights.

### Sample Protocol
Purified proteins were acquired from online suppliers and tissue samples were lyophilized and milled prior to digestion. Digests were performed in appropriate buffer systems for optimal digestion depending on the enzyme in use: pH 8 for trypsin and chymotrypsin digests, pH 3 for HTA-protease digests. Sample digestion was performed for 5 minutes to 24 hours depending on substrate and experimental goals. Digests were cleaned using C18 spin columns and analyzed using a variety of MS systems: LTQ XL (Thermo Fisher), Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Fisher), and Q Exactive HF (Thermo Fisher).

### Data Protocol
LTQ XL and Q Exactive HF data was processed using PEAKS X Pro. Orbitrap Velos data was processing using Mascot for database searching and Scaffold for results aggregation. Searches were primarily performed with no enzyme cleavage specificity. Modifications were assigned depeding on sample type.

### Publication Abstract
Here we introduce hyperthermoacidic archaeal proteases (HTA-Proteases&#xa9;) isolated from organisms that thrive in nearly boiling acidic volcanic springs and investigate their use for bottom-up proteomic experiments. We find that HTA-Proteases have novel cleavage specificities, show no autolysis, function in dilute formic acid, and store at ambient temperature for years. HTA-Proteases function optimally at 70-90&#xa0;&#xb0;C and pH of 2-4 with rapid digestion kinetics. The extreme HTA-Protease reaction conditions actively denature sample proteins, obviate the use of chaotropes, are largely independent of reduction and alkylation, and allow for a one-step/five-minute sample preparation protocol without sample manipulation, dilution, or additional cleanup. We find that brief one-step HTA-Protease protocols significantly increase proteome and protein sequence coverage with datasets orthogonal to trypsin. Importantly, HTA-Protease digests markedly increase coverage and identifications for ribonucleoproteins, histones, and mitochondrial membrane proteins as compared to tryptic digests alone. In addition to increased coverage in these classes, HTA-Proteases and simplified one-step protocols are expected to reduce technical variability and advance the fields of clinical and high-throughput proteomics. This work reveals significant utility of heretofore unavailable HTA-Proteases for proteomic workflows. We discuss some of the potential for these remarkable enzymes to empower new proteomics methods, approaches, and biological insights. SIGNIFICANCE: Here we introduce new capabilities for bottom-up proteomics applications with hyperthermoacidic archaeal proteases (HTA-Proteases&#xa9;). HTA-Proteases have novel cleavage specificity, require no chaotropes, and allow simple one-step/five-minute sample preparations that promise to reduce variability between samples and laboratories. HTA-Proteases generate unique sets of observable peptides that are non-overlapping with tryptic peptides and significantly increase sequence coverage and available peptide targets relative to trypsin alone. HTA-Proteases show some bias for the detection and coverage of nucleic acid-binding proteins and membrane proteins relative to trypsin. These new ultra-stable enzymes function optimally in nearly boiling acidic conditions, show no autolysis, and do not require aliquoting as they are stable for years at ambient temperatures. Used independently or in conjunction with tryptic digests, HTA-Proteases offer increased proteome coverage, unique peptide targets, and brief one-step protocols amenable to automation, rapid turnaround, and high-throughput approaches.

### Keywords
Hydrolysis, Hyperthermophile, Heat, Acid, Sample preparation, Protease, Archaea, Digestion, Ultrastable enzymes

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Colorado Denver, Aurora, CO, 80045, USA
University of Colorado

### Submitter
Maxwell McCabe

### Lab Head
Dr Kirk Hansen
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Colorado Denver, Aurora, CO, 80045, USA


