### Accession
PXD008211

### Title
Parallel Reaction Monitoring on a Q Exactive Mass Spectrometer Increases Reproducibility of Phosphopeptide Detection in Bacterial Phosphoproteomics Measurements

### Description
Increasing number of studies report the relevance of protein Ser/Thr/Tyr phosphorylation in bacterial physiology, yet the analysis of this type of modification in bacteria still presents a considerable challenge. Unlike in eukaryotes, where tens of thousands of phosphorylation events likely occupy more than two thirds of the proteome, the abundance of protein phosphorylation is much lower in bacteria. Even the state-of-the-art phosphopeptide enrichment protocols fail to remove the high background of abundant unmodified peptides, leading to low signal intensity and undersampling of phosphopeptide precursor ions in consecutive data-dependent MS runs. Consequently, large-scale bacterial phosphoproteomic datasets often suffer from poor reproducibility and a high number of missing values. Here we explore the application of parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer in bacterial phosphoproteome analysis, focusing especially on run-to-run sampling reproducibility. In multiple measurements of identical phosphopeptide-enriched samples, we show that PRM outperforms DDA in terms of detection frequency, reaching almost complete sampling efficiency, compared to 20% in DDA. We observe a similar trend over multiple rounds of (heterogeneous) phosphopeptide-enriched samples and conclude that PRM is a method of choice in bacterial phosphoproteomics projects where reproducible detection and quantification of a relatively small set of phosphopeptides is desired.

### Sample Protocol
Wild type E.coli K12 MG1655 was inoculated in LB medium. Cells in stationary phase were pelleted at 3,345 g for 10 min and resuspended in 3 ml lysis buffer containing 4% sodium dodecylsulfate (SDS), 100Mm Tris-HCl pH 8.6, 10 mM EDTA, 5 mM glycerol-2-phosphate, 5 mM sodium fluoride, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate supplemented with cOmpleteTM protease inhibitors (Roche). The cell extract was sonicated five times for 30 s at 40% amplitude (Sonifier I W-250, Branson) and cellular debris spun down at 13,000 g for 30 min. Proteins were isolated by acetone/methanol precipitation. The solution was mixed with eight volumes of ice-cold acetone and one volume of methanol. Precipitating proteins were pelleted by centrifugation at 2,000 g at 4°C for 20 min, subsequently washed twice with 80% acetone and air-dried for 3 min. Proteins were reconstituted in denaturation buffer consisting of 6 M urea, 2 M thiourea in 10 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0. Protein concentration was determined by Bradford assay. Protein samples were reduced with 1 mM dithiothreitol (DDT) and alkylated with 5.5 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 1 h followed by pre-digestion with endoproteinase Lys-C (1:100 w/w) for 3 h and overnight digestion with trypsin (1:100 w/w) at room temperature at 750 rpm. The digestion was quenched by acidifying to a final concentration of 0.1% of trifuoroacetic acid (TFA). To target low abundant peptides the digest was directly purified on a C18 StageTip while for phosphopeptide analysis the sample was first subjected to TiO2 enrichment in three biological replicates with a protein starting amount of 6 mg per replicate. Prior phosphopeptide enrichment the digest was purified on Sep-Pak 18 cartridges (Waters). Briefly, the cartridge was activated with 5 ml methanol, conditioned with 5 ml of solvent A* (1% TFA, 2% acetonitrile (ACN)) and subsequently loaded with the sample. Peptides were washed with 5 ml of solvent A (0.1% formicacid (FA)) and eluted with 1 ml loading solution (6% TFA, 80% ACN). TiO2 beads were washed twice in loading solution and added to the sample in a peptide to bead ratio of 10:1 (mg/mg). Beads were incubated for 10 min and spun down. The supernatant was subsequently used for further sequential enrichment for a total of 10 enrichment rounds. Peptide loaded beads were washed with 200 µl loading solution, 200 µl washing solution (1% TFA, 80% ACN) and transferred to a C8 StageTip. Peptides were stepwise eluted with 30 µl elution solution I (5% NH4OH), 70 µl elution solution II (20% NH4OH, 60% ACN, pH 10.5) and 20 µl elution solution III (1% FA, 60% ACN) in a tube containing 30 ml of 20% TFA. The sample was concentrated to <60 µl by vacuum centrifugation and acidified to pH < 2.7 with 20% TFA. All fractions per replicate were pooled and subsequently half of each sample combined for a master mix. The other half was used for individual measurements. All samples were purified on C18 StageTips. Peptides were eluted from StageTip with 100 µl solvent B (0.1% FA, 80% ACN) and dried by vacuum centrifugation. Proteome samples were reconstituted in 10% solvent A* in solvent A to a final concentration of 1 µg/µl and 2 µg loaded on the column for LC-MS/MS analysis. Phosphopeptide fractions were reconstituted to a final volume of 15µl in 10% solvent A* in solvent A and 2µl injected for a single run on the column for LC-MS/MS analysis All peptide samples were measured on an EASY-nLC 1200 online coupled to a Q Exactive HF hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (both Thermo Scientific). The peptide mixture was separated on a 20 cm and 75 µm ID PicoTip fused silica emitter (New Objective) in-house packed with reversed-phase ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 µm resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH). Peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 200 nl/min in 0.1% FA at 40°C with a linear, segmented gradient of 10-33-50% of solvent B (0.1% FA, 80% ACN) over 87 min prior electrospray ionization. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode and spectra acquired either with in DDA or PRM mode. For DDA, survey scans were acquired at R 120,000 with a maximum injection time of 25 ms and a target value of 3x106 over a mass range of 300-1650 m/z. For proteome measurements the top 12 most intense ions were selected for fragmentation and recorded at R 30,000 with an injection time of 45 ms and a target value of 1x105. For the phosphoproteome samples the top seven most intense ions were selected and the injection time increased to 220 ms. For PRM, the survey scan settings were kept equal. The second event covers the PRM isolating the target peptide m/z values from an inclusion list with a 1.2 m/z window. The injection times were either set to 120 or 220 ms for phosphopeptide analysis.

### Data Protocol
MS raw data was processed with MaxQuant software suite (v. 1.5.5.1) and Skyline (v. 3.6). In MaxQuant the derived peak lists were searched using the Andromeda search engine against the Uniprot E. coli K12 proteome (taxonomy ID 83333; 4311 protein entires; access: October 2015). Trypsin was chosen as protease with up to two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation (C) was set as fixed and oxidation (M), acetylation (protein N-term) and phosphorylation (S, T, Y) were defined as variable modifications. The mass tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm at the MS level and to 0.5 Da at the MS/MS level. The false discovery rate was specified to 0.01 at the peptide, protein and phosphorylation site level. A minimum peptide length of seven amino acids was required and match between runs was disabled. All other settings were kept as default. In Skyline, the MSMS table output file of MaxQuant was used to create a spectral library with a cut-off score of 0.95. Fragment ions with charge states 1-2 of the b and y series were defined and the fragment ion filter set to ion 3 to last ion -1. Three fragment ions per peptide were picked form the filtered library. The ion match tolerance was set to 0.1 m/z.

### Publication Abstract
Increasing number of studies report the relevance of protein Ser/Thr/Tyr phosphorylation in bacterial physiology, yet the analysis of this type of modification in bacteria still presents a considerable challenge. Unlike in eukaryotes, where tens of thousands of phosphorylation events likely occupy more than two thirds of the proteome, the abundance of protein phosphorylation is much lower in bacteria. Even the state-of-the-art phosphopeptide enrichment protocols fail to remove the high background of abundant unmodified peptides, leading to low signal intensity and undersampling of phosphopeptide precursor ions in consecutive data-dependent MS runs. Consequently, large-scale bacterial phosphoproteomic datasets often suffer from poor reproducibility and a high number of missing values. Here we explore the application of parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer in bacterial phosphoproteome analysis, focusing especially on run-to-run sampling reproducibility. In multiple measurements of identical phosphopeptide-enriched samples, we show that PRM outperforms data-dependent acquisition (DDA) in terms of detection frequency, reaching almost complete sampling efficiency, compared to 20% in DDA. We observe a similar trend over multiple heterogeneous phosphopeptide-enriched samples and conclude that PRM shows a great promise in bacterial phosphoproteomics analyses where reproducible detection and quantification of a relatively small set of phosphopeptides is desired. SIGNIFICANCE: Bacterial phosphorylated peptides occur in low abundance compared to their unmodified counterparts, and are therefore rarely reproducibly detected in shotgun (DDA) proteomics measurements. Here we show that parallel reaction monitoring complements DDA analyses and makes detection of known, targeted phosphopeptides more reproducible. This will be of significance in replicated MS measurements that have a goal to reproducibly detect and quantify phosphopeptides of interest.

### Keywords
Dda, Qexactive, Lc-msms, Phosphoproteomics, E.coli, Prm, Tio2

### Affiliations
Prof. Dr. Boris Macek Quantitative Proteomics Proteome Center Tuebingen Interfaculty Institute for Cell Biology University of Tuebingen Auf der Morgenstelle 15 72076 Tuebingen Germany
Tuebingen University

### Submitter
Nicolas Nalpas

### Lab Head
Dr Boris Macek
Prof. Dr. Boris Macek Quantitative Proteomics Proteome Center Tuebingen Interfaculty Institute for Cell Biology University of Tuebingen Auf der Morgenstelle 15 72076 Tuebingen Germany


