### Accession
PXD021719

### Title
TFAM Binds to and Promotes Mutagenic Transcriptional Bypass of O4-Alkylthymidine Lesions

### Description
O2- and O4-alkylated thymidine lesions are known to be poorly repaired and persist in mammalian tissues. To understand how mammalian cells sense the presence and regulate the repair of these lesions, we employed a stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC)-based quantitative proteomic method to discover novel O2- and O4-n-butylthymidine (O2- and O4-nBudT)-binding proteins. We were able to identify 21 and 74 candidate DNA damage recognition proteins for O2-nBudT- and O4-nBudT-bearing DNA probes, respectively. Among these proteins, DDB1 and DDB2 selectively bind to O2-nBudT-containing DNA, whereas three HMG-box-containing proteins (i.e. HMGB1, HMGB2 and TFAM) exhibit preferential binding to O4-nBudT-bearing DNA. We further confirmed, by employing electrophoretic mobility shift assay, that TFAM can bind selectively and directly with O4-alkyldT-harboring DNA, and the binding capacity depends mainly on the HMG box-A domain of TFAM. We also found that TFAM promotes transcriptional mutagenesis of O4-alkyldT lesions in vitro and in human cells. Together, we explored, for the first time, the interactomes of O-alkyldT lesions. Our study also expands the functions of TFAM by revealing its capability in binding to O4-alkyldT-bearing DNA, demonstrating the role of HMG-box A domain in this molecular recognition, and uncovering its modulation of transcriptional mutagenesis of these lesions in human cells.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of Nuclear Protein Lysates HeLa cells, when reached 80% confluency, were harvested using trypsin-EDTA (Invitrogen) and pelleted by centrifugation. The cell pellet was washed twice with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). The nuclear proteome was prepared from heavy- and light-labeled cells using the NE-PER nuclear and cytoplasmic extraction reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific) following the manufacturer’s guidelines. The protein concentrations were measured using Bradford Quick Start Protein Assay kit (Bio-Rad), and the nuclear lysate was stored at -80°C until use. Preparation of Damage-bearing DNA Substrates The 20-mer lesion-containing oligodeoxyribonucleotides (ODNs) were prepared by ligating 5′-ATGGCGXGCTAT-3′ (X = O2-nBudT, O4-nBudT or O4-POBdT) (6,14,23) to an 8-mer ODN (5′-GATCCTAT-3′) in the presence of a 28-mer template (5′-ATAGGATCATAGCACGCCATTTTTTTTT-3′). The resulting ligation products were purified by denaturing polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE), and their identities and purities confirmed by LC-MS/MS and PAGE analyses. Affinity Pull-down of O2- and O4-nBudT-binding Proteins The 20-mer O2- and O4-nBudT-containing ODNs (50 pmol) were annealed individually with biotin-conjugated complementary strand in a buffer containing 100 mM potassium acetate and 30 mM HEPES (pH 7.5) by raising the temperature to 95°C and allowing to cool to room temperature over 3 h. The annealed double-stranded DNA was incubated with high-capacity streptavidin agarose beads (Thermo Pierce) at room temperature with shaking for 60 min. The beads were then washed for three times with a buffer containing 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 10 mM KCl, 10 mM MgCl2 and 0.5 mM EDTA to remove any single-stranded or unbound DNA. The DNA-bound beads were then incubated with nuclear lysates at 4°C for 2 h in a buffer containing 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 10 mM KCl, 0.5 mM EDTA, and 10% glycerol. In forward SILAC experiments, the lesion-containing probe and the control lesion-free probe were incubated with the heavy and light isotope-labeled lysates, respectively, whereas the opposite incubations were conducted in reverse SILAC experiments. The biotinylated probes and their bound proteins were subsequently eluted with 1% TFA in CH3CN/H2O (7:3, v/v) at 75°C. The heavy- and light-labeled eluents were subsequently combined, dried in a Speed-vac, and subjected to filter-aided sample preparation, as previously described with some modifications (24). Briefly, the dried samples were dissolved in a 400-μL solution containing 8 M urea and 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) (pH 8.5), and transferred to a ultracentrifugal filter (10,000 MWCO, VWR International). After centrifugation at 14,000 g for 3 min, the filter devices were washed twice with 200 μL of 50 mM ABC to remove urea. After addition of dithiothreitol and iodoacetamide for cysteine reduction and alkylation, 200 μL of 50 mM ABC containing 0.8 μg trypsin was added to each filter device and the digestion was continued at 37°C for 16 h. The digestion mixture was subsequently centrifuged, and the filter device was rinsed with 200 μL of 50 mM ABC and centrifuged again. The combined filtrates were dried in a Speed-vac, desalted using OMIX C18 Tips (Agilent Technologies), and then analyzed by LC-MS/MS. Mass Spectrometry LC-MS/MS experiments were performed on an EASY-nLC 1200 system coupled with a Q Exactive Plus quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), as previously described.(18) The trapping (150 μm × 50 mm) and analytical (75 μm × 120 mm) columns were packed with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ resin (5 μm and 3 μm in particle sizes, respectively, Dr. Maisch HPLC GmbH, Germany). The peptide samples were loaded onto the trapping column with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water at a flow rate of 3 μL/min, and resolved on the separation column with a 180-min linear gradient of 2-40% acetonitrile in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The mass spectrometer was set up in the positive-ion mode, and the spray voltage was 1.8 kV. MS/MS were recorded in a data-dependent scan mode, in which one full MS scan was followed with 25 MS/MS scans.

### Data Protocol
The above LC-MS/MS data were searched using Maxquant (Version 1.2.2.5) (25) against UniProt human proteome database (UP000005640), to which contaminants and reverse sequences were added. The maximum number of missed cleavages for trypsin was two per peptide. Cysteine carbamidomethylation and methionine oxidation were set as fixed and variable modifications, respectively. MaxQuant multiplicity was set to 2, and [13C6]-L-arginine and [13C6,15N2]-L-lysine were selected as heavy amino acids. The search was performed with the tolerances in mass accuracy of 10 ppm and 20 ppm for MS and MS/MS, respectively. The required false-positive discovery rate was set at 1% at both the peptide and protein levels, with the minimal required peptide length being 6 amino acids. The match between runs option was used, with the alignment window and minimum protein ratio counts being 5 min and 1.0, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
<i>O</i><sup>2</sup>- and <i>O</i><sup>4</sup>-alkylated thymidine lesions are known to be poorly repaired and persist in mammalian tissues. To understand how mammalian cells sense the presence and regulate the repair of these lesions, we employed a quantitative proteomic method to discover regioisomeric <i>O</i><sup>2</sup>- and <i>O</i><sup>4</sup>-<i>n-</i>butylthymidine (<i>O</i><sup>2</sup>- and <i>O</i><sup>4</sup>-<i>n</i>BudT)-binding proteins. We were able to identify 21 and 74 candidate DNA damage recognition proteins for <i>O</i><sup>2</sup>-<i>n</i>BudT- and <i>O</i><sup>4</sup>-<i>n</i>BudT-bearing DNA probes, respectively. Among these proteins, DDB1 and DDB2 selectively bind to <i>O</i><sup>2</sup>-<i>n</i>BudT-containing DNA, whereas three high-mobility group (HMG) proteins (i.e., HMGB1, HMGB2, and mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM)) exhibit preferential binding to <i>O</i><sup>4</sup>-<i>n</i>BudT-bearing DNA. We further demonstrated that TFAM binds directly and selectively with <i>O</i><sup>4</sup>-alkyldT-harboring DNA, and the binding capacity depends mainly on the HMG box-A domain of TFAM. We also found that TFAM promotes transcriptional mutagenesis of <i>O</i><sup>4</sup>-<i>n</i>BudT and <i>O</i><sup>4</sup>-pyridyloxobutylthymidine, which is a DNA adduct induced by tobacco-specific <i>N</i>-nitrosamines, in vitro and in human cells. Together, we explored, for the first time, the interaction proteomes of <i>O</i>-alkyldT lesions, and our study expanded the functions of TFAM by revealing its capability in the recognition of <i>O</i><sup>4</sup>-alkyldT-bearing DNA and uncovering its modulation of transcriptional mutagenesis of these lesions in human cells.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Dna damage, Tfam

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry, University of California Riverside
University of California, Riverside

### Submitter
Xiaomei He

### Lab Head
Dr YINSHENG WANG
Department of Chemistry, University of California Riverside


