### Accession
PXD037165

### Title
Depletion Assisted Hemin Affinity (DAsHA) Proteomics Reveals an Expanded Landscape of Heme Binding Proteins in the Human Proteome

### Description
Heme b (iron protoporphyrin IX) plays important roles in biology as a metallocofactor and signaling molecule. However, the targets of heme signaling and the network of proteins that mediate the exchange of heme from sites of synthesis or uptake to heme dependent or regulated proteins are poorly understood. Herein, we describe a quantitative mass spectrometry-based chemoproteomics strategy to identify exchange labile hemoproteins in human embryonic kidney HEK293 cells that may be relevant to heme signaling and trafficking. The strategy involves depleting endogenous heme with the heme biosynthetic inhibitor succinylacetone (SA), leaving putative heme binding proteins in their apo-state, followed by the capture of those proteins using hemin-agarose resin and finally elution and identification by mass spectrometry. By identifying only those proteins that interact with high specificity to hemin-agarose relative to control beaded agarose in a SA-dependent manner, we have expanded the number of proteins and ontologies that may be involved in binding and buffering labile heme or are targets of heme signaling. Notably, these include proteins involved in chromatin remodeling, DNA damage response, RNA splicing, cytoskeletal organization and vesicular trafficking, many of which have been associated with heme through complementary studies published recently. Taken together, these results provide support for the emerging role for heme in an expanded set of cellular processes from genome integrity to protein trafficking and beyond.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC cell culture. Human embryonic kidney HEK293 cells were obtained from the laboratory of Loren D. Williams (Georgia Institute of Technology). HEK293 cells were cultured for 6 cell passages in SILAC media consisting of Powdered DMEM Medium for SILAC (Thermo, #88425), L-leucine (105 mg/L, Sigma, #L8912), L-proline (200 mg/L, Sigma #L5607), 2% penicillin streptomycin (VWR, #97063-708), and 10% Dialyzed Fetal Bovine Serum (R&D Systems, #S12850) supplemented with either 0.798 mM “heavy” L-lysine-13C6, 15N2 (Lys8, Cambridge Isotope Laboratories, #CNLM-291-H), and 0.398 mM “heavy” L-arginine-13C6, 15N4 (Arg10, Cambridge Isotope Laboratories, #CNLM-539-H) for SILAC heavy group or the same concentrations of “light” L-lysine (Lys0, Sigma, #L8662), and L-arginine (Arg0, Sigma, #A6969) for SILAC light group at 37 °C in 5% CO2. Heme Affinity Chromatography (HAC). To perform HAC, 1.5 mg protein lysate was incubated with 150 μl bead bed of pre-equilibrated hemin-agarose (Sigma, #H6390) for SILAC “heavy” group and the same bead bed volume of pre-equilibrated Sepharose (Sigma, #4B200) in HAC buffer (10 mM phosphate buffer pH 7.4 with 50 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA, 1X ProteaseArrestTM, and 1 mM PMSF) for 1 hour at 20 rpm at a rotator at room temperature. The incubated beads were washed 3 times with HAC buffer followed by eluted in 1 M imidazole (Sigma, #IX0005) in HAC buffer. Trypsin digestion. The eluates of SILAC “heavy” and “light” were combined for each SA+ and SA- group respectively followed by reduction in 5 mM TCEP (VWR, #97064-848) for 1 hour and alkylation in 10 mM iodoacetamide (VWR, #97064-926) in dark for 30 minutes. Protein pellet of each SA+ and SA- group was obtained by removing the aqueous and organic layers consecutively following the addition of 4 volumes of methanol (Sigma, #34860), 1 volume of chloroform (ACROS Organics, #423550250), and 3 volumes of water (Sigma, #270733) and centrifugation at 4 °C at 21,000 x g for 10 minutes. The protein pellets were resuspended in 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, 1 M ammonium bicarbonate, 6 M urea followed by incubation for 1 hour at 37 ◦C, and dilution of the urea down to 1.5 M with LC-MS grade water. The resuspended protein samples were enzymatically digested by trypsin with 1:20 (w/w) of enzyme to substrate ratio at 37 °C overnight. High-pH RPLC fractionation for whole proteome (WP). The SILAC-labeled peptides were pre-fractionated by high pH reverse phase liquid chromatography using an Agilent 1100 HPLC system with Waters XBridge C18 reverse phase column (4.6 x 250 mm, 3.5 µM, 130 Å) with 10 mM ammonium formate (solvent A, Fluka, #17843) and 10 mM ammonium formate in 90% acetonitrile (solvent B, EMD Millipore, #AX0145) adjusted to pH 10 using ammonium solution (EMD Millipore, #105426). Fractions were collected every 1 minute at a flow rate of 700 µl/min using a gradient method (from 0% to 75% solvent B in 60 min). The collected fractions were frozen at -80 °C followed by CentriVap lyophilization.  LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptide fractions were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using a Q Exactive Plus orbitrap mass spectrometer equipped with UltiMate 3000 LC system (Thermo). The lyophilized fractions were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid (FA) in 5% acetonitrile (ACN) and loaded onto NanoViper trap column (75 µm I.D. x 20 mm) packed with AcclaimTM PepMap 100 C18 (3 µm, 100 Å). The samples were resolved through NanoViper analytical column (75 µm I.D. x 150 mm) packed with Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 (2 µm, 100 Å) at a flow rate of 0.3 µl/min with solvent A (0.1% FA in 2% ACN) and solvent B (0.1% FA in 90% ACN) for 150 minutes. Data-dependent tandem mass spectrometry was conducted with the full scans in the range from 200 to 1,800 m/z using an Orbitrap mass analyzer where automatic gain control (AGC) being set at 3e6 (MS1) and 1e5 (MS2), resolution at 70,000 (MS1) and 17,500 (MS2), and Max IT at 100 ms (MS1) and 50 ms (MS2). The top 15 most abundant precursor ions were selected at MS1 with an isolation window of 4 m/z and further fragmented at MS2 by high energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with normalized collision energies (NCE) of 28.

### Data Protocol
Data-dependent tandem mass spectrometry was conducted with the full scans in the range from 200 to 1,800 m/z using an Orbitrap mass analyzer where automatic gain control (AGC) being set at 3e6 (MS1) and 1e5 (MS2), resolution at 70,000 (MS1) and 17,500 (MS2), and Max IT at 100 ms (MS1) and 50 ms (MS2). The top 15 most abundant precursor ions were selected at MS1 with an isolation window of 4 m/z and further fragmented at MS2 by high energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with normalized collision energies (NCE) of 28. MS data analysis. MS raw data were searched against UniProt Homo sapiens (Human) proteome (UP000005640) using Proteome Discoverer 2.0 with 10 ppm MS precursor mass tolerance, 0.02 Da MS fragment mass tolerance, and 0.01 false discovery rate. SILAC protein ratios (“heavy” Hemin-agarose / “light” Sepharose for both SA+ and SA- conditions and “heavy” SA+ / “light” SA- for WP) were calculated based on the ratio of integrated peak areas at MS1 for SILAC “heavy” and “light” peptides. Statistical significance of specific hemin-agarose binding of proteins based on the SILAC protein ratio (“heavy” Hemin-agarose / “light” Sepharose) for both SA+ (n=3) and SA- (n=3) were determined respectively using response screening in JMP 16.0. Proteins with either “heavy” or “light” values only were separately processed and reported as +/- infinite change in specific hemin-agarose binding and protein abundance.

### Publication Abstract
Heme b (iron protoporphyrin IX) plays important roles in biology as a metallocofactor and signaling molecule. However, the targets of heme signaling and the network of proteins that mediate the exchange of heme from sites of synthesis or uptake to heme dependent or regulated proteins are poorly understood. Herein, we describe a quantitative mass spectrometry (MS)-based chemoproteomics strategy to identify exchange labile hemoproteins in human embryonic kidney HEK293 cells that may be relevant to heme signaling and trafficking. The strategy involves depleting endogenous heme with the heme biosynthetic inhibitor succinylacetone (SA), leaving putative heme-binding proteins in their apo-state, followed by the capture of those proteins using hemin-agarose resin, and finally elution and identification by MS. By identifying only those proteins that interact with high specificity to hemin-agarose relative to control beaded agarose in an SA-dependent manner, we have expanded the number of proteins and ontologies that may be involved in binding and buffering labile heme or are targets of heme signaling. Notably, these include proteins involved in chromatin remodeling, DNA damage response, RNA splicing, cytoskeletal organization, and vesicular trafficking, many of which have been associated with heme through complementary studies published recently. Taken together, these results provide support for the emerging role of heme in an expanded set of cellular processes from genome integrity to protein trafficking and beyond.

### Keywords
Labile heme pool, Heme, Proteomics, Hemin agarose, Heme trafficking, Heme binding protein, Cell stress, Heme affinity

### Affiliations
School of Biological Sciences, Georgia Institute of Technology
Georgia Institute of Technology

### Submitter
Matthew Torres

### Lab Head
Dr Matthew Torres
School of Biological Sciences, Georgia Institute of Technology


