### Accession
PXD017582

### Title
Proteomic studies of Escherichia coli CFT073 and MG1655

### Description
Here we dissected a regulatory network directed by the conserved iron homeostasis regulator, Ferric Uptake Regulator (Fur), in uropathogenic E. coli strain CFT073. Comparing anaerobic genome-scale Fur DNA binding, with Fur dependent transcript expression and protein levels of the uropathogen to that of commensal E. coli K-12 strain MG1655, showed that the Fur regulon of the core genome is conserved but also includes genes within the pathogenicity/genetic islands. Unexpectedly, regulons indicative of amino acid limitation and the general stress response were also indirectly activated in the uropathogen fur mutant, suggesting that induction of the Fur regulon increases amino acid demand. Using RpoS levels as a proxy, addition of amino acids mitigated the stress. In addition, iron chelation increased RpoS to the same levels as in the fur mutant. The increased amino acid demand of the fur mutant or iron chelated cells was exacerbated by aerobic conditions, which could be partly explained by the O 2 -dependent synthesis of the siderophore aerobactin, encoded within a pathogenicity island. Taken together, this data suggest in the iron-poor environment of the urinary tract, amino acid availability could play a role in the proliferation of this uropathogen, particularly if there is sufficient O 2 to produce aerobactin.

### Sample Protocol
MG1655 and CFT073 wild-type and mutant strains were grown anaerobically in 1X MOPS minimal media supplemented with 0.2% glucose at 37 ° C to an OD 600nm of 0.25. Cells were harvested at 7550 x g for 10 min at 4  C. Pelleted protein was re-suspended in 200 μL lysis buffer (8 M Urea, 100 mM Tris pH 8.0, 20 mM TCEP, 80 mM Chloroacetamide) and subjected to 3 freeze thaw cycles by submersing tubes in liquid nitrogen. Samples were then diluted with 50 mM Tris (pH 8.0) to a concentration of 1.5 M Urea. Protein digestion was performed overnight with trypsin (4 μg) before centrifuging for 5 min at 14,000 G and de-salting cleared supernatant with 10 mg Strata C18 solid phase extraction cartridges. Resulting peptides were then quantified using a quantitative colorimetric peptide assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific)and dried in a vacuum centrifuge before re-suspending in 0.2% formic acid. Samples were analyzed using a LC/MS instrument comprising an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Mobile phase A consisted of 0.2% formic acid in water and mobile phase B consisted of 0.2% formic acid in 70% acetonitrile. A 105-minute gradient ranging from 0% to 53% B was employed spanning a total runtime of 120 minutes. Analytes were injected onto a 1.7 micron C18 column packed in-house to a length of 35 cm and heated to 46°C. Survey scans of peptide precursors were collected from 300-1350 Th with an AGC target of 1,500,000 and a resolution of 240,000 in the orbitrap followed by HCD MS/MS scans taken at rapid speed in the ion trap.

### Data Protocol
The resulting LC-MS proteomic data were processed using Maxquant software version 1.5.2.8 and searched against a concatenated database of MG1655 and CFT073 using ASAP database. The digestion enzyme was set to trypsin with up to two missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation of cysteines as a fixed modification, and oxidation of methionines and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. The match between runs feature was utilized to decrease missing data values within the data set. Precursor mass tolerance was 20 ppm and product ions were searched at 4.5 ppm tolerances. Peptides were filtered to a 1% FDR and combined to protein groups based on the rules of parsimony. A cutoff of 2-fold change in protein abundance in fur mutant over wild-type was selected.

### Publication Abstract
Pathogenicity islands and plasmids bear genes for pathogenesis of various <i>Escherichia coli</i> pathotypes. Although there is a basic understanding of the contribution of these virulence factors to disease, less is known about variation in regulatory networks in determining disease phenotypes. Here, we dissected a regulatory network directed by the conserved iron homeostasis regulator, ferric uptake regulator (Fur), in uropathogenic <i>E. coli</i> (UPEC) strain CFT073. Comparing anaerobic genome-scale Fur DNA binding with Fur-dependent transcript expression and protein levels of the uropathogen to that of commensal <i>E. coli</i> K-12 strain MG1655 showed that the Fur regulon of the core genome is conserved but also includes genes within the pathogenicity/genetic islands. Unexpectedly, regulons indicative of amino acid limitation and the general stress response were also indirectly activated in the uropathogen <i>fur</i> mutant, suggesting that induction of the Fur regulon increases amino acid demand. Using RpoS levels as a proxy, addition of amino acids mitigated the stress. In addition, iron chelation increased RpoS to the same levels as in the <i>fur</i> mutant. The increased amino acid demand of the <i>fur</i> mutant or iron chelated cells was exacerbated by aerobic conditions, which could be partly explained by the O<sub>2</sub>-dependent synthesis of the siderophore aerobactin, encoded by an operon within a pathogenicity island. Taken together, these data suggest that in the iron-poor environment of the urinary tract, amino acid availability could play a role in the proliferation of this uropathogen, particularly if there is sufficient O<sub>2</sub> to produce aerobactin.<b>IMPORTANCE</b> Host iron restriction is a common mechanism for limiting the growth of pathogens. We compared the regulatory network controlled by Fur in uropathogenic <i>E. coli</i> (UPEC) to that of nonpathogenic <i>E. coli</i> K-12 to uncover strategies that pathogenic bacteria use to overcome iron limitation. Although iron homeostasis functions were regulated by Fur in the uropathogen as expected, a surprising finding was the activation of the stringent and general stress responses in the uropathogen <i>fur</i> mutant, which was rescued by amino acid addition. This coordinated global response could be important in controlling growth and survival under nutrient-limiting conditions and during transitions from the nutrient-rich environment of the lower gastrointestinal (GI) tract to the more restrictive environment of the urinary tract. The coupling of the response of iron limitation to increased demand for amino acids could be a critical attribute that sets UPEC apart from other <i>E. coli</i> pathotypes.

### Keywords
Upec, Fur, Metabolic adaptation, Ryhb, Sigma s, Cft073, Ppgpp, Iron regulation

### Affiliations
University of Wisconsin - Madison
Professor of Biomolecular Chemistry at the University of Wisconsin - Madison

### Submitter
Evgenia Shishkova

### Lab Head
Dr Joshua J Coon
Professor of Biomolecular Chemistry at the University of Wisconsin - Madison


