### Accession
PXD008962

### Title
A regulatory cascade reprograms the ubiquitin ligase Ubr1 to enhance protein quality control during stress

### Description
When faced with proteotoxic stress, cells mount adaptive responses to eliminate aberrant proteins. Adaptive responses enhance the cellular quality control machinery by increasing expression of protein folding and degradation factors, but it is unclear if and how this augmented machinery acquires new activities during stress. Here, we uncover a regulatory cascade in budding yeast that consists of the hydrophilin protein Roq1, the HtrA protease Ynm3 and the ubiquitin ligase Ubr1. Various stresses stimulate ROQ1 transcription. The Roq1 protein is cleaved by Ynm3. Cleaved Roq1 allosterically regulates Ubr1, transforming its substrate specificity. Altered substrate recognition by Ubr1 accelerates proteasomal degradation of misfolded and native proteins at the endoplasmic reticulum membrane and in the cytosol. We term this pathway stress-induced homeostatically regulated protein degradation (SHRED) and propose that it promotes physiological adaptation by reprogramming a key component of the cellular quality control machinery.

### Sample Protocol
Strains SSY1488 (WT), 1559 (WT+Roq1), 2143 (∆ubr1) and 1561 (∆ubr1+Roq1) were grown to mid-log phase in SCD, diluted to an OD of 0.05 and treated with 400 nM estradiol for 8 h. Three ODs of cells were harvested and lysed as follows. Cells were collected by centrifugation, washed once with water and disrupted by bead beating with a FastPrep 24 (MP Biomedical) in 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5 containing 0.5 mM EDTA, 1 mM PMSF and complete protease inhibitors (Roche). Proteins were solubilized by addition of 2% SDS and incubation at 65ºC for 5 min. Lysates were cleared at 16,000 g at 4ºC for 2 min and protein concentrations were determined with the BCA assay kit (Thermo Scientific Pierce).  In-solution digestion of proteins 50 µg of each protein sample was precipitated by addition of 5 volumes of ice-cold acetone, before incubation at -20 °C for 30 minutes and subsequent centrifugation at 4 °C for 5 minutes at 10,000 g (Centrifuge 5415R, Eppendorf). All subsequent steps were performed at room temperature. Supernatants were removed and pellets allowed to air-dry for 5 minutes. Pellets were re-suspended in digestion buffer (50 mM Tris pH 8.1, 8 M Urea, 1 mM DTT) and incubated for 15 minutes. Cysteines were alkylated by addition of 5 mM Iodoacetamide with incubation for 20 minutes. Proteins were enzymatically digested by addition of 1 µg LysC per 50 µg of protein, with incubation for 3 hours. Digests were then diluted four-fold with 50 mM Tris pH 8.1 before addition of 1 µg Trypsin per 50 µg of protein and overnight incubation.  Peptide purification Peptides were purified as previously described (Kulak et al., 2014). Briefly, SDB-RPS (Sigma, #66886-U) stage tips were activated with 100% Acetonitrile, followed by an aqueous solvent containing 30% Methanol 1% TFA. Peptide mixtures were acidified with 1% TFA, 20 µg was loaded onto activated stage-tips, and washed with 0.1%TFA. Peptides were eluted with 60 µL buffer X (80% Acetonitrile, 5% Ammonium Hydroxide) Tryptic peptides were dried almost to completion in a centrifugal vacuum concentrator (Concentrator 5301, Eppendorf), and volumes were adjusted to 10 µL with buffer A* (0.1% TFA, 2% Acetonitrile).  Mass spectrometry 4µL of peptides were loaded on a 50-cm column with 75-µm inner diameter, packed in-house with 1.8-µm C18 particles (Dr Maisch GmbH, Germany). Reverse phase chromatography was performed using the Thermo EASY-nLC 1000 with a binary buffer system consisting of 0.1% formic acid (buffer A) and 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid (buffer B). The peptides were separated by a linear gradient of buffer B from 2 to 30% in 130 min followed by washout (ramping to 95% B in 5 mins, constant at 95% B for 5 min, ramping down to 2% B in 5 min, constant at 2% B for 5 min). The flow rate was 250 nl/min. The column was operated at a constant temperature of 55 °C. The LC was coupled to a Q ExactiveTM HF Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo) via the nanoelectrospray source (Thermo). MS data were acquired using a data-dependent top-15 method, dynamically choosing the most abundant not-yet-sequenced precursor ions from the survey scans (maximum injection time 25 ms, 300–1650 Th). Sequencing was performed via higher energy collisional dissociation fragmentation with a target value of 1e5 ions determined with predictive automatic gain control. Isolation of precursors was performed with a window of 1.4 Th. Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 120,000. Resolution for HCD spectra was set to 15,000 with maximum ion injection time of 55 ms. The “underfill ratio,” specifying the minimum percentage of the target ion value likely to be reached at the maximum fill time, was defined as 20%. Repeat sequencing of peptides was kept to a minimum by dynamic exclusion of the sequenced peptides for 30s.

### Data Protocol
Full proteomes from each of the four strains were quantified from four independent biological replicates. Raw files were processed with MaxQuant 1.5.5.2 and searched against the yeast protein database (SwissProt) downloaded from UniProt on 25/01/2017. Protein expression levels were quantified and normalized based on their intensities using the MaxLFQ algorithm implemented in MaxQuant (Cox et al., 2014). Protein groups were filtered to remove reverse protein hits to the reverse decoy database, proteins exclusively identified through modified peptides, and common contaminants (with the exception of GFP, which was retained in the list). Furthermore, only proteins with four normalized label-free quantification values (LFQ intensities) in at least one of the analyzed strains were retained in the set. 3377 protein groups passed these criteria. Rtn1Pho8*-GFP was not separately added to the database; rather, the GFP was treated as representative of the whole construct. Since endogenous Pho8 is expressed at low levels, the behavior of detected Pho8 also largely reflects that of Rtn1Pho8*-GFP. In contrast, endogenous Rtn1 is highly expressed, and hence detected Rtn1 does not reflect the behavior of Rtn1Pho8*-GFP. LFQ intensities were compared to gauge protein expression differences between strains. Two analyses were carried out, one based on a series of filters, and another applying imputation of missing values and standardized volcano plot analysis. Filter-based analysis: To identify proteins that show a similar Roq1-dependent downregulation as Rtn1Pho8*-GFP, we custom-designed a sensitive and false discovery rate (FDR)-controlled filter analysis. LFQ data were log-transformed to obtain approximately normally distributed data. For each protein, the difference in expression between WT+Roq1 and WT cells was calculated, and averaged over the four replicates, to obtain the average (paired) fold change in expression. Candidate hits had ratios <1 on a linear scale. We chose a cut-off of <0.75 based on the change observed in the positive controls, GFP and Pho8. Next, we subjected all differences to a t-test (paired, one-tailed). Proteins then had to pass a variable p-value filter (see below). Furthermore, for each protein we calculated the average paired fold change between expression in ∆ubr1+Roq1 and ∆ubr1 cells; proteins were required to show very small changes (between 0.9 and 1.1 fold). Only proteins passing all three filters were considered candidate hits. For FDR control, we applied the same filters, but swapped the WT/WT+Roq1 strains with the Dubr1/Dubr1+Roq1 strains (mock dataset). With this data configuration we did not expect to see any real changes, and hence simulated experimental noise. The FDR was then calculated as the number of hits identified with the mock dataset, divided by the number of hits obtained with the analysis dataset. The FDR level was controlled by changing the p-value cut-off of the t-test. P-values set to 0.0095, 0.02, and 0.05 resulted in estimated FDRs of 0%, 10%, and 20%, respectively. The positive controls GFP and Pho8 passed as hits at the 0% FDR level. Furthermore, we also evaluated the fold change between WT and Dubr1 cells to identify proteins that are constitutively regulated by Ubr1.  Imputation-assisted analysis: The above test is very sensitive, but does not cover proteins that are not identified in all strains. Hence, we performed a complementary, more inclusive analysis, with lower statistical power. We imputed missing values from a normal distribution (downshift 1.8 SDs, width 0.3 SDs). Pairwise comparison of strains was achieved via a t-test (non-paired, two-tailed), with permutation-based FDR control (FDR = 5%, S0 = 0.5), implemented in Perseus software.

### Publication Abstract
When faced with proteotoxic stress, cells mount adaptive responses to eliminate aberrant proteins. Adaptive responses increase the expression of protein folding and degradation factors to enhance the cellular quality control machinery. However, it is unclear whether and how this augmented machinery acquires new activities during stress. Here, we uncover a regulatory cascade in budding yeast that consists of the hydrophilin protein Roq1/Yjl144w, the HtrA-type protease Ynm3/Nma111, and the ubiquitin ligase Ubr1. Various stresses stimulate ROQ1 transcription. The Roq1 protein is cleaved by Ynm3. Cleaved Roq1 interacts with Ubr1, transforming its substrate specificity. Altered substrate recognition by Ubr1 accelerates proteasomal degradation of misfolded as well as native proteins at the endoplasmic reticulum membrane and in the cytosol. We term this pathway stress-induced homeostatically regulated protein degradation (SHRED) and propose that it promotes physiological adaptation by reprogramming a key component of the quality control machinery.

### Keywords
Yeast, Lc-msms, Qexactive hf, Orbitrap

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry

### Submitter
Daniel Itzhak

### Lab Head
Dr Georg Borner
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry


