### Accession
PXD038817

### Title
ProSight Native Complex Down Analysis of Aquaporin Z

### Description
In this dataset, we analyzed Aquaporin Z using native mass spectrometry. The data was then input into ProSight Native to determine the protein complex composition.

### Sample Protocol
E. coli expressed Aquaporin Z was analyzed using a Thermo Q Exactive UHMR.

### Data Protocol
The complex workflow in ProSight Native was used to perform deconvolution of intact complex and subunit mass spectra. Fragmentation data was searched in the subunit portion of ProSight Native. A final composition was determined by using the deconvolution and search results.

### Publication Abstract
Native mass spectrometry has recently moved alongside traditional structural biology techniques in its ability to provide clear insights into the composition of protein complexes. However, to date, limited software tools are available for the comprehensive analysis of native mass spectrometry data on protein complexes, particularly for experiments aimed at elucidating the composition of an intact protein complex. Here, we introduce ProSight Native as a start-to-finish informatics platform for analyzing native protein and protein complex data. Combining mass determination via spectral deconvolution with a top-down database search and stoichiometry calculations, ProSight Native can determine the complete composition of protein complexes. To demonstrate its features, we used ProSight Native to successfully determine the composition of the homotetrameric membrane complex Aquaporin Z. We also revisited previously published spectra and were able to decipher the composition of a heterodimer complex bound with two noncovalently associated ligands. In addition to determining complex composition, we developed new tools in the software for validating native mass spectrometry fragment ions and mapping top-down fragmentation data onto three-dimensional protein structures. Taken together, ProSight Native will reduce the informatics burden on the growing field of native mass spectrometry, enabling the technology to further its reach.

### Keywords
Native mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Proteinaceous, Inc.

### Submitter
Kenneth Durbin

### Lab Head
Dr Kenneth Durbin
Proteinaceous, Inc.


