### Accession
PXD011058

### Title
Nuclear Lactate Dehydrogenase A Senses ROS to Produce α-Hydroxybutyrate for HPV-Induced Cervical Tumor Growth

### Description
It is well known that high-risk human papilloma virus (HR-HPV) infection is strongly associated with cervical cancer and E7 was identified as one of the key initiators in HPV-mediated carcinogenesis. Here we show that lactate dehydrogenase A (LDHA) preferably locates in the nucleus in HPV16-positive cervical tumors due to E7-induced intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS) accumulation. Surprisingly, nuclear LDHA gains a non-canonical enzyme activity to produce α-hydroxybutyrate and triggers DOT1L (disruptor of telomeric silencing 1-like)-mediated histone H3K79 hypermethylation, resulting in the activation of antioxidant responses and Wnt signaling pathway. Furthermore, HPV16 E7 knocking-out reduces LDHA nuclear translocation and H3K79 tri-methylation in K14-HPV16 transgenic mouse model. HPV16 E7 level is significantly positively correlated with nuclear LDHA and H3K79 tri-methylation in cervical cancer. Collectively, our findings uncover a non-canonical enzyme activity of nuclear LDHA to epigenetically control cellular redox balance and cell proliferation facilitating HPV-induced cervical cancer development.

### Sample Protocol
5 × 106 cells cultured in media were washed in cold PBS, then lysed with lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES pH 7.9, 0.5 mM EDTA, 5 mM NaCl, 1% NP-40) adding 10 μl of LC/MS-grade methanol dissolved Cleavable ICAT-Light reagent (AB Sciex, 4337260) in an anoxic chamber. The lysates were sonicated for 30 sec, then centrifuged at 16,000 × g for 10 min at 4°C to pellet insoluble materials. The supernatant was collected into a new tube and incubate at 900 rpm in ThermoMixer for 1 h at 37°C protected from light. To remove the excessive Cleavable ICAT-Light reagents, the proteins were precipitated with 500 μl of prechilled (-20°C) acetone overnight at -20°C. Precipitated proteins were washed twice with 500 μl of prechilled (-20°C) acetone after centrifuged at 16,000 × g for 30 min at 4°C. The protein pellet was dissolved in 90 μl of denaturing alkylation buffer (6 M urea, 0.5% SDS, 10 mM EDTA, 200 mM Tris·HCl, pH 8.5) with 1 mM Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP), and adding 10 μl of LC/MS-grade methanol dissolved Cleavable ICAT-Heavy reagent. The sample was incubated at 900 rpm in ThermoMixer for 1 h at 37°C protected from light. Then, the ICAT labeled protein was precipitated by prechilled (-20°C) acetone as described. For protein digestion, the precipitated proteins were dissolved in 100 μl 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer, pH 8.0. Add 2.5 μl of trypsin to sample (1/50:trypsin/protein, w/w). Digest the sample overnight at 37°C water bath. After digestion, peptides were cleaned up using C18 tips and lyophilized. For LC-MS/MS analysis, purified peptides were resuspended in 1% acetonitrile and 1% formic acid (FA) in H2O and analyzed by LC (Ultimate 3000, Thermo Scientific) equipped with self-packed capillary column (150 μm i.d. × 12 cm, 1.9 μm C18 reverse-phase fused-silica, Trap) using a 90 min nonlinear gradient at a flow rate of 600 nL/min.

### Data Protocol
Data were analysed by ProteinPilot program (v5.0.1) according to default parameters. We processed MS/MS raw files in this study in Proteome Discoverer 2.0 (v2.0.0.802, Matrix Science Mascot 2.3.01) against human SwissProt database (release 2015.12). The tolerances of precursor and fragment ions were set at 15 ppm and 20 mmu, respectively. For digestion, trypsin was set as pretease with two missed cleavage permitted.

### Publication Abstract
It is well known that high-risk human papilloma virus (HR-HPV) infection is strongly associated with cervical cancer and E7 was identified as one of the key initiators in HPV-mediated carcinogenesis. Here we show that lactate dehydrogenase A (LDHA) preferably locates in the nucleus in HPV16-positive cervical tumors due to E7-induced intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS) accumulation. Surprisingly, nuclear LDHA gains a non-canonical enzyme activity to produce &#x3b1;-hydroxybutyrate and triggers DOT1L (disruptor of telomeric silencing 1-like)-mediated histone H3K79 hypermethylation, resulting in the activation of antioxidant responses and Wnt signaling pathway. Furthermore, HPV16 E7 knocking-out reduces LDHA nuclear translocation and H3K79 tri-methylation in K14-HPV16 transgenic mouse model. HPV16 E7 level is significantly positively correlated with nuclear LDHA and H3K79 tri-methylation in cervical cancer. Collectively, our findings uncover a non-canonical enzyme activity of nuclear LDHA to epigenetically control cellular redox balance and cell proliferation facilitating HPV-induced cervical cancer development.

### Keywords
Redox proteomics, Cervical cancer, Hpv

### Affiliations
Department of Biotherapy, State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy and Cancer Center, West China Hospital, and West China School of Basic Medical Sciences & Forensic Medicine, Sichuan University, and Collaborative Innovation Center for Biotherapy, Chengdu 610041, P.R. China

### Submitter
Canhua Huang

### Lab Head
Dr Canhua Huang
Department of Biotherapy, State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy and Cancer Center, West China Hospital, and West China School of Basic Medical Sciences & Forensic Medicine, Sichuan University, and Collaborative Innovation Center for Biotherapy, Chengdu 610041, P.R. China


