### Accession
PXD018219

### Title
Inter- and Intra-Molecular Interactions of The Arabidopsis Plasma Membrane Proton Pump Revealed Using a Mass Spectrometric-Cleavable Crosslinker

### Description
In plants and fungi, the plasma membrane proton pump (H+-ATPase) establishes an electrochemical gradient across the plasma membrane which serves as the driving force for the secondary transport of ions and nutrients across the cell membrane. This is an essential enzyme that functions in many important processes including stomatal movement, cell elongation, and cellular responses to stimuli from hormones, light, and other environmental conditions. Therefore, understanding how the activity of the H+-ATPase is regulated is important to understand how plants adapt to different growth conditions. The autoinhibitory effect of the C- terminal regulatory domain of H+-ATPase is well established and is thought to be mediated by interactions with the catalytic domains. Here, using the lysine reactive mass spectrometry cleavable crosslinker DSSO, we found that the C-terminal domain of the Arabidopsis H+- ATPase 2 (AHA2) crosslinked extensively with the actuator, nucleotide-binding, and phosphorylation domains, suggesting that the C-terminal domain regulates the catalytic cycle by modulating the relative positions of these domains. Interestingly, several C-terminal crosslinks occurred near a predicted proton binding site (Asp-684 in TM6), suggesting that the C-terminal domain may regulate proton efflux. Additionally, crosslinks between the C-terminal domain and other domains of AHA2 were detected in a monomeric protein resolved on SDS-PAGE, suggesting that intramolecular interactions may also be involved in the regulation of enzyme activity. Finally, we observed mixed-isotope crosslinking between unlabeled (14N-AHA2) and labeled (15N-AHA2) between the C-terminal domain and other domains of AHA2, supporting    our model that oligomeric H+-ATPase may autoinhibit the neighboring monomer in a “head to tail” configuration.

### Sample Protocol
Peptide mixtures were separated on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano system with C18 column: Acclaim PepMap, 75 μm × 25 cm, 2 μm, 100 Å (Thermo Fisher Scientific). A gradient from 2% to 40% B was used with a flow rate of 300 nL/min (5-43 min gradient time). For the peptide sample digested in solution, a longer gradient elution from 5 minute to 100 minutes were used instead. The peptides were then further eluted for 5 minutes with 40% to 90% B. The column was then washed with 90% B for 5 minutes and re-equilibrated with 100% buffer A for 12 minutes. Solvent A: water + 0.1% formic acid; solvent B: acetonitrile + 0.01% formic acid. The nano-HPLC system was directly coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer with an EASY spray Source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Data were acquired in data-dependent MS/MS mode. Each high-resolution full scan (R = 60 000) in the orbitrap was followed by high- resolution product ion scans (R = 30 000) within 5 seconds, starting with the most intense signal in the full scan mass spectrum (isolation window of 2 m/z); the target value was set to 50 000, and maximum accumulation time was set to 200 ms. Dynamic exclusion (exclusion duration of 16 seconds exclusion window of ±10 ppm) was enabled to detect less abundant ions. Only precursors with charge states from 3+ to 8+ were selected for MS/ MS. For CIDMS2-HCDMS2 acquisition, sequential fragmentation with CID at 25% normalized collision energy (NCE), and stepped HCD (30 ±5% NCE) were used to obtain MS2 spectrum. For CIDMS2-HCDMS3 acquisition, CID fragmentation energy was set to 25% NCE, then four most abundant reporter doublets from MS/MS scans (charge states 2−6, Δ-mass 31.9721 Da, ±30 ppm) were selected for MS3. MS3 scans were recorded in the ion trap operated in rapid mode with a maximum fill time of 150 ms (isolation width 2.0 m/z). Fragmentation was carried out using stepped HCD by applying a collision energy of 30 ±5% NCE. For CID-MS2/ETD-MS2 or CID-MS2/EThcD-MS2 the methods were adapted from a previous study 28.

### Data Protocol
Acquired mass spectra raw files were analyzed using Thermo Scientific Proteome Discoverer 2.2 software using the XlinkX node. The target search database was the AHA2 sequence with other yeast proteins identified in the purified AHA2 sample supplemented with the sequences of common keratin contaminant proteins. Mass spectral analysis parameters included 3 maximum allowed missed cleavages, a minimum peptide length of 6. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a static modification, and 4 maximum variable modifications: methionine oxidation, deamidation of glutamine and asparagine. In addition, three modifications on lysines were included: alkene (C3H2O; +54 Da), sulfenic acid (C3H4O2S; +104 Da), and thiol (C3H2SO; +86 Da) modifications due to remnants of the crosslinker as described in a previous study 22. For Precursor mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm, and fragment mass tolerance was set at 20 ppm and 0.5 Da for Orbitrap and ion trap spectra, respectively. False discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% using Percolator algorithm, and crosslink peptide spectra matching with minimum score threshold set at 40. For our mixed-crosslinking experiments, we limited the search space to 14N-AHA2 due to the computational scaling problem. We then calculated the expected m/z shift for a given crosslink ID by adding the value of single neutron (0.997035 Daltons) divided by the charge state of the dipeptide being considered, to the m/z of one peptide for every nitrogen atom in each residue (Heavy x Light crosslink). We repeated this for a case in which the second peptide of the dipeptide was the heavy-labeled one as well. We then used these predicted shifts to identify a matching isotopic envelope for a mixed dipeptide. The spectra of crosslinks were extracted using FreeStyle (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Publication Abstract
In plants and fungi, the plasma membrane proton pump (H<sup>+</sup>-ATPase) establishes an electrochemical gradient across the plasma membrane, which serves as the driving force for the secondary transport of ions and nutrients across the cell membrane. This is an essential enzyme that functions in many important processes including stomatal movement, cell elongation, and cellular responses to stimuli from hormones, light, and other environmental conditions. Therefore, understanding how the activity of the H<sup>+</sup>-ATPase is regulated is important to understand how plants adapt to different growth conditions. The autoinhibitory effect of the C-terminal regulatory domain of H<sup>+</sup>-ATPase is well-established and is thought to be mediated by interactions with the catalytic domains. Here, using the lysine reactive mass spectrometry cleavable cross-linker DSSO, we found that the C-terminal domain of the <i>Arabidopsis</i> H<sup>+</sup>-ATPase 2 (AHA2) cross-linked extensively with the actuator, nucleotide-binding, and phosphorylation domains, suggesting that the C-terminal domain regulates the catalytic cycle by modulating the relative positions of these domains. Interestingly, several C-terminal cross-links occurred near a predicted proton binding site (Asp-684 in TM6), suggesting that the C-terminal domain may regulate proton efflux. Additionally, cross-links between the C-terminal domain and other domains of AHA2 were detected in a monomeric protein resolved on SDS-PAGE, suggesting that intramolecular interactions may also be involved in the regulation of enzyme activity. Finally, we observed mixed-isotope cross-linking between the C-terminal domain and other domains of <sup>14</sup>N-AHA2 (unlabeled) and <sup>15</sup>N-AHA2 (labeled), supporting our model that oligomeric H<sup>+</sup>-ATPase may autoinhibit the neighboring monomer in a "head-to-tail" configuration.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis, Crosslinking, Dsso, Plasma membrane protein pump, Metabolic labeling

### Affiliations
University of Missouri-Columbia
University of Wisconsin Madison, Department of Biochemistry

### Submitter
Thao Thi Nguyen

### Lab Head
Dr Michael R. Sussman
University of Wisconsin Madison, Department of Biochemistry


