### Accession
PXD025349

### Title
Engineered yeast strains expressing human glycolytic enzymes

### Description
Ewout Knibbe et al.,(Pascale Daran-Lapujade Lab, TU Delft) report on engineered yeast strains to express the human glycolysis pathway instead of the native pathway enzymes. The goal of the project is to investigate the conservation of these functions between species. The engineered yeast strains were compared to their native strains in regard to growth rate and glycolytic flux, and by means of omics such as by large-scale quantitative proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
Approximately 50mg of cell pellets (wet weight) were lysed using beads beating in 1% SDS, 100mM TEAB, including protease inhibitor and phosphate inhibitor. Then, the samples were centrifuged and the supernatant was transferred to a new tube. The proteins were reduced with dithiothreitol and alkylated using acrylamide (AA), where the protein was finally precipitated and washed using ice cold acetone. The protein pellets were dissolved in 100mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer, and subjected to overnight digestion using proteomics grade trypsin at 37°C and under gentle shaking. The peptides were desalted using solid-phase extraction on a Waters Oasis HLB 96-well µElution plate according to the manufacturers protocol, SpeedVac dried and stored at -20°C until analysed. One aliquot of each sample was dissolved in 3% acetonitrile and 0.01% formic acid and subjected to nLC-MS/MS analysis for digestion quality control purpose. One aliquot of each sample was further dissolved in 100mM TEAB for TMT 10plex labelling. The peptide content of the samples were estimated using a NanoDrop photospectrometer, and the samples were diluted to achieve an approx. equal concentration. The TMT labelling agents were dissolved by adding 40µL anhydrous acetonitrile, and 5µL of each label was added to the individual samples. The samples were incubated at 25°C under gentle shaking, for 75 minutes. Then the reaction was stopped by adding diluted hydroxylamine solution. The samples were incubated at 25°C under gentle shaking. Equal amounts of sample were combined in a LoBind Eppendorf tube. After dilution with aqueous buffer, solid phase extraction was once more performed according to the manufacturers protocol. The samples were SpeedVac dried, and stored at -20°C until analysed. Finally, the samples were solubilised in 3% acetonitrile and 0.01% TFA and subjected to nLC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
An aliquot corresponding to approx. 500ng of every TMT 10plex peptide mixture (SET1, SET2 and SET3, where 3 strains were mixed and compared within one SET, and each strain within one SET was present as triplicate) was analysed by duplicate analysis employing one-dimensional shotgun proteomics. Briefly, TMT labelled peptides were analysed using a nano-liquid-chromatography system consisting of an ESAY nano LC 1200, equipped with an Acclaim PepMap RSLC RP C18 separation column (50 µm x 150 mm, 2µm and 100A), online coupled to a QE plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Germany). The flow rate was maintained at 350nL/min over a linear gradient from 5% to 25% solvent B over 178 minutes, and finally to 55% B over 60 minutes. Solvent A consisted of H2O containing 0.1% formic acid, and solvent B consisted of 80% acetonitrile in H2O, plus 0.1% formic acid. The Orbitrap was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode acquiring peptide signals form 385-1450 m/z at 70K resolution, 75ms max IT, and an AGC target of 3e6, where the top 10 signals were isolated at a window of 1.6m/z and fragmented at a NCE of 32. The peptide fragments were measured at 35K resolution, using an AGC target of 1e5 and allowing a max IT of 100ms.  Mass spectrometric raw data were processed using PEAKS Studio 10.0 (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc.) allowing 20ppm parent and 0.01Da fragment mass error tolerance, TMT10plex and Carbamidomethylation as fixed, and methionine oxidation and N/Q deamidation as variable modifications. Data were matched against an in-house established yeast protein sequence database, including the GPM crap contaminant database (https://www.thegpm.org/crap/) and a decoy fusion for determining false discovery rates. Peptide spectrum matches were filtered against 1% false discovery rate (FDR) and protein identifications were accepted as being significant when having 2 unique peptides matches minimum. Quantitative analysis of the global proteome changes between the individual yeast strains was performed using the PEAKS Q software package (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc.), considering a quantification mass tolerance of 10ppm, a FDR threshold of 1%, using auto normalisation and ANOVA as the significance method.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Yeast, Glycolysis, Tmt experiment, Qe plus

### Affiliations
TUD
Department of Biotechnology, TU Delft, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Martin Pabst

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Pabst
Department of Biotechnology, TU Delft, The Netherlands


