### Accession
PXD015538

### Title
WblC- and tetracycline-dependent shifts in the composition of Streptomyces coelicolor ribosomal proteome

### Description
WblC, also known as WhiB7, is a widely conserved WhiB-like transcription factor in actinomycetes that activates transcription of many targets upon antibiotic challenge to bring about intrinsic resistance to a wide range of translation-targeting antibiotics. As we found that WblC controls many genes involved in translation and that WblC promotes translation rate upon antibiotic stress in the model actinomycetes Streptomyces coelicolor, we speculated that WblC might alter the protein composition of ribosome during antibiotic stress. To test this, we prepared 70S ribosome fraction from wild-type S. coelicolor cells untreated or treated with tetracycline and ΔwblC mutant treated with tetracycline, and then compared the protein compositions of each 70S samples by mass spectrometric quantification.

### Sample Protocol
Wild-type and ΔwblC cells were grown to OD600 of about 0.4 and treated with 0.25 μg/ml tetracycline for 2 h. Control cells were grown in parallel without tetracycline (final OD of 0.7~1.0). Then, cells were harvested and washed with wash buffer [20 mM Tris-Cl pH 7.4, 100 mM NaCl, 10 mM MgCl2] and were lysed by sonication in lysis buffer [20 mM Tris-Cl pH 7.4, 200 mM NH4Cl, 10 mM MgCl2, 0.5 mM EDTA, 6 mM β-mercaptoethanol] with 5 U/ml RNase inhibitor (Applied Biosystems) and 1 mM PMSF. After 5 U/ml TURBO DNase (Ambion) treatment at 4°C for 15 min, lysates were clarified twice by centrifugation (22,000  g, 10 min, 4°C). Crude ribosomes were pelleted by ultracentrifugation (100,000 x g, 1 h, 4°C), rinsed with lysis buffer by gentle swirling, and resuspended in lysis buffer with 10 U/ml RNase inhibitor on ice. Crude ribosomes were loaded onto 5-30% sucrose gradient prepared with lysis buffer, spun at 150,000 x g for 2.5 h, and fractions were collected. The 70S fractions were identified by measuring absorbance of the fractions at 254 nm and pooled together for each sample. Integrity of rRNAs extracted from each sample was checked on standard formaldehyde agarose gel for all biologically independent replicates. The purified ribosome samples were denatured with 8 M urea and reduced with 10 mM DTT, followed by subsequent alkylation of cysteine thiol groups with 40 mM iodoacetamide in the dark. The samples were diluted to 1 M urea and trypsinized (1:50 ratio (w/w)) overnight at 37°C. The tryptic digests were cleaned up with C18-SPE column (Supelco) and resuspended in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer. 2 μg of each peptide samples, quantified by BCA assay, were subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis. LC-MS/MS experiments with HCD fragmentation mode was performed on Q-Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometry (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled with nanoACQUITY UPLC (Waters), equipped with in-house packed capillary trap column (150 μm inner diameter, 3 cm long) and analytical column (75 μm inner diameter, 100 cm long) with 3 μm Jupiter C18 particles (Phenomenex) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. A linear gradient (100 min) was applied for each biological replicate.

### Data Protocol
Acquired datasets were analysed by MaxQuant (v1.5.3.30) with Andromeda search engine at 10 ppm precursor ion mass tolerance against Swiss-Prot S. coelicolor database at <1% of protein false discovery rate. The label-free quantification mode was applied for the quantitative analysis of ribosome-associated proteins and statistical analysis among experiments was performed using Perseus that accompanies MaxQuant.

### Publication Abstract
Bacteria that encounter antibiotics can efficiently change their physiology to develop resistance. This intrinsic antibiotic resistance is mediated by multiple pathways, including a regulatory system(s) that activates specific genes. In some <i>Streptomyces</i> and <i>Mycobacterium</i> spp., the WblC/WhiB7 transcription factor is required for intrinsic resistance to translation-targeting antibiotics. Wide conservation of WblC/WhiB7 within <i>Actinobacteria</i> indicates a critical role of WblC/WhiB7 in developing resistance to such antibiotics. Here, we identified 312 WblC target genes in <i>Streptomyces coelicolor</i>, a model antibiotic-producing bacterium, using a combined analysis of RNA sequencing and chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing. Interestingly, WblC controls many genes involved in translation, in addition to previously identified antibiotic resistance genes. Moreover, WblC promotes translation rate during antibiotic stress by altering the ribosome-associated protein composition. Our genome-wide analyses highlight a previously unappreciated antibiotic resistance mechanism that modifies ribosome composition and maintains the translation rate in the presence of sub-MIC levels of antibiotics.<b>IMPORTANCE</b> The emergence of antibiotic-resistant bacteria is one of the top threats in human health. Therefore, we need to understand how bacteria acquire resistance to antibiotics and continue growth even in the presence of antibiotics. <i>Streptomyces coelicolor</i>, an antibiotic-producing soil bacterium, intrinsically develops resistance to translation-targeting antibiotics. Intrinsic resistance is controlled by the WblC/WhiB7 transcription factor that is highly conserved within <i>Actinobacteria</i>, including <i>Mycobacterium tuberculosis</i> Here, identification of the WblC/WhiB7 regulon revealed that WblC/WhiB7 controls ribosome maintenance genes and promotes translation in the presence of antibiotics by altering the composition of ribosome-associated proteins. Also, the WblC-mediated ribosomal alteration is indeed required for resistance to translation-targeting antibiotics. This suggests that inactivation of the WblC/WhiB7 regulon could be a potential target to treat antibiotic-resistant mycobacteria.

### Keywords
Ribosome, Streptomyces coelicolor, Whib7, Antibiotic stress, Wblc

### Affiliations
School of Biological Sciences, Seoul National University, Seoul, 08826, South Korea
Seoul National University

### Submitter
Ju-Hyung Lee

### Lab Head
Dr Jung-Hye Roe
School of Biological Sciences, Seoul National University, Seoul, 08826, South Korea


