### Accession
PXD027903

### Title
Identification of polysome-associated translational regulators during oxidative stress and amino acid starvation

### Description
To identify RBPs with previously unappreciated roles in translational regulation, we performed polysome proteomics (polysome profiling and label-free mass spectrometry) to identify and quantify proteins associated with translating ribosomes in unstressed yeast cells and changes in association during two acute stresses that induce the integrated stress response (ISR): oxidative stress (0.45 mM H2O2 treatment for 15 min) and amino acid starvation (10 mM 3-AT treatment for 15 min). Five fractions were isolated from sucrose gradients prepared from each extract, corresponding to monosomes (F1) and polysomes with increasing numbers of ribosomes per mRNA (F2-F5). Unfractionated cyotplasmic lysates (totals) were analysed for each sample. Four replicate extracts were prepared and analysed for each condition.

### Sample Protocol
Polysome profiling Batch cultures of BY4741 yeast were grown at 30°C to an OD600 of 0.6. Formaldehyde crosslinking was used to fix translating ribosomes and their associated factors on mRNA. Cultures were transferred into pre-chilled Falcon tubes containing formaldehyde (at a final concentration of 0.8% (v/v)) and a quarter volume of frozen media pellets. Samples were incubated on ice for 1 h then excess formaldehyde was quenched by the addition of 2 M glycine (to a final concentration of 80 mM). Cells were harvested by centrifugation, washed and lysed with acid-washed glass beads in 200 µL of polysome lysis buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 2 mM magnesium acetate, 100 mM potassium acetate, 0.5 mM DTT, 0.1% DEPC) for 20 s, 7 times. Two OD units of lysate were layered on to 15-50% sucrose gradients prepared in 12 mL thin-walled open polyallomer tubes (Seton Scientific) and separated by ultracentrifugation in an SW41 Ti rotor (2.5 h at 278,000 x g, 4°C). Profiles were generated by continuous A254 recording using a UA-6 UV/Vis detector and chart recorder (Teledyne ISCO). Monosomal and polysomal fractions were collected manually at pre-determined intervals.  Protein extraction Protein was extracted from sucrose gradient fractions for analysis by western blotting and mass spectrometry. A half volume of ice-cold 40% TCA was added to each fraction, mixed by inversion and incubated overnight at -20°C. Precipitated protein was pelleted by centrifugation (15 min at 20,000 x g, 4°C) and washed twice with ice-cold acetone. Pellets were dried for 20 min at room temperature then resuspended in 5 µL of 1 M Tris and 10 µL of protein loading buffer (2x NuPAGE LDS sample buffer (Invitrogen), 715 mM 2-mercaptoethanol). Samples were incubated for 5 min at 95°C.  Label-free mass spectrometry Protein samples from sucrose gradient fractions and cytoplasmic extracts (‘totals’) were dehydrated using acetonitrile and centrifuged under vacuum. Dried gel pieces were reduced with 10 mM DTT and alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide, then twice washed alternately with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate and acetonitrile. Gel pieces were dried by vacuum centrifugation and samples digested using trypsin overnight at 37°C. Liquid chromatography (LC) was carried out using an UltiMate 3000 Rapid Separation Binary System (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were concentrated using an ACQUITY UPLC M-Class Symmetry C18 Trap Column (180 μm inner diameter, 20 mm length (Waters)) and then separated using an ACQUITY UPLC M-Class Peptide BEH C18 Column (75 μm inner diameter, 250 mm length, 1.7 μm particle size (Waters)). A gradient starting with 99% Buffer A (0.1% formic acid in water) and 1% Buffer B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) and increasing to 75% Buffer A and 25% Buffer B was used to separate the peptides over 45 min at a flow rate of 200 nL/min. Label-free tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) was performed using an Orbitrap Elite Hybrid Ion Trap-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were selected for fragmentation and MS2 analysis automatically by data-dependent analysis.

### Data Protocol
MS data processing Raw MS data were processed using MaxQuant version 1.5.7.4. A peptide mass tolerance of 20 ppm was used for the first search, 4.5 ppm for the main search, and 0.5 Da for the MS/MS fragment ions. The peak list was searched against the Uniprot Saccharomyces cerevisiae database using the built-in Andromeda search engine. The false discovery rate (FDR) for accepted peptide spectrum matches and protein matches was set to 1%. Further analysis was performed using R (version 3.6.2) and additional packages.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Translation, Yeast, Ribosome, Polysomes, Stress response, S. cerevisiae

### Affiliations
University of Manchester
Division of Molecular & Cellular Function, School of Biological Sciences, Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, University of Manchester, Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, Oxford Road, Manchester, M13 9PT

### Submitter
Robert Crawford

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Graham Pavitt
Division of Molecular & Cellular Function, School of Biological Sciences, Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, University of Manchester, Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, Oxford Road, Manchester, M13 9PT


