### Accession
PXD023577

### Title
Deciphering the architecture and interactome of the spliceosomal C complex using in vivo chemical crosslinking

### Description
We used in vivo PIR-based crosslinking to assess specific regions of interaction and protein structure of the spliceosomal C complex components hnRNPA1, A2/B1, and C, and the RALY protein. Our results indicate the interaction of proteins of the C complex via domains regions and conserved motifs, posing as evidence of a coordinated action of known regulatory sequences of RBPs. Moreover, the crosslinking information helped to model some of the RBPs, being complementary to other structural methods available.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysis HeLa cells were seeded at a density of 5 × 106 cells into 150 mm culture dishes with 20 ml of DMEM supplemented with 10% dialyzed fetal bovine serum (Valley Biomedical) and 1% penicillin/streptomycin (Fisher Scientific). Cells were harvested with 5 ml of PBS 1× with 5 mM EDTA for 3 min, at 37 °C. Cells were washed once with a solution containing 1 mM CaCl2 and 1 mM MgCl2 and twice with PBS 1×, pelleted each time by centrifugation at 300 × g for 3 min. Cell pellets were suspended in 1 mL of HEPES buffer (200 mM HEPES, 200 mM NaCl, 2 mM EDTA, pH 7.5) and cryo-milled using the Mixer Mill MM 400 (Retsch), following the manufacturer’s instructions. The cell powder was suspended in 500 μL of HEPES buffer. Chemical crosslinking Two biological replicates of each cell lysate – treated with RNase and control – were crosslinked with the PIR crosslinker amide BDP-NHP, as previously described 12,13. Briefly, 10 mM of amide BDP-NHP in 500 μL of crosslinker buffer (170 mM Na2HPO4, pH 8.0) was added to the cell lysates and the reaction happened for 30 min, in room temperature with constant shaking. The crosslinked cells were pelleted by centrifugation at 300 × g for 3 min and washed 3 times with PBS 1×. Sample preparation Crosslinked cell pellets were suspended in 8 M urea solution in 0.1M NH4HCO3 buffer, pH 8.0, and sonicated using a GE-130 ultrasonic processor, followed by reduction, alkylation, and tryptic digestion. Peptide samples were acidified to pH 2 with trifluoroacetic acid, followed by desalting by solid phase extraction using C18 Sep-Pak cartridges (Waters) and concentration by vacuum centrifugation. Resulting peptides were suspended in 500 μL of solvent A (7 mM KH2PO4, 30% acetonitrile pH 2.8) and fractionated by SCX chromatography using an Agilent 1200 series high-performance liquid chromatography system equipped with a 250 3 10.0 mm column packed with Luna 5 mm diameter, 100 A ° pore size particles (Phenomenex). Peptide separation was made using a binary mobile phase solvent system consisting of solvent A and solvent B (7 mM KH2PO4, 350 mM KCl, 30% acetonitrile pH 2.8) at a flow rate of 1.5 mL/min using the following gradient program: 0-7.5 min 100% A, 7.5-47.5 min 95% A/5% B to 40% A/ 60% B, 47.5- 67.5 min 40% A/ 60% B to 100% B, 67.5-77.5 min 100% B, 77.5-97.5 min 100% A. A total of 14 fractions were collected and pooled as follows: fractions 1 to 5, 6 and 7, and 11 to 14. Crosslinked peptides from SCX fractions were further enriched using UltraLink monomeric avidin (Thermo). The enriched crosslinked peptide sample was concentrated by vacuum centrifugation and stored at 80 °C. LC-MS/MS analysis of cross-linked samples Pooled peptides from SCX fractions (1-5, 6-7, 8, 9, 10, and 11-14) were suspended in 30 μL of 0.1% (vol/vol) formic acid. Sample fractions were centrifuged at 16,000 × g for 10 min at room temperature and the supernatant of each sample transferred to an LC autosampler vials (Thermo). For the LC-MS/MS analysis, 3 µL of each sample (approximately 1 µg) from each pooled fraction was injected into the nano-LC system (Thermo), coupled to a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo). Each fraction was analyzed 2 times for technical replicates of the experiment. Each peptide fraction was then loaded onto a trap column [3 cm × 100-μm i.d., stationary phase ReproSil-Pur C8 (5-μm diameter and 120-Å-pore-size particles)] with a flow rate of 2 μL/min of mobile phase: 98% (vol/vol) LC–MS solvent A [0.1% (vol/vol) FA in water] and 2% (vol/vol) LC–MS solvent B [0.1% (vol/vol) FA in acetonitrile], and chromatographically separated using an analytical column [60 cm × 75-μm i.d., stationary phase ReproSil-Pur C8 (5-μm diameter and 120-Å-pore-size particles)], applying a 240-min linear gradient: from 95% LC–MS solvent A, 5% LC–MS solvent B to 60% LC–MS solvent A, 40% LC–MS solvent B, at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. For Mango analysis of the PIR crosslinker 14, the mass spectrometer was set to high resolution method to data-dependent acquisition (DDA) of the 5 most intense ions with charge state of +4 to +8, with a dynamic exclusion of 30 s and isolation window of 3 Da. Each MS1 scan (70,000 resolving power at 200 m/z, automated gain control (AGC) of 1 × 106, scan range 400 to 2,000 m/z, dynamic exclusion of 30 s) was followed by 5 MS2 scans (70,000 resolving power at 200 m/z, AGC of 5 × 104, normalized collision energy of 30).

### Data Protocol
Data was searched using Comet and results validated with XLinkProphet.

### Publication Abstract
RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) have conserved domains and consensus sequences that interact with RNAs and other proteins forming ribonucleoprotein (RNP) complexes. RNPs are involved in the regulation of several cellular processes, including transcription, pre-mRNA splicing, mRNA transport, localization, degradation and storage, and ultimately control of translation. Heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoproteins (hnRNPs) comprise a family of RBPs that mediate transcription control and nuclear processing of transcripts. Some hnRNPs are part of the spliceosome complex, a dynamic machinery formed by RNPs that regulate alternative splicing of pre-mRNAs. Here, chemical crosslinking of proteins was applied to identify specific interacting regions and protein structural features of hnRNPs: hnRNPA1, hnRNPA2/B1, hnRNPC, and RALY. The results reveal interaction of these proteins within RNA-binding domains and conserved motifs, providing evidence of a coordinated action of known regulatory sequences of RBPs. Moreover, these crosslinking data enable structural model generation for RBPs, illustrating how crosslinking mass spectrometry can complement other structural methods.

### Keywords
Chemical cross-linking, Rna-binding proteins, Splicing, Interactome, Protein interaction reporter, Nuclear hnrnps

### Affiliations
Bruce Lab, Genome Sciences, University of Washington
University of Washington

### Submitter
Helisa Wippel

### Lab Head
Dr James Bruce
Bruce Lab, Genome Sciences, University of Washington


