### Accession
PXD019678

### Title
Quantitative proteomic analysis of hypoxia induced primary kidney cells

### Description
Chronic kidney disease (CKD) is characterized by a slow and gradual loss of kidney function, with glomerular filtration loss over months or years, inevitably leading to end-stage renal disease. The renal failure resulting from this irreversible process derives from fibrotic lesions of each compartment of the kidney; glomerulosclerosis, vascular sclerosis, and tubulointerstitial fibrosis. Nevertheless, despite numerous research efforts, both the definitive mechanism underlying the progression from CKD to end stage renal disease and an effective treatment have remained elusive. In this study, We utilized TMT-multiplexed quantitative proteomics approaches to identify protein expression changes associated with chronic injury in primary cultured renal cells.

### Sample Protocol
For relative quantification of human primary GECs and PTECs before and after hypoxic injury, we performed TMT-labeled MS analysis. Proteins extracted from primary cells were digested by the FASP method as described above. Primary cell pellets were lysed in lysis buffer (4% SDS, 2 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine, and 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH7.5) by direct sonication. Lysates were heated for 30 min at 95 °C. To minimize interference from the reducing reagent, the concentration of proteins in lysates was measured using a reducing agent-compatible BCA assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific). After each sample containing 150 g of total protein was precipitated with cold acetone, the proteins were digested via multi-digestion FASP according to our previously described process. Peptide concentrations were measured by tryptophan fluorescence assay. TMT labeling was performed according to the manufacturer’s protocol with some modifications. Briefly, the TMT reagent (0.8 mg) was dissolved in 100% acetonitrile. After spiking with 500 ng of peptides derived from ovalbumin as an internal standard, 25 l of the reagent was added to 50 g of peptide samples along with acetonitrile to give a final concentration of 30%(v/v). Normoxia samples were labeled with the tags TMT-126, TMT-127, and TMT-128, whereas hypoxia samples were labeled with tags TMT-129, TMT-130, and TMT-131. After incubation at room temperature for 1 h, the reaction was quenched with 5% hydroxylamine. TMT-labeled samples were pooled at a 1:1:1:1:1:1 ratio. The resulting peptide mixtures were vacuum-centrifuged to dry and subjected to C18 solid-phase extraction. The pooled peptides were subjected to high pH reverse-phase-high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) fractionation using an Agilent 1290 bioinert HPLC (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA, USA) equipped with an analytical column (4.6 × 250 mm, 5 μm) as described previously. Solvent A consisted of 15 mM ammonium hydroxide in water and solvent B consisted of 15 mM ammonium hydroxide in 90% acetonitrile. The peptides were separated with a 5 to 35% acetonitrile gradient at a flow rate of 0.2 ml/min. A total of 96 fractions were concatenated to mix different parts of the gradient into 24 fractions. The fractions were lyophilized and stored at −80 C until MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
For the database search for the TMT 6-plex experiment, MS raw files were processed using Proteome Discoverer version 2.2 with the SEQUEST-HT algorithm against the Human UniProt protein sequence database (December 2014, 88,657 entries). The search parameters included full enzyme digestion using trypsin with up to two missed cleavages, 20 ppm of peptide precursor mass tolerance, and 0.02 Da of fragment ion mass tolerance. Variable modifications of 15.995 Da for methionine oxidation and 42.011 Da for protein N-terminal acetylation and fixed modifications of 57.021 Da for carbamidomethylation on cysteine residues and 229.153 Da for TMT 6-plex labeled lysine and any N-terminus were selected. The co-isolation threshold for quantification of peptides was set to 50%. The FDRs of peptide-spectral matches and proteins were set to < 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Urinary proteomics studies have primarily focused on identifying markers of chronic kidney disease (CKD) progression. Here, we aimed to determine urinary markers of CKD renal parenchymal injury through proteomics analysis in animal kidney tissues and cells and in the urine of patients with CKD. Label-free quantitative proteomics analysis based on liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry was performed on urine samples obtained from 6 normal controls and 9, 11, and 10 patients with CKD stages 1, 3, and 5, respectively, and on kidney tissue samples from a rat CKD model by 5/6 nephrectomy. Tandem mass tag-based quantitative proteomics analysis was performed for glomerular endothelial cells (GECs) and proximal tubular epithelial cells (PTECs) before and after inducing 24-h hypoxia injury. Upon hierarchical clustering, out of 858 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) in the urine of CKD patients, the levels of 416 decreased and 403 increased sequentially according to the disease stage, respectively. Among 2965 DEPs across 5/6 nephrectomized and sham-operated rat kidney tissues, 86 DEPs showed same expression patterns in the urine and kidney tissue. After cross-validation with two external animal proteome data sets, 38 DEPs were organized; only ten DEPs, including serotransferrin, gelsolin, poly ADP-ribose polymerase 1, neuroblast differentiation-associated protein AHNAK, microtubule-associated protein 4, galectin-1, protein S, thymosin beta-4, myristoylated alanine-rich C-kinase substrate, and vimentin, were finalized by screening human GECs and PTECs data. Among these ten potential candidates for universal CKD marker, validation analyses for protein S and galectin-1 were conducted. Galectin-1 was observed to have a significant inverse correlation with renal function as well as higher expression in glomerulus with chronic injury than protein S. This constitutes the first multisample proteomics study for identifying key renal-expressed proteins associated with CKD progression. The discovered proteins represent potential markers of chronic renal cell and tissue damage and candidate contributors to CKD pathophysiology.

### Keywords
Chronic kidney injury, Gec, Ptec, Fibrosis, Hypoxia, Tmt, Kidney

### Affiliations
Proteomics Core Facility, Biomedical Research Institute, Seoul National University Hospital
Proteomics core facility, Biomedical Research Institute, Seoul National University Hospital

### Submitter
Dohyun Han

### Lab Head
Dr Dohyun Han
Proteomics core facility, Biomedical Research Institute, Seoul National University Hospital


