### Accession
PXD026539

### Title
CDK4/6 inhibition promotes anti-tumor immunity

### Description
Pharmacologicalinhibitors of cyclin dependent kinases 4 and 6 (CDK4/6) are an approvedtreatment forhormone receptor-positive breast cancer and are currently under evaluation across hundreds of clinical trials for other cancertypes. The clinical success of these inhibitorsis largely attributedto well-defined tumor-intrinsic   cytostatic   mechanisms,   while   their   emerging   role   as immunomodulatory  agents  is  lessunderstood. Usingintegrated  epigenomic,  transcriptomic  and proteomicanalyses,  we demonstrateda  novel  action  of  CDK4/6inhibitorsin promoting the phenotypic and functional acquisition of immunological T cell memory.Short-term priming with a CDK4/6inhibitorpromoted long-termendogenousanti-tumor T cell immunityin mice,  enhanced the persistence and therapeutic efficacy of chimeric antigen receptor (CAR)-T cells, and induced an RB-dependent T cell phenotype supportive offavorable responses to immune checkpoint blockade in melanoma patients.Together, thesemechanistic insights significantlybroaden the prospective utility of CDK4/6 inhibitors as clinical tools to boostanti-tumorT cell immunity.

### Sample Protocol
500g of each cell pellet was digested using the USP3 protocol1. Cell pellets were dissolved in 5% SDS, 10mM TCEP, 40mM 2-CAA, Tris-HCl pH 7.5 by heating to 95C for 10min. DNA was hydrolysed using 1% Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) before the sample was neutralised using 3M Tris (final concentration 160mM). 20ul of carboxy-agarose magnetic beads (CUBE biotech, Germany) were added to each sample before addition of acetonitrile (ACN; 70% v/v). Samples were mixed and incubated for 20min at room temperature. Samples were placed against a magnetic rack and washed twice with 70% Ethanol and once with 100% ACN. Samples were lyophilised to dryness to remove residual ACN. 50l of lysis buffer (10% Trifluoroethanol (v/v), 100mM Ammonium Bicarbonate) containing 1:25 enzyme:substrate ratio of Trypsin (Promega, USA) plus LysC (Wako, Japan). Samples were placed in an ultrasonic water bath for 2min before incubation in a Thermomixer (Eppendorf, Germany) at 37C, 1200rpm for 12 hours. Samples were placed on a magnetic rack and supernatant containing peptides collected. Beads were washed in 50l of MilliQ water, placed on a magnetic rack and supernatant collected and pooled with first collection.  Peptide solution was acidified using TFA (1% v/v final). Solution was centrifuged at 20,000g to remove precipitate, supernatant collected. ACN containing TFA was added such that the final concentration was 80% ACN, 0.1% TFA. 50l of FeIII-NTA beads (CUBE biotech) were added to each sample and incubated with gentle shaking for 30min at room temperature. Samples were placed against a magnetic rack and wash vigorously 3 X using wash buffer (80% ACN, 0.1% TFA). Beads were transferred with 40 μl of wash buffer into the top of pre-wetted C8 stage-tips (2 plugs, pre-wet with 50μl ACN before use). C8 stage-tips were centrifuged 500g to remove wash buffer. 30μl of 10% TFA was added to the bottom of a collection tube. Phospho-peptides were eluted using 2 X 20μl Elution buffer (50% ACN, 2.5% Ammonium Hydroxide, pH 10). Samples were lyophilised until near to dryness. Peptide solutions were resuspended in 50μl 5% formic acid (FA) and transferred into C18 stage tips (2 X plugs, wet with 20μl 100% IPA, 60% ACN, 5% FA, re-equilibrate using 5% FA before use). Stage-tips were washed with 2 X 50μl 5% FA and eluted using 50μl 60% ACN, 5% FA. Lyophilised to dryness and stored at -80°C.  Samples were analysed on a M-class UPLC (Waters, USA) coupled to a timsTOF Pro (Bruker, Germany) equipped with a CaptiveSpray source. Peptides were resuspended in 2% ACN, 1% formic acid (FA) separated on a 25cm X 75μm analytical column, 1.6μm C18 beads with a packed emitter tip (Aurora Series, IonOpticks, Australia). The column temperature was maintained at 50°C using an integrated column oven (Sonation GmbH, Germany). The column was equilibrated using 5 column volumes before loading sample in 100% buffer A (99.9% MilliQ water, 0.1% FA). Samples were separated at 400nl/min using a linear gradient from 2% to 17% buffer B (99.9% ACN, 0.1% FA; 55min), 17% to 25% buffer B (21min) before ramping to 35% buffer B (13min), ramp to 85% buffer B (3min) and sustained for 10min. The timsTOF Pro (Bruker) was operated in PASEF mode using Compass Hystar 5.0.36.0. Settings were as follows: Mass Range 100 to 1700m/z, 1/K0 Start 0.6 V⋅s/cm2 End 1.6 V⋅s/cm2, Ramp time 109.9ms, Lock Duty Cycle to 100%, Capillary Voltage 1600V, Dry Gas 3 l/min, Dry Temp 180°C, PASEF settings: 10 MS/MS scans (total cycle time 1.26sec), charge range 0-5, active exclusion for 0.4 min, Scheduling Target intensity 20000, Intensity threshold 2500, CID collision energy 48eV.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.14). The database search was performed using the Uniprot Homo sapiens database plus common contaminants with strict trypsin specificity allowing up to 2 missed cleavages. The minimum peptide length was 7 amino acids. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was a fixed modification while N-acetylation of proteins N-termini, oxidation of methionine and phosphorylation of Serine/Threonine/Tyrosine were set as variable modifications. During the MaxQuant main search, precursor ion mass error tolerance was set to 6 ppm. PSM and protein identifications were filtered using a target-decoy approach at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% with the match between runs option enabled.  Further analysis was performed using a custom pipeline developed in R, which utilizes the MaxQuant output file evidence.txt. A feature was defined as the combination of peptide sequence, charge and modification. Features not found in at least 50% of the replicates in one group were removed. To correct for injection volume variability, feature intensities were normalized by converting to base 2 logarithms and then multiplying each value by the ratio of maximum median intensity of all replicates over median replicate intensity. Missing values were imputed using a random normal distribution of values with the mean set at mean of the real distribution of values minus 1.8 s.d., and a s.d. of 0.3 times the s.d. of the distribution of the measured intensities. The probability of differential peptide expression between groups was calculated using the Limma R package2. Probability values were corrected for multiple testing using Benjamini–Hochberg method.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cdk6, T-cell, Phosphoproteomics, Cdk4

### Affiliations
WEHI
Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, 305 Grattan St Melbourne VIC 3000

### Submitter
Jarrod Sandow

### Lab Head
Dr Stephin J. Vervoort
Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, 305 Grattan St Melbourne VIC 3000


