### Accession
PXD010995

### Title
Protein-level regulation of nitrogen and phosphorous metabolism in two endomycorrhizal fungi, Serendipita vermifera and Serendipita bescii

### Description
We sought to characterize the proteome and metabolome of S. vermifera and S. bescii under N and P starvation conditions in vitro. As very little is known about the ecological functioning of the Serendipitaceae in most environments, the overall objective of the study was to elucidate the cellular response(s) of two Serendipitaceae strains toward stress imposed by the lack of one or the other of these important nutrients. Our approach allows us to not only evaluate N and P acquisition processes in the understudied Serendipitaceae, but also to understand the physiological responses to their restriction.

### Sample Protocol
To profile the whole-cell and supernatant proteomes, fungal tissue was suspended in SDS lysis buffer, proteins were precipitated by TCA, and then denatured, reduced and digested with ttyrpsin. Peptide sequencing was performed with two-dimensional liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Experimental MS/MS spectra were searched against reference proteomes using MyriMatch and protein inference and relative quantification was achiefed with IDPicker and IDPQuantify, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
Serendipitaceae represents a diverse fungal group in the Basidiomycota that includes endophytes and lineages that repeatedly evolved ericoid, orchid and ectomycorrhizal lifestyle. Plants rely upon both nitrogen and phosphorous, for essential growth processes, and are often provided by mycorrhizal fungi. In this study, we investigated the cellular proteome of Serendipita vermifera MAFF305830 and closely related Serendipita vermifera subsp. bescii NFPB0129 grown in vitro under (N) ammonium and (P) phosphate starvation conditions. Mycelial growth pattern was documented under these conditions to correlate growth-specific responses to nutrient starvation. We found that N-starvation accelerated hyphal radial growth, whereas P-starvation accelerated hyphal branching. Additionally, P-starvation triggers an integrated starvation response leading to remodelling of lipid metabolism. Higher abundance of an ammonium transporter known to serve as both an ammonium sensor and stimulator of hyphal growth was detected under N-starvation. Additionally, N-starvation led to strong up-regulation of nitrate, amino acid, peptide, and urea transporters, along with several proteins predicted to have peptidase activity. Taken together, our finding suggests S. bescii and S. vermifera have the metabolic capacity for nitrogen assimilation from organic forms of N compounds. We hypothesize that the nitrogen metabolite repression is a key regulator of such organic N assimilation.

### Keywords
Serendipita vermifera, Phosphate, Protoemics, Mycorrhiza, Serendipita bescii, Nitrogen

### Affiliations
Chemical Sciences Division, Oak Ridge National Laboratory
Oak Ridge National Laboratory

### Submitter
Paul Abraham

### Lab Head
Dr Paul E. Abraham
Chemical Sciences Division, Oak Ridge National Laboratory


