### Accession
PXD033293

### Title
Proteomic analysis neutrophils from COVID-19 patients

### Description
To go further insight into the involvement of neutrophils in COVID-19 clinical expression, we performed a proteomic analysis of this blood cell type in COVID-19 patients and two non-infected SARS-CoV-2 control groups composed of healthy subjects and ARDS patients hospitalized in intensive care unit (ICU) respectively. All patients were from Guadeloupe and represent a homogeneous population. We have performed a quantitative proteomic study of neutrophiles from French hot spot COVID region, Guadeloupe, confirming the activation of type I IFN pathway and in some target of IFN as TAP proteins, specifically in COVID patients, but not in hospitalized ARDS non-COVID patients and described modification of the NET proteome potentially associated with ARDS.

### Sample Protocol
Neutrophils were isolated from EDTA-blood samples using MACSexpress whole blood neutrophil isolation kit and MACSexpress erythrocyte depletion kit from Miltenyl Biotec GmbH (Germany) according to manufacturer instructions.  Cells were lysed in 200µl lysis buffer (50 mM Tris (pH 8.5), 2% SDS, 20 mM TCEP, 50 mM chloroacetamide) and heated 5 min at 95°C. Proteins (50µg) from whole cell lysate were trypsin-digested overnight using the filtered-aided sample preparation (FASP) method as previously described (Wisniewski et al, 2009). Peptides obtained were fractionated using strong cation exchange (SCX) StageTips in 5 fractions as previously described (Kulak N A et al., 2014) and vaccum-dried while centrifuge in a Speed Vac (Eppendorf). Peptides from each SCX fraction were solubilized in 10µl of 0.1% trifluoracetic acid containing 10% acetonitrile and analysed by LC-MSMS. Analyses were performed on a Dionex U3000 RSLC nano-LC- system (Thermo Fisher scientific) coupled to a TIMS-TOF Pro mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonik GmbH, Bremen, Germany). One μL was loaded, concentrated and washed for 3 min on a C18 reverse phase precolumn (3μm particle size, 100 Å pore size, 75 μm inner diameter, 2 cm length, from Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on an Aurora C18 reverse phase resin (1.6 μm particle size, 100Å pore size, 75 μm inner diameter, 25 cm length mounted to the Captive nanoSpray Ionisation module, (IonOpticks, Middle Camberwell Australia) in a 120 min. run time with a gradient ranging from 99% of solvent A containing (v/v) 0.1% formic acid in milliQ-grade H2O to 35% of solvent B containing 80% acetonitrile, 0.085% formic acid in mQH2O. The mass spectrometer acquired data throughout the elution process and operated in DDA PASEF mode with a 1.9 s./cycle, with Timed Ion Mobility Spectrometry (TIMS) mode enabled and a data-dependent scheme with full MS scans in PASEF mode. Ion accumulation and ramp time in the dual TIMS analyzer were set to 166 ms each and the ion mobility range was set from 1/K0 = 0.6 Vs cm-2 to 1.6 Vs cm-2. Precursor ions for MS/MS analysis were isolated in positive mode with the PASEF mode set to « on » in the 100-1.700 m/z range by synchronizing quadrupole switching events with the precursor elution profile from the TIMS device. The cycle duty time was set to 100%, accommodating as many MS/MS in the PASEF frame as possible. Singly charged precursor ions were excluded from the TIMS stage by tuning the TIMS using the otof control software, (Bruker Daltonik GmbH). Precursors for MS/MS were picked from an intensity threshold of 5.000 arbitrary units.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometry data were analyzed using Maxquant version 1.6.17.0(Cox J et al., 2009). The database used was a concatenation of Human sequences from the Uniprot databases (release 2020-03) and a list of contaminant sequences from Maxquant. The enzyme specificity was trypsin’s. The precursor’s and fragment’s mass tolerances were set to 10 and 40ppm respectively. Carbamidomethylation of cysteins was set as permanent modification and acetylation of protein N-terminus and oxidation of methionines were set as variable modifications. Second peptide search was allowed and minimal length of peptides was set at 7 amino acids. False discovery rate (FDR) was kept below 1% on both peptides and proteins. Label-free protein quantification (LFQ) was done using both unique and razor peptides. At least 2 ratios were required for LFQ. The “match between runs” (MBR) option and the normalisation were allowed. For differential analysis, LFQ results from MaxQuant were imported into the Perseus software (version 1.6.12.0) (Tyanova S et al., 2016).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Labelfree, Covid-19, Tims-tof, Neutrophil

### Affiliations
Laboratoire d’Excellence GR-Ex, Paris, France 3P5 Proteom’IC facility, Université Paris Cité, Institut Cochin, INSERM, CNRS, F-75014 PARIS, France
Plateforme Proteomique 3P5, Université Paris Descartes, Inserm U1016, Institut Cochin, Cnrs UMR8104,  France

### Submitter
Emilie-Fleur GAUTIER

### Lab Head
Dr Emilie-Fleur Gautier
Laboratoire d’Excellence GR-Ex, Paris, France 3P5 Proteom’IC facility, Université Paris Cité, Institut Cochin, INSERM, CNRS, F-75014 PARIS, France


