### Accession
PXD021082

### Title
Memory-enhancing effects of Origanum majorana essential oil in an Alzheimer's amyloid beta1-42 rat model: a molecular and behavioral study

### Description
Origanum L. (Lamiaceae) is an important genus of medicinal and aromatic plants used in the traditional medicine since ancient times as culinary herbs and remedies. The effects of Origanum majorana-based aromatherapy was investigated in an Alzheimer's amyloid beta1-42 rat model. Protein extracts from brain tissue containing hippocampi were analyzed by label-free quantitative LC-HDMSE. Proteins whose expression seemed influenced by Origanum majorana-based aromatherapy were assigned as representatives of biological processes, which were further targeted using well established biochemical/molecular assays.

### Sample Protocol
To induce the AD model in male Wistar rats, amyloid beta1-42 solution was intracerebroventricularly applied ventral from the surface of the cortex. After wound healing, the rats were exposed to Origanum majorana L. essential oil for 21 days using an electronic vaporizer. Proteins were extracted from brain regions containing hippocampi in lysis buffer containing 1 % sodium deoxycholate, 20 mM dithiothreitol, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and protease inhibitor cocktail CompleteTM (Roche, Mannheim, Germany). Following phase transfer surfactant-aided trypsin digestion, peptide content was quantified using the Qubit Protein Assay Kit ( Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Separation and mass spectrometric analysis of peptides were performed on a nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters, Manchester, UK) coupled to a Waters Synapt G2-S mass spectrometer.  140 ng of sample peptides supplemented with 40 fmol of Hi3 ClpB_ECOLI standard for protein absolute quantification (Waters, Manchester, UK) were trapped and desalted using a pre-column (ACQUITY UPLC Symmetry C18, 5 µm, 180 µm x 20 mm, Waters, Manchester, UK) at a flow rate of 10 µl/min for 4 min with 99.9 % mobile phase A (0.1 % formic acid in water) Subsequently, peptides were separated on an analytical column (ACQUITY UPLC HSS T3, 1.8 µm, 75 µm x 200 mm, Waters, Manchester, UK) using a gradient from 3 % to 35 % mobile phase B (0.1 % formic acid in acetonitrile) over 120 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min and 35 °C. Data acquisition for peptide ions after ion-mobility separation was conducted with data-independent alternations of scans at low and elevated collision energy (CE) to obtain precursor and fragment ions for 0.6 s respectively (referred to as HDMSE).

### Data Protocol
For the database search a database containing 29,944 protein sequences of the Rattus norvegicus proteome (UniProt release 2020_06) appended with the sequences of ClpB_ECOLI (P63284) and porcine trypsin was used. Progenesis QI for Proteomics version 4.1 (Nonlinear Dynamics, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK) was used for raw data processing, protein identification and quantification. The following search parameters were set: trypsin as digestion reagent, two missing cleavage sites allowed, carbamidomethylation of cysteines as a fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine residues as variable modification. The false discovery rate was set to 1%. At least three fragment ions were required for peptide identification, and at least six fragment ions corresponding to minimally two peptides were required for protein identification. Only peptides with two, three, and four positive charges were accepted if they were identified at least two times within the dataset. Peptides with a peptide score below 5.7, an absolute mass error above 13 ppm, and less than 6 amino acid residues in length were excluded. Finally, only proteins with at least two unique peptides were included into the quantitative analysis. For label-free quantification, the Hi3 method implemented into the Progenesis QI for Proteomics workflow was applied using the Hi3 ClpB_ECOLI standard (Waters, Manchester, UK) as a reference.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Origanum</i> L. (Lamiaceae) is an important genus of medicinal and aromatic plants used in traditional medicine since ancient times as culinary herbs and remedies. The aim of the present study was to evaluate the chemical composition, as well as the biochemical and cellular activities of freshly prepared <i>Origanum majorana</i> L. essential oil (OmEO) in an Alzheimer's disease (AD) amyloid beta1-42 (A&#x3b2;1-42) rat model. OmEO (1% and 3%) was inhaled for 21 consecutive days, while A&#x3b2;1-42 was administered intracerebroventricularly to induce AD-like symptoms. Our data demonstrate that OmEO increased antioxidant activity and enhanced brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) expression, which in concert contributed to the improvement of cognitive function of animals. Moreover, OmEO presented beneficial effects on memory performance in Y-maze and radial arm-maze tests in the A&#x3b2;1-42 rat AD model.

### Keywords
Rat, Amyloid beta1-42, Alzheimer disease, Origanum majorana, Brain tissue

### Affiliations
Proteome Center Rostock, Medical Faculty and Natural Science Faculty, University of Rostock, Schillingallee 69, 18057 Rostock, Germany
Core Facility Proteome Analysis, University Medicine Rostock, Schillingallee 69, 18057 Rostock

### Submitter
Stefan Mikkat

### Lab Head
Dr Michael O. Glocker
Proteome Center Rostock, Medical Faculty and Natural Science Faculty, University of Rostock, Schillingallee 69, 18057 Rostock, Germany


