### Accession
PXD003757

### Title
Deep Phosphoproteome Analysis Reveals Neurobiological Underpinnings for Nurse and Forager Honeybee Workers (Apis mellifera ligustica)

### Description
The honeybee brain is comprised of a nervous system that sufficiently regulates this life transition. Knowledge about how protein phosphorylation functions in regards to the neurobiological activities in the honeybee brain to drive the age-specific labor division is still lacking. Protein phosphorylation, the most common post-translational modification (PTM), is a key switch for rapid on-off control of signaling cascades that regulate cell differentiation and development, enzyme activity and metabolic maintenance in living cells. A fundamental mechanism for regulating signaling network and protein activity is the covalent PTM of serine (Ser), threonine (Thr), and tyrosine (Tyr) residues with phosphate. Fortunately, because of advances in phosphopeptide enrichment and improvements in mass spectrometry (MS) instrumentation and methods, phosphoproteomics has enabled large-scale identification of protein phosphorylation sites and phosphorylation networks in biological samples. Although the proteome has been mapped in the brain of nurse and forager bees, knowledge about age-specific effects of phosphorylation regulation on proteins in the honeybee brain is still lacking. Moreover, information in regards to the honeybee phosphoproteome is also very limited. Only very recently, in-depth phosphoproteomics analyses of protein phosphorylation networks in the hypopharyngealgland of the honeybee have been reported. Although the phosphoproteome analyses during the development of brood and salivary glands has been reported, only very limited proteins were phosphorylated and phosphorylation sites of those phosphoproteins were not assigned. Therefore, a comprehensive characterization of phosphoproteomics and changes in the brains of nurse and forager bees is key to understand the phosphorylation events underlying age-specific physiology to achieve the completion of biological missions in this well-organized social community of the honeybee. Honeybee (A. m. ligustica) colonies used for sampling were raised at the apiary of the Institute of Apicultural Research, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Science, Beijing. Newly emerged (<12 h after emergence) worker bees were marked on their thoraxes and placed back into the colonies to develop and then the marked nurse and forager bees were collected on days 10 and 20, respectively. There were 150 bees sampled from each of the five colonies which have queens at the same age. In brief, for each time point, worker bees were sampled from five colonies, and pooled all samples for further analysis. This procedure was repeated three times, so that we finally ended up with three independent biological replicates per time point, each consisting of 150 honeybees. Then their brains were dissected, and the brain samples were pooled and stored at −80 °C for further analysis. All the colonies were managed with almost identical population, food, and brood during the nectar flow of chaste berry (Vitexnegundo L.) in June.

### Sample Protocol
1. Brain Dissection and Protein Sample Preparation  Prior to protein extraction the brain tissue was homogenized in ice by pestle. The sample was then mixedwith a lysis buffer containing 8 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4% 3-[(3-cholamidopropyl) dimethylammonio]-1-propanesulfonate (CHAPS), 20 mM Trisbase, 30 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), and 2% Bio-lyte(pH 3–10). The sample was centrifuged at 15,000g at 4°C for 15min to remove the insoluble fractions. Ice-cold acetone was added to the recovered supernatant at -20°C for 30min to precipitate the proteins, then centrifuging twice at 15,000g at 4°C for 10 min. The protein pellets were dissolved in 40 mM (NH4)HCO3, and then reduced with DTT (final concentration 10 mM) for 1h to prevent reformation of disulfide bonds, and finally, alkylated with iodoacetamide (final concentration 50 mM) for 1h in the dark. Afterwards, sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega, Medison, WI) was used to digest the protein (enzyme/protein ratio is 1:100 (W/W) sample at 37°C for 14 hours.. 2. Phosphopeptide Enrichment Using Ti4+-IMAC To enrich the phosphopeptides in the brains of nurse and forager honeybee workers, a high efficiencyTi4+-IMAC material was applied as previously described. Specifically, the immobilized Ti4+ polymer beads (Ti4+-IMAC) were obtained by incubation of 10 mg of polymer beads in 100 mM Ti(SO4)2 solution at room temperature overnight under gentle stirring. The obtained Ti4+- IMAC beads were centrifuged at 20,000g for 2 min. After the removal of the supernatant, to remove the residual titanium ions, we use distilled water to wash the Ti4+-IMAC beads several times. Before usage the obtained Ti4+-IMAC beads were dispersed in 30% ACNcontaining 0.1% TFA. Then, digested samples were reconstituted in 500 μL of binding solution containing 6.0% TFA/80%ACN and incubated with 5mg of Ti4+-IMAC material at room temperature for 60 min. The mixture was centrifuged at 13,500 g at 4°C for 5 min. we discarded the supernatant and the precipitate was washed with 200 μL of binding solution, 0.6% TFA/50% ACN/200 mM NaCl solution, and 0.1% TFA/30% ACN solution. The bound phosphopeptides were then eluted twice with 100 μL of 10% ammonia solution with vibration for 10 min. Finally, the enriched phosphopeptides were manually loaded onto Reversed-Phase Zip-Tip C18 columns (desalting column) for concentrating and desalting. The desalted peptides were extracted in a Speed-vac system (RVC 2–18, Marin Christ, Germany) and dissolved in 0.1%formic acid (FA) thereafter, the dried sample stored at −80 °C for further LC−MS/MS analysis. 3. LC-MS/MS Analysis To enrich the phosphopeptides in the brains of nurse and forager honeybee workers, a high efficiency Ti4+-IMAC material was applied as previously described. An 8 µl sample of phosphopeptide was loaded onto a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and coupled to the EASY-nLC 1000 system using a nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The samples were loaded onto a 2 cm long trap column (100 μm inner diameter fused silica containing 5.0 μm Aqua C18 beads, Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 2 min in buffer A (0.1% acetic acid) at a flow rate of 5 μL/min prior to separation. Then the peptides were eluted from the trap column and then separated by the analytical column (15cm long, 75μm inner diameter fused silica trap column filing with 3.0 μm Aqua C18 beads, Thermo Fisher Scientific)  using a 90 min gradient with the following conditions: 100% buffer A (0.1% formic acid) to 8% buffer B (0.1% formic acid, 80% acetonitrile) for 5 min, 8%to 20% buffer B for 55 min, then 20% to 30% buffer B for 10 min followed by an increase to 100% buffer B for 5 min and 100% buffer B for an additional 15 min. The eluting peptides were directly infused into a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) via ESI. MS and MS/MS data were collected in a data-dependent mode using the following settings: one full scan (resolution 70,000 at m/z 400; m/z 300-1,800) followed by top 20 MS/MS scans using high energy dissociation in the linear ion trap mass spectrometer (resolution: 17,500, isolation window: 2 m/z, normalized collision energy: 27) using dynamic exclusion (charge exclusion: unassigned 1, >8; peptide match: preferred; exclude isotopes: on; dynamic exclusion: 10 s). The MS/MS spectra of phosphopeptides were retrieved using Xcalibur (version 2.2, Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Data processing protocol 1. Database Search and Site Localization The gathered MS/MS data were processed and analyzed using in-house PEAKS software (version 7.0, Bioinformatics Solutions Inc.). A database containing protein sequences of Apis mellifera (downloaded April, 2015) and common contaminants was downloaded with a total of 21,778 entries. The search parameters were trypsin specificity, fixed modification of carbamidomethyl (C)/+57.02 Da, variable modifications of oxidation (M)/+15.99 Da and phosphorylation (S, T, Y)/+79.96 Da, and two allowed missed cleavages per peptide; one non-specific cleavage at either end of the peptide; three maximum allowed variable PTM per peptide. Precursor mass tolerance was set at 15.0 ppm, and fragment ion tolerance at 0.05 Da. The false discovery rate (FDR) was controlled at both the protein and peptide levels using a fusion-decoy database search strategy with a threshold ≤1.0%, an enhanced target-decoy approach that makes more conservative FDR estimations.29 Scaffold PTM (Version 2.1.3, Proteome Software, Oregon, USA) was used to estimate the phosphosites localization probability by assigning Ascores algorithm. All MS/MS of phosphopeptides queries with an Ascore for each site having a 95% or better probability were considered. Abundances of phosphorylation sites were quantified via spectral counting at each localized site. 2. Validation of Phosphosites To confirm the localized phosphorylation sites on nurse and forager brain proteins, five phosphopeptides were commercially synthesized using a solid-phase peptide synthesis process (China Peptides Ltd. Co., Shanghai, China). The MS/MS spectra were compared between the digested phosphopeptides from the honeybee (A. m. ligustica) brain and the synthetic phosphopeptides. Only if the major ions in the spectra between the brain sample and synthetic phosphopeptides were aligned when retention time shift tolerance <0.2 min and >90% b or y ions were consistent, were the phosphosites considered to be validated. 3.  Motif Analysis The significantly enriched phosphorylation motif sets were extracted from all phosphopeptides with confident localized phosphosites (probability ≥ 95%) using motif-X algorithm(http://motif-x.med.harvard.edu/motif-x.html). The background was the uploaded Apis mellifera proteome (<10M of database size that randomly generated from A. mellifera proteome), the motif width was 13, occurrences were 20, significance was1x10-6, and motifs were extracted separately by pS, pT and pY sites at position 7. The extracted motifs were used to determine the kinase classes (acidic, basic, proline-directed, tyrosine and others) based on substrate sequence specificity because the kinase specificity is often defined by amino acid motif surrounding Ser, Thr, and Tyr residues on the substrate proteins.  Quantitation of Phosphoprotein Abundance Levels To evaluate the altered expression level of phosphorylated proteins between the brains of nurse and forager bees, a label-free quantitation was employed using Progenesis LC-MS software (Version 4.1; Nonlinear Dynamics, UK). The  raw MS data was imported and processed with the Progenesis LC-MS software using defualt settings. One run was selected as a reference, followed by automatic feature matching for all runs, with manual editing to correct mismatched and unmatched feature detection. MS1 spectra were subjected to peak modeling algorithm and quality control using default settings of the software. The result of peak detection is a set of features, and each feature represents the same peptide ion and its associated isotopes from all aligned samples. The sum of the peak’s area within the isotope boundaries of the corresponding feature gives the abundance of discriminatory peptides. Each protein expression level was calculated in terms of its peptide ion abundance of the three replicated experiments. The differences in the levels of phosphoprotein expression between nurse and forager bees were determined by one-way ANOVA using a q-value for multiple tests. The differences in phosphoprotein abundance levels among the nurse and forager honeybees were taken as statistically significant when they contained at least 2-fold changes and p<0.05. 4. Bioinformatics Analysis The identified proteins were used as an input for functional enrichment analyses using ClueGOv2.1.6, a Cytoscape plug-in (http://www.ici.upmc.fr/cluego/). A right-sided hyper-geometric test was used to report the significantly enriched, functional gene ontology (GO) categories in biological processes and pathways. To correct the p-value, we compared the background set of GO annotations in the entire honeybee genome and an FDR by Bonferroni step-down test. Based on their kappa score level (0.4) in ClueGO, the nodes in functionally grouped networks were linked. Functional categories and pathways were only considered significantly enriched when the p value was < 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
The honeybee brain is a central organ in regulating wide ranges of honeybee biology, including life transition from nurse to forager bees. Knowledge is still lacking on how protein phosphorylation governs the neural activity to drive the age-specific labor division. The cerebral phosphoproteome of nurse and forager honeybees was characterized using Ti<sup>4+</sup>-IMAC phosphopeptide enrichment mass-spectrometry-based proteomics and protein kinases (PKs) were predicted. There were 3,077 phosphosites residing on 3,234 phosphopeptides from 1004 phosphoproteins in the nurse bees. For foragers the numbers were 3,056, 3,110, and 958, respectively. Notably, among the total 231 PKs in honeybee proteome, 179 novel PKs were predicted in the honeybee brain, of which 88 were experimentally identified. Proteins involved in wide scenarios of pathways were phosphorylated depending on age: glycolysis/gluconeogenesis, AGE/RAGE and phosphorylation in nurse bees and metal ion transport, ATP metabolic process and phototransduction in forager bees. These observations suggest that phosphorylation is vital to the tuning of protein activity to regulate cerebral function according to the biological duties as nursing and foraging bees. The data provides valuable information on phosphorylation signaling in the honeybee brain and potentially useful resource to understand the signaling mechanism in honeybee neurobiology and in other social insects as well.

### Keywords
Brain, Foragers, Honeybee, Nurses, Worker, Phosphoproteome

### Affiliations
Institute of Apicultural Research
Apiculture Research Institute 

### Submitter
Gebreamlak Bezabih

### Lab Head
Dr Prof.Dr. Jianke Li
Institute of Apicultural Research


