### Accession
PXD008455

### Title
Proteomic Profile of Daphnia pulex using Data-Independent Acquisition Mass Spectrometry and Ion Mobility Separation

### Description
In this study, various sample preparation and mass spectrometry acquisition methods were performed for the purpose of improving Daphnia pulex proteome exploration. We observed benefits for employing both in-gel and in-solution methods of trypsin digestion. Furthermore, data independent acquisition methods employing ion-mobility separation greatly increased peptide identification and more than doubled our proteome coverage.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of tryptic peptides for mass spectrometry analysis were generated by both in-gel and in-solution digestion methods to compare the value of pre-fractionation (in-gel) against more rapid and efficient approaches (in-solution). For in-gel digestion methods, SDS/PAGE gels were run using extracts (80 μg) diluted in loading dye (3X) and boiled for 5 min. In-gel digestion proceeded from 16 equal gel slices. Peptide extracts were pooled to yield 8 separate fractions for MS analysis. For in-solution experiments, protein precipitation with 13% TCA/acetone for 3 hrs reproducibly gave us the highest protein yield compared to other tested reagents. Following centrifugation, pellets were washed 3 times with cold acetone and dried using a vacuum concentrator. Re-suspended pellets were digested overnight at 37˚C with trypsin.  Proteomic analysis was performed using a Waters Synapt G2-Si mass spectrometer interfaced with a nanoAcquity UPLC system. Following trypsin digestion, approximately 300 ng was injected on a C18 reverse phase column (Waters® HSS T3 75 μm x 150 μm analytical column) at a flow rate of 0.5 μL/minute using a 3-85 % acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% formic acid over 110 minutes. For 2D-UPLC separation, peptides were loaded onto the first dimension column, XBridge BEH130 C18 nanoEase Column (300 μm x 50 μm) which had been equilibrated with 20 mM ammonium formate, pH 10. First dimension fractions were eluted off using a discontinuous step gradient with acetonitrile elution steps (11%, 14.5%, 17.5%, 20%, 45%, and 65%) at 2 μL/min and transferred onto a second trapping column. Peptides were then eluted from the trap onto a nanoAcquity BEH130 C18 analytical column (100 μm x 100 mm, 1.7μm) using a 0-85% acetonitrile gradient at 400 nL/min over 45 min. Eluting peptides were analyzed in DIA mode without IM (MS E ) and with IM (HDMS E ) by alternating between high and low energy scans in positive ion mode.

### Data Protocol
Processing parameters for noise reduction thresholds for low energy, high energy and peptide intensity combined across isotopes and charge states were fixed at 135, 30, and, 750, respectively, with data lock mass corrected post acquisition. The Daphnia pulex database was downloaded from NCBI containing 33524 gene products. The protein search parameters were set to include a maximum protein mass of 250 kDa, a minimum of 3 matched fragment ions per peptide, a minimum of 7 fragments ions per protein, and two-missed trypsin cleavages was permitted. A 1% false discovery rate was estimated utilizing a decoy database. Variable modifications of carbamidomethylated cysteine and oxidation of methionine were specified.

### Publication Abstract
Daphnia pulex is a keystone species for aquatic habitats and an ecological/evolution model organism. Although significant progress has been made on characterizing its genome, the D. pulex proteome remains largely uncharacterized partially due to abnormally high protein degradation during homogenization and emphasis on genomic analysis. In this study, various sample preparation and mass spectrometry acquisition methods are performed for the purpose of improving D. pulex proteome exploration. Benefits for employing both in-gel and in-solution methods of trypsin digestion are observed. Furthermore, acquisition methods employing ion mobility separation greatly increase peptide identification and more than doubled the proteome coverage. Bioinformatic analysis suggests that mitochondrial and hydrolytic activities are enriched in D. pulex compared to closely related invertebrates or Homo sapiens. Also, novel D. pulex proteins possessing putative genome modifying functional domains are identified. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD008455.

### Keywords
Ion mobility, Daphnia pulex, Proteomics, Data independent acquisition, Bioinformatics

### Affiliations
Chemistry and biochemistry, university of windsor, Canada
University of Windsor

### Submitter
Robert Gombar

### Lab Head
Dr Panayiotis, O., Vacratsis
Chemistry and biochemistry, university of windsor, Canada


