### Accession
PXD035668

### Title
Disordered region encodes α-crystallin chaperone activity toward lens client γD-crystallin

### Description
Small heat-shock proteins (sHSPs) are a widely expressed family of ATP-independent molecular chaperones that are among the first responders to cellular stress. Mechanisms by which sHSPs delay aggregation of client proteins remain undefined. sHSPs have high intrinsic disorder content of up to ~60% and assemble into large, polydisperse homo- and hetero-oligomers, making them challenging structural and biochemical targets. Two sHSPs, HSPB4 and HSPB5, are present at millimolar concentrations in eye lens, where they are responsible for maintaining lens transparency over the lifetime of an organism. Together, HSPB4 and HSPB5 compose the hetero-oligomeric chaperone known as α-crystallin. To identify the determinants of sHSP function, we compared the effectiveness of HSPB4 and HSPB5 homo-oligomers and HSPB4/HSPB5 hetero-oligomers in delaying the aggregation of the lens protein γD-crystallin. In chimeric versions of HSPB4 and HSPB5, chaperone activity tracked with the identity of the 60-residue disordered N-terminal regions (NTR). A short 10-residue stretch in the middle of the NTR (“Critical sequence”) contains three residues that are responsible for high HSPB5 chaperone activity toward γD-crystallin. These residues affect structure and dynamics throughout the NTR. Abundant interactions involving the NTR Critical sequence reveal it to be a hub for a network of interactions within oligomers. We propose a model whereby the NTR critical sequence influences local structure and NTR dynamics that modulate accessibility of the NTR, which in turn modulates chaperone activity.

### Sample Protocol
BPA was incorporated in HSPB5 using amber codon suppression technology. The amber codon was inserted at HSPB5 site 9, 24, 47, or 61 using QuickChange mutagenesis (Agilent). Single-BPA HSPB5 mutants were purified using the standard protocol while taking steps to limit exposure to ambient light. Sample concentrations were determined using BCA. 50 uM HSPB5 BPA mutants were incubated for 1 hour at 37 °C, cooled to 4 °C, placed in a 96-well flat-bottomed half-area plate, and then exposed to UV for 30 minutes at 4 °C. Samples were subjected to SDS-PAGE on a 4-20% acrylamide gradient gel (Bio-Rad). The no-UV monomer and plus-UV dimer bands were excised and were each digested in-gel with Trypsin (Thermo Scientific) and GluC (New England Biolabs) in ammonium bicarbonate buffer (Thermo Manual–In-GelTryptic Digestion Kit). Digests were cleaned up with C18 spin columns (Thermo Scientific) and dried using a speed-vac. Samples were resuspended in 95% water 5% ACN with 0.1% FA with volumes adjusted based on sample weight. Data were collected with an Easy Nano LC coupled to a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid. 0.5 µg of protein was loaded onto an 8-cm trap column. The sample was then then separated on a 25-cm analytical column with a 75 µm inner diameter using an 85-minute gradient from 6% B to 45% B, where A was water and B was 80% acetonitrile, at 300 nL min<sup>–1</sup>. The column was then flushed and regenerated for 35 minutes. Spectra were acquired across the entire LC method using data-dependent acquisition with dynamic exclusion after one time for a duration of 30 seconds and an intensity threshold of 2.0x10<sup>4</sup>. Orbitrap detection and Higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) fragmentation (30% normalized collision energy) were used with a target value of 1.00x10<sup>5</sup>, maximum injection time of 22 ms, top N of 20, and isolation width of 1.6. MS1 were acquired at a resolution of 120,000 over the range of 400-2000 m/z, and MS2 were acquired with a resolution of 15,000.

### Data Protocol
First, Comet was used to search for non-crosslinked peptides in the non-UV treated control to construct the protein database. The Comet search database contained the BL21 <em>E.coli</em> database from uniprot (UP000431028), the cRAP database from the Global Proteome Machine with all 5 levels of proteins (cRAP Protein Sequences), the pertinent HSPB5 BPA mutant, and reverse-sequence decoys. In addition, the wild-type HSPB5 was included in the database for samples that were analyzed on the same date as other samples containing that protein. The Comet searches were enzyme nonspecific using a peptide mass tolerance of 20.0 ppm. The isotope error offset was 3, and BPA was defined as an additional amino acid, B, that has a mass of 251.09462859 Da. Methionine oxidation and cysteine iodoacetamide alkylation were variable modifications. Results were validated using Peptide Prophet. After filtering using a 1% False Discovery Rate (FDR, based on PeptideProphet probabilities) and a minimum of 2 Peptide Spectral Matches (PSMs), this yields a protein database for the sample.
Second, crosslinks in the UV-treated samples were identified using Kojak and the protein database for the sample. The Kojak search settings matched those described for the Comet searches expect the precursor tolerance was 15 ppm and enzyme selection rules were used. For the trypsin digested samples, the preexisting trypsin setting was used. For the trypsin-GluC digested samples, the cleavage sites of D and E were added to the trypsin settings. Crosslinks were defined as from BPA to any residue with no mass change. Crosslink results were validated using PeptideProphet. For ions of each charge state, probabilities were determined using PeptideProphet and were used to define the thresholds used to filter results to a 1% FDR. For histograms, each PSM was associated with the residue that was assigned the highest probability of participating in a crosslink with BPA. When more than one residue was assigned the same probability, an equal fraction of that PSM was assigned to each of those residues.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bpa, Hspb5, Crosslinking, Small heat shock proteins

### Affiliations
University of Washington Department of Chemistry

### Submitter
Lindsey D. Ulmer

### Lab Head
Dr Matthew F. Bush
University of Washington Department of Chemistry


