### Accession
PXD012525

### Title
Schistosomes- exosomal miRNAs: modulators of T helper (CD+) cell differentiation

### Description
Schistosomiasis (Bilharziasis) is caused by the helminth Schistosoma. The acute stage of the infection extends from the penetration of the parasite through the host skin until it reaches its final location as adult female and male in copula, at the blood vessels around the gut or bladder. The female starts then depositing fertile eggs. The chronic stage of schistosomiasis starts with laying the eggs which promote a strong immunological Th2 response. It is unclear, so far, how this Th2 response gradually declines even though the parasitic worms live for years and continue to produce eggs. Here we demonstrate that schistosomes downregulate the differentiation toward the Th2 lineage by modulating the Th2 transcriptional program. Moreover, we found that adult schistosomes secrete micro-vesicles, possessing exosomal characteristics, and containing miRNAs, which have been found in Th2 cells that exposed indirectly to schistosomes. Importantly, we demonstrate that, the schistosoma miR-10 molecule targets MAP3K7, which consequently down modulates NF-kB. Since NF-kB is a critical factor necessary for Th2 differentiation and function, our results can at least partially explain, the decrease of the Th2 response over time of infection This exosomal worm-host immune cell interaction, can be further utilized for the development of novel diagnostic and therapeutic approaches to schistosomiasis.

### Sample Protocol
Exosomed were boiled in SDS buffer, sonicated and precipitated in 80% aceton. The protein were dissovued in 8M urea, reduced alkylated and trypsinied. The resulted peptides were analyzed by LC-MSMS.

### Data Protocol
MS data was analysed by proteomediscoverer 1.4 ve the Schstosoma and vs the bovine databases.

### Publication Abstract
During the chronic stage of Schistosoma infection, the female lays fertile eggs, triggering a strong anti-parasitic type 2 helper T-cell (Th2) immune response. It is unclear how this Th2 response gradually declines even though the worms live for years and continue to produce eggs. Here, we show that Schistosoma mansoni downregulates Th2 differentiation in an antigen-presenting cell-independent manner, by modulating the Th2-specific transcriptional program. Adult schistosomes secrete miRNA-harboring extracellular vesicles that are internalized by Th cells in&#xa0;vitro. Schistosomal miRNAs are found also in T helper cells isolated from Peyer's patches and mesenteric lymph nodes of infected mice. In T helper cells, the schistosomal miR-10 targets MAP3K7 and consequently downmodulates NF-&#x3ba;B activity, a critical transcription factor for Th2 differentiation and function. Our results explain, at least partially, how schistosomes tune down the Th2 response, and provide further insight into the reciprocal geographic distribution between high prevalence of parasitic infections and immune disorders such as allergy. Furthermore, this worm-host crosstalk mechanism can be harnessed to develop diagnostic and therapeutic approaches for human schistosomiasis and Th2-associated diseases.

### Keywords
Mirna, T helper, Schistosomes

### Affiliations
Technion
Laboratory of Molecular Cell Biology, Center for Cancer Research and Department of Medicine C, Molecular Laboratory for the Study of Tropical Diseases,Sheba Medical Center, Tel Hashomer.

### Submitter
Tamar Ziv

### Lab Head
Dr Dror Avni
Laboratory of Molecular Cell Biology, Center for Cancer Research and Department of Medicine C, Molecular Laboratory for the Study of Tropical Diseases,Sheba Medical Center, Tel Hashomer.


