### Accession
PXD002133

### Title
Identifying Kinase Substrates via a Heavy ATP Kinase Assay and Quantitative Mass Spectrometry

### Description
Mass spectrometry‐based in vitro kinase screens play an essential role in the discovery of kinase substrates, however, many suffer from biological and technical noise or necessitate genetically‐altered enzymecofactor systems. We describe a method that combines stable γ‐[18O2]‐ATP with classical in vitro kinase assays within a contemporary quantitative proteomic workflow. Our approach improved detection of known substrates of the non‐receptor tyrosine kinase ABL1; and identified potential, new in vitro substrates.

### Sample Protocol
Cellular immunopurified ABL1‐PP and ABL1‐Kin‐ were mixed with an FSBA‐treated cytosolic extract of HEK293 cells. Excess FSBA and endogenous ATP were removed via filtration. The kinase reaction was initiated by adding ‘heavy’ ATP and kinase reaction pairs were quenched at 30, 90 and 150 min. Proteins were reduced, alkylated, digested and phosphotyrosine peptides enriched by immunopurification. After labelling with TMT 6‐plex reagents; pooled samples were further enriched with immobilised metal affinity chromatography (IMAC) and analysed by nano‐LCMS.

### Data Protocol
Mascot (v2.3.02, MatrixScience, London, UK) and Sequest HT database search engines and Percolator validation software node (V2.04) to remove false positives with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% under strict conditions. In addition, the phosphoRS 3.0 node was used to validate peptide phosphorylation and assignment of normal ‘light’ phosphorylated sites. For ‘heavy’ phosphorylated sites or Sequest HT search results this computational tool is not available. Searches were performed with full tryptic digestion against the human SwissProt database v2014.03_20140331 (40,055 sequences including isoforms obtained from varsplic.pl and appended known contaminants) with up to two miscleavage sites. Oxidation (+15.9949 Da) of methionine and phosphorylation (+79.9963 Da) of serine, threonine and tyrosine were set as variable modifications, whilst carbamidomethylation (+57.0214 Da) of cysteine residues and TMT 6‐plex labelling of peptide N‐termini and lysine residues were set as fixed modifications.For data sets containing ‘heavy’ pY‐sites, a modification of 18O2‐phosphorylation (+83.9880 Da) was chosen as a variable modification on tyrosine residues in addition to normal phosphorylation. Further data processing was achieved with R Studio (v0.98.1091), GraphPad Prism (v6.01) and Windows Office Excel (v2013).

### Publication Abstract
Mass spectrometry-based in vitro kinase screens play an essential role in the discovery of kinase substrates, however, many suffer from biological and technical noise or necessitate genetically-altered enzyme-cofactor systems. We describe a method that combines stable &#x3b3;-[(18)O2]-ATP with classical in vitro kinase assays within a contemporary quantitative proteomic workflow. Our approach improved detection of known substrates of the non-receptor tyrosine kinase ABL1; and identified potential, new in vitro substrates.

### Keywords
Human, Kinase substrates; in vitro kinase assay; proteomics; mass spectrometry; heavy atp; non receptor tyrosine kinase abl1

### Affiliations
Mass Spectrometry Department CeMM Research Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Sciences Vienna Austria
Research Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Andre Mueller

### Lab Head
Dr Keiryn L. Bennett
Mass Spectrometry Department CeMM Research Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Sciences Vienna Austria


