### Accession
PXD030095

### Title
Multi-facetted proteomics of mitochondrial TMBIM5 deficient cell lines: Regulation of mitochondrial proteostasis by the proton gradient

### Description
Mitochondria adapt to different energetic demands reshaping their proteome. Mitochondrial proteases are emerging as key regulators of these adaptive processes. Here, we use a multi-proteomic approach to demonstrate regulation of the m-AAA protease AFG3L2 by the mitochondrial proton gradient, coupling mitochondrial protein turnover to the energetic status of mitochondria. We identify TMBIM5 (previously also known as GHITM or MICS1) as a Ca2+/H+ exchanger in the mitochondrial inner membrane, which binds to and inhibits the m-AAA protease. TMBIM5 ensures cell survival and respiration, allowing Ca2+ efflux from mitochondria and limiting mitochondrial hyperpolarization. Persistent hyperpolarization, however, triggers degradation of TMBIM5 and activation of the m-AAA protease. The m-AAA protease broadly remodels the mitochondrial proteome and mediates the proteolytic breakdown of respiratory complex I to confine ROS production and oxidative damage in hyperpolarized mitochondria. TMBIM5 thus integrates mitochondrial Ca2+ signaling and the energetic status of mitochondria with protein turnover rates to reshape the mitochondrial proteome and adjust the cellular metabolism.

### Sample Protocol
Protein Digestion 40 µL of 4% SDS in 100 mM HEPES pH 8.5 was pre-heated to 70°C and added to the cell pellet for further 10 min incubation at 70°C on a ThermoMixer (shaking: 550 rpm).  The protein concentration was determined using the 660 nm Protein Assay (ThermoFisher Scientific, catalog number 22660). 50 µg of protein was subjected for tryptic digestion. Proteins were reduced (10 mM TCEP) and alkylated (20 mM CAA) in the dark for 45 min at 45 °C. Samples were subjected to SP3 based digestion as described above (Hughes et al., 2019). Generated peptides were eluted from magnetic beads in 10 µL 5% DMSO in LC-MS water (Sigma Aldrich) in an ultrasonic bath for 10 min. Samples were then dried and stored at -20°C until subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptides were then reconstituted in 10 µL 2.5% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile and 3 µL were used for a LC-MS/MS run.   Liquid Chromatography and Mass Spectrometry  LC-MS/MS instrumentation consisted out of an Easy-LC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled via a nano-electrospray ionization source to an Exploris 480 or QExactive HF-x mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For peptide separation an in-house packed column (inner diameter: 75 µm, length: 40 cm) was used. A binary buffer system (A: 0.1 % formic acid (Thermo Fisher Scientific, cat# LS118-1) and B: 0.1 % formic acid in 80% acetonitrile (Thermo Fisher Scientific, cat# LS122)) was applied as follows: Linear increase of buffer B from 4% to 27% within 69 min, followed by a linear increase to 45% within 5 min. The buffer B content was further ramped to 65% within 5 min and then to 95% within 6 min. 95% buffer B was kept for further 10 min to wash the column. Prior each sample, the column was washed using 5 µL buffer A and the sample was loaded using 8 µL buffer A.  The RF Lens amplitude was set to 55%, the capillary temperature was 275°C and the polarity was set to positive. MS1 profile spectra were acquired using a resolution of 60,000 (at 200 m/z) at a mass range 320-1150 m/z and an AGC target of 1 × 106.  For data independent MS/MS spectra acquisition, 48 windows were acquired at an isolation m/z range of 15 Th and the isolation windows overlapped by 1 Th. The fixed first mass was to 200. The isolation center range covered a mass range of 350–1065 m/z. Fragmentation spectra were acquired at a resolution of 15,000 at 200 m/z using a maximal injection time of 22 ms and stepped normalized collision energies (NCE) of 26, 28, 30. The default charge state was set to 3. The AGC target was set to 900% (Exploris 480) or 1e6 (QExactive HF-x). MS2 spectra were acquired as centroid spectra.  The accompanied ProjectDescription Excel files provides detail information about each project which is numbered as: 0022 0038 0107 0114 0123 0135

### Data Protocol
Data Analysis For the analysis of DIA (Data independent acquisition) experiments, expect pulseSILAC (see below), we utilized DIA-NN version 1.7.15 (Demichev et al., 2020). The library-free approach was used based on the human Uniport reference proteome (downloaded Nov. 2019, containing 20362 protein amino acid sequences) which predicts MS2 spectra using neuronal network. The deep-learning option was enabled. Quantification strategy was set to ‘robust LC (high accuracy)’. The precursor range was adjusted to 330 – 1200 m/z matching the acquired mass range. The RT profiling option was enabled. Otherwise, default settings were used. To identify significantly different proteins, a two-sided t-test was applied using log2 transformed MaxLFQ intensities calculated by DIA-NN (Cox et al., 2014). The FDR was controlled to 5% using a permutation-based approach in the Perseus software (Tyanova et al., 2016).  If applicable, a two/three ANOVA was calculated in the Perseus software. Raw output of DIA-NN analysis as well as raw files were deposited to the PRIDE repository.  CHX-chase experiment Log2 transformed LFQ intensities were utilized to determine the degradation rate of each protein by fitting a first-order kinetic. The area under curve was determined using trapezoid rule in the software InstantClue (Nolte et al., 2018). See Paper for detailed descrptions.  pulse SILAC data To analyze pulseSILAC DIA data, a library was first created using acquired DIA files Spectronaut’s Pulsar search engine using exclusively y-ions but otherwise default settings. Then in a second analysis, the individual files were analyzed using the generated spectra library. Data were exported on the precursor level and were transformed as follows. First, the remaining heavy fraction was determined by calculating the natural logarithm of H/L / (H/L + 1). Second, the data were adjusted by calculation the median of the remaining fraction for each group (e.g. timepoint and genotype) and individual replicates were adjusted to the overall group median. Then, data were filtered by removing values that were found to be outliers (1.8 x inter quantile range) which were replaced by the group mean. A linear model was fit to the data and the r-value, p-value, slope and intercepts as well as their standard errors were calculated for each individual replicate (time point 48 h was removed since it was found to be outside the linear range). Slope values with a r-value above -0.75 were removed by replacement with NaN. To compare the slopes between genotypes, a two-sided t-test was performed. Analysis was performed using the Instant Clue (v 0.11.1) software suite (www.instantclue.de) (Nolte et al., 2018).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hela, Afg3l2, Mitochondria, Ghitm, Cyclohexamide, Silac, Tmbim5, Hek

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Biology of Ageing, 50931 Cologne, Germany
Max-Planck-Institute for Biology of Ageing Department of Mitochondrial Proteostasis Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 9b 50931 Cologne

### Submitter
Hendrik Nolte

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Langer
Max-Planck-Institute for Biology of Ageing Department of Mitochondrial Proteostasis Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 9b 50931 Cologne


