### Accession
PXD002446

### Title
Quantitative proteomics of Phytophthora infestans life stages

### Description
Samples were isolated from six different P. infestans life stages (hyphae, sporangia, zoospores, cysts, germinated cysts and appressoria).

### Sample Protocol
Hyphae, sporangia, zoospores, cysts, germinated cysts and appressoria were isolated. Samples from the different life stages were ground under liquid nitrogen. Protein was extracted and analyzed on SDS-PAGE. The entire lane was excised and the proteins digested with trypsin. The digests were desalted using Stage Tips.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were converted to mzML and MGF using ProteoWizard. MGF files were searched in Mascot and X!Tandem against a database consisting of the Phytophtora infestans proteins in UniProt as of 2010-04-22, expanded with an equal amount decoy proteins (random proteins with same lengths and amino acid distribution as in the original database). The peptide identifications from the two search engines where combined and filtered at a 1% false discovery rate in the Proteios Software Environment, and subsequently assembled to proteins.

### Publication Abstract
The oomycete <i>Phytophthora infestans</i> is the most harmful pathogen of potato. It causes the disease late blight, which generates increased yearly costs of up to one billion euro in the EU alone and is difficult to control. We have performed a large-scale quantitative proteomics study of six <i>P. infestans</i> life stages with the aim to identify proteins that change in abundance during development, with a focus on preinfectious life stages. Over 10 000 peptides from 2061 proteins were analyzed. We identified several abundance profiles of proteins that were up- or downregulated in different combinations of life stages. One of these profiles contained 59 proteins that were more abundant in germinated cysts and appressoria. A large majority of these proteins were not previously recognized as being appressorial proteins or involved in the infection process. Among those are proteins with putative roles in transport, amino acid metabolism, pathogenicity (including one RXLR effector) and cell wall structure modification. We analyzed the expression of the genes encoding nine of these proteins using RT-qPCR and found an increase in transcript levels during disease progression, in agreement with the hypothesis that these proteins are important in early infection. Among the nine proteins was a group involved in cell wall structure modification and adhesion, including three closely related, uncharacterized proteins encoded by PITG_01131, PITG_01132, and PITG_16135, here denoted <i>Piacwp1-3</i> Transient silencing of these genes resulted in reduced severity of infection, indicating that these proteins are important for pathogenicity. Our results contribute to further insight into <i>P. infestans</i> biology, and indicate processes that might be relevant for the pathogen while preparing for host cell penetration and during infection. The mass spectrometry data have been deposited to ProteomeXchange via the PRIDE partner repository with the data set identifier PXD002446.

### Keywords
Phytophthora infestans, Life stages

### Affiliations
Department of Plant Protection Biology
Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences

### Submitter
Svante Resjo

### Lab Head
Dr Svante Resjö
Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences


