### Accession
PXD035750

### Title
DNMT and HDAC inhibition induces immunogenic neoantigens from human endogenous retroviral element-derived transcripts

### Description
Immunotherapies targeting cancer-specific neoantigens have revolutionized the treatment of cancer patients. Recent evidence suggests that epigenetic therapies synergize with immunotherapies, mediated bythe de-repression of endogenous retroviral element (ERV)-encoded promoters, and the initiation of transcription. Here, we use deep RNA sequencing from cancer cell lines treated with DNA methyltransferase inhibitors (DNMTi) and/or Histone deacetylase transferase inhibitors (HDACi), to assemble a de novo transcriptome and identified 3,023 ERV-derived, treatment-induced novel polyadenylated transcripts (TINPATs), encoding for 61,426 open reading frames. Using Immunopeptidomics, we further demonstrate the human leukocyte antigen (HLA) presentation of treatment-induced neoepitopes (t-neoepitopes) derived from TINPATs. We illustrate the potential of the identified t-neoepitopes to elicit a T-cell response and cancer cell killing. The presence of t-neoepitopes was further verified in AML patient samples 48/96 h after in vivo treatment with the DNMT inhibitor Decitabine. Our findings highlight a novel mechanism of ERV-derived neoantigens in epigenetic and immune therapies.

### Sample Protocol
Peptide samples were separated by reversed-phase liquid chromatography (nanoUHPLC, UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano, ThermoFisher Scientific) and subsequently analyzed in an on-line coupled Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). Samples were analyzed in five technical replicates. Sample volumes of 5 µl with shares of 17% were injected onto a 75 µm x 2 cm trapping column (ThermoFisher Scientific) at 4 µl/min for 5.75 min. Peptide separation was subsequently performed at 50 °C and a flow rate of 300 nL/min on a 50 µm x 25 cm separation column (PepMap C18, ThermoFisher Scientific) applying a gradient ranging from 2.4 to 32.0% of ACN over the course of 90 min. Eluting HLA class I peptides were ionized by nanospray ionization and analyzed in the mass spectrometer implementing a top speed (3 s) CID (collision-induced dissociation) method generating fragment spectra with a resolution of 30,000, a mass range limited to 400 - 650 m/z, and positive charge states 2 - 3 selected for fragmentation. HLA class II peptides were analyzed with a HCD (Higher-energy C-trap dissociation) method, a mass range limited to 400 - 1000 m/z, and positive charge states 2 - 5 selected for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
HLA class I and HLA class II molecules were isolated by standard immunoaffinity purification using the pan-HLA class I-specific mAb W6/32, the pan-HLA class II-specific mAb Tü 39, and the HLA-DR-specific mAb L243 (all produced in-house) to extract HLA ligands. The Proteome Discoverer (v1.4, Thermo Fisher) was used to integrate the search results of the SequestHT search engine (University of Washington 77) against the human proteome (Swiss-Prot database, 20,279 reviewed protein sequences, August 21st, 2019) accompanied by the complete ORF sequences. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 5 ppm and fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. For the immunopeptidome analysis the posttranslational modification (PTM) Ooxidized methionine was allowed as a dynamic modification. The false discovery rate (FDR, estimated by the Percolator algorithm 2.04 78) was limited to 5% for HLA class I and 1% for HLA class II. Peptides with an XCorr below 1 were excluded from the analysis. HLA class I annotation was performed using SYFPEITHI 1.0 79 and NetMHCpan 4.1 80. For the detailed PTM search analysis oxidation of methionine, tryptophan, and histidine, methylation of aspartic acid, histidine, isoleucine, leucine, lysine, and arginine, acetylation of lysine, carbamidomethylation of cysteine, and phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine were allowed as a dynamic modifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Erv, Decitabine, Mhc, Ltr, Sb939, Dnmt, Immunopeptidomics, Immunotherapy, Hla, Hdac, Neoantigen, Humna, Cancer

### Affiliations
Clinical Collaboration Unit Translational Immunology, German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), Department of Internal Medicine, University Hospital Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany
Department of Peptide-based Immunotherapy, University and University Hospital Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany (lab head)

### Submitter
Jens Bauer

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Juliane Walz
Department of Peptide-based Immunotherapy, University and University Hospital Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany (lab head)


