### Accession
PXD021813

### Title
LC-MS/MS analysis of immunoprecipitation samples of Tetrahymena meiotic proteins Melg1, Melg2, Melg3, and Tass1

### Description
In most eukaryotes, the meiotic chromosomal bouquet (comprising clustered chromosome ends) provides an ordered chromosome arrangement that facilitates pairing and recombination between homologous chromosomes. In the protist Tetrahymena thermophila, the meiotic prophase nucleus stretches enormously and chromosomes assume a bouquet-like arrangement in which telomeres and centromeres are attached to opposite poles of the nucleus. We have identified and characterized three meiosis-specific genes (MELG1-3) that control nuclear elongation and centromere and telomere clustering. Hence, to find out potential interactions, we did LC-MS/MS analysis for Melg1, Melg2, Melg3, and Tass1 (a partner of Melg3) immunoprecipitation samples.

### Sample Protocol
Cells expressing N-terminally tagged EGFP-Melg1, HA-Melg3, HA-Tass1 or C-terminally tagged Melg2-HA protein were harvested by centrifugation 3.5 h after meiotic induction (at maximum nuclear elongation). EGFP-Melg1-expressing cells were resuspended in ice-cold GFP-Trap lysis buffer (150 mM NaCl, 1% Triton X-100, 1 mM phenylmethanesulfonylfluoride [PMSF], 1 cOmplete EDTA-free protease inhibitor [Roche, Indianapolis, IN]) and homogenized by pipetting. Melg2, Melg3, and Tass1 overexpressing cells were resuspended in ice-cold Tris lysis buffer (30 mM Tris-Base, 20 mM KCl, 2 mM MgCl2, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% Triton X-100, 1 mM PMSF, 1 cOmplete EDTA-free protease inhibitor, pH7.4) and ground in a Dounce homogenizer on ice. Soluble cell lysates from samples and controls were collected and clarified by filtration. In addition, insoluble pellets from HA-Melg3- or HA-Tass1 overexpressing cells and the corresponding controls were extracted with nuclease-containing buffer (1% Triton X-100, 150 mM NaCl, 100 µg/ml benzonase) for 1 h on ice. After nuclease treatment, soluble fractions were harvested by centrifugation, mixed with an equal amount of lysis buffer, and filtered.  EGFP-Melg1-expressing cell lysate was mixed with 25 μl of pre-equilibrated GFP-Trap magnetic agarose beads (ChromoTek, Planegg, Germany) and incubated on a rotor at 4 ˚C for 1 h. Beads were washed four times with 40 volumes of 150 mM NaCl, resuspended in 30 μl of 1 SDS-PAGE loading buffer (125 mM Tris-HCl pH6.8, 2.3% SDS, 10% glycerol, 10 μg/ml bromophenol blue, 5% 2-mercaptoethanol), and boiled for 10 min. HA-Melg3, HA-Tass1 and Melg2-HA lysates were incubated with 200 µl EZview red anti-HA affinity gel (Sigma-Aldrich) for 2 h at 4 ˚C. After washing four times with wash buffer (30 mM Tris-Base, 20 mM KCl, 2 mM MgCl2, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% Triton X-100, 1 cOmplete EDTA-free protease inhibitor, pH7.5) and once with wash buffer without Triton X-100, proteins eluted from the gel were precipitated with 10% trichloroacetic acid (TCA), boiled in 1SDS loading buffer and let run shortly on a SDS-PAGE such that the proteins just entered the resolving gel. Proteins were fixed and stained by Coomassie staining.  Gel sections were excised, washed and after reduction and alkylation of thiols using dithiothreitol and iodoacetamide, the proteins were digested with trypsin over night at 37 °C. After digestion, the peptide solutions were desalted on custom-made C18 stagetips. Tryptic digests were separated on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano-flow chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA), using a pre-column for sample loading (PepMapAcclaim C18, 2 cm × 0.1 mm, 5 μm) and a C18 analytical column (PepMapAcclaim C18, 50 cm × 0.75 mm, 2 μm, Dionex-Thermo-Fisher Scientific), applying a linear gradient from 2 to 35% solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid; solvent A 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 230 nl min−1 over 120 minutes. Eluted peptides were analyzed on a Q Exactive HF Orbitrap mass spectrometer, equipped with a Proxeon nanospray source (all from Thermo Fisher Scientific). For the data-dependent mode survey, scans were obtained in a mass range of 380–1,650 m/z with lock mass on, at a resolution of 120,000 at 200 m/z and an AGC target value of 3E6. The 10 most intense ions were selected with an isolation width of 2.0 Da, fragmented in the HCD cell at 27% collision energy and the spectra recorded at a target value of 1E5 and a resolution of 30,000. Peptides with a charge of +1 or > +6 were excluded from fragmentation, the peptide match and exclude isotope features were enabled and selected precursors were dynamically excluded from repeated sampling for 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed with MaxQuant software MaxQuant 1.6.0.16 (http://www.maxquant.org/) searching against a Tetrahymena database (www.ciliate.org, version 2014 supplemented with sequences from www.jcvi.org build 2014;) and a custom contaminant database, with tryptic specificity allowing two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification, oxidation of methionine, N-terminal protein acetylation, phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine as variable modifications — all other parameters were set to default. Results were filtered at a protein and peptide false discovery rate of 1%. The SAINTexpress algorithm (v3.6; developed by Teo et al [2014, J Proteomics., 100, 37-43]; parameter set to SAINTexpress-spc.exe – L4) was used to identify high-confidence protein - protein interactions. Proteins of Melg1, Melg2, Melg3 or Tass1 with a Bayesian false discovery rate (BFDR) of 0.05 or less are considered as potential partner proteins.

### Publication Abstract
In most eukaryotes, the meiotic chromosomal bouquet (comprising clustered chromosome ends) provides an ordered chromosome arrangement that facilitates pairing and recombination between homologous chromosomes. In the protist <i>Tetrahymena thermophila</i>, the meiotic prophase nucleus stretches enormously, and chromosomes assume a bouquet-like arrangement in which telomeres and centromeres are attached to opposite poles of the nucleus. We have identified and characterized three meiosis-specific genes [meiotic nuclear elongation 1-3 (<i>MELG1-3</i>)] that control nuclear elongation, and centromere and telomere clustering. The Melg proteins interact with cytoskeletal and telomere-associated proteins, and probably repurpose them for reorganizing the meiotic prophase nucleus. A lack of sequence similarity between the <i>Tetrahymena</i> proteins responsible for telomere clustering and bouquet proteins of other organisms suggests that the <i>Tetrahymena</i> bouquet is analogous, rather than homologous, to the conserved eukaryotic bouquet. We also report that centromere clustering is more important than telomere clustering for homologous pairing. Therefore, we speculate that centromere clustering may have been the primordial mechanism for chromosome pairing in early eukaryotes.

### Keywords
Tetrahymena thermophila, Immunoprecipitation, Lc-ms/ms, Meiosis

### Affiliations
Max F. Perutz Laboratories
Max Perutz Labs Dept. Chromosome Biology University of Vienna

### Submitter
Miao Tian

### Lab Head
Dr Josef Loidl
Max Perutz Labs Dept. Chromosome Biology University of Vienna


