### Accession
PXD038232

### Title
Assigning functionality to cysteines by base editing of cancer dependency genes

### Description
Chemical probes are lacking for most human proteins. Covalent chemistry represents an attractive strategy for expanding the ligandability of the proteome, and chemical proteomics has revealed numerous electrophile-reactive cysteines on diverse proteins. Determining which of these covalent binding events impact protein function, however, remains challenging. Here, we describe a base-editing strategy to infer the functionality of cysteines by quantifying the impact of their missense mutation on cell proliferation. We show that the resulting atlas, which covers >13,800 cysteines on >1,750 cancer dependency proteins, correctly predicts the essentiality of cysteines targeted by cancer therapeutics and, when integrated with chemical proteomic data, identifies essential, ligandable cysteines on >110 cancer dependency proteins. We finally demonstrate how measurements of reactivity in native versus denatured proteomes can further discriminate essential cysteines amendable to chemical modification from those buried in protein structures, providing a valuable resource to prioritize the pursuit of small-molecule probes with high function-perturbing potential.

### Sample Protocol
The sample processing protocol has been described previously.  Vinogradova, E. V et al. An Activity-Guided Map of Electrophile-Cysteine Interactions in Primary Human T Cells. Cell 182, 1009–1026.e29 (2020).

### Data Protocol
The MS2 and MS3 files were extracted from the raw files and were uploaded to Integrated Proteomics Pipeline (IP2). The data files were searched using the ProLuCID algorithm using a reverse concatenated, non-redundant variant of the Human UniProt database (release 2016-07). Cysteine residues were searched with a static modification for carboxyamidomethylation (+57.02146 Da). For cysteine profiling experiments, a dynamic modification for IA-DTB labeling (+398.25292 Da) was included. N-termini and lysine residues were also searched with a static modification corresponding to the TMT tag (+229.1629 Da).

### Publication Abstract
Covalent chemistry represents an attractive strategy for expanding the ligandability of the proteome, and chemical proteomics has revealed numerous electrophile-reactive cysteines on diverse human proteins. Determining which of these covalent binding events affect protein function, however, remains challenging. Here we describe a base-editing strategy to infer the functionality of cysteines by quantifying the impact of their missense mutation on cancer cell proliferation. The resulting atlas, which covers more than 13,800 cysteines on more than 1,750 cancer dependency proteins, confirms the essentiality of cysteines targeted by covalent drugs and, when integrated with chemical proteomic data, identifies essential, ligandable cysteines in more than 160 cancer dependency proteins. We further show that a stereoselective and site-specific ligand targeting an essential cysteine in TOE1 inhibits the nuclease activity of this protein through an apparent allosteric mechanism. Our findings thus describe a versatile method and valuable resource to prioritize the pursuit of small-molecule probes with high function-perturbing potential.

### Keywords
Cysteine, Cancer dependency, Ligandability, Base editing, Electrophile

### Affiliations
The Scripps Research Institute
Department of Chemistry, Scripps Research, La Jolla, CA 92037 USA

### Submitter
Haoxin Li

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin Cravatt
Department of Chemistry, Scripps Research, La Jolla, CA 92037 USA


