### Accession
PXD020128

### Title
ABHD11 maintains 2-oxoglutarate metabolism by preserving functional lipoylation of the 2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase complex

### Description
2-oxoglutarate (2-OG or α-ketoglutarate) relates mitochondrial metabolism to cell function by modulating the activity of 2-OG dependent dioxygenases involved in the hypoxia response and DNA/histone modifications. However, metabolic pathways that regulate these oxygen and 2-OG sensitive enzymes remain poorly understood. Here, using CRISPR Cas9 genome-wide utagenesis to screen for genetic determinants of 2-OG levels, we uncover a redox sensitive mitochondrial lipoylation pathway, dependent on the mitochondrial hydrolase ABHD11, that signals changes in mitochondrial 2-OG metabolism to 2-OG dependent dioxygenase function. ABHD11 loss or inhibition drives a rapid increase in 2-OG levels by impairing lipoylation of the 2-OG dehydrogenase complex (OGDHc) – the rate limiting step for mitochondrial 2-OG metabolism. Rather than facilitating lipoate conjugation, ABHD11 associates with the OGDHc and maintains catalytic activity of lipoyl domain by preventing the formation of lipoyl adducts, highlighting ABHD11 as a regulator of functional lipoylation and 2-OG metabolism.

### Sample Protocol
Liquid chromatography mass spectrometry Samples were reduced, alkylated and digested in-gel using either trypsin, GluC or AspN. The resulting peptides were analysed by LC-MS/MS using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos coupled to an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano UHPLC equipped with a 100 μm ID x 2 cm Acclaim PepMap Precolumn (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and a 75 μm ID x 50 cm, 2 μm particle Acclaim PepMap RSLC analytical column. Loading solvent was 0.1% formic acid with analytical solvents A: 0.1% formic acid and B: 80% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid. Samples were loaded at 5 μl/minute loading solvent for 5 minutes before beginning the analytical gradient. The analytical gradient was 3-40% B over 42 minutes rising to 95% B by 45 minutes followed by a 4 min wash at 95% B and equilibration at 3% solvent B for 10 minutes. Columns were held at 40ºC. Data was acquired in a DDA fashion with the following settings: MS1: 375-1500 Th, 120,000 resolution, 4x105 AGC target, 50 ms maximum injection time. MS2: Quadrupole isolation at an isolation width of m/z 1.6, HCD fragmentation (NCE 30) with fragment ions scanning in the Orbitrap from m/z 110, 5x104 AGC target, 100 ms maximum injection time. Dynamic exclusion was set to +/- 10 ppm for 60 s. MS2 fragmentation was trigged on precursors 5x104 counts and above.  Mass spectrometry detection of lipoylation HeLa cells were lysed on ice for 30 min in a HEPES buffer (150 mM NaCl, 50 mM HEPES pH 7.0, 1% IGEPAL CA-630, 1 mM nicotinamide (Sigma), 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (Sigma), 1X Complete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche), and 1 mM PMSF). Lysates were centrifuged at 16,900 g for 10 min. For LC-MS experiments, free thiols were blocked by addition of 10 mM N-ethyl maleimide (Sigma) and incubated on a rotator at 4°C for 1 hour. For mass spectrometry analysis, in-gel AspN digest and sample analysis were performed as described above.

### Data Protocol
Liquid chromatography mass spectrometry Raw files were processed using PEAKS Studio (version 8.0, Bioinformatics Solutions Inc.). Searches were performed with either trypsin, GluC or AspN against a Homo sapiens database (UniProt reference proteome downloaded 26/01/18 containing 25,813 sequences) and an additional contaminant database (containing 246 common contaminants). Variable modifications at PEAKS DB stage included oxidation (M) and carbamidomethylatation with 479 built in modifications included at PEAKS PTM stage.  Mass spectrometry detection of lipoylation To identify possible modifications of DLST K110, raw files were processed using PEAKS Studio (version 8.0, Bioinformatics Solutions Inc.) with the following parameters: AspN digestion; Human database (UniProt reference proteome downloaded 18 Dec 2018 containing 21066 proteins) with additional contaminant database (containing 246 common contaminants); oxidation and carbamidomethylation as variable modifications at the PEAKS DB stage. The data were processed twice, with different variable modifications searched at the PEAKS PTM stage, either with 485 PEAKS built-in modifications listed in Supplementary File S2 (sheet A) and 34 custom modifications listed in Supplementary File S2 (sheet B). XIC were obtained from Thermo Xcablibur Qual Browser (4.0.27.13). Mass ranges were limited to 564.79-564.80 m/z, 658.81-658.82 m/z and 784.87-784.88 m/z for the unmodified, lipoylated and 2x NEM lipoylated peptides respectively. Label-free quantitation values were obtained by processing raw files with MaxQuant (version 1.6.6.0) with the following parameters: specific AspN digestion; Human database (UniProt reference proteome downloaded 18 Dec 2018 containing 21066 proteins); oxidation, lipoylation, 2x NEM lipoylation, N terminal acetylation as variable modifications; carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification; label-free quantification enabled. Label-free quantification values were normalised to the sum of DLST peptides label-free quantification values.

### Publication Abstract
2-oxoglutarate (2-OG or &#x3b1;-ketoglutarate) relates mitochondrial metabolism to cell function by modulating the activity of 2-OG dependent dioxygenases involved in the hypoxia response and DNA/histone modifications. However, metabolic pathways that regulate these oxygen and 2-OG sensitive enzymes remain poorly understood. Here, using CRISPR Cas9 genome-wide mutagenesis to screen for genetic determinants of 2-OG levels, we uncover a redox sensitive mitochondrial lipoylation pathway, dependent on the mitochondrial hydrolase ABHD11, that signals changes in mitochondrial 2-OG metabolism to 2-OG dependent dioxygenase function. ABHD11 loss or inhibition drives a rapid increase in 2-OG levels by impairing lipoylation of the 2-OG dehydrogenase complex (OGDHc)-the rate limiting step for mitochondrial 2-OG metabolism. Rather than facilitating lipoate conjugation, ABHD11 associates with the OGDHc and maintains catalytic activity of lipoyl domain by preventing the formation of lipoyl adducts, highlighting ABHD11 as a regulator of functional lipoylation and 2-OG metabolism.

### Keywords
Lipoic acid, 2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase complex, Lipoylation, Hypoxia inducible factor, Α-ketoglutarate, Lipid peroxidation, 2-oxoglutarate, Α-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase complex, Abhd11

### Affiliations
Cambridge Institute of Therapeutic Immunology & Infectious Disease (CITIID), Jeffrey Cheah Biomedical Centre Cambridge Biomedical Campus, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, CB2 0AW, UK.
University of Cambridge

### Submitter
Jack Houghton

### Lab Head
Dr James A Nathan
Cambridge Institute of Therapeutic Immunology & Infectious Disease (CITIID), Jeffrey Cheah Biomedical Centre Cambridge Biomedical Campus, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, CB2 0AW, UK.


