### Accession
PXD017651

### Title
Antennal proteomics of allogroomers and same age range non-grooming bees

### Description
Allogrooming is a behaviour in which a worker uses its mouth parts to remove debris from the body of other colony members. This behaviour, observed in several species of eusocial insects, play a role in defence against parasites and pathogens. In honeybees, allogrooming represents an important resistance mechanism that seems to limit ectoparasites load, especially mites, within colonies and its expression depends on genetic and environmental factors. The degree of specialization of individuals performing this task is still unclear and behavioural and physiological correlates of allogroomers are largely unknown. It would be advantageous for allogroomers to be able to detect nestmates needing to be groomed. Since many stressors, including pathogens and parasites, change the odour of workers in A. mellifera, an enhanced perception of such chemical cues could contribute to a possibly specialized phenotype of allogroomers. Indeed, antennae play a key role in the expression of hygienic behaviours and proteomic investigation also showed that in the honeybee individuals performing different tasks differ for antennal profile of soluble olfactory proteins, which play a crucial role in the first steps of odour recognition. We thus investigated the expression of olfactory proteins in the antennae, predicting that if allogroomers have any degree of chemosensory specialization, this would reflect in a different antennal proteomic profile.

### Sample Protocol
Allogroomers and same age range non-grooming bees (defined as above) were collected from 3 observation hives. Once identified as allogroomers, bees were gently removed from the comb with forceps and immediately stored at -20 °C. For each allogroomer sampled a non-allogroomer of the same age range was collected from the same hive. Flagella from antennae were dissected immediately before protein extractions. Extracts were prepared from pools of 5 individuals randomly sampled from the three colonies. Five biological replicates for each group (allogroomers, raw file names AmelG1:5, and non-grooming bees, raw file names AmelC1:5) were prepared. The extracts were prepared crushing the tissue in a mortar under liquid nitrogen and the proteins extracted with 6 M Urea/2 M Thiourea in Tris-Cl 50 mM pH 7.4. The protein extracts were centrifuged at 14,000 rpm for 40 min at 4 °C and the supernatants were collected for the analysis. The total amount of protein in each sample was assessed by the Bradford colorimetric assay, with the “Bio-Rad Protein Assay” kit using serial dilutions of bovine serum albumin to generate a standard curve. Protein sample concentration was measured by Infinite PRO 200 reader (TECAN). Protein digestion was carried out on 15 μg protein extracts. Reduction of disulfide bridges was performed by treating samples with DTT (1 μg of DTT/50 μg of proteins for 30 min at RT), followed by alkylation (5 μg of iodoacetamide/ 50 μg of proteins for 20 min at RT in the dark), as described by Foster and co-workers (Foster et al., 2003). Protein samples were diluted 3 times with 500 mM ammonium bicarbonate, to increase pH and reduce the concentration of urea/thiourea. A first enzymatic digestion was performed by incubating the samples with LysC in a ratio 1:50 (w/w) for 3 h at 37 °C. The digestion products were then incubated with trypsin in a ratio 1:50 (w/w) overnight at 37 °C. The digested samples were then acidified by adding trifluoracetic acid and desalted on STop And Go Extraction (STAGE) tips (Rappsilber et al., 2007). The eluates were concentrated and reconstituted to 20 μL in 0.5% acetic acid, prior to HPLC-MS analyses. The peptide mixture of each sample was submitted to a nanoLC-nanoESI-MS/MS analysis on an Ultimate 3000 HPLC (Dionex, San Donato Milanese, Milano, Italy) coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany). Fractions containing 2.25 μg protein were injected directly on a homemade nano column packed with Aeris Peptide XB-C18 phase (75 μm i.d. × 15 cm, 3.6 μm, 100 Å, Phenomenex, Torrance, CA, USA) and eluted with a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The elution mobile phases composition was as following: H2O 0.1% formic acid/CH3CN 97/3 (phase A) and CH3CN 0.1 % formic acid/ H2O 80/20 (phase B). The elution program was: 0 min, 2% B; 40 min, 2% B; 68 min, 15% B; 168 min, 25% B; 228 min, 35% B; 273 min, 50% B; 274 min, 90% B; 288 min, 90% B; 289 min, 2% B; 309 min, 2 % B. Mass spectra were acquired in positive ion mode, setting the spray voltage at 1.8 kV, the capillary voltage and temperature respectively at 45 V and 200 °C, and the tube lens at 130 V. Data were acquired in data dependent mode with dynamic exclusion enabled (repeat count 2, repeat duration 15 s, exclusion duration 30 s); survey MS scans were recorded in the Orbitrap analyzer in the mass range 300-2000 m/z at a 15,000 nominal resolution at m/z = 400; then up to five most intense ions in each full MS scan were fragmented (isolation width 3 m/z, normalized collision energy 30) and analyzed in the IT analyzer. Monocharged ions did not trigger MS/MS experiments.

### Data Protocol
The identification of proteins was performed using MaxQuant software (version 1.5.2.6) (Cox and Mann, 2008). The derived peak list was searched with Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011). We used as database sequences retrieved by searching Uniprot for Apis mellifera and sequences retrieved by searching Uniprot for virus AND Apis mellifera, merged with a set of commonly observed contaminants, such as human keratins, bovine serum proteins, and proteases. In parameter section, we set as enzyme Trypsin and Lys-C, allowing up to two missed cleavages. The minimum required peptide length was seven amino acids. Carbamido-methylation of cysteine and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications. As no labeling was performed, multiplicity was set to 1. During the main search, parent masses were allowed an initial mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and fragment ions were allowed a mass deviation of 0.5 Da. PSM (Peptide Spectrum Match) and protein identifications were filtered using a target-decoy approach at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%. Relative, label-free quantification (LFQ) of proteins was done using the MaxLFQ algorithm integrated into MaxQuant. The match between runs option was enabled with a match time window of 4 min and an alignment time window of 20 min. For protein quantification we used 1 as Minimum ratio count, “Unique+Razor” peptides (i.e. those exclusively shared by the proteins of the same group), peptides with variable modifications, and selected “discard unmodified counterpart peptide”. Annotations regarding gene onthology (GO) categories, Protein family (Pfam) and Interpro were downloaded from the link (http://141.61.102.106:8080/share.cgi?ssid=0q4b6sT) available in Perseus software (version 1.5.1.6) and each protein identifier was associated with these categories if available. The data were filtered to eliminate hits to the reverse database, contaminants and proteins only identified with modified peptides.

### Publication Abstract
The significant risk of disease transmission has selected for effective immune-defense strategies in insect societies. Division of labour, with individuals specialized in immunity-related tasks, strongly contributes to prevent the spread of diseases. A trade-off, however, may exist between phenotypic specialization to increase task efficiency and maintenance of plasticity to cope with variable colony demands. We investigated the extent of phenotypic specialization associated with a specific task by using allogrooming in the honeybee, Apis mellifera, where worker behaviour might lower ectoparasites load. We adopted an integrated approach to characterize the behavioural and physiological phenotype of allogroomers, by analyzing their behavior (both at individual and social network level), their immunocompetence (bacterial clearance tests) and their chemosensory specialization (proteomics of olfactory organs). We found that allogroomers have higher immune capacity compared to control bees, while they do not differ in chemosensory proteomic profiles. Behaviourally, they do not show differences in the tasks performed (other than allogrooming), while they clearly differ in connectivity within the colonial social network, having a higher centrality than control bees. This demonstrates the presence of an immune-specific physiological and social behavioural specialization in individuals involved in a social immunity related task, thus linking individual to social immunity, and it shows how phenotypes may be specialized in the task performed while maintaining an overall plasticity.

### Keywords
Apis mellifera, Allogroomers, Olfaction, Shotgun proteomics

### Affiliations
Biology Department, University of Firenze, Italy
University of Firenze

### Submitter
Francesca Romana Dani

### Lab Head
Dr F.R. Dani
Biology Department, University of Firenze, Italy


