### Accession
PXD004054

### Title
SILAC analysis of Δhmt1 yeast -  Knockout of the Hmt1p arginine methyltransferase in Saccharomyces cerevisiae leads to the dysregulation of phosphate-associated genes and processes

### Description
In this study, the proteome-level effects of the deletion of the gene encoding Hmt1p, the predominant yeast arginine methyltransferase, were measured using SILAC (stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture), to clarify if the abundance levels of any proteins were disrupted by systemic loss of arginine methylation. Analysis revealed that numerous proteins were found to be differentially abundant between wild-type yeast and Δhmt1, and functional analysis revealed perturbation of phosphate signalling and repression of the PHO pathway.

### Sample Protocol
A yeast strain with the lysine and arginine biosynthetic pathways knocked out (Δlys2/Δarg4), as to be amenable to complete metabolic labelling with these amino acids, was used as a background for these experiments, and is referred to as the background strain. The gene encoding the predominant yeast arginine methyltransferase Hmt1p was deleted from this background strain, producing a Δlys2/Δarg4/Δhmt1 strain. For SILAC experiments, cells were grown in yeast nitrogen base (YNB) liquid medium containing either 20 mg/L lysine-8 (13C615N2-L-lysine HCl) and arginine-10 (13C615N4-L-arginine HCl) (Silantes GmbH, Germany) or 20 mg/L L-lysine and L-arginine, and harvested at an OD600 of 0.7-1.0. A reciprocal design integrating an isotope label set swap was used. Four parallel cultures (two of each of the background strain and Δhmt1 in heavy and light media) were grown to mid-log phase and combined after lysis, prior to separation by SDS-PAGE. This produced two sets of biological replicates, A and B. To determine the differences in the proteome arising from the knockout of HMT1, large-scale LC-MS/MS analysis was performed by segmenting appropriate gel lanes into 13 pieces, according to protein mass, reducing and alkylating according according to established methods,  and analysing each sample twice on an Orbitrap mass spectrometer. This included one iteration of exclusion list analysis. LC-MS/MS analysis of extracted peptides was performed on an LTQ Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Electron, Bremen, Germany), using an UltiMate 3000 HPLC and autosampler system (Dionex, The Netherlands), with positive ion mode electrospray; for all samples, the mass spectrometer was operating in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. A survey scan mass to charge ratio (m/z) of 350–1750 was acquired in the Orbitrap (Resolution = 30 000 at m/z 400, with an accumulation target value of 1 million ions) with lock mass enabled. Up to the 10 most abundant ions (>5000 counts) with charge states of +2 or greater were sequentially isolated and fragmented within the linear ion trap. Collisionally induced dissociation was used with an activation q = 0.25 and activation time of 30 milliseconds at a target value of 30 000 ions. The m/z ratios selected for tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) were dynamically excluded for 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
SILAC data generated from comparison of Δhmt1 yeast and background strain were processed using MaxQuant software [205] (version 1.3.0.5) using the Andromeda search engine, searching against the UniProtKB database. Search parameters were as follows: variable modifications of methionine oxidation and cysteine carbamidomethylation, peptides of minimum six or more amino acids, maximum of two missed cleavages, minimum two razor peptides for quantitation, and peptide and protein false discovery rate of 0.01. Unique and razor peptides were assigned to proteins. For search tolerances, MS1 was set to <5 p.p.m. and MS2 was set to .40 Da. For exclusion list generation, mass-to-charge ratios for all selected precursor ions were extracted from MaxQuant outputs and excluded over all retention time windows.

### Publication Abstract
Hmt1p is the predominant arginine methyltransferase in <i>Saccharomyces cerevisiae</i> Its substrate proteins are involved in transcription, transcriptional regulation, nucleocytoplasmic transport and RNA splicing. Hmt1p-catalyzed methylation can also modulate protein-protein interactions. Hmt1p is conserved from unicellular eukaryotes through to mammals where its ortholog, PRMT1, is lethal upon knockout. In yeast, however, the effect of knockout on the transcriptome and proteome has not been described. Transcriptome analysis revealed downregulation of phosphate-responsive genes in <i>hmt1</i>&#x394;, including acid phosphatases <i>PHO5</i>, <i>PHO11</i>, and <i>PHO12</i>, phosphate transporters <i>PHO84</i> and <i>PHO89</i> and the vacuolar transporter chaperone <i>VTC3</i> Analysis of the <i>hmt1</i>&#x394; proteome revealed decreased abundance of phosphate-associated proteins including phosphate transporter Pho84p, vacuolar alkaline phosphatase Pho8p, acid phosphatase Pho3p and subunits of the vacuolar transporter chaperone complex Vtc1p, Vtc3p and Vtc4p. Consistent with this, phosphate homeostasis was dysregulated in <i>hmt1</i>&#x394; cells, showing decreased extracellular phosphatase levels and decreased total P<sub>i</sub> in phosphate-depleted medium. <i>In vitro</i>, we showed that transcription factor Pho4p can be methylated at Arg-241, which could explain phosphate dysregulation in <i>hmt1</i>&#x394; if interplay exists with phosphorylation at Ser-242 or Ser-243, or if Arg-241 methylation affects the capacity of Pho4p to homodimerize or interact with Pho2p. However, the Arg-241 methylation site was not validated <i>in vivo</i> and the localization of a Pho4p-GFP fusion in <i>hmt1</i>&#x394; was not different from wild type. To our knowledge, this is the first study to reveal an association between Hmt1p and phosphate homeostasis and one which suggests a regulatory link between S-adenosyl methionine and intracellular phosphate.

### Keywords
Hmt1, Yeast, Phosphate, Silac, Methylation, Arginine methylation

### Affiliations
University of New South Wales
Systems Biology Initiative, University of New South Wales, Australia

### Submitter
Daniel Yagoub

### Lab Head
Dr Marc Roland Wilkins
Systems Biology Initiative, University of New South Wales, Australia


