### Accession
PXD010919

### Title
Protein Complex identification and quantitative complexome by CN-PAGE

### Description
The majority of cellular processes are carried out by protein complexes. Various size fractionation methods have previously been combined with mass spectrometry to identify protein complexes. However, most of these approaches lack the quantitative information which is required to understand how changes of protein complex abundance and composition affects metabolic fluxes.  In this paper we present a proof of concept approach to quantitatively study the complexome in the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana at the end of the day (ED) and the end of the night (EN). We show that size-fractionation of native protein complexes by Clear-Native-PAGE (CN-PAGE), coupled with mass spectrometry can be used to establish abundance profiles along the molecular weight gradient. Furthermore, by deconvoluting complex protein abundance profiles, we were able to drastically improve the clustering of protein profiles. To identify putative interaction partners, and ultimately protein complexes, our approach calculates the Euclidian distance between protein profile pairs.  Acceptable threshold values are based on a cut-off that is optimized by a receiver-operator characteristic (ROC) curve analysis. Our approach shows low technical variation and can easily be adapted to study in the complexome in any biological system.

### Sample Protocol
Prior to analysis peptides were resuspended in 40 µl of resuspension buffer (3% [v/v] acetonitrile, 0.1% [v/v] formic acid). Peptides were separated online by reverse phase liquid chromatography using a NanoLC 1D (Eksigent) before being measured on a LTQ-Orbitrap XL ETD (Thermo Scientific). An in-house made capillary column (75 µm i.d., 8 cm long) was packed with Magic C18 AQ beads (5µm, 100 Å, Microm) and used for sample loading. Samples were loaded at a flow rate of 0.5 µL min-1 in a buffer composed of 3% (v/v) acetonitrile and 0.2% (v/v) formic acid. An acetonitrile concentration gradient (5% to 40% [v/v] acetonitrile) was used to elute peptides over 70 minutes at a flow rate of 0.5 µL min-1. The column was then washed for ten minutes with 80% (v/v) acetonitrile at a 0.25 µL min-1 flow rate. Scan parameters were configured to detect ions in a full scan from 300 to 2000 m/z at a resolution of 35’000 . Following detection data dependent tandem mass spectrometry scans were performed for the 5 most abundant ions (minimal signal strength, 500 hits, isolation width mass-to-charge ratio, 3, relative collision energy, 35%). Dynamic exclusion was applied for two minutes to peptides for which MS/MS spectra was recorded.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS/MS spectra was imported into MaxQuant for protein identification and quantitation40. Peptide identification by the Andromeda search engine was based on the Arabidopsis thaliana TAIR10 protein sequence database (35,386 entries)16. The following parameters were applied to the analysis: 10 ppm peptide mass tolerance; 0.8 Da MS/MS tolerance; a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed; a decoy database search with a 1% FDR cutoff on the protein level; carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification, while the oxidation of methionine was set as variable modification. The “label-free quantification” and “match between runs” settings were also highlighted in the software. Valid peptides were expected to have a minimum length of six amino acids. Peptide quantitation was performed proteins identified with a minimum of one unique and one razor peptide. Known contaminants were removed from the analysis. MaxQuant was used to produce the “mean” complexome dataset by combining replicates within the software.

### Publication Abstract
The majority of cellular processes are carried out by protein complexes. Various size fractionation methods have previously been combined with mass spectrometry to identify protein complexes. However, most of these approaches lack the quantitative information which is required to understand how changes of protein complex abundance and composition affect metabolic fluxes. In this paper we present a proof of concept approach to quantitatively study the complexome in the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana at the end of the day (ED) and the end of the night (EN). We show that size-fractionation of native protein complexes by Clear-Native-PAGE (CN-PAGE), coupled with mass spectrometry can be used to establish abundance profiles along the molecular weight gradient. Furthermore, by deconvoluting complex protein abundance profiles, we were able to drastically improve the clustering of protein profiles. To identify putative interaction partners, and ultimately protein complexes, our approach calculates the Euclidian distance between protein profile pairs. Acceptable threshold values are based on a cut-off that is optimized by a receiver-operator characteristic (ROC) curve analysis. Our approach shows low technical variation and can easily be adapted to study in the complexome in any biological system.

### Keywords
Cn-page, Proteomics, Mass spectrometry, Protein-protein interactions, Protein complexes

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute of Molecular Plant Physiology Am Mühlenberg 1, 14476 Golm  Germany
Max Planck Institute for Molecular Plant Physiology | Celon Pharma

### Submitter
Michal Gorka

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Graf
Max Planck Institute of Molecular Plant Physiology Am Mühlenberg 1, 14476 Golm  Germany


