### Accession
PXD022473

### Title
Exploring the molecular machinery of denitrification in Haloferax mediterranei through proteomics

### Description
Many proteins and enzymes involved in denitrification in haloarchaea can be inferred to be located between the cytoplasmic membrane and the S-layer, based on the presence of a Tat signal sequence and the orientation of the active site that some of these enzymes have. The membrane fraction of the haloarchaeon Haloferax mediterranei (R-4), grown under anaerobic conditions in the presence of nitrate, was solubilised to identify the respiratory proteins associated or anchored to it. Using Triton X-100, CHAPS and n-Octyl-β-d-glucopyranoside at different concentrations we found the best conditions for isolating membrane proteins in micelles, in which enzymatic activity and stability were maintained. Then, they were subjected to purification using two chromatographic steps followed by the analysis of the eluents by NANO-ESI Chip-HPLC-MS/MS. The results showed that the four main enzymes of denitrification (nitrate, nitrite, nitric oxide and nitrous oxide reductases) in H. mediterranei were identified and they were co-purified thanks to the micelles made with Triton X-100 (20% w/v for membrane solubilisation and 0.2% w/v in the buffers used during purification). In addition, several accessory proteins involved in electron transfer processes during anaerobic respiration as well as proteins supporting ATP synthesis, redox balancing and oxygen sensing were detected. This is the first characterization of anaerobic membrane proteome of haloarchaea under denitrifying conditions using liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry. It provides new information for a better understanding of the anaerobic respiration in haloarchaea.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were harvested by centrifugation at 16,300 xɡ for 45 min at 4 ºC in a Beckman J-20 XP centrifuge, washed with 20% SW for three times and then centrifuged again at 16,300 xg for 60 min at 4oC. The cell pellet obtained was resuspended in 10 mM Tris-HCl, 1 mM DTT buffer pH 8.0 (40 % w/v for cellular resuspension in the mentioned buffer). After that, cells were disrupted by sonication and the suspension was centrifuged at 2,100 xg for 30 min at 4 ºC in a Beckman J-20 XP to remove non-lysed cells. The supernatant (containing lysed cells) was centrifuged at 105,000 xg for 60 min at 4 ºC in a Beckman Coulter Optima™ XL-100K Ultracentrifuge. The new supernatant was discarded and the pellet (containing the insoluble fraction) was then subjected to solubilisation using three different detergents in a range of concentrations (0.5-20 % (w/v)): Triton X-100, n-octyl-β-D-glucopyranoside and CHAPS (provided by Sigma or Anatrace companies). For each of the assays, they were added to the buffer used for the isolation of the crude extract (10 mM Tris-HCl, 1 mM DTT, pH 8), gently stirred at 4 ºC overnight. Then, the solubilised samples were centrifuged at 105,000 xg for 60 min at 4 ºC in a Beckman Coulter Optima™ XL-100K Ultracentrifuge. Supernatants were collected to quantify protein by Bradford method and to measure nitrate reductase activity (see below for details). From these experiments the detergent showing the best results (Triton X-100) was selected to get the micelles at large scale for protein purification and proteomic analysis. The micelles obtained by solubilizing the membrane were then enriched in denitrification proteins following the next purification steps. All of them were carried out at 25 ºC: Step 1: DEAE-Sepharose CL-6B chromatography.  Step 2: HiPrep™ Q-Sepharose 16/10 FF.  The protein content was determined by the Bradford method, with bovine serum albumin as a standard (Bradford, 1976). Nar and Nir activities were assayed in solubilised extracts as well as along the purification process as previously described (Martínez-Espinosa et al., 2001a; Martínez-Espinosa et al., 2001b; Lledó et al., 2004). The assay mixture for Nar activity contained, in a final volume of 250 µL, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, 3.6 M NaCl, 4 mM methyl viologen (MV), 35 mM KNO3, 17 mM Na2S2O4 (freshly prepared in 0.1 M NaHCO3) and 50 µL of sample preparations; for Nir activity, the mixture contained, in a final volume of 250 µL, 50 mM phosphate buffer pH 7.5, 3.2 M NaCl, 3 mM methyl viologen (MV), 5 mM KNO2, 17 mM Na2S2O4 (freshly prepared in 0.1 M NaHCO3) and 50 µL of sample preparations The assay was developed at 40 ºC for 15 min (Nar activity) or 20 min (Nir activity).  Nar specific activity is expressed as micromoles of NO2- appearing per minute per milligram of protein, while Nir specific activity is expressed as micromoles of NO2- disappearing per minute per milligram of protein (U = µmol NO2-/min). All the assays were carried out in triplicate and against a control assay without enzyme. Sample preparation Fifty µg protein from two biological replicates were precipitated with Trichloroacetic acid 10% (w/v) in a final volume of 500 µL overnight at -20 ºC. Then, the proteins were pelleted by centrifugation at 16,000 xg in a centrifuge Eppendorf 5418 R for 5 minutes and washed three times using 1 mL of cold acetone for each sample. The clean precipitate was then resuspended in a solution containing urea 6 M (50 µL). Tryptic in-solution digestion For tryptic in-solution digestion, 50 µg of protein sample were reduced with 5 μL of 0.2 M DTT followed by incubation for 1 h at 37°C and S-alkylation with 20 μL of 0.2 M iodoacetamide followed by incubation for 1 h in the dark at room temperature. Then, 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer was added to reduce the concentration of urea to 0.6 M. For in-solution digestion, trypsin was added to the protein mixture at an enzyme-to-substrate ratio of 1:30 (w/w). After incubation at 37°C for 16 h, additional trypsin (1:60, w/w) was added to the sample and incubation was continued for 5 h to ensure complete digestion. Tryptic peptides were dried down in a Speed-Vacbenchtop centrifuge and resuspended in 5% acetonitrile and 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid. The resulting peptides were desalted with PepClean C-18 Spin Columns (Agilent Technologies) in batches of 30 μg of protein according to manufacturer recommendations. Eventually, eluted peptides were dried down in a Speed-Vacbenchtop centrifuge and resuspended in 10 µL of first LC mobile phase (5% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid).

### Data Protocol
Peptide separation was performed using an Agilent 1290 Infinity LC system coupled to the 6550 Accurate-Mass QTOF (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA) with electrospray interface (Jet Stream Technology) operating in positive-ion mode (3,500 V) and in high sensitivity mode. The best conditions for the electrospray interface were: gas temperature 250 °C, drying gas 14 L/min, nebulizer 35 psi, sheath gas temperature 250 °C, sheath gas flow 11 L/min. Samples were injected (10 μL) on an Agilent Advance Bio Peptide mapping column (2.1 × 250 mm, 2.7 μm) (Agilent Technologies) with a 3–40% gradient of solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 90% acetonitrile) for 140 min operating at 50 °C and a flow rate of 0.4 mL/min. The data were acquired with Agilent Mass Hunter Workstation Software, LC/MS Data Acquisition B.08.00 (Build 8.00.8058.0) operating in Auto MS/MS mode whereby the 20 most intense ions (charge states, 2–5) within 300–1,700 m/z mass range above a threshold of 1,000 counts were selected for MS/MS analysis. MS/MS spectra (50–1,700 m/z) were collected with the quadrupole set to “narrow” resolution and were acquired until 25,000 total counts were collected or for a maximum accumulation time of 333 ms. To ensure the desired mass accuracy of recorded ions, continuous internal calibration was performed during analyses with the use of signals m/z 322.0481 (detected m/z [C6H18N3O6P3-H]+) and m/z 1221.9906 (detected m/z [C24H18O6N3P3F36-H]+). Data analysis Each MS/MS spectra data set was processed to determine monoisotopic masses and charge states, to merge MS/MS spectra with the same precursor (Δm/z < 1.4 Da and chromatographic Δt < 60 s) and to select high quality spectra with the Extraction tool of SpectrumMill Proteomics Workbench (Agilent). The reduced data set was searched against the Haloferax NCBInr database in the identity mode with the MS/MS search tool of SpectrumMillProteomics Workbench and with the following settings: trypsin, up to 2 missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation of cysteines as fixed modifications, oxidation of methionine as variable, mass tolerance of ±20 ppm for precursor and ±50 ppm for product ions. The precursor mass shift was set between -18 Da to 177 Da to take into consideration variable modifications such as the presence of sodium and potassium adducts. Peptide hits were validated in the peptide mode to achieve a false discovery rate (FDR) of <1.2% and then in the protein mode according to the score settings recommended by the manufacturer. Positive identifications were considered only when two or more peptides were matched, and their summed score was >30.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Anaerobiosis, Micelles., Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry, Proteomics, Haloferax, Electron transfer, Denitrification, Haloarchaea, Detergents

### Affiliations
Agrochemistry and Biochemistry Department. University of Alicante
Department of Agrochemistry and Biochemistry. University of Alicante.

### Submitter
Javier Torregrosa-Crespo

### Lab Head
Dr Rosa María Martínez-Espinosa
Agrochemistry and Biochemistry Department. University of Alicante


