### Accession
PXD038000

### Title
Moonlighting chaperone 1 activity of the enzyme PqsE contributes to RhlR-controlled virulence of Pseudomonas aeruginosa

### Description
Pseudomonas aeruginosa is a major cause of nosocomial infections and also leads to severe exacerbations in cystic fibrosis or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Three intertwined quorum sensing systems control virulence of P. aeruginosa, with the rhl circuit playing the leading role in late and chronic infections. The majority of traits controlled by rhl transcription factor RhlR depend on PqsE, a dispensable thioesterase in Pseudomonas Quinolone Signal (PQS) biosynthesis that interferes with RhlR through an enigmatic mechanism likely involving direct interaction of both proteins. Here we show that PqsE and RhlR form a 2:2 protein complex that, together with RhlR agonist N-butanoyl-L-homoserine lactone (C4-HSL), solubilizes RhlR and thereby renders the otherwise insoluble transcription factor active. We determined crystal structures of the complex and identified residues essential for the interaction. To corroborate the chaperone like activity of PqsE, we designed stability-optimized variants of RhlR that bypass the need for C4-HSL and PqsE in activating PqsE/RhlR-controlled processes of P. aeruginosa. Together, our data provide insight into the unique regulatory role of PqsE and lay groundwork for developing new P. aeruginosa-specific pharmaceuticals.

### Sample Protocol
P. aeruginosa PA14 wildtype and deletion mutants ΔpqsE, ΔrhlR, ΔrhlI and ΔpqsE/rhlI were freshly streaked on LB-agar. Colonies were grown in 3 ml TSB overnight for inoculation of 20 ml media shaken at 37 °C for 24 h. Cells were pelleted and washed three times in PBS before equal amounts of cells were harvested by centrifugation. Soluble fractions were prepared by suspending in 50 mM Bicine pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 5% glycerol with protease inhibitors (cOmplete, EDTA-free) followed by sonication and centrifugation at 100.000 x g for 30 minutes. Whole cell extracts were generated by lysis in SDS-containing buffer (2% SDS, 500 mM TEAB, 200 mM NaCl) with protease inhibitors (cOmplete, EDTA-free). Protein digestion and peptide purification for LC-MS/MS was performed using a slightly adapted SP3 protocol63. In short, proteins were subjected to reduction and alkylation using 5 mM TCEP and 10 mM MMTS, respectively. Proteins were allowed to bind to SP3 carboxylate beads overnight in the presence of 60% acetonitrile. Then, beads were washed twice with 70% ethanol and subsequently once with 100% acetonitrile. Proteins were digested overnight at 37 °C using trypsin at a final concentration of 1 μg protease to 50 μg total protein in the presence of 50 mM TEAB, 5mM TCEP and 10 mM MMTS. Digested peptides were then allowed to bind to SP3 carboxylate beads overnight in the presence of 95% acetonitrile. After extensively washing the beads with 100% acetonitrile, peptides were eluted using 2% DMSO and milliQ H2O. Samples were vacuum dried and resuspended in 0.1% folic acid before applying to C18 Evotips (EV-2001; Evosep) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Evotips were then loaded on an Evosep One HPLC (Evosep) connected to a TimsTOFPro mass spectrometer (Bruker) equipped with PaSER Version 2022c (Bruker) for real-time database searches.   Interaction partners of PqsE in P. aeruginosa were identified by pulldown combined with untargeted LC-MS proteomic analysis. Overnight cultures of PA14 tnpqsE pUCP20::His6-pqsE and the control strain (PA14 Δ20700ΩGm pUCP20::His6-flgZ) were used to inoculate a 100 ml LB culture to an OD600 of 0.05, which was then shaken at 37 °C for 8 h (180 rpm). Cells were harvested by centrifugation, washed on ice with 2.5 ml pellet wash buffer (50 mM Tris, 300 mM NaCl, 20 mM imidazole, 1 mM DTT, and 1x protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche)), resuspended in 3 ml lysis buffer (50 mM Tris pH 8.0, 300 mM NaCl, 10 mM imidazole, 1 mM DTT, and 1x protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche)) and lysed by sonification. The supernatant was cleared by centrifugation at 21.000 x g and 4 °C for 5 min and one aliquot was taken as reference for later enrichment factor calculation. The rest of the supernatant was incubated with 1 ml Ni-NTA bead suspension (Qiagen) on a rotary shaker at 4 °C for 1 h. The suspension was then loaded into a column, beads were washed twice with wash buffer and then eluted with three times with 0.5 ml of elution buffer (50 mM Tris pH 8.0, 300 mM NaCl, 250 mM imidazole, 1 mM DTT, and 1x protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche)). The pulldown procedure was repeated in the presence of 50 μM C4-HSL in all buffers. Analysis followed published protocols64. Briefly, protein extracts (full extract and pooled Ni- NTA eluates) were fractionated by SDS-PAGE, lanes were cut into three parts and then incubated with trypsin (Promega) at 37 °C overnight. Peptides were separated with an RP765 nanoLC system (RSLC, Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled directly to the ion source of a mass spectrometer (LTQ Orbitrap Velos, Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Evotips were then loaded on an Evosep One HPLC (Evosep) connected to a TimsTOFPro mass spectrometer (Bruker) equipped with PaSER Version 2022c (Bruker) for real-time database searches. For quantification the ID_STAT©COMPARE plug-in in PaSER Version 2022c was used. Data analysis, data presentation and statistics were performed using GraphPad Prism 9.3.1.  Raw data were searched against the P. aeruginosa entries of the UniProt database using the MaxQuant software package65 (version 1.5.3.8) including 768 the Andromeda search engine66 for identification and quantification. Proteins were stated as identified by an FDR < 0.01 on peptide and protein level. Normalization employed the LFQ algorithm67. Enrichment was calculated by dividing the LFQ intensities of Ni-NTA eluates by values for the full extract. Non-specifically enriched proteins were eliminated by subtraction of the control strain. Experiments were performed in triplicates, and the significance of enrichment was calculated by Student’s t-test.

### Publication Abstract
Pseudomonas aeruginosa is a major cause of nosocomial infections and also leads to severe exacerbations in cystic fibrosis or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Three intertwined quorum sensing systems control virulence of P. aeruginosa, with the rhl circuit playing the leading role in late and chronic infections. The majority of traits controlled by rhl transcription factor RhlR depend on PqsE, a dispensable thioesterase in Pseudomonas Quinolone Signal (PQS) biosynthesis that interferes with RhlR through an enigmatic mechanism likely involving direct interaction of both proteins. Here we show that PqsE and RhlR form a 2:2 protein complex that, together with RhlR agonist N-butanoyl-L-homoserine lactone (C4-HSL), solubilizes RhlR and thereby renders the otherwise insoluble transcription factor active. We determine crystal structures of the complex and identify residues essential for the interaction. To corroborate the chaperone-like activity of PqsE, we design stability-optimized variants of RhlR that bypass the need for C4-HSL and PqsE in activating PqsE/RhlR-controlled processes of P. aeruginosa. Together, our data provide insight into the unique regulatory role of PqsE and lay groundwork for developing new P. aeruginosa-specific pharmaceuticals.

### Keywords
Pqse, Lc-ms/ms, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Rhlr, Quorum sensing

### Affiliations
Department Structure and Function of Proteins Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research Inhoffenstr. 7, 38124 Braunschweig, Germany
HZI

### Submitter
Lothar Jaensch

### Lab Head
Dr Lothar Jänsch, Wulf Blankenfeldt
Department Structure and Function of Proteins Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research Inhoffenstr. 7, 38124 Braunschweig, Germany


