### Accession
PXD001296

### Title
Exoproteome of Aspergillus flavus corneal isolates and saprophytes

### Description
A. flavus exoproteome reference map as well as identification of the exoproteins from corneal isolates.

### Sample Protocol
100 µg of pooled exoproteins were prefractionated on 1D PAGE and bands were excised and were washed twice with water and completely destained by repeated incubation in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate prepared in 50% acetonitrile, followed by incubation in 100% acetonitrile to dehydrate the gel pieces. Dehydrated gel pieces were dried under vacuum and were rehydrated for 30 min on ice with 200 ng to 600 ng of trypsin (Invitrogen) in 5µl of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate prepared in 10% acetonitrile. The gel pieces were overlaid with 20µl of 40mM ammonium bicarbonate in 10% acetonitrile and incubated at 37ºC for 16 h. Peptides were then extracted from gel pieces using 25µl of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) in 60% acetonitrile and then with 20µl of 100% acetonitrile. Extracted peptides were vacuum dried, desalted using C18 tips, dried and stored at 4°C. Dried tryptic peptides were suspended in 10 µl of 0.1% FA and analyzed using Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
All the raw files acquired from Orbitrap Velos Pro Mass Spectrometer were analyzed by Proteome Discoverer v1.4 using Mascot and SequestHT search nodes. Tthe complete proteome of Aspergillus flavus (strain ATCC 200026 / FGSC A1120 / NRRL 3357 / JCM 12722 / SRRC 167) including the isoforms downloaded from the Uniprot database on 30th August, 2013 (13501 entries) was used for the search. The database search was performed with the following parameters: peptide tolerance of 10 PPM and fragment tolerance of 0.60 Da to 0.80 Da, allowing two missed cleavages.  Cysteine carbamidomethylation was given as fixed modification while methionine oxidation, N-terminal acetylation and phosphorylation (S,T,Y) as variable modifications. The peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) from SequestHT and Mascot were post-processed using the Percolator algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Aspergillus flavus; exoproteome; alkaline protease

### Affiliations
Aravind Medical Research Foundation, Madurai, India
Aravind Medical Research Foundation, Madurai

### Submitter
Naveen Luke

### Lab Head
Dr Dharmalingam Kuppamuthu
Aravind Medical Research Foundation, Madurai, India


