### Accession
PXD020285

### Title
Candidate early biomarkers of Glioblastoma Multiforme revealed by longitudinal bottom-up proteomics study on multiple biofluids in a murine model

### Description
Glioblastoma Multiforme (GBM) is an aggressive form of brain tumor, associated with poor prognosis and low survival rates, and early diagnosis is impaired by the lack of presymptomatic biomarkers. Here we used a syngenic GBM mouse model to investigate longitudinal changes in the proteome profile of serum, serum small extracellular vesicles (sEVs) and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) during GBM progression. Motor tests were used to define a baseline, a presymptomatic and an advanced stage of tumor progression and body fluids were sampled at these time points.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were analyzed using proteomics workflows developed for the analysis of the small sample volumes collected during such longitudinal investigations. 15 µL serum were immunodepleted, buffer was exchanged to an SDC-based buffer and Try/LysC digestion was carried out after protein reduction and alkylation. A protocol for automated on-column TMT labelling using the AssayMAP BRAVO was adapted for serum samples. Labeled peptides were fractionated into seven fractions on RPS cartridges. 50 µL of serum were used for sEVs isolation, using a size-exclusion chromatography approach. The resulting sEVs and CSF were digested using a modified SP3 protocol. Five CSF peptide samples were pooled and subjected to high pH fractionation. Their runs were used to increase proteome coverage usin the match between runs option in MaxQuant. Peptides were separated using the same chromatographic system and quantified with a label-free approach.

### Data Protocol
Raw data of the serum dataset were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer (v.2.1, Thermo Scientific) and searched against the SP Mus Musculus database. Searches were performed with a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and using a strict FDR of 0.01. A maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Methionine oxidation (+15.995 Da) and acetylation (+42.01 Da, protein N-terminus) were set as dynamic modifications while carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.021 Da) and TMT 10plex of N-Term and lysines (+229.163 Da) were set as static modifications. Raw data files from the CSF and sEVs experiments were processed with MaxQuant (v.1.6.3.4). Fully tryptic peptides were searched against the same SP Mus Musculus protein database. The search was performed allowing a maximum of two missed cleavages, methionine oxidation and acetylation as dynamic modifications, and cysteine carbamidomethylation as static modification. A Linear Mixed Effect model was fitted to each protein. The model includes a fixed effect for the time point and a random intercept for individual mice. The model was tested for significant effects of the time points. Effects were considered significant if p/value was lower than 0.05 after Benjamini-Hockberg correction for an FDR of 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Glioblastoma Multiforme (GBM) is a brain tumor with a poor prognosis and low survival rates. GBM is diagnosed at an advanced stage, so little information is available on the early stage of the disease and few improvements have been made for earlier diagnosis. Longitudinal murine models are a promising platform for biomarker discovery as they allow access to the early stages of the disease. Nevertheless, their use in proteomics has been limited owing to the low sample amount that can be collected at each longitudinal time point. Here we used optimized microproteomics workflows to investigate longitudinal changes in the protein profile of serum, serum small extracellular vesicles (sEVs), and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) in a GBM murine model. Baseline, pre-symptomatic, and symptomatic tumor stages were determined using non-invasive motor tests. Forty-four proteins displayed significant differences in signal intensities during GBM progression. Dysregulated proteins are involved in cell motility, cell growth, and angiogenesis. Most of the dysregulated proteins already exhibited a difference from baseline at the pre-symptomatic stage of the disease, suggesting that early effects of GBM might be detectable before symptom onset.

### Keywords
Longitudinal, Proteomics, Glioblastoma, Extracellular vesicles, Csf., Biomarkers, Serum

### Affiliations
Fondazione Pisana per la Scienza ONLUS, 56107 San Giuliano Terme (PI), Italy
Scuola Superiore Sant'Anna, Pisa

### Submitter
Francesco Greco

### Lab Head
Dr Liam Andrew McDonnell
Fondazione Pisana per la Scienza ONLUS, 56107 San Giuliano Terme (PI), Italy


