### Accession
PXD000890

### Title
Decoding Listeria by N-terminomics

### Description
This dataset contains spectral information of protein N-terminal peptides isolated from Listeria monocytogenes EGD-e, a bacterial model organism and human pathogen. When mapped onto the Listeria genome these peptides indicate the exact location of translation initiation sites (TIS). The large majority of the identified TIS corresponded to start sites of predicted open reading frames (ORFs), however, a significant fraction of the identified TIS indicated deviations from the current genome annotation. The latter include primarily TIS inside the sequence of predicted ORFs or TIS that delineate the start position of novel ORFs.

### Sample Protocol
Bacteria were grown in BHI medium at different temperatures in the presence of actinonin, a peptide deformylase inhibitor. Upon lysis by sonication, proteins were reduced and alkylated, free amines were blocked by trideuteron-acetylation and proteins were digested by trypsin or Glu-C. N-terminal peptides were isolated and fractionated by the COFRADIC technology and analyzed by LC-MS/MS on a LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer. During two analyses a total of 201 LC-MS/MS datafiles were acquired.

### Data Protocol
From the MS/MS data in each LC-run, Mascot generic files (mgf) were created using the Mascot Distiller software (version 2.5.0.0, Matrix Science Ltd.) and generated peak lists were searched with Mascot using the Mascot Daemon interface (version 2.4.0, Matrix Science Ltd.). Spectra were searched against two databases with Listeria monocytogenes EGD-e protein sequences, one of which generated by 6-frame translation of the EGD-e genome from any of the seven known start codons. Depending on the digestion enzyme, Arg-C/P or Glu-C enzyme settings were used with one missed cleavage allowed. In all searches oxidation of methionine (+15.994915 Da), trideuteron-acetylation of lysine (+45.029395 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.021464 Da) were set as fixed modifications, while variable modifications included acetylation (+42.010565 Da) and trideuteron-acetylation (+45.029395 Da) of N-termini and pyroglutamate formation of N-terminal glutamine residues (-17.026549 Da). Mass tolerance of the precursor ions was set to 10 ppm and mass tolerance of the fragment ions was set to 0.5 Da. The peptide charge was set to 1+, 2+, or 3+ and the C13 setting of Mascot was set to 1. Only peptides that were ranked first and scored above the threshold score set at 99% confidence were withheld. The current dataset contains only those peptides that were modified at their N-termini by acetylation, trideuteron-acetylation or formylation and that were used for mapping onto the Listeria genome.

### Publication Abstract
To adapt to changing environments, bacteria have evolved numerous pathways that activate stress response genes. In Gram-positive bacteria, the stressosome, a cytoplasmic complex, relays external cues and activates the sigma B regulon. The stressosome is structurally well-characterized in Bacillus, but how it senses stress remains elusive. Here, we report a genome-wide N-terminomic approach in Listeria that strikingly led to the discovery of 19 internal translation initiation sites and 6 miniproteins, among which one, Prli42, is conserved in Firmicutes. Prli42 is membrane-anchored and interacts with orthologues of Bacillus stressosome components. We reconstituted the Listeria stressosome in vitro and visualized its supramolecular structure by electron microscopy. Analysis of a series of Prli42 mutants demonstrated that Prli42 is important for sigma B activation, bacterial growth following oxidative stress and for survival in macrophages. Taken together, our N-terminonic approach unveiled Prli42 as a long-sought link between stress and the stressosome.

### Keywords
Proteogenomics, Listeria, Translation initiation, N-terminal cofradic

### Affiliations
Institut Pasteur
Institut Pasteur Unité des Interactions Bactéries-Cellules, Inserm U604, INRA USC2020 25 rue du Dr. Roux  75015 Paris France

### Submitter
Francis Impens

### Lab Head
Dr Pascale Cossart
Institut Pasteur Unité des Interactions Bactéries-Cellules, Inserm U604, INRA USC2020 25 rue du Dr. Roux  75015 Paris France


