### Accession
PXD023070

### Title
Obesity-associated deterioration of the hippocampus is partially restored after weight loss - AWL_ContA

### Description
Objective Obesity is a multidimensional condition that is treatable by the restoration of a lean phenotype; however, some obesity-related outcomes may persist after weight normalization. Among the organs of the human body, the brain possesses a relatively low regenerative capacity and could retain perturbations established as a result of developmental obesity. Calorie restriction (CR) or a restricted ketogenic diet (KD) are successfully used as weight loss approaches, but their impact on obesity-related effects in the brain have not been previously evaluated.  Methods We performed a series of experiments in a rat model of developmental obesity induced by a 12-week cafeteria diet, followed by CR to implement weight loss. First, we assessed the impact of obesity on neurogenesis (BrdU incorporation into the hippocampus), cognitive function (water maze), and concomitant changes in hippocampal protein expression (GC/MS-MS, western blot). Next, we repeated these experiments in a rat model of weight loss induced by CR. We also measured mitochondrial enzyme activity in rats after weight loss during the fed or fasting state. By using a modified version of the water maze we evaluated cognitive abilities in rats subjected to weight loss by CR or a restricted KD.  Results In this study, obesity affected metabolic processes, upregulated hippocampal NF-κB, and induced proteomic differences which were associated with impaired cognition and neurogenesis. Weight loss improved neurogenesis and enhanced cognition. While the expression pattern of some proteins persisted after weight loss, most of the changes appeared de novo revealing metabolic adjustment by overactivation of citrate synthase and downregulation of ATP synthase. As a consequence of fasting, the activity of these enzymes indicated hippocampal adaptation to negative energy balance during the weight loss phase of CR. Moreover, the effects on cognitive abilities measured after weight loss were negatively correlated with the obesity level and were alleviated by KD, which improved cognition when used as a weight loss approach.  Conclusions The study shows that cognition and mitochondrial metabolism in the hippocampus are affected by CR- or KD-induced weight loss.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction The isolated hippocampi were lysed in a buffer with 1 M triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) and 0.1% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) and automatically homogenized using a Precellys 24 homogenizer (Bertin Technologies) in 0.5-mL tubes pre-filled with ceramic (zirconium oxide) beads (Bertin Technologies). Next, the material was subjected to a threefold cycle of freezing and thawing. Then, the tissue in the buffer was sonicated in a bath for three 1-minute cycles on ice and homogenized again using the Precellys 24 instrument. The protein concentration was measured using Pierce BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in the isolated protein fraction according to the manufacturer’s instructions. In-solution digestion Ten-microgram aliquots of the proteins were diluted with 15 µl of 50 mM NH4HCO3 and reduced with 5.6 mM DTT for 5 min at 95 °C. The samples were then alkylated with 5 mM iodoacetamide for 20 min in the dark at RT. The proteins were digested with 0.2 µg of sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37 °C.  Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis of the proteins The analysis was performed with the use of the Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLC nanoLC System connected to the Q Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides derived from the in-solution digestion were separated on a reverse phase Acclaim PepMap RSLC nanoViper C18 column (75µm × 25cm, 2µm granulation) using an acetonitrile gradient (from 4 to 60%, in 0.1% formic acid) at 30°C and a flow rate of 300 nL/min (for 230 min). The spectrometer was operated in data-dependent MS/MS mode with survey scans acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200 in MS mode, and 17,500 at m/z 200 in MS2 mode. The spectra were recorded in the scanning range of 300–2000 m/z in the positive ion mode. Higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) ion fragmentation was performed with normalized collision energies set to 27.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis of the proteins Protein identification was performed using the Swiss-Prot rat database with a precision tolerance set to 10 ppm for peptide masses and 0.08 Da for fragment ion masses. All raw data obtained for each dataset was imported into MaxQuant 1.5.3.30 version for protein identification and quantification. Protein was considered as positively identified if at least two peptides per protein were found by the Andromeda search engine, and a peptide score reached the significance threshold FDR=0.01. The obtained data was exported to Perseus ver. 1.5.3.2 software (part of the MaxQuant package). The numeric data was transformed to the logarithmic scale and each sample was annotated with its group affiliation. Next, the data was filtered based on valid values – proteins, which had valid values in 70% of samples in at least one group were kept in the table. Student’s T analysis was performed on the analyzed sample data with permutation-based FDR 0.05 used for truncation and the resulting list of differentiating proteins was normalized using a Z-score algorithm for the hierarchical clustering of data.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Obesity, Weight loss, Cognition, Neurogenesis, Hippocampus, Ketogenic diet

### Affiliations
Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry Polish Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Lukasz Marczak

### Lab Head
Dr Lukasz Marczak
Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry Polish Academy of Sciences


