### Accession
PXD015035

### Title
Next generation unnatural monosaccharides reveal that ESRRBO GlcNAcylation enhances pluripotency of mouse embryonic stem cells

### Description
Unnatural monosaccharides such as azidosugars that can be metabolically incorporated into cellular glycans are currently used as a major tool for glycan imaging and glycoproteomic profiling.  As a common practice to enhance membrane permeability and cellular uptake, the unnatural sugars are per O acetylated, which, however, can induce a long-overlooked side reaction, non enzymatic S-glycosylation.  Herein, we develop1,3 di esterified N azidoacetylgalactosamine (GalNAz) as the next generation chemical reporters for metabolic glycan labeling.  Both 1,3 di O-acetylated GalNAz (1,3-Ac2GalNAz) and1,3 di O propionylated GalNAz (1,3-Pr2GalNAz)exhibited high efficiency for labeling protein O-GlcNAcylation with no artificial S-glycosylation.  Applying1,3 Pr2GalNAz in mouse embryonic stem cells (mESCs), we identified ESRRB, a critical transcription factor for pluripotency, as an O-GlcNAcylated protein.  We showed that ESRRB O-GlcNAcylation is important for mESC self-renewal and pluripotency.  Mechanistically, ESRRB is O-GlcNAcylated by O-GlcNAc transferase (OGT) at serine 25 (Ser 25), which stabilizes ESRRB, promotes its transcription activity and facilitates its interactions with two master pluripotency regulators, OCT4 and NANOG.

### Sample Protocol
For identification of 1,3-Ac2GalNAz or 1,3-Pr2GalNAz modified peptides, 1 mL suspensions from metabolic labeling were incubated with 100 µM alkyne-AC-biotin, BTTAA-CuSO4 mixture (50 µM CuSO4, CuSO4-BTTAA 1:2 in molar ratio) and 2.5 mM freshly prepared sodium ascorbate at R.T. for 2 h.  The resulting solution was precipitated by 10 mL methanol at -80 °C overnight.  The precipitants were centrifuged (4 °C, 4200 g, 15 min), washed twice with 10 mL ice-cold methanol, and re-suspended in 1 mL PBS (pH 7.4) containing 1.2% SDS (wt/vol).  Then 100 μL streptavidin beads (Thermo Fisher Scientific) were washed with 1 mL PBS (pH 7.4) for three times and re-suspended in 5 mL PBS (pH 7.4), which was transferred into the protein solution.  The resulting mixture was incubated at R.T. for 4 h with gentle rotation.  The beads were then washed with PBS (pH 7.4) for five times and Milli-Q water for five times.  The resulting samples were re-suspended with 500 µL 6 M urea in PBS, followed by addition of 25 µL 200 mM DTT in water (65 °C, 15 min) and 25 µL 400 mM iodoacetamide in water (35 °C, 30 min, in dark).  After changing buffer with 200 µL 2 M urea in PBS, 4 µL trypsin (0.5 µg/µL in trypsin resuspension buffer) and 2 µL 100 mM CaCl2 were added and the resulting mixture was incubated at 37 °C for 16 h, followed by Acid cleavage and LC-MS/MS analysis. The beads with modified peptides obtained above were washed with PBS (pH 7.4) for five times and Milli-Q water for five times, and cleaved twice with 200 µL 2% formic acid in water (vol/vol) for totally 2 h at R.T. with gentle rotation.  The supernatant was collected and evaporated in a vacuum centrifuge, followed by LC-MS/MS analysis. All MS data were acquired on an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a 4 µm C18 bulk material (InnosepBio) packed loading column (100 µm × 2 cm), a separating C18 capillary column (75 µm × 15 cm) and an EASY-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  For mapping 1,3-Ac2GalNAz or 1,3-Pr2GalNAz modified peptides, the samples were re-constituted in 0.1% formic acid in water (vol/vol), loaded onto the pre-column and separated by the separating column eluting with 7-35% B [A: 0.1% formic acid in water (vol/vol), B: 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (vol/vol)] during 120 min and then subjected to ETD-based LC-MS/MS analysis.  The instrument was operated with a full mass scans (300-1,700 m/z) in FT mode at a resolution of 60,000, followed by ETD MS/MS scan on the top 10 most intense precursors (with multiply charge such as 2+, 3+, or higher).  The ETD activation times were set at 150 ms.  The charge state dependent time, supplemental activation for ETD and dynamic exclusion were enabled. ESRRB purified from E.coli co-expressing OGT and ESRRB was resolved on 10% SDS/PAGE and stained by CBB.  The ESRRB band was excised, washed with Milli-Q water, and destained twice with the destaining buffer (the mixture of 50 mM ABC and acetonitrile at the volume ratio of 1:1) for 30 min, followed by dehydrating in acetonitrile and rehydrating with 10 mM DTT in 50 mM ABC for 45 min at 56 °C.  The gel slices were treated with 55 mM iodoacetamide in 50 mM ABC for 45 min at R.T. in the dark, followed by dehydrating in acetonitrile.  Then gel slices were digested with chymotrypsin (2 ng/μL) and incubated at 37 °C for 16 h.  The resulting peptides were eluted twice in 50% acetonitrile containing 5% TFA (vol/vol) with 200 μL per time and evaporated in a vacuum centrifuge.  The samples were detected by an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using the ETD fragmentation mode.

### Data Protocol
SwissPort Homo sapiens database and Mus musculus database were downloaded from Uniprot (www.uniprot.org) on November 4, 2016.  For identification of 1,3-Ac2GalNAz or 1,3-Pr2GalNAz modified peptides, the ETD raw data files were subjected to database searches using MaxQuant software suite (version 1.5.8.2) integrated with Andromeda search engine.  The default parameters were set as previously described (Qin, W. et al. Artificial cysteine S-glycosylation induced by per-O-acetylated unnatural monosaccharides during metabolic glycan labeling. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 106, 12–5 (2018); Qin, K. et al. Quantitative profiling of protein O-GlcNAcylation sites by an isotope-tagged cleavable linker. ACS Chem. Biol. 13, 1983–1989 (2018).).  The O-HexNAc sites located on the extracellular domains of membrane proteins or secreted proteins were excluded from the O-GlcNAc site list. For identification of ESRRB O-GlcNAc sites. The data were processed using Mascot (version 2.3.02, MatrixScience) with a HexNAc modification of 203.079373 Da and evaluated the modification sites manually.

### Publication Abstract
Unnatural monosaccharides such as azidosugars that can be metabolically incorporated into cellular glycans are currently used as a major tool for glycan imaging and glycoproteomic profiling. As a common practice to enhance membrane permeability and cellular uptake, the unnatural sugars are per-O-acetylated, which, however, can induce a long-overlooked side reaction, non-enzymatic S-glycosylation. Herein, we develop 1,3-di-esterified N-azidoacetylgalactosamine (GalNAz) as next-generation chemical reporters for metabolic glycan labeling. Both 1,3-di-O-acetylated GalNAz (1,3-Ac<sub>2</sub>GalNAz) and 1,3-di-O-propionylated GalNAz (1,3-Pr<sub>2</sub>GalNAz) exhibit high efficiency for labeling protein O-GlcNAcylation with no artificial S-glycosylation. Applying 1,3-Pr<sub>2</sub>GalNAz in mouse embryonic stem cells (mESCs), we identify ESRRB, a critical transcription factor for pluripotency, as an O-GlcNAcylated protein. We show that ESRRB O-GlcNAcylation is important for mESC self-renewal and pluripotency. Mechanistically, ESRRB is O-GlcNAcylated by O-GlcNAc transferase at serine 25, which stabilizes ESRRB, promotes its transcription activity and facilitates its interactions with two master pluripotency regulators, OCT4 and NANOG.

### Keywords
1, 3-ac2galnaz, Esrrb, 3-pr2galnaz, O-glcnac

### Affiliations
Peking University
College of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering, Peking University, Beijing, China.

### Submitter
Xinqi Fan

### Lab Head
Dr Xing Chen
College of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering, Peking University, Beijing, China.


