### Accession
PXD038155

### Title
Multi-omics characterization of response to PD-1 inhibitors in advanced melanoma

### Description
Immunotherapy improves the survival of patients with advanced melanoma, 40% of whom become long-term responders. However, not all patients respond to immunotherapy. Further knowledge about the processes involved in response and resistance to immunotherapy is still needed. In this study, clinical paraffin samples from fifty-two advanced melanoma patients treated with anti-PD1 inhibitors were assessed by high-throughput proteomics and RNA-seq. The obtained proteomics and transcriptomics data were analyzed using network analyses based on probabilistic graphical models to identify those biological processes involved in response to immunotherapy. Additionally, proteins related to overall survival were studied.

### Sample Protocol
Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) sections were deparaffinized in xylene and washed twice in absolute ethanol. Protein isolates were diluted in 2%SDS. Ten µg of each protein isolate were digested with trypsin (1:50) and SDS was removed by Detergent Removal Spin Columns (Pierce). Finally, samples were desalted using ZipTips, dried and resolubilized in 15 µL of a 0.1% formic acid and 3% acetonitrile solution. Samples (5 µL of 1:10 dilution) were analyzed on a Q Exactive HF-X-Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer coupled to an M-class UPLC. Peptide separation was performed on commercial MZ Symmetry C18 Trap Column (100Å, 5 µm, 180 µm x 20 mm) followed by nanoEase MZ C18 HSS T3 Column (100Å, 1.8 µm, 75 µm x 250 mm). Peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 300nL/min in a gradient from 8 to 27% B in 85 minutes, 35% B in 5min and 80% B in 1 min. Mass-spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode (DDA), acquiring full-scan MS spectra (350−1’400 m/z) at a resolution of 120’000 at 200 m/z after accumulation to a target value of 3’000’000, followed by HCD (higher-energy collision dissociation) fragmentation on the twenty most intense signals per cycle. HCD spectra were acquired at a resolution of 15’000 using normalized collision energy of 25 and a maximum injection time of 22 ms. The automatic gain control (AGC) was set to 100’000 ions. Charge state screening was enabled. Singly, unassigned, and charge states higher than seven were rejected. Only those precursors with an intensity above 110’000 were selected for MS/MS. Precursor masses previously selected for MS/MS measuremen were excluded from further selection for 30 s, and the exclusion window was set at 10 ppm.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw MS data were processed using MaxQuant version 1.6.2.3, followed by a protein identification using Andromeda. Spectra were searched against the Uniprot reference proteome (taxonomy 9606, version 20190709), concatenated with its reverse decoy fasta database and common contaminants. Methionine oxidation and N-terminal protein acetylation were set as variable modifications. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin/P allowing for a minimal peptide length of 7 amino acids and a maximum of two missed-cleavages. MaxQuant Orbitrap default search settings were used. The maximum false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 for peptides and 0.05 for proteins. Label-free quantification was enabled and a 2 minutes window for match between runs was applied. In the MaxQuant experimental design template, each file is kept separate in the experimental design to obtain individual quantitative values.Perseus software was used to transform protein data into log 2, apply quality criteria of at least two unique peptides and 50% of valid values, and impute missing values to normal distribution using default settings.

### Publication Abstract
Immunotherapy improves the survival of patients with advanced melanoma, 40% of whom become long-term responders. However, not all patients respond to immunotherapy. Further knowledge of the processes involved in the response and resistance to immunotherapy is still needed. In this study, clinical paraffin samples from fifty-two advanced melanoma patients treated with anti-PD-1 inhibitors were assessed via high-throughput proteomics and RNA-seq. The obtained proteomics and transcriptomics data were analyzed using multi-omics network analyses based on probabilistic graphical models to identify those biological processes involved in the response to immunotherapy. Additionally, proteins related to overall survival were studied. The activity of the node formed by the proteins involved in protein processing in the endoplasmic reticulum and antigen presentation machinery was higher in responders compared to non-responders; the activity of the immune and inflammatory response node was also higher in those with complete or partial responses. A predictor for overall survival based on two proteins (AMBP and PDSM5) was defined. In summary, the response to anti-PD-1 therapy in advanced melanoma is related to protein processing in the endoplasmic reticulum, and also to genes involved in the immune and inflammatory responses. Finally, a two-protein predictor can define survival in advanced disease. The molecular characterization of the mechanisms involved in the response and resistance to immunotherapy in melanoma leads the way to establishing therapeutic alternatives for patients who will not respond to this treatment.

### Keywords
Ffpe, Immunotherapy, Omics, Melanoma, Pd-1 inhibitor

### Affiliations
ETH
Medical Oncology Service, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain

### Submitter
Antje Dittmann

### Lab Head
Dr Enrique Espinosa
Medical Oncology Service, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain


