### Accession
PXD003376

### Title
Molecular evolution of sperm competition in mice

### Description
Sperm are amongst the most rapidly evolving cell types due, in part, to their central role in post-mating competitive reproductive success (sperm competition) and participation in coevolving male-female interactions. To establish the molecular basis of sperm divergence we have conducted a whole-cell, semi-quantitative proteomic approach to characterize sperm divergence in three closely related Mus species (musculus, spretus and spicilegus), which experience different regimes of sperm competition and exhibit remarkable variation in sperm production, energetics, motility and fertilization capacity.

### Sample Protocol
Mature sperm were purified from the caudal epididymis using a swim up approach in Dubecco phosphate-buffered saline (DPBS) medium.  Isolated sperm were washed three times using 900ul DPBS and lysed in a buffer containing 4% CHAPS, 6M urea, 2M thiourea, 10mM tris pH 8.5, and 5mM magnesium acetate and 25μg of protein for each replicate was separated on 4-12% Nupage Bis-Tris gels.  Gels were then fixed in 45% methanol and 1.0% acetic acid for 1h and transferred to a gel slicer where each lane was cut vertically and then horizontally into 16 slices. Proteins were then reduced and alkylated and then successively treated with dithiothreitol and iodoacetamide followed by digestion with trypsin (500 ng/µl, Promega) at 37C for 16 h.  LC-MS/MS experiments were performed using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nanoUPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc, Waltham, MA, USA) system and a QExactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc, Waltham, MA, USA). Separation of peptides was performed by reverse-phase chromatography at a flow rate of 300 nL/min and a Thermo Scientific reverse-phase nano Easy-spray column (Thermo Scientific PepMap C18, 2 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size, 75 µm i.d. x 50 cm length). Peptides were loaded onto a pre-column (Thermo Scientific PepMap 100 C18, 5 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size, 300 µm i.d. x 5 mm length) from the Ultimate 3000 autosampler with 0.1% formic acid for 3 minutes at a flow rate of 10 µL/min. After this period, the column valve was switched to allow elution of peptides from the pre-column onto the analytical column. Solvent A was water + 0.1% formic acid and solvent B was 80% acetonitrile, 20% water + 0.1% formic acid. The linear gradient employed was 2-40% B in 30 minutes.  The LC elutant was sprayed into the mass spectrometer by means of an Easy-spray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.). All m/z values of eluting ions were measured in an Orbitrap mass analyzer, set at a resolution of 70000. Data dependent scans (Top 20) were employed to automatically isolate and generate fragment ions by higher energy collisional dissociation in the quadrupole mass analyzer and measurement of the resulting fragment ions was performed in the Orbitrap analyzer, set at a resolution of 17500. Peptide ions with charge states of 2+ and above were selected for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Data from each MS/MS sequential run was analyzed by X!Tandem CYCLONE TPP (2011.12.01.1 - LabKey, Insilicos, ISB) against the Global Proteome Machine mouse proteome database (GRCm38 refseq; 29,763 entries) with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.40 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 25.0 PPM. Iodoacetamide derivative of cysteine was specified as a fixed modification, whereas oxidation of methionine was specified as a variable modification.  Two missed cleavages were allowed, with no non-specific cleavages permitted.  False Discovery Rates (FDRs) were estimated using a randomized decoy database. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability as specified by the Peptide Prophet algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
Sexual selection is the pervasive force underlying the dramatic divergence of sperm form and function. Although it has been demonstrated that testis gene expression evolves rapidly, exploration of the proteomic basis of sperm diversity is in its infancy. We have employed a whole-cell proteomics approach to characterize sperm divergence among closely related Mus species that experience different sperm competition regimes and exhibit pronounced variation in sperm energetics, motility and fertilization capacity. Interspecific comparisons revealed significant abundance differences amongst proteins involved in fertilization capacity, including those that govern sperm-zona pellucida interactions, axoneme components and metabolic proteins. Ancestral reconstruction of relative testis size suggests that the reduction of zona pellucida binding proteins and heavy-chain dyneins was associated with a relaxation in sperm competition in the M. musculus lineage. Additionally, the decreased reliance on ATP derived from glycolysis in high sperm competition species was reflected in abundance decreases in glycolytic proteins of the principle piece in M. spretus and M. spicilegus. Comparison of protein abundance and stage-specific testis expression revealed a significant correlation during spermatid development when dynamic morphological changes occur. Proteins underlying sperm diversification were also more likely to be subject to translational repression, suggesting that sperm composition is influenced by the evolution of translation control mechanisms. The identification of functionally coherent classes of proteins relating to sperm competition highlights the utility of evolutionary proteomic analyses and reveals that both intensified and relaxed sperm competition can have a pronounced impact on the molecular composition of the male gamete.

### Keywords
Reproduction, Fertilization, Speciation, Oocyte

### Affiliations
Syracuse University
Biology Department, Syracuse University, NY, USA

### Submitter
Kirill Borziak

### Lab Head
Dr Stephen Dorus
Biology Department, Syracuse University, NY, USA


