### Accession
PXD039151

### Title
Blocking muscle wasting via deletion of the muscle specific E3 ligase MuRF1 impedes pancreatic tumor growth – ubiquitome dataset

### Description
Cancer-induced muscle wasting reduces quality of life, complicates or precludes cancer treatments, and predicts early mortality. Herein, we investigated the requirement of the muscle-specific E3 ubiquitin ligase, MuRF1, for muscle wasting induced by pancreatic cancer. Murine pancreatic cancer (KPC) cells, or saline, were injected into the pancreas of WT and MuRF1-/- mice, and tissues analyzed throughout tumor progression. KPC tumors induced progressive wasting of skeletal muscle and systemic metabolic reprogramming in WT mice, but not MuRF1-/- mice. KPC tumors from MuRF1-/- mice also grew slower, and showed an accumulation of metabolites normally depleted by rapidly growing tumors. Mechanistically, MuRF1 was necessary for the KPC-induced increases in cytoskeletal and muscle contractile protein ubiquitination, and the depression of proteins that support protein synthesis. Together, these data demonstrate that MuRF1 is required for KPC-induced skeletal muscle wasting, whose deletion reprograms the systemic and tumor metabolome and delays tumor growth.

### Sample Protocol
Freshly harvested tibialis anterior muscles were quickly rinsed in PBS and snaped-frozen in liquid nitrogen before being stored at -80°C until analysis. For each group, approximately equal amount of starting tissue (~200 mg, N = 3-6 samples/group) were pooled and sent to Cell Signaling (Cell Signaling Technologies, Danvers, Massachusetts, USA) for protein extraction, and subsequent global proteome analyses according to standard procedures (Nelson, et al. 2021 – Methods Mol Biol 2365, 203-216).   The methodological procedures used for global ubiquitinome analyses are described in details in  Nelson, et al. 2021 (Methods Mol Biol 2365, 203-216). Briefly, extracted proteins were digested with trypsin to generate peptides and di-glycine remnants (diGly), reversed phase purified, enriched with the PTMScanR Ubiquitin Remnant Motif (K-ε-GG) Kit (Cell Signaling Technology) and run in LC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap-Fusion Lumos Tribridmass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were evaluated using Comet (Eng, et al. 2013 – Proteomics 13, 22-24) and the  core platform from Harvard University. Searches were performed against the most recent update of the Uniprot Mus musculus database with mass accuracy of ± 50 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for product ions. Results were filtered with mass accuracy of ± 5 ppm on precursor ions and presence of intended motif. Protein identification was further subjected to a 1% false discovery rate.

### Publication Abstract
Cancer-induced muscle wasting reduces quality of life, complicates or precludes cancer treatments, and predicts early mortality. Herein, we investigate the requirement of the muscle-specific E3 ubiquitin ligase, MuRF1, for muscle wasting induced by pancreatic cancer. Murine pancreatic cancer (KPC) cells, or saline, were injected into the pancreas of WT and MuRF1<sup>-/-</sup> mice, and tissues analyzed throughout tumor progression. KPC tumors induces progressive wasting of skeletal muscle and systemic metabolic reprogramming in WT mice, but not MuRF1<sup>-/-</sup> mice. KPC tumors from MuRF1<sup>-/-</sup> mice also grow slower, and show an accumulation of metabolites normally depleted by rapidly growing tumors. Mechanistically, MuRF1 is necessary for the KPC-induced increases in cytoskeletal and muscle contractile protein ubiquitination, and the depression of proteins that support protein synthesis. Together, these data demonstrate that MuRF1 is required for KPC-induced skeletal muscle wasting, whose deletion reprograms the systemic and tumor metabolome and delays tumor growth.

### Keywords
Cancer cachexia, Mus musculus, Muscle wasting, Murf1, Pancreatic cancer, Proteasome system

### Affiliations
University of Florida
Department of Physical Therapy    University of Florida

### Submitter
Daria Neyroud

### Lab Head
Dr Andrew R. Judge
Department of Physical Therapy    University of Florida


