### Accession
PXD004123

### Title
Label-Free Quantitative Analysis of the Salivary Pellicle’s Proteome

### Description
The salivary pellicle, covering natural as well as restored tooth surfaces in the oral cavity as an immobilized protein-rich layer, acts as an important biological mediator at the tooth-saliva-interface. Going beyond previous non-quantitative analyses on pooled samples, we here analyzed the pellicle’s proteome of four individuals, separately on three consecutive days, and determined the relative protein abundance by a label-free quantitative nano-LC-MS/MS approach. We identified 72 major proteins in the initial pellicles formed after 3 min intraorally on ceramic specimens with high inter-individual and inter-day consistency, while significant differences in protein abundance were evident between subjects exhibiting unique individual pellicle profiles. Furthermore, we compared the relative protein abundance with corresponding saliva samples of the same individuals and provide first data on significantly enriched and depleted salivary proteins (p < 0.05) within the salivary pellicle. Our findings reveal the initial adsorption of salivary proteins to solid substrates to be a rapid, highly selective, and reproducible process leading to the immobilization of a broad range of protective proteins and enzymes on the substratum surface within a few minutes. This provides evidence that the pellicle layer might be physiologically functional even without further maturation.

### Sample Protocol
In situ pellicle formation was performed on ceramic specimens exposed to the oral cavities of the four volunteers for 3 min.  Full tryptically digested proteomes.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.1.0) with the integrated search engine Andromeda. For peptide and protein identification, raw files were searched against the UniProt human (009606) reference database (v22.07.13) annotated with Pfam.

### Publication Abstract
The salivary pellicle, covering natural as well as restored tooth surfaces in the oral cavity as an immobilized protein-rich layer, acts as an important physico-chemical and biological mediator at the tooth-saliva-interface. For the first time, the pellicle's proteome of individual volunteers were analyzed separately on three consecutive days and the relative protein abundance determined by a label-free quantitative nano-LC-MS/MS approach. A total of 72 major proteins were identified in the initial pellicles formed intraorally on dental ceramic specimens already after 3min with high inter-individual and inter-day consistency. In comparison, significant differences in protein abundance were evident between subjects, thus indicating unique individual pellicle profiles. Furthermore, the relative protein abundance in pellicles was compared to the proteome pattern in the corresponding saliva samples of the same individuals to provide first data on significantly enriched and depleted salivary proteins (p &lt;0.05) within the surface-bound salivary pellicle. Our findings reveal the initial adsorption of salivary proteins at the solid-liquid interface to be a rapid, highly selective, and reproducible process leading to the immobilization of a broad range of protective proteins and enzymes on the substratum surface within a few minutes. This provides evidence that the pellicle layer might be physiologically functional even without further maturation.

### Keywords
Acquired pellicle, Human, Orbitrap velos, Saliva

### Affiliations
Technical University of Munich
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics Technical University of Munich

### Submitter
Guillaume Médard

### Lab Head
Dr Bernhard Kuster
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics Technical University of Munich


