### Accession
PXD039416

### Title
Ex vivo proteomics of Mycobacterium marinum

### Description
Proteins expressed and exported out of the mycobacterial biofilm cells into granulomatous environment during infection were identified by LC-MS/MS. To this end, adult 5- to 10-month-old female AB wild-type zebrafish (Danio rerio) were infected with 4-day old M. marinum ATCC927 (carrying the pTEC27 plasmid expressing the tdTomato fluorescent protein) cells. After 8 weeks post infection, ten zebrafish were euthanized, and red fluorescent mycobacterial granulomas were carefully dissected from the zebrafish ovaries. Ten granulomas were collected per tube, frozen on dry ice and stored at -80 °C until preparation for proteomics. Altogether, ten replicate samples, each with ten mycobacterial granulomas, were subjected to protein extraction and LC-MS/MS identification.

### Sample Protocol
The mycobacterial granulomas were mixed with RapiGest surfactant in 50 mM (w/v) in Tris-HCl (pH 8.0) and transferred into FastPrep-24TM (MP Biomedicals) tubes with 6 ceramic beads. Mechanistic bead beating with speed set at level 6 and three cycles (30 sec each) in a FastPrep-24TM (MP Biomedicals) with cooling on ice between the pulses was used to soften/disrupt the granulomas without disrupting the mycobacterial biofilms. Then, 0.4% RapiGest (w/v) was added onto the softened granulomas and the suspensions were incubated at room temperature for 2 hours with frequent mixing. Proteins solubilized into RapiGest were sent to the microparticle-assisted sample preparation prior to LFQ identifications using the recently reported method (Batth et al., 2019; PMID: 30833379) as follows. Acetonitrile at 70 % (v/v) was used to aggregate proteins in RapiGest and 10 µL of MAgReSyn Amine beads (20 mg mL-1, ReSyn Biosciences) to bind the protein aggregates. For on-beads digestion, 50 mM Tris-HCL (pH 8.0) was added to beads and proteins were reduced with 10 mM DTT (dithiotreitol) for 30 min at 37 °C, alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in dark and quenched with 20 mM DTT. Trypsin/Lys-C Mix (mass-spec grade, Promega) was added to each sample at a 25:1 protein:protease ratio (w/w). Samples were gently mixed and incubated overnight at 37 °C. Beads were separated by magnet, the supernatants with the released peptides were transferred into new tubes and acidified with 0.6% trifuoroacetic acid (v/v), and the peptides were de-salted using C18 StageTips  LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using a nanoElute nanoflow ultrahigh pressure LC system (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) coupled to a timsTOF fleX mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics) using a CaptiveSpray nanoelectrospray ion source (Bruker Daltonics). The peptides were separated using a 60-minute gradient at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The timsTOF fleX was operated in PASEF mode, and data-dependent acquisition was performed using 10 PASEF MS/MS scans per cycle with a near 100% duty cycle.

### Data Protocol
The obtained MS raw data were processed using the MaxQuant software (version v.2.0.1.0). Database searches were done against Uniprot Mmr and zebrafish (Danio rerio)-databases.  Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as a fixed modification, whilst methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as a variable modification. A first search peptide tolerance of 20 ppm and main search peptide tolerance of 10 ppm were used Trypsin without the proline restriction enzyme option was used, with two allowed miscleavages. The minimal unique + razor peptide number was set to 1, and the FDR was set to 0.01 (1%) for peptide and protein identification. Generation of reversed sequences was selected to assign FDR rate.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pacm sample preparation, Maxquant, Lc-ms/ms identification, Mycobacterial surface and secreted proteins

### Affiliations
University of Oslo
Head of Proteomics

### Submitter
Tuula Nyman

### Lab Head
Dr Tuula Nyman
Head of Proteomics


