### Accession
PXD033414

### Title
Heat stressed equine Mesenchymal Stem Cells

### Description
The aim of this research was to determine the impact of heat stress on cell differentiation in an equine stem cell model through the outcome of heat stress on the proteome.  Proteomic analysis was performed using mass spectrometry to compare relative protein abundances among three cell types, mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs), osteoblasts, and adipocytes, cultured at two temperatures, 37°C and 42°C.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted for use in Liquid Chromatography/Tandem Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) Analysis.  Proteins were precipitated using a Chloroform/Methanol Precipitation Protocol and protein was stored at -20°C.  To a 200µl sample of protein in lysis buffer, 800µl of methanol, 200µl of chloroform, and 600µl of deionized water were added, mixing thoroughly after each step.  This was then centrifuged for 1 min at 14,000xg.  The top aqueous layer was then removed, and 800µl of methanol were added and mixed thoroughly.  The samples were then centrifuged for 2 min at 14,000xg.  The methanol layer was removed, and the pellet was allowed to dry. The resulting pellet was re-suspended in 8M urea: 0.4M NH4HCO3: 0.1% SDS and stored at -20°C.  The sample concentrations were normalized by diluting all protein samples in urea buffer to have a final volume of 200µL and 12µg of total protein.   Before trypsin digestion, protein samples were reduced with 10 µL 0.5M DTT (Fisher BioReagents: BP172-5).  20µL of 0.7M iodoacetamide (Sigma: I1149) was then added, and the samples were incubated for 30 minutes at room temperature.  The samples were then diluted with Milli-Q® water, then digested with 0.2 µg/µL buffered Trypsin (20µg Pierce™ Trypsin Protease (Thermo Scientific: 90657) in 50uL Trypsin resuspension dilution buffer (Promega, V542A)) and incubated at 37°C overnight.  An equivalent amount of Trypsin was then added and incubated for two hours at 37°C.  The peptide samples were washed using the following solid phase extraction protocol: once with 100% methanol, once with 50% acetonitrile +0.1% Trifluoroacetic Acid, and once with 0.1% TFA, before being eluted with 50% acetonitrile +0.1% Trifluoroacetic Acid and dried.  All protein samples were resuspended in 70µL 100mM HEPES buffer (Gibco: 11344041).  14µL of each sample were combined and split into two pools with volume of 126µL to facilitate comparison between both experiments.  The TMT10plex Isobaric Reagent Set (Thermo Scientific: 90110) was resuspended into TMT11-131C Label Reagent (Thermo Scientific: A34807).  30 µL of reagent was added to the samples and 60µL to the pools, and the reaction was incubated at room temperature for one hour.   The reaction was quenched with 5µL 5% hydroxylamine (Sigma-Aldrich: 159417).  Samples from run 1, in addition to half of Pool 1 and Pool 2 each, were then pooled to form Tube 1, and samples from run 2 were then pooled with the remaining Pool 1 and Pool 2 to form Tube 2.  The combined samples were then diluted 1:15 times with 0.1% TFA, then the solid phase extraction was repeated to desalt the combined samples. Samples from tubes 1 and 2 were suspended in Buffer A (95% water, 5% Acetonitrile, 10mM NH4HCO3, pH 9.0).  These samples were then separated by Reverse Phase Liquid Chromatography with an ÄKTA pure (GE Healthcare Life Sciences) at high pH using a 100 × 4.6 mm Onyx Monolithic C18 column (Phenomenex: CH0-7643), with a flow rate of 1mL/minute.  The column was run for 15 minutes at a gradient of 0-40% of Buffer B (5% water, 95% Acetonitrile); Buffer A, then for 5 minutes up to 100% Buffer B using the protocol in Table 3.4 below.  Sixty fractions of 0.6mL volume were collected, then the fractions were concatenated into twenty samples    The samples were transferred to 300 µL HPLC vials and subjected to analysis by LC-MS/MS on a Thermo Scientific Orbitrap VelosPRO mass spectrometer equipped with an UltiMate 3000 Nano-LC system (ThermoFisher Scientific). Chromatographic separation of the digests was performed on PicoFRIT C18 self-packed 75 mm x 60 cm capillary column (New Objective, Woburn, MA) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. MS and MS/MS data was acquired using a data-dependent acquisition method in which a full scan was obtained at a resolution of 30,000, followed by ten consecutive MS/MS spectra in both higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) and collision-induced dissociation (CID) mode (normalized collision energy 36%). Internal calibration was performed using the ion signal of polysiloxane at m/z = 445.120025 as a lock mass.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (ThermoFisher Scientific). Peak lists were searched against the Uniprot database as well as the cRAP database of common contaminants (Global Proteome Machine Organization). Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification, while methionine oxidation, N-terminal methionine loss, and phosphorylation on serine, threonine, and tyrosine were included as variable modifications. A mass accuracy tolerance of 5 ppm was used for precursor ions, while 0.02 Da for HCD fragmentation or 0.6 Da for CID fragmentation was used for product ions. Percolator was used to determine confident peptide identifications using a 0.1% false discovery rate (FDR). Site-specific determination of phosphorylated amino acids was confirmed using PhosphoRS (ThermoFisher Scientific).

### Publication Abstract
The aim of this research was to determine the impact of heat stress on cell differentiation in an equine mesenchymal stem cell model (EMSC) through the application of heat stress to primary EMSCs as they progressed through the cell specialization process. A proteomic analysis was performed using mass spectrometry to compare relative protein abundances among the proteomes of three cell types: progenitor EMSCs and differentiated osteoblasts and adipocytes, maintained at 37 &#xb0;C and 42 &#xb0;C during the process of cell differentiation. A cell-type and temperature-specific response to heat stress was observed, and many of the specific differentially expressed proteins were involved in cell-signaling pathways such as Notch and Wnt signaling, which are known to regulate cellular development. Furthermore, cytoskeletal proteins profilin, DSTN, SPECC1, and DAAM2 showed increased protein levels in osteoblasts differentiated at 42 &#xb0;C as compared with 37 &#xb0;C, and these cells, while they appeared to accumulate calcium, did not organize into a whorl agglomerate as is typically seen at physiological temperatures. This altered proteome composition observed suggests that heat stress could have long-term impacts on cellular development. We propose that this in vitro stem cell culture model of cell differentiation is useful for investigating molecular mechanisms that impact cell development in response to stressors.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Mesenchymal stem cells

### Affiliations
Department of Applied Human Sciences, Faculty of Science, and Faculty of Nursing Health Sciences Building, University of Prince Edward Island, Charlottetown, PE, Canada
Faculty of Science
University of Prince Edward Island
Charlottetown, PE

### Submitter
Ahmad Abd-El-Aziz

### Lab Head
Dr William Montelpare
Department of Applied Human Sciences, Faculty of Science, and Faculty of Nursing Health Sciences Building, University of Prince Edward Island, Charlottetown, PE, Canada


