### Accession
PXD009509

### Title
Remodelling of the acetylproteome by SIRT3 manipulation fails to affect insulin secretion or beta-cell metabolism in the absence of over nutrition

### Description
From Peterson et. al. 2018:  SIRT3 is an NAD+-dependent mitochondrial protein deacetylase purported to influence metabolism through post-translational modification of metabolic enzymes. Fuel-stimulated insulin secretion, which involves mitochondrial metabolism, could be susceptible to SIRT3-mediated effects. We used CRISPR/Cas9 technology to manipulate SIRT3 expression in b-cells, resulting in wide-spread, SIRT3dependent changes in acetylation of key metabolic enzymes, but with no appreciable changes in glucose- or pyruvate-stimulated insulin secretion, or in metabolomic profile during glucose stimulation. Moreover, these broad changes in the SIRT3-targeted acetylproteome did not affect responses to nutritional or ER stress conditions. We also studied mice with global SIRT3 knockout fed either standard chow (STD) or high- fat/high-sucrose (HFHS) diets. Only when chronically fed a HFHS diet do SIRT3 KO animals exhibit a modest reduction in insulin secretion. We conclude that broad changes in mitochondrial protein acetylation in response to manipulation of SIRT3 are not sufficient to cause changes in islet function or metabolism.

### Sample Protocol
Study design, protein digestion, and TMT labeling: We used CRISPR/Cas9n technology to generate complete loss of SIRT3 (KO) in 832/13 beta-cells, which we used to re-express active SIRT3 (WT) or catalytically dead (HY) mutant SIRT3. We enriched mitochondria from WT, KO, and HY cell lines cultured at confluence in serum deprived media for 6 days and performed TMT-based quantitative acetylproteomics.  Mitochondrial pellets were re-suspended in 300 µL of ice-cold 8M Urea Lysis Buffer containing protease and de-acetylase inhibitors. Samples were disrupted by a combination of pipetting, vortexing, and sonication. Samples were centrifuged at 10,000 x g for 10 min at 4°C and the supernatant was retained. Protein concentration was determined by BCA, and equal amount of protein (500 µg, adjusted to 2.5 mg/mL with Urea Lysis Buffer) from each sample was reduced with 5 mM DTT at 37°C for 30 min, cooled to RT, alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark and unreacted iodoacetamide quenched by the addition of DTT up to 15 mM. Each sample was digested with 5 µg LysC at 37°C for 4 hours. Following dilution to 1.5 M urea, the samples were digested with trypsin overnight at 37°C. The samples were acidified to 0.5% TFA and centrifuged at 4,000 x g for 10 min at 4°C to pellet insoluble material. The supernatant was desalted by SPE with a Waters 50 mg tC18 SEP-PAK SPE column and the eluate was frozen and dried in a speed vac. Each sample was re-suspended in 100 µL of 200 mM TEAB, mixed with a unique 10-plex TMT reagent (0.8 mg re-suspended in 50 µL 100% acetonitrile), and shaken for 5 hours at room temperature. After samples were quenched with 0.8 µL 50% hydroxylamine and shaken for 15 additional minutes at RT, all nine samples were combined, frozen, and dried in a speed vac. The mixture was re-suspended in 1 mL 0.5% TFA and subjected to SPE with a Waters 100 mg tC18 SEP-PAK SPE column. The eluate was vortexed and split into aliquots containing ~ 5% of the total peptide mixture (250 µg) and a second aliquot containing ~ 95% (4.75 mg). Both aliquots were frozen and dried in a speed vac. The 250 µg aliquot of the “input” material was saved at -80°C for quantification of unmodified peptides.      Acetylpeptide enrichment and input fractionation: The 4.75 mg aliquot was re-suspended in 1.4 mL 1X IAP Buffer and subjected to IP with PTMScan Acetyl Lysine Motif IAP Beads on a rotator overnight at 4°C. The next day, the antibody-peptide complexes were pelleted via centrifugation at 2,000 x g for 30 seconds and the precipitate was washed 2 times in 1 mL of IP buffer and 3 times in 1 mL water. Acetylpeptides were eluted twice with 100 µL of 0.15% TFA for 10 minutes each time, and the supernatants from each elution were combined, acidified to 0.5% TFA, desalted on a 50 mg tC18 SEP-PAK SPE column, frozen, and dried in a speed vac. The “input” material was separated into 8 fractions using a High pH Reversed Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit. After column conditioning, 100 µg of peptide re-suspended in 300 µL 0.1% TFA was loaded onto a column and centrifuged at 3,000 x g for 2 minutes at RT. Sample was washed with 300 µL water followed by 300 µL of 5% acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1% TFA. Sample was eluted in 8 fractions containing increasing amount of ACN, frozen, and dried in a speed vac. Peptide fractions were re-suspended in 10 µL of 0.1% formic acid (FA) and quantified.      Nano-LC-MS/MS: All samples were subjected to nanoLC-MS/MS analysis using an EASY-nLC UPLC system coupled to a Q Exactive Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer via an EASY-Spray nanoelectrospray ionization source. Prior to injection, the acetylpeptide sample was re-suspended in 22.5 µL 1% FA and each of the HPRP fractions of the input material were re-suspended in enough 0.1% FA to achieve a concentration of ~0.15 µg/µL. The acetylpeptide sample was analyzed with technical triplicate runs, with 6.5 µL of sample injected for each. The 8 input HPRP fractions were analyzed in singlicate, with 1 ug injections. For each injection, the sample was first trapped on an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 trapping column (3 µm, 75 µm × 20 mm) with 18 µL of solvent A (0.1 % FA) at a variable flow rate dictated by max pressure of 500 Bar, after which the analytical separation was performed over a 105 minute gradient (flow rate of 300 nL/minute) of 5 to 40% solvent B (90% ACN, 0.1% FA) using an Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 analytical column (2 um, 75 µm × 500 mm column with a column temperature of 55ºC. MS1 was performed at 70,000 resolution, with an AGC target of 3x106 ions and a maximum injection time of 60 ms. MS2 spectra were collected by DDA top 10 (z> 1) per MS1 scan, with dynamic exclusion enabled for a window of 30 seconds. Precursor ions were filtered with a 0.7 m/z isolation window and fragmented with a normalized collision energy of 30. MS2 scans were performed at 35,000 resolution, with an AGC target of 1x105 ions and a max IT of 60 ms.

### Data Protocol
Raw data processing: Raw LC-MS/MS data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository (Vizcaino et al., 2016) with the dataset identifier to be issued. Raw LCMS/MS data were processed in Proteome discoverer v2.2 (PD2.2, Thermo Fisher Scientific), using both the Sequest HT (Yates, 2015) and MS Amanda 2.0 (Dorfer et al., 2014) search engines. Data were searched against the UniProt rat (Rattus norvegicus) complete proteome database of reviewed (Swiss-Prot) and unreviewed (TrEMBL) proteins, which consisted of 29,979 sequences on the date of download (9/20/2017). Default search parameters included oxidation (15.995 Da on M) as a variable modification and carbamidomethyl (57.021 Da on C) and TMT (229.163 Da on peptide N-term and K). To assess labeling efficiency as a quality control measure, the input fraction was re-searched with N-terminal TMT as a variable modification, confirming N-terminal labeling of 91% of all PSMs. Acetylpeptide runs added acetyl(42.01057 Da on K) as a variable modification and changed TMT to a variable modification on K (remaining fixed on peptide N-term). Data were searched with a 10 ppm precursor mass and 0.02 Da product ion tolerance. The maximum number of missed cleavages was set to a default value of 2 (but changed to 4 for acetyl runs) and enzyme specificity was trypsin (full). Considering each data type (acetyl, input) separately, peptide spectral matches (PSMs) from each search algorithm were filtered to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) using the Percolator (Kall et al., 2007) node of PD2.2. For acetyl data, site localization probabilities were determined for acetyl lysines using the ptmRS algorithm (Taus et al., 2011). PSMs were grouped to unique peptides while maintaining a 1% FDR at the peptide level and using a 90% site localization threshold for acetyl lysines. Peptides from all samples (acetyl, input) were grouped to proteins together using the rules of strict parsimony and proteins were filtered to 1% FDR using the Protein FDR Validator node of PD2.2. Reporter ion intensities for all PSMs having co-isolation interference below 50% (of the ion current in the isolation window) and average reporter S/N>2.5 were summed together at the peptide group and protein level, but keeping quantification for each data type (acetyl, input) separate. Peptides shared between protein groups were excluded from protein quantitation calculations.   Statistical analysis: Protein and peptide groups tabs in the PD2.2 results were exported as tab delimited .txt. files, opened in Microsoft EXCEL, and analyzed as described previously (McDonnell et al., 2016). First, peptide group reporter intensities for each peptide group in the input material were summed together for each TMT channel, each channel’s sum was divided by the average of all channels’ sums, resulting in channel-specific loading control normalization factors to correct for any deviation from equal protein/peptide input into the ten-sample comparison. Reporter intensities for peptide groups from the acetyl fraction and for proteins from the input fraction were divided by the loading control normalization factors for each respective TMT channel. Analyzing the acetylpeptide and protein datasets separately, all loading control-normalized TMT reporter intensities were converted to log2 space, and the average value from the nine samples was subtracted from each sample-specific measurement to normalize the relative measurements to the mean. For each cell line (WT, KO, HY), condition average and standard deviation were calculated. For each comparison (WT/HY, WT/KO, HY/KO), Log2 fold change, p-value (two-tailed student’s t-test, assuming equal variance), and adjusted p-value (Padjusted, Benjamini Hochberg FDR correction) were calculated (Benjamini et al., 2001; Lesack and Naugler, 2011). For protein-level quantification, only Master Proteins—or the most statistically significant protein representing a group of parsimonious proteins containing common peptides identified at 1% FDR—were used for quantitative comparison. Acetylpeptide measurements were calculated both alone (referred to as “relative abundance”) and with normalization to any change in the corresponding Master Protein (referred to as “normalized acetylation ratio”), calculated by subtracting Log2 Master Protein values from acetylpeptide quantitation values on a sample-specific basis (See Table S1 for all acetylpeptide and protein abundance data).

### Publication Abstract
SIRT3 is a nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD<sup>+</sup>)-dependent mitochondrial protein deacetylase purported to influence metabolism through post-translational modification of metabolic enzymes. Fuel-stimulated insulin secretion, which involves mitochondrial metabolism, could be susceptible to&#xa0;SIRT3-mediated effects. We used CRISPR/Cas9&#xa0;technology to manipulate SIRT3 expression in &#x3b2;&#xa0;cells, resulting in widespread SIRT3-dependent changes in acetylation of key metabolic enzymes but no appreciable changes in glucose- or pyruvate-stimulated insulin secretion or metabolomic profile during glucose stimulation. Moreover, these broad changes in the SIRT3-targeted acetylproteome did not affect responses to nutritional or ER stress. We also studied mice with global SIRT3 knockout fed either standard chow (STD) or high-fat and high-sucrose (HFHS) diets. Only when chronically fed HFHS diet do SIRT3 KO animals exhibit a modest reduction in insulin secretion. We conclude that broad changes in mitochondrial protein acetylation in response to manipulation of SIRT3 are not sufficient to cause changes in islet function or metabolism.

### Keywords
Beta cells, Protein acetylation, Sirt3, Pancreas

### Affiliations
Director, Duke Molecular Physiology Institute, Professor Departments of Medicine (Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism, and Nutrition) and Pharmacology & Cancer Biology Duke University Medical Center
Duke Molecular Physiology Institute

### Submitter
Paul Grimsrud

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher B. Newgard
Director, Duke Molecular Physiology Institute, Professor Departments of Medicine (Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism, and Nutrition) and Pharmacology & Cancer Biology Duke University Medical Center


