### Accession
PXD001715

### Title
Rod-derived Cone Viability Factor 2

### Description
Rod-derived Cone Viability Factor (RdCVF) is a truncated thioredoxin secreted by rod photoreceptors that protects cones. Because the secondary loss of cones in retinitis pigmentosa (RP) is the major visual handicap of this untreatable neurodegenerative disease, the administration of RdCVF is thought to be a promising therapy for RP. We show that RdCVF is acting by binding to Basigin-1 (BSG1) at the surface of cones. BSG1 is an alternative splice product of the BSG gene, a transmembrane protein with an extra immunoglobin domain expressed specifically in the retina. BSG1 binds to the glucose transporter GLUT1. RdCVF increases glucose entry into cones. We found that the increase in glucose is used by cones to induce cell survival by stimulating aerobic glycolysis. A disease associated missense mutation of RdCVF results in its inability to bind to BSG1, to stimulate glucose uptake and to prevent secondary cone death of a model of RP.

### Sample Protocol
The data set contains 2 sample preparations:  - 1D SDS-PAGE, in-gel digestion with trypsin and nanoLC-MS/MS on an nanoACQUITY UltraPerformance LC® System coupled to a quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometer Maxis (Bruker) - 1D SDS-PAGE, in-gel digestion with trypsin and nanoLC-MS/MS on an nanoACQUITY UltraPerformance LC® System coupled to a quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometer Impact (Bruker)

### Data Protocol
All nanoLC-MSMS analyses were processed using database searching with the Mascot algorithm run on a local server (Matrix Science). Identifications were validated at a FDR <1% using the Scaffold software (Proteome Software).

### Publication Abstract
Rod-derived cone viability factor (RdCVF) is an inactive thioredoxin secreted by rod photoreceptors that protects cones from degeneration. Because the secondary loss of cones in retinitis pigmentosa (RP) leads to blindness, the administration of RdCVF is a promising therapy for this untreatable neurodegenerative disease. Here, we investigated the mechanism underlying the protective role of RdCVF in RP. We show that RdCVF acts through binding to Basigin-1 (BSG1), a transmembrane protein expressed specifically by photoreceptors. BSG1 binds to the glucose transporter GLUT1, resulting in increased glucose entry into cones. Increased glucose promotes cone survival by stimulation of aerobic glycolysis. Moreover, a missense mutation of RdCVF results in its inability to bind to BSG1, stimulate glucose uptake, and prevent secondary cone death in a model of RP. Our data uncover an entirely novel mechanism of neuroprotection through the stimulation of glucose metabolism.

### Keywords
Impact, Maxis, Retina, Gallus gallus

### Affiliations
CNRS
Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse BioOrganique, IPHC, Université de Strasbourg, CNRS, UMR7178, Strasbourg, France

### Submitter
Francois Delalande

### Lab Head
Dr Alain Van Dorsselaer
Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse BioOrganique, IPHC, Université de Strasbourg, CNRS, UMR7178, Strasbourg, France


