### Accession
PXD006423

### Title
Target identification of PAB

### Description
Identification of cellular targets of PAB and functional studies

### Sample Protocol
The proteomics experiment was carried out in biological duplicates. Each of 500 µL of proteome sample was subjected to click reaction with Biotin-N3 (500 mM, Biomatrick Inc.), CuSO4 (1.0 mM), THTPA (100 mM) and NaVc (1.0 mM). The samples were precipitated with CH3OH (600 mL) / CHCl3 (150 mL) / H2O (300 mL) sequentially and vortexed for a while. After centrifuge at 14,000 g for 3 minutes, the protein disk was washed twice with CH3OH (500 mL), air-dried and re-dissolved in 200 µL of click buffer (50 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 1% SDS) by sonication. 50 µL of streptavidin-sepharose (GE Healthcare) beads were added to each sample and incubated at room temperature with continuous rotation for 1 hour. The beads were washed with PBS with 1% SDS (w/v) three times, PBS with 0.5 M NaCl three times, 4.0 M Urea in 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) twice, and 100 mM TEAB five times. Each wash was performed on a rotator for 15 minutes. The bounded proteins were subjected to on-beads reductive alkylation with 200 µL of 10 mM of tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) at 56 °C for 30 minutes and 200 µL of 55 mM iodoacetamide at 37 °C in dark for another 30 minutes, followed by wash with 100 mM TEAB three times. Bounded proteins on beads were digested with 0.25 µg of sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega) reconstituted in 50 µL of 100 mM TEAB overnight at 37 °C. The digests of both Dead-Dayne and PAB-Dayne treated-samples were labeled with TMT2-126 and TMT2-127 Isobaric Label Reagent (Thermo Scientific) respectively, according to the manufacturer’s procedures. The labeled peptides were desalted by Pierce C18 spin columns and evaporated to dryness on a SpeedVac. Dried peptides were resuspended in 10 µL of ddH2O containing 0.1% formic acid with sonication. A volume of 1.0 mL of each sample was desalted by loading on a Thermo C18 PepMap100 precolumn (300 µM × 5 mm) and eluted on a Thermo Acclaim PepMap RSLC analytical column (75 µM × 15 cm). Mobile phase A (0.1% formic acid in H2O) and mobile phase B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) were used to establish the 80 min gradient comprised of 55 min of 4−30% B, 7 min of 30−50% B, and 5 min of 50−90% B, followed by re-equilibrating at 4% B for 8 min. The flow rate was 0.3 mL/min. Peptides were then analyzed on Thermo Orbitrap Fusion Lumos proteomic mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) in a data-dependent manner, with automatic switching between MS and MS/MS scans using a cycle time 3 s. MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 120,000 with AGC target value of 4×105 ions or a maximum integration time of 50 ms. The scan range was limited from 375 to 1500 m/z. Peptide fragmentation was performed via high energy collision dissociation (HCD) with the energy set at 38 NCE. The MS/MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 50,000 with AGC target value of 1×105 ions or a maximum integration time of 105 ms. The fixed first m/z was 120, and the isolation window was 0.7 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification were performed using Proteome Discoverer 2.1 software (Thermo Scientific). Peptide sequences (and hence protein identity) were determined by matching Uniprot protein databases with the acquired fragmentation pattern by SEQUEST HT algorithm. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment ion mass tolerance to 0.02 Da. One missed cleavage site of trypsin was allowed. Carbamidomethyl (C) and TMT-duplex (K and N-terminal) were used as a fixed modification. Oxidation (M) was used as variable modifications. All spectra were searched against protein database using a target false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%. The proteins identified in positive group (PAB-Dayne-treated samples) were additionally filtered by at least two spectral counts and one unique peptides in each experimental replicate. Protein ratios were calculated as the median of all peptide hits belonging to a protein. Statistical analysis was performed with Perseus 1.5.1.6. TMT ratios obtained from Proteome Discoverer 2.1 were transformed with log2-(x) and then normalized using Z-score and -log10-(p-value) were obtained by a two sided one sample t-test over three biological replicates. Only proteins identified have ratios higher than 4.0 and p-values less than 0.05 were considered statistical significant targets.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pab, Target

### Affiliations
Dr.
SIPPE, SIBS

### Submitter
Yiqing Zhou

### Lab Head
Dr Yiqing Zhou
SIPPE, SIBS


