### Accession
PXD004254

### Title
Identification of potential human PML interacting proteins in Nicotiana benthamiana

### Description
In spite of the crucial tasks fulfilled by the subnuclear structures known as PML nuclear bodies (PML-NBs) in mammalian cells, the presence of PML-NBs in plant cells could not be shown yet. Interestingly, the key organizer of PML-NBs, human promyelocytic leukemia protein (PML), is not targeted to structures resembling PML-NBs when expressed heterologously in plants, but localizes to interchromosomal areas associated with the nucleolus. In order to identify plant proteins interacting with human PML, a GFP-fusion protein was ectopically expressed in Nicotiana benthamiana using Agrobacterium tumefaciens mediated transformation. The bait protein as well as potential interactors were immunoprecipitated by use of magnetic GFP-Trap beads (Chromotek). Precipitated proteins were analyzed by Nano-LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were processed as described in Lamm et al. 2016. In short, Nicotiana benthamiana leaf discs (diameter appr. 2.5 cm) expressing hPML::eGFP were harvested 2 days after Agrobacterium infiltration and were homogenized in 1 ml ice cold extraction buffer (100 mM Tris HCl pH 7.5, 300 mM NaCl, 10 mM DTT, 0.5 mM EDTA, 0.5 % (v/v) NP-40, cOmplete ULTRA Tablets (Roche diagnostics, Mannheim, Germany)). After 20 min of incubation on ice, extracts were centrifuged and supernatant was transferred into a new tube and diluted with 1 ml ice cold dilution buffer (100 mM Tris HCl pH 7.5, 300 mM NaCl, 10 mM DTT, 0.5 mM EDTA, cOmplete ULTRA Tablets (Roche diagnostics)) supplemented with 25 µl GFP-Trap® magnetic bead slurry (Chromotek, Planegg-Martinsried, Germany). Samples were kept at 4° C under constant mixing for 2 h before washing with cold dilution buffer. Immunoprecipitated proteins were eluted in 100 µl of 200 mM glycine pH 2.5. Supernatant containing proteins was transferred into new microcentrifugation tubes and pH was neutralized using 20 µl Tris HCl pH 8.0. Tryptic digest of the extracted proteins was carried out based on the modified filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method (Wisniewski et al., 2009), in which eluted proteins were collected on 10 kDa Vivacon 500 Hydrosart® membrane filters (Sartorius Stedim Biotech, Göttingen, Germany). Reduction was performed by addition of 250 µl buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEAB), 20 mM DTT) and incubation for 30 min at room temperature under constant mixing. Alkylation of reduced proteins was achieved by addition of 250 µl of 8 M urea, 100 mM TEAB, 40 mM chloroacetamide and incubation for 30 min at room temperature in the dark under constant mixing. After a washing step with 8 M urea and 100 mM TEAB, filters were transferred to new microcentrifugation tubes and tryptically digested by addition of 250 µl of 1 M urea, 50 mM TEAB and 1 µg trypsin and incubation over night at 37° C. Resulting peptides were desalted on C18 stage tips. Prior to LC-MS/MS analysis, peptides were concentrated on a centrifugal evaporator and resuspended in 0.1 % trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Peptides were analyzed by an Orbitrap Fusion™ Tribrid™ mass spectrometer in connection with an UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The samples were loaded and separated on PepMap100 columns (300 µm i.d. x 5 mm, 5 µm, 100 Å and 75 µm i.d. x 50 cm, 3 µm, 100 Å, respectively) with a 3 – 35% gradient of buffer B (acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) over 160 minutes at a flow rate of 300 nL/min at 35° C. Ionization of peptides was achieved using a nanospray Flex™ ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific), measurement was performed with a survey scan range of 300-2000 m/z. The most intense peptides of each scan cycle were selected and fragmented by collision- induced dissociation, resulting MS/MS scans were analyzed by the ion trap.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were evaluated using Peaks7 (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, ON, Canada) and a Nicotiana benthamiana proteome database (Sol Genomics Network, retrieved on 06.03.2015). The amino acid sequence of hPML::eGFP was additionally added to this database. Peptide identification was based on two missed trypsin cleavages maximum and 10 ppm mass tolerance for survey scans. Carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification, whereas oxidation of methionine residues was regarded optional. Resulting peptides were only considered as identified with a false discovery rate (FDR) below 1%. For quantification, two groups containing the respective four biological replicates were used. The samples were normalized by the total ion count (TIC) and only proteins with two or more unique peptides were included in the calculation. Finally, only proteins that were 5 times (or more) more abundant in the hPML::eGFP-samples (with a significance of 13 -10lgP or higher) were included in the list used in this study.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Nicotiana benthamiana, Pml nuclear bodies, Nano-lc ms/ms, Coimmunoprecipitation, Human promyelocytic leukemia protein

### Affiliations
Friedrich-Alexander Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg
Division of Biochemistry, Department of Biology, Friedrich-Alexander University Erlangen-Nuremberg, Staudtstraße 5, 91058 Erlangen

### Submitter
Christian Lamm

### Lab Head
Dr Uwe Sonnewald
Division of Biochemistry, Department of Biology, Friedrich-Alexander University Erlangen-Nuremberg, Staudtstraße 5, 91058 Erlangen


