### Accession
PXD013011

### Title
The cellular response towards lanthanum is substrate specific and reveals a novel route for glycerol metabolism in Pseudomonas putida KT2440

### Description
Ever since the discovery of the first rare earth element (REE)-dependent enzyme,the physiological role of lanthanides has become an emerging field of research due to the environmental implications and biotechnological opportunities. In Pseudomonas putida KT2440, the two pyrroloquinoline quinone-dependent alcohol dehydrogenases (PQQ-ADHs) PedE and PedH are inversely regulated in response to REE availability. This transcriptional switch is orchestrated by a complex regulatory network that includes the PedR2/PedS2 two-component system and is important for efficient growth on several alcoholic volatiles. To study whether cellular responses beyond the REE switch exist, the differential proteomic responses that occur during growth on various model carbon sources were analyzed. Apart from the Ca2+-dependent enzyme PedE, the differential abundances of most identified proteins were conditional. During growth on glycerol-and concomitant with the proteomic changes-lanthanum (La3+) availability affected different growth parameters, including the onset of logarithmic growth and final optical densities. Studies with mutant strains revealed a novel metabolic route for glycerol utilization, initiated by PedE and/or PedH activity. Upon oxidation to glycerate via glyceraldehyde, phosphorylation by the glycerate kinase GarK most likely yields glycerate-2-phosphate, which is eventually channeled into the central metabolism of the cell. This new route functions in parallel with the main degradation pathway encoded by the glpFKRD operon and provides a growth advantage to the cells by allowing an earlier onset of growth with glycerol as the sole source of carbon and energy.IMPORTANCE The biological role of REEs has long been underestimated, and research has mainly focused on methanotrophic and methylotrophic bacteria. We have recently demonstrated that P. putida, a plant growth-promoting bacterium that thrives in the rhizosphere of various food crops,possesses a REE-dependent alcohol dehydrogenase (PedH), but knowledge about REE-specific effects on physiological traits in nonmethylotrophic bacteria is still scarce. This study demonstrates that the cellular response of P.putida to lanthanum (La3+) is mostly substrate specific and that La3+ availability highly affects the growth of cells on glycerol. Further, a novel route for glycerol metabolism is identified, which is initiated by PedE and/or PedH activity and provides a growth advantage to this biotechnologically relevant organism by allowing a faster onset of growth. Overall, these findings demonstrate that lanthanides can affect physiological traits in nonmethylotrophic bacteria and might influence their competitiveness in various environmental niches.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction for comparative proteome analysis For comparative proteome analysis experiments, 50 ml M9 medium supplemented with citrate, glucose, glycerol or 2-phenylethanol and 0 or 10 µM LaCl3 were inoculated with an OD600 of 0.05 from succinate precultures of strain P. putida KT2440 in 250 ml polycarbonate Erlenmeyer flasks and incubated at 30°C and 180 rpm. When cell cultures reached an OD600 of > 0.4, cells were harvested by centrifugation for 15 min at 6000 x g and 4°C. Cell pellets were resuspended in 1 ml sample buffer (150 mM Tris-HCl pH 6.8; 2 % SDS; 20 mM dithiothreitol) and heated for 5 min at 95°C with gentle shaking. Subsequently, samples were centrifuged for 15 min at 21000 x g and 4°C, and the supernatants were stored in new reaction tubes at -20 °C. In a next step, proteins were precipitated using chloroform-methanol and pellets were resuspended in Tris-buffered (50 mM, pH 8.5) urea (6 M). Protein concentrations were determined by the Bradford assay.  In-solution digest of proteins and peptide purification with C18 Stage Tips  To 25 µg protein in 60 µl Tris-buffered (50 mM, pH 8.5) urea (6 M), DTT was added to a final concentration of 10 mM to guarantee reduction of cysteines. Samples were incubated for 30 min at 56 °C under shaking at 1000 rpm. Alkylation of cysteines was performed by adding 30 mM iodoacetamide and incubation for 45 min at room temperature in the dark. Alkylation was stopped by adding 50 mM DTT and samples were incubated for another 10 min at RT. 500 ng LysC protease (Roche) in 50 mM Tris buffer (pH 8.5) was added and samples were digested overnight at 30 °C. Next, the urea in the reaction mixture was diluted to 2 M by adding the appropriate amount of Tris buffer (50 mM, pH 8.5). 1 µg trypsin (Roche) in Tris buffer (50 mM, pH 8.5) was added and digestion was continued for 4 hours at 37 °C. The digest was stopped by addition of 3 µl 10% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Next, peptide mixtures were concentrated and desalted on C18 stage tips and dried under vacuum. Samples were dissolved in 20 µl 0.1% (v/v) TFA. Aliquots of 1 µl were subjected to nanoLC-MS/MS analysis.   Mass spectrometry analysis NanoLC-ESI-MS/MS experiments were performed on an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using an EASY-Spray nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Tryptic peptides were directly injected to an EASY-Spray analytical column (2 μm, 100 Å PepMapRSLC C18, 25 cm × 75 μm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) operated at constant temperature of 35 °C. Peptides were separated at a flow rate of 250 nL/min using a 240 min gradient with the following profile: 2% - 10% solvent B in 100 min, 10% - 22% solvent B in 80 min, 22% - 45% solvent B in 55 min, 45% - 95% solvent B in 5 min and isocratic at 90% solvent B for 15 min. Solvents used were 0.5 % acetic acid (solvent A) and 0.5% acetic acid in acetonitrile/H2O (80/20, v/v, solvent B). The Q Exactive Plus was operated under the control of XCalibur 3.0.63 software. MS spectra (m/z = 300-1600) were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70000 (m/z = 200) using a maximum injection time (MIT) of 100 ms and an automatic gain control (AGC) value of 1 x 10E6. Internal calibration of the Orbitrap analyzer was performed using lock-mass ions from ambient air as described elsewhere. Data dependent MS/MS spectra were generated for the 10 most abundant peptide precursors in the Orbitrap using high energy collision dissociation (HCD) fragmentation at a resolution of 17500, a normalized collision energy of 27 and an intensity threshold of 1.3 x 10E5. Only ions with charge states from +2 to +5 were selected for fragmentation using an isolation width of 1.6 Da. For each MS/MS scan, the AGC was set at 5 x 10E5 and the MIT was 100 ms. Fragmented precursor ions were dynamically excluded for 30 s within a 5 ppm mass window to avoid repeated fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Protein quantification and data analysis Raw files were imported into MaxQuant version 1.6.0.1 for protein identification and label-free quantification (LFQ) of proteins. Protein identification in MaxQuant was performed using the database search engine Andromeda. MS spectra and MS/MS spectra were searched against P. putida KT2440 protein sequence database downloaded from UniProt. Reversed sequences as decoy database and common contaminant sequences were added automatically by MaxQuant. Mass tolerances of 4.5 ppm (parts per million) for MS spectra and 20 ppm for MS/MS spectra were used. Trypsin was specified as enzyme and two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification and protein N-terminal acetylation and oxidation were allowed as variable modifications. The ‘match between runs’ feature of MaxQuant was enabled with a match time window of one minute and an alignment time window of 20 minutes. Peptide false discovery rate (FDR) and protein FDR thresholds were set to 0.01. Statistical analysis including t-tests and principal component analysis (PCA) were performed using Perseus software version 1.6.0.2. Matches to contaminant (e.g., keratins, trypsin) and reverse databases identified by MaxQuant were excluded from further analysis. Proteins were considered for LFQ (label free quantification) if they were identified by at least two peptides. First, normalized LFQ values from MaxQuant were log2 transformed. Missing values were replaced from normal distribution using a width of 0.2 and a downshift of 2.0. Statistical differences between two sample groups were determined using an unpaired t-test and a p-value < 0.01 and a regulation factor > 2 (log2 fold-change > 1) were considered as significant change in protein abundance.

### Publication Abstract
Ever since the discovery of the first rare earth element (REE)-dependent enzyme, the physiological role of lanthanides has become an emerging field of research due to the environmental implications and biotechnological opportunities. In <i>Pseudomonas putida</i> KT2440, the two pyrroloquinoline quinone-dependent alcohol dehydrogenases (PQQ-ADHs) PedE and PedH are inversely regulated in response to REE availability. This transcriptional switch is orchestrated by a complex regulatory network that includes the PedR2/PedS2 two-component system and is important for efficient growth on several alcoholic volatiles. To study whether cellular responses beyond the REE switch exist, the differential proteomic responses that occur during growth on various model carbon sources were analyzed. Apart from the Ca<sup>2+</sup>-dependent enzyme PedE, the differential abundances of most identified proteins were conditional. During growth on glycerol-and concomitant with the proteomic changes-lanthanum (La<sup>3+</sup>) availability affected different growth parameters, including the onset of logarithmic growth and final optical densities. Studies with mutant strains revealed a novel metabolic route for glycerol utilization, initiated by PedE and/or PedH activity. Upon oxidation to glycerate via glyceraldehyde, phosphorylation by the glycerate kinase GarK most likely yields glycerate-2-phosphate, which is eventually channeled into the central metabolism of the cell. This new route functions in parallel with the main degradation pathway encoded by the <i>glpFKRD</i> operon and provides a growth advantage to the cells by allowing an earlier onset of growth with glycerol as the sole source of carbon and energy.<b>IMPORTANCE</b> The biological role of REEs has long been underestimated, and research has mainly focused on methanotrophic and methylotrophic bacteria. We have recently demonstrated that <i>P. putida</i>, a plant growth-promoting bacterium that thrives in the rhizosphere of various food crops, possesses a REE-dependent alcohol dehydrogenase (PedH), but knowledge about REE-specific effects on physiological traits in nonmethylotrophic bacteria is still scarce. This study demonstrates that the cellular response of <i>P. putida</i> to lanthanum (La<sup>3+</sup>) is mostly substrate specific and that La<sup>3+</sup> availability highly affects the growth of cells on glycerol. Further, a novel route for glycerol metabolism is identified, which is initiated by PedE and/or PedH activity and provides a growth advantage to this biotechnologically relevant organism by allowing a faster onset of growth. Overall, these findings demonstrate that lanthanides can affect physiological traits in nonmethylotrophic bacteria and might influence their competitiveness in various environmental niches.

### Keywords
Pqq, Gark, Dehydrogenases, Pede, Rare earth elements, Lanthanides, Proteome, Pedh, Pseudomonas putida, Glycerol metabolism

### Affiliations
University of Hohenheim
University of Stuttgart, Institute of Biochemistry and Technical Biochemistry, Department of Technical Biochemistry,Stuttgart, Germany

### Submitter
Jens Pfannstiel

### Lab Head
Dr Janosch Klebensberger
University of Stuttgart, Institute of Biochemistry and Technical Biochemistry, Department of Technical Biochemistry,Stuttgart, Germany


