### Accession
PXD019462

### Title
Proteomic analysis of two populations of Schistosoma haematobium-derived extracellular vesicles: exosome-like vesicles and microvesicles

### Description
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) have been characterized from many species of parasitic helminths, and recent experimental evidence supports important functions for their cargo in host-parasite relationships. Here, we carried out the first proteomic analysis of two populations of EVs – exosome like vesicles (ELVs) and microvesicles (MVs) – from Schistosoma haematobium.

### Sample Protocol
EVs were isolated from the excretory/secretory products from S. haematobium by ultracentrifugation followed by iodixanol gradient. Highly pure ELVs obtained from fractions 5-9 after density gradient and MVs were electrophoresed on a 10% SDS-PAGE gel for 60 min at 140 V. For tryptic in-gel digestion, the gel was stained with Coomassie blue (0.03%), destained overnight and each lane was cut into 3 slices. Each band was destained by washing twice in 50% acetonitrile with 200 mM ammonium bicarbonate at 37°C for 45 min, reduced with 20 mM dithiothreitol in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 1 h at 65°C, alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate at 37°C for 15 min and digested with 100 ng/µl trypsin at 37°C for 18 h. Peptides were extracted in 50% acetonitrile with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. All peptides were finally dried in a vacuum concentrator. Samples were then resuspended in 10 µl of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and tryptic peptides were desalted using a Zip-Tip® column pipette tip and dried in a vacuum concentrator before analysis using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS).  For LC-MS/MS, tryptic fragments from each sample were resuspended in 10 μl of 5% formic acid and injected onto a 50 mm 300 μm C18 trap column (Agilent Technologies, USA). The samples were then desalted for 5 min at 30 μl/min using 0.1% formic acid and the peptides were then eluted onto an analytical nano-HPLC column (150 mm × 75 μm 300SBC18, 3.5 μm, Agilent Technologies, USA) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Peptides were separated using a 95 min gradient of 1–40% buffer B (90/10 ACN/0.1% formic acid) followed by a steeper gradient from 40 to 80% buffer B in 5 min. A 5600 ABSciex mass spectrometer operated in information-dependent acquisition mode, in which a 1 s TOF-MS scan from 350–1400 m/z was used, and for product ion ms/ms 80–1400 m/z ions observed in the TOF-MS scan exceeding a threshold of 100 counts and a charge state of +2 to +5 were set to trigger the acquisition of product ion. Analyst 1.6.1 (ABSCIEX, Framingham, MA, USA) software was used for data acquisition.

### Data Protocol
For database search and protein identification, a database was built using a concatenated target/decoy version of the S. haematobium predicted proteome (11,140 sequences; Bioproject PRJNA78265) downloaded from Parasite WormBase (www.parasite.wormbase.org) and concatenated to the common repository of adventitious proteins (cRAP, https://www.thegpm.org/crap/), 116 sequences) as well as to the Sh-TSP-2 protein (Genbank QCO69687.1). Database search was performed using a combination of four search engines (X! Tandem version X! Tandem Vengeance (2015.12.15.2), MS-GF+ version Release (v2018.04.09), OMSSA and Tide) using SearchGUI version v3.3.3. The identification settings were as follows: Trypsin, Specific, with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages 10.0 ppm as MS1 and 0.2 Da as MS2 tolerances; fixed modifications: Carbamidomethylation of C (+57.021464 Da), variable modifications: Deamidation of N (+0.984016 Da), Deamidation of Q (+0.984016 Da), Oxidation of M (+15.994915 Da). Peptides and proteins were inferred from the spectrum identification results using PeptideShaker version 1.16.38. Peptide Spectrum Matches (PSMs), peptides and proteins were validated at a 1.0% False Discovery Rate (FDR) estimated using the decoy hit distribution. Only proteins having at least two unique peptides were considered as identified.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Schistosoma haematobium, Proteomics, Extracellular vesicles, Microvesicles, Exosome-like vesicles

### Affiliations
Instituto de Salud Carlos III
James Cook University

### Submitter
Javier Sotillo

### Lab Head
Dr Javier Sotillo
Instituto de Salud Carlos III


