### Accession
PXD002040

### Title
Proteomic profiling of the extracellular matrix (slime sheath) of Dictyostelium discoideum

### Description
Dictyostelium discoideum has historically served as a model system for cell and developmental biology, but recently it has gained increasing attention as a model for the study of human diseases. The extracellular matrix (ECM) of this eukaryotic microbe serves multiple essential functions during development. It not only provides structural integrity to the moving multicellular pseudoplasmodium, or slug, it also provides components that regulate cell motlity and differentiation. An LC/MS/MS analysis of slug ECM revealed the presence of a large number of proteins in two wild-type strains, NC4 and WS380B. GO annotation identified proteins involved in binding, as well as proteins that modulate metabolic processes, cell movement, and multicellular development. In addition, this proteomic analysis identified numerous expected, as well as unexpected components.

### Sample Protocol
Slug ECM was harvested, separated by SDS-PAGE, and subjected to an LC/MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Sequest version 1.4.0.288 and X! Tandem version CYCLONE (2010.12.01.1). Sequest was set up to search Uniprot-Dictyostelium discoideum-Slime-Mold.fasta (12758 entries) assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin with the max number of missed cleavages set to 2. X! Tandem was set up to search the Uniprot-Dictyostelium discoideum-Slime-Mold database (12763 entries) also assuming trypsin with the maximum number of missed cleavages set to 2.

### Publication Abstract
Dictyostelium discoideum has historically served as a model system for cell and developmental biology, but recently it has gained increasing attention as a model for the study of human diseases. The extracellular matrix (ECM) of this eukaryotic microbe serves multiple essential functions during development. It not only provides structural integrity to the moving multicellular pseudoplasmodium, or slug, it also provides components that regulate cell motility and differentiation. An LC/MS/MS analysis of slug ECM revealed the presence of a large number of proteins in two wild-type strains, NC4 and WS380B. GO annotation identified a large number of proteins involved in some form of binding (e.g. protein, polysaccharide, cellulose, carbohydrate, ATP, cAMP, ion, lipid, vitamin), as well as proteins that modulate metabolic processes, cell movement, and multicellular development. In addition, this proteomic analysis identified numerous expected (e.g. EcmA, EcmD, discoidin I, discoidin II), as well as unexpected (e.g. ribosomal and nuclear proteins) components. These topics are discussed in terms of the structure and function of the ECM during the development of this model amoebozoan and their relevance to ongoing biomedical research.

### Keywords
Dictyostelium discoideum, Proteomics, Development, Extracellular matrix, Model system

### Affiliations
Massachusetts General Hospital
Massachusetts General Hospital Center for Human Genetic Research

### Submitter
Robert Huber

### Lab Head
Dr Robert Joseph Huber
Massachusetts General Hospital Center for Human Genetic Research


