### Accession
PXD005664

### Title
TRAIL-induced cancer secretome

### Description
To comprehensively determine which factors are secreted by cancer cells upon TRAIL stimulation, we conducted an unbiased mass spectrometric analysis of TRAIL’s secretome in resistant A549 cells.

### Sample Protocol
The protein content of the secretome was acquired on the peptide level by data-dependent analysis on the Q Exactive Orbitrap coupled to an Easy-nLC 1000.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analysed with MaxQuant version 1.4.1.2 where they were searched against the human UniProt database (http://www.uniprot.org/, downloaded 03/04/2013) using default settings. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as fixed modification, and oxidation of methionines and acetylation at N-termini were set as variable modifications. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin with maximally 2 missed cleavages allowed. To ensure high confidence identifications, PSMs, peptides, and proteins were filtered at a less than 1% false discovery rate (FDR). The label-free quantification workflow was used with a match time window of 4min, an alignment time window of 20mins, and a match between runs selected.

### Publication Abstract
Tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) is known for specifically killing cancer cells, whereas in resistant cancers, TRAIL/TRAIL-R can promote metastasis via Rac1 and PI3K. It remains unknown, however, whether and to what extent TRAIL/TRAIL-R signaling in cancer cells can affect the immune microenvironment. Here we show that TRAIL-triggered cytokine secretion from TRAIL-resistant cancer cells is FADD dependent and identify the TRAIL-induced secretome to drive monocyte polarization to myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) and M2-like macrophages. TRAIL-R suppression in tumor cells impaired CCL2 production and diminished both lung MDSC presence and tumor growth. In accordance, the receptor of CCL2, CCR2, is required to facilitate increased MDSC presence and tumor growth. Finally, TRAIL and CCL2 are co-regulated with MDSC/M2 markers in lung adenocarcinoma patients. Collectively, endogenous TRAIL/TRAIL-R-mediated CCL2 secretion promotes accumulation of tumor-supportive immune cells in the cancer microenvironment, thereby revealing a tumor-supportive immune-modulatory role of the TRAIL/TRAIL-R system in cancer biology.

### Keywords
A549 cells, Lable-free quantification

### Affiliations
Department of Cancer Biology UCL cancer institute University College London
UCL

### Submitter
Silvia Surinova

### Lab Head
Dr Silvia Surinova
Department of Cancer Biology UCL cancer institute University College London


