### Accession
PXD017873

### Title
Structure of Cyanobacterial Phycobilisome Core Revealed by Structural Modeling and Chemical Cross-linking

### Description
In cyanobacteria and red algae, the structural basis dictating efficient excitation energy transfer from the phycobilisome (PBS) antenna complex to the reaction centers (RCs) remains unclear. PBS has several peripheral rods and a central core, which binds to the thylakoid membrane, allowing energy coupling with Photosystems II (PSII) and Photosystem I (PSI). Here, we integrated chemical cross-linking mass spectrometry with homology modeling analysis to propose a tri-cylindrical cyanobacterial PBS-core structure. Our model reveals a side view crossover configuration of the two basal cylinders, consolidating the essential roles of the anchoring domains comprised of the ApcE PB-loop and ApcD, which facilitate the energy transfer to PSII and PSI respectively. The uneven bottom surface of the PBS-core contrasts with the flat reducing side of PSII. The extra space between two basal cylinders of the PBS-core and PSII provides increased accessibility of regulatory elements, e.g., orange carotenoid protein, which are required for modulating photochemical activities.

### Sample Protocol
CK-PBS, dissolved in 0.4 M K-phosphate buffer at 0.1 M, and the isotopic-coded BS3 cross-linker mixture (BS3-H12/D12, Creative Molecule, Inc) were incubated together for 10 mins in the dark at 25 C, where the cross-linker was in 10-, 50-, 100-fold excess with respect to the PBS-CK. Tris (1M) was added to give a final concentration of 50 mM to stop the cross-linking chemistry. For quenching and desalting purposes, Zeba spin columns (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) were employed following the manufacture’s protocol. The cross-linked CK-PBS were then desalted and purified by acetone precipitation to prepare them for enzymatic digestion. The protein pellets were dissolved in 20 l, 8M urea for 30 min at room temperature for denaturation, followed by 30-min incubation with 2.5 mM TCEP (tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine) at 37 C. Iodoacetamide was then added to the reaction sample at a final concentration of 5 mM for 30 min at 25 C in dark. The first-step digestion was achieved by Lys-C (0.05 g/l) for 2-h incubation at 37 C. Dilution to 1M urea with Tris buffer (100 mM) was needed for the subsequent trypsin digestion, which required overnight incubation at 37 C with a trypsin:protein ratio of 1:25. The digested mixture was quenched by 0.1% formic acid the next day.

### Data Protocol
MS and MS/MS data were imported into pLink software for identification. Searching parameters were: enzyme was trypsin (up to three missed cleavages) with 20 ppm of precursor tolerance and 60 ppm of fragment tolerance. Variable modifications were: oxidation of M, deamidation of N, Q, and N terminus. The minimum number of peptide length is 6 with peptide mass of 600 Da and maximum number is 60 with peptide mass of 6000 Da. The false discovery rate was equal to or smaller than 5% at spectral level with a 10-ppm filter tolerance. Isotopic pairs were examined manually in raw files to confirm cross-link identification. The theoretical product-ion mass list was calculated in Protein Prospector. Manually validation of the fragments was further performed as a comparison to the pLink assignment.  The cross-linking dataset was also submitted into ICC-Class for cross-linking identification. In the DXMSMSMatch program, the settings were: cross-linker was DSS with DX of 12.07532. The DX mass tolerance was 0.013 Da, retention time tolerance was 60 s. The filtered DX mass tolerance was 5 ppm and the filter DX time window was 60 s. The digestion sites were K and R, including cross-link sites. Missed digest sites was up to 4. Assigned cross-link sites are K and N-terminal primary amines. Precursor tolerance was 5 ppm and fragment tolerance were 30 ppm. Manually validation of the fragments was carried out as the same way mentioned above.

### Publication Abstract
In cyanobacteria and red algae, the structural basis dictating efficient excitation energy transfer from the phycobilisome (PBS) antenna complex to the reaction centers remains unclear. The PBS has several peripheral rods and a central core that binds to the thylakoid membrane, allowing energy coupling with photosystem II (PSII) and PSI. Here, we have combined chemical cross-linking mass spectrometry with homology modeling to propose a tricylindrical cyanobacterial PBS core structure. Our model reveals a side-view crossover configuration of the two basal cylinders, consolidating the essential roles of the anchoring domains composed of the ApcE PB loop and ApcD, which facilitate the energy transfer to PSII and PSI, respectively. The uneven bottom surface of the PBS core contrasts with the flat reducing side of PSII. The extra space between two basal cylinders and PSII provides increased accessibility for regulatory elements, e.g., orange carotenoid protein, which are required for modulating photochemical activity.

### Keywords
I-tasser, Phycobilisome, Photosynthesis  , Protein structure prediction, Phycobilisome core structure, Mass spectrometry, Protein cross-linking

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry Washington University in St. Louis
Washington University in St. Louis

### Submitter
Haijun Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Haijun Liu
Department of Chemistry Washington University in St. Louis


