### Accession
PXD002923

### Title
Proteomic analysis of Pennisetum glaucum under drought stress

### Description
Pearl millet [Pennisetum glaucum (L.) R.Br] is the fifth most important cereal crop next to rice, wheat, maize, and sorghum. It is cultivated especially by small holder farmers in arid and semi-arid regions because of its drought resistance. However, the molecular mechanisms during drought stress in Pennisetum remain elusive. In the present study we have used a shotgun proteomics approach (GEL-LC-Orbitrap-MS) for identification and quantification of proteins from different tissues (root, seed and leaf) under drought and control conditions. Plants were grown in a tube system to survey root growth under drought stress. The water content was measured in the upper and the lower part of the tube using soil moisture sensors. Under drought stress root elongation was observed. Measurement of stomatal conductance showed a clear response to drought stress. For proteomics measurements root, leaf and seed tissues were harvested. In total 2281 proteins were identified, 1095 in root, 1299 in seed, and 1208 in leaf in both stress and control conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Phenol protein extraction, trypsin digestion, desalting C-18

### Data Protocol
Principal component analysis (PCA), bi-cluster plot and ANOVA were performed using the statistical tool box COVAIN . This software can be accessed online. The obtained data were log transformed before PCA analysis. K means cluster analysis was performed in Matlab and only proteins were chosen, if they were present in all the three biological replicates of at least one tissue. Sparse partial least squares (sPLS) regression analysis was performed using the mixOmics package for the statistical software environment R (R Core 20).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics, Pearl millet, Drought

### Affiliations
University of Vienna
Department of Ecogenomics and Systems Biology, University of Vienna

### Submitter
Palak Chaturvedi

### Lab Head
Dr Wolfram Weckwerth
Department of Ecogenomics and Systems Biology, University of Vienna


