### Accession
PXD026095

### Title
The human and mouse islet peptidome: effects of obesity and type 2 diabetes

### Description
To characterise the impact of metabolic disease on the peptidome of human and mouse pancreatic islets and the contribution of intra-islet glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1) receptor signalling.

### Sample Protocol
Peptides were extracted from sorted alpha, beta and delta cells from islet preparations. Whole human and mouse islets were homogenised and analysed by LC-MS. Mouse islets were subjected to incubation with varying levels of glucose and the supernatant analysed to see what was excreted. Methods involved using organic solvent precipitation followed by SPE extraction and LC-MS/MS analysis on an Orbitrap Q-Exactive plus. Plasma samples were also extracted and analysed for insulin and other proinsulin derived peptides.

### Data Protocol
MSMS data was searched against the human or mouse database using PEAKS 8.5. Fixed modifications were carbamidomethylation, and variable modifications included N-terminal acetylation, N-terminal pyroglutamate and C-terminal amide as well as methionine oxidation.

### Publication Abstract
To characterize the impact of metabolic disease on the peptidome of human and mouse pancreatic islets, LC-MS was used to analyze extracts of human and mouse islets, purified mouse alpha, beta, and delta cells, supernatants from mouse islet incubations, and plasma from patients with type 2 diabetes. Islets were obtained from healthy and type 2 diabetic human donors, and mice on chow or high fat diet. All major islet hormones were detected in lysed islets as well as numerous peptides from vesicular proteins including granins and processing enzymes. Glucose-dependent insulinotropic peptide (GIP) was not detectable. High fat diet modestly increased islet content of proinsulin-derived peptides in mice. Human diabetic islets contained increased content of proglucagon-derived peptides at the expense of insulin, but no evident prohormone processing defects. Diabetic plasma, however, contained increased ratios of proinsulin and des-31,32-proinsulin to insulin. Active GLP-1 was detectable in human and mouse islets but 100-1000-fold less abundant than glucagon. LC-MS offers advantages over antibody-based approaches for identifying exact peptide sequences, and revealed a shift toward islet insulin production in high fat fed mice, and toward proglucagon production in type 2 diabetes, with no evidence of systematic defective prohormone processing.

### Keywords
Type 2 diabetes, Glucagon, Islets, Peptidomics, Insulin

### Affiliations
Wellcome Trust MRC Institute of Metabolic Science
University of Cambridge

### Submitter
Richard Kay

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Fiona Gribble
Wellcome Trust MRC Institute of Metabolic Science


