### Accession
PXD034364

### Title
N-glycoproteomics and proteomics in NGLY1 deficient patient-derived dermal fibroblasts

### Description
In the biological systems, several genes are involved in protein glycosylation and deglycosylation pathways. Congenital disorders of deglycosylation (CDDG) are a set of disorders which occur due to the defect in genes involved in deglycosylation pathways. The only known CDDG so far is the defect in N-glycanase 1 (NGLY1), which primary function is to cleave the N-glycans from misfolded proteins prior to their proteasomal degradation. We used TMT-based N-glycoproteomics and proteomics on patient derived NGLY1 deficient and control fibroblasts to characterize the alteration in glycoproteome and proteome. 24 fractions of enriched glycopeptides after size exclusion chromatography (SEC) and 24 fractions after basic reverse phase liquid chromatography (bRPLC) were analyzed by LC-MS/MS for glycoproteomics and proteomics, respectively. We identified a total of 3,255 N-glycopeptides which were quantified on 550 glycosylation sites of 407 glycoproteins. A site specific aberrant glycosylation was observed for several extracellular matrix and cell adhesion proteins. By using quantitative proteomics, we detected 8,041 proteins. The alteration in expression of several proteins separated the affected individuals and controls. This is the first glycoproteomic study in patient derived NGLY1-CDDG fibroblasts. The glycoproteomics and proteomics analysis in NGLY1-CDDG provides the potential biomarkers and will increase our general understanding of its pathogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
Cells from four patients and four controls were harvested by scarping the cell in phosphate buffered saline (pH 7.4) and lysed in modified RIPA buffer (50 mM Tris–HCl, pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mm EDTA, 1% Nonidet P-40, 0.25% sodium deoxycholate) using a probe sonicator. The protein amount was quantified using BCA assay. Equal amounts of protein were precipitated by cold acetone and pellet resuspended in 8M urea, 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), pH 8.5. The solubilized proteins were first reduced using 10 mM dithiothreitol at 37°C for 30 minutes and then alkylated using 40 mM iodoacetamide in dark at room temperature for 30 minutes. These proteins were digested with trypsin overnight at 37°C using 1:50 enzyme to protein ratio. The peptide mixture was desalted using C18 tips and labeled with tandem mass tag (TMT) as per manufacturer’s instructions. All the labelled samples were pooled and splited into two aliquots. One aliquot was subjected to SEC for glycopeptide enrichment and another aliquot was fractionated by bRPLC for total proteomics. SEC was performed in isocratic run mode with 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 0.2 mL/min for 130 min on Superdex peptide 10/300 column (GE Healthcare). Early 24 fractions were collected starting at 10 minutes after injection and they were dried and analyzed by LC-MS/MS using data-dependent acquisition. bRPLC was performed on a reversed phase C18 column (4.6 × 100 mm column) using an Ultimate 3000 UHPLC System 120 min using a gradient flow (0.5 mL/min) with solvent A (5 mM ammonium formate, pH 9) and solvent B (5 mM ammonium formate, pH 9, in 90% acetonitrile). Ninety-six fractions collected and were then concatenated into 12 fractions, which were dried analyzed by LC-MS/MS using data-dependent acquisition on an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer connected to Ultimate 3000 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA).

### Data Protocol
The raw glycoproteomic MS/MS data was searched for the identification of N-glycopeptides using publically available software pGlyco 2.2.0 against the glycan database containing 8,092 entries, available with the software. Error tolerance for precursor and fragment ions were set to 5 and 20 ppm, respectively. Fully tryptic peptides with 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Error tolerance for precursor and fragment ions were set to 5 ppm and 20 ppm, respectively. The output contained peptide sequence, glycosylation site, gene symbol with accession number and glycan composition at each site. Reporter ion intensities were quantified with Proteome Discover 2.5 and matched with pGlyco identification on a scan-to-scan basis. The proteomic MS/MS raw data was searched Proteome Discoverer 2.5 against the Uniprot Human Reviewed protein sequences (20,432 entries). Fully tryptic peptides with 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Error tolerance for precursor and fragment ions were set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine, TMT-16 plex mass of lysine and peptide N-terminal was used as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine, protein N-terminal acetylation and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine were set as variable modifications for both proteomics and glycoproteomics. False discovery rate was set at 1% at peptide, glycan and glycopeptide levels.

### Publication Abstract
Congenital disorders of glycosylation are genetic disorders that occur due to defects in protein and lipid glycosylation pathways. A deficiency of N-glycanase 1, encoded by the NGLY1 gene, results in a congenital disorder of deglycosylation. The NGLY1 enzyme is mainly involved in cleaving N-glycans from misfolded, retro-translocated glycoproteins in the cytosol from the endoplasmic reticulum before their proteasomal degradation or activation. Despite the essential role of NGLY1 in deglycosylation pathways, the exact consequences of NGLY1 deficiency on global cellular protein glycosylation have not yet been investigated. We undertook a multiplexed tandem mass tags-labeling-based quantitative glycoproteomics and proteomics analysis of fibroblasts from NGLY1-deficient individuals carrying different biallelic pathogenic variants in NGLY1. This quantitative mass spectrometric analysis detected 8041 proteins and defined a proteomic signature of differential expression across affected individuals and controls. Proteins that showed significant differential expression included phospholipid phosphatase 3, stromal cell-derived factor 1, collagen alpha-1 (IV) chain, hyaluronan and proteoglycan link protein 1, and thrombospondin-1. We further detected a total of 3255 N-glycopeptides derived from 550 glycosylation sites of 407 glycoproteins by multiplexed N-glycoproteomics. Several extracellular matrix glycoproteins and adhesion molecules showed altered abundance of N-glycopeptides. Overall, we observed distinct alterations in specific glycoproteins, but our data revealed no global accumulation of glycopeptides in the patient-derived fibroblasts, despite the genetic defect in NGLY1. Our findings highlight new molecular and system-level insights for understanding NGLY1-CDDG.

### Keywords
Human, Ngly1, Glycoproteomics, Proteomics, Fibroblasts, Congenital disorder of glycosylation, Mass spectrometry, Congenital disorder of deglycosylation

### Affiliations
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 55905, United States

### Submitter
Akhilesh Pandey

### Lab Head
Dr Akhilesh Pandey
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 55905, United States


