### Accession
PXD003556

### Title
The proteomes of plasmodium falciparum mature male and female gametocytes

### Description
Gametocytes are obligate for the transmission of malaria parasite to mosquito. This study reports the first comprehensive proteomes of accurately separated mature male and female Plasmodium falciparum gametocytes using a transgenic line. the proteomes revealed significant differences that are consistent with the divergent functions of the two sexes. While the male proteome is enriched in proteins associated with flagella and genome replication, the female proteome is more abundant in proteins involved in metabolism, translation and organellar functions.

### Sample Protocol
The separated parasites were lysed in SDT-lysis buffer (4% SDS, 100 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.6, 0.1 M DTT) for complete dissolution and separated in a 10% Bis-Tris SDS-PAGE gel. Ten slices were excised in-gel digestion was done as described (Lasonder et al., 2002). The digests were analyzed by nano LC/MS/MS with a Waters NanoAcquity HPLC system interfaced to a Q Exactive™ Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded on a trapping column and eluted over a 75 μm analytical column at 350 nL/min. MS and MS/MS were performed at 70,000 FWHM and 17,500 FWHM resolution, respectively. The fifteen most abundant ions were selected for MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
The LC/MS/MS data were searched against Uniprot P. falciparum protein database (v01/2014) with reversed entries in order to assess false discovery rate (FDR). Data were filtered at 0.7-1% protein and 0.1-0.2% peptide FDR. Search parameters included trypsin digestion (C-terminal K and R cleavage), full cleavage with 2 missed sites, fragment ion mass tolerance with tolerance of 0.02 Da, peptide mass tolerance of 10 ppm. Mascot DAT files were parsed into the Scaffold software for validation and filtering to create a non-redundant list per sample.

### Publication Abstract
The gametocytes of the malaria parasites are obligate for perpetuating the parasite's life cycle through mosquitoes, but the sex-specific biology of gametocytes is poorly understood. We generated a transgenic line in the human malaria parasite <i>Plasmodium falciparum</i>, which allowed us to accurately separate male and female gametocytes by flow cytometry. In-depth analysis of the proteomes by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry identified 1244 and 1387 proteins in mature male and female gametocytes, respectively. GFP-tagging of nine selected proteins confirmed their sex-partitions to be agreeable with the results from the proteomic analysis. The sex-specific proteomes showed significant differences that are consistent with the divergent functions of the two sexes. Although the male-specific proteome (119 proteins) is enriched in proteins associated with the flagella and genome replication, the female-specific proteome (262 proteins) is more abundant in proteins involved in metabolism, translation and organellar functions. Compared with the <i>Plasmodium berghei</i> sex-specific proteomes, this study revealed both extensive conservation and considerable divergence between these two species, which reflect the disparities between the two species in proteins involved in cytoskeleton, lipid metabolism and protein degradation. Comparison with three sex-specific proteomes allowed us to obtain high-confidence lists of 73 and 89 core male- and female-specific/biased proteins conserved in <i>Plasmodium</i> The identification of sex-specific/biased proteomes in <i>Plasmodium</i> lays a solid foundation for understanding the molecular mechanisms underlying the unique sex-specific biology in this early-branching eukaryote.

### Keywords
Plasmodium falciparum, Proteome, Gametocyte, Sex-specific

### Affiliations
Pennsylvania State University
Department of Entomology, Pennsylvania State University, USA

### Submitter
JUN MIAO

### Lab Head
Dr Liwang Cui
Department of Entomology, Pennsylvania State University, USA


