### Accession
PXD035261

### Title
Tumor decellularization reveals proteomic and mechanical characteristics of the extracellular matrix of primary liver cancer

### Description
Tumor initiation and progression are critically dependent on interaction of cancer cells with their cellular and extracellular microenvironment. Alterations in the composition, integrity, and mechanical properties of the extracellular matrix (ECM) dictate tumor processes including proliferation, migration, and invasion. Also in primary liver cancers, consisting of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and cholangiocarcinoma (CCA), the dysregulation of the extracellular environment by liver fibrosis and tumor desmoplasia is pertinent. Yet, in-depth characterization of liver cancer ECM and underlying tumor-promoting mechanisms remain largely unknown. Herein, we used an integrative molecular and mechanical approach to extensively characterize the ECM of HCC and CCA tumors by utilizing decellularization techniques. We identified a myriad of ECM-related proteins in both tumor and adjacent liver tissue, highlighting the complexity of the primary liver cancer matrisome. The differences in ECM protein abundance result in divergent mechanical properties on a macro- and micro-scale that is tumor-type specific. Furthermore, we employed the decellularized tumor ECM to create a tumor-specific hydrogel that support patient-derived tumor organoids. This provides a new avenue for personalized medicine by combining patient-derived tumor ECM and cancer cells. Taken together, this study provides better understanding of alterations to key aspects of the ECM that occur during primary liver cancer development.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomic sample preparation  100 µL 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0) was added to the decellularized ECM scaffolds and snap frozen in liquid nitrogen, followed by homogenizing using a dismembrator. The sample was heated in a thermomixer for 5 min at 95 °C. 90 µL 50 mM Tris-HCl and 5 µL 100 mM of 1,4-Dithiothreitol (DTT) were added and the sample was incubated at 50 °C for 60 min. Subsequently, 5 µL 200 mM of 2-Chloroacetamide (CAA) was added and the sample was incubated at RT for 30 min. Then, 100 µL 50 mM Tris-HCl and 10 µL PNGase F (500 units/mL) was added and the samples were further incubated at 37 °C for 4 h, followed by 5 min at 95 °C. Finally, 25 µL Sodium Deoxycholate (SDC) and trypsin was added (1:100, trypsin:protein) and incubated in a thermomixer O/N at 30 °C and 1100 RPM. The next day, 25 µL 10 % trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was added to the sample, followed by 2X washes with ethylacetate: 300 µL ethylacetate (H2O saturated) was added, the mixture was mixed vigorously and then centrifuged for 2 min at 5,000 rpm. The upper layer was removed, followed by 45 min in the speedvac to evaporate the solvent and reduce the sample volume. The protein digest was desalted using C18 stage tips. This was repeated for the flow through. The stage tip was then washed with 100 µL 0.1 % TFA, centrifuged for 10 min at 2,000 rpm, followed by 2X elution of the peptides with 75 µL 50 % acetonitrile (AcN) and centrifugation for 8 min at 2,000 rpm. Next, peptides were dried in the speedvac and reconstituted in 25 µL 2 % AcN, 0.5 % formic acid (FA). Nanoflow liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (nLC-MS/MS) was performed on an EASY-nLC coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo), operating in positive mode. Peptides were separated on a ReproSil-C18 reversed-phase column (Dr Maisch; 15 cm × 50 μm) using a linear gradient of 0–80% acetonitrile (in 0.1% formic acid) during 90 min at a rate of 200 nl/min. The elution was directly sprayed into the electrospray ionization (ESI) source of the mass spectrometer. Spectra were acquired in continuum mode; fragmentation of the peptides was performed in data-dependent mode by HCD.

### Data Protocol
Proteomic data processing  Raw mass spectrometry data were analyzed using the Proteome Discoverer 2.3 software suite (ThermoFisher Scientific). The Mascot search algorithm (version 2.3.2, MatrixScience) was used for searching against the Uniprot database (taxonomy: Homo sapiens). The peptide tolerance was typically set to 10 ppm and the fragment ion tolerance was set to 0.8 Da. A maximum number of 2 missed cleavages by trypsin were allowed and carbamidomethylated cysteine and oxidized methionine were set as fixed and variable modifications, respectively. Typical contaminants were omitted from the output tables.   Proteomic data analysis  To identify and categorize the detected proteins that are related to the extracellular matrix, the dataset was compared to and filtered with the MatrisomeDB database [71]. MatrisomeDB uses domain-based organization of matrisome-related proteins to obtain a complete collection of ECM proteomic data. Proteins identified are subdivided into ECM-affiliated proteins, secreted factors, collagens, ECM regulators, ECM glycoproteins, and proteoglycans. The identified matrisome proteins were further classified into 3 categories: a core ensemble of proteins, differentially expressed (DE) proteins, and exclusive proteins. The core ensemble of proteins consist of proteins that are present in all replicates of all conditions. Proteins are differentially expressed if the adjusted p-val is >0.05. Proteins are identified as ‘exclusive’ if they are present in samples of one condition, while absent in all replicates of another condition. To note, the difference between DE proteins and exclusive proteins is likely due to the sensitivity of mass spectrometry. Therefore, DE proteins and exclusive proteins were combined to apply enrichment analysis using the fgsea (version 1.16.0) R package. To compare the proteomic data to global RNA expression, the TCGA data portal was used to determine DE genes between two conditions (CCA vs CCA-ADJ (N=36 cancer samples, N=9 normal samples) and HCC vs HCC-ADJ (N=373 cancer samples, N=50 normal samples) as previously described [72]. Benjami and Hochberg (BH) method was used to calculate the False Discovery Rate (FDR). For the comparison between CCA and HCC, gene expression profiles were obtained from the GEO database (GSE15765) which contained both CCA and HCC samples (CCA N=13, HCC N=70). DE genes were obtained by using the GEO2R online tool (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/geo2r/) [73].

### Publication Abstract
Tumor initiation and progression are critically dependent on interaction of cancer cells with their cellular and extracellular microenvironment. Alterations in the composition, integrity, and mechanical properties of the extracellular matrix (ECM) dictate tumor processes including cell proliferation, migration, and invasion. Also in primary liver cancer, consisting of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and cholangiocarcinoma (CCA), the dysregulation of the extracellular environment by liver fibrosis and tumor desmoplasia is pertinent. Yet, the exact changes occurring in liver cancer ECM remain uncharacterized and underlying tumor-promoting mechanisms remain largely unknown. Herein, an integrative molecular and mechanical approach is used to extensively characterize the ECM of HCC and CCA tumors by utilizing an optimized decellularization technique. We identified a myriad of proteins in both tumor and adjacent liver tissue, uncovering distinct malignancy-related ECM signatures. The resolution of this approach unveiled additional ECM-related proteins compared to large liver cancer transcriptomic datasets. The differences in ECM protein composition resulted in divergent mechanical properties on a macro- and micro-scale that are tumor-type specific. Furthermore, the decellularized tumor ECM was employed to create a tumor-specific hydrogel that supports patient-derived tumor organoids, which provides a new avenue for personalized medicine applications. Taken together, this study contributes to a better understanding of alterations to composition, stiffness, and collagen alignment of the tumor ECM that occur during liver cancer development.

### Keywords
Decellularization; extracellular matrix; primary liver cancer; hepatocellular carcinoma; cholangiocarcinoma

### Affiliations
Erasmus MC
Proteomics Center, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Jeroen Demmers

### Lab Head
Dr Jeroen Demmers
Erasmus MC


