### Accession
PXD000554

### Title
Convergence of Ubiquitylation and Phosphorylation Signaling in Rapamycin-Treated Yeast Cells

### Description
Protein, Ubiquitylation, and Phosphorylation changes were quantified after 1 and 3 hours of rapamycin treatment in budding yeast. Approximately 3,600 proteins, 9,000 phosphorylation sites, and 2,500 ubiquitylation sites were quantified.

### Sample Protocol
Saccharomyces cerevisiae cells (strain BY4742) were grown in a synthetic complete medium supplemented with SILAC “light” lysine (L-lysine 12C614N2), SILAC “medium” lysine (L-lysine 12C614N22H4) and SILAC “heavy” lysine (L-lysine 13C615N2-lysine). At a logarithmic growth phase (OD600 value of ~0.5) “light” labeled yeast were mock treated, whereas “medium” and “heavy” labeled yeast were treated with rapamycin at 200nM final concentration for 1 hour and 3 hours, respectively. Cells were harvested at 3000 x g for 5min and washed twice in sterile water, resuspended in lysis buffer (50mM Tris, pH7.5, 150mM NaCl, 1mM EDTA, 1x mini complete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche), 5mM sodium fluoride, 1mM sodium orthovanadate, 5mM beta-glycerophosphate), frozen in liquid nitrogen and ground using a MM400 ball mill (Retsch) for 2 × 3 min at 25 Hz. To thawed lysates, NP-40 and sodium deoxycholate were added to a final concentration of 1% and 0.1% respectively. Followed by centrifugation, proteins were precipitated using ice-cold acetone, resuspended in urea solution (6M urea, 2M thio-urea, 10mM Hepes pH8.0) and protein concentration determined by Bradford assay. Proteins extracted from “light”, “medium” and “heavy” SILAC labeled yeast were mixed 1:1:1 ratio, treated with 1mM DTT for 45 min, followed by alkylation with 5.5 mM chloracetamide for 45 min in the dark and overnight digestion with protease Lys-C (1:100 protease to protein ratio). Proteases were inactivated by addition of TFA to a final concentration of 1% and precipitates were removed by centrifugation at 2000 x g for 5min. Peptide supernatants were purified using reversed phase (C18) Sep-Pak cartridges (Waters). For further information on peptide fractionation, ubiquitylated peptide enrichment, and phosphorylated peptide enrichment, please refer to the corresponding publication.

### Data Protocol
The RAW data files were computationally processed using MaxQuant, all search parameters, including the MaxQuant version used, are found in the parameters.txt file located in the MaxQuant output archive. MS2 spectra were searched against the Saccharomyces Genome Database (SGD) Jan. 5, 2010 version. The ProteinGroups.txt, GlyGly (K)sites.txt, and Phospho (STY)sites.txt files include the unfiltered MaxQuant output, the data used in our study was additionally filtered as follows. For ProteinGroups, reverse, contaminant, and only identified by site were removed, proteins were filtered for PEP <0.01 and were required to have both a Ratio M/L and a Ratio H/L. For GlyGly (K)sites, reverse and contaminant were removed, sites were filtered for localization probability >0.9, PEP<0.01 and were required to have both a Ratio M/L and a Ratio H/L. For Phospho (STY)sites, reverse and contaminant were removed, sites were filtered for localization probability >0.75, score difference >5, PEP<0.01, and were required to have both a Ratio M/L and a Ratio H/L.

### Publication Abstract
The target of rapamycin (TOR) kinase senses the availability of nutrients and coordinates cellular growth and proliferation with nutrient abundance. Inhibition of TOR mimics nutrient starvation and leads to the reorganization of many cellular processes, including autophagy, protein translation, and vesicle trafficking. TOR regulates cellular physiology by modulating phosphorylation and ubiquitylation signaling networks; however, the global scope of such regulation is not fully known. Here, we used a mass-spectrometry-based proteomics approach for the parallel quantification of ubiquitylation, phosphorylation, and proteome changes in rapamycin-treated yeast cells. Our data constitute a detailed proteomic analysis of rapamycin-treated yeast with 3590 proteins, 8961 phosphorylation sites, and 2299 di-Gly modified lysines (putative ubiquitylation sites) quantified. The phosphoproteome was extensively modulated by rapamycin treatment, with more than 900 up-regulated sites one hour after rapamycin treatment. Dynamically regulated phosphoproteins were involved in diverse cellular processes, prominently including transcription, membrane organization, vesicle-mediated transport, and autophagy. Several hundred ubiquitylation sites were increased after rapamycin treatment, and about half as many decreased in abundance. We found that proteome, phosphorylation, and ubiquitylation changes converged on the Rsp5-ubiquitin ligase, Rsp5 adaptor proteins, and Rsp5 targets. Putative Rsp5 targets were biased for increased ubiquitylation, suggesting activation of Rsp5 by rapamycin. Rsp5 adaptor proteins, which recruit target proteins for Rsp5-dependent ubiquitylation, were biased for increased phosphorylation. Furthermore, we found that permeases and transporters, which are often ubiquitylated by Rsp5, were biased for reduced ubiquitylation and reduced protein abundance. The convergence of multiple proteome-level changes on the Rsp5 system indicates a key role of this pathway in the response to rapamycin treatment. Collectively, these data reveal new insights into the global proteome dynamics in response to rapamycin treatment and provide a first detailed view of the co-regulation of phosphorylation- and ubiquitylation-dependent signaling networks by this compound.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Tor, Ubiquitylation, Proteome, Rapamycin

### Affiliations
Proteomics
The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Dept. of Proteomics and Cell Signaling

### Submitter
Brian Weinert

### Lab Head
Dr Chunaram Choudhary
The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Dept. of Proteomics and Cell Signaling


