### Accession
PXD040787

### Title
comparative phosphoproteomics uncover proteins from the mechanobiome in Entamoeba histolytica

### Description
Entamoeba histolytica is a protozoan parasite and the causative agent of amoebiasis in humans. This amoeba invades human tissues by taking advantage of the actin-rich cytoskeleton to move, enter the tissue matrix, kill and phagocyte human cells. During events leading to tissue invasion, E. histolytica moves from the intestinal lumen to cross the mucus layer and enter the epithelial parenchyma. Faced with the chemical and physical constraints of these diverse environments, E. histolytica has developed sophisticated systems to integrate internal and external signals and to coordinate cell shape changes and motility. These cell signalling circuits are driven by the interactions between the parasite and the extracellular matrix combined with rapid responses from the mechanobiome protein network in which protein phosphorylation is important. To understand phosphorylation events we focus on phosphatidylinositol 3-kinases and we have performed live cell imaging and phosphoproteomics. The results highlight 1150 proteins within the amoebic proteome being members of the phosphoproteome, including signalling and structural molecules involved in cytoskeleton activities. Inhibition of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinases alters phosphorylation dynamics in important members of these categories, a finding that correlates with changes in the kinetic parameters of amoeba motility and morphology, as well as with altered content of actin-rich adhesive structures

### Sample Protocol
For sample preparation, 5mg of the Gn-HCL protein lysates were first reduced with 5 mM TCEP (tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine) and further alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide. Alkylated proteins were further diluted using 50mM ammonium bicarbonate to bring final Gn-HCL concentration to 0.6M and then digested with trypsin (1:50, trypsin: lysate ratio, Promega) for 16 hrs at 37°C. The overnight digests were clarified with brief spin and the clean supernatant pH was adjusted around pH2 using 10% Trifluoroacetic Acid (TFA). Sep-Pak (Waters, USA) columns were washed with methanol and washing buffer (2% Acetonitrile / 0.1% TFA) followed by loading of total peptides. The column was washed 3 times with washing buffer (2% Acetonitrile / 0.1% TFA) and final peptide elution was performed using high acetonitrile containing elution buffers (50% and 80% Acetonitrile  /  0.1%TFA). The peptide mixture was dried using speed vacuum. The dried peptide pellet was dissolved using Phthalic acid buffer (0.1% P Acid / 20% Water / 80% Acetonitrile, 2.5%TFA) and mixed with TiO2 (Titansphere 5 μm, GL sciences, USA) beads and mixed on a rotator for two hrs. The beads were washed twice with Phthalic acid buffer followed by washing with 80% acetonitrile/0.1%TFA and finally 0.1% TFA. Phosphopeptides were eluted using 0.3M NH4OH and the pH was adjusted around 2 using 50% TFA. The Phosphopeptides were dried using speed vacuum and further clarified using C18 columns (ThermoFisher Scientific, USA) as per above mentioned buffers.

### Data Protocol
All the six raw files (3 sets of each Wtmn unstimulated and stimulated samples) were analysed with MaxQuant software (version 1.6.3.4) (https://www.maxquant.org/maxquant/)  against the E. histolytica UniProt reference proteome (7959 proteins) database (www.uniprot.org). For Andromeda search, the precursor and fragment mass tolerances were set at 10 ppm and 0.520 ppmDa, respectively. The protease used to generate peptides i.e., enzyme specificity was set for Trypsin/P along with maximum missed cleavages value of two. Carbamidomethyl (C) on cysteine as fixed modification and Phosphorylation (P) on Serine, Threonine, Tyrosine, oxidation (O) of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were considered as variable modifications for database search. The settings also included reverse sequences of database and in built 247 contaminants in default settings of MaxQuant. For peptide identification a peptide posterior error probability (PEP) threshold of 0.05 was specified. Both PSM and protein FDR was set to 0.01. Default settings were applied for all other parameters. For relative quantitative comparison among the biological replicates of the two conditions label free quantification with "match between runs" option was utilized within the MaxQuant suite with standard settings for generating the peak lists from 6 raw files (Xcalibur, ThermoFisher Scientific, USA) with retention time alignment window of 1 min. Protein groups were created by default settings of MaxQuant in case the peptide sets were common among multiple proteins.  The data matrix containing phosphopeptides (3411) was imported in perseus software (version 1.6.2.3) and the phosphopeptides were filtered for reverse and contaminant entries. For further analysis, high quality phospho site localization probability of 0.75 value was considered. All the filtered high quality respective phosphopeptides were further analysed based on their relative label free quantification (LFQ) values. The resulting phosphopeptides were further filtered for entries where LFQ values were available in at least 2 bioreplicates among the two study groups (total 3 bioreplicates of both wortmannin unstimulated and stimulated samples). The resulting 2352 phosphorylated peptides were considered as part of the E. histolytica phosphoproteome. For quantitative studies, the LFQ abundance values of these filtered peptides (2352) were log2 transformed and imputation was applied using perseus default settings (width 0.3, downshift 1.8) where missing values were replaced by random numbers that are drawn from a normal distribution. Student’s t test was applied between Wmn stimulated and unstimulated group samples using a p-value significance threshold level of 0.05 and the test results were represented as volcano plot. Z-score normalization was applied using median abundance values and Student’s t test significant phospho-peptide (n = 723) abundance values were used for hierarchical clustering of rows and/or columns (Distance: Euclidean, Linkage: average, Preprocess: k-means, Number of clusters: 300, Maximum iterations:10) in order to generate heatmap/Clustergram.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Entamoeba histolytica</i> is a protozoan parasite and the causative agent of amoebiasis in humans. This amoeba invades human tissues by taking advantage of its actin-rich cytoskeleton to move, enter the tissue matrix, kill and phagocyte the human cells. During tissue invasion, <i>E. histolytica</i> moves from the intestinal lumen across the mucus layer and enters the epithelial parenchyma. Faced with the chemical and physical constraints of these diverse environments, <i>E. histolytica</i> has developed sophisticated systems to integrate internal and external signals and to coordinate cell shape changes and motility. Cell signalling circuits are driven by interactions between the parasite and extracellular matrix, combined with rapid responses from the mechanobiome in which protein phosphorylation plays an important role. To understand the role of phosphorylation events and related signalling mechanisms, we targeted phosphatidylinositol 3-kinases followed by live cell imaging and phosphoproteomics. The results highlight 1150 proteins, out of the 7966 proteins within the amoebic proteome, as members of the phosphoproteome, including signalling and structural molecules involved in cytoskeletal activities. Inhibition of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinases alters phosphorylation in important members of these categories; a finding that correlates with changes in amoeba motility and morphology, as well as a decrease in actin-rich adhesive structures.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Wortmannin, Entamoeba

### Affiliations
Institut Pasteur, 25 rue du Dr. Roux, 75724 Paris cedex 15, France
VProteomics

### Submitter
gagan jhingan

### Lab Head
Dr Nancy Guillen
Institut Pasteur, 25 rue du Dr. Roux, 75724 Paris cedex 15, France


