### Accession
PXD023424

### Title
USP25 is a HIF-1 regulator and a therapeutic target in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma

### Description
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is a devastating disease with both an extremely poor prognosis and response to conventional chemotherapy. Identifying novel biological vulnerabilities is therefore critical in the development of more effective therapies. By using patient-derived organoids and murine genetic models, we developed a pipeline for identifying biologically active deubiquitylases (DUBs) with activity-based proteomics, coupled with a loss-of-function genetic screen in organoids. We found that ubiquitin specific protease 25 (USP25) is indispensable for PDAC progression. Compared with normal pancreatic tissue, USP25 was highly expressed and active in murine PDAC tumours and in primary human PDAC samples. Silencing of Usp25/USP25 led to reduced tumour organoid formation and viability, and transcriptional profiling revealed that USP25 is a regulator of hypoxia, glycolysis and HIF-1 signalling pathways. Mechanistically, we found that USP25 directly interacts with HIF-1 and that its deubiquitylase activity regulates HIF-1 protein stability, nuclear translocation and transcriptional activity. Moreover, treatment with a novel USP25 inhibitor resulted in a dramatic loss of murine and patient-derived organoid viability, HIF-1 signalling, and consequently induced substantial regression of murine and human organoid-derived xenografts in vivo. Thus, USP25 is a promising therapeutic target for the treatment of human PDAC.

### Sample Protocol
Hu-derived PDAC organoids were cultured and dissociated from matrix gel. Cells were homogenized in cold DUB activity buffer (50mM TRIS [pH7.5], 150mM NaCl, 0.5% CHAPS, 0.1% NP40, 5mM MGCL2, 10% Glycerol, 1mM DTT,). Mouse KPCY tumors or normal pancreatic tissues were collected from 7-8 week old adult mice. Tissues were homogenized using a MagNA lyser (Roche) in cold DUB activity buffer following manufactures instructions.  All supernatants were collected following centrifugation (14,000 xg, 4 ⁰C, 15 min). Protein concentrations will be measured as described above and adjusted to 1mg/mL. Samples were treated with PR619 pan DUB inhibitor, or DMSO vehicle control, at a final concentration of 50µM. All samples were incubated for 1hour at 25º with 2µM equal mixture of DUB activity-based probes Biotin-ubiquitin-propargylamide (Biotin-Ahx-UB-PA, UbiQ, UbiQ-076), Biotin-ubiquitin-vinyl methyl ester (Biotin-Ahx-UB-VME, UBiQ, UbiQ-054), and Biotin-ubiquitin-vinylsulfone (Biotin-Ahx-UB-VS, UbiQ, UbiQ-188). Following incubation, excess probe was removal with a 10K centrifugal column filtration (Merck Millipore).   Following this step, samples were diluted in IP buffer (0.2% SDS/PBS) to a volume of 1mL/condition and incubated with 100µL High Capacity Neutravidin Agarose resin (Thermo Fisher Scientific) modified in-house by dimethylation of lysine residues. The samples were rotated at room temperature for 3 hours, and then washed 2x with DUB activity buffer, 2x with 4M Urea/PBS, and 3x with PBS.   For the label free experiments proteins were eluted from the beads with 50µL 2x LSB, heated at 95ºC for 5 minutes and run on 10% SDS-PAGE gels. Following a short-run (1cm protein front) gels were stained with InstantBlue and entire lanes alkylated prior to lys-C digestion overnight in 50mM TriEthylAmmonium Bicarbonate (TEAB) pH 8. Supernatants were removed and digested with trypsin for 3h (ThermoFisher Scientific). Proteolysed samples were vacuum centrifuged and resuspended in 0.1% TriFluoroAcetic acid (TFA). This approach prevents the excessive levels of digested neutravidin observed with unmodified beads.   For the TMT experiments proteins were alkylated then digested on-bead with Lys-c and trypsin, as above, in a thermomixer at 800rpm. TMT 10plex (ThermoFisher Scientific) isotopic labelling was performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Samples were labelled as follows: 126, 127N, 127C = “WT” replicates;128N, 128C, 129N = “tumour” replicates; 129C, 130N, 130C = “tumour + DUBi” replicates; 131 = unused. After checking labelling efficiency was >90%, differentially labelled samples were combined and desalted with 3M EmporeTM C18 solid phase extraction discs (aka “stage tips”) prior to drying and resuspension as with the label-free experiments.   On an Ultimate 3000 nanoRSLC HPLC resuspended peptides were loaded on a 2mm x 0.3mm Acclaim Pepmap C18 trap column prior to the trap being switched to elute at 0.25 ul/min through a 50cm x 75um EasySpray C18 column into an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (HPLC, columns and MS all from ThermoFisher Scientific).  Peptides were eluted with a gradient of 2%-40%B in 60’ (LFQ) or 150’ (TMT), followed by a cleaning step with 100%B and re-equilibration (A= 2%ACN,0.1% formic acid; B= 80%ACN, 0.1% formic acid).  The orbitrap was operated in “Data Dependent Acquisition” mode with a survey scan at a resolution of 120k from m/z 300-1500, followed by MS/MS in “TopS” mode.  Dynamic exclusion was used with a time window of 20s. The Orbitrap charge capacity was set to a maximum of 1e6 ions in 10ms. HCD was adopted for MS/MS fragmentation. The label-free samples were acquired in the ion trap (1e4 ions in 100ms). TMT labelled samples were acquired in the orbitrap at 50k resolution (1e5 ions in 100ms).

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed using Maxquant and Perseus and recent downloads of the human or mouse Uniprot reference proteomes.A decoy database of reversed sequences was used to filter false positives, at a peptide false detection rate of 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Deubiquitylating enzymes (DUBs) play an essential role in targeted protein degradation and represent an emerging therapeutic paradigm in cancer. However, their therapeutic potential in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) has not been explored. Here, we develop a DUB discovery pipeline, combining activity-based proteomics with a loss-of-function genetic screen in patient-derived PDAC organoids and murine genetic models. This approach identifies USP25 as a master regulator of PDAC growth and maintenance. Genetic and pharmacological USP25 inhibition results in potent growth impairment in PDAC organoids, while normal pancreatic organoids are insensitive, and causes dramatic regression of patient-derived xenografts. Mechanistically, USP25 deubiquitinates and stabilizes the HIF-1&#x3b1; transcription factor. PDAC is characterized by a severely hypoxic microenvironment, and USP25 depletion abrogates HIF-1&#x3b1; transcriptional activity and impairs glycolysis, inducing PDAC cell death in the tumor hypoxic core. Thus, the USP25/HIF-1&#x3b1; axis is an essential mechanism of metabolic reprogramming and survival in PDAC, which can be therapeutically exploited.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-msms, Mouse, Deubiquitylase, Affinity, Biotin, Pancreas, Cancer

### Affiliations
Francis Crick Institute
Acting Head of Proteomics

### Submitter
Steven Howell

### Lab Head
Dr James McCrae
Acting Head of Proteomics


