### Accession
PXD024388

### Title
A KRAS-responsive long non-coding RNA controls microRNA

### Description
RNA Antisense Purification and Mass Spectrometry (RAP-MS) was performed to explore the potential RNA binding proteins of lncRNA KIMAT1

### Sample Protocol
To pull down endogenous KIMAT1, 5’ biotinylated 20-mer antisense oligonucleotides were designed using the online tool (https://www.biosearchtech.com) and synthesized by LGC Biosearch Technologies. Cells (2.0 x 108 cells per sample) were UV cross-linked and lysed in 2 ml RIPA buffer (SigmaAldrich). Cell lysates were sonicated using a Bioruptor shearing device. Precleared cell lysates were mixed with 20 μg of lncRNA antisense probes and incubated for 2 hours at 67oC with intermittent mixing at 1100 x g on a thermomixer. Washed beads were added to the lysate-probes complex and further incubated for 2 hours at 67oC. Beads were washed six times and boiled in 1 x Laemli loading buffer (Bio-Rad). Protein lysates were loaded on a SDS-PAGE gel (Bio-Rad) and protein bands were destained in 1 ml of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 40% methanol at 37oC. Gel bands were then washed in 1 ml of HPLC grade water for 10 minutes before removal of the water. Gel pieces were dehydrated by the addition of 1 ml acetonitrile for 10 minutes followed by the removal of the acetonitrile. The water-acetonitrile hydration-dehydration cycle was repeated a total of 3 times. Dehydrated gel pieces were then rehydrated in 100 μl of 40 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 10% acetonitrile carrying 12.5 ng/μl sequencing grade trypsin for 20 minutes before the removal of any excess. Gel pieces were then covered with 100 μl of 40 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 10% acetonitrile and incubated at 37oC for 16 hours. Digests were acidified by the addition of trifluoroacetic acid to a final concentration of 0.1% before removal of the digest from the gel with subsequent drying of the sample in a vacuum centrifuge. Dried peptide samples were then resuspended in 2% acetonitrile, 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid prior to injection on the nano LC system Peptides were injected directly onto a 25 cm long 75 μm ID, 2 μm C18 pepmap EasySpray column (Thermo) using an RSLCn HPLC system (Thermo) at a flow rate of 200 nl/min. Peptides were separated with a gradient of 1%-22% acetonitrile 0.1% formic acid over 30 minutes at a temperature of 60oC. The EasySpray column interfaced directly into an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer with a spray voltage of 1.4KV. The instrument was operated in data-dependent mode with a 120,000 resolution orbitrap MS1 scan over a mass range of 350-1000 m/z with a target value of 2E5 ions and a maximum fill time of 50ms. MS2 HCD spectra were collected in the linear ion trap with a 3 m/z isolation window, 28% normalised collision energy, rapid scan rate with a target value of 1e4 ions and a maximum fill time of 50 ms. Two separate samples, as negative control, were incubated either with the housekeeping gene Ubiquitin C (UBC) or treated with RNase (10 ug/ml at 37oC for 30 minutes) prior the hybridization step.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed using Mascot Distiller (Matrix Science) to generate MGF peak lists which were subsequently submitted to a Mascot (Matrix science) database search. Mascot search results were then imported in Scaffold 4 (Proteome software). Two independent biological replicates were analysed and to minimize the potential background.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rna-binding proteins, H1299, Non-small cell lung cancer, Rna antisense purification, Kimat1, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Cancer Research UK
University of Manchester
Cancer Research UK  Manchester Institute  Transcriptional Networks in Lung Cancer Group

### Submitter
Dave Lee

### Lab Head
Dr Michela Garofalo
Cancer Research UK  Manchester Institute  Transcriptional Networks in Lung Cancer Group


