### Accession
PXD040981

### Title
A DOMON domain-cytochrome b561 protein acts as a ferric reductase in iron homeostasis and impacts primary root growth under phosphate deficiency

### Description
An Arabidopsis mutant in the ER chaperones Calnexins has shown reduced primary root growth under phosphate deficiency. In order to determine which protein(s) could be implicated in this phenotype, we have performed a proteomic experiment to identify proteins differentially abundant in roots of the calnexin mutants versus wild-type.

### Sample Protocol
Col-0 and cnx1 cnx2 mutant plants were grown in +Pi and –Pi media for seven days before their roots were harvested for a proteomic analysis. The tissues were homogenized in SDS-containing FASP buffer (4% SDS, 0.1 M DTT, 100 mM Tris pH 7.5), heated at 70°C for 5 min, and allowed to cool at room temperature (RT). The cooled proteins were centrifuged for 20 min at 4000 rpm, after which the supernatant was recovered and frozen at –80°C. The concentration of each extract was determined by gel electrophoresis, Coomassie blue staining, and total lane densitometry in comparison with a pre-quantitated total cell extract, and 50 µg of each tissue extract was subjected to further processing. Four replicates for each condition were prepared. The eight-plex iTRAQ approach (Hunt et al., 2004), based on isobaric labeling and the measurement of reporter fragment ion intensities, was used for the relative quantitation. The extracts were proteolytically digested and iTRAQ-labeled according to the iFASP procedure, which was performed essentially as previously described (McDowell et al., 2013). More than 98.5% of the sequences of all samples had peptide spectrum matches determined by MASCOT (www.matrixscience.com) that corresponded to fully labeled iTRAQ peptides.   The labeled iTRAQ samples (8 × 50 µg) were pooled and desalted on SepPak C18 cartridges (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA, USA). Dried eluates were dissolved in 4 M urea with 0.1% ampholytes (pH 3–10; GE Healthcare, Chicago, IL, USA) and fractionated by off-gel focusing, as previously described (Geiser et al., 2011). The 24 fractions obtained were desalted on a micro-C-18 96-well plate (Waters), dried, and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid with 3% (v/v) acetonitrile for LC-MS/MS analysis.  A data-dependent LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on the extracted peptide mixtures after digestion using a Fusion tri-hybrid orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) interfaced through a nano-electrospray ion source to a RSLC 3000 HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides were separated on a reversed-phase Easy-spray PepMap nanocolumn (75 μM inner diameter × 50 cm, 2 μM particle size, 100 Å pore size; Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a 4–76% acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% formic acid (total time: 140 min). Full MS survey scans were performed at 120'000 resolution. In the data-dependent acquisition controlled by Xcalibur 3.0.63 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific), the most intense multiply charged precursor ions detected in the full MS survey scan were selected for “multi-notch” synchronous precursor selection (McAlister et al., 2014) and MS3 fragmentation, which minimizes the co-isolation of near-isobaric precursors (maximum scan cycle: 3 s).

### Data Protocol
The data files were analyzed with MaxQuant 1.5.3.30 (Cox and Mann, 2008) incorporating the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011). The sequence database used for the search was the UNIPROT Arabidopsis thaliana proteome containing 27,242 sequences, in addition to a custom database containing most of the common environmental contaminants (keratins, trypsin, etc.). Both peptide and protein identifications were filtered at a 1% FDR relative to hits against a decoy database built by reversing the protein sequences. The raw reporter ion intensities generated by MaxQuant were used in all following steps leading to the quantification. Further data analysis was performed using the R statistical programming language version 2.15.2 (R Core Team, 2012) and the Perseus software (Cox and Mann, 2008).

### Publication Abstract
Arabidopsis primary root growth response to phosphate (Pi) deficiency is mainly controlled by changes in apoplastic iron (Fe). Upon Pi deficiency, apoplastic Fe deposition in the root apical meristem activates pathways leading to the arrest of meristem maintenance and inhibition of cell elongation. Here, we report that a member of the uncharacterized cytochrome b561 and DOMON domain (CYBDOM) protein family, named CRR, promotes iron reduction in an ascorbate-dependent manner and controls apoplastic iron deposition. Under low Pi, the crr mutant shows an enhanced reduction of primary root growth associated with increased apoplastic Fe in the root meristem and a reduction in meristematic cell division. Conversely, CRR overexpression abolishes apoplastic Fe deposition rendering primary root growth insensitive to low Pi. The crr single mutant and crr hyp1 double mutant, harboring a null allele in another member of the CYDOM family, shows increased tolerance to high-Fe stress upon germination and seedling growth. Conversely, CRR overexpression is associated with increased uptake and translocation of Fe to the shoot and results in plants highly sensitive to Fe excess. Our results identify a ferric reductase implicated in Fe homeostasis and developmental responses to abiotic stress, and reveal a biological role for CYBDOM proteins in plants.

### Keywords
Er stress, Phosphate homeostasis, Root growth, Calnexin

### Affiliations
University of Lausanne
Department of Plant Molecular Biology, University of Lausanne, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland

### Submitter
Manfredo Quadroni

### Lab Head
Dr Yves Poirier
Department of Plant Molecular Biology, University of Lausanne, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland


