### Accession
PXD024191

### Title
Interaction with the CCT chaperonin complex limits cytotoxicity from the APOBEC3A cytosine deaminase.

### Description
The APOBEC3 cytosine deaminases are implicated as the cause of a prevalent somatic mutation pattern found in cancer genomes. The APOBEC3 enzymes act as viral restriction factors by mutating viral genomes. Mutation of the cellular genome is presumed to be an off-target activity of the enzymes, although the regulatory measures for APOBEC3 expression and activity remain undefined. It is therefore difficult to predict the circumstances that enable APOBEC3 interaction with cellular DNA that leads to mutagenesis. The APOBEC3A (A3A) enzyme is the most potent deaminase of the family. Using proteomics, we evaluated protein interactors of A3A to identify potential regulators. We found that A3A interacts with the Chaperonin Containing TCP-1 (CCT) complex, a cellular machine that assists in protein folding and function. Importantly, depletion of CCT resulted in increased A3A-induced cytotoxicity. Evaluation of cancer genomes demonstrated an enrichment of A3A mutational signatures in cancers with silencing mutations in CCT subunit genes. Together, these data suggest that the CCT complex interacts with A3A, and that disruption of CCT function results in increased A3A mutational activity.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for proteomic analysis. All chemicals used for preparation of nanoflow liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (nLC-MS/MS) samples were sequencing grade (Sigma-Aldrich), unless otherwise stated. The immunoprecipitation eluate (80-100%) was separated by SDS–PAGE using NuPAGE 1DE System (NuPAGE Novex 10% bis–tris gels, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Visualization of separated proteins was performed by overnight staining with Coomassie blue G-250 solution (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The in-gel tryptic digestion followed by peptide extraction from the gel bands was performed accordingly to previously published protocols [Shevchenko A., et al., Anal Chem. 1996. PMID: 8779443]. The extracted peptides were desalted using Poros Oligo R3 RP (PerSeptive Biosystems) P200 columns with C18 3 M plug (3 M Bioanalytical Technologies) prior to nLC–MS/MS analysis.  Nanoflow Liquid Chromatography – Tandem Mass Spectrometry (nLC–MS/MS). The peptide mixture was resuspended in buffer-A (0.1% formic acid) and loaded onto an Easy-nLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific), coupled online with an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded into a picofrit 18 cm long fused silica capillary column (75μm i.d., 360μm o.d.) packed in-house with reversed-phase Repro-Sil Pur C18-AQ 3μm resin. The gradient length was 75 min. The gradient was from 2–26% buffer-B (100% ACN/0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The MS method was set up in a data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. For full MS scan, the mass range of 350–1200 m/z was analyzed in the Orbitrap at 120,000 FWHM (200m/z) resolution and 5 × 10e5 AGC target value. HCD collision energy was set to 27, AGC target to 10e4 and maximum injection time to 120 msec. Detection of MS/MS fragment ions was performed in the ion trap in the rapid mode using the TopSpeed mode (3s).

### Data Protocol
Protein Identification and Quantification. The raw mass spectrometer files were processed for protein identification using the Proteome Discoverer (v2.3, Thermo Scientific) and the Sequest HT algorithm with a peptide mass tolerance of 10 ppm, fragment m/z tolerance of 0.25 Da, and a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% for proteins and peptides. All peak lists were searched against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database of Human (March 2019, 20417 entries) sequences using the parameters as follows: enzyme, trypsin; maximum missed cleavages, 2; fixed modification, carbamidomethylation (C); variable modifications, oxidation (M), protein N-terminus acetylation. Protein quantifications were log2 transformed and normalized using the median of the distribution for each sample. Every MS-analysis was performed with three biological replicates to provide enough statistical power to apply parametric tests (either homoscedastic or heteroscedastic one-tailed t-test, depending on the statistical value of the F-test; heteroscedastic if F-test p value<0.05). The t-test was considered as a valuable statistical test because binary comparisons were performed, and the number of replicates was limited. No samples were excluded as outliers. Proteins with a t-test p-value smaller than 0.05 were considered as significantly altered between the two tested conditions. Data distribution was assumed to be normal, but this was not formally tested.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cct chaperonin, Mutational signatures, Cytosine deaminase, Apobec3a, Protein interaction

### Affiliations
Benjamin A. Garcia, Ph.D., FRSC John McCrea Dickson M.D. Presidential Professor Director of Quantitative Proteomics Penn Epigenetics Institute Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics Smilow Center for Translational Research Perelman School of Medicine University of Pennsylvania Room 9-124 (office) 3400 Civic Center Blvd Philadelphia, PA 19104 215-573-9423 (office)
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia

### Submitter
Katarzyna Kulej

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin A. Garcia
Benjamin A. Garcia, Ph.D., FRSC John McCrea Dickson M.D. Presidential Professor Director of Quantitative Proteomics Penn Epigenetics Institute Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics Smilow Center for Translational Research Perelman School of Medicine University of Pennsylvania Room 9-124 (office) 3400 Civic Center Blvd Philadelphia, PA 19104 215-573-9423 (office)


