### Accession
PXD006534

### Title
HLA-DRB1*15:01 and HLA-DRB5*01:01 peptidomes

### Description
HLA-DR15 is a haplotype associated with multiple sclerosis. It contains the two DRB* genes DRB1*1501 (DR2b) and DRB5*0101 (DR2a). The reported anchor motif of the corresponding HLA-DR molecules was determined years ago based on a small number of peptide ligands and binding assays. DR2a could display a set of peptides complementary to that presented by DR2b or, alternatively, a similar peptide repertoire but recognized in a different manner by T cells. It is known that DR2a and DR2b share some peptide ligands, although the degree of similarity of their associated peptidomes remains unclear. In addition, the contribution of each molecule to the global peptide repertoire presented by the HLA-DR15 haplotype has not been evaluated. We used mass spectrometry to analyze the peptide pools bound to DR2a and DR2b, identifying 169 and 555 unique peptide ligands of DR2a and DR2b, respectively. The analysis of these sets of peptides allowed the refinement of the corresponding binding motifs revealing novel anchor residues that had been overlooked in previous analyses. Moreover, the number of shared ligands between both molecules was low, indicating that DR2a and DR2b present complementary peptide repertoires to T cells. Finally, our analysis suggests that, quantitatively, both molecules contribute to the peptide repertoire presented by cells expressing the HLA-DR15 haplotype.

### Sample Protocol
Peptides were purified from lysates of BLS-DR2a and BLS-DR2b cells which were subjected to immunoprecipitation with the mAb B8.11.2. After acid extraction, the peptide pool was analyzed by LC-MS/MS. Samples were analyzed in a nano-LC Ultra HPLC (Eksigent) coupled online with a 5600 triple TOF mass spectrometer (AB Sciex) and equipped with a C18 chromXP trapping column (350 µm x 0.5 mm, 3 µm, Eksigent) and a C18 chromXP column (75 µm x 150 mm, 3 µm, Eksigent). Solvent A and B were 0.1% formic acid and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile, respectively. Peptides were fractionated at a flow-rate of 300 nl/min at 40°C under gradient elution conditions, as follows: a linear increase from 5 to 30% B in 180 min, a linear increase to 60% B in 10 min, a linear increase to 90% B in 15 min and 90% B for 10 minutes. Each acquisition cycle comprised a survey scan (350 - 1250 m/z) of 250 ms and up to of 25 MS/MS scans (100 - 1500 m/z) of 100 ms. The HPLC and the mass spectrometer were respectively controlled with Eksigent Control (version 3.12, Eksigent) and Analyst TF (version 1.7, Eksigent).

### Data Protocol
Raw MS/MS data were converted to mgf files with Peakview 1.2 (AB SCiex) and searched against a concatenated target-decoy database containing the 88,669 Uniprot entries of the Homo sapiens complete proteome set (as of March 2015) and their corresponding reverse sequences. The mgf file corresponding to the DR2b fraction was recalibrated with Protein Pilot (version 4.5, AB Sciex) before the search. MASCOT (Matrix Science, version 2.5) was used as search engine with the following parameters: no enzyme, MS tolerance of 15 ppm, MS/MS tolerance of 0,025 Da and protein N-terminal acetylation, pyroglutamic acid formation from glutamine and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. Estimation of the False Discovery Rate (FDR) was carried out by decoy hit counting. Results were filtered at a FDR < 5% at the peptide level.

### Publication Abstract
Human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-DR15 is a haplotype associated with multiple sclerosis. It contains the two DRB* genes <i>DRB1</i>*<i>1501</i> (DR2b) and <i>DRB5</i>*<i>0101</i> (DR2a). The reported anchor motif of the corresponding HLA-DR molecules was determined in 1994 based on a small number of peptide ligands and binding assays. DR2a could display a set of peptides complementary to that presented by DR2b or, alternatively, a similar peptide repertoire but recognized in a different manner by T cells. It is known that DR2a and DR2b share some peptide ligands, although the degree of similarity of their associated peptidomes remains unclear. In addition, the contribution of each molecule to the global peptide repertoire presented by the HLA-DR15 haplotype has not been evaluated. We used mass spectrometry to analyze the peptide pools bound to DR2a and DR2b, identifying 169 and 555 unique peptide ligands of DR2a and DR2b, respectively. The analysis of these sets of peptides allowed the refinement of the corresponding binding motifs revealing novel anchor residues that had been overlooked in previous analyses. Moreover, the number of shared ligands between both molecules was low, indicating that DR2a and DR2b present complementary peptide repertoires to T cells. Finally, our analysis suggests that, quantitatively, both molecules contribute to the peptide repertoire presented by cells expressing the HLA-DR15 haplotype.

### Keywords
Multiple sclerosis, Hla-dr15, Drb5*0101, Drb1*1501, Hla-ii, Peptidome

### Affiliations
Proteomics Unit - Dpt. of Macromolecular Structures - Spanish National Biotechnolgy Centre (CNB-CSIC)
Institut de Biotecnologia i de Biomedicina, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Spain

### Submitter
Miguel Marcilla

### Lab Head
Dr Iñaki Alvarez
Institut de Biotecnologia i de Biomedicina, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Spain


