### Accession
PXD007867

### Title
Characterisation of HMGB1 interactome in PNT2 prostate cells

### Description
HMGB1 and HMGB2 are members of the High Mobility Group (HMG) protein superfamily that contain a DNA binding domain (HMG-Box), and their overexpression has been related to main cancer hallmarks, tumor progression, metastasis formation and bad prognosis. We have used yeast two hybrid and affinity purification-mass spectrometry to explore HMGB1 and HMGB2 protein interactions in prostate and ovarian epithelial cells.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extracts from PNT2 cells were immunoprecipitated with an HMGB1 antibody coupled to Protein G Dynabeads. Immunoprecipitated proteins were digested on the beads overnight with trypsin. Peptides were dried, redissolved in 20 mM TCEP-0.5% formic acid and analysed on an Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer coupled with an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano System. The Orbitrap Velos was operated in standard data-dependent acquisition.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were processed with Proteome Discoverer v1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Database searches were performed with Mascot (Matrix Science) against the human Uniprot database (2014, 77606 entries) and an in-house contaminant database. The search parameters were: trypsin/P digestion, 2 missed cleavages, 10 ppm mass tolerance for MS, 0.5 Da mass tolerance for MS/MS, with variable modifications of acetyl (N-terminal), carbamidomethyl (C), N-formylation (protein), oxidation (M), and pyro-glu (N-term Q). Database search results were refined through processing with Percolator (significance threshold < 0.05, FDR < 1%). Protein identification required at least one high-confidence peptide (FDR < 1%) with a minimum score of 20.

### Publication Abstract
High Mobility Group B (HMGB) proteins are involved in cancer progression and in cellular responses to platinum compounds used in the chemotherapy of prostate and ovary cancer. Here we use affinity purification coupled to mass spectrometry (MS) and yeast two-hybrid (Y2H) screening to carry out an exhaustive study of HMGB1 and HMGB2 protein interactions in the context of prostate and ovary epithelia. We present a proteomic study of HMGB1 partners based on immunoprecipitation of HMGB1 from a non-cancerous prostate epithelial cell line. In addition, HMGB1 and HMGB2 were used as baits in yeast two-hybrid screening of libraries from prostate and ovary epithelial cell lines as well as from healthy ovary tissue. HMGB1 interacts with many nuclear proteins that control gene expression, but also with proteins that form part of the cytoskeleton, cell-adhesion structures and others involved in intracellular protein translocation, cellular migration, secretion, apoptosis and cell survival. HMGB2 interacts with proteins involved in apoptosis, cell motility and cellular proliferation. High confidence interactors, based on repeated identification in different cell types or in both MS and Y2H approaches, are discussed in relation to cancer. This study represents a useful resource for detailed investigation of the role of HMGB1 in cancer of epithelial origins, as well as potential alternative avenues of therapeutic intervention.

### Keywords
Ovary, Lc-msms, Prostate, Affinity purification, Cancer

### Affiliations
Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute
Functional Proteomics, Institute Cancer Research
&
Proteomic Mass Spectrometry, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute

### Submitter
James Wright

### Lab Head
Dr Jyoti Choudhary
Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute


