### Accession
PXD004919

### Title
Ethylene glycol improves electrospray ionization

### Description
We evaluated a number of compounds as LC additives to modify the electrospray response and found that ethylene glycol was capable of enhancing nESI response by a factor of twofold on average. This result was comparable to DMSO.

### Sample Protocol
Tryptic digests of HeLa and A431 cell lysates were prepared according to standard procedure. 250 to 500ng of peptides were analyzed with LTQ Orbitrap XL or Velos equipped with Eksigent nanoLC Ultra 1D+ with DDA mode. MS1 was recorded with Orbitrap, MS2 with ion trap for XL (Top7) and Orbitrap for Velos (Top 10). Separation was on a 75um x 40cm column packed with Dr. Maisch Gold C18 3um material with acetonitrile gradient with or without additives.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were searched with MaxQuant v.1.5.1.0 against Uniprot Human proteome database. MS1 tolerance was 20ppm, MS2 tolerance was 0.4 Da for XL and 0.05 Da for Velos. Match between run was used within replicates for an alignment time window of 10min and matching window of 0.5min. All statistical processing downstream were carried out in R programming environment.

### Publication Abstract
Liquid chromatography coupled online to nano-electrospray ionization (nESI) tandem mass spectrometry is the analytical workhorse in the field of proteome research. Dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) was recently shown to improve nESI efficiency by a factor of three to ten thus improving the sensitivity and coverage of proteomic experiments. However, relatively few investigations into which solvent additives promote nESI response have been performed at a proteomic scale. Here, we systematically evaluated the concept by screening about 30 compounds with various physico-chemical properties. Detailed further analysis showed that ethylene glycol performed similarly to DMSO and the results indicate that enhancing the nESI response of peptides by simple solvent additives is a valid and promising approach. Ethylene glycol may serve as a viable alternative to DMSO in applications where DMSO has disadvantages. In keeping with nESI theory, the key properties of an effective solvent additive for proteomic applications are a boiling point higher than water, low surface tension, and preferably high polarity for reversed phase LC-MS/MS applications. Graphical Abstract Ethylene glycol substantially improves peptide ionization.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Nano-electrospray ionization, Ethylene glyco

### Affiliations
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technical University of Munich
TUM

### Submitter
Peng Yu

### Lab Head
Dr Bernhard Kuster
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technical University of Munich


