### Accession
PXD002566

### Title
Characterization and quantification of proteins secreted by single human embryos prior to implantation

### Description
The use of in vitro fertilization (IVF) has revolutionized the treatment of infertility and is now responsible for 1-5% of all births in industrialized countries. During IVF, it is typical for patients to generate multiple embryos. However, only a small proportion of them possess the genetic and metabolic requirements needed in order to produce a healthy pregnancy. The identification of the embryo with the greatest developmental capacity represents a major challenge for fertility clinics. Current methods for the assessment of embryo competence are proven inefficient and the inadvertent transfer of non-viable embryos is the principal reason why most IVF treatments (approximately two-thirds) end in failure. In this study, we investigate how the application of proteomic measurements could improve success rates in clinical embryology. We describe a procedure that allows the identification and quantification of proteins of embryonic origin, present in attomole concentrations in the blastocoel, the enclosed fluid filled cavity that forms within five-day old human embryos. By using targeted proteomics, we demonstrate the feasibility of quantifying multiple proteins in samples derived from single blastocoels, and that such measurements correlate with aspects of embryo viability, such as chromosomal (ploidy) status. This study illustrates the potential of high-sensitivity proteomics to measure clinically relevant biomarkers in minute samples and, more specifically, suggests that key aspects of embryo competence could be measured using a proteomic-based strategy, with negligible risk of harm to the living embryo. Our work paves the way for the development of “next-generation” embryo competence assessment strategies, based on functional proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
Protein digestion and peptide desalting for urea-based procedure A 5 µL solution of 10 M urea and 125 mM ammonium bicarbonate was added to each sample tube immediately after collection. Samples were then stored at -80˚C. At time of processing, the tubes were thawed and spun at 13,000 xg for 5 min. Supernatants from 20 samples were batched and transferred to a fresh tube and Dithiothreitol was added to reach 10 mM and incubated 30 min at 37˚C with mixing (800 rpm). Iodoacetamide was added to reach 15 mM and incubated 30 min in the dark. LysC (Wako) was added to an estimated enzyme:protein ratio of 1:100 (w/w) and incubated for 4 h at 37˚C. The urea concentration was then diluted to 1.5 M using HPLC-grade water, trypsin (Promega) was added to reach an estimated enzyme:protein ratio of 1:50 (w/w), and samples incubated overnight at 37˚C. Samples were acidified with 0.5% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to stop digestion and spun at 13,000 xg for 5 min. The supernatants were moved to a fresh tube and desalted using C18 spin columns (Ultra-micro spin columns, Harvard Apparatus) according to manufacturer instructions.  Protein digestion for MonoPrep procedure Acetonitrile was added to the sample to reach a concentration of 40% (v/v). 1 µL of diluted trypsin (0.01 µg/µL) was added to reach an estimated protein:enzyme ratio of 1 (w/w). Samples were incubated at 37˚C overnight then acidified with 0.5% (v/v) TFA to stop digestion. Digested samples were stored at -80˚C until MS analysis.  Shotgun mass spectrometry Samples were analyzed using a nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters GmbH) connected online to a LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific GmbH) as described by Ori et al23. Briefly, peptides were separated on a BEH300 C18 (75 µm x 250 mm, 1.7 µm) nanoAcquity UPLC column (Waters GmbH) using a stepwise 145 min gradient between 3 and 85% (v/v) ACN in 0.1% (v/v) FA. Data acquisition was performed in data-dependent mode using a TOP-20 strategy where survey MS scans (m/z range 375-1,600) were acquired in the orbitrap (R = 30,000 FWHM) and up to 20 of the most abundant ions per full scan were fragmented by collision-induced dissociation (normalized collision energy = 35, activation Q = 0.250) and analyzed in the LTQ. Ion target values were 1,000,000 (or 500 ms maximum fill time) for full scans and 10,000 (or 50 ms maximum fill time) for MS/MS scans. Charge states 1 and unknown were rejected. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with repeat count = 1, exclusion duration = 60 s, list size = 500 and mass window ±  15 ppm. Raw files were analyzed using MaxQuant (version 1.2.2.5)42. For urea-based procedure, samples were analyzed in technical duplicate (repated injection of the same sample) and the results combined.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched against the human Swiss-Prot entries of the Uniprot release 2011_12 using the Andromeda search engine43. The search criteria were set as follows: full tryptic specificity was required (cleavage after lysine or arginine residues, unless followed by proline); 2 missed cleavages were allowed; carbamidomethylation (C) was set as fixed modification (only for samples from urea-based procedure); oxidation (M) and acetylation (protein N-term) were applied as variable modifications, if applicable; mass tolerance of 20 ppm (precursor) and 0.5 Da (fragments). The reversed sequences of the target database were used as decoy database. Peptide and protein hits were filtered at a false discovery rate of 1% using a target-decoy strategy44.  The “peptides.txt” output file of the MaxQuant search was used to calculate protein abundance scores from the summed intensities of proteotypic (unique) peptides normalized by the protein molecular weight, as described in Ori et al.24. Proteins were assigned as deriving from the blastocoel if they were identified by at least one proteotypic peptide and they were not detected in blank samples.

### Publication Abstract
The use of in&#xa0;vitro fertilization (IVF) has revolutionized the treatment of infertility and is now responsible for 1-5% of all births in industrialized countries. During IVF, it is typical for patients to generate multiple embryos. However, only a small proportion of them possess the genetic and metabolic requirements needed in order to produce a healthy pregnancy. The identification of the embryo with the greatest developmental capacity represents a major challenge for fertility clinics. Current methods for the assessment of embryo competence are proven inefficient, and the inadvertent transfer of non-viable embryos is the principal reason why most IVF treatments (approximately two-thirds) end in failure. In this study, we investigate how the application of proteomic measurements could improve success rates in clinical embryology. We describe a procedure that allows the identification and quantification of proteins of embryonic origin, present in attomole concentrations in the blastocoel, the enclosed fluid-filled cavity that forms within 5-day-old human embryos. By using targeted proteomics, we demonstrate the feasibility of quantifying multiple proteins in samples derived from single blastocoels and that such measurements correlate with aspects of embryo viability, such as chromosomal (ploidy) status. This study illustrates the potential of high-sensitivity proteomics to measure clinically relevant biomarkers in minute samples and, more specifically, suggests that key aspects of embryo competence could be measured using a proteomic-based strategy, with negligible risk of harm to the living embryo. Our work paves the way for the development of "next-generation" embryo competence assessment strategies, based on functional proteomics.

### Keywords
Blastocoel, Human blastocyst, Secretion, Ivf

### Affiliations
Leibniz Institute on Aging
Nuffield Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University of Oxford, Institute of Reproductive Sciences, Oxford, OX4 2HW, UK

### Submitter
Alessandro Ori

### Lab Head
Dr Dagan Wells
Nuffield Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University of Oxford, Institute of Reproductive Sciences, Oxford, OX4 2HW, UK


