### Accession
PXD000708

### Title
Irradiation - The project is aimed at measuring DNA-repair enzymes and their change of concentration upon treatment with gamm-radiation, in six breast or breast-cancer derived cell lines. Two of the cell lines were analysed by shotgun proteomics to confirm the SRM data and identify alternative mechansims responsible for radio-resistance.

### Description
The project is aimed at measuring DNA-repair enzymes and their change of concentration upon treatment with gamm-radiation, in six breast or breast-cancer derived cell lines. Two of the cell lines were analysed by shotgun proteomics to confirm the SRM data and identify alternative mechansims responsible for radio-resistance.

### Sample Protocol
After irradiation, cells for the shotgun experiments were washed and gently divided into a nuclear enriched fraction and a cytoplasmic one. Nuclei were mixed with a SILAC labelled standard and lysed in Laemmli buffer. Proteins fractionated by SDS-PAGE and in-gel digested prior of LC-MS analysis on a Thermo Orbitrap XL. Phospho-peptides were enriched from each un fractionated pool and analysed on the same setup.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant 1.2 was used to analyse the raw files from the shotgun experiment. 0.01 FDR was set both at peptide and at protein level. M-oxidation was set as variable modification and C-carbamidomethylation as fixed one. S,T and Y-phosphorylation was set as variable modification only for the sample enriched with TiO2.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Gamma-radiation breast cell-line dna-repair

### Affiliations
Immunotechnology dept., Lund University, Sweden
Sloan Kettering Institute, Molecular Pharmacology Program 

### Submitter
Paolo Cifani

### Lab Head
Dr Peter James
Immunotechnology dept., Lund University, Sweden


