### Accession
PXD007735

### Title
Identification of a new XPF-ERCC1-like complex important for meiotic crossovers production

### Description
Proteins of the XPF-ERCC1 complex family play roles in DNA repair. Known members (four in mammals, two in budding yeast) recognize branched DNA structures and most bear nuclease activity. Here, we identified a new XPF-ERCC1-like complex important for meiotic crossovers production. Through a proteomic screen, we found that Zip2 and Spo16, two proteins important for CO formation in budding yeast, form a complex and share structural similarities with XPF-ERCC1. Zip2 XPF domain is important for CO formation and, in complex with Spo16, preferentially binds branched DNA molecules. However, Zip2-Spo16 lacks endonucleolytic activity. This suggests that Zip2-Spo16 works as a structural module that recognizes and stabilizes joint molecules to ensure CO formation. Moreover, Zip2-Spo16 forms a complex (called ZZS) with Zip4, another protein important for CO formation, which directly interacts with components of the chromosome axis, providing a link between recombination intermediates and the underlying chromosome structure.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were harvested and 2 ml of PMSF (0,5M in DMSO) was immediately added. Cells were washed two times with ice-cold TNG buffer (50 mM Tris/HCl pH 8; 150 mM NaCl, 10% Glycerol; 1 mM PMSF; 1X Complete Mini EDTA-Free (Roche); 1X PhosSTOP (Roche) and flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen. Frozen cells were mechanically ground in liquid nitrogen with the 6775 Freezer/Mill cryogenic grinder (SPEX SamplePrep). The resulting powder was resuspended in 50 mL of lysis buffer (50 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.5; 1 mM EDTA; 0.5% NP-40; 10% glycerol; 300 mM NaCl; 1 mM PMSF; 10 mM NEM; 1X Complete Mini EDTA-Free (Roche); 1X PhosSTOP (Roche)). The lysate was cleared by centrifugation at 4000 rpm for 10 min and then incubated with 1 ml of lgG Sepharose beads (GE Healthcare) for 1 hr at 4 °C. The beads were collected in 2 ml tubes, washed two times with lysis buffer and once with TEV-C buffer (20 mM Tris/HCl pH 8; 0.5 mM EDTA; 150 mM NaCl; 0.1% NP-40; 5% glycerol; 1 mM MgCl2; 1 mM DTT). The beads were resuspended in 1 ml of TEV-C buffer and transferred into 1.2 ml Bio-Spin Chromatography Column (BioRad). The beads were incubated with 60 µl TEV protease (1mg/ml) and 125 units of Benzonase Nuclease (Sigma) at 4°C overnight. The eluate was transferred into Poly-Prep Chromatography Column (BioRad) containing 6ml of CAM-B buffer (20 mM Tris/HCl pH 8; 150 mM NaCl; 1mM Imidazole; 5% glycerol; 1 mM MgCl2; 2 mM CaCl2). The beads were washed three times with TEV-C 300 mM NaCl buffer (20 mM Tris/HCl pH 8; 0.5 mM EDTA; 300 mM NaCl; 0.1% NP-40; 5% glycerol; 1 mM MgCl2; 1 mM DTT). The eluate was then incubated with 400 μl of Calmodulin Sepharose Beads (GE Healthcare) for 3 hr at 4°C. The beads were washed three times with CAM-B/NP-40 buffer (20 mM Tris/HCl pH 8; 150 mM NaCl; 1mM Imidazole; 5% glycerol; 1 mM MgCl2; 2 mM CaCl2; 0,05% NP-40; 10 mM β-Mercaptoethanol). For Zip2-TAP purification, the column was eluted with 350 µl and 700 µl of CAM-E 4/150 (10 mM Tris/HCl pH 8; 150 mM NaCl; 4 mM EGTA; 1 mM Imidazole; 5% glycerol; 1 mM MgCl2; 0,02% NP-40; 10 mM β-Mercaptoethanol), and with 700 µl and 300 µl of CAM-E 20/500 (10 mM Tris/HCl pH 8; 500 mM NaCl; 20mM EGTA; 1 mM Imidazole; 5% glycerol; 1 mM MgCl2; 0,02% NP-40; 10 mM β-Mercaptoethanol). For Zip4-TAP and Spo16-TAP purifications, the column was eluted once with 350 µl of CAM-E 20/500 and twice with 700 µl of CAM-E 20/500, and once with CAM-E 50/1000 (10 mM Tris/HCl pH 8; 1 M NaCl; 50 mM EGTA; 1 mM Imidazole; 5% glycerol; 1 mM MgCl2; 0,02% NP-40; 10 mM β-Mercaptoethanol). Eluate fractions was concentrated by TCA purification and resuspended in one tube with 45 µl of loading buffer. Eluted proteins were stacked as a single band in a SDS-PAGE gel (NuPAGE 4–12%, Invitrogen) and in-gel digested using trypsin (Promega, sequencing grade). Resulting peptides were analysed by online nanoLC-MS/MS (UltiMate 3000 and Q-Exactive Plus, Thermo Scientific) using a 120-min gradient.

### Data Protocol
Peptides and proteins were identified and quantified using MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.30) and the SwissProt database (August 2016 version, Saccharomyces cerevisiae S288c taxonomy). Trypsin was chosen as the enzyme and 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Precursor mass error tolerances were set respectively at 20 ppm and 4.5 ppm for first and main searches. Fragment mass error tolerance was set to 0.5 Da. Peptide modifications allowed during the search were: carbamidomethylation (C, fixed), acetyl (Protein N-ter, variable) and oxidation (M, variable). Minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids. Minimum number of peptides, razor + unique peptides and unique peptides were all set to 1. Maximum false discovery rates - calculated by employing a reverse database strategy - were set to 0.01 at peptide and protein levels. Proteins were quantified based on the iBAQ value (Schwanhäusser et al., 2011) calculated by MaxQuant.

### Publication Abstract
Meiotic crossover formation requires the stabilization of early recombination intermediates by a set of proteins and occurs within the environment of the chromosome axis, a structure important for the regulation of meiotic recombination events. The molecular mechanisms underlying and connecting crossover recombination and axis localization are elusive. Here, we identified the ZZS (Zip2-Zip4-Spo16) complex, required for crossover formation, which carries two distinct activities: one provided by Zip4, which acts as hub through physical interactions with components of the chromosome axis and the crossover machinery, and the other carried by Zip2 and Spo16, which preferentially bind branched DNA molecules in vitro. We found that Zip2 and Spo16 share structural similarities to the structure-specific XPF-ERCC1 nuclease, although it lacks endonuclease activity. The XPF domain of Zip2 is required for crossover formation, suggesting that, together with Spo16, it has a noncatalytic DNA recognition function. Our results suggest that the ZZS complex shepherds recombination intermediates toward crossovers as a dynamic structural module that connects recombination events to the chromosome axis. The identification of the ZZS complex improves our understanding of the various activities required for crossover implementation and is likely applicable to other organisms, including mammals.

### Keywords
Meiotic recombination, Budding yeast, Interactomics

### Affiliations
EDyP

### Submitter
Yohann Couté

### Lab Head
Dr Virginie Brun
EDyP


