### Accession
PXD001167

### Title
Quantitative Histone Acetylation

### Description
This work details a previously uncharacterized cross-talk between the Gcn5 bromodomain "reader" function and enzymatic HAT activity that may ultimately affect gene expression.

### Sample Protocol
Gel bands excised from acid-urea gels were destained and subjected to in-gel trypsin digestion. Tryptic peptides were separated by reverse phase Jupiter Proteo resin using a nanoAcquity UPLC system. Eluted peptides were ionized by electrospray followed by MS/MS analysis using collision induced dissociation on an LTQ Orbitrap Velos Mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
MS data were acquired using the FTMS analyzer in profile mode at a resolution of 60,000 over a range of 375 to 1500 m/z. MS data was database searched with Mascot using heavy and light acetylation of lysines as variable modifications. The percentage of site-specfic lysine acetylation was determined with spectral count comparisons of peptides with light or heavy acetylation at the given lysine [% light acetylation for a lysine in a given peptide = (light spectral counts/ light + heavy spectral counts) x 100].

### Publication Abstract
In yeast, the conserved histone acetyltransferase (HAT) Gcn5 associates with Ada2 and Ada3 to form the catalytic module of the ADA and SAGA transcriptional coactivator complexes. Gcn5 also contains an acetyl-lysine binding bromodomain that has been implicated in regulating nucleosomal acetylation in vitro, as well as at gene promoters in cells. However, the contribution of the Gcn5 bromodomain in regulating site specificity of HAT activity remains unclear. Here, we used a combined acid-urea gel and quantitative mass spectrometry approach to compare the HAT activity of wild-type and Gcn5 bromodomain-mutant ADA subcomplexes (Gcn5-Ada2-Ada3). Wild-type ADA subcomplex acetylated H3 lysines with the following specificity; H3K14 &gt; H3K23 &gt; H3K9 &#x2248; H3K18 &gt; H3K27 &gt; H3K36. However, when the Gcn5 bromodomain was defective in acetyl-lysine binding, the ADA subcomplex demonstrated altered site-specific acetylation on free and nucleosomal H3, with H3K18ac being the most severely diminished. H3K18ac was also severely diminished on H3K14R, but not H3K23R, substrates in wild-type HAT reactions, further suggesting that Gcn5-catalyzed acetylation of H3K14 and bromodomain binding to H3K14ac are important steps preceding H3K18ac. In sum, this work details a previously uncharacterized cross-talk between the Gcn5 bromodomain "reader" function and enzymatic HAT activity that might ultimately affect gene expression. Future studies of how mutations in bromodomains or other histone post-translational modification readers can affect chromatin-templated enzymatic activities will yield unprecedented insight into a potential "histone/epigenetic code." MS data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD001167.

### Keywords
Epigentics, Transcription coactivators, Histone modification, Histone acetylation, Bromodomain

### Affiliations
University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences

### Submitter
Alan Tackett

### Lab Head
Dr Alan J Tackett
University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences


