### Accession
PXD007852

### Title
Analysis of the Salivary Gland Transcriptome of Unfed and Partially Fed Amblyomma sculptum Ticks and Descriptive Proteome of the Saliva

### Description
Ticks are obligate blood feeding ectoparasites that transmit a wide variety of pathogenic microorganisms to their vertebrate hosts. Amblyomma sculptum is vector of Rickettsia rickettsii, the causative agent of Rocky Mountain spotted fever, the most lethal rickettsiosis that affects humans. It is known that the transmission of pathogens by ticks is mainly associated with the physiology of the feeding process. Pathogens that are acquired with the blood meal must first colonize the tick gut and later the salivary glands in order to be transmitted during a subsequent blood feeding via saliva. Tick saliva contains a complex mixture of bioactive molecules with anticlotting, antiplatelet aggregation, vasodilatory, anti-inflammatory, and immunomodulatory properties to counteract both the hemostasis and defense mechanisms of the host. Besides facilitating tick feeding, the properties of saliva may also benefits survival and establishment of pathogens in the host. In the current study, we compared the sialotranscriptome of unfed A. sculptum ticks and those fed for 72 h on rabbits using next generation RNA sequencing (RNA-seq). The total of reads obtained were assembled in 9,560 coding sequences (CDSs) distributed in different functional classes. CDSs encoding secreted proteins, including lipocalins, mucins, protease inhibitors, glycine-rich proteins, metalloproteases, 8.9 kDa superfamily members, and immunity-related proteins were mostly upregulated by blood feeding. Selected CDSs were analyzed by real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction preceded by reverse transcription (RT-qPCR), corroborating the transcriptional profile obtained by RNA-seq. Finally, high-performance liquid chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis revealed 124 proteins in saliva of ticks fed for 96-120 h. The corresponding CDSs of 59 of these proteins were upregulated in salivary glands of fed ticks. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report on the proteome of A. sculptum saliva. The functional characterization of the identified proteins might reveal potential targets to develop vaccines for tick control and/or blocking of R. rickettsii transmission as well as pharmacological bioproducts with antihemostatic, anti-inflammatory and antibacterial activities.

### Sample Protocol
Five samples containing the saliva of five ticks each (females fed for 96-120 h on rabbits) were independently processed and analyzed. First, protein concentration in each sample was determined using a bicinchoninic acid protein assay (Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA). An aliquot of 25 µg of protein was submitted to extraction according to (Mudenda et al., 2014), with modifications. Saliva samples were diluted in urea 8 M (1:10; v/v). Then, reduction with DTT, alkylation with iodoacetamide. Urea was removed and the buffer was changed to 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate with 10% acetonitrile by ultrafiltration with a 10 kDa cutoff Amicon Ultra 0.5mL filtration unit (Millipore). LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using a Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer coupled with a Proxeon nano-LC through a nanoelectrospray ion source. Peptides were loaded onto an Acclaim™ PepMap™ 100 C18 pre-column (5µm, 100Å, 75µm x 2 cm; Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated on a PepMap™ RSLC C18 column (2µm, 100Å, 75µm x 25 cm; Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a linear gradient of acetonitrile (0-40%) in 0.1% formic acid for 80 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. This gradient was followed by a 2 min increase to 80% acetonitrile and held at this concentration for 3 min. The nanoelectrospray voltage of the capillary was set to 1.8kV. The analysis was performed in full scan (m/z 400 - 1600) with the resolution of Orbitrap adjusted to 120,000. Using a 3 s cycle time and rapid scan, peptide ions with charge states 2-8 were fragmented in the linear ion trap using low-energy CID (normalized collision energy of 35 %) and an isolation width of 1.6 dynamic exclusion was enabled with an exclusion duration of 20 s, and a repeat count of 1.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification, raw files were imported into PEAKS version 8.5 (Bioinformatics Solutions, Inc) and searched against A. sculptum transcript fasta database (9,560 CDSs presented in the current study) and the cRAP contaminant database (the common Repository of Adventitious Proteins—http://www.theGPM.org/crap), using a tolerance of 10 ppm for the precursor ion and 0.6 Da for fragment ions. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin with a maximum of two missed cleavages and one non-specific cleavage. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine (57.021 Da) was set as a fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine (15.994 Da), and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine (0.98 Da) were selected as variable modifications. All peptide identifications were filtered in order to achieve a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.5% using a decoy database approach. Contaminant proteins were filtered from the final list for clarity.

### Publication Abstract
Ticks are obligate blood feeding ectoparasites that transmit a wide variety of pathogenic microorganisms to their vertebrate hosts. <i>Amblyomma sculptum</i> is vector of <i>Rickettsia rickettsii</i>, the causative agent of Rocky Mountain spotted fever (RMSF), the most lethal rickettsiosis that affects humans. It is known that the transmission of pathogens by ticks is mainly associated with the physiology of the feeding process. Pathogens that are acquired with the blood meal must first colonize the tick gut and later the salivary glands (SG) in order to be transmitted during a subsequent blood feeding via saliva. Tick saliva contains a complex mixture of bioactive molecules with anticlotting, antiplatelet aggregation, vasodilatory, anti-inflammatory, and immunomodulatory properties to counteract both the hemostasis and defense mechanisms of the host. Besides facilitating tick feeding, the properties of saliva may also benefits survival and establishment of pathogens in the host. In the current study, we compared the sialotranscriptome of unfed <i>A. sculptum</i> ticks and those fed for 72 h on rabbits using next generation RNA sequencing (RNA-seq). The total of reads obtained were assembled in 9,560 coding sequences (CDSs) distributed in different functional classes. CDSs encoding secreted proteins, including lipocalins, mucins, protease inhibitors, glycine-rich proteins, metalloproteases, 8.9 kDa superfamily members, and immunity-related proteins were mostly upregulated by blood feeding. Selected CDSs were analyzed by real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction preceded by reverse transcription (RT-qPCR), corroborating the transcriptional profile obtained by RNA-seq. Finally, high-performance liquid chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis revealed 124 proteins in saliva of ticks fed for 96-120 h. The corresponding CDSs of 59 of these proteins were upregulated in SG of fed ticks. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report on the proteome of <i>A. sculptum</i> saliva. The functional characterization of the identified proteins might reveal potential targets to develop vaccines for tick control and/or blocking of <i>R. rickettsii</i> transmission as well as pharmacological bioproducts with antihemostatic, anti-inflammatory and antibacterial activities.

### Keywords
Blood feeding, Spotted fever, Salivary glands, Rna-seq, Tick, Tran, Amblyomma

### Affiliations
Parasitology, University of São Paulo/Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Brazil
Department of Molecular Sciences, Macquarie University, Sydney, NSW, Australia

### Submitter
Rebeca Kawahara

### Lab Head
Dr Andrea Fogaca
Parasitology, University of São Paulo/Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Brazil


