### Accession
PXD040957

### Title
Proteomics of immune cells from liver tumors reveals immunotherapy targets

### Description
Elucidating the mechanisms by which immune cells become dysfunctional in tumors is critical to developing next-generation immunotherapies. We profiled proteomes of cancer cells, monocyte/macrophages, CD4+ and CD8+ T cells, and NK cells isolated from tumors, liver, and blood of 48 patients with hepatocellular carcinoma. We found that tumor macrophages induce the sphingosine-1-phospate-degrading enzyme SGPL1, which dampened their inflammatory phenotype and anti-tumor function in vivo. We further discovered that the signaling scaffold protein AFAP1L2, typically only found in activated NK cells, is also upregulated in chronically stimulated CD8+ T cells in tumors. Ablation of AFAP1L2 in CD8+ T cells increased their viability upon repeated stimulation and enhanced their antitumor activity synergistically with PD-L1 blockade in mouse models. Our data revealed new targets for immunotherapy and provide a resource on immune cell proteomes in liver cancer (www.immunomics.ch/liver).

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets (sorted immune cells or tumor/liver stroma) were re-suspended in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer (ABC) at pH 8 containing 8M urea (Sigma). Then, samples were sonicated in a Bioruptor (Diagenode) (15 cycles, 30s on, 30s off, high mode). Disulfide bonds were reduced with 10mM DTT (Sigma) and subsequently alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma). Samples were pre-digested with LysC (Wako Fujifilm, 1:100, w/w) and then diluted 1:4 with 50 mM ABC before trypsin (Promega, 1:100, w/w) was added and the mixtures were incubated overnight at RT. The resulting peptide mixtures were acidified and loaded on C18 StageTips (Rappsilber et al., 2007). Peptides were eluted with 80% acetonitrile (ACN), dried using a SpeedVac, and resuspended in 2% ACN, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and 0.5% acetic acid. Peptides were separated on an EASY-nLC 1200 HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Odense) coupled online to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer via a nanoelectrospray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded in buffer A (0.1% formic acid) on in house packed columns (75 μm inner diameter, 50 cm length, and 1.9 μm C18 particles from Dr. Maisch GmbH) and eluted with a linear 150 min gradient of 5%–30% buffer B (80% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 250 nl/min and a column temperature of 50°C. The Q Exactive HF was operated in a data-dependent mode with a survey scan range of 300-1,650 m/z, resolution of 60,000 at 200 m/z, maximum injection time of 20 ms and AGC target of 3e6. Up to the ten most abundant ions with charge 2 to 5 were isolated with a 1.8 m/z isolation window and subjected to higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 27. MS/MS spectra were acquired with a resolution of 15,000 at 200 m/z, maximum injection time of 55 ms and AGC target of 1e5. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s to reduce repeated sequencing. Data were acquired with the Xcalibur software (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant software (version 1.6.7.0) was used to analyze MS raw files (Cox and Mann, 2008). MS/MS spectra were searched against the human Uniprot FASTA database (version June 2019) and a common contaminants database (247 entries) by the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011). A false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was required for peptides and proteins. Enzyme specificity was set as “Trypsin/P” with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages and 7 as the minimum length required for peptide identification. N‐terminal protein acetylation and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications, and cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification. Peptide identification was performed with an allowed initial precursor mass deviation of up to 7 ppm and an allowed fragment mass deviation of 20 ppm. Nonlinear retention time alignment of all measured samples was performed in MaxQuant. Peptide identifications were matched across different replicates within a matching time window of 0.7 min and an alignment time window of 20 min. Protein identification required at least 1 razor peptide. A minimum ratio count of 1 was required for valid quantification events via MaxQuant’s Label Free Quantification algorithm (Cox et al., 2014). Data were filtered for common contaminants and reverse peptides, and peptides only identified by side modification were excluded from further analysis. Data analysis was performed using the R statistical computing environment. Missing values were imputed with a normal distribution of 30% in comparison to the SD of measured values and a 1.8 SD down-shift of the mean to simulate the distribution of low signal values.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cd4, Monocytes, Immunotherapy, Cd8, Hepatocellular carcinoma, Nk cells, Macrophages, T cells

### Affiliations
Institute for Research in Biomedicine (IRB), Università della Svizzera italiana, Bellinzona, Switzerland
Institute for Research in Biomedicine, Via Vincenzo Vela 6 - CH-6500 Bellinzona

### Submitter
Matteo Pecoraro

### Lab Head
Dr Roger Geiger
Institute for Research in Biomedicine (IRB), Università della Svizzera italiana, Bellinzona, Switzerland


