### Accession
PXD008479

### Title
Palaeoproteomic  profiles of Iron Age teeth from Northwest Thailand

### Description
Human skeletal tissue contains an abundance of proteins some of which may be preserved over geological timescales. The profiling of proteins from ancient individuals — or palaeoproteomics —has begun to provide new information about the diseases suffered in past societies. We describe here the first dental palaeoproteomic profiles of Iron Age individuals, collected from the site of Long Long Rak rockshelter in northwest Thailand. We recovered amino acid sequences for thousands of proteins preserved in their dental tissue, however, it is evident that these palaeoproteomic profiles comprise a palimpsest of modifications that occurred both ante-mortem and post-mortem. Palaeoproteomic profiles are able to categorise disease and show the capacity of these individuals for harboring a variety of illnesses prior to death. Here we apply for the first time palaeoproteomic analysis to five prehistoric human teeth from Southeast Asia. We combine this method with stable isotope  analysis using δ18O and δ13C values to broadly identify the diet of these individuals. The specimens were collected from log coffins contained within the Iron Age site of Long Long Rak (LLR) rockshelter in Pang Mapha district, Mae Hong Son Province, northwest Thailand.. Radiocarbon dating shows these log coffins to date within the range of 1,960±30 cal. yr BP to 1,636±44 cal. yr BP.

### Sample Protocol
Comparative compilation of peptides using Progenesis Analysis.  Ion feature mapping was achieved by alignment of rT and m/z using ProgenesisQI LC-MS data analysis software v4 (Nonlinear Dynamics, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK). The peptide intensities were normalized against total intensity (sample specific log-scale abundance ratio scaling factor) and compared between groups by one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA, p≤0.05 for statistical significance) and post hoc multiple comparison procedures. Type I errors were controlled for by False Discovery Rate (FDR) with q value significance set at 0.01 44,45. Results are reported as mean ± SD (normalized ion intensity score).

### Data Protocol
Protein dataset-peak lists of proteins were generated using Mascot Daemon/extract_msn (Matrix Science, Thermo, London, UK) using the default parameters, and submitted to Mascot 2.3 (Matrix Science). All MS/MS spectra of differentiating peptides were searched against human non-redundant NCBInr database using the Mascot search program (Matrix Science, London, UK, www.matrixscience.com) for protein identification with the following criteria: (1) species, Homo sapiens; (2) allowed two missed cleavage; (3) variable modifications, Oxidation(M), Citrullination (R); (4) peptide tolerance, ±4 ppm; (5) MS/MS tolerance, ± 0.4Da; (6) peptide+2, +3 and +4; and (7) enzyme specificity, semi-tryptic. The peptides were considered to be confidently identified when matches had a high ion score >20 and peptides were assigned to a protein.

### Publication Abstract
The first dental proteomic profile of Iron Age individuals (ca. 2000-1000 years B.P.), collected from the site of Long Long Rak rock shelter in northwest Thailand is described. A bias toward the preservation of the positively charged aromatic, and polar amino acids is observed. It is evident that the 212 proteins identified (2 peptide, FDR &lt;1%) comprise a palimpsest of alterations that occurred both ante-mortem and post-mortem. Conservation of amino acids within the taphonomically resistant crystalline matrix enabled the identification of both X and Y chromosome linked amelogenin peptides. A novel multiple reaction monitoring method using the sex specific amelogenin protein isoforms is described and indicate the teeth are of male origin. Functional analysis shows an enrichment of pathways associated with metabolic disorders and shows a capacity for harboring these conditions prior to death. Stable isotope analysis using carbon isotopes highlights the strongly C<sub>3</sub> based (&#x2248;80%) diet of the Long Long Rak cemetery people, which probably comprised rice combined with protein from freshwater fish among other food items. The combination of proteomics and stable isotope analysis provides a complementary strategy for assessing the demography, diet, lifestyle, and possible diseases experienced by ancient populations.

### Keywords
Human, Teeth, Paleoproteome

### Affiliations
UNSW
Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Facility Mark Wainwright Analytical Centre. Room 404B, Lv4 Wallace Wurth Building C27 UNSW Australia www.bmsf.unsw.edu.au  Affiliated with: Paleontology, Geobiology and Earth Archives Research Centre (PANGEA)  http://www.pangea.unsw.edu.au/

### Submitter
Valerie Wasinger

### Lab Head
Dr Valerie Wasinger
Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Facility Mark Wainwright Analytical Centre. Room 404B, Lv4 Wallace Wurth Building C27 UNSW Australia www.bmsf.unsw.edu.au  Affiliated with: Paleontology, Geobiology and Earth Archives Research Centre (PANGEA)  http://www.pangea.unsw.edu.au/


