### Accession
PXD013951

### Title
Comparative exoproteome and virulence analysis of different clusters of Staphylococcus aureus with the Sequence Type ST398

### Description
Livestock-associated (LA) methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) and strains of sequence type 398 (ST398), which first became known for its widespread colonization of pigs but are now also rapidly emerging in the number of human colonization and infections. The ability of broad host adaption in combination with a consciously evolves by acquisition of virulence gene or mobile genetic elements (MGE) have been increasingly addressed ST398 lineage a serious threat to public health. The present study was aimed to track out how the diverse ST398 lineage, which colonized or infected in a broad range of reservoirs and various geographic regions, is actually reflected in the course of virulence evolution. We therefore profiled the extracellular proteome, representing the main reservoir of virulence factors, of 30 representative clinical isolates using label-free quantitative mass spectrometry. The results show that these isolates can be divided into five distinct clusters based on their exoproteome identities and abundance signatures. The majority of proteins identified were predicted as cytoplasmic proteins showing substantial heterogeneity among our 30 investigated isolates. Only 50% of isolates their exoproteome clustering of isolates can be correlated the clustering based on genome sequences suggested that the large-scale extend of genotype changes over time. To assess the virulence and cytotoxicity of the 30 investigated isolates, we employed infection models based on Galleria mellonella and HeLa cells. The results uncovered the grouping of clinical isolates based on their virulence or cytotoxicity have apparently distinctive exoproteome signatures and particular exoproteins could play decisive roles in pathogenicity of this specific S. aureus lineage. Altogether, the combination of exoproteome and virulence analysis contribute to the comprehensive insights for the impact of genome diversity on the global production of virulence factors of this zoonotic lineage, and more importantly, our outcomes as well as our approach provided an effective pipeline to define proteomic signatures of S. aureus virulence.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial isolates  A total of 30 S. aureus ST398  isolates, which were collected from humans or pigs in 9 different countries, were used for exoproteome analyses in the present study. The epidemiological and molecular characteristics of the isolates, including their origins, host, spa-typing and clustering based on whole-genome sequencing are presented in Table 1.  Bacterial cultivation and extracellular protein collection  All bacterial isolates were grown in triplicate overnight (14-16 h) in 10 mL tryptic soy broth (TSB, OXOID) under vigorous shaking (115 rpm) at 37°C in a water bath. The cultures were then diluted into 10 mL pre-warmed RPMI 1640 medium supplemented with 2 mM glutamine (GE Healthcare/PAA, Little Chalfont, United Kingdom) to an optical density at 600 nm (OD600 ) of 0.1 and cultivation was continued under the same conditions. Exponentially growing cells with an OD600 of ± 0.5 were again diluted into 20 mL of fresh pre-warmed RPMI 1640 medium to a final OD600 of 0.1 and their cultivation was continued until an OD600 of ±1.3 was reached, which corresponds to the stationary growth phase. Then, culture aliquots of 2 mL were collected, and cells were separated from the growth medium by centrifugation at 14,000 rpm for 10 min at 4°C. Extracellular proteins were collected from 1.2 mL aliquots of the supernatant fraction by overnight precipitation with 0.3 mL of 50% trichloroacetic acid (TCA, Sigma-Aldrich) on ice and subsequent centrifugation at 14000 rpm (4°C) for 20 min. The protein pellets were washed with 500 μl of ice-cold acetone and collected by centrifugation at 14,000 rpm (4°C) for 10 min. After removing the acetone, the protein pellets were dried at room temperature and stored at -20°C for further use.   Sample preparation for Mass Spectrometry Collected extracellular proteins were processed for Mass Spectrometry (MS) analysis essentially as described previously [Dreisbach A, Hempel K, Buist G, Hecker M, Becher D, van Dijl JM. Profiling the surfacome of Staphylococcus aureus. Proteomics. 2010;10(17):3082-96]. In brief, the dried protein pellets were re-suspended in 100 μl of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer(Fluka, Buches, Switzerland) and reduced with 2 μl of 500 mM dithiothreitol (DTT, Duchefa Biochemie, the Netherlands) for 45 min at 60°C. The samples were then alkylated with 2 μl of 500 mM iodoacetamide (IAA, Sigma-Aldrich) and incubated for 15 min in the dark at room temperature. 100 ng of sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega, Madison, USA) were added and the mixture was incubated overnight at 37°C under continuous shaking at 250 rpm to completely digest the proteins. Subsequently, the samples were acidified with a final concentration of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, USA) for 45 min at 37°C to inactivate the trypsin. The digested peptides were purified with C-18 ZipTips (Millipore, Billerica, MA). The ZipTips were first wetted with 45 μL 70% acetonitrile (ACN, Fluka, Buchs, Switzerland) and then equilibrated with 45 μL 3% ACN/0.1% acetic acid. Peptides were bound to the ZipTips by pipetting 10 times up and down. After washing with 45 μL 0.1% MS-acetic acid, the ZipTips were eluted with 45 μL 60% ACN/0.1% MS-acetic acid. Lastly, the eluted peptides were dried in a SpeedVac (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany) at room temperature. The dried samples were stored at 4°C until further use.   Mass Spectrometry  The purified peptides were analysed by reversed phase liquid chromatography (LC) coupled with electrospray ionization Mass Spectrometry (ESI-MS) using an LTQ Orbitrap XL (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) essentially as described by Stobernack et al [Stobernack T, Glasner C, Junker S, Gabarrini G, de Smit M, de Jong A, Otto A, Becher D, van Winkelhoff AJ, van Dijl JM. The extracellular proteome and Citrullinome of the oral pathogen Porphyromonas gingivalis. J Proteome Res 2016; 15:4532-43]. 

### Data Protocol
Database searching was done with Sorcerer-SEQUEST 4 (Sage-N Research, Milpitas, USA). After extraction from the raw files, *.dta files were searched with Sequest against a target-decoy database with a set of common laboratory contaminants. To this end, a non-redundant protein database was used, which was generated from the genome sequences of the thirty S. aureus study isolates. This database includes 6994 protein sequences in total, which differ in at least one amino acid residue. The RAST annotation file of the thirty study isolates was used to create a non-redundant database comprising protein sequences. Database searches were based on a strict trypsin digestion with two missed cleavages permitted. No fixed modifications were considered. Oxidation of methionine was considered as variable modification. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set to 10 ppm and the mass tolerance for fragment ions to 0.5 Da. Validation of MS/MS-based peptide and protein identification was performed with Scaffold V4.7.5 (Proteome Software, Portland, USA), and peptide identifications were accepted if they exceeded the following specific database search engine thresholds. SEQUEST identifications required at least deltaCn scores of greater than 0.1 and XCorr scores of greater than 2.2, 3.3 and 3.75 for doubly, triply and all higher charged peptides, respectively. Protein identifications were accepted if at least 2 identified peptides were detected with the above mentioned filter criteria in 2 out of 3 biological replicates. With these filter parameters, no false-positive hits were obtained, as was verified by a search against a concatenated target-pseudoreversed decoy database. Quantitative values of protein abundances were obtained by summing up all spectra associated with a specific protein within a sample, which includes also those spectra that are shared with other proteins. To allow comparisons, spectral counts were normalized by applying a scaling factor for each sample to each protein adjusting the values to normalized spectral counts. Of note, some proteins are easier to detect than others, which may affect the comparison of abundance levels of different proteins. The normalized spectral count data were exported from Scaffold and curated in Microsoft Excel before further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Staphylococcus aureus: with the sequence type (ST) 398 was previously associated with livestock carriage. However, in recent years livestock-independent <i>S. aureus</i> ST398 has emerged, representing a potential health risk for humans especially in nosocomial settings. Judged by whole-genome sequencing analyses, the livestock- and human originated strains belong to two different <i>S. aureus</i> ST398 clades but, to date, it was not known to what extent these clades differ in terms of actual virulence. Therefore, the objective of this study was to profile the exoproteomes of 30 representative <i>S. aureus</i> ST398 strains by mass spectrometry, to assess clade-specific differences in virulence factor secretion, and to correlate the identified proteins and their relative abundance to the strains' actual virulence. Although the human-originated strains are more heterogeneous at the genome level, our observations show that they are more homogeneous in terms of virulence factor production than the livestock-associated strains. To assess differences in virulence, infection models based on larvae of the wax moth <i>Galleria mellonella</i> and the human HeLa cell line were applied. Correlation of the exoproteome data to larval killing and toxicity toward HeLa cells uncovered critical roles of the staphylococcal Sbi, SpA, SCIN and CHIPS proteins in virulence. These findings were validated by showing that <i>sbi</i> or <i>spa</i> mutant bacteria are attenuated in <i>G. mellonella</i> and that the purified SCIN and CHIPS proteins are toxic for HeLa cells. Altogether, we show that exoproteome profiling allows the identification of critical determinants for virulence of livestock-associated and human-originated <i>S. aureus</i> ST398 strains.

### Keywords
Mobile genetic elements (mge), Extracellular proteome, Virulence, Methicillin-resistant staphylococcus aureus (mrsa), Label-free quantitative mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
University of Greifswald,
Department for Microbial Proteomics
Institute of Microbiology, University of Greifswald, Felix-Hausdorff-Str. 8, 17489 Greifswald, Germany

### Submitter
Sandra Maass

### Lab Head
Dr Dörte Becher
Institute of Microbiology, University of Greifswald, Felix-Hausdorff-Str. 8, 17489 Greifswald, Germany


