### Accession
PXD029729

### Title
In-depth mass spectrometry-based proteomics of formalin-fixed, paraffin embedded tissues with a spatial resolution of 50–200 µm

### Description
Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissues are banked in large repositories as a cost-effective means of preserving invaluable specimens for subsequent study, including for clinical proteomics in translational medicine. With the rapid growth of spatial proteomics, FFPE tissue samples can serve as a more accessible alternative to commonly used fresh frozen tissues. However, extracting proteins from FFPE tissue for analysis by mass spectrometry has been challenging due to crosslinks formed between proteins and formalin, particularly when studying limited samples. We have previously demonstrated that nanoPOTS (Nanodroplet Processing in One Pot for Trace Samples) is an enabling technology for high-resolution and in-depth spatial and single-cell proteomics measurements, but only fresh frozen tissues had been previously analyzed. Here we have adapted the nanoPOTS sample processing workflows for proteome profiling of 10-µm-thick FFPE tissues with lateral dimensions as small as 50 µm. Following a comparison of extraction solvents, times, and temperatures, and under the most favorable conditions, we respectively identified an average of 1180 and 2990 proteins from FFPE preserved mouse liver tissues having dimensions of 50 µm and 200 µm. This was on average 87% of the coverage achieved for fresh frozen mouse liver samples analyzed with the same general procedure. We also characterized the performance of our fully automated sample preparation and analysis workflow, termed autoPOTS, for FFPE spatial proteomics. These workflows provide the greatest depth of coverage reported to date for high-resolution spatial proteomics applied to FFPE tissues.

### Sample Protocol
The tissue-containing nanowell chips were then thawed to room temperature and DMSO was allowed to dry to about 40 nL in the nanowells. For preparation of fresh frozen tissues, our previously developed protocol was followed19 Briefly, 100 nL of protein extraction buffer (containing 0.1% DDM and 5 mM DTT in 50 mM ABC) was dispensed into each nanowell and incubated at 70 °C for 1 h. The nanowells were again allowed to air dry, after which proteins were alkylated with 150 nL of 30 mM IAA for 30 min in the dark. A two-step digestion was carried out at 37 °C with 50 nL of Lys-C (0.1 ng/nL) and 50 nL of trypsin (0.2 ng/nL) for 3 h and 10 h, respectively. The digestion was quenched with the addition of 50 nL of 0.1% TFA, and peptide solution was collected into a capillary tube (4 cm long, 200 µm id). The capillary was then sealed with Parafilm M at both ends and stored at -20 °C until LC-MS/MS analysis.  For FFPE tissues, the same procedure was followed but with variations in the protein extraction step evaluated for improved proteome coverage as described in Results and Discussion. These included incubating with the same extraction buffer but varying the extraction time from 60 to 180 min and the temperature from 60 to 90 °C. In addition, an alternate extraction buffer consisting of 50% TFE in 50 mM ABC buffer and 5 mM DTT was evaluated, which was incubated at 90 °C for 90 min.

### Data Protocol
The Raw files were processed using Proteome Discoverer Software 2.5 (Thermo). The mouse proteome database was downloaded from UniProtKB on June 6th, 2019. A two-step database search was performed using Sequest HT and Inferys with default settings. The MS/MS spectra were searched for fully tryptic peptides with N-terminal protein acetylation, methionine oxidation and N-terminal methionine loss acetylation set as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues as a fixed modification. The precursor and fragment mass tolerances were set to 5 ppm and 0.02 Da. The match between runs (MBR) feature detection (referred to as Feature Mapping in the software) matched features having a normalized retention time shift up to 0.7 min with a mass tolerance of 5 ppm. The precursor ions quantifier node was used to calculate protein abundances based on the top 3 distinct peptides from each protein. Protein abundances were normalized by total peptide amount. The peptides and proteins were filtered with a maximum FDR of 0.01. Both unique and razor peptides were selected for protein quantification. Other unmentioned parameters were used as default.

### Publication Abstract
Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissues are banked in large repositories to cost-effectively preserve valuable specimens for later study. With the rapid growth of spatial proteomics, FFPE tissues can serve as a more accessible alternative to more commonly used frozen tissues. However, extracting proteins from FFPE tissues is challenging due to cross-links formed between proteins and formaldehyde. Here, we have adapted the nanoPOTS sample processing workflow, which was previously applied to single cells and fresh-frozen tissues, to profile protein expression from FFPE tissues. Following the optimization of extraction solvents, times, and temperatures, we identified an average of 1312 and 3184 high-confidence master proteins from 10 &#x3bc;m thick FFPE-preserved mouse liver tissue squares having lateral dimensions of 50 and 200 &#x3bc;m, respectively. The observed proteome coverage for FFPE tissues was on average 88% of that achieved for similar fresh-frozen tissues. We also characterized the performance of our fully automated sample preparation and analysis workflow, termed autoPOTS, for FFPE spatial proteomics. This modified nanodroplet processing in one pot for trace samples (nanoPOTS) and fully automated processing in one pot for trace sample (autoPOTS) workflows provides the greatest coverage reported to date for high-resolution spatial proteomics applied to FFPE tissues. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD029729.

### Keywords
Ffpe, Spatial, Lcm, Ddm, Fresh frozen

### Affiliations
Brigham Young University
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Brigham Young University.

### Submitter
Ryan Kelly

### Lab Head
Dr Ryan T Kelly
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Brigham Young University.


