### Accession
PXD042938

### Title
Proteomic changes of CD19+ B Lymphocytes in COVID-19 Patients

### Description
The immune response to SARS-CoV-2 varies among patients. We used proteomic analysis to study CD19+ lymphocytes, which are important for the immune response. By comparing the proteomes of CD19+ cells from healthy individuals and COVID-19 patients, we discovered proteins and signaling pathways involved in the immune response during COVID-19. This knowledge improves our understanding of immune dysregulation in COVID-19 and can help develop targeted therapies. Our research also explores the role of CD19+ lymphocytes in COVID-19 and identifies potential biomarkers. Overall, our findings contribute to understanding COVID-19 immunology and inform future research efforts.

### Sample Protocol
Peripheral blood samples were diluted and centrifuged to separate the plasma. CD19+ B lymphocytes were isolated using magnetic bead-based cell sorting. The isolated cells were lysed through sonication and vortexing, followed by precipitation and centrifugation. The protein pellet was resuspended, and its concentration was determined. Proteins were then digested using trypsin and incubation steps involving DTT and IAA. Finally, the protein cleavage was stopped, and the samples were adjusted for the desired protein concentration.

### Data Protocol
Samples were loaded onto a trap column (PepMap™ Neo Trap Cartridge) of the Vanquish Neo nano UHPLC system (Thermo Scientific™). Peptides were eluted using a two-step gradient on an 50 cm analytical C18 column with 2 μm particles (EASY-Spray™ HPLC Column) at a flow rate of 0,25 μl/min. Mass spectrometry data was acquired using the Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific™) with nanoelectrospray source. Full-scan and data-dependent MS/MS spectra were recorded, fragmenting the most abundant ions using higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD). Protein identification and relative quantification were performed using Proteome Discoverer (version 2.5) software, utilizing the SequestHT search engine against a Uniprot Homo sapiens database (release 2023_02) containing 182,026 sequences. LFQ analysis of 6vs6 samples from COVID-19 patients and six healthy individuals using statistical t-test.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Covid-19, Lymphocytes, Cd19+

### Affiliations
Department of medical and clinical biophysics, Faculty of Medicine UPJŠ, Košice Slovakia
University of Pavol Jozef Šafárik in Košice

### Submitter
Miroslav Marcin

### Lab Head
Dr Ján Sabo
Department of medical and clinical biophysics, Faculty of Medicine UPJŠ, Košice Slovakia


