### Accession
PXD038494

### Title
Two Legume Fatty Acid Amide Hydrolase Isoforms with Distinct Preferences for Microbial- and Plant-Derived Acylamides

### Description
We combined computational and biochemical approaches to compare the structural and enzymatic properties of two FAAH isoforms in the legume Medicago truncatula designated MtFAAH1 and MtFAAH2a.

### Sample Protocol
Gel bands were dehydrated using 100% acetonitrile and incubated with 10mM dithiothreitol in 100mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH≈8, at 56°C for 45min, dehydrated again and incubated in the dark with 50mM iodoacetamide in 100mM ammonium bicarbonate for 20 min.  Gel bands were then washed with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate and dehydrated again.  Sequencing grade modified trypsin, chymotrypsin, and Asp-N was prepared to 0.01 µg/µL in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate and ≈50 µL of this was added to each gel band so that the gel was completely submerged.  Bands were then incubated at 37°C overnight.  Peptides were extracted from the gel by water bath sonication in a solution of 60% Acetonitrile/ 1% TCA and vacuum dried to ≈2 µL. Peptides were then re-suspended in 2% acetonitrile/ 0.1% TFA to 20 µL.  From this, 5 µL were automatically injected by EASYnLC 1000 onto a Thermo Acclaim PepMap 0.1mm x 20 mm C18 peptide trap and washed for ≈5min.  Bound peptides were then eluted onto a Thermo Acclaim PepMap RSLC 0.075mm x 250mm C18 column over 35 min with a gradient of 5% B to 38% B in 24min, ramping to 90% B at 25min and held at 90% B for the duration of the run at a constant flow rate of 0.3 µL/min (Buffer A = 99.9 % Water/0.1% Formic Acid, Buffer B = 99.9% Acetonitrile/0.1% Formic Acid). The column was maintained at 50°C using an integrated column heater (PRSO-V1, Sonation GmbH, Biberach, Germany). Eluted peptides were sprayed into a ThermoFisher Q-Exactive mass spectrometer using a Flex Spray spray ion source.  

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS spectra were converted to peak lists using Mascot Distiller, v2.8.0.1 (www.matrixscience.com) and searched against a database that included FAAH protein sequences and, E.coli protein sequences available from Uniprot (www.uniprot.org) appended with common laboratory contaminants (downloaded from www.thegpm.org, cRAP project) using the Mascot searching algorithm, v 2.7.1.  The Mascot output was then analyzed using Scaffold, v5.0.1 (www.proteomesoftware.com) to probabilistically validate protein identifications.  Assignments validated using the Scaffold 1% FDR confidence filter are considered true.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Recombinant protein

### Affiliations
University of North Texas Department of Biological Sciences 1155 Union Circle #305220 Denton, TX  76203-5017
University of North Texas

### Submitter
Omar Arias-Gaguancela

### Lab Head
Dr Kent Chapman
University of North Texas Department of Biological Sciences 1155 Union Circle #305220 Denton, TX  76203-5017


