### Accession
PXD003932

### Title
Spatial and temporal effects in protein post-translational modification distributions in the developing mouse brain

### Description
Protein post-translational modification (PTM) is a powerful way to modify the behavior of cellular proteins and thereby cellular behavior. Multiple recent studies of evolutionary trends have shown that certain pairs of protein post-translational modifications tend to occur closer to each other than expected at random. This type of observation may form the basis of a proposed "PTM code", whereby protein function is controlled by complex patterns of multiple PTMs. This code could provide an additional, powerful level of regulatory control for protein function and is a plausible explanation for observations of increasingly frequent and diverse protein modification in cell biology. In this study, we use mass spectrometry and proteomic strategies to present biological data showing spatiotemporal PTM co-localization across multiple PTM categories, which display changes over development of the brain. This may be an indication of the existence of a PTM-based functional coding mechanism, which would significantly expand our view of the ways in which cells use protein PTMs in complex signaling networks.

### Sample Protocol
Sample Preparation:  Brains were dounce homogenized in 0.1 M Na2CO3 (ice cold) containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Roche, Meylan, France) and then tip-probe sonicated 2 × 20 s on ice. Homogenates were ultracentrifuged at 150,000g for 1.5 h. Pellets (membrane fractions) were resuspended in 6 M urea/2 M thiourea. Supernatants (soluble fractions) were precipitated using 20% trichloroacetic acid, and pellets from this precipitation were resuspended in 6 M urea/2 M thiourea. Samples were reduced in 10 mM dithiothreitol and then alkylated using 20 mM iodoacetamide. Lysyl-endopeptidase (Wako, Osaka, Japan) was added for 3 h, and then samples were diluted 6-fold in 50 mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate. Trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) was added at a ratio of 1:40 (w/w) and left for 18 h to digest. Digests were acidified with formic acid (2% final concentration), and aliquots were quantified using amino acid analysis. Equal amounts of protein from each were iTRAQ fourplex labeled according to manufacturer’s instructions (AB Sciex, MA, USA) and combined. Peptide Enrichments: Combined peptide samples were diluted in 80% acetonitrile, 5% trifluoroacetic acid, and 1 M glycolic acid and enriched using titanium dioxide (GL Science, Japan) essentially as per published techniques.(17-19) Briefly, beads were added to samples at 0.6 mg/100 μg (bead/peptide), incubated, and washed with 80% ACN/1% TFA and then 10% ACN/0.1% TFA. Phosphopeptides were eluted with pH 11 ammonia solution (Merck & Co., Inc., NJ, USA). Flow through from this enrichment was cleaned up on Oasis HLB columns (Waters, MA, USA), dried down, and then immunoprecipitated for lysine acetylation following published procedures.(20) Elutions from TiO2 were separated into multi- and monophosphorylated fractions using SIMAC.(21) Multiphosphorylated elutions were cleaned up on homemade R3 columns and dried down for MS analysis. Monophosphorylated elutions were adjusted to 70% ACN/2% TFA and enriched again using TiO2, cleaned up on R3, and then dried down for chromatography. All peptide samples were then resuspended in pH 7.4 ammonium bicarbonate and deglycosylated using PNGase F (Roche) and sialidase A (Prozyme, CA, USA) before being desalted once more and lyophilized. Chromatographic Separation All peptide samples excepting those multiphosphorylated were separately resuspended in 90% ACN/0.1% TFA and loaded onto an Agilent 1200 (Agilent, CA, USA) chromatography system running in HILIC mode. HILIC resin was TSK-gel Amide 80 (Tosoh Bioscience, Japan). Samples were separated over a gradient of 100% to 60% organic solvent over 30 min, then 60% to 0% over 15 min. Fractions were collected every minute at absorbances over 500 AU on a UV detector and every 5 min otherwise. All fractions were lyophilized. Mass Spectrometry: Dry fractions were resuspended in 0.1% FA and loaded onto a Thermo EasyLC. Peptides were eluted using a 0% to 60% organic gradient over 70 min, then 60% to 100% over 20 min. Multiphosphorylated fractions were separated over a gradient proportionally twice this length. All LC–MS runs were performed on 75 μm inner diameter fused silica columns, packed with C18 material (Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). Mass spectrometry was performed using higher energy collision fragmentation (HCD) fragmentation on a Thermo LTQ Velos (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Quantification was performed on reporter tags at m/z 114, 115, 116, and 117. MS settings: A full MS scan in the mass area of 400–1800 Da was performed in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 30,000 fwhm and a target value of 1 × 106 ions. For each full scan the seven most intense ions (>+1 charge state) were selected for higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) and detected at a resolution of 7500 fwhm. The settings for the HCD were as follows: threshold for ion selection was 20,000, the target value of ions used for HCD was 1 × 105, activation time was 10 ms, isolation window was 2.5 Da, and normalized collision energy was 48.

### Data Protocol
Data was searched using Thermo Proteome Discoverer (version 1.3.0.339) allowing for variable phosphorylation, asparagine deamidation and acetylation, as well as methionine oxidation. iTRAQ labeling was also set as a variable modification in order to detect lysine modification, while cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification. Data were searched against a Swiss-prot rodent database (UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot 2012_10), precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance of 0.05 Da. Data were filtered to a 1% false discovery rate using Proteome Discoverer’s percolator function, and peptide identifications were filtered to remove those with a Mascot scores less than 18.

### Publication Abstract
Protein post-translational modification (PTM) is a powerful way to modify the behavior of cellular proteins and thereby cellular behavior. Multiple recent studies of evolutionary trends have shown that certain pairs of protein post-translational modifications tend to occur closer to each other than expected at random. This type of observation may form the basis of a proposed "PTM code", whereby protein function is controlled by complex patterns of multiple PTMs. This code could provide an additional, powerful level of regulatory control for protein function and is a plausible explanation for observations of increasingly frequent and diverse protein modification in cell biology. In this study, we use mass spectrometry and proteomic strategies to present biological data showing spatiotemporal PTM co-localization across multiple PTM categories, which display changes over development of the brain. This may be an indication of the existence of a PTM-based functional coding mechanism, which would significantly expand our view of the ways in which cells use protein PTMs in complex signaling networks.

### Keywords
Mouse brain, Post-translational modifications, Development

### Affiliations
University of Southern Denmark

### Submitter
Veit  Schwämmle

### Lab Head
Dr Martin R Larsen
University of Southern Denmark


