### Accession
PXD029927

### Title
Melanoma RBPome identification reveals PDIA6 as an unconventional RNA-binding protein involved in metastasis

### Description
RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) have been relatively overlooked in cancer research despite their contribution to virtually every cancer hallmark. Here, we use RNA interactome capture(RIC) to characterize the melanoma RBPome and uncover novel RBPs involved in melanoma progression. Comparison of RIC profiles of two melanoma cell lines with different aggressiveness revealed prevalent changes in RNA binding capacities that were not associated with changes in RBP levels. Extensive functional validation of a selected group of 24 RBPs using five differentin vitroassays unveiled unanticipated roles of RBPs in melanoma malignancy. As proof-of-principle we focused on PDIA6, an ER-lumen chaperone that displayed a novel RNA-binding activity. We show that PDIA6 is involved in metastatic progression and map its RNA-binding domain, which we find to be required for PDIA6 tumorigenic properties. These results exemplify how RIC technologies can be harnessed to uncover novelvulnerabilities of cancer cells.

### Sample Protocol
Samples in 6M Urea 200nM amonium bicarbonatye were reduced with dithiothreitol (30 nmol, 37 ºC, 60 min) and alkylated in the dark with iodoacetamide (60 nmol, 25 ºC, 30 min). The resulting protein extract was first diluted to 2M urea with 200 mM ammonium bicarbonate for digestion with endoproteinase LysC (1:10 w:w, 37ºC, o/n, Wako, cat # 129-02541), and then diluted 2-fold with 200 mM ammonium bicarbonate for trypsin digestion (1:10 w:w, 37ºC, 8h, Promega cat # V5113).After digestion, peptide mixes were acidified with formic acid and desalted with a MicroSpin C18 column (The Nest Group, Inc) prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. RBPome mass-spec analysis: Samples were analyzed using a LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 using 60 minut gradients in DDA mode. Proteome mass-spec analysis: Samples were analyzed using a Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 using 90 minute gradients in DDA mode (HCD-IT)

### Data Protocol
RBPome: Acquired spectra were analyzed using the Proteome Discoverer v1.4 and the Mascot search engine v2.5. The data was searched against a SwissProt Human database plus a list of common contaminants and all the corresponding decoy entries. For peptide identification a precursor ion mass tolerance of 7 ppm was used for MS1 level, trypsin was chosen as enzyme and up to three missed cleavages were allowed. The fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da for MS2 spectra. Oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation were used as variable modifications whereas carbamidomethylation on cysteines was set as a fixed modification.False discovery rate (FDR) in peptide identification was set to a maximum of 5%. For the identification of RBPome, Significance Analysis of INTeractome (SAINT) Express algorithm was used. Proteomes: The acquired data was analyzed independently for each cell line in Proteome Discoverer software v2.0 and the Mascot search engine v2.5 against a Swiss-Prot human database plus a list of common contaminants and all the corresponding decoy entries. For peptide identification a precursor ion mass tolerance of 7 ppm was used for MS1 level, trypsin was chosen as enzyme, and up to three missed cleavages were allowed. The fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da for MS2 spectra. Oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation were used as variable modifications whereas carbamidomethylation on cysteines was set as a fixed modification. False discovery rate (FDR) in peptide identification was set to a maximum of 5%. Peptide quantification data were retrieved from the “Precursor ion area detector” node from Proteome Discoverer (v2.0) using 2 ppm mass tolerance for the peptide extracted ion current (XIC). Protein abundance was estimated as the average peak area of the 3 most intense peptides. Data was Log2 transformed and normalized by the total abundance of each sample. The obtained values were used to calculate protein fold-changes between cell lines and their corresponding pvalues and adjusted p-values.  

### Publication Abstract
RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) have been relatively overlooked in cancer research despite their contribution to virtually every cancer hallmark. Here, we use RNA interactome capture (RIC) to characterize the melanoma RBPome and uncover novel RBPs involved in melanoma progression. Comparison of RIC profiles of a non-tumoral versus a metastatic cell line revealed prevalent changes in RNA-binding capacities that were not associated with changes in RBP levels. Extensive functional validation of a selected group of 24 RBPs using five different in vitro assays unveiled unanticipated roles of RBPs in melanoma malignancy. As proof-of-principle we focused on PDIA6, an ER-lumen chaperone that displayed a novel RNA-binding activity. We show that PDIA6 is involved in metastatic progression, map its RNA-binding domain, and find that RNA binding is required for PDIA6 tumorigenic properties. These results exemplify how RIC technologies can be harnessed to uncover novel vulnerabilities of cancer cells.

### Keywords
Rbp, Melanoma, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
UPF
CRG, UPF

### Submitter
Eva Borràs

### Lab Head
Dr Eduard Sabido
CRG, UPF


