### Accession
PXD026287

### Title
Two zinc finger proteins with functions in m6A writing interact with HAKAI

### Description
The methyltransferase complex (m6A writer), which catalyzes the deposition of N6-methyladenosine (m6A) in mRNAs, is highly conserved across most eukaryotic organisms, but its components and interactions between them are still far from fully understood. Using in vivo interaction proteomics, two HAKAI-interacting zinc finger proteins, HIZ1 and HIZ2, were discovered as novel components of the Arabidopsis m6A writer complex. HAKAI is required for the interaction between HIZ1 and MTA. Whilst HIZ1 knockout plants have normal levels of m6A, plants in which it is overexpressed show reduced methylation. In addition, HIZ1 was found to be involved in root hair development upon auxin transport inhibition in a HAKAI-dependent manner. Mutant plants lacking HIZ2 are viable but have an 85% reduction in m6A abundance and show severe developmental defects. Our findings suggest that HIZ1 appears to be a HAKAI-dependent negative regulator of m6A deposition and HIZ2 is a novel and essential member of the Arabidopsis m6A writer complex.

### Sample Protocol
Freshly harvested two-week old seedlings were crosslinked using 1% (v/v) formaldehyde and the crosslinking was quenched by 0.125 M glycine solution. Nuclei were isolated from ground frozen sample powder using HONDA buffer (20 mM Hepes KOH pH 7.4, 10 mM MgCl2, 440 mM sucrose, 1.25% (v/v) Ficoll, 2.5% (v/v) Dextran T40, 0.5% (v/v) Triton X-100, 5 mM DTT, 5 mM PMSF and 1% (v/v) Plant Protease Inhibitor Inhibitors). After centrifuging at 2,000 g for 17 min at 4째C, the pellet was washed twice with HONDA buffer. The isolated nuclei samples were lysed using Nuclei lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 10 mM EDTA pH 8.0, 1% (w/v) SDS, 1 mM PMSF and 1% (v/v) Plant Protease Inhibitor Inhibitors) via sonication using a water bath sonicator (Diagenode Bioruptor 200) on low power with 4 cycles of 30 s ON and 60 s OFF. After centrifugation at 16,100 g for 15 min at 4째C, the supernatant was diluted using IP dilution buffer (16.7 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 1.2 mM EDTA pH 8.0, 167 mM NaCl, 1.1% (v/v) Triton X-100 and 1% (v/v) Plant Protease Inhibitors) and then pre-washed GFP-Trap_A agarose beads (ChromoTek) was added to pull down target protein complex. The mixture was incubated at 4째C with rotation for 5 h. Afterwards, beads were washed 3 times using Beads washing buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 2 mM EDTA pH 8.0, 1% (v/v) Triton X-100, 0.1% (w/v) SDS and 1 mM PMSF). Samples were incubated at 90째C for 30 min to reverse formaldehyde crosslinking. After running samples on SDS-PAGE gel, the gel for the same lane was cut into 5 slices. Protein samples were digested into peptides by trypsin and then analyzed on LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). 3 biological replicates were performed for each line.

### Data Protocol
After mass spectrometry, raw files corresponding to five slices from the same lane were merged together in MaxQuant (version 1.6.0.16). Peptide analysis was performed via MaxQuant. Arabidopsis Uniprot protein database was used as a reference. The MaxQuant output files containing proteins that were identified in each sample were subsequently analyzed using Perseus (version 1.6.15.0). The Student t-test was used in the statistical analysis for two samples (False discovery rate (FDR) = 0.1). Data were visualized on a volcano plot and proteins were plotted based on their enrichment versus that in WT using label free quantification (LFQ) and the significance was analyzed based on the negative logarithm of the p-value derived from the t-test (-log10p-value). Significantly-enriched proteins were separated from other proteins by a hyperbolic curve.

### Publication Abstract
The methyltransferase complex (m<sup>6</sup>A writer), which catalyzes the deposition of N<sup>6</sup>-methyladenosine (m<sup>6</sup>A) in mRNAs, is highly conserved across most eukaryotic organisms, but its components and interactions between them are still far from fully understood. Here, using in vivo interaction proteomics, two HAKAI-interacting zinc finger proteins, HIZ1 and HIZ2, are discovered as components of the Arabidopsis m<sup>6</sup>A writer complex. HAKAI is required for the interaction between HIZ1 and MTA (mRNA adenosine methylase A). Whilst HIZ1 knockout plants have normal levels of m<sup>6</sup>A, plants in which it is overexpressed show reduced methylation and decreased lateral root formation. Mutant plants lacking HIZ2 are viable but have an 85% reduction in m<sup>6</sup>A abundance and show severe developmental defects. Our findings suggest that HIZ2 is likely the plant equivalent of ZC3H13 (Flacc) of the metazoan m<sup>6</sup>A-METTL Associated Complex.

### Keywords
['Arabidopsis thaliana', 'N6-methyladenosine (m6a)', 'Zinc finger proteins', 'In vivo crosslinking', 'Hakai']

### Affiliations
['The University of Nottingham', 'Room C33 Plant Sciences Sutton Bonington Campus, the University of Nottingham Sutton Bonington Leicestershire LE12 5RD UK']

### Submitter
['Mi Zhang']

### Lab Head
[{'title': 'Dr', 'affiliation': 'Room C33 Plant Sciences Sutton Bonington Campus, the University of Nottingham Sutton Bonington Leicestershire LE12 5RD UK', 'email': 'rupert.fray@nottingham.ac.uk', 'country': '', 'orcid': '', 'name': 'Rupert G. Fray', 'id': '2249967'}]

### SDRF
characteristics[organism]: ['Arabidopsis thaliana']
characteristics[organism part]: ['whole seedlings']
characteristics[cell type]: ['plant cell']
characteristics[disease]: ['not applicable']
comment[label]: ['NT=label free sample;AC=MS:1002038']
comment[instrument]: ['NT=LTQ Orbitrap Velos;AC=MS:1001742']
comment[modification parameters]: ['NT=oxidation;MT=variable;TA=M;AC=UNIMOD:35']
comment[modification parameters].1: ['NT=Acetyl;AC=UNIMOD:1;PP=Protein N-term;MT=variable']

