### Accession
PXD028002

### Title
Mapping protein interactions in the active TOM-TIM23 supercomplex

### Description
Nuclear-encoded mitochondrial proteins destined for the matrix have to be transported across two membranes. The TOM and TIM23 complexes facilitate the transport of precursor proteins with N-terminal targeting signals into the matrix. During transport, precursors are recognized by the TIM23 complex in the inner membrane for handover from the TOM complex. However, we have little knowledge on the organisation of the TOM-TIM23 transition zone and on how precursor transfer between the translocases occurs. Here, we designed a precursor protein that is stalled during matrix transport in a TOM-TIM23-spanning manner and enables purification of the translocation intermediate. Combining chemical cross-linking with mass spectrometric analyses and structural modelling allowed us to map the molecular environment of the intermembrane space interface of TOM and TIM23 as well as the import motor interactions with amino acid resolution. Our analyses provide a framework for understanding presequence handover and translocation during matrix protein transport.

### Sample Protocol
TIM23 complexes were affinity-purified from yeast mitochondria in absence or presence of Jac1sfGFP blocking protein. The isolated complexes were treated with 2 mM DSS (three independent experiments) or 10 mM EDC for 3 h on ice, followed by quenching of the reaction with 250 µM glycine pH 8.0 for 30 min. For SDA cross-linking, 2 mM SDA was added to isolated complex for 2 h at 4°C. The cross-linking reaction was quenched with 50 mM Tris-HCl and free SDA was removed by dialysis. Afterwards, the samples were irradiated with UV light (365 nm) for 5 min at 4°C. The samples were precipitated with acetone, resuspended in 4 M urea/50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol and subsequently alkylated with 40 mM iodoacetamide. Proteins were digested with the endoproteinase trypsin in an enzyme-to-protein ratio of 1:50 (w:w) in the presence of 1 M urea at 37°C overnight. The reaction was terminated with 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) (v/v) and peptides were desalted on MicroSpin Columns (Harvard Apparatus). Vacuum-dried peptides were resuspended in 50 µL 30% acetonitrile/0.1% TFA.  DSS and EDC-cross-linked peptides were enriched by peptide size exclusion chromatography (Superdex Peptide 3.2/300 column, GE Healthcare), while basic pH reverse phase chromatography with an xBridge C18 3.5µm 1x150mm column (Waters) was used to fractionate SDA-cross-linked peptides. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed in technical duplicates on a Oribitrap Q Exactive HF (for SDA treated samples), Oribitrap Q Exactive HF-X (for EDC treated samples), Orbitrap Fusion  or Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (DSS treated samples) coupled to Dionex UltiMate 3000 UHPLC systems (all Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with an in house-packed C18 column (ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 µm pore size, 75 µm inner diameter, 30 cm length, Dr. Maisch GmbH). MS1 full scans were acquired in the orbitrap (OT) with a resolution of 120,000. Precursors with charge states between 3 and 8 were selected for fragmentation. MS2 spectra were acquired in the OT at a resolution of 30,000. Fragmentation was triggered by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD).

### Data Protocol
Raw files acquired for samples cross-linked with DSS were converted to mgf file format by Proteome Discoverer (v. 1.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The signal-to-noise ratio was set to 1.5 and the precursor mass between 1,000 and 10,000 Da. The mgf files were analyzed by pLink v. 1.23 for the identification of cross-linked peptides. Default settings were applied with carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine residues as variable modification. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% at spectrum level. A dedicated protein database including known proteins of the TOM-TIM23 complex was provided for the pLink search including Jac1sfGFP fusion protein, based on the prior identification of linear peptides by MaxQuant v. 1.6.0.1. Cross-linked peptide spectrum matches (CSMs) were evaluated manually. Raw files acquired for samples cross-linked with EDC and SDA were analyzed by pLink v. 2.3.9 for the identification of cross-linked peptide. The settings were as described above except that FDR was set to 5% on spectrum level; CSMs were not evaluated manually.

### Publication Abstract
Nuclear-encoded mitochondrial proteins destined for the matrix have to be transported across two membranes. The TOM and TIM23 complexes facilitate the transport of precursor proteins with N-terminal targeting signals into the matrix. During transport, precursors are recognized by the TIM23 complex in the inner membrane for handover from the TOM complex. However, we have little knowledge on the organization of the TOM-TIM23 transition zone and on how precursor transfer between the translocases occurs. Here, we have designed a precursor protein that is stalled during matrix transport in a TOM-TIM23-spanning manner and enables purification of the translocation intermediate. Combining chemical cross-linking with mass spectrometric analyses and structural modeling allows us to map the molecular environment of the intermembrane space interface of TOM and TIM23 as well as the import motor interactions with amino acid resolution. Our analyses provide a framework for understanding presequence handover and translocation during matrix protein transport.

### Keywords
Translocation, Tom23, Structural modelling, Mitochondria, Lc-msms, Tim, Crosslinking, Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Multidisciplinary Sciences
Max-Planck-Institute for Biophysical Chemistry Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Group  Am Fassberg 11, Goettingen, Germany ************************************************ University Medical Center Goettingen Bioanalytics Institute for Clinical Chemistry Robert Koch Strasse 40, Goettingen, Germany

### Submitter
Olexandr Dybkov

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Henning Urlaub
Max-Planck-Institute for Biophysical Chemistry Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Group  Am Fassberg 11, Goettingen, Germany ************************************************ University Medical Center Goettingen Bioanalytics Institute for Clinical Chemistry Robert Koch Strasse 40, Goettingen, Germany


