### Accession
PXD013836

### Title
Human Breast LC-MSMS -  Quantitative site- and structure-specific N-glycoproteomics characterization of differential N-glycosylation in MCF-7/ADR cancer stem cells

### Description
Cancer stem cells (CSCs) are reported to be responsible for tumor initiation, progression, metastasis, and therapy resistance where P-glycoprotein (P-gp) as well as other glycoproteins are involved. Identification of these glycoprotein markers is critical for understanding the resistance mechanism and developing therapeutics. Here we report our comparative N-glycoproteomics study of MCF‐7/ADR vs. MCF-7 cells. With zic-HILIC enrichment, isotopic diethyl labeling, RPLC-MS/MS (HCD) analysis and GPSeeker DB search, differentially expressed N-glycosylation was quantitatively characterized at the intact N-glycopeptides levels.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture of MCF7/ADR and MCF7/ADR CSCs. Drug-resistant cell line MCF-7/ADR was cultured using DMEM (Thermo Scientific Hyclone, MA, USA) supplied with 10% fetal bovine serum and 100 U/mL penicillin and 100 μg/mL streptomycin at 37°C and 5% CO2. To maintain a highly drug-resistant cell population, MCF-7/ADR cells were periodically reselected by growing them in the presence of 1000 ng/mL DOX. Experiments were performed using the cells incubated without DOX for 48 h. CD24-microbeads and CD44-microbeads antibodies (Miltenyi Biotec, Germany) were used for cell sorting of Breast Cancer Stem Cells (BCSCs)11. Brieﬂy, 10⁷ total MCF-7/ADR cells were incubated with the above antibodies on ice for 40 min. After washing with cold PBS, CD44+CD24−/low BCSCs which named MCF7/ADR-CSC were purified from MCF-7/ADR cell lines. Then, MCF7/ADR-CSC characteristics were regularly detected by flow cytometry and maintained into ultra-low attachment six well plates (Corning, New York, USA) in MammoCult™ Human Medium Kit (Stem cell technologies, Vancouver, Canada) according to manufacturer's guideline12. Protein extraction and trypsin digestion. Cells (either MCF7/ADR or MCF7/ADR CSCs, two 10 cm-dishes) were disrupted on ice in 1 mL of lysis buffer (0.1 M Tris/HCl, 4% SDS, pH 8.0) by sonication (Ningbo Scientz Biotechnology CO, .LTD, China) for 15 min. The whole cell lysates were centrifuged at 14,000 rpm and 4 °C for 15 min, and the supernatant protein mixtures were collected. After acetone precipitation, proteins were dissolved in 1 mL of 8 M urea and protein concentration was determined by BCA assay (SK3021, Sangon Biotech, Shanghai, China).   1 mg of proteins were reduced with 20 mM DTT (20 min, 55 °C), alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide (in the dark, 30 min, RT), and digested with trypsin (1:50 w/w, 37 °C, 16 h, stopping reagent 0.5% TFA). The digests were desalted using house-made C18-tip and eluted with 400 μL of 50% ACN and 400 μL of 80% ACN. Desalted peptides were concentrated and stored at -20 °C for further use. ZIC-HILIC enrichment of intact N-glycopeptides. Intact N-glycopeptides were enriched using ZIC-HILIC (zwitterionic type of hydrophilic interaction chromatography) particles. Briefly, desalted peptides were redissolved in 80% ACN with 1% TFA (defined as washing buffer) and loaded onto a house-made pipette tip containing 30 mg ZIC-HILIC particles (Merk Millipore, 5 μm, 200 Å) which were pre-equilibrated with 0.1% TFA (defined as elution buffer). The tip was then washed using 800 μL washing buffer. Enriched N-glycopeptides were eluted with 400 μL elution buffer, dried in a vacuum concentrator, and finally resuspended in ultrapure water for further analysis. Isotopic diethyl labelling of the enriched intact N-glycopeptides. Stock solution of NaBH3CN (600 mM), CH3CHO (20%, w/w), 13CH313CHO (20%, w/w), NH4OH (10%, v/v) and formic acid (5%, v/v) were freshly made. Diethylation of N-terminal and lysine amino groups with CH3CHO and NaBH3CN was carried out using the same protocol as reported for peptides. Two identical aliquots of MCF7 and MCF7-CSC N-glycopeptides were enriched and re-suspended in 100 μL TFE, and 8 μL 20% acetaldehyde or acetaldehyde-13C2 was added. Subsequently, 8 μL freshly prepared 600 mM NaBH3CN was added and incubated at 37°C for 1 h, and the reaction was quenched with incubation with 8 μL 4% (v/v) NH4OH for 1 min followed by addition of 6 μL 5% (v/v) FA. After concentrated, the labeled N-glycopeptides were desalted using house-made C18-tip and eluted with 250 μL of 50% ACN and 250 μL of 80% ACN. Desalted peptides were concentrated and re-suspended in ultrapure water for further analysis.

### Data Protocol
Database search and identification of intact N-glycopeptides in MCF7/ADR CSCs and MCF7/ADR using intact N-glycopeptide search engine GPSeeker The RPLC-MS/MS (HCD) datasets were searched by DB search engine GPSeeker for intact N-glycopeptide identification with FDR control; the details have been reported elsewhere and only a brief description is given here. Four theoretical customized human intact N-glycopeptides databases of two directions (forward and decoy) and two labels (light and heavy diethylation) were first created, and each dataset was searched against the four databases independently. The search parameters for the precursor and fragment ions are isotopic abundance cutoff (IPACO), isotopic peak m/z deviation (IPMD), and isotopic abundance deviation (IPAD); the adopted IPACO, IPMD, IPAD values for both the precursor and the fragment ions are 40%, 20 ppm, and IPAD=50%, respectively. Initial GPSMs were obtained with the following refinement criteria: Y1 ions, Top4; minimal percentage of matched fragment ions of N-glycosite-containing peptides, ≥10%; minimal matched product ions of N-glycan, ≥1; TopN hits, N=2 (top1 hits have the lowest P score). For each dataset, the target and decoy GPSMs from search of the four databases were combined and ranked with increasing P score, and a cutoff P score was then chosen to achieve spectrum-level FDR≤1%. Target GPSMs with P scores lower than the cutoff value were grouped with the criteria of “peptide sequence, N-glycosite, and N-glycan linkage” for removal of duplicates and generation of the final list of intact N-glycopeptide IDs.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Cscs, Lc-msms, Breast, Mcf7/adr

### Affiliations
Tongji University
TOngji University

### Submitter
Yue Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Zhixin Tian
TOngji University


