### Accession
PXD035925

### Title
GENOMIC INVESTIGATIONS OF ACUTE HEPATITIS OF UNKNOWN AETIOLOGY IN CHILDREN

### Description
Since the first reports of hepatitis of unknown aetiology occurring in UK children, over 1000 cases have been reported worldwide, including 268 cases in the UK, with the majority younger than 6 years old. Using genomic, proteomic and immunohistochemical methods, we undertook extensive investigation of 28 cases and 136 control subjects. In five cases who underwent liver transplantation, we detected high levels of adeno-associated virus 2 (AAV2) in the explanted livers. AAV2 was also detected at high levels in blood from 10/11 non-transplanted cases. Low levels of Adenovirus (HAdV) and Human Herpesvirus 6B (HHV-6B), both of which enable AAV2 lytic replication, were also found in the five explanted livers and blood from 15/17 and 6/9 respectively, of the 23 non-transplant cases tested. In contrast, AAV2 was detected at low titre in 6/100 whole bloods from child controls from cohorts with presence or absence of hepatitis and/or adenovirus infection. Our data show an association of AAV2 at high titre in blood or liver tissue, with unexplained hepatitis in children infected in the recent HAdV-F41 outbreak. We were unable to find evidence by electron microscopy, immunohistochemistry or proteomics of HAdV or AAV2 viral particles or proteins in explanted livers, suggesting that hepatic pathology is not due to direct lytic infection by either virus. The potential that AAV2, although not previously associated with disease, may, together with HAdV-F41 and/or HHV-6, be causally implicated in the outbreak of unexplained hepatitis, requires further investigation.

### Sample Protocol
Patients’ tissues were homogenized in lysis buffer, 100 mM Tris (pH 8.5), 5% Sodium dodecyl sulfate, 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine, 20 mM chloroacetamide then heated at 95 degrees for 10 minutes and sonicated in ultrasonic bath for other 10. The lysed proteins were quantified with NanoDrop 2000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). 100 µg were precipitated with Methanol/Chloroform protocol and then protein pellets were reconstituted in 100 mM tris (pH 8.5) and 4% sodium deoxycholate (SDC). The proteins were subjected to proteolysis with 1:50 trypsin overnight at 37°C with constant shaking. Digestion was stopped by adding 1% trifluoroacetic acid to a final concentration of 0.5%. Precipitated SDC was removed by centrifugation at 10,000g for 5 min, and the supernatant containing digested peptides was desalted on an SOLAµ HRP (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were first fractionated with high-pH. 12 fractions of peptides were dried and dissolved in 2% formic acid before liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) analysis.A total of 2000 ng of the mixture of tryptic peptides was analysed using an Ultimate3000 high-performance liquid chromatography system coupled online to an Eclipse mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Buffer A consisted of water acidified with 0.1% formic acid, while buffer B was 80% acetonitrile and 20% water with 0.1% formic acid. The peptides were first trapped for 1 min at 30 μl/min with 100% buffer A on a trap (0.3 mm by 5 mm with PepMap C18, 5 μm, 100 Å; Thermo Fisher Scientific); after trapping, the peptides were separated by a 50-cm analytical column (Acclaim PepMap, 3 μm; Thermo Fisher Scientific). The gradient was 9 to 35% B in 103 min at 300 nl/min. Buffer B was then raised to 55% in 2 min and increased to 99% for the cleaning step. Peptides were ionized using a spray voltage of 2.1 kV and a capillary heated at 280°C. The mass spectrometer was set to acquire full-scan MS spectra (350 to 1400 mass/charge ratio) for a maximum injection time set to Auto at a mass resolution of 120,000 and an automated gain control (AGC) target value of 100%. For a second the most intense precursor ions were selected for MS/MS. HCD fragmentation was performed in the HCD cell, with the readout in the Orbitrap mass analyser at a resolution of 15,000 (isolation window of 3 Th) and an AGC target value of 200% with a maximum injection time set to Auto and a normalized collision energy of 30%.

### Data Protocol
All raw files were analysed by MaxQuant v2.1 software using the integrated Andromeda search engine and searched against the Human UniProt Reference Proteome (February release with 79,057 protein sequences) together with UniProt reported AAVs proteins and specific fasta created using EMBOSS Sixpack translating patient’s virus genome. MaxQuant35 was used with the standard parameters with only the addition of deamidation (N) as variable modification. Data analysis was then carried out with Perseus v2.05: Proteins reported in the file “proteinGroups.txt” were filtered for reverse and potential contaminants.

### Publication Abstract
Since its first identification in Scotland, over 1,000 cases of unexplained paediatric hepatitis in children have been reported worldwide, including 278 cases in the UK<sup>1</sup>. Here we report an investigation of 38 cases, 66 age-matched immunocompetent controls and 21 immunocompromised comparator participants, using a combination of genomic, transcriptomic, proteomic and immunohistochemical methods. We detected high levels of adeno-associated virus 2 (AAV2) DNA in the liver, blood, plasma or stool from 27 of 28 cases. We found low levels of adenovirus (HAdV) and human herpesvirus 6B (HHV-6B) in 23 of 31 and 16 of 23, respectively, of the cases tested. By contrast, AAV2 was infrequently detected and&#xa0;at low titre in the blood or the liver from control children with HAdV, even when profoundly immunosuppressed. AAV2, HAdV and HHV-6 phylogeny excluded the emergence of novel strains in cases. Histological analyses of explanted livers showed enrichment for T cells and B lineage cells. Proteomic comparison of liver tissue from cases and healthy controls identified increased expression of HLA class 2, immunoglobulin variable regions and complement proteins. HAdV and AAV2 proteins were not detected in the livers. Instead, we identified AAV2 DNA complexes reflecting both HAdV-mediated and HHV-6B-mediated replication. We hypothesize that high levels of abnormal AAV2 replication products aided by HAdV and, in severe cases, HHV-6B may have triggered immune-mediated hepatic disease in genetically and immunologically predisposed children.

### Keywords
Liver, Epatitis, Proteomics, Fractionatio

### Affiliations
Institute of Structural and Molecular Biology, Division of Biosciences, University College London, London, United Kingdom
UCL Mass Spectrometry Science Technology Platform, Division of Biosciences, University College London, London

### Submitter
Riccardo Zenezini Chiozzi

### Lab Head
Dr Konstantinos Thalassinos
Institute of Structural and Molecular Biology, Division of Biosciences, University College London, London, United Kingdom


