### Accession
PXD020190

### Title
The trypanosome UDP-glucose pyrophosphorylase is active in both the glycosomal and cytosolic compartments and is imported into glycosomes by piggybacking

### Description
Trypanosoma brucei, the etiological agent of sleeping sickness, has particular peroxisome-like organelles called glycosomes where several metabolic pathways are compartmentalized, including glycolysis. Many enzymes from sugar nucleotide biosynthetic pathways are located in this organelle, contrasting with the cytosolic localisation reported in the eukaryota domain. The UDP-glucose pyrophosphorylase (UGP), the enzyme responsible for UDP-glucose (UDP-Glc) production, is essential for growth and survival of trypanosomes. In addition, UGP is localized in both glycosomes and cytosol, raising questions about why would these parasites maintain a pathway functional in two different subcellular compartments. UGP is imported into glycosomes by piggybacking on the glycosomal protein PEPCK, which is the first evidence of piggybacking involving two proteins not functionally related, and the first report in trypanosomatids.  The dataset demonstrates that UGP is present in the total cellular extract and the glycocomal fraction of the wild-type trypanosomes, while only in the total cellular extract of the PEPCK null mutant.

### Sample Protocol
Glycosomal enriched fractions were loaded on a 10% acrylamide SDS-PAGE gel and proteins were visualized by Colloidal Blue staining. Migration was stopped when samples had just entered the resolving gel and the unresolved region of the gel cut into only one segment. Each SDS-PAGE band was cut into into 1 mm x 1 mm gel pieces and protein were reduced, alkylated and digested by trypsin. Online nanoLC-MS/MS analyses were performed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC Nano-UPHLC system (Thermo Scientific, USA) coupled to a nanospray Q-Exactive hybrid quadruplole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, USA). Ten microliters of each peptide extract were loaded on a 300 µm ID x 5 mm PepMap C18 precolumn (Thermo Scientific, USA) at a flow rate of 10 µL/min. After 5 min desalting, peptides were online separated on a 75 µm ID x 25 cm C18 Acclaim PepMap® RSLC column (Thermo Scientific, USA) with a 4-40% linear gradient of solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80% ACN) in 108 min. The separation flow rate was set at 300 nL/min. The mass spectrometer operated in positive ion mode at a 1.8 kV needle voltage. Data were acquired using Xcalibur 3.1 software in a data-dependent mode. MS scans (m/z 350-1600) were recorded at a resolution of R = 70000 (@ m/z 200) and an AGC target of 3 x 106 ions collected within 100 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s and top 12 ions were selected from fragmentation in HCD mode. MS/MS scans with a target value of 1 x 105 ions were collected with a maximum fill time of 100 ms and a resolution of R = 17500. Additionally, only +2 and +3 charged ions were selected for fragmentation. Others settings were as follows: no sheath and no auxiliary gas flow, heated capillary temperature, 200°C; normalized HCD collision energy of 27% and an isolation width of 2 m/z.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification, Sequest HT and Mascot 2.4 algorithms through Proteome Discoverer 1.4 Software (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) were used for protein identification in batch mode by searching against a Trypanosoma brucei protein database (11 119 entries, release 46). This database was downloaded from http://tritrypdb.org website. Two missed enzyme cleavages were allowed. Mass tolerances in MS and MS/MS were set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da. Oxidation of methionine, acetylation of lysine and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine were searched as dynamic modifications. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine was searched as static modification. Peptide validation was performed using Percolator algorithm and only “high confidence” peptides were retained corresponding to a 1% False Discovery Rate (FDR) at peptide level. Raw LC-MS/MS data were imported in Progenesis QI (version 2.0; Nonlinear Dynamics, a Waters Company) for feature detection, alignment, and quantification. All sample features were aligned according to retention times by manually inserting up to fifty landmarks followed by automatic alignment to maximally overlay all the two-dimensional (m/z and retention time) feature maps. Singly charged ions and ions with higher charge states than six were excluded from analysis. All remaining features were used to calculate a normalization factor for each sample that corrects for experimental variation. Peptide identifications (with FDR<1%) were imported into Progenesis. Only non-conflicting features and unique peptides were considered for calculation of quantification at protein level. A minimum of two peptides matched to a protein was used as the criteria for identification as a differentially expressed protein.

### Publication Abstract
Glycosomes are peroxisome-related organelles of trypanosomatid parasites containing metabolic pathways, such as glycolysis and biosynthesis of sugar nucleotides, usually present in the cytosol of other eukaryotes. UDP-glucose pyrophosphorylase (UGP), the enzyme responsible for the synthesis of the sugar nucleotide UDP-glucose, is localized in the cytosol and glycosomes of the bloodstream and procyclic trypanosomes, despite the absence of any known peroxisome-targeting signal (PTS1 and PTS2). The questions that we address here are (i) is the unusual glycosomal biosynthetic pathway of sugar nucleotides functional and (ii) how is the PTS-free UGP imported into glycosomes? We showed that UGP is imported into glycosomes by piggybacking on the glycosomal PTS1-containing phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (PEPCK) and identified the domains involved in the UGP/PEPCK interaction. Proximity ligation assays revealed that this interaction occurs in 3 to 10% of glycosomes, suggesting that these correspond to organelles competent for protein import. We also showed that UGP is essential for the growth of trypanosomes and that both the glycosomal and cytosolic metabolic pathways involving UGP are functional, since the lethality of the knockdown UGP mutant cell line (<i><sup>RNAi</sup></i>UGP, where RNAi indicates RNA interference) was rescued by expressing a recoded UGP (rUGP) in the organelle (<i><sup>RNAi</sup></i>UGP/<i><sup>EXP</sup></i>rUGP-GPDH, where GPDH is glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase). Our conclusion was supported by targeted metabolomic analyses (ion chromatography-high-resolution mass spectrometry [IC-HRMS]) showing that UDP-glucose is no longer detectable in the <i><sup>RNAi</sup></i>UGP mutant, while it is still produced in cells expressing UGP exclusively in the cytosol (PEPCK null mutant) or glycosomes (<i><sup>RNAi</sup></i>UGP/<i><sup>EXP</sup></i>rUGP-GPDH). Trypanosomatids are the only known organisms to have selected functional peroxisomal (glycosomal) sugar nucleotide biosynthetic pathways in addition to the canonical cytosolic ones. <b>IMPORTANCE</b> Unusual compartmentalization of metabolic pathways within organelles is one of the most enigmatic features of trypanosomatids. These unicellular eukaryotes are the only organisms that sequestered glycolysis inside peroxisomes (glycosomes), although the selective advantage of this compartmentalization is still not clear. Trypanosomatids are also unique for the glycosomal localization of enzymes of the sugar nucleotide biosynthetic pathways, which are also present in the cytosol. Here, we showed that the cytosolic and glycosomal pathways are functional. As in all other eukaryotes, the cytosolic pathways feed glycosylation reactions; however, the role of the duplicated glycosomal pathways is currently unknown. We also showed that one of these enzymes (UGP) is imported into glycosomes by piggybacking on another glycosomal enzyme (PEPCK); they are not functionally related. The UGP/PEPCK association is unique since all piggybacking examples reported to date involve functionally related interacting partners, which broadens the possible combinations of carrier-cargo proteins being imported as hetero-oligomers.

### Keywords
Label-free quantitative proteome analysis, Trypanosoma brucei

### Affiliations
Laboratoire de Microbiologie Fondamentale et Pathogénicité (MFP), Université de Bordeaux, CNRS UMR-5234, Bordeaux, France
Plateforme Proteome Bordeaux

### Submitter
Dupuy Jean-William

### Lab Head
Dr Frédéric Bringaud
Laboratoire de Microbiologie Fondamentale et Pathogénicité (MFP), Université de Bordeaux, CNRS UMR-5234, Bordeaux, France


