### Accession
PXD017062

### Title
The target proteins phosphoglycerate kinase 2 (PGK2), glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GPD2)GPD2 and glucose-6-phosphate isomerase (GPI) were screened by combining transcriptome, proteomics and reverse docking, then, we. We detected the binding constant of the active compound using microscale thermophoresis (MST). It was found that esculetin bound well with three potential target proteins.

### Description
The results of this study demonstrated that esculetin can affect the glucose metabolism by binding to glycolytic proteins, thus playing an anti-tumor role, and the pathway comprising these proteins which have direct interactions are  a potential novel targets for tumor treatment by esculetin.

### Sample Protocol
Cell Culture The HepG2 cells were inoculated into 6-well plates at a concentration of 5 x 105/mL. There are two groups: HepG2 cells without esculetin,  and HepG2 cells containing esculetin (n=3). Esculetin was obtained from National Institutes for Food and Drug Control (China) (purity  99.18%). According to the physical and physiological properties of the compound and the relevant literature(Wang et al. 2015), esculetin was added at 50 M to each well. After incubation and incubated for 24 h at 37C with 5% CO2.  RNA extraction According to the manufacturers instructions (Invitrogen), total RNA was extracted from HepG2 cells with or without TRIzol Reagent, and genomic DNA was removed with using DNase I (TaKara). RNA quality was determined using a 2100 Bioanalyser (Agilent) and quantified by an ND-2000 (NanoDrop Technologies). Sequencing libraries were constructed using only high-quality RNA samples (OD260/280=1.8~2.2).

### Data Protocol
Library preparation, and Illumina Hiseq HiSeq X Ten Sequencing According to the TruSeqTM RNA sample preparation Kit of Illumina, we prepared the RNA-seq transcriptome library by using 5 g of total RNA. For a short timeperiod of time, we isolated mRNA by oligo(dT) beads and RNA was fragmented through a fragment buffer. The SuperScript double-stranded cDNA synthesis kit was used to synthesize Double-stranded cDNA. Based on Illuminas library construction protocol, the synthetic cDNA was then terminal repaired, phosphorylated and added A base. The 200300 bp cDNA target fragments size on 2% Low Range Ultra Agarose were selected, and 15 PCR cycles were amplified using Phusion DNA polymerase (NEB). Illumina HiSeq X Ten (2  150bp read length) was sequenced using the paired-end RNA-seq sequencing library after quantification by TBS380.  Differential expression analysis and functional enrichment The expression level of each transcript was calculated by the number of segments per kilobase of exon per million mapped reads (FRKM) method, in order to identify differential expression genes (DEGs) between two different samples. RSEM (http://deweylab.biostat.wisc.edu/rsem/)(Li and Dewey 2011) was used for quantitative genetic abundances. The R statistical software package EdgeR (Empirical analysis of Digital Gene Expression in R, http://www.bioconductor.org/packages/2.12/bioc/html/edgeR.html) (Robinson et al. 2010) was used to assess differences. Functional enrichment was performed using GO and KEGG compared to the total transcriptome background to determine which DEGs were significantly enriched in GO terms. GO functional enrichment and KEGG pathway analysis were performed by Goatools (https://github.com/tanghaibao/Goatools) and KOBAS (http://kobas.cbi.pku.edu.cn/home.do) (Xie et al. 2011).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Hepg2

### Affiliations
Faculty of Pharmacy, Hubei University of Chinese Medicine

### Submitter
Songtao Wu

### Lab Head
Dr Songtao Wu
Faculty of Pharmacy, Hubei University of Chinese Medicine


