### Accession
PXD027666

### Title
Exopeptidome of the lactic acid bacterium Streptococccus thermophilus LMD9, sepM mutant strain

### Description
Identification of the complete set of peptides produced by the sepM mutant strain of Streptococcus thermophilus LMD9 in the culture medium, based on three independent biological replicates.

### Sample Protocol
Strain was grown in chemically defined medium up to OD600 = 1. Supernatant was filtered at 0.22 µm. Peptides were concentrated by solid phase extraction on StrataX cartridges (Phenomenex). Eluted peptides (50% acetonitrile) were dried, resuspended in TFA 0.1% and ultrafiltered at 3 kDa. An equivalent of 20 ml of supernatant was loaded on a Kinetex C18 column (Phenomenex). Peptides were separated at 40°C with a linear gradient of acetonitrile (1.6% per min) in ammonium formate (20 mM pH 6.2) at 0.7 ml/min. Sixteen fractions of 0.7 ml each were collected and dried. Each of the 16 peptide-containing fractions was resuspended in TFA 0.1% acetonitrile 2% and analyzed by LC-MS/MS at the PAPPSO platform (INRA, Jouy-en-Josas). An equivalent of 3.33 ml of culture medium was loaded on a Pepmap C18 column (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated at 300 nl/min with a linear gradient (0.8% per min) of acetonitrile in formic acid (0.1%) during 45 min. Eluted peptides were analyzed online on a LTQ-Orbitrap Discovery mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer) at the PAPPSO proteomic paltform (INRAE, Jouy-en-Josas, France).

### Data Protocol
Native peptides (and protein they came from) were identified with X!Tandem version 2017.2.1.4 (Alanine) and X!Tandem Pipeline version 3.4.3 (Elastine Durcie) using the GenBank protein sequence of S. thermophilus LMD-9 (CP000419.1) associated with a classical proteomic contaminant database. The X!Tandem search parameters included no enzymatic cleavage specificity, variable oxidation of methionine (+15.99491), acetylation of the N-terminal residue (+42.01057), cyclization of the N-terminal Glu ( 8.01056) or Gln ( 17.02655) and mass tolerance of 10 ppm for the parent ion M+H mass and of 0.4 Da for the ion fragments. Peptide matches with E value < 0.01 were conserved.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Streptococcus thermophilus, Q-exactive, Sepm, Peptidomics

### Affiliations
MICALIS Institute, 
Université Paris-Saclay, INRAE, AgroParisTech,
78350 Jouy-en-Josas
MICALIS Institute Université Paris Sacaly, INRAE, AgroParisTech 78340 Jouy-en-Josas France

### Submitter
Vincent Juillard

### Lab Head
Dr Vincent Juillard
MICALIS Institute Université Paris Sacaly, INRAE, AgroParisTech 78340 Jouy-en-Josas France


