### Accession
PXD022512

### Title
POTENTIAL BIOMARKERS OF CHILDHOOD BRAIN TUMOR IDENTIFIED BY PROTEOMICS OF CEREBROSPINAL FLUID FROM  EXTRAVENTRICULAR DRAINAGE (EVD)

### Description
Brain tumors are the most common solid tumors in childhood. There is the need for biomarkers of residual disease, response to therapies and recurrence. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) is a source of brain tumor biomarkers. We analyzed the proteome of waste CSF from extraventricular drainage (EVD) from 30 children bearing different brain tumors and 16 controls needing EVD insertion for unrelated causes. 1598 and 1526 proteins were identified in CSF control and brain tumor patients, respectively, 263 and 191 proteins being exclusive of either condition. Bioinformatic analysis revealed promising biomarkers for the discrimination between control and tumor (TATA-binding protein-associated factor 15 and S100 protein B). Morever, Thymosin beta-4 (TMSB4X) and CD109, and 14.3.3 and HSP90 alpha could discriminate among other brain tumors and low-grade glyomas plus glyoneuronal tumors/pilocytic astrocytoma, or embryonal tumors/medulloblastoma. Biomarkers were validated by ELISA assay. Our method appears to be able to distinguish among two groups of tumors and each of these from a cohort of both normal and hemorrhagic patients. Further prospective studies may assess whether the biomarkers proposed by our discovery approach can be identified in other bodily fluids, therefore less invasively, and are useful to guide therapy and predict recurrences.

### Sample Protocol
sample pellets obtained by sodium deoxycholate and trichloroacetic acid precipitation were lysed, reduced and alkylated in 100 ul 6M Guanidine, 10 mM TCEP, 4 mM CAA, 100 mMTris pH 8.5, and the protein concentration measured using a tryptophan assay 63 . Then, 25 ug of each sample were digested by adding trypsin and LysC (at a 1:50 and 1:100 ratio of enzyme to sample protein respectively, both in micrograms), mixing and incubating at 37°C overnight. Digested samples were loaded onto StageTips 64 . Resulting peptides were completely dried using a SpeedVac centrifuge at 30°C, suspended in 2% ACN and 0,1% formic acid and analyzed by a nano-UHPLC-MS/MS system using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific Instrument). Elution was performed with an EASY spray column (75 μm x 50 cm, 2 μm particle size, Thermo Scientific) at a flow rate of 250 nl/min with a 150 min non-linear gradient consisting of 8 minutes wash with 2% buffer B (80% ACN, 20% H2O, 5% DMSO and 0.1% FA), then increasing to 30% B over 97 minutes, with a further increase to 50% B in 20 minutes, followed by a 5 minute wash at 80% B and a 20 minute re-equilibration at 2% B. MS scans were acquired at a resolution of 120,000 between 375 and 1,500 m/z and an AGC target of  4.0E5. MS/MS spectra were acquired in the linear ion trap (rapid scan mode) after collision induced dissociation (CID) fragmentation at a collision energy of 35 % and an AGC target of 4.0E3 for up to 250 ms. For precursor selection, were prioritized the least abundant signals. Ions with 2 m/z were scheduled for CID/IT analysis with the same parameters applied as above. Charge states 3-7 with minimum precursor intensity of 500,000 were scheduled for analysis by a fast HCD/FT scan of maximal 40ms at a resolution of 15,000. The remaining charge state 3-7 ions with maximum intensity of 500,000 were scheduled for analysis by CID/IT as described above. Dynamic Exclusion was set at 30 sec

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant software version 1.6.2.6 was used to process data. A false discovery rate was set at 0.01 for the identification of proteins, peptides and peptide-spectrum match (PSM). A minimum of 6 amino acids was required for peptide identification. Andromeda engine, incorporated into MaxQuant software, was used to search MS/MS spectra against Uniprot human database (release UP000005640_9606 April 2018). In the processing the variable modifications are Acetyl (Protein N-Term), Oxidation (M), Deamidation (NQ), by contrast, the Carbamidomethyl (C) was selected as fixed modification.

### Publication Abstract
Brain tumors are the most common solid tumors in childhood. There is the need for biomarkers of residual disease, therapy response and recurrence. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) is a source of brain tumor biomarkers. We analyzed the proteome of waste CSF from extraventricular drainage (EVD) from 29 children bearing different brain tumors and 17 controls needing EVD insertion for unrelated causes. 1598 and 1526 proteins were identified by liquid chromatography-coupled tandem mass spectrometry proteomics in CSF control and brain tumor patients, respectively, 263 and 191 proteins being exclusive of either condition. Bioinformatic analysis revealed promising protein biomarkers for the discrimination between control and tumor (TATA-binding protein-associated factor 15 and S100&#xa0;protein B). Moreover, Thymosin beta-4 (TMSB4X) and CD109, and 14.3.3 and HSP90 alpha could discriminate among other brain tumors and low-grade gliomas plus glyoneuronal tumors/pilocytic astrocytoma, or embryonal tumors/medulloblastoma. Biomarkers were validated by ELISA assay. Our method was able to distinguish among brain tumor vs non-tumor/hemorrhagic conditions (controls) and to differentiate two large classes of brain tumors. Further prospective studies may assess whether the biomarkers proposed by our discovery approach can be identified in other bodily fluids, therefore less invasively, and are useful to guide therapy and predict recurrences.

### Keywords
Biomarker; cerebrospinal fluid; extraventricular drainage; pediatric central nervous system tumors.

### Affiliations
Gaslini Children's Hospital
Ist. G. Gaslini

### Submitter
Andrea Petretto

### Lab Head
Dr Andrea Petretto
Ist. G. Gaslini


