### Accession
PXD018231

### Title
Mesenchymal stem cell secretome

### Description
Adult neural stem cells (aNSCs) show multilineage differentiation potential influenced by intrinsic and extrinsic signaling cues. We and others have shown that stimulation of aNSCs with bone marrow mesenchymal stem cell (MSC) secreted factors substantially enhances in vitro oligodendrogenesis at an expense of astrogenesis by yet unknown mechanisms (Rivera et al. 2006, Jadasz et al. 2013; 2018, Rivera et al., 2019). In the present study, we demonstrate that aNSCs pre-treated with MSC secretomes for different periods in vitro preferentially differentiate to oligodendrocytic cells in vivo after transplantation into the adult rat spinal cord. Analysis of different time points after transplantation revealed a stable survival rate of transplanted aNSCs and an emphasized pro-oligodendroglial differentiation in response to MSC secreted factors. MSC derived secretomes were then analyzed by mass spectrometry-based proteomics and label-free quantification to identify secreted proteins contributing to oligodendroglial lineage fate determination. To exclude possible contaminants derived from dead cells or serum, our approach includes a comparison of the abundances of proteins present in MSC derived secretomes with corresponding proteins in cell lysates (Grube et al., 2018, Schira-Heinen et al., 2019).

### Sample Protocol
Lysates and secretomes of MSCs were processed as described in PMID 29322779. Briefly, secretomes were concentrated by TCA precipitation and prepared for mass spectrometric analysis - like the cell lysates - by in-gel digestion with trypsin.

### Data Protocol
Raw files from the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos were prcessed with MaxQuant version 1.6.6.0. with standard parameters exept the match between runs function enabled as well as labelfree quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Mesenchymal stem cell (MSC)-secreted factors have been shown to significantly promote oligodendrogenesis from cultured primary adult neural stem cells (aNSCs) and oligodendroglial precursor cells (OPCs). Revealing underlying mechanisms of how aNSCs can be fostered to differentiate into a specific cell lineage could provide important insights for the establishment of novel neuroregenerative treatment approaches aiming at myelin repair. However, the nature of MSC-derived differentiation and maturation factors acting on the oligodendroglial lineage has not been identified thus far. In addition to missing information on active ingredients, the degree to which MSC-dependent lineage instruction is functional in vivo also remains to be established. We here demonstrate that MSC-derived factors can indeed stimulate oligodendrogenesis and myelin sheath generation of aNSCs transplanted into different rodent central nervous system (CNS) regions, and furthermore, we provide insights into the underlying mechanism on the basis of a comparative mass spectrometry secretome analysis. We identified a number of secreted proteins known to act on oligodendroglia lineage differentiation. Among them, the tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase type 1 (TIMP-1) was revealed to be an active component of the MSC-conditioned medium, thus validating our chosen secretome approach.

### Keywords
Mesenchymal stem cell, Spinal cord, Glial cell fate, Neural stem cell, Proteome, Transplantation, Secretome

### Affiliations
Proteome Research AG Stühler Institute of Molecular Medicine I Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf 40225 Düsseldorf
Molecular Proteomics Laboratory

### Submitter
Gereon Poschmann

### Lab Head
Dr Gereon Poschmann
Proteome Research AG Stühler Institute of Molecular Medicine I Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf 40225 Düsseldorf


