### Accession
PXD030304

### Title
Pan-cancer proteomic map of 949 human cell lines (ProCan-DepMapSanger)

### Description
This pan-cancer cell line proteomic atlas comprises proteomic data acquired by data independent acquisition (specifically, SWATH) mass spectrometry for 949 cancer cell lines. Cell lines were processed in technical triplicate, with duplicates acquired on different mass spectrometers, alongside HEK293T cell line control samples processed across the experimental period. For further details, refer to the publication that accompanies this data deposition.

### Sample Protocol
The cell lines were each prepared using Accelerated Barocycler Lysis and Extraction (ABLE) in a barocycler instrument, as described in Lucas et al J Proteome Res 2019. Refer to the publication that accompanies this data deposition for full sample processing details.

### Data Protocol
DIA-MS data in wiff file format were collected for 6,981 MS runs, and were processed using DIA-NN. Proteins were then quantified using maxLFQ with default parameters and implemented using the DiaNN R Package. For further details, refer to the publication that accompanies this data deposition.

### Publication Abstract
The proteome provides unique insights into disease biology beyond the genome and transcriptome. A lack of large proteomic datasets has restricted the identification of new cancer biomarkers. Here, proteomes of 949 cancer cell lines across 28 tissue types are analyzed by mass spectrometry. Deploying a workflow to quantify 8,498 proteins, these data capture evidence of cell-type and post-transcriptional modifications. Integrating multi-omics, drug response, and CRISPR-Cas9 gene essentiality screens with a deep learning-based pipeline reveals thousands of protein biomarkers of cancer vulnerabilities that are not significant at the transcript level. The power of the proteome to predict drug response is very similar to that of the transcriptome. Further,&#xa0;random downsampling to only 1,500 proteins has limited impact on predictive power, consistent with protein networks being highly connected and co-regulated. This pan-cancer proteomic map (ProCan-DepMapSanger) is a comprehensive resource available at https://cellmodelpassports.sanger.ac.uk.

### Keywords
Cell line, Proteomics, Swath, Dia, Cancer

### Affiliations
Head, Cancer Data Science (ProCan), Children's Medical Research Institute, The University of Sydney, Westmead, NSW, Australia
Children's Medical Research Institute, University of Sydney

### Submitter
Rebecca Poulos

### Lab Head
Dr Qing Zhong
Head, Cancer Data Science (ProCan), Children's Medical Research Institute, The University of Sydney, Westmead, NSW, Australia


