### Accession
PXD039521

### Title
Loss of H3K9 tri-methylation alters chromosome compaction and transcription factor retention during mitosis

### Description
Recent studies have shown that repressive chromatin machinery, including DNA methyltransferases and Polycomb Repressor Complexes, bind to chromosomes throughout mitosis and their depletion results in increased chromosome size. Here we show that enzymes that catalyse H3K9 methylation, such as Suv39h1, Suv39h2, G9a and Glp, are also retained on mitotic chromosomes. Surprisingly however, mutants lacking H3K9me3 have unusually small and compact mitotic chromosomes associated with increased H3S10ph and H3K27me3 levels. Chromosome size and centromere compaction in these mutants were rescued by providing exogenous Suv39h1, or inhibiting Ezh2 activity. Quantitative proteomic comparisons of native mitotic chromosomes isolated from wildtype versus Suv39h1/Suv39h2 double-null mouse ESCs revealed that H3K9me3 was essential for the efficient retention of bookmarking factors such as Esrrb. These results highlight an unexpected role for repressive heterochromatin domains in preserving transcription factor binding through mitosis, and underscore the importance of H3K9me3 for sustaining chromosome architecture and epigenetic memory during cell division.

### Sample Protocol
Flow-sorted mitotic chromosomes were pelleted by centrifugation (18,000 × g, 10 min, 5 °C). Supernatant was removed and the obtained pellet was processed by the in-Stage Tip digestion protocol using commercially available iST tips (Preomics, Martinsried, Germany) according to the manufacturer’s recommendations. Briefly, pellets were suspended in lysis buffer, and heat denatured, reduced and alkylated on a heated shaking incubator (1,000 r.p.m., 10 min, 95 °C). DNA was fragmented by sonication in an ultrasonic water bath (10 min) and samples were digested with trypsin (500 r.p.m., 1 h, 37 °C). Sample clean-up and desalting was carried out in the iST device using the recommended wash buffers. Peptides were eluted with elution buffer (2 × 100 µl), concentrated in a centrifugal evaporator and resuspended in LC loading buffer (20 µl). LC-MS/MS analysis was performed as follows. Resuspended protein digests were transferred to auto sampler vials for LC-MS analysis. Peptides were separated using an ultimate 3000 RSLC nano liquid chromatography system (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a Q-Exactive HF-X tandem mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) via an EASY-Spray source. Sample volumes were loaded onto a trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100C18, 100 µm × 2 cm) at 8 µl min−1 in 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% TFA. Peptides were eluted on-line to an analytical column (EASY-Spray PepMap C18, 75 µm × 75 cm). Peptides were separated at 200 nl min−1 using a ramped 120 min gradient from 1–42% buffer B in buffer A (buffer A: 5% DMSO and 0.1% formic acid; buffer B: 75% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid and 5% DMSO). Eluted peptides were analysed operating in positive polarity using a data-dependent acquisition mode. Ions for fragmentation were determined from an initial MS1 survey scan at 120,000 resolution (at m/z 200) in the orbitrap followed by HCD (higher-energy collisional dissociation) of the top 30 most abundant. MS1 and MS2 scan AGC targets set to 3e6 and 5e4 for a maximum injection time of 25 ms and 50 ms, respectively. A survey scan covering the range of 350–1750 m/z was used, with HCD parameters of isolation width 1.6 m/z and a normalised collision energy of 27%.  Further sample ID details: WT ESCs = WT26, Suv39h dn ESCs = DN57, WT MEFs = W8, Suv39h dn MEFs = D5 Mitotic lysate pellet = mitotic lysate = before sort Flow-sorted mitotic chromosomes = sorted chromosomes

### Data Protocol
Data obtained from biological triplicate experiments (each loaded in duplicate) were analysed using the LFQ algorithm in the MaxQuant software platform, with database searches carried out by the in-built Andromeda search engine against the Mus musculus database. A reverse decoy database was created and results displayed at a 1% FDR for peptide spectrum matches and protein identifications. Search parameters included: trypsin, two missed cleavages, fixed modification of cysteine carbamidomethylation and variable modifications of methionine oxidation, asparagine deamidation and protein N-terminal acetylation. LFQ was enabled with an LFQ minimum ratio count of 2. ‘Match between runs’ function was used with match and alignment time limits of 0.7 and 20 min, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Epigenetic memory - mitotic chromosomes - h3k9me3 - chromatin compaction - heterochromatin - mitotic bookmarking

### Affiliations
MRC-LMS: Head of Proteomics and Metabolomics Core Facility
Medical Research Council - London Institute of Medical Sciences

### Submitter
Alex Montoya

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Pavel Shliaha
MRC-LMS: Head of Proteomics and Metabolomics Core Facility


