### Accession
PXD039318

### Title
Oxidized methionine melanoma epitopes

### Description
One of the most promising alternatives to chemotherapy in cancer treatment is immunotherapy, particularly, peptide-based immunotherapy in which synthetic peptides derived from tumor-specific antigens are used to trigger an immune response to specifically target cancer cells. Here using custom nanoLC-MS/MS based workflows we examine the possible presentation of peptide-based oxidative variants in complex with Major Histocompatibility Complex (MHC) class I proteins at the surface of melanoma cells. The deposited data contains the raw files associated with mild acidic elutions (MAE) of MHC class I associated peptides from various melanoma cell lines. These were analysed using Data Independent Acquisition (DIA), employing a custom method for MS/MS fragmentation of the native and Met-oxidative modifications of a tyrosinase derived peptide (YMDGTMSQV denoted as YMD peptide). The data contains also the raw files referring to the nanoLC-MS/MS analysis of HPLC purified fractions of various oxidative derivatives of the YMD peptide but also of MAGE-10 native and oxidized forms.

### Sample Protocol
For MAE, melanoma cells were incubated with an acidic buffer containing 131.5 mM citric acid, 61.5 mM Na2HPO4 (spiked-in with the 13C15N-Val heavy-version of the YMD peptide) for 120 seconds and centrifuged. The supernatant was filtered using a 10kDa ultrafiltration membrane, desalted, dried under low pressure and reconstituted in solvent A (0.06% formic acid – FA and 2% acetonitrile ACN) before LC-MS/MS analysis. Samples were analyzed using an Easy nanoLC II (Proxeon Biosystems) coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides were separated using a 60/90-min gradient elution with 2-30% solvent B: 0.1 % FA + 98 % ACN on an analytical column (100 mm or 150 mm x 75 μm ID) or 0.06% FA + 80% ACN on an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For data acquisition the eluted peptides were analyzed using a targeted MS method involving a full Orbitrap scan at 60 000 resolution (m/z 400), followed by a SIM scan (500-600 m/z) at 60 000 resolution and a subsequent scan for peptide MS/MS spectra acquisition. Peptides were selected for CID fragmentation based on a custom inclusion list containing the m/z values detected for both, the light and heavy version of the standard peptide. For HPLC separation of the YMD peptide oxidation derivatives, the standard peptide was oxidized at 4 oC with 120 mM hydrogen peroxide. The separation of the oxidation forms was performed using a 50 min. linear gradient of 0.1% FA, 50% ACN on a reversed-phase (RP) C18, 1.9 μm, Hypersil GOLD column (50 mm x 2.1 ID, Thermo Scientific), pre-equilibrated in 95% A (0.1 % FA, 2 % ACN). The HPLC fractions were collected using a Dionex AFC 3000 fraction collector (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analyzed either manually in XCalibur (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using 7 ppm mass accuracy for Orbitrap scans and 0.5 Da for linear ion trap scans. Quantification was performed in Skyline software v2.6.0. Only +2 precursor charge state were used and +1/+2, b/y ions were considered for analysis. MS1 scans were set to Orbitrap (R: 60 000 at m/z 400) and for MS2 either QIT was selected as an analyzer (0.7 m/z resolution) or Orbitrap (R: 7 500 at m/z 400). For retention time, only scans within a five-minute window were considered. For analysis of the HPLC fractions the analysis focused on selection of the b/y ions flanking the two Met residues to locate the oxidation position.

### Publication Abstract
The impact of the peptide amino acids side-chain modifications on the immunological recognition has been scarcely explored. We investigate here the effect of methionine oxidation on the antigenicity of the melanoma immunodominant peptide 369-YMDGTMSQV-377 (YMD). Using CD8<sup>+</sup> T&#xa0;cell activation assays, we found that the antigenicity of the sulfoxide form is higher when compared to the YMD peptide. This is consistent with free energy computations performed on HLA-A&#x2217;02:01/YMD/TCR complex showing that this is lowered upon oxidation, paired with a steep increase in order at atomic level. Oxidized YMD forms were identified at the melanoma cell surface by LC-MS/MS analysis. These results demonstrate that methionine oxidation in the antigenic peptides may generate altered peptide ligands with increased antigenicity, and that this oxidation may occur <i>in&#xa0;vivo</i>, opening up the possibility that high-affinity CD8<sup>+</sup> T&#xa0;cells might be naturally primed in the course of melanoma progression, as a result of immunosurveillance.

### Keywords
Immunotherapy, Melanoma, Peptidomics, Mass spectrometry, Tyrosinase

### Affiliations
Institute of Biochemistry of the Romanian Academy (IBRA)
Dept. of Molecular Cell Biology of the Institute of Biochemistry of the Romanian Academy

### Submitter
Cristian Munteanu

### Lab Head
Dr Ștefana M. Petrescu
Dept. of Molecular Cell Biology of the Institute of Biochemistry of the Romanian Academy


