### Accession
PXD044429

### Title
protein quantification data of tomato under drought stress

### Description
protein quantification data of tomato under drought stress

### Sample Protocol
Protein Extraction Samples were ground in a liquid nitrogen, and the powder was transferred to a 5-mL centrifuge tube and mixed with lysis buffer (1% TritonX-100, 10 mM dithiothreitol, and 1% protease inhibitor cocktail) and sonicated for 3 min on ice using a high-intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz, China). An equal volume of Tris-saturated phenol (pH 8.0) was added to the mixture, vortexed for 5 min, and centrifuged at 5 000 g and 4°C for 10 min. The upper phenol phase was transferred to a new centrifuge tube. The protein was precipitated by adding four volumes of ammonium sulfate-saturated methanol and incubation at -20°C for at least 6 h. The mixture was centrifuged at 5 000 g, 4°C for 10 min, and the supernatant was discarded. The remaining precipitate was washed thrice with ice-cold methanol, followed by ice-cold acetone. The protein precipitate was redissolved in 8 M urea, and the protein concentration was determined using the Bradford method. Digestion and TMT labeling The protein solution was diluted to 5 mM and digested at 56°C for 30 min. Afterward, iodoacetamide was added to the digested protein to a final concentration of 11 mM, and the mixture was incubated at room temperature for 15 min in the dark. Finally, the sample was diluted to < 2 M urea before adding trypsin at a 1:50 (trypsin: protein) mass ratio and enzymatic hydrolysis at 37°C overnight. Then, trypsin was added to the mixture at a 1:100 (trypsin: protein) mass ratio and left for 4 h for further enzymatic hydrolysis. After trypsin digestion, the trypsin hydrolyzed peptides were desalted with strata x C18 (Phenomenex, USA), vacuum lyophilized, dissolved with 0.5 m TEAB, and labeled using the TMT kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) following the manufacturer’s instructions. HPLC Fractionation and LC-MS/MS Analysis The tryptic peptides were dissolved in solvent A (0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile/water) and directly loaded onto a homemade reversed-phase analytical column (25 cm length, 100 μm i.d.). The peptides were separated using a gradient from 8 to 16% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 90% acetonitrile) for 30 min, 16 to 30% for 25 min, 80% for 2 min, and held at 80% for 3 min. The flow rate was 400 nL/min in an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). The separated peptides were analyzed in Orbitrap FusionTM LumosTM (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) with a nano-electrospray ion source at 2.0 kV. The full MS scan resolution was set to 60,000 for a 350–1550 m/z scan range. Up to 20 most abundant precursors were then selected using dynamic exclusion for 30 s for further MS/MS analyses. The HCD (Higher Energy Collision Dissociation) fragmentation was performed at a 32% normalized collision energy (NCE). Then, the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at 15,000 resolutions, and the fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z. The automatic gain control (AGC) target was at 5E4, with a 5E4 intensity threshold and 60 ms maximum injection time.

### Data Protocol
Database Search The resulting MS/MS data were processed using the Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the S. lycopersicum reference genome (http://solgenomics.net) concatenated with the reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was the cleavage enzyme, allowing up to two missing cleavages. Then, the mass tolerance for precursor ions was 20 ppm and 5 ppm in the First search and Main search, respectively, at 0.02 Da mass tolerance for fragment ions. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified for fixed modification, and oxidation on Met was performed at variable modifications. The false discovery rate (FDR) was < 1% and the minimum peptide score was > 40. Bioinformatics methods The Gene Ontology (GO) annotation of the proteome was derived from the UniProt-GOA database (www. http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/). Pathway analysis was based on the KEGG database (http://www.genome.jp/kegg) After that, we used Wolfpsort, a subcellular localization tool for predicting subcellular localization. The DEPs were searched against the STRING database (version 10.1) for protein-protein interactions. The COG/KOG protein functional annotation was predicted using KOG sequence alignment in NCBI database.

### Publication Abstract
Drought is among the most common abiotic constraints of crop growth, development, and productivity. Integrating different omics approaches offers a possibility for deciphering the metabolic pathways and fundamental mechanisms involved in abiotic stress tolerance. Here, we explored the transcriptional and post-transcriptional changes in drought-stressed tomato plants using transcriptomic and proteomic profiles to determine the molecular dynamics of tomato drought stress responses. We identified 22467 genes and 5507 proteins, among which the expression of 3765 genes and 294 proteins was significantly changed under drought stress. Furthermore, the differentially expressed genes (DEGs) and differentially abundant proteins (DAPs) showed a good correlation (0.743). The results indicated that integrating different omics approaches is promising in exploring the multilayered regulatory mechanisms of plant drought resistance. Gene ontology (GO) and pathway analysis identified several GO terms and pathways related to stress resistance, including response to stress, abiotic stimulus, and oxidative stress. The plant hormone abscisic acid (ABA) plays pivotal roles in response to drought stress, <i>ABA-response element binding factor</i> (<i>AREB</i>) is a key positive regulator of ABA signaling. Moreover, our analysis indicated that drought stress increased the abscisic acid (ABA) content, which activated <i>AREB1</i> expression to regulate the expression of <i>TAS14</i>, <i>GSH-Px-1</i>, and <i>Hsp</i>, ultimately improving tomato drought resistance. In addition, the yeast one-hybrid assay demonstrated that the AREB1 could bind the Hsp promoter to activate Hsp expression. Thus, this study involved a full-scale analysis of gene and protein expression in drought-stressed tomato, deepening the understanding of the regulatory mechanisms of the essential drought-tolerance genes in tomato.

### Keywords
Tomato;drought stress;proteome

### Affiliations
Foshan University

### Submitter
Minmin Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Minmin Liu
Foshan University


