### Accession
PXD007121

### Title
Long Non-coding RNA SNHG1 in Neuroblastoma

### Description
Neuroblastoma (NB) is an embryonal tumor with various clinical presentations and behaviors. Several genomic alterations has been well-studied in NB, among which genomic amplification of MYCN oncogene, is a strong prognostic biomarker with worsens outcome. Long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs), constitute major proportion of the cellular transcripts with no coding capacity. One of their function is to guide transcription factors to the target genes and facilitate gene expression. However, relative contribution of lncRNA and MYCN to the advanced NB has remained unclear. Herein, by applying a network-based integrative analysis on MYCN amplified and MYCN nonamplified lncRNA expression profile from both RNA-seq and microarray platform, we identified lncRNA, SNHG1 to be differentially expressed and strongly correlated with MYCN in MYCN-amplified NB. The expression of SNHG1 was validated by RT-qPCR in NB cell lines. Survival analysis revealed that higher expression of SNHG1 significantly associates with poor patient survival. Moreover, knockdown of MYCN in MYCN-amplified NB cell lines inhibited SNHG1 expression. Furthermore, to unravel the role of SNHG1 in NB, we extracted SNHG1-interacting proteins by RNA-protein pull down assay coupled with doi:10.6342/NTU201701980 ! ! VI liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). We identified 27 SNHG1-interacting proteins in common from three NB cell lines. However, only three SNHG1-interacting proteins, MATR3, YBX1 and HHRNPL have binding site detected by DeepBind motif analysis. Western blot confirms interaction of MATR3 with SNHG1. Additionally, we further validated the direct interaction between MATR3 and SNHG1 by RNA-immunoprecipation (IP). MATR3 is known to be involved in RNA transport and stabilization. Therefore, we proposed that MATR3 after interacting with SNHG1 might help in SNHG1 transcription and stabilization. In conclusion, our study unveils that SNHG1 could be a prognostic marker for high-risk NB and possibly stabilized by MATR3. Our results might provide future directions for the development of therapeutic strategies against high-risk NB.

### Sample Protocol
We measured the concentration of eluted protein buffer and used whole volume of protein for proteome analysis. We added 1 M triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEABC) to make every sample buffer containing 50 mM TEABC (pH was about 8.5). Protein samples were reduced by 5 mM Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP) in a water bath at 37°C for 30 minutes and then were alkylated by using 2 mM S-Methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS) at room temperature which is protected from the light for 30 minutes after reduction. We preformed gel digestion for proteins into peptides. So we added Acrylamide/bisacrylamide (40%, v/v, 37.5:1), 10% APS (w/v) and TEMED were mixed with the protein solution by vortex for few seconds and spin down soon (the ratio of protein solution: acrylamide/bisacrylamide: APS: TEMED = 14:5:0.3:0.3, v/v) to make it polymerized and became gel. The gel was cut into small pieces and washed by 25 mM TEABC and added 25 mM TEABC/50% (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN) for washing the gel to remove the bubble with several times. Briefly, buffer was added to the gel and then we vortexed the solution. The gel was further dehydrated with 100% ACN and dried completely with a centrifugal evaporator for half a hour (CVE-2000; Eyela, Tokyo, Japan). 25 mM TEABC was added to rehydrate the gel and trypsin (protein: trypsin = 10:1, w/w) was subsequently added to the rehydrated gel. After ensuring the gel was fully covered by 25 mM TEABC, sample was incubated at 37°C overnight (16 hours-20 hours). Peptides were extracted from the gel with 0.1% (v/v) Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), 50% (v/v) ACN /0.1% (v/v) TFA, and 100% ACN sequentially. Like the step of washing the gel, buffer was added to the gel and then we vortexed the gel solution. The liquid part of the sample was collected and combined. The extracted peptide solution was dried with a sample concentrator (miVac Duo Concentrator; Genevac, Ipswich, UK; Eppendorf concentrator 5301). We performed desalting using ZipTip ® Pipette Tips (Millipore, Bedford, MA, USA). Dried peptides were resolved by 20 µl of 0.1% Pierce™ Trifluoroacetic Acid (TFA) (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) and added 10 % TFA to adjust the pH to pH 2-3. The ZipTip was wetted by 50% (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN) / 0.1% TFA for 5 cycles first and followed by equilibrated in 0.1% TFA with 10 cycles. Aspirated and dispensed the sample peptides with ZipTip for 20 cycles by pippeting slowly to let peptides bind to ZipTip. We washed the ZipTip with 0.1% TFA for 10 cycles. At the final stage, peptides were eluted with 20 µl of 50% (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN) / 0.1% TFA for 10 cycles by aspirating and dispensing for 10 cycles to new tubes. The eluted solution was dried with a centrifugal evaporator (CVE-2000, Eyela, Tokyo, Japan).

### Data Protocol
Raw MS spectral information was processed for peak detection and identification by using MaxQuant software version 1.5.6.5. Peptide identification was performed by using the Andromeda search engine against the Reviewed Swiss-Prot human database version canonical (Published February, 2017). Search criteria used in this study were trypsin specificity, fixed modification of carbamidomethyl (C), variable modifications of Carbamidomethyl (C), Oxidation (M), Carbamyl (N-term) and Deamidation (NQ), and allowed for up to two missed cleavages. The type selected Standard, and multiplicity chose 1. A minimum of seven amino acids in the peptide length was required. The precursor mass tolerance was 3 ppm and the fragment ion tolerance was 0.5 Da. By using a decoy database strategy, peptide identification was accepted based on the posterior error probability with a false discovery rate of 1%.

### Publication Abstract
The interaction of long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) with one or more RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) is important to a plethora of cellular and physiological processes. The lncRNA SNHG1 was reported to be aberrantly expressed and associated with poor patient prognosis in several cancers including neuroblastoma. However, the interacting RBPs and biological functions associated with SNHG1 in neuroblastoma remain unknown. In this study, we identified 283, 31, and 164 SNHG1-interacting proteins in SK-N-BE(2)C, SK-N-DZ, and SK-N-AS neuroblastoma cells, respectively, using a RNA-protein pull-down assay coupled with liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Twenty-four SNHG1-interacting RBPs were identified in common from these three neuroblastoma cell lines. RBPs MATR3, YBX1, and HNRNPL have the binding sites for SNHG1 predicted by DeepBind motif analysis. Furthermore, the direct binding of MATR3 with SNHG1 was validated by Western blot and confirmed by RNA immunoprecipitation assay (RIP). Coexpression analysis revealed that the expression of SNHG1 is positively correlated with MATR3 ( P = 3.402 &#xd7; 10<sup>-13</sup>). The high expression of MATR3 is associated with poor event-free survival ( P = 0.00711) and overall survival ( P = 0.00064). Biological functions such as ribonucleoprotein complex biogenesis, RNA processing, and RNA splicing are significantly enriched and in common between SNHG1 and MATR3. In conclusion, we identified MATR3 as binding to SNHG1 and the interaction might be involved in splicing events that enhance neuroblastoma progression.

### Keywords
Neuroblastoma; mycn; long non-coding rna; snhg1; rna-protein pull down assay; lc-ms/ms; rna-immunoprecipation (ip) ; matr3

### Affiliations
National Taiwan University
National Taiwan University, Institute of Molecular & Cellular Biology

### Submitter
Tz-Wen Yang

### Lab Head
Dr Hsueh-Fen Juan
National Taiwan University, Institute of Molecular & Cellular Biology


