### Accession
PXD027743

### Title
Quantitative fragmentomics to map affinities of interactomes

### Description
~500,000 protein interactions have been identified in human but most binding affinities remain unknown, limiting quantitative investigation of interactome-function relationships. This gap can be filled by systematically measuring the affinities of minimal interacting protein fragments, the building blocks of interactomes. As a proof of principle, we experimentally measured 65,000 affinities involving 266 human PDZ domains (practically the complete "PDZome"), 424 human PDZ-Binding Motifs (~10% of the "PBMome") and 24 viral motifs. We determined binding constants for ~18,000 interactions that passed the detection threshold. Independent AP-MS experiments and database surveys demonstrated the strong agreement of quantitative fragmentomics with full-length protein interactomics. We evidence hot spots for viral interference, which allow a viral PBM, such as that of HPV-E6 oncoprotein, to impact the cell proteome way beyond its immediate binders. We propose to distinguish interactomes and complexomes, viewed as intrinsic and extrinsic properties linked by the law of mass action.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for affinity purification mass spectrometry (AP-MS) experiments For PDZ-AP-MS experiments, PDZ domains were cloned as His6-AviTag-MBP-PDZ constructs. For co-expression with BirA, E. coli BL21(DE3) cells were co-transformed with His6-AviTag-MBP, or His6-AviTag-MBP-PDZ-coding and PET21a-BirA (Addgene #20857) plasmids (Howarth et al., 2005)⁠. Simultaneously to IPTG induction, 50 µM biotin was added to the media. After cell harvesting, the lysis buffer was also supplemented with 50 µM biotin. Otherwise, expression and double affinity purification was identical as previously described in details. Biotynilation efficiency was found to be around 60%. For PBM-AP-MS experiments, 30 μl streptavidin resin was mixed with biotin or peptide at 50-60 μM concentration in 6-6.5 resin volume for 60 min to achieve resin saturation. For PDZ-AP-MS experiments, 30 μl streptavidin resin was mixed with biotinylated MBP or MBP-PDZ at 40-50 μM concentration in >1000 resin volume for 60 min to achieve resin saturation. After saturation, resins were washed a single time (10 resin volume, holdup buffer), and were depleted with biotin (1 mM biotin, 5-10 resin volume, 10 min). Finally, resins were washed 2 times. 0.5 ml 2 mg/ml cell lysate was added to the dry resin (1mg total input) and were incubated at 4 ºC for 2 h. Then, the beads were washed 3 times with 10 resin volume buffer containing: TRIS pH8.5 50 mM, NaCl 150 mM, TritonX-100 1%, cOmplete EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail 10x, EDTA 2 mM, TCEP 1 mM. Then, the beads were washed 2 times with 10 resin volume buffer containing: TRIS pH8.5 50 mM, NaCl 150 mM, TCEP 1 mM. Finally, captured protein was eluted from the resin in two steps and the eluted fractions were pooled. For each elution the beads were incubated for 30 min with 3 resin volume buffer containing: TRIS pH8.5 20 mM, NaCl 100 mM, TCEP 500 μM, 8 M Urea. Between each steps, the beads were separated by mild centrifugation and the supernatant was removed by gentle pipetting. Sample digestion for mass spectrometry The samples were precipitated with TCA 20% overnight at 4°C and centrifuged at 14000 rpm for 10 minutes at 4°C. The protein pellets were washed twice with 1 mL cold acetone and air dried. The protein extracts were solubilized in urea 8 M, reduced with 5 mM TCEP for 30 minutes and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 30 minutes in the dark. Double digestion was performed at 37°C with 500 ng endoproteinase Lys-C for 4h, followed by 4-fold dilution and an overnight digestion with 500 ng trypsin. Peptide mixtures were then desalted on C18 spin-column and dried on Speed-Vacuum.  LC-MS/MS Analysis Samples were analyzed using an Ultimate 3000 nano-RSLC (Thermo Scientific, San Jose California) coupled in line with a LTQ-Orbitrap ELITE mass spectrometer via a nano-electrospray ionization source (Thermo Scientific, San Jose California). Peptide mixtures were injected in 0.1% TFA on a C18 Acclaim PepMap100 trap-column (75 µm ID x 2 cm, 3 µm, 100Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 3 minutes at 5 µL/min with 2% ACN, 0.1% FA in H2O and then separated on a C18 Accucore nano-column (75 µm ID x 50 cm, 2.6 µm, 150Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 220 nl/min and 38 °C with a 90 minutes linear gradient from 5% to 30% buffer B (A: 0.1% FA in H2O / B: 99% ACN, 0.1% FA in H2O), regeneration at 5% B. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ionization mode, in data-dependent mode with survey scans from m/z 350-1500 acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 400. The 20 most intense peaks from survey scans were selected for further fragmentation in the Linear Ion Trap with an isolation window of 2.0 Da and were fragmented by CID with normalized collision energy of 35%. (TOP20CID method) Unassigned and single charged states were excluded from fragmentation. The Ion Target Value for the survey scans (in the Orbitrap) and the MS2 mode (in the Linear Ion Trap) were set to 1E6 and 5E3 respectively and the maximum injection time was set to 100 ms for both scan modes. Dynamic exclusion was set to 20 s after one repeat count with mass width at ± 10 ppm.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data analysis Proteins were identified by database searching using SequestHT (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with Proteome Discoverer 2.4 software (PD2.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific) on human fasta database downloaded from SwissProt (reviewed, release 2020_11_27, 20304 entries) (https://www.uniprot.org/). Precursor and fragment mass tolerances were set at 7 ppm and 0.6 Da respectively, and up to 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Oxidation (M, +15.995 Da) was set as variable modification, and Carbamidomethylation (C, + 57.021 Da) as fixed modification. Peptides and proteins were filtered with a false discovery rate (FDR) at 1%. Label-free quantification was based on the extracted ion chromatography intensity of the peptides. All samples were measured in technical triplicates. The measured XIC intensities were normalized based on median intensities of the entire dataset to correct minor loading differences. For statistical tests and enrichment calculations, not detectable intensity values were treated with an imputation method, where the missing values were replaced by random values similar to the 10% of the lowest intensity values present in the entire dataset. Unpaired two tailed T-test, assuming equal variance, were performed on obtained log2 XIC intensities. The detection threshold for enriched proteins in AP-MS experiments were analyzed above 2-fold enrichment with <0.01 P value. The detection threshold for enriched proteins in IP-MS experiments were analyzed above 2-fold enrichment with <0.05 P value. Then, proteins with PDZ-domains or PBMs were extracted from the list of enriched proteins. In case only a specific isoform of the detected protein contains a PBM, the identified peptide fragments were manually checked to check which isoform(s) were most likely detected.

### Publication Abstract
Human protein networks have been widely explored but most binding affinities remain unknown, hindering quantitative interactome-function studies. Yet interactomes rely on minimal interacting fragments displaying quantifiable affinities. Here, we measure the affinities of 65,000 interactions involving PDZ domains and their target PDZ-binding motifs (PBM) within a human interactome region particularly relevant for viral infection and cancer. We calculate interactomic distances, identify hot spots for viral interference, generate binding profiles and specificity logos, and explain selected cases by crystallographic studies. Mass spectrometry experiments on cell extracts and literature surveys show that quantitative fragmentomics effectively complements protein interactomics by providing affinities and completeness of coverage, putting a full human interactome affinity survey within reach. Finally, we show that interactome hijacking by the viral PBM of human papillomavirus E6 oncoprotein substantially impacts the host cell proteome beyond immediate E6 binders, illustrating the complex system-wide relationship between interactome and function.

### Keywords
Interactome, Complexome, Pdz, Domain-motif interaction

### Affiliations
Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, 67404 Illkirch CEDEX, France
CNRS

### Submitter
Luc Negroni

### Lab Head
Dr Gergo Gogl
Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, 67404 Illkirch CEDEX, France


