### Accession
PXD029624

### Title
Hypocrates, a genetically encoded fluorescent biosensor for (pseudo)hypohalous acids and their derivatives

### Description
The lack of tools to monitor the dynamics of (pseudo)hypohalous acids in live cells and tissues hinders a better understanding of inflammatory processes. Here we present a fluorescent genetically encoded biosensor, Hypocrates, for the visualization of (pseudo)hypohalous acids and their derivatives. Hypocrates consists of a circularly permuted yellow fluorescent protein integrated into the structure of the transcription repressor NemR from Escherichia coli. We show that Hypocrates is ratiometric, reversible, and responds to its analytes in the 106 M-1s-1 range. Solving the Hypocrates X-ray structure provided insights into its sensing mechanism, making it the first circularly permuted fluorescent protein-based redox probe for which spatial organization is determined. We exemplify its applicability by imaging hypohalous stress in bacteria phagocytosed by primary neutrophils. Finally, we demonstrate that Hypocrates can be utilized in combination with HyPerRed for the simultaneous visualization of (pseudo)hypohalous acids and hydrogen peroxide dynamics in a zebrafish tail fin injury model

### Sample Protocol
Hypocrates protein was reduced with 20 mM DTT and desalted via a Hi-Trap® desalting column (GE Healthcare) using the AKTA™ Pure system (GE Healthcare, Life Sciences). The desalting buffer solution (100 mM sodium phosphate buffer pH 7.4) was argon flushed prior to use. The protein was then transferred into the Whitley A35 anaerobic workstation (Don Whitley Scientific). Reduced biosensor (30 µM) was incubated for 10 min with different oxidants (NaOCl, NaOBr, NCT, or HOSCN) at a 1:20 ratio of protein to oxidant concentration. The samples were then desalted using Micro Bio-Spin® Chromatography Columns (BIO-RAD) to remove excess oxidants. Finally, 10 mM NEM was added to block available free thiols. The samples were then stored at -20°C until mass spectrometry analysis. Proteins were precipitated with methanol/chloroform and digested overnight with trypsin at 37°C, the reaction was stopped with 0.1% (v/v) TFA

### Data Protocol
Proteins were precipitated with methanol/chloroform and digested overnight with trypsin at 37°C, the reaction was stopped with 0.1% (v/v) TFA. Peptides were dissolved in solvent A (0.1% TFA in 2% ACN), directly loaded onto reversed-phase pre-column (Acclaim PepMap 100, Thermo Scientific) and eluted in backflush mode. Peptide separation was performed using a reversed-phase analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, 0.075 x 250 mm, Thermo Scientific) with a linear gradient of 4%-27.5% solvent B (0.1% FA in 98% ACN) for 100 min, 27.5%-40% solvent B for 10 min, 40%-95% solvent B for 1 min and holding at 95% for the last 10 min at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min on an Ultimate 3000-nLC RSLC system. The peptides were analyzed by an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos tribrid mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Fusion Lumos coupled online to the nano-LC. Intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000. Peptides were selected for MS/MS using CID setting at 30; ion fragments were detected in the Ion Trap. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by MS/MS scans was applied for 5 seconds for ions above a threshold ion count of 1.0E4 in the MS survey scan with 60.0 s dynamic exclusion. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.1 kV. MS1 spectra were obtained with an AGC target of 4E5 ions and a maximum injection time of 50 ms, and MS2 spectra were acquired with an AGC target of 1E4 ions and a maximum injection time of 35 ms. For MS scans, the m/z scan range was 350 to 1800. The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Sequest HT search engine within Proteome Discoverer 2.4 SP1 against a Escherichia coli K12 protein database obtained from Uniprot (4349 entries) and containing the Hypocrates sequence. Trypsin was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missed cleavages, 4 modifications per peptide and up to 5 charges. Mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.5 Da for fragment ions. Oxidation on Met and Trp (+15.995 Da), dioxidation on Cys and Trp (+31.990 Da), trioxidation on Cys (+47.985 Da), bromination or chlorination on Phe, His and Trp (+77.991 and +33.961 Da, respectively) and N-ethylmaleimide on Cys (+125.048 Da) were considered as variable modifications. False discovery rate (FDR) was assessed using Percolator and thresholds for protein, peptide and modification site were specified at 1%. For abundance comparison, abundance ratios were calculated by Label Free Quantification (LFQ) of the precursor intensities within Proteome Discoverer 2.4 SP1

### Publication Abstract
The lack of tools to monitor the dynamics of (pseudo)hypohalous acids in live cells and tissues hinders a better understanding of inflammatory processes. Here we present a fluorescent genetically encoded biosensor, Hypocrates, for the visualization of (pseudo)hypohalous acids and their derivatives. Hypocrates consists of a circularly permuted yellow fluorescent protein integrated into the structure of the transcription repressor NemR from Escherichia coli. We show that Hypocrates is ratiometric, reversible, and responds to its analytes in the 10<sup>6</sup>&#x2009;M<sup>-1</sup>s<sup>-1</sup> range. Solving the Hypocrates X-ray structure provided insights into its sensing mechanism, allowing determination of the spatial organization in this circularly permuted fluorescent protein-based redox probe. We exemplify its applicability by imaging hypohalous stress in bacteria phagocytosed by primary neutrophils. Finally, we demonstrate that Hypocrates can be utilized in combination with HyPerRed for the simultaneous visualization of (pseudo)hypohalous acids and hydrogen peroxide dynamics in a zebrafish tail fin injury model.

### Keywords
Visualization, Hypohalous acids, Biosensor, Ratiometric, Fluorescence

### Affiliations
Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry, 117997 Moscow, Russia
UCL - de Duve Institute, Brussels Belgium

### Submitter
Didier Vertommen

### Lab Head
Dr Vsevolod V. Belousov
Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry, 117997 Moscow, Russia


