### Accession
PXD018271

### Title
Antagonism of PP2A is an independent and conserved function of HIV-1 Vif and causes cell cycle arrest

### Description
The seminal description of cellular restriction factor APOBEC3G and its antagonism by HIV-1 Vif has underpinned two decades of research on the host-virus interaction. As well as APOBEC3G and its homologues, however, we have recently discovered that Vif is also able to degrade the PPP2R5 family of regulatory subunits of key cellular phosphatase PP2A (PPP2R5A-E) (Greenwood et al., 2016; Naamati et al., 2019). We now identify amino acid polymorphisms at positions 31 and 128 of HIV-1 Vif which selectively regulate the degradation of PPP2R5 family proteins. These residues covary across HIV-1 viruses in vivo, favouring depletion of PPP2R5A-E. Through analysis of point mutants and naturally occurring Vif variants, we further show that degradation of PPP2R5 family subunits is both necessary and sufficient for Vif-dependent G2/M cell cycle arrest. Antagonism of PP2A by HIV-1 Vif is therefore independent of APOBEC3 family proteins, and regulates cell cycle progression in HIV-infected cells.

### Sample Protocol
For TMT-based whole cell proteomic analysis of transduced or infected CEM-T4s, washed cell pellets were lysed in 50 mM HEPES pH 8 with 5% SDS followed by 10 min (30 sec on/off) sonication in a Bioruptor Pico sonicator (Diagenode) at 18 °C. Lysates were quantified by BCA assay (Thermo Scientific) and 25 μg (transduced CEM-T4s, experiments 1-2) or 10 μg (infected and AFMACS-selected CEM-T4s, experiment 3) total protein/condition used for further analysis.  Sample volumes were equalised with lysis buffer and proteins reduced and alkylated by addition of 10mM TCEP and 20mM iodoacetamide followed by incubation at RT for 30 min, protected from light. Samples were then processed using S-Trap micro columns (Protifi). To each sample 10% v/v H3PO4 was added and samples mixed by vortexing briefly. 6 volumes of 90% MeOH HEPES pH 7.1 (loading buffer) were then added and pipette-mixed before loading onto columns using a vacuum manifold.  Samples were then washed with 4x 150 μl loading buffer. A 1:25 enzyme:protein ratio of LysC/trypsin mix (Promega) was added to each column in 30 μl of 50 mM HEPES pH 8 with 0.1% sodium deoxycholate (SDC). Columns were placed into microcentrifuge tubes and incubated for 6 hr at 37 °C in a Thermomixer S (Eppendorf) without shaking. Open tubes of water were placed in empty positions and the Thermomixer lid used to minimise evaporation.  After incubation, peptides were eluted in three stages: 40 μl 10 mM HEPES pH 8; 35 μl 0.2% formic acid (FA); then 35 μl 0.2% FA in 50% Acetonitrile (ACN). Samples were dried for a short period in a vacuum centrifuge to evaporate ACN and then acidified with FA to precipitate SDC. Samples were then made up to ∼100 μl with water, then 600 μl ethyl acetate was added and samples vortexed vigorously. After centrifugation at 15,000 g for 5 min the lower phase (containing peptides) was retained and the upper phase (containing SDC and ethyl acetate) was discarded.  After drying fully in a vacuum centrifuge, samples were resuspended in 21 μl 100 mM HEPES pH 8, to which was added 0.2 mg of TMT label dissolved in 9 μl ACN. After 1 hr incubation at RT samples were analysed by LCMS to ensure complete labelling, then pooled and dried by ∼50% in a vacuum centrifuge. The pooled sample was made up to ∼1ml in a final concentration of 0.1% triflouracetic acid (TFA) and the pH was adjusted to <2 with FA. The samples were then subjected to C18 SPE clean-up using 500 mg Sep-Pak tC18 cartridges (Waters). Columns was wetted with 1 ml ACN and equilibrated with 3 ml 0.1% TFA before loading the sample, washing with 2 ml 0.1% TFA and eluting with 250 μl 40% ACN, 250 μl 80% ACN and 250 μl 80% ACN. The eluates were dried in a vacuum centrifuge.

### Data Protocol
Spectra were searched using Mascot within Proteome Discoverer 2.2 in two rounds. The first search was against the UniProt human reference proteome, a custom HIV proteome (adjusted to include the exact protein coding sequences used) and a compendium of common contaminants (Global Proteome Machine). The second search took all unmatched spectra from the first search and searched against the human trEMBL database. The following search parameters were used. MS1 tol: 10 ppm; MS2 tol: 0.6 Da; fixed mods: carbamidomethyl (C) and TMT (N-term, K); var mods: oxidation (M); enzyme: trypsin (/P). MS3 spectra were used for reporter ion based quantitation with a most confident centroid tolerance of 20 ppm. PSM FDR was calculated using Mascot percolator and was controlled at 0.01% for ‘high’ confidence PSMs and 0.05% for ‘medium’ confidence PSMs. Normalisation was automated and based on total s/n in each channel.

### Publication Abstract
The seminal description of the cellular restriction factor APOBEC3G and its antagonism by HIV-1 Vif has underpinned two decades of research on the host-virus interaction. We recently reported that HIV-1 Vif is also able to degrade the PPP2R5 family of regulatory subunits of key cellular phosphatase PP2A (PPP2R5A-E; Greenwood et al., 2016; Naamati et al., 2019). We now identify amino acid polymorphisms at positions 31 and 128 of HIV-1 Vif which selectively regulate the degradation of PPP2R5 family proteins. These residues covary across HIV-1 viruses in vivo, favouring depletion of PPP2R5A-E. Through analysis of point mutants and naturally occurring Vif variants, we further show that degradation of PPP2R5 family subunits is both necessary and sufficient for Vif-dependent G2/M cell cycle arrest. Antagonism of PP2A by HIV-1 Vif is therefore independent of APOBEC3 family proteins, and regulates cell cycle progression in HIV-infected cells.

### Keywords
Vif, Hiv, Proteomics, Pp2a

### Affiliations
Cambridge Institute for Therapeutic Immunology and Infectious Disease (CITIID), University of Cambridge, UK
University of Cambridge

### Submitter
James Williamson

### Lab Head
Dr Nicholas J Matheson
Cambridge Institute for Therapeutic Immunology and Infectious Disease (CITIID), University of Cambridge, UK


