### Accession
PXD010172

### Title
The deficiency of poly-β-1,6-N-acetyl-glucosamine deacetylase trigger A. baumannii to convert to biofilm-independent colistin-tolerant cells

### Description
In this study, we perform the phosphoproteomic analysis to compare the differential profiles between Acinetobacter baumannii in planktonic and biofilm lifestyles.

### Sample Protocol
Five minigrams of extracted proteins were digested by trypsin (1:40 w/w) with both gel-based and gel-free procedures. The tryptic peptides were desalted through SDB-XC StageTip for further proteomic analysis. Phosphopeptides from both lifestyles were enriched by custom-made HAMMOC tips, which were prepared using 0.5 mg TiO2 beads (GL Sciences) packed into 10-μL C8-StageTips. Resulting phosphopeptides were lyophilized for further liquid chromatography electrospray ionization mass spectrometry (LC-ESI-MS, Fusion) analysis (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The MS and MS/MS raw data were programed with MaxQuant software (version 1.5.1.2) based on the database of A. baumannii strain 15151. The false discovery rate of the peptides, proteins, and modification sites was set to 0.1% and the minimum MaxQuant score for phosphorylation sites was 40 with at least 75% of localization probabilities. Gene ontology of each identified protein was annotated based on Uniprot database (www.uniprot.org).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Acinetobacter baumannii, De-n-acetylation, Biofilm, Phosphoproteome, Poly-β-1, 6-n-acetylglucosamine

### Affiliations
Room 712, Institute of Biological Chemistry, Academia Sinica  128, Academia Road Sec. 2, Nankang, Taipei 115, Taiwan
China Medical University

### Submitter
Shu-Jung Lai

### Lab Head
Dr Shih-Hsiung Wu
Room 712, Institute of Biological Chemistry, Academia Sinica  128, Academia Road Sec. 2, Nankang, Taipei 115, Taiwan


