### Accession
PXD005340

### Title
Targeted analysis of IGF:s in cat serum, LC-MS/MS

### Description
Today immunoassays are widely used in veterinary medicine, but lack of species specific assays often necessitates the use of assays developed for human applications. Mass spectrometry (MS) is an attractive alternative due to high specificity and versatility, allowing for species-independent analysis. Targeted MS-based quantification methods are valuable complements to large scale shotgun analysis. A method referred to as parallel reaction monitoring (PRM), implemented on Orbitrap MS, has lately been presented as an excellent alternative to more traditional selected reaction monitoring/multiple reaction monitoring (SRM/MRM)methods. The insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-system is not well described in the cat but there are indications of important differences between cats and humans. In feline medicine IGF–I is mainly analyzed for diagnosis of growth hormone disorders but also for research, while the other proteins in the IGF-system are not routinely analyzed within clinical practice. Here, a PRM method for quantification of IGF–I, IGF–II, IGF binding protein (BP) –3 and IGFBP–5 in feline serum is presented. Selective quantification was supported by the use of a newly launched internal standard named QPrEST™. Homology searches demonstrated the possibility to use this standard of human origin for quantification of the targeted feline proteins. Excellent quantitative sensitivity at the attomol/µL (pM) level and selectivity were obtained. As the presented approach is very generic we show that high resolution mass spectrometry in combination with PRM and QPrEST™ internal standards is a versatile tool for protein quantitation across multispecies.

### Sample Protocol
Internal standards, so-called QPrESTs, were added to the cat serum samples. The serum samples were reduced, alkylated and digested by trypsin. An additional internal standard was added. The samples were desalted and thereafter analysed by nanoLC-MS/MS. Online nano-LC separations were obtained with an EASY-nLC II system (ThermoFisher)connected via a nano-flex ion source to a LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro ETD mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
For the data analysis and quantification of the PRM runs, the Skyline software was used. The quantification was based on the sum of the area under the curves (AUC) of three to six fragments of the selected peptides and the ratio between sample peptide fragments and the heavy isotope peptide fragments. Each sample was measured three times and the mean and standard deviation of the determined concentrations were calculated.

### Publication Abstract
Today immunoassays are widely used in veterinary medicine, but lack of species specific assays often necessitates the use of assays developed for human applications. Mass spectrometry (MS) is an attractive alternative due to high specificity and versatility, allowing for species-independent analysis. Targeted MS-based quantification methods are valuable complements to large scale shotgun analysis. A method referred to as parallel reaction monitoring (PRM), implemented on Orbitrap MS, has lately been presented as an excellent alternative to more traditional selected reaction monitoring/multiple reaction monitoring (SRM/MRM) methods. The insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-system is not well described in the cat but there are indications of important differences between cats and humans. In feline medicine IGF-I is mainly analyzed for diagnosis of growth hormone disorders but also for research, while the other proteins in the IGF-system are not routinely analyzed within clinical practice. Here, a PRM method for quantification of IGF-I, IGF-II, IGF binding protein (BP) -3 and IGFBP-5 in feline serum is presented. Selective quantification was supported by the use of a newly launched internal standard named QPrEST&#x2122;. Homology searches demonstrated the possibility to use this standard of human origin for quantification of the targeted feline proteins. Excellent quantitative sensitivity at the attomol/&#x3bc;L (pM) level and selectivity were obtained. As the presented approach is very generic we show that high resolution mass spectrometry in combination with PRM and QPrEST&#x2122; internal standards is a versatile tool for protein quantitation across multispecies.

### Keywords
Cat, Lc-ms/ms, Prm

### Affiliations
Uppsala University
Analytical Chemistry, Department of Chemistry – BMC and Science for Life Laboratory, Uppsala University, Box 599, 751 24 Uppsala, Sweden

### Submitter
Margareta Ramstrom

### Lab Head
Dr Margareta Ramstrom
Analytical Chemistry, Department of Chemistry – BMC and Science for Life Laboratory, Uppsala University, Box 599, 751 24 Uppsala, Sweden


