### Accession
PXD004081

### Title
The innate immune protein calprotectin promotes Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Staphylococcus aureus interaction

### Description
Microorganisms form biofilms containing differentiated cell populations. To determine factors driving differentiation, we study protein distributions in bacterial biofilms using shotgun proteomics. Notably, zinc- and manganese-depleted portions of the biofilm repress the production of anti-staphylococcal molecules. Exposure to calprotectin (a host protein known to sequester metal ions at infectious foci) recapitulates responses occurring within metal-deplete portions of the biofilm and promotes interaction between P. aeruginosa and Staphylococcus aureus. Consistent with these results, the presence of calprotectin promotes co-colonization of the murine lung, and polymicrobial communities are found to co-exist in calprotectin-enriched airspaces of a cystic fibrosis lung explant. These findings, which demonstrate that metal fluctuations are a driving force of microbial community structure, have clinical implications because of the frequent occurrence of P. aeruginosa and S. aureus co-infections.

### Sample Protocol
A drip flow reactor was used to generate robust bacterial biofilms of Pseudomonas aeruginosa. These biofilms were either grown unchallenged [untreated] or challenged with the host protein calprotectin. Each biofilm was dissected into eight pieces, four from the central nutrient channel and four from the edges. Analyses were performed in biological triplicate. Each region of biofilm was moved to a 15 mL conical tube for lysis and protein extraction. Cells were lysed using 1 mL of 80% Acetonitrile 5% Formic acid and 400 µL of Bacterial Protein Extraction Reagent (BPER) (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL). Biofilms were homogenized using an ultrasonicator dismembrator Model 150E (Fisher Scientific). Protein was quantified using a Bradford Assay (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL). Twenty-five μg of protein was removed from each sample, dried using a speedvac concentrator (Thermo Scientific), reconstituted in sample buffer, and loaded onto a 10% Novex Bis-Tris Gel (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) with MES Running Buffer. Samples were run into the gel at 200 V for 5 minutes and stained using SimplyBlueTM SafeStain (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). Stained gel bands were removed and subjected to in-gel reduction, alkylation, and tryptic digestion. The resulting peptides were analyzed by data-dependent LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptides were autosampled onto a 200 mm by 0.1 mm self-packed analytical column (Jupiter 3 µm, 300A) coupled directly to an LTQ (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA) using a nanoelectrospray source. Peptides were eluted over a 70 minute aqueous to organic gradient. A full scan mass spectrum followed by 5 data-dependent tandem mass spectra (MS/MS) was collected with enabled dynamic exclusion to minimize the acquisition of redundant spectra.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were searched using SEQUEST against the PA14 database containing both forward and reversed versions for each entry (UniProt Pseudomonas aeruginosa strain UCBPP-PA14, taxon 208963 reference proteome set).  Identifications were filtered and compiled at the protein level using Scaffold 4 (Proteome Software) with a 5% FDR and 2 minimum peptide threshold. Differences in peptide enrichment in the biofilm center versus the biofilm edge were assessed using a three step process. First, peptides of interest were identified by assessing the peptide counts obtained from center-derived samples versus edge-derived samples and determining a statistically-significant enrichment in a biofilm compartment using a Student’s t-test comparing the four technical replicates of a single run. Secondly, this statistically-significant peptide enrichment needed to be maintained in replicate biofilms in order for the protein of interest to make the final cut-off. Finally, the averaged peptide counts of all replicate biofilm edge and center samples needed to be significantly enriched in one of these compartments in order to be included in Supplementary Data 2 and 3.

### Publication Abstract
Microorganisms form biofilms containing differentiated cell populations. To determine factors driving differentiation, we herein visualize protein and metal distributions within Pseudomonas aeruginosa biofilms using imaging mass spectrometry. These in vitro experiments reveal correlations between differential protein distribution and metal abundance. Notably, zinc- and manganese-depleted portions of the biofilm repress the production of anti-staphylococcal molecules. Exposure to calprotectin (a host protein known to sequester metal ions at infectious foci) recapitulates responses occurring within metal-deplete portions of the biofilm and promotes interaction between P. aeruginosa and Staphylococcus aureus. Consistent with these results, the presence of calprotectin promotes co-colonization of the murine lung, and polymicrobial communities are found to co-exist in calprotectin-enriched airspaces of a cystic fibrosis lung explant. These findings, which demonstrate that metal fluctuations are a driving force of microbial community structure, have clinical implications because of the frequent occurrence of P. aeruginosa and S. aureus co-infections.

### Keywords
Pa14, Biofilms, Drip flow reactor, Calprotectin, Pseudomonas aeruginoa, S100a9, S100a8

### Affiliations
Vanderbilt University
Vanderbilt University, Mass Spectrometry Research Center

### Submitter
Jessica Moore

### Lab Head
Dr Richard Caprioli
Vanderbilt University, Mass Spectrometry Research Center


