### Accession
PXD023994

### Title
Precisely measured protein lifetimes in the brain of aged mice

### Description
Aging, which is associated with protein homeostasis defects, is one of the most prominent risk factors for neurodegenerative disorders and the regulation of protein homeostasis is essential for brain health. While several studies have addressed changes in protein abundance due to aging, little is known about differences in protein stability in the mammalian brain proteome. In particular, pre-symptomatic alterations of protein stability might be instrumental for understanding the pathological alterations that occur during neurodegeneration. To explore these alterations, we measured proteome turnover with a pulse-SILAC approach in aged mice from total cortex and cerebellum homogenates and from the respective synaptic-enriched fraction. We compared the stability of young and aged proteomes. Our analyses revealed several differences and the large dataset that we created will serve as a resource for the community to develop approaches that explore these alterations with diagnostic and therapeutic purposes.

### Sample Protocol
The protein concentration of individual samples was determined with a BCA kit. For each sample, 100 µg of total protein was loaded on pre-casted NuPAGE gels. Gels were run at constant voltage, stained overnight with Coomassie Blue, and destained with water. After destaining, each lane was cut into 23 gel pieces using an in-house-made gel cutter, and processed for in-gel digestion using trypsin. The eluted peptides were dried and resuspended in 5% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid solution, and were further processed for LC-MS in an online UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system coupled online to the Q-Exactive-HF.

### Data Protocol
The acquired RAW data was analyzed using MaxQuant 1.6.17.0 software. The mouse UniProt database was used for identifying proteins. For defining the label on peptides, the multiplicity was selected to “2” and the label 13C6-lysine was ticked as heavy. “Match Between Runs” and “Requantify” were enabled. Protein quantification was based on “unique and razor peptides” for each given protein.

### Publication Abstract
Aging is a prominent risk factor for neurodegenerative disorders (NDDs); however, the molecular mechanisms rendering the aged brain particularly susceptible to neurodegeneration remain unclear. Here, we aim to determine the link between physiological aging and NDDs by exploring protein turnover using metabolic labeling and quantitative pulse-SILAC proteomics. By comparing protein lifetimes between physiologically aged and young adult mice, we found that in aged brains protein lifetimes are increased by ~20% and that aging affects distinct pathways linked to NDDs. Specifically, a set of neuroprotective proteins are longer-lived in aged brains, while some mitochondrial proteins linked to neurodegeneration are shorter-lived. Strikingly, we observed a previously unknown alteration in proteostasis that correlates to parsimonious turnover of proteins with high biosynthetic costs, revealing an overall metabolic adaptation that preludes neurodegeneration. Our findings suggest that future therapeutic paradigms, aimed at addressing these metabolic adaptations, might be able to delay NDD onset.

### Keywords
Cerebellum, Synapse, Brain turnover, Cortex, Protein lifetimes, Metabolic labeling

### Affiliations
UMG Neuro- and Sensory Physiology
Department of Neuro- and Sensory Physiology University Medical Center Göttingen Humboldtallee 23 37073 Göttingen

### Submitter
Verena Klüver

### Lab Head
Dr Eugenio F. Fornasiero
Department of Neuro- and Sensory Physiology University Medical Center Göttingen Humboldtallee 23 37073 Göttingen


