### Accession
PXD023960

### Title
The amino acid homoarginine inhibits atherogenesis by modulating T-cell function

### Description
Rational: Amino acid metabolism is crucial for inflammatory processes during atherogenesis. The endogenous amino acid homoarginine (HA) is a robust biomarker for cardiovascular outcome and mortality with high levels being protective. However, the underlying molecular mechanism remains elusive.  Objective: We investigated the effect of HA supplementation on atherosclerotic plaque development with a particular focus on athero-inflammation. Methods and Results: Female apolipoprotein (Apo) E-deficient mice were supplemented with HA (14 mg/L) in drinking water starting two weeks before and continuing throughout a six week-course of Western-type diet (HA-treated). Control mice (Ctrl) received normal drinking water. HA supplementation led to a 2-fold increase in circulating HA concentrations. Plaque- and immunological phenotyping revealed that HA-treated mice exhibited a reduction in atherosclerosis in the aortic root as well as in the brachiocephalic trunk. A substantial decrease in lesion CD3+ T cells suggested a T cell-related effect of HA supplementation. Using mass spectrometry-based proteomics and subsequent pathway analysis together with conventional in vitro techniques such as flow cytometry, various migration and chemotaxis assays as well as super-resolution microscopy, we demonstrate that HA profoundly modulated the spatial organization of the T-cell actin cytoskeleton. Further mechanistic studies revealed an inhibition of T-cell activation and proliferation as well as a striking impairment of the migratory capacities of T cells in response to relevant chemokines by HA, all of which likely contribute to its atheroprotective effects.  Conclusion: This study unravels a novel mechanism, by which the amino acid HA reduces atherosclerosis, namely the regulation of T-cell functions crucial for adaptive immunity. We identified that HA modulates the T-cell cytoskeleton and thereby mitigated important T-cell functions during atherogenesis. These findings provide a molecular explanation for the beneficial effects of HA in atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics (Tandem Mass Tag-labelling). CD4+ T cells were isolated from spleen, lymph nodes and blood of atherosclerotic Ctrl and HA mice using antibody-conjugated magnetic beads according to manufacturer’s instructions (Dynabeads™ Untouched™ Mouse CD4 Cells Kit, ThermoFisherScienitific). Cells were processed using the iST-NHS kit (Preomics) and labeled with TMT-10plex (Thermo Scientific) as described by the corresponding manufacturers. The description of the labelled samples can be found in Supplementary Table 2. For LC-MS/MS purposes, 5 µl of the desalted peptides were injected in an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo), separated in a 25-cm Aurora column (Ionopticks) with a 145-min gradient from 6 to 43% of 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. The effluent from the HPLC was directly electrosprayed into a Qexactive HF (Thermo) operated in data dependent mode to automatically switch between full scan MS and MS/MS acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (from m/z 375–1500) were acquired with resolution R=30,000 at m/z 400 (AGC target of 1x106). The 15 most intense peptide ions with charge states between 2 and 5 were sequentially isolated (window 0.7) to a target value of 1x105, with resolution R=60,000, fragmented at 27-30-32% stepped normalized collision energy and fixed first mass 100 m/z. Typical mass spectrometric conditions were: spray voltage, 1.5 kV; no sheath and auxiliary gas flow; heated capillary temperature, 250ºC; ion selection threshold, 33.000 counts.

### Data Protocol
Differential Analysis: Differential analysis was performed with the MS-EmpiRe method, which utilizes peptide-level statistics for detection of protein regulation. In a first step, MS-EmpiRe was called on each TMT-multiplex individually to derive protein-level fold changes and p-values. This was possible because each multiplex contained both treatment as well as control samples. Comparing within a multiplexed run enabled to resolve also subtle fold changes, due to the low noise within a single multiplex. From the within-multiplex comparisons, the protein-level Z-values derived from each multiplex. Subsequently, these Z-values were combined as independent, normally distributed random variables and an overall fold changes and p-values were calculated. Multiple testing correction of the protein p-values was performed via the Benjamini-Hochberg method. Proteins with a resulting FDR<5% were reported as significantly regulated. To validate results of the significance test, the significant proteins were visualized and are available for manual inspection under the respective links in: https://www.bio.ifi.lmu.de/files/ammar/AtzlerProteomics/ GO Enrichment: GO analysis was based on the Gene Ontology.obo database, the “is_a” relation was used to obtain the set of proteins in a GO class. For each GO process, the number of significant proteins was compared with the number of significant proteins expected by chance. The enrichment was calculated with an overrepresentation analysis employing the Hypergeometric test, using an in-house script. Genes detected in the proteomics runs were used as background in the hypergeometric test. Multiple testing correction was again carried out using the Benjamini-Hochberg method.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Homoarginine, Atherosclerosis, Amino acids, Actin cytoskeleton, T cells

### Affiliations
Biomedical Center-LMU
Institute for Cardiovascular Prevention (IPEK) Klinikum der Universität München,  Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München (LMU Munich) Pettenkoferstr. 9, D-80336 Munich, Germany  Telefon: +49 (0)89 4400 - 54672

### Submitter
Ignasi Forne

### Lab Head
Dr Dorothee Atzler, PhD
Institute for Cardiovascular Prevention (IPEK) Klinikum der Universität München,  Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München (LMU Munich) Pettenkoferstr. 9, D-80336 Munich, Germany  Telefon: +49 (0)89 4400 - 54672


