### Accession
PXD046977

### Title
CoIP-MS based method to identify FNIP1 binding proteins in exercising muscle

### Description
Using muscle-specific FNIP1 (WT) and FNIP1 (S220A Tg) muscle tissues, we identified approximately 600 potential FNIP1 (WT) or FNIP1 (S220A) binding proteins in exercising muscle tissue of the corresponding mice by the CoIP-MS method, proteomic analysis showed that both FNIP1 (WT) and FNIP1 (S220A) interacted with major mitochondrial proteins, such as the respiratory complex subunits. Notably, FNIP1 (S220A) specifically interacted with additional mitochondrial subunits that were not observed for FNIP1 (WT), including protein involved in NADH metabolism and sulfur cluster binding. These data suggested that non-phosphorylated FNIP1 (S220A) could enhance its interaction with mitochondria.

### Sample Protocol
To identify FNIP1-interacting proteins, muscle tissues from FNIP1 Tg or FNIP1 S220A Tg mice were homogenized, and then incubated with anti-Flag M2-beads (Sigma, A2220) at 4ºC overnight. The samples were subjected to SDS-PAGE, and stained with Coomassie bright blue R-250. For mass spectrometry identification, the gel portions containing the protein bands were excised, destained, dehydrated, and subjected to trypsin digestion. The resulting peptides were analyzed by a liquid chromatography mass spectrometry system (2D -NanoLC/TripleTOF5600).

### Data Protocol
The original MS data were submitted to ProteinPilot Software (version 4.5, AB SCIEX) with Paragon Algorithm for data analysis. MS/MS data were searched against Mus musculus in UniProt database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to three missing cleavages, four modifications per peptide and two to five charges. Mass error was set to 20 ppm for first search, 5 ppm for main search, and 0.02 Da for fragmented ions. False discovery rate thresholds for protein, peptide, and modification site were specified at 1%. Minimum peptide length was set at seven. All the other parameters in ProteinPilot were set to default values. In addition, ProteinProspector (version 5.20.0) was used for search compare and protein quantification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse, Muscle, Coip.

### Affiliations
Nanjing University Medical School
Medical School of Nanjing University

### Submitter
Lei Fang

### Lab Head
Dr Lei Fang
Medical School of Nanjing University


