### Accession
PXD030902

### Title
1A  GID  E3  ligase assembly  ubiquitinates  an Rsp5 E3 adaptor  and regulates  plasma membrane transporters

### Description
Cells  rapidly  remodel  their  proteomes  to  align  their  cellular  metabolism  to environmentalconditions.    Ubiquitin E3  ligases enablethis  response, by  facilitatingrapid andreversible changes to protein stability, localization, or interaction partners.  In S. cerevisiae, the GID E3 ligase regulatesthe switch from gluconeogenic to glycolytic conditions throughinduction and incorporation  of  the  substrate  receptorsubunitGid4,  whichpromotes  the  degradation  of gluconeogenic enzymes.  Here,we show an alternative substrate receptor, Gid10, which is induced  in  response  to  changes  in  temperature,  osmolarity  and  nutrient  availability,andregulates the  ART-Rsp5 pathway. Art2 levels are elevated upon GID10deletion, a crystal structure  shows  the  basis  for  Gid10-Art2  interactions,  andGid10 directs a  GID  E3  ligase complex to ubiquitinate Art2.  We also findthat the GID E3 ligase affects the flux of plasma membrane nutrient transportersduring heat stress.  The data revealGID as a system of E3 ligases  with metabolic regulatory  functions  outside  of  glycolysis  and  gluconeogenesis, controlled by distinct stress-specific substrate receptors.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were prepared and analyzed as previously described in Karayel et al., PNAS, 2020.  Briefly, sodium deoxycholate (SDC) lysis buffer (1% SDC and 100 mM Tris, pH 8.4) were added to the frozen cell pellets. Lysates were immediately boiled for 5 min at 95 °C and homogenized with sonication. Protein concentrations were estimated by tryptophan assay. Equal protein amounts were reduced and alkylated using CAA and TCEP, final concentrations of 40 mM and 10 mM, respectively, for 5 min at 45 °C. Samples were digested overnight at 37 °C using trypsin (1:100 wt/wt; Sigma-Aldrich) and LysC (1/100 wt/wt;Wako). Next, peptides were desalted using SDB-RPS StageTips (Empore). Samples were first diluted with 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) in isopropanol to a final volume of 200μL and loaded onto StageTips and subsequently washed with 200μL of 1% TFA in isopropanoland twice and 200μL of 0.2% TFA/2% ACN (acetonitrile). Peptides were eluted with 80μl of 1.25% Ammonium hydroxide (NH4OH)/80% ACN, dried using a SpeedVac centrifuge (Concentrator Plus; Eppendorf) and resuspended in buffer A* (0.2% TFA/2% ACN) prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptide concentrations were measured optically at 280 nm (Nanodrop 2000; ThermoScientific) and subsequently equalized using buffer A*. Three hundred nanograms of peptide was subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis.  Samples were loaded onto a 20-cm reversed-phase column (75-μm inner diameter, packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ1.9 μm resin [Dr. Maisch GmbH]). The column temperature was maintained at 60 °C using a homemade column oven. A binary buffer system, consisting of buffer A (0.1% formic acid [FA]) and buffer B (80% ACN plus 0.1% FA), was used for peptide separation, at a flow rate of 450 nL/min. An EASY-nLC1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific), directly coupled online with the mass spectrometer (Q Exactive HF-X, Thermo Fisher Scientific) via a nano-electrospray source, was employed for nano-flow liquid chromatography. A gradient starting at 5% buffer B, increased to 35% in 18.5 min 95% in a minute, and stayed at 95% for 3.5 min was used. The mass spectrometer was operated in data independent acquisition mode (DIA). Full MS resolution was set to 120,000 with a full scan range of 300 to 1,650m/z, a maximum fill time of 60 ms, and an AGC target of 3e6. One full scan was followed by 12 windows with a resolution of 30,000 in profile mode. Precursor ions were fragmented by stepped HCD (NCE 25.5,27, and 30%).

### Data Protocol
DIA files were analyzed using the proteome library previously generated (Karayel et al., PNAS, 2020) with default settings and enabled cross-run normalization using Spectronaut version 13 (Biognosys). The Perseus software package versions 1.6.0.7 and 1.6.0.9 (Tyanova et al., Nature Methods, 2016) and GraphPad Prism version 7.03 were used for the data analysis. Protein intensities were log2-transformed and the datasets were filtered to make sure that identified proteins showed expression or intensity in all biological triplicates of at least one condition and the missing values were subsequently replaced by random numbers that were drawn from a normal distribution (width=0.3 and downshift=1.8) in Perseus. To determine significantly different proteins, two sample t-test was applied, assuming that variance within the groups of replicates was equal.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rsp5, Gid, Ubiquitin e3 ligase, Ms, Proteomics, Nutrient signaling, Metabolism, Dia

### Affiliations
Head of the Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction at the MPI Biochemistry
Proteomics

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Head of the Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction at the MPI Biochemistry


