### Accession
PXD019751

### Title
The TRiC Chaperonin and Prefoldin Cooperate to Fold and Assemble Viral Capsid Oligomers

### Description
Chemical cross-linking coupled to mass spectrometry was used to study the folding of the reovirus sigma3 protein by the chaperonin, TRiC/CCT. Cross-linking was performed using the homobifunctional, noncleavable reagent, disuccinimidyl suberate (DSS).

### Sample Protocol
Chemical cross-linking was performed following previously described procedures (Leitner et al., Nat. Protoc., 2014). Samples were digested using endoproteinase Lys-C followed by trypsin. Digests were fractionated by size-exclusion chromatography and SEC fractions were analyzed by data-dependent LC-MS/MS on a Thermo Orbitrap Elite system. Additional experimental details are provided in the accompanying publication.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched using xQuest (Walzthoeni et al., Nat. Methods, 2012), version 2.1.4, against the sequences of target proteins and identified contaminants.  Additional search settings were as follows: Enzyme = trypsin, maximum number of missed cleavages = 2, MS mass tolerances dependent on the respective data set, MS/MS mass tolerance = 0.2 Da for “common”-type fragment ions and 0.3 Da for “xlink”-type fragment ions. The original scoring scheme of xQuest (Rinner et al., Nat. Methods, 2008) was used. Cross-linking identifications are compiled in four spreadsheet files in Microsoft Excel format, one per experiment. A separate spreadsheet connects the raw files and the individual cross-linking experiments.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Chemical cross-linking; dss; structural proteomics; protein folding, Tric/cct chaperonin

### Affiliations
ETH Zurich, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, Zurich, Switzerland
ETH Zurich, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology

### Submitter
Alexander Leitner

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Leitner
ETH Zurich, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, Zurich, Switzerland


