### Accession
PXD028276

### Title
The interferon-inducible antiviral GTPase MxB promotes capsid disassembly and genome release of herpesviruses

### Description
Host proteins sense viral products and induce defense mechanisms, particularly in immune cells. Using cell-free assays and quantitative mass spectrometry, we determined the interactomes of capsidhost protein complexes of herpes simplex virus, and identified the large dynamin-like GTPase myxovirus resistance protein B (MxB) as an interferon-inducible protein interacting with capsids. Electron microscopy analyses showed that cytosols containing MxB had the remarkable capability to disassemble the icosahedral capsids of herpes simplex viruses and varicella zoster virus into flat sheets of connected triangular faces. In contrast, capsids remained intact in cytosols with MxB mutants unable to hydrolyze GTP or to dimerize. Our data suggest that MxB senses herpesviral capsids, mediates their disassembly, and thereby restricts the efficiency of nuclear targeting of incoming capsids and/or the assembly of progeny capsids. The resulting premature release of viral genomes from capsids may enhance the activation of DNA sensors, and thereby amplify the innate immune responses.

### Sample Protocol
The samples were resuspended in hot Laemmli buffer and separated in NuPAGE™ 4 to 12% Bis-Tris protein gels (Invitrogen) before in-gel digestion. Briefly, proteins were fixed and stained by Coomassie solution (0.4% G250, 30% methanol, 10% acetic acid). Sample lanes were excised, destained (50% ethanol, 25mM ammonium bi-carbonate), dehydrated with 100% ethanol and dried using a SpeedVac centrifuge (Eppendorf, Concentrator plus). Gel pieces were rehydrated in trypsin solution (1:50 weight/weight enzyme:protein ratio) overnight at 37°C. Tryptic peptides were extracted in extraction buffer (3% trifluoroacetic acid, 30% acetonitrile), dried using a SpeedVac centrifuge, resuspended in 2M Tris-HCl buffer before reduction and alkylation using 10 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine, 40 mM 2-Cloroacetamide in 25 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5. Peptides were then purified and concentrated on StageTips with three C18 Empore filter discs (3M), and separated on a liquid chromatography instrument and analyzed by mass spectrometry (EASY- nLC 1200 system coupled to a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer; Thermo Fisher Scientific) as described before (Hubel et al., 2019). Peptides were loaded on a 20 cm reverse-phase analytical column (75 μm column diameter; ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 μm resin; Dr. Maisch) and separated using a 120 min acetonitrile gradient. The mass spectrometer was operated in Data-Dependent Analysis mode (XCalibur software v.3.0, Thermo Fisher).

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed using MaxQuant version 1.6.2.10 with carbamidomethyl (Cys) as fixed modification as well as oxidation (Met), Acetyl (Protein N-term) as variable modifications, using iBAQ and Match Between Runs options.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hsv1 ; mxb ; host defense

### Affiliations
Institute of Virology - Technical University Munich
Institute of Virology, Technical University of Munich, Munich 81675, Germany

### Submitter
Virginie Girault

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Pichlmair
Institute of Virology, Technical University of Munich, Munich 81675, Germany


