### Accession
PXD010540

### Title
An atypical parvovirus driving chronic tubulointerstitial nephropathy and kidney fibrosis

### Description
The occurrence of a spontaneous nephropathy in laboratory mice, characterized by tubular degeneration and intranuclear inclusions, has puzzled pathologists for over four decades. While the condition takes a more severe course in immunodeficient animals suggesting an infectious cause, its etiology has remained elusive. Using an unbiased metagenomics approach, we have identified the causative agent as a novel virus, mouse kidney parvovirus (MKPV), belonging to a divergent and unclassified genus of the Parvoviridae. MKPV was found to be present in animal facilities in Australia and North America, is transmitted via the orofecal route and is controlled by the adaptive immune system. Detailed analysis of the clinical course and histopathologic features demonstrated a stepwise progression of pathology ranging from sporadic tubular inclusions to extensive tubular degeneration and interstitial fibrosis culminating in renal failure. In summary, we identify a novel, widely distributed pathogen in laboratory mice causing significant impact on the interpretation and outcome of biomedical research based on mouse models. Additionally, we establish MKPV-induced nephropathy as a new tool for elucidating the mechanisms of tubulointerstitial fibrosis that shares molecular features with chronic kidney disease in humans.

### Sample Protocol
. Using an Acquity M-class nanoLC system (Waters, USA), 5 µL of the sample (1 µg) was loaded at 15 µL/min for 3 minutes onto a nanoEase Symmetry C18 trapping column (180 µm x 20 mm) before being washed onto a PicoFrit column (75 µmID x 250 mm; New Objective, Woburn, MA) packed with Magic C18AQ resin (Michrom Bioresources, Auburn, CA). Peptides were eluted from the column and into the source of a Q ExactiveTM Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using the following program: 5-30% MS buffer B (98% Acetonitrile + 0.2% Formic Acid) over 90 minutes, 30–80% MS buffer B over 3 minutes, 80% MS buffer B for 2 minutes, 80–5% for 3 min. The eluting peptides were ionized at 2000V. A Data Dependent MS/MS (dd-MS2) experiment was performed, with a survey scan of 350-1500 Da performed at 70,000 resolution for peptides of charge state 2+ or higher with an AGC target of 3e6 and maximum Injection Time of 50 ms. The Top 12 peptides were selected fragmented in the HCD cell using an isolation window of 1.4 m/z, an AGC target of 1e5 and maximum injection time of 100 ms. Fragments were scanned in the Orbitrap analyzer at 17,500 resolution and the product ion fragment masses measured over a mass range of 120–2000 Da. The mass of the precursor peptide was then excluded for 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS data files were searched using the Mascot search engine against the Mouse Proteome database (SWISS-PROT) “spiked” with the MKPV NS1 and VP1 proteins, using following parameter settings: Fixed modifications: none. Variable modifications: propionamide, oxidized methionine, deamidated asparagine. Enzyme: semi-trypsin. Number of allowed missed cleavages: 3. Peptide mass tolerance: 30 ppm. MS/MS mass tolerance: 0.1 Da. Charge state: 2+, 3+ and 4+. The results of the search were then filtered to include peptides with a –log10P score that was determined by the False Discovery Rate (FDR) of <1%, the score being that where decoy database search matches were <1% of the total matches. MS/MS data were compiled and exported using Scaffold (Proteome Software, Inc)

### Publication Abstract
The occurrence of a spontaneous nephropathy with intranuclear inclusions in laboratory mice has puzzled pathologists for over 4 decades, because its etiology remains elusive. The condition is more severe in immunodeficient animals, suggesting an infectious cause. Using metagenomics, we identify the causative agent as an atypical virus, termed "mouse kidney parvovirus" (MKPV), belonging to a divergent genus of Parvoviridae. MKPV was identified in animal facilities in Australia and North America, is transmitted via a fecal-oral or urinary-oral route, and is controlled by the adaptive immune system. Detailed analysis of the&#xa0;clinical course and histopathological features demonstrated a stepwise progression of pathology ranging from sporadic tubular inclusions to tubular degeneration and interstitial fibrosis and culminating in renal failure. In summary, we identify a widely distributed pathogen in laboratory mice and establish MKPV-induced nephropathy as a new tool for elucidating mechanisms of tubulointerstitial fibrosis that shares molecular features with chronic kidney disease in humans.

### Keywords
Virus, Miouse, Liver, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Centenary Institute, Newtown, New South Wales, Australia
University of Sydney

### Submitter
matthew O'Rourke

### Lab Head
Dr Ben Roediger
Centenary Institute, Newtown, New South Wales, Australia


