### Accession
PXD029628

### Title
Three Microbial Musketeers of the Seas: Shewanella baltica, Aliivibrio fischeri and Vibrio harveyi, and their adaptation to different salinity probed by a proteomic approach

### Description
Osmotic changes are common challenges for marine microorganisms. Bacteria developed numerous ways of dealing with this stress, including reprogramming of global cellular processes, however, many molecular details were obtained only for the model bacteria. In this work we asked what is the basis of the adjustment to prolonged salinity challenges at the proteome level. The objects of our studies were three representatives of bacteria inhabiting various marine environments, Shewanella baltica, Vibrio harveyi and Aliivibrio fischeri. The proteomic studies were performed with bacteria cultivated in increased and decreased salinity, followed by proteolytic digestion of samples which were then subjected to liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry analysis. We show that bacteria adjust at all levels of their biological processes, from DNA topology through gene expression regulation and proteasome assembly, to transport and cellular metabolism. Finding that many similar adaptation strategies were observed for both, low and high salinity conditions, is particularly interesting. The results show that adaptation to salinity challenge involves accumulation of DNA-binding proteins and increased polyamine uptake, and we hypothesize that their function is to coat and protect the nucleoid to counteract adverse changes in the DNA topology due to ionic shifts.

### Sample Protocol
Bacteria were cultivated in liquid Instant Ocean medium (0.1 % yeast extract, 0.05 % ammonium chloride, 5 mM Tris pH 7.4 with varying Instant Ocean® Sea Salt (Aquarium Systems Inc, Mentor, OH, USA) concentrations) or LBS medium with varying NaCl concentrations, at 30 °C with aeration. The growth was continued until OD 600 reached 0.5 (mid-exponential phase), and then 25 ml of bacterial cultures were sampled, centrifuged and resuspended in a lysis buffer (1.5 % SDS, 0.1 M DTT, 0.1 M Tris- HCl pH 7.6) in the volume corresponding to 10 x bacterial pellet. The samples were incubated for 5 min at 95 °C, and then kept at −20 °C until further analysis. Proteins were digested with the Filter-Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) procedure. Sample protein concentration was assessed spectrophotometericaly, and 100 µg of protein were placed on separate Microcon® filters with a 10 kDa cutoff membrane (Merck-Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany). Filters were washed twice with an urea buffer (8 M urea/100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5) by 20-minute centrifugation at 10,000 g prior to alkylation of the cysteine residues by incubation with 55 mM iodoacetamide/urea buffer in the dark, for 20 min. Afterwards, the filters were washed multiple times with the urea buffer and a digestion buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5). Filters were then placed in new tubes filled with a trypsin solution (1:50 enzyme-to- substrate weight ratio), and incubated at 37 °C overnight. Resulting proteolytic peptides were eluted in additional digestion buffer washes and further cleaned up for mass spectrometry analysis with the Stage Tips procedure on in-house prepared C18 resin tips. In the last clean-up step, peptides were eluted with 100 µl of 1% acetic acid/60% acetonitrile/water. Prior to mass spectrometry analysis the samples were condensed to 40 µl by using SpeedVac. Liquid chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis was conducted in positive ion mode on the Triple TOF 5600+ instrument (SCIEX, Framingham, MA, USA) coupled with Ekspert MicroLC 200 Plus System (Eksigent, Dublin, CA, USA). In each measurement, 5 µl of injected  peptides were separated on ChromXP C18CL column (3 µm, 120 Å, 150 × 0.3 mm, Eksigent) in a 60- minute gradient (11-42.5% buffer B; buffer A: 0.1% formic acid/water, buffer B: 0.1% formic acid/acetonitrile). All samples were registered once in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) analysis, which consisted of a TOF scan in the m/z range of 400-1200 Da in 100 ms and a Product ion scan in the m/z range of 100-1800 m/z in 50 ms, resulting in a cycle time of 1.15 s. Quantitative analysis was conducted using high sensitivity-mode SWATH-MS (Sequential Window Acquisition of all Theoretical Mass Spectra) analysis in 25 overlapping variable width acquisition windows constructed using SWATHTuner software focused on equalized ion frequency. SWATH-MS analysis consisted of a survey ion TOF scan in the m/z range of 400-1200 in 50 ms and following Product ion scans in the m/z range of 100-1800 in 40 ms, resulting in a cycle time of 1.1 s.

### Data Protocol
Files resulting from DDA measurements were searched against protein sets from UniProt database (proteome IDs: UP000076650 for S. baltica M1 strain, UP000000537 for A. fischeri ES114 strain and four proteomes—UP000008367, UP000067422, UP000032052, and UP000248176—available for V. harveyi; versions from 07.04.2021) with ProteinPilot 5.0.2 software (SCIEX) to construct a spectral library. Resulting .group file was imported into PeakView 2.2 (SCIEX) along with SWATH-MS measurement files for joint data analysis. The obtained protein intensity values were normalized by a total area sums (TAS) approach. Statistical analysis was performed with Perseus 1.6.15. Intensity values were log2- transformed. Principal component analysis (PCA), hierarchical clustering, and Pearson correlation of samples were performed, and their results were used to exclude potential outliers. At least two biological and technical replications were used in t-tests. Differences in protein concentrations with permutation-based FDR (q-values) under 0.05 were considered as statistically significant. Proteomic data were analyzed with Perseus software. Data were visualized using web-based tools: PlotsOfData Shiny app, VolcaNoseR and InteractiVenn. Gene ontology analysis was performed with GSAn 1.0.5 tool using UniprotKB ids generated with Retrieve/ID mapping tool from UniProt as an input. Gene Ontology (GO) terms and annotations (.gaf files) for bacterial species—Shewanella baltica (NCBI:txid62322), Vibrio harveyi (NCBI:txid669), and Aliivibrio fischeri (NCBI:txid668)—were obtained using the QuickGO web- based browser (access: 2021-08-22).

### Publication Abstract
Osmotic changes are common challenges for marine microorganisms. Bacteria have developed numerous ways of dealing with this stress, including reprogramming of global cellular processes. However, specific molecular adaptation mechanisms to osmotic stress have mainly been investigated in terrestrial model bacteria. In this work, we aimed to elucidate the basis of adjustment to prolonged salinity challenges at the proteome level in marine bacteria. The objects of our studies were three representatives of bacteria inhabiting various marine environments, <i>Shewanella baltica</i>, <i>Vibrio harveyi</i> and <i>Aliivibrio fischeri.</i> The proteomic studies were performed with bacteria cultivated in increased and decreased salinity, followed by proteolytic digestion of samples which were then subjected to liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry analysis. We show that bacteria adjust at all levels of their biological processes, from DNA topology through gene expression regulation and proteasome assembly, to transport and cellular metabolism. The finding that many similar adaptation strategies were observed for both low- and high-salinity conditions is particularly striking. The results show that adaptation to salinity challenge involves the accumulation of DNA-binding proteins and increased polyamine uptake. We hypothesize that their function is to coat and protect the nucleoid to counteract adverse changes in DNA topology due to ionic shifts.

### Keywords
Shewanella baltica, Aliivibrio fischeri, Vibrio harveyi, Salinity challenge, Lc-ms/ms, Osmotic stress

### Affiliations
University of Gdansk
Laboratory of Mass Spectrometry, Core Facility Laboratories, Intercollegiate Faculty of Biotechnology UG&MUG, University of Gdansk, Gdansk, Poland

### Submitter
Paulina Czaplewska

### Lab Head
Dr Paulina Czaplewska
Laboratory of Mass Spectrometry, Core Facility Laboratories, Intercollegiate Faculty of Biotechnology UG&MUG, University of Gdansk, Gdansk, Poland


