### Accession
PXD005038

### Title
BOX1 proteome -  Thermophilic archaea activate butane via alkyl-coenzyme M formation

### Description
Metaproteome of an Archaeal-Bacterial consortia degrading butane anaerobically

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets from 50 ml cultures were suspended in 30 ul of 50 mM ammonium  bicarbonate buffer, and lysed by three 60 s freeze-thaw cycles between liquid  nitrogen and +40°C (thermal shaker, 1400 rpm). The cell lysate was incubated  with 50 mM dithiothreitol at 30°C for 1h, followed by alkylation with 200 mM  iodacetamide for 1 h at room temperature, in the dark, and trypsin digestion  (0.6 ug trypsin, Promega) overnight at 37°C. Peptides were desalted using C18  Zip Tip columns (Millipore), and analysed by nLC-MS/MS using an LTQ-Orbitrap  mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nanoUPLC system  (nanoAquity, Waters).

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification was conducted by Proteome  Discoverer (v1.4.1.14, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using the Mascot search  engine with the annotated metagenome of Ca. Syntrophoarchaeum as database.  Peptides were considered to be identified by Mascot when a probability of 0.05  (probability-based ion score threshold of 40) was achieved.

### Publication Abstract
The anaerobic formation and oxidation of methane involve unique enzymatic mechanisms and cofactors, all of which are believed to be specific for C<sub>1</sub>-compounds. Here we show that an anaerobic thermophilic enrichment culture composed of dense consortia of archaea and bacteria apparently uses partly similar pathways to oxidize the C<sub>4</sub> hydrocarbon butane. The archaea, proposed genus 'Candidatus Syntrophoarchaeum', show the characteristic autofluorescence of methanogens, and contain highly expressed genes encoding enzymes similar to methyl-coenzyme M reductase. We detect butyl-coenzyme M, indicating archaeal butane activation analogous to the first step in anaerobic methane oxidation. In addition, Ca. Syntrophoarchaeum expresses the genes encoding &#x3b2;-oxidation enzymes, carbon monoxide dehydrogenase and reversible C<sub>1</sub> methanogenesis enzymes. This allows for the complete oxidation of butane. Reducing equivalents are seemingly channelled to HotSeep-1, a thermophilic sulfate-reducing partner bacterium known from the anaerobic oxidation of methane. Genes encoding 16S rRNA and methyl-coenzyme M reductase similar to those identifying Ca. Syntrophoarchaeum were repeatedly retrieved from marine subsurface sediments, suggesting that the presented activation mechanism is naturally widespread in the anaerobic oxidation of short-chain hydrocarbons.

### Keywords
Degradation, Butane, Anaerobic

### Affiliations
Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ
Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ, Permoserstr. 15, 04318 Leipzig, Germany

### Submitter
Florin Musat

### Lab Head
Dr Florin Musat
Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ, Permoserstr. 15, 04318 Leipzig, Germany


