### Accession
PXD044724

### Title
STPP-UP: A alternative method for drug target identification using protein thermal stability

### Description
Thermal proteome profiling (TPP) has significantly advanced the field of drug discovery by facilitating proteome-wide identification of drug targets and off-targets. However, TPP has not been widely applied for high-throughput drug screenings, since the method is labor intensive and requires a lot of measurement time on a mass spectrometer. Here, we present Single-tube TPP with Uniform Progression (STPP-UP), which significantly reduces both the amount of required input material and measurement time, while retaining the ability to identify drug targets for compounds of interest.

### Sample Protocol
Thermal proteome profiling Cells were harvested after 1 hour of treatment with the compound of interest or DMSO, washed with PBS, and counted. For TPP, ten aliquots, each containing 10^6 cells in 100 μL PBS, were distributed in a row of a 96-well PCR plate. After centrifugation (300 × g for 3 min) and removal of 80 μL of the supernatant, each aliquot was heated for three minutes to a distinct temperature (37°C, 40.4°C, 44°C, 46.9°C, 49.8°C, 52.9°C, 55.5°C, 68.6°C, 62°C, 66.3°C) in a PCR machine, followed by incubation at room temperature (RT) for 3 min. For STPP-UP, two aliquots, each containing 10^6 cells in 100 μL PBS, were distributed over a 96-well PCR plate. After centrifugation (300 × g for 3 min) and removal of 80 μL of the supernatant, one sample was heated to 37°C for three minutes followed by incubation at RT for 3 min (“control”), while the other sample was incubated at 37°C for 5 seconds, heated to 57°C at a rate of 0.2°C/second and then incubated at RT for 3 minutes (“test”). Cells were lysed with 30 μL ice-cold lysis buffer (1.33% NP-40, 2.5mM MgCl2, 1.6x protease inhibitors, 1.6x phosphatase inhibitors, 0.417 U/μL benzonase) on a shaker (500 rpm) at 4°C for one hour. Samples were centrifuged at 300 × g for 3 min at 4°C to remove cell debris, and the supernatant was filtered at 300 × g for 3 min at 4°C through a 0.45-μm 96-well filter plate that was pre-wetted with plate-wash buffer (0.8% NP-40 in PBS) to remove protein aggregates. Of the flow-through, 25 μL was mixed with 2× sample buffer (180 mM Tris pH 6.8, 4% SDS, 20% glycerol, 0.1 g bromophenol blue) and kept at -20°C until prepared for mass spectrometry analysis, while the remainder was used in a BCA to determine the protein concentration. For TPP, samples were diluted to 0.5 μg/μL in 1x sample buffer based on the protein concentrations in the lowest two temperatures (37°C, 40.4°C). For STPP-UP, sample buffer-mixed control samples were diluted to 0.5 μg/μL with a 1:1 ratio of plate wash buffer:2x sample buffer. An equal volume of diluent was added to the test samples. MS sample preparation For each condition/temperature, 20 μl sample (10 μg protein) was added to 40 μl bead suspension (5% 1:1 Sera-Mag Speed Beads pre-diluted 1:10 in H2O (Thermo Fischer Scientific; 4515-2105-050250 & 6515-2105-050250), 3.5% formic acid, 70% EtOH) on a 0.45-μm 96-well filter plate (Millipore, MSHVN4550) and incubated on a shaker (500 rpm) for 15 min at RT. Beads were washed four times with 70% ethanol and proteins were digested overnight in 40 μl digest solution (5 mM chloroacetamide, 1.25 mM TCEP, 200 ng trypsin, and 200 ng LysC in 100 mM HEPES pH 8). After digestion, samples were centrifuged to collect peptides. Peptides were vacuum-dried, reconstituted in 10 μl of water, and labeled for 1 hour at RT with either 80 μg of TMT10plex or 50 μg of TMTpro 16plex (ThermoFisher Scientific) dissolved in 4 μl or 2 μl of acetonitrile respectively. An overview of the labels used for each experiment can be found in Supplementary Table 1). The reaction was quenched with 5 μl of 5% hydroxylamine and samples were combined.  Sample cleanup, fractionation and measurement For TPP, pooled samples were desalted using an OASIS plate (Waters; 186001828BA). After activation with 80% ACN wells were equilibrated with 0.05% FA/water. Samples were loaded and washed twice with 0.05% FA/water. Samples were eluted with 80% ACN and then prepared for high pH fractionation. Offline high pH reverse phase fractionation was carried out on an Agilent 1200 Infinity high-performance liquid chromatography system, equipped with a Gemini C18 column (3 μm, 110 Å, 100 x 1.0 mm, Phenomenex)14. Samples were pooled into 12 fractions. Peptides were separated using an UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano LC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a trapping cartridge (Precolumn C18 PepMap 100, 5μm, 300 μm i.d. x 5 mm, 100 Å) and an analytical column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 75 μm x 50 cm C18, 3 μm, 100 Å). The LC system was directly coupled to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a Nanospray-Flex ion source. Using a 120 min gradient of solvent B (99.9% CAN, 0.1% formic acid) peptides were eluted and subjected to tandem mass spectrometry. The mass spectrometer was operated in Top10 mode and dynamic exclusion was applied for 30 seconds. For STPP-UP, pooled samples were acidified and desalted using StageTips and eluted with 2x 30 μl of buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.01% TFA). Samples were fractionated using the Pierce™ High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (ThermoFisher Scientific) into 4 fractions and cleaned up using StageTips. Peptides were eluted and applied to reverse-phase chromatography using a nanoLC-Easy1000 coupled online to a Thermo Orbitrap Q-Exactive HF-X. Using a 120 min gradient of buffer B, peptides were eluted and subjected to tandem mass spectrometry. The mass spectrometer was operated in Top20 mode and dynamic exclusion was applied for 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
STPP-UP data analysis Raw MS files were analyzed using MaxQuant (version 2.1.4.0). Data were searched against either human or mouse UniProt database (downloaded 27-06-2017), with default settings and either TMT10plex or TMTpro 16plex enabled. MaxQuant output files were further processed in R (version 4.1.3). Data were filtered for reverse hits, potential contaminants, proteins only identified by site and protein quantified with less than two unique peptides. Proteins that did not have a signal in all channels were also filtered out. Data were background corrected and normalized by variance stabilizing transformation (vsn). Proteins with an adjusted p-value <0.05 and a FC >log2(0.5) after differential enrichment analysis using the DEP package (version 1.16.0) were deemed significant. Correction for base differences in protein abundance was done by adding the log2 fold changes between treated and untreatedconditions from the control batch to the log2 transformed signal intensities of the control samples from the test batch. TPP data analysis Raw MS files were analyzed using IsobarQuant. Identification of peptide and protein was performed with Mascot against the mouse Uniprot database, modified to include known contaminants and the reversed protein sequences. Search parameters: trypsin, missed cleavages 3, peptide tolerance 10ppm, 0.02Da for MS/MS tolerance. Fixed modifications were carbamidomethyl on cysteines and TMT10plex on lysine; variable modifications included acetylation on protein N-terminus, oxidation of methionine, and TMT10plex on peptide N-termini). Output files were loaded into R, merged, filtered for duplicates and proteins with less than 2 unique peptides and saved in an ExpressionSet R-object. Potential batch effects were removed using limma and data were normalized using vsn. Normalization was done for each temperature independently, to account for the decreasing signal intensity at the higher temperatures. The abundance score of each protein was calculated as the average log2 fold change at the two lowest temperatures (37°C, 40.4°C). The stability score of each protein was calculated by subtracting the abundance score from the log2 fold changes of all temperatures and calculating the sum of the resulting values. The significance of abundance and thermal stability scores was assessed using a limma analysis, followed by an FDR analysis using the fdrtool package.

### Publication Abstract
Thermal proteome profiling (TPP) has significantly advanced the field of drug discovery by facilitating proteome-wide identification of drug targets and off-targets. However, TPP has not been widely applied for high-throughput drug screenings, since the method is labor intensive and requires a lot of measurement time on a mass spectrometer. Here, we present Single-tube TPP with Uniform Progression (STPP-UP), which significantly reduces both the amount of required input material and measurement time, while retaining the ability to identify drug targets for compounds of interest. By using incremental heating of a single sample, changes in protein thermal stability across a range of temperatures can be assessed, while alleviating the need to measure multiple samples heated to different temperatures. We demonstrate that STPP-UP is able to identify the direct interactors for anticancer drugs in both human and mice cells. In summary, the STPP-UP methodology represents a useful tool to advance drug discovery and drug repurposing efforts.

### Keywords
Thermal proteomics, Stpp-up, Protein stability, Drug discovery

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Science, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Oncode Institute, Radboud University Nijmegen, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. Division of Molecular Genetics, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
Radboud Universiteit Nijmegen

### Submitter
Dick Zijlmans

### Lab Head
Dr Michiel Vermeulen
Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Science, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Oncode Institute, Radboud University Nijmegen, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. Division of Molecular Genetics, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.


