### Accession
PXD001855

### Title
Arabidopsis thaliana N-terminal proteome,LC-MS

### Description
An extended ChaFRADIC workflow was applied to analyze the N-terminal proteome of Arabidopsis thaliana seedlings. Using iTRAQ protein labeling, a multi-enzyme digestion approach including trypsin, GluC, and subtilisin, a total of 200 μg per enzyme were used, and only 1/3 of each ChaFRADIC-enriched fraction were analyzed by LC-MS. Furthermore, our goal was to gain insights of the Met-excision dogma where initiator Met residues are cleaved posstranslationally if the second residue is small, as well as the N-end rule degradation pathway (NERD) discriminating between stabilizing/destabilizing functions of N-terminal amino acid residues in Arabidopsis. We found bona fide NERD destabilizing residues underrepresented. The list of neo N-termini from wild type samples represents an extremely helpful resource for excluding pseudo-candidates of NERD.

### Sample Protocol
Protein Extraction Arabidopsis thaliana plants were grown in vitro in Petri dishes under long-day regime (16 h light, 8 h dark) at 21°C for 21 days on 0.5% Murashige & Skoog medium (Duchefa Biochemicals, M0221). Afterwards, proteins were extracted using a TCA.  Dried pellet was resuspended in 1% SDS, 50 mM Tris-Cl (pH 7.8). Protein concentration was determined using the bichinonic acid assay (Thermo Scientific). Afterwards a carbamidomethylation was performed, followed by a cold ethanol precipitation. Afterwards, the protein pellet was resuspended in 100μl of 10% (w/v) SDS the sample was separated in 6 aliquots of 100µg. iTRAQ labeling on the protein level To each sample, 5 volumes of 0.5 M triethylammonium bicarbonate in 20% (v/v) of isopropanol were added. The iTRAQ reagent was resuspended in isopropanol and added to each sample. Samples were incubated for 2h at 25°C and pooled. The reaction was quenched by addition of 60 mM glycine and 130 mM hydroxylamine. The multiplexed sample was divided into 3 aliquots corresponding to 200μg of protein each and samples were subjected to ethanol precipitation as described above. Proteolytic digestion Protein pellets designated for digestion with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) or subtilisin (Sigma Aldrich) were resuspended in 50μl of 6 M GuHCl, 50 mM Na2HPO4, pH 7.8, followed by 10-fold dilution with 50 mM NH4HCO3 to reach a final concentration of 0.6 M GuHCl. For trypsin digestion, 2 mM CaCl2 and trypsin (1:20, enzyme:protein, w:w) were added, and the sample was incubated at 37°C for 14 h. Subtilisin was added 1:20 and digested for 20 min at 56°C. The protein pellet designated for GluC digestion was resolubilized in 6 M urea and diluted 15-fold with 50 mM NH4HCO3. Sequencing grade GluC (Promega) was added 1:20 and the sample was incubated for 14 h at 25°C. Proteolytic digests were controlled using monolitihic reversed phase chromatography.  Generated peptides were desalted using C18 solidphase tips (SPEC C18 AR, 4 mg bed, Agilent Technologies) according to the manufacturer’s instructions, peptides were dried under vacuum and resuspended in 52μl of SCX buffer A. Enrichment of N-terminal peptides using ChaFRADIC In the first dimension, 50 μl (200 μg) of each sample were separated using a flow rate of 80μl/min on a U3000 HPLC system (Thermo Scientific), a 150 x 1 mm POLYSULFOETHYL A column (PolyLC, Columbia, US, 5 μm particle size, 200 Å pore size), and a tertiary buffer system containing SCX buffer A (10 mM KH2PO4, pH 2.7, 20% ACN), SCX buffer B (10 mM KH2PO4, 250 mM KCl, pH 2.7, 20% ACN), and SCX buffer C (10 mM KH2PO4, 600 mM NaCl, pH 2.7, 20% ACN). An optimized gradient was used to separate the peptides according to their charge states combined with automated fraction collection. Following gradient steps were performed: 100% of A for 10 min, followed by a linear ramp from 0 to 15% of B in 9 min. After 9 min at 15%, B was increased to 30% in 8 min. After 11 min at 30%, B was increased to 100% in 5 min. After 5 min, C was increased to 100% in 1 min. After 5 min at 100% of C, A was increased to 100% in 1 min and the column was equilibrated for 20 min. Flow-throughs of the first SCX dimension were dried under Vacuum and desalted using Poros Oligo R3 reversed-phase (Applied Biosystems). The five collected fractions (corresponding to charge states +1, +2, +3, +4, and >+4) were dried under vacuum and resuspended in 50 mM Na2HPO4, pH 7.8. Free Ntermini of internal peptides were blocked by trideutero N-hydroxysuccinimide to induce a charge state shift. The reaction was quenched with 60 mM glycine for 10 min and 130 mM hydroxylamine. Samples were desalted as described above, dried under vacuum and subjected to re-chromatography. Collected fractions were completely dried under vacuum and desalted. LC-MS analysis Dried eluates were resuspended in 45 μl of 0.1% (w/v) TFA and 1/3 of each fraction was analyzed by nano-LC-MS/MS using a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer online-coupled to a nano RSLC HPLC system (both Thermo Scientific). LC separation was performed using a linear gradient from 3-42% of B in 90 min. Flow-through (FT) fractions from the 1st SCX dimension were analyzed using a shorter 50 min gradient. Samples were measured in datadependent acquisition mode acquiring full MS scans at a resolution of 70,000, and the 15 most abundant ions (Top15) were selected for MS/MS at a resolution of 17,500. Target values were set to 1 x 106 for MS and 2 x 105 for MS/MS scans. Maximum injection times were 120 ms and 200 ms, respectively. Normalized collision energy of 30 was used and the first fixed mass was set to 100 m/z. For SCX charge state fractions +3, +4 and +5, 10% ammonia solution was placed in front of the ion source to compensate for increased charge states, as described by Thingholm et al. For analysis of the FT and +1 fractions, fragmentation of singly charged peptides was allowed, excluding m/z values of singly charged ions occurring in previous blank runs.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer software version 1.4 (Thermo Scientific) was used with Mascot 2.4 (Matrix Science) as search engine, reporter ion quantifier and percolator nodes. Enzyme specificities were set to semi-ArgC (for trypsin) and semi-GluC with two allowed missed cleavage sites,respectively. For subtilisin, the enzyme was set to ‘none’. To enable the quantification of both classes of N-terminal peptides, those with N-terminal iTRAQ label and those with endogenous N-acetylation. Two data base searches were perfomed.  First, raw data were searched with iTRAQ-8plex (+304.2053 Da) as fixed modification at Lys and peptide N-termini; second iTRAQ 8-plex of Lys and N-terminal acetylation (+ 42.0105 Da) of N-termini were set as fixed modifications. In both cases, carbamidomethylation of Cys (+ 57.0214 Da) was selected as fixed and oxidation (+15.9949 Da) of methionine as variable modification. Mass tolerances were set to 5 ppm for MS and 0.01 Da for MS/MS. Identified peptides were filtered for high confidence corresponding to an FDR < 1% at the PSM level, and a search engine rank of 1. The reporter ion quantifier node was adjusted according to the search settings. Quantified PSM for each enzyme were grouped if they represented the same gene, sequence and modification state, to sum reporter intensities of replicate measurements. Normalization factors were assessed by summing reporter intensities from previous measurements in which the the labeling efficiency (i.e. non-enriched samples). To scale the data, for each generated entry, each of the six reporter intensities was divided by their corresponding median. Data for all three enzymes was combined and additional information such as position of the N-terminal amino acid, protein function, subcellular localization, etc. were taken from Uniprot.

### Publication Abstract
We applied an extended charge-based fractional diagonal chromatography (ChaFRADIC) workflow to analyze the N-terminal proteome of Arabidopsis thaliana seedlings. Using iTRAQ protein labeling and a multi-enzyme digestion approach including trypsin, GluC, and subtilisin, a total of 200 &#x3bc;g per enzyme, and measuring only one third of each ChaFRADIC-enriched fraction by LC-MS, we quantified a total of 2791 unique N-terminal peptides corresponding to 2249 different unique N-termini from 1270 Arabidopsis proteins. Our data indicate the power, reproducibility, and sensitivity of the applied strategy that might be applicable to quantify proteolytic events from as little as 20 &#x3bc;g of protein per condition across up to eight different samples. Furthermore, our data clearly reflect the methionine excision dogma as well as the N-end rule degradation pathway (NERP) discriminating into a stabilizing or destabilizing function of N-terminal amino acid residues. We found bona fide NERP destabilizing residues underrepresented, and the list of neo N-termini from wild type samples may represent a helpful resource during the evaluation of NERP substrate candidates. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD001855 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD001855).

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Itraq reagent, Chafradic, Enrichment of n-terminal peptide

### Affiliations
Leibniz-Institut für
Analytische Wissenschaften – ISAS – e.V.
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften – ISAS – e.V. Head of the department of Systems Analysis

### Submitter
Fiorella Andrea Solari

### Lab Head
Dr René Peiman Zahedi
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften – ISAS – e.V. Head of the department of Systems Analysis


