### Accession
PXD014991

### Title
Multiplexed Quantitative Proteomics Provides Mechanistic Cues for Malaria Severity and Complexity

### Description
Management of severe malaria remains a critical global challenge. In this study, using a multiplexed quantitative proteomics pipeline we systematically investigated the plasma proteome alterations in non-severe and severe malaria patients. We identified a few parasite proteins in severe malaria patients, which could be promising from a diagnostic perspective. Further, from host proteome analysis we observed substantial modulations in many crucial physiological pathways, including lipid metabolism, cytokine signaling, complement, and coagulation cascades in severe malaria. We propose that severe manifestations of malaria are possibly underpinned by modulations of the host physiology and defense machinery, which is evidently reflected in the plasma proteome alterations. Importantly, we identified multiple blood markers that can effectively define different complications of severe falciparum malaria, including cerebral syndromes and severe anemia. The ability of our identified blood markers to distinguish different severe complications of malaria may aid in developing new clinical tests for monitoring malaria severity.

### Sample Protocol
Malaria and dengue samples were confirmed using different diagnostic techniques, and the positive cases were incorporated in the quantitative proteomic analysis. Such multiplexing using stable isotope labeling provides increased throughput, higher precision, better reproducibility, reduced technical variations, and lower number of missing values. TMT-based multiplexed quantitative proteomics was used to map the plasma proteome (host) alterations, while we used a label-free quantitation approach for detection and quantification of the parasite (P. falciparum) proteins in host plasma. Quality control check (QC) of the data sets was performed by plotting the density plots for FM, VM, and DF using raw and normalized abundances at a proteome scale. The significantly (p < 0.05) altered proteins were considered for machine learning, and the elastic net regularized logistic regression method was applied to predict the best panel of proteins. Some selected targets were validated using Mass spectrometry (MS)-based Multiple Reaction Monitoring (MRM) assays. Eventually, we investigated the physiological pathways over-expressed in falciparum and vivax malaria.

### Data Protocol
TMT data analysis- TMTsixplex based quantitative proteomic analysis was carried out using individual samples of malaria patients. Raw instrument files were processed using Proteome Discoverer (PD) version 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For each of the TMT experiments, raw files from 9 fractions were merged and searched with the Sequest HT and Mascot (v2.6.0) search engine against Homo sapiens database, which is downloaded (71,523 sequence entries, dated: 24/06/2018) from uniport. All searches were configured with dynamic modifications for the TMT reagents (+229.163 Da) on lysines and N-termini, oxidation of methionine residues (+15.9949 Da) and static modifications carbamidomethyl (+57.021 Da) on cysteines, monoisotopic masses, and trypsin cleavage (max 2 missed cleavages). The intensities of the TMT reporter - ions at m/z = 127 were used as the denominators for fold change calculation. The PSMs files have been exported from PD for FM, VM and DF. The protein level abundance summarized using MSstatsTMT.

### Publication Abstract
Management of severe malaria remains a critical global challenge. In this study, using a multiplexed quantitative proteomics pipeline we systematically investigated the plasma proteome alterations in non-severe and severe malaria patients. We identified a few parasite proteins in severe malaria patients, which could be promising from a diagnostic perspective. Further, from host proteome analysis we observed substantial modulations in many crucial physiological pathways, including lipid metabolism, cytokine signaling, complement, and coagulation cascades in severe malaria. We propose that severe manifestations of malaria are possibly underpinned by modulations of the host physiology and defense machinery, which is evidently reflected in the plasma proteome alterations. Importantly, we identified multiple blood markers that can effectively define different complications of severe falciparum malaria, including cerebral syndromes and severe anemia. The ability of our identified blood markers to distinguish different severe complications of malaria may aid in developing new clinical tests for monitoring malaria severity.

### Keywords
Multiplexed quantitative proteomics, Infectious disease, Severe malaria

### Affiliations
Research Scholar
Proteomics Lab, Department of Biosciences and Bioengineering, IIT Bombay, Mumbai-400076, India.

### Submitter
Vipin  Kumar

### Lab Head
Dr Sanjeeva Srivastava
Proteomics Lab, Department of Biosciences and Bioengineering, IIT Bombay, Mumbai-400076, India.


