### Accession
PXD026604

### Title
Quantitative proteomics analysis of small inputs of human monocytic populations from blood and glioma macrophages

### Description
Many subsets of myeloid cells have been identified over the years, some of which are extremely rare populations. Previously, we identified the optimal protocol for proteomics studies in paucicellular myeloid samples [PXD018872], which was implemented here to investigate cellular relationships of small myeloid cell populations from peripheral blood and glioma material.

### Sample Protocol
Samples: Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were isolated from healthy human donors. Glioma material was obtained from glioma patients and tissue was processed into single cell suspensions. Both PBMCs and glioma cell suspension were FACS- (fluorescence-activated cell sorting) sorted to obtain classical, intermediate and non-classical monocytes (PB) and macrophages/microglia (glioma), as well as non-myeloid control T-cells (PB and glioma). Of all populations 2,500 and 50,000 cells were collected and lysed with a urea-based lysis buffer. Bulk cells of both PBMCs and glioma cell suspension were mixed as reference sample. Sample processing: Proteins were reduced and alkylated with DTT and IAA, respectively, and digested with Lys-C and trypsin. Peptides were purified using superparamagnetic beads (SP3, as described by Hughes CS et al, 2014), freeze-dried and labelled with TMTpro™ plex tags. After labeling, samples were pooled and freeze-dried.  Sample analysis: Samples were reconstituted in water/formic acid (100/0.1 v/v; solvent A) and analyzed by on-line C18 nanoHPLC MS/MS using a Ultimate3000 gradient HPLC (Thermo, Bremen, Germany) and an Exploris480 Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo). Samples were divided into 6 fractions and injected onto a precolumn (300 μm × 5 mm; Pepmap100 C18 5 um) cartridge (Thermo) and eluted via a homemade analytical nano-HPLC column (50 cm × 75 μm; Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 µm). The gradient was run from 5% to 30% of solvent B (water/acetonitrile/formic acid [20/80/0.1] v/v/v) in 120 min.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were converted to peak lists using Proteome Discoverer v2.4 (Thermo Electron). Protein identification was conducted using Mascot v2.2.07 (www.matrixscience.com) against the UniProt database (Homo sapiens minimal, 20,596 entries). Search parameters were set accordingly: tryptic digestion (no P rule) with up to 2 missed cleavages; precursor and fragment mass tolerances were set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively; fixed modifications were carbamidomethylation of C and TMT16plex of N-terminus and Lysine, with oxidation of M as variable modification. The false discovery rate (FDR) of proteins was set to 1%. A shared reference sample was used to connect 5 different TMT-16plex batches.

### Publication Abstract
Mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics profiling has undoubtedly increased the knowledge about cellular processes and functions. However, its applicability for paucicellular sample analyses is currently limited. Although new approaches have been developed for single-cell studies, most of them have not (yet) been standardized and/or require highly specific (often home-built) devices, thereby limiting their broad implementation, particularly in non-specialized settings. To select an optimal MS-oriented proteomics approach applicable in translational research and clinical settings, we assessed 10 different sample preparation procedures in paucicellular samples of closely-related cell types. Particularly, five cell lysis protocols using different chemistries and mechanical forces were combined with two sample clean-up techniques (C18 filter- and SP3-based), followed by tandem mass tag (TMT)-based protein quantification. The evaluation was structured in three phases: first, cell lines from hematopoietic (THP-1) and non-hematopoietic (HT-29) origins were used to test the approaches showing the combination of a urea-based lysis buffer with the SP3 bead-based clean-up system as the best performer. Parameters such as reproducibility, accessibility, spatial distribution, ease of use, processing time and cost were considered. In the second phase, the performance of the method was tested on maturation-related cell populations: three different monocyte subsets from peripheral blood and, for the first time, macrophages/microglia (MAC) from glioblastoma samples, together with T cells from both tissues. The analysis of 50,000 cells down to only 2,500 cells revealed different protein expression profiles associated with the distinct cell populations. Accordingly, a closer relationship was observed between non-classical monocytes and MAC, with the latter showing the co-expression of M1 and M2 macrophage markers, although pro-tumoral and anti-inflammatory proteins were more represented. In the third phase, the results were validated by high-end spectral flow cytometry on paired monocyte/MAC samples to further determine the sensitivity of the MS approach selected. Finally, the feasibility of the method was proven in 194 additional samples corresponding to 38 different cell types, including cells from different tissue origins, cellular lineages, maturation stages and stimuli. In summary, we selected a reproducible, easy-to-implement sample preparation method for MS-based proteomic characterization of paucicellular samples, also applicable in the setting of functionally closely-related cell populations.

### Keywords
Human, T-cells, Low cell numbers, Monocytes, Glioma, Paucicellular samples, Sp3, Tmt, Macrophages, Microglia

### Affiliations
Immune monitoring lab,  Department of Immunology Leiden University Medical Center (LUMC) The Netherlands
Immune monitoring group - Immunohematology and Blood Transfusion Department
Leiden University Medical Center (LUMC=

### Submitter
Paula Díez

### Lab Head
Dr Paula Díez García
Immune monitoring lab,  Department of Immunology Leiden University Medical Center (LUMC) The Netherlands


