### Accession
PXD044107

### Title
Comparative quantitative proteomic analysis of melanoma subtypes, nevus-associated melanoma, and corresponding nevi

### Description
A substantial part of cutaneous malignant melanomas develops from benign nevi. However, the precise molecular events driving the transformation from benign to malignant melanoma are not well understood. We used laser microdissection and mass spectrometry to analyze the proteomes of melanoma subtypes, including superficial spreading melanomas (SSM, n=17), nodular melanomas (NM, n=17), and acral melanomas (AM, n=15). Furthermore, we compared the proteomes of nevi cells and melanoma cells within the same specimens (nevus-associated melanoma (NAM, n=14)). In total, we quantified 7,935 proteins. Despite the genomic and clinical differences of the melanoma subtypes, our analysis revealed relatively similar proteomes, except for the upregulation of proteins involved in immune activation in NM vs AM. Examining NAM versus nevi, we found 1,725 differentially expressed proteins. Among these proteins were 140 that overlapped with cancer hallmarks, tumor suppressors, and regulators of metabolism and cell cycle. Pathway analysis indicated aberrant activation of the RAS/MAPK and PI3K-AKT-mTOR pathways, as well as the Hippo-YAP pathway. Using a classifier, we identified six proteins capable of distinguishing melanoma from nevi samples. Our study represents the first comprehensive comparative analysis of the proteome in melanoma subtypes and associated nevi, offering new insights into the biological behavior of these distinct entities.

### Sample Protocol
We excised the tissue using the Leica LMD7 system (power of 60, aperture 1, speed 18, head current 54% with a pulse frequency of 2600) with the 63x/0.70 CORR XT objective and Leica Laser Microdissection V 8.2.3.7603 software. Single cells and nests of cells were cut with high precision at x20 magnification and collected into 384-well plates (Eppendorf, Germany, Catalog no. 0030129547). For the NAM, an area of 238272 μm2 per sample was collected, giving an estimated number of 300 cells. For the nevi an area of 233560 μm2 per sample was collected, giving an estimated number of 290 cells. For the SSM, NM and AM in average an area of 734730,7 μm2 per sample was collected, consisting of approximately 800-1200 cells.   Sample preparation for mass spectrometry 20µl of 25mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) was added to each sample well. Plate was sealed with tape (Corning, CLS6569-100EA), vortexed for 20 s, centrifuged for 10 min at 2000g and then incubated for 60 min at 95°C in a thermal cycler (Biorad S1000 with 384-well reaction module). After incubation the plate was vortexed, spun down for 5 min at 2000g and heated for 30 min and 95°C. After cooling down, 5 µl of digestion buffer was added (60% acetonitrile in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate) and samples were heated at 75°C for 30 min. Samples were cooled down and 4 ng of LysC was added for digestion for 4 h at 37°C. Samples were incubated overnight at 37 °C with 6 ng of trypsin. Next day, trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, final concentration 1% v/v) was added to stop the digestion and the samples were vacuum-dried (for approx. 1.5 - 2 h at 60 °C). Samples were resuspended in 4.2 µl of MS loading buffer (3% acetonitrile in 0.2% TFA), vortexed for 10s and centrifuged for 5 min at 2000g. Samples were stored at -20 °C until LC-MS analysis.  Library sample preparation for mass spectrometry To generate a project-specific library, melanoma tumor tissue sections were macrodissected using a scalpel blade and lysed with 4% SDS in 100nM ammonium bicarbonate for 10 min at 95°C and 1000 RPM, followed by 15 mins sonication (Bioruptor, Diagenode, Belgium). 50 µg of proteins was then reduced with 10 mM DTT for 20 min at RT and alkylated with 55 mM chloroacetamide for 20 min, followed by acetone precipitation overnight at -20°C. Next day, the protein pellet was spun down for 15 at full speed, air dried for 5 min and resolved in 80 μL 8M urea. 1 µg LysC was added for digestion for 3 h at 37°C, 1500 RPM. After adding 3 parts of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer, 1 μg trypsin was added for digestion overnight at 37°C, 1500 RPM. Next day, the digestion was stopped by adding 1% TFA and the peptides were desalted on SDB-RPS Reverse Phase Stage Tips. Using the automated Opentron OT-2 (Opentron, NY, US), 13 µg of purified peptides were separated and concatenated into 24 fractions, vacuum dried, reconstituted in the MS loading buffer (3% acetonitrile in 0.2% TFA) and kept at −20°C until MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Liquid chromatography mass spectromectry analysis For LC-MS analysis, a timsTOF Pro (Bruker Daltonik GmbH, Germany) mass spectrometer was coupled on-line to an EASY-nLC 1000 HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). Peptides were separated on 50 cm, in-house packed C18 columns (75 μm inner diameter, 1.9 μm particles, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany) using a 70 min gradient from 5 to 60% buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid, LC–MS-grade water) followed by 10 min wash at 95% buffer B at 300nl/min. The column was kept under constant temperature of 60 °C. Buffer A is 0.1% formic acid in LC–MS-grade water. Mass spectra were acquired in either data-dependent (ddaPASEF) or data-independent acquisition (diaPASEF) mode using Compass HyStar software (version 5.0.37.1, Bruker Daltonik GmbH, Germany)20,79. For spectral library generation we used ddaPASEF acquisition mode.   Data analysis of raw proteomic files Raw files were analyzed with Spectronaut software (version12.0.20491.17 Biognosys AG, Schlieren, Switzerland) using default settings (except the normalization strategy for “cross-run normalization” was set to “local normalization” based on rows with “Qvalue complete”). The quantitative MS analysis of FFPE melanoma samples resulted in the identification of an average of 104276 unique peptides in the samples, corresponding to 5749 proteins.  Library mass spectrometric raw files acquired in ddaPASEF mode were analyzed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.7.0) and searched against the human UniProt database (UP000005640_9606)80. FDR of 1% was set, and a minimum of seven amino acids was required for the peptide identification. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin with a maximum of two allowed missed cleavages. First and main search mass tolerance was set to 70 p.p.m. and 20 p.p.m., respectively. Label-free quantification was performed using the MaxLFQ algorithm81.  Data analyses were carried out in Perseus (version 1.6.50). Intensities were log2 transformed and filtered for 70% in at least one group. Missing values were imputed based on a normal distribution (width = 0.3, downshift = 1.8) prior to statistical testing. Principal component analysis, and visualizations of data (volcano-, bar- and boxplots) were performed in R (Posit, Version 4.2.0). For pairwise proteomic comparisons (two-sided unpaired t-test for the analysis of subtypes and two-sided paired t-test for the analysis of nevi and melanoma originating from the same specimen), we applied a permutation-based FDR of 5% to correct for multiple hypothesis testing. For protein enrichment analyses “Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA)” (Version 4.2.3) and STRING (Version 11.0, https://version-11-0.string-db.org/) were used. The supervised Learning algorithm: SVM classifier as well as supplementary heatmaps with hierarchical clustering were performed in Qlucore v. 3.9.9.

### Publication Abstract
A substantial part of cutaneous malignant melanomas develops from benign nevi. However, the precise molecular events driving the transformation from benign to malignant melanoma are not well-understood. We used laser microdissection and mass spectrometry to analyze the proteomes of melanoma subtypes, including superficial spreading melanomas (n&#xa0;= 17), nodular melanomas (n&#xa0;= 17), and acral melanomas (n&#xa0;= 15). Furthermore, we compared the proteomes of nevi cells with those of melanoma cells within the same specimens (nevus-associated melanoma (n&#xa0;= 14)). In total, we quantified 7935 proteins. Despite the genomic and clinical differences of the melanoma subtypes, our analysis revealed relatively similar proteomes, except for the upregulation of proteins involved in immune activation in nodular melanomas versus acral melanomas. Examining nevus-associated melanoma versus nevi, we found 1725 differentially expressed proteins (false discovery rate &lt; 0.05). Among these proteins were 140 that overlapped with cancer hallmarks, tumor suppressors, and regulators of metabolism and cell cycle. Pathway analysis indicated aberrant activation of the phosphoinositide 3-kinase-protein kinase B-mTOR pathways and the Hippo-YAP pathway. Using a classifier, we identified six proteins capable of distinguishing melanoma from nevi samples. Our study represents a comprehensive comparative analysis of the proteome in melanoma subtypes and associated nevi, offering insights into the biological behavior of these distinct entities.

### Keywords
Human, Nevus-associated melanoma, Microdissection, Ffpe, Proteomics, Malignant melanoma, Skin, Melanoma subtypes, Nevi, Skin cancer

### Affiliations
Department of allergy and skin, Gentofte Hospital, Gentofte
Novo Nordisk Foundation (NNF) Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Denmark  Department of Dermatology and Allergy, Copenhagen University Hospital - Herlev and Gentofte Hospital, Hellerup, Denmark Leo Foundation Skin Immunology Research Center, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Denmark

### Submitter
Julie Breinholt Kjær Sølberg

### Lab Head
Dr Beatrice Dyring-Andersen
Novo Nordisk Foundation (NNF) Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Denmark  Department of Dermatology and Allergy, Copenhagen University Hospital - Herlev and Gentofte Hospital, Hellerup, Denmark Leo Foundation Skin Immunology Research Center, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Denmark


