### Accession
PXD030884

### Title
S100A4/TCF complex transcription regulation drives epithelial-mesenchymal transition in chronic sinusitis through Wnt/GSK-3β/β-catenin signaling

### Description
Chronic rhinosinusitis (CRS) is closely associated with remodelling of nasal mucosal tissue during a prolonged inflammatory process, and epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT) is thought to be involved in this process, but the underlying mechanisms driving this progression are unclear. Using a high-resolution Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer, we performed a proteomic screen of CRS nasal mucosal tissue to identify differentially expressed proteins.

### Sample Protocol
In-solution digestion was performed before MS analysis. 20 μg proteins were diluted to a final volume of 20 µL with digestion buffer (50 mM NH4HCO3, pH 8.0). The samples were treated with 1 μL 1 M DTT, mixed well, and incubated at 50 °C for 15 min, followed by the addition of 1 μL 550mM iodoacetamide for alkylation in darkness for 15min at 25 °C. Subsequently 80 μL digestion buffer and 1 μg Trypsin (Promega, Madison, USA ) were added to the sample followed by incubation overnight at 37°C. The reaction was terminated by addition of 33 μL buffer (2 % trifluoroacetic acid, 20% acetonitrile). Finally, the samples were purified by using C18 spin columns (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, US ) according to manufacturer's instructions and dried through a vacuum centrifuge (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Asheville, USA).

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were analyzed by MaxQuant (version 1.6.12.0) with the UniProt reference protein database (Homo sapiens, November, 2019). The label-free quantification (LFQ) algorithm was used for protein quantification. The option “match between runs” was checked to increase the number of peptide searches. Other options were set as default settings.. The results of MaxQuant analysis were further processed with excel.

### Publication Abstract
Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is thought to be involved in the tissue remodeling and long-term inflammatory process of chronic sinusitis (CRS), but the driving mechanism is still unclear. Using high-resolution mass spectrometry, we performed a proteomic screen of CRS nasal mucosal tissue to identify differentially expressed proteins. Data are available <i>via</i> ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD030884. Specifically, we identified S100 calcium binding protein A4 (S100A4), an effective factor in inflammation-related diseases, and its downstream protein closely related to tissue fibrosis collagen type I alpha 1 chain (COL1A1), which suggested its involvement in nasal mucosal tissue remodeling. In addition, stimulation of human nasal epithelial cells (HNEpCs) with lipopolysaccharide (LPS) mimicked the inflammatory environment of CRS and showed that S100A4 is involved in regulating EMT and thus accelerating tissue remodeling in the nasal mucosa, both in terms of increased cell motility and overexpression of mesenchymal-type proteins. Additionally, we further investigated the regulation mechanism of S100A4 involved in EMT in CRS. Our research results show that in the inflammatory environment of CRS nasal mucosal epithelial cells, TCF-4 will target to bind to S100A4 and regulate its transcription. The transcription of S100A4 in turn affects the execution of the important signaling pathway in EMT, the Wnt/GSK-3&#x3b2;/&#x3b2;-catenin pathway, through the TCF-4/&#x3b2;-catenin complex. In conclusion, this study confirmed that the expression of S100A4 was significantly increased during the progressive EMT process of CRS mucosal epithelial cells, and revealed that the transcriptional regulation of S100A4 plays an important role in the occurrence and development of EMT. This finding will help us to better understand the pathogenesis behind the remodeling in CRS patients, and identify target molecules for the treatment of CRS.

### Keywords
Crs, S100a4, Inflammation, Epigenetic regulation, Emt

### Affiliations
Precision Medicine Research Center, School of Pharmacy, Binzhou Medical University, Yantai, Shandong Province, 264003, PR China
Shandong University

### Submitter
Ningyue Gong

### Lab Head
Dr S100A4/TCF complex transcription regulation drives epithelial-mesenchymal transition in chronic sinusitis through Wnt/GSK-3β/β-catenin signaling
Precision Medicine Research Center, School of Pharmacy, Binzhou Medical University, Yantai, Shandong Province, 264003, PR China


