### Accession
PXD009769

### Title
Protein interactome changes as a result of single FilaminA RNA editing.

### Description
Identification of changes in proteome as a result of FLNA editing that would help understand the mechanism behind its involvement in cellular contraction.

### Sample Protocol
50 μl/IP of protein A beads were incubated with 50 μl/IP of polyclonal α-FlnA antiserum for 1 h at 4°C. After incubation beads were placed onto a magnetic rack and washed with lysis buffer and sodium borate (0.2 M, pH=9). The antibody was crosslinked in 20 mM dimethylpimelimidate (DMP) in 0.2 M Sodium Borate, for 30 min at room temperature. Crosslinking was followed by three washing steps (5-10 min) with 250 mM Tris (pH=8.0) and a quick pre-elution step with 100 mM Glycine (pH=2.0). Beads were washed and stored in 1xPBS prior to usage. Crosslinked beads were aliquoted and added in equal amounts to the cell lysates. Beads were incubated for 1 h at 4°C on a rotating wheel and washed with 6x500 μL/IP of wash buffer. A small aliquot (10%) was taken for IP control and the rest submitted to Mass Spectrometry for further processing. Beads were resuspended in 50 µL of 6 M urea 2 M thiourea 10 mM dithiothreitol in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and incubated for 30 min. After addition of 20 mM iodoacetamide and incubation for 30 min at room temperature in the dark another 5 mM dithiothreitol were added for quenching. The proteins were digested with 300 ng lysyl endopeptidase (Wako) for 1 h at room temperature. The supernatant was transferred to a new tube and six-fold diluted with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 300 ng trypsin (Promega) were added and the sample incubated overnight at room temperature. The digest was stopped by addition of 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and the peptides were desalted using C18 Stagetips (Rappsilber et al., 2007). Peptides were separated on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano-flow chromatography system (Thermo-Fisher), using a pre-column for sample loading (Acclaim PepMap C18, 2 cm × 0.1 mm, 5 μm, Thermo-Fisher), and a C18 analytical column (Acclaim PepMap C18, 50 cm × 0.75 mm, 2 μm, Thermo-Fisher), applying a segmented linear gradient from 2% to 80% solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid; solvent A 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 230 nL/min over 120 min. Eluting peptides were analyzed on a Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher), which was coupled to the column with a nano-spray Flex ion-source (Thermo Fisher) using coated emitter tips (New Objective). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, for parameters please refer to the .raw files.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using the MaxQuant software package (version 1.5.1.2, Tyanova et al., 2016) and the Uniprot mouse reference proteome (www.uniprot.org) as well as a database of most common contaminants. The search was performed with full trypsin specificity and a maximum of two missed cleavages at a protein and peptide spectrum match false discovery rate of 1%. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues were set as fixed, oxidation of methionine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. For label-free quantification the the “match between runs” feature and was activated - all other parameters were left at default.   MaxQuant search results were further processed using the Perseus software package (Tyanova et al., 2016). Contaminants, reverse hits, and proteins identified only by site were removed and the log2 transformed protein group intensity values were used for protein quantification. Protein groups with less than two valid values in at least one group were removed and missing values were replaced with random values drawn from a normal distribution close to the detection limit (“imputation” feature in Perseus). Protein group intensities in each sample were normalized using Filamin A intensity and differentially enriched proteins were determined with modified t-test in Perseus (at 5% Benjamini-Hochberg false discovery rate; S0 = 1).

### Publication Abstract
Epitranscriptomic events such as adenosine-to-inosine (A-to-I) RNA editing by ADAR can recode mRNAs to translate novel proteins. Editing of the mRNA that encodes actin crosslinking protein Filamin A (FLNA) mediates a Q-to-R transition in the interactive C-terminal region. While FLNA editing is conserved among vertebrates, its physiological function remains unclear. Here, we show that cardiovascular tissues in humans and mice show massive editing and that FLNA RNA is the most prominent substrate. Patient-derived RNA-Seq data demonstrate a significant drop in FLNA editing associated with cardiovascular diseases. Using mice with only impaired FLNA editing, we observed increased vascular contraction and diastolic hypertension accompanied by increased myosin light chain phosphorylation, arterial remodeling, and left ventricular wall thickening, which eventually causes cardiac remodeling and reduced systolic output. These results demonstrate a causal relationship between RNA editing and the development of cardiovascular disease indicating that a single epitranscriptomic RNA modification can maintain cardiovascular health.

### Keywords
Flna, Cytoskeleton, Smooth muscle

### Affiliations
Department of Cell- and Developmental Biology, Center for Anatomy and Cell Biology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria
Mass Spectrometry Facility, Max Perutz Labs Vienna, University of Vienna, Vienna Biocenter, Dr.-Bohr-Gasse 7, 1030 Vienna

### Submitter
Markus Hartl

### Lab Head
Dr Michael F. Jantsch
Department of Cell- and Developmental Biology, Center for Anatomy and Cell Biology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria


