### Accession
PXD008112

### Title
Interleukin-2 shapes the cytotoxic T cell proteome and immune-environment sensing

### Description
Interleukin-2 (IL-2) and Janus kinases (JAKs) regulate transcriptional programs and protein synthesis to control the differentiation of effector CD8+ cytotoxic T cells (CTL). Using high-resolution mass spectrometry, we have generated an in-depth characterisation of how IL-2 and JAKs configure the CTL proteome to control CTL function. We found that IL-2-JAK1/3 signaling selectively regulated the abundance of a key subset of proteins influencing the accumulation of critical cytokines and effector molecules in T cells. Moreover, IL-2 controlled the concentration of proteins that support core metabolic processes essential for cellular fitness. One fundamental insight was the dominant role for IL-2 in controlling how effector T cells respond to their microenvironment. IL-2-JAK1/3 signaling pathways thus controlled the abundance of nutrient transporters, nutrient sensors and critical oxygen sensing molecules. The data provide key insights of how IL-2 controls T cell function and highlight signaling mechanisms and transcription factors that link oxygen sensing to transcriptional control of CD8+ T cell differentiation.

### Sample Protocol
Cytotoxic T cells (CTL) were generated from the spleens of P14 mice. T cells were activated for 2 days with the P14-TCR ligand (peptide gp33-41 from Lymphocytic Choriomeningitis Virus) in the presence of 20 ng/ml IL 2 (Proleukin, Novartis) and 2 ng/ml IL-12 (R&D Systems). After 48 hours, the antigen-activated CD8+ cells were removed from TCR stimulation and were cultured in RPMI 1640 (Life Technologies), with 10% fetal bovine serum (Life Technologies), 100 units/ml penicillin-G and 100 µg/ml streptomycin (GIBCO), 50 µM β-mercaptoethanol (Sigma-Aldrich) and 20 ng/ml IL-2. CTL were differentiated in IL-2 for 4 days before treatments were performed. Experiment 1: CTL were twice washed with RPMI 1640 without cytokines, then divided into three cultures for 24 hours: 20 ng/ml IL-2 was added back to one culture (IL-2 maintained), 20 ng/ml IL-12 was added back to the second culture (IL-12 only, SW) and the third culture was deprived of cytokines (no IL-2, WO). Experiment 2: CTL maintained in 20 ng/ml IL-2 were divided into two cultures: one was maintained in 20 ng/ml IL-2 (IL-2 only) and the other culture was maintained in 20 ng/ml IL-2 and treated with 100 nM Tofacitinib for 24 hours (IL-2 + Tofacitinib). For each proteomic analysis, 3 independent biological replicate treatments were performed (CTL generated from 3 separate spleens).   CTL were lysed in urea buffer (8 M urea, 50 mM Tris pH 8.0, 1 mM TCEP) with protease (cOmplete mini EDTA free, Roche) and phosphatase inhibitors (PhosStop, Roche) at room temperature for 30 minutes. Samples were sonicated, and the protein concentration was determined using a BCA assay (Pearce). Samples were reduced with 10 mM DTT for 30 minutes at room temperature. After reduction, 50 mM iodoacetimide was added to each sample for 45 minutes at room temperature in the dark. Digestion: samples were diluted to 4 M urea with Tris buffer (100 mM Tris pH 8.0/1 mM CaCl2) and LysC (Wako) was added to each sample at a ratio of 50:1 protein:LysC and incubated overnight at 30°C. After LysC digestion, Tris buffer was used to adjust the buffer concentration to 0.8 M urea. Trypsin (Promega), reconstituted in Tris buffer, was added to samples at a ratio of 50:1 protein:trypsin, and incubated for 8 hours at 30°C. After digestion, samples were desalted using C18 SepPack cartridges (Waters) and dried down in a SpeedVac (Genevac). Dried peptides were resuspended in 10 mM sodium borate 20% (v/v) acetonitrile, pH 9.3 and were fractionated using an Ultimate 3000 HPLC equipped with an AS24 strong anion exchange (SAX) column. Buffers used for separation were 10 mM sodium borate, pH 9.3 (SAX A) and 10 mM sodium borate, pH 9.3, and 500 mM NaCl (SAX B). Peptide samples were injected onto the SAX column and separated using an exponential elution gradient starting with SAX A. 16 peptide fractions were collected and desalted using Sep-pack C18 96 well plates (Waters) before being dried down using a SpeedVac (Genevac).  Mass spectrometry (HPLC-MS/MS) was performed by the Proteomics facility, University of Dundee, UK. Peptide fractions were resuspended in 1% formic acid and separated by nanoscale C18 reverse phase chromatography (Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano system, Thermo Scientific). The chromatography buffers were: A (0.1% formic acid), B (80% acetonitrile, 0.08% formic acid) and C (0.1% formic acid). Peptides were loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap100 nanoViper C18 trap column (100 µm inner-diameter, 2cm; Thermo Scientific) in buffer C with a constant flow of 5 µl/min. After trap enrichment, peptides were eluted onto an EASY-Spray PepMap RSLC nanoViper, C18, 2 µm, 100 Å column (75 µm, 50 cm; Thermo Scientific) using the buffer gradient: 2% B (0-3 minutes), 2-40% B (3-128 minutes), 40-98% B (128-130 minutes), 98% B (130-150 minutes), 98-2% B (150-151 minutes), and equilibrated in 2% B (151-180 minutes) at a flow rate of 0.3 μl/minute. The eluting peptide solution was automatically electrosprayed into the coupled Linear Trap Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro; Thermo Scientific) using an Easy-Spray nanoelectrospray ion source at 50˚C and a source voltage of 1.9kV (Thermo Scientific). The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode. Full-scan MS survey spectra (m/z 335–1800) in profile mode were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 60,000. Data was collected using data-dependent acquisition: the fifteen most intense peptide ions from the preview scan in the Orbitrap were fragmented by collision-induced dissociation (normalized collision energy, 35%; activation Q, 0.250; and activation time, 10 ms) in the LTQ after the accumulation of 5,000 ions. Precursor ion charge state screening was enabled and all unassigned charge states as well as singly charged species were rejected. The lock mass option was enabled for survey scans to improve mass accuracy. In total, 192 HPLC-MS/MS runs were performed for the IL-2 and Tofacitinib study.

### Data Protocol
For data analysis, we analysed the raw data obtained for three biological replicates of the IL-2 maintained compared to IL-2 deprivation, and IL-2 maintained compared to IL-2 + Tofacitinib. Data was processed using MaxQuant version 1.6.0.1 which incorporates the Andromeda search engine. Proteins were mapped to the Uniprot mouse protein database ("uniprot-reviewed MusMusculus 020817 Canonical+isoforms") using the following search parameters: a MS tolerance of 20 ppm, MS/MS tolerance of 0.5 Da and LysC and full trypsin specificity. Up to two missed cleavages were permitted. Protein N-terminal acetylation, oxidation of methionine, glutamine to pyroglutamate conversion and deamidation (NQ) were set as variable modifications, while carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification. The minimum peptide length for identification was set to at least 6 amino acids in length. The match between run function was enabled. False discovery rates (FDRs) of 0.01 were based on hits against a reversed sequence database and calculated at the level of peptides, proteins and modification sites.

### Publication Abstract
Interleukin-2 (IL-2) and Janus kinases (JAKs) regulate transcriptional programs and protein synthesis to promote the differentiation of effector CD8<sup>+</sup> cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs). Using high-resolution mass spectrometry, we generated an in-depth characterization of how IL-2 and JAKs configure the CTL proteome to control CTL function. We found that IL-2 signaling through JAK1 and JAK3 (JAK1/3) increased the abundance of a key subset of proteins to induce the accumulation of critical cytokines and effector molecules in T cells. Moreover, IL-2 maintained the concentration of proteins that support core metabolic processes essential for cellular fitness. One fundamental insight was the dominant role for IL-2 in stimulating effector T cells to detect microenvironmental cues. IL-2-JAK1/3 signaling pathways thus increased the abundance of nutrient transporters, nutrient sensors, and critical oxygen-sensing molecules. These data provide key insights into how IL-2 promotes T cell function and highlight signaling mechanisms and transcription factors that integrate oxygen sensing to transcriptional control of CD8<sup>+</sup> T cell differentiation.

### Keywords
Interleukin-2, Lymphocytes, Proteomics, Il-2, Jak3, Jak1

### Affiliations
University of Dundee
Cell Signalling and Immunology, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee, UK.

### Submitter
Sarah Ross

### Lab Head
Dr Doreen Ann Cantrell
Cell Signalling and Immunology, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee, UK.


