### Accession
PXD025217

### Title
Topology of the redox network during induction of photosynthesis as revealed by time-resolved proteomics in tobacco

### Description
Employing a new time-resolved redox proteomic method, we have investigated the redox network in vivo during the dark-to-low-light transition. We show that redox states of some TRXs follow the photosynthetic linear electron transport rate. While some redox targets have kinetics compatible with an equilibrium with TRXf, reduction of other proteins shows specific kinetic limitations, allowing the fine-tuning of each redox-regulated step of chloroplast metabolism.

### Sample Protocol
Labelling Samples for proteomic analyses were labelled according to published protocols (Peled-Zehavi et al., 2010). Brieﬂy, TCA-precipitated material was split into two tubes of 450 µL each. The tubes were centrifuged and the pellets were washed twice with cold acetone, then resuspended in 1 mL of urea buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.9, 1 mM EDTA, 2 % SDS, Roche protease inhibitor cocktail) complemented with 50 mM N-ethylmaleimide (NEM) and incubated for 2 h at room temperature in the dark. The ﬁrst tube then received 110 µL of cold TCA 100 % and was stored on ice (control), whereas 110 µL of 1 M dithiothreitol (DTT) were added to the second tube, which was left for an additional hour at room temperature in the dark. 121 µL of cold 100 % TCA were then added to the second tube, and both tubes were centrifuged, the precipitated pellets were washed with ethanol and resuspended in 50 µL urea buffer complemented with Mal-PEG at a ﬁnal concentration of 10 mM. The tubes were incubated for two hours at room temperature with gentle shaking. Hence, reduced cysteines at the time of harvest were bound to small-sized NEM, while any oxidation of the cysteines that would be reversed by DTT (in particular disulﬁde bonds) resulted in the binding to large-sized Mal-PEG. In the control samples, oxidized cysteines remained unlabelled by Mal-PEG, thus keeping the molecular weights of the proteins very similar to those of the proteins with NEM-labelled reduced cysteines. In the next step, only the control corresponding to tp0 was analyzed, and called tpc. Samples were fully reduced and denaturated by adding sample buffer (ﬁnal concentrations: 10 % glycerol, 1 % SDS, 50 mM 2-mercaptoethanol, 15 mM DTT, 75 mM Tris-HCl pH 6.8, 1 mM EDTA, pyronin Y), followed by incubation for 1 h at room temperature.  Sample quality control and peptide preparation 50 µg protein were loaded on 10 % SDS-polyacrylamide NuPAGE (Invitrogen) gels and separated 2 h at 100 V with MOPS buffer. After transfer on PVDF membranes, a western blot was performed with the anti-FBPase antibody to check the quality of the samples (Figure 1 and Suppl. Figure 1). For sample preparation, aliquots of 100 µg protein were loaded on 10% SDS-polyacrylamide NuPAGE (Invitrogen) gels (1 gel per replicate with randomized sample order in order to minimize positional effects) and separated as above. Gels were stained in Coomassie Blue solution (20% v/v methanol, 10% v/v acetic acid, 0.1% m/v Coomassie Brilliant Blue R) for 45 min, then destained twice in 10% v/v methanol, 5% v/v acetic acid for 1 h at room temperature. Each lane of the gel was cut into 8 fractions corresponding to the following molecular weight ranges: Fraction 1: ~ 130 kDa and above; Fraction 2: ~80 to ~130 kDa; Fraction 3: ~55 to ~80 kDa; Fraction 4: ~50 to ~55 kDa (mainly containing the large subunit of Rubisco); Fraction 5: ~40 to ~50 kDa; Fraction 6: ~26 to ~40 kDa; Fraction 7: ~18 to ~26 kDa; Fraction 8: ~18 kDa and below (Figure 2). The resulting 120 gel pieces were treated with the HiT-Gel method for protein digestion (Swart et al., 2018).  Liquid chromatography and mass spectrometric analysis MS samples were prepared as described in (Swart et al., 2018) with minor modifications. Briefly, peptides were re-suspended in 40 µL 3% v/v acetonitrile and 0.1% v/v formic acid. Measurements were performed on a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer coupled to an nLC100 nano-HPLC (Thermo Scientific). 8 µL of the samples were loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap100 reversed phase column (75 µm inner diameter, 15 cm length, 2 µm bead size, Thermo Scientific) and eluted with a 3% to 40% v/v acetonitrile concentration gradient over 70 min. The column was then washed with 80% v/v acetonitrile for 10 min, at a flow rate of 0.25 µL/min. Peptide ions were detected in a full MS1 scan for mass-to-charge ratios between 300 and 1600. MS2 scans were performed for the 15 peptides with the highest MS signal (minimal signal strength 500 hits, isolation width mass-to-charge ratio 2 m/z, relative collision energy 35%). Precursor masses for which MS/MS spectra had been recorded were excluded from further MS/MS scans for 20 s.

### Data Protocol
Quantitative analysis of MS/MS measurements was performed using MaxQuant 1.6.0.16 (Cox and Mann, 2008). Searches were performed using a spectral library based on the sPOTbaseMS database. Library construction considered methionine oxidation and acetylation of protein N-termini as variable and carbamido-methylation of cysteines as a fixed modification. False discovery rate (FDR) thresholds for peptide spectrum matches and protein identification were set to 1%. Ion species mapping to contaminants were excluded and peptide species identified at multiple charge states were aggregated by summing their intensities. According to the assumption that identical protein amounts were used, peptide intensities were normalized for each lane, using the median intensity of all identified peptides per replicate. Subsequently, peptides were aggregated according to their assigned protein group. We optimized the respective quantile of peptide intensities for protein quantification resulting in the most stable quantification judged by minimal replicate dispersion.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tobacco, Sds, Lc-msms, Redox, Labelling, Quantitative

### Affiliations
Maître de Conférence, Institut de Biologie Physico-Chimique, Sorbonne Université
TU KL - CSB

### Submitter
David Zimmer

### Lab Head
Dr Alix Boulouis
Maître de Conférence, Institut de Biologie Physico-Chimique, Sorbonne Université


