### Accession
PXD038837

### Title
Physiological response and proteomics analysis of Castanopsis fissa  under drought stress

### Description
Castanopsis fissa is an evergreen broad-leaved species of the cone genus Castanopsis in the family Fagaceae, which is widely distributed and is an excellent native species in Guangdong Province of China. This species has a well-developed root system, excellent soil-fixing power, and better soil and water conservation ability and has the characteristics of barren tolerance, strong sprouting power, abundant and easily decomposed dead leaves, etc. Therefore, C. fissa is not only a pioneer species for postdestruction sprouting forests but also a highly potential ecological public welfare forest tree species. Moreover, due to its beautiful shape, wide canopy and various colors, it has become an ideal tree for landscaping and ornamental purposes. However, there is a basic gap in knowledge in the reports on the drought resistance or drought tolerance genes of C. fissa. Based on the above details, in this study, 2-year-old C. fissa seedlings were used as the study material to investigate the physiological response under drought stress by a potted drought experiment, and we also compared and analyzed the differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) under different periods of drought stress by TMT quantitative labeling protein to prepare a preliminary study on the physiological response and proteomic mechanism of C. fissa adaptation to drought stress.

### Sample Protocol
C. fissa seedlings were obtained from the state-owned Dananshan Forestry Farm in Zhaoqing City, Guangdong Province, China (111°54′15″ E, 23°47′31″N). Thirty plants of uniform growth were transplanted into pots 24.5 cm in diameter and 26.5 cm in height in May 2021. Normal maintenance management of the seedlings was performed for 30 days. After the seedlings had established, we selected 15 pots of well-grown seedlings, divided them into five groups of 3 pots each, and placed them in a ventilated greenhouse to avoid rain. The plants were irrigated sufficiently one day before the start of the experiment. One group was the control group (CK group), which was watered quantitatively every 3 days after the start of the stress to maintain its normal growth. The other four groups were the experimental drought groups, where the water supply was stopped for 1, 2, 3, and 4 weeks respectively to ensure drought conditions, photosynthesis was measured, and samples were collected on the last day when the water supply was stopped for each group. Samples were collected from 2:30 to 3:00 p.m., from top to bottom of the 3rd to 5th leaves. After treatment, leaves were wrapped separately in precooled 10 ml centrifuge tubes, placed immediately in liquid nitrogen, brought back to the laboratory, and stored at −80°C for further analysis.

### Data Protocol
All physiological index data were analyzed using SPSS 22.0 (SPSS Institute, Inc., USA), and for their relative quantification, protein expression abundance was set to determine the statistical significance of the difference and accurately identify the DEPs induced by salt stress. When the protein difference multiple was >1.5 and its P-value was <0.05, it was considered an upregulated protein; when the difference multiple was <0.66 and the P-value was <0.05, the protein was designated as downregulated. The functions of all identified proteins were determined by Gene Ontology (GO) analysis in the UniProt database (http://www.uniprot. org), and proteins were classified according to their main functions. We used the string-DB (http://string-db. org/) protein interaction database (selecting Arabidopsis thaliana) to analyze the interaction of the compared and DEPs.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Castanopsis fissa, Physiological response, Proteomics, Drought stress, Differentially expressed proteins

### Affiliations
No.24, Dongsha Street, Haizhu District, Guangzhou City, Guangdong Province, China
Zhongkai University of Agriculture and Engineering

### Submitter
Yi Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Yi Wang
No.24, Dongsha Street, Haizhu District, Guangzhou City, Guangdong Province, China


