### Accession
PXD019635

### Title
A new cost-effective ribosome profiling technique complements the functional genome annotation and reveals a key role of genic 3’ untranslated region in plant translatomic variation

### Description
A new cost-effective ribosome profiling technique complements the functional genome annotation and reveals a key role of genic 3’ untranslated region in plant translatomic variation

### Sample Protocol
Sample was first grinded by liquid nitrogen, then the powder was transferred to 5 mL centrifuge tube and sonicated three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in lysis buffer (including 1% TritonX-100, 10 mM dithiothreitol, and 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, 50 μM PR-619，3 μM TSA，50 mM NAM and 2 mM EDTA). An equal volume of Tris-saturated phenol (pH 8.0) was added; then, the mixture was further vortexed for 5 min. After centrifugation (4 °C, 10 min, 5 000g), the upper phenol phase was transferred to a new centrifuge tube. Proteins were precipitated by adding at least four volumes of ammonium sulfate-saturated methanol and incubated at -20 °C for at least 6 h. After centrifugation at 4 °C for 10 min, the supernatant was discarded. The remaining precipitate was washed with ice-cold methanol once, followed by ice-cold acetone for three times. The protein was redissolved in 8 M urea and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met was specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1% and minimum score for peptides was set > 40.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Eqtl, Protein ms, Maize, 3'ribo-seq

### Affiliations
Huazhong Agriculture University
National Key Laboratory of Crop Genetic Improvement, Huazhong Agricultural University, China

### Submitter
Wanchao Zhu

### Lab Head
Dr Lin Li
National Key Laboratory of Crop Genetic Improvement, Huazhong Agricultural University, China


