### Accession
PXD035400

### Title
Selective inhibitors of SARM1 targeting an allosteric cysteine in the autoregulatory ARM domain

### Description
The NAD hydrolase (NADase) SARM1 acts as a central executioner of programmed axon death and is a possible therapeutic target for neurodegenerative disorders. While orthosteric inhibitors of SARM1 have been described, this multi-domain enzyme is also subject to intricate forms of autoregulation, suggesting the potential for allosteric modes of inhibition. Previous studies have identified multiple cysteine residues that support SARM1 activation and catalysis, but which of these cysteines, if any, might be selectively targetable by electrophilic small molecules remains unknown. Here we describe the chemical proteomic discovery of a series of tryptoline acrylamides that site-specifically and stereoselectively modify cysteine-311 (C311) in the non-catalytic, autoregulatory armadillo repeat (ARM) domain of SARM1. These covalent compounds inhibit the NADase activity of WT-SARM1, but not C311A or C311S SARM1 mutants, show a high degree of proteome-wide selectivity for SARM1_C311, and stereoselectively block vincristine- and vacor-induced neurite degeneration in primary rodent dorsal root ganglion neurons. Our findings describe selective, covalent inhibitors of SARM1 targeting an allosteric cysteine, pointing to a potentially attractive therapeutic strategy for axon degeneration-dependent forms of neurological disease.

### Sample Protocol
Cells (22Rv1 cells were plated into 15 cm dishes at a density of 15 million cells/dish and drug treated the next day, Ramos cells were adjusted to a density of 3x106 cells/mL into a T-25 culture flask and allowed to recover for 30 minutes in the incubator before drug treatment) were treated with 20 μM tryptoline acrylamides in situ for 3 hours, washed with ice-cold DPBS (Gibco, 14190144), flash frozen in liquid nitrogen (LN2), and stored at -80ºC until use. Cell pellets thawed on ice and lysed by probe sonication (8 pulses, 10% power, three times) in 500 μL ice-cold PBS. Protein concentration of cell lysates was measured using a Pierce BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Scientific, 23225) and 500 μL (2 mg/mL protein content) were treated with 5 μL of 10 mM IA-DTB (in DMSO) for 1 hour at room temperature in the dark with intermittent vortexing. Further processing of proteomic samples for LC-MS/MS/MS analysis are described in detail in SI Appendix, SI Methods.

### Data Protocol
All data were searched against UniProt human database (2016-07 release). RAW files were convereted to MS1/MS3/MS3 files as necessary using Integrated Proteomics Pipeline (IP2) and searched using ProLuCID. All downstream processing are described in methods section.

### Publication Abstract
The nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide hydrolase (NADase) sterile alpha toll/interleukin receptor motif containing-1 (SARM1) acts as a central executioner of programmed axon death and is a possible therapeutic target for neurodegenerative disorders. While orthosteric inhibitors of SARM1 have been described, this multidomain enzyme is also subject to intricate forms of autoregulation, suggesting the potential for allosteric modes of inhibition. Previous studies have identified multiple cysteine residues that support SARM1 activation and catalysis, but which of these cysteines, if any, might be selectively targetable by electrophilic small molecules remains unknown. Here, we describe the chemical proteomic discovery of a series of tryptoline acrylamides that site-specifically and stereoselectively modify cysteine-311 (C311) in the noncatalytic, autoregulatory armadillo repeat (ARM) domain of SARM1. These covalent compounds inhibit the NADase activity of WT-SARM1, but not C311A or C311S SARM1 mutants, show a high degree of proteome-wide selectivity for SARM1_C311 and stereoselectively block vincristine- and vacor-induced neurite degeneration in primary rodent dorsal root ganglion neurons. Our findings describe selective, covalent inhibitors of SARM1 targeting an allosteric cysteine, pointing to a potentially attractive therapeutic strategy for axon degeneration-dependent forms of neurological disease.

### Keywords
Axonopathy, Covalent, Allosteric inhibition, Neurodegeneration, Chemical proteomics

### Affiliations
Postdoctoral Fellow
Department of Chemistry, Scripps Research

### Submitter
Hannah Feldman

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin F. Cravatt
Department of Chemistry, Scripps Research


