### Accession
PXD024524

### Title
LC-MS/MS analysis of proteins interacting with EAAT3

### Description
The excitatory amino acid transporter-3 (EAAT3) mediates the reuptake of glutamate from the synaptic cleft to terminate synaptic transmission at glutamatergic synapses. The plasma membrane expression of EAAT3 is regulated by the cycle of endocytosis and exocytosis.In this project we aimed to identify interacting proteins of EAAT3 involved in the trafficking of EAAT3.

### Sample Protocol
GFP-tagged EAAT3 and GFP proteins were transiently expressed in HEK293 cells and solubilized in lysis buffer containing 1% Triton X-100, and subsequently immunoprecipitated with GFP-Trap beads (Chromotek, Planegg-Martinsried, Germany) for overnight at 4 °C. After 6 washes, GFP-EAAT3/beads and GFP/beads complexes were incubated with rat brain lysates (RBL) overnight at 4 °C. To specify the interactions of EAAT3 with rat brain proteins, analogous EAAT3/beads complex was incubated in lysis buffer without RBL at 4 °C. After 6 washes, bound proteins were eluted in SDS sample buffer at 95 °C for 3 min. Eluted proteins were size fractionated on SDS-PAGE gels and visualized by a colloidal blue staining (Invitrogen). The protein bands were subjected to in-gel tryptic digestion at 37 °C for 18 hrs. The digested samples were separated on an Ultimate 3000 nano-HPLC system (Dionex) with a PepMap100 C-18 analytic column (75 μm x 250 mm). Eluted peptides were then directly sprayed into an ESI-Q-TOF (Compact, Bruker).

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS spectra were interpreted with the Mascot search engine (version 2.4.1, Matrix Science, London, UK) against Swissprot database (559,077 sequences, released in January 2019) and the taxonomy was restricted to homo sapiens (human; 20,414 sequences) for human EAAT3 from HEK293 cells as well as to rodentia (rodents; 26,759 sequences) for EAAT3-associated rat brain proteins. The search parameters were used with a mass tolerance of 10 ppm and an MS/MS tolerance of 0.1 Da. Carbamidomethylation on Cys, oxidation on Met were allowed with 2 missing cleavage sites and additionally phosphorylation on Ser/Thr was allowed for human EAAT3 protein searches. The Mascot cut-off score was set to 10 and proteins identified with two or more peptides were considered.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Esi-qtof, Arfgap1, Eaat3, Arf6, Excitatory amino acid transporter-3

### Affiliations
Institute of Pharmacology Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria
Medical University of Vienna

### Submitter
Jae-Won Yang

### Lab Head
Dr Jae-Won Yang
Institute of Pharmacology Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria


