### Accession
PXD033617

### Title
Ethinylestradiol in COC has broader effect on serum proteome compared with estradiol valerate - a randomized trial: LOW ABUNDANCE PROTEINS

### Description
Ethinylestradiol (EE)-based combined oral contraceptives (COC) have multiple beneficial effects besides contraception, but they also cause certain unfavorable health outcomes. They interfere, for example, with metabolism, inflammation, hepatic protein synthesis, and blood coagulation. COCs containing natural estrogens have recently been developed, yet little is known about their non-contraceptive effects compared to conventional EE-based COCs. The aim of the study was to analyze the serum proteome during three different treatments: EE+dienogest (DNG), estradiol valerate (EV)+DNG, and DNG only.

### Sample Protocol
Serum samples were stored at -70oC until analysis. High-abundant proteins and their protein complexes were affinity-purified from the samples, and samples were divided into two pools: high- and low-abundance proteins. Human serum albumin was further removed from the high-abundance samples. Proteins were digested with trypsin and applied via reverse-phase nano-liquid chromatograph column to the high-resolution mass spectrometer, data collected in data independent manner, peptides identified and quantified.

### Data Protocol
The distributions of protein changes were examined with the Shapiro-Wilk test. Most changes were skewed and thus, non-parametrical tests were used in analyses. Wilcoxon test with Benjamini-Hochberg procedure to control false discovery rates were used to analyze the changes within the study groups.  To investigate the differences between the study groups, we calculated the difference between baseline and nine weeks for all proteins, and these differential variables were analyzed with the Kruskal-Wallis test and Benjamini-Hochberg procedure. Statistically significant results were further compared with the Mann-Whitney post hoc test.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Estradiol valerate, Ethinylestradiol, Serum proteome, Coc

### Affiliations
Helsinki University
1) Haartman Institute, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. 2) HUS Diagnostic Center, Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland.

### Submitter
Sakari Joenväärä

### Lab Head
Dr Risto Renkonen
1) Haartman Institute, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. 2) HUS Diagnostic Center, Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland.


