### Accession
PXD015125

### Title
Phosphoproteomics analysis of CHK1 inhibitor treatment

### Description
Inhibitors of checkpoint kinase 1 (CHK1),a central component of DNA damage and cell cycle checkpoint response, represent a promising new cancer therapy, but the global cellular functionsthey regulate through phosphorylationare poorly understood. To elucidate the CHK1-regulated phosphorylation network, we performed a global quantitative phosphoproteomics analysis, which revealed 142 phosphositeswhose phosphorylation levels were significantly different following treatment with the CHK1 inhibitor SCH 900776.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293A cells were labeled by passaging the cells 8 times in DMEM media for SILAC labeling.Labeled HEK293A cells were treated with HU and SCH 900776. After 1 h, the treated cells were harvested and combined with the light labeled control cells, which were treated with only HU for 1 h. Cells were subjected to lysis in NETN buffer at 4°C for 20 min. Crude lysates were subjected to centrifugation at 14,000 rpm for 30 minat 4°C. Supernatants were taken as the soluble fraction. Proteins in the pellet were extracted by sonication and taken as the chromatin fraction. Protein lysates were reduced and alkylated. The treated proteins were precipitated in 80% acetone at -20°C overnight, and the precipitants were resuspended in 8 M urea. Then 2 mg of the proteins were diluted to 0.8 M urea, and digested with trypsin. Phosphopeptides enriched by TiO2 beads. The enriched peptides were fractionated using a micro-pipette tip packed with high pH C18. Then the samples were analyzed by Orbitrap Elite MS.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS spectra were used to search MaxQuant software program. Database searching included all entries from the human Uniprot database (October 2016). Enzyme specificity was set to tryptic with 2 missed cleavages. Carboxyamidomethyl for cysteine (+57.021 Da) was set as static modification; heavy SILAC labeling, phosphorylation for serine, threonine, and tyrosine residues, and oxidation for methionine residues were set as variable modifications. The identified peptides were filtered using a false discovery rate< 1% based on the target-decoy method.

### Publication Abstract
Inhibitors of checkpoint kinase 1 (CHK1), a central component of DNA damage and cell cycle checkpoint response, represent a promising new cancer therapy, but the global cellular functions they regulate through phosphorylation are poorly understood. To elucidate the CHK1-regulated phosphorylation network, we performed a global quantitative phosphoproteomics analysis, which revealed 142 phosphosites whose phosphorylation levels were significantly different following treatment with the CHK1 inhibitor SCH 900776. Bioinformatics analysis identified phosphoproteins that function in ATR-CHK1 signaling, DNA replication, and DNA repair. Furthermore, IRF3 phosphorylation at S173 and S175 was significantly reduced following treatment with SCH 900776. Our findings indicate that the CHK1-dependent regulation of IRF3 phosphorylation at S173 and S175 may play a role in the induction of innate immune response after replication stress or DNA damage, which suggests a potential function of CHK1 in the innate immune response. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD015125.

### Keywords
Silac, Phosphoprotomics, Chk1 inhibitor

### Affiliations
The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center
Department of Experimental Radiation Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center

### Submitter
Zhen Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Junjie Chen
Department of Experimental Radiation Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center


