### Accession
PXD036727

### Title
Altered plasma membrane abundance of the sulfatide-binding protein NF155 links glycosphingolipid imbalances to demyelination

### Description
Myelination of axons enables efficient signal propagation in neurones. Myelin is a multi-layered membrane that wraps around neuronal axons forming extremely tight contacts that insulate the axon. Tight contact between the axon and myelin sheath is mediated by specific plasma membrane proteins and lipids, with disruption to these contacts causing devastating demyelinating diseases. We have generated two cell-based models of demyelinating sphingolipidoses and shown that the altered lipid metabolism changes the plasma membrane protein composition. The proteins that are altered in these cells play roles in cell adhesion and signalling, several of which have previously been implicated in a range of neurological diseases. The adhesion molecule Neurofascin, with a known role in myelin-axon contact sites, is significantly altered in response to sphingolipid imbalances, highlighting a potential new player contributing to the pathogenesis of galactosphingolipid-mediated diseases. We show that the Neurofascin isoform NF155, but not NF186, directly binds the sphingolipid sulfatide, but does not bind other galactosylated-sphingolipids. Furthermore, this interaction requires the full-length extracellular domain of NF155 and that the structure of this domain adopts an S-shape with important implications for the arrangement of proteins in the tight axon-myelin space. Together, this work identifies that glycosphingolipid imbalances drive changes in membrane protein abundance and that this may be driven by direct interactions between extracellular portions of these proteins with specific lipid headgroups.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were washed twice in ice-cold PBS. Surface sialic acid residues were oxidized and biotinylated by incubation in the dark for 30 min with gentle rocking at 4°C using an oxidation/biotinylation mix comprising 1 mM sodium meta-periodate, 100 µmM aminooxy-biotin (Biotium Inc., Hayward, CA) and 10 µmM aniline (Sigma-Aldrich) in ice-cold PBS pH 6.7. The reaction was quenched with 1 mM glycerol and cells were washed twice in ice-cold PBS. Biotinylated cells were scraped into lysis buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6, 1% Triton X-100, 150 mM NaCl, protease inhibitor (complete, without EDTA (Roche), ½ tablet per 20 mL), and 5 mM EDTA) and incubated on a rotating wheel at 4°C for 30 mins. Lysate was cleared by centrifugation (20,000 g, 10 mins) at 4°C and supernatant snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C until further processing. Protein concentrations of thawed samples were determined by bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay and equal quantities of samples used in subsequent steps. Biotinylated glycoproteins were enriched by incubation for 3 hr at 4°C on a rotating wheel with high affinity streptavidin agarose beads (ThermoFisher Scientific). Extensive washing was performed on a vacuum manifold, using lysis buffer, then PBS containing 0.5% (w/v) SDS then washed with urea buffer (6 M urea, 50 mM Triethylammonium bicarbonate, TEAB). Beads were incubated at room temperature with shaking for 30 mins in reduction/alkylation mix (urea buffer containing 20 mM iodoacetamide and 10 mM TCEP). Beads were further washed with Urea buffer and then 50 mM TEAB and transferred to a fresh tube. Beads were pelleted gently (550 g, 2 mins), supernatant removed. Captured protein was digested on-bead with 10 µg/mL trypsin in 50 mM TEAB at 37°C with shaking for 4 hr. Beads were pelleted gently and supernatant conatining trypsinied peptides were dried using a speedvac.   Samples were resuspended in 21µL 100mM TEAB pH 8.5. After allowing to come to room temperature, 0.5µg TMTpro (GALC-KO experiment) or 0.2 µg TMT reagents (UGT8-KO experiment) (Thermo Fisher) were resuspended in 9µL anhydrous ACN which was added to the respective samples and incubated at room temperature for 1h. For the GALC-KO experiment TMTpro reagents were used in ascending order of reporter molecular mass to label: 3xWild Type, 3x Cas9 only, 3x GALC-KO Sg1, 3x GALC-KO sg2 and 3x GALC rescue. For the UGT8-KO experiment TMT reagents were similarly used to label; 3x Cas9 Only, 3x UGT8-KO sg1, 3x UGT8-KO sg2. A 3µL aliquot of each sample was taken and pooled to check TMT labelling efficiency and equality of loading by LC-MS. Samples were stored at -80°C in the interim. After checking each sample was at least 98% TMT labelled Total reporter ion intensities were used to normalise the pooling of the remaining samples such that the final pool should be as close to a 1:1 ratio of total peptide content between samples as possible. This final pool was then dried in a vacuum centrifuge. The sample was acidified to a final 0.1% Trifluoracetic Acid (TFA) (~200µL volume) and Formic Acid (FA) was added until the SDC visibly precipitated. 4 volumes of ethyl acetate were then added and the sample vortexed vigorously for 30s. Sample was then centrifuged at 15’000g for 5mins at RT to effect phase separation. A gel loading pipette tip was used to withdraw the lower (aqueous) phase to a fresh low adhesion microfuge tube. If any obvious SDC contamination remained the two-phase extraction with ethyl acetate was repeated. The sample was then partially dried in a vacuum centrifuge and brought up to a final volume of 1mL with 0.1% TFA. FA was added until the pH was <2, confirmed by spotting onto pH paper. The sample was then cleaned up by SPE using a 50mg tC18 SepPak cartridge (Waters) and a positive pressure manifold (Tecan Resolvex M10). The cartridge was wetted with 1mL 100% Methanol followed by 1mL ACN, equilibrated with 1mL 0.1% TFA and the sample loaded slowly. The cartridge was washed with 1mL 0.1% TFA before eluting with 750µL 80%ACN, 0.1% TFA. Eluate was dried in a vacuum centrifuge.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed with PeaksX+, v10.5 (Bioinfor). Briefly, .raw files were searched iteratively in three rounds, with unmatched DeNovo spectra (at 0.1% PSM FDR) from the previous search used as the input for the next. The three iterations were as follows 1) Swissprot Human (27/03/2020) + common contaminants 2) The same databases as search 1 but permitting semi-specific cleavage 3) trEMBL Human (27/03/2020), with specific cleavage rules.  Identified proteins and their TMT reporter abundances were output to .csv, imported to R and submitted to statistical analysis using LIMMA, a moderated t-test available through the Bioconductor package (PMID:25605792). LIMMA p-values were corrected for multiple hypothesis testing using the Benjamini-Hochberg method to generate an FDR (q-value) for each comparison.

### Publication Abstract
Myelin is a multilayered membrane that tightly wraps neuronal axons, enabling efficient, high-speed signal propagation. The axon and myelin sheath form tight contacts, mediated by specific plasma membrane proteins and lipids, and disruption of these contacts causes devastating demyelinating diseases. Using two cell-based models of demyelinating sphingolipidoses, we demonstrate that altered lipid metabolism changes the abundance of specific plasma membrane proteins. These altered membrane proteins have known roles in cell adhesion and signaling, with several implicated in neurological diseases. The cell surface abundance of the adhesion molecule neurofascin (NFASC), a protein critical for the maintenance of myelin-axon contacts, changes following disruption to sphingolipid metabolism. This provides a direct molecular link between altered lipid abundance and myelin stability. We show that the NFASC isoform NF155, but not NF186, interacts directly and specifically with the sphingolipid sulfatide via multiple binding sites and that this interaction requires the full-length extracellular domain of NF155. We demonstrate that NF155 adopts an S-shaped conformation and preferentially binds sulfatide-containing membranes in <i>cis</i>, with important implications for protein arrangement in the tight axon-myelin space. Our work links glycosphingolipid imbalances to disturbance of membrane protein abundance and demonstrates how this may be driven by direct protein-lipid interactions, providing a mechanistic framework to understand the pathogenesis of galactosphingolipidoses.

### Keywords
Myelination, Krabbe disease, Neurofascin, Galactosylceramide, Sulfatide

### Affiliations
Cambridge Institute of Therapeutic Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, University of Cambridge,
University of Cambridge

### Submitter
James Williamson

### Lab Head
Dr Paul Lehner
Cambridge Institute of Therapeutic Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, University of Cambridge,


