### Accession
PXD016747

### Title
Quantitative proteomics of Giardia exposures to HKMT inhibitors

### Description
We explored differential protein expression (DEPs) during sublethal exposures of HKMT inhibitors (BIX-01294 = 10uM (B), Chaetocin = 20uM (C)) in log-phase (growth; TY) and encystation (differentiation; EC) at 8 and 24 hours relative to DMSO controls (D). In total, 18,527 peptides from 1,981 proteins in log-phase, and 19,852 peptides from 2,097 proteins were analysed in encysting cultures. In total, 56 proteins were up- and 36 down-regulated in log-phase trophozoites and 32 up- and 12 down during encystation upon BIX-01294-treatment relative to the DMSO controls. Following Chaetocin-treatment, 195 proteins were up- and 121 down-regulated in log-phase trophozoites, and 63 up- and 12 down during encystation. We have presented results by cell-phase given positive correlations were driven by culture condition and not between either Chaetocin or BIX-01294 inhibitor).

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction was performed in 2.5% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) in 50 mM Tris (pH 8.8) (Sigma Aldrich). Proteins were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol at 37C followed by alkylation in 15 mM iodoacetamide (with alkylation quenched with 5 mM dithiothreitol). Proteins were precipitated via methanol/chloroform, transferred to 8 M Urea in 50 mM Tris (pH 8.8) and concentration quantitated by BCA assay (Pierce), followed by trypsin digestion of 20ug protein overnight at 37C at a ratio of 1:100 enzyme to protein. Samples were acidified with TFA and peptides desalted using C18 solid-phase extraction stage tips, dried using vacuum centrifuge and reconstituted in 2% ACN, 0.1% TFA for LC-MS/MS.  LC MS/MS was performed on a LTQ Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Scientific) with a nanoESI interface in conjunction with an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nanoHPLC (Dionex Ultimate 3000) equipped with an Acclaim Pepmap nano-trap column (Dinoex-C18, 100 Å, 75 µm x 2 cm) and an Acclaim Pepmap RSLC analytical column (Dinoex-C18, 100 Å, 75 µm x 15 cm). Peptides were analysed on a 125-minute flow gradient ranging 3%-80% ACN in 0.1% formic acid (FA). The LTQ Orbitrap Elite spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent mode and all spectra acquired using the previously described acquisition method 107, with fragmentation of the top 20 most intense precursors obtained using rapid collision induced dissociation (rCID) with normalized collision energy of 30 and activation q of 0.25.

### Data Protocol
Maxquant software was used for database searching and label-free quantitation, with the LFQ minimum ratio count set to 1, and matching between runs set to ‘match from and to’. Log-phase trophozoites and encysting trophozoite raw data searches were performed separately. Giardia duodenalis WB isolate genome (GiardiaDB.org, ATCC 50803 ver 37) were used along with sequences containing common contaminants, with parameters of trypsin digestion with maximum 2 missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification, protein N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications, peptide length of minimum 7 amino acids, and peptide and protein false discovery rate set to 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
Methylation is a common posttranslational modification of arginine and lysine in eukaryotic proteins. Methylproteomes are best characterized for higher eukaryotes, where they are functionally expanded and evolved complex regulation. However, this is not the case for protist species evolved from the earliest eukaryotic lineages. Here, we integrated bioinformatic, proteomic, and drug-screening data sets to comprehensively explore the methylproteome of Giardia duodenalis-a deeply branching parasitic protist. We demonstrate that Giardia and related diplomonads lack arginine-methyltransferases and have remodeled conserved RGG/RG motifs targeted by these enzymes. We also provide experimental evidence for methylarginine absence in proteomes of Giardia but readily detect methyllysine. We bioinformatically infer 11 lysine-methyltransferases in Giardia, including highly diverged Su(var)3-9, Enhancer-of-zeste and Trithorax proteins with reduced domain architectures, and novel annotations demonstrating conserved methyllysine regulation of eukaryotic elongation factor 1 alpha. Using mass spectrometry, we identify more than 200 methyllysine sites in Giardia, including in species-specific gene families involved in cytoskeletal regulation, enriched in coiled-coil features. Finally, we use known methylation inhibitors to show that methylation plays key roles in replication and cyst formation in this parasite. This study highlights reduced methylation enzymes, sites, and functions early in eukaryote evolution, including absent methylarginine networks in the Diplomonadida. These results challenge the view that arginine methylation is eukaryote conserved and demonstrate that functional compensation of methylarginine was possible preceding expansion and diversification of these key networks in higher eukaryotes.

### Keywords
Hkmt inhibitor, Bix-01294, Protein methylation, Giardia, Chaetocin

### Affiliations
Population Health and Immunity, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research
Population Health and Immunity Division, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Melbourne, VIC, Australia  Faculty of Veterinary and Agricultural Sciences, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC, Australia

### Submitter
Samantha Emery

### Lab Head
Dr Aaron Jex
Population Health and Immunity Division, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Melbourne, VIC, Australia  Faculty of Veterinary and Agricultural Sciences, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC, Australia


