### Accession
PXD004152

### Title
Quantitative proteomic analysis reveals the effects of human neural stem cells on multiple brain regions

### Description
Parkinson’s disease (PD) is one of the most common neurodegenerative disease caused by diminution of neurons in the substantia nigra (SN) which projects dopaminergic (DA) axons to the striatum and other target areas.  Recently, accumulating data demonstrated the prospects of cell replacement therapy by using neural stem cell (NSCs) transplantation. However the mechanisms underlying the potential efficacy are not fully understood.   To gain new insights into the mechanisms of 6-OHDA induced lesion and potential efficacy of hNSCs transplantation, Intrastriatal 6-Hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA) injected parkinsonian mice were unilaterally engrafted with undifferentiated human NSCs to striatum (ST). High-throughput quantitative proteomic approach was utilized to characterize the proteome profiles of PD related brain regions in these mice including SN, ST, olfactory bulb (OB) and subventricular zone (SVZ). The abundance of more than 5000 proteins with high confidence in each region was determined in this study which represents the most extensive proteomic study of PD mouse models to date.  In addition to the disruption of the DA system, the quantitative analysis demonstrated the profound disturbance of SVZ proteome after 6-OHDA insult, in which the abundance of more than 20% proteins was significantly changed. After hNSCs engraftment, the proteome of SVZ was restored and the astrocytes in ST was greatly activated in companion with the increase in neurotrophic factors.  Furthermore, bioinformatics analysis demonstrated that changes in proteome was not caused by the proliferation of hNSCs or their progeny, but rather by the reaction of endogenous cells.  Overall, this study reveals that hNSCs benefits parkinsonian animals by eliciting endogenous responses in multiple brain regions, and discovers the unexpected role of SVZ cells in PD progress and treatment, providing new therapeutic targets.

### Sample Protocol
The brain tissues were prepared under modified standard autopsy procedures and stored under -80 °C cryopreservation prior to use. The brain tissues were homogenized with ice-cold homogenization buffer, composed of 8 M urea in PBS, pH 8.0, 1× cocktail, and 1 mM phenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride. The homogenate was centrifuged at 12,000 rpm at 4°C for 15 min to remove cell debris, and the clarified supernatant was then transferred into a new 1.5-ml tube. The protein concentration was measured using a Nanodrop 2000 (Thermo Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The protein concentration was used in order to determine the volume of supernatant required to obtain 25 μg of protein from each sample. These were grouped brain region and treatment (Intact, 6-OHDA or hNSCs, as described in Section 2.1), and the samples in the same groups were mixed together to obtain three pooled extracts, each containing a total of 100 µg of protein. At this stage, the extracts were treated with 10 mM dithiothreitol for 1 h at 55°C, then with 25 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark at room temperature. They were then digested with 1:100 w/w endopeptidase Lys-C overnight at 37°C. The extracts were then diluted with PBS (pH 8.0) to give a final urea concentration of 1.0 M, and then digested with 1:50 w/w trypsin overnight. The next morning, the extracts were first acidified with 1% formic acid, and then desalted with a reverse-phase column (Oasis HLB; Waters, MC, USA). The extracts were dried with a vacuum concentrator and finally dissolved in 200 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer for labeling with TMT reagents. Two sets of TMT labels were used to label different groups: set1: TMT-126 for ST-Intact, TMT-127 for ST-6-OHDA, TMT-128 for ST-hNSCs, TMT-129 for SN-Intact, TMT-130 for SN-6-OHDA, TMT-131 for SN-hNSCs; set2: TMT-126 for OB-Intact, TMT-127 for OB-6-OHDA, TMT-128 for OB-hNSCs, TMT-129 for SVZ-Intact, TMT-130 for SVZ-6-OHDA, TMT-131 for SVZ-hNSCs. The prepared TMT reagents (0.8 mg TMT dissolved in 40 µL of 99.9% acetonitrile) were added to the corresponding solutions and the labeling reaction allowed to progress at room temperature. The reactions were stopped 1 h later by the addition of 5 µL of 5% hydroxylamine for 5 min. All of the labeled extracts from the three pools were mixed, desalted, dried as previously described, and dissolved in 100 µL of 0.1% formic acid. The labeled peptides were fractionated. The TMT labeled peptides (100 µL in 0.1% formic acid) were first transferred to MS tubes for HPLC (UltiMate 3000 UHPLC, Thermo Scientific) analysis. Then, an Xbridge BEH300 C18 column (4.6 × 250 mm, 2.5 µm, Waters) was maintained at 45°C with a flow rate of 1.0 ml/min for further fractionation. UV absorbance was detected at 214 nm. Fractions were collected every 1.5 min into 50 tubes, and were dissolved with 20 µL of 0.1% formic acid for liquid chromatography (LC)-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis was conducted on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The fractions were separated with a 120-min gradient elution at a flow rate of 0.30 μl/min. The UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano System (Thermo Scientific) was interfaced with the Thermo Q Exactive Benchtop mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The column used for analysis was a silica capillary column (75 μm ID, 150 mm length; Upchurch, Oak Harbor, WA) packed with C18 resin (300 Å, 5 µm; Varian, Lexington, MA). To set the Q Exactive mass spectrometer in data-dependent acquisition mode, we utilized Xcalibur 2.1.2 software for manipulation. Using Orbitrap (400-1,800 m/z, 60,000 resolution), the single full-scan mass spectrum was conducted before the ten data-dependent MS/MS scans at 27% normalized collision energy (higher energy C-trap dissociation, HCD). Proteome Discoverer 2.1 software (Thermo Scientific) was used for searching MS/MS spectra against mouse or human proteome database from UniProt (released Feb 29th, 2016) with a FDR equals to 0.01 and for estimating the absolute and relative abundance of proteins. The criteria for searching was set according to the software recommendations with the following modifications: full tryptic specificity with no more than two missed cleavages permitted; set carbamidomethylation (C, +57.021 Da) and TMT plex (lysine, K and any N-terminal) as static modifications; and oxidation (methionine, M) as a dynamic modification. The fragment ion mass tolerance was corrected to 20 mmu (all MS2 spectra) and the precursor ion mass tolerances were set at 20 ppm (all MS in an Orbitrap mass analyzer).

### Publication Abstract
Cell replacement therapy using neural stem cells (NSCs) transplantation has recently emerged as a promising method of Parkinson's disease (PD) treatment; however, the underlying mechanisms are not fully understood. To gain new insights into the mechanisms of 6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA)-induced lesioning and therapeutic efficacy of human NSCs (hNSCs) transplantation, the striatum (ST) of intrastriatal 6-OHDA-injected parkinsonian mice were unilaterally engrafted with undifferentiated hNSCs. A high-throughput quantitative proteomic approach was used to characterize the proteome profiles of PD-related brain regions such as the SN, ST, olfactory bulb, and subventricular zone (SVZ) in these mice. The abundance of more than 5,000 proteins in each region was determined with high confidence in this study, which is the most extensive proteomic study of PD mouse models to date. In addition to disruption of the DA system, the quantitative analysis demonstrated profound disturbance of the SVZ proteome after 6-OHDA insult. After hNSC engraftment, the SVZ proteome was restored and the astrocytes in the ST were greatly activated, accompanied by an increase in neurotrophic factors. Furthermore, bioinformatics analysis demonstrated that the changes in the proteome were not caused by the proliferation of hNSCs or their progeny, but rather by the reaction of endogenous stem cells. Overall, this study elucidates the unexpected role of SVZ cells in PD progress and treatment, thereby providing new therapeutic targets for PD. Stem Cells 2017;35:1519-1531.

### Keywords
Parkinson's disease, Proteomics, Hnscs transplantation, Subventricular zone

### Affiliations
National Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology & Department of Immunology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences 
Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, School of Basic Medicine, Peking Union Medical College; Dongdansantiao 5, Beijing, China.

### Submitter
Wei Ge

### Lab Head
Dr Wei Ge
Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, School of Basic Medicine, Peking Union Medical College; Dongdansantiao 5, Beijing, China.


