### Accession
PXD027914

### Title
The kidney releases in the urine and circulation a non-polymerizing form of Uromodulin that retains the external hydrophobic patch domain

### Description
Uromodulin (Tamm-Horsfall protein, THP) is a glycoprotein uniquely produced in the kidney. It is released by cells of the thick ascending limbs (TAL) apically in the urine, and basolaterally in the renal interstitium and systemic circulation. Processing of mature urinary THP, which polymerizes into supra-molecular filaments, requires cleavage of an external hydrophobic patch (EHP) at the C terminus. However, THP in the circulation is not polymerized, and it remains unclear if non-aggregated forms of THP exist natively in the urine. We propose that an alternative processing path, which retains the EHP domain, can lead to a non-polymerizing form of THP. We generated an antibody that specifically recognizes THP with retained EHP (THP+EHP) and established its presence in the urine in a non-polymerized native state. Proteomic characterization of urinary THP+EHP revealed its C-terminus to end at F617. In the human kidney, THP+EHP was not only detected in TAL cells, but also diffusely in the renal parenchyma. Using C-terminus proteomic sequencing and immunoblotting, we then demonstrated that serum THP has also retained EHP. In a small cohort of patients at risk for acute kidney injury (AKI), admission urinary THP+EHP was significantly lower in patients who subsequently developed AKI during hospitalization. Our findings uncover novel insights into uromodulin biology by establishing the presence of an alternative path for cellular processing, which could explain the release of non-polymerizing THP in the circulation. Larger studies as needed to establish the utility of urinary THP+EHP as a sensitive biomarker of kidney health and susceptibility to injury.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitation of non-polymerizing THP+EHP: Non-polymerizing THP+EHP was immunoprecipitated from 0.5 L of urine, from which polymerizing THP was previously removed by two consecutive precipitations with 0.58 M NaCl, according to the method of Tamm and Horsfall (47, 48). After removal of salt by dialysis, the urine was concentrated ~ 10 fold over Centricon Plus 75 with molecular weight cut off (MWCO) 30 kDa (Millipore #UFC70308) and used in immunoprecipitation. For immunoprecipitation experiments 0.5 mg of rabbit polyclonal anti-THP+EHP antibody was covalently coupled to 50 ml of Protein A agarose beads (Pierce Biotechnologies # 20333) using  homobifunctional cross-linking reagent DSS (disuccinimidyl suberate) according to the scaled up protocol in the Pierce Protein A IgG Plus orientation kit (# 44893).  Proteomic analysis of Immunoprecipitated urinary THP+EHP or Immunoprecipitated serum THP: Sample preparation, mass spectrometry analysis, bioinformatics, and data evaluation for proteomics experiments were performed in collaboration with the Indiana University Proteomics Core Facility at the Indiana University School of Medicine similarly to previously published protocols (49).  Each immunoprecipitation reaction was treated with 100 ml of 8M urea in 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5, reduced with 5 mM Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP- HCl) for 30 min at 37˚ C and alkylated with 10 mM chloroacetamide (CAA) at room temperature, in the dark, for 30 min. The reactions were then diluted with 100 mM Tris pH 8.5, 10 mM CaCl2 to 2 M urea and treated with 500 U of PNGase F (NEB P0705L) for 2 h at 37˚ C. Proteolytic digestion was accomplished using either trypsin/LysC (Promega V5072) or chymotrypsin (Roche # 11418467001). For the latter digestions the samples were additionally diluted to 0.5 M urea with 100 mM Tris pH 8.0, 10 mM CaCl2. The digestions were carried out at 35˚ C overnight followed acidification with 0.5% v/v trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Peptides were then cleaned up with SepPak 18 cartridge (WAT054955, Waters, washed with 1 mL of 0.1% TFA and eluted in 600 µL 70% Acetonitrile 0.1 % formic acid (FA)).

### Data Protocol
Raw files were loaded into PEAKS X Pro Studio 10.6 Build 20201221 (Bioinformatics Solutions, (50)) with fragmentation mode, detector and enzyme specified for each file. Precursor ion tolerance was 10 ppm and fragment ion tolerance was 0.6 Da for io  data and 0.02 Da for Orbitrap data. Database searches were performed in semispecific mode with the Uniprot_Swissprot Homo sapiens database and common contaminants (20437 entries) with variable modifications of acetylation (K, n-terminal), oxidation (M), phosphorylation (STY), carbamidomethylation (C), and ubiquitination (K). PEAKS PTM and SPIDER searches were enabled to search all de novo peptides above 15% score for over 300 potential PTMs and mutations. A 1 % peptide FDR cutoff (-10lgP≥21.8), PTM Ascore > 10, mutation ion intensity >1 and de novo only score > 80% were applied to the data. In total, 50981 peptides and 1939 protein groups were identified.

### Publication Abstract
Uromodulin [Tamm-Horsfall protein (THP)] is a glycoprotein uniquely produced in the kidney. It is released by cells of the thick ascending limbs apically in the urine and basolaterally in the renal interstitium and systemic circulation. Processing of mature urinary THP, which polymerizes into supramolecular filaments, requires cleavage of an external hydrophobic patch (EHP) at the COOH-terminus. However, THP in the circulation is not polymerized, and it remains unclear if nonaggregated forms of THP exist natively in the urine. We propose that an alternative processing path, which retains the EHP domain, can lead to a nonpolymerizing form of THP. We generated an antibody that specifically recognizes THP with retained EHP (THP + EHP) and established its presence in the urine in a nonpolymerized native state. Proteomic characterization of urinary THP + EHP revealed its COOH-terminus ending at F617. In the human kidney, THP + EHP was detected in thick ascending limb cells and less strongly in the renal parenchyma. Using immunoprecipitation followed by proteomic sequencing and immunoblot analysis, we then demonstrated that serum THP has also retained EHP. In a small cohort of patients at risk for acute kidney injury, admission urinary THP + EHP was significantly lower in patients who subsequently developed acute kidney injury during hospitalization. Our findings uncover novel insights into uromodulin biology by establishing the presence of an alternative path for cellular processing, which could explain the release of nonpolymerizing THP in the circulation. Larger studies are needed to establish the utility of urinary THP + EHP as a sensitive biomarker of kidney health and susceptibility to injury.<b>NEW &amp; NOTEWORTHY</b> In this work, we discovered and characterized a novel form of uromodulin that does not polymerize because it retains an external hydrophobic patch at the COOH-terminus. These findings establish an alternative form of cellular processing of this protein and elucidate new aspects of its biology. We also provide evidence suggesting that measuring urinary nonpolymerizing uromodulin could be a promising assay to assess the risk of acute kidney injury.

### Keywords
Urine, Human, External hydrophobicpatch domain, Lc-msms, Serum, Uromodulin, Aki, Elisa

### Affiliations
Indiana University School of Medicine
Division of Nephrology and Hypertension, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA

### Submitter
Emma Doud

### Lab Head
Dr Tarek M. El-Achkar
Division of Nephrology and Hypertension, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA


