### Accession
PXD036231

### Title
Novel peptide from Buthotus saulcyi,Odontobuthus doriae, Androctonus crassicauda scorpion venom (Jamil Zargan, Haider A. Khan, Shakir Ali)

### Description
In the present study, we report for the first time a proteomic profile of Buthotus saulcyi, Odontobuthus doriae and Androctonus crassicauda scorpion venom with the aim of looking ahead and determining the structural and functional characteristics of these compounds for use as medical tools. Molecular weight determination of isolated proteins was performed in order to better describe the B. saulcyi, O. doriae and A. crassicauda raw toxin proteins by both polyacrylamide electrophoresis and two-dimensional electrophoresis. 2D-PAGE data from the B. saulcyi, O. doriae and A. crassicauda raw toxin showed a molecular weight between 3.6 and 205 kDa (for B. saulcyi), 6.6 to 205 kDa (for O. doriae) and 6.6-109 kDa (for A. crassicauda). Then 14, 14 and 21 fractions of crude toxins were isolated using HPLC and their protein content was estimated for B. saulcyi, O. doriae and A. crassicauda, respectively. SDS-PAGE analysis of selected fractions of crude toxin showed 9 protein bands with a molecular weight between 13 and 217 kDa for B. saulcyi, 10 protein bands with a molecular weight between 3.8 to182 kDa for O. doriae and 5 protein bands with a molecular weight between 5.99 and 41.65 kDa for A. crassicauda. In case of B. saulcyi, the fraction 7 (F7) showed more cytotoxicity than other isolated fractions. Subsequently, the amino acid sequencing of fraction 7 led us to two protein bands designated as p3 and p4 peptide. For O. doriae, the peptide fraction of F17, obtained from the crude venoms of O. doriae scorpion, was found to be more cytotoxic than the crude venoms and other isolated fractions. Furthermore, F5 demonstrated significant anti-proliferative and apoptotic activity. Therefore, we performed PAGE on fraction F5 and found 5 protein bands. The two protein bands, each from fraction F5 that marked as P1 and P2 were selected for amino acid sequencing. The three peptide fractions F17, obtained from the crude venoms of A. crassicauda scorpion, was found to be more cytotoxic than the crude venoms and other isolated fractions. Furthermore, F17 demonstrated significant anti-proliferative and apoptotic activity. This makes this fraction better candidate for searching the peptide that might be used for selective killing of cancerous cells. Therefore, we performed PAGE on fractionsF17, and found 2 protein bands. One protein band from fraction F17 that marked as P5 was selected for amino acid sequencing. Finally, these protein bands were removed and molecular mass and amino acid sequence analysis was performed using Laser Desorption/Ionization Time-of-Flight Mass Spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS). In-silico studies of P1, P2, P3, P4 and P5 for protein sequence alignment showed the most similarity with Hemoglobin beta-2 chain protein, Chaperonin HSP60, Chrysophsin2, pheromone-bound protein 2 and Trypsin- like serine proteinase, respectively

### Sample Protocol
2.12 Isolation of the scorpion venom fractions by chromatography The lyophilized crude venom from scorpion was dissolved in 0.1% aqueous trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) containing 5% (v/v) acetonitrile (28) and the insoluble materials and mucous debris was discarded by centrifugation at 15000 RPM (29) for 20 min (30) at 4°C. Next, the supernatant was filtered through 0.45µm syringe filter, prior to fractionation (28). The separation of fractions was performed by reversed-phase semi-preparative high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) where the separation was achieved according to the hydrophobicity of the components in the venom. The HPLC system CECIL 1100 equipped with a UV Detector using Preparative C18 [SUPELCOSILTM PLC-18(59185), 25cmx 21.2mm, 12µm] was used in the present study.  In the next step, the column was equilibrated for 15 min in 0.1% TFA, and the elution was done with a linear gradient program from solution A (0.1% TFA in grade water) to 60% solution B (0.1% TFA in HPLC grade acetonitrile) (18, 31) in 60 min at 25°C (18). The prepared solutions of mobile phase (solutions A and B) were used after filtration through 0.45µm membrane filter and sonication in one hr. The flow rate was 4ml/min and eluent was monitored at absorbance of 220 nm. The appeared fractions corresponding to the peaks were collected manually and were vacuum dried using lyophilisateur. The retention times for each fractions peak were indicated.  2.13 Amino acid sequencing and MALDI-TOF/MS analysis: 2.14 Excision and de-staining of gel piece The excision of the gel piece and de-staining of stained gel with coomassie dye was perfomred according to the previously describe method (32-35). The protein band of selected fraction was excised from 1-D gels and cut into 1×1 - 2×2 mm pieces. The pieces were put into receiver tube and were mixed with 200 μl de-staining solution (25 mM ammonium bicarbonate in 50% acetonitrile) twice. Then, the gel pieces were incubated at 37°C for 30 min with constant shaking. De-staining solution was discarded and gel pieces were shrunk by adding 50 μl of acetonitrile followed by 15 min incubation at room temperature. Acetonitrile was gentely removed and gel pieces were air-dried for 5-10 min at room temperature. Then, the shrunken gel pieces were added to an empty tube and the volume of 10 μl of ready to use trypsin solution [1μg/0.1 ml solution of high-quality trypsin (TPCK Treated- BioChemicals) in ultrapure water] was added into the tube. The tube was incubated at room temperature for 15 min to allow the gel pieces to swell and absorb the trypsin solution. In the next step, the volume of 25 μl of digestion buffer was added to the tube and sample was incubated at 37°C for 4 hr with constant shaking. The digestion mixture was carefully transferred into a clean tube

### Data Protocol
2.15 Amino acid sequencing MALDI-TOF/MS analysis was carried out on an Autoflex mass spectrometer (Applied Biosystems, Tokyo, Japan) using positive acceleration in either linear or reflector mode. Time-to-mass conversion in linear mode was achieved by external calibration using bradykinin (m}z 1061.2), bovine pancreatic b-insulin (m}z 3496.6) and bovine pancreatic insulin (m}z 5734.5) (Sigma) as standards or a peptide mixture as internal calibrant in reflector mode. All experiments were done using a-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid (Aldrich) as the matrix.

### Publication Abstract
The two types of bladder cancer, muscle invasive and non-muscle invasive (NMIBC), are among the most prevalent cancers worldwide. Despite this, even though muscle-invasive bladder cancer is more deadly, NMIBC requires more therapy due to a greater recurrence rate and more extended and expensive care. Immunotherapy, intravesical chemotherapy, cystoscopy, and transurethral resection (TUR) are among the treatments available. Crude scorpion venomand purified proteins and peptides, can suppress cancer metastasis in an <i>in&#xa0;vitro</i> or <i>in&#xa0;vivo</i> context, suppress cancer growth, halt the cell cycle, and cause cell apoptosis, according to an increasing number of experimental and preclinical studies. In this research, three novels discovered peptides (P2, P3 and P4. ProteomeXchange: PXD036231) from <i>Buthotus saulcyi</i> and, <i>Odontobuthus doriae</i> scorpions were used along with a peptide called pantinin (as a control). The phylogenetic tree showed that the peptides belong to <i>Chaperonin</i> HSP60, <i>Chrysophsin2</i> and <i>Pheromone-binding protein2</i>, respectively. These peptides were docked with four known antigens, BAGE, BLCAP, PRAME and ROR1 related to bladder cancer and three bacterial antigens FliC, FliD and FimH to investigate their antimicrobial and anticancer properties. The results showed that peptides 2 and 3 have the best binding rate. The MD simulation results also confirmed the binding of peptides 2 and 3 to antigens. The penetration power of peptides 2 and 3 in the membrane of cancer cells and bacterial cells was also simulated, and the results of RMSD and PD confirmed it. QSAR suggests that peptides 2 and 3 can act as anti-cancer and anti-microbial peptides.Communicated by Ramaswamy H. Sarma.

### Keywords
Scorpion, Venom, Peptide

### Affiliations
Department of Biology, Faculty of Basic Science, Imam Hossein University, Tehran, Iran.

### Submitter
Jamil Zargan

### Lab Head
Dr Jamil Zargan
Department of Biology, Faculty of Basic Science, Imam Hossein University, Tehran, Iran.


