### Accession
PXD021566

### Title
The comprehensive interactomes of human adenosine RNA methylases and demethylases revealed by proximity labelling-mass spectrometry.

### Description
N6-methyladenosine (m6A) and N6,2′-O‐dimethyladenosine (m6Am) are two abundant modifications found in mRNAs and ncRNAs that can regulate multiple aspects of RNA biology and function mainly through regulation of interaction with specific RNA-binding proteins. Both modifications are linked to development, disease and stress response. To date three methylases and two demethylases have been identified that modify adenosines in mammalian (m)RNAs. Here we provide a comprehensive study of the in vivo protein-protein interactome of the key methyltransferases and demethylases using the BioID proximity biotinylation approach, which allows capturing of stable and short-lived interactions. Our results show that METTL3, METTL16, CAPAM, FTO and ALKBH5 occupy specific non overlapping protein interacting territories. Moreover, the individual interactomes help to understand the biological functions of these enzymes

### Sample Protocol
HEK293 T-REx Flp-In (Invitrogen) stable cell lines expressing BirA* fused to METTL3, METTL16, CAPAM, FTO and ALKBH5, respectively, together with control cell lines BirA* and NLS-BirA* were used. 2x100 mm cell culture dishes of each cell line were grown to 90% confluency and 200ng/ml of dox and 50µM biotin (Sigma) were added to the medium 24 h prior cell harvesting. Cells from the 2 dishes were pellet together as one biological replicate, flash frozen and short-term stored at -80C until affinity purification was performed. At least 3 independent biological replicates were prepared per cell line. Affinity purification was performed according to the protocol developed by Roux and co-workers (Roux et al., 2013) with small modifications. Cell lysate was homogenized with a syringe and a big needle (21G x 1-1/2’’) prior to sonication and 150µl of magnetic streptavidin beads (Dynabeads™ MyOne™ Streptavidin C1, Invitrogen) were used per sample (2x100 mm cell culture dishes). After washing with wash 3 buffer, beads were washed thoroughly 3 times with 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8 to remove any detergents present in the sample that would interfere with mass spectrometry analysis. Following affinity purification washes, bead-bound protein complexes were digested directly on beads by addition of 0.75μg (1μg/μl) of trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega) in 50mM NaHCO3 buffer. Beads were gently tapped to ensure even suspension of trypsin solution and incubated at 37°C with mild agitation for 2h. Beads were then vortexed to ensure the release of the partially digested proteins from the beads and the sample was transferred to clean tubes to separate it from the beads and incubated at 37°C for 16h without agitation. Resulting peptides were extracted into LC-MS vials by 2.5% formic acid (FA) in 50% acetonitrile (ACN) and 100% ACN with addition of polyethylene glycol (20,000; final concentration 0.001%) (Stejskal et al., 2013) and concentrated in a SpeedVac concentrator (Thermo Fisher Scientific). LC-MS/MS analyses of all peptide mixtures were done using RSLCnano system connected to either Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) or Orbitrap Elite hybrid spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Prior to LC separation, tryptic digests were online concentrated and desalted using trapping column (100 μm × 30 mm, column compartment temperature of 40ºC) filled with 3.5-μm X-Bridge BEH 130 C18 sorbent (Waters). After washing of trapping column with 0.1% FA, the peptides were eluted (flow rate - 300 nl/min) from the trapping column onto an analytical column (Acclaim Pepmap100 C18, 3 µm particles, 75 μm × 500 mm; column compartment temperature of 40ºC, Thermo Fisher Scientific) by 100 min nonlinear gradient program (1-56% of mobile phase B; mobile phase A: 0.1% FA in water; mobile phase B: 0.1% FA in 80% ACN). Equilibration of the trapping column and the analytical column was done prior to sample injection to sample loop. The analytical column outlet was directly connected to the Digital PicoView 550 (New Objective) ion source with sheath gas option and SilicaTip emitter (New Objective; FS360-20-15-N-20-C12) utilization. ABIRD (Active Background Ion Reduction Device, ESI Source Solutions) was installed. MS data for ALKBH5, METTL16 and CAPAM baits were acquired on Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer in a data-dependent strategy with cycle time for 3 seconds and with survey scan (350-2000 m/z). The resolution of the survey scan was 60000 (200 m/z) with a target value of 4×105 ions and maximum injection time of 50 ms. HCD MS/MS (30% relative fragmentation energy, normal mass range) spectra were acquired with a target value of 5.0x104 and resolution of 30 000 (200 m/z). The maximum injection time for MS/MS was 50 ms. Dynamic exclusion was enabled for 60 s after one MS/MS spectra acquisition. The isolation window for MS/MS fragmentation was set to 1.6 m/z. MS data for FTO and METTL3 baits were acquired on Orbitrap Elite hybrid spectrometer in a data-dependent strategy selecting up to top 10 precursors based on precursor abundance in the survey scan (350-2000 m/z). The resolution of the survey scan was 60 000 (400 m/z) with a target value of 1×106 ions, one microscan and maximum injection time of 200 ms. HCD MS/MS spectra were acquired with a target value of 50 000 and resolution of 15 000 (400 m/z). The maximum injection time for MS/MS was 500 ms. Dynamic exclusion was enabled for 45 s after one MS/MS spectra acquisition and early expiration was disabled. The isolation window for MS/MS fragmentation was set to 2 m/z. ROUX, K. J., KIM, D. I. & BURKE, B. 2013. BioID: a screen for protein-protein interactions. Curr Protoc Protein Sci, 74, 19 23 1-19 23 14.

### Data Protocol
The analysis of the mass spectrometric RAW data files was carried out using the MaxQuant software (version 1.6.10.43) using default settings unless otherwise noted. MS/MS ion searches were done against modified cRAP database (based on http://www.thegpm.org/crap) containing protein contaminants like keratin, trypsin etc., and UniProtKB protein database for Homo Sapiens (ftp://ftp.uniprot.org/pub/databases/uniprot/current_release/knowledgebase/reference_proteomes/Eukaryota/UP000005640_9606.fasta.gz; downloaded 19.09.2018, version 2018/08, number of protein sequences: 21,053). Oxidation of methionine and proline, deamidation (N, Q) and acetylation (protein N-terminus) as optional modification, and trypsin/P enzyme with 2 allowed miss cleavages were set. Only peptides and proteins with FDR threshold <0.01 and proteins having at least one unique or razor peptide were considered. Match between runs was set among all analysed samples. Protein abundance was assessed using protein intensities calculated by MaxQuant. Protein intensities reported in proteinGroups.txt file (output of MaxQuant) were further processed using the software container environment (https://github.com/OmicsWorkflows), version 3.7.2a. Processing workflow is available upon request. Briefly, it covered: a) removal of decoy hits and contaminant protein groups, b) protein group intensities log2 transformation, c) LoessF normalization, d) differential expression using Limma statistical test.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bioid, Rna methyltransferase, M6am, Rna demethylase, M6a, Rna modification

### Affiliations
CEITEC, Masaryk University
Proteomics Core Facility and Research Group Proteomics, CEITEC-MU, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic

### Submitter
Ranjani Ganji

### Lab Head
Dr Zbynek Zdrahal
Proteomics Core Facility and Research Group Proteomics, CEITEC-MU, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic


