### Accession
PXD004055

### Title
Large-scale phosphorylation site interaction proteomics

### Description
Receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) are membrane proteins that regulate complex, multilayered signaling networks centered on tyrosine phosphorylation of proteins with broad implications in human health and disease. Here we developed a large-scale mass spectrometry-based proteomics platform for investigation of in-vivo RTK signaling networks and the dynamic protein interactions they induce.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were acetone precipitated and resuspended in urea (6M urea, 2M thiourea). Following reduction (1 mM DTT, 30 min) and alkylation (5.5 mM chloroacetamide, 20 min in dark) the proteins were digested in-solution with endoproteinase Lys-C (1µg/200µg protein, 3 hours) and following dilution of urea digestion was continued with trypsin (1µg/200µg protein, overnight).  Purified peptide mixtures were analyzed by online reversed-phase C18 nanoscale liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry on a Q-Exactive quadropole Orbitrap mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were processed using the MaxQuant software. Phosphopeptides were identified using the Mascot search algorithm (www.matrixscience.com) by searching all MS/MS spectra against a concatenated forward/reversed version of rat and mouse International Protein Index v.3.37 protein sequence database supplemented with protein sequences of common observed contaminants like human keratins and porcine trypsin and peptides from the proteome samples were identified using the Andromeda search algorithm and a concatenated sequence database of all mouse and rat protein sequences deposited in the Swissprot database.

### Publication Abstract
Tyrosine phosphorylation regulates multi-layered signaling networks with broad implications in (patho)physiology, but high-throughput methods for functional annotation of phosphotyrosine sites are lacking. To decipher phosphotyrosine signaling directly in tissue samples, we developed a mass-spectrometry-based interaction proteomics approach. We measured the in&#xa0;vivo EGF-dependent signaling network in lung tissue quantifying &gt;1,000 phosphotyrosine sites. To assign function to all EGF-regulated sites, we determined their recruited protein signaling complexes in lung tissue by interaction proteomics. We demonstrated how mutations near tyrosine residues introduce molecular switches that rewire cancer signaling networks, and we revealed oncogenic properties of such a lung cancer EGFR mutant. To demonstrate the scalability of the approach, we performed &gt;1,000 phosphopeptide pulldowns and analyzed them by rapid mass spectrometric analysis, revealing tissue-specific differences in interactors. Our approach is a general strategy for functional annotation of phosphorylation sites in tissues, enabling in-depth mechanistic insights into oncogenic rewiring of signaling networks.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation; interaction proteomics

### Affiliations
The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, University of Copenhagen, Denmark
University of Copenhagen

### Submitter
Christian Kelstrup

### Lab Head
Dr Jesper V. Olsen
The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, University of Copenhagen, Denmark


