### Accession
PXD003139

### Title
Two unrelated 8-vinyl reductases ensure production of mature chlorophylls in Acaryochloris marina

### Description
The aim of this project is to identify, by bottom-up proteomic analysis, one or both representatives of two classes of 8-vinyl reductase in an Acaryochloris marina cell lysate. This enzyme is responsible for the conversion of the C8 vinyl group in the chlorophyll precursor Mg-divinyl-protochlorophyllide to ethyl as part of the chlorphyll biosynthesis pathway. Both putative 8VRs, NmrA and FrhB were detected.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed by bead-beating in 2% SDS, 60 mM DTT at 95C. Proteins were then precipitated, redissolved in 8M urea and digested for 2h at 37C. After dilution to 1M urea, digestion was continued with trypsin overnight at 37C. Tryptic peptides were desalted using a C18 spin column and analysed by nanoLC-MS/MS on a Q Exactive HF quadrupole-Orbitrap MS. Peptides were resolved on a 75-min gradient from 5-40% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid.

### Data Protocol
Data-files were converted to MGF using MSConvert and two technical replicates merged into a single search using Mascot Daemon v. 2.5.1 running with Mascot Server v. 2.5. Tolerances were 0.01 Da for MS and MS/MS, allowing one missed cleavage with S-carbamidomethyl-Cys and methionine oxidation set as fixed and variable modifications respectively. FDRs were determined by decoy searches of reversed sequences.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Acaryochloris marina, Photosynthesis, Chlorophyll d biosynthesis

### Affiliations
School of Biosciences, University of Sheffield
Department of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, University of Sheffield, UK

### Submitter
Philip Jackson

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. C Neil Hunter, FRS
Department of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, University of Sheffield, UK


