### Accession
PXD025746

### Title
Peripubertal Bisphenol A Exposure Imparts Detrimental Acute and Aging-Related Changes in Body Composition, Cognition, and H2S Production and Signaling

### Description
Peripubertal endocrine disruption has immediate and lifelong consequences on health, cognition, and lifespan. Disruption comes from dietary, environmental, and pharmaceutical sources. The plasticizer Bisphenol A (BPA) is one such endocrine disrupting chemical (EDC). However, it’s unclear if peripubertal BPA exposure incites long-lasting physiological, neuro-cognitive, and/or longevity-related metabolic impairments. Catabolism of cysteine via transsulfuration enzymes produces hydrogen sulfide (H2S), a redox-modulating gasotransmitter causative to endocrine and metabolic homeostasis and improved cognitive function with age. As thyroid hormone (TH) regulates hepatic H2S production and BPA is a TH receptor antagonist, we hypothesized BPA exposure during peripubertal development impairs metabolic and neuro-cognitive/behavioral endpoints in aged mice, in part, due to altered peripheral H2S production. Results: To test this, male C57BL/6J mice at 5 weeks of age were orally exposed for 5 weeks to 250 ug BPA/kg defined as low dose group (LD BPA), or 250 mg BPA/kg defined as high dose group (HD BPA). Both LD and HD BPA exposure decreased lean mass and increased fat mass. These changes were accompanied by decreased serum total TH. Additionally, LD BPA had an anxiogenic effect while HD BPA caused cognitive deficits. Notably, HD BPA attenuated renal H2S production both acutely and during aging, which correlated with spatial memory deficits. Innovation and Conclusion: These findings provide a potential mechanism of action for the acute and long-term health impacts of BPA-induced peripubertal endocrine disruption and bolster the need for improved monitoring and limitation of adolescent BPA exposure.

### Sample Protocol
7 mg of proteins were extracted and alkylated with 343 µM Maleimide-PEG2- biotin as described above in the BTA assay. Alkylated proteins were precipitated with ice cold acetone, resuspended in denaturation buffer (8 M urea, 1 mM MgSO4 and 30 mM Tris–HCl, pH 7.5). After denaturation for 10 minutes at 90°C proteins were diluted with 7 volumes of dilution buffer (1 mM CaCl2, 100 mM NaCl and 30 mM HEPES-NaOH pH 7.5), followed by incubating with trypsin (Promega, #V5111) (ratio of 1:50 W/W) overnight at 37°C. After overnight digestion, trypsin was heat inactivated at 95°C for 10min. Prior to adding the digested peptide to the streptavidin-agarose resin containing spin columns, the columns (Pierce, Catalog No. 69705) were first washed with PBS two times, followed by adding 0.400 mL streptavidin-agarose resin (Thermo Scientific, #20347) to the column and washing the resin 1x with PBS. The resin was then equilibrated with a 1:7 denaturation buffer: dilution buffer wash four times prior to plugging the outlet of the column and incubated at 4°C with continuous rotation for better mixing for 18 hours. After the overnight incubation, the protein resin mix in the columns was washed six times in 0.85 mL of wash buffer 1 (30 mM Hepes, 1 mM EDTA, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5 % Triton X-100, 0.1 % SDS, pH 7.5) followed by another six washes with 0.85 mL of wash buffer 2 (30 mM Hepes, 1 mM EDTA, 600 mM NaCl, 0.5 % Triton X-100, 0.1 % SDS, pH 7.5) and finally another three washes with 0.85 mL of wash buffer 3 (30 mM Hepes, 1 mM EDTA, 100 mM NaCl, pH 7.5). All washes were done using the Vac-Man Laboratory Vacuum Manifold (Promega A7231). Resin with bound peptide was first incubated with freshly prepared 500 µL elution buffer (30 mM Hepes, 1 mM EDTA, 100 mM NaCl, 10 mM TCEP, 10mM TEAB, pH 7.5) for 30 min at 25˚C followed by centrifugation of the spin tube inside of a 2 mL collection tube at 2000 g for 2 minutes to collect the eluate. A C18 column (Thermo #89870) was used to remove the TCEP followed by eluting peptide with 70% ACN. Eluted peptides were dried and suspended with 100 µl of 50 mM TEAB buffer. Thiol groups were alkylated and labeled with 2.95 mM iodoTMT (Thermo Scientific #90101) for 1h in the dark. Reactions were then quenched by vortexing and incubating for 15 minutes at 37oC in 20 mM DTT in the dark. Each of the 6 samples labeled with a unique IodoTMT tag were then mixed into a single tube and dried.  Finally, the combined labeled peptides were reconstituted with 1% Acetic Acid for further analyses via LC/MS.

### Data Protocol
MS raw data files of iodoTMT labeled samples were analyzed by searched Proteome discoverer version 2.4.1.15 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with the following settings. We used Mus musculus in SwissProt version 2019 (Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Switzerland) FASTA file. For quantification method we used iodoTMT6plex with the TMT reporter ion isotope distribution (lot number VH308730). For processing setup, we used integration tolerance as 20 ppm and integration method were set to most confident centroid. We used FTMS mass analyzer. We selected MS1 precursor for precursor selection section. For the enzyme name we used trypsin (full) with a maximum missed cleavage site of 2. Precursor mass tolerance were 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance were set to 0.2 Da. For dynamic modification we allowed methionine oxidation (+15.995 Da). We selected static modification as iodoTMT6plex/+329.227 Da of cysteine. For consensus setup, we used intensity as reporter abundance. Validation mode were set to automatic (control peptide level error rate if possible). Target FDR (strict) for PSMs and target FDR (strict) for peptide were set at 0.01, on the other hand Target FDR (relaxed) for PSMs and target FDR (relaxed) for peptide were set at 0.05. Peptide confidence were set to high with minimum peptide length allowed to 6.  For confidence threshold we used target FDR (strict) and target FDR (relaxed) at 0.01 and 0.05, respectively. Minimum PSM confidence level was set to high.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Peripubertal, Persulfidation, Endocrine disruption, H2s, Aging, Bisphenol a (bpa), Cognition

### Affiliations
Cleveland Clinic Lerner Research Institute 
Cardiovascular and Metabolic Sciences, Cleveland Clinic Lerner Research Institute

### Submitter
Nazmin Bithi

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher Hine
Cardiovascular and Metabolic Sciences, Cleveland Clinic Lerner Research Institute


