### Accession
PXD037003

### Title
Proteome of R1441C and G2019S LRRK2 knock in mice after striatal motor learning task

### Description
LRRK2 mutations are associated with both familial and sporadic forms of Parkinson’s disease (PD). Convergent evidence suggests that LRRK2 plays critical roles in regulating striatal function. Here, by using knock-in mouse lines that express the two most common LRRK2 pathogenic mutations—G2019S and R1441C—we investigated how pathogenic LRRK2 mutations altered striatal physiology. To identify the signaling pathways that underlie the motor learning deficits, specifically in the RC mice we performed six-plex tandem mass tag (TMT) quantitative mass spectrometry (MS) to compare the protein expression of either RC or GS and WT mice following the five days of the rotarod test.

### Sample Protocol
Mouse striata of mice collected 24hrs after the 5th session of the rotarod test were fractionated to obtain crude synaptosomes (P2) as described in the subcellular fractions and Western Blot section. P2 pellets were resuspended with binding buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 1% triton-X-100, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM AEBSF with protease inhibitor cocktail and phosphatase inhibitor) and solubilized for 1 h at 4 °C. The detailed information for Tandem Mass Tag-liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry (TMT-LC/MS) was described previously in detail [41]. Briefly, extracts isolated from tissues were reduced, alkylated and digested overnight. The samples were labeled with the tandem mass tag (TMT) sixplex Isobaric Label Reagent as follows: 129 for WT, 130 for RC, and 131 for GS for three biological replicates per the manufacturer's instructions (Thermo Scientific). They were then mixed before sample fractionation and clean-up. Specifically, each sample for each genotype (WT, RC, or GS) was isolated and mixed in a tube. This was repeated to establish three replicates per genotype. Peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 Rapid Separation nanoLC and a Q Exactive HF Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.).

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified from the tandem mass spectra extracted by Xcalibur version 4.0. MS/MS spectra were searched against the Uniprot Mouse database using Mascot search engine (Matrix Science; version 2.5.1). TMT reporter ion quantification and validation of identified peptides and proteins were performed by Scaffold software (version Scaffold_4.8.4, Proteome Software Inc.). The subject groups enabled two pairwise comparisons, for which the statistics of differential protein expressions were calculated using the LIMMA (linear models for microarray data) package.

### Publication Abstract
LRRK2 mutations are closely associated with Parkinson's disease (PD). Convergent evidence suggests that LRRK2 regulates striatal function. Here, by using knock-in mouse lines expressing the two most common LRRK2 pathogenic mutations-G2019S and R1441C-we investigated how LRRK2 mutations altered striatal physiology. While we found that both R1441C and G2019S mice displayed reduced nigrostriatal dopamine release, hypoexcitability in indirect-pathway striatal projection neurons, and alterations associated with an impaired striatal-dependent motor learning were observed only in the R1441C mice. We also showed that increased synaptic PKA activities in the R1441C and not G2019S mice underlie the specific alterations in motor learning deficits in the R1441C mice. In summary, our data argue that LRRK2 mutations' impact on the striatum cannot be simply generalized. Instead, alterations in electrochemical, electrophysiological, molecular, and behavioral levels were distinct between LRRK2 mutations. Our findings offer mechanistic insights for devising and optimizing treatment strategies for PD patients.

### Keywords
Brain, Striatum, Mouse, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Northwestern University
Department of Pharmacology, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University

### Submitter
Renu Goel

### Lab Head
Dr Loukia Parisiadou
Department of Pharmacology, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University


