### Accession
PXD009495

### Title
Thermal proteome profiling in Escherichia coli

### Description
We adapted thermal proteome profiling (TPP) to study the thermostability of Escherichia coli proteins in vivo. We monitored the E. coli meltome and proteome at different growth phases, in a tolC knock-out mutant and after drug treatment.

### Sample Protocol
After heating, lysing and extraction of remaining soluble protein fraction (with a modified thermal proteome profiling protocol - Savitski et al., Science (2014), samples were processed with a modified SP3 protocol, digested using trypsin and labeled with TMT. Shotgun proteomics using a Q-Exactive Orbitrap was then performed.

### Data Protocol
TMT quantification was used, by using the isobarquant python package (Franken et al., Nat Protoc (2015)), and Mascot 2.4 was used for protein identification. Search parameters: trypsin, missed cleavages 3, peptide tolerance 10ppm, 0.02Da for MS/MS tolerance. Fixed modifications were carbamidomethyl on cysteines and TMT10plex on lysine. Variable modifications included acetylation on protein N-terminus, oxidation of methionine and TMT10plex on peptide N-termini. The R programming language was used to analyze the output data.

### Publication Abstract
Increasing antibiotic resistance urges for new technologies for studying microbes and antimicrobial mechanism of action. We adapted thermal proteome profiling (TPP) to probe the thermostability of <i>Escherichia coli</i> proteins <i>in&#xa0;vivo</i><i>E.&#xa0;coli</i> had a more thermostable proteome than human cells, with protein thermostability depending on subcellular location-forming a high-to-low gradient from the cell surface to the cytoplasm. While subunits of protein complexes residing in one compartment melted similarly, protein complexes spanning compartments often had their subunits melting in a location-wise manner. Monitoring the <i>E.&#xa0;coli</i> meltome and proteome at different growth phases captured changes in metabolism. Cells lacking TolC, a component of multiple efflux pumps, exhibited major physiological changes, including differential thermostability and levels of its interaction partners, signaling cascades, and periplasmic quality control. Finally, we combined <i>in&#xa0;vitro</i> and <i>in&#xa0;vivo</i> TPP to identify targets of known antimicrobial drugs and to map their downstream effects. In conclusion, we demonstrate that TPP can be used in bacteria to probe protein complex architecture, metabolic pathways, and intracellular drug target engagement.

### Keywords
Drugs, Thermal proteome profiling, Escherichia coli, Meltome, Target engagement, Growth phase

### Affiliations
European Molecular Biology Laboratory

### Submitter
Andre Mateus

### Lab Head
Dr Mikhail M. Savitski
European Molecular Biology Laboratory


