### Accession
PXD030062

### Title
Mitochondrial phosphoproteomes are functionally specialized across tissues

### Description
Mitochondria are essential organelles involved in critical biological processes such as energy metabolism and cell survival. Their dysfunction is linked to numerous human pathologies that often manifest in a tissue-specific manner. Accordingly, mitochondria fitness depends on versatile proteomes specialized to meet diverse tissue-specific requirements. Furthermore, increasing evidence suggests that phosphorylation may also play an important role in regulating tissue-specific mitochondrial functions and pathophysiology. We hypothesized that recent advances in mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics would now enable in-depth measurement toof quantitatively profile mitochondrial proteomes along with their matching phosphoproteomes across tissues. We isolated mitochondria from mouse heart, skeletal muscle, brown adipose tissue, kidney, liver, brain, and spleen by differential centrifugation followed by separation on Percoll gradients and high resolution MS analysis of the proteomes and phosphoproteomes. This in-depth map substantially quantifies known and predicted mitochondrial proteins and provides a resource of core and tissue modulated mitochondrial proteins (mitophos.biochem.mpg.de). We also uncover tissue-specific repertoires of dozens of kinases and phosphatases. Predicting kinase substrate associations for different mitochondrial compartments indicates tissue-specific regulation at the phosphoproteome level. Illustrating the functional value of our resource, we reproduce mitochondrial phosphorylation events on DRP1 responsible for its mitochondrial recruitment and fission imitation initationinitiation and describe phosphorylation clusters on MIGA2 linked to mitochondrial fusion.

### Sample Protocol
Mice were sacrificed by cervical dislocation and the 7 tissues - heart, skeletal muscle (SKM), brown adipose tissue (BAT), spleen, kidney, liver, and brain – were rapidly removed. Heart, spleen, and kidney, tissues were homogenized in mitochondrial isolation buffer containing 320 mM sucrose, 1 mM EDTA, and 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, supplemented with EDTA-free complete protease inhibitor cocktail and PhosSTOP tablets (Roche). For isolation of mitochondria from BAT, liver, and brain the mitochondrial isolation buffer was additionally supplemented with 0.2% bovine serum albumin (Sigma-Aldrich). Subsequently, crude mitochondria were isolated from the homogenates by two rounds of differential centrifugation. Isolation of crude mitochondria from SKM was performed as previously described (Frezza et al., 2007)). Crude mitochondrial pellets from all tissues were further purified on a Percoll density gradient as described recently (Kuhl et al., 2017). Briefly, mitochondrial pellets were washed  once in 1xM buffer (220 mM mannitol, 70mM sucrose, 5mM HEPES pH 7.4, 1 mM EGTA pH 7.4; pH was adjusted with potassium hydroxide; supplemented with EDTA-free complete protease inhibitor cocktail and PhosSTOP tablets (Roche)) and  subsequently purified on a Percoll (GE healthcare) density gradient of 12%:19%:40% via centrifugation in a SW41 rotor at 42, 000 g at 4°C for 30 min in a Beckman Coulter Optima L- 100 XP ultracentrifuge using 14 mm × 89 mm Ultra-Clear Centrifuge Tubes (Beckman Instruments Inc.). Ultra-pure mitochondria were harvested at the interphase between 19% and 40% and washed three times with 1xM buffer. Dry mitochondrial pellets were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C until further use.

### Data Protocol
DDA raw data were analyzed with MaxQuant (1.6.2.10) against the mouse fasta file (downloaded 19. October 2020) using default settings unless stated otherwise in the following. The match between runs (MBR) functionality was enabled and set in a way that only biological replicates belonging to the same tissue type were allowed to match each other. Carbamidomethyl (C) was selected as fixed modification and Acetyl (Protein N-term) and oxidation (M) were defined as variable modifications. For mitochondrial phosphoproteome analysis, STY site phosphorylation was additionally selected as variable modification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse tissues, Mitochondria, Oxidative phosphorylation, Systems biology, Mitochondrial dynamics, Proteomics, : phosphorylation, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry
Proteomics

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry


