### Accession
PXD025370

### Title
Nucleoside Analogues are Potent Inducers of Bacterial Mutagenesis

### Description
Drugs targeting DNA and RNA in mammalian cells or viruses can  also affect bacteria present in the host and thereby induce the bacterial SOS system. This has the potential to increase mutagenesis and the development of antimicrobial resistance (AMR). Here we have examined nucleoside analogues (NAs) commonly used in anti-viral and anti-cancer therapies for potential effects on mutagenesis in Escherichia coli using the Rifampicin mutagenicity assay. To further explore the mode of action of the NAs, we appliedanalyzed metabolome and proteome of E.coli deletion mutants., and metabolome and proteome analyses. Five out of the thirteen NAs examined, including three nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NRTIs) and two anti-cancer drugs, increased the mutation frequency in E. coli more than 25-fold at doses that were within reported plasma concentration range (Pl.CR), but that did not affect bacterial growth. We show that the SOS response is induced and that the increase in mutation frequency is mediated by the TLS polymerase Pol V. Quantitative mass spectrometry based metabolite profiling did not reveal large changes in nucleoside phosphate or other central carbon metabolite pools, which suggests that the SOS induction is an effect of increased replicative stress. Our results suggest that NAs/NRTIs can contribute to the development of AMR.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial Species, Strains and Growth Measurements  Escherichia coli (E. coli) K12 (MG1655) wild type (WT) and TLS polymerase deletion strains (ΔumuDC) from the Keio collection and ΔpolB/ΔdinB made in-house [21] were used. Peptide A cell-penetrating peptide targeting the β-clamp named APIM-peptide (Ac-MDRWLVK-GILQWRKI-RRRRRRRR-NH2) (Innovagen, Sweden) was used. This is the same peptide as RWLVK* used in Nedal et al [21], except it has three arginine residues less in its cell penetrating tail. Nucleoside Analogues (NAs)  The nucleoside analogues (NAs) used in this study (listed in Table 1) were purchased from Glentham Life Sciences Ltd (Wiltshire, United Kingdom). Bacterial Cultivation  Luria Bertani (LB) broth Miller/Microbiological agar and Mueller Hinton broth/agar were used for bacterial cultivation in the rifampicin mutagenicity (RifR) and MICs assays, respectively. Bacterial cultures were incubated at 37 °C with or without shaking at 250 rpm. Rifampicin (Tokyo chemicals industry Co Ltd, Japan) was used for the RifR assay. MIC-Assay  The minimal inhibitory concentrations of the nucleoside analogues and APIM-peptide were determined following the protocol used for microtiter broth microdilution assays established by the clinical and laboratory standard institutes [22] with modifications as described [21]. MIC was determined after 24 hours. Rifampicin Mutagenicity Assay (RifR) - Assay  This assay was conducted as described [21]. Briefly, pre-cultures of E. coli MG1655 (WT and mutant strains) were inoculated in LB broth (Miller) and grown at 37 ˚C for 16 hours. The pre-cultures were diluted in fresh LB broth (1:100) and 10 mL cultures were grown in 50 mL conical tubes for one hour at 37 ˚C (shaking incubator at 250 rpm) before they were treated with NAs and/or APIM-peptide. Untreated cultures were used as a control. The cultures were further incubated for two hours at 37 ˚C before the cultures were serially diluted in LB and plated on LB agar. Eight hundred microlitres of undiluted cultures were plated in LB soft agar containing rifampicin (100 µg/mL) on LB agar plates and incubated for 48 hours at 37 ˚C. The bacterial colony-forming units per millilitre (CFU/mL) were determined from plates with and without rifampicin, and the frequency of rifampicin resistance per 108 CFU (RifR/108), was calculated.  Protein Extraction  When harvesting cells for the RifR assay, 2 x 2 mL of untreated cultures and culture treated with Stav (0.32 µg/mL), APIM-peptide (26 µg/mL) or the combination were pelleted for cell extracts (4000 rpm, 10 minutes) for each biological replica (n=3). The pellets were resuspended in omnicleave storage buffer (Lucigen) and incubated at room temperature in the presence of 200 U omnicleave endonuclease(Lucigen), 20 µg/µL RNAse (Sigma-Aldrich), 10 U DNAse I (Sigma-Aldrich), 1x phosphatase inhibitor cocktails II and III (Sigma-Aldrich) and 1x cOmplete™ protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche Diagnostics GmbH, Germany). The cells were sonicated on ice at 1.5 output control and 15% duty cycle for 30 seconds. The sonication was repeated until a clear phase was observed and cell debris was removed by centrifugation (1400 rpm, 15 minutes). The supernatants were snap-frozen and stored at -80 ˚C. The total protein concentration was measured using NanoDrop One C (Thermo Scientific) and the Bio-Rad protein assay with a UV-1700 Visible Spectrophotometer (Pharmaspec, 595 nm)  Multiplexed inhibitor beads (MIB)-assay and Mass Spectrometry (MS) [19] -analysis of proteome Before MS analysis of the protein extract, kinases and other ATP/GTP binding proteins were enriched using the MIB-assay as described [23]. 100 µg of the protein extract was anlyzed per sample.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were quantified by processing MS data using MaxQuant v.1.6.17.0 (Ref: The MaxQuant computational platform for mass spectrometry-based shotgun proteomics ).  Open workflow (Ref: PTM-Shepherd: Analysis and Summarization of Post-Translational and Chemical Modifications From Open Search Results ) provided in FragPipe version 14 was used to inspect the raw files to determine optimal search criteria. Namely, the following search parameters were used: enzyme specified as trypsin with a maximum of two missed cleavages allowed; acetylation of protein N-terminal, oxidation of methionine, deamidation of asparagine/glutamine, and phosphorylation of serine/threonine/tyrosine as dynamic post-translational modification. These were imported in MaxQuant which uses m/z and retention time (RT) values to align each run against each other sample with a minute window match-between-run function and 20 mins overall sliding window using a clustering-based technique. These were further queried against the Escherichia coli (strain K12) proteome including isoforms downloaded from Uniprot (https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000000625 ) in August 2020 and MaxQuant’s internal contaminants database using Andromeda built into MaxQuant. Both Protein and peptide identifications false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1%, only unique peptides with high confidence were used for final protein group identification. Peak abundances were extracted by integrating the area under the peak curve. Each protein group abundance was normalized by the total abundance of all identified peptides for each run and protein by calculated median summing all unique and razor peptide-ion abundances for each protein using label-free quantification (LFQ) algorithm  (Ref: Accurate Proteome-wide Label-free Quantification by Delayed Normalization and Maximal Peptide Ratio Extraction, Termed MaxLFQ, https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1535947620333107 ) with minimum peptides ≥ 1. LFQ values for all samples were combined and log-transformed with base 2 and the transformed control values were subtracted. The resulting values reflecting the change relative to control for each condition were subjected to a two-sided non-parametric Wilcoxon Sign Rank Test (Ref: Jean Dickinson Gibbons, Subhabrata Chakraborti: Nonparametric statistical inferences ) as implemented in MATLAB R2020a (Math Works Inc.,https://www.mathworks.com/ ) in order to check the consistency in the directionality of the change, namely a negative sign reflecting decreased and positive sign reflecting the increased expression of respective protein group. The choice of this non-parametric test avoids the assumption of a certain type of null distribution as in the Student’s t-test by working over the Rank of the observation instead of the observation value itself. Further, it also makes it robust to outliers and extreme variations noticed in observed values. DE protein groups were identified at p 0.25. The Uniprot accession IDs of these DE were mapped to pathways (www.wikipathways.org/index.php/Download Pathways version wikipathways-20201010-gmt-Homo_sapiens.gmt) using R (https://www.R-project.org/ ) libraries, org.Hs.eg.db and clusterProfiler (www.liebertpub.com/doi/10.1089/omi.2011.0118 ). Venn diagrams were built using the R package limma (Ref: limma powers differential expression analyses for RNA-sequencing and microarray studies ) and Heatmap using pheatmap (CRAN - Package pheatmap ).

### Publication Abstract
Drugs targeting DNA and RNA in mammalian cells or viruses can also affect bacteria present in the host and thereby induce the bacterial SOS system. This has the potential to increase mutagenesis and the development of antimicrobial resistance (AMR). Here, we have examined nucleoside analogues (NAs) commonly used in anti-viral and anti-cancer therapies for potential effects on mutagenesis in <i>Escherichia coli</i>, using the rifampicin mutagenicity assay. To further explore the mode of action of the NAs, we applied <i>E. coli</i> deletion mutants, a peptide inhibiting Pol V (APIM-peptide) and metabolome and proteome analyses. Five out of the thirteen NAs examined, including three nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NRTIs) and two anti-cancer drugs, increased the mutation frequency in <i>E. coli</i> by more than 25-fold at doses that were within reported plasma concentration range (Pl.CR), but that did not affect bacterial growth. We show that the SOS response is induced and that the increase in mutation frequency is mediated by the TLS polymerase Pol V. Quantitative mass spectrometry-based metabolite profiling did not reveal large changes in nucleoside phosphate or other central carbon metabolite pools, which suggests that the SOS induction is an effect of increased replicative stress. Our results suggest that NAs/NRTIs can contribute to the development of AMR and that drugs inhibiting Pol V can reverse this mutagenesis.

### Keywords
Na, Sos, Amr, Pol v, Tls, Mdr, Nrtis, -clamp

### Affiliations
Professor, Department of Clinical and Molecular Medicine, Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU), PO Box 8905, N-7491, Trondheim, Norway Phone: +47 72573075, Fax: +47 72576400
Engineer at NTNU, Norway

### Submitter
Animesh Sharma

### Lab Head
Dr Marit Otterlei
Professor, Department of Clinical and Molecular Medicine, Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU), PO Box 8905, N-7491, Trondheim, Norway Phone: +47 72573075, Fax: +47 72576400


