### Accession
PXD026979

### Title
Dynamics of different mGBP as revealed by computational and experimental methods

### Description
Guanylate binding proteins (GBP) belong to the superfamily of dynamin proteins. Those might assemble into larger structures upon initial dimerization. We analyzed monomeric and dimerization of mGBP7 via molecular dynamic simulations and compared the developed models with data from crosslinking mass spectrometry experiments.

### Sample Protocol
Recombinant mGBP7 protein was in solution crosslinked with DSSO or BS3 crosslinker (both 0.5 mM, no crosslinker for control) and subsequently separated in a polyacrylamidegel. Monomer and dimer containing bands were separately cut out and prepared for mass spectrometric analysis essentially as described (PMID 32202429).

### Data Protocol
Rawfiles from BS3 crosslinked samples were converted into .mgf files and analysed with MeroX (version 2.0.2.4, PMID: 30382245) for intra and intermolecular BS3 crosslinks. For the analysis of DSSO crosslinks, Proteome Discoverer version 2.3.0.523 with XlinkX and Sequest HT was used for crosslink and peptide identification, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
Guanylate-binding proteins (GBPs) are essential interferon-&#x3b3;-activated large GTPases that play a crucial role in host defense against intracellular bacteria and parasites. While their protective functions rely on protein polymerization, our understanding of the structural intricacies of these multimerized states remains limited. To bridge this knowledge gap, we present dimer models for human GBP1 (hGBP1) and murine GBP2 and 7 (mGBP2 and mGBP7) using an integrative approach, incorporating the crystal structure of hGBP1's GTPase domain dimer, crosslinking mass spectrometry, small-angle X-ray scattering, protein-protein docking, and molecular dynamics simulations. Our investigation begins by comparing the protein dynamics of hGBP1, mGBP2, and mGBP7. We observe that the M/E domain in all three proteins exhibits significant mobility and hinge motion, with mGBP7 displaying a slightly less pronounced motion but greater flexibility in its GTPase domain. These dynamic distinctions can be attributed to variations in the sequences of mGBP7 and hGBP1/mGBP2, resulting in different dimerization modes. Unlike hGBP1 and its close ortholog mGBP2, which exclusively dimerize through their GTPase domains, we find that mGBP7 exhibits three equally probable alternative dimer structures. The GTPase domain of mGBP7 is only partially involved in its dimerization, primarily due to an accumulation of negative charge, allowing mGBP7 to dimerize independently of GTP. Instead, mGBP7 exhibits a strong tendency to dimerize in an antiparallel arrangement across its stalks. The results of this work go beyond the sequence-structure-function relationship, as the sequence differences in mGBP7 and mGBP2/hGBP1 do not lead to different structures, but to different protein dynamics and dimerization. The distinct GBP dimer structures are expected to encode specific functions crucial for disrupting pathogen membranes.

### Keywords
Infection, Mgbp7, Dimerisation, Crosslinking, Dynamin superfamily proteins, Protein dynamics

### Affiliations
Proteome Research (AG Stühler) Institute for Molecular Medicine I Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf Universitätsstraße 1 40225 Düsseldorf Germany
Molecular Proteomics Laboratory

### Submitter
Gereon Poschmann

### Lab Head
Dr Gereon Poschmann
Proteome Research (AG Stühler) Institute for Molecular Medicine I Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf Universitätsstraße 1 40225 Düsseldorf Germany


