### Accession
PXD018409

### Title
Triggering acute RyR1 Ca2+ leak leads to improved mitochondrial remodelling and function

### Description
C2C12 myotubes at day 7 of differentiation were stimulated with a single session of SIT (6 x 30s with 4 min at rest) and were immediately after the stimulation treated or not with 10 uM S107 drug for 72h. The myotubes were then harvested at 72h post stimulation (for SIT condition) and 72h post stimulation and S107 treatment (for SIT S107 condition) for mass spectrometry analysis using the proteomics approach. N = 5 independent myotube wells per condition.

### Sample Protocol
Replicate samples (5 per group) were digested following a modified version of the iST method (Kulak et al., 2014) (named miST method). Briefly, frozen cell pellets (3x10e6 cells each) were lysed  in 100ul miST lysis buffer (1% Sodium deoxycholate , 100mM Tris pH 8.6 , 10 mM DTT ) by vortexing and heating  at 95°C for 5min. A total of 100 ug of proteins were processed further to digest nucleic acids with Benzonase (Merck #70746, final 2.5 U/ul, 15 min) and alkylate cysteines with chloroacetamide (final 32 mM, 45min at 25C ). Samples were digested 2x with 1 ug Trypsin/LysC mix (Promega #V5073) each time  for 1h at 37°C. To remove sodium deoxycholate, two sample volumes of isopropanol containing 1% TFA were added, and the samples were desalted on a strong cation exchange (SCX) plate (Oasis MCX ; Waters Corp., Milford, MA) by centrifugation. After washing with isopropanol/1%TFA, peptides were eluted in 80% MeCN, 19% water, 1% (v/v) ammonia.  TMT labelling Samples were dried before resuspension of equivalent of 25ug in in 25 ul of 50 mM TEAB buffer, pH 8.0.  For labelling, 0.2 mg of TMT 10-plex reagent in 20ul acetonitrile (Thermo Fisher Scientific ) were added to the samples and incubated for 1h at RT, after which excess reagent was quenched with 1ul of 5% hydroxylamine for 15 min at RT.  An aliquot (0.8 ul) was injected before mixing to assess labelling completion (>98% peptide spectrum matches). After mixing, the TMT multiplex sample was dried and desalted on a SepPak micro C18 96-well plate (Waters Corp., Milford, MA). Peptide fractionation  The dried desalted eluate was dissolved in 4M Urea containing 0.1% Ampholytes pH 3-10 (GE Healthcare). 75% of the sample (225 ug) was fractionated by off-gel focusing as described (Geiser, et al. 2011). The 24 peptide fractions obtained were desalted on a SepPak micro C18 96-well plate, dried and dissolved in 25ul of 0.05% trifluroacetic acid, 2% (v/v) acetonitrile for LC-MS/MS analysis. MS analysis  Data-dependent LC-MS/MS analysis of TMT sample was carried out on a Fusion Tribrid Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) interfaced through a nano-electrospray ion source to an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system (Dionex). Peptides were separated on a reversed-phase custom packed 40 cm C18 column (75 μm ID, 100Å, Reprosil Pur 1.9 um particles, Dr. Maisch, Germany) with a 4-76% acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% formic acid (total time 140 min). Full MS survey scans were performed at 120'000 resolution. A data-dependent acquisition method controlled by Xcalibur 4.2 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used that optimized the number of precursors selected (“top speed”) of charge 2+ to 5+ while maintaining a fixed scan cycle of 1.5s. The precursor isolation window used was 0.7 Th. Peptides were fragmented by higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) with a normalized energy of 37%. MS2 scans were done at 50’000 resolution in the Orbitrap, to resolve 10-plex TMT reporter ions. The m/z of fragmented precursors was then dynamically excluded from selection during 60 s.

### Data Protocol
MS data analysis  Data files were analysed with MaxQuant 1.6.3.4 (Cox et al., 2008, Cox et al., 2011) incorporating the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011). Cysteine carbamidomethylation and TMT labelling (peptide N-termini and Lysine side chains) were selected as fixed modification while methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were specified as variable modifications. The sequence databases used for searching were the mouse (Mus musculus) Reference Proteome based on the UniProt database (www.uniprot.org, version of January 31th, 2019, containing 54’211 sequences), and a “contaminant” database containing the most usual environmental contaminants and the enzymes used for digestion (keratins, trypsin, etc). Mass tolerance was 4.5 ppm on precursors (after recalibration) and 20 ppm on HCD fragments. Both peptide and protein identifications were filtered at 1% FDR relative to hits against a decoy database built by reversing protein sequences. For TMT analysis, the raw reporter ion intensities generated by MaxQuant (with a mass tolerance of 0.003 Da) and summed for each protein group were used in all following steps to derive quantitation. Processing of quantitative data and statistical tests  The MaxQuant output table “proteinGroups.txt” was processed with Perseus software (Tyanova et al., 2016) to remove proteins matched to the contaminants database as well as proteins identified only by modified peptides or reverse database hits, and those without any quantitative values, yielding a first unfiltered list of 7229 identified proteins. Next, the table was filtered to retain only proteins identified by a minimum of three peptides (5870 protein groups left).  After log-2 transformation of all intensity values, and normalization by median substraction, a two-samples T-test with Benjamini-Hochberg FDR correction (threshold at 0.05 on the adjusted p-value; Benjamini et al., 1995) was performed between conditions. GO annotation enrichment test was carried out with Perseus, using average difference in log-2 scale between both groups, and applying a Benjamini-Hochberg FDR of 2%. The resulting score used in Figures 3 and S3 indicates how far is the center of the distribution of values for the protein category considered relatively to the overall distribution of values (Cox et al., 2012). The interval of this positional score is between -1 and 1.

### Publication Abstract
Sustained ryanodine receptor (RyR) Ca<sup>2+</sup> leak is associated with pathological conditions such as heart failure or skeletal muscle weakness. We report that a single session of sprint interval training (SIT), but not of moderate intensity continuous training (MICT), triggers RyR1 protein oxidation and nitrosylation leading to calstabin1 dissociation in healthy human muscle and in in vitro SIT models (simulated SIT or S-SIT). This is accompanied by decreased sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca<sup>2+</sup> content, increased levels of mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation proteins, supercomplex formation and enhanced NADH-linked mitochondrial respiratory capacity. Mechanistically, (S-)SIT increases mitochondrial Ca<sup>2+</sup> uptake in mouse myotubes and muscle fibres, and decreases pyruvate dehydrogenase phosphorylation in human muscle and mouse myotubes. Countering Ca<sup>2+</sup> leak or preventing mitochondrial Ca<sup>2+</sup> uptake blunts S-SIT-induced adaptations, a result supported by proteomic analyses. Here we show that triggering acute transient Ca<sup>2+</sup> leak through RyR1 in healthy muscle may contribute to the multiple health promoting benefits of exercise.

### Keywords
Ryanodine receptor, Muscle fibers, Short interval training

### Affiliations
University of Lausanne
Institut des Sciences du Sport de l'Université de Lausanne Bâtiment Synathlon 1015 Lausanne Switzerland

### Submitter
Manfredo Quadroni

### Lab Head
Dr Nicolas Place
Institut des Sciences du Sport de l'Université de Lausanne Bâtiment Synathlon 1015 Lausanne Switzerland


