### Accession
PXD015885

### Title
salivary duct carcinoma genomics

### Description
Salivary duct carcinoma is a rare and aggressive salivary gland cancer subtype with poor prognosis. Its mutational landscape has been described rather exhaustively but little is known regarding its functional genomics and tumor microenvironment. In this study, we combined transcriptomics and proteomics to obtain a first characterization of deregulated pathways, which revealed the importance of Notch, TGB-β, and interferon-γ signaling. We then associated computational biology, immunohistochemistry, multiplexed immunofluorescence, and digital imaging to start charting the cellular network within the microenvironment, identify two well-defined groups of tumors according to their immune infiltrate, find novel SDC immune checkpoints, and show the role macrophages and NK cells in immunosuppression. Furthermore, we showed a clear trend between recurrence free survival and M2 macrophage abundance, and, independently, α-SMA abundance – a measure of desmoplastic stromal reaction. Altogether, these many findings open new perspectives for SDC. Classical patient stratification according to the immune infiltrate should be applied before choosing an immunotherapy. The microenvironment offers new actionable targets such as macrophages or NK cells, or even fibroblasts or hyaluronic acid in the absence of immune infiltrate. Related therapies are developed e.g. against pancreatic tumors that could inspire equivalents for SDC. Combinations with drugs targeting SDC mutated genes might also contribute to patient-specific regimens.

### Sample Protocol
FFPE tissue sections of five-micrometer thickness were deparaffinized with 1ml of xylen at 60°C for 10 min. Following this, the samples were centrifuged at 20.000g, room temperature (RT) for 5 min and the supernatant was removed. The xylen treatment was reapplied for a total of 3 times. Next, 1ml of ethanol was added and the samples were vortexed and centrifuged at 20.000g, RT for 5 min. The supernatant was discarded and the ethanol wash was re-applied to the pellet for a total of 4 times. The samples were then dried using Speed Vacuum and suspended in 500μl of citrate buffer (pH 6) with 1% SDS. Following a sonication step, the samples were incubated for 30min at 95°C under vigorous shaking. Next, the samples were allowed to cool down at RT for 20-30min and the pH was re-adjusted to 8.5 with 100mM NaOH solution. The samples were centrifuged (20.000g, RT for 5 min) and the supernatant was transferred to a new tube. The protein content of the resulting solution was determined using BCA Protein Quantification Kit (Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA, USA; cat. no.: 23225). Hundred microgram of protein extract was transferred in a fresh tube and subjected to reduction using 20mM DTT for 30min at 60°C. Following this, the protein samples were alkylated using 50mM 2-chloroacetamide for 30min at RT, in the absence of light and under shaking. The proteins were then precipitated using 2D Clean-Up kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions (GE Healthcare, Chicago, IL, USA; cat. no. 80648451). The protein pellets were then suspended in 50μl of ammonium bicarbonate 100mM /calcium chloride 1mM buffer (pH 8). To this suspension, 0.01% of Protease Max surfactant was added along with 1μg of trypsin. The samples were digested overnight (ON) at 37°C. Following digestion, 10% of each sample was transferred in a new tube where all the samples were mixed in a library. The remainder of the sample was Speed Vac to dryness. The library sample was further subjected to peptide fractionation using High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo Fisher; cat. no.: 84868). From the library sample, 8 individual peptide fractions were derived, which were then Speed Vac to dryness. All the samples, including the library samples, were dissolved in 0.1% TFA and were subjected to salt removal using ZipTip according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany; cat. no.: C5737).  The peptide samples were analyzed using a 1D-nano-HPLC system (Sciex, Framingham, MA, USA), which was connected on-line with an electro spray Q-TOF mass spectrometer 6600 (Sciex). A total of 1 µg of sample was injected on the C18 analytical column (Acclaim® 75 µm x 150 mm, p/n: 162224; Dionex, California, USA) with a gradient of 0–40% phase B (90 % acetonitrile, 9.9 % water and 0.1 % formic acid) for 100 min at the flow rate of 0.3 µl/min. Two acquisition modes were used, data dependent (DDA) for the measurement of the library and data independent (DIA or SWATH) for the samples. In the DDA mode, mass spectral data were acquired over a mass range from 400 to 1600 m/z. One full MS scan was automatically followed by up-to 30 MS/MS scans of the most intensive peptides found in this mass range (bearing +2 or +3 charges).

### Data Protocol
The acquired data for each fraction of the library sample were merged and used for MS/MS database search with Protein Pilot software (Sciex). For the SWATH acquisitions, the DDA method was adapted using the automated method generator embedded in the Analyst software (Sciex). Protein identification and quantification was conducted using Peak View software and the previously generated protein library.

### Publication Abstract
<b>Purpose</b>: Salivary duct carcinoma (SDC) is a rare and aggressive salivary gland cancer subtype with poor prognosis. The mutational landscape of SDC has already been the object of several studies, however little is known regarding the functional genomics and the tumor microenvironment despite their importance in oncology. Our investigation aimed at describing both the functional genomics of SDC and the SDC microenvironment, along with their clinical relevance. <b>Methods</b>: RNA-sequencing (24 tumors), proteomics (17 tumors), immunohistochemistry (22 tumors), and multiplexed immunofluorescence (3 tumors) data were obtained from three different patient cohorts and analyzed by digital imaging and bioinformatics. Adjacent non-tumoral tissue from patients in two cohorts were used in transcriptomic and proteomic analyses. <b>Results</b>: Transcriptomic and proteomic data revealed the importance of Notch, TGF-&#x3b2;, and interferon-&#x3b3; signaling for all SDCs. We confirmed an overall strong desmoplastic reaction by measuring &#x3b1;-SMA abundance, the level of which was associated with recurrence-free survival (RFS). Two distinct immune phenotypes were observed: immune-poor SDCs (36%) and immune-infiltrated SDCs (64%). Advanced bioinformatics analysis of the transcriptomic data suggested 72 ligand-receptor interactions occurred in the microenvironment and correlated with the immune phenotype. Among these interactions, three immune checkpoints were validated by immunofluorescence, including CTLA-4/DC86 and TIM-3/galectin-9 interactions, previously unidentified in SDC. Immunofluorescence analysis also confirmed an important immunosuppressive role of macrophages and NK cells, also supported by the transcriptomic data. <b>Conclusions</b>: Together our data significantly increase the understanding of SDC biology and open new perspectives for SDC tumor treatment. Before applying immunotherapy, patient stratification according to the immune infiltrate should be taken into account. Immune-infiltrated SDC could benefit from immune checkpoint-targeting therapy, with novel options such as anti-CTLA-4. Macrophages or NK cells could also be targeted. The dense stroma, i.e., fibroblasts or hyaluronic acid, may also be the focus for immune-poor SDC therapies, e.g. in combination with Notch or TGF-&#x3b2; inhibitors, or molecules targeting SDC mutations.

### Keywords
Salivary gland

### Affiliations
IRCM
Institut de Recherche en Cancérologie de Montpellier

### Submitter
Jacques Colinge

### Lab Head
Dr Jacques Colinge
Institut de Recherche en Cancérologie de Montpellier


