### Accession
PXD013604

### Title
Pig Tooth Pixelation - Tooth enamel forms in an ephemeral protein matrix where changes in protein abundance, composition and post-translational modifications are critical to achieve healthy enamel properties

### Description
Tooth enamel forms in an ephemeral protein matrix where changes in protein abundance, composition and post-translational modifications are critical to achieve healthy enamel properties. Amelogenin (AMELX) with its splice variants is the most abundant enamel matrix protein, with only one known phosphorylation site at serine 16 shown in vitro to be critical for regulating mineralization. The phosphorylated form of AMELX stabilizes amorphous calcium phosphate, while crystalline hydroxyapatite forms in the presence of the unphosphorylated protein. While it is necessary to our understanding of how AMELX regulates mineral transitions over space and time, it is unknown whether and when un-phosphorylated amleogenin occurs during enamel mineralization. This study aims to reveal the spatiotemporal distribution of the most abundant AMLEX splice variants including the full length P173, the shorter leucine-rich amelogenin protein (LRAP), and the exon 4-containing P190 in forming enamel, all within the context of the changing enamel matrix proteome during mineralization. We microsampled permanent pig molars, capturing known stages of enamel formation from both crown surface and inner enamel. Nano-LC-MS/MS proteomic analyses after tryptic digestion rendered more than 500 unique protein identifications in enamel, dentin, and bone. We mapped collagens, keratins, and proteolytic enzymes (CTSL, MMP2, MMP10) and determined distributions of P173, LRAP and P190, the enamel proteins enamelin (ENAM) and ameloblastin (AMBN), and matrix-metalloprotease-20 (MMP20) and kallikrein-4 (KLK4). All enamel proteins and KLK4 were near-exclusive to enamel and in excellent agreement with published expression levels. Phosphorylated P173 and LRAP decreased in abundance from recently deposited matrix towards older enamel, mirrored by increasing abundances of testicular acid phosphatase (ACPT). Our results showed that hierarchical clustering analysis of secretory enamel links closely matching distributions of unphosphorylated P173 and LRAP with ACPT and nontraditional amelogenesis proteins, many associated with enamel defects. We report higher protein diversity than previously published and Gene Ontology (GO)-defined protein functions related to the regulation of mineral formation in secretory enamel (e.g. casein α-S1, CSN1S1), immune response in erupted enamel (e.g. peptidoglycan recognition protein, PGRP), and phosphorylation. This study presents a novel approach to characterize and study functional relationships through spatiotemporal mapping of the ephemeral extracellular matrix proteome.

### Sample Protocol
2.1 Tooth collection and enamel dicing All samples were collected from a euthanized 8-month-old female pig in agreement with IACUC regulations of the Tufts University Cummings School of Veterinary Medicine and The Forsyth Institute. Mandibles were dissected out, immediately transferred to dry ice for transport and stored at –80 C until further processing. Erupted and unerupted mandibular molars were excavated and extracted on ice with a Dremel saw, soft tissue and adhering cells pulled off. Coronal sections of 1.2 mm thickness were cut under a continuous, nonrecycled stream of 1% PBS from the second (M2) and third (M3) molars using a low-speed saw (Isomet, Buehler, Lake Bluff IL, USA) with a diamond blade (diamond wafering blade 102 x 0.3 mm, Buehler, Lake Bluff IL, USA). Sections passed through dentin horns and maximum cervical enamel extent on buccal and lingual sides. After cutting, the tooth crown surface was lightly scraped with a scalpel blade to remove debris. Each section was washed three times under continuous 1 % PBS rinse for 30 seconds and mounted onto silica wafers with Quickstick 135 Mounting Wax Electron Microscopy Sciences, Hatfield PA, USA). The enamel from each section was diced in a grid pattern at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology Media Technology Laboratories using a DAD3400 saw with zinc aluminum blades (0,03 mm; Z09–SD1700–Y1–60, Disco Hi-Tech America) under continuous flow of distilled water. Resulting enamel and dentin blocks (n=20) were 3 mm long, 0.5–0.6 mm wide and 1.2 mm thick (Fig. 1A). Mean block volume was 2.3 mm3.  Variations in volume resulting from adjustments made in sections close to the enamel dentine junction and crown morphology were quantified using imaging analyses of the surface area in FIJI (https://fiji.sc/). Each enamel block was taken up from the waver by forceps under a microscope, placed in a separate 2 mL microcentrifuge tube, and gently rinsed five times with 1 mL 1 % PBS solution. A sample piece of alveolar bone adjacent to the M2 was removed by forceps and processed in the same manner as enamel samples.   2.2 Protein extraction Each enamel block was dissolved in 1 mL of 12 % trichloroacetic acid under agitation at 450 RPM for 48 hours at room temperature (RT), then centrifuged at 4 C for 45 minutes (2,500 x g), and the supernatants discarded. Pellets were twice washed with 200 µL acetone, centrifuged at 13,000 x g for 10 minutes at RT, supernatants discarded, samples evaporated for 1h at RT and pellets resuspended in 20 µL of 8 M urea followed by 55 µL of 50 nM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) buffer solution. Proteins were reduced by the addition of 6 µL 1 M dithiothreitol (DTT) in ABC for 15 minutes in the dark at RT, then alkylated with 30 µL 200 µM iodoacetamide (IAA) in ABC for 30 minutes at 37 C, and the reaction quenched with 12 µL DTT. Proteins were digested by the addition of 0.2 µg/µl trypsin (Trypsin Gold, Promega) and incubation at 37 C for 48 hours. Digestions were stopped by the addition of 5 µl 10% TFA, and the digests were desalted over Pierce C18 tips and resuspended in 24 µL 0.1% formic acid after solvent evaporation in a SpeedVac. For normalization of nLC-chromatogram retention times, we added custom iRT peptide standard variants to each sample for a final concentration of 50 nM (49).

### Data Protocol
Nano-liquid chromatography electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry (nanoLC-ESI-MS/MS) 5 µL of each sample was injected, in randomized order, into an EASY-nLC 1000 liquid chromatography unit (Thermo Scientific) hyphenated to a QExactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Samples were loaded onto the trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 100 µm x 2 cm,) for 9 min at 2 µl/min in a mixture of mobile phase buffer A (0.1% formic acid in water) and mobile phase buffer B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) and subsequently separated on a 50 cm EASY-Spray column (ES803, 75 µm × 50 cm, C18, 2 µm, 100 Å). Mobile phase B increased from 2% to 32% at 150 min at a flowrate of 200 nL/min followed by a 30-min wash at 72% and a 20-min re-equilibration at 0% B. Data was acquired in positive ionization mode using data-dependent acquisition (DDA) with the following parameters: Precursor ion survey scans from 350 to 1200 m/z were acquired at 70k resolution (at 200 m/z) with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3.0 × 106 ion counts. Subsequent MS/MS analyses were conducted using the Top20 approach. The most abundant precursors (intensity greater than 2.0 × 104 ions) were isolated in the quadrupole mass analyzer using a 2.5-Da m/z isolation window and fragmented by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) using a normalized collision energy of 28. Fragment ions were detected in the Orbitrap mass analyzer with a resolution setting of 17,500, an AGC target setting 1 × 105 and a maximum ion accumulation time of 150 msec. Previously analyzed precursor ions and isotopes were dynamically excluded for 40 s. Only precursors with assigned charge states larger than 1 were selected for MS/MS.   2.4 Protein identification Protein identification was performed by using the PEAKS Studio software suite (version 8.0)(50). Raw instrument data was refined using the following parameters: scans were merged over 10 min retention time windows using a 10-ppm precursor m/z error tolerance; precursor mass and charge states (z = 1-10) were corrected. Other data pre-processing (centroiding; deisotoping; deconvolution) was performed automatically. Feature detection was performed on each raw instrument file individually. PEAKS database searching was performed against the UniprotKB database for Sus scrofa (Pig) containing 34,524 entries (downloaded September 2017). Search parameters were: parent mass error tolerance 10 ppm; fragment mass error tolerance 0.05 Da; trypsin enzyme specificity with cleavage prior to proline permitted; variable modifications: pyro-glu (Q), oxidation (M), deamidation (NQ) HexNAcylation (N) and phosphorylation (STY); maximal two variable modifications per peptide; one non-specific cleavage specificity on either terminus, maximal two missed cleavages, maximal two variable posttranslational modifications per peptide. The false discovery rate was estimated using the decoy-fusion approach (1% on the PSM-level). Proteins with at least two unique peptides were considered identified. Protein significance threshold was set at 20 (-10lgP).  Protein abundances were based upon area-under-the-curve measurements for the three most abundant unique peptides ascribed to that protein. Abundances were subsequently normalized to microsampling volumes compared to a reference standard sample volume of 2.14mm3 to account for variation in sample volume, for example in regions of thinning enamel at the cervical margin (Supplementary Table 1). For the visualization of each peptide, abundance was shown on a percent scale normalized to the peptide’s highest abundance in the tooth crown (Supplementary Table 1) Peptides (LPPHPGHPGYINFSYEK, P190; MPLPPHPGHPGYINFSYEVLTPLK, P173, LRAP) were used to discern the phosphorylated and unphosphorylated variants of Ser16 and between the parent molecules P190 and P173 including LRAP. PCA (Fig. 1B) and hierarchical clustering (Fig. 2) were performed with the Scikit-learn module in Python 3.6. Data visualization was provided by the Python matplotlib and seaborne modules. Gene Ontology classification enrichment analyses (Supplementary Tables 1, Supplementary Figure 1) were conducted using the DAVID 6.8 online Bioinformatics Resource with default stringency criteria, employing the whole pig proteome as a reference database. Enrichment analyses were conducted for proteins found in each of the four Euclidean distance enamel location clusters shown in Fig. 2, excluding the lowest 10th percentile least abundant proteins in each group. To locate those proteins with differential abundance in one location cluster compared to others, we conducted a non-parametric ANOVA using permutation tests for each protein (51) and performed the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure to account for multiple comparisons (52). We then observed cluster means to determine whether proteins identified as having differential abundance more or less abundant in each cluster (Supplementary Table 1 and Supplementary Figure 1).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteome, Tooth, Pig

### Affiliations
The Forsyth Institute
FORSYTH INSTITUTE

### Submitter
Markus Hardt

### Lab Head
Dr Markus Hardt
The Forsyth Institute


