### Accession
PXD005043

### Title
Discovery of Novel Antimicrobial Peptides from Varanus komodoensis (Komodo dragon) by Large Scale Analyses and De Novo Assisted Sequencing using Electron Transfer Dissociation Mass Spectrometry

### Description
We have employed a custom bioprospecing approach to identify cationic antimicrobial peptides from Komodo dragon plasma. Through these analyses we identified forty eight novel potential cationic antimicrobial peptides, with all but one of the identified peptides being derived from histone proteins. The antimicrobial effectiveness of eight of these peptides was evaluated against Pseudomonas aeruginosa 9027 and Staphylococcus aureus 25983, with seven peptides exhibiting antimicrobial activity against both microbes, and one only showing significant potency against Pseudomonas aeruginosa 9027. This study demonstrates the power and promise of our bioprospecting approach to CAMP discovery and it reveals the presence of a plethora of novel histone-derived antimicrobial peptides in the plasma of the dragon. These findings may have broader implications regarding the role that intact histones and histone-derived peptides play in defending the host from infection.

### Sample Protocol
Plasma was collected from Komodo dragon blood that had been stimulated by incubating it with LPS (1µM, 30 minutes, 30°C), as well as blood that had not been stimulated. Harvests were performed from both the stimulated and unstimulated plasma. In each case, plasma (100 µL) was diluted into 1.6 mL of hydrogel particles (40 mg) suspended in 10 mM Tris-Cl buffer(particle suspension = pH 9), for a final volume of ~ 1.7 mL. After incubating approximately 18-24 hours at room temperature, the plasma–particle harvest mixture was centrifuged at 16.1 × 10 3  rcf to pellet the particles, and the pelleted particles were then re-suspended in 10 mM Tris-Cl buffer (pH 9.0). This centrifugation and re-suspension process was repeated to ensure removal of excluded proteins and peptides. Following the final wash with Tris-Cl buffer, the pelleted particles were suspended in an elution solution that consisted of 1:1 (v/v) trifluoroethanol (TFE): 0.1% TFA in water. The particles were gently agitated for one hour at room temperature before pelleting (as described above). The supernatant layer, containing eluted captured peptides, was set aside for later use. To ensure all peptides had been removed from the particle interior, the elution process was repeated three more times with incubation times of 20 minutes. All elution supernatants were combined and dried via vacuum centrifugation before de-salting by Zip-Tip for mass spectrometry analysis. LC-MS/MS experiments were performed on an LTQ-Orbitrap Elite (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) equipped with a nanospray EASY-nLC 1000 HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Peptides were separated using a reversed-phase PepMap 50 μm i.d. × 15 cm long with 3 μm, 100 Å pore size, C18 resin LC column (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The mobile phase consisted of 0.1 % aqueous formic acid (mobile phase component A) and 0.1 % formic acid in acetonitrile (mobile phase component B). After sample injection, the column was washed for 5 min with A; the peptides were eluted by using a linear gradient from 0 to 50 % B over 120 min and ramping to 100 % B for an additional 2 min. The flow rate was set at 300 nL/min. The LTQ-Orbitrap Elite was operated in a data-dependent mode in which one full MS scan (60,000 resolving power) from 300Da to 2000Da was followed by a second full MS scan (60,000 resolving power) from 300Da to 900Da, and was followed by eight MS/MS scans (60,000 resolving power) in which the eight most abundant molecular ions were dynamically selected (based on the 2 nd full scan from 300Da to 900Da) and fragmented by electron transfer dissociation (ETD). Fluoranthene was used as the electron transfer reagent with a charge state dependent ETD reaction time based on a reaction time of 100 ms for doubly charged ions. “FT master scan preview mode”, “Charge state screening”, “Monoisotopic precursor selection”, and “Charge state rejection” were enabled so that only the ≥ 4+ ions are selected and fragmented by ETD. Supplemental activation was also applied.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were imported directly as .RAW files and analyzed by PEAKS de novo sequencing software version 6 (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, ON Canada). PEAKS first performs a de novo sequence analysis of the ETD MS/MS data. Mass tolerance for precursor ions was 10 ppm, and mass tolerance for fragment ions was 0.05 Da. Data were analyzed with no enzyme specificity, along with oxidation (+15.9949 Da) on methionine as a variable post translation modification, and a quality spectral filter of 0.65. Confident de novo peptide sequences were achieved by filtering Average Local Confidence (ALC) to ≥ 30%. A cDNA library database was generated from Komodo dragon leukocytes to aid in peptide sequence determination. PEAKS used high-cofnidence sequence tags from the de novo sequences to search against this database in order to correct misassignments and fill gaps in the de novo determined sequences. A 1 % false discovery rate (FDR) was used as a cut-off value for reporting peptide spectrum matches (PSM) from the database. Peptides of interest that were identified against the transcriptome database had their sequences manually verified by matching the experimental spectral ions to a fragment prediction program (MS-Product; http://prospector.ucsf.edu). For peptides of interest with de novo-only sequences, the sequences were manually verified by matching the experimental spectral ions to a fragment prediction program (MS-Product; http://prospector.ucsf.edu). In addition, the peptides synthesized for the antimicrobial activity assay based on the de novo-only sequences were analyzed by ETD-MS, and those spectra were matched against the experimentally derived sequences. For de novo-only sequences, only leucine (L) was denoted since it is indistinguishable from isoleucine (I) by ETD fragmentation. Potential CAMPs were identified based on results from CAMP prediction algorithms and/or physico-chemical properties. We developed a python script to aid in the identification of potential antimicrobial peptides. The python script generates a FASTA file of the sequences determined using PEAKS de novo sequencing software, from which it sends post requests to the CAMP database that allows evaluation using three different machine learning algorithms (SVM, RF, and DA) to predict whether a specific peptide sequence will likely correspond to a peptide with antimicrobial properties . The script then calculates the physicochemical properties(length, molecular weight, nominal solution charge, pI and hydrophobicity) of each sequence. All of the data is automatically exported to an excel file and sorted by the various physicochemical parameters, including hydrophobicity and net charge, or by the number of algorithms that predicted a sequence to be antimicrobial.

### Publication Abstract
Komodo dragons are the largest living lizards and are the apex predators in their environs. They endure numerous strains of pathogenic bacteria in their saliva and recover from wounds inflicted by other dragons, reflecting the inherent robustness of their innate immune defense. We have employed a custom bioprospecting approach combining partial de novo peptide sequencing with transcriptome assembly to identify cationic antimicrobial peptides from Komodo dragon plasma. Through these analyses, we identified 48 novel potential cationic antimicrobial peptides. All but one of the identified peptides were derived from histone proteins. The antimicrobial effectiveness of eight of these peptides was evaluated against Pseudomonas aeruginosa (ATCC 9027) and Staphylococcus aureus (ATCC 25923), with seven peptides exhibiting antimicrobial activity against both microbes and one only showing significant potency against P. aeruginosa. This study demonstrates the power and promise of our bioprospecting approach to cationic antimicrobial peptide discovery, and it reveals the presence of a plethora of novel histone-derived antimicrobial peptides in the plasma of the Komodo dragon. These findings may have broader implications regarding the role that intact histones and histone-derived peptides play in defending the host from infection. Data are available via ProteomeXChange with identifier PXD005043.

### Keywords
Plasma, Etd, Antimicrobial peptides, Komodo, Ms/ms

### Affiliations
George Mason University, Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Bishop lab
George Mason University

### Submitter
Barney Bishop

### Lab Head
Dr Barney Bishop
George Mason University, Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Bishop lab


