### Accession
PXD035028

### Title
Generation of the HCC spectral library covering more than 10,000 protein groups

### Description
Peptides of HCC cell lines and tumour tissues were fractionated by Hp-RP to eight fractions and repeated analysed three times by the LC-MS/MS detection system consisted of the EASY-nLC 1000 coupled to the Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer using data dependent acquisition mode.

### Sample Protocol
Peptide mixture of cell lines and tissues was fractionated by Hp-RP with stepwise gradients manually. The C18 tip packed with 5 mg C18 reverse-phase media (3 μm, Durashell, Agela Technologies, China) was washed with 90 μL methanol (Sigma-Aldrich, USA) and then with 90 μL ammonia water (pH 10). Then, 50 μg peptides dissolved in 160 μL ammonia water (pH 10) was loaded. And the tip was centrifuged at 1,000g for 8 min at 25°C to remove the liquid followed by washed with 90 μL of ammonia water (pH 10). Peptides were then sequentially eluted with 8 different concentrations of acetonitrile (9%, 12%, 15%, 18%, 21%, 25%, 30%, and 50%) in ammonia water (pH 10). These fractions were collected, heat-dried and stored at -80°C. The LC-MS/MS detection system consisted of the EASY-nLC 1000 coupled to the Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer. For data acquisition, 1/8 of each of the Hp-RP fractions in buffer A was loaded and separated on the analytical column at a flow rate of 500 nL/min with following gradients: 0~13 min, 7 ~ 13% buffer B (0.1% FA in 100% acetonitrile); 13 ~ 99 min, 13~28% buffer B; 99 ~ 120 min, 28 ~ 42% buffer B; 120~123 min, 42 ~ 95% buffer B; 123 ~135 min, 95% buffer B. For the full mass (MS1) scan, the target value was 3E6 and the m/z scan ranged from 300 to 1400 Da at a resolution of 120,000 and a maximum injection time of 80 ms. Only spectra with charge states of 2~ 6 were selected for fragmentation with a normalized collision energy of 27%. Precursor ions with top 20 intensities were selected for fragmentation. For MS2 scan, the target value was 5E4 and the resolution was 15000 with a maximum injection time of 45 ms. iRT peptide standards (Biognosys AG, Schlieren-Zürich, Switzerland) were spiked into all runs of spectral library generation.

### Data Protocol
The obtained DDA raw files were searched against the human UniProt database (updated at 2022-09-07 with 20,398 protein groups and the iRT peptide sequence) by MaxQuant v2.0.3.0. The digestion mode was set to specific, and trypsin/P was chosen. Oxidation of methionine and acetylation of N-term of peptides were set as variable modification, and Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was set as fixed modification. False discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 on both PSM and protein groups level. The max peptide mass range was set to 4600 Da, and the peptide length range was set from 7 to 25, and the missed cleavage was set to 2. The MS/MS match tolerance was set to 20 ppm, and MS/MS de novo tolerance was set to 10 ppm. 
The search results of MaxQuant version 2.0.3.0 were imported into SpectronautTM version 15.2 to generate the HCC spectral library. The missed cleavage for peptide was set to 2. The m/z range was set as 400 to 1200 Da, and the ‘best N fragments per peptide’ was set as 3 to 6. B and y fragments were chosen, and modifications including oxidation of methionine, acetylation of N-term of peptides and Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was kept during library generation. The ‘empirical iRT database’ was set as the iRT reference, and the minimum square cutoff was set to 0.8. FDR was set to 0.01 on both precursor and protein level. For calibration and main search, the tolerance was set to dynamic. 


### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hcc proteome

### Affiliations
Beijing institute of Lifeomics
Mass spectrometry and glycoproteomics research lab, Beijing institute of Lifeomics

### Submitter
Mingchao Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Wang Mingchao
Mass spectrometry and glycoproteomics research lab, Beijing institute of Lifeomics


