### Accession
PXD011768

### Title
Exosomes -  Differential miRNA expression profile and proteome in plasma exosomes from patients with paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria

### Description
Quantitative Proteomic analysis of human plasma exosomes using TMT isobaric tag labelling and nanoLC-Orbitrap. Nine patient samples and five control samples are analyzed to assess the proteome changes due to the pathology

### Sample Protocol
For proteomic analyses, proteins were firstly isolated from 30 µl of sample by trichloroacetic acid (TCA)/acetone precipitation and obtained pellets were resuspended in 100 µl of 8M urea/50 mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) at pH8 containing protease inhibitors (PhosSTOP™ Roche 04 906 845 001 + cOmplete™, Mini, EDTA-free Roche 04 693 159 001). Then, aliquots containing 130 μg of protein (quantified by Bradford’s method) were reduced with tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) for 25 min at 56°C and alquilated with iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in darkness. Afterwards, samples were overnight digested (pH 8.0, 37 ºC) with sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega) at enzyme:protein ratio of 1:100. Digestion was quenched by acidification with formic acid at a 1% (v/v) and peptides were desalted on C18 Sep-Pak columns (Waters, USA) before TMT 10-plex labelling (Thermo Fisher) following manufacturer instructions. To normalize all samples in the study and the two different TMT-multiplexed batches used, a pool containing all the samples was labelled with TMT-126 tag and included in each TMT batch. The different TMT 10-plex batches were desalted on C18 SPE before the nanoLC-MS analysis. The chromatographic analysis of each TMT batch containing labelled peptides was performed by triplicate on an EASY-II nanoLC from Thermo Fisher (San José, CA, USA ) equipped with a trap nano-column (100 μm I.D.; 2cm length; 5μm particle diameter, Thermo Fisher) and a C18 reversed phase nano-column (75μm I.D.; 15cm length; 3μm particle diameter, Nikkyo Technos Co. LTD, Japan). The chromatographic separation was performed with a continuous acetonitrile gradient (0 min 2%, 5 min 2%, 35 min 15%, 115 min 25%, 155 min 40%, 175 min 50%, 185 min 95%, 205 min 95%, 207 min 2%) using Milli-Q water (0.1% formic acid) and ACN (0.1% formic acid) as mobile phase at flow rate of 300 nL/min. Mass spectrometry analyses were performed on an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro from Thermo Fisher by an enhanced FT-resolution spectrum (R=30,000 FHMW) followed by two data dependent MS/MS scan events. One consist on an HCD fragmentation (40% NCE) and FT-MS/MS acquisition (R=15,000 FHMW) from the most intense ten parent ions with a charge state rejection of one and dynamic exclusion of 0.5 min which is used for peptide quantification. The other event consist on a CID fragmentation (35% NCE) and IT-MS/MS acquisition from the same most intense ten parent ions which is used for peptide identification.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification/quantification was performed on Proteome Discoverer software v.1.4.0.288 (Thermo Fisher). For protein identification all MS and MS/MS spectra were analysed using Mascot search engine (v.2.5). Mascot was set up to search SwissProt_2015_10.fasta database (549646 entries), restricting for Human taxonomy (20197 sequences) and assuming trypsin digestion. Two missed cleavages were allowed and an error of 0.02 Da for FT-MS/MS fragment ion mass, 0.8 Da for IT-MS/MS fragment ion mass and 10.0 ppm for a FT-MS parent ion mass were allowed. Oxidation of methionine and acetylation of N-termini were set as dynamic modifications, whereas carbamidometylation of cysteine and TMT-10plex on lysine were set as static modifications. The false discovery rate (FDR) and protein probabilities were calculated by Target Decoy PSM Validator working between 0.01 and 0.05 for Strict and relaxed respectively. For protein quantification, the ratios between each TMT-label against 126-TMT label were used and quantification results were normalized based on protein median and Log2 transformed for statistical analysis (Gene Spring software v. 13.1 from Agilent Technologies).

### Publication Abstract
Paroxysmal Nocturnal Hemoglobinuria (PNH) is a clonal disease of blood cells caused by the lack of glycosyl phosphatidyl inositol anchored proteins bound to the cell membrane. In consequence, erythrocytes lead to intravascular hemolysis upon complement activation, which promotes high risk of thrombosis, intravascular hemolytic anemia, and bone marrow failure in patients. The mechanisms of thrombosis in PNH are still poorly understood. Treatment with eculizumab reduces intravascular hemolysis and thrombotic risk, but not in all cases. Exosomes are extracellular vesicles released by cells and whose secretion is closely related to the inflammatory status. They participate in cell communication by activating signaling pathways and transferring genetic material and proteins to host cells. In consequence, exosomes may serve as surrogate biomarkers for the prognosis and/or diagnosis of a disease. Isolation of exosomes was carried out from healthy controls and from three groups of PNH patients, i.e. i) with no eculizumab treatment; ii) under treatment with eculizumab that have not suffered thrombosis; and iii) under treatment with eculizumab but that have suffered thrombosis. The miRNAome and proteome was analyzed using plasma focus miRNAs PCR panel and LC-MS analysis respectively. We found differential expression of miRNAs miR-148b-3p, miR-423-3p, miR29b-3p, miR15b-5p, let-7e-5p, miR126-3p, miR-125b-5p and miR-376c-3p as well as hemoglobin, haptoglobin, protein S and C4-binding protein in healthy controls vs PNH patients. Our results warrant further research and provide new information on the content of exosomes that could play a role in the hypercoagulable state in this disease.

### Keywords
Shotgun proteomics; exosomes; tmt

### Affiliations
Centre for Omic Sciences (COS) - Universitat Rovira i Virgili (URV)-EURECAT
Haematology and Oncology Department. University of Murcia Centro Regional de Hemodonación Ronda Garay s/n 30003 Murcia, Spain

### Submitter
Pol Herrero

### Lab Head
Dr Irene Martínez Martínez
Haematology and Oncology Department. University of Murcia Centro Regional de Hemodonación Ronda Garay s/n 30003 Murcia, Spain


