### Accession
PXD017784

### Title
Neutrophil specific granule and NETosis defect in Gray Platelet Syndrome

### Description
Gray Platelet Syndrome (GPS) is an autosomal recessive bleeding disorder characterized by a lack of α-granules in platelets and progressive myelofibrosis. Rare loss of function variants in NBEAL2, a member of the family of BEACH genes, are causal of GPS. The gene is involved in fusion, fission and trafficking of vesicles and granules. Whether NBEAL2 controls the ontogeny of granules of myeloid cells remains disputed. We found that neutrophils obtained from the peripheral blood from GPS patients have a normal distribution of azurophilic granules, but show a deficiency of specific granules, as confirmed by immuno-electron microscopy and mass spectrometry proteomics analyses. In cultures from peripheral CD34+ hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) into mature neutrophils, the time dynamics showed concordance of NBEAL2 and specific granule protein expression at transcriptional and protein level, which were discordant in neutrophils obtained GPS-HSCs. This is indicative of normal granulopoiesis in GPS and identifies NBEAL2 as an important regulator of granule release (similar to platelets) which is suggested to occur upon egress into the blood stream. Patient neutrophil functions, including production of reactive oxygen species, chemotaxis and killing of bacteria and fungi were intact. Since GPS patients do not excessively suffer from infections, the consequence of the reduced specific granule content and lack of NET formation for innate immunity remains to be explored.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets (1-2e6) were lysed in 50 μl of 4% (w/v) SDS, 100 mM DTT, 100 mM Tris.HCl pH 7.5 supplemented with HALT protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Thermo Scientific). 20ug of protein was processed into tryptic peptides by the Filter Aided Sample Preparation method. Peptides were desalted and concentrated with Empore-C18 StageTips and eluted with 0.5% (v/v) acetic acid, 80 % (v/v) acetonitrile. Sample volume was reduced by SpeedVac and supplemented with 2 % (w/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (w/v) Tri-Fluoro-Acetic acid to a final volume of 5 μl. 3 μl of each sample was analyse. Tryptic peptides were separated by nanoscale C18 reverse chromatography coupled on line to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) via a nanoelectrospray ion source (Nanospray Flex Ion Source, Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded on a 20 cm 75–360 μm inner-outer diameter fused silica emitter (New Objective) packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 1.9 μm resin (Dr Maisch GmbH). The column was installed on a Dionex Ultimate3000 RSLC nanoSystem (Thermo Scientific) with a MicroTee union formatted for 360-μm outer diameter columns (IDEX) and a liquid junction. The spray voltage was set to 2.15 kV. Buffer A was composed of 0.5 % (w/v) acetic acid and buffer B of 0.5 % (w/v) acetic acid, 80% (w/v) acetonitrile. Peptides were loaded for 17 min at 300 nl/min at 5% (v/v) buffer B, equilibrated for 5 minutes at 5% buffer B (17-22 min) and eluted by increasing (v/v) buffer B from 5-15% (v/v) (22-87 min) and 15-38% (v/v) (87-147 min), followed by a 10-minute wash to 90 % (v/v) buffer B and a 5 min regeneration to 5% (v/v). Survey scans of peptide precursors from 300 to 1600 m/z were performed at 120K resolution (at 200 m/z) with a 4E5 × ion count target. Tandem mass spectrometry was performed by isolation with the quadrupole with isolation window 1.6, HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 30, and rapid scan mass spectrometry analysis in the ion trap. The MS2 ion count target was set to 10E4 and the max injection time was 35 ms. Only those precursors with charge state 2–7 were sampled for MS2. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 30 s with a 10 ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. Monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on. The instrument was run in top speed mode with 3 s cycles. All data were acquired with Xcalibur 4.1 software.

### Data Protocol
All data were acquired using Xcalibur software and analyzed with the Maxquant (1.5.3.30) computational platform. Proteins and peptides were identified using the Andromeda search engine by querying the human Uniprot database (release 3-2017). Protein quantification was based on unique peptides with the ‘match between runs’ option enabled. Results were loaded into R 3.6.2. Contaminants and reverse values were filtered out. Proteins were considered quantified based on the presence of 2/3 valid values in at least one condition. Missing values were replaced with random values from a down shifted normal distribution (width = 0.3 standard deviations and down shift = 1.8 standard deviations of the non-missing data). Statistical analysis was performed using the limma package, a P <0.05 and an absolute log2 fold change >1 were considered significant and relevant.

### Publication Abstract
Gray platelet syndrome (GPS) is an autosomal recessive bleeding disorder characterized by a lack of &#x3b1;-granules in platelets and progressive myelofibrosis. Rare loss-of-function variants in neurobeachin-like 2 (NBEAL2), a member of the family of beige and Ch&#xe9;diak-Higashi (BEACH) genes, are causal of GPS. It is suggested that BEACH domain containing proteins are involved in fusion, fission, and trafficking of vesicles and granules. Studies in knockout mice suggest that NBEAL2 may control the formation and retention of granules in neutrophils. We found that neutrophils obtained from the peripheral blood from 13 patients with GPS have a normal distribution of azurophilic granules but show a deficiency of specific granules (SGs), as confirmed by immunoelectron microscopy and mass spectrometry proteomics analyses. CD34+ hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) from patients with GPS differentiated into mature neutrophils also lacked NBEAL2 expression but showed similar SG protein expression as control cells. This is indicative of normal granulopoiesis in GPS and identifies NBEAL2 as a potentially important regulator of granule release. Patient neutrophil functions, including production of reactive oxygen species, chemotaxis, and killing of bacteria and fungi, were intact. NETosis was absent in circulating GPS neutrophils. Lack of NETosis is suggested to be independent of NBEAL2 expression but associated with SG defects instead, as indicated by comparison with HSC-derived neutrophils. Since patients with GPS do not excessively suffer from infections, the consequence of the reduced SG content and lack of NETosis for innate immunity remains to be explored.

### Keywords
Neutrophil, Gray platelet syndrome

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Hematology, Sanquin Research, Amsterdam
Laboratory of Proteomics, Department of Molecular Hematology, Sanquin Research, Amsterdam, NL

### Submitter
Arie Hoogendijk

### Lab Head
Dr M. van den Biggelaar
Laboratory of Proteomics, Department of Molecular Hematology, Sanquin Research, Amsterdam, NL


