### Accession
PXD033290

### Title
Deep proteogenomics of a unicellular cyanobacterium

### Description
Cyanobacteria are photoautotrophs that profoundly impact the biogeochemical cycles on Earth. Due to their photosynthetic lifestyle that includes the fixation of atmospheric CO2, they are of increasing interest for a sustainable economy. Knowledge of protein expression and regulation is key for understanding of the cyanobacterial metabolism; however, proteome studies in cyanobacteria are still limited and cover only a fraction of the theoretical proteome. Here, we performed a proteogenomic analysis of 628 LC-MS/MS measurements for the unicellular model cyanobacterium Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 to characterize the expressed (phospho)proteome, re-annotate known and discover potential novel open reading frames (ORFs). By mapping extensive shotgun MS proteomics data generated by the SCyCode consortium onto a six-frame translation of the Synechocystis genome, we re-annotated 96 start sites and discovered 103 novel open reading frames (ORFs). Through re-analysis of previously published multi-omics datasets, we confirmed 48 re-annotated or novel ORFs with high confidence. Our study resulted in the largest reported proteome and phosphoproteome dataset for Synechocystis, covering expression of about 80% of the theoretical proteome and 642 O-phosphorylation events under various cultivation conditions, such as nitrogen or carbon limitation. This dataset will serve as a resource providing dedicated information on condition-dependent protein expression and phosphorylation.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were prepared as part of the original research they were described in. All samples originate from Synechocystis sp PCC 6803 and were measured on high resolution Thermo Fisher Orbitrap mass spectrometers. The list of datasets used here can be found in Table S1.

### Data Protocol
Validation by independent MS datasets (386 LC-MS/MS runs) required their re-processing with the MaxQuant software against our optimised protein sequence databases (3,669 known proteins + 280 refined ORFs). The novel ORFs, which were re-identified in these independent datasets, were considered successfully validated.

### Publication Abstract
Cyanobacteria, the evolutionary ancestors of plant chloroplasts, contribute substantially to the Earth's biogeochemical cycles and are of great interest for a sustainable economy. Knowledge of protein expression is the key to understanding cyanobacterial metabolism; however, proteome studies in cyanobacteria are limited and cover only a fraction of the theoretical proteome. Here, we performed a comprehensive proteogenomic analysis of the model cyanobacterium <i>Synechocystis</i> sp. PCC 6803 to characterize the expressed (phospho)proteome, re-annotate known and discover novel open reading frames (ORFs). By mapping extensive shotgun mass spectrometry proteomics data onto a six-frame translation of the <i>Synechocystis</i> genome, we refined the genomic annotation of 64 ORFs, including eight completely novel ORFs. Our study presents the largest reported (phospho)proteome dataset for a unicellular cyanobacterium, covering the expression of about 80% of the theoretical proteome under various cultivation conditions, such as nitrogen or carbon limitation. We report 568 phosphorylated S/T/Y sites that are present on numerous regulatory proteins, including the transcriptional regulators cyAbrB1 and cyAbrB2. We also catalogue the proteins that have never been detected under laboratory conditions and found that a large portion of them is plasmid-encoded. This dataset will serve as a resource, providing dedicated information on growth condition-dependent protein expression and phosphorylation.

### Keywords
Proteogenomics, Synechocystis sp. pcc 6803, Small proteins, Stress acclimation, Cyanobacteria, Primary metabolism, Photosynthesis, Protein phosphorylation, Gene expression

### Affiliations
Quantitative proteomics University of Tuebingen Auf der Morgenstelle 15 72076 Tuebingen Germany
Tuebingen University

### Submitter
Nicolas Nalpas

### Lab Head
Dr Boris Macek
Quantitative proteomics University of Tuebingen Auf der Morgenstelle 15 72076 Tuebingen Germany


