### Accession
PXD031327

### Title
Fe3+-NTA magnetic beads as an alternative to spin column-based phosphopeptide enrichment

### Description
Protein phosphorylation is a central mechanism of cellular signal transduction in living organisms. Phosphoproteomic studies aim to systematically catalogue, characterize, and comprehend alterations in phosphorylation states across multiple cellular conditions and are often incorporated into global proteomics workflows. Previously, we found that spin column-based Fe3+-NTA enrichment integrated well with our workflow but it remained a bottleneck for methods that require higher throughput or a scale that is beyond the maximum capacity of these columns. Here, we compare our well-established spin column-based enrichment strategy with one encompassing magnetic beads. Our data show little difference in both the number and properties of the phosphopeptides identified when using either method. In all, we illustrate how scalable and automation-friendly magnetic Fe3+-NTA beads can seamlessly substitute spin column-based Fe3+-NTA for global phosphoproteome profiling.

### Sample Protocol
Several human cell lines (SH-SY5Y, HEP-G2, Panc1 and HAP1) were propagated in DMEM supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum and 1% penicillin- streptomycin until 70-90% confluent. The cells were washed twice with ice cold PBS, and harvested on-plate with 8 M urea, 200 mM EPPS pH 8.5 plus 1X Pierce protease and phosphatase inhibitor), and syringe lysed (10 times with 21-gauge needle). Lysates were pooled and stored at -80 °C until use. Following a BCA assay to estimate protein concentration, all lysates were reduced (20 min with 5 mM TCEP at room temperature), alkylated (20 min with 10 mM iodoacetamide, at room temperature in the dark), and quenched (20 min with 10 mM DTT, at room temperature in the dark). Proteins were precipitated by single-pot, solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation (SP3), as described previously. Precipitated proteins were digested in 200 mM EPPS pH 8.5 (~1 mg/ml) with LysC for 3 hr 37 °C shaking on a vortexer (speed =50%) followed by a 6 hr trypsin digestion at 37 °C. Peptides were displaced from the beads and then desalted using a 1 g SepPak cartridge (Waters) prior to MS analysis. Peptides originating from Xenopus laevis eggs were prepared (and labeled with TMTpro) as described previously.

### Data Protocol
Spectra were converted to mzXML via MSconvert. Database searching included all entries from the human UniProt database (downloaded April 2021). The database was concatenated with one composed of all protein sequences for that database in the reversed order. Searches were performed using a 50-ppm precursor ion tolerance and a 0.03 Da product ion tolerance. These wide mass tolerance windows were chosen to maximize sensitivity in conjunction with Comet searches and linear discriminant analysis. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) was set as a static modification, while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da), deamidation (+0.984) at glutamine and asparagine residues, and phosphorylation (+79.966) were set as variable modifications. PSMs (Peptide-spectrum matches) were adjusted to a 1% FDR (false discovery rate). PSM filtering was performed using a linear discriminant analysis, as described previously and then assembled further to a final protein-level FDR of 1%. Data analysis and visualization was performed in Microsoft Excel or R Bioconductor with the “peptides” package.

### Publication Abstract
Protein phosphorylation is a central mechanism of cellular signal transduction in living organisms. Phosphoproteomic studies systematically catalogue and characterize alterations in phosphorylation states across multiple cellular conditions and are often incorporated into global proteomics experiments. Previously, we found that spin column-based Fe<sup>3+</sup>-NTA enrichment integrated well with our workflow but remained a bottleneck for methods that require higher throughput or a scale that is beyond the capacity of these columns. Here, we compare our well-established spin column-based enrichment strategy with one encompassing magnetic beads. Our data show little difference when using either method in terms of the number of identified phosphopeptides as well as their physicochemical properties. In all, we illustrate how the potentially scalable and automation-friendly magnetic Fe<sup>3+</sup>-NTA beads can seamlessly substitute spin column-based Fe<sup>3+</sup>-NTA agarose beads for global phosphoproteome profiling. SIGNIFICANCE: Protein phosphorylation plays a key role in regulating a multitude of biological processes and can lead to insights into disease pathogenesis. Methodologies which can efficiently enrich phosphopeptides in a scalable and high-throughput manner are essential for profiling dynamic phosphoproteomes. Here we compare two phosphopeptide enrichment workflows, a well-established spin column-based strategy with agarose Fe<sup>3+</sup>-NTA beads and a strategy using magnetic Fe<sup>3+</sup>-NTA beads. Our data suggest that the scalable and automation-friendly magnetic bead-based workflow is an equivalent, but more flexible, enrichment strategy for phosphoproteome profiling experiments.

### Keywords
Automation, Imac, Phosphoproteome, Phosphopeptide enrichment

### Affiliations
Cell Biology Harvard Medical School Boston, MA 02115
Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Joao Paulo

### Lab Head
Dr Joao A. Paulo
Cell Biology Harvard Medical School Boston, MA 02115


