### Accession
PXD039609

### Title
Crosslinking-MS analysis of Saccharomyces cerevisiae cohesin with or without binding of Mrc1

### Description
Crosslinking-MS analysis of Saccharomyces cerevisiae cohesin complex with or without binding with Mrc1.

### Sample Protocol
Saccharomyces cerevisiae cohesin complex was crosslinked in vitro with and without the presence of Mrc1, using crosslinking sulfo-SDA, giving rise to two samples: “conhesin+ Mrc1” and “cohesion – Mrc1”. The crosslinked protein samples were precipitated using acetone and then subjected to crosslinking MS analysis. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), connected to an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Each size exclusion chromatography (SEC) fraction was resuspended in 1.6% v/v acetonitrile 0.1% v/v formic acid and analysed with LC-MS/MS acquisitions. Each SEC fraction was analyzed with duplicated LC-MS/MS acquisitions. Peptides were injected onto a 50-centimetre EASY-Spray C18 LC column (Thermo Scientific) that is operated at 50 °C column temperature. Mobile phase A consists of water, 0.1% v/v formic acid and mobile phase B consists of 80% v/v acetonitrile and 0.1% v/v formic acid. Peptides were loaded and separated at a flowrate of 0.3 μl/min. Peptides were separated by applying a gradient ranging from 2% to 45% B over 90 minutes. The gradient was optimized for each fraction. Following the separating gradient, the content of B was ramped to 55% and 95% within 2.5 minutes each. Eluted peptides were ionized by an EASY-Spray source (Thermo Scientific) and introduced directly into the mass spectrometer. The MS data is acquired in the data-dependent mode with the top-speed option. For each three-second acquisition cycle, the full scan mass spectrum was recorded in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 120,000. The ions with a charge state from 3+ to 7+ were isolated and fragmented using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD). For each isolated precursor, stepped collision energy (26%, 28% or 30%) was applied. The fragmentation spectra were then recorded in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 50,000. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with single repeat count and 60 second exclusion duration.

### Data Protocol
xiSEARCH & xiFDR is used to analyze the data and identified the peptides and proteins. Results are exported to mzidentml.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Crosslinking-ms, Mrc1, Cohesin

### Affiliations
Technische Universität Berlin

### Submitter
Zhuo Chen 

### Lab Head
 Juri Rappsilber 
Technische Universität Berlin


