### Accession
PXD024296

### Title
A new parallel high-pressure packing system enables rapid multiplexed production of capillary columns

### Description
Reversed-phase high performance liquid chromatography is the most commonly applied separation technique in mass spectrometry-based proteomics. Particle-packed capillary columns are predominantly used for nano-flow systems. Despite being the broadly applied standard for many years capillary columns are still expensive and suffer from short lifetimes, particularly in combination with ultra-high-pressure chromatography systems. For this reason, and to achieve ultimate performance, many laboratories produce their own in-house packed columns, typically requiring a considerable amount of time and trained personnel. Here, we present a new packing system for capillary columns enabling rapid, multiplexed column packing with pressures up to 3000 bar. Requiring only a conventional gas pressure supply and methanol as driving fluid, our system replaces the traditional setup of helium pressured packing bombs. By using 10x multiplexing, we have reduced the production time to just under 2 minutes for several 50 cm columns with 1.9 um particle size, speeding up the process of column production 40 to 800 times. We compare capillary columns with various inner diameters and length packed under different pressure conditions with our newly designed, broadly accessible high-pressure packing station.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa cells were cultured in high glucose DMEM with 10% fetal bovine serum and 1% penicillin/streptomycin (all from Life Technologies, Inc.). Cells were counted using a countess cell counter (Invitrogen), and aliquots of 1x106 cells were washed twice with PBS (Life Technologies, Inc.), snap-frozen and stored at −80 °C. Sample preparation was carried out with the PreOmics iST kit (www.preomics.de). Per cartridge we used one HeLa pellet with ~1 million cells and set purified peptides concentration to 0.2 mg/ml after determination of concentration by nanodrop.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were analyzed by MaxQuant software, version 1.6.11.0, and peptide lists were searched against the human Uniprot FASTA database. A contaminant database generated by the Andromeda search engine was configured with cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification and N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. We set the false discovery rate (FDR) to 0.01 for protein and peptide levels with a minimum length of 7 amino acids for peptides and the FDR was determined by searching a reverse database. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to arginine and lysine as expected using trypsin and LysC as proteases. A maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Peptide identification was performed with an initial precursor mass deviation up to 7 ppm and a fragment mass deviation of 20 ppm. All proteins and peptides matching to the reversed database were filtered out.

### Publication Abstract
Reversed-phase HPLC is the most commonly applied peptide-separation technique in MS-based proteomics. Particle-packed capillary columns are predominantly used in nanoflow HPLC systems. Despite being the broadly applied standard for many years, capillary columns are still expensive and suffer from short lifetimes, particularly in combination with ultra-high-pressure chromatography systems. For this reason, and to achieve maximum performance, many laboratories produce their own in-house packed columns. This typically requires a considerable amount of time and trained personnel. Here, we present a new packing system for capillary columns enabling rapid, multiplexed column packing with pressures reaching up to 3000&#xa0;bar. Requiring only a conventional gas pressure supply and methanol as the driving fluid, our system replaces the traditional setup of helium-pressured packing bombs. By using 10&#xd7; multiplexing, we have reduced the production time to just under 2&#xa0;min for several 50 cm columns with 1.9-&#xb5;m particle size, speeding up the process of column production 40 to 800 times. We compare capillary columns with various inner diameters and lengths packed under different pressure conditions with our newly designed, broadly accessible high-pressure packing station.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Capillary columns, Chromatography

### Affiliations
Proteomics
Director, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Director, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction


