### Accession
PXD002613

### Title
Exome-based proteogenomics of HEK-293 human cell line: coding genomic variants identified at the level of shotgun proteome

### Description
Genomic and proteomic data were integrated into the proteogenomic workflow to identify coding genomic variants of Human Embryonic Kidney 293 (HEK-293) standard cell line at the proteome level. Shotgun proteome data published by Geiger et al (2012) and obtained in this work for HEK-293 were searched against the customized genomic databased generated using exome data published by Lin et al (2014). 54 unique variants out of ~1,200 coding variants annotated in the exome were found at the proteome level. 27 of them were validated by two search engines, X!Tandem and Andromeda. 16 (60%) of those validated variants were confidently identified in both own and published proteome datasets. Some of the variants found belonged to widely known genomic polymorphisms originated from the germline, while others are more likely to result from somatic mutations. Notably, the peptide subsets identified by only one, or the other search engine were enriched by the sequences with miscleavages. This can be due to the large presence of false-positive hits in these subsets that is especially true for the subset of variant peptides. High-resolution mass-spectra of HEK-293 cell line were deposited to ProteomeXchange repository, project accession PXD002613.

### Sample Protocol
Both samples were similarly in-solution digested. One sample was then fractionated into 10 fractions and also analyzed as one shot. The other sample was analyzed as one shot only. The resulting raw data files are:  1. Sample 1, one shot, file names: MSA_5_6_02.raw and MSA_5_6_03.raw – two replicates. 2. Sample 1, fractions, file names: fr_opt_n01_r01.raw – fr_opt_n10_r03.raw, where “n” is a number of a fraction, “r” is a number of a replicate.  3. Sample 2, one shot, file names: MSA_09_new_column_04H_r01.raw and MSA_09_new_column_04H_r02.raw – two replicates.

### Data Protocol
All searches were performed using Human Uniprot database release 02/2015 merged with variant database of HEK293 cell line including the wild-type sequences. The search parameters were as follows: trypsin cleavage rule with maximum of 2 missed cleavages allowed, precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm (100 ppm for preliminary search by MaxQuant), fragment mass tolerance of 0.01 Da. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as fixed modification and methionine oxidation as a potential one. The identifications were filtered to 1% protein FDR.

### Publication Abstract
Genomic and proteomic data were integrated into the proteogenomic workflow to identify coding genomic variants of Human Embryonic Kidney 293 (HEK-293) cell line at the proteome level. Shotgun proteome data published by Geiger et&#xa0;al. (2012), Chick et&#xa0;al. (2015), and obtained in this work for HEK-293 were searched against the customized genomic database generated using exome data published by Lin et al. (2014). Overall, 112 unique variants were identified at the proteome level out of &#x223c;1200 coding variants annotated in the exome. Seven identified variants were shared between all the three considered proteomic datasets, and 27 variants were found in any two datasets. Some of the found variants belonged to widely known genomic polymorphisms originated from the germline, while the others were more likely resulting from somatic mutations. At least, eight of the proteins bearing amino acid variants were annotated as cancer-related ones, including p53 tumor suppressor. In all the considered shotgun datasets, the variant peptides were at the ratio of 1:2.5 less likely being identified than the wild-type ones compared with the corresponding theoretical peptides. This can be explained by the presence of the so-called "passenger" mutations in the genes, which were never expressed in HEK-293 cells. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with the dataset identifier PXD002613 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD002613).

### Keywords
Exome, Proteogenomics, Hek-293 cell line, Shotgun proteomics

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Medical Proteomics, Department of Personalized Medicine, Institute of Biomedical Chemistry
IBMC

### Submitter
Irina Ilina

### Lab Head
Dr Sergei Moshkovskii
Laboratory of Medical Proteomics, Department of Personalized Medicine, Institute of Biomedical Chemistry


