### Accession
PXD023340

### Title
APOE-Dependent Molecular Abnormalities in the Cerebrovasculature of Autopsied Alzheimer Disease Brain Tissue

### Description
Cerebrovascular dysfunction is a hallmark feature of Alzheimer's disease (AD). One of the greatest risk factor for AD is the apolipoprotein E4 (E4) allele. APOE4 genotype has been shown to negatively impact on perivascular amyloid clearance, however, its direct influence along with the other APOE variants (APOE2 and APOE3) on the molecular integrity of the cerebrovasculature has not been largely explored. To address this, we employed a 10-plex tandem isobaric mass tag approach in combination with an ultra-high pressure liquid chromatography MS/MS (Q-Exactive) method, to interrogate unbiased proteomic changes in cerebrovessels from AD and healthy control brains on different APOE genotype backgrounds. We first interrogated changes between healthy control homozygote E2/E2, E3/E3 and E4/E4 cases to identify underlying genotype specific effects on cerebrovessels. EIF2 signaling, regulation of eIF4 and 70S6K signaling and mTOR signaling were the top significantly altered pathways in E4/E4 compared to E3/E3 cases. EIF2, nitric oxide and sirtuin signaling pathways were the top significantly altered pathways in E4/E4 compared to E2/E2 cases. We used a Two-way ANOVA analysis to identify AD-dependent changes and their interactions with APOE genotype. The highest number of significantly regulated proteins from this interaction was observed in E3/E4 (192) and E4/E4 (189) cases. As above, EIF2, mTOR signaling and eIF4 and 70S6K signaling were the top three significantly altered pathways in E4 allele carriers (i.e. E3/E4 and E4/E4 genotypes). Of all the cerebrovascular cell specific markers identified in our proteomic analyses, endothelial cell, astrocyte, and smooth muscle cell specific protein markers were significantly altered in E4/E4 cases, while endothelial cells and astrocyte specific protein markers were altered in E3/E4 cases. These proteomic changes provide novel insights to explain the longstanding link between APOE4 and cerebrovascular dysfunction. The early and converging APOE4 dependent changes we identified could provide novel targets in the cerebrovasculature for developing disease modifying strategies to mitigate the effects of APOE4 genotype on increasing the risk for, and the path towards AD pathogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
Subcellular protein extraction: 250ul of ice cold phosphate buffered saline (PBS) was added to each cerebrovascular pellet, followed by homogenization using a probe sonicator and subsequent centrifugation at 20,000g for 5 mins at 4oC. Supernatant was collected in a different Eppendorf tube to obtain PBS-fraction.  Pelleted samples were re-suspended in 250ul of ice cold PBS containing 1M sodium chloride, further sonicated and centrifuged at 20,000g for 5 mins at 4oC. Supernatant was collected in a different Eppendorf tube and labeled as PBS-high salt fraction. The precipitant was resuspended in 250ul of ice cold 20mM Triethylamonium bicarbonate (TEAB) and 2% lithium dodecylsulphate anionic detergent, sonicated, and also followed by centrifugation at 20,000g for 5mins at 4oC. Final supernatant was transferred to a new Eppendorf tube and labeled as the membrane protein pellet fraction. PBS, PBS-high salt and membrane fractions (i.e. cytosolic, nuclear and membrane proteins) were used in the entire study to enhance the proteomic mining process.  Trypsin Digestion: 12.5ul of 21x proteinase inhibitor cocktail was added to 250ul of the PBS, PBS-high salt and membrane protein fractions, followed by BCA analyses to determine protein concentration. For the PBS fraction, 30ug protein was added to 3x volume of acetone, and left to incubate at -20oC for 1hr. Following centrifugation at 14,000g for 1.5mins at room temperature, pelleted samples were brought up in 20ul modified reduction alkylation buffer (MRAB) consisting of 20mM TEAB at pH 8, 1% w/v sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 1mM tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP), and 2.5mM 2-chloroacetamide (CAM). For the PBS-high salt fraction, 30ug protein was added to 1 in 5 parts of 20% w/v Trichloroacetic acid (TCA) and 3x volume of acetone, and left to incubate on ice for 1hr. Following centrifugation at 14,000g for 1.5mins at room temperature, pelleted samples were washed with 200ul of acetone and pelleted material brought up in 20ul MRAB. For the membrane protein pellet fraction, 30ug protein was added to 20% of 100% w/v Trichloroacetic acid (TCA), and left to incubate on ice for 1hr. Following centrifugation at 14,000g for 1.5mins at room temperature, pelleted samples were also washed with 200ul of acetone and pelleted material resolubilized in 20ul of MRAB. Validation of protein separation in all three protein fractions was conducted using sypro-red and Coomassie staining for total protein after polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. Seven and a half microliters of all three protein fractions underwent trypsin digestion at a 1:100 enzymatic concentration. Firstly re-suspended samples in MRAB were incubated at 37oC for 30minutes; 7.5ul of prepared activated trypsin solution (Promega) was added to re-suspended samples, and further incubated overnight at 37oC while shaking mildly. Digested samples were stored at -80oC prior to TMT labeling.   TMT labeling: Re-suspended labels were subsequently added to 10ul of dried digested protein samples, and allowed to incubate for 1hr at room temperature, after which 1ul of formic acid solution was added to stop the reaction. Labeled samples were pooled together in entire batches and subsequently dried in the speed vacuum.    Sodium deoxycholate (SDC) and tetraethylammonium bromide (TEAB) clean up: After TMT labeling, to remove traces of SDC and TEAB, protein samples were re-suspended in 100ul of 1% formic acid solution and centrifuged at 15,000 rpm for 1min to allow separation into different phases. Supernatants were collected in new Eppendorf tubes, and 200ul of ethyl acetate was added, and centrifuged at 15,000rpm with the upper organic layer discarded. This process was repeated three separate times, with the final lower phase taken to dryness in the speed vacuum. The resultant dried samples were re-solubilized in 100ul of 0.1% formic acid.   Purification and concentration of peptides: Prior to ultra-high pressure liquid chromatography, single step desalting, concentration and purification of peptides were conducted using 0.6ul C18 resin Ziptips. Briefly, ziptips pipette tips were used to remove contaminants by aspirating and dispensing in a solution of 0.1% formic acid made up in 50% acetonitrile (i.e. wetting buffer), and afterwards in a solution containing 0.1% formic acid (i.e. binding buffer). Ziptips were used for sample binding, by aspirating and dispensing through the samples multiple times. The resultant concentrated and purified labeled samples were aspirated in a solution of 5% methanol and 0.1% formic acid (i.e. washing buffer), followed by elution in a solvent containing 10ul of 0.1% formic acid made up in 50% acetonitrile (wetting buffer). After desalting and concentrating peptides, final samples were dried and re-suspended in 20ul of 0.1% formic acid and subsequently transferred into an auto-sampler vial, and analyzed by nano-Ultra-Performance Liquid Chromatography (UPLC) MS on a Q-Exactive Orbitrap instrument.

### Data Protocol
Chromatography and mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) methods                 Protein samples were analyzed using LC-MS/MS (Q-Exactive). Data dependent acquisition (DDA) settings for these MS experiments followed our previous work58,61. DDA settings were as follows: full-scan MS resolution = 140 000 full width at half maximum at 200 m/z, full-scan range = 380–1250 m/z, isolation width = 1.2 m/z, higher energy C-trap dissociation relative collision energy = 29, a minimum m/z setting of 100 m/z was used for all MS2 spectra, MS2 resolution = 17 500, dynamic exclusion = 180 s, and a Top 15 high/low duty cycle was used for precursor ion selection. We used a narrow isolation window and an ultra-long gradient setting to minimize the deleterious effects on quantitative accuracy that typically result from co-isolation of isobaric precursors without resorting to MS3-based method.   Data Processing and Statistical Analysis of proteomics data             We surveyed our amalgamated data-files, and added other modifications to our search criteria if deemed necessary, using the PMi preview software. Preview results were used to choose the precursor and fragment ion mass tolerances (4-ppm, 0.02-Da, respectively) and dynamic modifications. We used the following settings to search the data using SEQUEST and BYONIC as the search algorithms, and Uniprot human database (FEB/2018). Dynamic modifications - Oxidation / +15.995 Da (M), Methyl / +14.016 Da (E), Deamidated / +0.984 Da (N, Q), static modifications of TMT10plex / +229.163 Da (N-Terminus, K), Carbamidomethyl +57.021 (C).  Only unique peptides were considered for our final quantification. We used the Percolator feature of Proteome Discoverer for SEQUEST, and used the target-decoy feature, to set a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 for Byonic. The peptides passing this stringent cutoff FDR rate were subsequently exported for data cleaning and statistical analysis in JMP (SAS) software (version 15). Master proteins only underwent quantitative analysis if they were identified in at least 50% of the total number of plexes. JMP software employs a Shapiro-Wilk test for normality which was assessed prior to statistical analyses. Raw ion counts were ln transformed and analyzed by either two-way analyses of variance (ANOVA) (for AD and APOE interactions) or t-test (Control vs AD, Control E2/E2 vs E3/E3, Control E2/E2 vs E4/E4 and Control E3/E3 vs E4/E4 comparisons) to interrogate significantly regulated proteins between groups. Abundance ratio was generated by dividing each samples with the respective control E3/E3 sample used as a reference in the same plex for normalization of data (see Table 1). Log2 fold change and negative log 10 of the p value were subsequently uploaded into ingenuity pathway analyses (IPA) where molecules and pathways, diseases and biofunctions, associated networks and upstream regulators unique to each group comparison(s) were identified. Only master proteins with a significance level of 1.3 (i.e. negative log 10 of p value) were uploaded into IPA.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mural cells, Perivascular cells, Alzheimer’s disease, Proteomics, Cerebrovasculature, Apoe, Mass spectrometry, Endothelial cells

### Affiliations
Roskamp Institute
Neuroproteomics Lab, Roskamp Institute, Sarasota, FL, USA

### Submitter
Joseph Ojo

### Lab Head
Dr Joseph Ojo
Neuroproteomics Lab, Roskamp Institute, Sarasota, FL, USA


