### Accession
PXD032141

### Title
Influence of sex, age and diabetes on brain transcriptome and proteome modifications following cerebral ischemia

### Description
Ischemic stroke is a major cause of death and disability worldwide. Translation into the clinical setting of neuroprotective agents showing promising results in pre-clinical studies has systematically failed. One of the reasons that could explain this failure is that the animal models used to test neuroprotectants do not represent properly the population affected by stroke, as the majority of pre-clinical studies are performed in healthy young male mice. In this regard, we aimed to determine if the response to cerebral ischemia differed depending on age, sex and the presence of comorbidities. Thus, we explored proteomic and transcriptomic changes triggered during the hyperacute phase of cerebral ischemia (by transient intraluminal middle cerebral artery occlusion) in the brain of: (1) young male mice, (2) young female mice, (3) aged male mice and (4) diabetic young male mice. Moreover, we compared the proteomic and transcriptomic changes of each group using an integrative enrichment pathways analysis to disclose key common and exclusive altered proteins, genes and pathways in the first stages of the disease. We found 61 differentially expressed genes (DEG) in male mice, 77 in females, 699 in diabetic and 24 in aged mice. Of these, only 14 were commonly dysregulated in all four groups. The enrichment pathways analysis revealed that the inflammatory response was the biological process with more DEG in all groups of animals, followed by hemopoiesis and lymphoid organ development. Our findings indicate that the response to cerebral ischemia regarding proteomic and transcriptomic changes differs depending on the sex, age and comorbidities, highlighting the importance of incorporating these groups of animals in future stroke research studies.

### Sample Protocol
Animals were deeply anesthetized and transcardially perfused with cold saline to remove blood from brain vessels. Immediately after perfusion, mouse brains were quickly removed and sectioned into 1mm slices in cold conditions. The slice corresponding to the bregma anatomical point (as the core of the infarct tissue) was carefully dissected to isolate the right (ipsilateral, IP) and left (contralateral, CL) hemispheres separately. Each hemisphere was flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80ºC. Flash-frozen tissues were pulverized into powder in liquid nitrogen, and total fractions of protein and RNA were then isolated using the MirVana™ Paris™ kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., USA) following manufacturers’ instructions. RNA and protein fractions were stored at -80ºC until further use.  Samples were digested with trypsin in-solution. Initial buffer exchange to 8M Urea 50mM ammonium bicarbonate (AB) was performed using 0.5mL 3KDa cut-off Amicon Ultra ultrafiltration devices (Merck-Millipore). Total protein content was quantified using RCDC kit (Bio-Rad), and 15 μg of each protein extract were taken for tryptic digestion. Samples were first reduced with DTT to a final concentration of 10mM, for 1h at room temperature (RT), and then alkylated with 20mM of iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30min at rt in the dark. Carbamidomethylation reaction was quenched by addition of N-acetyl-L-cysteine to final concentration of 35mM followed by incubation for 15min at RT in the dark. Samples were diluted with 50 mM AB to a final concentration of 1M Urea, and then modified porcine trypsin (Promega Gold) was added in a ratio of 1:20 (w/w), and the mixture was incubated overnight at 37 °C. The reaction was stopped with formic acid (FA) to a final concentration of 0.5%.  The tryptic digests were then purified on SCX spin columns (PolyLC), evaporated to dryness and stored at -20ºC until analyzed. For LC-MS/MS analysis tryptic digests were diluted in 3% ACN, 1% FA and 500 ng of the sample was loaded to a 300 μm × 5 mm Pep-Map C18 (Thermo Scientific) at a flow rate of 15 μl/min using a Thermo Scientific Dionex Ultimate 3000 chromatographic system (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated using a C18 analytical column (NanoEase MZ HSS T3 column, 75 μm × 250 mm, 1.8 μm, 100Å, Waters) with a 210 min run, comprising four consecutive steps, first 3 min of isocratic gradient at 3%B, from 3 to 35% B in 180 min, from 35 to 50% B in 5 min, from 50 to 85% B in 1 min, followed by isocratic elution at 85 % B in 5 min and stabilization to initial conditions (A= 0.1% FA in water, B= 0.1% FA in CH3CN). The column outlet was directly connected to an Advion TriVersa NanoMate (Advion) fitted on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos™ Tribrid (Thermo Scientific). The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. Survey MS scans were acquired in the orbitrap with the resolution (defined at 200 m/z) set to 120,000. The lock mass was user-defined at 445.12 m/z in each Orbitrap scan. The top speed (most intense) ions per scan were fragmented in the linear ion trap (CID) and detected in the Ion Trap. Quadrupole isolation was employed to selectively isolate peptides of 350-1700 m/z. The predictive automatic gain control (pAGC) target was set to 1.5e5. The maximum injection time was set to 50 ms for MS1 and 35 ms for MS2 scan. Included charged states were 2 to 7. Target ions already selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 30 s. The mass tolerance of this dynamic exclusion was set to ±2.5 ppm from the calculated monoisotopic mass. Spray voltage in the NanoMate source was set to 1.7 kV. RF Lens were tuned to 30%. Minimal signal required to trigger MS to MS/MS switch was set to 5000 and activation Q was 0.250. The spectrometer was working in positive polarity mode and singly charge state precursors were rejected for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Progenesis® QI for proteomics software v 3.0 (Nonlinear dynamics, UK) was used for MS data analysis using default settings. The results from LCMS runs were automatically aligned to a selected reference sample. Alignments were then manually supervised. Normalization of MS signals, based on the median of ratiometric distribution of the abundance measurements, was performed automatically by the Progenesis® QI for proteomics software. Only features within the 400 to 1,600 m/z range, from 50 to 180 min of retention time, and with positive charges between 2 to 4 were considered for identification and quantification. Peaklists (mgf files) were generated using Progenesis® QI for proteomics and searched from Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., USA) using the Mascot search engine (v5.1, Matrix Science, UK). Protein identification was carried out using the SwissProt-MusMusculus database (2020, Jul 01: 55,400 entries) setting precursor mass tolerance to 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance to 0.5 Da. Oxidized methionine was considered as variable amino acid modification and carbamidomethylation of cysteines as fixed modification. Trypsin was selected as the enzyme allowing up to two missed cleavages. Significance threshold for the identifications was set to p<0.05, minimum Mascot ions score of 20. Only those proteins quantified and identified with at least 2 unique peptides were considered for further Progenesis® QI for proteomics software v 3.0 (Nonlinear dynamics, UK) was used for MS data analysis using default settings. The results from LCMS runs were automatically aligned to a selected reference sample. Alignments were then manually supervised. Normalization of MS signals, based on the median of ratiometric distribution of the abundance measurements, was performed automatically by the Progenesis® QI for proteomics software. Only features within the 400 to 1,600 m/z range, from 50 to 180 min of retention time, and with positive charges between 2 to 4 were considered for identification and quantification. Peaklists (mgf files) were generated using Progenesis® QI for proteomics and searched from Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., USA) using the Mascot search engine (v5.1, Matrix Science, UK). Protein identification was carried out using the SwissProt-MusMusculus database (2020, Jul 01: 55,400 entries) setting precursor mass tolerance to 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance to 0.5 Da. Oxidized methionine was considered as variable amino acid modification and carbamidomethylation of cysteines as fixed modification. Trypsin was selected as the enzyme allowing up to two missed cleavages. Significance threshold for the identifications was set to p<0.05, minimum Mascot ions score of 20. Only those proteins quantified and identified with at least 2 unique peptides were considered for further statistical analyses.  Protein abundance quantification was based on the sum of the peak areas within the isotope boundaries of peptide ion peaks. Proteins identified by identical peptide sets were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Only those proteins quantified and identified with at least 2 unique and non-conflicting peptides (it is, features assigned unambiguously to peptides belonging to the protein, as assessed by Progenesis software). Protein abundance values were log-10 transformed and column-wise standardized. A quality control of the data was performed using a principal component analysis (PCA) and intensity boxplots for each file. Selection of differentially expressed proteins was based on a linear model analysis with empirical Bayes modification for the variance estimates, using limma package. This analysis has been performed considering sample pairing. False Discovery Rate (FDR)-based corrections for multiple testing were also calculated. Fold-change (FC) was calculated by dividing the IP to the CL expression value for each animal.  statistical analyses.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics; transcriptomics; integromics; stroke; ischemic brain; mouse

### Affiliations
Vall d'Hebron Intitute of Research
Neurovascular Research Laboratory, Vall d’Hebron Institute of Research (VHIR), Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. Stroke Research Program, Institute of Biomedicine of Seville, IBiS/Hospital Universitario Virgen del Rocío/CSIC/University of Seville &amp; Department of Neurology, Hospital Universitario Virgen Macarena, Seville, Spain

### Submitter
Laura Ramiro 

### Lab Head
Dr Joan Montaner
Neurovascular Research Laboratory, Vall d’Hebron Institute of Research (VHIR), Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. Stroke Research Program, Institute of Biomedicine of Seville, IBiS/Hospital Universitario Virgen del Rocío/CSIC/University of Seville &amp; Department of Neurology, Hospital Universitario Virgen Macarena, Seville, Spain


