### Accession
PXD011765

### Title
Proteome-wide identification of arginine methylation in colorectal cancer tissues from patients

### Description
High-throughput identification of arginine methylation using clinical samples has not previously been studied.

### Sample Protocol
Purification of methylarginine-containing peptides was performed using PTMScan monomethyl- or asymetric dimethyl arginine motif kit after enzyme digestion

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were evaluated using SEQUEST and the Core platform from Harvard University (Eng, Huttlin, Villen). Files were searched against the SwissProt Homo sapiens FASTA database.  A mass accuracy of +/-5 ppm was used for precursor ions and 1.0 Da for product ions.  Enzyme specificity was limited to trypsin, with at least one tryptic (K- or R-containing) terminus required per peptide and up to four mis-cleavages allowed.  Cysteine carboxamidomethylation was specified as a static modification, oxidation of methionine and methylation (mono- or di-methyl) on arginine residues were allowed as variable modifications.  Reverse decoy databases were included for all searches to estimate false discovery rates, and filtered using a 5% FDR in the Linear Discriminant module of Core. Peptides were also manually filtered using a -/+ 5ppm mass error range and presence of a methylated arginine residue.  All quantitative results were generated using Progenesis (Nonlinear Dynamics) and Skyline (MacLean) to extract the integrated peak area of the corresponding peptide assignments.  Accuracy of quantitative data was ensured by manual review in Skyline or in the ion chromatogram files.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Asymmetric dimethyl-arginine, Mono-methyl arginine, Colorectal cancer, Protein arginine methylation, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Korea Basic Science Institute
Department of Surgery, Samsung Medical Center

### Submitter
Ju Yeon Lee

### Lab Head
Dr Hee Cheol Kim
Department of Surgery, Samsung Medical Center


