### Accession
PXD025174

### Title
Proteome of long-term expanded human CD4+ and CD8+ T cells

### Description
We analyzed the total proteome of CD4+ and CD8+ T cells isolated from human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC), and cultured to perform a CRISPR/CAS9 edition of their genome, in order to introduce an OST sequence at the C-terminus of proteins of interest (SLP76 or ZAP70, n=3 biological replicates in each case). Control T cells , isolated and cultured in the same way, but not modified by CRISPR/CAS9, were also analyzed (WT, n=3 or 6 biological replicates).

### Sample Protocol
For proteome analysis, cell pellets corresponding to 5 × 106 expanded CD4+ or CD8+ T cells were incubated with 150 μl of lysis buffer containing 50 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 0.5 mM EDTA, 135 mM NaCl, and 1% SDS for 10 min on ice and subjected to sonication with a Bioruptor ultrasonicator. An aliquot of 100µg of total protein from each sample was digested by trypsin on a S-trap mini device (Protifi). Tryptic peptides were dried and resuspended in 125 µl of 2% acetonitrile and 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid. 5 µL of each sample were analyzed with by nanoLC-MS on an Orbitrap Q Exactive mass spectrometer (model Q Exactive HFX, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and were loaded on a C18 precolumn (300 µm inner diameter × 5 mm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) in a solvent made of 2% acetonitrile and 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid, at a flow rate of 20 µl/min. After 5 min of desalting, the precolumn was switched online with the analytical C18 column (75 µm inner diameter × 50 cm, Acclaim PepMap C18, 2 µM, Thermo Fisher Scientific) equilibrated in 95% solvent A (5% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid) and 5% solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid), and peptides were separated with gradient of 10-45% of solvent B over 120 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode with the Xcalibur software.  MS survey scans were acquired with a resolution of 60,000 and an AGC target of 3e6. The 12 most intense ions were selected for fragmentation by high-energy collision induced dissociation, and the resulting fragments were analyzed at a resolution of 15000, using an AGC target of 1e5 and a maximum fill time of 22ms. Dynamic exclusion was used within 30 s to prevent repetitive selection of the same peptide

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were processed with MaxQuant software (version 1.5.2.8) for database search with the Andromeda search engine and quantitative analysis of the the each interactome. Data were searched against Homo Sapiens entries of the UniProtKB protein database (release UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot+TrEMBL 2019_09, 195349 entries including isoforms), plus the One-Strep-tag peptide sequence, and the set of common contaminants provided by MaxQuant. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification, whereas oxidation of methionine, protein N-terminal acetylation, and phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine were set as variable modifications. Specificity of trypsin digestion was set for cleavage after K or R, and two missed trypsin cleavage sites were allowed. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the first search and 4.5 ppm for the main Andromeda database search. The mass tolerance in tandem MS mode was set to 20 ppm. Minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids, and minimum number of unique or razor peptides was set to one. The I=L option of MaxQuant was enabled to avoid erroneous assignation of undistinguishable peptides belonging to very homologous proteins. Andromeda results were validated by the target decoy approach using a reverse database at both a peptide and protein false-discovery rate of 1% at both PSM and protein level. The match between runs option of MaxQuant was enabled with a match time window of 1 min, to allow cross-assignment of MS features detected in the different runs, after alignment of the runs with a time window of 20min. Protein quantification was based on unique and razor peptides. The minimum ratio count was set to 1 for LFQ calculation, and computation of the iBAQ metric was also enabled.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Whole cell lysate, Crispr/cas9, Proteome, Primary cd4+ and cd8+t cell

### Affiliations
Institute of Pharmacology and Structural Biology, CNRS, Toulouse, France
CNRS/IPBS

### Submitter
Anne Gonzalez de Peredo

### Lab Head
Dr Odile Schiltz
Institute of Pharmacology and Structural Biology, CNRS, Toulouse, France


