### Accession
PXD033378

### Title
The role of actin II in the mosquito stages of Plasmodium berghei

### Description
The aim of this work is to characterize the Plasmodium berghei actin II during mosquito stages with special focus on post-translational modification of histidine.

### Sample Protocol
Zygotes from 1.5 h culture were isolated by magnetic beads coated with 13.1 antibody against Pbs21. Three samples were pooled in each experiment. The samples were lysed in 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.8, 1 mM CaCl2, 0.5 mM ATP {Daher, 2010 #253} to which cocktails of protease and phosphatase inhibitors were added (PMSF, protease inhibitor cocktail from Sigma (cat no P2714) and phosphatase inhibitors A and B (from SIGMA)) with sonication 4 times 15 sec on ice. TritonX-100 was added to a final concentration of 1% and the samples were incubated for 30min, followed by centrifugation at 8000xg for 15 min. The supernatant (30ul) was loaded on a NuPAGE Bis-Tris 4-12% poliacrylamide gel (Invitrogen, Massachusetts, United States), and run in MOPS buffer at 200V. The gel was then treated with Imperial Coomassie Stain (Thermo Fisher Scientific, CA, United States) and a mainly coloured band below 42kDa was cut, destained with a solution containing 50mM bicarbonate ammonium (AMBIC) and acetonitrile (1:1), treated with 10 mM DTT at 56°C for 45min, washed, incubated with 55 mM iodoacetamide at RT for 30 min, dried with acetonitrile, then in a Speed Vac, and treated with 12.5ng/µl AspN (Promega Corporation, WI, United States) in 25 mM AMBICfor 4h or  overnight at 37°C. The peptide mixture obtained was analyzed by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis using an Ultimate 3000 HPLC (Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific) on-line with an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid (Thermo Fisher Scientific, CA, United States) mass spectrometer. Peptides were desalted on a trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and then separated onto a 16 cm long silica capillary (Silica Tips FS 360-75-8, New Objective, MA, United States), packed in-house with a C18, 1.9μm size particle (Michrom BioResources, CA, United States). A 60 min gradient was applied using buffer A (95% water, 5% acetonitrile, and 0.1% formic acid) and B (95% acetonitrile, 5% water, and 0.1% formic acid): B buffer was increased from 5% to 32% in 35 min, then to 80% in 5 minutes, and the column was washed and equilibrated again for the following run. MS spectra were acquired in the orbitrap at 120k while MS/MS spectra were acquired in the linear ion trap.

### Data Protocol
Spectra were analyzed using the software Proteome Dicoverer 2.4 (Thermo) using database containing Plasmodium Berghei Actin_I and_II sequences. Parameters used for the searches were: 15 ppm and 0.6 Da tolerance for precursor and fragment ions, respectively, fixed cysteine carbamidomethylation, variable methionine oxidation, histidine and lysine acetylation or methylation. Fixed Value PSM Validator node was applied taking into account maximum 0.05 deltaCn and high confidence PSMs (peptides spectral matches) with Xcorr= 2.5 and 3 for peptide charge 2 and 3, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Actin plasmodium methylation

### Affiliations
Istituto superiore di sanità

### Submitter
Serena Camerini

### Lab Head
Dr Serena Camerini
Istituto superiore di sanità


