### Accession
PXD046710

### Title
RNA helicase EIF4A1-mediated translation is essential for the GC response

### Description
EIF4A1 and cofactors EIF4B and EIF4H have been well characterised in cancers, including B cell malignancies, for their ability to promote the translation of oncogenes with structured 5’ untranslated regions. However, very little is known of their roles in non-malignant cells. Using mouse models to delete Eif4a1, Eif4b or Eif4h in B cells we show that EIF4A1, but not EIF4B or EIF4H, is essential for B cell development and the germinal centre response. Following B cell activation in vitro, EIF4A1 facilitates an increased rate of protein synthesis, MYC expression and expression of cell cycle regulators. However, EIF4A1-deficient cells remain viable whereas inhibition of EIF4A1 and EIF4A2 by Hippuristanol treatment induces cell death.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for mass spectrometry Splenic B cell isolated from four Eif4a1+/+ Cd23-cre or Eif4a1fl/fl Cd23-cre mice were cultured on CD40LB cell for 24 hours. Single cell suspensions were first incubated with 2.4G2 followed by a biotinylated H-2Kd (SF1-1.1) antibody at room temperature in MACS buffer. The biotinylated CD40LB cells were then removed by incubation with anti-biotin microbeads (Militenyi) and passed through an LS column. The purified B cells were washed twice with ice-cold PBS and pellets were frozen on dry ice. A paired Eif4a1+/+ Cd23-cre and Eif4a1fl/fl Cd23-cre sample (batch A males) were analysed by mass spectrometry and RNA-seq but removed for differential expression analysis due to reduced cell viability following isolation. Cell pellets were lysed in 200 μl of SDS buffer comprised of 5% SDS, 10 mM TCEP and 50 mM TEAB. Samples were incubated at 95C for 5 minutes before sonicating for 15 cycles of 30 seconds each using a BioRuptor (Diagenode). Proteins were alkylated in the dark for 1 hour by the addition of IAA at a final concentration of 20mM. Protein lysates were prepared for mass spectrometry using s-trap mini columns following the manufactures instructions (Protifi). In brief, for each sample 100 μg of protein was loaded onto a s-trap mini column. Captured protein was washed 5 times with 400 μl of wash buffer (90% methanol with 100 mM TEAB, pH 7.1). Proteins were digested by the addition of 5 μg of trypsin to each sample in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Samples were digested for 3 hours at 47C. Once digestion was complete, peptides were eluted with 80 μl of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate followed by 80 μl of 0.2 % formic acid and lastly with the addition of 80 μl 50 % acetonitrile with 0.2 % formic acid. After the addition of each elution buffer, columns were centrifuged at 4000 g for 1 minute and the flow through collected. Eluted peptides were dried by speedvac and suspended in 1 % formic acid before quantification using the CBQCA assay (Invitrogen).  Analysis of peptides by mass spectrometry Peptides were analysed by data independent acquisition (DIA) mass spectrometry. For each sample 1.5 μg of peptide was injected onto a Q Exactive™ plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RS (Thermo Scientific). The following LC buffers were used:  buffer A (0.1 % formic acid in Milli-Q water (v/v)) and buffer B (80 % acetonitrile and 0.1 % formic acid in Milli-Q water (v/v). An equivalent of 1.5 µg of each sample was loaded at 10 μL/min onto a µPAC trapping C18 column (Pharmafluidics). The trapping column was washed for 6 min at the same flow rate with 0.1 % TFA and then switched in-line with a Pharma Fluidics, 200 cm, µPAC nanoLC C18 column. The column was equilibrated at a flow rate of 300 nl/min for 30 min. The peptides were eluted from the column at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min with a linear gradient from 1 % buffer B to 3.8 % buffer B in 6 min, from 3.8 % B to 12.5 % buffer B in 40 min, from 12.5 % buffer B to 41.3 % buffer B within 176 min and then from 41.3 % buffer B to 61.3 % buffer B in 14 min. The gradient was finally increased from 61.3 % buffer B to 100 % buffer B in 1 min, and the column was then washed at 100 % buffer B for 10 min.  Two blanks were run between each sample to reduce carry-over.  The column was kept at a constant temperature of 50 oC.   Q-exactive plus was operated in positive ionization mode using an easy spray source. The source voltage was set to 2.2 Kv and the capillary temperature was 275 oC. Data were acquired in Data Independent Acquisition Mode.  A scan cycle comprised of a full MS scan (m/z range from 345-1155), resolution was set to 70,000, AGC target 3 x 106, maximum injection time 200 ms. MS survey scans were followed by DIA scans of dynamic window widths with an overlap of 0.5 Th. DIA spectra were recorded at a resolution of 17,500 at 200 m/z using an automatic gain control target of 3 x 106, a maximum injection time of 55 ms and a first fixed mass of 200 m/z. Normalised collision energy was set to 25 % with a default charge state set at 3. Data for both MS scan and MS/MS DIA scan events were acquired in profile mode.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics data analysis Raw files were searched using Spectronaut (Biognosys) version 16.0.220606.53000 using the directDIA function. The following search settings were used: minimum peptide length 7, maximum peptide length 52, cleavage enzyme Trypsin, maximum missed cleavages 2, protein and peptide FDR was set at 0.01, profiling and cross run normalisation were disabled. Carbamidomethyl (C) was selected as a fixed modification while Acetyl (N-term), Deamidation (NQ) and Oxidation (M) were selected as variable modifications.  Data were searched against a hybrid database generated from the UniProt mouse database (June 2020). This hybrid protein database consisted of manually annotated mouse SwissProt entries, along with mouse TrEMBL entries with a manually annotated homologue within the human SwissProt database. Estimated protein copy numbers and concentration were calculated using the proteomic ruler and Perseus. Differential expression analysis was performed using the t-test function in R after filtering for proteins with a mean > 2 peptides used for quantification across all samples.  7A: Ctrl 1             9A: Eif4a1 KO 1 7B: Ctrl 2             9B: Eif4a1 KO 2 8A: Ctrl 3             10A: Eif4a1 KO 3 8B: Ctrl 4             10B: Eif4a1 KO 4  Note that replicate 1 for both control and KO were excluded from downstream analysis due to low cell viability following activation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Translation, Eif4a1, B cells

### Affiliations
Immunology Programme, The Babraham Institute, Babraham Research Campus, Cambridge, CB22 3AT, United Kingdom.
University of Dundee

### Submitter
Andrew Howden

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Martin Turner
Immunology Programme, The Babraham Institute, Babraham Research Campus, Cambridge, CB22 3AT, United Kingdom.


