### Accession
PXD036737

### Title
Arginine limitation causes a directed DNA sequence evolution response in colorectal cancer cells

### Description
Proteomic changes following arginine deprivation in colorectal cancer cells before/after starvation were quantified with TMT mass spec

### Sample Protocol
RKO cells were plated in full media in quadruplicates. Once at 40% confluence, cells were washed with PBS and continued on either full media (condition “DF” 1-4) or low-arginine media (12.5 uM - condition “DL” 1-4), both supplemented with dialyzed fetal bovine serum. Cells were then collected at 24 hours using a lysis buffer consisting of 0.02 M Tris-HCl (pH 7.4), 0.1 M KCl, 0.001 M EDTA (pH 8), and 0.5 M NP-40, and cOmplete protease inhibitor (Roche). Cell lysates were precipiated and proteins were digested with trypsin and labeled with TMTpro. Peptides were analyzed with a Q-Exactive HF in MS2

### Data Protocol
Spectra were queried against the human proteome using Andromeda through MaxQuant. Further statistical analysis was performed with Perseus.

### Publication Abstract
Utilization of specific codons varies between organisms. Cancer represents a model for understanding DNA sequence evolution and could reveal causal factors underlying codon evolution. We found that across human cancer, arginine codons are frequently mutated to other codons. Moreover, arginine limitation-a feature of tumor microenvironments-is sufficient to induce arginine codon-switching mutations in human colon cancer cells. Such DNA codon switching events encode mutant proteins with arginine residue substitutions. Mechanistically, arginine limitation caused rapid reduction of arginine transfer RNAs and the stalling of ribosomes over arginine codons. Such selective pressure against arginine codon translation induced an adaptive proteomic shift toward low-arginine codon-containing genes, including specific amino acid transporters, and caused mutational evolution away from arginine codons-reducing translational bottlenecks that occurred during arginine starvation. Thus, environmental availability of a specific amino acid can influence DNA sequence evolution away from its cognate codons and generate altered proteins.

### Keywords
Colorectal cancer, Tmt, Arginine deprivation

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Systems Cancer Biology, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY, USA.
Research Support Specialist

### Submitter
Soren Heissel

### Lab Head
Dr Sohail F Tavazoie
Laboratory of Systems Cancer Biology, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY, USA.


