### Accession
PXD009395

### Title
Adaptive response of the sea urchin Paracentrotus lividus to ocean acidification at a volcanic CO2 vent’s system (Mediterranean Sea, Italy)

### Description
Ocean acidification is recognized as one of the most pervasive anthropogenic impact on marine life. A variety of responses have been highlighted in different marine organisms ranging from physiology to gene and protein expression. However, most of these studies have been performed in laboratory exposing adults or developmental stages to CO2 enriched seawater. To what extend the information obtained from these in vitro experiments may be extrapolated to a natural environment is questionable. Here, we utilized the Castello volcanic CO2 vents at Ischia as natural laboratory to study the P. lividus population living at the low pH zone (pH~7.8) compared to those of sea urchins living at control sites. Wide-ranging analyses were performed in animals collected at the acidified site, including the monitoring of their position, the determination of the physico-chemical parameters of the coelomic fluid and an in depth characterization of coelomocytes regarding the number and type of cells, Hsp70 expression, redox status and protein expression through de-novo sequencing analyses. In addition, the respiration, nitrogen metabolism, and skeletal mineralogy of urchins from the vent were examined in comparison with those from control animals. Overall these analyses allowed to understand how the sea urchins can thrive in low pH/high CO2.

### Sample Protocol
Paracentrotus lividus (~ 4 cm test diameter, n = 10 per site) were collected and transported in cool boxes to the laboratory and maintained in aerated tanks (air saturation >90%) with circulating seawater from the collection site (1 animal/5 L). The urchins were placed in close recirculating tanks, connected to external aquarium filters unit (Pratiko Askoll) and filled with natural seawater (38 PSU salinity). Temperature was maintained at 18 ±2°C with 12:12 light: dark cycle and daily measured. Seawater pH in each aquarium was continuously monitored with a pH meter (HI98150, HANNA), calibrated with standard buffer solutions. In the tank with the animals collected in the acidified N2 station, the pH was maintained stable at 7.7-7.8 units, with a CO2 bubbling and a pH controller system: “CO2 energy professional” system (Ferplast) comprising digital pH controllers (mod. AQUA2001) connected to pH electrodes. Animals were maintained in these conditions for maximum 48 hours before the analysis.  5-10 ml of the coelomic fluid were collected making a cut in the peristomal membrane by scissors, and poured on an equivalent amount of ice-cold 2× CCM. The cell suspension was then centrifuged at 8000 g for 10 minutes. The pellet containing immune cells was  washed in PBS and then deep-frozen in liquid nitrogen for further analyses. Shotgun mass spectrometry and label free quantification; after reduction and derivatisation, the proteins were digested with trypsin sequence grade trypsin (Roche) for 16 h at 37 °C using a protein:trypsin ratio of 1:20. LC-ESI-MS/MS analysis was performed on a DionexUltiMate 3000 HPLC System with a PicoFritProteoPrep C18 column (200 mm, internal diameter of 75 μm) (New Objective, USA). Gradient: 1% ACN in 0.1 % formic acid for 10 min, 1-4 % ACN in 0.1% formic acid for 6 min, 4-30% ACN in 0.1% formic acid for 147 min and 30-50 % ACN in 0.1% formic for 3 min at a flow rate of 0.3 μl/min. The eluate was electrosprayed into an LTQ OrbitrapVelos (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) through a Proxeonannoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The LTQ-Orbitrap was operated in positive mode in data-dependent acquisition mode to automatically alternate between a full scan (m/z 350-2000) in the Orbitrap (at resolution 60000, AGC target 1000000) and subsequent CID MS/MS in the linear ion trap of the 20 most intense peaks from full scan (normalized collision energy of 35%, 10 ms activation). Isolation window: 3 Da, unassigned charge states: rejected, charge state 1: rejected, charge states 2+, 3+, 4+: not rejected; dynamic exclusion enabled (60 s, exclusion list size: 200). Eight replicate analyses were performed. Data acquisition was controlled by Xcalibur 2.0 and Tune 2.4 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were analysed using MaxQuant software (version 1.3.0.5). The initial maximum allowed mass deviation was set to 6 ppm for monoisotopic precursor ions and 0.5 Da for MS/MS peaks. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin, defined as C-terminal to arginine and lysine excluding proline, and a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylcysteine was set as a fixed modification, N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. The spectra were searched by the Andromeda search engine against the rat Uniprot sequence database (release 29.05.2013). Protein identification required at least one unique or razor peptide per protein group. Quantification in MaxQuant was performed using the built in XIC-based label free quantification (LFQ) algorithm using fast LFQ. The required false positive rate was set to 1% at the peptide and 1% at the protein level, and the minimum required peptide length was set to 6 amino acids. Statistical analyses were performed using the Perseus software (version 1.4.0.6, www.biochem.mpg.de/mann/tools/). Only proteins present and quantified in at least 3 out of 4 technical repeats were considered as positively identified in a sample and used for statistical analyses. The protein data were analysed by analysis of variance (ANOVA, FDR 0.05) to identify proteins differentially expressed among the different conditions. Focusing on specific comparison, proteins were considered differentially expressed if they were present only in one condition or showed significant t-test difference (Post hoc Bonferroni test p value = 0.0167). Bioinformatics analysis was carried out by DAVID software to cluster enriched annotation groups of molecular function, biological processes, biological cellular component, KEGG pathway, keywords and molecular complexes (CORUM) within the set of differentially expressed proteins (p ≤ 0.05).

### Publication Abstract
The effects of ocean acidification, a major anthropogenic impact on marine life, have been mainly investigated in laboratory/mesocosm experiments. We used the CO<sub>2</sub> vents at Ischia as a natural laboratory to study the long-term effects of ocean acidification on the sea urchin Paracentrotus lividus population resident in low-pH (7.8&#x202f;&#xb1;&#x202f;0.2) compared to that at two control sites (pH&#x202f;8.02&#x202f;&#xb1;&#x202f;0.00; 8.02&#x202f;&#xb1;&#x202f;0.01). The novelty of the present study is the analysis of the sea urchin immune cells, the sentinels of environmental stress responses, by a wide-ranging approach, including cell morphology, biochemistry and proteomics. Immune cell proteomics showed that 311 proteins were differentially expressed in urchins across sites with a general shift towards antioxidant processes in the vent urchins. The vent urchin immune cells showed higher levels of total antioxidant capacity, up-regulation of phagosome and microsomal proteins, enzymes of ammonium metabolism, amino-acid degradation, and modulation of carbon metabolism proteins. Lipid-hydroperoxides and nitric oxide levels were not different in urchins from the different sites. No differences in the coelomic fluid pH, immune cell composition, animal respiration, nitrogen excretion and skeletal mineralogy were observed. Our results reveal the phenotypic plasticity of the immune system of sea urchins adapted to life at vent site, under conditions commensurate with near-future ocean acidification projections.

### Keywords
Sea urchins, Nanolc-ms/ms, Proteomics, Eco-physiology, Ocean acidification, Adaptation

### Affiliations
University of Milan
Dipartimento di Medicina Veterinaria, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milano, Italy

### Submitter
Simona Nonnis

### Lab Head
Dr Gabriella Tedeschi
Dipartimento di Medicina Veterinaria, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milano, Italy


