### Accession
PXD017058

### Title
Astrocyte Support for Oligodendrocyte Differentiation can be Conveyed via Extracellular Vesicles but Diminishes with Age

### Description
Extracellular vesicles isolated from the conditioned media of short, long-term, and rapamycin treated long-term cultured astrocytes were subjected to proteomic analysis to determine the how the EV proteome changes following long-term culture.

### Sample Protocol
In solution protein digestion was performed. Briefly, extracellular vesicle pellets were resuspended in 1XRIPA buffer containing Halt Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA), and then homogenized by sonication and cleared by centrifugation (14,000 rpm, 4°C, 10 min). Proteins were extracted by Chloroform/Methanol precipitation using established protocols. Protein pellets were dissolved and denatured (8M urea, 0.4M ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8) and then reduced by addition of 1/10 volume of 45 mM dithiothreitol and incubated (37ºC / 20 min), and then alkylated with the addition of 1/10 volume of 100mM iodoacetamide with incubation in the dark (RT/ 20 min). The urea concentration was adjusted to 2M by the addition of water prior to enzymatic digestion at 37°C with LysC for 4 h, then trypsinized (Seq. Grade Mod. Trypsin 16 h). Protease:protein ratios were estimated at 1:50. Samples were acidified by the addition of 20% trifluoroacetic acid, then desalted using C18 MacroSpin columns (The Nest Group, Southborough, MA, USA) following the manufacturer’s directions with peptides eluted with 0.1% TFA, 80% acetonitrile. Eluted sample was speedvaced dry and dissolved in MS loading buffer (2% aceotonitrile, 0.2% trifluoroacetic acid). A nanodrop measurement (Thermo Scientific Nanodrop 2000 UV-Vis Spectrophotometer) determined protein concentrations (A260/A280). Each sample was then further diluted with MS loading buffer to 0.08 µg/µl, with 0.4 ug (5µl) injected for LC-MS/MS analysis. Following in solution protein digestion, LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Thermo Scientific Q Exactive Plus with a Waters nanoAcquity UPLC system, using a Waters Symmetry® C18 180µm x 20mm trap column and a ACQUITY UPLC PST (BEH) C18 nanoACQUITY Column 1.7 µm, 75 µm x 250 mm (37ºC) for peptide separation. Trapping was done at 5µl/min, 97% Buffer A (100% water, 0.1% formic acid) for 3 min. Peptide separation was performed at 330 nl/min with Buffer A: 100% water, 0.1% formic acid and Buffer B: 100% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. A linear gradient (90 minutes) was run with 3% buffer B at initial conditions; 5% B at 1 minute; 35% B at 50 minutes; 50% B at 60 minutes; 90% B at 65-70; and back to initial conditions at 71 minutes. MS was acquired in profile mode over the 300-1,700 m/z range using 1 microscan; 70,000 resolution; AGC target of 3E6; and a full max ion time of 45 ms. MS/MS was acquired in centroid mode using 1 microscan; 17,500 resolution; AGC target of 1E5; full max IT of 100 ms; 1.7 m/z isolation window; normalized collision energy of 28; and 200-2,000 m/z scan range. Up to 20 MS/MS were collected per MS scan on species with an intensity threshold of 2E4, charge states 2-6, peptide match preferred, and dynamic exclusion set to 20 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification was determined using Proteome Discoverer software v2.2. Data searching was performed using the Mascot algorithm (version 2.6.0) against the SwissProtein database with taxonomy restricted Homo sapiens. The search parameters included tryptic peptides with up to 3 missed cleavages, 10 ppm precursor mass tolerance and 0.02 Da fragment mass tolerance, and variable (dynamic) modifications of methionine oxidation, carbamidomethylated cysteine, deamidated asparagine or glutamine. Normal and decoy database searches were run, with the confidence level set to 95% (P < 0.05). Scaffold Proteome Software_version 4.8.7 was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides.

### Publication Abstract
The aging brain is associated with significant changes in physiology that alter the tissue microenvironment of the central nervous system (CNS). In the aged CNS, increased demyelination has been associated with astrocyte hypertrophy and aging has been implicated as a basis for these pathological changes. Aging tissues accumulate chronic cellular stress, which can lead to the development of a pro-inflammatory phenotype that can be associated with cellular senescence. Herein, we provide evidence that astrocytes aged in culture develop a spontaneous pro-inflammatory and senescence-like phenotype. We found that extracellular vesicles (EVs) from young astrocyte were sufficient to convey support for oligodendrocyte differentiation while this support was lost by EVs from aged astrocytes. Importantly, the negative influence of culture age on astrocytes, and their cognate EVs, could be countered by treatment with rapamycin. Comparative proteomic analysis of EVs from young and aged astrocytes revealed peptide repertoires unique to each age. Taken together, these findings provide new information on the contribution of EVs as potent mediators by which astrocytes can extert changing influence in either the disease or aged brain.

### Keywords
Senescence, Astrocytes, Oligodendrocytes, Extracellular vesicles

### Affiliations
University of Connecticut
University of Connecticut School of Medicine, Department of Neuroscience, Farmington, CT, 06032, USA

### Submitter
Cory Willis

### Lab Head
Dr Stephen J Crocker
University of Connecticut School of Medicine, Department of Neuroscience, Farmington, CT, 06032, USA


