### Accession
PXD029305

### Title
Host Cell Protein Quantification Workflow Using Optimized Standards combined with Data-Independent Acquisition Mass Spectrometry

### Description
Monitoring of host cell proteins (HCPs) during the manufacture of monoclonal antibodies (mAb) has become a critical requirement to provide effective and safe drug product. ELISA assays are still the current gold standard for the quantification of protein impurities. However, this technique has several limitations and does, among others, not enable the precise identification of proteins. In this context, mass spectrometry (MS) has emerged as an alternative and orthogonal method that delivers qualitative and quantitative information on all identified HCPs. However, in order to be routinely implemented in biopharmaceutical companies, liquid chromatography (LC)-MS based methods still need to be standardized to provide highest sensitivity and robust and accurate quantification. In this study, we developed a promising MS-based analytical workflow coupling the use of an innovative quantification standard, the HCP Profiler solution, with a spectral library-based data-independent acquisition (DIA) method and strict data validation criteria. The performance of the HCP Profiler solution was compared to more conventional standard protein spikes and the DIA approach was benchmarked against classical data-dependent acquisition (DDA) using samples collected at various stages of the manufacturing process. Finally, we further explored the possibility to use spectral library-free DIA. As a result, our method showed accurate and reproducible (coefficients of variation (CVs) < 10%) quantification of HCPs while reaching a sensitivity down to the sub-ng/mg mAb level.

### Sample Protocol
CHO-DG44 null cell line sample was fractionated onto 12% acrylamide sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis SDS-PAGE for spectral library generation. CCCF and PPA samples were stacked in a single band for HCP quantification. Gel bands of the fractionated null cell line sample and stacked bands were cut into small pieces. Proteins were in-gel reduced with 10 mM DTT for 30 min at 60°C. Alkylation was performed with 55 mM IAA for 30 min in the dark. Then trypsin (Promega, Madison, USA) was added to a 1:50 enzyme:substrate ratio (we estimated 1 µg of proteins in each band of the null cell line fractionation). Samples were incubated overnight at 37°C (14 hours). Peptides were extracted from gel band using 60% ACN, 0.1% FA for 1 hour under agitation and a second step with 100% ACN for 1 hour. After vaccum drying, samples were resolubilized in 2% ACN, 0.1% FA to obtain a final protein concentration of 0.4 µg/µL. In all samples, retention time standards (iRT kit, Biognosys, Schlieren, Switzerland) were spiked. For the HCP Profiler solution (Anaquant, Villeurbanne, France) based quantification, one bead was spiked in 150 µL of 0.2 ng/µL protein solution. For the mix of standard protein, four accurately quantified standard proteins (on column 10 fmol of ADH (yeast alcohol dehydrogenase, P00330), 2 fmol of PYGM (rabit phosphorylase b, P00489), 0.5 fmol of BSA (bovine serum albumin, P02769) and 0.2 fmol of ENL (yeast enolase, P00924)) from the MassPREP Digestion Standard Kit (Waters, Milford, USA) were spiked.  nanoLC-MS/MS acquisitions: Data Dependent Acquisition and Data Independent Acquisition were performed on a NanoAcquity UPLC device (Waters) coupled to a Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Mobile phase A was 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water and mobile phase B was 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in acetonitrile. The equivalent of 400ng of proteins was trapped onto a Symmetry C18 precolumn (20 mm × 180 μm, 5 μm diameter particles; Waters) and eluted on an Acquity UPLC BEH130 C18 column (250 mm × 75 μm, 1.70 μm particles; Waters). A 115 minutes chromatographic gradient (2-35% B in 95 min, 35-80% B in 1 min, 80% B for 5 min, 80-2% B in 1 min and maintained 2% B for 13 min) was applied at 400nl/min, with a column temperature set at 60°C. The Q-Exactive HF-X source temperature was set at 250°C and spray voltage to 2 kV. The system was fully controlled by XCalibur software v4.0.27.19, 2013 (Thermo Scientific) and NanoAcquity UPLC console v1.51.3347 (Waters). DIA and DDA injections were performed in a randomized injection sequence.  DDA acquisition: Full scan MS spectra (375-1500 m/z) were acquired in positive mode at a resolution of 120 000 at 200 m/z, a maximum injection time of 60 ms and an AGC target value of 3 x 106 charges. The 10 most intense multiply charged peptides per full scan (charge states ≥2) were isolated using a 2 m/z window and fragmented using higher energy collisional dissociation (normalized collision energy set at 27). MS/MS spectra were acquired with a resolution of 15 000 at 200 m/z, a maximum injection time of 60 ms and an AGC target value of 1 x 105, and dynamic exclusion was set to 40 sec.  DIA acquisition: Full-scan MS spectra were collected from 350–1 250 m/z at a resolution of 60 000 at 200 m/z with an AGC target fixed at 3.106 ions and a maximum injection time of 60 ms. Fragments analysis (MS/MS) was subdivided into 40 windows of variable widths. The 40 MS2 spectra were collected in a range from 350 to 980 m/z for CCCF and 350 to 1027 m/z PPA samples. Resolution was set to 30 000 at 200 m/z, AGC target fixed at 1.106 ions and with an automatic maximum injection time.

### Data Protocol
DDA data treatment: Raw DDA files were converted to .mgf peaklists using MsConvert and were submitted to Mascot database searches on a local server (version 2.5.1, MatrixScience, London, UK) against a .fasta database including all Critecutulus griseus entries extracted from UniProtKB/TrEMBL (56 566 protein entries, February 15, 2021) together with their reversed sequences, as well as the iRT retention time standards (Biognosys), the four standard proteins of the MassPREP Digestion Standard Kit (Waters),  HCP Profiler kit proteins, the mAb heavy and light chains and common contaminants. Spectra were searched with a mass tolerance of 5 ppm in MS mode and 0.05 Da in MS/MS mode. One trypsin missed cleavage was tolerated. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine residues and acetylation of proteins n-termini were set as variable modifications. Identification results were imported into Proline software version 1.6 (http://proline.profiproteomics.fr/; Bouyssié et al., Bioinformatics 202042) for validation. A false discovery rate of 1% was set at peptide levels using Adjusted e-Value and protein level using Mascot Modified Mudpit scores. Peptides abundances were extracted with Proline software using an extraction m/z tolerance and PSM/Peakel matching m/z tolerance of 5 ppm. Alignment of the LC-MS runs was performed using Loess smoothing, Peptide Identity method and with a time tolerance of 300 seconds. Cross assignment of peptide ions abundances was performed among PPA or harvest samples using a m/z tolerance of 5 ppm and a retention time tolerance of 40 seconds.  Cricetulus griseus, CHO reference spectral library generation: A reference spectral library combining a series of analyses conducted on different samples in DDA mode was generated using the Spectronaut and Pulsar algorithm (v.14.5; Biognosys). This series of analyses comprised:  - 24 gel bands obtained by SDS PAGE fractionation of the CHO DG44 null cell line sample. - All DDA analyses of current CCCF and PPA samples., including iRT retention time standards (Biognosys) and the 18 proteins from HCP Profiler kit. Raw DDA files were uploaded into Spectronaut and searched with the Pulsar algorithm against a fasta database containing all Critecutulus griseus entries extracted from UniProtKB/TrEMBL (56 687 protein entries, 2021/02/15), as well as the iRT retention time standards (Biognosys), the 18 proteins from HCP Profiler kit, the reference sequence of the mAb and common contaminants).  Trypsin/P enzyme was used and one missed cleavage was tolerated. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine residues and acetylation of proteins n-termini were set as variable modifications. MS and MS/MS mass tolerances were set in dynamic mode. The spectral library was validated as follows: a False Discovery Rate (FDR) of 0.01 was set at Peptide Spectrum Matches (PSM), Peptides and Proteins levels. Fragment ions window was set between 300 and 1800 m/z with a minimum of 4 fragments per precursor and up to 6.  DIA data treatment: DIA data was analysed with a peptide-centric approach using the Spectronaut algorithm and the upper described in house generated spectral library (v.14.5; Biognosys).  Trypsin/P was used as digestion enzyme with one missed cleavage allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine residues and acetylation of proteins n-termini were set as variable modifications. For quantitative data extraction, MS and MS/MS mass tolerances, Extracted Ion Chromatogram (XIC) and retention time windows were all set as dynamic. iRT regression type was set to local (non-linear) regression. A false discovery rate of 1% was set at precursors and proteins levels. At this extraction stage, a sparse q-value filter was applied. Peptide quantities corresponding to the sum of a minimum of 4 fragments XIC areas and up to 6 fragments (interference correction parameter was turned on) were calculated. Precursors with a Qvalue below 0.01 were used for IRT profiling.

### Publication Abstract
Monitoring of host cell proteins (HCPs) during the manufacturing of monoclonal antibodies (mAb) has become a critical requirement to provide effective and safe drug products. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays are still the gold standard methods for the quantification of protein impurities. However, this technique has several limitations and does, among others, not enable the precise identification of proteins. In this context, mass spectrometry (MS) became an alternative and orthogonal method that delivers qualitative and quantitative information on all identified HCPs. However, in order to be routinely implemented in biopharmaceutical companies, liquid chromatography-MS based methods still need to be standardized to provide highest sensitivity and robust and accurate quantification. Here, we present a promising MS-based analytical workflow coupling the use of an innovative quantification standard, the HCP Profiler solution, with a spectral library-based data-independent acquisition (DIA) method and strict data validation criteria. The performances of the HCP Profiler solution were compared to more conventional standard protein spikes and the DIA approach was benchmarked against a classical data-dependent acquisition on a series of samples produced at various stages of the manufacturing process. While we also explored spectral library-free DIA interpretation, the spectral library-based approach still showed highest accuracy and reproducibility (coefficients of variation &lt;&#xa0;10%) with a sensitivity down to the sub-ng/mg mAb level. Thus, this workflow is today mature to be used as a robust and straightforward method to support mAb manufacturing process developments and drug products quality control.

### Keywords
Host cell proteins (hcps), Data validation., Data-independent acquisition (dia), Hcp profiler, Protein quantification

### Affiliations
LSMBO IPHC CNRS
Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse BioOrganique (LSMBO), Université de Strasbourg, CNRS, IPHC, UMR 7178, 25 Rue Becquerel, F-67087 Strasbourg, France

### Submitter
Steve Hessmann

### Lab Head
Dr Christine Carapito
Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse BioOrganique (LSMBO), Université de Strasbourg, CNRS, IPHC, UMR 7178, 25 Rue Becquerel, F-67087 Strasbourg, France


