### Accession
PXD019999

### Title
p53 C-terminal acetylation modulates apoptotic program

### Description
Advanced colorectal cancer (CRC) is an unresolved clinical problem. Epigenetic drugs belonging to the group of histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi) may combat CRC in rationally designed treatment schedules. Unfortunately, there is sparse evidence on molecular mechanisms and markers that determine cellular sensitivity to HDACi. Irinotecan is widely used to treat CRC and causes replication stress (RS) and DNA damage as topoisomerase-I inhibitor. We applied irinotecan and the class I HDACi entinostat (MS-275) to isogenic p53-positive and -negative CRC cells. Combinations of irinotecan and MS-275 evoke mitochondrial damage, caspase-mediated apoptosis, and RS-associated DNA damage synergistically and p53-dependently. Targeted mass spectrometry and immunoblot show that irinotecan induces phosphorylation, acetylation, and accumulation of p53 and its target genes. Addition of MS-275 augments the irinotecan-induced acetylation of C-terminal lysine residues of p53 but decreases its phosphorylation and p53 target gene induction. Furthermore, MS-275 increases the amount of acetylated p53 at mitochondria and dysregulates the expression of pro- and anti-apoptotic BCL2 proteins in irinotecan-treated cells. Regarding DNA repair, we see that MS-275 represses the homologous recombination (HR) filament protein RAD51, which limits DNA damage and pro-apoptotic effects of irinotecan. These data suggest that key class I HDAC-dependent functions of p53 in cells with RS are linked to mitochondrial damage and a breakdown of HR. Most importantly, combinations of irinotecan plus MS-275 also kill short-term primary CRC cell cultures and organoids from CRC patients but spare organoids of adjacent matched normal tissue. Thus, irinotecan/HDACi treatment is a promising new approach for the therapy of p53-proficient tumors with clinically tractable inhibitors.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitation of p53  Immunoprecipitation of p53 was performed as previously described (Deschoemaeker et al, 2015). In brief, protein G Dynabeads (Thermo Fisher Scientific) were cross-linking with an equal volume of anti-p53 primary antibodies (50:50 (v/v) DO-1 and Bp53-12; Santa Cruz) with BS3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) following to the manufacturers' instructions. Cells were harvested by scraping in lysis buffer (50mM Tris pH 7.5, 1mM EDTA, 1% (v/v) NP-40, 50mM NaF, 5mM sodium pyrophosphate, 0.27M sucrose supplemented with protease inhibitor complete (Roche), 10µM trichostatin A, 10mM sodium butyrate, 10mM nicotinamide, 1mM sodium orthovanadate, 10mM sodium β-glycerophosphate) followed by brief sonication. Each lysate was incubated with 30 µl of bead-antibody mixture over night at 4°C. Afterwards, beads were washed twice with lysis buffer, once with high salt buffer (20mM Tris pH 8.1, 500mM NaCl, 0.1% SDS, 1% triton X-100, 1mM EDTA) and three times with TBST (0.05% Tween-20 in TBS). Precipitated p53 was eluted from the beads for 10min at 95°C in 50μl 1x LDS buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Supernatants were transferred into new tubes and DTT was added (final concentration 20mM). Samples were boiled again 10min at 95°C, separated by SDS-PAGE and stained with Coomassie.    In-gel proteolytic protein digestion The region containing p53 was excised from an SDS-gel and washed twice with 50mM NH4HCO3, and 50mM NH4HCO3 with 50% acetonitrile. Proteins within the gel slices were reduced using 10mM DTT (54°C, 30min) and subsequently alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide (RT, 45min). Gel pieces were washed with 50mM NH4HCO3, and 50mM NH4HCO3 with 50% acetonitrile and finally dehydrated using acetonitrile before drying in a SpeedVac. Trypsin (5μg/ml trypsin gold; Promega; in 25mM ammonium bicarbonate) was added and incubated for 12h at 30°C. Tryptic peptides were extracted from gel pieces with two 50% (v/v) acetonitrile/water washes and subsequently dried in a SpeedVac.    Liquid Chromatography The tryptic digest obtained was separated by nanoscale C18 reverse-phase liquid chromatography performed on an EASY-nLC II (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a Linear Trap Quadrupole - Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Elution was carried out using a binary gradient with buffer A: 2% acetonitrile and B: 80% acetonitrile, both containing 0.1% of formic acid. Samples were re-suspended and loaded with buffer A, on a pre-column NS-MP-10 BioSphere C-18 5μm 120Å– 360/100μm x 0.2cm of length (NanoSeparations) and washed with 25µl of buffer A at a maximum pressure of 200bar. Desalted peptides were subsequently eluted at 200nl/min flow, into a 20cm fused silica emitter (New Objective) packed in-house with ReproSil Gold 200 C18, 3μm resin (Dr Maisch GmbH). The gradient used start at 5% of buffer B, and was increased to 28% over 42min and then to 45% over 13min. Finally, a washing step at 100% of B is carried out over 10min followed by a 5min re-equilibration at 5% B for a total duration of 70min. The eluting peptide solutions were automatically (online) electrosprayed into the mass spectrometer via a nanoelectrospray ion source. An Active Background Ion Reduction Device (ABIRD) was used to decrease contaminant signal level.    Data dependent acquisition  General mass spectrometric conditions were as follows: spray voltage, 2.4kV, ion transfer tube temperature, 200°C. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode and used in data-dependent acquisition mode (DDA). A full scan (FT-MS) was acquired at a target value of 1000000 ions with resolution R = 60000 over mass range of 350-1600amu. The top ten most intense ions were selected for fragmentation in the linear ion trap using Collision Induced Dissociation (CID) using a maximum injection time of 25ms or a target value of 5000 ions. Multiply charged ions from two to five charges having intensity greater than 5000 counts were selected through a 1amu window and fragmented using normalized collision energy of 35 for 10ms. Former target ions selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 30seconds.    Parallel reaction monitoring  Parallel reaction monitoring acquisition (PRM) was used for analysis of p53 acetylated peptides. A full scan (FT-MS) was acquired at a target value of 1000000 ions with resolution R = 60.000 over mass range of 350-1600amu followed by nine PRM scans targeting the molecular masses of acetylated p53 peptides present in library and peptide 343-351 used for normalization (table 2) The precursor masses in the PRM scans were fragmented using collision induced dissociation in the linear ion trap. Isolation width of 1m/z, activation time of 10ms and normalized collision energy of 36 were used to fragment a maximum target of 5000 ions (or injection time of 25ms). PRM scans mass ranges were adjusted according to the masses of the monitored parent peptides. PRM data were collected in triplicate.

### Data Protocol
Data dependent analysis  Raw data were processed with Raw2MSN (Olsen et al, 2005), and Mascot generic files generated were analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Science, version 2.4.1), querying both: SwissProt database (release 2014_01, restricted to Homo sapiens, 20273 entries) and an in-house database containing common proteomic contaminants and main isoforms of human p53. Mascot was searched assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin allowing for two miscleavages with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.5Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10ppm. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was specified in Mascot as a fixed modification. Acetylation of protein N-termini and lysines, oxidation of Methionine, and phosphorylation of Serine and Threonine were specified in Mascot as variable modifications. Scaffold (version 4.3.2, Proteome Software) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability as specified by the Peptide Prophet algorithm, resulting in a peptide false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.02% (Keller et al, 2002). Only acetylated peptides still present after filtering were used to build the library used in PRM experiments.    Parallel Reaction monitoring and quantitation analysis  Normal and acetylated p53 tryptic peptides precursor and fragment masses, used to setup PRM acquisition methods, were deduced from a library generated using data dependent analysis data gathered from p53 immunoprecipitations. The PRM data traces of p53 acetylated tryptic peptides were used for MS/MS based quantitation. Raw data were imported into Skyline, and y” and b product ions chromatograms of 1+ and 2+ charges were extracted, summed and integrated. Only fragment ion peaks with the same retention time were used for quantitation. MS/MS filtering in Skyline was applied to all replicates using: “Targeted” acquisition method, product mass analyzer “QIT” and resolution of 0.6 m/z. All matching scan were included in data extraction. Ion series extracted were compared using a 0.5 m/z tolerance to the 10 most intense product ions of p53 acetylated peptides library; and dotp values (Frewen & MacCoss, 2007) obtained are reported in table.     Statistical analysis  Statistical analyses were done with Microsoft Excel using two-tailed Student’s t test (*p<0.05, **p<0.01, ***p<0.001). Error bars show standard deviation (SD) if not mentioned otherwise.    Parallel Reaction Monitoring p53 peptides ______________________________________________________________________________________________________________________  p53 peptide Sequence  Ac. Position m/z  z Top 5 Monitored MS/MS Peptide Fragment  (292-305) (K)KGEPHHELPPGSTK(R) 292  519.2670 3 y6, y9++, y11++, y13++, b8++ (292-306) (K)KGEPHHELPPGSTKR(A) 305  571.3007 3 y6, y7++, y9++, b8, b9++ (307-320) (R)ALPNNTSSSPQPKK(K) 319  755.8966 2 y3, y5, y7, y12++, b11 (307-320) (R)ALPNNTSSSPQPKK(K) 319  795.8798 2 y3, y5, y11++, y12++, b11 (320-333) (K)KKPLDGEYFTLQIR(G) 321  875.4803 2 y9, y10, y12, y13++, b5 (Rt=51.7) (320-333) (K)KKPLDGEYFTLQIR(G) 320  875.4803 2 y9, y10, y12, y13++, b5 (Rt=50.8) (343-351) (R)ELNEALELK(D)  "  529.7900 2 y3, y4, y5, y6, y7 ______________________________________________________________________________________________________________________

### Publication Abstract
Late-stage colorectal cancer (CRC) is still a clinically challenging problem. The activity of the tumor suppressor p53 is regulated via post-translational modifications (PTMs). While the relevance of p53 C-terminal acetylation for transcriptional regulation is well defined, it is unknown whether this PTM controls mitochondrially mediated apoptosis directly. We used wild-type p53 or p53-negative human CRC cells, cells with acetylation-defective p53, transformation assays, CRC organoids, and xenograft mouse models to assess how p53 acetylation determines cellular stress responses. The topoisomerase-1 inhibitor irinotecan induces acetylation of several lysine residues within p53. Inhibition of histone deacetylases (HDACs) with the class I HDAC inhibitor entinostat synergistically triggers mitochondrial damage and apoptosis in irinotecan-treated p53-positive CRC cells. This specifically relies on the C-terminal acetylation of p53 by CREB-binding protein/p300 and the presence of C-terminally acetylated p53 in complex with the proapoptotic BCL2 antagonist/killer protein. This control of C-terminal acetylation by HDACs can mechanistically explain why combinations of irinotecan and entinostat represent clinically tractable agents for the therapy of p53-proficient CRC.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Parallel reaction monitoring, Dna damage response (ddr), Acetylation, C-terminus, Apoptosis, P53

### Affiliations
CRUK Beatson Institute, Switchback Road, Glasgow G61 1BD, UK.
Proteomics

### Submitter
Sergio Lilla

### Lab Head
Dr Sara Rossana Zanivan
CRUK Beatson Institute, Switchback Road, Glasgow G61 1BD, UK.


