### Accession
PXD038740

### Title
Comparative proteomic analysis of side and non-side populations isolated from A549 lung carcinoma cells cultivated under normoxic and hypoxic conditions

### Description
Presence of key hypoxic regulators, HIF-1α or HIF-2α, in tumors is associated with disease progression and poor patient prognosis. Hypoxia massively activates several genes including the one encoding BCRP transport protein that proffers the multidrug resistance to cancer cells through the xenobiotic efflux and, moreover, is a determinant of side population (SP) that associates with cancer stem-like phenotype. As the natural medicine comes to the fore, it is instinctive to look for natural agents possessing powerful features against cancer resistance. Hypericin, pleiotropic agent found in Hypericum plants, is good example, as it is BCRP substrate and potential inhibitor, as well as SP- and HIF-modulator. Here, we showed that hypericin efficiently accumulates in hypoxic cancer cells, degrades HIF-1/2α and together with hypoxia decreases BCRP efflux, thus diminishes SP population. On the contrary, this seemingly favorable result was accompanied by stimulated migration of this minor population of cancer cells that preserved SP phenotype. Since hypoxia unexpectedly decreased BCRP level and SP fraction, we also compared the SP and nonSP proteomes and their changes under hypoxia in A549 cell line. We identified differences especially among protein groups connected to the epithelial-mesenchymal transition, although major changes were related to hypoxia, as upregulation of many proteins, including serpin E1, PLOD2 and LOXL2, that ultimately contribute to the initiation of the metastatic cascade, were detected. Altogether, this study represents another piece of puzzle that clarify the innate and hypoxia-triggered resistance of cancer cells and highlights the ambivalent role of natural agents in biology of these cells.

### Sample Protocol
SP and nonSP cells separated from A549 cell line cultured in normoxia or hypoxia were sorted by FACS (minimum 200 000 cells), each sample group in hexaplicates. The purity of the FACS sorting was back-verified (Appendix Fig. A2). Cells were washed in ice-cold PBS and lysed in SDT buffer (4% SDS, 0.1% DTT in Tris/HCl, pH 7.6) and homogenized for 2 h at 95 °C. Samples were desalted, concentrated and trypsinized by standard procedures on 30 kDa FASP filters. The obtained peptides were analyzed on a Q Exactive HF-X with an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The data were evaluated using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.14.0) against the UniProtKB database (taxonomy: Homo sapiens (9606) dated 18.12.2019). The list of identified protein groups was subsequently processed in the KNIME analytical interface using OmicsWorkflows (version 0.6a; available at https://github.com/OmicsWorkflows/KNIME_workflows ). The data were normalized using the LoessF method and the individual groups were compared with each other by the LIMMA and Benjamini Hochberg methods.

### Publication Abstract
The presence of key hypoxia regulators, namely, hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)-1&#x3b1; or HIF-2&#x3b1;, in tumors is associated with poor patient prognosis. Hypoxia massively activates several genes, including the one encoding the BCRP transporter that proffers multidrug resistance to cancer cells through the xenobiotic efflux and is a determinant of the side population (SP) associated with cancer stem-like phenotypes. As natural medicine comes to the fore, it is instinctive to look for natural agents possessing powerful features against cancer resistance. Hypericin, a pleiotropic agent found in Hypericum plants, is a good example as it is a BCRP substrate and potential inhibitor, and an SP and HIF modulator. Here, we showed that hypericin efficiently accumulated in hypoxic cancer cells, degraded HIF-1/2&#x3b1;, and decreased BCRP efflux together with hypoxia, thus diminishing the SP population. On the contrary, this seemingly favorable result was accompanied by the stimulated migration of this minor population that preserved the SP phenotype. Because hypoxia unexpectedly decreased the BCRP level and SP fraction, we compared the SP and non-SP proteomes and their changes under hypoxia in the A549 cell line. We identified differences among protein groups connected to the epithelial-mesenchymal transition, although major changes were related to hypoxia, as the upregulation of many proteins, including serpin E1, PLOD2 and LOXL2, that ultimately contribute to the initiation of the metastatic cascade was detected. Altogether, this study helps in clarifying the innate and hypoxia-triggered resistance of cancer cells and highlights the ambivalent role of natural agents in the biology of these cells.

### Keywords
Ecm reorganization, Q-exactive, Hypericin, Proteomics, Hypoxia, Breast cancer resistance protein, Side population

### Affiliations
Masaryk University
National Centre for Biomolecular Research, Faculty of Science, Masaryk University, Kamenice 5, 625 00 Brno, Czech Republic  Central European Institute of Technology, Masaryk University, Kamenice 5, 625 00 Brno, Czech Republic

### Submitter
Pavel Roudnický

### Lab Head
Dr Zbyněk Zdráhal
National Centre for Biomolecular Research, Faculty of Science, Masaryk University, Kamenice 5, 625 00 Brno, Czech Republic  Central European Institute of Technology, Masaryk University, Kamenice 5, 625 00 Brno, Czech Republic


