### Accession
PXD003204

### Title
Annotation of the domestic pig genome by quantitative proteomics

### Description
Proteogenomics analysis of porcine embryonal stages and juvenile organs.

### Sample Protocol
Gel-based separation of protein extracts, in-gel digestion, LC-MS/MS

### Data Protocol
Maxquant database search using various sequence databases

### Publication Abstract
The pig is one of the earliest domesticated animals in the history of human civilization and represents one of the most important livestock animals. The recent sequencing of the Sus scrofa genome was a major step toward the comprehensive understanding of porcine biology, evolution, and its utility as a promising large animal model for biomedical and xenotransplantation research. However, the functional and structural annotation of the Sus scrofa genome is far from complete. Here, we present mass spectrometry-based quantitative proteomics data of nine juvenile organs and six embryonic stages between 18 and 39 days after gestation. We found that the data provide evidence for and improve the annotation of 8176 protein-coding genes including 588 novel and 321 refined gene models. The analysis of tissue-specific proteins and the temporal expression profiles of embryonic proteins provides an initial functional characterization of expressed protein interaction networks and modules including as yet uncharacterized proteins. Comparative transcript and protein expression analysis to human organs reveal a moderate conservation of protein translation across species. We anticipate that this resource will facilitate basic and applied research on Sus scrofa as well as its porcine relatives.

### Keywords
Pig genome, Quantitative proteomics, Proteogenomics

### Affiliations
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics Technische Universitaet Muenchen Freising

### Submitter
Hannes Hahne

### Lab Head
Dr Bernhard Kuster
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics Technische Universitaet Muenchen Freising


