### Accession
PXD035404

### Title
Generation of Nomo-1 cell surfaceome database

### Description
The goal was to build a custom proteome database for cell surface proteins of Nomo-1 (AML cell line). Such custom database was meant to facilitate cross-linking (XL-MS) of cell surface proteins for this cell line using non-cleavable cross-linkers. Using such custom database helps with the computational search complexity associated with XL-MS.

### Sample Protocol
The cultured cells were harvested, and the cell surface proteins were viably biotinylated using sodium metaperiodate and biocytin hydrazide chemistry targeting the glycosylated proteins (covers most of the cell surface proteins).  The cells were then lysed and biotinylated proteins were pulled down using streptavidin beads followed by on-bead digestion of the bound proteins with simultaneous reduction and alkylation of cysteines residues at room temperature in end-to-end rotor. The Trypsin-LysC digestion was initially performed with 50 mM tris (pH 8.5) + 4 M urea, LysC works for 2 hours after which the mixture is diluted to 1.5 M urea using 50 mM tris (pH 8.5) upon which Trypsin also gets activated and this protease digestion goes overnight (16-20 hours). The peptides obtained were desalted and subjected to SEC (Size Exclusion Chromatography) fractionation for 90 minutes at 50µl/min. These SEC fractions 9 - 18 were run on QE Exactive Plus mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
The machine generated raw data were processed using MSFragger within FragPipe with default settings unless stated otherwise. Briefly, the spectral data was searched against the human proteome (Uniprot, downloaded 05/11/21, 20,395 entries). The contaminant and decoy protein sequences were added to the search database using the inbuilt feature of the FragPipe pipeline downstream statistical analysis. The search was run with “Mass calibration and parameter optimization” and “closed search default config” allowing ±20 PPM mass tolerance for precursor ions as well as for fragment ions. The inbuilt tools PeptideProphet and ProteinProphet was used for statistical validation of search results and subsequent mapping of the peptides to the proteins respectively with 1% FDR.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Aml and cell surfaceome, Nomo-1

### Affiliations
University of California, San Francisco
Dept. of Laboratory Medicine University of California, San Francisco USA

### Submitter
Kamal Mandal

### Lab Head
Dr Arun P. Wiita
Dept. of Laboratory Medicine University of California, San Francisco USA


