### Accession
PXD018516

### Title
Putative carotenoid-binding proteins from the hemolymph of endemic Lake Baikal amphipod Eulimnogammarus cyaneus and E. vittatus

### Description
Color is an important trait in nature, playing a role in selection and speciation. The most important colorants in crustaceans are carotenoids, which in complexes with carotenoid-binding proteins provide an astonishing variety of colors from red to violet. Over 350 species and subspecies of amphipods (Crustacea: Amphipoda) endemic to Lake Baikal exhibit an impressive variability of colors and coloration patterns. However, the mechanisms forming this diversity are underexplored. In this work, we analyze the coloration of two species of endemic Lake Baikal amphipods, Eulimnogammarus cyaneus and E. vittatus. These species are brightly colored and, even more importantly, characterized by intraspecific color variability. We showed that the color of either species strongly correlated with the abundance of two putative carotenoid-binding proteins (the relative abundance of these proteins was higher in blue or teal-colored animals than in the orange- or yellow-colored ones.). With LC-MS/MS, we were able to identifiy these proteins, which turned out to be similar to the pheromone/odorant-binding protein family.

### Sample Protocol
Hemolymph of one animal was extracted and mixed with an anti-coagulation buffer (Shchapova et al., 2019, doi:10.3390/polym11081246). Each sample was mixed with an equal amount of 2x sampling buffer (Laemmli, 1970, doi:10.1038/227680a0) to the hemolymph/anti-coagulation buffer mixture, incubated it at 95 °C for 2 minutes, chilled on ice and loaded into 12.5% acrylamide gel blocks. The gel was run at 60 V until the dye reached the end of the gel, according to the standard procedure (Sambrook et al., 1989). The PageRuler Prestained Protein Ladder, 10 to 180 kDa (Thermo Scientific, USA) was used to assess protein molecular weights. The gel was stained with 0.2% Coomassie Brilliant Blue in 10% acetic acid / 25% ethanol and destained with hot distilled water. Gel densitometry was performed with the ImageJ/Fiji package (Schindelin et al., 2012, doi:10.1038/nmeth.2019; Schneider et al., 2012, doi:10.1038/nmeth.2089). The bands of interest were cut from gels with a scalpel in sterile conditions for subsequent identification with liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Proteins were subjected to in-gel trypsin digestion according to the following procedure. After three washes in water, the gel pieces were incubated in 50% (v/v) acetonitrile and 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.9) for 20 min, then in 100% acetonitrile for 20 min. The pieces were dried for 1 h. Depending on the original size of the gel slice, 5–8 μl of trypsin solution (25 ng/μl sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution) were added, and protein hydrolysis was carried out at 37 °C overnight. Tryptic peptides were extracted by addition of 15 μl extraction solution (5% acetonitrile, 0.5% formic acid) for 30 min and analyzed by LC-MS/MS.  The peptides were separated with high-performance liquid chromatography (Ultimate 3000 Nano LC System, Thermo Scientific, Rockwell, IL, USA) in a 15-cm long C18 column with an inner diameter of 75 μm (Acclaim® PepMap™ RSLC, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockwell, IL, USA). The peptides were eluted with a gradient from 5–35% buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) over 45 min at a flow rate of 0.3 μL/min. Total run time including 5 min to reach 99% buffer B, flushing 5 min with 99% buffer B and 5 min re-equilibration to buffer A (0.1% formic acid) was 60 min. MS analysis was performed in triplicate with a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Q Exactive™ HF Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap™ Mass spectrometer, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockwell, IL, USA). Mass spectra were acquired at a resolution of 120,000 (MS) and 15,000 (MS/MS) in a m/z range of 350−1500 (MS) and 100–2000 (MS/MS). Isolation threshold of 100,000 counts was determined for precursor selection, and up to top 10 precursors were chosen for fragmentation with high-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) at 30 NCE and 100 ms accumulation time. Precursors with a charged state of +1 were rejected, and all measured precursors were excluded from measurement for 20 s.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data were searched with SearchGUI (Barsnes and Vaudel, 2018, doi:10.1021/acs.jproteome.8b00175) v3.3.17. Parameters were set as follows: tryptic specificity allowing two missed cleavage; precursor M/Z tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment m/z tolerance of 0.5 Da tolerance for MS/MS ions; precursor charge 2-4; carbamidomethylation of C as a fixed modification and oxidation of M as a variable modification. The sequence databases contained the protein sequences predicted with TransDecoder (Haas et al., 2013, doi:10.1038/nprot.2013.084) v2.1.0 in the transcriptome assembly of the corresponding species (GEPS01 and GEPV01; Naumenko et al., 2017, doi:10.1111/mec.13927), as well as common contaminants from the cRAP database (https://www.thegpm.org/crap/). The SearchGUI output was analyzed and visualized in PeptideShaker (Vaudel et al., 2015, 10.1038/nbt.3109) v1.16.44. Peptide-Spectrum Matches (PSMs), peptides and proteins were validated at a 1.0% false discovery rate estimated using the decoy hit distribution (the decoy sequences were added by PeptideShaker). Only proteins having at least two unique peptides were considered as positively identified. Relative quantities of the proteins were estimated with NSAF.

### Publication Abstract
Color is an essential clue for intra- and interspecies communication, playing a role in selection and speciation. Coloration can be based on nanostructures and pigments; carotenoids and carotenoproteins are among the most widespread pigments in animals. Over 350 species and subspecies of amphipods (Crustacea: Amphipoda) endemic to Lake Baikal exhibit an impressive variability of colors and coloration patterns, including intraspecific color morphs. However, the mechanisms forming this diversity are underexplored, as while the carotenoid composition of several transparent, green, and red species was investigated, there have been no reports on the corresponding carotenoid-binding proteins. In this work, we analyze the coloration of two brightly colored Baikal amphipods characterized by intraspecific color variability, <i>Eulimnogammarus cyaneus</i> and <i>E. vittatus</i>. We showed that the color of either species is defined by the level of putative carotenoid-binding proteins similar to the pheromone/odorant-binding protein family, as the concentration of these putative crustacyanin analogs was higher in blue or teal-colored animals than in the orange- or yellow-colored ones. At the same time, the color did not depend on the total carotenoid content, as it was similar between animals of contrasting color morphs. By exploring the diversity of these sequences within a larger phylogeny of invertebrate crustacyanins, we show that amphipods lack orthologs of the well-studied crustacyanins A and C, even though they possess some crustacyanin-like sequences. The analysis of expression levels in <i>E. cyaneus</i> showed that the transcripts encoding crustacyanin analogs had much higher expression than the crustacyanin-like sequences, suggesting that the former indeed contribute to the color of these brightly colored animals. The crustacyanin analogs seem to act in a similar way to the well-studied crustacyanins in body color formation, but the details of their action are still to be revealed.

### Keywords
Baikal, Lc-ms/ms, Carotenoid-binding proteins, Coloration, Amphipoda

### Affiliations
Irkutsk State University
Institute of Biology at Irkutsk State University, Irkutsk, Russia

### Submitter
Polina Drozdova

### Lab Head
Dr Maxim Timofeyev
Institute of Biology at Irkutsk State University, Irkutsk, Russia


