### Accession
PXD004748

### Title
Dynamics of the interaction between cotton bollworm Helicoverpa armigera and nucleopolyhedrovirus as revealed by integrated transcriptomic and proteomic analyses

### Description
Over the past decades, Helicoverpa armigera nucleopolyhedrovirus (HearNPV) has been widely used for biocontrol of cotton bollworm, which is one of the most destructive pest insects in agriculture worldwide. However, the molecular mechanism underlying the interaction between HearNPV and host insects remains poorly understood. In this study, high throughput RNA-sequencing was integrated with label-free quantitative proteomics analysis to examine the dynamics of gene expression in the fat body of H. armigera larvae in response to challenge with HearNPV. RNA-sequencing-based transcriptomic analysis indicated that host gene expression was substantially altered, yielding 3,850 differentially expressed genes (DEGs), while no global transcriptional shut-off effects were observed in the fat body. Among the DEGs, 60 immunity-related genes were down-regulated after baculovirus infection, a finding that was consistent with the results of quantitative real-time RT-PCR (qRT-PCR). Gene ontology and functional classification demonstrated that the majority of down-regulated genes were enriched in gene cohorts involved in energy, carbohydrate, and amino acid metabolic pathways. Proteomics analysis identified differentially expressed proteins in the fat body, among which 76 were up-regulated, whereas 373 were significantly down-regulated upon infection. The down-regulated proteins are involved in metabolic pathways such as energy metabolism, carbohydrate metabolism (CM), and amino acid metabolism, in agreement with the RNA-seq data. Furthermore, correlation analysis suggested a strong association between the mRNA level and protein abundance in the H. armigera fat body. More importantly, the predicted gene interaction network indicated that a large subset of metabolic networks was significantly negatively regulated by viral infection, including CM-related enzymes such as aldolase, enolase, malate dehydrogenase and triose-phosphate isomerase. Taken together, transcriptomic combined with proteomic data elucidated that baculovirus established systemic infection of host larvae, and manipulated the host mainly by suppressing the host immune response and down-regulating metabolism to allow viral self-replication and proliferation. Therefore, this study provided important insights into the mechanism of host-baculovirus interaction.

### Sample Protocol
Fat body protein in-gel digestion and nano LC-MS/MS analysis – Fat body samples from the control and infected groups were collected as described previously (14). Total protein was extracted using the Tissue Protein Extraction Kit (Cwbiotech Co. Ltd, Beijing, China) following the manufacturer’s instructions. The protein concentrations were determined by the BCA method. Equal amounts of total proteins were separated on SDS-polyacrylamide gels and stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue G-250 for visualization. Subsequently, the gel lanes were excised into six sections and stored in individual clean Eppendorf tubes at -20 ºC, respectively.Fat body proteins were digested as follows according to an in-gel protein digestion protocol described previously (43). Each gel section was cut into smaller cubes for the convenience of subsequent treatment. The samples were washed in ammonium bicarbonate (50 mM) and then reduced using dithiothreitol (10 mM) at 37 ºC for 20 min. Samples were further alkylated using 55 mM iodoacetamide for 20 min in the dark. After washing twice with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, the gel pieces were destained with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate/acetonitrile (1:1, v/v) by incubating at room temperature for 20 min. Finally, the gel pieces were immersed in trypsin solution and incubated at 37 ºC overnight for adequate in-gel digestion. The peptides obtained from in-gel digestion were collected by centrifugation and concentrated by drying in a vacuum rotary evaporator. Next, the dried peptides were solubilized in 0.1% triformic acid and 2% acetonitrile and were sonicated in an ultrasonic water bath for 5 min. The samples were then centrifuged to collect the supernatant sample. Next, the 18 mock and infected samples were individually analyzed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a New Objective PV-550 nanoelectrospray ion source and an Eksigent NanoLC-2D chromatography system. Briefly, peptides were separated using a 5-40% acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% triformic acid performed over 120 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Three biological replicates were used for each group, and three technical replicates were performed for each biological sample in the LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Database search and protein quantification – Raw MS/MS data were uploaded into the Proteome Discoverer software system (version 1.4.0.288; Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) to perform tandem mass spectrometry data analysisusing the Sequest-HT search engine. The predicted H. armigera protein sequence database (14), which was deduced from the putative ORFs based on the transcriptomic unigene dataset, was used as the reference database for protein identification and database searches. The enzyme specificity was set to trypsin using acrylamide modification of cysteines as a static modification and oxidation of methionines as a dynamic modification. The mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.05 Da for fragment ions. The minimal peptide length was set to six, and up to two missed cleavage sites were allowed. Reversed protein sequences in the protein database were used as the decoy database for calculation of the FDR. In the filtering of the search results, matches with a high peptide confidence for at least one unique peptide were regarded as significant. For quantification of the relative expression levels of different proteins within one sample, we employed the Peak Area Calculation Quantification method within the Proteome Discoverer software.

### Publication Abstract
Over the past decades, <i>Helicoverpa armigera</i> nucleopolyhedrovirus (HearNPV) has been widely used for biocontrol of cotton bollworm, which is one of the most destructive pest insects in agriculture worldwide. However, the molecular mechanism underlying the interaction between HearNPV and host insects remains poorly understood. In this study, high-throughput RNA-sequencing was integrated with label-free quantitative proteomics analysis to examine the dynamics of gene expression in the fat body of <i>H. armigera</i> larvae in response to challenge with HearNPV. RNA sequencing-based transcriptomic analysis indicated that host gene expression was substantially altered, yielding 3,850 differentially expressed genes (DEGs), whereas no global transcriptional shut-off effects were observed in the fat body. Among the DEGs, 60 immunity-related genes were down-regulated after baculovirus infection, a finding that was consistent with the results of quantitative real-time RT-PCR. Gene ontology and functional classification demonstrated that the majority of down-regulated genes were enriched in gene cohorts involved in energy, carbohydrate, and amino acid metabolic pathways. Proteomics analysis identified differentially expressed proteins in the fat body, among which 76 were up-regulated, whereas 373 were significantly down-regulated upon infection. The down-regulated proteins are involved in metabolic pathways such as energy metabolism, carbohydrate metabolism (CM), and amino acid metabolism, in agreement with the RNA-sequence data. Furthermore, correlation analysis suggested a strong association between the mRNA level and protein abundance in the <i>H. armigera</i> fat body. More importantly, the predicted gene interaction network indicated that a large subset of metabolic networks was significantly negatively regulated by viral infection, including CM-related enzymes such as aldolase, enolase, malate dehydrogenase, and triose-phosphate isomerase. Taken together, transcriptomic data combined with proteomic data elucidated that baculovirus established systemic infection of host larvae and manipulated the host mainly by suppressing the host immune response and down-regulating metabolism to allow viral self-replication and proliferation. Therefore, this study provided important insights into the mechanism of host-baculovirus interaction.

### Keywords
Cotton bollworm, Rna-seq, Lc-ms/ms, Insect immunity, Carbohydrate metabolism, Fat body, Baculovirus, Host-pathogen interaction

### Affiliations
Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
Institute of Zoology, CAS

### Submitter
Zhen Zou

### Lab Head
Dr Zhen Zou
Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences


