### Accession
PXD036609

### Title
Human serum LC-MS/MS for long-term persistent COVID-19 patients

### Description
The emergence of a new type of COVID-19 patients, who were retested positive after hospital discharge with long-term persistent SARS-CoV-2 infection but without COVID-19 clinical symptoms (hereinafter, LTPPs), poses novel challenges to COVID-19 treatment and prevention. Why was there such a contradictory phenomenon in LTPPs? To explore the mechanism underlying this phenomenon, we performed quantitative proteomic analyses using the sera of 12 LTPPs (Wuhan Pulmonary Hospital), with the longest carrying history of 132 days, and mainly focused on seven LTPPs without hypertension (LTPPs-NH).

### Sample Protocol
Protein preparation Serum samples were obtained from LTPPs by clotting blood at room temperature, followed by centrifugation at 1,000 ×g for 3 min at 4 °C. High-abundance proteins were depleted by Pierce™ Top 12 (Thermo Scientific) protein depletion columns, and total protein concentration was measured using the Bradford protein assay kit (Bio-Rad). Protein digestion was performed as previously described: DB lysis buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM TEAB, pH 8.5), trypsin, and 100 mM TEAB buffer were added to protein samples, followed by incubation at 37°C for 4 h. The mixture was subsequently digested with trypsin (Promega) in the presence of CaCl2 at 37°C for overnight, followed by desalination on a C18 cartridge. The samples were then lyophilized for liquid chromatography (LC)–MS/MS analysis.  LC-MS/MS Samples were quantified using data-independent acquisition (DIA) mode by Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled with an Ultimate 3000 UHPLC LC system (Thermo Scientific). Lyophilized peptides were first dissolved in solution A (100% water and 0.1% formic acid) and separated on an analytical column (C18, Thermo Scientific) with a gradient of 8%–95% solution B (80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) in 80 min at a flow rate of 600 nL min−1. Peptides eluted from the microcapillary column were directly electrosprayed into a mass spectrometer using a Nanospray Flex™ (ESI) ion source; the spray voltage was 2.4 kV and ion-transport capillary temperature was 320°C. In terms of HF-X settings, the mass range of MS1 was set at 400–1250 m/z, with the resolution being 120,000. The automatic gain control was set to 3,000,000 and the maximum ion injection time to 50 ms. In terms of DIA settings, the mass range of MS2 was 400–1250 m/z, and MS2 scans were performed at a resolution of 30,000, with the automatic gain control set to 1,000,000, automatic maximum ion injection time, and normalized collision energy of 27%.

### Data Protocol
Proteins identification and quantitation  The spectra from each fraction were searched against the UniProt database using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo). The parameters were as follows: mass tolerance for precursor ion, 10 ppm; mass tolerance for product ion, 0.02 Da; fixed modification, carbamidomethyl (C); dynamic modification, oxidation methionine (M); N-terminal modification, acetylation; and maximum missed cleavages, 2. High-quality search results were defined as follows: peptide spectrum matches with a credibility of >99%; proteins with at least one unique peptide; and FDR ≤ 0.01.  Next, the search results obtained by Proteome Discoverer 2.2 were imported into Spectronaut™ v14.0 (Biognosys) to generate a library. All eligible peptides and ions were selected from the spectra, as previously described, which led to the generation of a “Target List”. DIA data were also imported to calculate the quantity of peptides according to the “Target List”.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Covid-19, Lc-ms/ms, Serum, Dia

### Affiliations
 Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences and China National Center for Bioinformation
Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China National Center for Bioinformation

### Submitter
Cuidan Li

### Lab Head
Dr Fei Chen
Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China National Center for Bioinformation


