### Accession
PXD001509

### Title
Equine synovial fluid

### Description
The aim of the study was to characterise the protein complement of synovial fluid (SF) in health and osteoarthritis (OA) using liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) following peptide-based depletion of high abundance proteins.   SF was used from nine normal and nine OA Thoroughbred horses. Samples were analysed with LC-MS/MS using a NanoAcquity™ LC coupled to a LTQ Orbitrap Velos. In order to enrich the lower-abundance protein fractions protein equalisation was first undertaken using ProteoMiner™.  Progenesis-QI™ LC-MS software was used for label-free quantification. In addition immunohistochemistry, western blotting and mRNA expression analysis was undertaken on selected joint tissues.The number of protein identifications was increased by 33% in the Proteominer™ treated SF compared to undepleted SF. A total of 754 proteins were identified in SF. A subset of 10 proteins were identified which were differentially expressed in OA SF. S100-A10, a calcium binding protein was upregulated in OA and validated with western blotting and immunohistochemistry. Several new OA specific peptide fragments (neopeptides) were identified.The protein equalisation method compressed the dynamic range of the synovial proteins identifying the most comprehensive SF proteome to date. A number of proteins were identified for the first time in SF which may be involved in the pathogenesis of OA. We identified a distinct set of proteins and neopeptides that may act as potential biomarkers to distinguish between normal and OA joints.

### Sample Protocol
Synovial fluid was treated with hyaluronidase. The supernatant was centrifuged through a 0.22 μm cellulose acetate membrane tube filter (5000×g/15mins) to remove insoluble material.   For peptide-based depletion, 5mg SF was bound to its own spin column containing ProteoMiner™ Small Capacity beads with on-bead trypsin digestion. Following in-situ trypsin digestion on Proteominer™ beads samples were treated with 1% (w/v) Rapigest.  In-solution tryptic digestion of protein samples was carried out as following reduction and alkylation. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using nanoAcquity™ ultraperformance LC on line to an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos  via a ESI ion source containing a 10 μm coated Pico-tip emitter. Aliquots of tryptic peptides equivalent to 1:10 dilution of the total digest (2 µl) were loaded onto a 180 μm × 20 mm C18 trap column at 5 μL/min in 99% solvent A (water plus 0.1% FA) and 1% solvent B (acetonitrile plus 1% FA for 5 min and subsequently back-flushed onto a C18 pre-equilibrated analytical column (75 μm × 15 mm Waters, Manchester, UK) using a flow rate of 0.3 μL/min and a 2 hour gradient per sample.  Xcalibur 2.0 software was used to operate the LTQ-Orbitrap Velos in data-dependant acquisition mode. The survey scan was acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolving power set to 30,000 (at 400 m/z). MS/MS spectra were concurrently acquired on the 20 most intense ions from the high resolution survey scan in the LTQ. Charge state filtering >1 was used, where unassigned precursor ions were not selected for fragmentation. Fragmentation parameters in the LTQ were: normalized collision energy; 30, activation; 0.250, activation time; 10 ms and minimum signal threshold 500 counts with isolation width 2 m/z

### Data Protocol
Raw spectra were converted to mascot generated files (mgf) (Proteome Discoverer software). The resulting mgf files were searched against the Equus caballus database; Ensembl database for horse (Equus caballus;EquCab2.56.pep,(ftp://ftp.ensembl.org/pub/current_fasta/equus_caballus/pep/) using an in-house Mascot server (Version 2.3.01). Search parameters used were: enzyme; trypsin, peptide mass tolerances, 10 ppm; fragment mass tolerance, 0.6 Da; 1+, 2+ and 3+ ions; missed cleavages, 1; instrument type, ESI-TRAP. Modifications included were: fixed carbamidomethyl cysteine and variable; oxidation of methionine, lysine, proline.  The Thermo raw files of the acquired spectra from in-solution tryptic digests were analyzed by the Progenesis™ LC-MS software (Version 4, Nonlinear Dynamics). The top three spectra for each feature was exported from Progenesis-QI™ and utilized for peptide identification against the Equus caballus database. Search parameters used were: 10 ppm peptide mass tolerance and 0.6-Da fragment mass tolerance; one missed cleavage allowed; fixed modification, carbamidomethylation; variable modifications, methionine oxidation, proline oxidation, and lysine oxidation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Synovial fluid, Equine, Osteoarthritis

### Affiliations
University of Liverpool
Centre for Proteomic Research, Institute of Integrative Biology, University of Liverpool, Crown Street, Liverpool, L69 7ZB

### Submitter
Mandy Peffers

### Lab Head
Dr Robert Beynon
Centre for Proteomic Research, Institute of Integrative Biology, University of Liverpool, Crown Street, Liverpool, L69 7ZB


