### Accession
PXD001400

### Title
Effects of exogenous auxin on the Arabidopsis thaliana root proteome

### Description
This study evaluates the effects of exogenous auxin on the Arabidopsis thaliana root proteome at 8, 12, and 24 hours post-treatment.

### Sample Protocol
Protein (0.4 to 0.6 mg) extracted from approximately 150 mg of root tissue harvested from plants treated with auxin at 8, 12, and 24 hours post-treatment or time-matched controls was digested with trypsin following reduction and alkylation of cysteine residues. The resulting peptides from each sample were separated off-line using SCX SPE columns collecting 6 fractions per digestion. Peptides from each SCX fraction were separated using RP chromatography and analyzed using HDMSe on a Synapt G2-S (Waters; Milford, MA) in microspray (50 uL/min) mode.

### Data Protocol
HDMSe data was processed using ProteinLynx Global Server (PLGS) 3.0.2 to match high energy fragment ions to low energy precursor ions. Protein identifications were obtained by searching the resulting peak list against an Arabidopsis thaliana protein database (UniProt) using the PLGS software followed by data summary and protein quantitation using IsoQuant (1.6).

### Publication Abstract
Auxin is involved in many aspects of root development and physiology, including the formation of lateral roots. Improving our understanding of how the auxin response is mediated at the protein level over time can aid in developing a more complete molecular framework of the process. This study evaluates the effects of exogenous auxin treatment on the <i>Arabidopsis</i> root proteome after exposure of young seedlings to auxin for 8, 12, and 24 h, a timeframe permitting the initiation and full maturation of individual lateral roots. Root protein extracts were processed to peptides, fractionated using off-line strong-cation exchange, and analyzed using ultra-performance liquid chromatography and data independent acquisition-based mass spectrometry. Protein abundances were then tabulated using label-free techniques and evaluated for significant changes. Approximately 2000 proteins were identified during the time course experiment, with the number of differences between the treated and control roots increasing over the 24 h time period, with more proteins found at higher abundance with exposure to auxin than at reduced abundance. Although the proteins identified and changing in levels at each time point represented similar biological processes, each time point represented a distinct snapshot of the response. Auxin coordinately regulates many physiological events in roots and does so by influencing the accumulation and loss of distinct proteins in a time-dependent manner. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with the identifier PXD001400.

### Keywords
Auxin, Root, Arabidopsis

### Affiliations
Virginia Tech
Department of Biochemistry, Virginia Tech., Blacksburg, VA, USA

### Submitter
Keith Ray

### Lab Head
Dr Richard F. Helm
Department of Biochemistry, Virginia Tech., Blacksburg, VA, USA


