### Accession
PXD008071

### Title
Systems Signature Reveals Unique Remission-path of Diabetes Generated by Gastric Bypass Surgery

### Description
Gastric bypass surgery (GBP) emerging as a powerful tool for treatment of obesity has been applied for remission of diabetes. However, the GBP global molecular effects on diabetes remission independent of weight loss remain largely unknown. We profiled plasma metabolites and proteins of 10 normoglycemic obese (NO) and 9 diabetic obese (DO) patients at 1-week, 3-months and 1-year stages after Roux-en-Y gastric bypass (RYGB) as well pre-RYGB stage, by which 146 proteins and 128 metabolites were detected from both NO and DO groups at all four stages. By analyzing a set of bi-molecular associations among the corresponding network of the subjects with our newly developed computational method, we defined the representing physiological states (called the edge-states, in contrast to the traditional node-states) and the related molecular networks of NO and DO patients, respectively. The PCA results and hubnetworks of NO subjects were significantly different from those of DO patients; particularly, the hub-network rearrangement of both groups differentially went through after RYGB. In conclusion, by developing network-based systems signatures rather than relying on individual molecules, we for the first time reveal that RYGB generates a unique recovering-path for diabetes remission independent of weight loss.

### Sample Protocol
A volume of 12 μL plasma containing high-abundance proteins was removed by Agilent Plasma 7 multiple affinity removal spin(MARS) cartridge (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, Calif.). The fractions containing low-abundance proteins were dried and then resuspended in 200 μL SDT-lysis buffer (2% SDS, 0.1 M DTT, 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 7.6). The protein concentration of plasma samples were determined by fluorescent method. Trypsin digestion of protein from each sample was completed as previously described[2]. TMT labeling was done following the manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL). Briefly, for each six-plex experiment, The tryptic digested peptides were reconstituted with 20 μL 0.5 M TEAB Buffer (pH 8.5). Each peptide solution was labeled at room temperature for 2 h with a quarter of reagent vial (six-plex mass tag 126, 127, 128, 129, 130, 131) previously reconstituted with 300 μL anhydrous acetonitrile (ACN). After 2 h, 8 μL 5% hydroxylamine were added to each tube to quench the TMT reaction and incubated at room temperature for 15 min. The contents of all TMT reagent labeled sample tubes were combined into one tube for six- plex experiments, respectively. Then, labeled samples were dried down by evaporation in a SpeedVac to obtain a brown pellet. 100 μL of water was added to the tube and the sample was dried completely. Prior to MS analysis, samples were desalted onto Empore C18 47 mm Disk (3M). Just prior mass spectrometry analysis, the fractions were resuspended in 20  μL H2O with 0.1% (v/v) FA. For all samples, online reverse-phase (RP) chromatography was performed on an UltiMate 3000 RSLC nanoLC System (Dionex, now ThermoFisher Scientific) and a nanoflow HPLC Easy nLC 1000 System (ThermoFisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on a 20-cm column (i.d. 75 μm) packed in-house with the RP materials ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 3.0 μm resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany), using a 180 min at 350 nl/min (for LTQ-Orbitrap Velos) or 180 min at 250 nl/min (for Q-Exactive) linear gradient from 4% to 25% of acetonitrile with 0.1% ( v/v ) formic acid. All MS data were acquired on LTQ-Orbitrap Velos and Q-Exactive mass spectrometers (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For data acquisition on LTQ-Orbitrap Velos, the ‘high-low’ mode was used, which involved a full scan at high resolution (60 000 at m/z 400) by orbitrap mass analyzer (300-1800 m/z) following data-dependent ‘top 15’ MS2 scans generated by CID fragmentation in ion trap mass analyzer. The normalized collision energy (NCE) was 35. The Q-Exactive was operated using ‘high-high’ mode, in which 20 most abundant precursor ions were selected with high resolution (70000 at m/z 200) from the full scan (300−1500 m/z ) for HCD fragmentation. Precursor ions with singly charged and charge information unassigned were excluded. Resolution for MS2 spectra was set to 17500 at m/z 200, target value was 2E5 (AGC control enabled), and isolation window was set to 2.0 m/z and 30.0% NCE. Data were acquired using the Xcalibur software.

### Data Protocol
All raw MS data were analyzed with the MaxQuant software (version 1.3.0.5). A false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 for proteins and peptides and a minimum peptide length of 7 amino acids were required. MS/MS spectra were searched by the Andromeda search engine incorporated in the MaxQuant software against a Uniprot human database. Trypsin digestion was chosen as enzyme specificity. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (229.162932 Da) and cysteine carbamidomethylation were selected as a fixed modification, while protein N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation were selected as variable modifications. Maximally two missed cleavages were allowed. Initial mass deviation for the precursor ion was up to 7 ppm, and maximally allowed mass deviation for fragment ions was 0.5 Da. In Quantification, 6-plex TMT in MaxQuant software was selected as reporter ion MS2. Protein abundance were calculated from TMT reagent reporter ion intensities from MS/MS spectra.

### Publication Abstract
Roux-en-Y Gastric bypass surgery (RYGB) is emerging as a powerful tool for treatment of obesity and may also cause remission of type 2 diabetes. However, the molecular mechanism of RYGB leading to diabetes remission independent of weight loss remains elusive. In this study, we profiled plasma metabolites and proteins of 10 normal glucose-tolerant obese (NO) and 9 diabetic obese (DO) patients before and 1-week, 3-months, 1-year after RYGB. 146 proteins and 128 metabolites from both NO and DO groups at all four stages were selected for further analysis. By analyzing a set of bi-molecular associations among the corresponding network of the subjects with our newly developed computational method, we defined the represented physiological states (called the edge-states that reflect the interactions among the bio-molecules), and the related molecular networks of NO and DO patients, respectively. The principal component analyses (PCA) revealed that the edge states of the post-RYGB NO subjects were significantly different from those of the post-RYGB DO patients. Particularly, the time-dependent changes of the molecular hub-networks differed between DO and NO groups after RYGB. In conclusion, by developing molecular network-based systems signatures, we for the first time reveal that RYGB generates a unique path for diabetes remission independent of weight loss.

### Keywords
Network, Gastric bypass, Diabetes, Systems signature

### Affiliations
student
Key Laboratory of Systems Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences Department of Life Sciences, ShanghaiTech University

### Submitter
dandan wang

### Lab Head
Dr Rong Zeng
Key Laboratory of Systems Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences Department of Life Sciences, ShanghaiTech University


