### Accession
PXD036077

### Title
Strain- and cell type-specific influenza A virus (IAV)-host protein-protein interaction (PPI) network identified by affinity purification-mass spectrometry (AP-MS)

### Description
Influenza A Virus (IAV) is a recurring respiratory virus with antiviral therapies of limited use. Understanding host proteins essential for IAV infection can identify targets for alternative host-directed therapies (HDTs). Using affinity purification-mass spectrometry and global phosphoproteomic and protein abundance analyses with three IAV strains (pH1N1, H3N2, H5N1) in three human cell types (A549, NHBE, THP-1), we mapped 332 IAV-human protein-protein interactions and identified 13 IAV-modulated kinases. Whole exome sequencing of patients who experienced severe influenza revealed several genes, including the structural scaffold protein AHNAK, with predicted loss-of-function variants that were also identified in our proteomic analyses. Of our identified host factors, 54 significantly altered IAV infection upon siRNA knockdown, and two factors, COPB1 and AHNAK, were also essential for productive infection by SARS-CoV-2. Finally, 16 compounds targeting our identified host factors suppressed IAV replication, with three targeting ATP6V1A, CDK2 and FLT3 showing pan-antiviral activity across influenza and coronavirus families. This study provides a comprehensive network model of IAV infection in human cells, identifying functional host targets for pan-viral HDT. This project includes the AP-MS data; all global proteomic data (abundance and phosphorylation) has been submitted separately as its own dataset and has its own dataset identifier.

### Sample Protocol
The coding sequences of 12 A/California/04/2009 H1N1, 13 A/Wyoming/03/2003 H3N2, and 13 A/Vietnam/1203/2004 H5N1 proteins were cloned into a pLVX-TetOne-Puro doxycycline-inducible backbone vector. IAV proteins were cloned with either an N-terminal 2X-Strep tag (PB1-F2, NA, M1, M2, NS1, NEP), C-terminal 2X-Strep tag (PB2, PB1, N40, PA, PA-X, NP) or internal 2X-Strep tag (HA). Two controls (empty vector and GFP-2XStrep) and all 38 IAV proteins were transduced in A549, NHBE, and THP-1 cells. Polyclonal stable cells were generated for A549 and NHBE samples, and monoclonal stable cells were generated for THP-1 samples. Transgene expression was induced with doxycycline at three days (A549) and five days (NHBE) after seeding cells. THP-1 samples were differentiated into a macrophage-like state with phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA) for 48 hours before transgene expression was induced with doxycycline. After transduction, one set of replicates was treated with universal type I interferon (1000U/mL for 12 hours) and one set of replicates remained untreated. There were few discernible differences in observed protein-protein interactions between treated and untreated replicate sets, therefore replicate sets were collapsed as biological replicates totaling six replicates (A549 and NHBE) or eight replicates (THP-1) to increase statistical power. A549, NHBE and THP-1 cells were washed in PBS and pelleted, and cell pellets were resuspended in 1ml cold lysis buffer (IP buffer pH 7.4 at 4ºC [50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA] supplemented with 0.5% Nonidet P40 substitute [NP40], Complete mini EDTA-free protease inhibitor and PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor). Samples were rotated at 4ºC for 30 minutes and frozen at -80ºC. Thawed lysates were incubated with Strep-Tactin Sepharose beads for 4 hours at 4ºC with rotation. Flow-through was discarded and beads were washed twice in 1mL cold wash buffer (IP buffer pH 7.4 at 4ºC with 0.05% NP40) and three times in 1mL cold IP buffer (no NP40). After the final wash, bead-bound proteins were reduced and alkylated for 45 minutes, quenched, and digested on-beads by incubation with sequencing-grade trypsin overnight at 37ºC. Peptides were extracted from beads by gel-loading tips, acidified, desalted, and lyophilized by vacuum centrifugation to be stored at -20ºC until MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Dried peptides were dissolved in 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid and injected in technical singlet for LC-MS/MS analysis onto an Easy-nLC 1000 coupled to a Orbitrap Elite Hybrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Briefly, peptides were separated on a 75μm x 25cm fused silica IntegraFrit capillary packed with 1.9μm Reprosil-Pur C18 AQ reversed-phase resin over a 120min gradient at a flow rate of 300 nL/minute (see MS parameters table for details). Buffer A consisted of 0.1% formic acid (FA) in water, and buffer B was 0.1% FA in acetonitrile. For each cycle, one full MS scan in the Orbitrap (150-1500 m/z, at 120,000 resolution with an AGC target of 1×10^6 and maximum injection time of 100 milliseconds) was followed by 20 data-dependent MS/MS scans acquired in the linear ion trap (AGC target 3x10^4, maximum injection time of 50 milliseconds, fragmented by normalized collision energy at 35%). Target ions already acquired in MS/MS scans were dynamically excluded for 20 seconds (tolerance of 10 ppm). Detailed MS acquisition parameters are reported in the MS parameters table. Raw MS files were grouped separately by cell line and searched simultaneously within each group using MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.10). 6 replicates were searched for each IAV protein and control protein in A549 and NHBE search groups, and 7-8 replicates were searched for each IAV protein and control protein in THP-1 search group. MS/MS spectra were searched against the human proteome (SwissProt human canonical sequences, downloaded 09 October 2018), IAV protein sequences and the eGFP sequence. Trypsin (KR|P) was selected to allow up to two missed cleavages. Variable modifications were assigned for: methionine oxidation and N-terminal protein acetylation. One static modification was assigned for carbamidomethyl cysteine. Label free quantitation (LFQ) was enabled. All other MaxQuant settings were left at the default. MaxQuant-analyzed data were then scored using the MiST algorithm using spectral counts as the quantifying feature. To enable robust scoring, we excluded samples with low spectral counts and low or no bait protein identification, and those with less than two remaining replicates. Following these quality control filtering steps, 590 samples across 14 baits (12 IAV proteins and 2 controls) remained for analysis. We ran the MiST algorithm applying a weight set of specificity S=50%, reproducibility R=45% and abundance A=5%. To identify high-confidence PPIs, we applied a set of stringent scoring criteria: (1) MiST score >0.6; (2) the interaction is absent in eGFP and empty-vector control samples; and (3) at least 4/6 replicates have a spectral count >0. IAV M2 protein in A549 cells and IAV NP protein in NHBE cells retained a disproportionately large number of interactions, therefore we applied more stringent scoring criteria to these two specific samples: (1) MiST score >0.75; (2) the interaction is absent in eGFP and empty-vector control samples; (3) at least 5/6 replicates have a spectral count >0; and (4) average spectral count >3.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Thp-1, H5n1, Ap-ms, A549, Ppi, Nhbe, Influenza a virus, Virus-host, H1n1, H3n2

### Affiliations
Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA
Dept. Cellular Molecular Pharmacology, University of San Francisco (UCSF), USA

### Submitter
Robyn Kaake

### Lab Head
Dr Robyn Kaake
Dept. Cellular Molecular Pharmacology, University of San Francisco (UCSF), USA


