### Accession
PXD005612

### Title
Capturig the Asc1p/RACK1 microenviroment at the head region of the 40S ribosome with quantitative BioID

### Description
The Asc1 protein of Saccharomyces cerevisiae is a Gβ-like scaffold protein considered to organize the local microenvironment at the head region of ribosomes in order to link mRNA translation with cellular signaling. In this study we used the in vivo protein labeling technique proximity-dependent Biotin IDentification (BioID) in combination with stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) in S. cerevisiae to quantitatively monitor the proteinaceous Asc1p neighborhood in exponentially growing cells, but also to record alterations in response to glucose deprivation and heat stress. Beyond expected known interaction partners several proteins not known to co-localize with Asc1p were identified including mRNA-binding proteins, translational regulators and even transcription-related proteins. Additionally, we observed major alterations in response to glucose withdrawal. In contrast, heat stress caused only minor effects on the Asc1p neighborhood. Furthermore, we analyzed the molecular microenvironment of the “ribosome-binding deficient” Asc1DE protein, which revealed ribosome-association of the major Asc1DEp population in vivo, but suggests a distorted position of the variant at the ribosome.

### Sample Protocol
Three strains or conditions were compared in one BioID experiment (Roux et al., 2012) using SILAC-based isotope labeling. Cells were cultivated individually in 200 ml YNB medium (0.15% yeast nitrogen base without amino acids and ammonium sulfate, 0.5% ammonium sulfate, 2% glucose) with the required amino acids including 50 mg/l of stable isotope labeled amino acids (13C6-L-arginine HCl, 13C6 15N4-L-arginine HCl, 4,4,5,5-D4-L-lysine HCl, 13C6-L-lysine HCl), and with 10 μM D-biotin until an OD600 of 0.8 was reached. When comparing growth conditions all three cultures were cultivated equally until an OD600 of 0.6 or 0.7 was reached. At this point heat stress was triggered by shifting the cells to 37°C or starvation was induced by washing and shifting the cells to YNB medium with or without glucose. Biotin was added 10 or 15 min after stress induction and the cells were cultivated for 1 h. Cells were harvested by centrifugation and resuspended in 15 ml Strep-buffer (10 mM HEPES, pH 7.9, 10 mM KCl, 1.5 mM MgCl2) each. The three cell suspensions were combined in a 1:1:1 ratio according to the optical densities of the cultures. After denaturing cell lysis in 1x Strep-buffer (with 1 cOmpleteTM protease inhibitor cocktail tablet per 50 ml, 0.5 mM DTT and 0.5 mM PMSF) the protein crude extract was split into two parts: About 60 μg were used as proteome standard and were directly separated by SDS-PAGE. The remaining crude extract was used for biotin affinity capture with Strep-Tactin® Sepharose® gravity flow columns with 1 ml column bed volume. The crude extract was applied to the column at room temperature, the column bed was washed with 50 ml 1x washing buffer containing 0.4% SDS and the biotinylated proteins were eluted with 1x washing buffer containing 10 mM biotin. The proteins of the eluate were precipitated by chloroform-methanol extraction and separated by SDS-PAGE. This gel lane and the proteome gel lane were each cut into 10 pieces and subjected to tryptic digestion according to Shevchenko et al. (1996) followed by LC-MS analysis. Strep-Tactin® spin columns were used for the purification of biotinylated peptides according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Peptides were eluted in three steps with each time 150 μl of 1x washing buffer containing 10 mM biotin. Before LC-MS analysis desalting of peptide solutions was achieved by using C18 stop and go extraction (stage) tips. The resulting peptide solution was dried completely in the SpeedVac concentrator and resolved in the sample buffer (2-5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) for LC-MS analyses. LC-MS analysis for protein identification and SILAC-based protein quantification was performed with an Orbitrap Velos ProTM Hybrid Ion Trap-Orbitrap mass spectrometer. 1-5 μl of peptide solutions were loaded and washed on an Acclaim® PepMAP 100 pre-column (#164564, 100 μm x 2 cm, C18, 3μm, 100 Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with 100% loading solvent A (98% H2O, 2% acetonitrile, 0.07% trifluoracetic acid) at a flow rate of 25 μl/min for 6 min. Peptides were separated by reverse phase chromatography on an Acclaim® PepMAP RSLC column (75 μm x 25 cm (#164536) or 50 cm (#164540), C18, 3 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a gradient from 98% solvent A (H2O, 0.1% formic acid) and 2% solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 20% H2O, 0.1% formic acid) to 42% solvent B for 95 min and to 65% solvent B for the following 26 min at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Peptides eluting from the chromatographic column were on-line ionized by nanoelectrospray at 2.4 kV with the Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Full scans of the ionized peptides were recorded within the Orbitrap FT analyzer of the mass spectrometer within a mass range of 300-1850 m/z at a resolution of 30,000 or in case of SILAC-based experiments 60,000. Collision-induced dissociation (CID) fragmentation of data-dependent top-ten peptides was performed with the LTQ Velos Pro linear ion trap. For data acquisition and programming the XCalibur 2.2 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used.   References  Roux KJ, Kim DI, Raida M, Burke B. 2012. A promiscuous biotin ligase fusion protein identifies proximal and interacting proteins in mammalian cells. J Cell Biol 196:801-810.  Shevchenko A, Wilm M, Vorm O, Mann M. 1996. Mass spectrometric sequencing of proteins silver-stained polyacrylamide gels. Anal Chem 68:850-858.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and SILAC-based quantification was performed with the MaxQuant 1.5.1.0 software (Cox and Mann, 2008). A UniProt-derived S. cerevisiae-specific database (http://www.uniprot.org, Proteome ID UP000002311, 6721 entries, download 2014) was used for database search with the Andromeda algorithm and with the program’s default parameters. As the digestion mode trypsin/P was used, maximum missed cleavage sites were set to three, carbamidomethylation of cysteins was considered as fixed modification, acetylation of the N-terminus, oxidation of methionines, and biotinylation of lysines were set as variable modifications. For SILAC-based experiments Arg6 and Lys4 or Arg10 and Lys8 were set as medium or heavy isotopic peptide labels, respectively. Match between runs, FTMS requantification and FTMS recalibration were enabled. The mass tolerance was 4.5 ppm for precursor ions and 0.5 Da for fragment ions. The decoy mode was revert with a false discovery rate of 0.01. Subsequent data processing and statistical analysis were performed with the Perseus 1.5.1.0 software (Cox and Mann, 2008). For the identification of proteins and their biotinylated lysine residues also the Proteome DiscovererTM 1.4 software was used. Database searches were performed with the SequestHT and Mascot search algorithms against a S. cerevisiae-specific protein database (SGD, 6110 entries including common contaminants, S288C_ORF_database release version 2011, Stanford University). The digestion mode was set to trypsin and the maximum of missed cleavage sites to three. Carbamidomethylation of cysteins was set as fixed modification, oxidation of methionines and biotinylation of lysines were set as variable modifications. The mass tolerance was 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.6 Da for fragment ions. The decoy mode was revert with a false discovery rate of 0.01.  Reference  Cox J, Mann M. 2008. MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat Biotechnol 26:1367-1372.

### Publication Abstract
The Asc1 protein of <i>Saccharomyces cerevisiae</i> is a scaffold protein at the head region of ribosomal 40S that links mRNA translation to cellular signaling. In this study, proteins that colocalize with Asc1p were identified with proximity-dependent <i>Bio</i>tin <i>ID</i>entification (BioID), an <i>in vivo</i> labeling technique described here for the first time for yeast. Biotinylated Asc1p-birA*-proximal proteins were identified and quantitatively verified against controls applying SILAC and mass spectrometry. The mRNA-binding proteins Sro9p and Gis2p appeared together with Scp160p, each providing ribosomes with nuclear transcripts. The cap-binding protein eIF4E (Cdc33p) and the eIF3/a-subunit (Rpg1p) were identified reflecting the encounter of proteins involved in the initiation of mRNA translation at the head region of ribosomal 40S. Unexpectedly, a protein involved in ribosome preservation (the clamping factor Stm1p), the deubiquitylation complex Ubp3p-Bre5p, the RNA polymerase II degradation factor 1 (Def1p), and transcription factors (Spt5p, Mbf1p) colocalize with Asc1p in exponentially growing cells. For Asc1<sup>R38D, K40E</sup>p, a variant considered to be deficient in binding to ribosomes, BioID revealed its predominant ribosome localization. Glucose depletion replaced most of the Asc1p colocalizing proteins for additional ribosomal proteins, suggesting a ribosome aggregation process during early nutrient limitation, possibly concomitant with ribosomal subunit clamping. Overall, the characterization of the Asc1p microenvironment with BioID confirmed and substantiated our recent findings that the &#x3b2;-propeller broadly contributes to signal transduction influencing phosphorylation of colocalizing proteins (<i>e.g.</i> of Bre5p), and by that might affect nuclear gene transcription and the fate of ribosomes.

### Keywords
Bioid, Signal transduction, Translation, Lc-msms, Asc1p, Silac, Rack1, Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Affiliations
Georg-August-Universität Göttingen
Georg-August-University Göttingen Department of Molecular Microbiology and Genetics Institute of  Microbiology and Genetics

### Submitter
Oliver Valerius

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Oliver Valerius
Georg-August-University Göttingen Department of Molecular Microbiology and Genetics Institute of  Microbiology and Genetics


