### Accession
PXD017473

### Title
Quantative proteomic analysis of teh central amygdala in neuropathic pain model rats

### Description
Neuropathic pain is a major clinic probelm as it is very difficult to treat and mechanism remain unknown. Here, we investigated the differential expression of proteins in the central nuecleus of amygdala (CeA) in neuropathic pain moldel spinal nerve transection (SNT)in rats. CeA was excised from naive, sham, SNTmodels at days 3, 7, 14 and 21 rats. The aim was to quatify the differential proteins in CeA including memebrane proteins. We used gel- and mass spectrometry- based proteomics. For gel-proteomics, total tissue lysate proteins were separated by 2D-PAGE. The 2D gels from different SNT time points against Sham and control rats were compared using Progenesis SameSpot software. The spots with fold change greater then 2 excised for the proteins IDs by LC-MS/MS. Protein spots were digested using trypsin. Extracted peptides were injected on the nano C18 column and measured by a LTQ Orbitrap XL or a LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometers. For the identification of membrane proteins in CeA, we used 1-SDS-PAGE and cut the gel region of MW 80 kDa and higher for nano-LC-MS/MS analysis. We also quantified membrane proteins by utilising triplex stabel isotope dimethyl labelling at the peptide level. Sham, control and day 3, 7 and 21 after SNT surgery rats CeA membrane proteins were purified and digested by trypsin and labelled with "light", "medium" and "heavy" dimethyl labelling reagents. The resulting peptides were analysed by a nano LC connected to the Q Exactive mass spectrometer. Quantification of peptide was processed using Proteome Discoverer 1.3.

### Sample Protocol
The CeA from sham, naive and SNT models at day 3, 7 14 and 21 rats were excised under a stereomicroscope maintained at 4C. The thickness of tehe xcised tissue was approximately 2,400 microm. The CeA was micro-punched with a sample corer(1 mm ID x 3mm OD). A total volume of the CeA is approximately 1.6 mm3 and a protein mass was between 80 to 200 microg. The CeA tissues were stored at -80C. For 2D-PAGE, the CeA tissues were solubilised in hot SDS sample buffer adn sonicated. Fifty microg of protein was loaded buffer exchanged to 8M urea, 2M thiourea adn 2% CHAPS in water. Sixty microg of protein was loaded per IPG strip. The IPG strips were 11 cm or 24 cm. Upon completion of IEF, the IPG strips were equilibrated and the second dimension SDS-PAGE separation was performed. 2D gels were fixed and then stained using a silver staining mass spectrometry compatible kit. Three biological replicates 2D gels for each model (naive, sham, SNT days 3, 7, 14 and 21) were imaged using a Fujifilm Imager reader adn images were exported to TIFF format abd loaded for the spot detection using Progenesis SameSpots V3.0. The spots with fold change higher than 2 were excised from 2D gel. Proteins were reduced and alkylated and igested with trypsin. The peptide mixture was desalted on C18 tips and eluted in 1.5 microL alpha CA matrix for MALDI-TOF/TOF-MS analysis using a 4700 Proteomics analyser (Applied Biosystems). For  nano LC-MS/MS analysis peptides were disalted ad analsyed on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 LC system connected to LTQ Orbitrp XL or an LTQ Orbitrap Velos. The peptides were separated on 15 cm lenght 100 microm ID C18 column. MS data was acquired using a data-dependent acquisition mode, operated at 60,000 resolution. Membrarane proteins of teh CeA were seaparted using the differential centrifugation. SDS-PAGE gel region from 80 kDa and higher excised and proteins extracted and reduced/alkylated and digested with trypsin. The resulting peptides were analysed as above but on the longer 50 cm C18 column. The separation of peptides was for 290 min and measured by the LTQ Orbitrap Velos. For qunatification of memebrane proteins, equal amounts of proteins were lablled on column "light", "medium" adn "heavy" for an on-columnstable isotope dimethyl labelling and the three channels were mixed in a 1:1:1 ratios. The labelled peptides were immmediately analysed by nano LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Acquired mass spec data MS/MS peak lists were converted to mzXML format using ReAdW version 4.4.1(LTQ XL Orbitrap data). Data was uploaded to the central proteomics facilities pipeline (CPFP at:https://cpfp-master.molbiol.ox.ac.uk/cpfp_demo/auth/login or https:/mascot.molbiol.ox.ac.uk (www.proteomics.ox.ac.uk). Files were serached using MASCOT version 2.3.01, x!tandem version 2008.12.01.1 and OMSSA version 2.1.8 against a concatenated target and reversed decoy version of the IPI rat sequence database (EBI), version 3.79 containing 78,946 target protein sequences and 41,806,600 residues. Enzyme was ste to trypsin allowing for up to 3 missed cleavages. Carbamidomethyl was set as a fixed modification, acetyl (N-term), deamidated (NQ), oxidation (M) were set as variable modifications. Mass tolerance for MS and MS/MS peak identifications were 20 ppm adn 0.6 Da respectively. Protein identification were made when two or peptides from that protein were identified with MASCOT scores above the identity thresholds.

### Publication Abstract
Pain and emotional distress have a reciprocal relation. The amygdala has been implicated in emotional processing. The central nucleus of the amygdala (CeA) receives nociceptive information from the dorsal horn of spinal cord and is responsible for the central plasticity in chronic pain. Neuropathic pain is a type of severe chronic pain and can be strongly influenced by emotional components. Plastic changes in the CeA may play a key role in the development or maintenance or both of neuropathic pain. We studied the expression levels of proteins in the CeA of spinal nerve transection (SNT) model rats. Total tissue lysate proteins were separated by two-dimensional-gel electrophoresis (2D-PAGE). Gels from different time points were compared using Progenesis SameSpot software, and the spots with Fold Change greater than 2 were excised for protein identification by mass spectrometry. We identified more than 50 cytosolic proteins as significantly altered in their expression levels in the CeA of SNT rats, and most of these changes have been validated at mRNA levels by qRT-PCR. We also identified more than 40 membrane proteins as notably up- or down-regulated in the CeA of SNT model rats relative to a control using stable isotope dimethyl labeling nano-LC-MS/MS based proteomics and found that one such protein, doublecortin (DCX), a microtubule-associated protein expressed by neuronal precursor cells during development, is specifically localized in the membrane fraction without changes in total amount of the protein. Immunohistochemistry showed that doublecortin is expressed in processes in the CeA of rats 7 and 21 days after SNT surgery, suggesting that doublecortin is one of the proteins that may contribute to the plastic changes, namely, redevelopment or rewiring of neural networks, in the CeA in the neuropathic pain model. These dysregulated proteins may play roles in reciprocal relationships between pain and psychological distress in the amygdala and contribute to central sensitization. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD017473.

### Keywords
Ncentral amygdala, Lc-ms/ms, Spinal nerve transcection, 2d-gel

### Affiliations
Mass Spectrometry Manager
PhD

### Submitter
Kersti Karu

### Lab Head
Dr Kersti Karu
Mass Spectrometry Manager


