### Accession
PXD029228

### Title
Dysregulated RNA polyadenylation contributes to metabolic impairment in non-alcoholic fatty liver disease

### Description
Pre-mRNA processing is an essential mechanism for the generation of mature mRNA and the regulation of gene expression in eukaryotic cells. While defects in pre-mRNA processing have been implicated in a number of diseases their involvement in metabolic pathologies is still unclear. Here we show that both alternative splicing and alternative polyadenylation, two major steps in pre-mRNA processing, are significantly altered in non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD). Moreover, we find that Serine and Arginine Rich Splicing Factor 10 (SRSF10) binding is enriched adjacent to consensus polyadenylation motifs and its expression is significantly decreased in NAFLD, suggesting a role mediating pre-mRNA dysregulation in this condition. Consistently, inactivation of SRSF10 in mouse and human hepatocytes in vitro, and in mouse liver in vivo, was found to dysregulate polyadenylation of key metabolic genes such as peroxisome proliferatoractivated receptor alpha (PPARA) and exacerbate diet-induced metabolic dysfunction. Collectively our work implicates dysregulated pre-mRNA polyadenylation in obesity-induced liver disease and uncovers a novel role for SRSF10 in this process.

### Sample Protocol
Sample processing: Samples were processed using an on-bead digestion procedure. Briefly, beads were suspended in 4M urea in 20mM HEPES (pH 8.0) and transferred to fresh lo-bind tubes. Samples were placed on a magnetic rack and clarified supernatant from each tube used to wash original tubes for recovery of residual beads. Samples were digested for 5 hours with 1.5 µg of LysC/Trypsin (Promega, V5071) at 37oC with shaking. Bead slurry was further diluted to approximately 1M urea by addition of 20mM HEPES (ph 8.0) containing 2mM DTT. Samples were further incubated at 37oC over-night. Post digestion, clarified digest solutions were recovered with use of the magnetic rack. Beads were sequentially washed with 20mM HEPES twice, with clarified supernatants pooled with relevant solutions. Samples were acidified with 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 0.1% and protein digests were desalted using Glygen C18 spin tips (Glygen Corp, TT2C18.96). Tryptic peptides were eluted with 60% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid (FA). Eluents were dried by vacuum centrifugation. Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis: Dried tryptic digests were re-dissolved in 0.1% TFA by shaking (1200rpm) for 30min at room temperature and then pulse sonicated on an ultrasonic water bath for 5min twice, followed by centrifugation (13,000 rpm, 5°C) for 10 minutes.LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano liquid chromatography system (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a coupled to a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) via an EASY spray source (Thermo Scientific). For LC-MS/MS analysis re-dissolved protein digests were injected and loaded onto a trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, 100μm × 2cm) for desalting and concentration at 8μL/min in 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA. Final on-column digest concentration was 600ng per injection. Peptides were then eluted on-line to an analytical column (Acclaim Pepmap RSLC C18, 75μm × 75cm) at a flow rate of 200nl/min. Peptides were separated using a 120 minute gradient, 4-25% of buffer B for 90 minutes followed by 25-45% buffer B for another 30 minutes (composition of buffer B – 80/20%, acetonitrile/ H2O + 0.1% FA) and subsequent column conditioning and equilibration. Eluted peptides were analysed by the mass spectrometer operating in positive polarity using a data-dependent acquisition mode. Ions for fragmentation were determined from an initial MS1 survey scan at 70,000 resolution, followed by HCD (Higher Energy Collision Induced Dissociation) of the top 12 most abundant ions at 17,5000 resolution. MS1 and MS2 scan AGC targets were set to 3e6 and 5e4 for maximum injection times of 50ms and 50ms respectively. A survey scan m/z range of 400 – 1800 was used, normalised collision energy set to 27%, charge exclusion enabled with unassigned and +1 charge states rejected and a minimal AGC target of 1e3. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Data was processed using the MaxQuant software platform (v1.6.2.3), with database searches carried out by the in-built Andromeda search engine against the Uniprot H.sapiens database (version 20180104, number of entries: 172,263) concatenated with mouse SRSF10 sequence. A reverse decoy search approach was used at a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) for both peptide spectrum matches and protein groups. Search parameters included: maximum missed cleavages set to 2, variable modifications of methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation, lysine biotinylation and protein N-terminal biotinylation. Label-free quantification was enabled with an LFQ minimum ratio count of 2. ‘Match between runs’ function was used with match and alignment thresholds of 1 and 20 minutes respectively. Please note only WT and Control conditions were considered in this analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Pre-mRNA processing is an essential mechanism for the generation of mature mRNA and the regulation of gene expression in eukaryotic cells. While defects in pre-mRNA processing have been implicated in a number of diseases their involvement in metabolic pathologies is still unclear. Here, we show that both alternative splicing and alternative polyadenylation, two major steps in pre-mRNA processing, are significantly altered in non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD). Moreover, we find that Serine and Arginine Rich Splicing Factor 10 (SRSF10) binding is enriched adjacent to consensus polyadenylation motifs and its expression is significantly decreased in NAFLD, suggesting a role mediating pre-mRNA dysregulation in this condition. Consistently, inactivation of SRSF10 in mouse and human hepatocytes in vitro, and in mouse liver in vivo, was found to dysregulate polyadenylation of key metabolic genes such as peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha (PPARA) and exacerbate diet-induced metabolic dysfunction. Collectively our work implicates dysregulated pre-mRNA polyadenylation in obesity-induced liver disease and uncovers a novel role for SRSF10 in this process.

### Keywords
Obesity, Sr protein, Nafld, Rna alternative splicing, Liver., Rna polyadenylation, Splicing factor

### Affiliations
Head of Proteomics and Metabolomics Facility
Medical Research Council - London Institute of Medical Sciences

### Submitter
Alex Montoya

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Pavel Shliaha
Head of Proteomics and Metabolomics Facility


