### Accession
PXD015840

### Title
Automated sample preparation with SP3 for low-input clinical proteomics

### Description
High-throughput and streamlined workflows are essential in clinical proteomics for standardized processing of samples originating from a variety of sources, including frozen tissue, FFPE tissue, or blood. To reach this goal, we have implemented single-pot solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation (SP3) on a liquid handling robot for automated processing (autoSP3) of tissue lysates in a 96-well format, performing unbiased protein purification and digestion delivering peptides that can be directly analyzed by LCMS. AutoSP3 eliminates hands-on time and minimizes the risk of error, and we show it reduces the protein quantification variability, and improves longitudinal performance and reproducibility. We demonstrate the distinguishing ability of autoSP3 to process low-input samples, reproducibly quantifying 500-1000 proteins from 100-1000 cells (<100 ng protein). Furthermore, we added a LE220-plus focused- ultrasonicator (Covaris Ltd, UK) to our pipeline to include 96-well format lysis of fresh-frozen tissue and cells. Collectively, autoSP3 provides a generic, scalable, and cost-effective pipeline for routine and standardized proteomic sample processing that should enable reproducible proteomics in broad range of clinical and non-clinical applications.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa cells were cultured as previously described. Cells were trypsinized, counted, and transferred in 1x PBS to a 96 AFA-tube TPX plate and centrifuged at 400 x g for 4 minutes. The supernatant was carefully removed and the remaining cell pellet was resuspended in 12 μL 1% SDS, 100 mM ABC pH 8.5 for further processing. Fresh-frozen tissue of pig heart and mus musculus liver and kidney were cut on dry-ice into small pieces ranging from 1.5 mg to 7.5 mg wet weight. Subsequently, each tissue piece was topped with 75 μL of 1% SDS, 100 mM ABC pH 8.5 and transferred to a 96 AFA-tube TPX plate for further processing. The focused ultra-sonication process was performed with volume-dependent settings that were optimized for 25 μL or less and 75 μL to 100 μL (in brackets): 300 seconds duration, 200 peak power (or 300), 25% duty factor, 50 cycles per burst (or 200), and average power of 50 (or 75). The dithering parameters were Y +/- 1 mm and speed 20 mm/s for both methods. For solubilization of heart tissue two to three rounds of ultra-sonication were necessary. For HeLa cell samples the 96 AFA-tube TPX plate was directly transferred to the Bravo for autoSP3. For fresh-frozen tissue an intermediate BCA assay was performed and 10 μg of five randomly selected samples per type (heart, liver, and kidney) were further processed by directly transferring the 96 AFA-tube TPX plate to the Bravo for autoSP3. As a reference, the SP3 protocol was carried out manually as described before (Hughes 2019). In brief, 10 μg of extracted HeLa protein were added to PCR tubes in a total volume of 10 μL lysis buffer (1% SDS, 100 mM ABC pH 8.5). Magnetic beads were prepared by combining 20 μL of both, Sera-Mag Speed Beads A and B (Fisher Scientific, Germany), and wash them one time with 160 μL and two times with 200 μL ddH2O, and re-suspend them in 20 μL ddH2O for a final working concentration of 100 μg/μL. 2 μL of pre-washed magnetic beads as well as 12 μL 100% acetonitrile (ACN) were added to each sample to reach a final concentration of 50% ACN. Protein binding to the beads was allowed for 18 minutes, followed by 2 minutes incubation on a magnetic rack to immobilize beads. The supernatant was removed and beads were washed two times with 200 μL of 80% ethanol (EtOH) and one time with 180 μL of 100% ACN. Beads were resuspended in 15 μL of 100 mM ABC and sonicated for 5 minutes in a water bath. Finally, sequencing-grade trypsin was added in an enzyme:protein ratio of 1:20 (5 μL of 0.1 μg/μL trypsin in ddH2O), and beads were pushed from the tube walls into the solution to ensure efficient digestion. Upon overnight incubation at 37°C and 1000 rpm in a table-top thermomixer, samples were acidified by adding 5 μL of 5% TFA and quickly vortexed. Beads were immobilized on a magnetic rack and peptides were recovered by transferring the supernatant to new PCR tubes. Samples were acidified and diluted with 0.1% FA to reach a peptide concentration of approximately 1 μg/10 μL. MS injection-ready samples were stored at -20 C.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were separated using the Easy NanoLC 1200 fitted with a trapping (Acclaim PepMap C18, 5 μm, 100 Å, 100 μm x 2 cm) and a self-packed analytical column (Reprosil-Pur Basic C18, 1.9 μm, 100 Å, 75 μm x 40 cm). The C18 material was packed into fused silica with an uncoated Pico-Tip Emitter with a 10 μm tip (New Objective) using a Nanobaum pressure bomb. The outlet of the analytical column was coupled directly to a Q-Exactive HF Orbitrap (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer. Solvent A was 0.1% (v/v) FA, in ddH2O and solvent B was 80% ACN, 0.1% (v/v) FA, in ddH2O. The samples were loaded with a constant flow of solvent A at a maximum pressure of 800 bar, onto the trapping column. Peptides were eluted via the analytical column at a constant flow of 0.3 μL/minute at 55°C. During the elution, the percentage of solvent B was increased in a linear fashion from 3 to 8% in 4 minutes, then from 8% to 10% in 2 minutes, then from 10% to 32% in a further 68 minutes, and then to 50% B in 12 minutes. Finally, the gradient was finished with 7 minutes at 100% solvent B, followed by 10 minutes 97% solvent A. Peptides were introduced into the mass spectrometer at a spray voltage of 2.5 kV. In both settings, the capillary temperature was set at 275°C. Full scan MS spectra with mass range m/z 350 to 1500 were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 60,000 FWHM. The filling time was set to a maximum of 50 ms with an automatic gain control target of 3 x 106 ions. The top 10 most abundant ions per full scan were selected for an MS2 acquisition. The dynamic exclusion list was with a maximum retention period of 60 seconds. Isotopes, unassigned charges, and charges of 1 and >8 were excluded. For MS2 scans, the resolution was set to 15,000 FWHM with automatic gain control of 5 x 104 ions and maximum fill time of 50 ms. The isolation window was set to m/z 1.6, with a fixed first mass of m/z 120, and stepped collision energy of 28.  Raw files were processed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.1.2). The search was performed against the most recent  Uniprot databases for human, mouse, and pig using the Andromeda search engine with the following search criteria: enzyme was set to trypsin/P with up to 2 missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation (C) and oxidation (M) / acetylation (protein N-term) were selected as a fixed and variable modifications, respectively. First and second search peptide tolerance were set to 20 and 4.5 ppm, respectively. Protein quantification was performed using the label-free quantification (LFQ) algorithm of MaxQuant. LFQ intensities were calculated separately for different parameter groups using a minimum ratio count of 1, and minimum and average number of neighbors of 3 and 6, respectively. MS2 spectra were not required for the LFQ comparison. Identification transfer between runs via the matching between runs algorithm was allowed with a match time window of 0.3 minutes. Peptide and protein hits were filtered at a false discovery rate of 1%, with a minimal peptide length of 7 amino acids. The reversed sequences of the target database were used as a decoy database.

### Publication Abstract
High-throughput and streamlined workflows are essential in clinical proteomics for standardized processing of samples from a variety of sources, including fresh-frozen tissue, FFPE tissue, or blood. To reach this goal, we have implemented single-pot solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation (SP3) on a liquid handling robot for automated processing (autoSP3) of tissue lysates in a 96-well format. AutoSP3 performs unbiased protein purification and digestion, and delivers peptides that can be directly analyzed by LCMS, thereby significantly reducing hands-on time, reducing variability in protein quantification, and improving longitudinal reproducibility. We demonstrate the distinguishing ability of autoSP3 to process low-input samples, reproducibly quantifying 500-1,000 proteins from 100 to 1,000 cells. Furthermore, we applied this approach to a cohort of clinical FFPE pulmonary adenocarcinoma (ADC) samples and recapitulated their separation into known histological growth patterns. Finally, we integrated autoSP3 with AFA ultrasonication for the automated end-to-end sample preparation and LCMS analysis of 96 intact tissue samples. Collectively, this constitutes a generic, scalable, and cost-effective workflow with minimal manual intervention, enabling reproducible tissue proteomics in a broad range of clinical and non-clinical applications.

### Keywords
Sample preparation, Proteomics, Sp3, Fresh-frozen tissue, Cells

### Affiliations
DKFZ
Division of Proteomics of Stem Cells and Cancer German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ)

### Submitter
Torsten Mueller

### Lab Head
Dr Jeroen Krijgsveld
Division of Proteomics of Stem Cells and Cancer German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ)


