### Accession
PXD023993

### Title
A proteomics study identifying interactors of the FSHD2 gene product SMCHD1 reveals RUVBL1-dependent DUX4 repression.

### Description
Structural Maintenance of Chromosomes Hinge Domain Containing 1 (SMCHD1) is a chromatin repressor, which is mutated in >95% of Facioscapulohumeral dystrophy (FSHD) type 2 cases. In FSHD2, SMCHD1 mutations ultimately result in the presence of the cleavage stage transcription factor DUX4 in muscle cells due to a failure in epigenetic repression of the D4Z4 macrosatellite repeat on chromosome 4q, which contains the DUX4 locus. While binding of SMCHD1 to D4Z4 and its necessity to maintain a repressive D4Z4 chromatin structure are well documented, it is unclear how SMCHD1 is recruited to D4Z4, and how it exerts its repressive properties on the chromatin. Here, we employ a quantitative proteomics approach to identify and characterize novel SMCHD1 interacting proteins, and assess their functionality in D4Z4 repression. We identify 47 robust SMCHD1 interactors, of which 19 are present in D4Z4 chromatin. We demonstrate that one of these SMCHD1 interacting proteins in D4Z4, RuvB-like 1 (RUVBL1) is indeed required for maintaining DUX4 silencing in FSHD myocytes. We also confirm the interaction of SMCHD1 with EZH inhibitory protein (EZHIP), which prevents global H3K27me3 deposition by the Polycomb repressive complex PRC2, providing novel insights into the potential function of SMCHD1 in the repression of DUX4 in the early stages of embryogenesis. The SMCHD1 interactome outlined herein can thus provide further direction into research on the potential function of SMCHD1 at genomic loci where SMCHD1 is known to act, such as D4Z4 repeats, the inactive X chromosome, autosomal gene clusters, imprinted loci and telomeres.

### Sample Protocol
Sample Preparation  U2OS (stably expressing GFP-SMCHD1 or GFP) cells grown in SILAC Heavy or Light medium as described above, were harvested from a full T182 culture flask by dissociation of cells using TrypLE dissociation reagent (12604-013 Life Technologies). Cells were counted, and aliquots of 2.5*106 cells were transferred to 1.5 ml microcentrifuge tubes on ice for subsequent nuclear isolation. After washing with PBS and pelleting of cells in a microcentrifuge (2600 RPM), pellets were resuspended in 65 µl Fractionation Buffer 1 (HEPES 25 mM, KCl 5 mM, MgCl2 0.5 mM, DL-Dithiothreitol (DTT) 1 mM supplemented with 1x cOmplete Protease Inhibitor (11836145001 Roche). Subsequently, 65 µl Fractionation Buffer 2 was added (HEPES 25 mM, KCl 5 mM, MgCl2 0.5 mM, DL-Dithiothreitol (DTT) 1 mM and 2% Igepal CA-630 supplemented with 1x cOmplete Protease Inhibitor, to reach a final Igepal CA-630 concentration of 1%. Tubes were incubated while tumbling at 4°C for 15 minutes. Nuclei were pelleted at 2500 RPM and supernatant was removed, with a part of the supernatant transferred to a clean microcentrifuge tube to serve as a cytoplasmic fraction. Nuclei were washed twice in Fractionation Buffer 3 (1:1 mixture of Fractionation Buffer 1 and Fractionation Buffer 2) and were pooled in a new Eppendorf Protein Lobind tube (EP0030108116, Eppendorf) by resuspension in 300 µl NP40 lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 1% NP-40 (Igepal CA-630) and 1 mM MgCl2, supplemented with 1x cOmplete protease inhibitors and 20 mM NaF). Lysed nuclei were sonicated in a Bioruptor Pico (Diagenode) for 6 cycles (10 seconds on, 30 seconds off) and afterwards supplemented with 500U Benzonase (E1014-25KU EMD Millipore) and an additional 700 µl NP40 lysis buffer. Lysis was completed by incubation at 4°C while tumbling for 60 minutes, after which insoluble material was pelleted by centrifugation at maximum speed in a cooled microcentrifuge.  Protein concentrations in the lysates were determined using Pierce BCA kit (23225 ThermoFisher), and equal amounts of nuclear lysate were incubated with 20 µl washed GFP-Trap Agarose beads (gta-20 Chromotek) slurry for 1.5 hours while tumbling. Beads were washed 1x in NP-40 lysis buffer, 1x in NP-40 lysis buffer containing 300 mM NaCl, and 2x in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate ((NH4)2CO3). At the last wash-step, beads used for corresponding GFP-SMCHD1 IP (e.g. SILAC Heavy) and GFP control IP (e.g. SILAC Light) were combined in a new tube. Mixed samples were then trypsinized overnight by resuspending beads in 250 µl 50 mM Ammonium Bicarbonate containing 2.5 µg sequencing grade trypsin (V5111 Promega). Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, 40967-10X1ML-F, Honeywell) was added to a final concentration of 1%, and samples were centrifuged for 5 minutes to pellet insoluble debris. The supernatant was loaded on a Sep-Pak Vac 1cc (100 mg) tC18 cartridge (WAT036820, Waters), washed twice with 0.1% acetic acid, and eluted using 1 ml 0.1 % acetic acid, 60 % acetonitrile. Eluates were lyophilized using a RVC 2-25 CD centrifugal vacuum concentrator (Christ) and stored at -80°C. Per experiment, two U2OS GFP-SMCHD1 clones were used in both Heavy and label swapped Light SILAC medium for an N=4. The eExperiment was performed two independently  two times.  Mass Spectrometry data acquisition.  Mass spectrometry data was acquired as in (Sha et al., 2019). In brief, Liquid Chromatography gradient was performed on an EASY-nLC 1000 system (Proxeon, Odense, Denmark) connected to a Q-Exactive Orbitrap (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany) through a nano-electrospray ion source. The Q-Exactive was coupled to a 15 cm analytical column with an inner-diameter of 75 μm, in-house packed with 1.9 μm C18-AQ beads (Reprospher-DE, Pur, Dr. Maish, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). The chromatography gradient length was 95 minutes from 2% to 30% acetonitrile in followed by 10 minutes to 95% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 200 nL/minute. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode with a top-10 method. Full-scan MS spectra were acquired in a range from 400 to 2000 m/z at a target value of 3 x 106 and a resolution of 70,000, and the Higher-Collisional Dissociation (HCD) tandem mass spectra (MS/MS) were recorded at a target value of 1 x 105 and with a resolution of 17,500 with a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 25%. The maximum MS1 and MS2 injection times were 20 ms and 60 ms, respectively. The precursor ion masses of scanned ions were dynamically excluded (DE) from MS/MS analysis for 60 sec. Ions with charge 1, and greater than 6 were excluded from triggering MS2 analysis.

### Data Protocol
To determine SILAC ratios, LC-MS/MS Raw files were analyzed using MaxQuant software (v1.6.14.0) according to (Tyanova et al., 2016) using default settings with the following modifications. Two labelings were included, K0R0 and K8R10, for light and heavy medium, respectively.  Maximum number of mis-cleavages by trypsin/p was set to 3 and Carbamidomethyl(C) was deactivated as fixed modification. We performed the search against an in silico digested UniProt reference proteome for Homo sapiens (16th Oct 2020). Minimum amount of petides for quatification was set to 1. Match-between-runs feature was enabled with 0.7 min match time window and 20 min alignment time window.  MaxQuant proteingroups.txt file output was further processed in Microsoft Excel 365 for comprehensive visualization.

### Publication Abstract
Structural Maintenance of Chromosomes Hinge Domain Containing 1 (SMCHD1) is a chromatin repressor, which is mutated in&#x2009;&gt;&#x2009;95% of Facioscapulohumeral dystrophy (FSHD) type 2 cases. In FSHD2, SMCHD1 mutations ultimately result in the presence of the cleavage stage transcription factor DUX4 in muscle cells due to a failure in epigenetic repression of the D4Z4 macrosatellite repeat on chromosome 4q, which contains the DUX4 locus. While binding of SMCHD1 to D4Z4 and its necessity to maintain a repressive D4Z4 chromatin structure in somatic cells are well documented, it is unclear how SMCHD1 is recruited to D4Z4, and how it exerts its repressive properties on chromatin. Here, we employ a quantitative proteomics approach to identify and characterize novel SMCHD1 interacting proteins, and assess their functionality in D4Z4 repression. We identify 28 robust SMCHD1 nuclear interactors, of which 12 are present in D4Z4 chromatin of myocytes. We demonstrate that loss of one of these SMCHD1 interacting proteins, RuvB-like 1 (RUVBL1), further derepresses DUX4 in FSHD myocytes. We also confirm the interaction of SMCHD1 with EZH inhibitory protein (EZHIP), a protein which prevents global H3K27me3 deposition by the Polycomb repressive complex PRC2, providing novel insights into the potential function of SMCHD1 in the repression of DUX4 in the early stages of embryogenesis. The SMCHD1 interactome outlined herein can thus provide further direction into research on the potential function of SMCHD1 at genomic loci where SMCHD1 is known to act, such as D4Z4 repeats, the inactive X chromosome, autosomal gene clusters, imprinted loci and telomeres.

### Keywords
Smchd1; fshd; ruvbl1; silac; ezhip

### Affiliations
Cell and Chemical Biology Leiden University Medical Center, LUMC The Netherlands
Andalusian Center for Regenerative Medicine and Cell Biology, CABIMER, University of Seville

### Submitter
Román González-Prieto

### Lab Head
Dr Alfred C.O. Vertegaal
Cell and Chemical Biology Leiden University Medical Center, LUMC The Netherlands


