### Accession
PXD011312

### Title
Mapping the proteome of the synaptic cleft through peroxidase-based reporter protein SynCAM1-HRP

### Description
Synapses are the brain’s functional units connecting neurons into circuits that underlie memory and behavior. These specialized neuronal junctions are heterogenic in function and molecular composition, reflecting diverse health and disease states. Progress over the past years has shown that trans-synaptic adhesion molecules mediate synapse formation, specification, and differentiation during development. Among the prominently expressed synaptic cleft proteins are SynCAMs, a group of immunoglobulin molecules that engage in homo- and heterophilic interactions and that instruct synapse formation and guide synaptic maturation and that are specific for excitatory synapses. The current study describes the use of peroxidase-mediated proximity labeling to map the proteome of excitatory synapses using SynCAM1 as a reporter protein.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation was carried out similar to protocol published from Alice Ting's group (Loh, et.al. 2016, Cell 166, p1295-1307).  Digested peptides were analzyed utilizing an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer coupled to to a nanoACQUITY UPLC system. LC MS/MS bottom-up proteomics data were collected for Label-Free Quantitative analyses.

### Data Protocol
Mascot was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.020 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 PPM. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified in Mascot as a fixed modification. Glu->pyro-Glu of the n-terminus, gln->pyro-Glu of the n-terminus, deamidated of asparagine, oxidation of methionine, acetyl of the n-terminus and phospho of serine and tyrosine were specified in Mascot as variable modifications. CRITERIA FOR PROTEIN IDENTIFICATION-- Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.8.4, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability by the Peptide Prophet algorithm (Keller, A et al Anal. Chem. 2002;74(20):5383-92) with Scaffold delta-mass correction. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides.  Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii, Al et al Anal. Chem. 2003;75(17):4646-58). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters.

### Publication Abstract
Synapses are specialized neuronal cell-cell contacts that underlie network communication in the mammalian brain. Across neuronal populations and circuits, a diverse set of synapses is utilized, and they differ in their molecular composition to enable heterogenous connectivity patterns and functions. In addition to pre- and post-synaptic specializations, the synaptic cleft is now understood to be an integral compartment of synapses that contributes to their structural and functional organization. Aiming to map the cleft proteome, this study applied a peroxidase-mediated proximity labeling approach and used the excitatory synaptic cell adhesion protein SynCAM 1 fused to horseradish peroxidase (HRP) as a reporter in cultured cortical neurons. This reporter marked excitatory synapses as measured by confocal microcopy and was targeted to the edge zone of the synaptic cleft as determined using 3D dSTORM super-resolution imaging. Proximity labeling with a membrane-impermeant biotin-phenol compound restricted labeling to the cell surface, and Label-Free Quantitation (LFQ) mass spectrometry combined with ratiometric HRP tagging of membrane vs. synaptic surface proteins was used to identify the proteomic content of excitatory clefts. Novel cleft candidates were identified, and Receptor-type tyrosine-protein phosphatase zeta was selected and successfully validated. This study supports the robust applicability of peroxidase-mediated proximity labeling for synaptic cleft proteomics and its potential for understanding synapse heterogeneity in health and changes in diseases such as psychiatric disorders and addiction.

### Keywords
Lc ms/ms, Syncam1, Proteomics, Synapse composition, Synaptic cleft, Synaptomics, Proximity labeling

### Affiliations
Yale University
Yale University, New Haven, CT 06511

### Submitter
TuKiet Lam

### Lab Head
Dr TuKiet Lam
Yale University, New Haven, CT 06511


