### Accession
PXD001584

### Title
Importance of arginine trasporter ArgP in Francisella by comparative proteomics.

### Description
Metabolic adaptation has recently been recognized as a key component of the intracellular life cycle of pathogenic microorganisms. Upon entry into mammalian host cells, Francisella tularensis, a pathogenic bacterium responsible for the zoonotic disease tularemia, rapidly escapes from the phagosome to multiply actively in the cytosolic compartment. Francisella is auxotroph for several amino acids, including arginine, and thus relies exclusively on their import from the host to survive in infected cells. We identified an arginine transporter (hereafter designated ArgP) whose inactivation considerably delayed bacterial phagosomal escape and intracellular multiplication. Remarkably, this defect could be totally suppressed in macrophages and dendritic cells from IRAP-KO mice. Wild-type cytosolic multiplication of the mutant bacteria was restored in these cells, indicating that the ArgP transporter is mainly required for arginine uptake in the phagosomal compartment. Proteomic analyses showed that arginine deprivation in the ∆argP mutant rapidly affected the expression of a numerous proteins, and in particular reduced expression of most of the ribosomal proteins. We propose that regulation of ribosomal protein biogenesis may contribute to the sensing of the intracellular stage of the pathogen and to phagosomal membrane disruption.

### Sample Protocol
MS/MS Protein Identification and Quantification WT and ∆argP mutant strains were grown overnight in CDMmin. The next day, bacteria were resuspended at an OD600 of 0.1 in CDMmin or in CDM containing arginine at the concentration of 0.43 mM and cultivated for 1 h or 2 h.  The cells (50 mL) were harvested by centrifugation at 3,000 x g for 20 min and resuspended in 2 mL of 5 mM Tris-HCl pH 8. The bacterial suspensions were sonicated three times for 30 s at 4.0 output, 70% pulsed (Branson Sonifier 250). Lysates were centrifuged once again at 8,000 x g for 6 min and supernatant were collected. For label-free, relative quantitative analysis, 50 µg protein from each of the eight samples (WT and ∆argP, at 1 h and 2 h of growth, at 2.3 mM or 0.46 mM arginine) were precipitated in 80%, acetone and digested with 1 µg sequencing grade trypsin (Promega). Following an overnight digestion at 37°C samples were vacuum dried, and resuspended in 100 µL of 10% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid, for LC-MS/MS.  For each run, 5 µL were injected in a nanoRSLC-Q Exactive PLUS (Dionex RSLC Ultimate 3000, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Peptides were separated on a reversed-phase liquid chromatographic column (Pepmap C18, Dionex). Chromatography solvents were (A) 0.1% formic acid in water, and (B) 80% acetonitrile, 0.08% formic acid. Peptides were eluted from the column with the following gradient 5% to 40% B (120 min), 40% to 80% (10 minutes). At 131 min, the gradient returned to 5% to re-equilibrate the column for 30 minutes before the next injection. Two blanks, one short 40 min-step gradient and one 60 min-linear gradient, were run between triplicates to prevent sample carryover. Peptides eluting from the column were analyzed by data dependent MS/MS, using top-10 acquisition method. Briefly, the instrument settings were as follows: resolution was set to 70,000 for MS scans and 17,500 for the data dependent MS/MS scans in order to increase speed. The MS AGC target was set to 3.106counts, while MS/MS AGC target was set to 5.104. The MS scan range was from 400 to 2000 m/z. MS and MS/MS scans were recorded in profile mode. Dynamic exclusion was set to 20 sec duration. Each sample was analyzed in biological triplicate by nanoLC/MS/MS. Each biological replicate was acquired in three technical replicates.

### Data Protocol
Data Processing Following LC-MS/MS acquisition The MS files were processed with the MaxQuant software version 1.4.1.2 and searched with Andromeda search engine against the NCBI F. tularensis subsp. novicida database (release 28-04-2014; 1,719 entries). To search parent mass and fragment ions, we set an initial mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and 0.5 Da respectively, no match between runs allowed. The minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and strict specificity for trypsin cleavage was required, allowing up to two missed cleavage sites. Carbamidomethylation (Cys) was set as fixed modification, whereas oxidation (Met) and N-term acetylation were set as variable modifications. The false discovery rates (FDRs) at the protein and peptide level were set to 1%. Scores were calculated in MaxQuant as described previously (Cox J., Mann M., 2008). The reverse and common contaminants hits were removed from MaxQuant output. Proteins were quantified according to the MaxQuant label-free algorithm using LFQ intensities [Luber, 2010 #1907;Cox, 2008 #1906]; protein quantification was obtained using at least 2 peptides (unique peptide + razor) per protein.  Statistical and bioinformatic analysis, including heatmaps, profile plots and clustering, were performed with Perseus software (version 1.4.1.3) freely available at www.perseus-framework.org. For statistical comparison, we set two groups, each containing biological and technical triplicates, we then filtered the data to keep only proteins with at least 9 valid values out of 18. Next, the data were imputed to fill missing data points by creating a Gaussian distribution of random numbers with a standard deviation of 33% relative to the standard deviation of the measured values and 1.8 standard deviation downshift of the mean to simulate the distribution of low signal values. We performed a T-test, with a permutation based testing correction that was controlled by using a false discovery rate threshold of 0.05, 250 randomizations. Hierarchical clustering of proteins that survived the test was performed in Perseus on logarithmised LFQ intensities after z-score normalization of the data, using Euclidean distances using default parameters and setting 12 clusters for the row tree.

### Publication Abstract
Upon entry into mammalian host cells, the pathogenic bacterium Francisella must import host cell arginine to multiply actively in the host cytoplasm. We identified and functionally characterized an arginine transporter (hereafter designated ArgP) whose inactivation considerably delayed bacterial phagosomal escape and intracellular multiplication. Intramacrophagic growth of the &#x394;argP mutant was fully restored upon supplementation of the growth medium with excess arginine, in both F. tularensis subsp. novicida and F. tularensis subsp. holarctica LVS, demonstrating the importance of arginine acquisition in these two subspecies. High-resolution mass spectrometry revealed that arginine limitation reduced the amount of most of the ribosomal proteins in the &#x394;argP mutant. In response to stresses such as nutritional limitation, repression of ribosomal protein synthesis has been observed in all kingdoms of life. Arginine availability may thus contribute to the sensing of the intracellular stage of the pathogen and to trigger phagosomal egress. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange database with identifier PXD001584 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD001584).

### Keywords
Labelfree, F. tularensis, Q exactive plus, Arginine transporter

### Affiliations
Necker proteomics, INSERM
Necker proteomic platform, , PPN-3P5, Structure Federative de Recherche Necker, INSERM US24,

### Submitter
Chiara guerrera

### Lab Head
Dr Ida Chiara GUERRERA
Necker proteomic platform, , PPN-3P5, Structure Federative de Recherche Necker, INSERM US24,


