### Accession
PXD039954

### Title
Structural basis for SMAC-mediated antagonism of caspase inhibition by the giant ubiquitin ligase BIRC6

### Description
Certain Inhibitors of apoptosis (IAP) family members are sentinel proteins preventing untimely cell death by inhibiting caspases. Antagonists including second mitochondria-derived activator of caspase (SMAC) regulate IAPs, driving cell death. Baculoviral IAP repeat-containing protein 6 (BIRC6), a giant IAP with dual E2/E3 ubiquitin ligase activity, regulates programmed cell death through unknown mechanisms. We show BIRC6 directly restricts executioner caspases-3 and -7, and ubiquitinates caspases-3, -7 and -9 working exclusively with non canonical E1, UBA6. Importantly, we show SMAC supresses both mechanisms. Cryo-electron microscopy structures of BIRC6 alone and in complex with SMAC reveals BIRC6 is an anti parallel dimer juxtaposing the substrate-binding module against the catalytic domain. Furthermore, we discover SMAC multi-site binding to BIRC6 results in a sub-nanomolar affinity interaction, enabling SMAC to competitively displace caspases thus antagonising BIRC6 anti-caspase function.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293F cells grown in FreeStyleTM 293 Expression Media (Gibco), were washed with PBS and lysed in 25 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 100 mM NaCl, 1 mM DTT supplemented with 0.2 % (v/v) Igepal CA-630 (Sigma), 1 x cOmplete protease inhibitor tablet (Roche), 80 μM leupeptin and 40 μM pepstatin. Lysates were cleared by centrifugation (13,000 rpm, 15 min, 4°C) followed by ultracentrifugation (45,000 rpm, 30 min, 4°C). At least 7 mg of lysate protein was incubated for 1 hr at 4°C with Strep-tactin resin (IBA) uncoated or coated with 500 μg Strep-mScarlet-BIRC6. Following incubation, resin was washed and bound proteins eluted by resuspension in 2.5X Laemmli SDS sample buffer. Three biological repeats were performed. Eluted proteins were processed for mass spectrometry analysis using suspension traps (S-Traps). Proteins were reduced with 200 mM DTT in 0.1 M Tris pH 7.8, followed by alkylation with 200 mM iodoacetamide in 0.1 M Tris pH 7.8 in the dark. Samples were acidified by addition of 12 % phosphoric acid and captured on S-TrapTM midi columns (C02-midi, ProtiFi). Columns were washed with 90 % methanol in 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TAEB) with centrifugation at 4000 g. Captured proteins were digested with trypsin (1:100 w/w) in 1 mM HCl overnight at RT. Peptides were eluted, dried and dissolved in Buffer A (98 % MilliQ-H20, 2 % CH3CN and 0.1 % TFA). A non-saturating peptide amount (based on the intensity of the TIC chromatogram) of each biological repeat was injected for LC-MS/MS analysis on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano UPLC (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The instrument was operated in a data-independent acquisition (DIA) mode adapted from a previously described method (47).

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified using the DIA-NN search engine (version 1.8), and label-free quantification was performed in Perseus (version 1.6.2.3). Volcano plots were generated using protein group intensities from DIA-NN and significant enrichment was plotted using a t-test with permutation FDR = 0.01 for multiple-test correction and s0 = 0.1 as cutoff parameters.

### Publication Abstract
Certain inhibitor of apoptosis (IAP) family members are sentinel proteins that prevent untimely cell death by inhibiting caspases. Antagonists, including second mitochondria-derived activator of caspases (SMAC), regulate IAPs and drive cell death. Baculoviral IAP repeat-containing protein 6 (BIRC6), a giant IAP with dual E2 and E3 ubiquitin ligase activity, regulates programmed cell death through unknown mechanisms. We show that BIRC6 directly restricts executioner caspase-3 and -7 and ubiquitinates caspase-3, -7, and -9, working exclusively with noncanonical E1, UBA6. Notably, we show that SMAC suppresses both mechanisms. Cryo-electron microscopy structures of BIRC6 alone and in complex with SMAC reveal that BIRC6 is an antiparallel dimer juxtaposing the substrate-binding module against the catalytic domain. Furthermore, we discover that SMAC multisite binding to BIRC6 results in a subnanomolar affinity interaction, enabling SMAC to competitively displace caspases, thus antagonizing BIRC6 anticaspase function.

### Keywords
Ap-ms, Cell death, Ubiquitomics, Biochemistry, Birc6, Structural biology

### Affiliations
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences Oxford Institute (CAMS) - Nuffield Department of Medicine. University of Oxford
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Adan Pinto-Fernandez

### Lab Head
Dr Adan Pinto-Fernandez
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences Oxford Institute (CAMS) - Nuffield Department of Medicine. University of Oxford


