### Accession
PXD022672

### Title
Metabolic reprogramming and host-immune response against Crimean-Congo Hemorrhagic Fever Viruses (CCHFV) during acute infection

### Description
The pathogenesis and host viral interactions of the Crimean–Congo hemorrhagic fever virus (CCHFV) are convoluted and have not been evaluated previously. To understand the host immune responses against CCHFV, we have performed a global transcriptomic analysis of peripheral blood mononuclear cells from a longitudinal cohort of CCHF patients who survived, and a temporal untargeted proteomics analysis of CCHFV infected cells. Our results indicate that during the acute phase of CCHFV infection, metabolic reprogramming of the host towards central carbon metabolism including glycolysis/gluconeogenesis  occurs. This could potentially be regulated by the PI3K/Akt, HIF-1, FoxO, and AMPK signaling pathways and play a central role in viral replication. Moreover, key interferon stimulating genes (ISGs: ISG12, ISG15, ISG20 and MXs: Mx1 and Mx2) are activated during infection, suggesting a role for type I and II interferon-mediated antiviral mechanisms. Targeting type I interferon response through metabolic rewiring could be an attractive therapeutic intervention for CCHFV.

### Sample Protocol
Huh7 cells were infected with the CCHFV in triplicate, as described by us previously. Briefly, Huh7 cells were infected with CCHFV IbAr10200 at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 1. After 1 h of incubation (37°C, 5% CO2) the inoculum was removed, the cells were washed with PBS, and 2 ml DMEM supplemented with 5% heat-inactivated FBS was added to each well. Samples were collected in triplicate at 24 and 48 hpi along with controls. The medium was removed, cells were washed carefully with PBS and lyzed in lysis buffer (10 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, 10% SDS, and protease inhibitor). After that, 4x sample buffer (ThermoFisher, US) was added and the samples were boiled at 99°C for 10 min. Protein digestion was performed in S-Trap microcolumns (Protifi, Huntington, NY) and the resulting peptides were labeled with TMTpro™ tags. Labeled peptides were fractionated by high pH (HpH) reversed-phase chromatography, and each fraction was analyzed on an Ultimate™ 3000 UHPLC (ThermoFisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) in a 120 min linear gradient. Data were acquired on a Orbitrap™ Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, San Jose, CA)  in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode collecting full mass spectra at 120,000 resolution in a mass range of  350 – 1400 m/z for a maximum injection time (IT) of 50 ms. Tandem mass spectra of the top 20 precursors were acquired with high collision energy (HCD) of 34%, resolution of 45,000 and maximum IT of 86 ms, isolating precursors with 0.7 Th and applying 45 s dynamic exclusion. Proteins were searched against the SwissProt human database using the search engine Mascot v2.5.1 (MatrixScience Ltd, UK) in Proteome Discoverer v2.4 (ThermoFisher Scientific) software allowing up to two missed cleavages. The oxidation of methionine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, TMTpro™ at lysine and N-termini were set as variable modifications; while carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1%.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were first filtered to remove missing data. Proteins detected in all samples were retained for analysis resulting in 8,501 proteins in the filtered dataset. The filtered data was then normalized by applying eight different methods using R/Bioconductor package NormalyzerDE v1.4.0 35. The quantile normalization was found superior to other methods and was selected for further use. Differential protein expression analysis was performed using R/Bioconductor package limma v3.42.2 36. Proteins with adjusted P-values of less than 0.05 were regarded as significant. KEGG pathway enrichment analysis of significantly regulated proteins was performed using the enrichr module of python package GSEAPY v 0.9.16.

### Publication Abstract
Viruses hijack host metabolic pathways for their replicative advantage. In this study, using patient-derived multiomics data and in&#xa0;vitro infection assays, we aimed to understand the role of key metabolic pathways that can regulate severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 reproduction and their association with disease severity. We used multiomics platforms (targeted and untargeted proteomics and untargeted metabolomics) on patient samples and cell-line models along with immune phenotyping of metabolite transporters in patient blood cells to understand viral-induced metabolic modulations. We also modulated key metabolic pathways that were identified using multiomics data to regulate the viral reproduction in&#xa0;vitro. Coronavirus disease 2019 disease severity was characterized by increased plasma glucose and mannose levels. Immune phenotyping identified altered expression patterns of carbohydrate transporter, glucose transporter 1, in CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells, intermediate and nonclassical monocytes, and amino acid transporter, xCT, in classical, intermediate, and nonclassical monocytes. In in&#xa0;vitro lung epithelial cell (Calu-3) infection model, we found that glycolysis and glutaminolysis are essential for virus replication, and blocking these metabolic pathways caused significant reduction in virus production. Taken together, we therefore hypothesized that severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 utilizes and rewires pathways governing central carbon metabolism leading to the efflux of toxic metabolites and associated with disease severity. Thus, the host metabolic perturbation could be an attractive strategy to limit the viral replication and disease severity.

### Keywords
Transcriptomics, Cchfv, Cell lines, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Division of Chemistry I, Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden

### Submitter
JIMMY RODRIGUEZ

### Lab Head
Dr Ákos Végvári
Division of Chemistry I, Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden


