### Accession
PXD012927

### Title
HULC interactome MS analysis

### Description
we report a high throughput strategy to screen for lncRNA interacting proteins in vivo by combining tobramycin affinity purification and mass spectrometric analysis (TOBAP-MS). This method was applied to establish the interactome network for the lncRNA highly-upregulated in liver cancer (HULC).

### Sample Protocol
The tobramycin-coated sepharose beads were incubated with cell lysates, then beads were isolated by centrifugation and were washed with washing buffer. The bund RNA and proteins were eluted with 30 mM tobramycin solution. The HepG2-J6f1 cells were processed in parallel as the negative control. The proteins purified from HepG2-HULC-J6f1 cells were mixed with the control sample, separated on a 10% SDS-PAGE, and visualized using silver staining. Each gel lane was diced into 10 slices, and in-gel tryptic digestion was conducted.

### Data Protocol
The in-gel digested samples were desalted using C18 ZipTip and loaded on a nanoUPLC system (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) equipped with a self-packed C18 column (C18, 150 × 0.075 mm, 1.7 μm). The peptides were eluted using a 5-40% B gradient (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) over 90 min into a nanoelectrospray ionization (nESI) LTQ Fusion mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). The Xcalibur™ software (ThermoFisher Scientific) was used to set the instrumental parameters and collect the data.Raw data were searched against the Swiss-Prot/UniProt human protein database (release August 2018) containing 20325 sequence entries and a common contaminants database using the Andromeda search engine embedded in the MaxQuant Software (version 1.6.3.4). The following parameters were applied during the database search: 20 ppm precursor and 0.5 Da fragment mass error tolerance, Arg/Lys (+6.0201 Da, SILAC heavy amino acid) as variable modifications, static modifications of carbamidomethylation for all cysteine residues, flexible modification of oxidation modifications for methionine residues, and two missed cleavage site of trypsin was allowed. The false discovery rate (FDR) <0.01 was used as filtering criteria for all identified proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Interacting with proteins is a crucial way for long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) to exert their biological responses. Here we report a high throughput strategy to characterize lncRNA interacting proteins in vivo by combining tobramycin affinity purification and mass spectrometric analysis (TOBAP-MS). Using this method, we identify 140 candidate binding proteins for lncRNA highly upregulated in liver cancer (HULC). Intriguingly, HULC directly binds to two glycolytic enzymes, lactate dehydrogenase A (LDHA) and pyruvate kinase M2 (PKM2). Mechanistic study suggests that HULC functions as an adaptor molecule that enhances the binding of LDHA and PKM2 to fibroblast growth factor receptor type 1 (FGFR1), leading to elevated phosphorylation of these two enzymes and consequently promoting glycolysis. This study provides a convenient method to study lncRNA interactome in vivo and reveals a unique mechanism by which HULC promotes Warburg effect by orchestrating the enzymatic activities of glycolytic enzymes.

### Keywords
Hulc, Silac, Gel-based proteomics

### Affiliations
Department of Genetics, school of Basic Medical Sciences, Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin 300070, P.R. China
Tianjin medical university

### Submitter
Hao Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Ruibing Chen
Department of Genetics, school of Basic Medical Sciences, Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin 300070, P.R. China


