### Accession
PXD027238

### Title
Identifying Specific Protein Interactors of Nucleosomes Carrying Methylated Histones using Quantitative Mass Spectrometry

### Description
Chemical modification of histone proteins by methylation plays a central role in chromatin regulation by recruiting epigenetic ‘readers’ via specialized binding domains. Depending on the degree of methylation, the exact modified amino acid, and the associated reader proteins histone methylations are involved in the regulation of all DNA-based processes, such as transcription, DNA replication, and DNA repair. We have previously established a method that allows the unbiased identification of nuclear proteins which binding to nucleosomes is regulated by the presence of specific histone modifications (1,2). The method is based on an in-vitro reconstitution of semi-synthetic nucleosomes bearing a predefined set of histone modifications which are subsequently used as baits for affinity purification pull-down experiments with nuclear extracts followed by identification and quantification of nucleosome-interacting proteins using LC-MS/MS.  Here we provide a representative set of label-free MS results for nucleosome pull-down affinity purification experiments performed using unmodified as well as H3K4me3- and H3K9me3-modified di-nucleosomes and nuclear extract obtained from HeLa S3 cells.   1. Bartke T, Vermeulen M, Xhemalce B, Robson SC, Mann M, Kouzarides T (2010) Nucleosome-interacting proteins regulated by DNA and histone methylation. Cell 143:470-484 2. Makowski MM, Gräwe C, Foster BM, Nguyen NV, Bartke T, Vermeulen M (2018) Global profiling of protein-DNA and protein-nucleosome binding affinities using quantitative mass spectrometry. Nat Commun 9:1653

### Sample Protocol
Nucleosome assembly Unmodified as well as H3K4me3- and H3K9me3-modified histone octamers were refolded from the purified histones and assembled into nucleosomes with biotinylated DNA via salt deposition dialysis as previously described (Bartke et al., 2010; Dyer et al., 2004). Biotinylated nucleosomal DNAs containing two 601 nucleosome positioning sequences (Lowary and Widom, 1998) separated by a 50 bp linker (di-nucleosomes) were prepared as described (Bartke et al., 2010). Di-nucleosomes were assembled in the presence of MMTV A competitor DNA and a slight excess of octamers as described for longer chromatin arrays to ensure saturation of the 601 repeats (Dorigo et al., 2003). The reconstituted nucleosomes were then immobilized on Streptavidin Sepharose HP beads (Cytiva) via the biotinylated DNA, washed to remove MMTV A competitor DNA and MMTV A nucleosomes, and directly used for SILAC nucleosome affinity purifications. Correct assembly and immobilization of nucleosomes were verified by native PAGE.  Nucleosome pull-down affinity purifications Nuclear extracts were prepared from HeLa S3 cells as previously described (Bartke et al., 2010). For each pull-down, nucleosomes corresponding to 12.5 μg of octamer were immobilized on 10 μl Streptavidin Sepharose HP beads (Cytiva) in the final reconstitution buffer (10 mM Tris [pH 7.5], 250 mM KCl, 1 mM EDTA and 1 mM DTT; supplemented with 0.1% NP40) and then rotated with 0.5 mg HeLa S3 nuclear extract in 1 ml of SNAP buffer (20 mM HEPES [pH 7.9], 150 mM NaCl, 0.2 mM EDTA, 10% Glycerol) supplemented with 0.1% NP40, 1 mM DTT and protease inhibitors cocktail (Roche) for 4 hr at 4°C. After two washes with 1 ml SNAP buffer +0.1% NP40 followed by two washes with 1 ml SNAP buffer without NP40, the supernatant was completely removed, and proteins bound to the beads were eluted by on-bead digestion.  On-bead digestion and peptide purification The beads were resuspended in 50 μl of Elution buffer (2M Urea, 100 mM Tris [pH 7.5], 10 mM DTT) and incubated on a shaker (1,000 rpm) at 25°C for 20 min. Iodoacetamide (Sigma I1149) was added to a final concentration of 50 mM and the sample was incubated on a shaker (1,000 rpm) at 25°C in the dark for 10 min. After digestion with 0.3 μg Trypsin (Promega V5113) for 2 hr on a shaker (1,000 rpm) at 25°C, the supernatant was transferred to a new tube and was further digested with 0.1 μg Trypsin overnight at 25°C. The digestion was stopped by adding 5.5 μl of 10% TFA. Eluted peptides were purified on C18 stage-tips (Glygen 10-200 μL TopTips) following the manufacturer’s instructions and dried with a SpeedVac.  Mass Spectrometry Samples were loaded at 8 μl/min onto a trap column (Thermo Scientific Acclaim Pepmap 100; 100 μm internal diameter, 2 cm length, C18 reversed-phase material, 5 μm diameter beads, 100 Å pore size) in 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid.  Peptides were eluted on-line to an analytical column (Thermo Scientific Acclaim Pepmap RSLC; 75 μm internal diameter, 50 cm length, C18 reversed-phase material, 2 μm diameter beads, 100  Å pore size) and separated using a flow rate of 250 nl/min and gradient conditions of: Initial 5 minutes with 4% buffer B, then 90 minutes gradient 4-25% B, then 30 minutes gradient 25-45% B, then 1 minute gradient 45-90% B and finally 15 minutes isocratic at 90% B before returning to starting conditions for a 23 minute equilibration (Buffer A: 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in water; B: 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid).  The QExactive instrument acquired full scan survey spectra (m/z 300 to 1650) at 70,000 resolution. An AGC target value of 3E6 and a maximum injection time of 20 milliseconds were used. The top 10 most abundant multiply-charged ions were selected in a data-dependent manner, fragmented by higher-energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) and data were collected over the range 200-2000 m/z at 17,500 resolution. An AGC target value of 1E5 with a maximum injection time of 120 milliseconds were used. A dynamic exclusion time of 30 seconds was enabled.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS data were analyzed using the Proteome Discoverer software (Version 2.5, Thermo Scientific). Spectra were searched using Sequest HT against the human reviewed Swiss-Prot FASTA database (released on 2016.06.19) combined with a manually curated list of common protein contaminants. The criteria for searching were set as follows: Enzyme Name:  Trypsin; Max. Missed Cleavage Sites:  2; Min. Peptide Length:  6; Max. Peptide Length:  144; Precursor Mass Tolerance:  10 ppm; Fragment Mass Tolerance:  0.02 Da; Use Average Precursor Mass:  False; Use Average Fragment Mass:  False; Dynamic Modification:  Oxidation / +15.995 Da (M), Deamidated / +0.984 Da (N, Q); Dynamic Modifications (protein N-terminus): Acetyl / +42.011 Da (N-Terminus), Met-loss / -131.040 Da (M), Met-loss+Acetyl / -89.030 Da (M); Static Modification:  Carbamidomethyl / +57.021 Da (C). The FDR of peptide and protein identification were both set to 0.01 (1%). Protein abundances were calculated as the average intensity for the three most abundant unique peptides assigned to a protein.   Data post-processing: only proteins identified on at least two unique peptides and in at least two technical replicated for at least one experimental condition (i.e. unmodified H3, H3K4me3 or H3K9me3) were considered for subsequent analysis. Common protein contaminants, such as keratins and albumin, were filtered out. The relative protein abundances were calculated by normalizing protein abundance on the sum of abundances of all proteins quantified in the sample. To determine significant differences in protein abundance between the experimental conditions, the normalized protein abundances were compared using the t-test followed by p-value adjustment for multiple testing using the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure. Proteins were considered as differentially abundant if they fulfill one of the following criteria: Adj. p < 0.05 and the average protein abundance fold change (FC) > 1 or Adj. p < 0.05 and the average protein abundance fold change (FC) < -1.

### Publication Abstract
Chemical modification of histone proteins by methylation plays a central role in chromatin regulation by recruiting epigenetic "readers" via specialized binding domains. Depending on the degree of methylation, the exact modified amino acid, and the associated reader proteins histone methylations are involved in the regulation of all DNA-based processes, such as transcription, DNA replication, and DNA repair. Here we present methods to identify histone methylation readers using a mass spectrometry-linked nucleosome affinity purification approach. We provide detailed protocols for the generation of semisynthetic methylated histones, their assembly into biotinylated nucleosomes, and the identification of methylation-specific nucleosome-interacting proteins from nuclear extracts via nucleosome pull-downs and label-free quantitative proteomics. Due to their versatility, these protocols allow the identification of readers of various histone methylations, and can also be adapted to different cell types and tissues, and other types of modifications.

### Keywords
Histone ptms, H3k4me3, H3k9me3, Nucleosome pull-down affinity purification

### Affiliations
Institute of Functional Epigenetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg 85764, Germany

### Submitter
Andrey Tvardovskiy

### Lab Head
Dr Till Bartke
Institute of Functional Epigenetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg 85764, Germany


