### Accession
PXD024717

### Title
UCP1-dependent depletion of liver extracellular succinate antagonizes inflammatory pathogenesis

### Description
Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is the most prevalent liver pathology worldwide and is intimately linked with obesity and type 2 diabetes. Liver inflammation is a hallmark of NAFLD and is thought to contribute to tissue fibrosis and disease pathogenesis. Uncoupling protein 1 (UCP1) is exclusively expressed in brown and beige adipocytes and has been extensively studied for its capacity to elevate thermogenesis and reverse obesity. Here we identify an endocrine pathway regulated by UCP1 that antagonizes liver inflammation and pathology, independent of effects on obesity. We show that, without UCP1, brown and beige fat exhibit a diminished capacity to clear succinate from the circulation. Moreover, UCP1KO mice exhibit elevated extracellular succinate in liver tissue that drives inflammation through ligation of its cognate receptor succinate receptor 1 (SUCNR1) in liver-resident stellate cell and macrophage populations. Conversely, increasing brown and beige adipocyte content in mice antagonizes SUCNR1-dependent inflammatory signaling in the liver. We show that this UCP1-succinate-SUCNR1 axis is necessary to regulate liver immune cell infiltration and pathology, and systemic glucose intolerance in an obesogenic environment. As such, the therapeutic utility of brown and beige adipocytes, and UCP1, extends beyond thermogenesis and may be leveraged to antagonize NAFLD and SUCNR1-dependent liver inflammation.

### Sample Protocol
. Cells and tissues were homogenized in 100 mM HEPES pH 8.5, 8 M urea, 2% SDS, 1p/15ml protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Thermo). The mixture was clarified by centrifugation and the supernatant was subjected to BCA protein concentration measurement, and reduced with 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide. Proteins were then purified using the methanol-chloroform precipitation method and reconstituted in 200 mM EPPS at pH 8.5 and digested by Lys-C and trypsin overnight 1:100 enzyme-to-substrate ratio and an additional 6 h by trypsin the next day. Resulting peptides were labeled by TMT10plex or TMT-pro 16plex (Thermo) following the SL-TMT protocol69, and quench by adding 5% hydroxylamine. A ratio-check is then performed by mixing 1% sample from each TMT channel, and the TMT-labeled peptides were evenly mixed based on the ratio-check. The mixture was desalted using Sep-pak cartridges (Waters), dried, and fractionated using an Agilent 1100 quaternary HPLC system. Peptides were separated using a 50 min linear gradient from 18% to 40% acetonitrile in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8, into a total of 96 fractions that were consolidated into 12 fractions. Alternatively, samples were fractionated using Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo, Cat 84868) following the manufacturer’s protocol. Samples were dried and desalted via StageTip and reconstituted in 5% formic acid and 5% ACN for liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC–MS/MS) analysis. Protein abundance was measured using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos or Orbitrap Eclipse instrument. For measurements on the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos instrument, samples were analyzed using 180 min gradients at 500 nl/min flow rate. Fractionated peptides were injected. Tandem mass spectra (MS2) were matched in real time to targeted proteins70.  When a peptide match was observed to a targeted protein, a quantitative SPS-MS3 scan was acquired71. For protein abundance measurements on the Orbitrap Eclipse instrument coupled with an Easy-nLC 1200 (ThermoFisher Scientific) ultra-high-pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC) pump, all samples were analyzed with a 180 min gradient consisting of 2%–23% ACN, 0.125% FA at 500 nl/min flow rate. A FAIMSPro (Thermo) device for FAIMS separation of precursors72. The FAIMS device was operated with default settings and multiple compensation voltages (40V/-60V/-80V). Under each FAIMS voltage, peptide ions were collected in data-dependent mode using a mass range of m/z 400 – 1600 using 2 sec cycles. Resolution for MS1 was set at 120,000, with standard automatic gain control (AGC) target. Multiply-charged ions were selected and subjected to fragmentation at 35% normalized collisional energy (NCE) for MS2 with a dynamic exclusion of 120 s. Quantification was performed using multinotch SPS-MS3 as described previously.

### Data Protocol
The Comet algorithm73 was used to search all MS/MS spectra against a database containing sequences of mouse (Mus Musculus) proteins downloaded from UniProt (http://www.uniprot.org). Reversed sequences were appended as decoys for FDR filtering, and common contaminant proteins (e.g. human keratins, trypsin) were included. Peptides were searched using following parameters: 25 ppm precursor mass tolerance; 1.0 Da product ion mass tolerance; fully tryptic digestion; up to three missed cleavages; variable modification: oxidation of methionine (+15.9949); static modifications: TMT 10plex (+229.162932) or TMT 16plex (+304.2071) on lysine and peptide N-terminus, carboxyamidomethylation (+57.0214637236) on cysteines. The target-decoy method was employed to control the false discovery rate (FDR)74-76. To distinguish correct and incorrect peptide identifications, linear discriminant analysis (LDA) was used to control peptide-level FDR to less than 1%. Peptides shorter than seven amino acids were discarded. Protein-level FDR was also controlled to 1% and as a result the number of peptide reverse hits were further decreased. Peptides were matched to the least number of proteins. TMT reporter ion signal-to-noise ratios for all quantified peptides matched to the same protein or site were summed up to report protein abundance. KEGG pathway GO enrichment analyses were performed using Enrichr, https://amp.pharm.mssm.edu/Enrichr/.

### Publication Abstract
Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD), the most prevalent liver pathology worldwide, is intimately linked with obesity and type 2 diabetes. Liver inflammation is a hallmark of NAFLD and is thought to contribute to tissue fibrosis and disease pathogenesis. Uncoupling protein 1 (UCP1) is exclusively expressed in brown and beige adipocytes, and has been extensively studied for its capacity to elevate thermogenesis and reverse obesity. Here we identify an endocrine pathway regulated by UCP1 that antagonizes liver inflammation and pathology, independent of effects on obesity. We show that, without UCP1, brown and beige fat exhibit a diminished capacity to clear succinate from the circulation. Moreover, UCP1KO mice exhibit elevated extracellular succinate in liver tissue that drives inflammation through ligation of its cognate receptor succinate receptor 1 (SUCNR1) in liver-resident stellate cell and macrophage populations. Conversely, increasing brown and beige adipocyte content in mice antagonizes SUCNR1-dependent inflammatory signalling in the liver. We show that this UCP1-succinate-SUCNR1 axis is necessary to regulate liver immune cell infiltration and pathology, and systemic glucose intolerance in an obesogenic environment. As such, the therapeutic use of brown and beige adipocytes and UCP1 extends beyond thermogenesis and may be leveraged to antagonize NAFLD and SUCNR1-dependent liver inflammation.

### Keywords
Thermogenesis, Bat, Liver, Ucp1, Inflammation

### Affiliations
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute/ Harvard Medical School
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute/Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Haopeng Xiao

### Lab Head
Dr Edward Chouchani
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute/ Harvard Medical School


