### Accession
PXD009570

### Title
LFQMS  of RING2 (RING1B, RNF2) immunoprecipitation from MDA-MB-231 and T47D breast cancer cells

### Description
Polycomb repressive complex PRC1 is essential for gene regulation in numerous cell fate decisions. We show that RING1B (RING2, RNF2) and canonical PRC1 (cPRC1) genes are amplified and overexpressed in breast cancer (BC). Moreover, cPRC1 complexes functionally associate with genes regulated by cell type specific key transcription factors such as estrogen receptor (ER) in ER+ tumor cells and BRD4 in triple negative BC cells. cPRC1 is recruited to active enhancers in a manner independent of PRC2 and RING1B enzymatic activity. RING1B regulates enhancer activity and gene transcription not only by promoting the expression of BC oncogenes but also by regulating chromatin accessibility for oncogenic transcription factors. RING1B recruitment, and thus PRC1 association, to active enhancers occurs in multiple cancers.

### Sample Protocol
Triplicate pellets from cell lines were snap frozen in liquid nitrogen. Each was resuspended 1:4 (w:v) in a solution of 50 mM Tris pH 8.0, 300 mM NaCl, 0.2% (v/v) NP-40, supplemented with protease inhibitors (Sigma-Aldrich cat# 11836170001). Samples were lysed by ultrasonication at 4°C. For each sample, ~20 J of output per 100 mg of cell pellet was applied. Samples were centrifuged at 20,000 RCF at 4 °C for 10 min. In IP experiments, extracts were combined with magnetic affinity medium (Thermo Fisher Scientific cat# 14301) coupled to anti-RING1B antibodies (MBL); in control experiments mouse IgG (Sigma-Aldrich cat# I5381) was used, both in epoxy-based covalent coupling (as per manufacturer’s instructions). Clarified cell extracts were incubated with magnetic media for 1 hr at 4°C. Supernatants were removed and the beads were washed three times with 1 ml of the extraction solution. The bound fraction was eluted by the addition of 15 μl of 1x LDS sample buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, cat# NP0007) with incubation at 70 °C for 5 min with agitation. After incubation, the eluate was removed, reduced with DTT, alkylated with iodoacetamide, and then run a ~6 mm into a 4-12% Bis-Tris NuPAGE gel (1mm, 12-well; Thermo Fisher Scientific cat# NP0322BOX). The gel was stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue G-250, the gel plugs were excised, and cut into ~1 mm cubes for processing, as follows.  Samples were destained with several washes of 0.5-1 ml 50% v/v acetonitrile (ACN) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate at 37 °C with shaking. Destained gel pieces were dehydrated by washing with 500 μl ACN, and placed in a speed-vac for ~10 min at RT. Trypsin working solution (~40 μl at 12.5 ng/μl in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate) was added to the gel pieces on ice, which were allowed to swell for 45 min. After swelling, additional 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate was added in order to submerge the swollen gel pieces (typically ~15 μl). The samples were incubated at 37°C to undergo tryptic proteolysis. Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was added to each tube at 0.5% (w/v) final concentration, and incubated 5 min at RT. The supernatant (tryptic digest supernatant) was recovered and transferred to a 0.5ml low protein binding microfuge tube (Sorenson Bioscience cat# 11300). An aliquot of 50 μl 0.1% w/v TFA was added to the gel pieces, which were extracted a further 45 min at RT, with agitation. The supernatants were removed and pooled with the appropriate tryptic digest supernatant. Pooled extracted peptides were desalted using C18 reversed-phase OMIX tips (Agilent cat# A57003100) as per the manufacturer’s instructions. The peptides were eluted from the tips first with 100 μl of aqueous 40% (v/v) ACN, 0.5% (v/v) acetic acid (E1) and then with 100 μl of 80% (v/v) ACN, 0.5% (v/v) acetic acid (E2). E1 and E2 were combined, frozen in liquid nitrogen, and dried in a centrifugal vacuum concentrator.

### Data Protocol
For MS analysis, dried peptide samples were resuspended in 10 μl of aqueous 5% (v/v) methanol, 0.2% (v/v) formic acid. Mass spectra were recorded on a QExactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Database searching and label-free quantitation were performed by MaxQuant using the UP000000589 human database. Intensities were based on maximum peak height. The “proteingroups.txt” file was uploaded to Perseus, and protein identifications from the decoy database were removed. LFQ intensities were logarithmized. Control experiments were grouped together, as were RING1B pull-down experiments. Proteins were filtered, with the constraint that at least one group (RING1B or control) should contain at least three valid values. Missing values were imputed from a normal distribution. A two-sample Student’s t test was performed with a permutation-based FDR = 0.01 used for truncation.

### Publication Abstract
Polycomb repressive complex 1 (PRC1) plays essential roles in cell fate decisions and development. However, its role in cancer is less well understood. Here, we show that RNF2, encoding RING1B, and canonical PRC1 (cPRC1) genes are overexpressed in breast cancer. We find that cPRC1 complexes functionally associate with ER&#x3b1; and its pioneer factor FOXA1 in ER+ breast cancer cells, and with BRD4 in triple-negative breast cancer cells (TNBC). While cPRC1 still exerts its repressive function, it is also recruited to oncogenic active enhancers. RING1B regulates enhancer activity and gene transcription not only by promoting the expression of oncogenes but also by regulating chromatin accessibility. Functionally, RING1B plays a divergent role in ER+ and TNBC metastasis. Finally, we show that concomitant recruitment of RING1B to active enhancers occurs across multiple cancers, highlighting an under-explored function of cPRC1 in regulating oncogenic transcriptional programs in cancer.

### Keywords
Lc-msms lfqms ip-ms ap-ms ring2

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Cellular and Structural Biology
The Rockefeller University

### Submitter
John LaCava

### Lab Head
Dr John LaCava
Laboratory of Cellular and Structural Biology


