### Accession
PXD021927

### Title
Microbore High Throughput Ion Mobility Enabled Mass Spectrometry for Utilisation of Large Cohort Studies

### Description
The deployment of proteomic analysis in clinical studies represents a significant opportunity to detect and validate biomarkers in translational medicine, improve disease understanding and provide baseline information on population health.  However, comprehensive proteome studies usually employ nano-scale chromatography and often require several hours of analysis/sample. Here we describe a high throughput LC/MS/MS methodology using 1mm scale chromatography requiring only 15 min/sample, coupled to ion mobility-enabled mass spectrometry.  The short run time effected  a 6 – fold increase in productivity compared with nano-scale LC/MS.  The method demonstrated excellent reproducibility with retention time CVs of less than 0.05 % and peak area reproducibility ranging from 5 – 15%.  The 1mm system produced similar chromatographic peak capacity values as the miniaturized system, detecting 90% of the E.coli proteins identified by the 75µm LC/MS system.  Application to the analysis of serum samples from a human prostate cancer study resulted in the identification of a total of 533 proteins revealing the differential expression of proteins linked to patients receiving hormone-radiotherapy or surgery.

### Sample Protocol
Human serum samples corresponding to seven conditions consisting of pooled individuals per condition and one study pool control (QC) were reduced, alkylated and tryptically digested overnight. Samples were further concentrated using solid phase extraction (SPE) following the “ProteinWorks” protocol (Waters Corporation, USA). iRT peptides were used as an internal reference with 1 µL spiked into 50 µL of sample. The E. coli digest was prepared at a concentration of 1 µg/µL and 100 ng/µL using water. Blood samples were collected in BD Vacutainer lithium heparin-containing vacuum tubes (BD Biosciences, Oxford, UK), inverted five times and left at room temperature for 30 min before centrifugation at 2,500 g for 10 min. All samples were centrifuged within 2 h of collection. After centrifugation, the top clear fraction (serum) was removed and aliquoted into cryovials (1 ml per vial) before being stored at −80 °C. Pooled samples for each of the seven groups were constructed by pooling individuals per group to produce seven phenotypic pools.   A digested E.coli cytosolic extract was also used as a standard sample for evaluation.

### Data Protocol
All data were imported, normalised and peak picked using Progenesis QI for Proteomics (vs.4.2).  Protein identifications were obtained by searching against Homo sapiens (20,350 reviewed entries, release 2020_01) or Escherichia coli strain K12 (23,141 reviewed entries, release 2020_01) UniProt databases. Searches were conducted using a 1% false discovery rate (FDR), which was determined using a decoy database strategy 18. Peptide and fragment ion tolerances were determined automatically. Fixed (carbamidomethylation of cysteine) and variable (oxidation of methionine) modifications were specified along with one tryptic missed cleavage.

### Publication Abstract
The deployment of proteomic analysis in clinical studies represents a significant opportunity to detect and validate biomarkers in translational medicine, improve disease understanding, and provide baseline information on population health. However, comprehensive proteome studies usually employ nanoscale chromatography and often require several hours of analysis/sample. Here, we describe a high-throughput liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC/MS/MS) methodology using 1 mm scale chromatography requiring only 15 min/sample, coupled to ion mobility-enabled mass spectrometry. The short run time effected a 6-fold increase in productivity compared with nanoscale LC/MS. The method demonstrated excellent reproducibility with retention time coefficient of variations of less than 0.05% and peak area reproducibility ranging from 5 to 15%. The 1 mm system produced similar chromatographic peak capacity values to the nanoscale miniaturized system, detecting 90% of the <i>Escherichia coli</i> proteins identified by the 75 &#x3bc;m LC/MS system (albeit based on only 75% of the peptides found by the latter). Application to the analysis of serum samples from a human prostate cancer study group resulted in the identification of a total of 533 proteins revealing the differential expression of proteins linked to patients receiving hormone-radiotherapy or undergoing surgery.

### Keywords
Microbore high-throughput ion mobility

### Affiliations
Waters Corporation
Waters, United Kingdom

### Submitter
Lee Gethings

### Lab Head
Dr Lee Gethings
Waters, United Kingdom


