### Accession
PXD002913

### Title
Androgen-sensitive glycomembrane protein expression in LNCaP prostate tumor cells

### Description
Aberrant androgen receptor (AR)-mediated transcription is a critical driver in progression of human prostate cancer. It's known that different doses of androgens can elicit differential transcriptional and proliferative responses in prostate-tumor cells. Here, we set out to examine the androgenic regulation of glycoprotein expression in the membrane fraction of prostate-tumor cells that could serve as mediators or markers of androgen-induced proliferative responses observed in prostate-tumor cells. A bioanalytical workflow involving lectin-affinity chromatography and label-free quantitative mass spectrometry was used to identify androgen-sensitive glycomembrane protein expression associated with androgen-mediated proliferation. This study would facilitate the identification of surface membrane proteins involved in androgen-mediated proliferation and provide potential therapeutic targets in the detection treatment of proliferation prostate-tumors.

### Sample Protocol
Lectin affinity chromatography LNCaP cells were grown in androgen-depleted medium for 72 hr and treated with vehicle (ethanol, 0 nM) or different concentrations of androgen (0.1, 1, and 10 nM R1881) for 24 hr. The cells were harvested and incubated in hypotonic solution (10 mM Hepes, 1.5 mM MgCl2, and 10 mM KCl, pH 7.9) with 5 mM DTT and 1x protease inhibitor cocktail (PIC, Thermo Scientific Pierce) for 10 min, and subjected to nitrogen cavitation at 100 psi for 5 min. Lysed samples were centrifuged at 600 x g for 20 min at 4°C to pellet the nuclei, and the resulting supernatant was centrifuged at 100,000 x g for 3 hr at 4°C to remove the microsomes (pellet) from the cytosolic proteins. Crude microsomal proteins were extracted by solubilizing each membrane pellet with 1% digitonin in microsome buffer (20 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1 mM CaCl2, 0.1 mM MnCl2, pH 7.5), 5 mM DTT (Sigma), and 1x PIC (Thermo) rotating end-over-end overnight at 4 °C. The next day, samples were centrifuged at 100,000 x g for 1 hr at 4°C to pellet the insoluble fraction. The resulting supernatant was collected and quantified by silver-stain. 10 mg of microsomal protein were used for lectin-affinity purification of membrane glycoproteins by incubating overnight with wheat germ agglutinin (WGA) and concanavalin A (ConA) agarose beads (Vector Laboratories Inc., Burlingame, CA) with 5 mM DTT (Sigma), and 1x PIC (Thermo) at 4°C. The glycosylated membrane proteins were competitively eluted with 2 column volume of elution buffer (500 mM N-acetylglucosamine, 200 mM α-Methyl Mannose, 200 mM α-Methyl Glucose, 200 mM Mannose, and 5 mM DTT in microsome buffer). The eluted samples were dialyzed against 8M Urea, 50 mM Tris, and 100 mM β-mercaptoethanol, pH 8.5 with 10 kDa cutoff dialysis cassettes (Thermo Scientific Pierce), and the samples were quantified by silver-stain.  Sample preparation for mass spectrometry 350 µg of lectin-affinity purified samples were first reduced in 10 mM DTT (Thermo Scientific Pierce) for 1 hr at 37 °C, alkylated in 55 mM iodoacetamide (Thermo Scientific Pierce) for 1 hr at room temperature in the dark, and then digested with trypsin (1:50 trypsin to protein ratio, Promega) in 0.5 M Urea. Next, each sample was spiked with a tryptic-digest of bovine serum albumin (BSA) containing iodoacetic acid alkylated cysteine residues (Michrom Bioresources, Auburn, CA) at a 1:75 BSA to protein molar ratio. Samples were acidified prior to being desalted on Vydac C18 spin-columns (The Nest Group, Southborough, MA) and then subjected to strong-cation exchange (SCX) fractionation on the Agilent 1200 HPLC using a 2.1 mm x 20 cm Polysulfoethyl A column (PolyLC Inc., Columbia, MD) at a flow rate of 250 µl/min, with a mixture of buffer A (5 mM KH2PO4, 25% acetonitrile, pH 2.8) and buffer B (5 mM KH2PO4, 350 mM KCl, 25% acetonitrile, pH 2.8). The gradient was set up as followed: 30-min gradient from 0-59% buffer B, followed by 2-min gradient from 59%-100% buffer B. The column was then washed with 100% buffer B for 10 min and equilibrated with buffer A for 20 min. Fractions 6-14 were collected and desalted with C18 spin columns (The Nest Group) and subsequently analyzed by directed mass spectrometry (dMS).  Mass spectrometry analysis The samples were dissolved in mass spectrometry loading buffer (1% acetic acid, 1% acetonitrile) and analyzed by nanoliquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry using an Agilent 6520 Accurate-Mass Quadropole Time-of-Flight mass spectrometer interfaced with an HPLC Chip Cube. The samples were loaded onto an Ultra High Capacity Chip (500 nL enrichment column, 75 μm x 150 mm analytical column). LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using a 120-minute gradient ranging from 1.5 % to 32% buffer C (100% acetonitrile, 0.8% acetic acid). Full MS (MS1) data was acquired with a mass range of 400 – 1250 m/z and acquisition rate of 1 spectra/second. From this data, an ion preferred list was generated with Agilent MassHunter Qualitative Software with the settings of 400-1250 m/z, 2+ and 3+ charge states, and spectra with 2 or more ions. The directed Mass Spectrometry (dMS) was performed with the following settings: a maximum of 10 ions per cycle, a narrow isolation width (~ 1.3 atomic mass units), precursor masses dynamically excluded for 30 seconds after 8 MS/MS in a 30-second time window, and use of the preferred ion list. Mass spectrometry capillary voltage and capillary temperature settings were set to 1800 V and 330°C, respectively. The infused reference mass of 1221.9906 was used to correct precursor m/z masses each LC-MS/MS experiment.

### Data Protocol
The raw.d files were searched against the UniProt human database using SpectrumMill Software version B.04.00.127 and the following settings: precursor mass tolerance of 25 parts per million (ppm), product mass tolerance of 200 ppm, and a maximum of two trypsin miss cleavages. Search modifications included a static carbamidomethylation on cysteine residues (C = 57.02146 AMU), differential modifications for oxidized methionine (M = 15.9949 AMU), phosphorylated serine, threonine, tyrosine (STY = 79.9663 AMU), and GlcNAc-modified serine, threonine, asparagine (STN = 203.079 AMU) were used for post-translational modifications. A false discovery rate (FDR) of < 1% was accepted for this analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Whole genome sequencing (WGS) is able to differentiate closely related Mycobacterium tuberculosis variants within the same transmission cluster. Our aim was to evaluate if this higher discriminatory power may help identify and characterize more actively transmitted variants and understand the factors behind their success. We selected a robust MIRU-VNTR-defined cluster from Almer&#xed;a, Spain (22 cases throughout 2003-2019). WGS allowed discriminating, within the same epidemiological setting, between a successfully transmitted variant and seven closely related variants that did not lead to secondary cases, or were involved in self-limiting transmission (one single secondary case). Intramacrophagic growth of representative variants was evaluated in an in vitro infection model using U937 cells. Intramacrophage multiplication ratios (CFUs at Day 4/CFUs at Day 0) were higher for the actively transmitted variant (range 5.3-10.7) than for the unsuccessfully transmitted closely related variants (1.5-3.95). Two SNPs, mapping at the DNA binding domain of DnaA and at kdpD, were found to be specific of the successful variant.

### Keywords
Human prostate cancer cells, Androgen, Lectin affinity purification

### Affiliations
Molecular Physiology & Biophysics Department , Wright Lab, University of Iowa, USA
University of Iowa

### Submitter
Jordy Hsiao

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Eugene Wright
Molecular Physiology & Biophysics Department , Wright Lab, University of Iowa, USA


