### Accession
PXD019737

### Title
Regulation of the microsomal proteome by salicylic acid and deficiency of phosphatidylinositol‐4‐kinases β1 and β2 in Arabidopsis thaliana

### Description
Phosphatidylinositol-4-kinases β1 and β2 (PI4Kβ1/PI4Kβ2), which are responsible for phosphorylation of phosphoinositol to phosphatidylinositol-4-phosphate, have an important role in vesicular trafficking in plants. Moreover, PI4Kβ1/PI4β2 negatively regulate biosynthesis of phytohormone salicylic acid (SA). SA plays crucial role in plant immune responses and its endogenous concentration strongly affects plant transcriptome. In this study we were focused on the effect of the PI4Kβ1/PI4Kβ2 and SA on the abundance of membrane proteins. For this purpose, we performed proteomic analysis on isolated microsomal fractions from leaves of four Arabidopsis thaliana genotypes: wild type ecotype Columbia-0; double mutant impaired in function of PI4Kβ1/PI4Kβ2 (pi4kβ1/pi4kβ2) exhibiting high SA level; sid2 mutant with impaired SA biosynthesis depending on the isochorismate synthase 1 and triple mutant sid2/pi4kβ1/pi4kβ2. In total, we identified 4534 proteins from which 1696 proteins differed in abundance between the mutants and WT. We showed that SA has a big impact on membrane proteome, because among hundreds of the identified affected proteins typical proteins associated with SA triggered pathway occurred. Our data thus point out new connections between SA pathway and clathrin independent endocytosis (flotillins) and exocytosis/protein secretion (syntaxins, tertraspanin) to be investigated in future. In contrast to SA, presence/absence of PI4Kβ1/PI4Kβ2 itself affected only 27 proteins. Nevertheless, among them we identified CERK1, plasma membrane receptor for chitin. Although PI4Kβ1/PI4Kβ2 itself did not have strong impact on A. thaliana microsomal proteome, our data clearly shows that PI4Kβ1/PI4Kβ2 enhance the proteome changes when SA pathway is modulated in parallel

### Sample Protocol
Arabidopsis thaliana (ecotype Columbia-0) wild type (WT), single T-DNA insertion mutant sid2-3 (SALK_042603; Gross et al., 2006), double T-DNA insertion mutant pi4kß1/pi4kß2 (SALK_040479, SALK_098069; Preuss et al., 2006) and triple mutant sid2/pi4kß1/pi4kß2 (Šašek et al., 2014) plants were used.  All seeds were sterilized with 30% SAVO solution (15 ml SAVO®, Unilever; 35 ml distilled water; 0.1 ml Tween 20, Sigma Aldrich) and three times washed with distilled water. 2-day stratification at 4°C in dark conditions was applied to break dormancy. Seeds were then placed into pots on Jiffy 7 peat pellets. One-week-old seedlings were replanted to two plants per pot and cultivated in Snijders cultivation chambers at 22°C, 70% humidity and light cycle: 10-h light (100 - 130 μE∙m2∙s-1)/14-h dark. Whole rosettes of 4-week-old plants were harvested and immediately frozen in a liquid nitrogen. Three sets of plants were cultivated for each genotype to obtain three independent biological replicates for the further protein isolation, purification and LC-MS/MS analysis.  15 g of frozen A. thaliana WT and mutant plants rosettes were ground in mortar with a pestle in liquid nitrogen, resuspended in 45 ml of isolation buffer (50mM Trizma base, 300mM sucrose, 5mM EDTA, 5mM EGTA, 2mM DTT and cOmpleteTM EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Sigma Aldrich), pH 7.5) and further homogenized by the sonication for 3 × 30 s (25 W). The homogenate was filtered through Miracloth filter paper (Milipore) and further centrifuged 2 times at 1,500 x g for 5 minutes at 4 °C and 6 times at 7,100 x g for 10 minutes at 4 °C. After each centrifugation supernatant was collected to new centrifuge tubes. Final supernatant was ultracentrifuged at 100,000 x g for 1 h at 4 °C. Supernatant was carefully discarded and the pellet containing microsomes was resuspended in 3 ml of isolation buffer with 0.1% Brij-58 and further homogenized in a Potter-Elvehjem homogenizer. Isolation buffer with 0.1% Brij-58 was then added to a total volume of 30 ml. Protein concentration in all obtained microsomal fractions was determined by Popov´s method (Popov et al.,1975) using bovine serum albumin as a protein concentration standard.  Purification and LC-MS/MS sample preparation including proteolytic digestion was performed using eFASP as previously described by Erde et al. (2014). Proteolytic digestion was performed by the addition of 100 μl of buffer B with 0.1 μg of MS-Grade PierceTM Trypsin Protease (Thermo Scientific) and incubation of the samples for 16 hours at 37 °C. Obtained peptides were collected in new tube by the centrifugation of digested samples for 15 minutes and two in two additional washing steps with 50 μl of 50mM ABC buffer with subsequent centrifugation, each time for 20 minutes. Deoxycholic acid in eluates was then precipitated by the addition of 2.5 μl of TFA and 1 ml of ethyl acetate was added to perform its extraction. The mixtures were vortexed and centrifugated for 5 minutes and upper organic phase was removed. Ethyl acetate extraction was repeated three-times and final aqueous phase containing peptides was dried by vacuum centrifugation (SpeedVac, Thermo Fisher) for each sample. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed with an UHPLC Dionex Ultimate3000 RSLC unit coupled with an Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ mass spectrometer (Thermo Scentific). Dried samples were dissolved in 10 µl of 0.1% formic acid, of which 3 µl were used for LC-MS/MS analysis. Samples were measured in three technical replicates for each of three biological replicates for each genotype during in one sequence lasting several days. Peptides were firstly applied on µ-Precolumn PepMap 100 C18 column (300 µm×5 mm, particle size 5 µm) and then separated on PepMap RSLC C18 analytical column (75 µm×250 mm, particle size 2 µm). Mobile-phase flow rate was set to 0.3 μl min-1. Peptides were eluted with mobile-phase A (0.1% formic acid in water (v/v)) and mobile-phase B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (v/v)) using following gradient: 0 min 5 % B, 10 min 12 % B, 100 min 35 % B, 104 min 90 % B, 109 min 90 % B, 110 min 5 % B, 120 min 5 % B. Eluted peptides were immediately ionized by the ion source EASY-Spray NG (1,600 V).  MS spectra were scanned each 2 s in Orbitrap analyzer (R = 120,000; ACG target of 1x106; the maximum ion accumulation time of 50 ms). Precursor ions were selected in the range of 350-2000 Da. DDA mode was used for MS/MS. The most intense ions in MS scans with the charges of 2-6 were fragmented with HCD technique and MS/MS spectra were scanned during the 2s between each MS scan, while the dynamic exclusion time was set to 30s. These MS/MS spectra were scanned in Orbitrap analyzer (R = 30,000; ACG target of 1x104; the maximum ion accumulation time of 54 ms).  All scans were collected in profile mode.

### Data Protocol
Identification and quantification of proteins were performed in the MaxQuant software (version 1.6.3.4), using Andromeda search engine (http://www.coxdocs.org/doku.php) and A. thaliana protein database (ID3702) downloaded from UniProt in September 2019. Database search parameters were set as follows: oxidation (M) and acetyl (N-term) as variable modifications and carbamidomethyl (C) as fixed modification; mass tolerance in MS mode of 20 ppm in the first search and 4.5 ppm in the main search; mass tolerance in MS/MS mode of 20 ppm; enzyme trypsin, two missed cleavage sites allowed per peptide; minimal peptide length of 7 residues, maximal peptide mass of 4600 Da. Proteins and peptides were identified with FDR 0.01. Quantification was performed in LFQ mode with LFQ min. ratio count of 2 and both, unique and razor, peptides were used for quantification. MaxQuant output files were further statistically processed in the Perseus software (version 1.6.5.0). Proteins identified only by site, matching to the reverse database or marked as potential contaminants were excluded from the analysis. For remaining proteins: LFQ intensity values were transformed to a logarithmic scale using log2(x); missing data were replaced by the values of the noise from a normal distribution. To reveal changes in protein abundances among genotypes, t-test was used. FDR was set to 0.05, s0 to 0.1 and number of permutations to 250. To each protein the difference value (representing difference in protein distribution) and -log(p-value) (representing statistical significance) was assigned and the proteins with significantly different abundance among genotypes were marked. Data were exported and further proceeded in MS Excel.

### Publication Abstract
Phosphatidylinositol-4-kinases &#x3b2;1 and &#x3b2;2 (PI4K&#x3b2;1/PI4K&#x3b2;2), which are responsible for phosphorylation of phosphatidylinositol to phosphatidylinositol-4-phosphate, have important roles in plant vesicular trafficking. Moreover, PI4K&#x3b2;1/PI4K&#x3b2;2 negatively regulates biosynthesis of phytohormone salicylic acid (SA), a key player in plant immune responses. The study focused on the effect of PI4K&#x3b2;1/PI4K&#x3b2;2 deficiency and SA level on the proteome of microsomal fraction. For that purpose we used four Arabidopsis thaliana genotypes: wild type; double mutant with impaired function of PI4K&#x3b2;1/PI4K&#x3b2;2 (pi4k&#x3b2;1/pi4k&#x3b2;2) exhibiting high SA level; sid2 mutant with impaired SA biosynthesis depending on the isochorismate synthase 1 and triple mutant sid2/pi4k&#x3b2;1/pi4k&#x3b2;2. We identified 1797 proteins whose levels were changed between genotypes. We showed that increased SA concentration affected the levels of 473 proteins. This includes typical SA pathway markers but also points to connections between SA pathway and clathrin-independent endocytosis (flotillins) and exocytosis/protein secretion (syntaxins, tetraspanin) to be investigated in future. In contrast to SA, the absence of PI4K&#x3b2;1/PI4K&#x3b2;2 itself affected only 27 proteins. Among them we identified CERK1, a receptor for chitin. Although PI4K&#x3b2;1/PI4K&#x3b2;2 deficiency itself did not have a substantial impact on the proteome of the microsomal fraction, our data clearly show that it enhances proteome changes when SA pathway is modulated in parallel.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Phosphatidylinositol-4-kinases β1 and β2, Salicylic acid, Lc-ms/ms, Microsomal fraction, Label-free quantification

### Affiliations
Institute of Organic Chemistry and Biochemistry of the Czech Academy of Sciences, Flemingovo náměstí 542/2, 160 00, Prague 6, Czech Republic
Institute of Organic Chemistry and Biochemistry, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic, Flemingovo nám. 2, 166 10 Prague

### Submitter
Petra Junková

### Lab Head
Dr Josef Cvačka
Institute of Organic Chemistry and Biochemistry of the Czech Academy of Sciences, Flemingovo náměstí 542/2, 160 00, Prague 6, Czech Republic


