### Accession
PXD014895

### Title
Characterization of the CORVET complexes of Tetrahymena thermophila

### Description
In endolysosomal networks, two hetero-hexameric tethers called HOPS and CORVET are found widely throughout eukaryotes. The ciliate Tetrahymena thermophila is a unicellular organism with elaborate endolysosomal pathways. Curiously, Tetrahymena and related protozoa have lost HOPS. Tetrahymena encodes multiple paralogs of most CORVET subunits, assembled into six distinct hexameric complexes,  including a distinct Vps8 subunit. Here we analyze the composition of these complexes immunoisolated by affinity capture using the Vps8-FLAG paralogs as bait.

### Sample Protocol
Tetrahymena, expressing endogenously-FLAG-tagged Vps8 paralogs (Vps8A-F), were grown overnight to 2-3x105 cells/ml, washed once with 10mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4 and re-pelleted. Supernatants were rapidly aspirated to leave a dense cell slurry. The slurries were transferred, drop-wise, into liquid nitrogen and milled to powders using a Cryogenic Grinder 6875 Freezer Mill. The cryopowders were resuspended in buffer B4 (20 mM Hepes pH 7.4, 250 mM NaCitrate, 1 mM MgCl2, 0.1% CHAPS, 1 mM DTT), supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail tablets (Roche), gently mixed for 1h at 4°C, and then on ice until no solid matter was visible. Lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 35000 rpm (Beckman Instruments type 45 Ti rotor) for 1.5 h at 4°C, and mixed with anti-FLAG beads (EZ view Red Anti-FLAG M2 affinity Gel, Sigma), pre-washed with cold lysis buffer, for 2 h at 4°C. The beads were then washed five times with 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 1 mM EDTA, 500 mM NaCl, 0.1% NP-40, 1 mM DTT, 10% glycerol supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail tablets (Roche). Finally, proteins were eluted from the beads with 60μl 100°C LDS sample buffer containing 40 mM DTT, then loaded on a 4-20% gel for SDS-PAGE, allowed to migrate for 1.5 cm into the gel, and briefly stained with Coomassie Blue R-250 solution (0.1% w/v Coomassie, 10% acetic acid, 50% methanol). A single 1.5 cm gel slice per lane was excised from the Coomassie stained gel, destained, and then subjected to tryptic digest and reductive alkylation. Liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) was performed by the Proteomic Facility at the University of Dundee. The samples were subjected to LC-MS/MS on a Ultimate3000 nano rapid separation LC system (Dionex) coupled to a LTQ Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Sample layout: Vps8A (replicate1: mz-vps8A; replicate2: mz-vps8A-2); Vps8B (replicate1: mz-vps8B-1; replicate2: mz-vps8B-2); Vps8C (replicate1: mz-vps8C-1; replicate2: mz-vps8C-2); Vps8D (replicate1: mz-8D-1; replicate2: mz-8D-2); Vps8E (replicate1: mz-8E-1; replicate2: mz-8E-2); Vps8F (replicate1: mz-8F-1; replicate2: mz-8F-2); control (wt) (replicate1: mz-cu428-1; replicate2: mz-cu428-2)

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were processed using the intensity-based label-free quantification (LFQ) method of MaxQuant version 1.6.1.0 (PMID:19029910; PMID: 24942700) searching the T. thermophila annotated protein database from ciliate.org (PMID: 16933976). Minimum peptide length was set at six amino acids, isoleucine and leucine were considered indistinguishable and false discovery rates (FDR) of 0.01 were calculated at the levels of peptides, proteins and modification sites based on the number of hits against the reversed sequence database.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tetrahymena thermophila, Endolysosomal tethers, Corvet, Ciliata

### Affiliations
Drug Discovery and Evaluation Unit, Center for Research of Pathogenicity and Virulence of Parasites, BIOCEV, Charles University in Prague
Division of Biological Chemistry & Drug Discovery
School of Life Sciences
University of Dundee
Dundee DD1 5EH

### Submitter
Martin Zoltner

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Zoltner
Drug Discovery and Evaluation Unit, Center for Research of Pathogenicity and Virulence of Parasites, BIOCEV, Charles University in Prague


