### Accession
PXD019354

### Title
Proteomic characterisation of host-pathogen interactions during bovine trophoblast cell line infection by Neospora caninum

### Description
Despite the importance of bovine neosporosis, important knowledge gaps remain concerning pathogenic mechanisms of N. caninum. The infection of the placenta is a crucial event in the pathogenesis of the disease, however, very little is known about the relation of the parasite with this target organ. Recent studies have shown that isolates with important variations in virulence also show different interactions with the bovine trophoblast cell line F3, involving proliferative capacity and transcriptome host cell modulation. Herein, we use the same model of infection to study the interaction of Neospora with these target cells at the proteomic level using LC-MS/MS over the course of the parasite lytic cycle. We also analyzed the proteome differences between high (Nc-Spain7)- and low (Nc-Spain1H)- virulence isolates. The results showed mitochondrial processes and metabolism as the main point of Neospora-host interactions. Interestingly, Nc-Spain1H infection showed the highest level of influence on host cell proteome in contrast to Nc-Spain7 infection. These results confirm Nc-Spain7 capacities to evade host cell response and establish infection more effectively.

### Sample Protocol
All analyses were essentially performed as previously described (Horcajo et al., 2018). Pellets were resuspended in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate and RapiGestTM (Waters MS Technologies, Milford, MA, USA) for protein solubilization, reduced with DTT and alkylated with iodocetamide for trypsin digestion. Then, the digests were analysed using an LC-MS/MS system comprising an Ultimate 3000 nano system coupled to a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Reversed-phase liquid chromatography was performed using the Ultimate 3000 nanosystem by a linear gradient of 5-40% Buffer B (80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid) in 0.1% formic acid (Buffer A). The Q-Exactive was operated in data-dependent mode with survey scans acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200. Up to the top 10 most abundant isotope patterns were selected and fragmented by higher energy collisional dissociation with normalized collision energies of 30. The maximum ion injection times for the survey scan and the MS/MS scans were 250 and 100 ms, respectively.

### Data Protocol
For proteome data analyses, the Thermo RAW files were imported into Progenesis QI (version 2.0, Nonlinear Dynamics, Durham, CA, USA). Replicate runs were time-aligned using default settings and an auto-selected run as a reference. Spectral data were transformed into .mgf files with Progenesis QI and exported for peptide identification using the Mascot (version 2.3, Matrix Science, London, UK) search engine and the database Bos Taurus (SwissProt release Feb 2015) and ToxoDB-13_Ncaninum LIV_Annotated Proteins (version 13, ToxoDB). Finally, protein abundance (iBAQ) was calculated as the sum of all the peak intensities (from Progenesis output) divided by the number of theoretically observable tryptic peptides for a given protein

### Publication Abstract
Despite the importance of bovine neosporosis, relevant knowledge gaps remain concerning the pathogenic mechanisms of <i>Neospora caninum</i>. Infection of the placenta is a crucial event in the pathogenesis of the disease; however, very little is known about the relation of the parasite with this target organ. Recent studies have shown that isolates with important variations in virulence also show different interactions with the bovine trophoblast cell line F3 in terms of proliferative capacity and transcriptome host cell modulation. Herein, we used the same model of infection to study the interaction of <i>Neospora</i> with these target cells at the proteomic level using LC-MS/MS over the course of the parasite lytic cycle. We also analysed the proteome differences between high- (Nc-Spain7) and low-virulence (Nc-Spain1H) isolates. The results showed that mitochondrial processes and metabolism were the main points of <i>Neospora</i>-host interactions. Interestingly, Nc-Spain1H infection showed a higher level of influence on the host cell proteome than Nc-Spain7 infection.

### Keywords
Isolate virulence, Bovine trophoblast cell line host-parasite interaction, Neospora caninum, Proteome

### Affiliations
Infection Biology
The Royal Veterinary College Royal College Street London NW1 0TU United Kingdom

### Submitter
Stuart Armstrong

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Dong Xia
The Royal Veterinary College Royal College Street London NW1 0TU United Kingdom


