### Accession
PXD008601

### Title
Quantitative metaproteomics of medieval dental calculus reveals individual oral health status

### Description
The composition of the ancient oral microbiome has recently become possible to investigate by using advanced biomolecular methods such as metagenomics and metaproteomics. This study presents a look at the individuality of the metaproteomes from 22 medieval Danish dental calculus samples. The proteomics data suggest two distinct groups; a healthy and disease-susceptible. Comparison to modern healthy calculus samples supports this hypothesis. The osteological inspections of the samples does not immediately support the grouping made by proteomics data, making us believe that this will add a new and exciting level of information. We identify 3671 protein-groups across all medieval samples and thus expanding the depth of previous studies more than ten times. As a part of future perspective for further depth in these types of samples we performed offline high pH fractionation in combination with TMT labelling and achieved ~30% more protein identifications and reduced costly mass spectrometry time.

### Sample Protocol
The calculus were demineralized in 1 ml of 15% acetic acid overnight then spun for ten minutes, after which the supernatant was removed. The pellet was then resuspended in 2M guanidine hydrochloride solution and the pH adjusted with ammonium hydroxide to around 8.0. The pellet was physically crushed using sterile micro-pestles to ensure maximum coverage of the lysis buffer. Protein denaturation occurred by heating for ten minutes at 99 ºC, after which the protein concentration was measured by Bradford Assay. Samples were digested under agitation at 37ºC for three hours with 0.2µg of rLysC (Promega, Sweden) after pH adjustment. The samples were then diluted to a final concentration of 0.6M guanidine hydrochloride using 25mM Tris in 10% acetonitrile (ACN). This was followed by overnight digestion with 0.8µg of Trypsin (Promega, Sweden) per sample. To quench the digestion, 10% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was added until the pH was less than 2.0. The samples were washed on in-house made C18 stage tips and stored in the freezer until the mass spectrometry analysis. Samples were eluted from the stage tips directly into a 96 well plate with 20 µl of 40% ACN followed by 10 µl of 60% ACN. Samples were SpeedVaced until ~3 μl was left and 5 µl of 1 % TFA , 5 % ACN was added. The samples were separated on a 50 cm PicoFrit column (75 μm inner diameter) in-house packed with 1.9 μm C18 beads (Reprosil-AQ Pur, Dr. Maisch) on an EASY-nLC 1000 system connected to a Q-Exactive HF (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The peptides were separated with a 165 min gradient. The Q-Exactive HF was operated in data-dependent top 10 mode. Full scan mass spectra were recorded at a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200 over the m/z range 300–1750 with a target value of 3e6 and a maximum injection time of 20 ms. HCD-generated product ions were recorded with a maximum ion injection time set to 108 ms through a target value set to 2e5 and recorded at a resolution of 60,000.

### Data Protocol
Rawfiles were processed with MaxQuant version 1.5.3.36 (Cox & Mann, 2008) using default settings, except deamidation (NQ) was set as a variable modification and the minimum score of modified and unmodified peptides was set to 40. The data was searched against a concatenated FASTA file, consisting of the human reference proteome from UniProt, entire SwissProt (The UniProt Consortium, 2015), and the Human Oral Microbiome Database (HOMD, (Chen et al., 2010)), retrieved August 2014, with the exception of applying no FDR cutoff. The aim was to increase peptide and protein identifications, while controlling false positives in a conservative manner. Therefore, we stratified the search space into three uneven groups, namely “human”, “bacteria”, and “other” (consisting of all “other” taxa such as food remains and peptides not mapped to kingdom level). FDR calculations were performed separately within each of these groups at the peptide level using the peptides.txt file from MaxQuant output. The FDR was calculated analogous to Cox & Mann, 2008 as follows. In order to determine a cutoff score for a specific FDR, all peptide identifications - from the forward and the reverse database - were sorted by their Andromeda-score in descending order. Peptides were accepted until 1% of reverse hits/forward hits has accumulated. In order to work with MaxQuants LFQ intensities we used the remaining “Leading razor proteins” identifiers from the peptides.txt to map and filter the proteinGroups.txt file through the “Protein IDs” column. The proteinGroups.txt was then filtered by removing all proteinGroups entries with a value of less than two “Razor + unique peptides” per rawfile.

### Publication Abstract
The composition of ancient oral microbiomes has recently become accessible owing to advanced biomolecular methods such as metagenomics and metaproteomics, but the utility of metaproteomics for such analyses is less explored. Here, we use quantitative metaproteomics to characterize the dental calculus associated with the remains of 21 humans retrieved during the archeological excavation of the medieval (ca. 1100-1450 CE) cemetery of Tj&#xe6;rby, Denmark. We identify 3671 protein groups, covering 220 bacterial species and 81 genera across all medieval samples. The metaproteome profiles of bacterial and human proteins suggest two distinct groups of archeological remains&#xa0;corresponding to health-predisposed and oral disease-susceptible individuals, which is supported by comparison to the calculus metaproteomes of healthy living individuals. Notably, the groupings identified by metaproteomics are not apparent from the bioarchaeological analysis, illustrating that quantitative metaproteomics has the potential to provide additional levels of molecular information about the oral health status of individuals from archeological contexts.

### Keywords
Metaproteomics, Calculus

### Affiliations
Jesper Velgaard Olsen, PhD Vice Director, Professor Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research Proteomics Program University of Copenhagen Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences
University of Copenhagen

### Submitter
Rosa Jersie-Christensen

### Lab Head
Dr Jesper Velgaard Olsen
Jesper Velgaard Olsen, PhD Vice Director, Professor Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research Proteomics Program University of Copenhagen Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences


