### Accession
PXD021739

### Title
Consequences of fibroblast ablation in adult murine hearts

### Description
Fibroblasts produce the majority of collagen in the heart and are thought to regulate extracellular matrix (ECM) turnover. However, the in vivo role of fibroblasts in structuring the basal ECM network is poorly understood. To examine the effects of fibroblast loss on the microenvironment in the adult murine heart, we generated mice with reduced fibroblast numbers and evaluated the tissue microenvironment during homeostasis and after injury. We determined that a 60-80% reduction in fibroblasts numbers did not overtly change the fibrillar collagen network but did alter the distribution and abundance of type VI collagen, a microfibrillar collagen that forms an open network with the basement membrane. In fibroblast ablated mice, myocardial infarction did not result in ventricular wall rupture, and heart function was more effectively preserved during angiotensin II/phenylephrine (AngII/PE) induced fibrosis. Analysis of cardiomyocyte contractility demonstrated weaker contractions and slower calcium release and reuptake in uninjured and AngII/PE infused fibroblast ablated animals. Moreover, fibroblast ablated hearts have a similar gene expression prolife to hearts with exercise-induced and physiological hypertrophy after AngII/PE infusion. These results suggest that hearts are resilient to a significant degree of fibroblast loss and that fibroblasts can directly impact cardiomyocyte function. Furthermore, a reduction in fibroblasts may have cardioprotective effects heart after injury suggesting that manipulation of the number of fibroblasts may have therapeutic value.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction was performed using T-PER tissue protein extraction reagent (Thermo Fisher, 78510) with protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche, 11873580001). Heart tissue was homogenized in 0.5 mL of T-Per on ice and centrifuged, supernatant was collected in a fresh tube and 4M GuHCl with inhibitor cocktail was added to the pellet and incubated at 4ºC for 24 h on a rotary shaker. All subsequent processing was done separately for T-Per and GuHCl extracts. Protein estimation was done using the Bradford assay and 200 µg of protein was denatured, reduced, and alkylated as per the iTRAQ labeling protocol. iTRAQ labels were reconstituted in DMSO and samples were incubated with iTRAQ labels for 2 h in the dark. Excess iTRAQ reagent was quenched by incubation with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 30 min in the dark. After labeling, the samples were combined (i.e. T-Per extracts combined and GuHCl extracts each combined separately to have two final samples, 1 T-Per and 1 GuHCl for MS) and methanol-chloroform precipitation was done. The pellet was reconstituted in 100 µl of 100 mM NaOH, 50 µl of H2O, and 100 µl of 100 mM HEPES. Samples were digested overnight with trypsin (1:50 ratio) at 37ºC. Peptide quantitation was performed using Pierce Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher, 23275) and 500 µg of each sample was retained for direct analysis by mass spectrometry (pre-TAILS, akin to shotgun analysis, but with a caveat that labeling was at protein level). The remaining sample was enriched for blocked N-Termini using ALD-HPG polymer to bind reactive (tryptic) N-termini (TAILS). Pre-TAILS and TAILS samples were fractionated by reverse phase high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC). 32 fractions were collected which were pooled in bins to generate 4 final fractions for analysis on the mass spectrometer. A small portion of unfractionated sample was also retained and analyzed on the mass spectrometer. C18 clean-up of samples was done prior to mass spectrometry.  Samples were analyzed on Thermo Ultimate 3000 UHPLC interfaced with a Thermo Fisher Scientific Fusion Lumos tribrid mass spectrometer system. The HPLC column was a Dionex 15 cm x 75 μm id Acclaim Pepmap C18, 2μm, 100 Å reversed phase capillary chromatography column. 5 μL volumes of the extract were injected and the peptides eluted from the column by an acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid gradient at a flow rate of 0.3 μL/min were introduced into the source of the mass spectrometer on-line. The nanospray ion source is operated at 1.9 kV. The digest was analyzed using a data dependent method with TMT-MS2 fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Proteome discoverer was used for identification, quantitation and statistical analysis of the peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Fibroblasts produce the majority of collagen in the heart and are thought to regulate extracellular matrix (ECM) turnover. Although fibrosis accompanies many cardiac pathologies and is generally deleterious, the role of fibroblasts in maintaining the basal ECM network and in fibrosis in vivo is poorly understood. We genetically ablated fibroblasts in mice to evaluate the impact on homeostasis of adult ECM and cardiac function after injury. Fibroblast-ablated mice demonstrated a substantive reduction in cardiac fibroblasts, but fibrillar collagen and the ECM proteome were not overtly altered when evaluated by quantitative mass spectrometry and N-terminomics. However, the distribution and quantity of collagen VI, microfibrillar collagen that forms an open network with the basement membrane, was reduced. In fibroblast-ablated mice, cardiac function was better preserved following angiotensin II/phenylephrine (AngII/PE)-induced fibrosis and myocardial infarction (MI). Analysis of cardiomyocyte function demonstrated altered sarcomere shortening and slowed calcium decline in both uninjured and AngII/PE-infused fibroblast-ablated mice. After MI, the residual resident fibroblasts responded to injury, albeit with reduced proliferation and numbers immediately after injury. These results indicate that the adult mouse heart tolerates a significant degree of fibroblast loss with a potentially beneficial impact on cardiac function after injury. The cardioprotective effect of controlled fibroblast reduction may have therapeutic value in heart disease.

### Keywords
Hearts, N-terminomics, Fibroblast ablated, Murine, Tails

### Affiliations
Cleveland Clinic 
Cleveland Clinic

### Submitter
Sumit Bhutada

### Lab Head
Dr Suneel Apte
Cleveland Clinic


