### Accession
PXD034623

### Title
Galectin-1 upregulates IDO1 and PD-L1 and induces a tolerogenic tumor-associated M2 macrophage phenotype

### Description
Galectins are a group of carbohydrate binding proteins with immunomodulatory functions. While the effects of galectins on the T cell compartment are well described, the interactions between galectins and antigen-presenting cells (APCs) remain elusive. Here we find increased expression of galectin-1(gal-1) in the stroma of a large selection of cancers, and investigating the effect of gal-1 on stroma localized antigen presenting cells, including monocyte derived dedritic cells and M1 and M2 macrophages (M1s and M2s, respectively). Using an in depth and dynamic proteomic and phosphoproteomic analysis of the effect of gal-1 on M2s we show that gal-1 induces global changes in the proteomic and signaling landscape of M2s, consistent with induction of a tolerogenic macrophage phenotype. Specifically, gal-1 induces expression of key immunomodulatory and tumor-associated proteins, including the key immune checkpoint protein, programmed cell death 1 ligand 1 (PD-L1/CD274) and the immunomodulator, indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase-1 (IDO1). Gal-1 induced IDO1 and its active metabolite kynurenine in a dose dependent manner, an effect that was prevented by JAK/STAT inhibition. Analyzing gal-1 expression in human tumors we find that gal-1 is upregulated across multiple tumors, and in a 3D organotypic model system equipped with genetically engineered tumorigenic epithelial cells, we find that the tumor associated gal-1 is derived from both from epithelial and stromal cells. Our results highlight the potential of targeting gal-1 in immunotherapeutic treatment of human cancers.

### Sample Protocol
Monocyte-derived M2 cells were generated as described. On day 6, M2s were stimulated w/wo galectin-1 300ng/mL for 0 min, 5 min, 6 h or 12 h. Cells were then washed twice with cold phosphate containing buffer (1× PBS) and then rapidly lysed, and cysteines were reduced and alkylated in a single step. Briefly, boiling 2% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) in 50 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (pH 8.5) was added directly to the cells. Lysis buffer containing cells was boiled for an additional 10 min at 99 °C followed by sonication for 2 min. Cell digestion was conducted with an automated protein aggregation capture (PAC) pipeline as previously described. PAC digestion was performed on a KingFisherTM Flex robot (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in a 96-well plate.  For cells from Donor 1, digested samples were purified on SepPak (C18 Classic Cartridge, Waters, Milford, MA) and then 120 µg peptides of each sample were labeled by TMTpro 16plex reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Labeled samples were then pooled and purified again on SepPak cartridges. 10 µg of pooled peptides were reserved for proteome samples and the rest was used for phosphopeptide enrichment with Ti-IMAC beads (ReSyn Biosciences) on the KingFisherTM Flex robot as described before. The reserved peptides and enriched phosphopeptides were then subjected to offline high pH reverse phase fractionation. 46 and 24 fractions were collected for peptide and phosphopeptides samples, respectively. The eluate was dried in SpeedVac, re-dissolved in 0.1% FA and then loaded on EvoTips. For cells from Donor 2, 3 and 4, digested samples were purified on SepPak (C18 Classic Cartridge, Waters, Milford, MA) and then 500 µg peptides of each sample were loaded on EvoSeps.

### Data Protocol
All samples were analyzed on an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer coupled with an Evosep One system using an in-house packed 15 cm, 150 μm i.d. capillary column with 1.9 μm Reprosil-Pur C18 beads (Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany) using the pre-programmed gradients (30 samples per day). For TMTpro samples, full MS resolution was set to 60,000 at m/z 200 with AGC target at 300%. MS2 resolutions were 45,000 for proteome samples and 30,000 for phosphoproteome samples. Normalized collision energy for HCD was set to 32%. Samples from donor 2, 3 and 4 were analyzed in data-independent acquisition (DIA) mode as described before.  All raw files were processed in Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with the human SwissProt FASTA database (20,355 entries, March 2019). Trypsin was set as the digest enzyme and up to two missed cleavages was allowed. TMTpro was specified as a fixed modification on lysine and peptide N-terminus and methionine oxidation was specified as a variable modification. In addition, phosphorylation was set as a variable modification on serine, threonine and tyrosine residues in phosphoproteome samples. All DIA raw files were processed with Spectronaut (Biognosys, Zurich, Switzerland) in DirectDIA mode. Default settings were used in Spectronaut for peptide identification and quantification. Statistical analysis and functional enrichment were conducted with in-house written R-scripts mainly using clusterProfiler and DAPAR packages.

### Publication Abstract
Galectins are a group of carbohydrate-binding proteins with a presumed immunomodulatory role and an elusive function on antigen-presenting cells. Here we analyzed the expression of galectin-1 and found upregulation of galectin-1 in the extracellular matrix across multiple tumors. Performing an in-depth and dynamic proteomic and phosphoproteomic analysis of human macrophages stimulated with galectin-1, we show that galectin-1 induces a tumor-associated macrophage phenotype with increased expression of key immune checkpoint protein programmed cell death 1 ligand 1 (PD-L1/CD274) and immunomodulator indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase-1 (IDO1). Galectin-1 induced IDO1 and its active metabolite kynurenine in a dose-dependent manner through JAK/STAT signaling. In a 3D organotypic tissue model system equipped with genetically engineered tumorigenic epithelial cells, we analyzed the cellular source of galectin-1 in the extracellular matrix and found that galectin-1 is derived from epithelial and stromal cells. Our results highlight the potential of targeting galectin-1 in immunotherapeutic treatment of human cancers.

### Keywords
Galectin, Lc-ms/ms, Pd-l1/cd274, Macrophage, Ido1

### Affiliations
University of Copenhagen
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, University of Copenhagen, Denmark

### Submitter
Zilu Ye

### Lab Head
Dr Jesper Velgaard Olsen
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, University of Copenhagen, Denmark


