### Accession
PXD021429

### Title
LSD1 interactome in Glioblastoma

### Description
Tumor-initiating cells (TICs) play a critical role in glioblastoma (GBM) maintenance being responsible for its heterogeneity and resistance to standard therapy. A step toward clinical translation includes GBM TIC targeting. Among the molecules tested for GBM treatment, are  those targeting epigenetic modifiers. By using patient-derived TICs and xenograft orthotopic models, we identified Lysine-specific histone demethylase 1A (LSD1) as a potentially druggable target in GBM. LSD1-directed therapy by means of the selective, orally bioavailable and brain penetrant inhibitor DDP_38003 effectively impairs growth, stem-like features and tumorigenic potential of GBM TICs. Our findings point to LSD1 as a positive regulator of Activating Transcription Factor 4 (ATF4)-dependent response in all stress conditions arising during tumor growth and therapy. Thus, through the downregulation of either ATF4 and its adaptive genes, LSD1 targeting is likely a promising strategy to hit GBM TICs by counteracting the ATF4-mediated adaptation to stress.

### Sample Protocol
In-gel digestion of proteins Immuno-precipitated proteins were separated in SDS-page and each sample was cut into 8 slices, corresponding to different molecular weight (MW) interval. Protein were, then, in-gel digested with Trypsin prior to MS analysis, following a previously described protocol (Shevchenko, A., et al., 2006; DOI:10.1038/nprot.2006.468). Upon digestion and extraction from the gel, peptides were desalted and concentrated by reversed-phase chromatography onto micro-column C18 Stage Tips (Rappsilber, J. et al., 2007; DOI:10.1038/nprot.2007.261). Peptides were then eluted from the stage tips with buffer B (80% ACN, 0.5% acetic acid), lyophilized, re-suspended in 0.1% Formic Acid and subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis.   Liquid Chromatography and Tandem Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) Digested peptide mixtures were analyzed by online nano-flow liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry using an EASY-nLC™ 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientic, Odense, Denmark) coupled to a quadrupole/Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive HF, Thermo Fisher Scientific) through a nanoelectrospray ion source. The nano-LC system was operated in one column set up with an EASY-Spray™ LC Columns (50-cm length, 75 μm inner diameter) packed with C18 reversed-phase resin (2 μm). Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid (FA) in ddH2O and solvent B was 80% ACN with 0.1% FA. Peptides were injected at a flow rate of 500 nL/min and separated with a gradient of 3–30% solvent B over 70 min, followed by a gradient of 30–60% for 5 min and 60–95% over 1 min at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. The Q-Exactive was set in the data-dependent mode (DDA) to automatically switch between full scan MS and MS/MS acquisition. MS- experiments consisted of an Orbitrap full scan followed by the acquisition of the 10 most intense peptide ions (Top10) detected in the survey MS scan. Mass spectrometer conditions were as follows: full MS (AGC 3e6; resolution 60,000; m/z range 375-1550; maximum ion time 20 ms); MS/MS (AGC 1e5; maximum ion time 80 ms; isolation window 1.4 m/z with a dynamic exclusion time of 20 sec). Singly charged ions and ions for which no charge state could be determined were excluded from the selection. Normalized collision energy was set to 28%; spray voltage was 1.8 kV; no sheath and auxiliary gas flow; heated capillary temperature was 275 °C.

### Data Protocol
Mass-spectrometry data analysis MS Raw data were analyzed with the integrated MaxQuant software v.1.6.11.0, using the Andromeda search engine (Cox, J. and M. Mann, 2008 DOI:10.1038/nbt.1511; Cox et al., 2011 DOI: 10.1021/pr101065j). The May 2019 version (UniProt Release 2019_05) of the Homo Sapiens Uniprot sequence was used for peptide identification. Enzyme specificity was set to Trypsin/P, meaning that trypsin cleavage occurs also in the presence of proline, at the C-terminal of lysine or arginine residues. In MaxQuant, the estimated false discovery rate (FDR) of all peptide identifications was set to a maximum of 1%. A maximum of  3 missed cleavages were permitted, and the minimum peptide length was fixed at 7 amino acids. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification. ‘Label-free Quantitation’ function was enabled.  LSD1 interactome data analysis Max Quant (MQ) outputs of the LSD1 interactomics data were analysed with Perseus software. The putative LSD1 interactors in GBM were determined as follows: 1) all proteins quantified (LFQ > 0) in at least 2 out of 3 replicates of the LSD1 co- IP and not quantified in the control co-IP (Table 1, spreadsheet 1), 2) proteins quantified (LFQ > 0) in at least 2 out of 3 replicates in each condition, were analyzed by an unpaired Student’s t-test. On this set of proteins, LSD1 putative interactors were defined as those displaying a log2LFQ(LSD1-IP)-log2LFQ(Control-IP) > 0 and a p-value < 0.05 (Table 1, spreadsheet 2).   In the dynamic LSD1-interactomics experiments, we defined evicted and recruited proteins from LSD1 interaction upon LSD1 pharmacological inhibition based on the following criteria: evicted proteins displayed a log2LFQ(DDP-38003)-log2LFQ(DMSO) < 0 and p-value < 0.05 (Table 2, spreadsheet 3), and also the proteins quantified only in the DMSO condition in at least 2 out of 3 replicates (Table 2, spreadsheet 1); recruited proteins included all the proteins displaying a log2LFQ(DDP-38003)-log2LFQ(DMSO) > 0 and a p-value < 0.05 (Table 2, spreadsheet 3) and as those quantified only in the treated condition (at least 2 out of 3 replicates) (Table 2, spreadsheet 2). Once analyzed the results of the dynamic interactome, the modulated proteins were filtered on the basis of the results of the basal LSD1 interactome, which defines the list of the specific binders.

### Publication Abstract
Glioblastoma (GBM) is a fatal tumor whose aggressiveness, heterogeneity, poor blood-brain barrier penetration, and resistance to therapy highlight the need for new targets and clinical treatments. A step toward clinical translation includes the eradication of GBM tumor-initiating cells (TICs), responsible for GBM heterogeneity and relapse. By using patient-derived TICs and xenograft orthotopic models, we demonstrated that the selective lysine-specific histone demethylase 1 inhibitor DDP_38003 (LSD1i) is able to penetrate the brain parenchyma in vivo in preclinical models, is well tolerated, and exerts antitumor activity in molecularly different GBMs. LSD1 genetic targeting further strengthens the role of LSD1 in GBM TIC maintenance. GBM TIC plasticity supports their adaptation and survival under a plethora of environmental stresses, including nutrient deficiency and proteostasis perturbation. By mimicking these stresses in vitro, we found that LSD1 inhibition hampers the induction of the activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4), the master regulator of the integrated stress response (ISR). The resulting aberrant ISR sensitizes GBM TICs to stress-induced cell death, hampering tumor aggressiveness. Functionally, LSD1i interferes with LSD1 scaffolding function and prevents its interaction with CREBBP, a critical ATF4 activator. By disrupting the interaction between CREBBP and LSD1-ATF4 axis, LSD1 inhibition prevents GBM TICs from overcoming stress and sustaining GBM progression. The effectiveness of the LSD1 inhibition in preclinical models shown here places a strong rationale toward its clinical translation for GBM treatment.

### Keywords
Lsd1, Protein complex, Lsd1 inhibitor, Targeted therapy, Glioblastoma

### Affiliations
Department of Experimental Oncology, European Institute of Oncology (IEO), IRCCS, Milan 20139, Italy
European Institute of Oncology IRCSS, Department of Experimental Oncology, Milan, Italy

### Submitter
Enrico Massignani

### Lab Head
Dr Tiziana Bonaldi
Department of Experimental Oncology, European Institute of Oncology (IEO), IRCCS, Milan 20139, Italy


