### Accession
PXD012484

### Title
Characterization of a thaumarchaeal symbiont that drives incomplete nitrification in the tropical sponge Ianthella basta

### Description
Marine sponges represent one of the few eukaryotic groups that ubiquitously harbor symbiotic members of the Thaumarchaeota, which are important chemoautotrophic ammonia-oxidizers in many environments. However in most studies, direct demonstration of ammonia-oxidation by these archaea within sponges is lacking, and little is known about sponge-specific adaptations of archaeal ammonia oxidizers (AOA). In this study, we characterized the thaumarchaeal symbiont of the marine sponge Ianthella basta using metaproteogenomics, fluorescence in situ hybridization, qPCR and direct isotope-based functional assays. We demonstrate that the I. basta symbiont is not closely related to other genomically sequenced sponge AOA and is a member of a new genus. “Candidatus Nitrosospongia bastadiensis” is an abundant symbiont that is solely responsible for nitrite formation from ammonia in I. basta that surprisingly does not harbor nitrite-oxidizing microbes. Consistently, Ca N. bastadiensis encodes and expresses the genetic repertoire required for chemolithoautotrophic ammonia oxidation. Furthermore, we show that this AOA is equipped with an expanded set of extracellular subtilisin-like proteases, a metalloprotease unique among archaea, as well as a putative branched-chain amino acid ABC transporter. This repertoire is strongly indicative of a mixotrophic lifestyle and is (with slight variations) also found in other sponge-associated, but not in free-living AOA. We predict that this feature as well as an expanded and unique set of secreted serpins (protease inhibitors), a unique array of eukaryotic-like proteins, and a DNA-phosporothioation system likely involved in defense against foreign DNA, represent important adaptations of AOA to life within these ancient filter-feeding animals.

### Sample Protocol
1D PAGE followed by liquid chromatography-based tandem mass spectrometry (1D-PAGE-LC-MS/MS) were used for protein and peptide separation and identification as described previously (Washburn et al., 2001; Otto et al., 2010), with slight modifications. MS spectra and MS/MS spectra were acquired from eluting peptides ionized with electrospray ionization (ESI) and analyzed in a LTQ Orbitrap Velos hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA), as described previously (Otto et al., 2010; Verberkmoes et al., 2009), with minor modifications. Samples of the sponge homogenate without sponge skeleton and crude sponge homogenate processed in liquid N2 were analyzed in technical duplicates, whereas the sponge homogenate without sponge nuclei was analyzed only once.

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS spectra were searched against predicted protein sequence databases composed of the I. basta symbiont-enriched metagenome bins and common laboratory contaminants using the Sorcerer SEQUEST (v.27, rev. 11) algorithm. The CD-HIT software (Li and Godzik, 2006) was used to remove redundancies from the database due to the potential for strain-level redundancies. Protein identifications were filtered with Scaffold version 3.5.1 applying the “sequest” filter criteria described previously (Heinz et al. 2012 ). For protein identification only peptides identified with high mass accuracy (maximum ± 10 ppm difference between calculated and observed mass) were considered and at least two exclusively unique peptides were required to identify a protein.

### Publication Abstract
Marine sponges represent one of the few eukaryotic groups that frequently harbour symbiotic members of the Thaumarchaeota, which are important chemoautotrophic ammonia-oxidizers in many environments. However, in most studies, direct demonstration of ammonia-oxidation by these archaea within sponges is lacking, and little is known about sponge-specific adaptations of ammonia-oxidizing archaea (AOA). Here, we characterized the thaumarchaeal symbiont of the marine sponge Ianthella basta using metaproteogenomics, fluorescence in situ hybridization, qPCR and isotope-based functional assays. 'Candidatus Nitrosospongia ianthellae' is only distantly related to cultured AOA. It is an abundant symbiont that is solely responsible for nitrite formation from ammonia in I. basta that surprisingly does not harbour nitrite-oxidizing microbes. Furthermore, this AOA is equipped with an expanded set of extracellular subtilisin-like proteases, a metalloprotease unique among archaea, as well as a putative branched-chain amino acid ABC transporter. This repertoire is strongly indicative of a mixotrophic lifestyle and is (with slight variations) also found in other sponge-associated, but not in free-living AOA. We predict that this feature as well as an expanded and unique set of secreted serpins (protease inhibitors), a unique array of eukaryotic-like proteins, and a DNA-phosporothioation system, represent important adaptations of AOA to life within these ancient filter-feeding animals.

### Keywords
Symbionts, Thaumarchaetota, Ammonia-oxidizers, Metaproteome, Sponge

### Affiliations
Universität Greifswald Institut für Pharmazie, AG Pharmazeutische Biotechnologie Greifswald, Germany
University of Greifswald

### Submitter
Stephanie Markert

### Lab Head
Dr Stephanie Markert
Universität Greifswald Institut für Pharmazie, AG Pharmazeutische Biotechnologie Greifswald, Germany


