### Accession
PXD027090

### Title
Global quantitative proteomic analysis of aging Drosophila eyes

### Description
Wild-type Drosophila melanogaster expressing nuclear GFP-KASH fusion protein in photoreceptors for cell type-specific gene expression profiling (Rh1-Gal4>UAS-GFPKASH ; Genotype = w1118;; P{w+mC=[UAS-GFP-Msp300KASH}attP2, P{ry+t7.2=rh1-GAL4}3, ry506) were raised in 12:12h light:dark cycle at 25°C. Flies were aged for 10 or 40 days post-eclosion, and eyes were harvested from male flies for global quantitative proteomic analysis. Significantly changed proteins were identified that may contribute to age-associated retinal degeneration and loss of visual function in the aging Drosophila eye.

### Sample Protocol
100 manually dissected eyes were collected in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and flash frozen in liquid N2. Male flies were used.

### Data Protocol
Resulting RAW files were analyzed using Proteome Discover 2.2.0.388 (ThermoScientific). A specific TMT 8plex quantification method was formulated using the default TMT 10plex method using the tools available in Proteome Discover 2.2. The MS/MS spectra were searched against in silico tryptic digest of a drosophila proteins database (FASTA format) downloaded from the UniProt sequence database (v. Nov 2018; 21995 entries of OS=Drosophila melanogaster) using the SEQUEST HT search engine that also accounted for “common mass spectrometry contaminants”—63 entries. The relevant “fasta” file used for the search is provided in the supplemental document entitled, “Drosophila_uniprot_contam_090318.fasta”. In order to carry out the search, following specific search parameters were applied to vender provided  “processing” and “consensus” workflow templates that correspond to Thermo “Fusion” instruments: Trypsin as the proteolytic enzyme; searched for peptides with a maximum number of 2 missed cleavages; precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm; and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.6 Da. Static modifications used for the search were, 1) carbamidomethylation on cysteine(C) residues; 2) TMT sixplex label on lysine (K) residues and the N-termini of peptides. Dynamic modifications used for the search were oxidation of methionines, and acetylation of N-termini. Percolator False Discovery Rate was set to a strict setting of 0.01 and a relaxed setting of 0.05. Values from both unique and razor peptides were used for quantification. In order to account for procedural errors, reporter ions based responses for proteins were normalized in Proteome Discover 2.2 (Thermo Scientific) using the “total peptide amount” option. Resulting “grouped” abundance values for each sample type; “abundance ratio” values; and respective “p-values (ANOVA)” from Proteome Discover were exported to Microsoft Excel, from Proteome Discover 2.5 (Thermo Scientific) to construct “Volcano Plots” to screen out statistically increased or decreased proteins for global proteomic comparison between Day10 and Day40 samples.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Eye, Drosophila, Aging, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Indiana University
Department of Biochemistry, Purdue University, 175 S. University Street, West Lafayette, Indiana 47907, USA

### Submitter
Aruna Wijeratne

### Lab Head
Dr Vikki M. Weake
Department of Biochemistry, Purdue University, 175 S. University Street, West Lafayette, Indiana 47907, USA


