### Accession
PXD032799

### Title
Genotype-by-environment interactions influence the composition of the Drosophila seminal proteome

### Description
Ejaculate proteins are key mediators of post-mating sexual selection and sexual conflict, as they can influence both male fertilization success and female reproductive physiology. However, the extent and sources of genetic variation and condition dependence of the ejaculate proteome are largely unknown. Such knowledge could reveal the targets and mechanisms of post-mating selection and inform about the relative costs and allocation of different ejaculate components, each with its own potential fitness consequences. Here, we used liquid chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry to characterize the whole-ejaculate protein composition across twelve isogenic lines of Drosophila melanogaster that were reared on a high- or low-quality diet. We discovered new proteins in the transferred ejaculate and inferred their origin in the male reproductive system. We further found that the ejaculate composition was mainly determined by genotype identity and genotype-specific responses to larval diet, with no clear overall diet effect. Nutrient restriction increased proteolytic protein activity and shifted the balance between reproductive function and RNA metabolism. Our results open new avenues for exploring the intricate role of genotypes and their environment in shaping ejaculate composition, or for studying the functional dynamics and evolutionary potential of the ejaculate in its multivariate complexity.

### Sample Protocol
We distributed the 90 bursae per combination across three biological replicates, resulting in a total of n = 72 samples, each containing 30 bursae, which we analysed across five quantification experiments using tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) with 16-plex Tandem Mass Tag (TMT, Thermo Fisher) labelling (Fig. S2). For protein extraction, samples were mechanically solubilized in PBS with a pestle (2%SDS, 5%DTT), and proteins were acetone-precipitated and resuspended in iST-NHS buffer (iST-NHS kit, PreOmics). After protein digestion, peptides were labelled with a 1:2.5 TMT16 tag ratio (peptide:label) before resuspension in 3% acetonitrile / 0.1% formic acid. We equally combined the individual samples and fractionated offline the TMT pools using high-pH reverse-phase chromatography. Each TMT experiment consisted of 20 liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) runs on a Thermo Scientific Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer equipped with a Waters M-Class LC system. We followed each scan by a data-dependent MS/MS scan and isolated the most abundant fragments. We assigned reporter ion such that they reduced the effect of cross-population interference (i.e., channel leakage; supplemental Fig. S2; (Brenes et al., 2019)) and increased quantitative accuracy of proteins across isobaric labels (Sandberg et al., 2014). Detailed information can be found in the supplementary material.


### Data Protocol
We processed the raw data in Proteome Discoverer v2.5 (Thermo Fisher Scientific), searching against the D. melanogaster protein database containing only the longest isoform for each protein (r6.32; [37], n = 13,813 entries). We assigned spectra using a precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm and fragment ion tolerance of 0.5 Da using the Sequest algorithm [38]. Static modifications included a specific cysteine modification (Acetylhypusine, +113.084 Da), TMT (+304.207 Da) on the peptide N-terminus and lysine residues. Variable modifications included an acetylation on the N-terminus of the protein end (+42.011 Da), oxidized methionine (+15.995 Da) and methionine loss with ( 131.040 Da) and without Acetyl (-89.030 Da). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin allowing a minimal peptide length of six amino acids and a maximum of two missed cleavages. The maximum false discovery rate (FDR) for peptides was set to 0.01. For reporter ion quantification the integration tolerance was 20 ppm for the most confident peak. Protein fold changes were computed based on Intensity values reported in the Protein output. 

### Publication Abstract
Ejaculate proteins are key mediators of post-mating sexual selection and sexual conflict, as they can influence both male fertilization success and female reproductive physiology. However, the extent and sources of genetic variation and condition dependence of the ejaculate proteome are largely unknown. Such knowledge could reveal the targets and mechanisms of post-mating selection and inform about the relative costs and allocation of different ejaculate components, each with its own potential fitness consequences. Here, we used liquid chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry to characterize the whole-ejaculate protein composition across 12 isogenic lines of <i>Drosophila melanogaster</i> that were reared on a high- or low-quality diet. We discovered new proteins in the transferred ejaculate and inferred their origin in the male reproductive system. We further found that the ejaculate composition was mainly determined by genotype identity and genotype-specific responses to larval diet, with no clear overall diet effect. Nutrient restriction increased proteolytic protein activity and shifted the balance between reproductive function and RNA metabolism. Our results open new avenues for exploring the intricate role of genotypes and their environment in shaping ejaculate composition, or for studying the functional dynamics and evolutionary potential of the ejaculate in its multivariate complexity.

### Keywords
Nutrition, G×e, Genotype, Ejaculate protein composition.

### Affiliations
Department of Evolutionary Biology and Environmental Studies, University of Zurich, Winterthurerstrasse 190, 8057 Zurich, Switzerland
University of Zurich

### Submitter
Valérian Zeender

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan Lüpold
Department of Evolutionary Biology and Environmental Studies, University of Zurich, Winterthurerstrasse 190, 8057 Zurich, Switzerland


