### Accession
PXD016659

### Title
Light-activatable, 2,5-disubstituted tetrazoles for the proteome-wide profiling of aspartates and glutamates in living bacteria

### Description
Covalent inhibitors have recently seen a resurgence of interest in drug development. Nevertheless, compounds, that do not rely on an enzymatic activity, have almost exclusively been developed to target cysteines. Expanding the scope to other amino acids would be largely facilitated by the ability to globally monitor their engagement by covalent inhibitors. Here, we present the use of light-activatable 2,5-disubstituted tetrazoles that allow quantifying close to 9000 aspartates and glutamates in the bacterial proteome with excellent selectivity. Using these probes, we competitively map the binding sites of two isoxazolium salts and introduce hydrazonyl chlorides as a new class of carboxylic acid-directed covalent protein ligands. As the probes are unreactive prior to activation, they allow global profiling even in living Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria. Taken together, this method to monitor aspartates and glutamates proteome-wide will lay the foundation to efficiently develop covalent inhibitors targeting these amino acids.

### Sample Protocol
The data consists of two different kinds of experiments:  isoDTB-ABPP experiments:  Two samples of lysate or living bacteria of S. aureus SH1000 or E. coli ATCC 25922 were labeled with 2,5-disubstituted tetrazole probes through irradiation with light. In some experiments in lysates, one of the samples was pretreated with an inhibitor. The samples were clicked to the heavy (solvent-treated in case of competitive experiments) or light (compound-treated in case of competitive experiments) isoDTB tags, respectively. The light- and heavy-labeled samples were combined and precipitated. The protein precipitates were washed, re-dissolved and enriched on high capacity streptavidin agarose beads. After enrichment, the proteins were reduced and alkylated with iodoacetamide. The proteins were digested with trypsin or chymotrypsin. The beads were washed, the modified peptides eluted and dried under vacuum. The residues were re-dissolved in 1% FA and filtered. Samples were analyzed using a Qexactive Plus mass spectrometer coupled to an Ultimate 3000 nano HPLC system. Samples were loaded on an Acclaim C18 PepMap100 trap column and separation was carried out on an Acclaim C18PepMapRSLC column. TOP10 data-dependent mode, scan range 300-1500 m/z, resolution of 70,000 and AGC target of 3e6 with 80 ms maximum injection time for full scans. The most intense peaks were selected for MS2 measurement with the following criteria: Minimum AGC target 1e3, isotope exclusion and dynamic exclusion enabled and peaks with unassigned charge or a charge of +1 excluded. Resolution of 17,500, AGC target 1e5, maximum injection time 100 ms, isolation window 1.6 m/z and higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD, normalized collision energy: 27%) for MS2.  Reductive Dimethyl Labeling Experiments: Two samples of recombinant S. aureus nicotinate phosphoribosyltransferase were treated with covalent inhibitor or DMF as a control. The protein was precipitated. The precipitates were washed and re-dissolved. The proteins were reduced and alkylated with iodoacetamide. The samples were diluted with TEAB and digested with trypsin. Reductive dimethylation was performed as previously described. Briefly, DMF-treated samples were labeled with heavy formaldehyde (13C,D2) and compound-treated samples with light formaldehyde (12C,H2). Sodium cyanoborohydride was added to both samples. The reactions were quenched with NH4OH and acidified with formic acid. The samples were desalted using 50 mg SepPak Cartridges. The solvent was removed in a vacuum concentrator. The residues were re-dissolved in 1% FA and filtered. Samples were analyzed using a Qexactive Plus mass spectrometer coupled to an Ultimate 3000 nano HPLC system. Samples were loaded on an Acclaim C18 PepMap100 trap column and separated on an Acclaim C18PepMapRSLC column. TOP10 data-dependent mode, scan range 300-1500 m/z, resolution of 70,000 and AGC target of 3e6 with 80 ms maximum injection time for full scans. The most intense peaks were selected for MS2 measurement with the following criteria: Minimum AGC target 1e3, isotope exclusion and dynamic exclusion enabled and peaks with unassigned charge or a charge of +1 excluded. Resolution of 17,500, AGC target 1e5, maximum injection time 100 ms, isolation window 1.6 m/z and higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD, normalized collision energy: 27%) for MS2.

### Data Protocol
The data consists of two different kinds of experiments:  isoDTB-ABPP experiments: These experiments were analyzed in two different ways.  For quantification, MS raw data were analyzed using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.1.0). Standard settings were used with the following changes and additions: A modified FASTA database, based on the UniProt database for S. aureus SH1000 or E. coli ATCC 25922, with individual substitutions of aspartates and glutamates with the placeholders “O” and “U”, respectively, was used as described previously (“SA59_DO_EU.fasta” and “EC60_DO_EU.fasta”). Labels were set on the placeholder amino acids “O” and “U” to accommodate the modification with the probe and the light or heavy isoDTB tag and to additionally transfer the mass of the placeholder amino acid to the mass of aspartates and glutamates. A multiplicity of 2 was set and a maximum number of labeled amino acids of 1 was allowed. The digestion enzyme was set to Trypsin/P for all regular experiments or Chymotrypsin+ for the experiments with chymotrypsin digestion with maximum number of missed cleavages of 2. No variable modifications were included. The “Re-quantify” option was enabled. Carbamidomethyl was used as fixed modification on cysteine. Contaminants were included. Peptides were searched with a minimum peptide length of 7 and a maximum peptide mass of 4,600 Da. “Second peptides” and “Dependent peptides” were disabled and the option “Match between run” was enabled with a Match time window of 0.7 min and an alignment window of 20 min. An FDR of 0.01 was used for Protein FDR, PSM FDR and XPSM FDR.  For selectivity analysis, MS raw data were analyzed using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.1.0). Standard settings were used with the following changes and additions: The normal FASTA databases without manual changes were used (“SA59.fasta” and “EC60.fasta”). Two individual runs were performed for the light and the heavy isoDTB tags. No labels were used. The digestion enzyme was set to Trypsin/P for all regular experiments or Chymotrypsin+ for the experiments with chymotrypsin digestion with maximum number of missed cleavages of 2. Variable modification with the probe and either the light or the heavy isoDTB tag was allowed on all potentially nucleophilic amino acids (C, D, E, F, H, K, M, N, Q, R, S, T, W, Y). Carbamidomethyl (C) was included as a variable modification on cysteine. The max. number of modifications per peptide was 2. The “Re-quantify” option was enabled. Contaminants were included. Peptides were searched with a minimum peptide length of 7 and a maximum peptide mass of 4,600 Da. “Second peptides” and “Dependent peptides” were disabled and the option “Match between run” was enabled with a Match time window of 0.7 min and an alignment window of 20 min. An FDR of 0.01 was used for Protein FDR, PSM FDR and XPSM FDR.  Reductive Dimethyl Labeling Experiments:  MS raw data were analyzed using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.1.0). Standard settings were used with the following changes and additions: The modified FASTA databases with addition of S. aureus nicotinate phosphoribosyltransferase (UniProt code Q2G235) to the FASTA database of E. coli K12 was used (“EC33-2_plus_Q2G235.fasta”). Labels for reductive demethylation were set on lysine and the N-terminus of each peptide (C2H4 for light labels and 13C2D4 for heavy labels). A multiplicity of 2 was set and a maximum number of labeled amino acids of 4 was allowed. The digestion enzyme was set to Trypsin/P with maximum number of missed cleavages of 2. Variable modification with the covalent ligand was allowed on aspartates and glutamates (C8H8N2). The “Re-quantify” option was enabled. Carbamidomethyl (C2H3NO) was used as fixed modification on cysteine. Contaminants were included. Peptides were searched with a minimum peptide length of 7 and a maximum peptide mass of 4,600 Da. “Second peptides” and “Dependent peptides” were disabled and the option “Match between run” was enabled with a Match time window of 0.7 min and an alignment window of 20 min. An FDR of 0.01 was used for Protein FDR, PSM FDR and XPSM FDR.

### Publication Abstract
Covalent inhibitors have recently seen a resurgence of interest in drug development. Nevertheless, compounds, which do not rely on an enzymatic activity, have almost exclusively been developed to target cysteines. Expanding the scope to other amino acids would be largely facilitated by the ability to globally monitor their engagement by covalent inhibitors. Here, we present the use of light-activatable 2,5-disubstituted tetrazoles that allow quantifying 8971 aspartates and glutamates in the bacterial proteome with excellent selectivity. Using these probes, we competitively map the binding sites of two isoxazolium salts and introduce hydrazonyl chlorides as a new class of carboxylic-acid-directed covalent protein ligands. As the probes are unreactive prior to activation, they allow global profiling even in living Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria. Taken together, this method to monitor aspartates and glutamates proteome-wide will lay the foundation to efficiently develop covalent inhibitors targeting these amino acids.

### Keywords
Chemoproteomics, Antibiotics, Covalent inhibitors, Isodtb-abpp

### Affiliations
Technical University of Munich
Technical University Munich, Department of Chemistry, Lichtenbergstrasse 4, 85748 Garching bei Muenchen, Germany

### Submitter
Stephan M. Hacker

### Lab Head
Dr Stephan M. Hacker
Technical University Munich, Department of Chemistry, Lichtenbergstrasse 4, 85748 Garching bei Muenchen, Germany


