### Accession
PXD018674

### Title
PROTAC-triggered degradation of MYC

### Description
The oncogene MYC drives many cancers and is an outstanding therapeutic target. MYC is an intrinsically disordered protein, and therefore, targeting MYC remains a challenge.  Here, we developed a proteolysis targeting chimera (PROTAC) degrading MYC: MDEG-541. The inhibitor is based on the MYC-MAX dimerization inhibitor 10058-F4 and Thalidomide. Mode of action depends on the proteasome and cereblon. MDEG-541 shows single digit mM activity in most sensitive colon and pancreatic cancer cell lines as well as gastrointestinal tumor organoids.

### Sample Protocol
PSN1 cells were lysed in 500 µl of 40 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6 containing 2% SDS. To reduce viscosity, the sample was boiled at 95 ºC for 10 min and TFA was added to a final concentration of 1 %. To neutralize the sample, 300 mM N-methylmorpholin was added to a final concentration of 2 %. Protein concentration was determined using the BCA assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the protocol of the manufacturer. The beads suspension for sp3 sample workup was prepared by mixing magnetic SeraMag-A and SeraMag-B beads (10 µl per sample of each type; Cytiva) in a ratio of 1:1, washing them three times with ddH2O and resuspending them in 10 µl ddH2O per sample. A total of 100 µg per sample was mixed with 10 µl beads suspension. Acetonitrile (ACN) was added to a final concentration of 70 % and incubated at room temperature, 18 min, 800 rpm. After discarding the supernatant, beads were washed twice using 200 µl ethanol, 30 sec incubation, and once using 180 µl ACN, 15 sec incubation. The supernatant was discarded and the beads air-dried for 30 sec, before 50 µl of 16.0 mM (4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid (HEPES) pH 8.5 was added. Proteins were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 45 min at 37 °C and 800 rpm, and alkylated with 55 mM chloroacetamide (CAA) at room temperature in the dark for 30 min. Proteins were digested in a 1:100 trypsin/substrate weight ratio overnight at 37 °C and 800 rpm. On the next day, the samples were sonicated to resuspend the beads and another round of digestion (1:100 trypsin/substrate weight ratio) was performed for 6 h at 37 °C and 800 rpm. Samples were sonicated 3 times for 30 sec and supernatant was collected. Beads were washed once with 20 µl ddH2O, sonicated 3 times for 30 sec, and supernatants were combined with previous supernatants. Samples were frozen at -80 °C and dried in a SpeedVac. Afterwards labeling of the desalted peptides was performed with tandem mass tags 11 (TMT11)-plex (Thermo Fisher Scientific) as previously described (PMID 30967486), and peptides were pooled after labeling (126 = 0 h, 127N = 1 h, 127C = 2 h, 128N = 4 h, 128C = 6 h, 129N = 8 h, 129C = 10 h, 130N = 12 h, 130C = 16 h, 131N = 20 h, 131C = 24 h). A Dionex Ultra 3000 HPLC system operating a Waters XBridge BEH130 C18 3.5 µm 2.1 × 250 mm column was used to fractionate 500 µg of pooled peptides at a flow rate of 200 µl/min. Buffer A was 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH = 8.0), buffer B was 100 % ddH2O, buffer C was 100 % ACN. The proportion of buffer A was kept at 10 % during separation. 500 µg pooled peptides were separated by a linear gradient from 9-42% C in 86 min, followed by a linear gradient from 42-80% C in 12 min. 96 fractions were collected and one third of each fraction was subsequently pooled into 46 fractions by adding fraction 49 to fraction 1, fraction 50 to fraction 2 and so forth. Peptide fractions were dried in a SpeedVac and stored at -20 °C until LC-MSn analysis. For microflow LC-MSMS, a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano System was coupled online to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were dissolved in solvent A (0.1 % FA in 3 % DMSO) and one third (app. 3 µg) was directly injected onto the microflow LC system. Online chromatography was performed using a commercially available Thermo Fisher Scientific Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 LC column (2 µm particle size, 1 mm ID × 150 mm; catalog number 164711). Peptides were delivered at a flow rate of 50 µl/min and separated using a 27 min linear gradient from 6 % to 33 % LC solvent B (0.1 % FA, 3 % DMSO in ACN) in LC solvent A. The Orbitrap Fusion Lumos was operated as follows: positive polarity; spray voltage 3.5 kV, capillary temperature 325 °C; vaporizer temperature 125 °C. The flow rates of sheath gas, aux gas and sweep gas were set to 32, 5, and 0, respectively. For TMT labeled peptides, the cycle time was set to 1.2 s. Full MS resolution was set to 60,000 at m/z 200 and the mass range was set to 360–1560. Full MS AGC target value was 4E5 with a maximum IT of 50 ms and RF lens value was set to 50. The MIPS properties were set to peptide. Default charges were set to state 2–6. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 50 s, exclude after one time. For readout of MS2 spectra, the ion trap was used applying the rapid scan function. The isolation width was set to 0.6 m/z, the first mass was fixed at 100 m/z, activation type was HCD, HCD collision energy [%] was 32. The AGC target value was set to 1.2E4 at a maximum IT of 40 ms. The precursor selection range was set to 400–2000, exclusion mass widths were set to 20 m/z for low and 5 m/z for high. For MS3 spectra readout, the orbitrap was used spectra at 50,000 resolution and over a scan range of 100–1000. Synchronous precursor selection (SPS) was enabled, the number of SPS precursors was set to 8. MS isolation window was 1.2 m/z, activation type was HCD, and HCD collision energy was 55 %. AGC target was 1E5 with a maximum IT of 86 ms.

### Data Protocol
Protein and peptide identification and quantification was performed using MaxQuant [PMID 19029910] (version 1.6.2.10) by searching the tandem MS data against all canonical protein sequences as annotated in the UniProt reference database (human proteins only, 88,391 entries, downloaded 22.07.2013, internally annotated with PFAM domains, two MYC isoforms were separately listed) using the search engine Andromeda [PMID 21254760]. Carbamidomethylated cysteine was set as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modification. Trypsin/P was specified as the proteolytic enzyme and up to two missed cleavage sites were allowed. The minimum peptide length was set to seven and all data were adjusted to 1 % peptide-spectrum match (PSM) and 1 % protein false discovery rate (FDR). MS3-based TMT quantification was enabled, taking TMT correction factors as supplied by the manufacturer into account.   Data analysis was performed using the Perseus software suite [PMID 27348712] (version 1.5.8.5) and Microsoft Excel on identified and quantified protein groups as provided in the proteinGroups.txt file, and on individual PSMs as provided in the evidence.txt file. Proteingroups.txt was filtered for contaminants and reverse hits, and total sum normalization and log2 transformation were performed. The 24 h timepoint was removed as an outlier and data was filtered for at least 1 valid value. A cutoff of log2 ratio (0:20h) of 1 was used to identify proteins showing a time-dependent effect (downregulation log2 ratio < -1, upregulation log2 ratio >1). Data quality and temporal effects of individual proteins were analyzed on PSM level in the evidence.txt.

### Publication Abstract
Targeted protein degradation offers new opportunities to inactivate cancer drivers and has successfully entered the clinic. Ways to induce selective protein degradation include proteolysis targeting chimera (PROTAC) technology and immunomodulatory (IMiDs) / next-generation Cereblon (CRBN) E3 ligase modulating drugs (CELMoDs). Here, we aimed to develop a MYC PROTAC based on the MYC-MAX dimerization inhibitor 10058-F4 derivative 28RH and Thalidomide, called MDEG-541. We show that a subgroup of gastrointestinal cancer cell lines and primary patient-derived organoids are MDEG-541 sensitive. Although MYC expression was regulated in a CRBN-, proteasome- and ubiquitin-dependent manner, we provide evidence that MDEG-541 induced the degradation of CRBN neosubstrates, including G1 to S phase transition 1/2 (GSPT1/2) and the Polo-like kinase 1 (PLK1). In sum, we have established a CRBN-dependent degrader of relevant cancer targets with activity in gastrointestinal cancers.

### Keywords
Human, Myc degradation, Lc-ms3

### Affiliations
Technical University of Munich Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics Emil-Erlenmeyer-Forum 5 85354 Freising Germany
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technische Universität München, Germany

### Submitter
Stephanie Wilhelm 

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Bernhard Kuster
Technical University of Munich Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics Emil-Erlenmeyer-Forum 5 85354 Freising Germany


