### Accession
PXD003726

### Title
Characterisation of the immune compounds in koala milk using a combined transcriptomic and proteomic approach

### Description
Production of milk is a key characteristic of mammals, but the features of lactation vary greatly between monotreme, marsupial and eutherian mammals. Marsupials have a short gestation followed by a long lactation period, and the milk constituents vary greatly across lactation to meet the changing needs of the developing young. Marsupials are born immunologically naïve and rely on their mother’s milk for immunological protection. The koala is an iconic Australian species and many are increasingly threatened by disease. Here we use a mammary transcriptome, two milk proteomes and the koala genome to comprehensively characterise the protein components of the milk of the koala, with a key focus on the immune constituents during early and late lactation. We have characterised the most abundant peptides present in milk, examined key differences between early and late lactation, and determined differences between the koala and other marsupial species. The most abundant proteins were well characterised mammalian and marsupial-specific milk proteins including β-lactoglobulin, lactotransferrin, caseins and early lactation protein. We have generated a list of 851 immune compounds identified in the mammary transcriptome and examined a range of immune proteins that were highly abundant in the milk proteomes. These include immunoglobulins, complement components and immune receptors. A host of antimicrobial peptides were identified including cathelicidins, lysozyme, WAP four-disulfide core domain protein 2, Mucin-1 and Peptidoglycan recognition protein. We discovered that the previously described marsupial milk protein Very Early Lactation Protein is an ortholog of the eutherian gene Glycam1 (PP3) and likely has an antimicrobial role in milk. We also identified highly abundant koala endogenous retrovirus sequences in the mammary and milk transcriptome and proteomes, identifying a potential route for retroviral transmission from mother to young. Identifying and characterising the immune components of milk is key to understanding how marsupial young are protected throughout lactation and the novel immune compounds identified may have applications in clinical research.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were collected at necropsy from two female koalas admitted to Australia Zoo Wildlife Hospital for veterinary care. The koala “Leah” was euthanized following identification of an  osteochondroma (“Leah”) while the koala “Little Jo” was euthanized due to severe dog attack injuries  (Table 1). Little Jo was in the early stage of lactation with an attached pouch young of 18 g, aged between 2 and 10 weeks old. Both milk and mammary gland tissue were collected from Little Jo. Milk was collected from Leah who was in the late stage of lactation with a young aged 8 months.  The mammary gland sample was stored in RNA-later and the milk samples were snap frozen.  A 100 µL sample of milk was diluted in 400 µL of ultrapure water and spun at 14,000 ×g for one hour to separate the top lipid layer, the middle whey layer and the bottom casein layer. 100 µL of the whey fraction was collected and spun in pre-conditioned centrifugal filter unit (10,000Da MWCO, Millipore) at 13,000 ×g for 10 minutes at 10 °C. The retained fraction was collected and 20 µL was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for one hour at 56 °C, alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide at RT for one hour and digested overnight with trypsin at 37 °C. The digested sample was dried in a vacuum centrifuge.  The dried, digested peptide sample was fractionated by SCX HPLC (1260 Quaternary HPLC system with Polysulfoethyl A, 200 mm × 2.1 mm, 5 µm, 200 Å column; Agilent). The sample was resuspended in loading buffer (5 mM phosphate, 25% ACN, pH 2.7). After sample loading and washing, buffer B (5 mM phosphate, 350 mM KCl, 25% acetonitrile, pH 2.7) concentration was increased from 10% to 45% in 70 minutes and then increased to 100% for 10 minutes at a flow rate 300 µl/min. The SCX HPLC eluent was collected every 2 minutes at the beginning of the gradient and at 4 minute intervals later. The first 13 fractions from the start of the gradient were obtained, dried and used for nanoLC ESI analysis.  The dried, digested peptide sample from the early stage lactated milk sample was also fractionated using high pH reversed-phase peptide fractionation kit (Pierce, Thermo Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instruction. A total of eight fractions were collected, dried and used for nanoLC ESI analysis.  A 5600 TripleTOF mass spectrometer (AB Sciex) coupled to an Eksigent Ultra-nanoLC-1D system (Eksigent, Dublin, CA) was employed for LC-MS/MS analysis. Each of the dried SCX fractions was resuspended in 80 µL of loading/desalting solution (0.1% (v/v) formic acid, 2% (v/v) acetonitrile). 40 µL of sample was injected onto a reverse phase peptide C18 Captrap (Bruker) for pre-concentration and desalted for 5 minutes with the loading buffer at a flow rate of 10 µL per minute. After desalting, the peptide trap was switched in-line with an in-house packed analytical column (75 μm × 10 cm) directly in a fused silica PicoTip emitter (New Objective, Woburn, MA, USA) with solid core Halo C18, 160 Å, 2.7 μm (Bruker). Peptides were eluted and separated from the column using the buffer B (99.9% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid) gradient starting from 10% and increasing to 40% over 45 minute at a flow rate of 300 nL per minute. After peptide elution, the column was flushed with 95% buffer B for 10 minutes and re-equilibrated with 95% buffer A (0.1% (v/v) formic acid) for 12 minutes before next sample injection. The peptides were analysed in the positive ion nanoflow electrospray mode in an information dependent acquisition (IDA) mode.  TOF-MS survey scan was acquired at m/z 350-1500 with 0.25 second accumulation time, with the ten most intense precursor ions (2+ - 5+; counts  > 150) in the survey scan consecutively isolated for subsequent automated  measurement of their corresponding product ions. Dynamic exclusion was used with a 20 seconds and 4 Da window. Product ion spectra were accumulated for 200 milliseconds in the mass range m/z 100-1500 with rolling collision energy.

### Data Protocol
The data were exported using ABSciexCommandDriver.exe (AB Sciex) in a format suitable for submission to the database search software Mascot Daemon (Matrix Science Ltd, London, UK). The search parameters were as follows: Variable modifications: Carbamidomethyl (C), Oxidation (M); Peptide tol. ±: 20 ppm; MS/MS tol. ±: 0.1 Da; Peptide charge: 2+ - 4+; Enzyme: Trypsin. A database was constructed based on transcripts obtained from the koala mammary gland (sequencing and assembly described below). A decoy database of reverse sequences was used to report 1% peptide FDR.

### Publication Abstract
Production of milk is a key characteristic of mammals, but the features of lactation vary greatly between monotreme, marsupial and eutherian mammals. Marsupials have a short gestation followed by a long lactation period, and milk constituents vary greatly across lactation. Marsupials are born immunologically na&#xef;ve and rely on their mother's milk for immunological protection. Koalas (Phascolarctos cinereus) are an iconic Australian species that are increasingly threatened by disease. Here we use a mammary transcriptome, two milk proteomes and the koala genome to comprehensively characterise the protein components of koala milk across lactation, with a focus on immune constituents. The most abundant proteins were well-characterised milk proteins, including &#x3b2;-lactoglobulin and lactotransferrin. In the mammary transcriptome, 851 immune transcripts were expressed, including immunoglobulins and complement components. We identified many abundant antimicrobial peptides, as well as novel proteins with potential antimicrobial roles. We discovered that marsupial VELP is an ortholog of eutherian Glycam1, and likely has an antimicrobial function in milk. We also identified highly-abundant koala endogenous-retrovirus sequences, identifying a potential transmission route from mother to young. Characterising the immune components of milk is key to understanding protection of marsupial young, and the novel immune compounds identified may have applications in clinical research.

### Keywords
Marsupials, Koala milk, Proteomic, Transcriptomic, Nanolc

### Affiliations
Faculty of Veterinary Science, University of Sydney, Camperdown, NSW, 2006, Australia
APAF

### Submitter
Thiri Zaw

### Lab Head
Dr Katherine Belov
Faculty of Veterinary Science, University of Sydney, Camperdown, NSW, 2006, Australia


