### Accession
PXD039588

### Title
Proteome profiling highlights mechanisms underlying pigment and tocopherol accumulation in red and black rice seeds

### Description
Rice is a major component of the human diet and feeds more than 50 million people across the globe. Therefore, efforts are being made to improve the nutritional quality of rice seeds in order to make a super-rice cultivar rich in antioxidants and vitamins. We previously developed two rice cultivars, Super-hongmi (red seeds) and Super-jami (black seeds), that were highly rich in antioxidants and exhibited high levels of radical scavenging activities. However, the molecular mechanism underlying the color development and accumulation of different antioxidants in these rice cultivars remains largely elusive. Here, we report the proteome profiles of mature Super-hongmi, and Super-jami seeds and compared with the Hopum (white seeds) using a label-free quantitative proteomics approach. This approach led to the identification of 5127 rice seed proteins of which 1628 showed significant changes (ANOVA, Benjamini-Hochberg FDR ≤ 0.01, fold change ≥ 1.5). Functional annotation of the differentially modulated proteins led to the identification of a phytoene desaturase (PDS3) that was highly enriched in the red seeds and was decreased in the black seeds as compared to the control white seeds. PDS3 is involved in the conversion of phytoene to ζ-carotene which may be responsible for the accumulation of red color in red seeds. Moreover, black seeds seem to accumulate higher levels of anthocyanins because of the higher abundance of dihydroflavonol 4-reductase. In addition, proteins associated with lignin and tocopherol biosynthesis were found to be highly increased in both red and black cultivars. Taken together, these data report the seed proteome of three different colored rice seeds and identify novel components associated with pigment accumulation.

### Sample Protocol
Specification of Samples and Total Protein Extraction For protein extraction, 1 g of dried seed powder (and finely powdered in liquid nitrogen) from white (Hopum), red (superhongmi), and black (superjami) rice seeds was homogenized in 10 mL of Tris-Mg/NP-40 buffer [0.5 M Tris-HCl (pH 8.3), 2% (v/v) NP-40, 20 mM MgCl2) followed by centrifugation at 12,000× g for 15 min at 4 °C. Supernatant so obtained was subjected to TCA-acetone precipitation method followed by final washing of pellet with 80% acetone containing 0.07% β-mercaptoethanol.  Sample Preparation and LC-MS/MS for Proteome Analysis For proteome analysis, protein pellets after TCA-acetone precipitation were dissolved in the SDT-lysis buffer containing 4% SDS, 100 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.6 and 0.1 M DTT. After sonication for 1 min, samples were incubated at 95 °C for 30 min after which these were allowed to cool at room temperature for 15 min and protein concentration in each sample was measured by 2D-Quant kit (GE Healthcare) following manufacturer’s protocol. A total of 100 μg of proteins from each sample was used for trypsin digestion by filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method as described earlier and peptides so obtained were quantified using PierceTM Quantitative Fluorometric Peptide Assay (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) following manufacturer’s protocol. Peptides, thus obtained, were desalted using Oasis® HLB 1cc (360 mg) solid-phase extraction (SPE) cartridge (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) following manufacturer’s instructions, and the final eluate was lyophilized. Consequently, dried peptides were fractionated using a basic pH reversed-phase (BRPR) chromatography as reported previously. The dried peptides were reconstituted in 200 μL of loading solution (15 mM Ammonium formate, 2% ACN) and loaded onto stage-tip prepared by packing C18 Empore disk membranes (3M, Bracknell, UK) at the bottom and POROS 20 R2 reversed phase resin into 200 μL yellow tip. Prior to loading the peptides, the stage-tips were conditioned with 100% methanol, 100% ACN and equilibrated with the loading solution. The peptides were loaded and 3 fractions were subsequently eluted with pH 10 buffer solution series containing 5, 10, 15, 20, 25, 30, 35, 40, 60, 80, and 100% ACN. Finally, 3 fractions were lyophilized and used for LC-MS/MS analysis.  Q-Exactive MS Analysis Lyophilized peptides were dissolved again in solvent-A (water/ACN, 98:2 v/v; 0.1% formic acid) and separated by reversed-phase chromatography using a UHPLC Dionex UltiMate® 3000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) instrument. For trapping the sample, the UHPLC was equipped with Acclaim PepMap 100 trap column (100 μm × 2 cm, nanoViper C18, 5 μm, 100 Å) and subsequently washed with 98% solvent A for 6 min at a flow rate of 6 μL/min. The sample was continuously separated on an Acclaim PepMap 100 capillary column (75 μm × 15 cm, nanoViper C18, 3 μm, 100 Å) at a flow rate of 400 nL/min. The LC analytical gradient was run at 2% to 35% solvent B (100% ACN and 0.1% formic acid) over 90 min, then 35% to 95% over 10 min, followed by 90% solvent B for 5 min, and finally 5% solvent B for 15 min. Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) was coupled with an electrospray ionization source to the quadrupole-based mass spectrometer QExactive™ Orbitrap High-Resolution Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Resulting peptides were electro-sprayed through a coated silica emitted tip (Scientific Instrument Service, Amwell Township, NJ, USA) at an ion spray voltage of 2000 eV. The MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 (200 m/z) in a mass range of 350–1650 m/z. The automatic gain control (AGC) target value was 3 × 106 and the isolation window for MS/MS was 1.2 m/z. Eluted samples were used for MS/MS events (resolution of 35,000), measured in a data-dependent mode for the 15 most abundant peaks (Top15 method), in the high mass accuracy Orbitrap after ion activation/dissociation with Higher Energy C-trap Dissociation (HCD) at 32 collision energy in a 100–1650 m/z mass range. The maximum ion injection time for the survey scan and MS/MS scan was 30 ms and 120 ms, respectively.

### Data Protocol
The acquired MS data were analyzed with MaxQuant (ver. 1.5.3.30). MS/MS spectra were searched with the integrated Andromeda search engine against the Oryza sativa database (NCBI-taxonomy ID 4530, 442,060 entries) database downloaded from Phytozome and 248 common contaminant proteins. Trypsin specificity was required and a maximum of two missed cleavages allowed. Minimal peptide length was set to seven amino acids. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as fixed, oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. Allowed mass deviation was 4.5 ppm for peptides and 20 ppm for fragments. Label-free quantification (LFQ) data were processed using the default precursor mass tolerances set by Andromeda with mass deviation was 4.5 ppm for peptides and 20 ppm for fragments with enabled stabilization of large LFQ ratios and LFQ normalization study. The LFQ data were searched based on 0.5 Da of a product mass tolerance with a maximum of two missed cleavages allowed. Minimal peptide length was set to seven amino acids. Peptide-spectrum matches and proteins were retained if they were below a false discovery rate of 1%. Statistical analyses were carried out using Perseus software (ver. 1.5.8.5). Hits were only retained if they were quantified in at least two of the three replicates in at least one experiment. The missing value imputation of protein intensities was performed from a normal distribution (width: 0.3, down shift: 1.8). Multiple sample test (ANOVA), controlled by the Benjamini–Hochberg FDR threshold of 0.01, was applied to identify significant differences in the protein abundance.

### Publication Abstract
Rice is a major component of the human diet and feeds more than 50 million people across the globe. We previously developed two pigmented rice cultivars, Super-hongmi (red seeds) and Super-jami (black seeds), that are highly rich in antioxidants and exhibit high levels of radical scavenging activities. However, the molecular mechanism underlying the accumulation of pigments and different antioxidants in these rice cultivars remains largely elusive. Here, we report the proteome profiles of mature Super-hongmi and Super-jami seeds, and compared them with the Hopum (white seeds) using a label-free quantitative proteomics approach. This approach led to the identification of 5127 rice seed proteins of which 1628 showed significant changes in the pigmented rice cultivar(s). The list of significantly modulated proteins included a phytoene desaturase (PDS3) which suggested accumulation of &#x3b6;-carotene in red seeds while the black seeds seem to accumulate more of anthocyanins because of the higher abundance of dihydroflavonol 4-reductase. Moreover, proteins associated with lignin and tocopherol biosynthesis were highly increased in both red and black cultivars. Taken together, these data report the seed proteome of three different colored rice seeds and identify novel components associated with pigment accumulation in rice.

### Keywords
Seeds, Proteomics, Pigmented seeds, Rice

### Affiliations
Pusan National University, Miryang, South Korea
Pusan National University

### Submitter
Sun Tae Kim

### Lab Head
Dr Sun Tae Kim
Pusan National University, Miryang, South Korea


