### Accession
PXD031644

### Title
quantitative crosslinking of ADP treated mitochondria isolated from HEK293 cells

### Description
Acute treatment of isolated mitochondria with 1.5 mM ADP. Crosslinking and quantitative comparison to non-treated control using iqPIR technology for quantitative crosslinking.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293 cells were grown in DMEM media supplemented with 3.5 mg/L glucose, 10% fetal bovine serum, 1% penicillin and streptomycin to confluency. The plates were washed with PBS, cells detached using EDTA 20 mM (?), centrifuged and washed twice in MgCl2. Cells were then resuspended in ice-cold mitochondrial isolation buffer (70 mM sucrose, 220 mM D-mannitol, 5 mM MOPS, 1.6 mM carnitine, 1 mM EDTA at pH 7.4) and homogenized in glass homogenizer. The homogenate was centrifuged at 600 g for 5 min at 4 C. The supernatant was transferred to a 15 mL tube and centrifuged at 8000 g for 10 min at 4 C. The supernatant was then removed, and mitochondrial pellet was resuspended in 5 mL of mitochondrial isolation buffer and centrifuged at 8000 g for 10 min. Mitochondrial pellet was then resuspended in 200 uL of mitochondrial isolation buffer and split into two. ADP was added to one vial to a final concentration of 1.5 mM. Both samples were incubated at RT for 10 min with shaking. Supernatant was then removed by centrifugation and pellets were resuspended in crosslinking buffer. RH iqPIR crosslinker and ADP was added to ADP treated sample to final concentrations of 10 and 1.5 mM respectively. SH iqPIR crosslinker was added to control sample to a final concentration of 10 mM. The crosslinlking reaction was allowed to proceed for 30 min at RT with shaking. Crosslinking buffer was then removed by centrifugation and mitochondrial pellets were lysed in 8M urea. Proteins were reduced with TCEP (30 min RT with shaking) and alkylated with IAA (30 min RT with shaking). Protein concentration of each mitochondrial sample was measured with Bradford assay using Cytation plate reader. Samples were mixed pairwise (one old and one young) using equal amount of protein from each sample making 4 biological replicates total. Protein mixtures were digested with trypsin overnight (1:100 trypsin concentration at 37 C with shaking). Peptides were then acidified with TFA and cleaned using seppak c18 columns (Waters). Peptides were separated using SCX chromatography (Luna column, Agilent HPLC) into 14 fractions and fractions were pooled together as following: fractions 1 to 5, fractions 6 and 7, fraction 8, fraction 9, fraction10, fractions 11 to 14. Pooled fractions were dried in a SpeedVac and resuspended in ammonium bicarbonate buffer; pH was adjusted to 8.0 with NaOH. Biotinylated crosslinked peptides were captured with monomeric avidin (ThermoFisher Scientific 20228) for 30 min at RT with shaking. The beads were washed with ammonium bicarbonate and peptides were eluted with 0.1% formic acid in 70% ACN, dried down by vacuum centrifuation and resuspended in 20 uL of 0.1% formic acid.

### Data Protocol
4 uL of each pooled fraction was loaded on a 60 cm C8 heated column and separated on 2 hour gradient on nanoAcquity HPLC system (Waters) and analyzed with QExactive Plus mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). MS1 scans were analyzed at 70K resolution with AGC target 1e6, and maximum ion time 100 ms. Top 5 peaks with charge 4 or greater were selected for HCD fragmentation with NCE 30 and MS2 spectra were collected at 70K resolution, 5e4 AGC target, and 300 ms maximum ion time. Raw files were converted to mzXML, and spectra containing crosslinked peptides were determined with Mango software. These spectra were then searched against mouse Mitocarta 2.0 database62 using Comet63 search engine and crosslinked peptides were validated with XLinkProphet.64 Identified cross-links were quantified using iqPIR algorithm15 and results were uploaded to XLinkDB database. Log2 ratios and associated p-values based on the Student’s t-test on each quantified ion for every crosslink were downloaded from XLinKDB and correlation plots between biological replicates, density plots for each replicate and volcano plot indicating significantly changed cross-links were generated in R using tidyverse package.66 Heatmap of of all common cross-links was generated for cross-links quantified with 95% confidence less than 0.5 in all 4 biological replicates using NG-CHM builder web application.67 Heat maps for cross-links in specific proteins or proteins complexes were generated in XLinkDB. Cross-links were mapped on available structures with either Euclidean distances or SASD distances calculated by Jwalk.

### Publication Abstract
Chemical cross-linking of proteins in complex samples, cells, or even tissues is emerging to provide unique structural information on proteins and complexes that exist within native or nativelike environments. The public database XLinkDB automatically maps cross-links to available structures based on sequence homology. Structures most likely to reflect protein conformations in the cross-linked sample are routinely identified by having cross-linked residues separated by Euclidean distances within the maximum span of the applied cross-linker. Solvent accessible surface distance (SASD), which considers the accessibility of the cross-linked residues and the path connecting them, is a better predictor of consistency than the Euclidean distance. However, SASDs of structures are not publicly available, and their calculation is computationally intensive. Here, we describe in XLinkDB version 4.0 the automatic calculation of SASDs using Jwalk for all cross-links mapped to structures, both with and without regard to ligands, and derive empirical maximum SASD spans for BDP-NHP and DSSO cross-linkers of 51 and 43 &#xc5;, respectively. We document ligands proximal to cross-links in structures and demonstrate how SASDs can be used to help infer sample protein conformations and ligand occupancy, highlighting cross-links sensitive to ADP binding in mitochondria isolated from HEK293 cells.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Hek293, Qxl-ms

### Affiliations
University of Washington
Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington

### Submitter
Anna Bakhtina

### Lab Head
Dr James Bruce
Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington


