### Accession
PXD046444

### Title
Ultra-fast label-free quantification and
comprehensive proteome coverage
with narrow-window data-independent
acquisition.Three mix species

### Description
Mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics aims to characterize comprehensive proteomes in a fast and reproducible manner. Here, we present an ultra-fast scanning data-independent acquisition (DIA) strategy consisting on 2-Th precursor isolation windows, dissolving the differences between data-dependent and independent methods. This is achieved by pairing a Quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer with the asymmetric track lossless (Astral) analyzer that provides >200 Hz MS/MS scanning speed, high resolving power and sensitivity, as well as low ppm-mass accuracy. Narrowwindow DIA enables profiling of up to 100 full yeast proteomes per day, or ~10,000 human proteins in half-an-hour. Moreover, multi-shot acquisition of fractionated samples allows comprehensive coverage of human proteomes in ~3h, showing comparable depth to next-generation RNA sequencing and with 10x higher throughput compared to current state-of-the-art MS. High quantitative precision and accuracy is demonstrated with high peptide coverage in a 3-species proteome mixture, quantifying 14,000+ proteins in a single run in half-an-hour.

### Sample Protocol
Yeast and human cell lines were digested overnight using the protein aggregation capture *(PAC) protocol. The proteolytic digestion was performed by addition of LysC and trypsin enzymes 1:500 and 1:250 protein ratio respectively. The samples were incubated at 37 °C overnight. The digestion was quenched by the addition of tri-fluoro acetic acid acid to final concentration of 1%. Peptide mixtures from human cell lines were further concentrated on SepPaks (C18 Vac C18 Cartridge, 1cc/50 mg 55–105 μm Waters, Milford, MA). Final peptide concentration was estimated by measuring absorbance at 280 nm on a NanoDrop 2000C spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The resulting peptide mixtures from yeast were desalted by Stage-tips, eluted and finally dried down using a speedvac vacuum concentrator. The protein digests from the mixed species for the LFQ analysis were purchased from Pierce™ for HeLa (Cat# 88328), Promega for yeast (V7461), and WatersTM for E.coli (SKU: 186003196). They were mixed manually in six different ratios, E5-H50-Y45, E10-H50-Y40, E20-H50-Y30, E30-H50-Y20, E40-H50-Y10 and E45-H50-Y5, respectively. Samples were kept at -20 °C until further use. For the DIA experiments, the Orbitrap Astral MS was operated at a full MS resolution of 180,000 or 240,000 with a full scan range of 380 − 980 m/z when stated. The full MS AGC was set to 500%. Fragment ion scans were recorded at a resolution of 80,000 and maxIT of 2.5 ms. 300 windows of 2-Th scanning from 380-980 m/z were used, unless stated otherwise. The isolated ions were fragmented using HCD with 25% NCE.

### Data Protocol
Raw files from single-shot dilution series of HEK peptides, window optimization, fractionation and clinical samples were analyzed in Spectronaut v17 (Biognosys) with a library-free approach (directDIA+) using the human reference database (Uniprot 2022 release, 20,588 sequences) complemented with common contaminants (246 sequences). Cysteine carbamylation was set as a fixed modification, whereas methionine oxidation and protein N-termini acetylation were set as variable modifications. Precursor filtering was set as Q-value, cross run normalization was unchecked. Each experiment was analyzed separately, and those that contained different experimental conditions (different input amounts or acquisition methods) were search enabling method evaluation and indicating the different conditions (each one with n=3 experimental replicates) in the condition setup tab. Raw files from single-shot analysis of different gradients were analyzed in Spectronaut v18 (Biognosys) using a library-free approach (directDIA+) using same parameteres as above. Raw files from LFQ analysis of the mixed species samples were analyzed in Spectronaut v17 (Biognosys) using a library-free approach (directDIA+) using a benchmark reference database for the three species (31,657 sequences in total). Raw files from DIA and DDA comparison experiments were analyzed in DIA-NN 18.1 using an in-silico DIA-NN predicted spectral library (4299848 precursors, allowing for C carbamidomethylation and N-term M excision and 1 missed cleavage). The spectral library was generated from a human reference database (Uniprot 2022 release, 20,588 sequences).

### Publication Abstract
Mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics aims to characterize comprehensive proteomes in a fast and reproducible manner. Here we present the narrow-window data-independent acquisition (nDIA) strategy consisting of high-resolution MS1 scans with parallel tandem MS (MS/MS) scans of ~200&#x2009;Hz using 2-Th isolation windows, dissolving the differences between data-dependent and -independent methods. This is achieved by pairing a quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer with the asymmetric track lossless (Astral) analyzer which provides &gt;200-Hz MS/MS scanning speed, high resolving power and sensitivity, and low-ppm mass accuracy. The nDIA strategy enables profiling of &gt;100 full yeast proteomes per day, or 48 human proteomes per day at the depth of ~10,000 human protein groups in half-an-hour or ~7,000 proteins in 5&#x2009;min, representing 3&#xd7; higher coverage compared with current state-of-the-art MS. Multi-shot acquisition of offline fractionated samples provides comprehensive coverage of human proteomes in ~3&#x2009;h. High quantitative precision and accuracy are demonstrated in a three-species proteome mixture, quantifying 14,000+ protein groups in a single half-an-hour run.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Dia, Astral

### Affiliations
Professor, Deputy Head of Centre Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research University of Copenhagen Copenhagen, DENMARK
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research

### Submitter
Ulises H Guzman 

### Lab Head
Dr Jesper V
Professor, Deputy Head of Centre Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research University of Copenhagen Copenhagen, DENMARK


