### Accession
PXD045237

### Title
Multi-omic profiling of pathogen-stimulated primary immune cells

### Description
Objectives:  To perform long-read transcriptome and proteome profiling of pathogen-stimulated peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) from healthy donors. We aim to discover new transcripts and protein isoforms expressed during immune responses to diverse pathogens.  Methods:  PBMCs were exposed to four microbial stimuli for 24 hours: the TLR4 ligand lipopolysaccharide (LPS), the TLR3 ligand Poly(I:C), heat-inactivated Staphylococcus aureus, Candida albicans, and RPMI medium as negative controls. Long-read sequencing (PacBio) of one donor and secretome proteomics and short-read sequencing of five donors were performed. IsoQuant was used for transcriptome construction, Metamorpheus/FlashLFQ for proteome analysis, and Illumina short-read 3’-end mRNA sequencing for transcript quantification.  Results: Long-read transcriptome profiling reveals the expression of novel sequences and isoform switching induced upon pathogen stimulation, including transcripts that are difficult to detect using traditional short-read sequencing. We observe widespread loss of intron retention as a common result of all pathogen stimulations. We highlight novel transcripts of NFKB1 and CASP1 that may indicate novel immunological mechanisms. In general, RNA expression differences did not result in differences in the amounts of secreted proteins. Interindividual differences in the proteome were larger than the differences between stimulated and unstimulated PBMCs. Clustering analysis of secreted proteins revealed a correlation between chemokine (receptor) expression on the RNA and protein levels in C. albicans- and Poly(I:C)-stimulated PBMCs.   Conclusion: Isoform aware long-read sequencing of pathogen-stimulated immune cells highlights the potential of these methods to identify novel transcripts, revealing a more complex transcriptome landscape than previously appreciated.

### Sample Protocol
Ex vivo PBMC experiments Venous blood was drawn from five healthy donors5 and collected in 10mL EDTA tubes. Isolation of peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) was conducted as described elsewhere25. In brief, PBMCs were obtained from blood by differential density centrifugation over Ficoll gradient (Cytiva, Ficoll-Paque Plus, Sigma-Aldrich) after 1:1 dilution in PBS. Cells were washed twice in saline and re-suspended in serum-free cell culture medium (Roswell Park Memorial Institute (RPMI) 1640, Gibco) supplemented with 50 mg/mL gentamicin, 2 mM L-glutamine and 1 mM pyruvate. Cells were counted using a particle counter (Beckmann Coulter, Woerden, The Netherlands) after which the concentration was adjusted to 5 × 106/mL. Ex vivo PBMC stimulations were performed with 5×105 cells/well in round-bottom 96-well plates (Greiner Bio-One, Kremsmünster, Austria) for 24 hours at 37°C and 5% carbon dioxide. Cells were treated with lipopolysaccharide (E. coli LPS, 10 ng/mL), Staphylococcus aureus (ATCC25923 heat-killed, 1×106/mL), TLR3 ligand Poly I:C (10 µg/mL), Candida albicans yeast (UC820 heat-killed, 1×106/mL), or left untreated in regular RPMI medium as normal control. After the incubation period of 24h and centrifugation, supernatants were collected and stored at -80°C until further processing. For the RNA isolation, cells were stored in 350 µL RNeasy Lysis Buffer (Qiagen, Rneasy Mini Kit, Cat nr. 74104) at −80°C until further processing.  RNA and protein isolation RNA was isolated from the samples using the RNeasy RNA isolation kit (Qiagen) according to the protocol supplied by the manufacturer. The RNA integrity of the isolated RNA was examined using the TapeStation HS D1000 (Agilent), and was found to be ≥7.5 for all samples.  Accurate determination of the RNA concentration was performed using the Qubit (ThermoFisher).  We extracted the secretome of the 24 hour stimulated PBMCs. To 250 µl of supernatant, 250 µl buffer containing 10% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) and 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), pH 8.5 was added. Proteins were reduced by addition of 5 mM dithiothreitol and incubation for 30 minutes at 55˚C and then alkylated by addition of 10 mM iodoacetamide and incubation for 15 minutes at RT in the dark. Phosphoric acid was added to a final concentration of 1.2% and subsequently samples were diluted 7-fold with binding buffer containing 90% methanol in 100 mM TEAB, pH 7.55. The samples were loaded on a 96-well S-TrapTM plate (Protifi) in parts of 400 µl, placed on top of a deepwell plate, and centrifuged for 2 min at 1,500 x g at RT. After protein binding, the S-trapTM plate was washed three times by adding 200 µl binding buffer and centrifugation for 2 min at 1,500 x g at RT. A new deepwell receiver plate was placed below the 96-well S-TrapTM plate and 125 µl 50 mM TEAB containing 1 µg of trypsin was added for digestion overnight at 37°C. Using centrifugation for 2 min at 1,500 x g, peptides were eluted in three times, first with 80 µl 50 mM TEAB, then with 80 µl 0.2% formic acid (FA) in water and finally with 80 µl 0.2% FA in water/acetonitrile (can) (50/50, v/v). Eluted peptides were dried completely by vacuum centrifugation.  LC-MS/MS analysis Peptides were re-dissolved in 20 µl loading solvent A (0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in water/acetonitrile) (98:2, v/v)) of which 4 µl was injected for LC-MS/MS analysis on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system in-line connected to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo). Trapping was performed at 10 μl/min for 4 min in loading solvent A on a 20 mm trapping column (made in-house, 100 μm internal diameter (I.D.), 5 μm beads, C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch, Germany).   The peptides were separated on a 250 mm Waters nanoEase M/Z HSS T3 Column, 100Å, 1.8 µm, 75 µm inner diameter (Waters Corporation) kept at a constant temperature of 45°C. Peptides were eluted by a non-linear gradient starting at 1% MS solvent B reaching 33% MS solvent B (0.1% formic acid (FA) in water/acetonitrile (2:8, v/v)) in 100 min, 55% MS solvent B (0.1% FA in water/acetonitrile (2:8, v/v)) in 135 min, 97% MS solvent B in 145 minutes followed by a 5-minute wash at 97% MS solvent B and re-equilibration with MS solvent A (0.1% FA in water).   The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 16 most abundant ion peaks per MS spectrum. Full-scan MS spectra (375-1500 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 in the Orbitrap analyzer after accumulation to a target value of 3,000,000. The 16 most intense ions above a threshold value of 15,000 were isolated with a width of 1.5 m/z for fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 28% after filling the trap at a target value of 100,000 for maximum 80 ms. MS/MS spectra (200-2000 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 15,000 in the Orbitrap analyzer.

### Data Protocol
Two search databases were constructed; one database for proteoform detection and one database for quantification. The database used for sensitive detection of proteoforms was generated using a slightly adapted version of the Long Read Proteogenomics pipeline by Miller et al40. Since the pipeline uses a different long-read transcriptomics tool, small syntax adjustments were made to accommodate the use of Isoquant output. Additionally, a custom script was written to have Isoquant output mimic the required input format. The pipeline generated a GENCODE-PacBio hybrid database. The proteome from C. albicans (taxon ID 5476) and S. aureus (taxon ID 1280) were downloaded from UniProt and added to the search database. The search database used for quantification was created by downloading the proteome from H. sapiens (taxon ID 9609), C. albicans (taxon ID 5476) and S. aureus (taxon ID 1280) from UniProt. Metamorpheus default contaminants were added to both search databases. Mass spectra were identified using Metamorpheus v1.0.041. Quantification was performed using FlashLFQ v 1.2.4.29442 with all five individuals set as biological replicates and the two control (RPMI) samples per individual set as technical replicates. The following options enabled: normalization, shared peptide quantification, Bayesian fold change analysis, and match between runs (Supplemental table 2). An adapted version of SQANTI protein was used to search for novel peptides in the Metamorpheus identifications. Enrichment of secreted proteins was determined using the predicted secreted proteins from Human protein atlas43 as reference.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Stimulation, Pathogen, Immunity, Pbmc

### Affiliations
Professor of Bioinformatics Medical BioSciences department Radboud university medical center P.O.Box 9101, 6500 HB Nijmegen (huispost 260) The Netherlands
Radboudumc

### Submitter
Renee Salz

### Lab Head
Dr Peter-Bram 't Hoen
Professor of Bioinformatics Medical BioSciences department Radboud university medical center P.O.Box 9101, 6500 HB Nijmegen (huispost 260) The Netherlands


