### Accession
PXD019381

### Title
An anatomic proteomic atlas of human glioblastoma

### Description
Glioblastoma (GBM) is an aggressive form of brain cancer with well-established patterns of intra-tumoral heterogeneity implicated in treatment resistance, recurrence and progression. While the regional and single cell-level genetic variation of GBM have been recently resolved, downstream phenotype-level proteomic programs have yet to be assigned to specific niches. Here, we leverage laser capture microdissection and mass spectrometry-based proteomics to assign 4794 proteins to GBM’s hallmark histomorphologic niches across 20 patients. Importantly, this analysis defined 1360 regionally enriched proteins, including 502 which are proteogenomically concordant. We validate a subset of identified niche-specific markers using orthogonal immunohistochemical approaches and make the associated atlas publicly available as an online resource (https://www.brainproteinatlas.org/dash/apps/GPA). Spatial resolution of the molecular landscape of GBM, operational at the protein level, aims to further facilitate and refine our biological understanding and treatment approaches for this aggressive disease.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation For proteomic analysis, 50 μL of 1% Rapigest™ (Waters Corp.) was added to each sample and stored overnight at 4oC. 200 μL of a solution including dithiothreitol (8 mM), ammonium bicarbonate (50 mM) and tris-HCl (200 mM) was added to each sample. The samples were then sonicated on high with 30 second intervals using a Bioruptor Plus (Diagenode) for 30 mins on high. Solutions were then centrifuged at 12,000 x g for 10 mins and the supernatant was collected. The supernatant was then heated to 95oC for 45 mins followed by 80oC for 90 mins using a ThermoMixer (Eppendorf). For alkylation, 20 μL of iodoacetamide (300 mM) was added to each solution in the absence of light. 1 μg of trypsin / Lys-C mix (Promega) was added to each sample and left to react overnight at 37oC and acidified with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) at a final concentration of 1% prior to stagetip cleanup step.

### Data Protocol
Statistical Analysis Mass spectrometry raw data files were processed using MaxQuant Andromeda search engine (www.coxdocs.org) against the Human Swissprot protein database (July, 2019 version). Analysis of proteomic data was performed using a variety of biostatistical platforms Perseus (www.coxdocs.org), R (www.r-project.org), Orange (https://orange.biolab.si/) and GSEA (https://www.gsea-msigdb.org/gsea/index.jsp). Based on the number of proteins identified by MS/MS and the total number of proteins identified, cook’s distance and leverage analysis were then performed using R scripts to identify outliers. To average the technical replicates for PCA and heatmap analysis (Fig 2 B-D), values were averaged except when one value was missing from a technical replicate in which the non-zero numerical value was taken. Proteins were filtered such that only those that appeared in at least 60% within a group were included. The raw values were Log2 transformed and non-valid values were imputed. Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) was used to define pathways enriched in each anatomical niche. These pathways were then used in custom R scripts to filter and visualize unique and common pathways associated with each anatomical niche. Differential expression matrix analysis utilized all samples and was performed using a custom R script to generate lists of genes that are differentially expressed against other regions when average values are greater than the comparison group and statistically significant (p < 0.01). The genes identified as markers were common across all comparisons. Boxplots were generated using (https://www.brainproteinatlas.org/dash/apps/GPA) and points include all samples.

### Publication Abstract
Glioblastoma is an aggressive form of brain cancer with well-established patterns of intra-tumoral heterogeneity implicated in treatment resistance and progression. While regional and single cell transcriptomic variations of glioblastoma have been recently resolved, downstream phenotype-level proteomic programs have yet to be assigned across glioblastoma's hallmark histomorphologic niches. Here, we leverage mass spectrometry to spatially align abundance levels of 4,794 proteins to distinct histologic patterns across 20 patients and propose diverse molecular programs operational within these regional tumor compartments. Using machine learning, we overlay concordant transcriptional information, and define two distinct proteogenomic programs, MYC- and KRAS-axis hereon, that cooperate with hypoxia to produce a tri-dimensional model of intra-tumoral heterogeneity. Moreover, we highlight differential drug sensitivities and relative chemoresistance in glioblastoma cell lines with enhanced KRAS programs. Importantly, these pharmacological differences are less pronounced in transcriptional glioblastoma subgroups suggesting that this model may provide insights for targeting heterogeneity and overcoming therapy resistance.

### Keywords
Anatomical niches, Glioblastoma, Lc-ms/ms, Laser capture microdissection

### Affiliations
University Health Network, Princess Margaret Hospital
Mt. Sinai Hospital

### Submitter
Ugljesa Djuric

### Lab Head
Dr Phedias Diamandis
University Health Network, Princess Margaret Hospital


