### Accession
PXD000272

### Title
Low abundance of the matrix arm of complex I in the mitochondria predicts longevity

### Description
The mouse liver mitochondrial proteome was analysed in four different mouse groups (allocation of the samples to Exp1 and Exp2 in brackets): AL (ad libitum fed) C57Bl6 (Exp1 129, Exp1 130, Exp2 130), DR (dietary restriction) C57Bl6 (Exp1 126, Exp1 127, Exp1 128), AL ICRFa (Exp2 128, Exp2 129) and old ICRFa (Exp2 126, Exp2 127). To achieve quantitative standardisation between Exp1 and Exp2, all 10 samples were pooled and one portion of the pool was anlaysed in each Exp (Exp1 131 and Exp2 131).  Following tryptic digest and TMT 6-plex labelling, samples were separated by OffGel electrophoresis and all fractions were subsequently analysed by LCMSMS on an Orbitrap LTQ XL. One survey scan (res. 30,000) was followed by a high energy HCD scan (res. 6000) and a low energy CID scan in the LTQ. HCD data were used for the quantitation and CID data for the identification of peptides.  Data were searched using Mascot (v. 2.2) through the Proteome Discoverer interface. Peptide raw quantitations were extracted as text files and further processed using dpeaqms (http://r-forge.r-project.org/projects/dpeaqms/) to obtain probability values for the differences in protein amounts for specific proteins between the different animal groups.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
Mitochondrial function is an important determinant of the ageing process; however, the mitochondrial properties that enable longevity are not well understood. Here we show that optimal assembly of mitochondrial complex I predicts longevity in mice. Using an unbiased high-coverage high-confidence approach, we demonstrate that electron transport chain proteins, especially the matrix arm subunits of complex I, are decreased in young long-living mice, which is associated with improved complex I assembly, higher complex I-linked state 3 oxygen consumption rates and decreased superoxide production, whereas the opposite is seen in old mice. Disruption of complex I assembly reduces oxidative metabolism with concomitant increase in mitochondrial superoxide production. This is rescued by knockdown of the mitochondrial chaperone, prohibitin. Disrupted complex I assembly causes premature senescence in primary cells. We propose that lower abundance of free catalytic complex I components supports complex I assembly, efficacy of substrate utilization and minimal ROS production, enabling enhanced longevity.

### Keywords
Mus musculus, Mitochondria, Mouse, Liver, Ageing, Tmt, Quantitative

### Affiliations
NUPPA

### Submitter
Achim Treumann

### Lab Head


