### Accession
PXD011736

### Title
Folliculin regulates mTORC1/2 and WNT pathways in early human pluripotency

### Description
Using co-immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry analysis we identify unique FLCN binding partners. The interactions of FLCN with components of the mTOR pathway (mTORC1 and mTORC2) reveal a mechanism of FLCN function during exit from naïve pluripotency.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitated proteins were suspended in 1M urea, 50mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 7.8, and heated to 50C for 20min. Proteins were reduced with 2mM DTT, alkylated with 15mM iodoacetamide, and digested overnight with trypsin. The resulting peptides were desalted on Waters Sep-Pak C18 cartridges. Peptides were measured by nano-LC-MS/MS on a Fusion Orbitrap (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated online by reverse phase chromatography using a heated 50C 30cm C18 columns (75mm ID packed with Magic C18 AQ 3M /100 beads) in a 280min gradient (1% to 45% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid) separated at 250nl.min-1. The Fusion was operated in data-dependent mode with the following settings: 30000 resolution, 350-1500 m/z full scan, Top Speed 2 seconds, and an 1.8 m/z isolation window.

### Data Protocol
Identification and label free quantification of peptides was done with MaxQuant 1.5.7.4 using a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) against the human Swiss-Prot/TrEMB database downloaded from Uniprot on June 2nd, 2016. The databases contained forward and reverse human sequences as well as common contaminants. Peptides were searched using a match between run window of 2min, 5ppm mass error, a maximum of 2 missed cleavages, modification of cysteine residues (alkylation +57.0215 Da), methionine (oxidation +15.9949 Da) and acetylation of protein n-termini (+42.0106 Da). Proteins that were significantly regulated between conditions were identified using a permutation-based t-test (S1, FDR 5%) in Perseus 1.5.6. We analyzed two biological experiments with 3-4 technical replicates per condition.

### Publication Abstract
To reveal how cells exit human pluripotency, we designed a CRISPR-Cas9 screen exploiting the metabolic and epigenetic differences between na&#xef;ve and primed pluripotent cells. We identify the tumor suppressor, Folliculin(FLCN) as a critical gene required for the exit from human pluripotency. Here we show that FLCN Knock-out (KO) hESCs maintain the na&#xef;ve pluripotent state but cannot exit the state since the critical transcription factor TFE3 remains active in the nucleus. TFE3 targets up-regulated in FLCN KO exit assay are members of Wnt pathway and ESRRB. Treatment of FLCN KO hESC with a Wnt inhibitor, but not ESRRB/FLCN double mutant, rescues the cells, allowing the exit from the na&#xef;ve state. Using co-immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry analysis we identify unique FLCN binding partners. The interactions of FLCN with components of the mTOR pathway (mTORC1 and mTORC2) reveal a mechanism of FLCN function during exit from na&#xef;ve pluripotency.

### Keywords
Folliculin, Mtor

### Affiliations
University of Washington
Department of Biochemistry, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195, USA Institute for Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 98109, USA

### Submitter
Aaron Robitaille

### Lab Head
Dr Hannele Ruohola-Baker
Department of Biochemistry, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195, USA Institute for Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 98109, USA


