### Accession
PXD005323

### Title
iTRAQ-Based Quantitative Proteomic Analysis of Inhibitory Effects of Polysaccharides from Viscum coloratum (Kom.) Nakai on HepG2 Cells

### Description
Viscum coloratum (Kom.) Nakai is a variety of biological activities of medicinal plants, and the active component such as polysaccharides or alkaloids, also proved to have the effect of anti-tumor, anti-virus, anti-radiation, anti-oxidation and anti-infection. In this study, we examined the inhibition of three polysaccharide fractions from Viscum coloratum (Kom.) Nakai on HepG2 cells growth in a dose-dependent manner using CCK-8 kit assay, and flow cytometry analysis showed that VCP2 delayed cell cycle in G1 phase and induced apoptosis in HepG2 cells which may due to overexpressed p21Wafl/Cip1 and Cyclin D and decreased expressions of Cyclin E and CDK4, and the upregulated Bad, Smac and Caspase-3 and the downregulated Bcl-XL and XIAP may be one of reasons for inducing apoptosis in VCP2-treated HepG2 cells, but these effects may be not obviously related to Bad. Using iTRAQ and 2D-LC-MSMS, 113 differentially expressed proteins identified in normal and VCP2-treated HepG2 cells. Among them, the expressions of 59 proteins were upregulation, and the expressions of 54 proteins were downregulation. GO, pathways and PPI of differentially expressed proteins further analyzed in polysaccharides-treated HepG2 cells by bioinformatic approach. These findings widen our understanding the anti-tumor mechanisms of mistletoe polysaccharide and provide new clues for screening potent responsive protein to polysaccharides.

### Sample Protocol
HepG2 cells were cultured for 24 h in 6-well, and the concentration of 100 μg/mL VCP2 was added to 6-well with 2 mL in a 37℃, 5% CO2 and humidified incubator for 48 h, and DMEM was as the control group. Collected HepG2 cells and polysaccharides-treated HepG2 cells was washed twice by pre-cooling PBS. The extraction and the concentration of total protein were performed as described previously by WB assay. Total protein was separated by SDS-PAGE on 12% separating gel and 5% stacking gel. A total of 100 μg denatured proteins of each sample were dissolved using dissolution buffer and then reducing reagent and cysteine-blocking reagent were added into the solution to reductive alkylation. After being washed thrice by dissolution buffer, the samples were digested with trypsin. Finally, peptides were washed twice using dissolution buffer again and pooled for iTRAQ labeling according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Samples were labeled with the iTRAQ tags as follows: HepG2 (117 tag), HepG2 (118 tag), polysaccharides-treated HepG2 (119 tag), polysaccharides-treated HepG2 (121 tag) and then combined and vacuum-dried[补11]. The experiments were carried out in twice.The dried fraction of labeled peptides were dissolved by mobile phase A (5% acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1% formic acid (FA) in deionized water) and purified using a SCX column at a constant flow rate of 0.3 mL/min on Agilent 1200 HPLC (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA, USA) with a gradient from 2 to 25% phase B (90% ACN, 0.1% FA in deionized water) in 40 min, to 90% phase B in 10 min, maintained 90% phase B in 10 min, and 2% phase B in 5 min. Absorbances at 210 nm and 280 nm were monitored, a total of 10 fractions were collected and vacuum-dried. Subsequently, Peptides separation were performed by Nano-RPLC using an Eksigent nanoLC-Ultra™ 2D system (AB SCIEX). The sample fractions were loaded on a C18 precolumn (100 µm×3 cm，3 µm, 150 Å) and desalted for 10 min at a flow rate of 2 µL/min. And then the samples were loaded on a C18 reverse phase column (75 μm×15 cm，3 μm，120 Å，ChromXP Eksigent) with a gradient from 5 to 35% mobile phase B in 70 min.A TripleTOF5600 mass spectrometer (AB SCIEX, Foster City, CA, USA) under TripleTOF5600 system ﬁtted with Nanospray III source (AB SCIEX) and a pulled quartz tip as the emitter (New Objectives, MA) was used for all measurements. The parameters were set as follows: the spray voltage was 2.5 kV, the curtain gas was 30 PSI and the nebulizer gas was 5 PSI; the interface heater temperature was 150 ℃; mass spectra of were acquired in an information dependent analysis mode; survey scans were acquired in 250 ms and 35 product ions maximum were collected if these product ions exceeded a threshold of 150 counts/s with a 2+ to 5+ charge-state; the cycle time was 2.5 s; the normalized collision energy was applied to all precursor ions for collision-induced dissociation (CID); dynamic exclusion was set for 1/2 of peak width (18 s), and then the precursor ion exclusion (PIE) lists were used to minimize redundancy.

### Data Protocol
Protein quantification was also performed by ProteinPilot software (Versio 5.0, AB SCIEX) against Homo sapiens database using the Paragon algorithm. Protein identification was performed with methylmethanethiosulfonate (MMTS) selected for cysteine modification with iodoacetamide of emphasis on biological modifications, the false discovery rate (FDR) analysis was estimated using an automatic decoy database search strategy of the PSPEP Software (Proteomics System Performance Evaluation Pipeline Software, integrated in the ProteinPilot Software). The peptides of iTRAQ labeling were chosen for protein quantification with unique peptides during the search. Only peptides with global FDR ≤ 1% identified were considered for further analysis. The p-values were generated by ProteinPilot Software using the peptides used to quantitate the respective protein. Finally, FC was calculated as the average ratio of 119/117 and 118/121 for differentially expressed proteins, and samples of FC>2 or <0.5 and p<0.05 were considered to be significantly differentially expressed proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Viscum coloratum (Kom.) Nakai is one of active medicinal plants, and its active components, especially polysaccharides, have been shown to exhibit bioactivity. In this study, we examined the effects of three polysaccharide fractions from Viscum coloratum (Kom.) Nakai on HepG2 cell growth in a dose-dependent manner by using a CCK-8 assay kit. Flow cytometry analysis showed that VCP2 treatment delayed the cell cycle in the G1 phase and induced apoptosis in HepG2 cells, a result possibly due to the increased expression of p21<sup>Wafl/Cip1</sup> and Cyclin D and the decreased expression of Cyclin E and CDK4. The increased expression of Bad, Smac and Caspase-3 and the decreased expression of Bcl-XL and XIAP may be some of the reasons for the induction of apoptosis in VCP2-treated HepG2 cells. Through iTRAQ and 2D-LC-MSMS, 113 and 198 differentially expressed proteins were identified in normal and VCP2-treated HepG2 and Caco2 cells. The mRNA and protein levels of Histone H3.1, Cytoskeletal 9 and Vitronectin agreed with iTRAQ proteomic results. GO, pathways and the PPI of differentially expressed proteins were further analyzed. These findings broaden the understanding of the anti-tumor mechanisms of mistletoe polysaccharides and provide new clues for screening proteins that are responsive to polysaccharides.

### Keywords
Proteomic, Hepg2, Viscum coloratum, Itraq

### Affiliations
Shenyang argriculture University
Northeast forestry university

### Submitter
ZEPENG Yin

### Lab Head
Dr Yangyang Chai
Northeast forestry university


