### Accession
PXD032311

### Title
Analysis of the role of the proteome on lipid nanoparticle distribution

### Description
Analysis of the role of the proteome on lipid nanoparticle distribution

### Sample Protocol
Whole liver protein (from perfused liver) was generated using a Retch Mill, metal beads, and RIPA buffer, as published before in detail (Bartneck, M., et al. (2012). ACS Nano, 6, 8767-8777). Liver lysate samples were mixed with LDS loading buffer (NuPAGE) at a concentration of 50 µg total protein in a total volume of 20 µL and serum samples were diluted 20x in LDS loading buffer in a total volume of 20 µL. The samples were run briefly into  precast 4-12% Bis-Tris gels (Novex, ran for maximally 5 min at 100 V). The gel was stained with Biosafe Coomassie G-250 stain (Biorad) and after destaining with milliQ-H2O, the band containing all proteins was excised from gel. The gel band was sliced into small pieces, washed subsequently with 30% and 50% v/v acetonitrile in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (dissolved in milliQ-H2O), each incubated at RT for 30 min while mixing (500 rpm) and lastly with 100% acetonitrile for 5 min, before drying the gel pieces in an oven at 37 °C. The proteins were reduced with 20 μL 10 mM dithiothreitol (in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate dissolved in milliQ-H2O, 30 min, 55 °C) and alkylated with 20 μL 55 mM iodoacetamide (in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate dissolved in milliQ-H20, 30 min, in the dark at RT). The gel pieces were washed with 100% acetonitrile for 30 min while mixing (500 rpm) and dried in an oven at 37 °C) before overnight digestion with 30 μL trypsin (1:100 g/g, sequencing grade modified trypsin V5111, Promega) at 37 °C. The next day, the peptides were eluted from the gel pieces with 30 µL 75% v/v acetonitrile plus 5% v/v formic acid (incubation 20 min at RT, mixing 500 rpm). The elution fraction was diluted with 900 µL 0.1% v/v formic acid for cleanup with a C18-SPE column (SPE C18-Aq 50 mg/1mL, Gracepure). This column was conditioned with 2x1 mL acetonitrile plus 0.1% v/v formic acid, and re-equilibrated with 2x1 mL 0.1% v/v formic acid before application of the samples. The bound peptides were washed with 2x1mL 0.1% v/v formic acid and eluted with 2x0.4 mL 50% v/v acetonitrile plus 0.1% v/v formic acid. The eluted fractions were dried under vacuum and resuspended in 0.1% v/v formic acid to a final concentration of around 1 µg/µL total protein starting material.

### Data Protocol
Discovery mass spectrometric analyses were performed on a quadrupole orbitrap mass spectrometer equipped with a nano-electrospray ion source (Orbitrap Exploris 480, Thermo Scientific). Chromatographic separation of the peptides was performed by liquid chromatography (LC) on a nano-HPLC system (Ultimate 3000, Dionex) using a nano-LC column (Acclaim PepMapC100 C18, 75 µm x 50 cm, 2 µm, 100 Å, Dionex, buffer A: 0.1% v/v formic acid, dissolved in milliQ-H2O, buffer B: 0.1% v/v formic acid, dissolved in acetonitrile). In general, an equivalent of 1 µg total protein starting material from the liver lysates or 50 nL digested serum was injected using the µL-pickup method with buffer A as a transport liquid from a cooled autosampler (5 ˚C) and loaded onto a trap column (µPrecolumn cartridge, Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 5 µm, 100 Å, 300 µmx5 mm, Dionex). Peptides were separated on the nano-LC column using a linear gradient from 2-45% buffer B in 117 min at a flowrate of 300 nL/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode and data-independent acquisition mode (DIA) using isolation windows of 12 m/z with a precursor mass range of 300-1200. LC-MS raw data were processed with Spectronaut (version 15.6.211220.50606, Biognosys) using the standard settings of the directDIA workflow, with a mouse SwissProt database (www.uniprot.org, 17021 entries). For the quantification, local normalization was applied and the Q-value filtering was adjusted to the classical setting without imputing.

### Publication Abstract
Hepatic clearance of lipid nanoparticles (LNP) with encapsulated nucleic acids restricts their therapeutic applicability. Therefore, tools for regulating hepatic clearance are of high interest for nucleic acid delivery. To this end, this work employs wild-type (WT) and low-density lipoprotein receptor (Ldlr)<sup>-/-</sup> mice pretreated with either a leukotriene B4 receptor inhibitor (BLT1i) or a high-density lipoprotein receptor inhibitor (HDLRi) prior to the injection of siRNA-LNP. This work is able to demonstrate significantly increased hepatic uptake of siRNA-LNP by the BLT1i in Ldlr<sup>-/-</sup> mice by in vivo imaging and discover an induction of specific uptake-related proteins. Irrespective of the inhibitors and Ldlr deficiency, the siRNA-LNP induced RNA-binding and transport-related proteins in liver, including haptoglobin (HP) that is also identified as most upregulated serum protein. This work observes a downregulation of proteins functioning in hepatic detoxification and of serum opsonins. Most strikingly, the HDLRi reduces hepatic uptake and increases siRNA accumulation in spleen and myeloid immune cells of blood and liver. RNA sequencing demonstrates leukocyte recruitment by the siRNA-LNP and the HDLRi through induction of chemokine ligands in liver tissue. The data provide insights into key mechanisms of siRNA-LNP biodistribution and indicate that the HDLRi has potential for extrahepatic and leukocyte targeting.

### Keywords
Mouse, Liver, Serum, Dia

### Affiliations
University Medical Center Groningen, NL and University Hospital Aachen, DE
UMCG

### Submitter
Justina Clarinda Wolters

### Lab Head
Dr Justina Clarinda Wolters and Matthias Bartneck
University Medical Center Groningen, NL and University Hospital Aachen, DE


