### Accession
PXD031923

### Title
Cannabinoids modulate proliferation, differentiation, and migration signaling pathways in oligodendrocytes

### Description
To elucidate the specific molecular signals associated with the activation or blockade of CB1 and CB2 receptors in this glial cell, mass spectrometry-based proteomics and in silico biology tools were used to determine which signaling pathways and molecular mechanisms are triggered in a human oligodendrocytic cell line (MO3.13) by several pharmacological stimuli: the phytocannabinoid cannabidiol (CBD); CB1 and CB2 agonists WIN55,212-2, ACEA, and HU308; CB1 and CB2 antagonists AM251 and AM630; and endocannabinoids anandamide (AEA) and 2-arachidonoylglycerol (2-AG).

### Sample Protocol
MO3.13 cells were cultured in 60 mm wells for proteomic analysis. Experiments were performed in biological triplicate. Cells were exposed for 8 hours to CBD (phytocannabinoid with several pharmacological targets), WIN55,212-2 (CB1, CB2, and TRPV1 agonist), ACEA (potent and highly selective CB1 receptor agonist), HU308 (potent CB2 receptor agonist, weak TRPV1 agonist), anandamide (endogenous cannabinoid, acts on CB1, CB2, TRPV1, and GPR55 receptors), 2-AG (endogenous cannabinoid, CB1, CB2, TRPV1, and GPR55 agonist), AM251 (potent CB1 receptor antagonist or inverse agonist, and potent GPR55 agonist and μ-opioid receptor antagonist) or AM630 (CB2 antagonist or inverse agonist). For CBD treatment, we also performed two technical replicates for a total of N=6. MO3.13 cells were harvested from the plates and centrifuged at 300 x g for 5 min. The pellets were homogenized in a lysis buffer consisting of 6M urea, 2M thiourea, 10mM DTT, protease and phosphatase inhibitors, and 0.1mM sodium pervanadate. Protein lysates were centrifuged at 14,000 x g for 45 min at 4ºC to remove pelleted lipids and other debris. The supernatant was removed and the cellular pellets were stored at -80 °C for later analyses. Peptides were injected and separated by two-dimensional liquid chromatography in an M-Class ACQUITY ultra-performance liquid chromatography system, coupled to a Synapt G2-Si mass spectrometer (MS) (Waters, Corp., Milford, USA). The first dimension consisted of three fractions using an XBridge BEH130 C18 column (5µm x 300 µm x 50 mm; Waters, Corp., Milford, USA). Elution was performed using 3 gradients with ammonium formate (20 mM, pH 10) in acetonitrile at a flow rate of 400 nL/min. Peptides from the first-dimension column were separated in a Symmetry C18: 5 µm x 180 µm x 20 mm column (Waters, Corp., Milford, USA) and diluted, online, with acetonitrile containing 0.1 % formic acid, at a flow rate of 2 µL.min-1. For the second dimension, separation was performed with the HSS T3: 1.8 µm x 75 µm x 150 mm column  (Waters, Corp., Milford, USA), using a binary gradient from 3 to 40 % of acetonitrile with 0.1 % formic acid (54 min) followed by a binary gradient from 40 to 85% (15 min) at a flow rate of 400 nL.min-1. Fractionated peptides were injected online to mass spectrometry for data-independent acquisition. Experiments were performed in the ion mobility mode, the scan time of 0.5 s was used for low and high-energy scans from m/z 50 to 2000.

### Data Protocol
Raw data processing and protein identification were performed using Progenesis QI for Proteomics 4.0 (Nonlinear Dynamics). The following parameters were used for the analysis: at least 2 fragment ions matched per peptide, 5 fragment ions matched per protein, and 1 unique peptide matched per protein; a maximum of 1 trypsin missed cleavage; carbamidomethyl C as a fixed modification, and oxidation of M as a variable modification; maximum FDR of 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Cannabinoid signaling, mainly via CB1 and CB2 receptors, plays an essential role in oligodendrocyte health and functions. However, the specific molecular signals associated with the activation or blockade of CB1 and CB2 receptors in this glial cell have yet to be elucidated. Mass spectrometry-based shotgun&#xa0;proteomics and in silico biology tools were used to determine which signaling pathways and molecular mechanisms are triggered in a human oligodendrocytic cell line (MO3.13) by several pharmacological stimuli: the phytocannabinoid cannabidiol (CBD); CB1 and CB2 agonists ACEA, HU308, and WIN55, 212-2; CB1 and CB2 antagonists AM251 and AM630; and endocannabinoids anandamide (AEA) and 2-arachidonoylglycerol (2-AG). The modulation of cannabinoid signaling in MO3.13 was found to affect pathways linked to cell proliferation, migration, and differentiation of oligodendrocyte progenitor cells. Additionally, we found that carbohydrate and lipid metabolism, as well as mitochondrial function, were modulated by these compounds. Comparing the proteome changes and upstream regulators among treatments, the highest overlap was between the CB1 and CB2 antagonists, followed by overlaps between AEA and 2-AG. Our study opens new windows of opportunities, suggesting that cannabinoid signaling in oligodendrocytes might be relevant in the context of demyelinating and neurodegenerative diseases.&#xa0;Proteomics data are available at ProteomeXchange (PXD031923).

### Keywords
Cb2, Cb1, Proteomics, Cannabidiol, Endocannabinoids

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Neuroproteomics, Department of Biochemistry and Tissue Biology, Institute of Biology, University of Campinas (UNICAMP), Campinas, Brazil
UNICAMP

### Submitter
Bradley Smith

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel Martins-de-Souza
Laboratory of Neuroproteomics, Department of Biochemistry and Tissue Biology, Institute of Biology, University of Campinas (UNICAMP), Campinas, Brazil


