### Accession
PXD015547

### Title
Comprehensive map of the Artemisia annua proteome and quantification of differential protein expression in chemotypes producing high vs low content of artemisinin

### Description
Artemisia annua is well known for biosynthesizing artemisinin, which is the primary therapeutic approach against malaria. It was reported that treatment with leaf of A. annua showed better effect and less tendency of developing drug resistance than purified artemisinin, suggesting other components in A. annua may contribute to the therapeutic efficacy. Here, we conducted a global proteomic profiling of A. annua with identification of a total of 13,403 proteins based on the genome sequence annotation database. Furthermore, we generated a spectral library to perform quantitative proteomic analysis using data independent acquisition mass spectrometry (DIA-MS). Specifically, we comprehensively quantified and compared proteins between two chemotypes that produce high (HAP) and low (LAP) artemisinin content, respectively. 182 proteins were identified with abundance significantly different between these two chemotypes. Overall, our current study globally identified the proteome of A. annua and quantitatively compared the targeted sub-proteomes between the two cultivars of HAP and LAP, providing systematic information on metabolic pathways of A. annua and facilitating identification of good chemotypes for producing anti-malaria compounds. 

### Sample Protocol
to generate MS assays for Artemisia annua. Young leaf and Flower bud were selected for DDA (Data dependent acquisition) assay by Orbitrap and Q Exactive plus mass spectrometers. MS/MS peptide spectra were searched against Artemisia annua genome sequences. After the DDA data extraction by Skyline, a spectral library was generated. Six samples of HAPs (Hunan, Shanghai, Chongqing) and LAPs (Iran8, Iran14, Iran47) DIA (Data independent acquisition) data were analyzed by Skyline and statistical analysis. The confidently quantified proteins with significant changes between the HAPs and LAPs were obtained for biology functional analysis and western blot verification.

### Data Protocol
The library was generated on Skyline-daily 3.5.1.9426, an open source software project (http://proteome.gs.washington.edu/software/skyline) (MacLean et al., 2010). Differential abundance of proteins was tested by MSstats, which is an open-source R package for statistical analysis of quantitative DIA data. The results for differential abundance of proteins were visualized by the R program.

### Publication Abstract
Artemisia annua is well known for biosynthesizing the antimalarial drug artemisinin. Here, a global proteomic profiling of A. annua is conducted with identification of a total of 13&#xa0;403 proteins based on the genome sequence annotation database. Furthermore, a spectral library is generated to perform quantitative proteomic analysis using data independent acquisition mass spectrometry. Specifically, proteins between two chemotypes that produce high (HAP) and low (LAP) artemisinin content, respectively, are comprehensively quantified and compared. 182 proteins are identified with abundance significantly different between these two chemotypes means after the statistic use the p-value and fold change it is found 182 proteins can reach the demand conditions which represent the expression are significantly different between the high artemisnin content plants (HAPs) and the low artemisnin content plants (LAPs). Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD015547. Overall, this current study globally identifies the proteome of A. annua and quantitatively compares the targeted sub-proteomes between the two cultivars of HAP and LAP, providing systematic information on metabolic pathways of A. annua.

### Keywords
Artemisia annua, Data dependent acquisition, Data independent acquisition, Proteome, Metabolism, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Joint International Research Laboratory of Metabolic & Developmental Sciences, Key Laboratory of Urban Agriculture (South) Ministry of Agriculture, Plant Biotechnology Research Center, Fudan-SJTU-Nottingham Plant Biotechnology R&D Center, School of Agriculture and Biology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 800 Dongchuan Road, Shanghai 200240, P. R. China
postdoc

### Submitter
MINGHUI CHEN

### Lab Head
Dr Kexuan Tang
Joint International Research Laboratory of Metabolic & Developmental Sciences, Key Laboratory of Urban Agriculture (South) Ministry of Agriculture, Plant Biotechnology Research Center, Fudan-SJTU-Nottingham Plant Biotechnology R&D Center, School of Agriculture and Biology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 800 Dongchuan Road, Shanghai 200240, P. R. China


