### Accession
PXD009905

### Title
SRRM4/nSR100 directs neuronal-specific microexon splicing of TAF1 mRNA involved in X-linked Dystonia-Parkinsonism

### Description
X-linked dystonia-parkinsonism is a neurodegenerative disease, which is caused by a SVA retrotransposon insertion within TAF1, gene encoding an integral component of the basal transcription factor TFIID. The SVA insertion has been shown to induce defects both in biosynthesis and in alternative splicing of TAF1 mRNA in various cell types. This includes the reduction of a neuron-specific isoform of TAF1 mRNA generated by inclusion of the evolutionary conserved microexon 34’ (TAF1-34’). In this study, we investigated the tissue distribution of TAF1-34’ mRNA and protein and the neuron-specific mechanism sustaining its alternative splicing. Using isoform-specific RNA probes and antibodies, we observe that canonical TAF1 and TAF1-34’ have different distributions in the brain. To our knowledge, this is the first in situ detection of a microexon. We find that the differential expression of these two isoforms distinguishes proliferating from post-mitotic neurons in vitro and in vivo. Knockdown and ectopic expression experiments in cell lines demonstrated that the neuron-specific splicing factor nSR100/SRRM4 is directing the inclusion of microexon 34’ into TAF1 mRNA. These results show that SRRM4 regulates temporal and spatial distribution of alternative TAF1 mRNAs to generate a neuron-specific isoform of basal transcription factor TFIID.

### Sample Protocol
Cytoplasmic and nuclear extracts were prepared from N-GFP-SRRM4 expressing HeLa cells as previously described (18). After Bradford measurement, 1 mg of nuclear extract was used for GFP affinity purification (18), in the absence of ethidium bromide. The experiment was performed in triplicate with GFP-trap beads (gta-20, Chromotek) and control agarose beads (bab-20, Chromotek). After trypsin-digestion, the peptides were desalted using C18 matrix in StageTips (19). Peptides were eluted in 80% acetonitrile and concentrated using a SpeedVac. The dry samples were diluted to the desired volume in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and analyzed by mass spectrometry.For LC-MS/MS analysis, peptide samples were analyzed by an Orbitrap Q-Exactive Plus (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer coupled to an Easy nano-LC 1000 (Thermo Scientific) with a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Buffer A was 0.1% (v/v) formic acid and buffer B was 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in 80% acetonitrile. For reversed phase chromatography, a gradient of increasing acetonitrile proportion was applied in combination with a C18 separating column (2 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size, length 150 mm, inner diameter 50 µm, Thermo Scientific). The mass spectrometer operated in data dependent mode with a maximum of 10 MS/MS scans following each MS1 scan.  18. Baymaz, H.I., Spruijt, C.G. and Vermeulen, M. (2014) Identifying nuclear protein-protein interactions using GFP affinity purification and SILAC-based quantitative mass spectrometry. Methods Mol Biol, 1188, 207-226. 19. Rappsilber, J., Mann, M. and Ishihama, Y. (2007) Protocol for micro-purification, enrichment, pre-fractionation and storage of peptides for proteomics using StageTips. Nat Protoc, 2, 1896-1906.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification was performed with the Andromeda search engine using a human proteome database containing reviewed Uniprot sequences without isoforms downloaded from Uniprot 15th April 2016 (human, 20,193 entries). Peptide spectrum matching and relative protein quantitation were performed using MaxQuant v.1.5.2.8 using a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%. Perseus v.1.6.0.7 was used to filter contaminants and reverse hits. Label-free quantification values were log2 transformed and groups based on beads type were defined. Identified proteins were accepted when measured three times within at least one combination of beads, resulting in a total of 917 proteins. The data was plotted as volcano plot using R version 3.4.3. To determine the relative stoichiometry of the identified interactors, intensity based absolute quantification (iBAQ) values were used to determine the relative stoichiometry of the significant interactors (20), after normalizing to the bait protein (GFP-SRRM4). FDR was set at 0.001 and the minimal fold change (s0) was set at 2. Gene Ontology (GO)-term enrichment analysis for biological processes was performed with DAVID (22) on the statistically significant SRRM4 interactors with a relative stoichiometry above 0.05. The significantly enriched GO terms with a Bonferroni-corrected P values were analyzed with REVIGO66 (23) to reduce redundancy.

### Publication Abstract
Neuronal microexons represent the most highly conserved class of alternative splicing events and their timed expression shapes neuronal biology, including neuronal commitment and differentiation. The six-nt microexon 34' is included in the neuronal form of <i>TAF1</i>&#xa0;mRNA, which encodes the largest subunit of the basal transcription factor TFIID. In this study, we investigate the tissue distribution of <i>TAF1-34'</i> mRNA and protein and the mechanism responsible for its neuronal-specific splicing. Using isoform-specific RNA probes and antibodies, we observe that canonical TAF1 and TAF1-34' have different distributions in the brain, which distinguish proliferating from post-mitotic neurons. Knockdown and ectopic expression experiments demonstrate that the neuronal-specific splicing factor SRRM4/nSR100 promotes the inclusion of microexon 34' into <i>TAF1&#xa0;</i>mRNA, through the recognition of UGC sequences in the poly-pyrimidine tract upstream of the regulated microexon. These results show that SRRM4 regulates temporal and spatial expression of alternative <i>TAF1</i> mRNAs to generate a neuronal-specific TFIID complex.

### Keywords
Co-immunoprecipitation, Epidgenetics

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Medicine and Cell Research  University of Freiburg  Stefan-Meier-Str. 17,  D-79104 Freiburg, Germany
University of Freiburg

### Submitter
Oliver Schilling

### Lab Head
Dr Oliver Schilling
Institute of Molecular Medicine and Cell Research  University of Freiburg  Stefan-Meier-Str. 17,  D-79104 Freiburg, Germany


