### Accession
PXD032791

### Title
Structural basis of paralog-specific KDM2A/B nucleosome recognition

### Description
The nucleosome acidic patch is a major interaction hub for chromatin, providing a platform for enzymes to dock and orient for nucleosome-targeted activities. In order to define the molecular basis of acidic patch recognition proteome-wide, we performed an amino acid resolution acidic patch interactome screen. We discovered that the histone H3 lysine 36 (H3K36) demethylase KDM2A, but not its closely related paralog, KDM2B, requires the acidic patch for nucleosome binding. These KDM2 family JumonjiC (JmjC) domain lysine demethylases are critical to heterochromatin formation and are commonly misregulated in cancer. Despite fundamental roles in transcriptional regulation in health and disease, the molecular mechanisms governing nucleosome substrate specificity of KDM2A/B, or any other JmjC lysine demethylases, remain unclear. We used a covalent JmjC inhibitor to solve cryo-EM structures of KDM2A and KDM2B trapped in action on the nucleosome. Our structures show that KDM2-nucleosome binding is paralog-specific and facilitated by dynamic nucleosomal DNA unwrapping and histone charge shielding that mobilize the H3K36 sequence for demethylation.

### Sample Protocol
Human embryonic kidney 293 cells (HEK 293T) nuclear lysates were prepared using the standard salt extraction protocol and nucleosome affinity pulldowns were conducted essentially as previously described (https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkaa544). Briefly, 20 μg of biotinylated nucleosomes were immobilized on streptavidin T1 magnetic dynabeads (MyOne, Thermofisher) in BB120 buffer (20 mM HEPES, pH 7.5, 120 mM NaCl, 10% glycerol, 1 mM DTT, 0.1% NP-40) and incubated with 500 μg HEK 293T nuclear lysate with rotation for 2 h at 4°C. Next, beads with nucleosome-bound nuclear proteins were moved to new tubes and after carefully aspirating and discarding any remaining BB120 buffer, nucleosome-nuclear protein complexes were eluted from the beads with 15 μl 2x gel loading buffer (Bio-Rad). Eluted samples were placed in a 100°C heat block for 5 min and then run on 4–20% 12-well Mini-PROTEAN TGX (Bio-Rad) gels (pre-run for 2 min at 250V) for 2 min at 250V. Proteins with molecular weights over ∼20 kDa, which resolved from the strong histones and monomeric streptavidin bands were excised from the gel and subjected to in-gel trypsin digestion following manufacturer’s protocols (Thermofisher). The concentration of extracted tryptic peptides was measured using the Pierce Quantitative Fluorometric Peptide Assay (Thermofisher) prior Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) labeling (Thermofisher, Cat. no. A44522, Lot: WB314414). Tryptic peptides representing seventeen different conditions in triplicate were labeled with sixteen unique TMT tags to allow deconvolution by mass-spectrometry in four independent runs/mixtures. Building on experience from our first-generation nucleosome interactome screen, where the acidic patch-neutralized (DAP) mutant nucleosome pulled down less total protein than the other mutants, we anticipated that point mutations in the critical arginine anchor cavity (H2A: E61, D90, E92) may behave in similar fashion. To avoid having the most deleterious mutations in the same mixture, which could cause inconsistencies in protein coverage between the mixtures, we divided the DAP and H2A E61, D90, and E92 mutant nucleosomes between the four mixtures. Wild-type tryptic peptides, labeled with the 133N, 133C, 134N TMT tags, were included in each run to allow comparison between the mixtures. Mixture 1 included: the acidic patch-neutralized (127N, 127C, 128N), H2A Q24A (128C, 129N, 129C), H2A E56A (130N, 130C, 131N) and H2A E56Q (131C, 132N, 132C) mutant nucleosomes. Mixture 2 included: H2A E61A (127N, 127C, 128N), H2A E64A, (128C, 129N, 129C), H2A N68A (130N, 130C, 131N) and H2A D72A (131C, 132N, 132C) mutant nucleosomes. Mixture 3 included H2A N89A (127N, 127C, 128N), H2A D90A, (128C, 129N, 129C), H2A E91A (130N, 130C, 131N) and H2B Q47A (131C, 132N, 132C) mutant nucleosomes. Mixture 4 included: H2A E92A (127N, 127C, 128N), H2A E92K, (128C, 129N, 129C), H2B E113A (130N, 130C, 131N) and H2B E113Q (131C, 132N, 132C) mutant nucleosomes. Additionally, each mixture included a bridge sample consisting of equal amount of tryptic peptides from each of the pulldowns, mixed and labeled with TMT 126. This bridge sample was included for normalization across the four mixtures.

### Data Protocol
TMT-labeled peptides were separated via reverse-phase nano-HPLC using an RSLCnano Ultimate 3000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The mobile phase consisted of water + 0.1% formic acid as buffer A and acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid as buffer B. Peptides were loaded onto a µPACᵀᴹ Trapping column (PharmaFluidics) operated at 35°C and flowing at 1 ul/min, and then separated on a 50 cm µPACᵀᴹ column (PharmaFluidics) at 300 nL/min using a segmented gradient as follows: 30 sec from 2-5% buffer B, 1.5min from 5-7% buffer B, 90.5 min from 7-25% buffer B, and 20 min from 25-45% buffer B. Mass spectrometry analysis was performed on an Orbitrap Eclipse (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a TMT-RTS-MS3 data acquisition method. MS1 scans were obtained at 120,000 resolution in the Orbitrap with a scan range from 350-2000 m/z, 50 ms max injection time, and automated gain control (AGC) target of 1e6. All precursors were filtered for monoisotopic peaks, charge states 2-7, mass between 800 and 8000 Da, dynamic exclusion of 60 seconds with 10 ppm mass tolerance excluding isotopes, and a precursor fit of 50% with a window width of 1.2 m/z. Precursors selected for MS2 were isolated in the quadrupole with an isolation window width of 0.7 m/z. MS2 ions were obtained in the ion trap with 35 ms max injection time and 1e4 AGC and fragmented with collision induced dissociation (CID) collision energy of 35% with 10 ms activation time. Precursors selected for MS3 scans were based on real-time search synchronous precursor selection (RTS-SPS, Orbitrap Eclipse 3.4.3072.18). MS2 spectra were searched against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot homo sapiens sequence database with isoforms (downloaded on August 2019) appended with mutant histone and contaminant sequences. For all analyses, the following RTS parameters were used: specific tryptic digestion with up to 1 missed cleavage, carbamidomethyl and TMTpro16plex fixed modifications, and variable methionine oxidation. Real-time FDR filtering was used along with the following scoring thresholds were used: xcorr ≥ 2, dCN ≥ 0.1, and precursor ppm ≤ 10. MS3 scans were obtained in the Orbitrap at 50,000 resolution with a 100-500 m/z scan range, 86 ms max injection time, higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) collision energy of 55%, and an MS2 isolation window of 3 m/z.  After data acquisition, raw files were processed for peptide identifications by Comet (2021.01 rev. 0) and Percolator (version 3.05.0) with the same database used for RTS and the following differences in parameters: semi- tryptic digestion with ≤ 2 missed cleavages, and a clear m/z range from 125.5 to 134.5.

### Publication Abstract
The nucleosome acidic patch is a major interaction hub for chromatin, providing a platform for enzymes to dock and orient for nucleosome-targeted activities. To define the molecular basis of acidic patch recognition proteome wide, we performed an amino acid resolution acidic patch interactome screen. We discovered that the histone H3 lysine 36 (H3K36) demethylase KDM2A, but not its closely related paralog, KDM2B, requires the acidic patch for nucleosome binding. Despite fundamental roles in transcriptional repression in health and disease, the molecular mechanisms governing nucleosome substrate specificity of KDM2A/B, or any related JumonjiC (JmjC) domain lysine demethylase, remain unclear. We used a covalent conjugate between H3K36 and a demethylase inhibitor to solve cryogenic electron microscopy structures of KDM2A and KDM2B trapped in action on a nucleosome substrate. Our structures show that KDM2-nucleosome binding is paralog specific and facilitated by dynamic nucleosomal DNA unwrapping and histone charge shielding that mobilize the H3K36 sequence for demethylation.

### Keywords
Acidic patch, Chromatin, Nucleosome, Demethylase, Kdm2b, Kdm2a, Jmjc

### Affiliations
Cell Biology and Physiology
Institute for Informatics
1Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, School of Medicine, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, United States

### Submitter
Dennis Goldfarb

### Lab Head
Dr Robert McGiinty
1Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, School of Medicine, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, United States


