### Accession
PXD027826

### Title
Human RKO cells LC-MSMS (gel-based proteomics)

### Description
Tumor cells evade T cell-mediated immunosurveillance via the interaction between programmed death-1 (PD-1) ligand 1 (PD-L1) on tumor cells and PD-1 on T cells. Strategies disrupting PD-1/PD-L1 have shown clinical benefits in various cancers. However, the limited response rate prompts us to investigate the molecular regulation of PD-L1. Here we identify trafficking protein particle complex subunit 4 (TRAPPC4), a major player in vesicular trafficking, as a crucial PD-L1 regulator. TRAPPC4 interacts with PD-L1 in recycling endosomes, promoting RAB11-mediated recycling of PD-L1, and acting as a scaffold between PD-L1 and RAB11, thus replenishing its distribution on the tumor cell surface.

### Sample Protocol
The RKO cells were lysed with using IP lysis buffer (Thermo Fisher) containing a proteinase and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail. Then the lysis was incubated and precipitated with the anti-PD-L1 antibody, and the precipitation of IgG was set as a negative control. The above immunoprecipitated samples were separated using SDS-PAGE electrophoresis, stained with Coomassie and cut into ~1mm square pieces. Gel pieces were destained in 50 mM NH4HCO3 in 50% acetonitrile (v/v) until clear, washed for three times in ddH2O and dehydrated with 100μl of 100% acetonitrile for 5 min. Then the gel pieces were rehydrated in 10mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and incubated at 25°C for 60 min. The gel pieces were washed with NH4HCO3 buffer once and incubated with 55 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) at room temperature for 45 minutes, protecting from the light. Gel pieces were washed with 50 mM NH4HCO3 twice and dehydrated with 100% acetonitrile. Then the gel pieces were digested using 10ng/μl Trypsin at 37°C for over 16 hours. Peptides were extracted with 50% acetonitrile /5% formic acid for twice, followed by dehydration using 100% acetonitrile. The samples were freeze-dried to completion, desolved in 0.1% formic acid and desalted with C18 Zip Tips and dried with SpeedVac. The samples were resuspended with 0.1% formic acid for mass spectrometry analysis. Briefly, samples were first loaded onto an HPLC chromatography system named Thermo Fisher Easy-nLC 1000 equipped with a C18 column (1.8mm，0.15×1,00mm). Solvent A contained 0.1% formic acid and solvent B contained 100% acetonitrile. The elution gradient was from 4% to 25% solvent B in 80min, 25% to 35% in 4 min and climbing to 90% in 2 min, then holding at 90% for 8 min, all at a constant flow rate of 300nl/min. The peptide samples were then analyzed on Thermo Fisher LTQ Obitrap ETD mass spectrometry in the positive-ion mode with an automated data-dependent MS/MS analysis with full scans (350-1600 m/z) acquired using FTMS at a mass resolution of 30,000. The MS/MS was acquired using higher-energy collision dissociation at 35% collision energy at a mass resolution of 15,000.

### Data Protocol
All Raw files were searched by Proteome Discoverer 1.4(Thermo Fisher Scientific) against the Uniprot-Homo sapiens. fasta. Trypsin was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. Mass error was set to 20 ppm for precursor ions and 0.05Da for fragment ions. The search included variable modifications of methionine oxidation and deamidation, and fixed modification of carbamidomethyl cysteine. Minimal peptide length was set to six amino acids and a maximum of two miscleavages was allowed. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 for peptide and protein identifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Huamn, Rko cells

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory for Oncogenes and Related Genes, Key Laboratory of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Ministry of Health, Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Shanghai Institute of Digestive Disease, Renji Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology,  Renji Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University

### Submitter
Yimeng Ren

### Lab Head
Dr Jingyuan Fang
State Key Laboratory for Oncogenes and Related Genes, Key Laboratory of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Ministry of Health, Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Shanghai Institute of Digestive Disease, Renji Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University


