### Accession
PXD013792

### Title
Proteins that interact physically with Drosophila blanks

### Description
RNA interference targets aberrant transcripts with cognate small interfering RNAs, which derive from double-stranded RNA precursors through nucleolytic processing. Several functional screens have identified Drosophila blanks/lump (CG10630) as a facilitator of RNAi in cultured cells, yet its molecular function has remained unknown. The protein carries two dsRNA binding domains (dsRBD) and blanks mutant males have a spermatogenesis defect. We demonstrate that blanks selectively boosts RNAi triggered by dsRNA of nuclear origin. Blanks binds dsRNA in vitro, shuttles between nucleus and cytoplasm and the abundance of certain endogenous siRNAs is reduced in blanks mutant testes. Transgenic expression of a Blanks protein variant with increased nuclear retention reduces endogenous siRNA abundance unless the protein also carries a mutation that prevents binding of dsRNA to the second dsRBD. Blanks thus facilitates the export of dsRNA to the cytoplasm for further processing by the canonical RNAi machinery. In contrast, rescue of male fertility in blanks mutant animals was independent of RNA binding to the second dsRBD, consistent with a previous report that linked fertility to the first dsRBD of Blanks. The role of blanks in spermatogenesis appears thus unrelated to its role in dsRNA export.

### Sample Protocol
Detailed information on the mass spectrometry-based immunoprecipitation experiments: S2 cells were cultured in the presence of 200 µM CuSO4, harvested, washed twice with 1x PBS and resuspended in an appropriate volume of 1xPBS to obtain 107 cells / ml. 37 % formaldehyde stock solution was added to the suspension to reach a final concentration of 0.1% formaldehyde. The cell suspension was incubated for 5 min at room temperature on a rotating wheel. To quench the reaction, glycine (stock 1.25 M) was added to a concentration of 125 mM, the suspension was centrifuged and the supernatant discarded. For lysis, the cells were resuspended in an appropriate volume of lysis buffer (150 mM KAc pH7.4, 30 mM Hepes pH 7.4, 5 mM MgAc, 1 mM DTT, 15% glycerol, 1% tergitol, per 10 ml: 1 tablet Protease Inhibitor (complete EDTA‐free, Roche)). Cells were mechanically lysed using the Bioruptor (Diagenode, 20 cycles a 20’’ ON, 40’’ OFF). Insoluble debris was pelleted by centrifugation, the supernatant represented the protein extract. For immunoprecipitation, 20 μL Dynabeads Protein G (Invitrogen) were washed with lysis buffer, resuspended in 200 μl in lysis buffer and incubated with 2 μl anti‐FLAG M2 (Sigma) or anti‐V5 (Biorad) antibody for 30 min at 4°C on a rotating wheel. Cell extract containing a total of 5 mg protein was added to the beads and incubated for 1 h at 4°C. The beads were washed twice with buffer 1 (150 mM KAc pH 7.4, 30 mM Hepes pH 7.4, 5 mM MgAc, 0.1 % tergitol-type NP40) and twice with buffer 2 (150 mM KAc pH 7.4, 30 mM Hepes pH 7.4, 5 mM MgAc). The beads were either analyzed via SDS‐PAGE and silver staining or via mass spectrometry. For the latter method, the beads were additionally washed 3 times with 50 mM ABC (ammonium bicarbonate) and resuspended in 100 μL of 5 ng/μl trypsin (NEB) in 1 M urea, 50 mM ABC. The digestion reaction was incubated for 30 min at 25°C, shaking at 800 rpm. The supernatant was saved, beads were washed twice with 50 μL of 50 mM ABC and finally, the supernatant was combined with the wash fractions. After the addition of DTT to a final concentration of 1 mM, the reaction was incubated at 25°C over night, shaking at 800 rpm. On the next day, 10 μL of 5 mg/ml iodoacetamide was added and the solution was incubated for 3 min in the dark at 25°C. 1 μL of 1 M DTT was added to the reaction, incubated for 10 min and in the end 2.5 μL trifluoroacetic acid was added to stop the reaction. The samples were lyophilized using a vacuum centrifuge.

### Data Protocol
Mass spec data was analyzed using MaxQuant v1.5.3.8 and Perseus v1.5.2.4: The data that was recorded by the mass spectrometer was analyzed using MaxQuant and its label‐free quantification algorithm. After removing identified known contaminants and by the algorithm speculatively identified proteins, the resulting protein levels were transferred to logarithmic values and normalized to the z‐score of the sample. Proteins that were not identified or only to such a small amount that no quantification was possible were assigned imputed values. These values were randomly calculated from a normal distribution of values that are close to the normalized values of the sample. The downstream analysis was performed with data prepared in that way.

### Publication Abstract
RNA interference targets aberrant transcripts with cognate small interfering RNAs, which derive from double-stranded RNA precursors. Several functional screens have identified Drosophila blanks/lump (CG10630) as a facilitator of RNAi, yet its molecular function has remained unknown. The protein carries two dsRNA binding domains (dsRBD) and blanks mutant males have a spermatogenesis defect. We demonstrate that blanks selectively boosts RNAi triggered by dsRNA of nuclear origin. Blanks binds dsRNA via its second dsRBD in vitro, shuttles between nucleus and cytoplasm and the abundance of siRNAs arising at many sites of convergent transcription is reduced in blanks mutants. Since features of nascent RNAs - such as introns and transcription beyond the polyA site - contribute to the small RNA pool, we propose that Blanks binds dsRNA formed by cognate nascent RNAs in the nucleus and fosters its export to the cytoplasm for dicing. We refer to the resulting small RNAs as blanks exported siRNAs (bepsiRNAs). While bepsiRNAs were fully dependent on RNA binding to the second dsRBD of blanks in transgenic flies, male fertility was not. This is consistent with a previous report that linked fertility to the first dsRBD of Blanks. The role of blanks in spermatogenesis appears thus unrelated to its role in dsRNA export.

### Keywords
Interaction with tagged blanks

### Affiliations
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München
Department of Biochemistry and Gene Center, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Feodor-Lynen-strasse 25, 81377 München

### Submitter
Klaus Förstemann

### Lab Head
Dr Klaus Förstemann
Department of Biochemistry and Gene Center, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Feodor-Lynen-strasse 25, 81377 München


