### Accession
PXD009000

### Title
Identification of MS-Cleavable and Non-Cleavable Chemically Crosslinked Peptides with MetaMorpheus

### Description
The present work describes a novel search program for the detection of both MS-cleavable and non-cleavable crosslinked peptides and it is the first software program reported with both capacities. The search strategy has been implemented in the computer program MetaMorpheus, which has a user-friendly graphical user interface (GUI). Novel crosslinker molecules can be easily added if desired. A fragment-ion index scheme makes the search computationally efficient. DSSO crosslinked BSA and E.coli ribosome data were used to validate the MS-cleavable crosslink search results.

### Sample Protocol
BSA (1µg/µL; Sigma) was dissolved in PBS buffer. Ribosome (13.3 µM; NEB) was diluted to 1 µg/µL with HEPES buffer. MS-cleavable crosslinker DSSO (disuccinimidyl sulfoxide, 50 mM stock; Thermo Scientific) was added to a final concentration of 1 mM. After incubating at RT for 60 min, the reaction was quenched by adding Tris Buffer to 40 mM. The samples were digested with a modified eFASP as described. Samples (~2 µg protein each injection) were analyzed via HPLC (NanoAcquity, Waters)-ESI-MS/MS (Q Exactive HF, ThermoFisher Scientific). The HPLC separation employed a 15 cm * 365 µm fused silica capillary micro-column packed with 3 µm diameter, 100 Å pore size C18 beads (Magic C18; Bruker), with an emitter tip pulled to approximately 2 µm using a laser puller (Sutter instruments). Peptides were loaded on-column at a flow-rate of 400 nL/min for 30 min, then eluted over 120 min at a flow-rate of 300 nL/min with a gradient from 5% to 35% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. The gradient is then ramped to 70% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid over 5 min and held for 5 min, then reduced to 2% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid over 5 min and held for 15 min. Full-mass profile scans are performed in the Orbitrap between 375 and 1,500 m/z at a resolution of 120,000, followed by MS/MS HCD (higher energy collisional dissociation) scans of the ten highest intensity parent ions with z > 2 at 30 CE (relative collision energy) and 15,000 resolution, with a mass range starting at 100 m/z. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with an exclusion window of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
After data-dependent acquisition, tandem mass spectral data were first calibrated using MetaMorpheus’s calibration function. The generated .mzML files were searched by MetaMorpheusXL (MetaMorpheus version 0.0.237). The DSSO data were also searched with XlinkX 2.0. The distance between each lysine-lysine pair of identified crosslinked peptides from E. coli ribosome were further validated by mapping to known structures with a self-developed python script.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ion index, Ms-cleavable chemical crosslink, Proteomics, Protein-protein interactions

### Affiliations
University of Wisconsin, Madison
Department of Chemistry, University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin 53706, United States

### Submitter
Lei Lu

### Lab Head
Dr Lloyd M Smith
Department of Chemistry, University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin 53706, United States


