### Accession
PXD031833

### Title
TTYH family members form tetrameric complexes at the cell membrane

### Description
The conserved Tweety homolog (TTYH) family consists of three paralogs in vertebrates, displaying a ubiquitous expression pattern. Although considered as ion channels for almost two decades, recent structural and functional analyses refuted this role. Intriguingly, while all paralogs shared a dimeric stoichiometry following detergent solubilization, their structures revealed divergence in their relative subunit orientation. Here, we determined the stoichiometry of intact mouse TTYH (mTTYH) complexes in cells. Using cross-linking and single-molecule fluorescence microscopy, we demonstrate that mTTYH1 and mTTYH3 form tetramers at the plasma membrane, stabilized by interactions between their extracellular domains. Using blue-native PAGE, fluorescence-detection size-exclusion chromatography and hydrogen-deuterium exchange mass spectrometry (HDX-MS), we reveal that detergent solubilization results in tetramers destabilization, leading to their dissolution into dimers. Moreover, HDX-MS demonstrates that the extracellular domains are stabilized in the context of the tetrameric mTTYH complex. Together, our results expose the innate tetrameric organization of TTYH complexes at the cell membrane. Future structural analyses of these assemblies in native membranes are required to illuminate their long-sought cellular function.

### Sample Protocol
Hydrogen/deuterium exchange was started by a 10-fold dilution of 20uM protein solution into a D2O-based buffer (20 mM Tris-Cl pD 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.3 mM DDM). Aliquots were collected at time points: 2 sec, 4 sec, 6 sec, 8 sec, 10 sec and 180 sec and quenched with 0.5 M glycine-HCl, pH 2.5, 0.5 M TCEP, 0.6 mM DDM in a 1:1 ratio and flash frozen in a liquid nitrogen. The labelling experiment was done at 4 °C and 2 and 6 sec time points were replicated (n=3). In the second set of experiments, the exchange was done at 25 °C, exchange times were 20 sec, 2 min, 20 min and 2hrs and 20 sec and 20 min were duplicated. Prior to the analysis, each sample was thawed, left on ice for disulfide bond reduction for 3 minutes and injected onto an LC system. It consisted of immobilized pepsin/nepenthesin-2 custom-made column (bed volume 66 µL), trap VanGuard Pre-column (ACQUITY UPLC BEH C18, 130Å, 1.7 μm, 2.1 mm × 5 mm, Waters, Milford, MA, USA) and an analytical column (ACQUITY UPLC BEH C18, 130 Å, 1.7 μm, 1 mm × 100 mm, Waters, Milford, MA, USA).  The LC system was connected to an ESI source of 15 FT-ICR MS (solariX XR, Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany). Digestion and peptide desalting with 0.4% formic acid (FA) in water was driven by 1260 Infinity II Quaternary pump (Agilent Technologies, Waldbronn, Germany) pumping at 100 μL·min-1 and took 3 minutes. Water-acetonitrile gradient (5%–45% B within 7 min; solvent A: 0.1% FA in water, solvent B: 0.1% FA/2% water in ACN) followed by a quick step to 99% B (5 min) was used for elution and separation of  the desalted peptides. The solvents were delivered by 1290 Infinity II LC System (Agilent Technologies, Waldbronn, Germany) at 40µL·min-1. To minimize the back-exchange, the setup was cooled to 0 °C.  Peptide identification for mTTYH1 dimeric and tetrameric populations was done using the same LC setup as described above but with the ESI-TIMS ToF Pro PASEF (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany). Here 100ms mobility ramps and 10 MS/MS events per a TIMS separation were used. Non-deuterated (ND) samples for these analyses were prepared similarly to deuterated ones but the buffer was prepared using normal H2O. To enable identification of the N-glycosylated sites, part of the proteins was deglycosylated by EndoH (New Englands Biolabs, Ipswich, MA, USA) – 10ug of  mTTYH1 was incubated with 500U of the enzyme at 30 °C overnight. Various quench conditions were tested – the quench solution was used either without denaturing agent or with 4 M urea or a mixture of 1M thiourea and 1.5M urea. Due to presence of disulfide bonds, TCEP was included in the quench and the sample was incubated 5 min on ice. The effect of denaturing agents was however negligible so it was omitted in the HDX experiment. On the other hand, inclusion of detergent, maintaining the CMC upon quenching provided better coverage in the hydrophobic regions and was thus used in the HDX-MS.

### Data Protocol
Acquired data were peak picked in Data Analysis (Bruker Daltonics) and exported to text files. These files were then loaded to DeutEx software [10.1074/MCP.RA118.001044] together with the sequence of the mTTYH1 construct and a list of identified peptides (see below). The processed HDX data were visualized in PyMol and using MSTools (http://peterslab.org/MSTools/index.php) [10.1016/j.ijms.2010.07.030]. Correction for back-exchange was done as described previously [10.1002/pro.5560020404 and 10.1096/fj.202000399R] LC-MS/MS data were searched against a custom built database using MASCOT search engine (v. 2.7, Matrix Science, London, United Kingdom). The database combined common cRAP.fasta (https://www.thegpm.org/crap/) with the sequence of mTTYH1, pepsin and nepenthesin-2. Search parameters were as follows – variable modification HexNAc at Asn, precursor tolerance 10ppm, fragment ion tolerance 0.05Da. Decoy search was enabled and FDR set to <1% and IonScore >15. Glycopeptides were manually identified in the glycosylated ND data based on the presence of oxonium ions in the MS/MS spectra and the known identity of the peptide part derived from the analysis of deglycosylated samples. Type of the glycan on each site and the distribution of glycoforms was the identified. Most intense glycoform were then included in the input file for DeuteEx software.

### Publication Abstract
The conserved Tweety homolog (TTYH) family consists of three paralogs in vertebrates, displaying a ubiquitous expression pattern. Although considered as ion channels for almost two decades, recent structural and functional analyses refuted this role. Intriguingly, while all paralogs shared a dimeric stoichiometry following detergent solubilization, their structures revealed divergence in their relative subunit orientation. Here, we determined the stoichiometry of intact mouse TTYH (mTTYH) complexes in cells. Using cross-linking and single-molecule fluorescence microscopy, we demonstrate that mTTYH1 and mTTYH3 form tetramers at the plasma membrane, stabilized by interactions between their extracellular domains. Using blue-native PAGE, fluorescence-detection size-exclusion chromatography, and hydrogen/deuterium exchange mass spectrometry (HDX-MS), we reveal that detergent solubilization results in tetramers destabilization, leading to their dissolution into dimers. Moreover, HDX-MS demonstrates that the extracellular domains are stabilized in the context of the tetrameric mTTYH complex. Together, our results expose the innate tetrameric organization of TTYH complexes at the cell membrane. Future structural analyses of these assemblies in native membranes are required to illuminate their long-sought cellular function.

### Keywords
Tweety homolog family, Hydrogen/deuterium exchange, Tetramer, Ttyh, Dimer

### Affiliations
Petr Man, PhD Laboratory of Structural Biology and Cell Signaling BioCeV - Institute of Microbiology of the Czech Acad Sci Prumyslova 595 252 50 Vestec Czech Republic
Institute of Microbiology of the CAS

### Submitter
Petr Man

### Lab Head
Dr Petr Man
Petr Man, PhD Laboratory of Structural Biology and Cell Signaling BioCeV - Institute of Microbiology of the Czech Acad Sci Prumyslova 595 252 50 Vestec Czech Republic


