### Accession
PXD025503

### Title
Obesity causes irreversible mitochondria failure in visceral adipose tissue despite successful anti-obesogenic lifestyle-based interventions

### Description
Metabolic plasticity is the ability of a biological system to adapt its metabolic phenotype to different environmental stressors. We used a whole-body and tissue- specific phenotypic, functional, metabolomic and transcriptomic approach to systematically assess metabolic plasticity in diet-induced obese mice after a combined nutritional and exercise intervention. Although most pathological features were successfully reverted, we observed a high degree of metabolic dysfunction irreversibility in visceral white adipose tissue, characterised by abnormal mitochondrial morphology and functionality. Despite two sequential therapeutic interventions and apparent global phenotypic recovery, obesity specifically triggered in visceral adipose tissue a cascade of events progressing from mitochondrial metabolic and proteostatic defects to widespread cellular stress, which compromises its biosynthetic and recycling capacity. Our data indicate that obesity prompts a lasting metabolic fingerprint that leads to an aging-like progressive breakdown of metabolic plasticity in white adipose tissue. A similar phenomenon was observed in an obese human cohort following weight loss. Further human studies should help dissect patients’ stratification of this significant milestone in obesity progression.

### Sample Protocol
Powdered fat pads were homogenized with ceramic beads (Percellys, 5500 rpm, 2 x 10 seconds, 30 seconds break) in the buffer containing 50 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 1% Triton X-100, 100 mM NaF, 10 mM sodium orthovanadate, 10 mM EDTA, 0.2% SDS, 100 mM NaCl. Homogenates were processed with Bioruptor (Diagenode SA; 10 min, cycle 30/30 seconds, at 4 C). Protein extracts were cleared from floating fat and tissue debris by centrifugation at 20000 xg. 150 ug of proteins were precipitated with 4x volume of ice-cold acetone, incubated for 15 min at -80 C, followed by 120 min incubation at -20 C. Precipitated proteins were pelleted by 15 min centrifugation at 16 000 xg and washed with ice-cold acetone twice. Air-dry pellets were resuspended in 8M Urea/50 mM TAEB buffer supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma). 150 ug of the sample were reduced in 5 mM DTT at 25 C for 1 hour, followed by treatment with 40 mM CAA for 30 min, in the dark, at room temperature. Lys-C protease was added at an enzyme:substrate ratio of 1:75 and incubated at 25 C for 4 hours. The sample was diluted with 50 mM TEAB to a final concentration of 2M Urea, and Trypsin was added at the ratio 1:75 followed by overnight digestion at 25 C. Sample was acidified with formic acid to a final concentration of 1%, and peptides were purified on the SDR-RP (C18) multi-stop-and-go-tip (Stage Tip) (Rappsilber et al., 2007). LCMS/MS proteomics analysis was done as previously described (Szczepanowska et al., 2020) . Briefly, all samples were analyzed on a Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer that was coupled to an EASY nLC (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded with solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) onto an in-house packed analytical column (50 cm — 75 µm I.D., filled with 2.7 µm Poroshell EC120 C18, Agilent) and separated with 150 min gradients. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode and MS1 survey scan was acquired from 300-1750 m/z at a resolution of 70,000. The top 10 most abundant peptides were isolated within a 1.8 Th window and subjected to HCD fragmentation using a collision energy of 27%. The AGC target was set to 5e5 charges, allowing a maximum injection time of 60 ms. Product ions were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. Precursors were dynamically excluded for 20.0 s

### Data Protocol
All mass spectrometric raw data were processed with Maxquant (version 1.5.3.8) using default parameters. False discovery rates on protein and PSM level were estimated by the target-decoy approach to 1% (Protein FDR) and 1% (PSM FDR), respectively. The downstream comparative analysis was performed in Perseus (v1.6.1.1) (Tyanova and Cox, 2018) and the dataset was filtered for proteins quantified in all the samples in at least one experimental group. Missing values were imputed using a Gaussian distribution of random numbers (width: 30% of standard deviation, down-shift: 1.8 standard deviations). Comparative analysis between groups was performed using a t-test (FDR=5% and S0=0.1).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Obesity, Ewat, Mouse, High-fat diet, Visceral adipose tissue

### Affiliations
Institute of Mitochondrial Disease and Ageing, Medical Faculty, University of Cologne
Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Ageing-Associated Diseases (CECAD), Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne (CMMC), and Institute for Mitochondrial Diseases and Ageing, Medical Faculty, University of Cologne D-50931 Cologne, Germany.

### Submitter
Karolina Szczepanowska

### Lab Head
Dr Aleksandra Trifunovic
Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Ageing-Associated Diseases (CECAD), Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne (CMMC), and Institute for Mitochondrial Diseases and Ageing, Medical Faculty, University of Cologne D-50931 Cologne, Germany.


