### Accession
PXD041033

### Title
USP1 expression driven by EWS-FLI1 transcription factor stabilizes Survivin and promotes Ewing sarcoma cell survival

### Description
Ewing sarcoma (EWS) is a malignant pediatric bone cancer. Most Ewing sarcomas are driven by EWS-FLI1 oncogenic transcription factor that plays roles in transcriptional regulation, DNA damage response, cell cycle checkpoint control, and alternative splicing. USP1, a deubiquitylase which regulates DNA damage and replication stress responses, is overexpressed at both the mRNA and protein levels in EWS cell lines compared to human mesenchymal stem cells, the EWS cell of origin. The functional significance of high USP1 expression in Ewing sarcoma is not known. Here, we identify USP1 as a transcriptional target of EWS-FLI1 and a key regulator of EWS cell survival. We show that EWS-FLI1 knockdown decreases USP1 mRNA and protein levels. ChIP and ChIP-seq analyses show EWS-FLI1 occupancy on the USP1 promoter. Importantly, USP1 knockdown or inhibition arrests EWS cell growth and induces cell death by apoptosis. We observe destabilization of Survivin (also known as BIRC5 or IAP4) and activation of caspases-3 and -7 following USP1 knockdown or inhibition in the absence of external DNA damage stimuli. Notably, EWS cells display hypersensitivity to combinatorial treatment of doxorubicin or etoposide, EWS standard of care drugs, and USP1 inhibitor compared to single agents alone. Together, our study demonstrates that USP1 is regulated by EWS-FLI1, the USP1-Survivin axis promotes EWS cell survival, and USP1 inhibition sensitizes EWS cells to standard of care chemotherapy.

### Sample Protocol
TC71 cell lines expressing a non-targeting shRNA or an shRNA against USP1 were used to analyze proteome quantification. Samples were prepared and TMT-labeled per manufacturer’s protocol (ThermoFisher TMT10plex Mass Tag Labeling Kit). After TMT labeling, acetonitrile was removed by Speedvac, and samples were resuspended in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. Sample cleanup with C18 tips was performed per the manufacturer’s protocol (Pierce, ThermoFisher). Sample concentrations were requantified (Pierce BCA Protein Assay kit) and combined in equal concentrations. Following combination, samples were dried by Speedvac and fractionated using the ThermoFisher high-pH reverse phase fractionation kit according to the manufacturer’s protocol for TMT. Resulting fractions were dried by Speedvac and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid for mass spectrometry analysis. TMT mass spectrometry and data analysis was performed in the Proteomics Core facility at UNMC. Samples were loaded onto trap column Acclaim PepMap 100 75µm x 2 cm C18 LC Columns (Thermo ScientificTM) at flow rate of 5µl/min then separated with a Thermo RSLC Ultimate 3000 (Thermo ScientificTM) from 5-20% solvent B (0.1% FA in 80% ACN) from 10-98 minutes at 300nL/min and 50ºC with a 120 minutes total run time for fractions one and two. For fractions three to six, solvent B was used at 5-45% for the same duration. Eluted peptides were analyzed by a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid (Thermo ScientificTM) mass spectrometer in a data dependent acquisition mode using synchronous precursor selection method. A survey full scan MS (from m/z 375- 1500) was acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 120,000. The AGC target for MS2 in iontrap was set as 1x104 and ion filling time set as 150ms and fragmented using CID fragmentation with 35% normalized collision energy. The AGC target for MS3 in orbitrap was set as 1x105 and ion filling time set as 200ms with a scan range of 100-500 and fragmented using HCD with 65% normalized collision energy.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was performed with Proteome Discoverer software version 2.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) by searching MS/MS data with Sequest against the UniProt human protein database (74600 sequences; downloaded 04/2020). The search was set up for full tryptic peptides with a maximum of 2 missed cleavage sites. Oxidation, TMT6plex of lysine, and phosphorylation of serine/threonine/tyrosine were included as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation and TMT6plex of the amino terminus were set as fixed modifications. The precursor mass tolerance threshold was set at 10ppm and fragment mass error of 0.6 Da with a minimum peptide length of 6 and a maximum peptide length of 144. The significance threshold of the ion score was calculated based on a false discovery rate calculated using the percolator node. Quantitation was performed on unique peptides considering protein groups for peptide uniqueness. Protein abundances were normalized by total peptide amount and scaled on channels average. Gene names were obtained from the description tab in the Proteome Discoverer output file.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ews-fli1, Usp1, Survivin

### Affiliations
University of Nebraska Medical Center
Department of Genetics, Cell Biology and Anatomy, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198, USA

### Submitter
Gargi Ghosal

### Lab Head
Dr Gargi Ghosal
Department of Genetics, Cell Biology and Anatomy, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198, USA


