### Accession
PXD031572

### Title
Proteomics analysis of physiological effect of ZBTB16 (PLZF) on osteogenic differentiation of human valve interstitial cells (VICs) by DDA PASEF on TimsToF Pro

### Description
During fundamental proteotranscriptomic analysis of human valve interstitial cells (VICs) osteogenic differentiation, we revealed ZBTB16 (PLZF) as one of the most upregulated proteins. Thus, to investigate its physiological role in VICs osteogenic differentiation we performed its overexpression by lentiviral transduction with subsequent proteomics analysis. Despite obvious PLZF overexpression and its reinforcing effect on osteogenic differentiation, we revealed surprisingly small amount of differentially expressed proteins that assumed to be the targets of PLZF.

### Sample Protocol
For PLZF overexpression we constructed plasmid by restriction cloning of full sequence of PLZF to pCIG3 (pCMV-IRES-GFP version 3) plasmid purchased from Adgene (Plasmid #78264). Lentiviral production was performed as described previously by three-plasmid system transduction of 293T cells with PEI (Malashicheva et al., 2007). Physiological effect of ZBTB16 overexpression was evaluated by Alizarine red stain and qPCR on Runx2, Col1A1 and PLZF. Proteomic analysis of VICs in control (transduction with empty vector) and PLZF overexpression was performed by “shotgun” approach with four biological replicates. On the 10th day after the induction of osteogenic differentiation, the cells were lysed in RIPA buffer supplemented with protease inhibitors. The cell slurry was sonicated on Ultrasonic bath with ice for 20 minutes. Samples were centrifuged at 16,000 g for 20 minutes at 4°C and protein was precipitated by classic acetone precipitation.  Protein pellet was re-dissolved in 8M Urea/50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Then the protein concentration was measured by Qubit 4.0 fluorimeter. 20 μg of each sample were incubated for 1 h at 37 °C with 5 mM DTT with subsequent incubation in 15 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark at RT. Next, the samples were diluted with seven volumes of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and incubated for 16 h at 37 °C with 400 ng of Trypsin Gold (ratio 1:50). The sample was mixed with formic acid to 1% final concentration, evaporated in Labconco Centrivap Centrifugal Concentrator and desalted with C18 ZipTip according to manufacturer recommendations. Desalted peptides were evaporated and dissolved in water/0.1% formic acid for further LC-MS/MS analysis. Approximate 500 ng of peptides were used for shotgun proteomics analysis by nanoHPLC-MS/MS with trapped ion mobility in TimsToF Pro mass spectrometer. HPLC was performed in two-column separation mode with Acclaim™ PepMap™ 5 mm Trap Cartridge and Bruker Fifteen separation column (C18 ReproSil AQ, 150 mm × 0.75 mm, 1.9 µm, 120 A; Bruker Daltonics) in gradient mode with 400 nL/min flow rate. Phase A was water/0.1% formic acid, phase B was acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid. The gradient was from 2% to 30% phase B for 42 min, then to 95% of phase B for 6 min with subsequent wash with 95% phase B for 6 min. CaptiveSpray ion source was used for electrospray ionization with 1600 V of capillary voltage, 3 l/min N 2 flow, and 180 °C source temperature. MS/MS acquisition was performed in automatic DDA PASEF mode with 0.5 s cycle in positive polarity with the fragmentation of ions with at least two charges in m/z range from 100 to 1700 and ion mobility range from 0.85 to 1.30 1/K0.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was performed in Peaks Xpro software (a license granted to St. Petersburg State University) using human protein SwissProt database (uploaded on 2 March 2021; 20,394 sequences) and protein contaminants database CRAP (https://www.thegpm.org/crap/; version of 4 March 2019; accessed on 07/02/2022). The search parameters were: parent mass error tolerance 10 ppm and fragment mass error tolerance 0.05 ppm, protein and peptide FDR less than 1%, 3 possible missed cleavage sites, proteins with at least one unique peptides were included for further analysis. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification. Methionine oxidation, acetylation of protein N-term, asparagine, and glutamine deamidation were set as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Heart valve calcification is an active cellular and molecular process that partly remains unknown. Osteogenic differentiation of valve interstitial cells (VIC) is a central mechanism in calcific aortic valve disease (CAVD). Studying mechanisms in CAVD progression is clearly needed. In this study, we compared molecular mechanisms of osteogenic differentiation of human VIC isolated from healthy donors or patients with CAVD by RNA-seq transcriptomics in early timepoint (48 h) and by shotgun proteomics at later timepoint (10th day). Bioinformatic analysis revealed genes and pathways involved in the regulation of VIC osteogenic differentiation. We found a high amount of stage-specific differentially expressed genes and good accordance between transcriptomic and proteomic data. Functional annotation of differentially expressed proteins revealed that osteogenic differentiation of VIC involved many signaling cascades such as: PI3K-Akt, MAPK, Ras, TNF signaling pathways. Wnt, FoxO, and HIF-1 signaling pathways were modulated only at the early timepoint and thus probably involved in the commitment of VIC to osteogenic differentiation. We also observed a significant shift of some metabolic pathways in the early stage of VIC osteogenic differentiation. Lentiviral overexpression of one of the most upregulated genes (ZBTB16, PLZF) increased calcification of VIC after osteogenic stimulation. Analysis with qPCR and shotgun proteomics suggested a proosteogenic role of ZBTB16 in the early stages of osteogenic differentiation.

### Keywords
Zbtb16; plzf; osteogenic differentiation; valve interstitial cells; pasef; timstof pro

### Affiliations
Laboratory of regenerative biomedicine, Institute of Cytology of the Russian Academy of Science
Emmanuel Levy Lab, Dept. of Chemical and Structural Biology, Weizmann Institute of Science

### Submitter
Arseniy Lobov

### Lab Head
Dr Anna B. Malashicheva
Laboratory of regenerative biomedicine, Institute of Cytology of the Russian Academy of Science


