### Accession
PXD029563

### Title
IgG binds Escherichia coli serine protease EspP and protects mice from E. coli O157:H7 infection

### Description
The effect of pooled immunoglobulins (IgG) on E. coli O157:H7 colonization and the course of disease in an EHEC mouse model was investigated showing an improved survival and decreased intestinal and renal pathology. Treatment was given after inoculation thereby corresponding to the clinical setting. In vitro studies identified E. coli serine protease EspP as the E. coli O157:H7 protein that IgG bound to, via the Fc fragment, in both murine and human IgG preparations, and blocked its enzymatic activity. EspP is a virulence factor previously shown to promote colonic cell injury and the uptake of Shiga toxin by intestinal cells. The results suggest that IgG in commercial preparations binds to EspP protecting the host from E. coli O157:H7 infection and could potentially be beneficial in patients.

### Sample Protocol
E. coli O157:H7 secreted proteins were eluted from PVDF membrane. The proteins were reduced with dithiothreitol and then alkylated with iodoacetamide. The samples were precipitated overnight using ethanol. Precipitated samples were centrifuged dissolved in ammonium bicarbonate and digested to peptides using trypsin. Peptides were analyzed by LC-MS on a fusion tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), operated in the positive data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed by Proteome Discoverer version 2.3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and peptides were identified using SEQUEST HT against Escherichia coli strain NADC 5570/86-24/6564|562.12925| down loaded (20200930) from https://patricbrc.org.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hemolytic uremic syndrome, Shiga toxin, Mouse, Escherichia coli o157:h7, Immunoglobulin g, Espp

### Affiliations
Dept. of Oncology, Clinical Sciences, Lund University, 221 85 Lund, Sweden
Department of Pediatrics, Clinical Sciences Lund, Lund University, Lund, Sweden

### Submitter
Charlotte Welinder

### Lab Head
Dr Diana Ora Karpman
Department of Pediatrics, Clinical Sciences Lund, Lund University, Lund, Sweden


