### Accession
PXD025885

### Title
IgG from systemic sclerosis patients induce a profibrosing and serotype-dependent phenotype in normal dermal fibroblast: a multi-omics study

### Description
Autoantibodies (Aab) are frequent in systemic sclerosis (SSc). While recognized as potent biomarkers, their pathogenic role is much debated. This study explored the effect of purified IgG from SSc patients on the phenotype and function of healthy dermal fibroblast (FB) using an innovative multi-omics approach.

### Sample Protocol
Normal dermal FB were cultured in the presence of purified IgG from patients with diffuse cutaneous SSc (dcSSc), limited cutaneous SSc or healthy controls (HC). FB proteome and transcriptome were explored using mass spectrometry coupled with liquid chromatography (LC-MS/MS) and microarray assays, respectively.

### Data Protocol
ormalization was performed with the Perseus software, including the imputation for missing values (8). This led to 3310 proteins measured in 15 SSc patients (5 ATA+ dcSSc, 5 ATA- dcSSc, 5 ACA+ lcSSc) and 5 HC and 764 genes quantified in 10 patients (5 ATA+ dcSSc, 5 ATA- dcSSc) and 5 non stimulated FB (NS). Exploration of transcriptomic and proteomic data was carried out with principal component analyses. Differential analyses were performed with the Bioconductor R package Limma (version 3.38.3) (9). Raw p-values were adjusted with the Benjamini-Hochberg method and transcripts or proteins with adjusted p-values below 0.05 were considered differentially expressed (DE) (10). Functional enrichment and pathway analysis were conducted using the Gene Ontology terms (GO terms)

### Publication Abstract
Autoantibodies (Aabs) are frequent in systemic sclerosis (SSc). Although recognized as potent biomarkers, their pathogenic role is debated. This study explored the effect of purified immunoglobulin G (IgG) from SSc patients on protein and mRNA expression of dermal fibroblasts (FBs) using an innovative multi-omics approach. Dermal FBs were cultured in the presence of sera or purified IgG from patients with diffuse cutaneous SSc (dcSSc), limited cutaneous SSc or healthy controls (HCs). The FB proteome and transcriptome were explored using liquid chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) and microarray assays, respectively. Proteomic analysis identified 3,310 proteins. SSc sera and purified IgG induced singular protein profile patterns. These FB proteome changes depended on the Aab serotype, with a singular effect observed with purified IgG from anti-topoisomerase-I autoantibody (ATA) positive patients compared to HC or other SSc serotypes. IgG from ATA positive SSc patients induced enrichment in proteins involved in focal adhesion, cadherin binding, cytosolic part, or lytic vacuole. Multi-omics analysis was performed in two ways: first by restricting the analysis of the transcriptomic data to differentially expressed proteins; and secondly, by performing a global statistical analysis integrating proteomics and transcriptomics. Transcriptomic analysis distinguished 764 differentially expressed genes and revealed that IgG from dcSSc can induce extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling changes in gene expression profiles in FB. Global statistical analysis integrating proteomics and transcriptomics confirmed that IgG from SSc can induce ECM remodeling and activate FB profiles. This effect depended on the serotype of the patient, suggesting that SSc Aab might play a pathogenic role in some SSc subsets.

### Keywords
Anti-topoisomerase type i, Autoantibodies, Systemic sclerosis, Multi-omics analysis, Sensitive proteomic

### Affiliations
MSAP USR 3290
Univ. Lille, U1286 – INFINITE – Institute for Translational Research in Inflammation, F59000 Lille, France

### Submitter
BRAY FABRICE

### Lab Head
Dr Vincent Sobanski
Univ. Lille, U1286 – INFINITE – Institute for Translational Research in Inflammation, F59000 Lille, France


