### Accession
PXD003098

### Title
In vivo trapping of thioredoxin substrates

### Description
Thioredoxin (Trx) is a ubiquitous oxidoreductase maintaining protein-bound cysteine residues in the reduced thiol state. Here, we combined a well-established method to trap Trx substrates with the power of bacterial genetics to comprehensively characterize the in vivo Trx redox interactome in the model bacterium Escherichia coli. Using strains engineered to optimize trapping, we report the identification of a total 257 Trx substrates, including 191 that had never been reported to depend on Trx for reduction. The newly identified Trx substrates are involved in a variety of cellular processes, ranging from energy metabolism to amino acid synthesis and transcription. The interaction between Trx and two of its newly identified substrates, a protein required for the import of most carbohydrates, PtsI, and the bacterial actin homolog MreB was studied in detail. We provide direct evidence that PtsI and MreB contain cysteine residues that are susceptible to oxidation and that participate in the formation of an intermolecular disulfide with Trx. By considerably expanding the number of Trx targets, our work highlights the role played by this major oxidoreductase in a variety of cellular processes. Moreover, as the dependence on Trx for reduction is often conserved across species, it also provides insightful information on the interactome of Trx in organisms other than E. coli

### Sample Protocol
To trap E. coli Trx1 bound to its substrates, we used a mutant version of the protein lacking the second cysteine of the catalytic site and fused to a C-terminal His-tag (Trx1WCGPA). This mutant was expressed in a strain in which the Trx system had been disrupted by deletion of both trxA (encoding Trx1) and trxC , Trx1WCGPA and its covalently-bound partners were then purified by affinity chromatography. The purified sample was then analyzed by two-dimensional gel electrophoresis, in which the first dimension is non-reducing while the second is reducing. In this experiment, proteins that were not linked to Trx1WCGPA by a disulfide bond were separated according to molecular weight in both dimensions and were therefore found on a diagonal in the second dimension. In contrast, proteins that were in complex with Trx1WCGPA were separated from it under the reducing conditions of the second dimension and were found off the diagonal. These proteins were subjected to MS/MS analysis and identified. Spots of interest were excised from the SDS-PAGE gel, digested with trypsin, and analyzed by liquid chromatographic tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) as described. Briefly, peptides were separated by an acetonitrile gradient on a C18 column and the MS scan routine was set to analyze by MS/MS the five most intense ions of each full MS scan, dynamic exclusion was enabled to assure detection of co-eluting peptides

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was performed with SequestHT. In details, peak lists were generated using extract-msn (ThermoScientific) within Proteome Discoverer 1.4.1. From raw files, MS/MS spectra were exported with the following settings: peptide mass range: 350–5000 Da, minimal total ion intensity 500. The resulting peak lists were searched using SequestHT against a target-decoy E. coli protein database obtained from Uniprot. The following parameters were used: trypsin was selected with proteolytic cleavage only after arginine and lysine, number of internal cleavage sites was set to 1, mass tolerance for precursors and fragment ions was 1.0 Da, considered dynamic modifications were + 15.99 Da for oxidized methionine and +57.00 for carbamidomethyl cysteine. Peptide matches were filtered using the q-value and Posterior Error Probability calculated by the Percolator algorithm ensuring an estimated false positive rate below 5%. The filtered Sequest HT output files for each peptide were grouped according to the protein from which they were derived and their individual number of peptide spectral matches was taken as an indicator of protein abundance

### Publication Abstract
Thioredoxin (Trx) is a ubiquitous oxidoreductase maintaining protein-bound cysteine residues in the reduced thiol state. Here, we combined a well-established method to trap Trx substrates with the power of bacterial genetics to comprehensively characterize the in vivo Trx redox interactome in the model bacterium Escherichia coli Using strains engineered to optimize trapping, we report the identification of a total 268 Trx substrates, including 201 that had never been reported to depend on Trx for reduction. The newly identified Trx substrates are involved in a variety of cellular processes, ranging from energy metabolism to amino acid synthesis and transcription. The interaction between Trx and two of its newly identified substrates, a protein required for the import of most carbohydrates, PtsI, and the bacterial actin homolog MreB was studied in detail. We provide direct evidence that PtsI and MreB contain cysteine residues that are susceptible to oxidation and that participate in the formation of an intermolecular disulfide with Trx. By considerably expanding the number of Trx targets, our work highlights the role played by this major oxidoreductase in a variety of cellular processes. Moreover, as the dependence on Trx for reduction is often conserved across species, it also provides insightful information on the interactome of Trx in organisms other than E. coli.

### Keywords
Trx1, Substrates, E. coli

### Affiliations
UCL - de Duve Institute, Brussels Belgium
UCL - de Duve Institute - Brussels Center for Redox Biology, 1200 Brussels Belgium

### Submitter
Didier Vertommen

### Lab Head
Dr Jean-François Collet
UCL - de Duve Institute - Brussels Center for Redox Biology, 1200 Brussels Belgium


