### Accession
PXD014097

### Title
Auto-phosphorylation at serine 166 regulates RIP kinase 1 mediated cell death and inflammation

### Description
Receptor interacting kinase 1 (RIPK1) regulates cell death and inflammatory responses downstream of TNFR1 and other receptors, and has been implicated in the pathogenesis of inflammatory and degenerative diseases. RIPK1 kinase activity induces cell death by activating apoptosis and necroptosis, however the mechanisms and phosphorylation events regulating RIPK1-dependent cell death signalling remain poorly understood. Here we show that RIPK1 auto-phosphorylation at serine (S) 166 plays a critical role for the activation of RIPK1 kinase-dependent apoptosis and necroptosis. Moreover, we show that S166 phosphorylation is required for RIPK1 kinase-dependent pathogenesis of inflammatory pathologies in vivo in four relevant mouse models. Mechanistically, we provide evidence that trans auto-phosphorylation at S166 modulates RIPK1 kinase activation but is not by itself sufficient for the induction of cell death. These results show that S166 auto-phosphorylation licences RIPK1 kinase activity to induce downstream cell death signalling and inflammation, suggesting that S166 phosphorylation can serve as a reliable biomarker for RIPK1 kinase-dependent pathologies.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysates were precipitated with acetone and resuspended in 8 M Urea. After reduction with DTT and carbamidomethylation with IAA, proteins were digested overnight at RT, using the proteases LysC (Wako) and trypsin (Promega). Samples were desalted using SepPak C18 cartridges (Waters) and phosphorylated peptides enriched with the High-Select TiO2 Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit (Thermo Fisher). Proteomic analysis was performed using an Easy nLC 1000 UHPLC coupled to a QExactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). Peptides were resuspended in Solvent A (0.1% FA), picked up with an autosampler and loaded onto in-house made 50 cm fused silica columns (internal diameter (I.D.) 75 μm, C18 1.7 μm, Dr. Maisch beads) at a flow rate of 0.75 µL/min. A 90 min segmented gradient of 8-48% Solvent B (80% ACN in 0.1% FA) over 61 min, 48-70% Solvent B over 6 min, and 70-95% Solvent B over 5 min at a flow rate of 250 nL/min was used to elute peptides. Eluted peptides were sprayed into the heated transfer capillary of the mass spectrometer using a nano-electrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode, where the Orbitrap acquired full MS scans (300-1750 m/z) at a resolution (R) of 70,000 with an automated gain control (AGC) target of 3×106 ions collected within 20 ms. The dynamic exclusion time was set to 20 s. From the full MS scan, the 10 most intense peaks (z≥2) were fragmented in the high-energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) cell. The HCD normalized collision energy was set to 25%. MS/MS scans with an ion target of 1×106 ions were acquired with R = 17,500, with a maximal injection time of 80 ms and an isolation width of 2.0 m/z.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were processed using MaxQuant software and its implemented Andromeda search engine. Parameters were set to default values and Phospho (STY) was added as variable modification. Phosphosite intensities were logarithmized using Perseus software.

### Publication Abstract
Receptor interacting protein kinase 1 (RIPK1) regulates cell death and inflammatory responses downstream of TNFR1 and other receptors, and has been implicated in the pathogenesis of inflammatory and degenerative diseases. RIPK1 kinase activity induces apoptosis and necroptosis, however the mechanisms and phosphorylation events regulating RIPK1-dependent cell death signaling remain poorly understood. Here we show that RIPK1 autophosphorylation at serine 166 plays a critical role for the activation of RIPK1 kinase-dependent apoptosis and necroptosis. Moreover, we show that S166 phosphorylation is required for RIPK1 kinase-dependent pathogenesis of inflammatory pathologies in vivo in four relevant mouse models. Mechanistically, we provide evidence that trans autophosphorylation at S166 modulates RIPK1 kinase activation but is not by itself sufficient to induce cell death. These results show that S166 autophosphorylation licenses RIPK1 kinase activity to induce downstream cell death signaling and inflammation, suggesting that S166 phosphorylation can serve as a reliable biomarker for RIPK1 kinase-dependent pathologies.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Cell death, Inflammation

### Affiliations
Institute for Genetics, Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases (CECAD) and Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany
Institute for Genetics/CECAD (AG Krüger)

### Submitter
Janica  Wiederstein

### Lab Head
Dr Manolis Pasparakis
Institute for Genetics, Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases (CECAD) and Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany


