### Accession
PXD024242

### Title
Analysis of the apical secretome of Calu-3 and NHBE cells in 3D models of the human bronchial epithelium

### Description
The mucus secreted by airway epithelial cells plays a key role in the protection against and clearance of particles and pathogens. In this project, a 3D model of the bronchial epithelium was established using Calu-3 cells grown on porous inserts at the air-liquid interface. The secreted proteins were characterized in long-term cultures and compared to the apical secretome of primary normal human bronchial epithelial (NHBE) cells. The apical secretome was collected and characterized in the Calu-3 model at day 4, day 11, and day 18 after air-liquid interface and in the NHBE model at day 4, day 12, and day 18 after air-liquid interface. "This project received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation program under grant agreement no 760928 (BIORIMA)."

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were collected from the apical compartment of cells grown on Transwell® inserts. 16 µg of protein were precipitated in cold acetone, then resuspended in 25 mM NH4HCO3 buffer before tryptic digestion (overnight). Peptides were desalted and concentrated with 10 μL ZipTip µ-C18 Pipette Tips (Millipore). Peptides were analyzed on a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer coupled to a Proxeon 1000 Nano-LC (ThermoFisher). Peptides were separated by chromatography using the following specifications: Acclaim PepMap100 C18 pre-column (2 cm, 75 μm i.d., 3 μm, 100 Å); Pepmap-RSLC Proxeon C18 column (50 cm, 75 μm i.d., 2 μm, 100 Å); 300 nL/min flow rate, 98 min gradient going from 95% solvent A (water, 0.1% formic acid) to 35% solvent B (100% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) followed by column regeneration (total time 120 min). Peptides were first analyzed in a positive mode in the Orbitrap cell at a 70,000 resolution with an m/z range of 375-1500. MS/MS data were acquired in the Orbitrap cell in a Top20 mode with an AGC target of 3.106 for full MS.

### Data Protocol
Label-Free quantitation was performed using Progenesis QI proteomics software (Waters) using HI-3 method for quantification of proteins. Data were processed with Proteome Discoverer 2.2 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Identification was performed on Mascot search server (Matrix Science; version 2.4) used in Proteome Discoverer 2.4. The mass tolerance of fragment ions was set to 6 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragments. Identification of tryptic peptides related to proteins was performed on the following databases Swissprot Homo sapiens (2019 update) or Swissprot Bos Taurus (2019 update). Post-translational modifications were searched in dynamics parameters: oxidation (M), phosphorylation (S/T/Y), acetylation (Protein N-terminal). The maximum number of missed cleavages was limited to two for trypsin digestion. P-values of peptides were calculated using the percolator algorithm, and a 5% filter was applied as a false-discovery rate threshold.

### Publication Abstract
The human bronchial epithelium is the first line of defense against atmospheric particles, pollutants, and respiratory pathogens such as the novel SARS-CoV-2. The epithelial cells form a tight barrier and secrete proteins that are major components of the mucosal immune response. Functional in vitro models of the human lung are essential for screening the epithelial response and assessing the toxicity and barrier crossing of drugs, inhaled particles, and pollutants. However, there is a lack of models to investigate the effect of chronic exposure without resorting to animal testing. Here, we developed a 3D model of the human bronchial epithelium using Calu-3 cell line and demonstrated its viability and functionality for 21&#xa0;days without subculturing. We investigated the effect of reduced Fetal Bovine Serum supplementation in the basal medium and defined the minimal supplementation needed to maintain a functional epithelium, so that the amount of exogenous serum proteins could be reduced during drug testing. The long-term evolution of the epithelial cell secretome was fully characterized by quantitative mass spectrometry in two preclinical models using Calu-3 or primary NHBE cells. 408 common secreted proteins were identified while significant differences in protein abundance were observed with time, suggesting that 7-10&#xa0;days are necessary to establish a mature secretome in the Calu-3 model. The associated Reactome pathways highlight the role of the secreted proteins in the immune response of the bronchial epithelium. We suggest this preclinical 3D model can be used to evaluate the long-term toxicity of drugs or particles on the human bronchial epithelium, and subsequently to investigate their effect on the epithelial cell secretions.

### Keywords
Human, Calu-3, Lc-msms, Apical secretome, Epithelial cells, Nhbe

### Affiliations
Equipe 6 BFA, Université de Paris 
Université de Paris, BFA unit UMR 8251 CNRS

### Submitter
Daniel Sanchez-Guzman

### Lab Head
Dr Armelle Baeza Squiban
Université de Paris, BFA unit UMR 8251 CNRS


