### Accession
PXD008679

### Title
Shotgun proteomics of chemosensory organs of Varroa destructor mite

### Description
Aims of the project is the identification of soluble chemosensory proteins in the olfactory organs of the honeybee mite Varroa destructor. Different families of soluble proteins acting as carriers for odorants have been identified in hexapods, while very limited information is available for other terrestrial Arthropoda. In mites and ticks olfactory organs are located on the distal part of the forelegs and on the capitulum appendages. These two body tagmata and the second pair of legs as control, have been dissected out of phoretics and reproductives Varroa destructor females and protein extracts have been analysed through shotgun proteomics. Protein identification and relative quantification (Label-free quantification, LFQ) has been performed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.8.3). Among the proteins more abundant in appendages bearing chemosensory organs, considering as a model hexapoda soluble olfactory proteins, we have searched for small secreted proteins whose structure include a hydrophobic binding pocket.

### Sample Protocol
Mites were collected either from forager bees or drones, from young bees and from male larvae. For each of these groups, protein extracts were prepared from pools of 3 different appendages (forelegs, mouth parts and second pair of legs) dissected from 35 individuals. Three biological replicates were prepared. The pools were crushed in a mortar under liquid nitrogen and the proteins extracted with 6 M urea/2 M thiourea in Tris–Cl 50 mM pH 7.4. The protein extracts were centrifuged at 14,000 rpm for 40 min at 4 °C and the supernatants were collected for the analysis. The total amount of protein in each sample was assessed by the Bradford colorimetric assay with the “Bio-Rad Protein Assay” kit using serial dilutions of bovine serum albumin to generate a standard curve. Protein sample concentration was measured by an Infinite PRO 200 reader (TECAN). Protein digestion was carried out on 15 μg protein extracts. Reduction of disulfide bridges was performed by treating samples with DTT (1 μg of DTT/50 μg of proteins for 30 min at RT), followed by alkylation (5 μg of iodoacetamide/50μg of proteins for 20 min at RT in the dark). Protein samples were diluted 3 times with 500mM ammonium bicarbonate, to increase pH and reduce the concentration of urea/thiourea. A first enzymatic digestion was performed by incubating the samples with LysC in a 1:50 ratio (w/w) for 3 h at 37 °C. The digestion products were then incubated with trypsin in a 1:50 ratio (w/w) overnight at 37 °C. The digested samples were then acidified by adding trifluoracetic acid and desalted on STop And Go Extraction (STAGE) tips. The eluates were concentrated and reconstituted to 20 μL in 0.5% acetic acid, prior to HPLC–MS analyses. The   extract   was   analysed   on a LC-MS/MS system (Eksigent nanoLC 1D+  coupled  to  a  Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo)), on a C18 column  (75micron i.d., 25 cm length, packed with 1.8 micron C18 beads, (Dr. Maisch)). The flow rate was 200 nL/min   and the gradient used  ranged from 5%  to  60%  of  solvent  B  (solvent  A = 5%acetonitrile,  0.1%  formic acid;  solvent  B  80%  acetonitrile,  0.1%formic  acid) in 255 minutes.  The nanospray  source  was  operated  with  a  spray voltage  of  2.1 kV  and  ion  transfer  tube  temperature  of  275 °C. Data were acquired in data dependent mode, with one survey MS scan in the (resolution 60,000 at m/z 400) followed by up to 10 MS/MS on the most intense. Once selected for fragmentation, ions were excluded from further selection for 30 seconds, in order to increase new sequencing events.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and relative quantification (Label-free quantification, LFQ) has been performed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.8.3). Data were searched against a collection of protein sequences predicted by the genome, all viruses known to infect Apis mellifera and Varroa, and A. mellifera protein sequences. Since our target was to identify putative soluble olfactory proteins, we also added those sequences of NPC2 and OBP-like reported in NCBI as proteins and in the transcriptomic analysis of Varroa chemosensory tissues (PMID: 29026097) and absent in any of the previous databases. Default search settings of Maxquant were used, with trypsin cleavage specificity, 2 allowed missed cleavages, variable oxidated methionine and N-terminal acetylation, fixed carbamidomethyl modification, parent masses were allowed an initial mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and fragment ions were allowed a mass deviation of 0.5 Da. PSM (Peptide Spectrum Match) and protein identifications were filtered using a target-decoy approach at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%. Relative, Label-Free Quantification (LFQ) of proteins was done using the MaxLFQ algorithm integrated into MaxQuant. The match between runs option was enabled with a match time window of 0.7 min in and an alignment time window of 20 min. For protein quantification we used 1 as Minimum ratio count, “Unique + Razor” peptides, peptides with variable modifications, and selected “discard unmodified counterpart peptide”.

### Publication Abstract
We have performed a proteomic analysis on chemosensory organs of Varroa destructor, the honey bee mite, in order to identify putative soluble carriers for pheromones and other olfactory cues emitted by the host. In particular, we have analysed forelegs, mouthparts (palps, chelicera and hypostome) and the second pair of legs (as control tissue) in reproductive and phoretic stages of the Varroa life cycle. We identified 958 Varroa proteins, most of them common to the different organs and stages. Sequence analysis shows that four proteins can be assigned to the odorant-binding protein (OBP)-like class, which bear some similarity to insect OBPs, but so far have only been reported in some Chelicerata. In addition, we have detected the presence of two proteins belonging to the Niemann-Pick family, type C2 (NPC2), which have also been suggested as semiochemical carriers. Biological significance: The mite Varroa destructor is the major parasite of the honey bee and is responsible for great economical losses. The biochemical tools used by Varroa to detect semiochemicals produced by the host are still largely unknown. This work contributes to understand the molecular basis of olfaction in Varroa and, more generally, how detection of semiochemicals has evolved in terrestrial non-hexapod Arthropoda. Moreover, the identification of molecular carriers involved in olfaction can contribute to the development of control strategies for this important parasite.

### Keywords
Forelegs, Olfaction, Lc-ms/ms, Capitulum., Chemosensory proteins

### Affiliations
University of Firenze
Biology Department, University of Firenze. Italy.

### Submitter
Francesca Romana Dani

### Lab Head
Dr Francesca Romana Dani
Biology Department, University of Firenze. Italy.


