### Accession
PXD028460

### Title
GDAP1 loss of function inhibits the mitochondrial pyruvate dehydrogenase complex by altering the actin cytoskeleton

### Description
Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT) disease 4A is an autosomal-recessive polyneuropathy caused by mutations of ganglioside-induced differentiation-associated protein 1 (GDAP1), a putative glutathione transferase, which affects mitochondrial shape and alters cellular Ca2+ homeostasis. Here, we identify the underlying mechanism. We found that patient-derived motoneurons and GDAP1 knockdown SH-SY5Y cells display two phenotypes: more tubular mitochondria and a metabolism characterized by glutamine dependence and fewer cytosolic lipid droplets. GDAP1 interacts with the actin-depolymerizing protein Cofilin-1 in a redox-dependent manner, suggesting a role for actin signaling. Consistently, GDAP1 loss causes less F-actin close to mitochondria, which restricts mitochondrial localization of the fission factor dynamin-related protein 1, instigating tubularity. Changes in the actin cytoskeleton also disrupt mitochondria-ER contact sites. This results in lower mitochondrial Ca2+ levels and inhibition of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex, explaining the metabolic changes upon GDAP1 loss of function. Together, these findings reconcile GDAP1-associated phenotypes and implicate disrupted actin signaling in CMT4A pathophysiology.

### Sample Protocol
Protein elution, lysis and digestion Whole cells were lysed in 5 µl of 10% SDS at 95 °C for 5 min. Protein samples were digested using the SP3 (“Single-Pot Solid-Phase-Enhanced Sample Preparation'') protocol (Hughes et al. 2014) with modifications (Sielaff et al. 2017). Proteins were reduced by adding 5 µl of 200 mM Dithiothreitol (DTT) per 100 µl lysate (45°C, 30 min). Free cysteines were subsequently alkylated by adding 10 µl 100 mM Iodoacetamide (IAA) per 100 µl lysate (RT, 30 min, in the dark). Subsequently, remaining IAA was quenched by adding 10 µl 200 mM DTT per 100 µl lysate. Magnetic carboxylate modified particles Beads (SpeedBeads, Sigma) were used for protein clean-up and acetonitrile (ACN), in a final concentration of 70%, was added to the samples to induce the binding of the proteins to the beads by hydrophilic interactions (18 min RT). By incubating the bead-protein mixture on a magnetic stand for 2 min, the sample was bound to the magnet and the supernatant removed, followed by two washing-steps with 70% ethanol (EtOH), addition of 180 µl ACN, incubation for 15 s and removal of the solvent. Finally, 5 µl digest buffer (50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 1:25 w/w trypsin:protein ratio) was added to the air-dried bead-protein mixtures and incubated overnight at 37°C. To purify peptides after digestion, ACN was added to a final concentration of 95%. After another washing step. the beads were resuspended in 10 µl 2% DMSO (in water), put into an ultrasonic bath for 1 min and then shortly centrifuged. 10 µl of the resulting supernatant was mixed with 5 µl 100 fmol/µl Enolase digest (Waters Corporation) and acidified with 5 µl 1% formic acid (FA). LC-MS analysis  Liquid chromatography (LC) of tryptic peptides was performed on a NanoAQUITY UPLC system (Waters Corporation) equipped with 75 µM x 250 mm HSS-T3 C18 column (Waters corporation). Mobile phase A was 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (FA) and 3% (v/v) DMSO in water. Mobile phase B was 0.1% (v/v) FA and 3% (v/v) DMSO in ACN. Peptides were separated running a gradient from 5 to 40% (v/v) mobile phase B at a flow rate of 300 nL/ min over 90 min. The column was heated to 55°C. MS analysis of eluting peptides was performed by ion-mobility enhanced data-independent acquisition (UDMSE) (Distler et al. 2014). Precursor ion information was collected in low-energy MS mode at a constant collision energy of 4 eV. Fragment ion information was obtained in the elevated energy scan applying drift-time specific collision energies. The spectral acquisition time in each mode was 0.7 s with a 0.05 s interscan delay resulting in an overall cycle time of 1.5 s for the acquisition of one cycle of low and elevated energy data. [Glu1]-fibrinopeptide was used as lock mass at 100 fmol/μL and sampled every 30 s into the mass spectrometer via the reference sprayer of the NanoLockSpray source. All samples were analyzed in three technical replicates.

### Data Protocol
UDMSE data processing and database search was performed using ProteinLynx Global Server (PLGS, ver. 3.0.2, Waters Corporation). The resulting proteins were searched against the UniProt proteome database (species: Mus musculus, UniProtK-Swissprot release 2019_05, 17.051 entries; Homo sapiens, UniProtK-Swissprot release 2019_10, 20367 entries) supplemented with a list of common contaminants. The database search was specified by trypsin as enzyme for digestion and peptides with up to two missed cleavages were included. Carbamidomethyl cysteine was set as fixed modification and oxidized methionine as variable modification. False discovery rate assessment for peptide and protein identification was done using the target-decoy strategy by searching a reverse database and was set to 0.01 for database search in PLGS. Retention time alignment, exact mass retention time (EMRT), as well as normalization and filtering were performed in ISOQuant ver.1.8.  (Distler et al. 2014). By using TOP3 quantification, absolute in-sample amounts of proteins were calculated.

### Publication Abstract
Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT) disease 4A is an autosomal-recessive polyneuropathy caused by mutations of ganglioside-induced differentiation-associated protein 1 (GDAP1), a putative glutathione transferase, which affects mitochondrial shape and alters cellular Ca<sup>2+</sup> homeostasis. Here, we identify the underlying mechanism. We found that patient-derived motoneurons and GDAP1 knockdown SH-SY5Y cells display two phenotypes: more tubular mitochondria and a metabolism characterized by glutamine dependence and fewer cytosolic lipid droplets. GDAP1 interacts with the actin-depolymerizing protein Cofilin-1 and beta-tubulin in a redox-dependent manner, suggesting a role for actin signaling. Consistently, GDAP1 loss causes less F-actin close to mitochondria, which restricts mitochondrial localization of the fission factor dynamin-related protein 1, instigating tubularity. GDAP1 silencing also disrupts mitochondria-ER contact sites. These changes result in lower mitochondrial Ca<sup>2+</sup> levels and inhibition of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex, explaining the metabolic changes upon GDAP1 loss of function. Together, our findings reconcile GDAP1-associated phenotypes and implicate disrupted actin signaling in CMT4A pathophysiology.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Gdap1, Β-oxidation

### Affiliations
University Medical Center of the Johannes Gutenberg-University Mainz
Institute for Immunology, University Medical Center Mainz. Langenbeckstr. 1 55131 Mainz, Germany

### Submitter
David Gomez-Zepeda

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan Tenzer
Institute for Immunology, University Medical Center Mainz. Langenbeckstr. 1 55131 Mainz, Germany


