### Accession
PXD018740

### Title
Deconstructing a type III secretion system effector network unravels the inherent robustness and plasticity in pathogenesis and immunity

### Description
Many Gram-negative pathogens use type III secretion systems to inject networks of effectors that subvert host cell processes. We modelled the robustness of such network using the mouse pathogen Citrobacter rodentium (encoding 31 effectors) through sequential deletions of effector genes, generating 100 distinct mutant combinations, which were tested in vivo. Counterintuitively, mutants lacking 19 unrelated effectors (CR14) or 10 immune-modulating effectors (CRi9) colonised and induced conserved molecular signatures of infection in intestinal epithelial cells. Specifically, CRi9 triggered heightened colonic secretion of TNF, IL-22, IL-17A and IFN-γ, while CR14 induced high-level secretion of IL-6 and GM-CSF with lower recruitment of myeloid cells. Yet, both CR14 and CRi9 induced sterile immunity. A machine learning model, trained on the mutant phenotypes and effector function, predicted an unprecedented combination of colonisation-failure effector mutations, which was validated experimentally. These results reveal the robustness and combinatorial plasticity of both the effector network and host immunity.

### Sample Protocol
Extraction of intestinal epithelial cells for proteomics:  At 8 DPI, a 4-cm segment of terminal colon was cut longitudinally and half of it was placed in 4 ml enterocyte dissociation buffer (1× Hanks’ balanced salt solution without Mg and Ca with 10 mM HEPES, 1 mM EDTA, and 0.5% of β-mercaptoethanol), and incubated at 37°C with shaking for 45 min. The remaining tissue was removed and stored at −80°C, and detached intestinal epithelial cells (IECs) were collected by centrifugation (2,000 × g for 10 min), followed by three washes with ice-cold PBS; cell were centrifuged at 4°C after the first spin. IEC pellets were stored at −80°C until proteomics analysis.   Sample preparation and TMT labelling:  For the final analysis, we included mice in which satisfactory colonisation level following the infection was reached (>1x107 CFU/g stool by 8 DPI). IEC pellets isolated from 5 mice per condition per biological replicate were solubilized using probe sonication in lysis buffer (100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), 1% sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 10% isopropanol, 50 mM NaCl) supplemented with Halt Protease and Phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Thermo Scientific, Catalog Number 78442), boiled for 5 min at 90°C,  and finally re-sonicated. Protein concentration was measured with Coomasie Plus assay (Thermo Scientific) following manufacturer’s protocol. 100 µg of protein, with an equal contribution from each individual mouse within the group were reduced with 5 mM tris-2-carboxyethyl phosphine (TCEP) for 1 h, followed by alkylation with 10 mM iodoacetymide (IAA) for 30 min, then digested by adding trypsin (Pierce) at final concentration 75 ng/µl to each sample and incubating the samples for 18 h at room temperature. Peptides were labelled with tandem mass tag (TMT) multiplex reagent (Thermo Scientific) following manufacturer’s protocol. SDC was precipitated with formic acid (FA) at final concentration of 2% (v/v) and centrifugation for 5 min at 10,0000 rpm. Supernatant containing TMT-labelled peptides was dried with a centrifugal vacuum concentrator.   High-pH Reversed-Phase peptide fractionation and LC-MS analysis:  Prior to mass spectrometry (MS) analysis, TMT-labelled peptides underwent high-pH reversed-phase (RP) fractionation using the Waters XBridge C18 column (2.1 × 150 mm, 3.5 μm) on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) system. 0.1% ammonium hydroxide was used as Mobile phase A, while mobile phase B was 100% acetonitrile and 0.1% ammonium hydroxide. The peptides were separated with a gradient elution at 200 µl/min including the following steps: isocratic for 5 min at 5% phase B, gradient for 40 min to 35% phase B, gradient to 80% phase B in 5 min, isocratic for 5 min, and re-equilibrated to 5% phase B. Fractions were collected in a 96-well plate every 42 s to a total of 65 fractions, then concatenated into 28 fractions, dried and reconstituted in 50 μl 0.1% formic acid. A Dionex Ultimate 3000 system and an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) were used for data acquisition. From each fraction 10 μl was injected onto a C18 trapping column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 100 μm × 2 cm,  5 μm, 100 Å) at a 10 μl/min flow rate. The samples were subjected to a low-pH gradient elution on a nanocapillary reversed phase column (Acclaim PepMap  C18, 75 μm × 50 cm, 2 μm, 100 Å) at 45°C. Mobile phases A and B were 0.1% formic acid and 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid respectively. The separation was performed at 300 nl/min flow rate and 90 min gradient from 5% to 38% phase B followed by 10 min up to 95% phase B, isocratic for 5 min at 95% B, re-equilibrated to 5% phase B in 5 min, and isocratic for 10 min at 5% phase B. MS1 scans were collected with mass resolution of 120,000, automatic gain control of 4 × 105, and injection time of 50 ms. Precursor ions (Top Speed mode, 3 s) were fragmented with collision-induced dissociation (CID) with a quadrupole isolation width of 0.7 Th (Thomson unit). Collision energy was set at 35%, with AGC at 1 × 104 and IT at 50 ms. Quantification was obtained at the MS3 level with higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation of the top 7 most abundant CID fragments isolated with synchronous precursor selection (SPS). Quadrupole isolation width was set at 0.7 Th, collision energy was applied at 65%, and the AGC setting was at 1 × 105 with IT at 105 ms. The HCD MS3 spectra were acquired for the range 100-500 m/z with a resolution of 50,000. Targeted precursors were dynamically excluded for further fragmentation for 45 s with 7 ppm mass tolerance.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched against UniProt annotated reference proteomes of Mus musculus and Citrobacter rodentium in Proteome Discoverer 2.3 (Thermo Scientific) with the SEQUEST-HT engine using following parameters: 20 ppm precursor mass tolerance and 0.5 Da fragment ion mass tolerance, the static modifications were specified as carbamidomethylation of Cys residues and TMT modification of peptide N-term and Lys residues, while dynamic modifications were specified as oxidation of Met and deamidation of Asp and Glu residues. The search was restricted to fully tryptic peptides with maximum of 2 missed-cleavages.  Based on the q value and decoy database search confidence of peptide discovery was estimated at 1% FDR with percolator node. The reporter ion quantifier node included a TMT-10-plex quantification method with an integration window tolerance of 15 ppm and integration method based on the most confident centroid peak at MS3 level. Protein groups with only unique peptides were used for quantification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse, Tmt, Citrobacter rodentium, Ms-ms

### Affiliations
The Institute of Cancer Research
The Institute of Cancer Research, London

### Submitter
James Wright

### Lab Head
Dr Jyoti Choudhary
The Institute of Cancer Research, London


