### Accession
PXD031242

### Title
XL-MS of RBBP6-bound CPSF complex

### Description
The 3’ ends of almost all eukaryotic mRNAs are generated in an essential two-step processing reaction, endonucleolytic cleavage of an extended precursor followed by the addition of a poly(A) tail. By reconstituting the reaction from overproduced and purified proteins, we provide a minimal list of fourteen polypeptides essential and two stimulatory for RNA processing. In a reaction depending on the polyadenylation signal AAUAAA, the reconstituted system cleaves pre-mRNA at a single preferred site corresponding to the one used in vivo. Among the proteins, Cleavage Factor I stimulates cleavage but is not essential, consistent with its prominent role in alternative polyadenylation. RBBP6 is required, structural data showing it to contact and presumably activate the endonuclease CPSF73 through its DWNN domain. The C-terminal domain of RNA polymerase II is dispensable. ATP, but not its hydrolysis, supports RNA cleavage by binding to the hClp1 subunit of cleavage factor II with submicromolar affinity.

### Sample Protocol
For cross-linking mass spectrometry with BS3, 1.0 µM CPSF and RBBP6 were mixed with an RNA substrate in a buffer containing 20 mM HEPES-KOH pH 7.9, 55 mM NaCl and 1 mM MgCl2. The sample was incubated 45 min at 4˚C before 0.5 mM BS3 was added. After 20 min incubation at 4˚C, the reaction was quenched by adding ~ 40 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5 and incubating 15 min at 4˚C. The sample was spun for 10 min at 18,000 g. For denaturation of the crosslinked proteins, 4 M Urea and 50 mM Tris was added to the supernatant and the samples were sonicated using a Bioruptor Plus sonication system (Diogenode) for 10x 30 sec at high intensity. For reduction and alkylation of the proteins, 40 mM 2-cloroacetamide (CAA, Sigma-Aldrich) and 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP; Thermo Fisher) were added. After incubation for 20 min at 37°C, the samples were diluted 1:2 with MS grade water (VWR). Proteins were digested overnight at 37°C by addition of 1 µg of trypsin (Promega). Thereafter, the solution was acidified with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA; Merck) to a final concentration of 1%, followed by desalting of the peptides using Sep-Pak C18 1cc vacuum cartridges (Waters). The elution was vacuum dried and the desalted peptides were further pre-fractionated into 8 fractions using a high pH reversed-phased nano-fractionation system (Kulak et al. 2017).  Fractionated peptides were loaded onto a 30-cm analytical column (inner diameter: 75 microns; packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9-micron beads, Dr. Maisch GmbH) by the Thermo Easy-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher) with buffer A (0.1% (v/v) formic acid) at 400 nl/min. The analytical column was heated to 60°C. Using the nanoelectrospray interface, eluting peptides were sprayed into the benchtop Orbitrap Q Exactive HF (Thermo Fisher Scientific) (Hosp et al. 2015). As gradient, the following steps were programmed with increasing addition of buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid): linear increase from 8 to 30% over 60 minutes, followed by a linear increase to 60% over 5 minutes, a linear increase to 95% over the next 5 minutes, and finally maintenance at 95% for another 5 minutes. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode with survey scans from m/z 300 to 1650 Th (resolution of 60k at m/z = 200 Th), and up to 15 of the most abundant precursors were selected and fragmented using stepped Higher-energy C-trap Dissociation (HCD with a normalized collision energy of value of 19, 27, 35). The MS2 spectra were recorded with dynamic m/z range (resolution of 30k at m/z = 200 Th). AGC target for MS1 and MS2 scans were set to 3 x 106 and 105, respectively, within a maximum injection time of 100 and 60 ms for the MS1 and MS2 scans, respectively. Charge state 2 was excluded from fragmentation to enrich the fragmentation scans for cross-linked peptide precursors.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw data were processed using Proteome Discoverer (version 2.5.0.400) with the XlinkX/PD nodes integrated (Klykov et al. 2018). To identify the crosslinked peptide pairs, a database search was performed against a FASTA containing the sequences of the proteins under investigation. DSS was set as a crosslinker. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification and methionine oxidation and protein N-term acetylation were set as dynamic modifications. Trypsin/P was specified as protease and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Furthermore, identifications were only accepted with a minimal score of 40 and a minimal delta score of 4. Otherwise, standard settings were applied. Filtering at 1% false discovery rate (FDR) at peptide level was applied through the XlinkX Validator node with setting simple.

### Publication Abstract
The 3' ends of almost all eukaryotic mRNAs are generated in an essential two-step processing reaction: endonucleolytic cleavage of an extended precursor followed by the addition of a poly(A) tail. By reconstituting the reaction from overproduced and purified proteins, we provide a minimal list of 14 polypeptides that are essential and two that are stimulatory for RNA processing. In a reaction depending on the polyadenylation signal AAUAAA, the reconstituted system cleaves pre-mRNA at a single preferred site corresponding to the one used in vivo. Among the proteins, cleavage factor I stimulates cleavage but is not essential, consistent with its prominent role in alternative polyadenylation. RBBP6 is required, with structural data showing it to contact and presumably activate the endonuclease CPSF73 through its DWNN domain. The C-terminal domain of RNA polymerase II is dispensable. ATP, but not its hydrolysis, supports RNA cleavage by binding to the hClp1 subunit of cleavage factor II with submicromolar affinity.

### Keywords
Cpsf, 3' end, Cpa

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry

### Submitter
Felix Sandmeir

### Lab Head
Dr Elena Conti
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry


