### Accession
PXD025820

### Title
The molecular basis of regulation of bacterial capsule assembly by Wzc

### Description
Bacterial extracellular polysaccharides (EPSs) play critical roles in virulence as well as representing valuable bioproducts. Many bacteria use a “Wzx-Wzy-dependent” mechanism to assemble EPSs, in a tightly controlled multi-protein process that couples glycan polymerisation at the inner membrane to translocation across the periplasm and outer membrane (OM). The tyrosine autokinase, Wzc, is required for both polymerization and translocation. The cryo-EM structure of dephosphorylated Wzc from E. coli reveals an octameric structure, where transmembrane helices create a large central cavity and connect the cytoplasmic tyrosine kinase domain to a periplasmic region containing helical bundles. Progressive autophosphorylation of Wzc’s tyrosine-rich C-terminus disassembles the octamer into a monomer and the cycling between these states in the cell drives function. The helical bundles are essential for function and their conformation responds to phosphorylation; most likely gating the OM translocase. We propose a molecular model for the regulation of EPS synthesis and transport by Wzc.

### Sample Protocol
For phosphorylation identification, the tryptic peptides were loaded onto a reverse phase C18 trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 75 µm x 2 cm, nano viper, C18, 3 µm, 100 Å, ThermoFisher, Waltham, MA, U.S.A) using an Ultimate 3000 and washed with 50 µL of solvent A at 10 µl/min. The desalted peptides were then separated using a 15 cm pre-packed reverse-phase analytical column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 75µm x 15 cm, C18, 3 µm, 100 Å, ThermoFisher, Waltham, MA, U.S.A) using a 45 min linear gradient from 5% to 40% solvent C (80% acetonitrile, 20% water, 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The separated peptides were electrosprayed into an Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid mass spectrometry system in the positive ion mode using data-dependent acquisition with a 3 s cycle time. Precursors and products were detected in the Orbitrap analyzer at a resolving power of 60,000 and 30,000 (@ m/z 200), respectively. Precursor signals with an intensity >1.0 x 10-4 and charge state between 2-7 were isolated with the quadrupole using a 0.7 m/z isolation window (0.5 m/z offset) and subjected to MS/MS fragmentation using higher energy collision-induced dissociation (30% relative fragmentation energy). MS/MS scans were collected at an AGC setting of 1.0 x 104 or a maximum fill time of 100 ms and precursors within 10 ppm were dynamically excluded for 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were processed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.3.4) and searched against the Escherichia coli (O9a:K30) biosynthesis gene cluster as well as a list of common contaminants using the Andromeda search engine with the following search parameters: trypsin digestion; fixed modification was set to carbamidomethyl (C); variable modifications set as oxidation (M), acetylated protein N terminus, and phosphorylation (Y); up to two missed cleavages allowed. Mass spectra were recalibrated within MaxQuant with a precursor error tolerance of 20 parts per million (ppm) and then re-searched with a mass tolerance of 5 ppm.

### Publication Abstract
Bacterial extracellular polysaccharides (EPSs) play critical roles in virulence. Many bacteria assemble EPSs via a multi-protein "Wzx-Wzy" system, involving glycan polymerization at the outer face of the cytoplasmic/inner membrane. Gram-negative species couple polymerization with translocation across the periplasm and outer membrane and the master regulator of the system is the tyrosine autokinase, Wzc. This near atomic cryo-EM structure of dephosphorylated Wzc from E. coli shows an octameric assembly with a large central cavity formed by transmembrane helices. The tyrosine autokinase domain forms the cytoplasm region, while the periplasmic region contains small folded motifs and helical bundles. The helical bundles are essential for function, most likely through interaction with the outer membrane translocon, Wza. Autophosphorylation of the tyrosine-rich C-terminus of Wzc results in disassembly of the octamer into multiply phosphorylated monomers. We propose that the cycling between phosphorylated monomer and dephosphorylated octamer regulates glycan polymerization and translocation.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Tyrosine autokinase, E. coli

### Affiliations
University of Oxford, Oxford
Department of Chemistry, University of Oxford

### Submitter
Jani Bolla

### Lab Head
Dr Carol V Robinson
Department of Chemistry, University of Oxford


