### Accession
PXD010168

### Title
Sperm proteome of apyrene and eupyrene sperm in Carolina Sphinx moth Manduca sexta, and monarch butterfly Danaus plexippus

### Description
All but the  most basal Lepidopteran species produce two sperm morphs. Only one of these morphs is capable of completing karyogamy and producing offspring, this morph contains the correct genetic complement and is termed eupyrene sperm. Apyrene sperm, on the other hand, is completely devoid of nuclear DNA and fertilisation incompetent. Despite the fact apyrene sperm is believed to be functional, the function of this sperm type is largely unknown. Here we apply tandem mass spectrometry based proteomics to the two sperm types independently in the monarch butterfly (Danaus plexippus) and the carolina sphinx moth (Manduca sexta). Comparative analysis between sperm morphs and species shows a reduced complexity and greater divergence in apyrene sperm relative to eupyrene consistent across the two species.

### Sample Protocol
Sperm samples were isolated from male seminal vesicles 5 to 10 days post eclosion via a small incision in the mid to distal region of the seminal vesicle. Apyrene and eupyrene sperm were seperated and purified via a panning method described in Karr and Walters(Insect Biochem Mol Biol. (2015) Aug;63:152-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ibmb.2015.06.007). Apyrene and eupyrene sperm were pooled, respectively, to produce three biological replicates of each sperm morph in both species. Samples were solubilized in 2X LDS sample buffer (Invitrogen, Inc) before quantification via the EZA Protein Quantitation Kit (Invitrogen, Inc). 25ug of protein per replicates were  separated on a 1 mm 10% NuPAGE Novex Bis-Tris Mini Gel system (Invitrogen). Each lane on the resulting gel (containing sample from a single pooled replicate) was sliced into four comparable slices, producing 12 gel fractions for independent tandem mass spectrometry analysis per sperm morph in each species. Gel fractions were sliced into 1 mm2 pieces for in-gel trypsin digestion. Gel fractions were reduced (DDT) and alkylated (iodoacetamide) before overnight incubation with trypsin at 37 °C. All LC-MS/MS experiments were performed using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nanoUPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc, Waltham, MA, USA) system and a QExactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc, Waltham, MA, USA). Separation of peptides was performed by reverse-phase chromatography at a flow rate of 300nL/min and a Thermo Scientific reverse-phase nano Easy-spray column (Thermo Scientific PepMap C18, 2μm particle size, 100A pore size, 75mm i.d. x 50cm length). Peptides were loaded onto a pre-column (Thermo Scientific PepMap 100 C18, 5μm particle size, 100A pore size, 300mm i.d. x 5mm length) from the Ultimate 3000 autosampler with 0.1% formic acid for 3 minutes at a flow rate of 10 µL/min. After this period, the column valve was switched to allow elution of peptides from the pre-column onto the analytical column. Solvent A was water plus 0.1% formic acid and solvent B was 80% acetonitrile, 20% water plus 0.1% formic acid. The linear gradient employed was 2-40% B in 30 minutes. The LC eluant was sprayed into the mass spectrometer by means of an Easy-spray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.). All m/z values of eluting ions were measured in an Orbitrap mass analyzer, set at a resolution of 70000. Data dependent scans (Top 20) were employed to automatically isolate and generate fragment ions by higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) in the quadrupole mass analyzer and measurement of the resulting fragment ions was performed in the Orbitrap analyzer, set at a resolution of 17500. Peptide ions with charge states of 2+ and above were selected for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data was analyzed using X!Tandem and Comet algorithms within the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline (v 4.8.0) (Deutsch et al. 2010) using the same tolerances, thresholds and modification described in Whittingon et al (2017). Spectra were matched against the D. plexippus official gene set 2 (OGS2) predicted protein set (downloaded from http://Monarchbase.umassmed.edu, last updated in 2012) and M. sexta OGS1 annotated protein set (n = 22,456), for the Monarch and Manduca analysis respectively. Protein inclusion in the proteome was based on the following stringent criteria: (1) identification in 2 or more biological replicates or (2) identification in a single replicate by 2 or more unique peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Spermatozoa are one of the most strikingly diverse animal cell types. One poorly understood example of this diversity is sperm heteromorphism, where males produce multiple distinct morphs of sperm in a single ejaculate. Typically, only one morph is capable of fertilization and the function of the nonfertilizing morph, called parasperm, remains to be elucidated. Sperm heteromorphism has multiple independent origins, including Lepidoptera (moths and butterflies), where males produce a fertilizing eupyrene sperm and an apyrene parasperm, which lacks a nucleus and nuclear DNA. Here we report a comparative proteomic analysis of eupyrene and apyrene sperm between two distantly related lepidopteran species, the monarch butterfly (Danaus plexippus) and Carolina sphinx moth (Manduca sexta). In both species, we identified &#x223c;700 sperm proteins, with half present in both morphs and the majority of the remainder observed only in eupyrene sperm. Apyrene sperm thus have a distinctly less complex proteome. Gene ontology (GO) analysis revealed proteins shared between morphs tend to be associated with canonical sperm cell structures (e.g., flagellum) and metabolism (e.g., ATP production). GO terms for morph-specific proteins broadly reflect known structural differences, but also suggest a role for apyrene sperm in modulating female neurobiology. Comparative analysis indicates that proteins shared between morphs are most conserved between species as components of sperm, whereas morph-specific proteins turn over more quickly, especially in apyrene sperm. The rapid divergence of apyrene sperm content is consistent with a relaxation of selective constraints associated with fertilization and karyogamy. On the other hand, parasperm generally exhibit greater evolutionary lability, and our observations may therefore reflect adaptive responses to shifting regimes of sexual selection.

### Keywords
Sperm, Monarch, Lepidoptera, Manduca sexta, Sperm heteromorphism

### Affiliations
Syracuse University
Syracuse Univeristy

### Submitter
Emma Whittington

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Steve Dorus
Syracuse University


