### Accession
PXD023440

### Title
Prevention of high fat diet induced obesity and associated disease by the major cap-binding protein

### Description
Employing genome-wide mass spectrometry and metabolomics, our findings reveal that eIF4E selectively facilitates translation of genes involved in lipid storage and lipid homeostasis pathways in response to fatty acid stimuli.

### Sample Protocol
Mouse liver portions (cubes around 2-3 mm long) were excised and homogenized in 100 ul 8 M Urea, using a probe sonicator (ThermoFisher Scientific). Total protein content in the extracts was determined utilizing a Micro BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific). Aliquots containing 170 ug of protein were treated with 8.8 mM DTT at 56°C for 15 minutes, followed by a 30-minute incubation at room temperature in the dark with 15 mM iodoacetamide. For tryptic digestion, the samples were then diluted 4-fold with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate to reduce urea concentration to 2 M and then added 5% (W/W) modified trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI). The pH was adjusted to 8.0 with 250 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and the samples were incubated 12 h at 37 ºC. After that, another aliquot of trypsin was added (2% W/W) and digested for additional 6 hours. After this, samples were acidified with formic acid to a final concentration of 5%. The digests were then desalted using a MAX-RP Sep Pak ® classic C18 cartridge (Waters) following the manufacturer’s protocol. Sep Pak eluates were dried-evaporated, then labelled with TMT-11 plex reagents (ThermoFisher Scientific) according kit’s instructions. All labeled materials were combined and desalted using a C18 SepPak. The Sep Pak eluate was dried , resuspended in 20 mM ammonium formate and fractionated on an AKTA purifier system utilizing a Phenomenex Gemini 5u C18  110A 150 x 4.60 mm column, operating at a flow rate of 0.550 mL/min. Buffer A consisted of 20 mM ammonium formate (pH 10) , and buffer B consisted of 20 mM ammonium formate in 90% acetonitrile (pH 10). Gradient details were as follows: 1 % to 9% B in 14 min, 9% B to 49% B in 4 min, 49% B to 70% B in 36 min, 70% B back down to 1% B in 3 min. 50 peptide-containing fractions were collected, evaporated and resuspended in 0.1% formic for mass spectrometry analysis. Aliquots (containing around 3 ug of digested material) of 11 non-consecutive chromatographic fractions were run onto a 2 um 75um x 50 cm PepMap RSLC C18 EasySpray column (Thermo Scientific) using 3-hour MeCN gradients (2–30% in 0.1% formic acid) was used to elute peptides, at a flow rate of 300 nl/min, for analysis in a Orbitrap Lumos Fusion (Thermo Scientific) in positive ion mode. MS spectra were acquired between 375 and 1500 m/z with a resolution of 120000. For each MS spectrum, multiply charged ions ions over the selected threshold (2E4) were selected for MSMS in cycles of 3 seconds with an isolation window of 0.7 m/z. Precursor ions were fragmented by HCD using stepped relative collision energies of 30, 35 and 40 in order to ensure efficient generation of sequence ions as well as TMT reporter ions. MSMS spectra were acquired in centroid mode with resolution 50000 from m/z=110. A dynamic exclusion window was applied which prevented the same m/z from being selected for 30s after its acquisition.

### Data Protocol
Peak lists were generated using PAVA in-house software (Guan, S., Price, J.C., Prusiner, S.B., Ghaemmaghami, S., and Burlingame, A.L. (2011). Mol Cell Proteomics 10, M111 010728.). All generated peak lists were searched against the mouse subset of the SwissProt database (SwissProt.2019.07.31), using Protein Prospector (Clauser, K.R., Baker, P., and Burlingame, A.L. (1999). Analytical chemistry 71, 2871-2882) with the following parameters: Enzyme specificity was set as Trypsin, and up to 2 missed cleavages per peptide were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues, and TMT labeling of lysine residues and N-terminus of the protein were allowed as fixed modifications. N-acetylation of the N-terminus of the protein, loss of protein N-terminal methionine, pyroglutamate formation from of peptide N-terminal glutamines, oxidation of methionine were allowed as variable modifications. Mass tolerance was 10 ppm in MS and 30 ppm in MS/MS. The false positive rate was estimated by searching the data using a concatenated database which contains the original SwissProt database, as well as a version of each original entry where the sequence has been randomized. A 1% FDR was permitted at the protein and peptide level. For quantitation only unique peptides were considered; peptides common to several proteins were not used for quantitative analysis. Relative quantization of peptide abundance was performed via calculation of the intensity of reporter ions corresponding to the different TMT labels, present in MS/MS spectra. Intensities were determined by Protein Prospector. Summed intensity on each TMT channel for all identified spectra were used to normalize individual intensity values. Relative abundances were calculated as ratios vs the average intensity levels in the 4 channels corresponding to control samples. Spectra representing replicate measurements of the same peptide were kept and used to calculate the dispersion and the significance threshold for the analysis. For total protein relative levels, peptide ratios were aggregated to the protein levels using median values of the log2 ratios.

### Publication Abstract
Obesity is a global epidemic leading to increased mortality and susceptibility to comorbidities, with few viable therapeutic interventions. A hallmark of disease progression is the ectopic deposition of lipids in the form of lipid droplets in vital organs such as the liver. However, the mechanisms underlying the dynamic storage and processing of lipids in peripheral organs remain an outstanding question. Here, we show an unexpected function for the major cap-binding protein, eIF4E, in high-fat-diet-induced obesity. In response to lipid overload, select networks of proteins involved in fat deposition are altered in eIF4E-deficient mice. Specifically, distinct messenger RNAs involved in lipid metabolic processing and storage pathways are enhanced at the translation level by eIF4E. Failure to translationally upregulate these mRNAs results in increased fatty acid oxidation, which enhances energy expenditure. We further show that inhibition of eIF4E phosphorylation genetically-and by a potent clinical compound-restrains weight gain following intake of a high-fat diet. Together, our study uncovers translational control of lipid processing as a driver of high-fat-diet-induced weight gain and provides a pharmacological target to treat obesity.

### Keywords
Obesity, Eft508, Lipid homeostasis, Translational control, Eif4e

### Affiliations
UCSF
Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA School of Medicine and Department of Urology, UCSF, CA, USA Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology, UCSF, CA, USA

### Submitter
Juan Oses-Prieto

### Lab Head
Dr Davide Ruggero
Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA School of Medicine and Department of Urology, UCSF, CA, USA Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology, UCSF, CA, USA


