### Accession
PXD014875

### Title
Proteomic analysis of a filaggrin-deficient skin organoid model shows evidence of increased translation, keratinocyte-immune crosstalk and disordered axon guidance

### Description
Atopic eczema is an itchy inflammatory disorder characterised by skin barrier dysfunction. Loss-of-function mutations in the gene encoding filaggrin (FLG) are a major risk factor, but the mechanisms by which filaggrin haploinsufficiency leads to atopic inflammation remain incompletely understood. Skin as an organ which can be modelled using primary cells in vitro provides the opportunity for selected genetic effects to be investigated in detail.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen organoid epidermal samples were ground on dry ice, solubilized in 200l of Cellular and Organelle Membrane Solubilizing Reagent (Sigma-Aldrich, Gillingham, Dorset, UK), 7.0 M urea, 2.0 M thiourea, 40 mM Trizma® base (Sigma Aldrich, Gillingham, Dorset, UK) and 1.0% C7BzO, pH 10.4 buffer with protease inhibitors. The lysate was acetone precipitated for 1 hour at -20oC and spun for 20 mins at 2oC at 15,000 rpm. The pellet was re-suspended in 200l of 50mM ammonium bicarbonate. 100l was taken for in-solution digest. 22l of dithiothreitol was added and samples heated to 50oC for 15mins. 24l of iodoacetamide was added and the samples incubated at 22oC for 30 mins. 1l of Rapigest was added, followed by 2.5l of trypsin, for a 12-hour digest. A further 1l trypsin was added for an additional 4-hour digest. The peptide samples were fractionated into 24 fractions with high pH Reversed Phase C18 chromatography, run on a Q Exactive Classic or Plus for 160 mins and the top 15 ions selected for sequencing. MS resolution was 70,000 and MS/MS resolution 17,500.

### Data Protocol
. Data were processed using MaxQuant (v1.6.0.13) and Human UniProt Database (Dec 2017) with a protein and peptide false discovery rate of 0.01.  Proteins identified as contaminants (trypsin and other lab originating proteins) and contained within the MaxQuant database (http://www.maxquant.org/maxquant/) were removed. To account for the possibility of keratin as a contaminant, we analysed the blank runs for keratin peptide intensity and subtracted this from the measured keratin intensities. A reversed database (i.e. scrambled protein sequences) was used to identify false positives and these were also removed. Total intensities of the samples were normalized to total protein abundance, with adjustment to the lowest total protein yield. All samples were run in quadruplicate to test reproducibility; the Pearson correlations were 0.86-0.92.

### Publication Abstract
<b>Background:</b> Atopic eczema is an itchy inflammatory disorder characterised by skin barrier dysfunction. Loss-of-function mutations in the gene encoding filaggrin ( <i>FLG</i>) are a major risk factor, but the mechanisms by which filaggrin haploinsufficiency leads to atopic inflammation remain incompletely understood. Skin as an organ that can be modelled using primary cells <i>in vitro</i> provides the opportunity for selected genetic effects to be investigated in detail. <b>Methods:</b> Primary human keratinocytes and donor-matched primary fibroblasts from healthy individuals were used to create skin organoid models with and without siRNA-mediated knockdown of <i>FLG</i>. Biological replicate sets of organoids were assessed using histological, functional and biochemical measurements. <b>Results:</b> <i>FLG</i> knockdown leads to subtle changes in histology and ultrastructure including a reduction in thickness of the stratum corneum and smaller, less numerous keratohyalin granules. Immature organoids showed some limited evidence of barrier impairment with <i>FLG</i> knockdown, but the mature organoids showed no difference in transepidermal water loss, water content or dye penetration. There was no difference in epidermal ceramide content. Mass spectrometry proteomic analysis detected &gt;8000 proteins per sample. Gene ontology and pathway analyses identified an increase in transcriptional and translational activity but a reduction in proteins contributing to terminal differentiation, including caspase 14, dermokine, AKT1 and TGF-beta-1. Aspects of innate and adaptive immunity were represented in both the up-regulated and down-regulated protein groups, as was the term 'axon guidance'.&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; <b>Conclusions:</b> This work provides further evidence for keratinocyte-specific mechanisms contributing to immune and neurological, as well as structural, aspects of skin barrier dysfunction. Individuals with filaggrin deficiency may derive benefit from future therapies targeting keratinocyte-immune crosstalk and neurogenic pruritus.

### Keywords
Human, Skin, Atopic eczema

### Affiliations
The Centre for Gene Regulation and Expression
Skin Research Group, Division of Molecular and Clinical Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Dundee, Dundee, Scotland, UK

### Submitter
Sara ten Have

### Lab Head
Dr Sara Brown
Skin Research Group, Division of Molecular and Clinical Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Dundee, Dundee, Scotland, UK


