### Accession
PXD011087

### Title
Shotgun proteomic profiling of intestinal mucosa of rainbow trout Oncorhynchus mykiss

### Description
The objective of this study was to identify and quantify proteomic profiles of intestine of rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss). Specific pathogen free rainbow trout (mean length 15 ± 1 cm) were maintained in recirculating de-chlorinated water at 19±1 °C. Prior to the experiment, fish were distributed between aquaria. The test groups were infected by immersion of Yersinia ruckeri CSF007-82 (biotype 1) and 7959-11 (biotype 2) strains. The control group was immersed similar with sterile broth medium. Fish were anaesthetized and sampled aseptically at different time points. Each intestine was washed three times with sterile phosphate-buffered saline containing a cocktail of mammalian protease inhibitors. Intestinal mucosa was scraped with a sterile large scalpel blade. Intestinal samples were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at –80 °C.

### Sample Protocol
Details on sample preparation can be found in the publication. After lysis, samples were digested according to the standard enhanced filter aided sample preparation protocol (Erde et al. 2014). Proteins were reduced with dithiothreitol and alkylated with iodoacetamide. On-filter digestion was performed with Trypsin/Lys-C mix in 4% sodium deoxycholate (Promega). Removal of sodium deoxycholate from extracted peptides was achieved with phase transfer with ethyl acetate prior to injection into LC-MS. Peptides were separated on an Eksigent NanoLC 425 system using a microflow pump module (Sciex). Sample pre-concentration and desalting were accomplished with a 5 mm YMC-Triart C18 precolumn. Separation of peptides was performed on a 15 cm YMC-Triart C18 column applying a 73 min gradient from 3% B (ACN with 0.1% FA) to 35% B. Mobile Phase A consisted of ultra-pure H2O with 0.1% formic acid. For mass spectrometric analysis, the LC was directly coupled to a high resolution quadrupole time of flight mass spectrometer (Triple TOF 5600+, Sciex).  For information dependent data acquisition (IDA runs) MS1 spectra were collected applying a Top-40 method (details in the publication). Quantification was performed based on MS2 spectra using SWATH acquisition. The HPLC system was operated by Eksigent Control Software version 4.2 (Sciex) and the MS by Analyst Software 1.7.1 (Sciex).

### Data Protocol
Acquired raw data were processed with ProteinPilot Software version 5.0 (Sciex) for re-calibration and database searches. The database consisted of UniProt entries of following taxonomies: Oncorhynchus (taxonomy id: 8016; entries: 51947), Salmo salar (taxonomy id: 8030; entries: 10025) and Yersinia ruckeri (taxonomy id: 29486; entries: 5300) [Released 2016_07] as well as common Repository of Adventitious Proteins, downloaded: ftp://ftp.thegpm.org/fasta/cRAP/crap.fasta. Mass tolerance in MS mode was set with 0.05 and 0.1 Da in MSMS mode for the rapid recalibration search, and 0.0011 Da in MS and 0.01 Da in MSMS mode for the final search. The following sample parameters were applied: trypsin digestion, cysteine alkylation set to iodoacetamide, search effort set to rapid ID. False discovery rate analysis (FDR) was performed using the integrated tools in ProteinPilot and was set to <1% on protein level as well as on peptide. IDA identification results were used to create the SWATH ion library with the MS/MS (ALL) with SWATH Acquisition MicroApp 2.0 in PeakView 2.2 (both Sciex). Peptides were chosen based on a FDR rate <1%, excluding shared and modified peptides. Up to 6 peptides per protein and up to 6 transitions per peptide were selected by software. Calculation of peak areas of SWATH samples after retention time alignment and normalization using total area sums was performed with MarkerView 1.2.1 (Sciex).  To determine differentially expressed proteins in infected samples, statistical evaluation was performed in R programming language (R Core Team 2015). Raw peak areas after normalization to total area sums were log2-transformed to approach normal distribution. On a logarithmic scale, technical replicates were aggregated by arithmetic mean before application of statistical tests. Differential expression of proteins was assessed using one-way ANOVA for each protein. To adjust for multiple testing, the method of Benjamini and Hochberg (1995) was used to control the FDR. Differences were considered significant if adjusted p-values were smaller than the significance level of α = 0.05. For those proteins, Tukey’s honest significant difference method was applied as a post hoc test to assess the significance of the pairwise comparisons. Protein expression was considered differential if the adjusted p-value was below α and the absolute fold change was at least two (fold change < −2 or > +2).

### Publication Abstract
Yersinia ruckeri is the causative agent of enteric redmouth disease in salmonids. In fish, the intestine represents an important site of nutrient uptake, host-pathogen interactions, and defense. The posterior intestine can be inflamed, reddened, and filled with an opaque, yellowish fluid during Y. ruckeri infection. Herein, we report an investigation on the proteome alteration in the posterior intestinal mucosa of rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss) after exposure to Y. ruckeri. The intestinal mucosal proteins were identified and quantified by a shotgun proteomic approach by applying data-independent quantification with sequential windowed acquisition of all theoretical mass spectra (SWATH). A total of 437 proteins were found to be differentially up- or downregulated in the posterior intestine. Gene ontology of upregulated proteins pointed to their involvement into exopeptidase, endopeptidase, and hydrolase activities, while the downregulated proteins were involved in lipid metabolism, actin binding, and translation processes. Additionally, upregulated proteins were predicted to be involved in lysosome, oxidative phosphorylation, and metabolic pathways, while downregulated proteins were implicated in focal adhesion, regulation of actin cytoskeleton, protein digestion and absorption pathways. This study showed that Y. ruckeri infection can alter protein abundance involved in serine-type carboxypeptidase, cysteine and aspartic-type endopeptidases, metallopeptidases, antioxidant defense, calcium ion binding, glycolytic and carbohydrate metabolic processes in the proteome of the intestinal mucosa of rainbow trout.

### Keywords
Intestine, Lc ms-ms, Rainbow trout, Proteome profile

### Affiliations
Clinical Division of Fish Medicine, University of Veterinary Medicine, Vienna, Austria
University of Veterinary Medicine, Vienna

### Submitter
Gokhlesh Kumar

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Gokhlesh Kumar
Clinical Division of Fish Medicine, University of Veterinary Medicine, Vienna, Austria


