### Accession
PXD037597

### Title
OsRALF17/19 activates ROS signaling through OsMTD2 to modulate pollen tube growth in Oryza sativa

### Description
- Pollen tube growth is important process for successful double fertilization, which is critical for grain yield in crop plants. Despite much progress in identification of rapid alkalization factors (RALFs) which serve as ligand for signaling transduction during fertilization in Arabidopsis, there is no functional study of RALF in mono-cotyledon plant.  - We functionally characterized two pollen specific RALF in rice (Oryza sativa) using multiple CRISPR/Cas9 induced loss-of-function mutants, peptide treatment, expression analyses, tag reporter lines.  - OsRALF17 is specifically expressed in pollen and pollen tube as the strongest level among 41 RALF members in rice. Exogenously applied OsRALF17 inhibits pollen tube germination and elongation at high concentration, but enhances tube elongation at low concentration, indicating the regulation of growth balance. Double mutant of OsRALF17 with OsRALF19 exhibit almost male sterile, with defect on pollen germination and tube elongation.  - Our study revealed that functionally-redundant OsRALF17 and 19 peptides binds to the OsMTD2, CrRLK1L family member, and transmits ROS signal for pollen tube germination and integrity maintenance in rice. We provide new insights into the role of RALF and expanding our understanding of the biological role of RALF in regulating rice fertilization.

### Sample Protocol
Total proteins from rice anther samples were isolated using trichloroacetic acid (TCA)/acetone precipitation method. Briefly, one gram of each find ground powder was homogenized with 10 mL of ice-cold Tris-Mg/NP-40 extraction buffer [0.5 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.3, 2% (v/v) Nonidet P-40 (NP-40), 20 mM MgCl2] followed by centrifuged at 12,000 rpm for 10 min at 4 °C. Sequentially, clear homogenate was collected and subjected precipitation with four volume of 12.5% TCA/acetone containing 0.07% (v/v) β-mercaptoethanol for 1h at -20 °C prior to being centrifuged at 12,000 rpm for 10 min at 4 °C. The resulting pellets were finally washed with 80% acetone containing 0.07% (v/v) β-mercaptoethanol and stored at -20 °C until further analysis.

### Data Protocol
The acquired LC-MS/MS raw data were analyzed with MaxQuant (ver. 2.0.3.0) for a database search as described before . All the three replicates were cross-referenced against the Oryza sativa database (MSU v6.0, 67,393 entries). Data sets were processed using 20 ppm for the first search and 4.5 ppm for the following ones as precursor mass tolerances set by Andromeda. Moreover, 0.5 Da of a product mass tolerance with a maximum of two missed tryptic digestions was used for quantification data search. Fixed and variable modifications were specified by carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues, acetylation of lysine residues, and oxidation of methionine residues. A reverse nonsense version of the original database was generated and used to determine the false discovery rate (FDR) which was set as 1% for peptide identifications. Sequentially, statistical analysis of data was conducted by Perseus software (ver. 1.6.15.0) as followed by previous study. Th missing values imputation of protein intensities by calculation of normal distribution (width: 0.3, downshift: 1.8), hierarchical clustering analysis (HCA), and multiple sample test (one-way ANOVA) controlled by Benjamini-Hochberg FDR threshold of 0.05, and determination of significant differences in the protein abundance (≥ 1.5-fold change) amongst different samples using Perseus software.

### Publication Abstract
Pollen tube growth is essential for successful double fertilization, which is critical for grain yield in crop plants. Rapid alkalinization factors (RALFs) function as ligands for signal transduction during fertilization. However, functional studies on RALF in monocot plants are lacking. Herein, we functionally characterized two pollen-specific RALFs in rice (Oryza sativa) using multiple clustered regularly interspaced palindromic repeats (CRISPR)/CRISPR-associated protein 9-induced loss-of-function mutants, peptide treatment, expression analyses, and tag reporter lines. Among the 41 RALF members in rice, OsRALF17 was specifically expressed at the highest level in pollen and pollen tubes. Exogenously applied OsRALF17 or OsRALF19 peptide inhibited pollen tube germination and elongation at high concentrations but enhanced tube elongation at low concentrations, indicating growth regulation. Double mutants of OsRALF17 and OsRALF19 (ralf17/19) exhibited almost full male sterility with defects in pollen hydration, germination, and tube elongation, which was partially recovered by exogenous treatment with OsRALF17 peptide. This study revealed that two partially functionally redundant OsRALF17 and OsRALF19 bind to Oryza sativa male-gene transfer defective 2 (OsMTD2) and transmit reactive oxygen species signals for pollen tube germination and integrity maintenance in rice. Transcriptomic analysis confirmed their common downstream genes, in osmtd2 and ralf17/19. This study provides new insights into the role of RALF, expanding our knowledge of the biological role of RALF in regulating rice fertilization.

### Keywords
Oryza sativa, Pollen tube growth, Rapid alkalization factor (ralf), Crispr-cas9, Monocot, Crrlk1l

### Affiliations
Department of Life Science and Environmental Biochemistry, Life and Industry Convergence Research Institute, Pusan National University, Miryang 50463, Republic of Korea
Pusan National University

### Submitter
Sun Tae Kim

### Lab Head
Dr Yu-Jin Kim
Department of Life Science and Environmental Biochemistry, Life and Industry Convergence Research Institute, Pusan National University, Miryang 50463, Republic of Korea


