### Accession
PXD002873

### Title
vg120629 -  Beyond plant defense: insights on the potential of salicylic and methylsalicylic acid to contain growth of the phytopathogen Botrytis cinerea

### Description
Using Botrytis cinerea we confirmed in the present work several previous studies showing that salicylic acid, a main plant hormone, inhibits fungal growth in vitro. Such an inhibitory effect was also observed for the two salicylic acid derivatives, methylsalicylic and acetylsalicylic acid. In marked contrast, 5-sulfosalicylic acid was totally inactive. Comparative proteomics from treated vs control mycelia showed that the intracellular proteome was markedly affected in the presence of salicylic acid or methylsalicylic acid, in a similar manner for the two compounds. These data suggest several mechanisms that could potentially account for the observed fungal growth inhibition, notably pH regulation, metal homeostasis, mitochondrial respiration, ROS accumulation and cell wall remodeling. The present observations document another facet of the role played by this phytohormone and derivatives in directly containing the pathogen.

### Sample Protocol
PROTEIN EXTRACTIONS, 2D-PAGE AND DENSITOMETRIC GEL ANALYSESIN-GEL DIGESTION OF PROTEINS AND SAMPLE PREPARATION FOR MS ANALYSIS: DATA ACQUISITION AND DATABASE SEARCHING

### Data Protocol
Mascot and Sequest algorithms through Proteome Discoverer 1.4 Software (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) were used for protein identification against the Broad Institute Botrytis cinerea database (http://www.broadinstitute.org/annotation/genome/botrytis_cinerea/MultiHome.html; 16,448 entries, 10/11/2009). Two missed enzyme cleavages were allowed. Mass tolerances in MS and MS/MS were set to 2 Da and 1 Da, respectively. Oxidation of methionine and carbamidomethylation on cysteine were searched as dynamic and static modifications, respectively. Peptide validation was performed using Target Decoy PSM Validator and only “high confidence” peptides were retained corresponding to a 1% false positive rate at peptide level

### Publication Abstract
Using Botrytis cinerea we confirmed in the present work several previous studies showing that salicylic acid, a main plant hormone, inhibits fungal growth in vitro. Such an inhibitory effect was also observed for the two salicylic acid derivatives, methylsalicylic and acetylsalicylic acid. In marked contrast, 5-sulfosalicylic acid was totally inactive. Comparative proteomics from treated vs. control mycelia showed that both the intracellular and extracellular proteomes were affected in the presence of salicylic acid or methylsalicylic acid. These data suggest several mechanisms that could potentially account for the observed fungal growth inhibition, notably pH regulation, metal homeostasis, mitochondrial respiration, ROS accumulation and cell wall remodeling. The present observations support a role played by the phytohormone SA and derivatives in directly containing the pathogen. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD002873.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Botrytis cinerea

### Affiliations
Laboratoire mixte UMR 5240 CNRS/INSA/UCBL/Bayer CropScience, Plateforme de protéomique, F-69263 Lyon, France
Plateforme Proteome Bordeaux

### Submitter
Dupuy Jean-William

### Lab Head
Dr Vincent Girard
Laboratoire mixte UMR 5240 CNRS/INSA/UCBL/Bayer CropScience, Plateforme de protéomique, F-69263 Lyon, France


