### Accession
PXD030096

### Title
Using targeted quantification (PRM) to quantify proteins between wild type Col and acinus-2 pinin-1 mutant with 15N metabolic labeling

### Description
ACINUS and PININ genes regulate transcription and alternative splicing (Bi et al., 2021)  and we hypothesize that some proteins should have altered expression in the double mutant. Therefore, MS experiments were designed to identify these altered proteins on a global scale using 15N metabolic labeling. Some of these altered proteins were subjected to targeted quantification.

### Sample Protocol
The WT and acinus-2 pinin-1 plants were grown on Hoagland medium containing 14N or 15N (1.34 g/L Hogland’s No. 2 salt mixture without nitrogen, 6 g/L Phytoblend, and 1 g/L KNO3 or 1 g/L K15NO3 (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories), pH 5.8). Proteins were extracted from six samples (one 14N-labeled Col, two of 15N-labeled Col, two of 14N-labeled acinus-2 pinin-1, and one 15N-labeled acinus-2 pinin-1) individually using SDS sample buffer and mixed as the following: one forward sample F1 (14N Col/15N acinus-2 pinin-1) and two reverse samples R1 and R2 (14N acinus-2 pinin-1/15N Col) and separated by the SDS-PAGE gel with a very short run (~3 cm). Two segments (upper part (U) ranging from the loading well to ~50 KD; lower part (L) ranging from ~50 KD to the dye front were excised and trypsin digested. The peptide mixtures were desalted using C18 ZipTips (Millipore) and analyzed on Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) equipped with an Easy LC 1200 UPLC liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher). Peptides were separated using analytical column ES803 (Thermo Fisher). The flow rate was 300 nL/min, and a 120-min gradient was used. Peptides were eluted by a gradient from 3 to 28% solvent B (80% (v/v) acetonitrile/0.1% (v/v) formic acid) over 100 min and from 28 to 44% solvent B over 20 min, followed by a short wash at 90% solvent B. For DDA acquisition, the precursor scan was from mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) 375 to 1600 and top 20 most intense multiply charged precursors were selected for fragmentation. Peptides were fragmented with higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) with normalized collision energy (NCE) 27. PRM Targeted quantification:  The data-dependent acquisition was used first to get the peptide information from multiple proteins with peptide mass/charge (m/z), retention time, and MS2 fragments. PININ peptide information was from an IP-MS experiment. For targeted analysis, parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) acquisition using a 20-min window was scheduled with an orbitrap resolution at 60,000, AGC value 2e5, and a maximum fill time of 200 ms. The isolation window for each precursor was set at 1.4 m/z unit.

### Data Protocol
PRM data was processed with a 5-p.p.m. window using skyline from 14N- and 15N-labeled samples. Peak areas of fragments were calculated from each sample, the sum of peak areas from the upper gel segment and the lower gel segment was used to calculate the Col/acinus-2 pinin-1 ratios for each peptide, normalized to TUBULIN2 to get the normalized ratios. The median number of multiple ratio measurements is used for each protein.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pinin, Quantification, Arabidopsis, Parallel reaction monitoring (prm), Acinus, 15n metabolic labeling, Protein prospector, Targeted quantification

### Affiliations
Carnegie Institution at Stanford
Carnegie Mass Spectrometry Facility, Carnegie Institution for Science at Stanford

### Submitter
Shouling Xu

### Lab Head
Dr Shouling Xu
Carnegie Mass Spectrometry Facility, Carnegie Institution for Science at Stanford


