### Accession
PXD012795

### Title
Proteomic analysis of Raptor-proximal proteins in U2OS cells

### Description
The mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) is a key nutrient-sensing hub and a master regulator of cellular growth and metabolism. Activation of mTORC1 by amino acids and growth factors requires its recruitment to the lysosomes. Furthermore, lysosomal distribution has been shown to be intimately involved in the control of mTORC1, where localisation of lysosomes near plasma membrane increases mTORC1 activity. However, the underlying mechanisms by which lysosomal positioning impacts on mTORC1 signalling are not well understood. To understand better the spatial associations of mTORC1, we analysed the proximal ‘interactome’ of the constitutive component of mTORC1, Raptor, using BioID2-based proximity labelling and MS-based proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
Proximity-based labelling was performed using BioID2. U2OS cells were cultured in biotin-depleted medium for 48 h and then incubated with 50 μM biotin in full-nutrient medium for 16 h at 37°C. Cells were washed twice with ice-cold PBS and lysed in RIPA buffer on ice. Two milligrams of lysates were incubated with NeutrAvidin agarose beads overnight at 4°C with agitation. Beads were washed three times with ice-cold RIPA buffer and two times with ice-cold PBS, then transferred to fresh non-coated low-protein-binding microcentrifuge tubes and washed once with ice-cold PBS. Captured proteins (from experiments performed in biological quadruplicate) were subjected to on-bead digestion, followed by desalting (StageTips) and LC-MS/MS (Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system coupled to a Q Exactive Pluss mass spectrometer).

### Data Protocol
Label-free analysis of MS data was performed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.3.4). Peptide lists were searched against the human UniProtKB database (version 2019_01) and a common contaminants database (supplemented with the chicken avidin sequence) using the Andromeda search engine. Peptide identifications in one or more LC runs that were not identified in some LC runs within a 0.7-min time window were matched and transferred between runs. Minimum peptide length was seven amino acids. At least one peptide ratio was required for label-free quantification, and normalisation by the label-free quantification algorithm was skipped. Peptide and protein false discovery rates were set to 1%, determined by searching a reversed database.

### Publication Abstract
The mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) integrates mitogenic and stress signals to control growth and metabolism. Activation of mTORC1 by amino acids and growth factors involves recruitment of the complex to the lysosomal membrane and is further supported by lysosome distribution to the cell periphery. Here, we show that translocation of lysosomes toward the cell periphery brings mTORC1 into proximity with focal adhesions (FAs). We demonstrate that FAs constitute discrete plasma membrane hubs mediating growth factor signaling and amino acid input into the cell. FAs, as well as the translocation of lysosome-bound mTORC1 to their vicinity, contribute to both peripheral and intracellular mTORC1 activity. Conversely, lysosomal distribution to the cell periphery is dispensable for the activation of mTORC1 constitutively targeted to FAs. This study advances our understanding of spatial mTORC1 regulation by demonstrating that the localization of mTORC1 to FAs is both necessary and sufficient for its activation by growth-promoting stimuli.

### Keywords
Human, Bioid, Mtorc1, Bioid2, Osteosarcoma, Ms, Proximity labelling, Lc-ms/ms, Q exactive plus, Raptor, Proximity-based biotinylation

### Affiliations
Institute for Cell and Molecular Biosciences, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom
University of Manchester

### Submitter
Adam Byron

### Lab Head
Dr Viktor I Korolchuk
Institute for Cell and Molecular Biosciences, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom


