### Accession
PXD036069

### Title
Phosphosecretome profiling and kinase-substrate interaction screening reveal key extracellular c-Src-regulated pathways

### Description
Secreted protein kinases are responsible for the phosphorylation of a vast number of extracellular phosphoproteins. The tyrosine kinase c-Src is secreted through the vesicular trafficking pathway, however, mechanistic insights into extracellular substrate specificity and potential therapeutic opportunities in cancer remain unexplored. Here, we show that the SH4/Unique region of c-Src is required for its secretion. Limited proteolysis-mass spectrometry together with mutagenesis further confirmed predictions of in-silico molecular docking of active c-Src structure with its bona fide substrate TIMP2, that the Src homology 3 (SH3) domain is critical for kinase interaction with the P31xxP34 motif in the amino domain of TIMP2. Interestingly, comprehensive unbiased phosphoproteomic studies revealed an enrichment of PxxP containing extracellular substrates as potential targets of secreted c-Src. Cell-based studies using custom anti-c-Src antibodies against the c-Src SH3-TIMP2 interacting interface revealed that blocking secreted Src not only disrupts kinase-substrate interaction but also inhibits prostate cancer cell proliferation. Together, our data provide insights into the intricate role of secreted c-Src in extracellular phosphorylation.

### Sample Protocol
For generation of the phosphosecretome, SYF and SYF+Src cells were serum starved in DMEM without phenol red for 24 hours. Conditioned media was collected following 24 hour serum starvation. Cells, dead cells and cell debris were removed by a series of sequential centrifiugations (300 x g for 10 minutes to remove cells, 200 x g for 10 minutes to remvoe dead cells, 10,000 x g for 30 minutes to remove cell debris). Conditioined media was concentrated 10X usinig Amicon Ultra-15 Centrifual FIlter Units. Phosphoproteins were isolated by immunooprecipitatoin with the anti-pan-phosphotyrosine antibody 4G10 (Millipore). Proteins were digested and then loaded directly onto a 50cm x 100µM PicoFrit capillary column packed with C18 reversed-phase resin. The column was developed with a 90-minute linear gradient of acetonitrile in 0.125% formic acid delivered at 280 nL/min. LC-MS/MS Analysis was done using Orbitrap-Fusion Lumos, ESI-HCD.  Limited proteolysis of purified TIMP2 and/or c-Src was achieved by exposing 10µg recombinant protein with 100mM ATP to 2.0 µg/ml TPCK-treated trypsin (Sigma) for 6 minutes on ice. Digest was loaded onto an SDS-PAGE gel and following Coomassie staining visible bands were manually cut into small pieces approximately 1 mm x 1 mm.  The selected protein gel bands were in-gel digested with chymotrypsin and the tryptic peptides were desalted and subjected to LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Phosphosecretome MS/MS spectra were evaluated using SEQUEST (J.K.Eng et. al.(1994) J Am Soc Mass Spectrom. 5(11) 976-989) and the Core platform from Harvard University. Searches were performed against the most recent update of the Swissprot Mus musculus database with mass accuracy of +/-50 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for product ions. Results were filtered with mass accuracy of +/– 5 ppm on precursor ions and presence of the intended motif. For limited proteolysis samples the data were processed by MaxQuant. MS data was searched against customized database containing Uniprot E. coli proteins and human TIMP2-His6, cSRC-GST kinase sequences, with parameter requiring semi-specificity of chymotrypsin.

### Publication Abstract
c-Src tyrosine kinase is a renowned key intracellular signaling molecule and a potential target for cancer therapy. Secreted c-Src is a recent observation, but how it contributes to extracellular phosphorylation remains elusive. Using a series of domain deletion mutants, we show that the N-proximal region of c-Src is essential for its secretion. The tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases 2 (TIMP2) is an extracellular substrate of c-Src. Limited proteolysis-coupled mass spectrometry and mutagenesis studies verify that the Src homology 3 (SH3) domain of c-Src and the P<sup>31</sup>VHP<sup>34</sup> motif of TIMP2 are critical for their interaction. Comparative phosphoproteomic analyses identify an enrichment of PxxP motifs in phosY-containing secretomes from c-Src-expressing cells with cancer-promoting roles. Inhibition of extracellular c-Src using custom SH3-targeting antibodies disrupt kinase-substrate complexes and inhibit cancer cell proliferation. These findings point toward an intricate role for c-Src in generating phosphosecretomes, which will likely influence cell-cell communication, particularly in c-Src-overexpressing cancers.

### Keywords
The tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases, Pxxp motif, Tumor growth inhibition, Blocking antibodies, Timps, Secretome, Src tyrosine kinase, Phosphoproteomic, Post translational modification

### Affiliations
Department of Urology, SUNY Upstate Medical University Syracuse, NY 13210, USA
SUNY Upstate Medical University

### Submitter
Sarah Backe

### Lab Head
Dr Dimitra Bourboulia
Department of Urology, SUNY Upstate Medical University Syracuse, NY 13210, USA


