### Accession
PXD023824

### Title
Leptopilina heterotoma (strain Lh14) venom gland proteome

### Description
The purpose of this project was to identify venom proteins from the venom gland of Leptopilina heterotoma (strain Lh14), a  parasitoid wasp species that infects fruit flies in the genus Drosophila.

### Sample Protocol
We first sequenced the wasp transcriptome to establish a database for comparison with the mass spec data. We then dissected venom glands from approximately 50 female wasps into PBS supplemented with 0.5 mM EDTA and Complete Protease Inhibitor Mixture (Roche) on ice. Venom glands were homogenized under nonlysing conditions, and gland cells were pelleted by centrifugation. Venom proteins from the supernatant were run on SDS/PAGE, separated into eight molecular weight fractions, and trypsinized for proteomic analysis.

### Data Protocol
Peptide digests were subjected to Nano LC-MS(MS)2. Briefly, peptides were injected onto a Surveyor HPLC plus machine (Thermo) run in-line with a Thermo LTQ XL ion trap mass spectrometer equipped with a nano-electrospray source. XCalibur RAW files outputted from the mass spectrometer were collected in profile mode, and centroided and converted to MzXML using ReAdW v. 3.5.1 (Institute for Systems Biology). Mgf files were then created using MzXML2Search (included in TPP v. 3.5, Institute for Systems Biology) for all scans with a precursor mass between 400 Da and 20,000 Da. The peptide sequence data were then queried against the database containing translated wasp abdomen transcripts along with common contaminant sequences such as digestion enzymes and human keratin, using SEQUEST (v.27 rev 12). The SEQUEST results files were first combined for each of the eight fractions per lane, then filtered using peptide and protein probability, grouped by top scoring protein ID, and quantified by normalized spectral counts (label free) using ProteoIQ (NuSep).

### Publication Abstract
The fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster and its endoparasitoid wasps are a developing model system for interactions between host immune responses and parasite virulence mechanisms. In this system, wasps use diverse venom cocktails to suppress the conserved fly cellular encapsulation response. Although numerous genetic tools allow detailed characterization of fly immune genes, lack of wasp genomic information has hindered characterization of the parasite side of the interaction. Here, we use high-throughput nucleic acid and amino acid sequencing methods to describe the venoms of two related Drosophila endoparasitoids with distinct infection strategies, Leptopilina boulardi and L. heterotoma. Using RNA-seq, we assembled and quantified libraries of transcript sequences from female wasp abdomens. Next, we used mass spectrometry to sequence peptides derived from dissected venom gland lumens. We then mapped the peptide spectral data against the abdomen transcriptomes to identify a set of putative venom genes for each wasp species. Our approach captured the three venom genes previously characterized in L. boulardi by traditional cDNA cloning methods as well as numerous new venom genes that were subsequently validated by a combination of RT-PCR, blast comparisons, and secretion signal sequence search. Overall, 129 proteins were found to comprise L. boulardi venom and 176 proteins were found to comprise L. heterotoma venom. We found significant overlap in L. boulardi and L. heterotoma venom composition but also distinct differences that may underlie their unique infection strategies. Our joint transcriptomic-proteomic approach for endoparasitoid wasp venoms is generally applicable to identification of functional protein subsets from any non-genome sequenced organism.

### Keywords
Parasitoid wasp drosophila leptopilina venom

### Affiliations
University of Arizona, Entomology Department
University of Arizona, Department of Entomology

### Submitter
Todd Schlenke

### Lab Head
Dr Todd A Schlenke
University of Arizona, Department of Entomology


