### Accession
PXD001626

### Title
Widespread somatic L1 retrotransposition occurs early during gastrointestinal cancer evolution

### Description
Somatic L1 retrotransposition events have been shown to occur in epithelial cancers1-8. Here, we attempted to determine how early somatic L1 insertions occurred during the development of gastrointestinal (GI) cancers. Using L1-targeted resequencing (L1-seq), we studied different stages of four colorectal cancers arising from colonic polyps, seven pancreatic carcinomas, as well as seven gastric cancers. Surprisingly, we found somatic L1 insertions not only in all cancer types and metastases, but also in colonic adenomas, well-known cancer precursors. Some insertions were also present in low quantities in normal GI tissues, occasionally caught in the act of being clonally fixed in the adjacent tumors. Insertions in adenomas and cancers numbered in the hundreds and many were present in multiple tumor sections implying clonal distribution. Our results demonstrate that extensive somatic insertional mutagenesis occurs very early during the development of GI tumors, probably before dysplastic growth. We assessed the impact of somatic L1 insertions on the expression of the corresponding protein-coding genes by comparing protein abundance in the polyp with the highest number of somatic L1 insertions with that of its paired normal colon using mass spectrometry analysis. Of the 10 validated somatic insertions that were in protein coding regions in the polyp, two proteins – KIAA1217 and WARS2 – were downregulated in the adenoma >90% and >70%, respectively.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomic analysis was performed on a colorectal tumor sample with the highest number of somatic L1 insertions and on a matched normal colon, where no somatic L1s detected. Frozen OCT tissues were first cryopulverized in presence of liquid nitrogen. Powderized tissue samples were then homogenized to extract proteins using a lysis buffer (4% SDS, 100 mM Tris, pH 7.6). Crude protein extracts were further sonicated before centrifugation. Cleared protein lysates were used for proteomics analysis. The protein was reduced and alkylated and digested with trypsin. Peptides were collected in filtrates by centrifugation, desalted using Sep-Pak C18 cartridge, vacuum-dried and labeled with TMT reagents (126, 127, 128 and 129) following the manufacturer instructions. Four labeling reactions were carried out including replicate. Labeled peptides were mixed and fractionated using reverse phase liquid chromatography at pH 10 into 24 fractions. Each fraction was analyzed separately on a high resolution Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo) online connected with a high-pressure EASY-nLC 1000 liquid chromatography system (Thermo). Precursor ions selected were fragmented by higher energy C-trap dissociation method and MS3 scans were sequentially acquired by utilizing synchronous precursor selection technology.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data obtained from all LC-MS analysis were searched against Human RefSeq65 database (containing 71,729 entries along with common contaminants) using Sequest algorithm through Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The search parameters used for database dependent searches were as follows: a maximum of 2 missed cleavages, fully trypsin digestion only considered, N-termini and lysine fully labeled with TMT reagent, oxidation at methionine allowed, peptide tolerance within 7 ppm and fragment tolerance within 0.05 Da. Peptide identifications were considered by applying peptide-spectrum matches with <1% false discovery rates. Proteome Discoverer calculated the quantitation values.

### Publication Abstract
Analysis of purified simian rotavirus has shown that it contains fewer structural polypeptide classes than previously reported. Two polypeptides (molecular weights, 62,000 and 28,000) commonly found in purified rotaviruses were, in fact, produced by cleavage of a larger structural polypeptide (molecular weight, about 88,000) by trypsin, which is usually employed to increase the yield of rotaviruses in tissue culture. Trypsin-uncleaved, double-shelled rotaviruses are probably composed of only five polypeptide classes; three in the inner layer, and two in the outer layer.

### Keywords
Retrotransposon, Carcinoma, L1, Colorectal cancer, Adenoma

### Affiliations
McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21205 USA
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine

### Submitter
Szilvia Solyom

### Lab Head
Dr Haig H. Kazazian, Jr.
McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21205 USA


