### Accession
PXD012779

### Title
Barnacle cyprid cement gland LC-MS/MS

### Description
Proteins were extracted from the cement glands of the cypird barnacle Megabalanus volcano. And thenproteins were subjected to in-solution digestion and analyzed by LTQ-Orbitrap Elite coupled to an Easy-nLC.

### Sample Protocol
Protein was alkylated by incubation in 40 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma) for 20 min at room temperature in the dark and then diluted 10-fold with 25 mM tetraethylammonium bromide (TEAB) (Sigma). Trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) was added at an enzyme-to-substrate ratio of 1:50 (w/w), and the mixture was incubated for 16 h at 37°C. After tryptic digestion, the peptide solution was desalted with Sep-Pak C18 cartridges (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) and dried using a SpeedVac (Thermo Electron, Waltham, MA, USA).Dried peptide fractions were reconstituted with 0.1% formic acid and analyzed two times using an LTQ-Orbitrap Elite coupled to an Easy-nLC system (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany) .

### Data Protocol
Raw data obtained from LC-MS/MS analysis were converted into MGF format files with the software Proteome Discovery version 1.3.0.339 (Thermo Finnigan, CA, USA) and then searched against the protein database with Mascot version 2.3.02 (Matrix Sciences, London, UK).

### Publication Abstract
Barnacles represent one of the model organisms used for antifouling research, however, knowledge regarding the molecular mechanisms underlying barnacle cyprid cementation is relatively scarce. Here, RNA-seq was used to obtain the transcriptomes of the cement glands where adhesive is generated and the remaining carcasses of <i>Megabalanus</i> <i>volcano</i> cyprids. Comparative transcriptomic analysis identified 9060 differentially expressed genes, with 4383 upregulated in the cement glands. Four cement proteins, named Mvcp113k, Mvcp130k, Mvcp52k and Mvlcp1-122k, were detected in the cement glands. The salivary secretion pathway was significantly enriched in the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) enrichment analysis of the differentially expressed genes, implying that the secretion of cyprid adhesive might be analogous to that of saliva. Lysyl oxidase had a higher expression level in the cement glands and was speculated to function in the curing of cyprid adhesive. Furthermore, the KEGG enrichment analysis of the 352 proteins identified in the cement gland proteome partially confirmed the comparative transcriptomic results. These results present insights into the molecular mechanisms underlying the synthesis, secretion and curing of barnacle cyprid adhesive and provide potential molecular targets for the development of environmentally friendly antifouling compounds.

### Keywords
Barnacle，cyprid，cement gland

### Affiliations
Institute of Deep-sea Science and Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Guoyong Yan

### Lab Head
Dr Lisheng He
Institute of Deep-sea Science and Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences


