### Accession
PXD027708

### Title
Analysis of RNA polymerase II interacting proteins in wild-type and spt6-1004 yeast cells.

### Description
The histone chaperone Spt6 is involved in promoting elongation of RNA polymerase II (RNAPII), maintaining chromatin structure, regulating co-transcriptional histone modifications, and controlling mRNA processing. These diverse functions of Spt6 are partly mediated through its interactions with RNAPII and other factors in the transcription elongation complex. In this study, we used mass spectrometry to characterize the differences in RNAPII interacting factors between wild-type cells and those depleted for Spt6, leading to the identification of proteins that depend on Spt6 for their interaction with RNAPII. In all, eight samples were processed - four genotypes (1. SPT6, RPB3-untagged; 2. SPT6, RPB3-tagged; 3. spt6-1004, RPB3-untagged; 4. spt6-1004; RPB3-tagged) in biological duplicates.

### Sample Protocol
Yeast strains were grown in 1.5 L of YPD supplemented with 6 µM biotin at 30oC to an OD600≈0.6. This was followed by addition of 1.5 L of YPD (supplemented with 6 µM biotin) at 42oC and growth at 37oC for 80 minutes. The yeast cultures were then rapidly cooled by transferring the cells to a flask with 0.3x volume of media at 4oC, and formaldehyde was immediately added to a final concentration of 1%. The cultures were incubated with shaking at room temperature for 30 minutes. Glycine was then added to a final concentration of 125 mM and the incubation was continued for 5 minutes. The cells were collected by filtration onto a 0.45 μm nitrocellulose membrane filter. The cells were then scraped off the filter, inserted into a syringe, and expelled into liquid nitrogen. The frozen cells were lysed in a mixer mill for 6 cycles, 3 minutes each at 15 Hz, with incubation in liquid nitrogen between each cycle, to form a “grindate.” The grindate was suspended in 12 ml of cold FA lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES-KOH pH 7.5, 140 mM NaCl, 1mM EDTA, 0.1% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% Triton X-100, 0.05% SDS, 2 µg/ml leupeptin, 2 µg/ml pepstatin, 1 mM PMSF) and divided equally between 15 tubes. The sample in each tube was pelleted by centrifugation, resuspended in 640 µl of FA lysis buffer, and sonicated in a Qsonica machine for 25 minutes (30 seconds on, 30 seconds off, 70% amplitude). The sonicated samples were centrifuged at 12,500 rpm for 30 minutes at 4oC. The supernatants from individual tubes were pooled and incubated with 1.8 ml of IgG beads (pre-washed with FA lysis buffer) overnight at 4oC. Following the IP, the beads were washed three times with RIPA buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 140 mM NaCl, 1mM EDTA, 1% Triton X-100, 0.1% SDS). For each wash, the resuspended beads were incubated at 4oC for 10 minutes with end-over-end rotation. The beads were then washed once with TEN140 buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 140 mM NaCl, 1mM EDTA) with end-over-end rotation for 2 minutes at room temperature. The protein complexes were eluted twice by incubation with 20 ml of freshly made IgG elution buffer (100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 200 mM NaCl, 6M Urea, 0.2% SDS) with end-over-end rotation for one hour at room temperature. The eluted sample was concentrated in an Amicon Ultra-15 column (10kDa cutoff, Millipore) and buffer exchange was done four times with 12 ml of TEN140 buffer. The resulting 1 ml of concentrated sample was brought up to 2.8 ml with RIPA buffer and incubated with 1 ml of streptavidin agarose beads (pre-washed with TEN140 buffer). Following the affinity pulldown, the beads were washed once with TEN140 buffer with 0.1% Triton-X 100, twice with IgG elution buffer, twice with IgG elution buffer without SDS, and once with TEN140 buffer for 5 minutes each at 4oC. The beads were then washed seven times with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 5 minutes each at room temperature and then suspended in 800 µl of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and split evenly between two tubes. Ten µl of trypsin was added to one tube, which was then incubated overnight at 37oC with end-over-end rotation. The beads in the other tube were boiled for 25 minutes in reverse cross-linking buffer (250 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.8, 2% SDS, 0.5 M β-mercaptoethanol) and the resulting supernatant was stored at -70oC. One µl of 100% formic acid was added to the trypsinization reaction. The beads were centrifuged at 3000 rpm for 5 minutes at 25oC and the supernatant containing the digested peptides was transferred to a new tube. The beads were washed three times with a solution of 25% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid, and the supernatants after each wash was pooled with the initial supernatant. A C18 spin tip was equilibrated with 50 µl of 100% acetonitrile and twice with 50 µl of 0.1% tri-fluoroacetic acid. The peptides were passed twice through the C18 spin tip, which was then washed twice with 0.1% tri-fluoroacetic acid. The peptides were then eluted from the resin once with 30 µl of 50% acetonitrile and once with 30 µl of 100% acetonitrile. The eluted peptides were dried completely in a SpeedVac vacuum concentrator and the dried peptides were stored at -70oC until analysis by mass spectrometry. The peptides were labelled with tandem mass tags, pooled and run on an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer. Peptides were separated using a gradient of 3 to 23% acetonitrile in 0.125% formic acid over 180 minutes. The peptides were detected (MS1) and quantified (MS3) in the Orbitrap; and sequenced (MS2) in the ion trap.

### Data Protocol
MS2 spectra were searched using the SEQUEST algorithm against a composite database derived from the yeast proteome. The composite database was composed of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae reference proteome (downloaded from Uniprot on 03/12/2014), common contaminants, and all sequences in reverse. Total number of sequence entries was 13,720. Peptide spectral matches were filtered to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) using the target-decoy strategy combined with linear discriminant analysis. The proteins were filtered to a <1% FDR. Proteins were quantified from peptides with a summed SN threshold of >=200 and MS2 isolation specificity of 0.5.

### Publication Abstract
The histone chaperone Spt6 is involved in promoting elongation of RNA polymerase II (RNAPII), maintaining chromatin structure, regulating cotranscriptional histone modifications, and controlling mRNA processing. These diverse functions of Spt6 are partly mediated through its interactions with RNAPII and other factors in the transcription elongation complex. In this study, we used mass spectrometry to characterize the differences in RNAPII-interacting factors between wildtype cells and those depleted for Spt6, leading to the identification of proteins that depend on Spt6 for their interaction with RNAPII. The altered association of some of these factors could be attributed to changes in steady-state protein levels. However, Abd1, the mRNA cap methyltransferase, had decreased association with RNAPII after Spt6 depletion despite unchanged Abd1 protein levels, showing a requirement for Spt6 in mediating the Abd1-RNAPII interaction. Genome-wide studies showed that Spt6 is required for maintaining the level of Abd1 over transcribed regions, as well as the level of Spt5, another protein known to recruit Abd1 to chromatin. Abd1 levels were particularly decreased at the 5' ends of genes after Spt6 depletion, suggesting a greater need for Spt6 in Abd1 recruitment over these regions. Together, our results show that Spt6 is important in regulating the composition of the transcription elongation complex and reveal a previously unknown function for Spt6 in the recruitment of Abd1.

### Keywords
Rnapii, Spt6, Tmt, S. cerevisiae

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School
Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston MA 02115 USA

### Submitter
Rajaraman Gopalakrishnan

### Lab Head
Dr Fred Winston
Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston MA 02115 USA


