### Accession
PXD013000

### Title
Secretome of Granulicatella adiacens

### Description
This project investigated the proteins secreted into extracellular medium by the oral bacterium G. adiacens.

### Sample Protocol
400ng protein were digested by trypsin (Promega, Mannheim, Germany) and applied to nanoLC-ESI-MS/MS. Peptides were trapped and desalted on the enrichment column (Zorbax SB C18, 0.3 x 5 mm, Agilent) for five minutes using 1% acetonitrile/0.5% formic acid as eluent, then peptides were separated on a Zorbax 300 SB C18, 75 µm x 150 mm column (Agilent) using an acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid gradient from 5% to 40% acetonitrile within 120 min.

### Data Protocol
MS spectra were automatically recorded by the mass spectrometer according to manufacturer's instrument settings for nanoLC-ESI-MSMS analyses. Proteins were identified by submitting all MS/MS spectra to the Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, London, England) and non-redundant protein database; NCBI-nr (National Center for Biotechnology Information, Bethesda, USA, version 20151202) and taxonomy Bacteria including 54,860,673 sequences. Ion charge in search parameters for ions from ESI-MS/MS data acquisition were set to "1+,2+ or 3+". Search parameters were as following: Fixed modifications: Carbamidomethyl (C); variable modifications: Deamidated (NQ), Oxidation (M); Peptide Mass Tolerance: ± 5 ppm; Fragment Mass Tolerance: ± 0.6 Da; Missed Cleavages: 2. Only peptides matched with a score of 20 or above were accepted and included in protein identification.

### Publication Abstract
Despite reports on the occurrence of <i>Granulicatella adiacens</i> in infective endocarditis, few mechanistic studies on its virulence characteristics or pathogenicity are available. Proteins secreted by this species may act as determinants of host-microbe interaction and play a role in virulence. Our aim in this study was to investigate and functionally characterize the secretome of <i>G. adiacens</i>. Proteins in the secretome preparation were digested by trypsin and applied to nanoLC-ESI-MS/MS. By using a combined mass spectrometry and bioinformatics approach, we identified 101 proteins. Bioinformatics tools predicting subcellular localization revealed that 18 of the secreted proteins possessed signal sequence. More than 20% of the secretome proteins were putative virulence proteins including serine protease, superoxide dismutase, aminopeptidase, molecular chaperone DnaK, and thioredoxin. Ribosomal proteins, molecular chaperones, and glycolytic enzymes, together known as "moonlighting proteins," comprised fifth of the secretome proteins. By Gene Ontology analysis, more than 60 proteins of the secretome were grouped in biological processes or molecular functions. KEGG pathway analysis disclosed that the secretome consisted of enzymes involved in biosynthesis of antibiotics. Cytokine profiling revealed that secreted proteins stimulated key cytokines, such as IL-1&#x3b2;, MCP-1, TNF-&#x3b1;, and RANTES from human PBMCs. In summary, the results from the current investigation of the <i>G. adiacens</i> secretome provide a basis for understanding possible pathogenic mechanisms of <i>G. adiacens</i>.

### Keywords
Granulicatella, Infective endocarditis, Oral infections

### Affiliations
Faculty of Dentistry
Kuwait University
Oral Microbiology Laboratory Faculty of Dentistry Kuwait University Kuwait

### Submitter
Maribasappa Karched

### Lab Head
Dr Maribasappa Karched
Oral Microbiology Laboratory Faculty of Dentistry Kuwait University Kuwait


