### Accession
PXD002156

### Title
Integrating Proteomics and Enzyme Kinetics Reveals Tissue-Specific Types of the Glycolytic and Gluconeogenic Pathways

### Description
Glycolysis is the core metabolic pathway supplying energy to cells. Whereas the vast majority of studies focus on specific aspects of the process, global analyses characterizing simultaneously all enzymes involved in the process are scarce. Here we demonstrate that quantitative label- and standard-free proteomics allows accurate determination of titers of metabolic enzymes and enables simultaneous measurements of titers and maximal enzymatic activities (Amax)c of all glycolytic enzymes and the gluconeogenic fructose 1,6-bisphosphatase in mouse brain, liver and muscle. Despite occurrence of tissue-specific isoenzymes bearing different kinetic properties, the enzyme titers often correlated well with the Amax values. To provide a more general picture of energy metabolism we analyzed titers of the enzymes in additional 7 mouse organs and in human cells. Across the analyzed samples we identified two basic profiles: a 'fast glucose uptake' one in brain and heart, and a 'gluconeogenic rich' one occurring in liver. In skeletal muscles and other organs, we found intermediate profiles. Obtained data highlighted the glucose-flux-limiting role of hexokinase which activity was always 10-100-fold lower than the average activity of all other glycolytic enzymes. A parallel determination of enzyme titers and maximal enzymatic activities allowed determination of kcat values without enzyme purification. Results of our in-depth proteomic analysis of the mouse organs did not support the concepts of regulation of glycolysis by lysine acetylation.

### Sample Protocol
Freshly dissected tissues from adult Swiss white mice were homogenized with Ultra Turrax T8 homogenizer (IKA Labortechnik) in ice-cold buffer: 20 mM Tris-HCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA, 1 mM DTT, 60 mM NaF, 1 mM PMFS, 1  g/ml leupeptin pH 7.4, 4oC. For the proteomic analysis protein extracts were supplemented with SDS and DTT to final concentrations of 2% and 0.05M, respectively. The lysis was completed by incubations of the mixtures at 100oC, for 5 min.  Protein lysates and extracts containing 100 µg of total protein were processed in the 30k filtration units (Cat No. MRCF0R030, Millipore)using the MED-FASP protocol. Endoproteinase Lys-C and trypsin were used for sequential digestion of proteins. The enzyme to protein ratios were 1/50. Triplicates of each sample were prepared and analyzed.

### Data Protocol
The MS data was analyzed using the software environment MaxQuant version 1.2.6.20. Proteins were identified by searching MS and MS/MS data of peptides against a decoy version of the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification. The maximum false peptide discovery rate was specified as 0.01. Protein concentrations were calculated on the basis of spectral protein intensity using the Total Protein Approach (TPA).

### Publication Abstract
Glycolysis is the core metabolic pathway supplying energy to cells. Whereas the vast majority of studies focus on specific aspects of the process, global analyses characterizing simultaneously all enzymes involved in the process are scarce. Here, we demonstrate that quantitative label- and standard-free proteomics allows accurate determination of titers of metabolic enzymes and enables simultaneous measurements of titers and maximal enzymatic activities (Amax) of all glycolytic enzymes and the gluconeogenic fructose 1,6-bisphosphatase in mouse brain, liver and muscle. Despite occurrence of tissue-specific isoenzymes bearing different kinetic properties, the enzyme titers often correlated well with the Amax values. To provide a more general picture of energy metabolism, we analyzed titers of the enzymes in additional 7 mouse organs and in human cells. Across the analyzed samples, we identified two basic profiles: a "fast glucose uptake" one in brain and heart, and a "gluconeogenic rich" one occurring in liver. In skeletal muscles and other organs, we found intermediate profiles. Obtained data highlighted the glucose-flux-limiting role of hexokinase which activity was always 10- to 100-fold lower than the average activity of all other glycolytic enzymes. A parallel determination of enzyme titers and maximal enzymatic activities allowed determination of kcat values without enzyme purification. Results of our in-depth proteomic analysis of the mouse organs did not support the concepts of regulation of glycolysis by lysine acetylation.

### Keywords
Energy metabolism, Quantitative proteomics, Glycolysis, Lysine acetylation, Carbohydrate metabolism, Kcat -values, Gluconeogenesis, "total protein approach", "filter aided sample preparation" absolute protein quantitation

### Affiliations
Proteomics
Biochemical Proteomics Group, Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max-Planck-Institute of Biochemistry, D-82152 Martinsried, Germany

### Submitter
Jacek Wisniewski

### Lab Head
Dr Jacek R Wisniewski
Biochemical Proteomics Group, Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max-Planck-Institute of Biochemistry, D-82152 Martinsried, Germany


