### Accession
PXD027787

### Title
A proteome-wide map of 20(S)-hydroxycholesterol interactors in cell membranes

### Description
Oxysterols (OHCs) are hydroxylated cholesterol metabolites that play ubiquitous roles in health and disease. Due to the non-covalent nature of their interactions and unique partitioning in membranes, the analysis of live-cell, proteome-wide interactions of OHCs remains an unmet challenge. In this Resource, we present a structurally precise chemoproteomics probe for the osteogenic molecule 20(S)-hydroxycholesterol (20(S)-OHC) and provide a map of its proteome-wide targets in the membranes of living cells. Our target catalogue consolidates diverse OHC ontologies and demonstrates that OHC-interacting proteins cluster with specific processes in immune response and cancer. Competition experiments reveal that 20(S)-OHC is a chemo-, regio-, and stereoselective ligand for the protein Tmem97 (σ2 receptor), enabling molecular reconstruction of the Tmem97:20(S)-OHC binding site. Our results demonstrate that multiplexed, quantitative analysis of cellular target engagement can expose new dimensions of OHC activity and identify actionable targets for molecular therapy.

### Sample Protocol
Biotinylated compound pulldowns performed in NIH3T3 cell lysates. On-bead reduction, alkylation, and trypsin digestion were performed.  Peptides were desalted on C18 stage tips and TMT labelled or analyzed by LFQ.

### Data Protocol
Non-normalized abundance values of proteins from Proteome Discoverer were log2- transformed before further analysis. Missing values were imputed within treatment groups using the MinProb (Probabilistic Minimum Imputation) method embedded in the imputeLCMD R package. Log2 fold changes were calculated from the differences in the means of replicates between groups. The statistical significance of differences between groups was assessed using a two-tailed unpaired t-test.

### Publication Abstract
Oxysterols (OHCs) are hydroxylated cholesterol metabolites that play ubiquitous roles in health and disease. Due to the non-covalent nature of their interactions and their unique partitioning in membranes, the analysis of live-cell, proteome-wide interactions of OHCs remains an unmet challenge. Here, we present a structurally precise chemoproteomics probe for the biologically active molecule 20(S)-hydroxycholesterol (20(S)-OHC) and provide a map of its proteome-wide targets in the membranes of living cells. Our target catalog consolidates diverse OHC ontologies and demonstrates that OHC-interacting proteins cluster with specific processes in immune response and cancer. Competition experiments reveal that 20(S)-OHC is a chemo-, regio- and stereoselective ligand for the protein transmembrane protein 97 (Tmem97/the &#x3c3;2 receptor), enabling us to reconstruct the 20(S)-OHC-Tmem97 binding site. Our results demonstrate that multiplexed, quantitative analysis of cellular target engagement can expose new dimensions of metabolite activity and identify actionable targets for molecular therapy.

### Keywords
Live-cell analysis, Immune response, Oxysterols, Chemoproteomics probe, Osteogenic molecules, Cancer

### Affiliations
Caltech Proteome Exploration Lab
Caltech Division of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering

### Submitter
Brett Lomenick

### Lab Head
Dr Alison E. Ondrus
Caltech Division of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering


