### Accession
PXD015010

### Title
Plasma membrane proteome of adhesion-competent endometrial epithelial cells and its modulation by Rab11a

### Description
Human endometrial epithelium (EE) is composed of a multitude of proteins, amongst which those localized on the plasma membrane (plasma membrane proteins-PMPs) are of critical relevance in early stages of implantation. Evidences support the key role of few PMPs in implantation. However, many remain unidentified, as efforts have not been made till date to generate the plasma membrane proteome of human EE cells, using a gel-free approach. This study presents a protein catalogue of the PMP enriched fraction of Ishikawa cell line; often used as an in vitro model for embryo-adhesive EE. Liquid Chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry identified 3598 proteins. Of these, 1963 proteins were annotated for their membrane localization. Of 1963 proteins, 1321 were found to have transmembrane domain and 43 proteins had GPI anchor. Extensive data mining revealed endometrial expression of 943 proteins reported in human and/or rodents. Further, quantitative alterations were observed in the plasma membrane proteome on perturbation of intracellular trafficking. Silencing of Rab11a (known for its role in plasma membrane organization) expression caused alteration in the abundance of 74 proteins. Caveolin-1 and EpCAM levels were reduced whereas Rab4a abundance increased in the PMP extracts of Rab11a-deficient cells, compared to control cells. Briefly, the study reports the identity of several novel plasma membrane-localized proteins. A major spin-off of the study is the identification of novel proteins trafficked by Rab11a to the plasma membrane. Targeted analysis of novel PMPs may reveal their specific roles in endometrial receptivity and implantation.

### Sample Protocol
Maintenance of Ishikawa cell line and its stable clones Ishikawa cells (a human endometrial carcinoma of the epithelial cell) (Cat # 99040201) were procured from Sigma Aldrich (USA). Cells were maintained in phenol-red free DMEM/F-12 media (Sigma Aldrich) supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (Gibco, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA), 100 units/ml penicillin and 100 µg/ml streptomycin (Gibco). The cell line was authenticated by STR profiling and karyotype analysis.  Stable clones of Ishikawa, deficient in Rab11a expression, were generated as described previously (Kakar-Bhanot et al., 2019). In brief, Ishikawa cells (1×105) were transfected with 2.0 μg plasmid constructs (pLKO-puro with or without human Rab11a shRNA) using Xtreme gene HP (Roche, Switzerland) for 48 hr. Cells were then incubated in media supplemented with puromycin dihydrochloride (0.6 μg/ml) (HiMedia Laboratories, India) to select clones with stable integration of Rab11a shRNA. Individual colonies were trypsinized and sub-cultured separately in a 12-well plate. Clones were individually screened for silencing of Rab11a expression. The clones showing >70% reduction in Rab11a protein expression (Rab11a kd-1 and 2), compared to control clones, were used for the experiments. Empty vector (pLKO-puro vector without shRNA) transfected clones, which showed Rab11a expression similar to parent Ishikawa cells, were used as Control clones (Control-1 and 2) (Fig S1). All the experiments were performed between passages 10 to 40.  Enrichment of plasma membrane proteins Plasma membrane protein (PMP) enriched fractions were extracted, following live cell biotinylation and affinity purification, using a Cell Surface Protein Isolation kit [Pierce, Thermo Fisher Scientific (USA)], from cultures at three different time points. Cells were grown to 90-95% confluency in four T75 flasks and rinsed twice with ice-cold PBS supplemented with Ca+2 and Mg+2 (PBS-CM). Adherent monolayers were incubated with sulpho-NHS-SS-biotin (0.25 mg/ml) for 40 min at 4°C in dark. Biotinylation reaction was terminated by adding quenching solution (provided in the kit). Cells were gently scraped, collected and lysed in lysis buffer (provided in the kit) supplemented with 4% Triton X-114. Cell lysates were sonicated on ice and spun at 9,391 g. Supernatants containing biotinylated proteins were incubated with neutravidin slurry for 1 hr on rotospin with end to end mixing. Biotinylated proteins were eluted by incubating the neutravidin slurry with rehydration buffer (9 M urea, 0.5% CHAPS) supplemented with 50 mM DTT for 1 hr and stored at -20°C. Plasma membrane protein enrichment was indicated by a higher abundance of Integrin β3 in PMP extracts compared to total protein lysates (Fig S2). Total protein isolation Clones (Control and Rab11a kd) were seeded (approx. 2×105) in a 12 well plate to obtain 75-80% confluency the following day. Cells were washed with 1X PBS (0.136M NaCl, 0.01M Na2HPO4.2H2O, 0.002M KCl, 0.001M KH2PO4) twice and lysed using lysis buffer (9M Urea, 40 mM Tris and 4% CHAPs) at 4°C for 60 min. Lysates were spun at 9,391 g for 45 min to obtain clear supernatants. Supernatants were stored at -20°C till future use. Total protein extracts were isolated from Rab11 kd and Control clones at three different time points. Protein concentration was estimated by Bradford’s assay (Bradford, 1976).

### Data Protocol
iTRAQ and LC/MS-MS analysis of Plasma Membrane Protein enriched fractions PMP fractions were subjected to buffer exchange using 3K cut-off column (Pierce, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) pre-equilibrated with 0.5M Triethyl Ammonium Bicarbonate (TEAB) buffer to eliminate urea and concentrate proteins. PMP samples (50 µg each from two different Control and two different Rab11a knockdown clones) were then processed for iTRAQ labeling as per manufacturer’s instructions (AB SCIEX UK Ltd, UK). Samples were denatured with 2% (w/v) SDS and reduced for 1 hr at 60°C with 50mM Tris 2-carboxyethyl phosphine (TCEP). Cysteines were blocked with freshly prepared 200 mM methyl methane 6 thiosulfonate (MMTS) in the dark at RT for 10 min. Samples were digested with trypsin in a 1:30 (trypsin: protein) ratio for 16 hr at 37°C. The tryptic peptides were labeled with iTRAQ tags; two Control clones (Control-1, 2) were labeled with 114 and 116 tags and Rab11a knockdown clones (Rab11a kd-1, 2) labeled with 115 and 117 tags. Labeled peptides from different samples were then pooled and subjected to high pH reversed-phase fractionation as per manufacturer’s instructions (Pierce, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). Digested peptides were bound to the column under aqueous conditions, followed by a step gradient of increasing acetonitrile (ACN) concentrations in a high pH solution to elute bound peptides into six different fractions. Each fraction was then dried using SpeedVac and the fractions were reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid (Solvent A) and then processed for LC-MS/MS analysis. The peptide samples were separated on the column for 90 min using the following gradient. The change in the organic solvent composition [Solvent A and Solvent B (80% ACN in 0.1% formic acid)] with respect to time was as follows, from 0 – 70 min 0-35% solvent B, 100-65% solvent A, from 70-77 min 35-95% solvent B, 65-5% solvent A, from 77-90 min 95% solvent B, 5% solvent A. The peptides were then eluted and analysed on Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with following parameters: the scan range of m/z 375–1700 with a resolution of 60000 at m/z 200 for full MS spectra. MS/MS acquisition was carried out with a cycle time of 3 sec. The intensity threshold was 20000, and the maximum injection time was 50 ms. The Automated Gain Control target was set to 400000, and the isolation window was 1.2 m/z. Ions with charge states 2+ to 6+ were sequentially fragmented by higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with normalized collision energy (NCE) of 35%. The dynamic exclusion duration was set at 40s. The data were searched using SEQUEST Algorithm in the Proteome Discoverer software v2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) against UniProt Homo sapiens reference proteome database. Trypsin with two missed cleavages, variable modifications of methionine oxidation and fixed modification of cysteine carbamidomethylation were selected as search parameters. iTRAQ experiments also included fixed iTRAQ modification of lysine and peptide N-termini. MS tolerance was set to 10ppm. Any MSn data analysis utilizing the Orbitrap analyzer was set to a tolerance of MS/MS 0.05 Da. An unused protein score of >1.3 (95% confidence interval) was used as the cut-off threshold for protein identification. Proteins were considered to be differentially expressed if fold change of relative abundance was less than 0.8 or more than 1.2 in both Rab11a knockdown clones compared with control clones.

### Publication Abstract
Human endometrial epithelium (EE) is composed of a multitude of proteins, amongst which those localized on the plasma membrane [plasma membrane proteins (PMPs)] are of critical relevance in the early stages of implantation. Evidence supports the key role of&#xa0;few PMPs in implantation. However, many remain unidentified, as efforts have not been made till date to generate the plasma membrane proteome of human EE cells, using a gel-free approach. This study presents a protein catalog of the PMP enriched fraction of Ishikawa cell line; often used as an in vitro model for embryo-adhesive EE. Liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry identified 3,598 proteins. Of these, 1,963 proteins were annotated for their membrane localization. Of 1,963 proteins, 1,321 were found to have a transmembrane domain and 43 proteins had glycophosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchor. Extensive data mining revealed endometrial expression of 943 proteins reported in humans and/or rodents. Further, quantitative alterations were observed in the plasma membrane proteome on the perturbation of intracellular trafficking. Silencing of Rab11a (known for its role in plasma membrane organization) expression caused alteration in the abundance of 74 proteins. Caveolin-1 and EpCAM levels were reduced whereas Rab4a abundance increased in the PMP extracts of Rab11a deficient cells, compared with control cells. Briefly, the study reports the identity of several novel plasma membrane-localized proteins. A major spin-off of the study is the identification of novel proteins trafficked by Rab11a to the plasma membrane. Targeted analysis of novel PMPs may reveal their specific roles in endometrial receptivity and implantation.

### Keywords
Plasma membrane, Proteomics, Epithelium, Endometrium, Ishikawa

### Affiliations
Group Leader, Primate Biology, National Institute for Research in Reproductive Health, India
Ph.D.

### Submitter
Geetanjali  Sachdeva

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Geetanjali Sachdeva
Group Leader, Primate Biology, National Institute for Research in Reproductive Health, India


