### Accession
PXD011604

### Title
Proteomic Characterization of Bradyrhizobium diazoefficiens bacteroids during soybean root nodules senescence

### Description
The form and physiology of Bradyrhizobium diazoefficiens after the decline of symbiotic nitrogen fixation has been characterized. Proteomic analyses showed that the post-symbiotic B. diazoefficiens undergo metabolic remodeling as well defined groups of proteins declined, increased or remained unchanged from 56 to 119 days after planting suggesting a transition to a hemibiotrophic-like lifestyle. Enzymatic analysis showed distinct patterns in both the cytoplasm and the periplasm. Similar to the bacteroid, the post-symbiotic bacteria rely on a non-citric acid cycle supply of succinate and although viable, they did not demonstrate the ability to grow within the senescent nodule.

### Sample Protocol
The periplasmic and cytoplasmic fractions were prepared from isolated bacteroids and were each precipitated using equal volumes of phenol.  The fractions were mixed at room temperature for one hour.  Phases were then separated by centrifugation at 4,000xg for 10 minutes at 4oC.  The phenol phase was collected and four volumes of 100% methanol containing 0.1M ammonium acetate and 10 mM dithiothreitol added.  Protein was precipitated overnight at -20oC.  Protein precipitate was collected by centrifugation at 4000xg for 10 min at 4oC.  The protein pellet was washed once with the methanol/ammonium acetate/dithiothreitol (DTT) solution.  The protein pellet was then washed three times with 90% ethanol containing 10 mM DTT and then stored in 90% (v/v) ethanol/DTT at -80oC.   Precipitated protein in 90% (v/v) ethanol/DTT was collected by centrifugation at 4000 g and 4oC.  Reconstitution buffer (30 mM Tris-HCl, 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4% (w/v) CHAPS at pH 8.8) was added to the pellet followed by gentle vortexing for one hour.  A 20 µg portion of protein from each sample, quantified by the Bradford method, was removed and diluted to 1 µg/uL with reconstitution buffer.  Bovine serum albumin was added as an internal standard to give a protein ratio of 1% (w/w). Disulfide bonds were reduced with 10 mM DTT (100 mM stock in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate), at 25oC for 1 hour and then alkylated with 40 mM iodoacetamide (200 mM stock in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate), at 25oC in the dark for 1 hour and finally quenched with additional DTT to 30 mM (100 mM stock in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate) and incubating at 25oC for 30 minutes.  Urea was brought to 1 M by dilution with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate.  Trypsin (Sequencing Grade Modified-Promega, Madison, WI) was reconstituted to 0.02 ug/uL and activated per manufacturer’s instructions in the provided re-suspension buffer ( 1:200  w/w, trypsin:sample).  Samples were incubated at 37oC for 16 hours.  Digests were then lyophilized to dryness.Lyophilized protein samples were reconstituted in 100 uL of 18 MΩ water with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid and 5.0% (v/v) acetonitrile by pipetting and mild vortexing.  Samples were spun at 13,000 rpm at 4oC for 10 minutes in a tabletop centrifuge to remove insoluble debris.  Twenty uL portions from each sample were placed in polypropylene 96 v-well plates and covered with adhesive film.  The plates were centrifuged to collect samples at the bottom of the well, and then placed in the pre-cooled tray of the LC auto-sampler.  Ten 10 µL injections were analyzed on a LTQ ProteomeX linear ion trap LC-MS/MS instrument (Thermo Fisher, San Jose, CA).  C8 captraps (Michrom Bioresources, Auburn, CA) were used to concentrate and desalt peptides before final separation by C18 column  chromatography (acetonitrile gradient of 0-90% solvent B (100% acetonitrile with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid), in solvent A (deionized 18 MΩ water with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid for a duration of 110 minutes).  The peptide trap and C18 column were re-equilibrated with 100% solvent A for 25 minutes before applying the next sample.  LC separation was performed using fused silica nanospray needles ( 26 cm length, 360 μm outer diameter, 150 μm inner diameter; Polymicro Technologies, Phoenix, AZ), packed with “Magic C18” (200Å, 5 μm particles, Michrom Bioresources) in 100% methanol.  Columns were equilibrated for 3-4 hours at 200 nL/min (at the column tip) with a 60:40 mix of solvent B to solvent A prior to sample application.  Samples analysis was performed in the data-dependent positive acquisition mode on the LC-MS/MS instrument, with normal scan rate for precursor ion analysis with dynamic exclusion enabled (1 repeat count, 30 sec repeat duration, 30 sec exclusion,  list size of 50). After each full scan (400-2000 m/z), a data-dependent triggered MS/MS scan was obtained for the three most intense parent ions.  The nanospray column was maintained at ion sprays of 2.0 kV.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were obtained using BioWorks version 3.3.  SEQUEST (ThermoFinnigan, San Jose, CA; version 2.7) was set up to search a FASTA file containing translated coding regions for both  B. diazoefficiens and G. max with a concatenated random database with fragment ion mass tolerance of 1.0 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 2.0 Da. These protein sequence files, named “brady.p.aa.gz” “Gmax_109_peptide.fa.gz” were provided at the websites (ftp://ftp.kazusa.or.jp/pub/RhizoBase/Bradyrhizobium/) and (ftp://ftp.jgi-psf.org/pub/JGI_data/phytozome/v7.0/Gmax/annotation/) repectively.  The random concatenated database was generated using the tool “DecoyDBCreateor” found at (http://p3db.org/tools/DecoyDBCreator/).  Iodoacetamide derivative of cysteine (+57) was specified as a fixed modification.  RAW files were aalyzed using Bioworks “SEQUEST batch-search” with 10 matches reported without redundancy reporting.  SEQUEST results were saved as .srf files.  In order to filter the SEQUEST matches for non-random hits, the files were converted to .SQT file formats.  Filtering of the .SQT files was performed using SEPro [22] with the following settings: Spectral FDR: 5%, Peptide FDR: 3% and final filtering of protein hits at: 1%.  All filtered data was saved as SEPro file outputs (.spr).Spectral count data associated with the protein IDs provided by SEPro were used for trend analysis via the proteomic analysis software PatternLab [46].  As per the software workflows, PatternLab input files were created using the Regrouper software (SparseMatrix and index files).  Folders for each time point in the timecourse were created, and the selected SEPro files for each timepoint were placed into the folders.  Regrouper was pointed to these folders, and the SparseMatrix and index files were created.  These files were provided to PatternLab in the TrendQuest module.  Trends were created using an assigned minimum average signal of 2, with minimum data points of 2 and minimum items per cluster of 3 and a health of 0.800.

### Publication Abstract
The form and physiology of <i>Bradyrhizobium diazoefficiens</i> after the decline of symbiotic nitrogen fixation has been characterized. Proteomic analyses showed that post-symbiotic <i>B. diazoefficiens</i> underwent metabolic remodeling as well-defined groups of proteins declined, increased or remained unchanged from 56 to 119 days after planting, suggesting a transition to a hemibiotrophic-like lifestyle. Enzymatic analysis showed distinct patterns in both the cytoplasm and the periplasm. Similar to the bacteroid, the post-symbiotic bacteria rely on a non-citric acid cycle supply of succinate and, although viable, they did not demonstrate the ability to grow within the senescent nodule.

### Keywords
Senescence, Nitrogen fixation, Bradyrhizobium diazoefficiens, Soybean

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry, University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri
University of Missouri

### Submitter
David Emerich

### Lab Head
Dr David W. Emerich
Department of Biochemistry, University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri


