### Accession
PXD042589

### Title
Lipoylation is dependent on the ferredoxin FDX1 and dispensable under hypoxia in human cells

### Description
Iron sulfur clusters (ISC) are essential cofactors that participate in electron transfer, environment sensing, and catalysis. Amongst the most ancient ISC containing proteins are the ferredoxin family of electron carriers. Humans have two ferredoxins, FDX1 and FDX2, localized to the mitochondria and important for ISC synthesis itself. We previously showed that hypoxia can bypass the requirement for some, but not all, components of the ISC biosynthetic pathway, but ferredoxins were not tested at that time. Here we report that FDX1 and its reductase FDXR, but not FDX2, are dispensable under ambient 1% O2 in cultured cells. We find that FDX1 is essential for production of the lipoic acid cofactor, which is synthesized by the ISC containing enzyme lipoyl synthase (LIAS). While hypoxia can rescue the growth phenotype of either FDX1 or LIAS knockout cells, lipoylation is not rescued, arguing against an alternative biosynthetic route or salvage pathway for lipoate in hypoxia. Our work identifies a role for FDX1/LIAS in lipoate synthesis and surprisingly reveals dispensability of lipoic acid altogether under low oxygen tensions in cell culture.

### Sample Protocol
sgCTRL, sgFXN, sgFDXR, sgFDX1, sgFDX2, sgLIAS HepG2 cells were grown for 10 days in 21% or 1% oxygen conditions in 150 mm plates. Cells were washed four times in ice cold PBS, scraped into fresh ice cold PBS, and spun down at 300 g for 5 minutes in a microcentrifuge. The remaining PBS was siphoned off and the cell pellets were snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80 °C until the time of sample submission to the Thermo Fisher Scientific Center for Multiplexed Proteomics (Harvard). Samples for protein analysis were prepared essentially as previously described.  Following lysis, protein precipitation, reduction/alkylation and digestion, peptides were quantified by micro-BCA assay and 100µg of peptide per sample were labeled with TMTPro reagents (Thermo-Fisher) for 2hrs at room temperature. Labeling reactions were quenched with 0.5% hydroxylamine and acidified with TFA. Acidified peptides were combined and desalted by Sep-Pak (Waters). TMT labeled peptides were solubilized in 5% ACN/10 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.0 and 300 µg of TMT labeled peptides was separated by an Agilent 300 Extend C18 column (3.5 mm particles, 4.6 mm ID and 250 mm in length). An Agilent 1260 binary pump coupled with a photodiode array (PDA) detector (Thermo Scientific) was used to separate the peptides. A 45 minute linear gradient from 10% to 40% acetonitrile in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0 (flow rate of 0.6 mL/min) separated the peptide mixtures into a total of 96 fractions (36 seconds).  A total of 96 Fractions were consolidated into 24 samples in a checkerboard fashion, acidified with 20 µL of 10% formic acid and vacuum dried to completion. Each sample was desalted via Stage Tips and re-dissolved in 5% FA/ 5% ACN for LC-MS3 analysis.

### Data Protocol
Proteome data were collected on an Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) coupled to a Proxeon EASY-nLC 1200 LC pump (ThermoFisher Scientific). Fractionated peptides were separated using a 120 min gradient at 500 nL/min on a 35 cm column (i.d. 100 μm, Accucore, 2.6 μm, 150 Å) packed in-house. High-field asymmetric-waveform ion mobility spectrometry (FAIMS) was enabled during data acquisition with compensation voltages set as −40, −60, and −80 V. MS1 data were collected in the Orbitrap (120,000 resolution; maximum injection time 50 ms; AGC 4 × 105). Charge states between 2 and 5 were required for MS2 analysis, and a 120 s dynamic exclusion window was used. Top 10 MS2 scans were performed in the ion trap with CID fragmentation (isolation window 0.5 Da; Turbo; NCE 35%; maximum injection time 35 ms; AGC 1 × 104). An on-line real-time search algorithm (Orbiter) was used to trigger MS3 scans for quantification. MS3 scans were collected in the Orbitrap using a resolution of 50,000, NCE of 45%, maximum injection time of 200 ms, and AGC of 3.0 × 105. The close out was set at two peptides per protein per fraction.

### Publication Abstract
Iron-sulfur clusters (ISC) are essential cofactors that participate in electron transfer, environmental sensing, and catalysis. Amongst the most ancient ISC-containing proteins are the ferredoxin (FDX) family of electron carriers. Humans have two FDXs- FDX1 and FDX2, both of which are localized to mitochondria, and the latter of which is itself important for ISC synthesis. We have previously shown that hypoxia can eliminate the requirement for some components of the ISC biosynthetic pathway, but FDXs were not included in that study. Here, we report that FDX1, but not FDX2, is dispensable under 1% O<sub>2</sub> in cultured human cells. We find that FDX1 is essential for production of the lipoic acid cofactor, which is synthesized by the ISC-containing enzyme lipoyl synthase. While hypoxia can rescue the growth phenotype of either FDX1 or lipoyl synthase KO cells, lipoylation in these same cells is not rescued, arguing against an alternative biosynthetic route or salvage pathway for lipoate in hypoxia. Our work reveals the divergent roles of FDX1 and FDX2 in mitochondria, identifies a role for FDX1 in lipoate synthesis, and suggests that loss of lipoic acid can be tolerated under low oxygen tensions in cell culture.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Lipoylation, Fdx1, Proteomics, Hypoxia, Tmt, Lias, Metabolism

### Affiliations
Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Molecular Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America; Broad Institute, Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States of America; Department of Systems Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America.
the Broad Institute

### Submitter
Xiaoyan Guo

### Lab Head
Dr Vamsi K.
Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Molecular Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America; Broad Institute, Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States of America; Department of Systems Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America.


