### Accession
PXD023921

### Title
Multi-protease approach for the improved identification and molecular characterization of small proteins and short open reading frame-encoded peptides

### Description
The identification of proteins below 70 amino acids in bottom-up proteomics is still a challenging task due to the limited number of peptides generated by proteolytic digestion. This includes the short open reading frame-encoded peptides (SEP), which are a subset of the small proteins that were not previously annotated or that are alternatively encoded. Here, we systematically investigated the use of multiple proteases (trypsin, chymotrypsin, LysC, LysArgiNase and GluC) in GeLC-MS/MS analysis to improve the sequence coverage and the number of identified peptides for small proteins (<70 amino acids), with a focus on SEP, in the archaeon Methanosarcina mazei. Combining the data of all proteases, we identified 63 small proteins and additional 28 SEP with at least two unique peptides, while only 55 small proteins and 22 SEP could be identified using trypsin only. For 27 small proteins and 12 SEP, a 100 % sequence coverage could be achieved. Moreover, for five SEP, incorrectly predicted translation start points were identified, confirming the data of a previous top-down proteomics study of this organism. The results show clearly that a multi-protease approach can improve the identification and molecular characterization of small proteins and SEP.

### Sample Protocol
Samples Cultivation of Methanosarcina mazei was performed as described previously [Kaulich, 2020 ]. In brief, the archaeon was cultivated under nitrogen starvation conditions (150 mM methanol, 40 mM acetate) under anaerobic conditions (37 °C, 80 % N2, 20 % CO2). Cells were harvested (30 min, 3,100 x g, 4 °C) when a turbidity at 600 nm of 0.6 was reached and washed with 100 mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEAB). Cell lysis was performed in lysis buffer (10 mM Tris (pH 8.8), 1 % SDS, cOmplete EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail) via freeze-thaw cycling and ultrasonic homogenizing (Sonoplus HD 2070, Bandelin, Berlin, Germany). After centrifugation, the protein concentration of the supernatant was determined by the Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany).   In-gel digestion  In-gel digestion was performed as described earlier with slightly modifications [Kaulich, 2020]. In brief, 50 µg aliquots of M. mazei proteome were used for separation via discontinuous SDS-PAGE (4 % stacking gel, 16 % resolving gel, 0.1 cm thick). The samples were mixed 1:1 (v/v) with reducing Laemmli buffer (62 mM Tris-HCl (pH 6.8), 25 % glycerin (v/v), 5 % β-mercaptoethanol (v/v), 2 % SDS (w/v), 0.01 % bromophenol blue (w/v)) and separated using Mini-PROTEAN Tetra Cell (Bio-Rad, Hercules, USA) in a TRIS-glycine running buffer (0.3 % TRIS, 1.44 % glycine, 0.1 % SDS (w/v)). A constant voltage was applied (40 V, 15 min and 120 V, ~80 min) until the running front reached the end of the gel. All experiments were performed in triplicates and for each protease three individual samples from the same biological batch were separated by SDS-PAGE. After electrophoresis, the gel was fixed 2 h in fixing solution (30 % Methanol, 10 % acetic acid in MilliQ water (v/v)), changing the solution twice. Using a pre-stained protein marker, three bands below 20 kDa (Figure S1) were cut out and washed three times with 200 µl 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) (pH 8). The proteins were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (200 µl, 1 h, 56°C) and alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide (55 mM, 30 min, room temperature in the dark). The gel bands were washed with 100 mM ABC and 100 % acetonitrile (each 200 µl, 15 min, room temperature) and dried by vacuum centrifugation for 10 min (45 °C).  For digestion, the proteases (20 ng/µl in 50 mM TEAB) were added to the gel pieces (trypsin, LysC, chymotrypsin and GluC: 100 ng; activated LysArgiNase: 300 ng) and the volume was filled up to 100 µl with 50 mM ABC, 5 % ACN. Digestion was performed overnight (16 h) at 37 °C. The peptides were eluted with each 150 µl 60 % ACN, 1 % TFA and 100 % ACN (15 min, 37 °C). After drying via vacuum centrifugation, the peptides were resuspended in 15 µl of loading buffer (3 % ACN, 0.1 % TFA). For LC-MS/MS measurements, 5 µl were injected.   LC-MS/MS analysis  A Dionex U3000 UHPLC system (Thermo, Dreieich, Germany), equipped with an AcclaimPepMap 100 column (2 µm, 75 µm × 500 mm), coupled online to a QExactive Plus Orbitrap MS (Thermo, Bremen, Germany), was used. Peptide were separated across a 2 h gradient at a flow rate of 300 nl/min: 4 % B for 2 min, followed by a linear gradient to 20 % B over 80 min, and a linear gradient to 40 % B over 40 min, an 8 min linear increase to 90 % B, and 10 min at 90 % B. Inter-run equilibration of the column was performed with 10 min at 4 % Eluent B. Eluent A was 0.05 % formic acid (FA) and eluent B 80 % ACN, 0.04 % FA. The MS acquisition program consisted of a full scan MS (resolution 70,000, automatic gain control (ACG) target 3e6, maximal injection time (IT) 50 ms) with top 15 MS/MS acquisition of the most intense ions using a 1.4 m/z isolation window (resolution 17,500, AGC target 1e5, maximal IT 100 ms). Ions of unassigned, +1 and >+6 charge state were excluded. For fragmentation, higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) was utilized with a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 27.5. Dynamic exclusion (30 s) and lock mass (445.12003 m/z) were enabled.

### Data Protocol
The database search was performed with the Proteome Discoverer software package (V2.4; Thermo, Germany). The raw data of the different proteases were searched individually using SequestHT algorithm node against database containing the genome-derived proteome of Methanosarcina mazei strain Gö1 (Uniprot-ID: UP000000595, 12.09.2019), a list of predicted SEP [Deppenmeier, 2002; Jäger, 2009; Dar, 2016] and common contaminants (cRAP). For database searches, we named the SEP with arbitrary accession numbers that are assigned to the gene identifiers in Table S1. Only full proteotypic peptides were allowed. Precursor mass tolerance: 10 ppm. Fragment mass tolerance: 0.02 Da. The number of maximal allowed missed cleavages was optimized by multiple database searches and finally set to 2 (trypsin, LysC), 3 (GluC) or 5 (LysArgiNase and chymotrypsin). Carbamidomethylation on cysteine was set as static modification. Variable modification: oxidation of methionine, deamidation of asparagine, glutamine and arginine, cleavage of start methionine and N-terminal acetylation with and without methionine truncation. For the calculation of false discovery rates, percolator was used.  Two different identification criteria were used: (i) strict criteria: identification of two high confident (FDR <1 %) peptides were one is proteotypic (ii) ion series-based criteria: identification of at least one high confident unique peptide, when in its MS2 spectrum at least five consecutive b- or five consecutive y-ions are present [Slavoff, 2013].

### Publication Abstract
The identification of proteins below approximately 70-100 amino acids in bottom-up proteomics is still a challenging task due to the limited number of peptides generated by proteolytic digestion. This includes the short open reading frame-encoded peptides (SEPs), which are a subset of the small proteins that were not previously annotated or that are alternatively encoded. Here, we systematically investigated the use of multiple proteases (trypsin, chymotrypsin, LysC, LysargiNase, and GluC) in GeLC-MS/MS analysis to improve the sequence coverage and the number of identified peptides for small proteins, with a focus on SEPs, in the archaeon <i>Methanosarcina mazei</i>. Combining the data of all proteases, we identified 63 small proteins and additional 28 SEPs with at least two unique peptides, while only 55 small proteins and 22 SEP could be identified using trypsin only. For 27 small proteins and 12 SEPs, a complete sequence coverage was achieved. Moreover, for five SEPs, incorrectly predicted translation start points or potential <i>in vivo</i> proteolytic processing were identified, confirming the data of a previous top-down proteomics study of this organism. The results show clearly that a multi-protease approach allows to improve the identification and molecular characterization of small proteins and SEPs. LC-MS data: ProteomeXchange PXD023921.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Sorf, Peptidomics, Sep

### Affiliations
Systematic Proteome Research & Bioanalytics, University of Kiel
Systematische Proteomics & Bioanalytik,  Institut für Experimentelle Medizin Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel 24105 Kiel, Germany

### Submitter
Andreas Tholey

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Tholey
Systematische Proteomics & Bioanalytik,  Institut für Experimentelle Medizin Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel 24105 Kiel, Germany


