### Accession
PXD006931

### Title
Bioactive natural product peptide discovery in fungal secretoms using PepSAVI-MS

### Description
Fungal secondary metabolites represent a rich and largely untapped source for bioactive molecules, including peptides with substantial structural diversity and pharmacological potential. As methods proceed to take a deep dive into fungal genomes, complimentary methods to identify bioactive components are required to keep pace with the expanding fungal repertoire. We developed PepSAVI-MS to expedite the search for natural product bioactive peptides and herein demonstrate proof-of-principle applicability of the pipeline for the discovery of bioactive peptides from fungal secretomes via identification of the antifungal killer toxin KP4 from Ustilago maydis P4. This work opens the door to investigating microbial secretomes with a new lens, and could have broad applications across human health, agriculture, and food safety.

### Sample Protocol
Peptide libraries were analyzed intact via a nano-LC-ESI-MS/MS platform: Waters nanoAcquity UPLC (Waters, Milford, MA) coupled to an AB Sciex TripleTOF5600 (AB Sciex, Framingham, MA). Peptide fractions were diluted to 0.2 μg/μL and acidified with 0.1 % formic acid.  Five microliters of each sample were injected onto a trap column (NanoAcquity UPLC 2G-W/M Trap 5 μm Symmetry C18, 180 μm Å~ 20 mm: Waters) before transfer to the analytical C18 column (10k PSI, 100 Å, 1.8μm, 75 μm x 250 mm: Waters). Peptide separation was carried out at a flow rate of 0.3 μL/min using a linear ramp of 5 – 50 % B (mobile phase A, 0.1% formic acid; mobile phase B, 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) over 30 min. The MS was operated in positive ion, high sensitivity mode with the MS survey spectrum using a mass range of 350-1600 m/z in 250 ms and information dependent acquisition (IDA) of MS/MS data, 87 ms per scan. For IDA MS/MS experiments, the first 20 features above 150 counts threshold and having a charge state of +2 to +5 were fragmented using rolling collision energy +5%. Each MS/MS experiment put the precursor m/z on an 8-second dynamic exclusion list. Auto calibration was performed every eight samples (8 h) to assure high mass accuracy in both MS and MS/MS acquisition.

### Data Protocol
Deisotoped peak lists for each fraction were generated using Progenesis QI for Proteomics software (Nonlinear Dynamics, v.2.0). To align runs, a reference run was chosen from a subset of bioactive fractions (20-32 for U. maydis). Automatic processing settings were used to align and peak pick ions across all runs. Identified features were quantified using AUC integration of survey scan data based on the summed intensity of each deisotoped feature. Data was exported as “peptide ion data” with the default parameters from Progenesis at the “Identify Peptides” stage in the software. Exported peptide ion data was analyzed using the PepSAVIms CRAN package in R.

### Publication Abstract
Fungal secondary metabolites represent a rich and largely untapped source for bioactive molecules, including peptides with substantial structural diversity and pharmacological potential. As methods proceed to take a deep dive into fungal genomes, complimentary methods to identify bioactive components are required to keep pace with the expanding fungal repertoire. We developed PepSAVI-MS to expedite the search for natural product bioactive peptides and herein demonstrate proof-of-principle applicability of the pipeline for the discovery of bioactive peptides from fungal secretomes via identification of the antifungal killer toxin KP4 from Ustilago maydis P4. This work opens the door to investigating microbial secretomes with a new lens, and could have broad applications across human health, agriculture, and food safety. Graphical Abstract.

### Keywords
Fungal secretome analysis, Peptidomics, Mass spectrometry, Bioactive peptides

### Affiliations
UNC Chapel Hill

### Submitter
Christine Kirkpatrick

### Lab Head
Dr Leslie M. Hicks
UNC Chapel Hill


