### Accession
PXD030230

### Title
Translational and Post-translational LC-MS of Naïve and Primed hESCs

### Description
Deciphering the regulatory network for human naïve and primed pluripotency is of fundamental theoretical and applicable significance. Here, by combining quantitative proteomics, phosphoproteomics and acetylproteomics analyses, we revealed RNA processing and translation as the most differentially-regulated processes between naïve and primed human embryonic stem cells (hESCs). While glycolytic primed hESCs rely predominantly on eIF4E-mediated cap-dependent pathway for protein translation, naïve hESCs with reduced mTORC1 activity are more tolerant to blockage of eIF4E-dependent translation, and their bivalent metabolism allows for translating selective mRNAs via both eIF4E-dependent and eIF4E-independent/eIF4A2-dependent pathways to form a more compact naïve proteome. Globally up-regulated proteostasis system and down-regulated post-translational modification system help to further refine and maintain the naïve proteome that is compatible with the more rapid cycling of naïve hESCs, where CDK1 plays an indispensable coordinative role.

### Sample Protocol
LC-MS Sample Preparation All MS experiments were performed in biological triplicates. Proteins were extracted from hESCs using SDT lysis buffer (4% SDS, 100 mM DTT, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0) with 1× Halt Protease and Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail (Thermo, #78443). Samples were boiled for 5 min, and further ultrasonicated and boiled for another 5 min. Undissolved cellular debris were removed by centrifugation at 16,000 g for 15 min. The supernatant was collected and quantified with a BCA Protein Assay Kit (Bio-Rad, #P0011).  Protein Digestion Protein digestion was performed with the FASP method as described by Wisniewski et al. (Wisniewski et al., 2009). Briefly, the detergent, DTT and IAA in UA buffer were added to block reduced cysteine. Then, the protein suspension was digested with trypsin (Promega, #V5113) at a ratio of 50:1 overnight at 37 °C and collected by centrifugation at 16,000 g for 15 min. Finally, the peptides were desalted with a Sep-Pak C 18 cartridge (Waters, #Z720070) for further analysis.  Affinity Enrichment  Phosphopeptides were enriched using High-Select™ TiO2 Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit (Thermo, #A32993). Briefly, lyophilized peptide samples were resuspended in Binding/Equilibration buffer and applied to the pre-equilibrated TiO2 Spin Tip. After washing, enriched phosphopeptides were eluted using the Phosphopeptide Elution Buffer. Then, the eluates were dried immediately in a speed vacuum concentrator to remove elution buffer. For acetylated peptide enrichment, the peptide samples were first dissolved in IPA buffer and incubated with prewashed anti-acetylation antibody beads (PTMScan® Acetyl-Lysine Motif [Ac-K] Kit, Cell Signaling Technology, #13416) at 4 °C for 1.5 hour incubation. Then the beads were washed three times with IPA buffer and three times with ddH2O. The bound peptides were eluted from the beads with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), and then, dried by vacuum concentrator. Finally, enriched acetylated peptides were desalted with a Sep-Pak C 18 cartridge and vacuum-dried again.  LC-MS/MS Analysis LC-MS/MS was performed on a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer coupled with Easy 1200 nLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were first loaded to a trap column (100 μm*20 mm, 5 μm, C18) in buffer A (0.1% (v/v) Formic acid in water). Reverse-phase high-performance liquid chromatography (RP-HPLC) separation was performed with the EASY-nLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a self-packed column (75 μm × 150 mm; 3 μm ReproSil-Pur C18 beads, 120 Å, Dr. Maisch GmbH) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The RP−HPLC mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid in water, and B was 0.1% formic acid in 95% acetonitrile. Peptides were eluted over 120 min with a linear gradient of buffer B. The gradient was 5% B for 2 min and was linearly increased to 8% in 88 min, and then increased to 23% in 10 min, and then increased to 40% in 8 min and maintained for 12 min. MS data were acquired using a data-dependent top20 method dynamically choosing the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan (300–1800 m/z) for HCD fragmentation. The instrument was run with peptide recognition mode enabled. A lock mass of 445.120025 Da was used as internal standard for mass calibration. The full MS scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200, and 17,500 at m/z 200 for MS/MS scan. The maximum injection time was set to 50 ms for MS and 50 ms for MS/MS. Normalized collision energy was 27 and the isolation window was set to 1.6 Th. Dynamic exclusion duration was 60 s.

### Data Protocol
QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS Sequence Database Searching and Mass Spectrometric Data Analysis We processed the mass spectra using MaxQuant software version 1.6.0.16. MS data were searched against the UniProtKB Homo sapiens database (173,282 total entries). The trypsin was selected as the digestion enzyme. The maximal two missed cleavage sites and the mass tolerance of 4.5 ppm for precursor ions and 20 ppm for fragment ions were defined for database search. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was defined as a fixed modification, while acetylation of protein N-terminal and oxidation of Methionine were set as variable modifications for database searching. The database search results were filtered and exported with <1% false discovery rate (FDR) at peptide-spectrum-matched level, and protein level, respectively. For phosphorylation or acetylation data searching, phosphorylation on serine, threonine, and tyrosine or acetylation on lysine was further added into the searching parameter and the site localization probability was set as > 0.75.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Human, Naïve, Primed, Hesc

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious Diseases, Collaborative Innovation Center for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious Diseases, the First Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, 310003 Hangzhou, China
The First Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University

### Submitter
Bo Kang

### Lab Head
Dr Ying-Jie Wang
The First Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University


