### Accession
PXD016217

### Title
O-Acetylated chemical reporters of glycosylation can display metabolism-dependent background labeling of proteins but are generally reliable tools for the identification of glycoproteins

### Description
Monosaccharide analogs bearing bioorthogonal functionalities, or metabolic chemical reporters (MCRs) of glycosylation, have been used for approximately two decades for the visualization and identification of different glycoproteins. More recently, proteomics analyses have shown that per-O-acetylated MCRs can directly and chemically react with cysteine residues in lysates and potentially cells, drawing into question the physiological relevance of the labeling. Here, we report robust cellular labeling by Ac42AzMan but not the structurally-similar Ac44AzGal. However, the levels of background chemical-labeling of cell lysates by both reporters are low and identical. We then characterized Ac42AzMan labeling and found that the vast majority of the labeling occurs on intracellular proteins but that this MCR is not converted to previously characterized reporters of intracellular O-GlcNAc modification. Additionally, we used IsoTag proteomics to show that essentially all of the Ac42AzMan labeling is on cysteine residues. Given the implications this result has for the identification of intracellular O-GlcNAc modifications using MCRs, we then performed a meta-analysis of the potential O-GlcNAcylated proteins identified by different techniques. We found that many of the proteins identified by MCRs have also been found by other methods. Finally, we randomly selected four proteins that had only been characterized as O-GlcNAcylated by MCRs and showed that half of them were indeed modified.

### Sample Protocol
We treated H1299 cells with either Ac42AzMan (200 μM), Ac44AzGal (200 μM), or DMSO vehicle in duplicate for 16 h. We then subjected the corresponding lysates to CuAAC with a mixture of isotopically-labeled, cleavable biotin tags. After enrichment of the labeled proteins on streptavidin beads and on-bead trypsinolysis, we exulted the directly modified, and therefore isotopically encoded, peptides using weak acid. Subsequent LC-MS/MS analysis using the IsoStamp v2.0 software was then used to look for azido-hexose modification of any Asn, Ser, Thr, or Cys residue.

### Data Protocol
The raw data was processed using Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  For quantitative proteomics, the data was searched against the human-specific SwissProt-reviewed database 2016 (20,152 proteins, downloaded on Aug. 19, 2016). Both HCD and EThcD spectra with a signal-to-noise ratio greater than 1.5 were searched against a database containing the Swissprot 2018 annotated human proteome (20,355 proteins, downloaded on Feb. 21, 2019) and contaminant proteins using Sequest HT and Byonic with a mass tolerance of 10 ppm for the precursor and 0.02 Da for fragment ions with full trypsin digestion, 2 missed cleavages, variable modifications (methionine oxidation, +15.995 Da; carbamidomethylcysteine, +57.021 Da; and others as described below). Intact glycopeptide searches allowed for un-acetylated, mono-acetylated, di-acetylated or tri-acetylated form of unnatural sugars (HexAz0Si, +287.112 Da; HexAz2Si, +289.124 Da; mono-acetylated HexAz0Si, +329.122 Da; mono-acetylated HexAz2Si, + 331.135 Da; di-acetylated HexAz0Si, +371.133 Da; di-acetylated HexAz2Si, +373.145 Da; tri-acetylated HexAz0Si, +413.143 Da; and tri-acetylated HexAz2Si, +415.156 Da) on asparagine, cysteine, serine, and threonine. Glycopeptide spectral assignments passing a false discovery rate of 1% at the spectrum level based on a target decoy database were manually validated for an isotope precursor pattern.

### Publication Abstract
Monosaccharide analogs bearing bioorthogonal functionalities, or metabolic chemical reporters (MCRs) of glycosylation, have been used for approximately two decades for the visualization and identification of different glycoproteins. More recently, proteomics analyses have shown that per-<i>O</i>-acetylated MCRs can directly and chemically react with cysteine residues in lysates and potentially cells, drawing into question the physiological relevance of the labeling. Here, we report robust metabolism-dependent labeling by Ac<sub>4</sub>2AzMan but not the structurally similar Ac<sub>4</sub>4AzGal. However, the levels of background chemical-labeling of cell lysates by both reporters are low and identical. We then characterized Ac<sub>4</sub>2AzMan labeling and found that the vast majority of the labeling occurs on intracellular proteins but that this MCR is not converted to previously characterized reporters of intracellular O-GlcNAc modification. Additionally, we used isotope targeted glycoproteomics (IsoTaG) proteomics to show that essentially all of the Ac<sub>4</sub>2AzMan labeling is on cysteine residues. Given the implications this result has for the identification of intracellular O-GlcNAc modifications using MCRs, we then performed a meta-analysis of the potential O-GlcNAcylated proteins identified by different techniques. We found that many of the proteins identified by MCRs have also been found by other methods. Finally, we randomly selected four proteins that had only been identified as O-GlcNAcylated by MCRs and showed that half of them were indeed modified. Together, these data indicate that the selective metabolism of certain MCRs is responsible for S-glycosylation of proteins in the cytosol and nucleus. However, these results also show that MCRs are still good tools for unbiased identification of glycosylated proteins, as long as complementary methods are employed for confirmation.

### Keywords
Ac44azgal, O-glcnac modifications, Ac42azman, Isotag

### Affiliations
Harvard University
Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Harvard University

### Submitter
Christina Woo

### Lab Head
Dr Christina Woo
Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Harvard University


