### Accession
PXD000971

### Title
Proteomic Analysis of Livers from Fat-fed Mice Deficient in Either PKCδ or PKCɛ

### Description
To investigate the mechanisms of lipid-activated protein kinase C (PKC) family, PKCδ or PKCɛ, involved in insulin resistance and fatty acid metabolism, we employed an in vivo adaptation of SILAC to examine the effects of a fat diet together with deletion of PKCδ or PKCɛ on the expression of liver proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Mice were killed by cervical dislocation after a 6 h fast and livers rapidly removed and frozen (1 and 3 livers per replicate experiment for PKCɛ and PKCδ KO mice respectively).  13C6-lysine labelled liver was from Silantes GmbH (Munich, Germany).  Tissues were powdered under liquid nitrogen and lysed in 8 M urea, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM glycerol phosphate, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 1 mM EDTA acid (pH 8), 2% SDS, 10 mM sodium fluoride, 20 mM Tris (pH 8), and 1 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine.  After sonication, protein samples were alkylated with 5 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature and centrifuged at 14,000 g for 10 min.  Protein concentration of the supernatant fraction was determined using a bicinchoninic acid protein assay (Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA).  50 µg of protein from each experimental sample were mixed with 13C6-lysine labelled liver lysate at a 1:1 ratio, separated on a 4-12% Tris-glycine gel (Invitrogen, USA), and stained with Coomassie G250.  The gel lanes were excised and cut horizontally into 15 sections of similar size.  Excised sections were destained in 50% ACN/200 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution, followed by dehydration in 100% ACN for 10 min.  ACN was discarded, and gel pieces were dried down in a vacuum centrifuge.  Each sample was then incubated overnight at room temperature in 10 µg/ml LysC.  Peptides were extracted with 5% formic acid, followed by 100% ACN for 15 min at room temperature and dried by vacuum centrifugation.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were processed with MaxQuant (1.2.0.18 version).  Peptides were identified using the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot Mus musculus database (Uniprot_mouse_2011_09) containing 16384 entries.  The following search criteria were used: initial maximum precursor and fragment mass deviations 7 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively, LysC as the enzyme, 2 missed cleavages, oxidation of methionine was selected as variable modification, 13C6-lysine as heavy SILAC label and carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification.  Peptides with at least six amino acids were considered for identification.  The false discovery rate for both peptide and protein identifications were set at 0.01. Protein ratios for each genotype and diet comparison groups were calculated and normalised to the median ratio.  The relative standard deviation generated from the averaged log2 ratios of both replicate experiments, was used to derive the statistical cut-off scores applied to each comparison groups.  Proteins were considered differentially regulated if they were within the 90% quantile (Z-score=1.64) in both biological replicates.

### Publication Abstract
Insulin resistance contributes to the development of Type 2 diabetes, and is associated with lipid oversupply. Deletion of isoforms of the lipid-activated protein kinase C (PKC) family, PKC&#x3b4; or PKC&#x3b5;, improves insulin action in fat-fed mice, but differentially affects hepatic lipid metabolism. To investigate the mechanisms involved, we employed an in vivo adaptation of SILAC to examine the effects of a fat diet together with deletion of PKC&#x3b4; or PKC&#x3b5; on the expression of liver proteins. We identified a total of 3359 and 3488 proteins from the PKC&#x3b4; and PKC&#x3b5; knockout study groups, respectively, and showed that several enzymes of lipid metabolism were affected by the fat diet. In fat-fed mice, 23 proteins showed changes upon PKC&#x3b4; deletion while 19 proteins were affected by PKC&#x3b5; deletion. Enzymes of retinol metabolism were affected by the absence of either PKC. Pathway analysis indicated that monosaccharide metabolism was affected only upon PKC&#x3b4; deletion, while isoprenoid biosynthesis was affected in a PKC&#x3b5;-specific manner. Certain proteins were regulated inversely, including HIV-1 tat interactive protein 2 (Htatip2). Overexpression or knockdown of Htatip2 in hepatocytes affected fatty acid storage and oxidation, consistent with a novel role in mediating the differential effects of PKC isoforms on lipid metabolism. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD000971 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD000971).

### Keywords
Protein kinase c, Mouse, Fatty acid metabolism, Glucose intolerance, Liver, High-fat diet, Insulin resistance, Silac

### Affiliations
Garvan Institute of Medical Research
Diabetes and Obesity Program, Garvan Institute of Medical Research, Australia

### Submitter
Bing Qing Liao

### Lab Head
Dr Carsten Schmitz-Peiffer
Diabetes and Obesity Program, Garvan Institute of Medical Research, Australia


