### Accession
PXD021736

### Title
Differential proteomic analysis in a host–parasite interaction of host cells infected with Toxoplasma gondii

### Description
Toxoplasma gondii, a representative model organism of the phylum Apicomplexa, can infect almost all warm-blooded organisms including humans. Invasion of host cells in a host–parasite interaction is the key step necessary for T. gondii to complete its life cycle. Here, we investigate global proteomic changes based on TMT analysis in both the host cells (human foreskin fibroblasts, HFFs) and T. gondii during intracellular infection. A total of 3477 and 1434 proteins were quantified, of which 378 and 1100 proteins were differentially expressed (p-value<0.05 and ≥1.5-fold change)in Homo sapiens and T. gondii proteins, respectively. In HFF cells, Gene Ontology (GO) and KEGG pathway analyses revealed a large number of differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) enriched in metabolic processes and immune-associated signaling pathways, such as NF-κB, cAMP, and Rap1 signaling pathways. T. gondii DEPs involved in pathway analysis and GO annotations included cellular protein metabolic process, peptide metabolic process, and peptide biosynthetic processes and indicated that cell biosynthesis and metabolism were increased during T. gondii infection. These findings reveal new proteomic differences in the parasite–host interaction during T. gondii infection.

### Sample Protocol
Parasite, cell cultures, and cell invasion experiments T. gondii RH strain tachyzoites were maintained in HFF cells at 37°C with 5% CO2 in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM; Hyclone, China) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS; Gibco, USA), 100 IU/mL penicillin, and 100 μg/mL streptomycin (Solarbio, China). Tachyzoites were harvested from monolayer HFF cells and purified with a 5 μm filter. The tachyzoites were counted with Trypan Blue stain after washing in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS).  For cell invasion experiments, RH tachyzoites were added to HFF monolayers (~85% confluent) at an infection ratio of 3:1. The tachyzoites that had not invaded cells were washed away with PBS after 2 h. The cells were harvested when approximately 80% of the cells appeared infected. To the control group, the non-infected cells and an equal number of parasites were prepared. All cells were washed with cool PBS and centrifuged at 400 g for 10 min and stored at −80°C until processing. Each sample was replicated three times to yield nine samples (three groups× three replicates) and three groups were designated H (HFF cells), T (T. gondii), and HT (HFF cells infected with T. gondii). Protein extraction and quantification All samples were disrupted three times in lysis buffer (8 M urea and 1% protease inhibitor) on ice by sonication. Then, the supernatant was separated by centrifugation at 4 °C and 12,000g for 10 min, and the pellet was removed. Finally, the protein concentration was determined using a BCA protein assay kit (Sigma, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Trypsin digestion and TMT labeling  Dithiothreitol (5 mM) was added to the protein solution and reduced at 56 °C for 30 min. The protein solution was then incubated with 11 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature in darkness for 15 min. The urea concentration of the protein solution was diluted by 100 mM TEAB to less than 2M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 and 1:100 (trypsin-to-protein mass ratio) for a first digestion overnight and a second digestion for 4h, respectively. The peptide was desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex, USA) and vacuum dried after trypsin digestion. The peptide was labeled with a TMT kit (Thermo, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.  High-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) fractionation and LC-MS/MS analysis       Labeled peptides were fractionated using a 300Extend C18 column (4.6×250 mm,5 μm, Agilent, USA). Peptides were separated with a gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile (pH 9.0) and the parameter is over 60 min into 60 fractions. After the peptides were vacuum dried, they were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid solution and loaded onto an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid in 90% acetonitrile solution. The gradient comprised an increase from 9% to 26% with solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 90% acetonitrile) over 40 min, 26% to 35% in 14 min and 35% to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for 4 min, all at a constant flow rate of 350 nL/min. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The mass spectrometer scan range was 350 ~1800 m/z and the orbitrap resolution was set at 70,000. The MS/MS scan range and orbitrap resolution were set at 100 m/z and 35,000, respectively. Data-dependent acquisition was used for data collection. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4. The dynamic exclusion duration was 30 s.

### Data Protocol
A 1.5-fold change in differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) was used to perform subcellular localization, clusters of orthologous groups of protein, gene ontology (GO) classification, and enrichment analyses. DEPs were enriched into three groups: cellular compartment, molecular function, and biological process. The Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database was used for the pathway enrichment of the DEPs. A GO enrichment analysis and KEGG pathway with a corrected p-value < 0.05 was considered significant.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Toxoplasma gondii; host–parasite interaction; tmt; comparative proteomic

### Affiliations
Shandong First Medical University & Shandong Academy of Medical Sciences 
Shandong Institute of Parasitic Diseases

Shandong Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Shandong First Medical University & Shandong Academy of Medical Sciences, Jining City, Shandong Province, 272033, China

### Submitter
hui sun

### Lab Head
Dr hui sun
Shandong Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Shandong First Medical University & Shandong Academy of Medical Sciences, Jining City, Shandong Province, 272033, China


