### Accession
PXD014612

### Title
Abberant Cathepsin S Activity Modulates the Immune Microenvironment in Follicular Lymphoma

### Description
Tumor cells can induce their own advantageous microenvironment. Here, we describe aberrant cathepsin S (CTSS) activity to modulate T-cell activation in follicular lymphoma (FL). In donor-derived FLs following bone marrow transplantation, we identified independent acquisition of CTSS mutations at Y132 in the donor´s and recipient's tumors. In a larger cohort, 6% of FL (20/312) harbored CTSS mutations, mostly Y132D, another 14% had CTSS amplification (40/280). Y132D leads to accelerated conversion from pro-CTSS to active CTSS and increased substrate cleavage, including CD74, which regulates MHC-II restricted antigen-presentation. In co-culture experiments, CTSS mutant lymphoma cells induced increased antigen-specific CD4+ T-cell activation. Moreover, antigen-processing was the top upregulated pathway in CTSS mutant primary FL biopsies. Thus, aberrant CTSS activity is a promising target in lymphoma.

### Sample Protocol
Purified FLAG-tagged proCTSS WT was incubated at 37°C in BioVision buffer in a total volume of 60 µl. Each reaction consisted of 36 µl of reaction buffer (pH 5.5 BioVision) and 20 µl (200 ng) of the WT pro-enzyme protein. After the incubation time that ensured separation of all three CTSS forms (3 hours), samples were denatured by adding SDS sample buffer and boiling for 5 minutes at 90°C. Next, proteins were reduced with 50 mM DTT and alkylated with 55 mM CAA. Subsequent a 4-12% SDS-PAGE gel electrophoresis separated CTSS in its three apparent forms (pro-, int-, and active CTSS). In total, 3 replicates of the proCTSS form, 4 replicates of the intCTSS form and 4 replicates of the active CTSS form were prepared and investigated. The proteins on the gel were Coomassie stained using the Thermo Scientific™ Pierce™ Power Stainer (Cat. No. 22833), bands were cut out and transferred to 1.5 ml Eppendorf tubes using the X-TRACTA (Biozym). In-gel trypsin digestion was performed according to standard procedures (Shevchenko et al., 2006). LC-MS/MS data acquisition Peptides generated by in-gel trypsin digestion were dried in a vacuum concentrator and dissolved in 20 μL 0.1% formic acid (FA). LC-MS/MS measurements were performed on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system coupled to a Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For each analysis, 5 μL of peptides was delivered to a trap column (ReproSil-pur C18-AQ, 5 μm, Dr. Maisch, 20 mm × 75 μm, self-packed) at a flow rate of 5 μL/min in 100% solvent A (0.1% formic acid in HPLC grade water). After 10 min of loading, peptides were transferred to an analytical column (ReproSil Gold C18-AQ, 3 μm, Dr. Maisch, 400 mm × 75 μm, self-packed) and separated using a 50 min gradient from 4% to 32% of solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile and 5% (v/v) DMSO) at 300 nL/min flow rate. Both nanoLC solvents contained 5% (v/v) DMSO to boost the nanoESI response of peptides.  The Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent acquisition and positive ionization mode. MS1 spectra (360–1300 m/z) were recorded at a resolution of 60,000 using an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 3e6 and maximum injection time (maxIT) of 45 ms. After peptide fragmentation using higher energy collision induced dissociation (HCD), MS2 spectra of up to 18 precursor peptides were acquired at a resolution of 15.000 with an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 1e5 and maximum injection time (maxIT) of 25 ms. The precursor isolation window width was set to 1.3 m/z and normalized collision energy to 26%. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with 25 s exclusion time (mass tolerance +/-10 ppm).

### Data Protocol
Database searching Peptide identification and quantification was performed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.3.4) with its built-in search engine Andromeda (Cox et al., 2011; Tyanova et al., 2016). MS2 spectra were searched against the Flag-tagged Cathepsin S amino acid sequence supplemented with common contaminants (built-in option in MaxQuant). Carbamidomethylated cysteine was set as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications. Semi-specific Trypsin/P was specified as proteolytic enzyme. Precursor tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm, and fragment ion tolerance to 20 ppm. Results were adjusted to 1 % false discovery rate (FDR) on peptide spectrum match (PSM) level employing a target-decoy approach using reversed protein sequences. The minimal peptide length was defined as 7 amino acids, the “match-between-run” function was disabled. Data analysis and visualization Confident and reproducible CTSS peptide identification and quantification was ensured by filtering the peptide results table for peptides that were detectable in at least two replicates of at least one CTSS form. Additionally, also a peptide intensity filtering was performed, i.e. only CTSS peptides with a relative intensity > 0.2% in comparison to the most intense CTSS peptide in a specific sample were considered. In total 31 high confident CTSS peptides remained detectable over all 11 CTSS samples and could be mapped onto the primary sequence of CTSS.

### Publication Abstract
Tumor cells orchestrate their microenvironment. Here, we provide biochemical, structural, functional, and clinical evidence that Cathepsin S (CTSS) alterations induce a tumor-promoting immune microenvironment in follicular lymphoma (FL). We found CTSS mutations at Y132 in 6% of FL (19/305). Another 13% (37/286) had CTSS amplification, which was associated with higher CTSS expression. CTSS Y132 mutations lead to accelerated autocatalytic conversion from an enzymatically inactive profrom to active CTSS and increased substrate cleavage, including CD74, which regulates major histocompatibility complex class II (MHC class II)-restricted antigen presentation. Lymphoma cells with hyperactive CTSS more efficiently activated antigen-specific CD4<sup>+</sup> T&#xa0;cells in&#xa0;vitro. Tumors with hyperactive CTSS showed increased CD4<sup>+</sup> T&#xa0;cell infiltration and proinflammatory cytokine perturbation in a mouse model and in human FLs. In mice, this CTSS-induced immune microenvironment promoted tumor growth. Clinically, patients with CTSS-hyperactive FL had better treatment outcomes with standard immunochemotherapies, indicating that these immunosuppressive regimens target both the lymphoma cells and the tumor-promoting immune microenvironment.

### Keywords
Cysteine-protease, Immune signaling, Hematology, Follicular lymphoma, Hotspot mutations

### Affiliations
Bavarian Center for Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry (BayBioMS) Technical University Munich Gregor-Mendel-Straße 4 85354 Freising GERMANY
TU Munich

### Submitter
Christina Ludwig

### Lab Head
Dr Christina Ludwig
Bavarian Center for Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry (BayBioMS) Technical University Munich Gregor-Mendel-Straße 4 85354 Freising GERMANY


