### Accession
PXD015770

### Title
Recombinant glycosyl hydrolase expression coupled with adaptation resembling sucrose-induction enable cellobiose-to-ethanol conversion and growth in Zymomonas mobilis

### Description
We engineered Z. mobilis ZM4 to express a recombinant glycosyl hydrolase (GH) from Caulobacter crescentus and subjected it to an adaptation in cellobiose medium. Growth on cellobiose was achieved after a prolonged lag phase in cellobiose medium that induced changes in gene expression and cell composition, including increased expression and secretion of GH. These changes were found to be reversible, i.e. not a genetic adaptation, but could be preserved upon transfer to fresh cellobiose medium. After adaptation to cellobiose, our GH expressing strain was able to convert about 50% of cellobiose to glucose within 24 h and use it for growth and ethanol production. Alternatively, adaptation by growth in sucrose medium also enabled immediate growth of Z. mobilis GH3 on cellobiose. Proteomics analysis of cellobiose- and sucrose-adapted strains revealed upregulation of secretion-, transport-, and outer membrane-related proteins, which may aid secretion of GH into the medium. Changes in the cell envelope may additionally enable entry of cellobiose into the cell periplasm or surface display of GHs.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were pelleted by centrifugation at 20,000 g for 5 minutes at 4C. Cell pellets were used for intracellular protein fractions and supernatant as extracellular fraction. Cell pellets were lysed by suspension in 6 M guanidine hydrochloride (GnHCl), followed by addition of methanol to 90%. Samples were centrifuged at 15,000 x g for 5 min at 4°C. Supernatants were discarded and pellets were allowed to air dry for ~5 min. Pellets were resuspended in 200 µL 8 M urea, 100 mM Tris pH 8.0, 10 mM (tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine) (TCEP), and 40 mM chloroacetamide, then diluted to 2 M urea in 50 mM Tris pH 8. Trypsin was added at an estimated 50:1 ratio, and samples were incubated overnight at ambient temperature.  Each sample was desalted over a PS-DVB solid phase extraction cartridge and dried in vacuo. Peptide mass was assayed with the peptide colorimetric assay. 2 µg of peptides were loaded onto a 75 µm i.d. 30 cm long capillary with an imbedded electrospray emitter and packed with 1.7 µm C18 BEH stationary phase.  The mobile phases used were A: 0.2% formic acid and B: 0.2% formic acid in 70% acetonitrile.  Peptides were eluted with an increasing gradient of acetonitrile from 0% to 53% B over 75 minutes followed by a 5-minute 100% B wash and a 10-minute equilibration in 0% B.   Eluting peptides were analyzed with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Scientific). Survey scans were performed at R = 240,000 with wide isolation analysis of 300-1,350 mz. Data dependent top speed (1 seconds) MS/MS sampling of peptide precursors was enabled with dynamic exclusion set to 20 s on precursors with charge states 2 to 4. MS/MS sampling was performed with 1.6 Da quadrupole isolation, fragmentation by HCD with NCE of 25, analysis in the ion trap with maximum injection time of 10 msec, and AGC target set to 3 x 104.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed using MaxQuant 1.6.0.1. Spectra were searched using the Andromeda search engine against proteins from Z. mobilis ZM4 (GenBank CP023715.1, CP023716.1, CP023717.1, CP023718.1, CP023719.1) and a target decoy database generated in house. Label free quantitation (LFQ) and match between runs were toggled on, and ion trap tolerance was set to 0.4 Da.  All other parameters were set by default. Peptides were grouped into subsumable protein groups and filtered to 1% FDR, based on target decoy approach.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cellobiose utilization, Z. mobilis zm4, Serial transfer, Oligosaccharide conversion, Glycosyl hydrolase, Biofuels

### Affiliations
University of Wisconsin - Madison
Professor of Biomolecular Chemistry and Chemistry at University of Wisconsin, Madison, USA

### Submitter
Evgenia Shishkova

### Lab Head
Dr Joshua J Coon
Professor of Biomolecular Chemistry and Chemistry at University of Wisconsin, Madison, USA


