### Accession
PXD015254

### Title
Analysis of the effect of atorvastatin on the growth of Aspergillus fumigatus

### Description
The filamentous fungus Aspergillus fumigatus is the cause of  a variety of pulmonary infections (chronic pulmonary aspergillosis) and life-threatening systemic infection that can infect a variety of different organs (invasive aspergillosis). A. fumigatus is widely distributed in the environment and produces large numbers of small conidia that are inhaled daily. A rapid immune response eliminates these in the immunocompetent host but in cases of pulmonary disease or immunosuppression conidia can quickly germinate and grow in the body. Statins interfere with biosynthesis of cholesterol and are therefore used in treatment of hypercholesterolemia. There is increasing evidence for the potential use of statins in preventing and treating fungal infections. The aim of this study was to assess the effect of statins on A fumigatus and to characterize the proteomic alterations occurring in A. fumigatus in response to statin. Pre-growth of A fumigatus in the presence of statin resulted in lower levels of ergosterol.  Cells also showed increased permeability as measured by elevated amino acid and protein leakage. Gliotoxin release increased about nine fold in atorvastatin treated cells. Proteomic analysis revealed differential abundance of proteins involved in oxidative stress response such as glutathione S-transferase family protein (8.43 fold increase) and heat shock protein Hsp30/Hsp42 (2.02 fold increase). Protein related to secondary metabolite biosynthesis like nonribosomal peptide synthetase fmpE (3.06 increase) and 3- Aflatoxin B1-aldehyde reductase GliO-like (-2.86 fold decrease) These results indicate that statins have the ability to reduce the growth of A. fumigatus.

### Sample Protocol
Label free shotgun semi-quantitative proteomics was conducted on A. fumigatus mycelium pre-grown in the presence of atrovastatin (3 µg/ml) for 72 hours. Protein was extracted as described and protein (75 μg) was reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT; 200 mM) (Sigma-Aldrich), alkylated with iodoacetamide (IAA; 1 M) (Sigma-Aldrich) and digested with sequence grade trypsin (Promega, Ireland) at a trypsin:protein ratio of 1:40, overnight at 37 °C.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification from the MS/MS data was performed using the Andromeda search engine in MaxQuant (version 1.2.2.5; http://maxquant.org/) to correlate the data against the proteome of A. fumigatus obtained from Uniport. The following search parameters were used: first search peptide tolerance of 20 ppm, second search peptide tolerance 4.5 ppm, carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification, while oxidation of methionines and acetylation of N-terminals were set as variable modifications and a maximum of 2 missed cleavage sites allowed. False Discovery Rates (FDR) were set to 1% for both peptides and proteins and the FDR was estimated following searches against a target-decoy database. Peptides with minimum length of seven amino acid length were considered for identification and proteins were only considered identified when more than one unique peptide for each protein was observed. Results processing, statistical analyses and graphics generation were conducted using Perseus v. 1.5.5.3. LFQ intensities were log2-transformed and ANOVA of significance and t-tests between the proteome of 72-hour control and atrovastatin (3 μg/ml) treated A. fumigatus mycelium was performed using a p-value of 0.05 and significance was determined using FDR correction (Benjamini-Hochberg). Proteins that had non-existent values (indicative of absence or very low abundance in a sample) were also used in statistical analysis of the total differentially expressed group following imputation of the zero values using a number close to the lowest value of the range of proteins plus or minus the standard deviation. After data imputation these proteins were included in subsequent statistical analysis.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Aspergillus fumigatus</i> is a serious cause of disease in immune-deficient patients and in those with pulmonary malfunction (e.g., cystic fibrosis (CF), asthma). Atorvastatin is a member of the statin drug family, which are the main therapeutic agents used to decrease high serum cholesterol levels by inhibiting (HMG-CoA) reductase enzyme. The aim of the work presented here was to analyse the antifungal activity of atorvastatin and assess its effect on the virulence of <i>A. fumigatus</i>. Atorvastatin demonstrated strong antifungal activity and reduced the growth and viability of <i>A. fumigatus</i>. Exposure of <i>A. fumigatus</i> to atorvastatin led to a reduction in ergosterol content and increased membrane permeability, as evidenced by the release of protein, amino acids and gliotoxin. Proteomic analysis revealed an increased abundance of proteins associated with an oxidative stress response, such as the glutathione s-transferase family protein (+8.43-fold), heat shock protein Hsp30/Hsp42 (+2.02-fold) and 5-demethoxyubiquinone hydroxylase, mitochondrial (+1.73-fold), as well as secondary metabolites such as isocyanide synthase A icsA (+8.52-fold) and non-ribosomal peptide synthetase fmpE (+3.06-fold). The results presented here indicate that atorvastatin has strong antifungal properties and may have potential application in the treatment of <i>A. fumigatus</i> infections alone or in combination with existing antifungal agents.

### Keywords
Ergosterol, Atorvastatin, Aspergillus fumigatus, Gliotoxin

### Affiliations
Department of Biology, Maynooth University, Co. Kildare, Ireland
Maynooth University

### Submitter
Gerard Sheehan

### Lab Head
Dr Prof Kevin Kavanagh
Department of Biology, Maynooth University, Co. Kildare, Ireland


