### Accession
PXD015642

### Title
Functional Dissection of the Retrograde Shiga Toxin Trafficking Inhibitor Retro-2

### Description
The retrograde transport inhibitor Retro-2 has a protective effect on cells and in mice against Shiga-like toxins and ricin. Retro-2 causes toxin accumulation in early endosomes, and the relocalization of the Golgi SNARE protein syntaxin-5 to the endoplasmic reticulum. The molecular mechanisms by which this is achieved remain unknown. Here, we show that Retro-2 targets the endoplasmic reticulum exit site component Sec16A, affecting anterograde transport of syntaxin-5 from the endoplasmic reticulum to the Golgi. The formation of canonical SNARE complexes involving syntaxin-5 is not affected in Retro-2-treated cells. In contrast, the interaction of syntaxin-5 with a newly discovered binding partner, the retrograde trafficking chaperone GPP130, is abolished, and we show that GPP130 must indeed bind to syntaxin-5 to drive Shiga toxin transport from endosomes to the Golgi. We thereby identify Sec16A as a druggable target, and provide evidence for a non-SNARE function for syntaxin-5 in interaction with the retrograde cycling protein GPP130.    a) Clickable Retro-2 pulldown. To identify protein target of Retro-2.1, providing the first steps to explain effects of Retro-2 on inhibition of STxB retrograde trafficking from endosomes to Golgi.      b) GFP-STX5 pulldown. To find interactors of STX5, to build a hypothesis to explain the affect of Retro-2-inhibited anterograde trafficking of STX5 to Golgi, which in turn inhibits STxB retrograde transport from endosomes to Golgi.     c) GFP-Sec16A pulldown. The aim of this proteomics assay is to show the effects of Retro-2 on the Sec16A interactome. Results show the differential effects of Retro-2 treatment on the Sec16A interactome, giving insight into the mechanism by which Retro-2, via Sec16A, specifically affects the anterograde trafficking of Syntaxin-5.

### Sample Protocol
a) HeLa cells were treated with 25 µM of the clickable Retro-2 compound for 30 min at 37 °C. The copper free click-reaction was performed on cells with DIBO-probes (Invitrogen, Click-iT reagents, 10 µM) for 1 hour at room temperature and covered from light. Cells were lysed for 30 min at 4 °C with TNE buffer containing 1% NP-40 and proteinase inhibitor cocktail. Protein lysate was incubated with NeutrAvidin® beads (Thermo Scientific) overnight at 4 °C. Beads were washed and prepared for mass spectrometry.    b) HeLa cells were transiently transfected with GFP-STX5 EGFP or no plasmid. Cells were lysed for 30 min at 4 °C in 1% NP40 TNE buffer. Protein lysate was incubated with pre-equilibrated GFP-trap beads overnight at 4 °C. Beads were washed and prepared for mass spectrometry.    c) HeLa cells were transiently transfected with GFP-Sec16A, EGFP or no plasmid. Cells were treated with DMSO (Mock, EGFP and GFP-sec16A+Veh) or 25uM Retro-2 (GFP-Sec16A) for 30 minutes then lysed in 0.5% NP40 TNE buffer. 1.8mg protein lysate was incubated with pre-equilibrated GFP-trap beads overnight at 4 °C. Beads were washed and prepared for mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
a) For eluted Retro-2.1-biotin samples, SDS/PAGE was used without completed separation as a clean-up step, and only two gel slices were excised. Gel slices were washed and proteins were reduced alkylated and in gel digested by using trypsin/LysC (Promega) overnight. Peptide were then extracted vacuum concentrated to dryness and analysed by nanoLC-MS/MS using an Ultimate 3000 system coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap XL (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer.  The resulting spectra were merged and analyzed with SequestTM through Proteome Discoverer (versions 2.1 Thermo Scientific) by using the SwissProt Homo Sapiens Protein Database (022017). Carbamidomethyle cysteine, oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. We set specificity of trypsin digestion, allowed 2 missed cleavage sites, and we set the mass tolerances in MS and MS/MS to 10 ppm and 0.6 Da, respectively. The resulting files were further processed by using myProMS (Poullet et al, 2007). The Sequest target and decoy search result were validated at 1% false discovery rate (FDR) with Percolator. Only protein with a minimum of 3 peptides found in the experiments and not in the control IPs were considered candidates.  b/c) Label free quantification from bead samples was performed by peptide Extracted Ion Chromatograms (XICs) computed with MassChroQ version 2 (Valot et al, 2011). For protein quantification, XICs from proteotypic peptides shared between compared conditions (TopN matching) with missed cleavages were used. Median & Scale normalization was applied on the total signal to correct the XICs for each biological replicate. To estimate the significance of the change in protein abundance, a two-tailed t-test was performed and p-values were adjusted with a Benjamini–Hochberg FDR procedure with a control threshold set to 0.05.   In the publication, samples were compared to negative control EGFP, however Mock transfection conditions were also performed and are included to allow comparison between EGFP and Mock transfection, as the interactome of the GFP beads alone is different.

### Publication Abstract
The retrograde transport inhibitor Retro-2 has a protective effect on cells and in mice against Shiga-like toxins and ricin. Retro-2 causes toxin accumulation in early endosomes and relocalization of the Golgi SNARE protein syntaxin-5 to the endoplasmic reticulum. The molecular mechanisms by which this is achieved remain unknown. Here, we show that Retro-2 targets the endoplasmic reticulum exit site component Sec16A, affecting anterograde transport of syntaxin-5 from the endoplasmic reticulum to the Golgi. The formation of canonical SNARE complexes involving syntaxin-5 is not affected in Retro-2-treated cells. By contrast, the interaction of syntaxin-5 with a newly discovered binding partner, the retrograde trafficking chaperone GPP130, is abolished, and we show that GPP130 must indeed bind to syntaxin-5 to drive Shiga toxin transport from the endosomes to the Golgi. We therefore identify Sec16A as a druggable target and provide evidence for a non-SNARE function for syntaxin-5 in interaction with GPP130.

### Keywords
Syntaxin5, Retro-2, Sec16a, Shiga toxin, Er exit site, Retrograde transport, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Curie Institute
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry Platform

### Submitter
Valentin SABATET

### Lab Head
Dr Damarys Loew
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry Platform


