### Accession
PXD034120

### Title
Global, in situ analysis of the structural proteome in individuals with Parkinson’s disease to identify a new class of biomarker

### Description
Parkinson’s disease (PD) is a prevalent and incurable neurodegenerative disease for which robust biomarkers for early detection and tailored treatment are needed. Protein abundance measurements have so far not proven discriminative as PD biomarkers. Since alterations in protein structure reflect various functionally relevant molecular events, such as allostery, chemical modification, protein misfolding or molecular interaction, we have tested whether global analysis of protein structural changes is informative about PD pathophysiology and status and could form the basis of the new concept of structural biomarkers of disease. We applied limited proteolysis-mass spectrometry (LiP-MS) for the detection of global protein structural changes in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) of PD patients and age-matched healthy individuals. Using linear modeling to correct for covariates, we identified 76 proteins as structurally altered in the CSF of patients with PD. We identified structural alterations in several proteins implicated in PD, many of which were also structurally altered in PD brain tissue suggesting that this approach provides insight into pathological mechanisms, although validation in independent cohorts is needed. Protein structural information from CSF outperformed protein abundance information in discriminating between healthy and PD subjects. Further, candidate structural biomarkers from our screen provided complementary information to CSF measures of the hallmark PD protein α-synuclein and thus improved the sensitivity and specificity of discriminating the healthy and PD states. Finally, we present the first analysis of inter-individual variability of a structural proteome in healthy humans, identifying biophysical and structural features of variable and invariable protein regions. Structurally variable protein regions show a greater propensity for protein-protein interaction and higher disorder than non-variable peptides. This dataset will be a valuable resource for structural biology and for future structure-based biomarker research. Our data suggest that global analyses of the human structural proteome will lead to the discovery of novel, structural biomarkers of disease and enables hypothesis-generation about the molecular events underlying disease processes.

### Sample Protocol
Please refer to the methods section of the published mansucript for detailed information about the sample processing protocol.

### Data Protocol
Please refer to the methods section of the published mansucript for detailed information about the data processing protocol.

### Publication Abstract
Parkinson's disease (PD) is a prevalent neurodegenerative disease for which robust biomarkers are needed. Because protein structure reflects function, we tested whether global, in situ analysis of protein structural changes provides insight into PD pathophysiology and could inform a new concept of structural disease biomarkers. Using limited proteolysis-mass spectrometry (LiP-MS), we identified 76 structurally altered proteins in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) of individuals with PD relative to healthy donors. These proteins were enriched in processes misregulated in PD, and some proteins also showed structural changes in PD brain samples. CSF protein structural information outperformed abundance information in discriminating between healthy participants and those with PD and improved the discriminatory performance of CSF measures of the hallmark PD protein &#x3b1;-synuclein. We also present the first analysis of inter-individual variability of a structural proteome in healthy individuals, identifying biophysical features of variable protein regions. Although independent validation is needed, our data suggest that global analyses of the human structural proteome will guide the development of novel structural biomarkers of disease and enable hypothesis generation about underlying disease processes.

### Keywords
Human, Structural proteomics, Csf, Parkinson disease, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
ETHZ
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology Otto-​Stern-Weg 3 8093 Zürich Switzerland

### Submitter
Marie-Therese Mackmull

### Lab Head
Dr Paola Picotti
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology Otto-​Stern-Weg 3 8093 Zürich Switzerland


