### Accession
PXD037991

### Title
Opisthorchis felineus excretory-secretory product (ESP) and lysate proteomics by GeLC-MS / MS

### Description
A significant number of pathological conditions, accompanied by chronic non-healing wounds, demands searching for new modern therapeutic approaches. Well-documented ability of O. felineus to initiate extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling and liver epithelium regeneration suggests that its bioactive molecules may stimulate skin wound healing processes. The aim of this study was to investigate the wound healing potential of the Opisthorchis felineus excretory-secretory and lysate proteins on a murine model. The following methods were used for the study: histological (wounded skin condition), immunohistochemical (ECM, neoangiogenesis, O. felineus GST and TPx proteins), gene expression analysis (inflammation, angiogenesis, ECM condition). O. felineus excretory-secretory product (ESP) and lysate proteins have revealed wound-healing potential, they: i) reduce inflammation levels, ii) modulate vascular response, iii) stimulate collagen deposition and dermal ECM remodeling. Additional proteomic analysis of adult O. felineus ESP and lysate samples was conducted. Proteomic analysis approach called GeLC-MS / MS was chosen to study of the excretory-secretory product and lysate proteins. This approach is based on one-dimensional sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE), in-gel protein digestion with trypsin followed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry. The SDS-PAGE step allow to removes hemozoin also as detergents, buffers and salts from the protein extract that may interfere with mass spectrometry analysis

### Sample Protocol
Fast denaturing one-dimensional electrophoresis was carried out in the presence of SDS with a polyacrylamide concentration of 8 to 12% in a separating gel and 5% in a concentrating gel. A total of 25 μL of the sample was applied to the lane, and electrophoresis was carried out for 20 min at constant current (18 mA). In this case, the voltage was 50 V for the first 10 min and increased to 100 V from 11 to 20 min. The samples were fixed with a solution of acetic acid and ethanol (2 times for 20 min). The protein line (total long ~ 6 mm) was cut into three approximately equal fragments about 2 mm wide and about 10–12 mm long. The obtained gel fragments were washed 2 times for 15 min with 100 μL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution, then dried with 100% acetonitrile (15 min), after which the solution was removed, and the samples were dried on a centrifugal vacuum evaporator (Concentrator Plus, Eppendorf). Proteins in each gel fragment were destained and digested by trypsin using the protocol described previously [Filatov et al., 2007]. Proteomic analysis of peptides was carried out using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano chromatographic HPLC system (Thermo Scientific, USA) connected to a mass spectrometer Q-Exactive HFX (Thermo Scientific, USA). Peptides were separated with high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC, Ultimate 3000 Nano LC System, Thermo Scientific, Rockwell, IL, USA) in a 15-cm long C18 column (Acclaim® PepMap™ RSLC inner diameter of 75 μm, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockwell, IL, USA). The peptides were eluted with a gradient of buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 0.3 μL/min. The total run time was 90 min.  MS analysis was performed in triplicate with a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Q Exactive HF-X Hybrid Quadrupole-OrbitrapTM Mass spectrometer, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockwell, IL, USA). The temperature of capillary was 240°C and the voltage at the emitter was 2.1 kV. Mass spectra were acquired at a resolution of 120,000 (MS) in a range of 300−1500 m/z. Tandem mass spectra of fragments were acquired at a resolution of 15,000 (MS/MS) in the range from 100 m/z to m/z value determined by a charge state of the precursor, but no more than 2000 m/z. The maximum integration time was 50 ms and 110 ms for precursor and fragment ions, correspondently. AGC target for precursor and fragment ions were set to 1*106 and 2*105, correspondently. An isolation intensity threshold of 50,000 counts was determined for precursor’s selection and up to top 20 precursors were chosen for fragmentation with high-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) at 29 NCE. Precursors with a charge state of 1+ and more than 5+ were rejected and all measured precursors were dynamically excluded from triggering of a subsequent MS/MS for 90 s.

### Data Protocol
The obtained raw data were processed using the MaxQuant software (version 1.6.3.4) with the Andromeda search engine [Tyanova et al., 2016]. The database of predicted protein sequences from O. felineus genome (GenBank: PRJNA413383) was used to identify proteins. The identification settings were as follows: trypsin as a specific protease with a maximum of 2 missed cleavage, a maximum m/z deviation of 5 ppm was allowed for precursor’s identification and 0.01 Da were set as match tolerance for fragment identification (acquisition in Orbitrap), Oxidation of methionines, N-terminal protein acetylation and modification of cysteine with propionamide was set as variable modification for the peptide search. Peptide Spectrum Matches (PSMs), peptides and proteins were validated at a 1.0% false discovery rate (FDR) estimated using the decoy hit distribution. Proteins were considered as significantly identified if at least two peptides were found for them. Label-free protein quantification was based on iBAQ.

### Publication Abstract
Exogenous bioactive peptides are considered promising for the wound healing therapy in humans. In this regard, parasitic trematodes proteins may potentially become a new perspective agents. Foodborne trematode Opisthorchis felineus is widespread in Europe and has the ability to stimulate proliferation of bile duct epithelium. In this study, we investigated skin wound healing potential of O. felineus proteins in mouse model. C57Bl/6 mice were inflicted with superficial wounds with 8&#xa0;mm diameter. Experimental groups included several non-specific controls and specific treatment groups (excretory-secretory product and lysate). After 10&#xa0;days of the experiment, the percentage of wound healing in the specific treatment groups significantly exceeded the control values. We also found that wound treatment with excretory-secretory product and worm lysate resulted in: (i) inflammation reducing, (ii) vascular response modulating, (iii) type 1 collagen deposition promoting dermal ECM remodeling. An additional proteomic analysis of excretory-secretory product and worm lysate samples was revealed 111 common proteins. The obtained data indicate a high wound-healing potential of liver fluke proteins and open prospects for further research as new therapeutic approaches.

### Keywords
Opisthorchis felineus, Lysate, Sds-page, Lc-ms/ms, Excretory-secretory product

### Affiliations
Institute of Biomedical Chemistry
Institute of Biomedical Chemistry, "Human Proteome" Core Facility Centre

### Submitter
Olga Tikhonova

### Lab Head
Dr Olga Tikhonoiva
Institute of Biomedical Chemistry, "Human Proteome" Core Facility Centre


