### Accession
PXD008143

### Title
The human cathelicidin antimicrobial peptide LL-37 promotes the growth of the pulmonary pathogen Aspergillus fumigatus.

### Description
Aspergillus fumigatus contributes to invasive and allergic pulmonary disease in immunocompromised individuals. The pulmonary mucus of cystic fibrosis (CF) patients displays elevated levels of the pleiotropic cathelicidin antimicrobial peptide LL-37 and the aim of this work was to assess the effect of LL-37 on the growth A. fumigatus.  Exposure of A. fumigatus conidia to high concentrations of intact LL-37 (100 μg/ml) for 24 hours had a positive effect on growth (277.45 ± 22.59% (p < 0.01)) whereas scrambled LL-37 (76.45 ± 7.46%) did not. Exposure of 24 hour pre-formed mycelium to 5 μg/ml LL-37 for 48 hours increased hyphal wet weight significantly (4.37 ± 0.23 g, p < 0.001) compared to the control (2.67 ± 0.05 g). Amino acid leakage from mycelium was observed in the presence of LL-37 and gliotoxin secretion was increased at 24 hours from LL-37 exposed hyphae (169.1 ± 6.36 ng/mg hyphae, p < 0.05) compared to the control (102 ± 18.81 ng/mg hyphae). Quantitative proteomic analysis of 24 hour LL-37 treated hyphae revealed an increase in the abundance of proteins associated with growth (eIF-5A (16.3 fold increased), tissue degradation (aspartic endopeptidase (4.7 fold increased)) and allergic reactions (Asp F13 (10 fold increased)). By 48 hours there was an increase in proteins indicative of cellular stress (glutathione peroxidase (9 fold increased)), growth (eIF-5A (6 fold increased), and virulence (ribonuclease mitogillin (3.7 fold increased). These results indicate that LL-37 stimulates A. fumigatus growth and this may result in increased fungal growth and secretion of toxins in the lungs of CF patients.

### Sample Protocol
Label free shotgun quantitative proteomics was conducted on protein extracted from control and LL-37 (5 μg/ml) treated A. fumigatus hyphae for 24 and 48 hours. Protein (75 μg) was reduced with dithiotreitol (DTT; 200 mM) (Sigma-Aldrich), alkylated with iodoacetamide (IAA; 1 M) (Sigma-Aldrich) and digested with sequence grade trypsin (Promega, Ireland) at a trypsin:protein ratio of 1:40, overnight at 37 °C. Tryptic peptides were purified for mass spectrometry using C18 spin filters (Medical Supply Company, Ireland) and 1 μg of peptide mix was eluted onto a Q-Exactive (ThermoFisher Scientific, U.S.A) high resolution accurate mass spectrometer connected to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 (RSLCnano) chromatography system. Peptides were separated by an increasing acetonitrile gradient on a Biobasic C18 PicofritTM column (100 mm length, 75 mm ID), using a 120 min reverse phase gradient at a flow rate of 250 nL /min. All data were acquired with the mass spectrometer operating in automatic data dependent switching mode. A high resolution MS scan (300-2000 Dalton) was performed using the Orbitrap to select the 15 most intense ions prior to MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Results processing, statistical analyses and graphics generation were conducted using Perseus v. 1.5.5.3. LFQ intensities were log2-transformed and ANOVA of significance and t-tests between the LL-37 treated and  control A. fumigatus hyphal proteomes was performed using a p-value of 0.05 and significance was determined using FDR correction (Benjamini-Hochberg). Proteins that had non-existent values (indicative of absence or very low abundance in a sample) were included in the study only when they were completely absent from one group and present in at least two of the three replicates in the second group (referred to as qualitatively differentially abundant proteins).

### Publication Abstract
The pulmonary mucus of cystic fibrosis (CF) patients displays elevated levels of the cathelicidin antimicrobial peptide LL-37, and the aim of this work was to assess the effect of LL-37 on the growth of <i>Aspergillus fumigatus</i>, a common pathogen of CF patients. Exposure of <i>A. fumigatus</i> to LL-37 and its derived fragment RK-31 (1.95 &#x3bc;g/ml) for 24 h had a positive effect on growth (199.94% &#xb1; 6.172% [<i>P</i> &lt; 0.05] and 218.20% &#xb1; 4.63% [<i>P</i> &lt; 0.05], respectively), whereas scrambled LL-37 peptide did not (85.12% &#xb1; 2.92%). Exposure of mycelium (preformed for 24 h) to 5 &#x3bc;g/ml intact LL-37 for 48 h increased hyphal wet weight (4.37 &#xb1; 0.23 g, <i>P</i> &lt; 0.001) compared to the control (2.67 &#xb1; 0.05 g) and scrambled LL-37 (2.23 &#xb1; 0.09 g) treatments. Gliotoxin secretion from LL-37 exposed hyphae (169.1 &#xb1; 6.36 ng/mg hyphae, <i>P</i> &lt; 0.05) was increased at 24 h compared to the results seen with the control treatment (102 &#xb1; 18.81 ng/mg hyphae) and the scrambled LL-37 treatment (96.09 &#xb1; 15.15 ng/mg hyphae). Shotgun proteomic analysis of 24-h LL-37-treated hyphae revealed an increase in the abundance of proteins associated with growth (eukaryotic translation initiation factor 5A [eIF-5A] [16.3-fold increased]), tissue degradation (aspartic endopeptidase [4.7-fold increased]), and allergic reactions (Asp F13 [10-fold increased]). By 48 h, there was an increase in protein levels indicative of cellular stress (glutathione peroxidase [9-fold increased]), growth (eIF-5A [6-fold increased]), and virulence (RNase mitogillin [3.7-fold increased]). These results indicate that LL-37 stimulates <i>A. fumigatus</i> growth and that this stimulation can result in increased fungal growth and secretion of toxins in the lungs of CF patients.

### Keywords
Antimicrobial, Ll-37, Aspergillus, Growth

### Affiliations
Maynooth University

### Submitter
Gerard Sheehan

### Lab Head
Dr Kevin Kavanagh
Maynooth University


