### Accession
PXD033145

### Title
Mass spectroscopy-based proteomics and metabolomics analysis of BT- 474 breast cancer cells treated with Tamoxifen and/or Trastuzumab

### Description
`Triple positive` BT-474 breast cancer cells were treated with anti-cancer compounds, Tamoxifen and Trastuzumab, and the metabolome and proteome analysed by LC-MS/MS using a timsTOF.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture   Human breast cancer cells BT-474 were grown in Dulbecco`s modified Eagle medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10% foeatal bovine serum (FBS). Penicillin and streptomycin antibiotics combination was added to DMEM/FBS growth media. Cells were maintained in humidified incubator with conditions of 37?  temperature and 5% CO2.  Protein extraction  Cell pellets were suspended in lysis buffer (10 mM Tris, Protease inhibitor cocktail tablets and lysozyme 5 µg/ml) and incubated on ice for 30 min with gentle shaking. Proteins were then precipitated with chloroform/methanol sample:methanol:chloroform (1v:1v:0.75v) and collected precipitates were resuspended in denaturation buffer (10 mM Tris, 6 M Urea, 2 M Thiourea (pH 8)). Precipitated proteins were quantified with the modified Bradford protein quantification method.    Tryptic Digestion   In-solution digestion was carried out on 100 µg total protein. Briefly, proteins were reduced with 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 1 hour at room temperature (RT) with gentle agitation and then alkylated with 5.5 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) at RT for 1 hour in the dark, to prevent the formation of disulfide bonds. Proteins were pre-digested with Lys-C endopeptidase (1:100) for 3 hours at 30°C before being diluted four times with HPLC-grade water to a final concentration of ~1.5 M urea. The diluted samples were then digested overnight with trypsin (1:100 ratio) at 30°C. The digestion was quenched with 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) (Sigma Aldrich) to a final concentration of 0.1%. Peptide preparations were then desalted using PIERCE C18 stage tips (100µL) as per manufacter instructions and dried before resuspension in 0.1% formic acid (FA) and 2% acetonitrile (ACN).    Tandem mass liquid chromatography (Q-TOF MS)  Liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis was performed using a Elute UHPLC and autosampler (Bruker Daltonik, Bremen, Germany) coupled to a trapped ion mobility spectrometry (TIMS) on an orthogonal time-of-flight (TOF) (Bruker Daltonik, Bremen, Germany) mass spectrometer employed to separate and detect the cell peptides. After being desalted as described above, peptides were resuspended in 100 µL of solvent A 0.1% formic acid (FA) and 2% acetonitrile (ACN), of which 10 µL was loaded per injection into the LC-MS/MS system. Peptides were chromatographically separated using a analytical C18 column (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, USA). Samples were loaded onto the column with a starting mobile phase of 2% ACN and 0.1% FA. Peptides were eluted with 85 minute gradient (5%-35% ACN). The flow rate was constant at 300 µL/min. Mass spectra were acquired with TIMS-TOF mass spectrometer in a data-dependent manner, with automatic switching between MS and MS/MS scans and a cycle time of ~3 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Data Processing: RAW data files were processed with MaxQuant version 1.6.17.0 19 for protein and peptide identification using the Andromeda search engine and the Uniprot proteome for Homo sapiens (Proteome ID: UP000005640, 29th January 2020, (https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000005640 )). Default parameter settings were used for the MS/MS database search, with carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues and acetylation of protein N-termini selected as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine as variable modification. The peptide spectral matches (PSMs) were filtered at a 1 % false discovery rate (FDR), and the precursor mass tolerance was set at 20 ppm. Trypsin/P was selected as protease, and the MaxLFQ algorithm was used for label-free quantitation (LFQ).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Lc-msms, Anti-cancer, Timstof, Cells

### Affiliations
University of Sharjah
University of Cape Town

### Submitter
Alexander Giddey

### Lab Head
Dr Mohammad Semreen
University of Sharjah


