### Accession
PXD026282

### Title
Myelin nanovesicles characterization

### Description
Neurodegenerative diseases affect millions of people worldwide and the presence of various physiological barriers limits the accessibility to the brain and reduces the efficacy of various therapies. Moreover, improving the solubility, stability and release of the drug in specific brain regions and in particular target cells (neuron or microglia), are essential factor to develop an efficient and targeted therapy for the treatment of brain disorders. Extracellular vesicles, nanoparticles and artificial nanovesicles represent a promising tool for contrast brain diseases, thanks to their ability to deliver therapeutic molecules and overcoming the problems mentioned. In this study, for the first time, we generated artificial nanovesicles derived from brain tissue, which were preliminary evaluated as potential brain delivery system. The nanovesicles were produced from myelin extracted from the brain, called Myelin NanoVesicles (MyVes). MyVes produced have an average diameter of 100nm, negative zeta potential, spheroidal morphology, lipids and main proteins of the myelin sheath and exhibit good cytocompatibility. The MyVes, are able to load a drug/molecule and cross a blood brain barrier model, in addition, they targeted specific brain regions, white matter and are able to interact mainly with the microglia cell line. Therefore, we propose MyVes for white matter and microglia targeted delivery as a potential approach to counteract white matter microglia related diseases

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation: Prior to perform in-solution enzymatic digestion, the pellet was delipidated through four washes in ether/ethanol (2:1) as reported elsewhere (Greenfield et al. 1971) , then the pellet was washed two times in water and re-dissolved in 50 µL of 0.1% Rapigest SF (Waters, Milan, Italy) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.2) and kept 15 min at 55 °C to promote sample denaturation. At this stage, the protein content was determined by means of a fluorimetric assay using the Qubit Protein Assay kit with the Qubit 1.0 Fluorometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Finally, an aliquot of sample equivalent to 10 µg of proteins was reduced by adding 0.1 M DTT in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.2 (3 h, RT), alkylated with 0,2 M IAA in the same buffer solution (1 h, in the dark at RT) and digested by porcine trypsin (Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin, Porcine, lyophilized, Promega, USA) at an enzyme–substrate ratio of 1:50 (overnight, 37 °C) (Di Francesco et al. 2020). The resulting peptide mixture solutions was dried under vacuum (Concentrator Plus, Eppendorf, Germany), re-dissolved in 100 µL of 5% aqueous formic acid (FA) and analyzed by UHPLC/highresolution nanoESI–MS/MS. To assess the reproducibility of the available MS data,  the extract was  analyzed in triplicate by RP-nHPLC/nESI-MS/MS -.  Mass spectrometry analysis: Mass spectrometry data were acquired on a Thermo Fisher Scientific Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid® (Q-OT-qIT) mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). Liquid chromatography was carried out using a Thermo Scientific Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano system (Sunnyvale, CA). One microliter of peptide mixture was loaded onto anAcclaim®Nano Trap C18 Column (100μm i.d. × 2 cm, 5μm particle size, 100 Å). After washing the trapping column with solvent A (H2O + 0.1% FA) for 3 min at a flow rate of 7μL/min, the peptides were eluted from the trapping column onto a PepMap® RSLC C18 EASY-Spray column (75μm i. d. × 50 cm, 2μm particle size, 100 Å) and separated by elution at a flow rate of 0.25μL/min at 40 °C by a linear gradient of solvent B (ACN + 0.1% FA) in A, 5% for 3 min, followed by 5% to 20% in 32 min, 20% to 40% in 30 min, 40% to 60% in 20 min and60% to 98% in 15 min, finishing by holding 98% B 5 min, 98% to 5% in 1 min and re-equilibrating at 5% B for 20 min. The eluting peptide cations were converted to gas-phase ions by electrospray ionization using a source voltage of 1.7 kV and introduced into the mass spectrometer through a heated ion transfer tube (275 °C). Survey scans of peptide precursors from 200 to 1600 m/z were performed at 120 K re-solution (@ 200m/z). Tandem MS was performed by isolation at 1.6 Th with the quadrupole, HCD fragmentation with a normalized collision energy of 35, and rapid scan MS analysis in the linear ion trap (low resolution MS/MS analysis). Only those precursors with charge state 2÷4 and intensity above the threshold of 5•103 were sampled for MS2.The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 60 s with a 10 ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. Monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on. The instrument was run in top speed mode with 3 s cycles, meaning it would continuously perform MS2 events until the list of non-excluded precursors diminished to zero or 3 s, whichever is shorter. MS/MS spectral quality was enhanced enabling the parallelizable time option (i.e. by using all parallelizable time during full scan detection for MS/MS precursor injection and detection). Mass spectrometer calibration was performed by using the Pierce® LTQ Velos ESI Positive Ion Calibration Solution (Thermo Fisher Scientific). MS data acquisition was carried out by utilizing the Xcalibur v. 3.0.63 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
MS data were processed using PEAKS X Pro de novo sequencing software (v. 10, Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, ON Canada). Data were searched against the 8125 reviewed entries of Rattus Norvegicus downloaded from the UniProt database (release March 2021). The common Repository of Adventitious Proteins (c-RAP) contaminant database was included in the database search. Database search was carried out using the following parameters: i) full tryptic peptides with a maximum of 3 missed cleavage sites; ii) cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification; iii) oxidation of methionine, the transformation of N-terminal glutamine and N-terminal glutamic acid residue to pyroglutamic acid form, and the deamidation of asparagine and glutamine as variable modifications. The precursor mass tolerance threshold was set to 10 ppm and the maximum fragment mass error was set to 0.6 Da. Peptide Spectral Matches (PSM) were validated using a Target Decoy PSM Validator node based on q-values at a 1% False Discovery Rate (FDR). Each proteins was considered identified if it was detected at least twice out of three replicates, with  at least two peptides and a minimum of one unique peptide. Proteins containing the same peptides and that could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony (groups of parsimony).

### Publication Abstract
Neurodegenerative diseases affect millions of people worldwide and the presence of various physiological barriers limits the accessibility to the brain and reduces the efficacy of various therapies. Moreover, new carriers having targeting properties to specific brain regions and cells are needed in order to improve therapies for the brain disorder treatment. In this study, for the first time, Myelin nanoVesicles (hereafter defined MyVes) from brain-extracted myelin were produced. The MyVes have an average diameter of 100-150&#xa0;&#x200b;nm, negative zeta potential, spheroidal morphology, and contain lipids and the key proteins of the myelin sheath. Furthermore, they exhibit good cytocompatibility. The MyVes were able to target the white matter and interact mainly with the microglia cells. The preliminary results here presented allow us to suppose the employment of MyVes as potential carrier to target the white matter and microglia in order to counteract white matter microglia-related diseases.

### Keywords
Orbitrap fusion; nanolc

### Affiliations
Department of Chemical Sciences, University of Catania
 Department of Chemical Sciences, University of Catania

### Submitter
Vera   Muccilli

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Salvatore Foti
Department of Chemical Sciences, University of Catania


