### Accession
PXD003149

### Title
Synthesis of chlorophyll-binding proteins in a fully-segregated ∆ycf54 strain of the cyanobacterium Synechocystis PCC 6803

### Description
The MS analysis is part of a wider study into chlorophyll biosynthesis. There is previous evidence, from both pulldown and CN-PAGE/immunoblot analyses that the enzyme Mg-protoporphyrin IX methylester cyclase (Cyc1), which catalyses the formation of the the fifth (E) ring in chlorophyll, associates with a protein of unknown function called Ycf54. There is also evidence for the association of Cyc1 with other enzymes in the chlorophyll biosynthetic pathway, eg. POR, ChlP and DVR. In the MS part of this study, FLAG-tagged Cyc1 was used to capture proteins from a Synechocystis cell lysate, with a comparison of FLAG-Cyc1 strains against wild-type and Ycf54 deletion backgrounds. MS-based quantification of the amounts of POR, ChlP and DVR relative to the Cyc1 bait supported evidence by immunoblotting of a significant reduction in these co-isolated proteins in the Ycf54 deletion strain.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysates, with thylakoid membranes solubilised with dodecylmaltoside, were passed through an immobilised anti-FLAG antibody column. FLAG-Cyc1 and captured proteins were desorbed with FLAG peptide and the proteins in the eluate precipitated, redissolved in 8M urea and digested for 2h at 37C. After dilution to 1M urea, digestion was continued with trypsin overnight at 37C. Tryptic peptides were desalted using a C18 spin column and analysed by nanoLC-MS/MS on Maxis UHR-TOF and Q Exactive HF quadrupole-Orbitrap instruments. Peptides were resolved on a 75-min gradient from 5-40% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid.

### Data Protocol
Data-files were converted to MGF using a script provided by Bruker for Maxis data and MSConvert for Q Exactive data. Database searching was carried out using Mascot Daemon v. 2.5.1 running with Mascot Server v. 2.5. Tolerances were 0.01 Da for MS and MS/MS, allowing one missed cleavage with S-carbamidomethyl-Cys and methionine oxidation set as fixed and variable modifications respectively. FDRs were determined by decoy searches of reversed sequences. For relative quantification, proteotypic peptide ions for Cyc1, POR, DVR and ChlP were extracted from MS spectra and their intensities averaged across their chromatographic peaks. Comparison between wild-type and Ycf54 deletion strains were made using captured protein:Cyc1 (bait) ratios.

### Publication Abstract
In the chlorophyll (Chl) biosynthesis pathway the formation of protochlorophyllide is catalyzed by Mg-protoporphyrin IX methyl ester (MgPME) cyclase. The Ycf54 protein was recently shown to form a complex with another component of the oxidative cyclase, Sll1214 (CycI), and partial inactivation of the ycf54 gene leads to Chl deficiency in cyanobacteria and plants. The exact function of the Ycf54 is not known, however, and further progress depends on construction and characterization of a mutant cyanobacterial strain with a fully inactivated ycf54 gene. Here, we report the complete deletion of the ycf54 gene in the cyanobacterium Synechocystis 6803; the resulting &#x394;ycf54 strain accumulates huge concentrations of the cyclase substrate MgPME together with another pigment, which we identified using nuclear magnetic resonance as 3-formyl MgPME. The detection of a small amount (~13%) of Chl in the &#x394;ycf54 mutant provides clear evidence that the Ycf54 protein is important, but not essential, for activity of the oxidative cyclase. The greatly reduced formation of protochlorophyllide in the &#x394;ycf54 strain provided an opportunity to use (35)S protein labeling combined with 2D electrophoresis to examine the synthesis of all known Chl-binding protein complexes under drastically restricted de novo Chl biosynthesis. We show that although the &#x394;ycf54 strain synthesizes very limited amounts of photosystem I and the CP47 and CP43 subunits of photosystem II (PSII), the synthesis of PSII D1 and D2 subunits and their assembly into the reaction centre (RCII) assembly intermediate were not affected. Furthermore, the levels of other Chl complexes such as cytochrome b 6 f and the HliD- Chl synthase remained comparable to wild-type. These data demonstrate that the requirement for de novo Chl molecules differs completely for each Chl-binding protein. Chl traffic and recycling in the cyanobacterial cell as well as the function of Ycf54 are discussed.

### Keywords
Chlorophyll, Mg-protoporphyrin ix methylester cyclase, Synechocystis 6803, Protochlorophyllide, Photosystem ii, Ycf54

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology
School of Biosciences, University of Sheffield

### Submitter
Philip Jackson

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher Neil Hunter
Department of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology


