### Accession
PXD034643

### Title
(Phospho)proteomics profiling of pre-treatment HER2+ BC biopsies

### Description
In this study, we perform (phospho)proteomics analysis of 45 pre-treatment HER2+ needle biopsies of early-stage invasive breast cancer to identify molecular signatures predictive of treatment response to Trastuzumab, Pertuzumab and chemotherapy. All patient biopsies included in this study were classified as HER2+ with a minimum tumour grade of two and tumour cell density of 60% or higher.  After needle biopsies were taken, patients completed multiple drug treatment cycles according to the regime of the TRAIN2 study. Finally, treatment response was determined at surgery. The systemic treatment response was categorised as pathological complete response (pCR = ypT0/isypN0) (n=26), near pCR (npCR) (n=8), or No pCR (n=11).

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were disrupted by multiple freeze-thaw cycles, grinding by pestle and mortar and sonication. Cell lysis was performed in a 1% sodium deoxycholate lysis buffer.  Proteins were digested overnight with Lys-C (1:75) and trypsin (1:25) at 37 oC. Samples were acidified and desalted using C18 cartridges on the AssayMap BRAVO Platform (Agilent Technologies).TMT labelling was used to quantify peptides. The TMT reference channel was made by pooling 10 µg of peptide from each sample. Samples were dried and resuspended in 50mM HEPES buffer and labelled with 10-plex TMT reagent (Thermo Scientific) in a 1:2 ratio (peptide:label). Labelled samples were mixed equally, desalted using Sep-Pac C18 cartridges (Waters), and fractionated on a high-pH reversed-phase C18 column (Kinetex 5u Evo C18 100A, 150 x 2.1mm, Phenomenex) coupled to an Agilent 1100 series HPLC over a 60 min gradient. Fractions were concatenated to 20 fractions for proteome analysis and further pooled to 10 fractions for phosphoproteome enrichment. Phosphoproteome samples were enrichened using Fe(III)-IMAC cartridges on the AssayMap BRAVO platform (Agilent Technologies). Samples were analysed by nanoLC-MS/MS on a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) equipped with an Agilent 1290 LC system with an LC gradient of 65 min (15% to 45% B) for proteome fractions and a 95 min gradient (9% to 35% B) for phosphoproteome fractions.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were processed with Proteome Discover 2.2 (Thermo Scientific) using a Sequest HT search against the Swissprot human database. Results were filtered using a 1% FDR cut off at the protein and peptide level. TMT fragment ions were quantified using summed abundances with PSM filters requiring a S/N ≥ 10 and an isolation interference cut off of 35% or 50 % (proteome and phosphoproteome respectively). Normalised protein and peptide abundances were extracted from PD2.2 and further scaled and analysed using Rstudio. Data was normalised by the pooled reference, Log2 transformed and normalised by median subtraction.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Treatment resistance, Breast cancer, Tmt

### Affiliations
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Utrecht, Utrecht, 3584 CH Utrecht, Netherlands.
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Donna Olivia Debets

### Lab Head
Dr Maarten Altelaar
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Utrecht, Utrecht, 3584 CH Utrecht, Netherlands.


