### Accession
PXD017487

### Title
DGAT1 phosphoproteome and long-term proteome

### Description
Enhanced fatty acid (FA) synthesis and uptake underpin the sustained membrane biogenesis and ATP production required for melanoma cell growth and division1-4. However, to thrive, melanoma cells must avoid a potential reduction in cell growth signalling, rampant reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation, and the build-up of toxic lipid species that can accompany excess free FA5. Here, we uncover and address the significance of frequent amplification and up-regulation of the Diacylglycerol O-acyltransferase 1 (DGAT1) gene in melanoma, whose encoded product catalyses the final step of Triacyglyceride (TAG) synthesis. Consistent with the classification of DGAT1 as an oncogene, we found that forced DGAT1 expression in p53 mutant zebrafish melanocytes was sufficient to induce melanoma, and accelerated melanoma progression initiated by co-expression of oncogenic BRAF or NRAS. Regarding DGAT1 function in human melanoma cells, its depletion, or alternatively pharmacological inhibition, suppressed mTOR-S6K signalling and increased levels of acyl carnitine species— FA derivatives that are the limiting substrate for FA oxidation (FAO). In turn, increased FAO induced mitochondrial malfunction, ROS generation, and lipid peroxidation. However, the resultant oxidative stress induced NRF2 and SESTRIN2 (SESN2) expression, which limited the extent of cell death. Conversely, DGAT1 over-expression enhanced mTOR-S6K signalling and cell growth, and protected against ROS, particularly in hypoxic conditions. Together, our data establish DGAT1 as a bona fide oncogene essential in melanoma cells for enabling FA accumulation.

### Sample Protocol
Phosphoproteome: - in solution digestion - TiO2 enrichment twice - QE-HF Proteome: - in-gel digestion - 8 fractions - QE-HF

### Data Protocol
- SILAC quantification - MaxQuant version 1.6.2.6 - Perseus 1.6.2.6 -

### Publication Abstract
Dysregulated cellular metabolism is a cancer hallmark for which few druggable oncoprotein targets have been identified. Increased fatty acid (FA) acquisition allows cancer cells to meet their heightened membrane biogenesis, bioenergy, and signaling needs. Excess FAs are toxic to non-transformed cells but surprisingly not to cancer cells. Molecules underlying this cancer adaptation may provide alternative drug targets. Here, we demonstrate that diacylglycerol O-acyltransferase 1 (DGAT1), an enzyme integral to triacylglyceride synthesis and lipid droplet formation, is frequently up-regulated in melanoma, allowing melanoma cells to tolerate excess FA. DGAT1 over-expression alone transforms p53-mutant zebrafish melanocytes and co-operates with oncogenic BRAF or NRAS for more rapid melanoma formation. Antagonism of DGAT1 induces oxidative stress in melanoma cells, which adapt by up-regulating cellular reactive oxygen species defenses. We show that inhibiting both DGAT1 and superoxide dismutase 1 profoundly suppress tumor growth through eliciting intolerable oxidative stress.

### Keywords
Dgat1 melanoma a229500 a375

### Affiliations
University of Manchester
Division of Molecular and Cellular Function School of Biological Sciences The University of Manchester M139PT Manchester UK

### Submitter
Chiara Francavilla

### Lab Head
Dr Chiara Francavilla
Division of Molecular and Cellular Function School of Biological Sciences The University of Manchester M139PT Manchester UK


