### Accession
PXD023037

### Title
Proteome profile of myelin in the zebrafish brain

### Description
While the myelin proteome is well characterized in mice, much less is known about the protein composition of myelin in non-mammalian species such as zebrafish (Danio rerio), despite its increasing popularity as model organism for myelin biology. Here, we assess the proteome of myelin biochemically purified from the brains of adult zebrafish by complementary proteomic approaches for deep qualitative and quantitative coverage. A data-independent acquisition (DIA) workflow with alternating low and elevated energy (MSE) provided the high dynamic range required for correct quantification of highest-abundance proteins. According to this analysis, the predominant Ig-CAM myelin protein zero (MPZ/P0), myelin basic protein (MBP) and the short chain dehydrogenase 36K constitute 12%, 8% and 6% of the total myelin protein, respectively. Combined with data from an ion mobility-enhanced version of the MSE mode (referred to as UDMSE) and from 1D-gel-based proteomic approaches, we provide the most comprehensive proteome resource of zebrafish myelin so far, correlate it with previously established mRNA-abundance profiles, and demonstrate both similarities and heterogeneity of myelin composition between teleost fish and rodents.

### Sample Protocol
Enrichment of myelin from zebrafish brains by discontinuous sucrose density gradient centrifugation. 1D-gel separation of myelin proteins followed by automated in-gel digestion and analysis by LC-MS. Solubilization of myelin proteins in ASB-14 detergent followed by automated in-solution protein digestion according to the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol and analysis by LC-MS. 1D LC separation of peptides using a Waters nanoAcquity nanoUPLC system. Mass spectrometric analysis performed by data-independent acquisition (DIA) on a Waters Synapt G2-S quadrupole time-of-flight (QTOF) mass spectrometer equipped with ion mobility option.

### Data Protocol
Peptide and protein identification with Waters ProteinLynx Global SERVER (PLGS). Retention time alignment, exact mass and retention time (EMRT) and ion mobility clustering, data normalization, isoform/homology filtering and calculation of absolute in-sample amounts for each detected protein according to the TOP3 quantification approach with ISOQuant.

### Publication Abstract
The velocity of nerve conduction along vertebrate axons depends on their ensheathment with myelin. Myelin membranes comprise specialized proteins well characterized in mice. Much less is known about the protein composition of myelin in non-mammalian species. Here, we assess the proteome of myelin biochemically purified from the brains of adult zebrafish (<i>Danio rerio</i>), considering its increasing popularity as model organism for myelin biology. Combining gel-based and gel-free proteomic approaches, we identified &gt; 1,000 proteins in purified zebrafish myelin, including all known constituents. By mass spectrometric quantification, the predominant Ig-CAM myelin protein zero (MPZ/P0), myelin basic protein (MBP), and the short-chain dehydrogenase 36K constitute 12%, 8%, and 6% of the total myelin protein, respectively. Comparison with previously established mRNA-abundance profiles shows that expression of many myelin-related transcripts coincides with the maturation of zebrafish oligodendrocytes. Zebrafish myelin comprises several proteins that are not present in mice, including 36K, CLDNK, and ZWI. However, a surprisingly large number of ortholog proteins is present in myelin of both species, indicating partial evolutionary preservation of its constituents. Yet, the relative abundance of CNS myelin proteins can differ markedly as exemplified by the complement inhibitor CD59 that constitutes 5% of the total zebrafish myelin protein but is a low-abundant myelin component in mice. Using novel transgenic reporter constructs and cryo-immuno electron microscopy, we confirm the incorporation of CD59 into myelin sheaths. These data provide the first proteome resource of zebrafish CNS myelin and demonstrate both similarities and heterogeneity of myelin composition between teleost fish and rodents.

### Keywords
Teleost, Oligodendrocyte, Plp, Mpz, Transcriptome, Danio rerio, Myelin proteome, Zebrafish, Mbp, Cd59, Central nervous system (cns), Label-free proteomics

### Affiliations
Proteomics Group Max-Planck-Institute of Experimental Medicine Hermann-Rein-Str. 3 37075 Goettingen, Germany
Neuroproteomics Group, Max Planck Institute for Multidisciplinary Sciences, Göttingen

### Submitter
Olaf Jahn

### Lab Head
Dr Olaf Jahn
Proteomics Group Max-Planck-Institute of Experimental Medicine Hermann-Rein-Str. 3 37075 Goettingen, Germany


