### Accession
PXD003022

### Title
Tetranychus urticae secretome -  The Salivary Protein Repertoire of the Polyphagous Spider Mite Tetranychus urticae: A Quest for Effectors

### Description
The two-spotted spider mite Tetranychus urticae is an extreme polyphaguous crop pest. Next to an increased detoxification potential of plant secondary metabolites, it has recently been shown that spider mites manipulate plant defences. Salivary constituents are proposed to play an important role during the interaction with its many hosts. The proteomic composition of saliva delivered into artificial diet by spider mites adapted to various hosts - bean, soy, maize, tomato -was determined using Orbitrap mass spectrometry. Over 200 different proteins were identified, many of unknown function and in numerous cases belonging to multi-membered gene families. A selection of these putative salivary proteins was validated using whole-mount in situ hybridizations and expression was shown to be localized in the anterior and dorsal podocephalic glands of the spider mite. Host-plant dependent expression was evident from the proteomics dataset and was further studied in detail by micro-array based genome wide gene expression profiling of mites maintained on the host plants under study. Previously obtained gene-expression datasets were further used to get more insight in the expression profile over different life stages and physiological states. To conclude, for the first time the T. urticae salivary proteome repertoire was characterized using a custom feeding hemisphere-based enrichment technique. This knowledge will assist in unraveling the molecular interactions between phytophagous mites and their host plants. This may ultimately facilitate the development of mite-resistant crops.

### Sample Protocol
Collection of artificial diet enriched with T. urticae saliva In order to collect saliva, spider mites were allowed to feed on an artificial diet. To this purpose, a pocket-like invagination was made in stretched Parafilm® M using a custom built vacuum device, consisting of a 96 hole well plate (plate thickness 4.2 mm, hole diameter 4.5 mm) fitting in a bottom vacuum manifold plate (Analytical Research Systems, Florida, USA) connected to a vacuum pump (KNF Neuberger, Germany). Next, 70μl sterile holidic artificial diet (based on 1/30 diluted aphid diet, Febvay et al. 1988) was added, after which the pocket was sealed with packaging tape (Scotch Packaging Tape, Extra Strong, Belgium). The artificial diet was supplemented with rifampicin (0.05 mg/ml) to inhibit bacterial growth. The parafilm, with the diet-filled hemisphere side up, was cut to size (approx. 4x4 cm) and mounted on the back of a small petridish, placed in a large petridish filled with water. Using cotton wool and paper tissue, a water barrier was created, confining the spider mites to the close proximity of the diet hemisphere (Fig. 2). Thirty to 40 adult female mites were transferred to each feeding arena. These mites originated from lines adapted to bean, soy, tomato and maize. For each host plant-specific sample, mites originating from all four biological replicates per host plant species were pooled. Addition of a blue colorant (0.05 mg/ml erioglaucine) in control diet hemispheres allowed to verify spider mite feeding by staining of the gut content (Fig). Petridishes with feeding hemispheres were placed in an incubator (Panasonic MLR-352H) at 26°C with 60% RH and 16:8 l:d. After 24 hours, the remaining content of the feeding hemispheres, enriched with secreted salivary components, was collected using a Hamilton microsyringe under sterile conditions (ESCO Laminar Flow cabinet). Samples were stored at -80°C until enough sample (0.5 to 1.0 ml) was collected for LC/MS analysis. As a control, feeding hemispheres that did not receive spider mites were treated identically and served as reference sample during LC/MS analysis. LC-MSMS The equivalent of 1 µg of total protein was loaded and analysed by nanoLC-mass spectrometry. Liquid chromatography mass spectrometric analysis was performed on a Eksigent Waters nanoAquity LC-Ultra system connected to a Thermo Scientific LTQ Velos Orbitrap mass spectrometer. The equivalent of 2 µg of total protein of the digested sample was dissolved in 20 µl of 2% acetonitrile in HPLC-grade water. 10 µl of the sample was loaded on the trapping column (Pepmap C18 300 µm x 20 mm, Dionex) with an isocratic flow of 2% acetonitrile in water with 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 5 µl min-1. After 2 min, the column-switching valve was switched, placing the pre-column online with the analytical capillary column, a Pepmap C18, 3 µm 75 µm x 150 mm nano column (Dionex). Separation was conducted using a linear gradient from 2% acetonitril in water, 0.1% formic acid to 40% acetonitril in water, 0.1% formic acid in 100 min. The flow rate was set at 400 nl min-1. The LTQ Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Scientific) was set up in a data dependent MS/MS mode where a full scan spectrum (350–5000 m/z, resolution 60 000) was followed by a maximum of ten CID tandem mass spectrum (100 to 2000 m/z). Peptide ions were selected as the twenty most intense peaks of the MS1 scan. Collision induced dissociation (CID) scans were acquired in the LTQiontrap part of the mass spectrometer, The normalized collision energy used was 35% in CID. We applied a dynamic exclusion list of 45 s.

### Data Protocol
Prior to protein identification, calibration of the data was performed using the methods described by Gibbons B.C. et al. (2015). Peak lists obtained from MS/MS spectra were identified using OMSSA version 2.1.9, X!Tandem version X! Tandem Vengeance (2015.12.15.2), and MS-GF+ version Beta (v10282). The search was conducted using SearchGUI version 2.8.5. Protein identification was conducted against a concatenated target/decoy version of the T. urticae protein database holding 17,907 target sequences (version of December 16th 2014) and the common Repository of Adventitious Proteins (cRAP) database (available at http://www.thegpm.org/crap/). Reversing the target sequences in SearchGUI created the decoy sequences. The identification settings were as follows: Trypsin with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages; 10.0 ppm as MS1 and 0.5 Da as MS2 tolerances; variable modifications: carbamidomethyl c (+57.021464 Da), oxidation of m (+15.994915 Da), pyro-glu from n-term q (-17.026549 Da), acetylation of protein n-term (+42.010565 Da), pyro-cmc (-17.026549 Da) and pyro-glu from n-term e (-18.010565 Da). Peptides and proteins were inferred from the spectrum identification results using PeptideShaker version 1.10.2. Peptide Spectrum Matches (PSMs), peptides and proteins were validated at a 1.0% False Discovery Rate (FDR) estimated using the decoy/hit distribution.

### Publication Abstract
The two-spotted spider mite Tetranychus urticae is an extremely polyphagous crop pest. Alongside an unparalleled detoxification potential for plant secondary metabolites, it has recently been shown that spider mites can attenuate or even suppress plant defenses. Salivary constituents, notably effectors, have been proposed to play an important role in manipulating plant defenses and might determine the outcome of plant-mite interactions. Here, the proteomic composition of saliva from T. urticae lines adapted to various host plants-bean, maize, soy, and tomato-was analyzed using a custom-developed feeding assay coupled with nano-LC tandem mass spectrometry. About 90 putative T. urticae salivary proteins were identified. Many are of unknown function, and in numerous cases belonging to multimembered gene families. RNAseq expression analysis revealed that many genes coding for these salivary proteins were highly expressed in the proterosoma, the mite body region that includes the salivary glands. A subset of genes encoding putative salivary proteins was selected for whole-mount in situ hybridization, and were found to be expressed in the anterior and dorsal podocephalic glands. Strikingly, host plant dependent expression was evident for putative salivary proteins, and was further studied in detail by micro-array based genome-wide expression profiling. This meta-analysis revealed for the first time the salivary protein repertoire of a phytophagous chelicerate. The availability of this salivary proteome will assist in unraveling the molecular interface between phytophagous mites and their host plants, and may ultimately facilitate the development of mite-resistant crops. Furthermore, the technique used in this study is a time- and resource-efficient method to examine the salivary protein composition of other small arthropods for which saliva or salivary glands cannot be isolated easily.

### Keywords
Tetranichus urticae, Secretome

### Affiliations
Faculty of Bioscience Engineering
BioBix, Lab for Bioinformatics and Computational Genomics, Ghent University, Belgium

### Submitter
Gerben Menschaert

### Lab Head
Dr Gerben Menschaert
BioBix, Lab for Bioinformatics and Computational Genomics, Ghent University, Belgium


