### Accession
PXD000916

### Title
Proteomic identification of monoclonal antibodies from rabbit serum and analysis of FDR using differential cysteine labeling

### Description
Proteomic analysis of serum antibodies is challenging due to the non-germline origin of immunoglobulin (Ig) sequences and the complexity of Ig primary structure, with regions of hypervariable sequence interspersed within highly conserved framework sections resulting in an unusually high frequency of peptide-spectrum mis-identification using standard reference database search methods.  Using a strategy of differential cysteine labeling with two alkylating reagents, we examined peptide-spectrum matches and decoy-based error modeling for the interpretation of antibody-derived mass spectral data.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoglobulin G was purified by protein A affinity chromatography from serum of a rabbit immunized with CCH protein.  F(ab')2 fragments were generated by digestion with pepsin and antigen-specific F(ab')2 fragments were isolated by affinity chromatography using immobilized CCH protein on agarose beads.  Proteins were denatured, reduced, and alkylated with either iodoacetamide (IAM) or iodoethanol (IodoEtOH), followed by digestion with trypsin.  Tryptic peptides were analyzed by nanoLC-MSMS on an Orbitrap Velos. with data-dependent acquisition of 20 MS2 scans per MS1.  Ions with charge >+1 were selected for CID, with monoisotopic precursor selection, charge state screening, and 45-s dynamic exclusion enabled.

### Data Protocol
Spectra were searched against a custom target protein sequence database consisting of IgG heavy chain and light chain variable genes determined by NextGen RNA sequencing (454) of donor rabbit PBMCs and BMPCs, rabbit protein-coding sequences from Ensembl (OryCun2.0), and common contaminants (MaxQuant).  Decoy databases include shuffled and "ConJ" (heavy chain J-region sequence and Arg/Lys positions preserved, remainder of sequence was shuffled between cleavage sites).  Searches performed by SEQUEST (Proteome Discoverer 1.4), with mass tolerances of 5 ppm (MS1) and 0.5 Da (MS2). Fully tryptic peptides (600-6000 Da) with up to 2 missed cleavage sites were allowed. Oxidation of methionine as dynamic modification and either cabamidomethyl (IAM) or ethanolyl (IodoEtOH) modification of cysteine as static modification were considered.

### Publication Abstract
Characterizing the in vivo dynamics of the polyclonal antibody repertoire in serum, such as that which might arise in response to stimulation with an antigen, is difficult due to the presence of many highly similar immunoglobulin proteins, each specified by distinct B lymphocytes. These challenges have precluded the use of conventional mass spectrometry for antibody identification based on peptide mass spectral matches to a genomic reference database. Recently, progress has been made using bottom-up analysis of serum antibodies by nanoflow liquid chromatography/high-resolution tandem mass spectrometry combined with a sample-specific antibody sequence database generated by high-throughput sequencing of individual B cell immunoglobulin variable domains (V genes). Here, we describe how intrinsic features of antibody primary structure, most notably the interspersed segments of variable and conserved amino acid sequences, generate recurring patterns in the corresponding peptide mass spectra of V gene peptides, greatly complicating the assignment of correct sequences to mass spectral data. We show that the standard method of decoy-based error modeling fails to account for the error introduced by these highly similar sequences, leading to a significant underestimation of the false discovery rate. Because of these effects, antibody-derived peptide mass spectra require increased stringency in their interpretation. The use of filters based on the mean precursor ion mass accuracy of peptide-spectrum matches is shown to be particularly effective in distinguishing between "true" and "false" identifications. These findings highlight important caveats associated with the use of standard database search and error-modeling methods with nonstandard data sets and custom sequence databases.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Antibody, Orbitrap velos, Rabbit, Igg

### Affiliations
University of Texas at Austin
Center for Systems and Synthetic Biology Institute for Cellular and Molecular Biology Department of Molecular Biosciences University of Texas at Austin

### Submitter
Daniel Boutz

### Lab Head
Dr Edward Marcotte
Center for Systems and Synthetic Biology Institute for Cellular and Molecular Biology Department of Molecular Biosciences University of Texas at Austin


