### Accession
PXD001467

### Title
Proteome resource allocation in bacteria

### Description
A central aim of cell biology is to understand the strategy of gene expression in response to the environment. Here we study gene expression response to metabolic challenges in exponentially growing Escherichia coli using mass spectrometry. Despite enormous complexity in the details of the underlying regulatory network, we find that the proteome partitions into several coarse-grained sectors, with each sector’s total mass abundance exhibiting positive or negative linear relations with the growth rate. The growth-rate dependent components of the proteome fractions comprise about half of the proteome by mass, and their mutual dependencies can be characterized by a simple flux model involving only two effective parameters. The success and apparent generality of this model arises from tight coordination between proteome partition and metabolism, suggesting a principle for resource-allocation in proteome economy of the cell. This strategy of global gene regulation should serve as a basis for future studies on gene expression and constructing synthetic biological circuits. Coarse-graining may be an effective approach to derive predictive phenomenological models for other ‘omics’ studies.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation. 1.8 ml of cell culture at OD600=0.4~0.5 during the exponential phase of the experimental culture (defined above) was collected by centrifugation. The cell pellet was re-suspended in 0.2 ml water and fast frozen on dry ice.  Aliquot of the 15N reference cell sample (or labeled cell sample) was mixed with each of the 14N cell samples (or non-labeled cell samples), which contained the same amount of proteins. Each aliquot of the 15N samples contained about 100 µg of proteins. Each of the 14N cell samples also contained about 100 µg proteins. For each mode of growth limitation, a 15N reference cell sample was made in such a way that it contained cell samples from both the fastest and slowest growth conditions under that growth limitation. The mixed reference is used to avoid the composition of proteins in the reference cell sample be biased by a particular growth medium.  Proteins were precipitated by adding 100% (w/v) trichloroacetic acid (TCA) to 25% final concentration. Samples were let stand on ice for a minimum of 1 hour. The protein precipitates were sped down by centifugation at 16000 g for 10 min at 4oC. The supernatant was removed and the pellets were washed with cold acetone. The pellets were dried in a Speed-Vac concentrator. The pellets were dissolved in 80 µl 100 mM NH4HCO3 with 5% acetonitrile (ACN). Then 8 µl of 50 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) was added to reduce the disulfide bonds before the samples were incubated at 65oC for 10 min. Cysteine residues were modified by the addition of 8 µl of 100 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) followed by incubation at 30oC for 30 min in the dark. The proteolytic digestion was carried out by the addition of 8 µl of 0.1 µg/µl trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) with incubation overnight at 37oC. The peptide solutions were cleaned by using the PepClean® C-18 spin columns (Pierce, Rockford, IL). After drying in a Speed-Vac concentrator, the peptides were dissolved into 10 µL sample buffer (5% ACN and 0.1% formic acid).  Mass spectrometry. The peptide samples were analyzed on an AB SCIEX TripleTOF® 5600 system (AB SCIEX, Framingham, MA) coupled to an Eksigent NanoLC Ultra® system (Eksigent, Dublin, CA). The samples (2 µL) were injected using an autosampler. The samples were first loaded onto a Nano cHiPLC Trap column 200µm x 0.5mm ChromXP C18-CL 3µm 120Å (Eksigent) at a flow rate of 2 µL/min for 10 minutes. The peptides were then separated on a Nano cHiPLC column 75µm x 15cm ChromXP C18-CL 3µm 120Å (Eksigent) using a 120-min linear gradient of 5-35% ACN in 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. MS1 settings: mass range of m/z 400-1250 and accumulation time 0.5 seconds. MS2 settings: mass range of m/z 100-1800, accumulation time 0.05 seconds, high sensitivity mode, charge state 2 to 5, selecting anything over 100 cps, maximal number of candidate/cycle 50, and excluding former targets for 12 seconds after each occurrence.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification: The raw mass spectrometry data files generated by the AB SCIEX TripleTOF® 5600 system were converted to Mascot generic format (mgf) files, which were submitted to the Mascot database searching engine (Matrix Sciences, London, UK) against the E. coli SwissProt database to identify proteins. The following parameters were used in the Mascot searches: maximum of two missed trypsin cleavage, fixed carbamidomethyl modification, variable oxidation modification, peptide tolerance ± 0.1 Da, MS/MS tolerance ± 0.1 Da, and 1+, 2+, and 3+ peptide charge. All peptides with scores less than the identity threshold (P=0.05) were discarded. Relative protein quantitation: The raw mass spectrometry data files were converted to the .mzML and .mgf formats using conversion tools provided by AB Sciex. The .mgf files were used to identify sequencing events against the Mascot database. Finally, spectra for peptides from the Mascot search were quantified using Least-Squares Fourier Transform Convolution implemented in house (Sperling et al, 2008). Briefly, data were extracted for each peak using a retention time and m/z window enclosing the envelope for both the light and heavy peaks. The data are summed over the retention time, and the light and heavy peaks amplitudes are obtained from a fit to the entire isotope distribution, yielding the relative intensity of the light and heavy species. The ratio of the non-labeled to labeled peaks was obtained for each peptide in each sample. The relative protein quantitation data for each protein in each sample mixture was then obtained as a ratio by taking the median of the ratios of its peptides. No ratio (i.e., no data) was obtained if there was only one peptide for the protein. The uncertainty for each ratio was defined as the two quartiles associated with the median. To filter out data with poor quality, the ratio was removed for the protein in that sample if at least one of its quartiles lied outside of 50% range of its median; Furthermore, ratios were removed for a protein in all the sample mixtures in a growth limitation if at least one of the ratios has one of its quartiles lying outside of the 100% range of the median. Since the ratios are all defined relative to the same reference sample, they represent the relative change of the expression of the protein across all the non-labeled cell samples, and are referred as “relative expression data”.  Absolute protein quantitation: The spectral counting data used for absolute protein quantitation were extracted from the Mascot search results. For our 15N and 14N mixture samples, only the 14N spectra were counted. As described in the main text, the absolute abundance of a protein was calculated by dividing the total number of spectra of all peptides for that protein by the total number of 14N spectra in the sample.

### Publication Abstract
A central aim of cell biology was to understand the strategy of gene expression in response to the environment. Here, we study gene expression response to metabolic challenges in exponentially growing Escherichia coli using mass spectrometry. Despite enormous complexity in the details of the underlying regulatory network, we find that the proteome partitions into several coarse-grained sectors, with each sector's total mass abundance exhibiting positive or negative linear relations with the growth rate. The growth rate-dependent components of the proteome fractions comprise about half of the proteome by mass, and their mutual dependencies can be characterized by a simple flux model involving only two effective parameters. The success and apparent generality of this model arises from tight coordination between proteome partition and metabolism, suggesting a principle for resource allocation in proteome economy of the cell. This strategy of global gene regulation should serve as a basis for future studies on gene expression and constructing synthetic biological circuits. Coarse graining may be an effective approach to derive predictive phenomenological models for other 'omics' studies.

### Keywords
Growth physiology, Escherichia coli, Proteome partition

### Affiliations
University of California, San Diego
Department of Physics and Section of Molecular Biology, Division of Biological Sciences, University of California at San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0374 USA

### Submitter
Sheng Hui

### Lab Head
Dr Terence Hwa
Department of Physics and Section of Molecular Biology, Division of Biological Sciences, University of California at San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0374 USA


