### Accession
PXD038311

### Title
Proteome decomplexation of Trimeresurus erythrurus from India

### Description
Proteome decomplexation of T. erythrurus venom was performed using a two-step proteomics approach. Crude venom was firstly subjected to reverse phase chromatography and the resulting peaks were subsequently processed for in-solution trypsin digestion and LC-MS/MS analysis. Protein identification was done using Proteome discoverer 2.2 with Sequest program.

### Sample Protocol
Crude venom of T. erythrurus was firstly fractionated using Rp-HPLC in Thermo Scientific UltiMate 3000 high performance gradient system equipped with a Diode-Array Detector (DAD) resulting into 10 peaks. Each peak was dried and reconstituted in Milli-Q water followed by reduction with 6M Urea and 200mM DTT at room temperature for 1 hour. Post incubation, samples were alkylated with 200mM Iodoacetamide (IAA) in dark condition. Fractions were then digested using proteomics grade trypsin solution in a ratio of 1:50 (w/w, trypsin: protein) by incubation at 37°C overnight.  The digested peptides in the mixture were separated by desalting using Nanospray capillary column (PepMapTM RSLC C18, ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Peptide mixtures were loaded on C-18 Zip tips pre-equilibrated with 0.1% TFA. The samples were aspirated and dispensed repeatedly ten times for effective binding of peptides to the C18 tips. The tips were washed in 0.1% TFA and peptides were eluted in 200 μl of 70% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA. The eluted fractions were vacuum-dried and reconstituted in 5% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA and subjected to sequencing by Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA).

### Data Protocol
The raw files were viewed in Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermofisher) using the Sequest program. The Taxid used to generate the protein list was 8764 (Trimeresurus). MS/MS mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm. Carbamidomethyl cysteine was set as a fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine and deamidation of Arginine and Glutamine were set as variable modifications. Double and triple charged peptides were selected and based on sequence similarity, peptide fragments were assigned to the proteins in the NCBI database. The matched proteins were filtered for at least two unique peptides and sequest score more than 2. The relative distribution of venom toxin families was calculated considering the total number of proteins identified by MS/MS as 100%.

### Publication Abstract
Green pit vipers are the largest group of venomous vipers in tropical and subtropical Asia, which are responsible for most of the bite cases across this region. Among the green pit vipers of the Indian subcontinent, <i>Trimeresurus erythrurus</i> is the most prevalent; however, limited knowledge is available about its venomics. Proteome decomplexation of <i>T. erythrurus</i> venom using mass spectrometry revealed a blend of 53 different proteins/peptides belonging to 10 snake venom protein families. Phospholipase A<sub>2</sub> and snake venom serine proteases were found to be the major enzymatic families, and Snaclec was the major nonenzymatic family in this venom. These protein families might be responsible for consumptive coagulopathy in victims. Along with these, snake venom metalloproteases, l-amino acid oxidases, disintegrins, and cysteine-rich secretory proteins were also found, which might be responsible for inducing painful edema, tissue necrosis, blistering, and defibrination in patients. Protein belonging to C-type lectins, C-type natriuretic peptides, and glutaminyl-peptide cyclotransfreases were also observed as trace proteins. The crude venom shows platelet aggregation in the absence of any agonist, suggesting their role in alterations in platelet functions. This study is the first proteomic analysis of <i>T. erythrurus</i> venom, contributing an overview of different snake venom proteins/peptides responsible for various pathophysiological disorders obtained in patients. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with the identifier PXD038311.

### Keywords
Rp-hplc, Proteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Green pit viper, Trimeresurus

### Affiliations
Tezpur University
Molecular Toxinology Lab, Department of Molecular Biology & Biotechnology, Tezpur University, Assam, India

### Submitter
Susmita Thakur

### Lab Head
Dr Robin Doley
Molecular Toxinology Lab, Department of Molecular Biology & Biotechnology, Tezpur University, Assam, India


