### Accession
PXD043759

### Title
A 3D printed plastic frame deeply impacts yeast cell growth

### Description
Solid State Fermentation (SSF) processes have been explored for yeast growth and protein and metabolites production. However, most of these processes lack standardization. In this work, we present a polylactic acid (PLA) 3D printed matrix that dramatically enhances yeast growth when embedded in liquid media compared to equivalent static cultures, and changes yeast expression patterns at the proteome level. Moreover, differences in sugar assimilation and ethanol production, as the main product of alcoholic fermentation, are observed. Our results suggest that these matrixes may be useful for a vast range of biotechnological applications based on yeast fermentation.

### Sample Protocol
One experiment (in triplicate) was carried out for proteome analysis. After collecting and cleaning the cells, pellets were directly frozen and stored at -80°C until required. Proteomic analysis was carried out by the Central Service for Experimental Research (SCSIE, Universitat de València). Proteins were separated by 1D SDS PAGE electrophoresis and identified through LC-MSMS.  In gel protein digestion The career corresponding to the library was cutted into 4 pieces  and then  were digested with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) as described elsewhere (Shevchenko A, Jensen ON, Podtelejnikov AV, Sagliocco F, Wilm M, Vorm O, Mortensen P, Boucherie H, Mann M. Linking genome and proteome by mass spectrometry: large-scale identification of yeast proteins from two dimensional gels. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 1996; 93:14440-14445). 500 ng of trypsin were used for each sample, and digestion was set to 37 ºC on. The trypsin digestion was stopped with 10% TFA and the SN was removed, and the library gel slides dehydrated with pure ACN. The new peptide solutions were combined with the corresponding SN. The peptide mixtures were dried in a speed vacuum and re suspended in 2 % ACN; 0.1% TFA (40 L). LCMSMS Analysis for library We have used an LC-MS/MS system composed of an Ekspert nanoLC 425 (Eksigent) and a mass spectrometer nanoESI qQTOF (6600plus TripleTOF, ABSCIEX) 5 µl of peptide mixture sample was loaded onto a trap column (3µ C18-CL 120 Ᾰ, 350 m x 0.5mm; Eksigent) and desalted with 0.1% TFA at 5 µl/min during 3 min. The peptides were then loaded onto an analytical column (3µ C18-CL 120 Ᾰ, 0.075 x 150 mm; Eksigent) equilibrated in 5% acetonitrile 0.1% FA (formic acid). Elution was carried out with a linear gradient of 7 a 40 % B in A for 60 min . (A: 0.1% FA; B: ACN, 0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Eluted peptides were ionized applying 2.8 kV to the spray emitter. Analysis was carried out in a data-dependent mode (DDA). Survey MS1 scans were acquired from 350–1250 m/z for 250 ms. The quadrupole resolution was set to ‘UNIT’ for MS2 experiments, which were acquired 100–1500 m/z for 150 ms in ‘high sensitivity’ mode. Following switch criteria were used: charge: 2+ to 5+; minimum intensity; 70 counts per second (cps). Up to 25 ions were selected for fragmentation after each survey scan. Dynamic exclusion was set to 15 s.  Differential proteomic analysis was carried out through SWATH. For individual SWATH analysis 20ug of total protein extract was loaded in a 1D_SDS_PAGE gel to clean samples.    Gel fraction was cut and the sample was digested with sequencing grade trypsin  (Promega) as described elsewhere (Shevchenko A, Jensen ON, Podtelejnikov AV, Sagliocco F, Wilm M, Vorm O, Mortensen P, Boucherie H, Mann M. Linking genome and proteome by mass spectrometry: large-scale identification of yeast proteins from two dimensional gels. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 1996; 93:14440-14445).  500 ng of trypsin in 150 µL of ABC solution was used. The digestion was stopped with TFA (1% final concentration), a double extraction with ACN was done and all the peptide solutions and dried in a rotatory evaporator. Sample was re suspended with 40 µL of 2% ACN; 0.1% TFA SWATH LCMSMS Analysis 5 µl of digested bands proteins were loaded onto a trap column (LC Column, 12 nm, 3 µ  Triart-C18, 0.5 x5.0 mm; YMC) and desalted with 0.1% TFA at 10 µl/min during  5 min.  The peptides were then loaded onto an analytical column (LC Column, 3 µm  ChromoXP C18, 150 x 0.3 mm, Capillary Eksigent) equilibrated in 3% acetonitrile 0.1% FA (formic acid). Elution was carried out with a linear gradient of 8a35% B in A for 60 min. (A: 0.1% FA; B: ACN, 0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 5uL/min. Peptides were analysed in a mass spectrometer microESI qQTOF (6600plus TripleTOF, ABSCIEX). Sample was ionized in a Source Type: Optiflow 1-50uL Micro applying 4.5 kV to the spray emitter. Survey MS1 scans were acquired from 400–1250 m/z for 250 ms.  The tripleTOF was operated in swath mode.  100 variable windows from 400 to 1250 m/z were acquired throughout the experiment. The total cycle time was 2.79 secs. The quadrupole resolution was set to ‘UNIT’ for MS2 experiments, which were acquired 100–1500 m/z for 25 ms in ‘high sensitivity’ mode.

### Data Protocol
Spectral Library  ProteinPilot v5.0. search engine (ABSciex). ProteinPilot default parameters were used to generate peak list directly from 6600 TripleTof  wiff files. The Paragon algorithm (Shilov, I. V., S. L. Seymour, et al. (2007). Mol Cell Proteomics 6(9): 1638-55) of ProteinPilot v 5.0 was used to search the Uniprot-Saccharomyces database  with the following parameters: Trypsin specificity, IAM cys-alkylation, taxonomy not restricted, and the search effort set to through and FDR correction.  The protein grouping was done by Pro group algorithm: A protein group in a Pro Group Report is a set of proteins that share some physical evidence. Unlike sequence alignment analyses where full length theoretical sequences are compared, the formation of protein groups in Pro Group is guided entirely by observed peptides only. Since the observed peptides are actually determined from experimentally acquired spectra, the grouping can be considered to be guided by usage of spectra. Then, unobserved regions of protein sequence play no role in explaining the data.  SWATH Analysis The wiff files obtained from Swath experiment were analysed by Peak View 2.1  Retention times of the detected peptides were alienate using iRT calibration peptides  to calibrate retention times. The area data obtained with Peak View is analyzed with Marker View (Sciex). First, the protein areas calculated are normalized by the total sum of the areas of all the quantified proteins. Next, statistical tests of reduction of the dimensionality,  PCA and DA (both with Pareto scaling) are carried out and the following results are obtained:

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Saccharomyces 11 cerevisiae, Yeast, Biomass production, Solid state fermentation, Proteomics

### Affiliations
UVEG
Institute for Integrative Systems Biology (I2SysBio), Universitat de València, Paterna, Spain Darwin Bioprospecting Excellence SL, Parc Científic Universitat de València, Spain

### Submitter
María Luz Valero

### Lab Head
Dr Manuel Porcar
Institute for Integrative Systems Biology (I2SysBio), Universitat de València, Paterna, Spain Darwin Bioprospecting Excellence SL, Parc Científic Universitat de València, Spain


