### Accession
PXD021914

### Title
EBV Latent membrane protein1 modifies EV content

### Description
Extracellular vesicles (EV) mediate intercellular communication events and alterations in normal vesicle content contribute to function and disease initiation or progression. The ability to package a variety of cargo and transmit molecular information between cells renders EVs important mediators of cell to cell crosstalk. Latent membrane protein 1 (LMP1) is a chief viral oncoprotein expressed in most Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-associated cancers and is released from cells at high levels in EVs. LMP1 containing EVs have been demonstrated to promote cell growth, migration, differentiation, and regulate immune cell function. Despite these significant changes in recipient cells induced by LMP1 modified EVs, the mechanism how this viral oncogene modulates the recipient cells towards these phenotypes is not well understood. We hypothesize that LMP1 alters EV content and following uptake of the LMP1-modified EVs by the recipient cells results in the activation of cell signaling pathways and increased gene expression which modulates the biological properties of recipient cell towards a new phenotype. Our results show that LMP1 expression alters the EV protein and microRNA content packaged into EVs.

### Sample Protocol
Extracellular vesicles were harvested from Hong Kong1 (HK1) wild type cells or HK1 cells expressing LMP1 using a modified ExtraPEG method and subsequently purified on an iodixanol density gradient. Equal protein of EV lysate was run and separated on a 4-20% SDS PAGE. After the separation, the gel fixed and stained with the Coomassie stain before being fractionated. The excised gel pieces containing the proteins were reduced, then alkylated before trypsin digestion. The eluted peptides from the gel pieces were submitted to beanalyzed on the Thermo Q Exactive HF.

### Data Protocol
Resulting raw files were searched with Proteome Discoverer 2.4 using SequestHT, Mascot and Amanda as search engines. Scaffold (version 4.10) was used to validate the protein and peptide identity. Cellular compartment enrichment and biological processes was done through FunRich v3.1.3. The Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway analyses were conducted using the NetworkAnalyst 3.0

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Evs, Lmp1, Extracellular vesicles, Ebv, Exosomes, Hk1

### Affiliations
Department of Biomedical sciences FSU College of Medicine
FSU

### Submitter
Dingani Nkosi

### Lab Head
Dr David Meckes
Department of Biomedical sciences FSU College of Medicine


