### Accession
PXD020617

### Title
Addressing reproducibility challenges in cell culture: the impact of oxylipins contained in fetal calf serum

### Description
Reproducibility issues regarding complex in vitro cell culture experiments have been mainly attributed to genetic variations within cell lines. Batch-dependent fetal calf serum variations are well known and also represent relevant influencing factors. However, the molecular constituents mediating such effects remained largely unknown. High resolution mass spectrometry is a powerful tool to identify molecular FCS constituents and investigate their effect on cultured cells. Using a differentiation and inflammatory stimulation protocol on U937 cells we observed FCS batch-dependent variations of secreted cytokines, oxylipins and other inflammatory mediators. In order to detect candidate bioactive molecules contained in FCS, the protein and oxylipin composition of FCS batches was investigated. Remarkably, the protein composition showed some, but much less batch-dependent variation when compared to the oxylipin composition. Efficient uptake of C13-labelled arachidonic acid from medium by U937 macrophages and inflammation-induced release thereof including oxylipin products was evidenced. Balancing out FCS batch-dependent nanomolar concentration differences of two selected oxylipins, 5-HETE and 15-HETE, by spiking experiments, resulted in significant proteome alterations of cultured U937 macrophages indicating PPAR activation. High-resolution microscopy demonstrated HETE-induced formation of peroxisomes, thus independently corroborating the proteome profiling results. In conclusion, the present data demonstrate a strong and previously underappreciated influence of FCS-contained oxylipins on cellular effector functions, thus representing a plausible cause for disturbing reproducibility issues.

### Sample Protocol
PMA and inflammatory activation with Lipopolysaccharides (LPS):  All experiments were carried out in triplicates of LPS activation and control. For the proteomics and eicosadomics measurements 2x10^6 cells were seeded in T25 polystyrene cell culture flasks with cell growth surface for adherent cells (Sarstedt, Austria) with 5 ml fully supplemented media and 100 ng/ml PMA (Phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate ≥99%, Sigma-Aldrich, Austria) to induce differentiation. After 48 h incubation the medium was withdrawn and used for eicosanoid measurements. 3 ml of new fully supplemented media was added either with 1 µg/ml LPS (Lipopolysaccharides from Escherichia coli 055:B5, γ-irradiated, BioXtra, Sigma-Aldrich, Austria) or 1 µl PBS per 1 ml medium as control. After 24 h activation the medium was withdrawn again and used for eicosanoid measurements. The cells were gently washed twice with 5 ml PBS and 3 ml new medium without FCS was added and incubated. After 4 hours the supernatant was withdrawn and used for proteomics measurements. The cells were used for a subcellular fractionation as described before and cytoplasm and nuclear fraction were used for proteomics analysis. Test of different FCS batches Throughout the experiments different suppliers and batches of FCS have been used. Additional details concerning the FCS batches are listed in table 1. FCS batches A-C were heat inactivated at 56°C for 30 min, batch D was already bought heat inactivated. Also different concentrations of HETEs and labelled Arachidonic acid have been supplemented and the respective controls have been treated with the same amount of LC-MS grade methanol (5µl/3ml medium). The experimental workflow of PMA differentiation and LPS activation was done for every condition similarly, only exchanging the FCS batch, supplier or eicosanoid. Additionally, cor every condition 3 aliquots (3x3ml) of the fully supplemented media were used for eicosanoid measurements to determine the default levels of eicosanoids present. Proteomics of supernatant (SN), cytoplasm (CYT) and nuclear extract (NE) For the proteomics sample preparation, the s-trap system (Protifi, Huntington, NY) was employed following the manufacturers protocol with slight modifications. The precipitated proteins were dissolved in lysis buffer (8 M Urea, 0.05 M TEAB and 5% SDS) and diluted to get a protein concentration of about 1 µg/µl. 20 µg of protein were used for each digestion. First, the sample was reduced with 20 µl DTT (Sigma-Aldrich) at a final concentration of 32 mM for 10 min at 95 °C. Afterwards, 5 µl IAA (Sigma-Aldrich) was added to a final concentration of 54 mM and incubated for 30 min at 30 °C in the dark. After adding 4,5 µl 12% ortho-phosphoric acid (Sigma-Aldrich) and 297 µl S-Trap buffer (90% Methanol (v/v) in H2O and 0.1 M TEAB) the sample was loaded onto the S-Trap Filter. The S-trap filters were centrifuged at 4000 g for 1 min to pass through all sample and trap the proteins onto the resin and afterwards washed four times with 150 µl S-Trap buffer. 20 µg aliquots of Trypsin/Lys-C (MS grade; Promega Corporation, Madison, WI, USA) were dissolved in 400 µl 50 mM TEAB and 20 µg of this solution was added directly onto the resin of the filter (corresponding to 1 µg Trypsin/Lys-C per sample) and incubated for 1 h at 47 °C. After finishing the digestion, the peptides were eluted with 40 µl of 50 mM TEAB followed by 40 µl of 0.2 % formic acid (FA) in H2O and 35 µl of 50 % (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN) with 0.2 % FA in H2O. The peptides were dried for about 2 h via vacuum centrifugation and stored at -20 °C until LC-MS measurement.  HPLC-MS/MS for proteomics For the HPLC-MS/MS analysis the peptides were resolved in 5 µL 30% formic acid and diluted with 40 µL of mobile phase A (97.9% H2O, 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). 1 µL for the supernatant samples and 5 µL of cytoplasmic and nuclear samples were injected into the Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano LC system coupled to the QExactive Orbitrap MS (all Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria).  Peptides were trapped on a C18 2 cm × 100 μm precolumn and LC separation was performed on a 50 cm × 75 μm Pepmap100 analytical column (both Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria). For the supernatant samples 1 µL of sample was injected. The 85 min HPLC method included a 43 min gradient from 7% to 40% mobile phase B (79.9% acetonitrile, 20% H2O, 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. For the cytoplasmic and nuclear samples 5 µL were injected. The 135 min HPLC method included a 95 min gradient from 8% to 40% mobile phase B at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Mass spectrometric settings were the same for all fractions. The resolution on the MS1 level was set to 70,000 (at m/z = 200) with a scan range from 400 to 1,400 m/z. The top eight abundant peptide ions were chosen for fragmentation at 30% normalized collision energy and resulting fragments analyzed in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500 (at m/z = 200).

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria) running Mascot 2.4 (Matrix Science, UK) was used for protein identification searching against the SwissProt Database (version 01/2018 with 20 258 entries) allowing a mass tolerance of 50ppm for MS spectra and 100mmu for MS/MS spectra, a FDR < 0.01 and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Furthermore, search criteria included carbamidomethylation on cysteines as fixed modification and methionine oxidation as well as N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Reproducibility issues regarding in vitro cell culture experiments are related to genetic fluctuations and batch-wise variations of biological materials such as fetal calf serum (FCS). Genome sequencing may control the former, while the latter may remain unrecognized. Using a U937 macrophage model for cell differentiation and inflammation, we investigated whether the formation of effector molecules was dependent on the FCS batch used for cultivation. High resolution mass spectrometry (HRMS) was used to identify FCS constituents and to explore their effects on cultured cells evaluating secreted cytokines, eicosanoids, and other inflammatory mediators. Remarkably, the FCS eicosanoid composition showed more batch-dependent variations than the protein composition. Efficient uptake of fatty acids from the medium by U937 macrophages and inflammation-induced release thereof was evidenced using C13-labelled arachidonic acid, highlighting rapid lipid metabolism. For functional testing, FCS batch-dependent nanomolar concentration differences of two selected eicosanoids, 5-HETE and 15-HETE, were balanced out by spiking. Culturing U937 cells at these defined conditions indeed resulted in significant proteome alterations indicating HETE-induced PPAR&#x3b3; activation, independently corroborated by HETE-induced formation of peroxisomes observed by high-resolution microscopy. In conclusion, the present data demonstrate that FCS-contained eicosanoids, subject to substantial batch-wise variation, may modulate cellular effector functions in cell culture experiments.

### Keywords
Reproducibility issues, Eicosanoids, Cell metabolism, Macrophages

### Affiliations
Department of Analytical Chemistry, University of Vienna
University of Vienna

### Submitter
Christopher Gerner

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher Gerner
Department of Analytical Chemistry, University of Vienna


