### Accession
PXD010252

### Title
Liver metastatic growth in colorectal cancer depends on PAD4 leading to modification of the extracellular matrix by citrullination

### Description
Colorectal cancer is one of the most frequently occurring malignancies and a major cause of cancer death. Distant metastases in this disease most commonly develop in the liver and are often untreatable.  Here, we show that citrullination of the extracellular matrix (ECM) by cancer cell derived peptidylarginine deiminase 4 (PAD4) is essential for the growth of liver metastases.  Citrullination of proteins, a post-translational conversion of arginine residues to citrulline, is well recognized in rheumatoid arthritis, but largely undocumented in cancer. PAD4, a key enzyme responsible for catalyzing citrullination, is produced by metastatic colorectal cancer cells and found at higher levels in human liver metastases than in normal liver. Functional significance for citrullination in metastatic growth was evident in murine models where inhibition of citrullination, either globally by pharmacologic inhibition of PADs or specifically in colorectal cancer cells by PAD4 knockdown substantially reduced liver metastatic burden. Additionally, citrullination of a key ECM component collagen type I led to greater adhesion and decreased migration of colorectal cancer cells along with increased expression of characteristic epithelial markers, suggesting a role for citrullination in promoting mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition (MET) and liver metastasis. Overall, our study revealed the potential for PAD4-dependant citrullination to drive the progression of liver metastasis. These data indicate that inhibition of citrullination could be exploited to prevent the development of liver metastases in colorectal cancer.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen ECM samples were thawed, then homogenized using the Tissue-Tearor tissue homogenizer (BioSpec Products) at speed 4 or 5 for 25 s. Homogenization was repeated three times; the probe was cleaned with 100% ethanol between samples. The samples were further processed on the high intensity VCX-130 ultrasonic processor (Sonics&Materials) at 4°C with the following settings: 100% amplitude, 2 s on/2 s off, 20 s in total (including offs). The samples were then deglycosylated with 3000-4000 units of PNGase F (P0704; New England BioLabs) and contaminating nucleic acids were removed by adding 1 μL Benzonase® nuclease (E1014; Sigma) for 1 h at 4°C. The samples were then spun down at 18,000 x g for 20 min. The supernatant was discarded, and the pellet was washed in 400 μL of ice cold buffer W (HEPES (pH7.9), MgCl2, KCl, EDTA, Sucrose, Glycerol, and Sodium OrthoVanadate, hereinafter, concentration of each component is not specified by a supplier) of the CNMCS Compartmental Protein Extraction Kit at 4˚C for 5 min. The washed protein extract was spun at 18,000 x g for 20 min. The supernatant was discarded, and the pellet was resuspended in 150 μL of ice cold buffer N (HEPES (pH7.9), MgCl2, NaCl, EDTA, Glycerol, Sodium OrthoVanadate) and incubated at 4°C for 20 min to solubilize nuclear proteins. Protein extract was spun at 18,000 x g for 20 min. The supernatant was discarded, and the pellet was resuspended in 150 μL of ice cold buffer M (HEPES (pH7.9), MgCl2, KCl, EDTA, Sucrose, Glycerol, Sodium deoxycholate, NP-40, Sodium OrthoVanadate) for membrane proteins solubilization. The extracts were then spun down at 18,000 x g for 20 min, and the supernatant was discarded. The remaining pellet was resuspended in 150 μL of pre-warmed buffer CS (Pipes (pH6.8), MgCl2, NaCl, EDTA, Sucrose, SDS, and Sodium OrthoVanadate) and incubated at RT for 20 min to solubilize cytoskeletal proteins. Protein extract was spun at 18,000 x g for 20 min. Finally, the supernatant was withdrawn, and the pellet was resuspended in 150 μL of buffer C, incubated at 4°C for 5 min and then spun for 20 min at 15,000 x g at 4°C. The remaining insoluble pellet consisting of ECM proteins was then flash frozen in liquid nitrogen and kept at -20°C. Biochemical processing of ECM-enriched proteins ECM-enriched samples were solubilized in 8M urea (9U5378; Sigma), 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (09830; Sigma), 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT, 43817; Sigma), pH 7.8, and incubated at 37°C for 30 min. Alkylating agent iodoacetamide (I1149; Sigma) was added to a final concentration of 25 mM and the samples were incubated for 30 min at RT. At this stage, protein concentration was measured using the detergent-compatible protein assay (5000111; Bio-Rad). Protein samples were then precipitated via the methanol/chloroform extraction method, followed by resuspension in 50 μL 8M urea and vortexing. Finally, the urea concentration was reduced to a final concentration of <1M by diluting the reaction mixture with ddH2O. ECM-enriched pellets were digested overnight using trypsin (V5111; Promega), at a ratio of 1:50 enzyme:substrate. The samples were constantly vortexed on a shaker at 37°C. A second aliquot of trypsin was added at a ratio of 1:100 enzyme:substrate, and samples were incubated for an additional 4-6 h at 37°C with shaking.

### Data Protocol
Peak lists containing MS/MS spectra were generated using MSConvert (Proteome Wizard). After that, these lists were searched using Mascot version 2.3 (http://www.matrixscience.com), against the Swiss-Prot protein database containing mouse (16,642 entries as of September 2012) or human (20,306 entries as of June 2014) sequences, with tryptic restriction and mass deviations of 10 parts per million/0.5 daltons in the respective MS modes. Oxidation of methionine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, and other known collagen and proteoglycan modifications were used as variable modifications. Peptide false discovery rate was adjusted to 1%. For label-free quantification of differentially expressed proteins, normalized abundance of each protein was determined by measuring the peak area intensity utilizing the Progenesis QI software (Nonlinear Dynamics). Briefly, protein abundance was calculated from the sum of all unique peptide ion abundances for a specific protein on each run. Normalization of abundance was performed to allow comparisons across different sample runs by the software. Proteins identified by more than one peptide were retained. The normalized peptide intensities for each sample were used to calculate fold change ratios for proteins between sample groups.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Citrullination, Pad4, Liver

### Affiliations
Discovery Proteomics Facility, Oxford
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Roman Fischer

### Lab Head
Dr Roman Fischer
Discovery Proteomics Facility, Oxford


