### Accession
PXD002395

### Title
11 human cell lines -  Comparative proteomic analysis of eleven common cell lines reveals ubiquitous but varying expression of most proteins

### Description
Re-submission of raw data from Geiger T et. al., Comparative proteomic analysis of eleven common cell lines reveals ubiquitous but varying expression of most proteins. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2012 Mar;11(3):M111.014050. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M111.014050. Epub 2012 Jan 25.

### Sample Protocol
cell lines used: A549, GAMG, HEK293, HeLa, HepG2, K562, MCF7, RKO, U2OS, LnCap and Jurkat  LC-MS/MS Experiment Labeling Method  Labelfree Enrichment  no Protease  Trypsin/P Separation  SAX Instrument  Orbitrap Velos with high-field analyzer

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant v1.4.1.2 was used to search the .Raw files. mqpar.xml is attached.

### Publication Abstract
Deep proteomic analysis of mammalian cell lines would yield an inventory of the building blocks of the most commonly used systems in biological research. Mass spectrometry-based proteomics can identify and quantify proteins in a global and unbiased manner and can highlight the cellular processes that are altered between such systems. We analyzed 11 human cell lines using an LTQ-Orbitrap family mass spectrometer with a "high field" Orbitrap mass analyzer with improved resolution and sequencing speed. We identified a total of 11,731 proteins, and on average 10,361 &#xb1; 120 proteins in each cell line. This very high proteome coverage enabled analysis of a broad range of processes and functions. Despite the distinct origins of the cell lines, our quantitative results showed surprisingly high similarity in terms of expressed proteins. Nevertheless, this global similarity of the proteomes did not imply equal expression levels of individual proteins across the 11 cell lines, as we found significant differences in expression levels for an estimated two-third of them. The variability in cellular expression levels was similar for low and high abundance proteins, and even many of the most highly expressed proteins with household roles showed significant differences between cells. Metabolic pathways, which have high redundancy, exhibited variable expression, whereas basic cellular functions such as the basal transcription machinery varied much less. We harness knowledge of these cell line proteomes for the construction of a broad coverage "super-SILAC" quantification standard. Together with the accompanying paper (Schaab, C. MCP 2012, PMID: 22301388) (17) these data can be used to obtain reference expression profiles for proteins of interest both within and across cell line proteomes.

### Keywords
['Human', 'Deep proteome']

### Affiliations
['MDC Berlin', 'MDC Berlin, Berlin, Germany']

### Submitter
['Chris Bielow']

### Lab Head
[{'title': 'Dr', 'affiliation': 'MDC Berlin, Berlin, Germany', 'email': 'stefan.kempa@mdc-berlin.de', 'country': '', 'orcid': '', 'name': 'Stefan Kempa', 'id': '24510100'}]

### SDRF
Characteristics[organism]: ['Homo sapiens']
Characteristics[organism part]: ['not available']
Characteristics[disease]: ['Lung adenocarcinoma' 'not available' 'Glioblastoma'
 'Human papillomavirus-related endocervical adenocarcinoma'
 'Hepatoblastoma' 'Childhood T acute lymphoblastic leukemia'
 'Chronic myelogenous leukemia, BCR-ABL1 positive'
 'Invasive ductal carcinoma, not otherwise specified' 'Colon carcinoma'
 'Prostate carcinoma' 'Osteosarcoma']
characteristics[cell type]: ['epithelial' 'not available' 'epithelial-like' 'lymphoblast']
comment[label]: ['AC=MS:1002038;NT=label free sample']
comment[fractionation method]: ['NT=Strong anion-exchange chromatography (SAX);AC=PRIDE:0000558']
comment[instrument]: ['NT=LTQ Orbitrap Velos;AC=MS:1001742']
comment[separation]: ['AC=PRIDE:0000558;NT=SAX']
comment[modification parameters]: ['NT=Acetyl;AC=UNIMOD:1;PP=Protein N-term;MT=Fixed']
comment[modification parameters].1: ['NT=Oxidation;MT=variable;TA=M;AC=UNIMOD:35']
comment[modification parameters].2: ['NT=Carbamidomethyl;AC=UNIMOD:4;TA=C;MT=Fixed']

