### Accession
PXD012614

### Title
Intra-surgical Protein Layer on Titanium Arthroplasty Explants

### Description
Aseptic loosening in total joint replacement due to insufficient osteointegration is an unsolved problem in orthopaedics.The purpose of our study was to obtain a picture of the initial protein adsorption layer on femoral endoprosthetic surfaces as the key to the initiation of osseointegration.

### Sample Protocol
This paper describes the first study of femoral stem explants from patients for proteome analysis of the primary protein layer. After 2 min. in situ the stems were explanted and frozen in liquid nitrogen. Proteins were eluted under reducing conditions and analyzed by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
RAW mass spectrometry data were processed with MaxQuant (version 1.6.0.16).

### Publication Abstract
Mesenchymal progenitor cells (MSCs) are promising for cell-based regeneration therapies. In elderly patients a reduced proliferation of MSCs has been described. Platelet-rich plasma (PRP) contains important factors necessary for osteogenic regeneration. The aim of this study was to find out whether the age-induced decrease in cell proliferation can be compensated by the use of supernatant of centrifuged, activated PRP (tPR). MSCs of donors of three age groups (A: young, 14-16 years, B: middle age, 36-46 years, C: older, 74-83 years) were expanded with 20% FCS alone or supplemented with thrombin-activated platelet releasate (tPR) (1%, 2.5%, and 5%) or platelet-poor plasma (PPP 5%). Cell proliferation and differentiation was measured on days 0, 3, and 7. Proliferation increased significantly in groups A and B with tPR, and non-significantly in group C. The generation times of MSCs of elderly patients were significantly increased in group C compared to groups A and B. Addition of 1% or 2.5% tPR significantly reduced population doubling times of all age groups. Adding tPR stimulates the proliferation rate of MSCs independent of donor age. For juvenile and middle-aged patients this influence was significant. Cells differentiation into osteoblasts was not influenced by addition of tPR.

### Keywords
Osteointegration, Proteomics, Protein adsorption, Total hip arthroplasty

### Affiliations
Department of Orthopaedics & Trauma Surgery, University of Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany
Department of Orthopedics and Trauma Surgery  University of Duisburg-Essen

### Submitter
Monika Herten

### Lab Head
Dr Univ.-Prof. Dr. med. Marcus Jäger
Department of Orthopedics and Trauma Surgery  University of Duisburg-Essen


