### Accession
PXD002529

### Title
Milk bottom-up proteomics: method optimisation.

### Description
Milk is a complex fluid whose proteome displays a diverse set of proteins of high abundance such as caseins and medium to low abundance whey proteins such as ß-lactoglobulin, lactoferrin, immunoglobulins, glycoproteins, peptide hormones and enzymes. A sample preparation method that enables high reproducibility and throughput is key in reliably identifying proteins present or proteins responding to conditions such as a diet, health or genetics. Using skim milk samples from Jersey and Holstein cows, we compared three extraction procedures which have not previously been applied to samples of cows’ milk. Method A (urea) involved a simple dilution of the milk in a urea-based buffer, method B (TCA/acetone) involved a TCA/acetone precipitation and method C (methanol/chloroform) involved a tri-phasic partition method in chloroform/methanol solution. Protein assays, SDS-PAGE profiling, and trypsin digestion followed by nanoHPLC-electrospray ionisation-tandem mass spectrometry (nLC-ESI-MS/MS) analyses were performed to assess their efficiency. Replicates were used at each analytical step (extraction, digestion, injection) to assess reproducibility. Overall 186 unique accessions, major and minor proteins, were identified with a combination of methods. Method C (methanol/chloroform) yielded the best resolved SDS-patterns and highest protein recovery rates, method A (urea) yielded the greatest number of accessions, and, of the three procedures, method B (TCA/acetone) was the least compatible of all with a wide range of downstream analytical procedures. Our results also highlighted breed differences between the proteins in milk of Jersey and Holstein cows.

### Sample Protocol
The tryptic digests were desalted using solid phase extraction (SPE) cartridges (Sep-Pak C18 1cc Vac Cartridge, 50 mg sorbent, 55-105 μm particle size, 1 mL, Waters) by gravity as follows. The SPE cartridges were conditioned by running 1 mL of 80% acetonitrile (ACN):0.1% FA in H2O (v:v:v) and then washed using 1 mL of 0.1% FA in H2O (v:v). The tryptic digests were loaded onto the cartridges and washed using 1 mL of 0.1% FA in H2O (v:v). Peptides were eluted using 1 mL of 80% ACN:0.1% FA in H2O (v:v:v) into a fresh 1.5 mL tube. The eluent’s volume (1.00 mL) was reduced to 0.18 mL using a Speedvac Concentrator without heat, thereby ensuring the complete evaporation of the ACN. Undigested milk proteins were filtered out using ultrafiltration (UF) devices (MWCO 30kD, 0.5mL, Amicon Ultra-0.5 centrifugal filter device, Millipore). The filtrates were collected and the peptide concentration was assessed using the Microplate BCA protein assay kit (Pierce), as per the manufacturer’s instructions albeit excluding the compatibility reagent step. An aliquot corresponding to 10 μg of peptide digest was diluted with 0.1% FA in H2O (v:v) to reach a final volume of 100 μL (0.1 μg/μL). The diluted peptide mixture was transferred into a 100 μL glass insert placed into a glass vial. The injection order was randomised to minimise systematic error including chromatographic drift or suppression effects. Chromatographic separation of the tryptic peptides was performed by reverse phase (RP) using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano System (Dionex). A 1 μL aliquot (0.1 μg peptide) was loaded using a full loop injection mode onto a trap column (Acclaim PepMap100, 75 μm x 2 cm, C18 3 μm 100 Å, Dionex) at a 3 μL/min flow rate and switched onto a separation column (Acclaim PepMap100, 75 μm x 15 cm, C18 2 μm 100 Å, Dionex) at a 0.4 μL/min flow rate after 3 min. The column oven was set at 30C. Mobile phases for chromatographic elution were 0.1% FA in H2O (v:v) (phase A) and 0.1% FA in ACN (v:v) (phase B). UV trace was recorded at 215 nm for the whole duration of the nLC run. A linear gradient from 3% to 40% of ACN in 35 min was applied. Then ACN content was brought to 90% in 2 min and held constant for 5 min to wash the separation column. Finally, the ACN concentration was lowered to 3% over 0.1 min and the column re-equilibrated for 5 min. On-line with the nLC system, peptides were analysed using an Orbitrap Velos hybrid ion trap-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Ionization was carried out in the positive ion mode using a nanospray source. The electrospray voltage was set at 2.2 kV, and the heated capillary was set at 280C. Full MS scans were acquired in the Orbitrap FT mass analyser over a normal range of 300-2000 m/z with 60,000 resolution in profile mode. MS/MS spectra were acquired in data-dependent mode. The 20 most intense peaks with charge state ≥ 2 and a minimum signal threshold of 10,000 were fragmented in the linear ion trap using collision-induced dissociation (CID) with a normalised collision energy of 35 %, 0.25 activation Q and activation time of 10 msec. The precursor isolation width was 2 m/z. Dynamic exclusion was enabled, and peaks selected for fragmentation more than once within 10 sec were excluded from selection for 30 sec. Blanks (1 μL of mobile phase A) were injected in between each peptide digest and analysed over a 20 min nLC run to further clean the C18 separation column, and minimise carry-over.

### Data Protocol
Database searching of the MS .RAW files was performed in Proteome Discoverer 1.4 with MASCOT 2.4.1 against both the non-redundant (nr) NCBI database with taxonomy as mammalia (2,578,153 entries, released on 7 November 2014, 68th release) and the IPI bovine database (23,841 entries, last modified on 4 April 2014, http://www.uniprot.org/proteomes). The database searching parameters specified trypsin as the digestion enzyme and allowed up to two missed cleavages. The precursor mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm, and fragment mass tolerance set at 0.5 Da. Carbamidomethylation (C) was set as a static modification. Oxidation (M), phosphorylation (STY), conversion from Gln to pyro-Glu (N-term Q) and Glu to pyro-Glu (N-term E), and deamination (NQ) were set as dynamic modifications. The target decoy PSM validator was used to estimate false discovery rates (FDR). At the peptide level, peptide confidence value set at high was used to filter the peptide identification, and the corresponding FDR on peptide level was less than 1 %. At the protein level, protein grouping was enabled.

### Publication Abstract
Milk is a complex fluid whose proteome displays a diverse set of proteins of high abundance such as caseins and medium to low abundance whey proteins such as &#xdf;-lactoglobulin, lactoferrin, immunoglobulins, glycoproteins, peptide hormones, and enzymes. A sample preparation method that enables high reproducibility and throughput is key in reliably identifying proteins present or proteins responding to conditions such as a diet, health or genetics. Using skim milk samples from Jersey and Holstein-Friesian cows, we compared three extraction procedures which have not previously been applied to samples of cows' milk. Method A (urea) involved a simple dilution of the milk in a urea-based buffer, method B (TCA/acetone) involved a trichloroacetic acid (TCA)/acetone precipitation, and method C (methanol/chloroform) involved a tri-phasic partition method in chloroform/methanol solution. Protein assays, SDS-PAGE profiling, and trypsin digestion followed by nanoHPLC-electrospray ionization-tandem mass spectrometry (nLC-ESI-MS/MS) analyses were performed to assess their efficiency. Replicates were used at each analytical step (extraction, digestion, injection) to assess reproducibility. Mass spectrometry (MS) data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD002529. Overall 186 unique accessions, major and minor proteins, were identified with a combination of methods. Method C (methanol/chloroform) yielded the best resolved SDS-patterns and highest protein recovery rates, method A (urea) yielded the greatest number of accessions, and, of the three procedures, method B (TCA/acetone) was the least compatible of all with a wide range of downstream analytical procedures. Our results also highlighted breed differences between the proteins in milk of Jersey and Holstein-Friesian cows.

### Keywords
Trypsin digestion, Replicates., Jersey and holstein cow milk, Proteome, Nlc-esi-ms

### Affiliations
AgriBio centre, Department of Economic Development, government of Victoria, Australia
Department of Economic Development

### Submitter
Delphine Vincent

### Lab Head
Dr Delphine Vincent
AgriBio centre, Department of Economic Development, government of Victoria, Australia


