### Accession
PXD008439

### Title
Changes in the proteome of mediterranean sea urchin Paracentrotus lividus due to activation of its immune system

### Description
Our aim was to study the immune system of a Mediterranean sea urchin Paracentrotus lividus. Using a label free quantitative mass spectrometry  approach we analyzed how bacterial lipopolysaccharide (LPS) is able to modulate the coelomocytes proteome and effect its cellular pathways such as cytoskeleton reorganization, stress and energetic homeostasis.

### Sample Protocol
Adult individuals of  P. lividus received injections, into the coelomic  cavity through the peristomial membrane, of lipopolysaccharide (LPS) from Escherichia coli. Control individuals were injected with artificial coelomic fluid alone. Coelomic fluid was withdrawn by syringe and after  centrifugation the pellet containing the sea urchin immune cells were aliquoted in tubes. Cells were lysed in RIPA buffer  and after solvent  exchange digested in solution using trypsin. Peptides were analyzed using a Maxis II ETD Q-TOF (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) coupled to an  Ultimate 3000 nanoRSLC system (Dionex,Sunnyvale, CA, USA) via CaptiveSpray nanoBooster ion source.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified using the in-house Mascot server v.2.5 (Matrix Science, London, UK) by searching against Strongylocentrotus purpuratus protein sequences (29720 entries) The following search parameters were set: trypsin enzyme, max. 2 missed cleavages,carbamidomethylation as fixed modification, methionine oxidation and  deamidation (N,Q) as variable  modifications. Precursor tolerance was set to 7  ppm, while the MS/MS tolerance was 0.05 Da. Label free quantification was  performed using MaxQuant software version 1.5.3.30 (Cox and Mann, 2008) on a sequence database created using the proteins identified from the Mascot search.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Shotgun proteomic analysis, Antimicrobial histones, Cytoskeleton reorganization, Endocytosis, Paracentrotus lividus, Iimmune response, Mass spectrometry, Phagocytosis

### Affiliations
MS Proteomics Research Group Research Centre for Natural Sciences, Hungarian Academy of Sciences H-1117, Budapest, Magyar tudósok körútja 2., Hungary
RCNS HAS, MS Proteomics Research Group

### Submitter
Lilla Turiák

### Lab Head
Dr László Drahos
MS Proteomics Research Group Research Centre for Natural Sciences, Hungarian Academy of Sciences H-1117, Budapest, Magyar tudósok körútja 2., Hungary


