### Accession
PXD000202

### Title
Archael ubiquitin-like SAMP3 is isopeptide-linked to Proteins by an UbaA-dependent mechanism

### Description
FLAG-SAMP3ylated proteins were immunoprecipitated from Haloferax volcanii using anti-FLAG affinity agarose and separated using SDS-PAGE. The Coomassie-stained IP-bands represented FLAG-SAMP3ylated proteins harvested from the wild type and also from the ubaA mutant as negative control. The Coomassie-lanes from the IP samples were cut into 10 fractions and in-gel tryptic digested and the tryptic peptides measured using Orbitrap Velos LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
All liquid cultures were grown with rotary shaking at 200 rpm. E. coli strains were grown at 37 °C in Luria-Bertani medium. Hfx. volcanii strains were grown at 42 °C in either rich or minimal media as previously described. Rich media included yeast-peptone-casamino acids (YPC) and ATCC 974 complex medium. In minimal media, carbon sources were glycerol (G), glucose (Glu), and lactate (L) at 20 mm final concentration as indicated. Minimal media was also supplemented with 25 mm alanine (and ammonium chloride was excluded), 1x YPC nutrients (0.5% (w/v) yeast extract, 0.1% (w/v) peptone, and 0.1% (w/v) casamino acids), 15–100 mm dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), 15 mm dimethyl formamide (DMF), 15 mm trimethylamine N-oxide (TMAO), and 15–75 mm potassium nitrate (KNO3). Ampicillin (0.1 mg · ml−1), novobiocin (0.1 μg · ml−1), and agar (1.5% (w/v)) were included as needed. Uracil was dissolved to 50 mg · ml−1 in 100% (v/v) DMSO or 500 mm NaOH and supplemented to a final concentration of 50 μg · ml−1 in growth medium. Uracil solutions, TMAO, DMF, and DMSO were sterilized by passage through a 0.2-μm nylon filter (Fisher) prior to their addition to sterile medium. Potassium nitrate was prepared as a 1 m stock and autoclaved prior to addition to sterile medium. Minimal medium components were added to YPC medium at their respective final concentrations where indicated. To monitor SAMP3 conjugation in cell lysate, cells were freshly inoculated from −80 °C glycerol stocks onto agar plates with ATCC974 complex medium and novobiocin. Cells from freshly inoculated plates were inoculated into 13 × 100 mm culture tubes containing 4 ml of medium and grown to stationary phase (A600 of 1.5 to 3.5). For immunoprecipitation experiments, cells from freshly streaked plates were either directly inoculated into 500-ml Erlenmeyer flasks containing 100 to 200 ml of medium or inoculated into 13 × 100 mm culture tubes (4 ml), grown overnight, and subcultured into 100 to 200 ml of medium in 500-ml Erlenmeyer flasks using 1% (v/v) inoculum. To monitor the effect of velcade (bortezomib) (Fisher) on SAMP conjugation, isolated colonies of the Hfx. volcanii strains were inoculated into 4 ml of YPC medium (13 × 100 mm culture tubes) and grown to log phase. Cells were subcultured into 4 ml of fresh YPC medium and again grown to log phase (A600 0.5 to 0.7). Velcade (7.7 μl of 52 mm velcade stock dissolved in ≥99.8% (w/v) DMF) and DMF solvent alone (7.7 μl DMF at 99.8% (w/v)) were added to log-phase cells (final concentrations at 100 μm velcade and 25 mm DMF). Cultures were incubated with shaking (200 rpm) at 42 °C for 24 h prior to harvest for immunoblot analysis.

### Data Protocol
The Sequest search was carried out considering a parent ion mass tolerance of 5 ppm and a fragment ion mass tolerance of 1.00 Da. Up to two tryptic miscleavages were allowed. Methionine oxidation (+15.994915 Da), cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57.021464 Da), and N6-glycylglycyl-l-lysine modifications (K+114.042927 Da) were set as variable modifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability by the Peptide Prophet algorithm (47) with Scaffold delta-mass correction. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability and contained at least two identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (48). Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters. Proteins were also identified by at least two peptides with the application of a stringent SEQUEST filter. Sequest identifications required at least ΔCn scores of greater than 0.10 and XCorr scores of greater than 2.2, 3.3, and 3.75 for doubly, triply, and quadruply charged peptides. The false discovery rate was 1% to 1.8% for peptide identifications with no false positive proteins detected and was calculated using the Protein and Peptide Prophet algorithms according to Scaffold_4_0_4.

### Publication Abstract
SAMP1 and SAMP2 are ubiquitin-like proteins that function as protein modifiers and are required for the production of sulfur-containing biomolecules in the archaeon Haloferax volcanii. Here we report a novel small archaeal modifier protein (named SAMP3) with a &#x3b2;-grasp fold and C-terminal diglycine motif characteristic of ubiquitin that is functional in protein conjugation in Hfx. volcanii. SAMP3 conjugates were dependent on the ubiquitin-activating E1 enzyme homolog of archaea (UbaA) for synthesis and were cleaved by the JAMM/MPN+ domain metalloprotease HvJAMM1. Twenty-three proteins (28 lysine residues) were found to be isopeptide-linked to the C-terminal carboxylate of SAMP3, and 331 proteins were reproducibly found associated with SAMP3 in a UbaA-dependent manner based on tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) analysis. The molybdopterin (MPT) synthase large subunit homolog MoaE, found samp3ylated at conserved active site lysine residues in MS/MS analysis, was also shown to be covalently bound to SAMP3 by immunoprecipitation and tandem affinity purifications. HvJAMM1 was demonstrated to catalyze the cleavage of SAMP3 from MoaE, suggesting a mechanism of controlling MPT synthase activity. The levels of samp3ylated proteins and samp3 transcripts were found to be increased by the addition of dimethyl sulfoxide to aerobically growing cells. Thus, we propose a model in which samp3ylation is covalent and reversible and controls the activity of enzymes such as MPT synthase. Sampylation of MPT synthase may govern the levels of molybdenum cofactor available and thus facilitate the scavenging of oxygen prior to the transition to respiration with molybdenum-cofactor-containing terminal reductases that use alternative electron acceptors such as dimethyl sulfoxide. Overall, our study of SAMP3 provides new insight into the diversity of functional ubiquitin-like protein modifiers and the network of ubiquitin-like protein targets in Archaea.

### Keywords
Post-translational modification, Haloferax volcanii, Samp3, Ubiquitin-like modifier

### Affiliations
Instiute for Microbiology
Institute for Microbiology

### Submitter
Haike Antelmann

### Lab Head
Dr Haike Antelmann
Instiute for Microbiology


