### Accession
PXD036352

### Title
Whole cellular and secreted proteins of C. diphtheriae ISS3319 grown in rich medium

### Description
Validation of essential proteins by using mass spectrometry based proteomics of C. diphtheriae ISS3319 identified in a Tn5 approach. For this purpose, a theoretical proteome was conducted from sequencing data. Bacteria were grown in rich medium and proteins from the whole cell and secreted proteins were extracted and analyzed.

### Sample Protocol
Mass spectrometric analyses were carried out following a previously published protocol (Möller et al. 2021). The separation of 10 µg of peptides were carried out by a nanoflow Ultimate 3000 HPLC (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) using an EASY-Spray column (Thermo Fisher Scientific; C18 with 2 µm particle size, 50 cm × 75 µm) with a (flow rate of 200 nL min−1 and increasing acetonitrile concentrations over 120 min. The total method duration including equilibration and column wash was set to 160 min. Triplicates of all samples were analyzed using an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) with following settings: spray voltage 2000 V, transfer tube temperature 275 °C ◦C, scan range for the MS 1 detection in the Orbitrap 300–2000 (m/z), 50 ms maximum injection time, automatic gain control (AGC) target of 4 * 106 and Orbitrap resolution of 120.000 (Möller et al. 2021). For collision-induced dissociation with a collision energy of 35%, the ten most intense ions were selected and for ion trap detection a maximum injection time of 250 ms and an AGC target of 1 * 103 was applied.

### Data Protocol
Resulting raw data files were analyzed using the Proteome Discoverer 1.4 program package (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). A UniProt database was not available for the ISS 3319 strain but does exist for the C. diphtheriae reference strain NCTC 13129 (accession BX248353), therefore, we compared the annotated protein CDSs of ISS 3319 with the annotations of NCTC 13129 using blastp with the following criteria: Evalue ≤1e-5, % identity ≥30 and % coverage ≥30. (S. Table 8). As described by Schäfer and co-workers (Schäfer et al. 2017), the theoretical masses of peptides were generated with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Due to reduction and alkylation of proteins a carbamidomethylation on cysteine was set as fixed modification. An oxidation of methionine was set as dynamic modification. To compare the measured spectra of product ions, the mass tolerance for survey scans was set to 10 ppm and 0.6 Da for fragment mass measurements. False discovery rate (FDR) was set on 1% for protein identification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Essential proteins, Microbial proteomics, Diphtheria

### Affiliations
FAU Erlangen
Biology, Microbiology

### Submitter
Jens Möller

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Burkovski
Biology, Microbiology


