### Accession
PXD010840

### Title
Proteomic analysis of small and large EVs from DKs8 cells

### Description
We used iTRAQ-quantitative proteomics analysis to identify protein cargos that may contribute to different functions of exosome-enriched small extracellular vesicles (EVs) and MV-enriched large EVs derived from a colorectral cancer cell line, DKs8.

### Sample Protocol
Vesicle lysates were digested and labeled with iTRAQ reagents, and quantitative analyses were performed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were searched against a database containing the homo sapiens subset of the UniprotKB database using Spectrum Mill. Results were filtered as described in the manuscript methods.

### Publication Abstract
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are important mediators of cell-cell communication due to their cargo content of proteins, lipids, and RNAs. We previously reported that small EVs (SEVs) called exosomes promote directed and random cell motility, invasion, and serum-independent growth. In contrast, larger EVs (LEVs) were not active in those assays, but might have unique functional properties. In order to identify protein cargos that may contribute to different functions of SEVs and LEVs, we used isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ)-liquid chromatography (LC) tandem mass spectrometry (MS) on EVs isolated from a colon cancer cell line. Bioinformatics analyses revealed that SEVs are enriched in proteins associated with cell-cell junctions, cell-matrix adhesion, exosome biogenesis machinery, and various signaling pathways. In contrast, LEVs are enriched in proteins associated with ribosome and RNA biogenesis, processing, and metabolism. Western blot analysis of EVs purified from two different cancer cell types confirmed the enrichment of cell-matrix and cell-cell adhesion proteins in SEVs. Consistent with those data, we found that cells exhibit enhanced adhesion to surfaces coated with SEVs compared to an equal protein concentration of LEVs. These data suggest that a major function of SEVs is to promote cellular adhesion.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Extracellular vesicles, Microvesicles, Exosomes, Itraq

### Affiliations
Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Department of Cell and Developmental Biology
Vanderbilt University Cell and Developmental Biology Dept

### Submitter
Lizandra Jimenez

### Lab Head
Dr Lizandra Jimenez
Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Department of Cell and Developmental Biology


