### Accession
PXD017703

### Title
Parallel accumulation – serial fragmentation combined with data-independent acquisition (diaPASEF)

### Description
Data independent acquisition modes isolate and concurrently fragment populations of different precursors by cycling through segments of a predefined precursor m/z range. Although these selection windows collectively cover the entire m/z range, overall only a few percent of all incoming ions in each window are sampled. Making use of the correlation of molecular weight and ion mobility in a trapped ion mobility device (timsTOF Pro), we here devise a novel scan mode that samples up to 100% of the peptide precursor ion current in m/z and mobility windows. We extend an established targeted data extraction workflow by including the ion mobility dimension for both signal extraction and scoring, thereby increasing the specificity for precursor identification. Data acquired from whole proteome digests and mixed organism samples demonstrate deep proteome coverage and a very high degree of reproducibility as well as quantitative accuracy, even from 10 ng sample amounts.

### Sample Protocol
The human cancer cell line (HeLa S3, ATCC) was cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium with 10% fetal bovine serum, 20 mM glutamine and 1% penicillin-streptomycin. Cells were collected by centrifugation, washed with phosphate-buffered saline, flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C. Cell lysis, reduction and alkylation was performed in lysis buffer with chloroacetamide (PreOmics) following our previously published protocol34. Briefly, the cell suspension was heated to 95°C for 10 min and subsequently sonificated to further disrupt cells and shear nucleic acids. Proteins were enzymatically cleaved overnight by adding equal amounts of LysC and trypsin in a 1:100 (wt/wt) enzyme:protein ratio. De-salting and purification was performed according to the PreOmics iST protocol on a styrendivinylbenzene reversed-phase sulfonate (SDB-RPS) sorbent. Purified peptides were vacuum-centrifuged to dryness and reconstituted in double-distilled water with 2 vol.-% acetonitrile (ACN) and 0.1 vol.-% trifluoroacetic acids (TFA) for single run LC-MS analysis or fractionation.  To evaluate the quantitative accuracy of diaPASEF, we performed a two-proteome experiment with HeLa and yeast. Purified and predigested yeast standard was purchased from Promega (Madison, USA) and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid (FA). Whole HeLa cell pellets were purchased from CIL Biotech (Mons, Belgium). Cell lysis was performed using trifluoroethanol (TFE)35. Briefly, the cell suspension was kept 10 minutes on ice and then incubated at 56°C for 20 min. We used 200 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) to reduce proteins at 90°C for 20 min and 200mM iodoacetamide (IAA) to alkylate free cysteine residues (90 min at room temperature).  Proteins were enzymatically cleaved overnight by adding trypsin in a 1:100 (wt/wt) enzyme:protein ratio. De-salting and purification was done using a solid phase extraction cartridge (Empore C18 SPE cartridge, Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, USA) by diluting and washing protein digest with 0.1% FA  and subsequent elution with 50% (w/w) ACN in 0.1% FA. Purified and dried peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% FA. For the two-proteome experiment, the purified peptides from HeLa and yeast were combined as following: Sample A was composed of 200 ng human and 45 ng yeast proteins per LC-MS injection, and sample B of 200 ng human and 15 ng yeast proteins per LC-MS injection.  Nanoflow reversed-phase chromatography was performed on an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated within 120 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min on a 50 cm x 75 µm column with a laser-pulled electrospray emitter packed with 1.9 µm ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ particles (Dr. Maisch). Mobile phases A and B were water with 0.1 vol.-% formic acid and 80/20/0.1 vol.-% ACN/water/formic acid. The %B was linearly increased from 5 to 30% within 95 min, followed by an increase to 60% within 5 min and a further increase to 95% before re-equilibration. For the two-proteome experiment, we employed a nanoElute liquid chromatography system (Bruker Daltonics). Peptides were separated within 120 min at a flow rate of 400 nL/min on a commercially available reversed-phase C18 column with an integrated CaptiveSpray Emitter (25 cm x 75µm, 1.6 µm, IonOpticks, Australia). Mobile phases A and B were with 0.1 vol.-% formic acid in water and 0.1% formic acid in ACN. The fraction of B was linearly increased from 2 to 25% within 90 min, followed by an increase to 35% within 10 min and a further increase to 80% before re-equilibration. LC was coupled online to a hybrid TIMS quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometer (Bruker timsTOF Pro) via a CaptiveSpray nano-electrospray ion source. A detailed description of the instrument is available in ref. 20. The dual TIMS analyzer was operated at a fixed duty cycle close to 100% using equal accumulation and ramp times of 100 ms each.  To perform data-independent acquisition, we extended the instrument control software to define quadrupole isolation windows as a function of the TIMS scan time (diaPASEF). The instrument control electronics were modified to allow seamless and synchronous ramping of all applied voltages. We tested multiple schemes for data-independent precursor windows and placement in the m/z-ion mobility plane and defined up to 8 windows for single 100 ms TIMS scans as detailed in the main text. Acquisition schemes for the three diaPASEF methods used herein are shown in Supplementary Figs. 1-3. In both scan modes, the collision energy was ramped linearly as a function of the mobility from 59 eV at 1/K0=1.6 Vs cm-2 to 20 eV at 1/K0=0.6 Vs cm-2.

### Data Protocol
To analyze diaPASEF data, we developed an ion mobility DIA analysis kit (Mobi-DIK) that extracts fragment ion traces from the four-dimensional data space as detailed in the main text. Raw data were automatically re-calibrated using curated reference values in m/z, retention time and ion mobility dimensions (387 peptides for linear and 3,184 peptides for non-linear alignment). We applied an outlier detection in each dimension before calculating the final fit function to increase robustness. Peak picking and sub-sequent scoring functionalities in the Mobi-DIK software build on OpenSWATH23 modules. For diaPASEF, we extended these modules to also take into account the additional ion mobility dimension. OpenSWATH (Revision: e0b987a) was run with following parameters: min_coverage = 0.1, RTNormalization:alignmentMethod = lowess, RTNormalization:lowess:span = 0.01, Scoring:TransitionGroupPicker:PeakPickerMRM:sgolay_frame_length = 11, Scoring:stop_report_after_feature = 5, rt_extraction_window = 250, Scoring:Scores:use_ion_mobility_scores, mz_correction_function = quadratic_regression_delta_ppm, use_ms1_traces, mz_extraction_window = 25, mz_extraction_window_unit = ppm, mz_extraction_window_ms1 = 25, mz_extraction_window_ms1_unit = ppm, irt_mz_extraction_window_unit = ppm, irt_mz_extraction_window = 40, Calibration:ms1_im_calibration, ion_mobility_window = 0.06, irt_im_extraction_window = 99, RTNormalization:NrRTBins = 8, RTNormalization:MinBinsFilled = 4. All other parameters were set to default values. PyProphet was used to train an XGBoost classifier for target-decoy separation by first creating one concatenated and sub-sampled OpenSwath output for each set of three replicate injections of the same acquisition strategy and sample amount. The classifier was subsequently applied for scoring all samples, controlling the FDRs <1% at the peak group level per sample and at both global peptide and global protein level. In the analysis of the two-proteome experiment, we set the peak group level FDR to <0.05 to perform TRIC37 alignment while controlling the FDRs <1% at the global peptide and global protein level. In case of two overlapping diaPASEF windows, the analysis was performed separately for the individual windows and for FDR estimations, the highest scoring peak group was selected. Protein abundances were estimated using an R implementation of the MaxLFQ38 algorithm for DIA termed iq (version 1.9) with default parameters39. Potential contaminants were excluded from further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Data-independent acquisition modes isolate and concurrently fragment populations of different precursors by cycling through segments of a predefined precursor m/z range. Although these selection windows collectively cover the entire m/z range, overall, only a few per cent of all incoming ions are isolated for mass analysis. Here, we make use of the correlation of molecular weight and ion mobility in a trapped ion mobility device (timsTOF Pro) to devise a scan mode that samples up to 100% of the peptide precursor ion current in m/z and mobility windows. We extend an established targeted data extraction workflow by inclusion of the ion mobility dimension for both signal extraction and scoring and thereby increase the specificity for precursor identification. Data acquired from whole proteome digests and mixed organism samples demonstrate deep proteome coverage and a high degree of reproducibility as well as quantitative accuracy, even from 10&#x2009;ng sample amounts.

### Keywords
Ion mobility, Pasef, Technical, Tims, Dia

### Affiliations
Proteomics
Proteomics and Signal Transduction Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry Germany

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Proteomics and Signal Transduction Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry Germany


