### Accession
PXD007734

### Title
Protein analysis from mandibular glands of termites

### Description
a. After collection, live termites were brought to geneOmbio Technologies Central Processing Laboratory under controlled room temperature (25.9C, 72% RH) until dissection was made. The termites selected for analysis were collected from Pune region (18°31′13″N 73°51′24″E) from the state of Maharashtra, India. These were identified as Hypotermes xenotermitis based on mitochondrial COI gene sequencing. b. Based on the morphological features the insects were segregated into two groups (a) workers (b) soldiers c. Ten termites from each group were anaesthetized on ice and immediately dissected for isolation of mandibular glands (circled) using sterile scalpel, blade and petri plate. d. The glands were transferred in two milliliter sterile Tris HCl buffer (pH 7.0) containing 0.1 M NaCl for SDS-PAGE analysis. Duplicate samples were collected for each workers and soldiers. Hence total four protein samples were prepared. e. The sample was homogenized with a teflon pestle homogenizer and stored at -20 C till use.

### Sample Protocol
2. SDS PAGE Analysis a. SDS PAGE was used to compare proteinaceous products between workers and soldiers of a given species. b. The protein homogenized extracts prepared in earlier steps were clarified by centrifugation (13,000 g, 10 min, 4C) and the supernatants were stored at -20C. Aliquots of the extracts were separated by SDS PAGE. c. Protein estimation was performed using Qubit Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) on Qubit 1.0 fluorometer. Following are the protein concentrations  Sample  Concentration of protein W1 3.2 mg/mL S1 2.9 mg/mL W2 2.8 mg/mL S2 3.1 mg/mL   d. We obtain good denaturation by preparing a sample having final concentration of 2 mg/ml or more protein with 1% SDS, 10% glycerol, 10 mM Tris-Cl, pH 6.8, 1 mM ethylene diamine tetraacetic acid (EDTA), a reducing agent such as dithiothreitol (DTT) or 2-mercaptoethanol, and a pinch of bromophenol blue to serve as a tracking dye (~0.05 mg/ml). e. A 2x concentrate of sample buffer consisting of 2% SDS, 20% glycerol, 20 mM Tris-Cl, pH 6.8, 2 mM ethylene diamine tetraacetic acid (EDTA), 160 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), and 0.1 mg/ml bromphenol blue dye was prepared.f. The SDS-PAGE was performed on 4-12% Bis Tris protein gels under reducing conditions, and the proteins were stained by Coomassie Brilliant Blue.

### Data Protocol
3. In-gel digestion of selected bands a. Excision of band: After comprehensive analysis of gel images candidate proteins are selected.  The spots of interest are excised for further processing. Spot excision is done using sterile scalpel under sterile dust-free environment and kept in sterile microcentifuge tubes. b. Stain removal: Stain removal is essential prior to mass spectrometric analysis. Immediately after spot picking, excised gels are washed with a mixture of bicarbonate buffer and acetonitrile for removal of the staining agent. ACN reduces the hydrophobic interaction between protein and the stain, while the ionic solution decreases the ionic interaction between negatively charged dye and positively charged protein. c. Reduction and alkylation: After stain removal, the next steps include reduction and alkylation of the protein residues to denature the protein into its primary structure. Treatment of the protein residues with DTT breaks the disulfide bonds completely. However, reformation of disulfide bonds may occur and to prevent that IAA, an alkylating agent, is used. It adds acetoamide group to the sulfhydral group and prevents the disulfide bond formation. d. Trypsin digestion: Prior to MS identification, proteins are digested to generate peptides. Several proteolytic enzymes are available. Chymotrypsin, trypsin, pepsin are some of the enzymes used for proteolysis. CNBr is one of the chemical agents that cleave the peptide bond at Methionine residue. Trypsin is most widely used proteolytic enzyme used for protein digestion prior to MS analysis. It breaks the peptide bond at carboxyl terminal of basic amino acids such as arginine and lysine. e. Excision of digested proteins: After overnight incubation, peptides generated through proteolytic digestion are extracted using extraction buffer containing 0.1% FA/TFA in 50% ACN solution. Efficient extraction process is essential to ensure the release of peptides from gel-matrix to solution, which is further subjected to mass spectrometric analysis.    4. NanoLC-MS/MS: Protein Identification For Protein Mixture  a. NanoLC-MS/MS is a powerful technique used for many applications which has very high sensitivity and specificity. Our experiment was conducted for protein identification of protein from 1D gel band.  b. For Moderate to high complexity samples- Nano-LCMSM coupled with protein fractionation is advantageous for protein mixtures in identification of more interesting or less abundant proteins in your sample.  Make Agilent Model  6450 Accurate mass QTOF MS Polarity Positive Vcap 1920 V Fragmentor 170 Gas temp 250°C Gas flow 5 L/min Source HPLC-CHIP (ESI) Mass range (m/z) 280-1700 Scan rate 8 Hz (MS). 3 Hz (MS/MS) Nano LC Model Analytical Pump G1377A  Cap Pump G1376A         Flow rate Analytical pump:            0.3 µL/min Cap pump:                       0.75 µL/min               Mobile phase A: Water (0.1 % Formic acid) B: Acetonitrile : Water (0.1% Formic acid)  90: 10  Chip (column) Agilent G4240-62030  Chip 360nl trap 150umx75mm 5um C18   Gradient  Time (min) %A %B 0 97 3 90 60 40 95 10 90 96 10 90 100 97 3 110 97 3  Total run time: 110 min Post run time: 3 min Injection volume 2.0 µL Data acquisition software Agilent Masshunter Data Acquisition software Data analysis software Agilent Masshunter Qualitative Analysis version 6.0.633 Identification criteria Mass accuracy within 10 ppm and isotopic distribution  Data analysis software parameter  Software: Morpheus (revision 142)   Parameters Unknown Precursor Charge State Range:  +2..+11 Absolute MS/MS Intensity Threshold:  disabled Relative MS/MS Intensity Threshold:  disabled Maximum Number of MS/MS Peaks:   1000 Assign Charge States:    true De-isotope:      false Protein FASTA Database:    termite and Hypotermes.fasta Create Target–Decoy Database On The Fly: true Protease:      trypsin Maximum Missed Cleavages:    4 Initiator Methionine Behavior:   variable

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Zootermosis, Mandibular gland, Proteome

### Affiliations
geneOmbio Technologies Private Limited
Head, Department of Life Sciences, Mumbai University

### Submitter
Yashwant Chavan

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Bhaskar Jadhav
Head, Department of Life Sciences, Mumbai University


