### Accession
PXD011265

### Title
sucrose-induced interaction of SIRK1 and QSK1

### Description
In this project, we want to search sucrose-induced interaction partners for LRR-receptor kinases SIRK1 and QSK1.

### Sample Protocol
Pull-downs of GFP-tagged SIRK1 and SAK1 Root microsomal protein (100 µg) isolated as described above was incubated with 25 µl of anti-GFP agarose beads (Chromotek, Germany) for two hours on a rotating wheel at 4 °C (Wu et al., 2013). After incubation, the beads were collected by centrifugation and washed two times with 500 µl wash buffer (10 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA, 0.01% IGEPAL). For protein–protein interaction assays, the proteins were eluted from the beads with 100 µl 6 M urea, 2 M thiourea, pH 8, before in-solution tryptic digestion. For kinase activity assays, three more washing steps were carried out with one time wash buffer (10 mM Tris/HCl, pH 7.5, 300 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA) and two times kinase reaction buffer (40 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.5, 10 mM MgCl2, 10 mM MnCl2,  0.1% BSA, 2 mM DTT).

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant version 1.5.3.8 was used for raw file peak extraction and protein identification against the UniProt FASAT database UP000006548 (39,389 entries). Protein quantification was performed in MaxQuant using the label free quantification (LFQ) algorithm. The following parameters were applied: trypsin as cleaving enzyme; minimum peptide length of six amino acids; maximal two missed cleavages; carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification; N-terminal protein acetylation, oxidation of methionine as variable modifications. Peptide mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm and 0.5 Da was used as MS/MS tolerance. Further settings were: “label-free quantification” marked, multiplicity set to 1; “match between runs” marked with time window 2 min; peptide and protein false discovery rates (FDR) set to 0.01; common contaminants (trypsin, keratin, etc.) excluded. Phosphorylation sites were determined by the site-scanning algorithm search engine Andromeda.

### Publication Abstract
Sucrose as a product of photosynthesis is the major carbohydrate translocated from photosynthetic leaves to growing nonphotosynthetic organs such as roots and seeds. These growing tissues, besides carbohydrate supply, require uptake of water through aquaporins to enhance cell expansion during growth. Previous work revealed Sucrose Induced Receptor Kinase, SIRK1, to control aquaporin activity via phosphorylation in response to external sucrose stimulation. Here, we present the regulatory role of AT3G02880 (QSK1), a receptor kinase with a short external domain, in modulation of SIRK1 activity. Our results suggest that SIRK1 autophosphorylates at Ser-744 after sucrose treatment. Autophosphorylated SIRK1 then interacts with and transphosphorylates QSK1 and QSK2. Upon interaction with QSK1, SIRK1 phosphorylates aquaporins at their regulatory C-terminal phosphorylation sites. Consequently, in root protoplast swelling assays, the <i>qsk1qsk2</i> mutant showed reduced water influx rates under iso-osmotic sucrose stimulation, confirming an involvement in the same signaling pathway as the receptor kinase SIRK1. Large-scale phosphoproteomics comparing single mutant <i>sirk1</i>, <i>qsk1</i>, and double mutant <i>sirk1 qsk1</i> revealed that aquaporins were regulated by phosphorylation depending on an activated receptor kinase complex of SIRK1, as well as QSK1. QSK1 thereby acts as a coreceptor stabilizing and enhancing SIRK1 activity and recruiting substrate proteins, such as aquaporins.

### Keywords
Sucrose, Kinase, Interaction

### Affiliations
Uni-Hohenheim, 260b
Universität Hohenheim (260b) Systembiologie der Pflanze Garbenstraße 30, Bio1 U2 70599 Stuttgart

### Submitter
Xuna Wu

### Lab Head
Dr Xuna Wu
Universität Hohenheim (260b) Systembiologie der Pflanze Garbenstraße 30, Bio1 U2 70599 Stuttgart


