### Accession
PXD012778

### Title
Abyssorchomene distinctus LC-MSMS with TMT Labeling

### Description
Despite the fact that deep sea mining is becoming more popular nowadays in terms of obtaining metals ores for daily life purposes, its potential impact to the deep sea habitat, which is originally stable and converse, stills remains uncertain. In order to estimate and regulate the imapct of deep sea mining activities, an in-situ exposure experiment is performed to observe the change in proteomics expression of the deep-sea scvangers, Abyssorchomene distinctus, to copper exposure. This project aims to suggest a potenial protein bio-marker in Abyssorchomene distinctus to assess the impact of mining activities towards deep sea organisms and also discuss the potential application of other deep sea in-situ exposure experiment in the future.

### Sample Protocol
The protein samples was extracted by Methonal/Chloroform percipitation and dissovled in lysis buffer after purification. It was then dried by speed-vac overnight and redissolved in ACN to perform Alkylation, Desalting and Trypsin Digestion. Total 9 amphipods samples were labelling by TMT-10 plex under manufacturer’s instruction. The labelled samples were being quantified by LC-MSMS approach.

### Data Protocol
The obtained proteomics data were processed by Proteome Discoverer 2.2 to identifiy proteins. By comparing the treatment group with the control groups samples, some proteins were filtered as significantly expressed (Rank Product p-vale <0.05 and fold-change >1.5/<0.67). These filtered proteins were then being annonateted with different databank, such as NR, SwissPort, KEGG and GO. An GO enrichment analysis and STRING analysis were also performed to investigated is there is any potential bio-marker protein.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Tmt labeling, Abyssorchomene distinctus

### Affiliations
Department of Ocean Science, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

### Submitter
Yick Hang KWAN

### Lab Head
Dr Yick Hang KWAN
Department of Ocean Science, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology


