### Accession
PXD027765

### Title
Donkey milk fermentation by Lactococcus lactis subsp. cremoris and Lactobacillus rhamnosus affects the antiviral and antibacterial milk properties

### Description
Background: milk is considered an important source of bioactive peptides, which can be produced by endogenous or starter bacteria, such as lactic acid bacteria, that are considered effective and safe producers of food-grade bioactive peptides. Among the various types of milk, donkey milk has been gaining more and more attention for its nutraceutical properties. Methods: Lactobacillus rhamnosus 17D10 and Lactococcus lactis subsp. cremoris 40FEL3 were selected for their ability to produce peptides from donkey milk. The endogenous peptides and those obtained after bacterial fermentation were assayed for their antioxidant, antibacterial and antiviral activities. The peptide mixtures were characterized by means of LC-MS/MS, and then analyzed in silico using the Milk Bioactive Peptide DataBase. Results: the peptides produced by the two selected bacteria enhanced the antioxidant activity and reduced E. coli growth. Only the peptides produced by L. rhamnosus 17D10 were able to reduce S. aureus growth. All the peptide mixtures were able to inhibit the replication of HSV-1 by more than 50%. Seventeen peptides were found to have 60% sequence similarity with already known bioactive peptides. Conclusion: a lactic acid bacterium fermentation process is able to enhance the value of donkey milk through bioactivities that are important for human health.

### Sample Protocol
Peptide extraction and purification: cell-free supernatants were collected, by means of centrifugation, for the DM fermented by LABs and for the non-fermented DM (control), (4000 ×g, 20 min, 4°C) and filtered (0.22 µm filter, Millipore). The supernatant was split into 2 mL acetone-compatible Eppendorf tubes, and four volumes of cold (−20 °C) acetone were added. The tubes were vortexed and incubated o/n at −20 °C. The supernatants were collected, by means of centrifugation (9400 ×g, 10 min at 4 °C), and dried using a vacuum concentrator (Christ RVC-2-18, Osterode am Harz, Germany). The dried pellets were resuspended in ddH20 0,1% TFA. Samples were purified, by means of SPE, on a reverse phase column (Phenomenex, Strata-X) as reported by Piovesana et al. [21]. Briefly, after conditioning the column with acetonitrile (ACN), peptides were rinsed with a 0.1% TFA aqueous solution and then eluted with ACN/ddH2O (70/30, v/v) with 0.1% TFA, and dried in the vacuum concentrator. Peptide identification by means of LC-MS/MS analysis: LC–MS/MS analyses were performed using a micro-LC Eksigent Technologies (Dublin, USA) system with a stationary phase of a Halo Fused C18 column (0.5 × 100 mm, 2.7 μm; Eksigent Technologies, Dublin, USA). The injection volume was 4.0 μL and the oven temperature was set at 40 °C. The mobile phase was a mixture of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water (A) and 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in acetonitrile (B), eluted at a flow rate of 15.0 μL min-1 with increasing concentrations of B, ranging from 2% to 40%, over 30 min. The peptides were suspended in 10 μL of A. The LC system was interfaced with a 5600+ TripleTOF system (AB Sciex, Concord, Canada) equipped with a DuoSpray Ion Source and a CDS (Calibrant Delivery System). Peptide identification was performed using the traditional data-dependent acquisition (DDA) method. The MS data were acquired with Analyst TF 1.7 (SCIEX, Concord, Canada).

### Data Protocol
The MS files were searched using Mascot software, v. 2.4 (Matrix Science Inc., Boston, USA) setting no enzyme as the digest enzyme, 50 ppm as the peptide mass tolerance, 0.1 Da as the MS/MS tolerance, and 2 +, 3 + and 4 + as the peptide charges; the search was set on the monoisotopic mass. The instrument was set to ESI-QUAD-TOF. The UniProt/Swiss-Prot reviewed database containing Equus asinus, L. rhamnosus and L. lactis subsp. cremoris proteins (NCBI Equus asinus, version 23092019, 42,662 sequences; NCBI Lactobacillus rhamnosus, version 23092019, 425,126 sequences; Lactobacillus lactis subsp. cremoris 23092019, 147,917 sequences) was used. Only the peptides identified with a higher peptide score than the peptide identity were considered for each biological replicate. Moreover, only the peptides that were common to the three biological replicates were taken into account for further data elaboration.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lactobacillus rhamnosus 17d10, Lactococcus lactis subsp. cremoris 40fel3, Lc-ms/ms, Bioactive peptides, Donkey milk

### Affiliations
University of Eastern Piedmont 
Biological Mass Spectrometry Lab,Department of Translational Medicine (DiMeT),Center for Translational Research on Autoimmune & Allergic Diseases - CAAD, University of Piemonte Orientale, Novara (NO),Italy.

### Submitter
Marcello Manfredi

### Lab Head
Dr Marcello Manfredi
Biological Mass Spectrometry Lab,Department of Translational Medicine (DiMeT),Center for Translational Research on Autoimmune & Allergic Diseases - CAAD, University of Piemonte Orientale, Novara (NO),Italy.


