### Accession
PXD001055

### Title
Biomarkers for cervical cancer. Verfification.

### Description
We developed a discovery-validation mass-spectrometry based pipeline to identify a set of proteins that are regulated in serum of patients with cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN) and squamous cell cervical cancer using isobaric Tags for Relative and Absolute Quantitation (iTRAQ®), label-free shotgun and targeted mass-spectrometric quantification. At the discovery stage we used a “pooling” strategy for the comparative analysis of immunodepleted serum from patients with early-(CES) and late-stage (CLS) cervical cancer versus healthy controls that revealed 15 up- and 26 down-regulated proteins. The analysis of non-depleted serum samples from patients with CIN, CES, CLS, and healthy controls showed significant changes in abundance of alpha-1-acid glycoprotein 1, alpha-1-antitrypsin, serotransferrin, haptoglobin, alpha-2-HS-glycoprotein and vitamin D-binding protein. To further validate our findings we developed a fast UPLC/MRM method for the simultaneous targeted quantification of these proteins in an independent set of serum from patients with cervical cancer or CIN and healthy controls as well as serum samples from patients with ovarian cancer. The panel of six proteins showed 72 % sensitivity and 82 % specificity for discrimination of patients with CIN from healthy controls, a stage of the disease where current protein-based biomarkers, e.g. squamous cell carcinoma antigen fail to show any discrimination.

### Sample Protocol
The total serum protein concentration was determined simultaneously with protein desalting by mRP chromatography. After desalting an aliquot of the collected fraction containing 25 µg of total protein amount was spiked with 10 pmol of two stable-isotope-labeled synthetic peptides: SDVVYTDWK (heavy lysine 13C615N2; monoisotopic mass: 1119.52 Da) and TEDTIFLR (heavy arginine 13C615N4, monoisotopic mass: 1003.51 Da) (Thermo-Fisher, Aqua Ultimate grade). After that, samples were re-suspended in 10 µL of 100 mM NH4HCO3, reduced with DTT, alkylated with IAA and digested for 16 hours with 1 µg of trypsin. The digestion was stopped with FA and the samples were injected randomly.

### Data Protocol
The results were exported in mzData format with the MassHunter Qualitative Analysis software (Agilent). The TOPASS software (version: 1.9.0) (23, 24) was used for the conversion of data from the mzData to the mzML format, for features finding. The further data processing was done with Microsoft Excel.  Quantification of A1AG1 was based on the ratio between the areas for doubly-charged ion of the heavy synthetic and the endogenous SDVVYTDWK peptide that were detected at m/z 560.76 and 556.76, respectively. A1AT, HPT, AACT, VTDB, TRFE, KNG1 and FETUA were relatively quantified based on their tryptic peptides whose areas were normalized with respect to the areas of the spiked synthetic heavy peptide from A1AG1 to reduce variability . The obtained values per each peptide were transformed in log2 scale and further normalized with respect to the randomly selected reference sample. The log2 protein level was finally calculated as the average level of the peptides assigned to a protein. Statistical analysis was performed with Statistica 10 (Statsoft, Inc.) and dot distributions and box plots were constructed with SigmaPlot (Systat Software, Inc.).

### Publication Abstract
We developed a discovery-validation mass-spectrometry-based pipeline to identify a set of proteins that are regulated in serum of patients with cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN) and squamous cell cervical cancer using iTRAQ, label-free shotgun, and targeted mass-spectrometric quantification. In the discovery stage we used a "pooling" strategy for the comparative analysis of immunodepleted serum and revealed 15 up- and 26 down-regulated proteins in patients with early- (CES) and late-stage (CLS) cervical cancer. The analysis of nondepleted serum samples from patients with CIN, CES, an CLS and healthy controls showed significant changes in abundance of alpha-1-acid glycoprotein 1, alpha-1-antitrypsin, serotransferrin, haptoglobin, alpha-2-HS-glycoprotein, and vitamin D-binding protein. We validated our findings using a fast UHPLC/MRM method in an independent set of serum samples from patients with cervical cancer or CIN and healthy controls as well as serum samples from patients with ovarian cancer (more than 400 samples in total). The panel of six proteins showed 67% sensitivity and 88% specificity for discrimination of patients with CIN from healthy controls, a stage of the disease where current protein-based biomarkers, for example, squamous cell carcinoma antigen (SCCA), fail to show any discrimination. Additionally, combining the six-protein panel with SCCA improves the discrimination of patients with CES and CLS from healthy controls.

### Keywords
Alpha-2-hs-glycoprotein, Haptoglobin, Serotransferrin, Lc-ms/ms, Alpha-1-antitrypsin, Vitamin d-binding protein, Alpha-1-acid-glycoprotein, Intraepithelial neoplasia, Protein panel, Cervical cancer

### Affiliations
Thermo Fisher Scientific
Head of Analytical Biochemistry

### Submitter
Alexander Boychenko

### Lab Head
Dr Rainer Bischoff
Head of Analytical Biochemistry


