### Accession
PXD004760

### Title
Gcn4-dependent translation reduction in long-lived ribosomal protein deletion strains

### Description
Deletion of several ribosomal proteins genes (RPKOs) has been shown to extend the lifespan of Saccharomyces cerevisiae in a Gcn4-dependent manner. To characterize the underlying mechanisms, we systematically analyzed the gene expression of both short- and long-lived RPKO strains at multiple levels. We found that up-regulation of amino acid biosynthesis and global down-regulation of protein synthesis are hallmarks of long-lived strains. We provide direct evidence that gene expression changes observed in long-lived strains result from translational up-regulation of GCN4 mRNA via skipping of upstream open reading frames (uORFs), in turn due to slow/defective ribosome assembly. We further demonstrate that Gcn4 acts as a transcriptional repressor on promoters of translation-related genes, thereby globally reducing protein synthesis. Our data suggest that the Gcn4-dependent increase in lifespan can be attributed partially to its ability to dampen the translation capacity of the cell, thereby engaging a well known mechanism of longevity.

### Sample Protocol
For each sample, 108 yeast cells were resuspended in 100 µl lysis buffer (2% sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate), sonicated for 2x10 s using a vial tweeter and spinned down. A small aliquot of the supernatant was taken to determine the protein concentration using a BCA assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Aliquots containing 50 ug proteins were taken from each sample, respectively, reduced with 5 mM TCEP for 15 min at 95 °C and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark at 25 °C. After quenching the reaction with 12 mM N-acetyl-cysteine the samples were diluted with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer to a final DOC concentration of 1%. Proteins were digested by incubation with sequencing-grade modified trypsin (1/50, w/w; Promega, Madison, Wisconsin) overnight at 37°C. Then, the samples were acidified with 2 M HCl to a final concentration of 50 mM, incubated for 15 min at 37 °C and the precipitated detergent removed by centrifugation at 10,000xg for 15 min. Subsequently, peptides were desalted on C18 reversed-phase spin columns according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Microspin, Harvard Apparatus) and dried under vacuum. The dried peptide samples were subsequently labeled with isobaric tag (TMT 6-plex, Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The pooled sample was again desalted on C18 reversed-phase spin columns according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Macrospin, Harvard Apparatus) and dried under vacuum. In total, three pooled TMT samples containing one biological replicates of all six conditions, respectively, were generated. The setup of the μRPLC-MS system was as described previously (PMID: 25413384). Chromatographic separation of peptides was carried out using an EASY nano-LC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific), equipped with a heated RP-HPLC column (75 μm x 50 cm) packed in-house with 1.9 μm C18 resin (Reprosil-AQ Pur, Dr. Maisch). Aliquots of 1 μg total peptides were analyzed per LC-MS/MS run using a linear gradient ranging from 95% solvent A (0.15% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile) and 5% solvent B (98% acetonitrile, 2% water, 0.15% formic acid) to 30% solvent B over 180 minutes at a flow rate of 200 nl/min. Mass spectrometry analysis was performed on a dual pressure LTQ-Elite Orbitrap mass spectrometer equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source (both Thermo Fisher Scientific). Each MS1 scan was followed by high-collision-dissociation (HCD, both acquired in the Orbitrap) of the 10 most abundant precursor ions with dynamic exclusion for 60 seconds. Total cycle time was approximately 2 s. For MS1, 1e6 ions were accumulated in the Orbitrap cell over a maximum time of 300 ms and scanned at a resolution of 60,000 FWHM (at 400 m/z). MS2 scans were acquired at a target setting of 50,000 ions, accumulation time of 100 ms and a resolution of 15,000 FWHM (at 400 m/z). Singly charged ions and ions with unassigned charge state were excluded from triggering MS2 events. The normalized collision energy was set to 35%, and one microscan was acquired for each spectrum.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw-files were converted to the mascot generic file (mgf) format using the msconvert tool (part of ProteoWizard, version 3.0.4624 (2013-6-3)). Using the MASCOT algorithm (Matrix Science, Version 2.4.0), the mgf files were searched against a decoy database containing normal and reverse sequences of the predicted SwissProt entries of Saccharomyces cerevisiae (www.uniprot.org, release date 20/10/2014) and commonly observed contaminants (in total 13,386 protein sequences) generated using the SequenceReverser tool from the MaxQuant software (Version 1.0.13.13). The precursor ion tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment ion tolerance was set to 0.01 Da. The search criteria were set as follows: full tryptic specificity was required (cleavage after lysine or arginine residues unless followed by proline), 2 missed cleavages were allowed, carbamidomethylation (C), TMT6plex (K and peptide n-terminus) were set as fixed modification and oxidation (M) as a variable modification. Next, the database search results were imported to the Scaffold Q+ software (version 4.3.3, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) and the protein false identification rate was set to 1% based on the number of decoy hits. Specifically, peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 93.0% probability to achieve an FDR less than 1.0% by the scaffold local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 5.0% probability to achieve an FDR less than 1.0% and contained at least 1 identified peptide. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet program (PMID: 14632076). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters. Acquired reporter ion intensities in the experiments were employed for automated quantification and statically analysis using a modified version of our in-house developed SafeQuant R script (PMID: 26550600). In brief, reporter ion intensities were corrected for isotopic impurities according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Intensities for each peptide and protein identification were summed, globally normalized across all acquisition runs and employed for ratio calculation and statistical analysis. Additionally, ratio distortion was controlled using spiked in protein calibrants as recently described (Ahrné et al, JPR, in press).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Yeast, Aging, Gnc4, Tmt

### Affiliations
Proteomics Core Facility
Biozentrum, Univesity of Basel, CH-4056 Basel, Switzerland

### Submitter
Alexander Schmidt

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Schmidt
Biozentrum, Univesity of Basel, CH-4056 Basel, Switzerland


