### Accession
PXD006336

### Title
FeatureFinderIdentification (OpenMS) analysis of the iPRG-2015 dataset

### Description
Benchmark of FeatureFinderIdentification (FFId), a targeted feature detection algorithm for use in label-free quantification, developed in the OpenMS software framework. The dataset used for the evaluation comes from the iPRG-2015 study ("Differential abundance analysis in label-free quantitative proteomics"), created by the Proteome Informatics Research Group (iPRG) of the Association of Biomolecular Resource Facilities (ABRF); see https://abrf.org/research-group/proteome-informatics-research-group-iprg. The samples contain yeast protein digest spiked with six digested proteins in varying, known concentrations.

### Sample Protocol
Description by the authors of the iPRG-2015 study (from https://abrf.org/sites/default/files/temp/RGs/iPRG/iprg2015_study_instructions_final.pdf): Four samples, each containing a constant background of tryptic digests of 200 ng S. cerevisiae (ATCC strain 204508/S288c) were separately spiked with different concentrations of several protein digests. All proteins had been reduced and alkylated with iodoacetamide prior to digestion with trypsin. The four samples were analyzed in triplicate by LC-MS/MS (total of 12 analyses) in random order. The digests were loaded directly onto a 15 cm X 75 μm PicoFrit column (New Objective) self-packed with 3 μm Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ beads (Dr. Maisch HPLC GmbH). Samples were separated using a Thermo Scientific Easy nLC 1000 system with a 110-min linear gradient of 0–40% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid at 250 nL/min directly connected to a Thermo Scientific Q-Exactive mass spectrometer. Data were acquired in data-dependent (DDA) mode, with each MS survey scan followed by 10 MS/MS HCD scans (AGC target 10E6, max fill time 60 msec), with 30-sec dynamic exclusion. Both MS and MS/MS data were acquired in profile mode in the Orbitrap, with resolution 70,000 for MS and 17,500 for MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
The Thermo RAW files were centroided and converted to mzML using ProteoWizard by the authors of the iPRG-2015 study. The data in mzML format was downloaded from the study repository (ftp://iprg_study:ABRF329@ftp.peptideatlas.org).  Peptide identification (ID) results were generated by the authors of the DeMix-Q publication (Bo Zhang et al., Mol. Cell. Proteomics 2016): Database searching of MS2 spectra was performed using the DeMix pipeline, and ID data were filtered to 1% false discovery rate on the peptide-spectrum match level. The result files in idXML format were downloaded from https://ki.box.com/s/15kv73pu2cvi4gwakzd6kdxcwch7dbl0 (linked via https://github.com/userbz/DeMix-Q). Subsequent processing of the ID data was carried out using TOPP tools from OpenMS (version 2.1): Peptide-to-protein mapping (PeptideIndexer), removal of decoy peptides (IDFilter), conversion to mzIdentML (IDFileConverter), RT alignment of different LC-MS/MS runs (MapAlignerIdentification with "lowess" smoothing), merging of aligned data (IDMerger).  Feature detection using FFId (OpenMS), analyzing the mzML files and targeting the sites of peptide identifications based on the ID data, was performed in three different variants: 1. For each LC-MS/MS run, using only ID data from the same run (result files: "FFId_internal_?_?.featureXML"). 2. For each LC-MS/MS run, using aligned and merged IDs from all runs (result files: "FFId_merged_?_?.featureXML"). 3. For each LC-MS/MS run, combining ID data from the same and other (aligned) runs using a machine learning approach (result files: "FFId_svm_?_?.featureXML"). The feature detection results were exported into tab-separated text files using the OpenMS tool ProteinQuantifier (with "filter_charge" option; result files: "peptides_[internal|merged|svm]_?_?.csv").

### Publication Abstract
Label-free quantification of shotgun LC-MS/MS data is the prevailing approach in quantitative proteomics but remains computationally nontrivial. The central data analysis step is the detection of peptide-specific signal patterns, called features. Peptide quantification is facilitated by associating signal intensities in features with peptide sequences derived from MS2 spectra; however, missing values due to imperfect feature detection are a common problem. A feature detection approach that directly targets identified peptides (minimizing missing values) but also offers robustness against false-positive features (by assigning meaningful confidence scores) would thus be highly desirable. We developed a new feature detection algorithm within the OpenMS software framework, leveraging ideas and algorithms from the OpenSWATH toolset for DIA/SRM data analysis. Our software, FeatureFinderIdentification ("FFId"), implements a targeted approach to feature detection based on information from identified peptides. This information is encoded in an MS1 assay library, based on which ion chromatogram extraction and detection of feature candidates are carried out. Significantly, when analyzing data from experiments comprising multiple samples, our approach distinguishes between "internal" and "external" (inferred) peptide identifications (IDs) for each sample. On the basis of internal IDs, two sets of positive (true) and negative (decoy) feature candidates are defined. A support vector machine (SVM) classifier is then trained to discriminate between the sets and is subsequently applied to the "uncertain" feature candidates from external IDs, facilitating selection and confidence scoring of the best feature candidate for each peptide. This approach also enables our algorithm to estimate the false discovery rate (FDR) of the feature selection step. We validated FFId based on a public benchmark data set, comprising a yeast cell lysate spiked with protein standards that provide a known ground-truth. The algorithm reached almost complete (&gt;99%) quantification coverage for the full set of peptides identified at 1% FDR (PSM level). Compared with other software solutions for label-free quantification, this is an outstanding result, which was achieved at competitive quantification accuracy and reproducibility across replicates. The FDR for the feature selection was estimated at a low 1.5% on average per sample (3% for features inferred from external peptide IDs). The FFId software is open-source and freely available as part of OpenMS ( www.openms.org ).

### Keywords
Iprg-2015, Feature detection, Benchmark, Shotgun proteomics, Label-free quantification

### Affiliations
Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute
Proteomic Mass Spectrometry, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, United Kingdom

### Submitter
Hendrik Weisser

### Lab Head
Dr Jyoti Sharma Choudhary
Proteomic Mass Spectrometry, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, United Kingdom


