### Accession
PXD011803

### Title
Combined FGFR and Akt pathway inhibition abrogate growth of EGFR TKI-resistant NSCLC cells with upregulated FGFR1 expression

### Description
Introduction: The clinical benefit of EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) treatment in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients with activating EGFR mutations is temporary, as virtually all patients develop acquired EGFR TKI resistance that occurs via diverse mechanisms. Here, we identified increased FGFR1 expression as such a resistance mechanism and using pathways analysis and drug combination testing we identified a novel combination treatment to control growth of these resistant tumors.  Methods: Novel erlotinib-resistant NSCLC cell lines were generated and analyzed by mass spectrometry-based proteomics to identify altered pathways associated with erlotinib resistance. The altered pathways were further analyzed in gefitinib and osibenib resistant cell lines. Small molecule inhibitor combinations were used to block the altered pathways and investigate growth reduction in vitro and in two xenograft mouse models. FGFR1 mRNA levels were examined in pre- and (post?)- EGFR TKI treatment clinical tumor samples. Results: Proteomic analysis revealed increased expression of FGFR1 and AXL as well as increased Akt and ERK1/2 activation in a panel of novel erlotinib-resistant HCC827 cell lines. Combined treatment with erlotinib or osimertinib and a panel of small molecule inhibitors targeting AXL/MET, FGFRs, Akt, PI3K/mTOR, MEK or ERK1/2 showed that the most prominent re-sensitization to EGFR TKI occurred with the pan-FGFR inhibitor, PD173074. Interestingly, simultaneous blockade of components of the Akt pathway using specific Akt or dual PI3K-mTOR inhibitors combined with inhibitors targeting the FGFR family exhibited the most efficient growth inhibition of FGFR1 overexpressing EGFR TKI-resistant cell lines. Phosphorylation of proteins downstream of Akt, including PRAS40, FOXO and S6 ribosomal protein, were completely abrogated by PD173074 combined with the Akt inhibitor GSK2141795 . Combination treatment with PD173074 and an Akt inhibitor exhibited synergistic growth inhibition in vivo in two FGFR1 overexpressing NSCLC EGFR TKI-resistant animal models.  Conclusion: The significant growth inhibition in vitro and in vivo observed with PD173074 combined with Akt compared to either drug alone imply that inhibition of several key targets may be beneficial in controlling erlotinib-resistant NSCLC. The complete abrogation of PRAS40, FOXO and S6 phosphorylations by PD173074 combined with an Akt inhibitor indicates that the Akt pathway is no longer active.

### Sample Protocol
Cell harvest for mass spectrometry Cells were harvested at 80-90% confluency. Cells were washed once in icecold Tris buffered saline (TBS, Sigma-Adrich) including protease inhibitors (Complete Mini EDTA-free, Roche, Basel, Switzerland), carefully scraped off from the cell culture flask in order not to damage extracellular membrane proteins and spun at 250g for 2 min, before cells were washed twice more in icecold TBS with protease inhibitor. Finally, cells were lyzed in icecold 0.1M Na2CO3 with protease inhibitor, pH 11. The lysate was adjusted to 1 mM MgCl2 and 5 µL benzonase (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, USA) was added and samples were left on ice for 15 min to degrade RNA and DNA. Lysates were now homogenized using a Branson sonifier 250, 2x 30 sec, output 10, output control 2.5. Subsequently, lysates were ultra-centrifuged at 100.000g for 45 min at 4°C in a Sorvall RC M150 GX centrifuge to separate soluble proteins (supernatant) from membrane proteins (pellet). After removal of the supernatant, pellets were washed with 0.5 M triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) followed by 0.05M TEAB to remove soluble protein contamination.   Protein purification and digestion  The supernatant proteins were precipitated by adding five volumes of icecold acetone, vortexed and stored ON at -20°C followed by centrifugation at 6000g for 15 min. After removal of acetone, the pellets containing soluble proteins were redissolved in 8M urea and incubated ON in order to fully dissolve proteins. Protein concentrations were determined by the Bio-Rad Protein Assay (Hercules, USA) before proteins were reduced by 20 mM DTT at 56°C for 45 min and subsequently alkylated by 40 mM iodoacetamide for 45 min in the dark. Samples were then diluted eight times with 0.05M TEAB and digested with 1µg trypsin/50µg protein (Promega, Madison, USA) at 37°C ON. Samples were acidified to 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and centrifuged at 15.000g for 10 min to pellet insoluble material such as lipids. The membrane proteins were redissolved in 8M urea, reduced and alkylated as stated above before 0.5 µL Sialidase A (Europa Bioproducts, Cambridge, UK) and 1 µL PNGase F (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, USA) was added at 37°C ON to remove extracellular glycan structures. Then, samples were digested with trypsin as stated above.  iTRAQ labeling Peptides mixtures were desalted using  in-house packed stage tip columns composed of two C18 membrane disks (Empore 3M, Bellefonte, USA) and porous R2/R3 reverse phase resins (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). In brief, samples were acidified to pH ~ 2 before peptides were applied to 0.1% TFA pre-equilibrated columns, washed with 0.1% TFA and eluted using 70% ACN, 0.1% TFA. The eluted peptides were vacuum centrifuge dried before reconstituted in 0.05M TEAB prior to amino acid analysis (AAA) to measure peptide concentration. AAA was performed by lyophilizing a small aliquot of peptide sample and adding 200µL hydrolysis buffer (6M HCl, 0,1% phenol, 0,1% thioglycolic acid), fill with argon and subsequently evaporate under vacuum. Samples were then incubated at 110°C ON. After hydrolysis, the amino acids were analysed on a Biochrom30 amino acid composition analyzer (Cambridge, UK) as described in (Laursen 2008) and 20µg of peptides from each sample were then transferred to new Eppendorf tubes, vacuum dried and re-dissolved in 0.5 M TEAB prior to iTRAQ labeling (AB Sciex, MS, USA),  as described by the manufacturer. After iTRAQ labeling and pooling, samples were vacuum centrifuge dried, re-dissolved in 0.1% TFA and desalted on in-house packed R2/R3 stage tip columns as previously above  HILIC fractionation Samples were fractionated using hydrophilic interaction chromatography (HILIC). Briefly, samples re-dissolved in of 90% ACN/0.1% TFA and 15 µl aliquots corresponding to approximately 25 µg peptides were injected onto an in-house-packed TSKgel Amide-80 HILIC 300 μm×300mm capillary HPLC column and fractionated into 22 fractions by a Dionex UltiMate 3000 nano high-performance liquid chromatography. The fractions were automatically collected in a microwell plate at one minute intervals after UV detection at 210 nm, and the fractions were dried by vacuum centrifugation and re-dissolved in 10 µl 0.1% TFA and analyzed by nanoLC–MS/MS as described below.

### Data Protocol
All Q-Exactive raw data files were processed and quantified using Proteome Discoverer version 1.4.0.288 (Thermo Scientific). The SEQUEST search engine and Mascot search Engine (v. 2.2.3) integrated with Proteome Discoverer were used to search the data with the following criteria: protein database used was Uniprot/Swissprot (downloaded 7th November 2012, 452768 entries) and restricted to humans. Fixed search parameters included trypsin, one missed cleavage allowed, carbamidomethylation at cysteines and iTRAQ labeling at lysine and N-terminal amines, while methionine oxidation and deamidation were set as dynamic. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 8 ppm and fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.05 Da. Peptide data were extracted using Mascot significance threshold 0.05 and minimum peptide length 6. Minimum 2 peptides were used for protein identification, and minimum 2 unique peptides were used for protein quantitation. FDR was calculated using a decoy database search and only high confidence peptide identifications (False discovery rate < 1 %) were included.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Shutgun proteomics 4-plex itraq, Akt inhibitors

### Affiliations
Odense University Hospital, Odense, Denmark
Centre for Clinical Proteomics, Odense University Hospital, Sdr Boulevard 29, DK-5000 Odense C

### Submitter
Hans Christian Beck

### Lab Head
Dr Hans C Beck
Centre for Clinical Proteomics, Odense University Hospital, Sdr Boulevard 29, DK-5000 Odense C


