### Accession
PXD014588

### Title
Biological strategies for mitigating Escherichia coli enterohemorragic (EHEC) colonization in meat and meat products

### Description
The enterohemorrhagic Escherichia (E.) coli (EHEC) is a pathogen of great concern for public health and the meat industry all over the world. High economic losses in meat industry and the high cost of the illness evidence the necessity of additional efforts to control this pathogen. Previous studies demonstrated inhibitory activity towards EHEC, of a bioprotective strain, Enterococcus mundtii CRL35, it showing also a specific proteomic response during the co-culture. In the present work additional studies of the EHEC-Ent. mundtii interaction were carried out: i) differential protein expression of E. coli O157:H7 NCTC12900 when growing in co-culture with Enterococcus mundtii in a meat environment, ii) the reciprocal influence between these two microorganisms in the adhesion to extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins and iii) the possible induction of the phage W933, coding for Shiga toxin (Stx1), by the presence of Ent. mundtii CRL35. When compared the co-culture with individual growth, proteomic results showed significant repression of E. coli NCTC12900 proteins related mostly to the metabolism and transport of amino acids and nucleotides. However, statistically significant over expression of EHEC proteins involved in stress, energy production, amino acid metabolism and transcription was observed at 30 h respect to 6 h when EHEC grew in co-culture. On the other hand, EHEC showed a decreased adhesion capacity to ECM proteins in the presence of the bioprotective strain. Finally, Ent. mundtii CRL35 did not induce the lytic cycle of W933 bacteriophage, thus indicating its potential safe use for eliminating this pathogen. Overall, this study expands the knowledge of EHEC- Ent. mundtii CRL35 interaction in a meat environment, as an attempt to find out effective biological strategies to eliminate this pathogen.

### Sample Protocol
The interaction between EHEC and Ent. mundtii CRL35 was studied in SMS cultures by means of two dimensional electrophoresis. Two different time points during the bacterial growth were evaluated: T1, corresponding to 6 h of growth when both microorganisms (Ent. mundtii CRL35 and E. coli NCTC12900) were in the exponential phase, and T2 that corresponds to 30 h (stationary and death phase for Ent. mundtii and E. coli during co-culture, respectively). To reach the death phase for pure cultures of E. coli, 96 h were needed.  E. coli O157:H7 NCTC12900 (104 CFU/mL) was grown alone and in co-culture with Ent. mundtii CRL35 (106 CFU/mL) , in 100 mL of SMS. Cells from co-cultures were harvested at T1 and  T2. Cells from E. coli and Ent. mundtii growing alone at T1 and T2, were collected separately. Cells from different cultures were harvested by centrifugation at 8,000 g for 10 min at 20 °C, washed with 0.1M Tris-HCl buffer, pH 7.5 and centrifuged again at 8,000 g for 10 min at 20 °C. The resulting pellets were stored at 20 °C until protein extraction. Three independent biological replicates were performed for each condition   when individual cultures were assessed, Ent. mundtii and E. coli cell pellets harvested at T1 were mixed before lysis and the same strategy was applied for T2 samples. These mixtures were called synthetic mixtures (SM).   The cell proportions of each microorganism used for T1 and T2 mixtures coming from single cultures were established according to the cell counts obtained in the respective co-culture in order to have in the mix a similar ratio between the two microorganisms. This way, assuring to have 600 ug of proteins placed in the IPG strip, with the same protein proportion of each microorganism than in IPG strips with samples from the co-culture. Each of these synthetic mixtures (SM) will constitute the respective controls (single culture) at T1 and T2. The SM pellets as well as those pellets from co-cultures were mixed with glass beads (150-212 um diameter) and 0.1M Tris-HCl buffer, pH 7.5 in a 1:2:1 (cell:buffer:bead) ratio. Then, cells were disrupted using a Mini-BeadBeater-8 cell disrupter at maximum speed for 10 min (10 cycles of 1 min each, with 1-min intervals where samples were kept on ice). Cell debris, unbroken cells and glass beads were removed by centrifugation (14,500 g, 5 min, 15 ºC), and the cell-free supernatant were kept at-80 ºC for proteomic analysis. The protein concentration of the extracts was estimated by the Bradford assay using bovine serum albumin as a standard.  Sample preparation and 2DE gels were carried out as previously described Bustos et al. (2015). Briefly, 600 ug of proteins were placed in each immobilized pH gradient (IPG) strip (Immobiline DryStrip Gels, linear pH 4-7, 18 cm, GE Healthcare; Uppsala, Sweden) and Isoelectrofocusing (IEF) was performed in Ettan IPGphor 3 (GE Healthcare, Uppsala, Sweden) at 53,500 Vh. For the second dimension, IPG strips were equilibrated at room temperature in 6 M urea, 2 % SDS, 30 % glycerol, 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, containing alternatively 50 mM DTT (15 min) and then 400 mM iodoacetamide (15 min in the dark). Second dimension was performed on homogeneous 12.5 % polyacrylamide gels at the constant current of 15 mA/gel at 15 ºC (approximately 16 h) using an Ettan DALTsix Large Vertical System (GE Healthcare, Uppsala, Sweden). Gels were stained with colloidal Coomassie blue Stain according to Candiano et al. (2004), distained with distilled water. The 2DE maps were digitalized using Image Scanner III LabScan 6.0 (GE Healthcare, Uppsala, Sweden).   Volume spot quantization and normalization were performed on digitalized gel images (600 dpi) using the software Prodigy SameSpots version 1.0.3400.25570 (Totallab, Newcastle, UK). The volume of each spot was calculated and normalized by referring the values to the sum of total spot volumes within each gel. Student test for unpaired samples was applied. A protein was considered as differentially abundant if the mean normalized spot volume varied at least 1.5-fold between compared spots. The effect was confirmed by analysis of variance at a significance level of p<0.05. Protein spots showing significant variations between the different conditions were manually excised from the gels using a scalpel blade and identified using mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Spots that had been excised were submitted to tryptic digestion as previously described (Nally et al., 2017). Tryptic peptides were subsequently ionized using alpha-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid as matrix. Samples were analysed at CEQUIBIEM (Facultad de Ciencias Exactas y Naturales, UBA, IQUIBICEN, CONICET, Buenos Aires, Argentina) and at LIST ( Luxembourg Institute of Science and Technology, Environmental Research and Innovation (ERIN), Luxembourg).  Samples processed at CEQUIBIEM were analysed with an Ultraflex II Bruker Daltonics UV-MALDI-TOF-TOF mass spectrometer, equipped with a Nd:YAG laser (355 nm) as follows: Spectra were obtained in positive reflectron mode, within a mass range of 800-4000 m/z.  The positive-ion mass spectra were calibrated externally using the Bruker Peptide Calibration Mix Standard II (Bruker Daltonics PN222570).  The generated spectra were visualized and compared with FlexAnalysis 3.3 software. The generated peak list was based on signal-to-noise filtering and a contaminant exclusion list.  Two high S/N MS peaks per sample were selected for fragmentation by MALDI TOF-TOF. MS and MSMS spectra for each spot were combined using BioTools software (Bruker Daltonics). The resulting file was then searched using Mascot (Matrix Science, Boston, MA) against NCBInr (20160618) database, taxonomy: Escherichia coli for Escherichia coli  O157:H7 NCTC 12900 samples, and against the Mascot taxonomy category Other firmicutes for Enterococcus mundtii CRL 35 samples. The database search parameters were: peptide mass tolerance of 100 ppm, fragment mass tolerance of 0.5 Da, one missed cleavage, oxidation of methionine as variable modifications, and carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification. Only matched proteins with significant scores (P< 0.05) were considered.   Samples processed at LIST were analysed using a TOF/TOF 5800 (AB SCIEX, Redwood City, CA, USA) as follows: Spectra were obtained in positive reflectron mode, within a mass range of 900-4000 m/z.  The positive-ion mass spectra were internally calibrated using the known trypsin auto-digestion peaks, when possible, or externally calibrated using the Mass Standards Kit for Calibration of AB SCIEX TOF/TOF Instruments (AB SCIEX, Redwood City, CA, USA). For each spot, the 10 most intense peaks of the MS spectrum were selected for MS/MS acquisition. Peaklists generated from all spectra of each spots were submitted, by ProteinPilot (v4.0, AB SCIEX, Redwood City, CA, USA), to an in-house Mascot server (v2.4.2, Matrix Science, Boston, MA). Searches were carried against NCBInr (20151110) database, taxonomy: Escherichia coli for Escherichia coli  O157:H7 NCTC 12900 samples, and against a database of all Enterococcus mundtii entries from the NCBInr (20160609, 20613 sequences) for Enterococcus mundtii CRL 35 samples. The database search parameters were: peptide mass tolerance of 100 ppm, fragment mass tolerance of 0.5 Da, two missed cleavage, oxidation of methionine and tryptophan to kynurenin as variable modifications, and carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification. Only matched proteins with significant scores (P< 0.05) were considered.

### Publication Abstract
The enterohemorrhagic Escherichia (E.) coli (EHEC) is a pathogen of great concern for public health and the meat industry all over the world. The high economic losses in meat industry and the high costs of the illness highlight the necessity of additional efforts to control this pathogen. Previous studies have demonstrated the inhibitory activity of Enterococcus mundtii CRL35 towards EHEC, showing a specific proteomic response during the co-culture. In the present work, additional studies of the EHEC-Ent. mundtii interaction were carried out: i) differential protein expression of E. coli O157:H7 NCTC12900 growing in co-culture with Ent. mundtii in a meat environment, ii) the reciprocal influence between these two microorganisms in the adhesion to extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins and iii) the possible induction of the phage W933, coding for Shiga toxin (Stx1), by Ent. mundtii CRL35. Proteomic analysis showed a significant repression of a number of E. coli NCTC12900 proteins in co-culture respect to its single culture, these mostly related to the metabolism and transport of amino acids and nucleotides. On the other hand, statistically significant overexpression of EHEC proteins involved in stress, energy production, amino acid metabolism and transcription was observed at 30&#x202f;h respect to 6&#x202f;h when EHEC grew in co-culture. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD014588. Besides, EHEC showed a decreased adhesion capacity to ECM proteins in the presence of the bioprotective strain. Finally, Ent. mundtii CRL35 did not induce the lytic cycle of W933 bacteriophage, thus indicating its potential safe use for eliminating this pathogen. Overall, this study expands the knowledge of EHEC- Ent. mundtii CRL35 interaction in a meat environment, which will certainly contribute to find out effective biological strategies to eliminate this pathogen.

### Keywords
Bioprotection, Lactic acid bacteria, Meat  proteomics, Escherichia coli, Bacterial interaction

### Affiliations
CERELA CONICET - Argentina (Reference Center for Lactobacilli, National Scientific and Technical Research Council - Argentina)
Luxembourg Institute of Science and Technology

### Submitter
Sebastien Planchon

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Silvina Fadda
CERELA CONICET - Argentina (Reference Center for Lactobacilli, National Scientific and Technical Research Council - Argentina)


