### Accession
PXD045483

### Title
Aged gastrocnemius muscle of mice positively responds to a late onset adapted physical training

### Description
A regular physical training is known to contribute to preserve muscle mass and strength, maintaining structure and function of neural and vascular compartments and preventing muscle insulin resistance and inflammation. However, physical activity is progressively reduced during aging causing mobility limitations and poor quality of life. Although physical exercise for rehabilitation purposes (e.g., after fractures or cardiovascular events) or simply aiming to counteract the development of sarcopenia is frequently advised by physicians, nevertheless few data are available on the targets and the global effects on the muscle organ of adapted exercise especially if started at old age. To contribute answering this question for medical translational purposes, the proteomic profile of the gastrocnemius muscle was analyzed in 24-month-old mice undergoing adapted physical training on a treadmill for 12 weeks or kept under a sedentary lifestyle condition. Proteomic data were implemented by morphological and morphometrical ultrastructural evaluations. Data demonstrate that muscles can respond to adapted physical training started at old age, positively modulating their morphology and the proteomic profile fostering protective and saving mechanisms either involving muscle cell components and pathways (i.e., mitochondrial processes, translation pathways and protein refolding, contractile apparatus) as well as the extracellular compartment. Therefore, this study provides important insights on the targets of adapted physical training, which can be regarded as suitable benchmarks for future in vivo studies further exploring the effects of this type of physical activity by functional/metabolic approaches.

### Sample Protocol
For proteomic analysis, whole gastrocnemius muscles were quickly removed from three O-S and three O-T (sacrificed by cervical dislocation) and frozen. Tissue protein digestion was performed as previously described (Lofaro et al., 2021). Frozen muscles were homogenized in phosphate buffer (PBS) on ice using a glass homogenizer to solubilize cellular and hydrophilic proteins. The resulting homogenates were then centrifuged at 8000× g for 30 minutes at 4 °C. The supernatants (PBS extract) were collected, whereas pellets were resuspended in urea-thiourea buffer and incubated at 4 °C for 24 hours with continuous shaking. The samples were centrifuged at 15,000× g for 20 minutes at 4 °C to obtain the supernatant (U/T extract), while the pellet was homogenized in guanidinium-HCl buffer (pH = 8.5, 1:5 w/v), heated at 100 °C for 10 minutes, and collected (GuHCl extract). The protein concentration of each fraction was determined using the Bradford method (Bradford, 1976). For each fraction (200 μg of proteins), a gel-tube digestion method was performed, as already described (Boraldi et al., 2019). The proteins embedded in the gel-tubes were firstly reduced by incubation with 10 mM dithioerythritol and 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate at 56 °C for 45 minutes. Subsequently,they were alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide and 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 30 minutes at room temperature in the dark. Protein digestion was performed by trypsin with an enzyme-to-protein ratio of 1:100 (Promega, Madison, MI, USA). Peptides were extracted from the gel-tubes using 100% acetonitrile and subsequently dried in a SpeedVac (Eppendorf AG, Hamburg, Germany). Mass spectrometric analysis was performed using an LC coupled to a QExactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher).

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data (.raw) were examined using BatMass (v. 0.3.0), as previously described (Lofaro et al., 2021). Briefly, replicates were aligned using FreeStyle (v.1.5) to assess the run quality. The raw files were then converted to .mzXML format using msConvert ProteoWizard (v.3.0.19239) with default settings and uploaded to the MSFragger (v.3.4.0) for MS/MS Ion Search. The search was conducted using the Uniprot database (2018_05) limited to Mus musculus (Taxonomy ID: 10090). Enzyme was specified to trypsin with a maximum of 1 missed cleavage. Fix modification was carbamidomethylation of cysteine, whereas variable modifications were deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, oxidation of methionine, and cysteine propionamide. Data searches were performed with a mass error tolerance of 10 ppm for precursor ions and of 0.02 Da for fragment ions with peptide charge states of 2+, 3+, and 4+.Only confidently identified peptides with a false discovery rate (FDR) ≤ 1 and proteins with at least one unique peptide were exported. The MSFragger results (interact.pep) obtained for each extraction were imported into Skyline-daily (v.21.0.9.139) to generate spectral libraries using the following parameters: a spectra cut-off score of 0.95, peptide length ranging from 8 to 25 amino acids, and precursor ion charges of 2+, 3+, and 4+. MS1 filters were set to "use high selectivity extraction" with a resolving power of 60,000 at 300 m/z, and repeated and duplicate peptides were removed. Following the Skyline "DDA peptide search" In review workflow, the raw files (.raw) were imported and matched to the spectral libraries to recover precursor ion intensity. Precursor ion intensity represents the sum of areas under the curve of extracted ion chromatograms (XICs) containing precursor ion isotope peaks (M, M+1, M+2) (Singhto and Thongboonkerd, 2018). Fasta files containing proteins with a 1% FDR were imported into Skyline to maintain and fix the FDR. The quantitative analysis was only conducted on proteins identified with at least two peptides because the quantification of a single peptide across LC-MS/MS runs could be not sufficiently accurate (Tsai et al., 2020).

### Publication Abstract
<b>Introduction:</b> A regular physical training is known to contribute to preserve muscle mass and strength, maintaining structure and function of neural and vascular compartments and preventing muscle insulin resistance and inflammation. However, physical activity is progressively reduced during aging causing mobility limitations and poor quality of life. Although physical exercise for rehabilitation purposes (<i>e.g.,</i> after fractures or cardiovascular events) or simply aiming to counteract the development of sarcopenia is frequently advised by physicians, nevertheless few data are available on the targets and the global effects on the muscle organ of adapted exercise especially if started at old age. <b>Methods:</b> To contribute answering this question for medical translational purposes, the proteomic profile of the gastrocnemius muscle was analyzed in 24-month-old mice undergoing adapted physical training on a treadmill for 12&#xa0;weeks or kept under a sedentary lifestyle condition. Proteomic data were implemented by morphological and morphometrical ultrastructural evaluations. <b>Results and Discussion:</b> Data demonstrate that muscles can respond to adapted physical training started at old age, positively modulating their morphology and the proteomic profile fostering protective and saving mechanisms either involving the extracellular compartment as well as muscle cell components and pathways (<i>i.e.,</i> mitochondrial processes, cytoplasmic translation pathways, chaperone-dependent protein refolding, regulation of skeletal muscle contraction). Therefore, this study provides important insights on the targets of adapted physical training, which can be regarded as suitable benchmarks for future <i>in vivo</i> studies further exploring the effects of this type of physical activity by functional/metabolic approaches.

### Keywords
Matrix, Physical training, Ageing, Proteomics, Electron microscopy, Skeletal muscle

### Affiliations
University of Modena and Reggio Emilia

### Submitter
Francesco Demetrio Lofaro

### Lab Head
Dr Federica Boraldi
University of Modena and Reggio Emilia


