### Accession
PXD041543

### Title
Identifying convergent pathomechanisms in ALS using hiPSC-derived motor neurons

### Description
Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS) is a fatal neurodegenerative disease mainly affecting upper and lower motoneurons (MNs). In the last decades, several genes have been associated to the familial form of this disorder (fALS), thus depicting an extremely complex pathogenic landscape. The aim of this study was to identify convergent molecular underpinnings shared by ALS cases characterized by mutations in different genes using human induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs).

### Sample Protocol
hiPSCs were cultured at 37°C (5% CO2, 5% O2) on Matrigel®-coated 6-well plates using mTeSR1 medium, and motor neuron differentiation was carried out. After 6 weeks in vitro, cultures were processed for mass spectrometry. For proteome analyses ten microgram of proteins per sample were digested in solution with trypsin. For phosphoproteome analyses one milligram of proteins per sample were digested, and peptides were further purified on Sep-Pak 18 cartridges and subjected three times to phosphopeptide enrichment by MagReSyn Ti-IMAC. LC-MS analyses of desalted peptides were performed on an EASY-nLC 1200 UHPLC coupled to a Q Exactive HF, or quadrupole Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer. Peptides were eluted with a 127 minute (proteome) or 57 minute (phosphoproteome) segmented gradient of 10-33-50-90% of HPLC solvent B (80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 200 nl/min.  For the Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer, full MS were acquired in a scan range of 300-1650 m/z at resolution 60k and target values of 3x106 charges with maximum IT set to 25 ms. In each scan cycle, the 12 (proteome) or 7 (phosphoproteome) most intense precursor ions were picked up at target values of 105 charges and maximum IT set to 45 ms and 220 ms, respectively, and fragmented using higher energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) of 27. MS/MS spectra were recorded with resolution 30k (proteome) and 60k (phosphoproteome), respectively. In all proteome and phosphoproteome measurements, sequenced precursor masses were excluded from further selection for 30 s.  For the quadrupole Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer, full MS were acquired in a scan range of 300-1750 m/z range at resolution 60k with an automatic gain control (AGC) set to standard and a maximum ion injection time set to automatic. The 20 most intense precursor ions were sequentially fragmented with a normalized collision energy of 28 in each scan cycle using HCD fragmentation. MS/MS spectra were recorded with a resolution of 15k, whereby fill time was set to automatic. In all measurements, sequenced precursor masses were excluded from further selection for 30 s.

### Data Protocol
MS data were processed using default parameters of the MaxQuant software (v1.5.2.8 or v1.6.14.0). Extracted peak lists were submitted to database search using the Andromeda search engine to query a target-decoy database of Homo sapiens. In database search, full tryptic specificity was required and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification, whereas protein N-terminal acetylation, and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications. In addition, phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine were set as variable modification for phosphoproteome analysis. Initial precursor mass tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm, and 20 ppm at the fragment ion level. Peptide, protein and modification site identifications were filtered at a false discovery rate of 0.01. The iBAQ and LFQ algorithms were enabled, as was the “match between runs” option.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Motor neurons, Synapse, Hipsc, Als

### Affiliations
Proteome Center Tuebingen
Cell biology of neurodegenerative diseases Institute of Anatomy and Cell Biology Ulm University Ulm Germany

### Submitter
Mirita Franz-Wachtel

### Lab Head
Dr Alberto Catanese
Cell biology of neurodegenerative diseases Institute of Anatomy and Cell Biology Ulm University Ulm Germany


