### Accession
PXD027095

### Title
Phosphoproteomic analysis of thermomorphogenic responses in Arabidopsis

### Description
To identify early regulators of plant thermo-responsiveness, we performed phosphoproteomic analysis using TMT (Tandem Mass Tags) labeling and phospeptide enrichment with dark-grown Arabidopsis wild-type seedlings treated with or without 3 hours of warm temperatures (29°C).

### Sample Protocol
Stratified WT seeds were exposed to light for 8 hr and then were kept in the dark at 22°C for 2 days, after which the plates were kept at 22°C or 29°C for 3 hours and etiolated seedlings were sampled for further study with three biological replicates.  Proteomics analysis was carried out in the company PTM BIO (Hangzhou, China). Briefly, samples were ground with the lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Triton-100, 10 mM dithiothreitol, and 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail), followed by sonication three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz). Total proteins were precipitated with cold 20% TCA for 2 h at -20 °C and redissolved in 8 M urea. After digestion with trypsin, peptides were desalted by Strata X C18 SPE columns (Phenomenex) and labeled with TMT kits according to the manufacturer’s protocol. For phosphoproteomic study, phosphopeptides were enriched with TiO2 (IMAC). The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using the Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8) against the Arabidopsis TAIR database. The mass error for precursor ions was less than 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in Main search, and the mass error for fragment ions was less than 0.02 Da. Differentially regulated phosphopeptides were calculated and their corresponding proteins were subjected to GO analysis (Biological Process, Cellular Component, Molecular Function).

### Publication Abstract
Plants rapidly adapt to elevated ambient temperature by adjusting their growth and developmental programs. To date, a number of experiments have been carried out to understand how plants sense and respond to warm temperatures. However, how warm temperature signals are relayed from thermosensors to transcriptional regulators is largely unknown. To identify new early regulators of plant thermo-responsiveness, we performed phosphoproteomic analysis using TMT (Tandem Mass Tags) labeling and phosphopeptide enrichment with <i>Arabidopsis</i> etiolated seedlings treated with or without 3h of warm temperatures (29&#xb0;C). In total, we identified 13,160 phosphopeptides in 5,125 proteins with 10,700 quantifiable phosphorylation sites. Among them, 200 sites (180 proteins) were upregulated, while 120 sites (87 proteins) were downregulated by elevated temperature. GO (Gene Ontology) analysis indicated that phosphorelay-related molecular function was enriched among the differentially phosphorylated proteins. We selected ATL6 (ARABIDOPSIS TOXICOS EN LEVADURA 6) from them and expressed its native and phosphorylation-site mutated (S343A S357A) forms in <i>Arabidopsis</i> and found that the mutated form of ATL6 was less stable than that of the native form both <i>in vivo</i> and in cell-free degradation assays. Taken together, our data revealed extensive protein phosphorylation during thermo-responsiveness, providing new candidate proteins/genes for studying plant thermomorphogenesis in the future.

### Keywords
Thermomorphogenesis, Phosphoproteomics, Arabidopsis, Hypocotyl growth, Warm temperature

### Affiliations
ZHEJIANG UNIVERSITY
State Key Laboratory of Plant Physiology and Biochemistry, College of Life Sciences, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310027, China

### Submitter
yujian shao

### Lab Head
Dr Jian-Xiang Liu
State Key Laboratory of Plant Physiology and Biochemistry, College of Life Sciences, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310027, China


