### Accession
PXD023280

### Title
Sickle cell trait modulates the proteome and phosphoproteome of Plasmodium falciparum-infected erythrocyte

### Description
The high prevalence of sickle cell disease in some human populations likely results from the protection afforded against severe Plasmodium falciparum malaria and death by heterozygous carriage of HbS. P. falciparum remodels the erythrocyte membrane and skeleton, displaying parasite proteins at the erythrocyte surface that interact with key human proteins in the Ankyrin R and 4.1R complexes. Oxidative stress generated by HbS, as well as by parasite invasion, disrupts the kinase/phosphatase balance, potentially interfering with the molecular interactions between human and parasite proteins. HbS is known to be associated with abnormal membrane display of parasite antigens. Studying the proteome and the phosphoproteome of red cell membrane extracts from P. falciparum infected and non-infected erythrocytes, we show here that HbS heterozygous carriage, combined with infection, modulates the phosphorylation of erythrocyte membrane transporters and skeletal proteins as well as of parasite proteins. Our results highlight modifications of Ser- /Thr- and/or Tyr- phosphorylation in key human proteins, such as ankyrin, β-adducin, β-spectrin and Band 3, and key parasite proteins, such as RESA or MESA. Altered phosphorylation patterns could disturb the interactions within membrane protein complexes, affect nutrient uptake and the infected erythrocyte cytoadherence phenomenon, thus lessening the severity of malaria symptoms.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation and mass spectrometry Proteins, from erythrocyte membrane or from parasite extracts, (100 μg) were first solubilized in 2% SDS pH 7.5 and heated at 95°C for 5 minutes. Samples were then reduced with 0.1 M dithiothreitol (Sigma-Aldrich) at 60°C for 1 hour. Mass Spectrometry (MS) sample preparation was performed using a filter aided sample preparation (FASP) method according to Lipecka et al. (Lipecka et al., 2016). We set aside 10% of the peptides for total ghost proteome analysis, while the remaining sample was used for phosphopeptide enrichment.  Phosphopeptide enrichment by titanium dioxide (TiO2) Phosphopeptide enrichment was carried out using a Titansphere TiO2 Spin tips (3 mg/200 μL, Titansphere PHOS-TiO (GL Sciences Inc) on the digested proteins for each biological replicate according to manufacturer’s instructions. Samples were applied to the TiO2 Spin tips three times in total in order to increase the adsorption of the phosphopeptides to the TiO2. Phosphopeptides were eluted by the sequential addition of 50 µL of 5% NH4OH and 50 µL of 5% pyrrolidine. Phosphopeptides were washed and eluted with 70 µL of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), 80% acetonitrile high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC)-grade (1,000 x g for 3 minutes) and vacuum dried.  NanoLC-MS/MS protein identification and quantification Samples were resuspended in 10 µL of 0.1% TFA in HPLC-grade water. For each run, 1 µL was injected in a nanoRSLC-Q Exactive PLUS (RSLC Ultimate 3000) (Thermo Scientific). Phosphopeptides were loaded onto a µ-precolumn (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, cartridge, 300 µm i.d.×5 mm, 5 µm) (Thermo Scientific), and were separated on a 50 cm reversed-phase liquid chromatographic column (0.075 mm ID, Acclaim PepMap 100, C18, 2 µm) (Thermo Scientific). Phosphopeptides were analysed using mass spectrometry parameters according to Meijer et al (Meijer et al., 2017).

### Data Protocol
The MS files were processed with the MaxQuant software version 1.5.8.3 and searched with Andromeda search engine against a merged database of human from Swissprot 2011-10-19 and Plasmodium falciparum from Swissprot and PlasmoDB 8.1 (26047 entries in total). MS files from total ghosts (proteome) and from TiO2 enriched peptides (phosphoproteome) were searched using two parameters groups. To search parent mass and fragment ions, we set a mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and 20 ppm respectively. Strict specificity for trypsin/P cleavage was required, allowing up to two missed cleavage sites. Carbamidomethylation (Cysteine) was set as fixed modification, whereas oxidation (Methionine) and N-term acetylation were set as variable modifications. For the analysis of MS files issued of TiO2 enrichment, the variable modification of phosphorylation on S, T and Y was also added. The false discovery rates (FDRs) at the protein and peptide level were set to 1%. Scores were calculated in MaxQuant as described previously (Cox and Mann, 2008). Match between runs was allowed. The reverse hits were removed from MaxQuant output. Proteins were quantified according to the MaxQuant label-free algorithm using Label-free quantification (LFQ) intensities (Cox and Mann, 2008; Cox et al., 2014) and phosphopeptides according to intensity; protein and peptide quantification were obtained using at least 1 peptide per protein.  Statistical and bioinformatic analysis, including heatmaps, profile plots and clustering, were performed with Perseus software (version 1.6.0.7) freely available at www.perseus-framework.org (Tyanova et al., 2016). For statistical comparison of the ghost proteome, we set 4 groups niHbAA, iHbAA, niHbAS, iHbAS. Each group contained 3 biological replicates (different donors). Each sample was also run in technical triplicates.  For total ghost proteome analysis, we analyzed the proteingroups.txt file. Protein LFQ intensities were transformed in log (2). Proteins were separated into Plasmodium and human to select the RBC derived proteins. We filtered the data to keep only proteins with at least 3 valid values in at least one group. Data were imputed to fill missing data points by creating a gaussian distribution of random numbers with a standard deviation of 33% relative to the standard deviation of the measured values and 1.8 standard deviation downshift of the mean to simulate the distribution of low signal values. We performed an ANOVA test, p-value<0.01, S0=0.1.  For phosphopeptide analysis, we analyzed the Phospho(STY).txt file. Phosphopeptide intensities were transformed in log (2), site table was expanded to analyze all phosphosites separately. Phosphosites were separated into Plasmodium and human to select the RBC derived phosphoproteins. We filtered the data to keep only phosphosites with at least 3 valid values in at least one group. Phosphosite intensities were normalized by subtracting the median and adding a constant (25). Data were imputed to fill missing data as described above. We performed an ANOVA to compare the four groups, p-value<0.05, S0=0.1. To evaluate the influence of the genotype on the infection, and if it induces variations, we also performed a 2-way ANOVA test, separating the infection and the genotype factors, interaction p-value<0.05.  For phosphopeptide analysis of the parasites, we analyzed the Phospho(STY).txt file. Phosphopeptide intensities were transformed in log (2), site table was expanded to analyze all phosphosites separately. Phosphosites were separated into Plasmodium and human to exclude the contamination from the RBC derived phosphoproteins. Only phosphosites with at least 0.75 of localization probability were retained. We filtered the data to keep only phosphosites with at least 3 valid values in at least one group. Data were imputed to fill missing values points by creating a gaussian distribution of random numbers with a standard deviation of 33% relative to the standard deviation of the measured values and 3 standard deviation downshift of the mean to simulate the distribution of very low signal values. We performed a t-test to compare the parasite phosphoproteome after infection in HbAA vs HbAS, FDR<0.05, S0=0.5.  Hierarchical clustering of phosphosites/proteins that survived the tests was performed in Perseus on logarithmised LFQ intensities after z-score normalization of the data, using Euclidean distances.

### Publication Abstract
The high prevalence of sickle cell disease in some human populations likely results from the protection afforded against severe <i>Plasmodium falciparum</i> malaria and death by heterozygous carriage of HbS. <i>P.&#xa0;falciparum</i> remodels the erythrocyte membrane and skeleton, displaying parasite proteins at the erythrocyte surface that interact with key human proteins in the Ankyrin&#xa0;R and 4.1R complexes. Oxidative stress generated by HbS, as well as by parasite invasion, disrupts the kinase/phosphatase balance, potentially interfering with the molecular interactions between human and parasite proteins. HbS is known to be associated with abnormal membrane display of parasite antigens. Studying the proteome and the phosphoproteome of red cell membrane extracts from <i>P.&#xa0;falciparum</i> infected and non-infected erythrocytes, we show here that HbS heterozygous carriage, combined with infection, modulates the phosphorylation of erythrocyte membrane transporters and skeletal proteins as well as of parasite proteins. Our results highlight modifications of Ser-/Thr- and/or Tyr- phosphorylation in key human proteins, such as ankyrin, &#x3b2;-adducin, &#x3b2;-spectrin and Band 3, and key parasite proteins, such as RESA or MESA. Altered phosphorylation patterns could disturb the interactions within membrane protein complexes, affect nutrient uptake and the infected erythrocyte cytoadherence phenomenon, thus lessening the severity of malaria symptoms.

### Keywords
Membrane phosphorylation, Erythrocyte, Proteomics., Plasmodium falciparum, Hemoglobin s

### Affiliations
Université de Paris, IRD, UMR 261 MERIT, F-75006 Paris, France
Proteomics Platform Necker, PPN-3P5, Structure Fédérative de Recherche SFR Necker, Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France

### Submitter
Cerina Chhuon

### Lab Head
Dr Anaïs Merckx
Université de Paris, IRD, UMR 261 MERIT, F-75006 Paris, France


