### Accession
PXD011718

### Title
Integrative analysis of transcriptomics and proteomics of Longissimus dorsi muscle to identify proteins underlying intramuscular fat content in pigs

### Description
The Laiwu pig is famous for its excessively higher level of IMF content, however, the exact regulatory mechanism is still unknown. The intramuscular fat content (IMF) is an economically important traits in pigs, which is controlled by multiple genes and biological pathways. In the present study, we performed an integrated transcriptome-assisted label-free quantitative proteomic analysis of longissimus dorsi (LD) muscle in Laiwu pigs at the fastest IMF deposition stage. A total of 5074 unique proteins were identified and 191 were differentially abundant proteins (DAPs) (> 1.2-fold cutoff, p < 0.05), which were hierarchically clustered in the LD muscle over two developmental stages from 120 d to 240 d. Proteins participating in the regulation of lipolysis in adipocytes and AMPK signaling pathway were identified. Six proteins were analyzed using parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) to confirm the reliability of the TMT proteomic analysis. Association networks of differentially abundant proteins revealed that these DAPs were mainly involved in ribosome biosynthesis in eukaryotic species. A comparasion between transcriptomic (mRNA) and proteomic data revealed seven differentially expressed genes corresponding to DAPs. This study, for the first time, provides some data for the elucidation of the molecular mechanism of IMF deposition in pigs.

### Sample Protocol
2.1. Animal sampling All animals used in this study were treated according to International Guiding Principles for Biomedical Research Involving Animals. A total of six castrated male Laiwu pigs reared under similar environmental and feeding conditions were randomly selected from the Conservation Center of Laiwu pigs (Laiwu, Shandong, China) at 120 and 240 days of two developmental stages (n = 3). Each stage includes three individuals of similar body weights. These pigs were weighed and slaughtered, and sampled from the LD muscle at the third lumbar vertebra, and then stored at liquid nitrogen. 2.2. Protein Extraction The sample were crushed in a mortar containing liquid nitrogen, and then transferred to a 5-mL centrifuge tube. After that, four volumes of lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail) were added to the cell powder, followed by sonication three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the supernatant was collected and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit according to the beyotime’s instructions. 2.3. Trypsin Digestion and TMT Labeling  For digestion, the extracted protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to urea concentration less than 2M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratios for a second 4 h-digestion. After trypsin digestion, peptide was desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. Peptide was reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for TMT kit. The peptide mixtures were then incubated for 2 h at room temperature and pooled, desalted and then dried using vacuum centrifugation 2.4. HPLC Fractionation The labeled peptides were fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Agilent 300Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID, 250 mm length). Peptides were first separated with a gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile (pH 9.0) over 60 min into 60 fractions. Then the peptides were combined into 18 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging. 2.5. LC-MS/MS Analysis The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q Exactive™ Plus (Thermo Fisher Scientifc), which had been coupled online to the UPLC. The resulting MS/MS data were searched against a transcriptome database with MaxQuant (v.1.5.2.8), and a functional annotation for the quantified proteins was performed with GO (Gene ontology) and KEGG (Kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes) pathway analysis. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE [19] partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD008448.

### Data Protocol
2.6. Quantitative real-time RT-PCR Total RNA from the 120 d and 240 d LD muscles in a TRAzol reagent (Takara Biotechnology, Inc., Japan), according to the manufacturer's protocol. First-strand cDNA was synthesized using Primescript RT reagent (Takara Bio Inc., Otsu, Japan) in a 20 μl total volume, containing 1 μL total RNA, 1 μL gDNA Eraser, 2 μL 5 × gDNAEraser Buffer, 4 μL 5 × Prime Script Buffer 2, 1 μL Prime Script RT Enzyme Mix, 1 μL RT Primer Mix4 and RNase-Free dH2O. Next the cDNA amplified using a duplicate SYBR Green real-time PCR reagent (Roche). The GAPDH gene was used as an endogenous control for normalization. 2.7. PRM-MS analysis The protein expression levels obtained using TMT analysis were confrmed by quantifying the expression levels of twelve selected proteins by a PRM-MS analysis carried out at the Hangzhou Jingjie PTM BioLab Co., Ltd. (Hangzhou, China). Signature peptides for the target proteins were defined according to the TMT data, and only unique peptide sequences were selected for the PRM analysis. The proteins (60μg) were prepared, reduced, alkylated, and digested with trypsin following the protocol for TMT analysis. The obtained peptide mixtures were introduced into the mass spectrometer via a C18 trap column (0.10× 20 mm; 3μm), and then via a C18 column (0.15× 120 mm; 1.9μm)  2.8. Statistical Analysis Student t-test was employed to analyze the mRNA over two developmental stages of pig muscle. The GO and KEGG analysis were performed by Fisher’s t-test. p < 0.05 was considered significantly different. To acquire the bioinformatics, the STRING 10.5 (www.string-db.org) databases were used.

### Publication Abstract
The Laiwu pig is famous for its excessively extremely high level of intramuscular fat content (IMF), however, the exact regulatory mechanism underlying intramuscular fat deposition in skeletal muscle is still unknown. As an economically important trait in pigs, IMF is controlled by multiple genes and biological pathways. In this study, we performed an integrated transcriptome-assisted TMT-labeled quantitative proteomic analysis of the longissimus dorsi (LD) muscle in Laiwu pigs at the fastest IMF deposition stage and identified 5074 unique proteins and 52 differentially abundant proteins (DAPs) (&gt;1.5-fold cutoff, p&#xa0;&lt; .05). These DAPs were hierarchically clustered in the LD muscle over two developmental stages from 120 d to 240 d. A comparison between transcriptomic (mRNA) and proteomic data revealed two differentially expressed genes corresponding to the DAPs. Changes in the levels of the nine proteins were further analyzed using RT-qPCR and parallel reaction monitoring (PRM). The proteins identified in this study could serve as candidates for elucidating the molecular mechanism of IMF deposition in pigs. SIGNIFICANCE: The intramuscular fat content (IMF) refers to the amount of fat within muscles and plays an important role in meat quality by affecting meat quality-related traits, such as tenderness, juiciness and flavor. Using the integrated transcriptome-assisted TMT-labeled quantitative proteomic approach to characterize changes in the proteomic profile of the longissimus dorsi muscle, we identified differentially abundant proteins, such as ALDH1B1, OTX2, AnxA6 and Zfp512, that are associated with intramuscular fat deposition and fat biosynthesis in pigs. These proteins could serve as candidates for elucidating the molecular mechanism of IMF deposition in pigs.

### Keywords
Pig; longissimus dorsi muscle; intramuscular fat content; proteomics; tmt; protein

### Affiliations
Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of Animal Biotechnology and Disease Control and Prevention,College of Animal Science and Veterinary Medicine, Shandong Agricultural University, No.61 Daizong Street,Taian 271018,Shandong,P.R.China;
PTM Biolabs Inc.

### Submitter
lihuan Qin

### Lab Head
Dr Yunliang Jiang
Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of Animal Biotechnology and Disease Control and Prevention,College of Animal Science and Veterinary Medicine, Shandong Agricultural University, No.61 Daizong Street,Taian 271018,Shandong,P.R.China;


