### Accession
PXD028798

### Title
Analysis of proteins that bind promoter of the PDR5 multidrug transporter gene in Saccharomyces cerevisiae using minichromosome isolation and LC-MS/MS

### Description
The Pleiotropic Drug Resistance (PDR) network is central to the drug response in fungi, and its overactivation is associated with drug resistance. However, gene regulation of the PDR network is not well understood. Here, we established a method to identify proteins that bind promoter of the PDR5 multidrug transporter gene in Saccharomyces cerevisiae using minichromosome isolation and SILAC-based quantitative proteomics, and identified the SWI/SNF chromatin remodelling complex as a PDR5 promoter-binding complex. We also purified the SWI/SNF complex from S. cerevisiae by immunoprecipitating Flag-tagged Snf6, a subunit of SWI/SNF, and identified the subunits of SWI/SNF and its binding proteins by LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
1. Identifying SW/SNF as a PDR5 promoter-binding complex To capture proteins assembled at the PDR5 promoter in a near-native in vivo context, we utilised a minichromosome isolation technique followed by SILAC-based quantitative proteomics. In this method, we purified from S. cerevisiae short circular chromosomes containing the PDR5 promoter and eight lactose operators (lacO) by immunoprecipitating FLAG-tagged Lac Repressor (LacI). Proteins bound to the PDR5 promoter will be enriched on the PDR5 promoter-containing minichromosome (PDR5pro), compared to a control minichromosome (Empty). Cells carrying minichromosome plasmids were grown in 1 L of SILAC media (Kaiser SC-Arg-Lys-Trp, supplemented with 20 mg/L heavy arginine-HCl (Arg10) and 30 mg/L lysine-2HCl (Lys6) or, for a control, 20 mg/L light arginine-HCl and 30 mg/L light lysine-2HCl) at 30C until log phase and harvested. After washing cells in ice-cold water supplemented with 2 mM PMSF, cells were resuspended in buffer H150 (25 mM HEPES-KOH, pH 7.5, 150 mM KCl, 2 mM MgCl2, 10% glycerol, 0.02% NP40, 1 mM PMSF, cOmplete Protease Inhibitor cocktail without EDTA (Roche), PhosSTOP (Roche), 5 mM nicotinamide) and disrupted using a FastPreP-24 bead beater (MP Biomedicals). Clarified lysates were prepared by centrifugation at 20,000 g for 20 min three times. lacO-containing minichromosomes were isolated by immunoprecipitating LacI-3FLAG with anti-FLAG M2 antibody (F1804, Sigma) cross-linked to Dynabeads protein G by dimethyl pimelimidate. Proteins on purified minichromosomes were eluted in Elution buffer (50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 0.1% RapiGest SF (Waters), 1 mM IPTG). Peptides digested by trypsin in solution were analysed using an Orbitrap Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a Dionex U3000 RSLCnano liquid chromatography system configured for pre-concentration on C18 PepMap 100 (300 µm i.d. x 5 mm) then peptide separation on EASY-Spray PepMap RSLC C18 (75 µm i.d. x 50 cm) over a 240-min elution gradient.  The raw MS data were analysed by MaxQuant (version 1.6.5.0).  2. Analysis of the SWI/SNF-purified fraction The SWI/SNF complex was purified from a protease-deficient yeast strain containing 3x Flag tag at the C-terminus of the Snf6 SWI/SNF subunit (Snf6-3Flag). The tagged yeast strain was grown in 2 L of YPD overnight at 30C. Cells were collected by centrifugation and washed with 40 ml of cold PBS. Cells were resuspended in 15 ml of Lysis buffer B (20 mM HEPES-NaOH, pH 7.4, 350 ml NaCl, 10% glycerol, 0.1% Tween 20, 1 mM PMSF, Halt protease and phosphatase inhibitor (Thermo Fisher)) and lysed in a FastPreP-24 bead beater (MP Biomedicals). Cell debris was removed by centrifugation at 16,000g at 4C for 20 min. The cleared lysate was mixed with anti-FLAG M2 antibody (F1804, Sigma) bound to Dynabeads Protein G (Invitrogen) and incubated at 4C for 2 h. The beads were washed five times in 1 ml of Lysis buffer B. Bound proteins were eluted with 0.2 ml of Lysis buffer B containing 1 mg/ml 3xFLAG peptide (Merck) by incubated at room temperature for 30 min, with shaking. The elution step was repeated twice, yielding 0.4 ml of eluate. The SWI/SNF complex was further purified and concentrated using Amicon Ultra centrifugal filter unit (MWCO 100 kDa, Millipore), removing smaller proteins including 3x FLAG peptide and exchanging buffer to PBS containing 0.02% Tween 20 and 50% glycerol. Peptides digested by trypsin in solution were analysed using an Orbitrap Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a Dionex U3000 RSLCnano liquid chromatography system configured for pre-concentration on C18 PepMap 100 (300 µm i.d. x 5 mm) then peptide separation on EASY-Spray PepMap RSLC C18 (75 µm i.d. x 50 cm) over a 240-min elution gradient.  The raw MS data was analysed by Proteome Discoverer.

### Data Protocol
1. RAW data obtained from SILAC samples was processed with MaxQuant (version 1.6.5.0) using the standard settings for Orbitrap against a S. cerevisiae protein database UP000002311_559292). Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionines, deamidation of asparagines and glutamines, and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications.  Minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and a maximum of two missed Trypsin/P cleavages was allowed. SILAC quantification was done using standard settings and a Label min ratio count of 2.  2. RAW data obtained from the SWI/SNF-enriched fraction was processed with Proteome Discoverer (version 2.2.0.388) incorporating Mascot Server (version 2.5) using the standard settings for Orbitrap, against a S. cerevisiae protein database. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionines, and phosphorylation of serines, threonines and tyrosines as variable modifications.  A maximum of three missed Trypsin cleavages was allowed.  A strict target FDR of 0.01 for the decoy database search was used.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Immunoprecipitation, Lc-msms, Promoter-binding proteins, Minichromosome, Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Affiliations
University of Aberdeen
Institute of Medical Sciences University of Aberdeen Foresterhill Aberdeen AB25 2ZD Scotland UK

### Submitter
David Stead

### Lab Head
Dr Takashi Kubota
Institute of Medical Sciences University of Aberdeen Foresterhill Aberdeen AB25 2ZD Scotland UK


