### Accession
PXD021106

### Title
Saliva LC-MS/MS of mouth breathing children

### Description
Salivary proteins of mouth breathing children were compared with paired nose breathing children using label-free quantification (LFQ). The differentially expressed proteins were screened (fold-change 1.5, p value<0.05).

### Sample Protocol
The supernatants of saliva were added with 1% PMSF to extract the total proteins of twenty saliva samples, and the concentration was determined using the Bradford assay. The protein fluid solution was added to a 10KDa ultrafiltration tube and digested with trypsin in 0.5M TEAB (1:100 w: w) overnight at 37℃. Each sample was evaporated using a Speedvac and subsequentially reconstituted in 2% acetonitrile (ACN) and 0.1% formic acid (FA). Chromatographic separations of peptides were analyzed with Thermo Scientific Q Exactive (Thermal Scientific, Chelmsford, MA, USA). The scan of first-grade MS ranged from 350-1800 m/z at a resolution of 70,000 and an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3×106. The scan of second-grade MS was initiated as 60 m/z at a resolution of 17,500 and an AGC target of 105. The raw files from the mass spectrometer were transferred to MGF files and retrieved in the database downloaded from uniprot through Maxquant software. The false discovery rate (FDR) was evaluated using the uniprot_rat library, and the proteins identified by sites, reverse database and common contaminant database were filtered. Based on the fundamental analysis of protein and peptides, the differentially expressed proteins were screened (fold-change 1.5, p value<0.05). Proteins from the LFQ experiment were processed with MetaCore to build an analysis of functional ontologies including canonical pathway maps.

### Data Protocol
The raw files from the mass spectrometer were transferred to MGF files and retrieved in the database downloaded from uniprot through Maxquant software (uniprot_rat_29389_20200312.fasta, included 29389 sequences, downloaded in 2020-03-12). The LC-MS/MS data were normalized and aligned according to the manufacturer’s specifications. The false discovery rate (FDR) was evaluated using the uniprot_rat library, and the proteins identified by sites, reverse database and common contaminant database were filtered. Based on the fundamental analysis of protein and peptides, the differentially expressed proteins were screened (fold-change 1.5, p value<0.05). Proteins from the LFQ experiment were processed with MetaCore to build an analysis of functional ontologies including canonical pathway maps. Functional annotation and pathway of the differentially proteins were performed to identify enriched cellular components, biological processes, and molecular functions between paired groups using gene ontology (GO) enrichment analysis and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) analysis. A unimodal model (canonical correspondence analysis [CCA]) was constructed to evaluate the effect of differentially expressed protein, duration of mouth breathing and clinical characteristics (age and gender of participants, with or without caries, and the PLI and GI) on microbiota composition.

### Publication Abstract
Mouth breathing induces a series of diseases, while the influence on microbiota of oral cavity and salivary proteins remains unknown. In this study, for the first time, profiles of oral-nasal-pharyngeal microbiota among mouth-breathing children (MB group, <i>n</i> = 10) were compared with paired nose-breathing children (NB group, <i>n</i> = 10) using 16S ribosomal DNA (rDNA) (V3-V4 region) high-throughput sequencing. The differentially expressed salivary proteins were revealed using label-free quantification (LFQ) method, and their associations with bacterial abundance were measured by canonical correspondence analysis (CCA). The overall bacterial profiles differed between the two groups, and the differences were related to the duration of mouth breathing. The diversity of oral-pharyngeal microbiota was significantly higher, and the nasal-pharyngeal species tended to be consistent (unweighted UniFrac, <i>p</i> = 0.38) in the MB group. Opportunistic pathogens were higher in relative abundance as follows: <i>Acinetobacter</i> in the anterior supragingival plaque, <i>Neisseria</i> in unstimulated saliva, <i>Streptococcus pneumoniae</i> in the pharynx, and <i>Stenotrophomonas</i> in the nostrils. The expression level of oxidative-stress-related salivary proteins (lactoylglutathione lyase and peroxiredoxin-5) were upregulated, while immune-related proteins (integrin alpha-M and proteasome subunit alpha type-1) were downregulated in MB group. The differentially expressed proteins were associated with specific bacteria, indicating their potentials as candidate biomarkers for the diagnosis, putatively early intervention, and therapeutic target of mouth breathing. This study showed that mouth breathing influences the oral-nasal-pharyngeal microbiota and enriches certain pathogens, accompanied with the alterations in the salivary environment. Further research on the pathological mechanisms and dynamic changes in longitudinal studies are warranted.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Mouth breathing children, Saliva

### Affiliations
Micrometer Biotech
Hospital of Stomatology, Guanghua School of Stomatology, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510055, China

### Submitter
Xianliang Ma

### Lab Head
Dr Cancan Fan
Hospital of Stomatology, Guanghua School of Stomatology, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510055, China


