### Accession
PXD023243

### Title
Direct mapping of peptide-spectral-matches to genome information facilitates qualifying proteomics information

### Description
The data set consist of three different sources. 1) All files with ecoli_* derive from a pure culture of Escherichia coli K-12 (MG1655). 2) All files with SIHUMI_standard_* derive from a mixed culture of 8 bacteria (SIHUMIx) Anaerostipes caccae (DSMZ 14662), Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron (DSMZ 2079), Bifidobacterium longum (NCC 2705), Blautia producta (DSMZ 2950), Clostridium butyricum (DSMZ 10702), Clostridium ramosum (DSMZ 1402), Escherichia coli K-12 (MG1655) and Lactobacillus plantarum (DSMZ 20174). A standard proteomic protocol was used for purification. 3) All files with SIHUMI_small_* derive from the same bacteria culture as second source in contrast a variety of different proteomic protocols were used to enhance enrichment of small (<100 AS) Proteins. The goal of the project was to design a workflow to quickly prioritize novel protein candidates. The workflow was designed to be robust in a meta-omics context and facilitate the integration of transcriptomic and other information on a genomic level. The MS-data from the first source was used to test the workflow under well controlled conditions, namely in pure culture and near complete annotation. The workflow was used with data from the second source to see if good results can be produced in a mixed culture. To enhance the chances of finding novel proteins we incorporated the data from the third source.

### Sample Protocol
The bacterial species from SIHUMIx were cultivated as single strains in Brain-Heart-Infusion (BHI) medium under anaerobic conditions at 37°C and 175 rpm shaking for 72 h before inoculation in the bioreactor. A total of 8·x109 bacteria cells (1·x109 cells/strain) were used for inoculation and the SIHUMIx community was continuously cultivated in modified complex intestinal medium in 250 mL culture vessels at 37°C, stirring at 150 rpm and constant pH of 6.5 as described (Schäpe et al., 2019). Samples were taken after 16 days of continuous cultivation. In total, 3 mL bacteria cell suspension were centrifuged (3,200 x g; 10 min; 4°C) and immediately frozen at -80°C for subsequent sample analysis. Different proteomic protocols and lysis buffers were used as described in Petruschke et al 2019 (PRIDE Project PXD016298) and Schäpe et al 2019 (PRIDE Project PXD017035). Extracted peptides were purified by SOLAµ (Thermo Scientific, USA) as per the manufactures suggested. After evaporation peptides were resuspended in 20 µL 0.1% formic acid. In total, 5 µL of peptide lysates were injected into nanoHPLC (UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano, Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific) followed by separation on a C18-reverse phase trapping column (C18 PepMap100, 300 µm x 5 mm, particle size 3 µm, Thermo Fischer Scientific), followed by separation on a C18-reverse phase analytical column (Acclaim PepMap® 100, 75 µm x 25 cm, particle size 3 µm, nanoViper, Thermo Fischer Scientific). Mass spectrometric analysis of eluted peptides was performed on a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) coupled with a TriVersa NanoMate (Advion, Ltd., Harlow, UK) source in LC chip coupling mode. LC Gradient, ionization mode and mass spectrometry mode was performed as described (Haange, Jehmlich et al. 2019).

### Data Protocol
Raw data were converted with msconvert to mzML. Comet (2019.01 rev. 4) was used to generated PSMs. Two different database types were used for the search algorithm once the annotated proteome and a 6frame database of the genome. For both different search configuration were used. Further some proteomic protocols include AspN and Trypsin for which also different parameters were set. This results in four different parameter sets for comet. The parameter files are included.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Metaomics, Intestine, Sihumi, Proteome

### Affiliations
Bioinformartics Leipzig
Helmholtz-Zentrum für Umweltforschung, Department of Molecular Systems Biology

### Submitter
John Anders

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Martin von Bergen
Helmholtz-Zentrum für Umweltforschung, Department of Molecular Systems Biology


