### Accession
PXD020785

### Title
A comprehensive spectral assay library to quantify the Escherichia coli proteome by DIA/SWATH-MS

### Description
A comprehensive and high-quality E. coli spectral assay library for 56,182 proteotypic peptides mapped to 4,014 (91.5%) of the 4,389 annotated proteins using one- and two-dimensional fractionated samples, and ion mobility separation.

### Sample Protocol
All experiments reported in this study were performed with lysates from an E. coli K12 strain and a set of E. coli open reading frame (ORF) archive strains devoid of green fluorescent protein (ASKA(-) library Host Cell AG1(ME5305)) that overexpress individual ORFs fused to a histidine-tagged protein. All strains were grown in Luria-Bertani broth (LB) medium, Tryptone (BD) and sodium chloride (Millipore-Sigma)) or M9 medium (Fisher Scientific)). Cell pellets from whole cell lysates (WCL) were resuspended in 2 mL 8 M Urea (VWR, USA) and 50 mM NH3HCO4 (AmBic) (Millipore-Sigma) per gram of wet weight pellet, sonicated 6 x 15 s, output level 2, 40%, 45 s on ice with a sonifier 250 (Branson). Insoluble cell debris was precipitated by centrifuging the sample for 10 min at 16,000 x g at 4° C. Protein concentration was determined by BCA protein assay (Pierce). Proteins were reduced with 10 mM DTT (Millipore-Sigma) at 56 °C for 25 min and alkylated with 14 mM Iodoacetamide (Millipore-Sigma) for 30 min in the dark. Proteins were digested with sequencing grade Trypsin-Gold (Promega) and a protein to enzyme ratio of 1:100 overnight at 37 °C. Digestion was stopped by lowering the pH to 2.0 and peptides desalted using C18 SepPak columns (Waters) following the manufacture’s protocol. DDA-MS was performed on both a TripleTOF 5600+ (SCIEX) and a TripleTOF 6600 mass spectrometer (SCIEX), both interfaced with a micro-LC interfacePlus HPLC system (Eksigent) configured in either nano-flow or micro-flow mode. DDA replicates in top-10 and top-20 mode configuration were acquired on Triple TOF 5600+ and 6600 instruments. Rolling collision energy with a collision energy spread of +/- 5V was used for fragmentation to mimic SWATH like fragmentation conditions.

### Data Protocol
For spectral library generation, a total 209 DDA-MS wiff files were converted to profile mzML using the ABSCIEX MS data converter. The Trans-Proteomic Pipeline (TPP) (version 5.2.0 Flammagenitus) was used for the analysis of the shotgun proteomics runs. Spectra were searched with both Comet (version 2017.01) and X!Tandem (version 2013.06.15, native and k-score) against the full non-redundant, canonical E. coli K12 reference proteome from UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot (Proteome ID UP000000625, November 2019) with 4,389 reviewed proteins and common contaminant proteins, decoy sequences and iRT peptides (Biognosys) appended. Carbamidomethyl (57.0214 Da) on cysteine was used as fixed modification and oxidation (15.9949 Da) on methionine was set as variable modification. Up to two missed tryptic cleavages were allowed. The precursor mass error was set to ±50 ppm, fragment bin tolerance was set to 0.05 m/z. The search identifications of these runs were combined and statistically scored using PeptideProphet and iProphet within the TPP. MAYU (version 1.07) was used to select an iProphet cutoff of 0.99617, resulting in a protein false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%. A raw and consensus spectral library was built and filtered for a MAYU FDR of 1% using SpectraST in library generation mode with CID-QTOF settings for high resolution and high mass accuracy.

### Publication Abstract
Data-Independent Acquisition (DIA) is a method to improve consistent identification and precise quantitation of peptides and proteins by mass spectrometry (MS). The targeted data analysis strategy in DIA relies on spectral assay libraries that are generally derived from a priori measurements of peptides for each species. Although Escherichia coli (E. coli) is among the best studied model organisms, so far there is no spectral assay library for the bacterium publicly available. Here, we generated a spectral assay library for 4,014 of the 4,389 annotated E. coli proteins using one- and two-dimensional fractionated samples, and ion mobility separation enabling deep proteome coverage. We demonstrate the utility of this high-quality library with robustness in quantitation of the E. coli proteome and with rapid-chromatography to enhance throughput by targeted DIA-MS. The spectral assay library supports the detection and quantification of 91.5% of all E. coli proteins at high-confidence with 56,182 proteotypic peptides, making it a valuable resource for the scientific community. Data and spectral libraries are available via ProteomeXchange (PXD020761, PXD020785) and SWATHAtlas (SAL00222-28).

### Keywords
Spectral assay library, Dda-ms, E. coli

### Affiliations
Institute for Systems Biology
Head of Proteomics Research Institute for Systems Biology 401 Terry Ave N, Seattle, WA 98109, USA

### Submitter
Mukul Midha

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Robert L. Moritiz
Head of Proteomics Research Institute for Systems Biology 401 Terry Ave N, Seattle, WA 98109, USA


