### Accession
PXD011484

### Title
Biochemical specialization of an ATG8 isoform in Nicotiana benthamiana

### Description
ATG8 is a highly-conserved ubiquitin-like protein that modulates autophagy pathways by binding autophagic membranes and numerous proteins, including cargo receptors and core autophagy components. Throughout plant evolution, ATG8 has expanded from a single protein in algae to multiple isoforms in higher plants. However, the degree to which ATG8 isoforms have functionally specialized to bind distinct proteins remains unclear. Here, we describe a comprehensive protein-protein interaction resource, obtained using in planta immunoprecipitation followed by mass spectrometry, to define the potato ATG8 interactome. We discovered that ATG8 isoforms bind distinct sets of plant proteins with varying degrees of overlap. This prompted us to define the biochemical basis of ATG8 specialization by comparing two potato ATG8 isoforms using both in vivo protein interaction assays and in vitro quantitative binding affinity analyses. These experiments revealed that the N-terminal β-strand, particularly a single amino acid polymorphism, underpins binding specificity to the protein PexRD54. This isoleucine to valine substitution perturbed the hydrophobic pocket that accommodates the conserved ATG8 interacting motif of PexRD54. Additional proteomics experiments indicated that the N-terminal β-strand impacts ATG8 interactor profile by defining interaction specificity with about ~100 plant proteins. Our findings are consistent with the view that ATG8 isoforms comprise one layer of specificity in the regulation of selective autophagy pathways in plants.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation Transient gene expression in planta was performed by delivering T-DNA constructs expressing N-GFP tagged  ATG8 proteins (StATG8-2.2, StATG8-4-S3, and StATG8-4) and empty vector GFP using Agrobacterium  tumefaciens strain GV3101 into 3- 4 week-old N. benthamiana plants as described previously (Win et al, 2011).  A. tumefaciens strains carrying the plant expression constructs were diluted in agroinfiltration medium [10  mM MgCl2, 5 mM 2-(N-morpholine)-ethanesulfonic acid (MES), pH 5.6] to a final OD600 of 0.2. N.  benthamiana leaves were harvested 3 days after infiltration, and protein isolation was conducted as previously  described (Win et al, 2011). The Co-IP protocol described by Win et al. 2011 was adapted for GFP fusions.  Immunoprecipitation was performed by affinity chromatography with GFP_Trap_A beads (Chromotek), and  elution of the proteins from the beads was performed by heating 10 minutes at 70C and separated by SDS- PAGE on slab 12% plyacrylamide gel. The separation was stopped prematurely to keep all protein contained in  the samples focused in approximatelly 1cm2 of the gel.  Mass spectrometry (MS) The samples for MS analysis were excised from one dimensional SDS-PAGE gels, stained with colloid  Coomassie Brilliant Blue (Simple stain, Invitrogen) and cut to small pieces. They were destained with repeated  washing in 50% Acetonitrile. Cysteine residues were modified by 30min reduction in 10mM DTT followed by  20min alkylation with 50mM chloroacetamide. After extensive washing and dehydration with 50% and 100%  Acetonitrile respectively. The gel slices with modified proteins were incubated with 100ng of trypsin (Promega)  in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate, 10% Acetonitrile at 37ºC overnight. The generated peptides were extracted  with 50% Acetonitrile, 5% Formic acid, evaporated to dryness in rotary vacuum evaporator and stored at  -20ºC.  LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using a hybrid mass spectrometer Orbitrap Fusion and a nanoflow UHPLC  system U3000 (Thermo Scientific). Tryptic peptides, dissolved in 2% Acetonitril, 0.2% Trifluoroacetic acid  (TFA), were injected onto a reverse phase trap column Acclaim Pepmap 100, beads diameter 5µm, 100µm x  20mm. The column was operated at the flowrate 20µl/min in 2% Acetonitril, 0.05% TFA column was after  2.5min connected to an analytical column nanoEase M/Z HSS C18 T3 Column, beads diameter 1.8µm, 75µm x  250mm (Waters). The column equilibrated with 3%B before injection in 3%B (A: 0.1% Formic Acid (FA), B: 80%  Acetonitrile in 0.05% FA) was subsequently eluted with following linear gradient steps:  2.5min 3%B, 5min 6.3%B, 13min 12.5%B, 50min 37.5%B, 58min 50%B, 61min 60%B, 63min 99%B, 66min  99%B, 67min 3%B, 90min 3%B. The flow rate was set to 200 nL*min-1. The mass spectrometer was operated in  positive ion mode with nano-electrospray ion source. Molecular ions were generated by applying voltage +2.2kV  to a conductive union coupling the column outlet with fussed silica PicoTip emitter, ID 10µm (New Objective).  The ion transfer capillary temperature was set to 275 ºC and the focusing voltages in the ion optics were in  factory default setting.  A method for mass spectrometer has been designed and tested with maximum sensitivity gain for samples of  low complexity, such as immunoaffinity enriched protein complexes from plants. Therefore, MS events  consisted from full scan in Orbitrap analyser followed by two collisions of “soft” CID (collision induced  dissociation) and more “energetic” HCD (Higher-energy collisional dissociation) to maximize the chances to  acquire spectra with structurally important information. The fragment ions were detected with low resolution  detector at the ion trap end. Fusion Software v2.1 was installed. Orbitrap full scan resolution 120000, mass range m/z 300 to 1800 automatic  gain control (AGC) for the target 200000 ions and maximal infusion time 50ms were set. The precursor  dissociation events were driven by “data dependent algorithm” (DDA) with the dynamic exclusion 15s after the  collision had been triggered. The number of precursors selected for collisions were Top20with gain settings Ion  Trap AGC = 10000, maximal injection time = 35ms).  The isolation width and normalized collision energy for  both collision events CID and HCD were set to m/z 1.6 and CE = 30 %respectively. Only precursor ions with  positive charge states 2 – 7 and intensity threshold greater than 10000 were submitted to fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Software processing and peptide identification Peak lists in the form of Mascot generic files (mgf files) were prepared from raw data using MS Convert  (Proteowizard project) and sent to peptide match search on Mascot server v2.4.1 using Mascot Daemon (Matrix  Science Ltd.).  Peak lists were searched against protein databases including typical proteomics contaminants such as keratins,  etc. Tryptic peptides with up to 2 possible mis-cleavages and charge states +2, +3, +4 were allowed in the search.  The following peptide modifications were included in the search: oxidized Methionine (variable),  carbamidomethylated Cysteine (static). Data were searched with a monoisotopic precursor and fragment ion  mass tolerance 10ppm and 0.6Da respectively. Decoy database was used to validate peptide sequence matches.  Mascot results were combined in Scaffold v4.4.0(Proteome Software Inc.) and exported to Excel (Microsoft  Office) for further processing and comparisons. In Scaffold, the peptide and protein identifications were accepted if probability of sequence match and protein  inference exceeded 95.0% and 99% respectively and at least 2 peptides identified per protein. Protein  probabilities were calculated in Scaffold by the Protein Prophet algorithm; proteins that contained similar  peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles  of parsimony.

### Publication Abstract
Autophagy-related protein 8 (ATG8) is a highly conserved ubiquitin-like protein that modulates autophagy pathways by binding autophagic membranes and a number of proteins, including cargo receptors and core autophagy components. Throughout plant evolution, ATG8 has expanded from a single protein in algae to multiple isoforms in higher plants. However, the degree to which ATG8 isoforms have functionally specialized to bind distinct proteins remains unclear. Here, we describe a comprehensive protein-protein interaction resource, obtained using in planta immunoprecipitation (IP) followed by mass spectrometry (MS), to define the potato ATG8 interactome. We discovered that ATG8 isoforms bind distinct sets of plant proteins with varying degrees of overlap. This prompted us to define the biochemical basis of ATG8 specialization by comparing two potato ATG8 isoforms using both in vivo protein interaction assays and in vitro quantitative binding affinity analyses. These experiments revealed that the N-terminal &#x3b2;-strand-and, in particular, a single amino acid polymorphism-underpins binding specificity to the substrate PexRD54 by shaping the hydrophobic pocket that accommodates this protein's ATG8-interacting motif (AIM). Additional proteomics experiments indicated that the N-terminal &#x3b2;-strand shapes the broader ATG8 interactor profiles, defining interaction specificity with about 80 plant proteins. Our findings are consistent with the view that ATG8 isoforms comprise a layer of specificity in the regulation of selective autophagy pathways in plants.

### Keywords
Nicotiana benthamiana, Phytophthora infestans, Pexrd54, Atg8, Autophagy

### Affiliations
The Sainsbury Laboratory, Norwich, UK
The Sainsbury Laboratory, University of East Anglia, Norwich Research Park,  NR4 7UK, United Kingdom

### Submitter
Jan Sklenar

### Lab Head
Dr Jan Sklenar
The Sainsbury Laboratory, University of East Anglia, Norwich Research Park,  NR4 7UK, United Kingdom


