### Accession
PXD038560

### Title
The phosphoproteome of choroid plexus epithelial cells following infection with Neisseria meningitidis

### Description
The Gram-negative bacterium Neisseria meningitidis causes meningitis in humans and has been demonstrated to manipulate or alter host signalling pathways during infection of the central nervous system. In this study, the phosphoproteome of an in vitro model of the blood-cerebrospinal fluid barrier was investigated during infection with the Neisseria meningitidis serogroup B (NmB) strain MC58 in presence and absence of the bacterial capsule. We show that the capsule deficient mutant has a higher impact on the phosphoproteome of the infected cells and identify potentially regulated pathways and cellular processes during infection.

### Sample Protocol
samples were lysed using lysis buffer (consisting of 6 M guanidinium hydrochloride, 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine, 40 mM chloroacetamide, 50 mM HEPES pH 8.5). Samples were boiled at 95 °C for 5 min, after which they were sonicated on the ‘high’ setting for 5 × 30 s in a Bioruptor sonication water bath (Diagenode) at 4 °C. 500-1000 µg was taken forward for digestion. Samples were diluted 1:3 with 10% acetonitrile, 50 mM HEPES, pH 8.5, LysC (mass spectrometry grade, Wako) was added in a 1:50 (en-zyme to protein) ratio, and samples were incubated at 37 °C for 4 h. Samples were further diluted to 1:10 with 10% acetonitrile, 50 mM HEPES pH 8.5, trypsin (mass spectrometry grade, Promega) was added in a 1:100 (enzyme to protein) ratio, and samples were incubat-ed overnight at 37 °C. Enzyme activity was quenched by adding 2% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 1%. samples were diluted 1:1 with 80% Acetonitrile, 1M glycolic acid, 5% TFA and added to the equilibrated Ti-IMAC particles. The suspension was incubated at RT for 30min with agitation. The bound peptides were washed 2 times with 400ul 80%Acetonitrile, 1% TFA, followed by 2 times 400ul 10% Acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA. Enriched phospho peptides were eluted 3 times with 80ul of NH4OH, each time agitating for 20min at RT. Peptides were collected in a new 0.5ml Protein-LoBind tube and Speed-vaced for 30min at 60oC to get rid of most of NH4OH. Samples were acidified using 10% TFA and subjected to C18 desalting step. Dried peptides were resuspended in 100 mM tetraethylammonium bromide (pH 8.5) for TMT labelling. Labelling was done according to the manufacturer’s instructions, and labelled peptides were subsequently mixed 1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1 (16-plex), acidified to 1% TFA and the acetonitrile concentration brought down to <5% using 2% TFA. Prior to mass spectrometry analysis, the peptides were fractionated using an offline Thermo Fisher Ultimate3000 liquid chromatography system using high pH fractionation (5 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 10) at a flowrate of 5 µl min−1. Peptides (20 µg) were separated over a 120 min gradient (from 5% to 35% acetonitrile), while collecting fractions every 120 s. The resulting 60 fractions were pooled into 30 final fractions (fractions 1 + 31, 2 + 32, 3 + 33, and so on), acidified to pH <2 with 1% TFA and loaded onto EvoSep StageTips according to the manufacturer’s protocol.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were analysed using Proteome Discoverer 2.4. TMTPro reporter ion quantita-tion was enabled in the processing and consensus steps, and spectra were matched against the Homo sapiens reference proteome (UP000005640, last modified October 18, 2020, pro-tein count 75776) obtained from Uniprot. Dynamic modifications were set as Phosphorylation (S,T,Y), oxidation (M), deamidation (N,Q) and acetyl on protein N termini. Cysteine carbami-domethyl (on C residues) and TMTPro (on peptide N termini and K residues) were set as static modifications. All results were filtered to a 1% false discovery rate, and TMT reporter ion quantitation done using the built-in ‘reporter ions quantifier’ node.

### Publication Abstract
[This corrects the article DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2023.1113528.].

### Keywords
Human, Exploris 480, Lcms, Tmt, Neisseria meningitidis

### Affiliations
Biogenity
Klinik für Kinder- und Jugendmedizin, Medizinische Fakultät Mannheim, Germany

### Submitter
Rune Hertz Larsen

### Lab Head
Dr Christian Schwerk
Klinik für Kinder- und Jugendmedizin, Medizinische Fakultät Mannheim, Germany


