### Accession
PXD031270

### Title
Raw data for "Dynamic mitochondrial proteome under polyamines treatment in cardiac aging"

### Description
In this study, we found that spermine (Spm) and spermidine (Spd) injection for 6 weeks could prevent 24-month old rats heart dysfunction，improve mitochondrial function and down-regulate apoptosis. Using iTRAQ tools, we identify 75 mitochondrial proteins of statistically significant alteration in aging hearts, which mainly participate in important mitochondrial physiological activity, such as metabolism, translation, transport, apoptosis and oxidative phosphorylation.

### Sample Protocol
The mitochondria extracted inThe mitochondria extracted in rat cardiomyocytes were divided into Y, O, Spm and Spd, each sample were mixed by multiple parallel samples, and each group of technologies is repeated once. All the reagents and buffers needed for iTRAQ labeling and cleaning were purchased from Applied Biosystems (Foster City, CA). The iTRAQ labeling protocol was referred to the manufacturer’s instructions. In brief, mitochondrial proteins were extracted by 8 M Urea supplemented with 10 mM DTT, pH 8.5 (Amesco St. Louis, MO) and concentration was determined by the Bradford assay. Proteins were dissolved, denatured, alkylated and digested with trypsin (Promega) at 37 °C overnight. To label peptides with iTRAQ reagent, 1 unit of label (defined as the amount of reagent required to label 100μg protein) was thawed and reconstituted in 150 μl of isopropanol. The digestions from CSM100 and SBM were labeled with 114 and 116 iTRAQ reagents, respectively and this reaction was repeated with 115 and 117 iTRAQ reagents again to guarantee the accuracy of quantitation. Moreover, a strong cation exchange (SCX) column was used for (Applied Biosystems) separating the mixed peptides rat cardiomyocytes were divided into Y, O, Spm and Spd, each sample were mixed by multiple parallel samples, and each group of technologies is repeated once. All the reagents and buffers needed for iTRAQ labeling and cleaning were purchased from Applied Biosystems (Foster City, CA). The iTRAQ labeling protocol was referred to the manufacturer’s instructions. In brief, mitochondrial proteins were extracted by 8 M Urea supplemented with 10 mM DTT, pH 8.5 (Amesco St. Louis, MO) and concentration was determined by the Bradford assay. Proteins were dissolved, denatured, alkylated and digested with trypsin (Promega) at 37 °C overnight. To label peptides with iTRAQ reagent, 1 unit of label (defined as the amount of reagent required to label 100μg protein) was thawed and reconstituted in 150 μl of isopropanol. The digestions from CSM100 and SBM were labeled with 114 and 116 iTRAQ reagents, respectively and this reaction was repeated with 115 and 117 iTRAQ reagents again to guarantee the accuracy of quantitation. Moreover, a strong cation exchange (SCX) column was used for (Applied Biosystems) separating the mixed peptides

### Data Protocol
The fractionated peptides were analyzed by a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer fitted with a nano-liquid chromatography system. The eluent was introduced directly to a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer via EASY-Spray ion source. As for data processing, the Proteome Discoverer software 1.3 was employed to interpret raw data and protein quantitation. The rat protein database was downloaded from Uniprot database and combined with the reversed sequences and sequences of widely spread contaminants, such as human keratins for false discovery rate (FDR) control. Finally, the FDR was set to 0.01 to get high confidence result.

### Publication Abstract
Age-related alteration of mitochondria causes impaired cardiac function, along with cellular and molecular changes. Polyamines can extend the life span in mice. However, whether polyamines can affect the dynamic mitochondrial proteome, thereby preventing age-related changes in cardiac function and cardiac aging, remains unclear. In this study, we found that spermine (Spm) and spermidine (Spd) injection for 6&#xa0;weeks could prevent 24-month-old rats heart dysfunction, improve mitochondrial function, and downregulate apoptosis. Using iTRAQ tools, we identify 75 mitochondrial proteins of statistically significant alteration in aging hearts, which mainly participate in important mitochondrial physiological activity, such as metabolism, translation, transport, apoptosis, and oxidative phosphorylation. Moreover, four proteins of differential expression, pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase (PDK4), trifunctional enzyme subunit alpha (HADHA), nicotinamide nucleotide transhydrogenase (NNT), and Annexin6, which were significantly associated with heart aging, were validated by Western blotting. <i>In vitro</i>, we further demonstrated polyamines could retard cardiomyocytes aging through downregulating the expression of PDK4 and thereby inhibiting cell apoptosis. In summary, the distinct mitochondrial proteins identified in this study suggested some candidates involved in the anti-aging of the heart after polyamines treatment, and PDK4 may provide molecular clues for polyamines to inhibit apoptosis and thus retard aging-induced cardiac dysfunction.

### Keywords
Mitochondrial proteome

### Affiliations
Department of Pathophysiology, Harbin Medical University, Harbin, China
Harbin Medical University

### Submitter
Hao Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Yajun Zhao
Department of Pathophysiology, Harbin Medical University, Harbin, China


