### Accession
PXD015403

### Title
Environmental viscosity modulates interbacterial killing during habitat transition

### Description
In this study we employed a proteomics method to determine how bacteria respond at the protein level to a transition from a low- to a high-viscosity liquid environment. We applied this method to explore how the symbiotic marine bacterium Vibrio fischeri responds to changes in environmental viscosity associated with the transition from free-living to host-associated states. For this project cultures of ES401 were initially grown in low-viscosity liquid media and then transferred to either fresh low- or high-viscosity liquid media, which was generated by supplementing liquid media with 5% polyvinylpyrrolidone (w/vol). Samples were then incubated for one, 12, or 24 hours, and then collected by centrifugation and cell pellets frozen at -80°C. For each treatment four biological replicates were generated and analyzed.

### Sample Protocol
We added 30 µL of SDT-lysis buffer (4% (w/v) SDS, 100 mM Tris-HCl, 0.1 M DTT) to each cell pellet and then incubated the samples at 95°C for 10 min for cell lysis. Tryptic digests of protein extracts were prepared following the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol described by Wisniewski et al. (2009). In addition to minor modifications as described in Kleiner et al. (2017, Nat. Comm. 8(1558)), we did not clear the lysate by centrifugation after boiling the sample in lysis buffer. We loaded the whole lysate on to the filter units used for the FASP procedure. Centrifugation times were reduced to 20 minutes as compared to Kleiner et al. (2017, Nat. Comm. 8(1558)). Peptide concentrations were determined with the Pierce Micro BCA assay (Thermo Scientific) using an Epoch2 microplate reader (Biotek) following the manufacturer’s instructions. All samples were analyzed by 1D-LC-MS/MS as described in Hinzke et al. (2019, Front. Microbiol 10:238), with the modification that a 75 cm analytical column and a 140 minute long gradient were used. For each sample run 400 ng peptide were loaded with an UltiMateTM 3000 RSLCnano Liquid Chromatograph (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in loading solvent A (2 % acetonitrile, 0.05 % trifluoroacetic acid) onto a 5 mm, 300 µm ID C18 Acclaim® PepMap100 pre-column (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Separation of peptides on the analytical column (75 cm x 75 µm analytical EASY-Spray column packed with PepMap RSLC C18, 2 µm material, Thermo Fisher Scientific) was achieved at a flow rate of 300 nl  min‑1 using a 140 min gradient going from 95 % buffer A (0.1 % formic acid) to 31 % buffer B (0.1 % formic acid, 80 % acetonitrile) in 102 min, then to 50 % B in 18 min, to 99 % B in 1 min and ending with 99 % B. The analytical column was heated to 60 °C and was connected to a Q Exactive HF hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) via an Easy-Spray source. Eluting peptides were ionized via electrospray ionization (ESI). Carryover was reduced by one wash run (injection of 20 µl acetonitrile, 99 % eluent B) between samples. Full scans were acquired in the Orbitrap at 60,000 resolution. The 15 most abundant precursor ions were selected for fragmentation and MS/MS scans were acquired at 15,000 resolution. The mass (m/z) 445.12003 was used as lock mass. Ions with charge state +1 were excluded from MS/MS analysis. Dynamic exclusion was set to 18 s. Roughly 135,000 MS/MS spectra were acquired per sample.

### Data Protocol
A database containing protein sequences from Aliivibrio fischeri  (SRJG00000000.1) downloaded from NCBI was used. Sequences of common laboratory contaminants were included by appending the cRAP protein sequence database (http://www.thegpm.org/crap/). The final database contained 3,925 protein sequences. Searches of the MS/MS spectra against this database were performed with the Sequest HT node in Proteome Discoverer version 2.2.0.388 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) as described previously (Petersen et al. 2016, Nat. Microb. 2(16195)). Only proteins identified with medium or high confidence were retained resulting in an overall false discovery rate of <5%. For protein quantification, normalized spectral abundance factors (NSAFs, Zybailov et al. 2006, J Proteome Res 5:2339–2347) were calculated and multiplied with 100 to obtain relative protein abundance in %.

### Publication Abstract
Symbiotic bacteria use diverse strategies to compete for host colonization sites. However, little is known about the environmental cues that modulate interbacterial competition as they transition between free-living and host-associated lifestyles. We used the mutualistic relationship between <i>Eupyrmna scolopes</i> squid and <i>Vibrio fischeri</i> bacteria to investigate how intraspecific competition is regulated as symbionts move from the seawater to a host-like environment. We recently reported that <i>V. fischeri</i> uses a type VI secretion system (T6SS) for intraspecific competition during host colonization. Here, we investigated how environmental viscosity impacts T6SS-mediated competition by using a liquid hydrogel medium that mimics the viscous host environment. Our data demonstrate that although the T6SS is functionally inactive when cells are grown under low-viscosity liquid conditions similar to those found in seawater, exposure to a host-like high-viscosity hydrogel enhances T6SS expression and sheath formation, activates T6SS-mediated killing in as little as 30 min, and promotes the coaggregation of competing genotypes. Finally, the use of mass spectrometry-based proteomics revealed insights into how cells may prepare for T6SS competition during this habitat transition. These findings, which establish the use of a new hydrogel culture condition for studying T6SS interactions, indicate that <i>V. fischeri</i> rapidly responds to the physical environment to activate the competitive mechanisms used during host colonization.<b>IMPORTANCE</b> Bacteria often engage in interference competition to gain access to an ecological niche, such as a host. However, little is known about how the physical environment experienced by free-living or host-associated bacteria influences such competition. We used the bioluminescent squid symbiont <i>Vibrio fischeri</i> to study how environmental viscosity impacts bacterial competition. Our results suggest that upon transition from a planktonic environment to a host-like environment, <i>V. fischeri</i> cells activate their type VI secretion system, a contact-dependent interbacterial nanoweapon, to eliminate natural competitors. This work shows that competitor cells form aggregates under host-like conditions, thereby facilitating the contact required for killing, and reveals how <i>V. fischeri</i> regulates a key competitive mechanism in response to the physical environment.

### Keywords
Vibrio fischeri, Aliivibrio fischeri, 1d-lc-ms/ms, Squid-vibrio symbiosis, Symbiont, Type vi secretion system

### Affiliations
North Carolina State University

### Submitter
Fernanda Salvato

### Lab Head
Dr Manuel kleiner
North Carolina State University


