### Accession
PXD019269

### Title
Phospho β-catenin Serine552 Predicts Recurrence of Non-Functioning Pituitary Tumors After Surgery

### Description
NFPTs are tumors without a clinical evidence of hormone hypersecretion. Due to their lack of clinically detectable hormonal activity, they tend to present with mass effects. The molecular pathogenesis of NFPT is not well understood. Treatment of these non-functioning tumors is either surgery or radiotherapy. When recurrent, they are associated with severe morbidity. Characterization of phosphorylation status is critical to elucidate signaling pathways leading to tumorigenesis. Therefore, identifying phosphorylated proteins and their sites of phosphorylation will provide an important clue to the mechanism of NFPT pathogenesis, they can be used as predictor of aggressive behavior as well as activated kinases may be specifically targeted using small molecule inhibitors. Till date no study has undertaken global analysis of phosphoproteins in NFPTs. In this study, we designed an integrative approach involving identification of aberrant phosphorylation events in NFPTs using quantitative (Tandem mass tag-based) mass spectrometry based phosphoproteomic profiling followed by in-silico analysis and validation of candidate phosphoproteins in large cohort of NFPTs.

### Sample Protocol
Initially, for the identification of phosphosites through high-throughput mass spectrometry-based analysis we sampled 20 NFPT tissues that were sub-grouped into non-invasive (n=5), likely-invasive (n=5), invasive (n=5), and recurrent (n=5). Histopathological, radiological, and surgical findings were used to classify tumors with invasion while tumors with recurrence were determined based on regular follow-up of patients for a duration of 15 years (median = 4 years). We performed quantitative phosphoproteomic analysis using LC-MS/MS-Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid Mass Spectrometer on tumor tissues.  Upto 5 precursor ions were selected for MS/MS analysis. Data analysis was performed on Proteome Discovere using a combination of Mascot and SEQUEST search engines. In-silico tools like Phosphosite Plus, Gene Ontology, DAVID, and KEGG were used to determine the biological significance of identified phosphoproteins. Further validation on a subset of identified phosphoproteins was carried out in large cohort of patients using IHC.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data analysis was carried using Proteome Discoverer platform, version 1.4.1.14 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, and Germany). The data was searched against NCBI Human RefSeq 70 database, which contained 35,298 unique protein sequences with known contaminants using SEQUEST and Mascot (Version 2.4) search algorithms. The search parameters used were set as indicated - precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm and fragment mass tolerance to 0.05 Da. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine and TMT 6-plex (+229.163) modification at peptide N-terminus and lysine were set as fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine and phosphorylation at serine, threonine and tyrosine were set as variable modifications. Other search parameters include 1 missed cleavage by trypsin and 1% false discovery rate (FDR) at PSM level. PhosphoRS (Version 3.0) were used to calculate the confident localization of phosphosites for enriched phosphopeptides (Phospho RS score ≥75). Peptides with ratios ≥1.5-fold were considered as up regulated and ≤0.5 were considered as downregulated for further bioinformatics analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Non-functioning pituitary tumours (NF-PitNETs) are common intracranial benign neoplasms that can exhibit aggressive behaviour by invading neighbouring structures and, in some cases, have multiple recurrences. Despite resulting in severe co-morbidities, no predictive biomarkers of recurrence have been identified for NF-PitNETs. In this study we have used high-throughput mass spectrometry-based analysis to examine the phosphorylation pattern of different subsets of NF-PitNETs. Based on histopathological, radiological, surgical and clinical features, we have grouped NF-PitNETs into non-invasive, invasive, and recurrent disease groups. Tumour recurrence was determined based on regular clinical and radiological data of patients for a mean follow-up of 10&#xa0;years (SD&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;5.4&#xa0;years). Phosphoproteomic analyses identified a unique phosphopeptide enrichment pattern which correlates with disease recurrence. Candidate phosphorylated proteins were validated in a large cohort of NF-PitNET patients by western blot and immunohistochemistry. We identified a cluster of 22 phosphopeptides upregulated in recurrent NF-PitNETs compared to non-invasive and invasive subgroups. We reveal significant phosphorylation of the &#x3b2;-catenin at Ser552 in recurrent and invasive NF-PitNETs, compared to non-invasive/non-recurrent NF-PitNET subgroup. Moreover, &#x3b2;-catenin pSer552 correlates with the recurrence free survival among 200 patients with NF-PitNET. Together, our results suggest that the phosphorylation status of &#x3b2;-catenin at Ser552 could act as potential biomarker of tumour recurrence in NF-PitNETs.

### Keywords
Human, Phosphoproteomics, Non-functioning pituitary tumors, Phospho, Ptm, Lc-ms/ms, Nfpt, Pituitary tumors, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905
Department of Endocrinology PGIMER, Chandigarh India Dr. Akhilesh Pandey Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology Mayo Clinic Rochester, MN

### Submitter
Akhilesh Pandey

### Lab Head
Dr Pinaki Dutta
Department of Endocrinology PGIMER, Chandigarh India Dr. Akhilesh Pandey Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology Mayo Clinic Rochester, MN


