### Accession
PXD003501

### Title
G4 Quadruplex Binding Proteins

### Description
In this study we discover proteins that bind to G4 quadruplex DNA structure. We use modified c-myc quadruplex as a bait, and compare it to the control bait - T15 oligo. We use spectral counts and G-test to determine significant binders. T15 and G4 datafiles are uploaded

### Sample Protocol
Streptavidin dynabeads are coated with biotynilated G4 c-myc-derived quadruplex. Control dynabeads are coated with the biotynilated T15 oligo. WM 266-4 cells are grown to 75% confluency, harvested, and lysed. The cell lysates are incubated with dynabeads, followed by extensive washed. The dynabeads were boiled in SDS, the SDS extracts were resolved on SDS-PAGE, gel bands were excized and in-gel digested with trypsin, and submitted to the LC-MS-LTQ-Orbitrap Velos for analysis. 10 ppm precursor, 0.85 fragment ion tolerance, SWISS-Prot (human taxonomy) database. Data Refinement (PEAKS) was used - with the Q paramater equal or higher than 0.65

### Data Protocol
PEAKS Software suite v 7.5 was used to process the RAW data

### Publication Abstract
Cells engage numerous signaling pathways in response to oxidative stress that together repair macromolecular damage or direct the cell toward apoptosis. As a result of DNA damage, mitochondrial DNA or nuclear DNA has been shown to enter the cytoplasm where it binds to "DNA sensors," which in turn initiate signaling cascades. Here we report data that support a novel signaling pathway in response to oxidative stress mediated by specific guanine-rich sequences that can fold into G-quadruplex DNA (G4DNA). In response to oxidative stress, we demonstrate that sequences capable of forming G4DNA appear at increasing levels in the cytoplasm and participate in assembly of stress granules. Identified proteins that bind to endogenous G4DNA in the cytoplasm are known to modulate mRNA translation and participate in stress granule formation. Consistent with these findings, stress granule formation is known to regulate mRNA translation during oxidative stress. We propose a signaling pathway whereby cells can rapidly respond to DNA damage caused by oxidative stress. Guanine-rich sequences that are excised from damaged genomic DNA are proposed to enter the cytoplasm where they can regulate translation through stress granule formation. This newly proposed role for G4DNA provides an additional molecular explanation for why such sequences are prevalent in the human genome.

### Keywords
Metastatic melanoma wm 266-4 cell lines

### Affiliations
University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology

### Submitter
Boris Zybailov

### Lab Head
Dr Boris Zybaylov
University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology


