### Accession
PXD020411

### Title
Protein identification of venoms of the African spitting Cobras, Naja mossambica and Naja nigricincta nigricincta

### Description
Venoms of Naja mossambica and  Naja nigricincta nigricincta were analysed in order to identify the proteins. Samples were run on SDS-PAGE gel or analysed without digestion.

### Sample Protocol
In-gel digestion: crude venoms were dissolved in Laemmli buffer and samples were then separated by SDS-PAGE gel. The gel and silver stained. Another gel was run under similar conditions, however, samples were to the resolving gel only for few cm, gel was not stained. These gels were digested using trypsin as the enzyme. Acetontirile precipitation: proteins (>10 kDa) were removed from the venom samples by acetonitrile precipitation. Dried supernatants were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid.. In order to be able to detect also the possible small proteins and natural peptides in the venom samples, and not only tryptic peptides, each supernatant sample was divided into two portions. One portion of each sample was run with HPLC-MS/MS without carrying out digestion before the analysis. In order to analyse the tryptic peptides, second portion of each sample was in-solution digested with trpysin. After digestion peptides were desalted. 200 ng of each sample was injected into a nanoflow HPLC system coupled to the Q Exactive HF  or to the Q Exactive mass spectrometer (equipped with a nano-electrospray ionization source. Peptides were first loaded on a trapping column and subsequently separated inline on 15 cm C18 column (75 µm x 15 cm, ReproSil-Pur 5 µm 200 Å C18-AQ, Dr. Maisch HPLC GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany); the mobile phase consisted of water with 0.1% formic acid (solvent A) and acetonitrile/water (80:20 (v/v)) with 0.1% formic acid (solvent B); active gradient lengths used depended on the complexity of the sample ranging between 10 to 120 minutes. The flow rate was set at 300 nl/minutes. Concentrated gel samples were first run using data dependent acquisition method. In order to increase the number of identifications, precursor ions of identified peptides were added to mass exclusion list and samples were re-run with mass spectrometer. This was repeated once.

### Data Protocol
For data analysis, raw data was processed using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The software was connected to an in-house server running the Mascot 2.6.1 software (Matrix Science). Data was searched against a custom-made venom database and target decoy database. In ProteomeDiscoverer MS/MS peptide mass tolerance was set at ± 8 ppm, fragment mass tolerance at ± 0.02 Da and the maximum missed cleavages was set to two. Carbamidomethyl (C) was chosen as static modification. Oxidation (M) and acetyl (protein N-terminus) were chosen as dynamic modifications. Trypsin was selected as enzyme for digested samples. The non-digested samples were searched with ‘none’ selected as the enzyme. A significance threshold of p < 0.05 was use

### Publication Abstract
Cobra snakes, including <i>Naja mossambica</i> and <i>Naja nigricincta nigricincta,</i> are one of the major groups of snakes responsible for snakebites in southern Africa, producing significant cytotoxicity and tissue damage. The venom of <i>N. mossambica</i> has been briefly characterised, but that of <i>N. n. nigricincta</i> is not reported. The current study identifies the venom proteins of <i>N. mossambica</i> and <i>N. n. nigricincta</i>. This is achieved using sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS)-polyacrylamide gel eletrophroresis (PAGE), followed by high-performance liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (HPLC-MS/MS). Most of the proteins were less than 17 kDa in both snakes. <i>N. mossambica</i> was found to have 75 proteins in total (from 16 protein families), whereas <i>N.n. nigricincta</i> had 73 (from 16 protein families). Of these identified proteins, 57 were common in both snakes. The proteins identified belonged to various families, including the three-finger toxins (3FTx), Cysteine-rich secretory proteins (CRiSP), Phospholipase A2 (PLA<sub>2</sub>) and Venom metalloproteinase M12B (SVMP). The current study contributes to the profile knowledge of snake venom compositions, which is of fundamental value in understanding the proteins that play a major role in envenomation.

### Keywords
Naja mossambica; naja nigricincta nigricincta; snake venom

### Affiliations
Turku Bioscience Centre
Turku Proteomics Facility, Turku Bioscience

### Submitter
Mirva Pääkkönen

### Lab Head
Dr Peter James
Turku Proteomics Facility, Turku Bioscience


