### Accession
PXD018156

### Title
Deglutarylation of GCDH by SIRT5 controls lysine metabolism in mice

### Description
A wide range of protein acyl modifications has been identified on enzymes across various metabolic processes; however, the impact of these modifications remains poorly understood. Protein glutarylation is a recently identified modification that can be non-enzymatically driven by glutaryl-CoA. In mammalian systems, this unique metabolite is only produced in the lysine and tryptophan oxidative pathways. To better understand the biology of protein glutarylation, we studied the relationship between enzymes within the lysine/tryptophan catabolic pathways, protein glutarylation, and regulation by the deglutarylating enzyme Sirtuin 5 (SIRT5).  Here, we identify glutarylation of the lysine oxidation pathway enzyme glutaryl-CoA dehydrogenase (GCDH). We show increased GCDH glutarylation when glutaryl-CoA production is stimulated by lysine catabolism. Our data reveal glutarylation of GCDH impacts its function, ultimately decreasing lysine oxidation. We then demonstrate the ability of SIRT5 to deglutarylate GCDH, restoring its enzymatic activity. Finally, metabolomic and bioinformatic data indicate a novel role for SIRT5 in regulation of amino acid metabolism. Together, these data suggest a model whereby a feedback loop exists within the lysine/tryptophan oxidation pathway, in which glutaryl-CoA is produced, in turn inhibiting GCDH function. This inhibition is relieved by SIRT5 deacylation activity.

### Sample Protocol
Label-free qualitative acyl-proteomic analysis of recombinant GCDH Chemically glutarylated and succinylated human recombinant GCDH protein was prepared as described in Mills et. al. Approximately 20 ug protein was loaded on 10% NuPAGE Bis-Tris protein gels (Thermo Fischer Scientific #NP0301BOX) and separated using the NuPAGE™ MOPS SDS running buffer (Thermo Fischer Scientific #NP0001) for 1 h at 180 volts. Post-run, the gel was stained overnight in colloidal blue stain (Thermo Fischer Scientific #LC6025), washed in de-ionized water, and prominent bands corresponding to a ~44 kDa protein (hGCDH -6XHIS  predicted molecular weight without any PTMs is 44.56 kDa) were excised and collected in 1.5 mL micro-centrifuge tubes. Gel pieces were cut into smaller pieces using a sterile 20 µL pipette tip, vortexed and incubated twice in 200 µL of a 1:1 mixture of acetonitrile (ACN) and 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AmBIC) at room temperature for 15 min followed by dehydration in 200 µL of 100% ACN for 1 min. The gel pieces were rehydrated and reduced with 200 µL 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) in 100 mM AmBIC for 30 min at 55 °C. After discarding the DTT-containing solution, the samples were alkylated using 200 µL of 55 mM iodoacetamide in 100 mM AmBIC in dark at room temperature for 30 min. Samples were further washed in 200 µL of 1:1 ACN: 100 mM AmBIC mixture followed by 200 uL of 100% ACN. Samples were rehydrated in 200 µL of digestion buffer (50 mM AmBIC, 5 mM CaCl2) containing 1 ug Trypsin per 50 ug of GCDH protein and in-gel digested overnight at 37 °C. Trypsin digested peptides were serially extracted using 200 µL each of 50% ACN, 0.3% formic acid and 80% ACN, 0.3% formic acid at room temperature for 15 min each. Pooled extracts were subjected to speed-vac until dry and resuspended in 1 mL of 0.5% trifluroacetic acid. Acidified samples were then desalted by solid phase extraction using 50 mg tC18 Sep-Pak columns (Waters) and dried using speed-vac. Samples were resuspended in 22 µL of 0.1% formic acid and subjected to nanoLC-MS/MS analysis using a using an EASY-nLC UPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Q Exactive Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific) via a nanoelectrospray ionization source. To minimize effects of acylpeptide carryover, unmodified GCDH samples were injected first and blanks were ran in between samples. Sample injections of 8 µL were first trapped on an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 trapping column (3 um particle size, 75 µm × 20 mm) with 18 µL of solvent A (0.1 % FA) at a variable flow rate dictated by max pressure of 500 Bar, after which the analytical separation was performed over a 105 minute gradient (flow rate of 300 nL/minute) of 5 to 40% solvent B (90% ACN, 0.1% FA) using an Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 analytical column (2 um particle size, 75 µm × 500 mm column (Thermo Fischer Scientific ) with a column temperature of 55ºC. MS1 (precursor ions) was performed at 70,000 resolution, with an AGC target of 3 x 106 ions and a maximum injection time (IT) of 100 ms. MS2 spectra (product ions) were collected by data-dependent acquisition (DDA) of the top 20 most abundant precursor ions with a charge greater than 1 per MS1 scan, with dynamic exclusion enabled for a window of 30 seconds. Precursor ions were filtered with a 1.2 m/z isolation window and fragmented with a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 27. MS2 scans were performed at 17,500 resolution, with an AGC target of 1x105 ions and a maximum IT of 100 ms.

### Data Protocol
Raw LC-MS/MS data were processed in Proteome Discoverer v2.4 (PD2.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific), using the Sequest HT and MS Amanda 2.0 (Protein Chemistry Facility IMP/IMBA/GMI, Vienna, Austria.) search engines as nodes. Data were searched against the UniProt E. Coli (strain K12) complete proteome database of reviewed (Swiss-Prot) and unreviewed (TrEMBL) proteins, which consisted of 4,276 sequences on the date of download (3/15/18) and hGCDH-6XHIS (modified from UniProtKB - Q92947) and mSIRT5-6XHIS (modified from UniProtKB - Q8K2C6). Variable modifications included oxidation of methionine (M) and glutarylation (114.0316941 Da monoisotopic mass) of lysine (K), with carbamidomethyl of cysteine (C) as a fixed modification. Data were searched with a 10 ppm precursor mass and 0.02 Da product ion tolerance. The maximum number of missed cleavages was set at 4 and enzyme specificity was designated as trypsin. Peptide spectral matches (PSMs) were filtered to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) with Percolator 32. Site localization probabilities were determined using ptmRS 33 using a 75% Site Probability Threshold. PSMs were grouped to peptides maintaining 1% FDR at the peptide level and peptides were grouped to proteins using the rules of strict parsimony. Proteins were filtered to 1% FDR using Protein FDR Validator. Peptide quantification was done using the MS1 precursor intensity from aligned features (10 min max retention time shift) and imputation was performed via low abundance resampling. Quantitation for each GCDH acylpeptide identified was normalized to the relative abundance of hGCDH -6XHIS  protein (calculated from unmodified GCDH peptides only) to control for any slight deviations in sample loading and LC-MS performance.  Statistical significance was assessed by taking the Log2 of GCDH-normalized acylpeptide abundance values, and calculating Log2 fold-changes and performing the student’s t-test (n=3) across conditions.

### Publication Abstract
A wide range of protein acyl modifications has been identified on enzymes across various metabolic processes; however, the impact of these modifications remains poorly understood. Protein glutarylation is a recently identified modification that can be nonenzymatically driven by glutaryl-CoA. In mammalian systems, this unique metabolite is only produced in the lysine and tryptophan oxidative pathways. To better understand the biology of protein glutarylation, we studied the relationship between enzymes within the lysine/tryptophan catabolic pathways, protein glutarylation, and regulation by the deglutarylating enzyme sirtuin 5 (SIRT5). Here, we identify glutarylation on the lysine oxidation pathway enzyme glutaryl-CoA dehydrogenase (GCDH) and show increased GCDH glutarylation when glutaryl-CoA production is stimulated by lysine catabolism. Our data reveal that glutarylation of GCDH impacts its function, ultimately decreasing lysine oxidation. We also demonstrate the ability of SIRT5 to deglutarylate GCDH, restoring its enzymatic activity. Finally, metabolomic and bioinformatic analyses indicate an expanded role for SIRT5 in regulating amino acid metabolism. Together, these data support a feedback loop model within the lysine/tryptophan oxidation pathway in which glutaryl-CoA is produced, in turn inhibiting GCDH function via glutaryl modification of GCDH lysine residues and can be relieved by SIRT5 deacylation activity.

### Keywords
Sirtuins, Gcdh, Mitochondria, Sirt5, Acylation

### Affiliations
Matthew Hirschey, PhD Associate Professor Department of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism, and Nutrition Department of Pharmacology and Cancer Biology  Duke University Medical Center
Duke Molecular Physiology Institute

### Submitter
Paul Grimsrud

### Lab Head
Dr Matthew Hirschey
Matthew Hirschey, PhD Associate Professor Department of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism, and Nutrition Department of Pharmacology and Cancer Biology  Duke University Medical Center


