### Accession
PXD040455

### Title
HyperSCP: Combining Isotopic and Isobaric Labeling for Higher Throughput Single-Cell Proteomics

### Description
Recent developments in mass spectrometry-based single-cell proteomics (SCP) have resulted in dramatically improved sensitivity, yet the relatively low measurement throughput remains a limitation. Isobaric and isotopic labeling methods have been separately applied to SCP to increase throughput through multiplexing. Here we combined both forms of labeling to achieve multiplicative scaling for higher throughput. Two-plex stable isotope labeling of amino acids in cell culture and isobaric Tandem Mass Tag labeling enabled up to 32 single cells to be analyzed in a single LC-MS analysis, in addition to reference and negative control channels. A custom nested nanowell chip was used for nanoliter sample processing to minimize sample losses. Using a 145-min total LC-MS cycle time, ~280 single cells were analyzed per day, which could be increased to ~700 samples per day with a high-duty-cycle multicolumn LC system producing the same active gradient. The labeling efficiency and achievable proteome coverage were characterized for multiple analysis conditions. Despite some decrease in coverage, this method readily differentiated four different cell types and thus proves suitable for, e.g., rapid cell typing.

### Sample Protocol
Single-cell sample preparation on the hyperSCP chip. HeLa, A549 and HFL1 cells were collected after trypsinization, while K562 cells were collected directly. Cells were washed 3 times with cold (4 ℃) PBS after pelletizing the cells by centrifugation at 150 ×g for 5 min. The cell suspensions were filtered with a 40-μm cell strainer and kept on ice until use. Fourteen SILAC light cells, 14 SILAC heavy cells and 2 PBS-containing droplets of equivalent (~300 pL) volume were sorted into nanowells within each nested well. Both cell sorting and reagent dispensing were performed using the cellenONE platform (Cellenion, Lyon, France). The temperature of the cellenONE platform was set to 1 ℃ below the dew point. Four nL of 5 mM TCEP and 0.05% DDM in 100 mM HEPES (pH = 8.5) was added into each well followed by 2 nL of 45 mM CAM. A cover glass with spacer was then clamped to the hyperSCP chip. The clamped chip was placed in a wet box and incubated at 70 ℃ for 30 min and then at 95 ℃ for 15 min. After being cooled to room temperature, the chip was placed back into the cellenONE platform and 5 nL of enzyme solution containing 0.25 ng of lys-c and 0.5 ng of trypsin was added into each well before incubating overnight at 37 ℃ for digestion. The temperature was adjusted to 20 ℃ before labeling with TMTpro reagents to prevent DMSO from freezing. To reduce evaporation, the humidity was set to 50% and 1 nL of DMSO was added to each well. Then 10 nL of 10 µg/µL TMTpro reagents were dispensed into the corresponding nanowells before the chip was capped with the cover glass slide and incubated at room temperature for 1 h. Unreacted TMTpro reagents were quenched with 2 nL of 5% hydroxylamine solution followed by 15 min incubation. At last, the sample was acidified with 5 nL of 5% FA. For carrier channels, 10 ng of 126-labeled “light” HeLa and A549 digest (1:1) and 10 ng of 126-labeled “heavy” HeLa and A549 digest (1:1) were added to each nested well. Similarly, for reference channels, 0.5 ng of 134N-labeled “light” HeLa and A549 digest (1:1) and 0.5 ng of 134N-labeled “heavy” HeLa and A549 digest (1:1) were dispensed in each nested well. The chip was then air-dried and stored at –80 ℃ prior to LC-MS analysis. NanoLC-MS/MS analysis. A home-packed 100-µm-i.d. solid-phase extraction (SPE) column (Dr. Maisch C18, 1.9 µm particles) was used for desalting. A 30-cm-long, 30-µm-i.d. column packed with the same particles was used for nanoLC separation at a flowrate of ~30 nL/min. For 60-min gradient separations, the nanoLC pump (Dionex UltiMate NCP-3200RS, Thermo Fisher) was programmed to deliver a 60-min linear gradient from 8% to 25% mobile phase B, followed by a 20-min linear gradient from 25% to 45% B, column wash and re-equilibration. The 90-min gradient increased mobile phase B from 8% to 25% over that time, and the 25% to 45% gradient was 30 min. An Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode to analyze the peptides. The ionization voltage was 2000 V, and the ion transfer tube was set to 200 ℃. Precursor ions with m/z ranging from 450 to 1600 were scanned with a resolution of 120,000 with a normalized AGC (Automatic Gain Control) target of 300%. Peptide precursors of charge state 2–5 with intensities greater than 5E3 were filtered with a fit threshold of 50% and an isolation window of 0.7 m/z for MS/MS analysis within a 1.5-s cycle time. The precursors were fragmented with 35% normalized HCD collision energy and then analyzed in the orbitrap with a resolution of 60,000, an AGC target of 200% and a maximum injection time (IT) of 118 ms.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer (Version 2.5, Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used to search all raw files against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot human database (downloaded 07/05/2020, 20,305 sequences). The precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance was 0.6 Da. Oxidation (+15.995 Da) on methionine residues and deamidation (+0.984 Da) on asparagine residues were selected as dynamic modifications, and TMTpro (304.207 Da) on any N-terminus and carbamidomethyl (+57.021 Da) on cysteines were set as static modifications. Two individual database searches were applied for each raw file because the software did not allow for labeling of lysine with both TMTpro and SILAC. For non-SILAC labeled (light) precursors, the TMTpro (304.207 Da) on lysine was set as another static modification. For SILAC-labeled (heavy) precursors, a new modification (H25C213C13N-115N4O3, +312.221 Da) on lysine was created, which accounted for both the SILAC and TMTpro labeling. This new modification and label 13C615N4 (+10.008 Da) on arginine were set as static modifications. The intensity of reporter ions was obtained from the PSM output and processed using R-script https://github.com/RTKlab-BYU/HyperSCP) referencing code from a previous study. Briefly, all reporter-ion intensities were filtered for high confidence and non-contaminants before being normalized using the reference channel. The CV was calculated at the peptide level and any single-cell data with CV > 0.3 was removed. 60% valid value was filtered at the protein level and KNN (k = 5) imputation was performed within each cell type. For PCA and correlation studies, the common proteins quantified from all the cell lines were selected and ComBat was used to remove batch effects.

### Publication Abstract
Recent developments in mass spectrometry-based single-cell proteomics (SCP) have resulted in dramatically improved sensitivity, yet the relatively low measurement throughput remains a limitation. Isobaric and isotopic labeling methods have been separately applied to SCP to increase throughput through multiplexing. Here we combined both forms of labeling to achieve multiplicative scaling for higher throughput. Two-plex stable isotope labeling of amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) and isobaric tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling enabled up to 28 single cells to be analyzed in a single liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) analysis, in addition to carrier, reference, and negative control channels. A custom nested nanowell chip was used for nanoliter sample processing to minimize sample losses. Using a 145-min total LC-MS cycle time, &#x223c;280 single cells were analyzed per day. This measurement throughput could be increased to &#x223c;700 samples per day with a high-duty-cycle multicolumn LC system producing the same active gradient. The labeling efficiency and achievable proteome coverage were characterized for multiple analysis conditions.

### Keywords
Single-cell proteomics, High-throughput, Multiplex

### Affiliations
Brigham Young University
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Brigham Young University

### Submitter
Ryan Kelly

### Lab Head
Dr Ryan T. Kelly
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Brigham Young University


