### Accession
PXD020159

### Title
Definition of key mechanisms of multidrug resistance of head and neck tumors to chemo- and radiotherapy treatments. Identification of new individualized antitumor drugs (Ref. GC16173720CARR)

### Description
Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is the sixth most commonly diagnosed cancer worldwide, with an incidence of about 600,000 new cases per year, accounting for 1-2% of all cancer deaths worldwide. Current treatment for head and neck cancer includes taxol (docetaxel), platinum compounds (e.g. cisplatin or carboplatin) and the anti metabolite 5 fluorouracil (5 FU), either as single agents or in combination, and also radiotherapy. Response rates to these chemotherapeutic drugs range from 60 to 80%, however there are high rates of resistance, which often leads to locoregional recurrence and metastasis. The therapeutic dose of treatment needed (hormone therapy, radiotherapy or chemotherapy) is often too toxic for the patient to withstand. Therefore, our main objetive in this proyect is the identification of the molecular and cellular mechanisms involved in the acquisition of resistance to chemotherapy as currently key pieces for the discovery of new drugs that allow the development of effective therapies against HNSCC.

### Sample Protocol
The cell lysis and protein solubilitzation was performed with modified Thermo Scientific Pierce RIPA Buffer. Thus, 200 ml of buffer (25mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.6), 150mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, 1% sodium deoxycholate, 1% SDS and protease and phosphatases inhibitors) was added to cell pellets and these were sonicated (Sonics & Materials, Vibra Cell, Illkirch, France) for 3 cycles of 6 times 10 seconds with 15 seconds pause intervals. Afterwards, the suspension was centrifuged and the supernatant was transferred to new tubes and protein concentration was determined by Lowry method. Then, 65 µg of protein of each sample were reduced with 4mM DTT for 25 minutes at 56 °C and alkylated with 8 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at 25 ºC in the dark and loaded in a polyacrylamide gel (only staking process) to remove detergents. Then, the gel slice containing unresolved proteins were cut into small pieces and digested overnight at 37ºC with trypsin at an enzyme protein ratio of 1:100. After digestion, a small aliquot of 2 µg was purified using C18 zip-tip (Millipore) to check proper protein digestion by nanoLC-Orbitrap before following sample preparation steps. The remaining protein digested sample, was desalted on C18 Sep-Pack column (Waters, Bedford, MA) using 80% Acetonitrile, 20% water 0.1% Formic Acid for elution. The eluted peptides were dried in the Speed-Vac and labelled with TMT 10-plex labelling (Thermo Fisher) following manufacturer’s instructions. To normalize all the samples, a pool of all samples was created mixing an equal small aliquot of each sample and then, 40 µg of this pool and 40 µg of each of the nine samples were labeled. Then, A small aliquot of 5 µg of each labelled sample were mixed and purified using C18 zip-tip (Millipore) and analyzed by nanoLC-Orbitrap to check the labelling reaction. The labelled peptides from each sample were mixed together and desalted on C18 Sep-Pack column (Waters, Bedford, MA) using 80% Acetonitrile, 20% water 0.1% Formic Acid for elution. The TMT pooled sample was dried in the Speed-Vac and resuspended in rehydration buffer (5% Glycerol and 1% v/v IPG strip Buffer 3-10NL) and then fractionated by isoelectrofocusing on an Off-Gel fractionator from Agilent Technologies through 12-well IPG strips (Nonlinear gradient from pH 3 to 10) according to the supplier’s protocol. Initially, 13-cm-long IPG strips were hydrated with 40 μL per well of the rehydration buffer. 200 ug of TMT pooled sample was loaded on the strip (150 μL of sample in each well). The samples were focused at 50 μA, with voltages between 500 and 4500 V for a total of 20 kVh. After separation, each one of the 12 fractions obtained was desalted on C18 Sep-Pack column (Waters, Bedford, MA) using 80% Acetonitrile, 20% water 0.1% Formic Acid for elution. Eluted fractions were resuspended in 50 ul of 0.1% formic acid. The 12 fractions obtained from Off-Gel fractionation method, were then separated on a trap nano-column (100 μm I.D.; 2cm length; 5μm particle diameter, Thermo Fisher Scientific, San José, CA, USA) and separated onto a C-18 reversed phase (RP) nano-column (75μm I.D.; 15cm length; 3μm particle diameter, Nikkyo Technos Co. LTD, Japan). The chromatographic separation was performed with a continuous acetonitrile gradient using Milli-Q water (0.1% FA) and ACN (0.1% FA) as mobile phase. A flow rate of 300 nl/min was used to elute peptides for real time ionization and peptide fragmentation on an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). An enhanced FT-resolution spectrum (resolution = 30,000 FHMW) followed by two data dependent MS/MS scan events were performed. One consist on an HCD fragmentation (40% NCE) and FT-MS/MS acquisition (R=15,000 FHMW) from most intense ten parent ions with a charge state rejection of one and dynamic exclusion of 0.5 min which is used for peptide quantification. The other event consist on a CID fragmentation (35% NCE) and IT-MS/MS acquisition from the same most intense ten parent ions which is used for peptide identification.

### Data Protocol
The raw data files obtained were analyzed by Multidimensional Protein Identification Technology (MudPIT) on Proteome Discoverer software v.1.4.0.288 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For protein identification all MS and MS/MS spectra were analyzed using Mascot search engine (version 2.5). Mascot was set up to search SwissProt_2017_05.fasta database (554515 entries), restricting for Human taxonomy (20202 sequences) and assuming trypsin digestion. Two missed cleavages were allowed and an error of 0.02 Da for FT-MS/MS fragment ion mass, 0.8 Da for IT-MS/MS fragment ion mass and 10.0 ppm for a FT-MS parent ion mass were allowed. TMT-10plex on lysine and N-termini were set as quantification modifications, oxidation of methionine and acetylation of N-termini were set as dynamic modifications, whereas carbamidometylation of cysteine was set as static modifications. The false discovery rate (FDR) and protein probabilities were calculated by Perclorator For protein quantification, the ratios between each TMT-label indicated in table 3 against 126-TMT label were used. Protein quantification was normalized based on protein median and Log2 transformed for statistical analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Sensitization of resistant cells and cancer stem cells (CSCs) represents a major challenge in cancer therapy. A proteomic study revealed tetraspanin-1 (TSPAN1) as a protein involved in acquisition of cisplatin (CDDP) resistance (Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD020159). TSPAN1 was found to increase in CDDP-resistant cells, CSCs and biopsies from head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) patients. TSPAN1 depletion in parental and CDDP-resistant HNSCC cells reduced cell proliferation, induced apoptosis, decreased autophagy, sensitized to chemotherapeutic agents and inhibited several signaling cascades, with phospho-SRC inhibition being a major common target. Moreover, TSPAN1 depletion in vivo decreased the size and proliferation of parental and CDDP-resistant tumors and reduced metastatic spreading. Notably, CDDP-resistant tumors showed epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) features that disappeared upon TSPAN1 inhibition, suggesting a link of TSPAN1 with EMT and metastasis. Immunohistochemical analysis of HNSCC specimens further revealed that TSPAN1 expression was correlated with phospho-SRC (pSRC), and inversely with E-cadherin, thus reinforcing TSPAN1 association with EMT. Overall, TSPAN1 emerges as a novel oncogenic protein and a promising target for HNSCC therapy.

### Keywords
Chemoresistance, Hnscc, Cancer stem cells

### Affiliations
Institut de Recerca Hospital Vall d´Hebron (VIHR)
Biomedical Research in Cancer Stem Cells Group,Pathology Department, Collserola Building, Lab 205,Vall d'Hebron Research Institute (VHIR, Passeig Vall d'Hebron 119-129,Barcelona 08035, Spain. Tel: +34-93-489-4169 FAX: +34-93-274-6708

### Submitter
Yoelsis Garcia-Mayea

### Lab Head
Dr Matilde Esther LLeonart Pajarin
Biomedical Research in Cancer Stem Cells Group,Pathology Department, Collserola Building, Lab 205,Vall d'Hebron Research Institute (VHIR, Passeig Vall d'Hebron 119-129,Barcelona 08035, Spain. Tel: +34-93-489-4169 FAX: +34-93-274-6708


