### Accession
PXD009068

### Title
A generic normalization method for proper quantification in untargeted proteomics screening

### Description
The label-free quantitative mass spectrometry methods, in particular the SWATH-MS approach, have gained popularity and became a powerful technique for comparison of large datasets. In the present work, it is introduced the use of recombinant proteins as internal standards for untargeted label-free methods. The proposed internal standard strategy reveals a similar intragroup normalization capacity when compared with the most common normalization methods, with the additional advantage of maintaining the overall proteome changes between groups (which are lost using the methods referred above). Thus, proving to be able to maintain a good performance even when large qualitative and quantitative differences in sample composition are observed, such as the ones induced by biological regulation (as observed in secretome and other biofluids’ analyses) or by enrichment approaches (such as immunopurifications). Moreover, it corresponds to a cost-effective alternative, easier to implement than the current stable-isotope labeling internal standards, therefore being an appealing strategy for large quantitative screening, as clinical cohorts for biomarker discovery.

### Sample Protocol
Test of Reproducibility: For reproducibility assays at MS and sample clean-up level, 400 µg of the membrane-enriched sample and 50 µg of internal standard (IS) mixture (MBP and GFP) were subjected to liquid digestion (LD) as described in Anjo et al., (2015), and their mixture was performed at peptide level in a ratio of 1 µg of IS peptides per 30 µg of extract peptides. For MS analysis, the IS peptides alone and a single mixture of IS and extract peptides were prepared and subjected to SWATH-MS acquisitions. For the C18 cleanup test, a single mixture of extract peptides and IS peptides was prepared, and then processed in independent micropipette stage tips. Four batches of the same IS peptide mixture were also processed in independent micropipette stage tips. To evaluate the impact of digestion, sample complexity, and sample processing on IS reproducibility, 4 replicate digestions were performed for the following samples: (i) IS alone, (ii) a mixture of 30 μg of membrane enriched extract spiked with 1 μg of IS, (iii) a mixture of 100 μg of membrane enriched extract spiked with 1 μg of IS, and (iv) a mixture of 30 μg of membrane enriched extract spiked with 1 μg of IS subjected to TCA/acetone precipitation. All samples were resuspended in mobile phase spiked with iRTs peptides (Biognosys AG). Samples were analyzed on an AB Sciex 5600 TripleTOF in two modes: information-dependent acquisition (IDA) for protein identification and library generation, and SWATH acquisition for quantitative analysis. IDA was performed for a representative sample of the membrane enriched extract spiked with the IS mixture, and for the IS alone. Each individual sample was set for quantitative analysis by acquisition in SWATH mode. The SWATH setup was essentially as in Gillet et al. (2012). Protein identification was obtained using ProteinPilotTM software (v4.5, AB Sciex®) with the following search parameters: search against the entire SwissProt database (released at February 2014) and iRT peptides sequences; trypsin digestion; and MMTS as cysteine alkylating reagent. An independent FDR analysis, using the target-decoy approach, was used to assess the quality of identifications. Positive identifications were considered when identified proteins and peptides reached a 5% local FDR. SWATH data was processed in the SWATHTM processing plug-in for PeakViewTM (v2.0.01, AB SCIEX). The chromatographic profiles were extracted from the SWATH-MS data (XIC window of 5 min) for up to 5 target fragment ions of up to 15 peptides per protein. Confident identification was considered for proteins with at least 1 peptide with a FDR below 1%. The retention time was adjusted to each sample using the iRT peptides.  Evaluation of the normalization capacity: Recombinant proteins NuSa-3C-PSI and APRc were subjected to LD for their characterization by IDA prior to this study. The conditioned medium (CM) samples were analyzed in two manners for a total of 4 biological replicates each: (1) using the same volume between samples or (2) the same amount of total protein per sample. The recombinant proteins NuSa-3C-PSI and APRc were added to the medium prior to medium concentration, while the IS mixture was added prior to concentration in the “same volume” analysis, and before protein digestion in the case of the “same amount” analysis. In the “same volume” analysis, the protein pellets were dissolved in 2x SDS Sample buffer and used for in-gel digestion using the Short-GeLC approach (Anjo et al., 2015). In the analysis using the “same amount of total protein amount”, after dissolution of the protein pellets, samples were quantified, and 30 µg of total protein were used for protein digestion. One plate of each condition was combined to create a pooled sample for each CM condition for IDA experiments to build a specific protein library to be used in SWATH-MS analysis. These pooled samples were spiked with the recombinant proteins and digested using the Short-GeLC approach. Samples were analyzed by SWATH-MS mode designed specifically for the samples to be analyzed. IDA experiments were performed for each fraction of the pooled samples spiked with the recombinant proteins GFP, MBP, NuSa-3C-PSI and APRc. Protein identification was obtained using ProteinPilotTM software (v5.0, AB Sciex®). as described above. NuSa-3C-PSI and APRc were analyzed using the following search parameters: search against the entire SwissProt database (released at October 2014) or against a sequence specific database; trypsin digestion; and MMTS as cysteine alkylating reagent. CM samples were combined in a single search against a database composed by the Homo sapiens database from SwissProt (released at August 2014) and the sequences of all the recombinant proteins spiked (MBP and GFP (IS), NuSa-3C-PSI and APRc), using trypsin and acrylamide as alkylating agent, and a special focus option for gel-based approaches. SWATH data was processed as described above but using a XIC window of 4 min.

### Data Protocol
Recombinant proteins, both the IS (MBP and GFP), NUSA-3C-PSI and APRc, were characterized by bioinformatics and proteomics analyses to evaluate the similarity of these proteins with other proteins present in the UniProt reviewed database. To evaluate sequence similarity, sequence alignment analysis was performed by using BLAST from UniProt, and the obtained data was evaluated by the calculated expectation values (E-values) and percentage of identity. Protein identification was used to detect the proteins related with the recombinant proteins used in this work. These related proteins, which correspond to proteins that can be identified by the same set of peptide(s) (shared peptides), are grouped and reported as Proteins Groups (N) in Protein Pilot software and further confirmed by the analysis of the Unused value, which corresponds to the ProScore contribution of the unique peptides, and determines if there is enough evidence to report a given protein. Protein identification was considered for all the Protein Groups that met the 5 % local FDR. For quantitative results, protein levels were estimated by summing all the transitions from all the peptides of a particular protein extracted from the SWATH-MS files (Anjo et al., 2015). The consistency of the quantification (robustness) of the proposed IS mixture and the impact of sample complexity were determined by the analysis of the coefficient of variation (CV) of the (i) technical replicates, (ii) between the “-/+ extract” conditions from the same experiment, and ultimately (iii) between all the experimental conditions. For CV analysis, the IS values were normalized by the total intensity of the elements common to all samples [the IS and the iRT peptides (Biognosys) spiked prior to LC-MS/MS analysis]. The normalization capacity was evaluated by (i) the capacity to reduce the intragroup variability through the analysis of the coefficient of variation between replicates, and (ii) by the capacity to reach the expected ratios. The normalization using the IS mixture was compared with a set of different well-established methods, with a special focus for the total intensity (TI) method. The quantification of the IS was obtained by summing the MBP and GFP levels, and the sample intensity was calculated by summing the levels of all the quantified proteins. The remaining normalizations were performed using the web tool “Normalyzer” (version 1.1.1), available at http://normalyzer.immunoprot.lth.se/ that performs the evaluation using 12 different normalization methods, widely used in untargeted proteomics and three different strategies: i) pooled coefficient of variation (PCV); ii) pooled median absolute deviation (PMAD); and iii) pooled estimate of variance (PEV). The normalization methods considered are: Log2, LOESS, Robust Linear Regression (RLR), Variance Stabilizing Normalization (VSN), total intensity (TI), median intensity (MedI), average intensity (AI), NormFinder (NF) and quantile. In the case of VSN, RLR and LOESS, the normalization can be achieved at global (G) or at local/replicate (R) level. Global normalization is performed across all samples without considering any replicate grouping, while local normalization is only performed within the replicates from the same group. Box plots and Violin plots were used to represent the distribution of large sets of data. In the box plots, the limits of the box indicate the 25th and 75th percentiles, and Tukey-whiskers extend 1.5 times the interquartile range from the 25th and 75th percentiles, after which the outliers’ values are indicated. In the Violin plots, the median of the data is indicated (indicated by a white circle), the 25th and 75th percentiles of the data limited by the box, the non-outliers range of values indicated by the Tukey-whiskers extended 1.5 times the interquartile range from the 25th and 75th percentiles, and finally an estimation of the data distribution calculated by the Kernel density estimation which extend to extreme values represented by a polygon. Protein quantification analysis of the recombinant proteins NuSa-3C-PSI and APRc using the two different normalization methods (IS and TI) was verified by statistical analysis using the one-sample Student’s t-test against a theoretical value correspondent to the expected ratio, and the ANOVA (ANalysis Of Variance) analysis followed by the Tukey HSD post hoc test for comparison of APRc levels among the experimental conditions. Significant differences were considered for p-values below a significance level of 5 %. Data presented as mean ± standard error of the mean (S.E.M.). Every experimental condition was tested in four sets of independent experiments. Parametric assumptions (data normality and homogeneity of variance) were tested using Shapiro-Wilk Test and Levene’s Test, respectively. Statistical analysis was performed using IBM® SPSS® Statistics Version 22.

### Publication Abstract
The label-free quantitative mass spectrometry methods, in particular, the SWATH-MS approach, have gained popularity and became a powerful technique for comparison of large datasets. In the present work, it is evaluated the use of recombinant proteins as internal standards for untargeted label-free methods. The proposed internal standard strategy reveals a similar intragroup normalization capacity when compared with the most common normalization methods, with the additional advantage of maintaining the overall proteome changes between groups (which is buffered with the use of other methods). Therefore, the proposed strategy is able to maintain a good performance even when large qualitative and quantitative differences in sample composition are observed, such as the ones induced by biological regulation (as observed in secretome and other biofluids' analyses) or by enrichment approaches (such as immunopurifications). Moreover, this approach corresponds to a cost-effective and simple normalization method altrenative, therefore being an appealing strategy for large quantitative screening, as the analysis of clinical cohorts for biomarker discovery.

### Keywords
Internal standard, Proteomics screening, Biofluids, Data normalization, Swath-ms

### Affiliations
​Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology – University of Coimbra
Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology – University of Coimbra

### Submitter
Sandra Anjo

### Lab Head
Dr Bruno Manadas
Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology – University of Coimbra


