### Accession
PXD014261

### Title
TAp63-regulated microRNAs suppress cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma

### Description
TAp63 is a transcription factor belonging to the p53 family with important tumor suppressive functions. We show that TAp63-/- mice exhibit an increased susceptibility to UVR-induced cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma (cuSCC). These tumors showed global disruption of miRNA and mRNA expression when compared to tumors arising in wild-type mice. A comparison to similarly sequenced human cuSCC tumors identified miR-30c-2* and miR-497 as being significantly underexpressed in cuSCC. Reintroduction of these miRNAs significantly inhibited the growth of cuSCC cell lines and xenografts. Proteomic profiling of cells transfected with either miRNA showed significant downregulation of proteins related to cell cycle progression and mitosis. A cross-platform comparison of the RNAseq and proteomics signatures identified 7 downregulated proteins, which are also frequently overexpressed in both mouse and human cuSCC. Knockdown of AURKA, KIF18B, PKMYT1, and ORC1 in cuSCC cell lines suppressed tumor cell proliferation and induced cell death. Additionally, we found that an investigational, oral, selective inhibitor of AURKA suppressed cuSCC cell growth and induced cell death, and showed anti-tumor effects in vivo. Our data establishes TAp63 as an essential regulator of miRNA expression during skin carcinogenesis and reveals a novel network of miRNAs and mRNAs, which include potential targets for therapeutic intervention.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed in denaturing lysis buffer containing 8M urea, 20 mM HEPES (pH 8), 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate and 1 mM β-glycerophosphate. A Bradford assay was carried out to determine the protein concentration. The proteins were reduced with 4.5 mM DTT and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide. Trypsin digestion was carried out at room temperature overnight. Tryptic peptides were acidified with 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and desalted with C18 Sep-Pak cartridges according to the manufacturer’s protocol. TMT Labeling An aliquot (100 micrograms) of tryptic peptides from each sample was labeled with TMT reagent. LC-MS/MS and spectral counting was used to analyze the incorporation of the TMT label. 98% or greater label incorporation was achieved for each channel. The 6 samples were then pooled and lyophilized.  High pH Reversed Phase Peptide Separation After lyophilization, the peptides were re-dissolved in 400 microliters of 20 mM Ammonium Formate, (pH 10.0). The high pH reversed phase separation was performed on a Xbridge 4.6 mm x 100 mm column packed with BEH C18 resin, 3.5 µm particle size, 130Å pore size. (Waters) The peptides were eluted as follows: 5% B (5 mM Ammonium Formate, 90% acetonitrile, pH 10.0) for 10 minutes, 5% - 15% B in 5 minutes, 15-40% B in 47 minutes, 40-100% B in 5 minutes and 100% B held for 10 minutes, followed by re-equilibration at 1% B. The flow rate was 0.6 ml/min, and 24 concatenated fractions were collected. Speedvac centrifuge was used to dry the peptides.  LC-MS/MS A nanoflow ultra high performance liquid chromatograph (RSLC, Dionex) interfaced with an electrospray bench top orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q-Exactive plus, Thermo) was used for tandem mass spectrometry peptide sequencing experiments.  Samples were first loaded onto a pre-column (2 cm x 100 µm ID packed with C18 reversed-phase resin, 5µm particle size, 100Å pore size) and washed for 8 minutes with aqueous 2% acetonitrile and 0.04% trifluoroacetic acid.  Trapped peptides were eluted onto an analytical column, (C18, 75 µm ID x 25 cm, 2 µm particle size, 100Å pore size, Dionex).  A 90-minute gradient was programmed as follows: 95% solvent A (2% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid) for 8 minutes, solvent B (90% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid) from 5% to 38.5% in 60 minutes, then solvent B from 50% to 90% B in 7 minutes and held at 90% for 5 minutes, followed by solvent B from 90% to 5% in 1 minute and re-equilibrated for 10 minutes.  The flow rate on the analytical column was 300 nl/min. Sixteen tandem mass spectra were collected in a data-dependent manner following each survey scan using a 15 second exclusion for previously sampled peptide peaks.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.8 with Andromeda) was used to identify peptides and quantify the TMT reporter ion intensities. Differentially expressed proteins (absolute fold-change>1.5) were selected and pathway analysis was performed using the Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) software (QIAGEN, Inc., https://www.qiagenbioinformatics.com/products/ingenuity-pathway-analysis).  For this upload, data were searched against human entries in UniProt using Mascot (www.matrixscience.com) using TMT lebeling of N-termini and lysines and carbamidomethylation of cysteine as modifications.

### Publication Abstract
TAp63 is a p53 family member and potent tumor and metastasis suppressor. Here, we show that <i>TAp63<sup>-/-</sup></i> mice exhibit an increased susceptibility to ultraviolet radiation-induced cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma (cuSCC). A human-to-mouse comparison of cuSCC tumors identified miR-30c-2* and miR-497 as underexpressed in TAp63-deficient cuSCC. Reintroduction of these miRNAs significantly inhibited the growth of cuSCC cell lines and tumors. Proteomic profiling of cells expressing either miRNA showed downregulation of cell-cycle progression and mitosis-associated proteins. A mouse to human and cross-platform comparison of RNA-sequencing and proteomics data identified a 7-gene signature, including <i>AURKA, KIF18B, PKMYT1</i>, and <i>ORC1</i>, which were overexpressed in cuSCC. Knockdown of these factors in cuSCC cell lines suppressed tumor cell proliferation and induced apoptosis. In addition, selective inhibition of AURKA suppressed cuSCC cell proliferation, induced apoptosis, and showed antitumor effects <i>in vivo</i>. Finally, treatment with miR-30c-2* or miR-497 miRNA mimics was highly effective in suppressing cuSCC growth <i>in vivo</i>. Our data establish TAp63 as an essential regulator of novel miRNAs that can be therapeutically targeted for potent suppression of cuSCC. SIGNIFICANCE: This study provides preclinical evidence for the use of miR-30c-2*/miR-497 delivery and AURKA inhibition in the treatment of cuSCC, which currently has no FDA-approved targeted therapies.<i>See related commentary by Parrales and Iwakuma, p. 2439</i>.

### Keywords
Microrna, Cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma, Expression proteomics, P63

### Affiliations
Moffitt Cancer Center
Moffitt Cancer Center Tampa, FL, USA

### Submitter
John Koomen

### Lab Head
Dr Elsa Flores, PhD
Moffitt Cancer Center Tampa, FL, USA


