### Accession
PXD034012

### Title
Proteomics investigation of Nucleostemin role in Nucleo-phosmin mutated OCI-AML 3 cell line

### Description
Nucleostemin (NS; product of the GNL3 gene) is a nucleolar/nucleoplasm shuttling GTPase whose levels are high in stem cells while rapidly decreasing upon differentiation. NS levels are also high in several solid and hematological neoplasms, including acute myeloid leukemia (AML). While a role in telomere maintenance, response to stress stimuli and in favoring DNA repair has been proposed in solid cancers, little or no information is available as to the role of nucleostemin in AML. Here we investigate this issue with a proteomics approach. We use as a model system the OCI-AML 3 cell line harboring a heterozygous mutation at the NPM1 gene, which is the most frequent driver mutation in AML (approximately 30% of total AML cases). We show that NS is highly expressed in this cell line but, contrary to what previously shown in other cancers, its presence is dispensable for cell growth and viability. However, proteomics analysis of OCI-AML 3 cell line before and after nu-cleostemin (NS) silencing showed several effects in different biological functions as highlighted by ingenuity pathway analysis (IPA). In particular, we report an effect in down-regulating DNA repair through homologous recombination and we confirmed higher DNA damage rate in OCI-AML 3 cells when NS is depleted, which considerably increases upon stress induced by the topoisomerase II inhibitor etoposide.

### Sample Protocol
We performed shotgun proteomics analysis to evaluate the effect of NS silencing on OCI-AML 3 cell line carrying NPM1 mutation A (expressing NPM1c+). Cellular pellets were lysed by sonication in a lysis buﬀer (urea 6 M in 100 mM Tris/HCl, pH 7.5). After centrifugation of cell debris, the supernatants were tested for protein concentration through Bradford assay (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA) using Bovine Serum Albumin (BSA, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MI, USA) standard for the calibration curve in order to digest 50 µg of proteins for each different condition according to the Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) method. For protein label free identification and quantification, a tryptic digestion was carried out overnight at 37°C (Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany). Tryptic peptides from each sample were analyzed in triplicate with LC-MS/MS using the UltiMateTM 3000 UPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, Waltham, MA, USA) chromatographic system coupled to the Orbitrap FusionTM TribridTM (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, Waltham, MA, USA) mass spectrometer, as already reported in our previous work [27]. Briefly, peptides were loaded on the Trap Cartridge C18 (0.3 mm ID, 5 mm L, 5 μm PS, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and then separated on an EASY-spray AcclaimTM PepMapTM C18 (75 μm ID, 25 cm L, 2 μm PS, Thermo Fisher Scientific) nanoscale chromatographic column. Mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid in H2O and mobile phase B was 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. The flow rate was set at 300 nL/min, with a total run time of 120 min using a chromatographic gradient from 2% to 90% of phase B. Proteomics data were acquired in positive-ion polarity with Data Dependent Acquisition (DDA) mode to trigger precursor isolation and MS2 sequence using N2 as collision gas for CID fragmentation. Moreover, LC-MS/MS analysis was used to further corroborate the NPM1 mutation A (coding for NPM1c+ protein) on OCI-AML 3 cell lines by using two fasta files with the two respective sequences of the NPM1 Wild-Type (WT) and NPM1 mutated proteins

### Data Protocol
Indeed, Proteome Discoverer software (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, Waltham, MA, USA) was set up to find the peptides, from the two respective NPM1 sequences, present in the samples OCI-AML 3 SCR and OCI-AML 3 shNS. Proteomics raw data were processed using the Andromeda peptide search engine in a free computational platform, MaxQuant version 1.6.6.0 (Max-Planck Institute for Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany) to match the spectra against the UniProt FASTA database (released 2018_04, taxonomy Homo Sapiens, 20,874 entries) supplemented with frequently observed contaminants and containing forward and reverse sequences. Processing parameters were set up as followed:   carbamidomethylation of cysteines (C) as fixed modification, oxidation of methionines (M) and deamidation of asparagines (N) and glutamines (Q) as variable modifications; a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was applied both at protein and peptide level. LFQ Intensity was used to quantify protein abundance in each sample whenever the protein was identified in at least two analytical replicates for each condition. Bioinformatics analysis was performed with Perseus version 1.6.10.50 (Max-Planck Institute for Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany). LFQ Intensities were log2 transformed to facilitate the calculation of the protein expression. The minimum number of valid values accepted was set at 2 in at least one group in order to simultaneously evaluate differential proteins and the presence and absence of proteins between two different treated conditions. Variability between the two different cellular treatments was reported as density plot with Pearson correlation (R2) of mean LFQ Intensities value transformed to log2 scale. The Volcano Plot function was used to identify the differentially regulated proteins by performing a t-test with threshold p-value of 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Nucleostemin (NS; a product of the <i>GNL3</i> gene) is a nucleolar-nucleoplasm shuttling GTPase whose levels are high in stem cells and rapidly decrease upon differentiation. NS levels are also high in several solid and hematological neoplasms, including acute myeloid leukaemia (AML). While a role in telomere maintenance, response to stress stimuli and favoring DNA repair has been proposed in solid cancers, little or no information is available as to the role of nucleostemin in AML. Here, we investigate this issue via a proteomics approach. We use as a model system the OCI-AML 3 cell line harboring a heterozygous mutation at the <i>NPM1</i> gene, which is the most frequent driver mutation in AML (approximately 30% of total AML cases). We show that NS is highly expressed in this cell line, and, contrary to what has previously been shown in other cancers, that its presence is dispensable for cell growth and viability. However, proteomics analysis of the OCI-AML 3 cell line before and after nucleostemin (NS) silencing showed several effects on different biological functions, as highlighted by ingenuity pathway analysis (IPA). In particular, we report an effect of down-regulating DNA repair through homologous recombination, and we confirmed a higher DNA damage rate in OCI-AML 3 cells when NS is depleted, which considerably increases upon stress induced by the topoisomerase II inhibitor etoposide. The data used are available via ProteomeXchange with the identifier PXD034012.

### Keywords
Nucleophosmin, Shotgun proteomics, Nucleostemin, Acute myeloid leukemia

### Affiliations
Department of Pharmacy, Univeristy of Chieti, Italy
University "G. d'Annunzio" of Chieti

### Submitter
Maria Concetta Cufaro

### Lab Head
Dr Piero Del Boccio
Department of Pharmacy, Univeristy of Chieti, Italy


