### Accession
PXD030573

### Title
Proteomic analysis of somatosensory cortex of Pten haploinsufficient mice

### Description
To discover differentially expressed proteins in somatosensory cortex of Pten haploinsufficient mice at adolescence (P30). Result reveals signatures of perturbation of dendritic spine development, keratinization and hamartoma. These are collectively respresentating molecular perturbation of neuropathology of PTEN Harmatoma Tumor Syndrome (PHTS).

### Sample Protocol
Snap-frozen somatosensory cortices from mice of Pten heterozygous loss (n=3) and wild-type littermates (n=3) were lysed on ice with 10 times volume of RIPA buffer supplemented with cocktail of protease and phosphatase inhibitors by passing through 25-G needle for 10 times. After centrifuged at 16,000x for 10 minutes at 4oC, 100ug total soluble proteins were used for iTRAQ analysis. The samples were diluted in buffer with EDTA and without SDS. Final concentration of 10mM DTT was added to reduce disulfide bonds in proteins, free cysteine thiol group was blocked by 50mM 2-iodoacetamide in dark for 45 minutes. Protein solutions were digested with trypsin at 1:20 (trypsin:total protein) for 4 hours at 37oC. After desalting, peptide samples were freeze-dried, reconstitued in 0.5M triethylammonium bicarbonate, labeled with different iTRAQ tags for 2 hours, fractionated by Shimadzu LC-20AB liquid phase system using 5um 4.6x250mm Gemini C18 column. The dried peptide samples were reconstituted with mobile phase A (5% ACN, pH 9.8) and injected with flow rate of 1mL/min in gradients of 5% mobile phase B (95% ACN, pH 9.8) for 10 minutes, 5% to 35% B for 40 minutes, 35% to 95% B for 1 minute, 100% B for 3 minutes, finished with 5% B for 10 minutes. Eluted samples were monitored at 214nM at fraction per minute and combined according to chromatographic elution peak map to obtained 20 fractions. Freeze-dried samples were reconstituted with mobile phase C (2% ACN, 0.1% formic acid(FA)) and separated in Thermo UltiMate 3000 UHPLC using a self-packed C18 column (75um internal diameter, 3um column size, 25cm column length), at 300nL/min in gradients of 5% mobile phase D (98% ACN, 0.1% FA) for 5 minutes, linear increasing B from 5% to 25% from 5 to 45 minutes, increasing B from 25% to 35% from 45 to 50 minutes, 35% to 80% of B from 50 to 52 minutes, 80% of B from 52 to 54 minutes, finished with 5% B from 54 to 60 minutes. The nanoliter liquid phase separation end was directly connected to tandem mass spectrometer Q-Exactive HF X for data dependent acquisition via ionization by a nanoESI source. Ion source voltage was set to 1.9kV, MS1 scanning range was 350-1,500 m/z with resolution of 60,000, MS2 starting m/z was fixed at 100 with resolution of 15,000. The ion screening conditions for MS2 fragmentation was charge from 2+ to 6+ with top 20 parent ions with peak intensity over 10,000. The ion fragmentation mode was HCD and the fragment ions were detected in Orbitrap with dynamic exclusion time of 30 seconds. The automated gain control target was set to MS1 at 3E6 and MS2 at 1E5.

### Data Protocol
Raw data from Q-Exactive HF-X were converted to MGF format. Protein identifications were searched by the local Mascot database server against UniProt database of Mus musculus. Parameters used for protein identifications were trypsin as cleavage enzyme, 0.05Da as fragment mass tolerance, monoisotopic as the mass values, oxidation, deamidated and iTRAQ8plex as variable modifications, carbamidomethyl (C), iTRAQ8plex (N-term) and iTRAQ8plex (K) as fixed modifications, and 20ppm as the peptide mass tolerance. An automatic software IQuant was used for quantification of proteins. To assess the confidence of peptides, the PSMs were pre-filtered at a PSM-level FDR of 1%. Identified peptide sequences were assembled into a set of confident proteins. To control the rate of false-positive at protein level, an protein FDR at 1% based on Picked protein FDR strategy was estimated after protein inference. Enrichment analysis of differentially expressed protein was done by GSEA.

### Publication Abstract
PTEN hamartoma tumour syndrome is characterised by mutations in the human PTEN gene. We performed transcriptomic and proteomic analyses of neural tissues and primary cultures from heterozygous and homozygous Pten-knockout mice. The somatosensory cortex of heterozygous Pten-knockout mice was enriched in immune response and oligodendrocyte development Gene Ontology (GO) terms. Parallel proteomic analysis revealed differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) related to dendritic spine development, keratinisation and hamartoma signatures. However, primary astrocytes (ASTs) from heterozygous Pten-knockout mice were enriched in the extracellular matrix GO term, while primary cortical neurons (PCNs) were enriched in immediate-early genes. In ASTs from homozygous Pten-knockout mice, cilium-related activity was enriched, while PCNs exhibited downregulation of forebrain neuron generation and differentiation, implying an altered excitatory/inhibitory balance. By integrating DEPs with pre-filtered differentially expressed genes, we identified the enrichment of traits of intelligence, cognitive function and schizophrenia, while DEPs in ASTs were significantly associated with intelligence and depression.

### Keywords
Somatosensory cortex, Lc-ms/ms, Pten, Q-exactive hf-x, Itraq

### Affiliations
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
School of Biomedical Science, The Chinese University of Hong Kong

### Submitter
Stanley Cheung

### Lab Head
Dr Andrew M. Chan
School of Biomedical Science, The Chinese University of Hong Kong


