### Accession
PXD020972

### Title
Proteomics of induced senescent cells

### Description
OMI (Uniprot ID O43464) is a pro-apoptotic protease localized to the mitochondria which was hypothesized to activate senescense following X-ray irradiation via cleavage of specific ligands. To elucidate cellular processes affected by OMI after irradiation, human lung cancer cell line was subjected to the following treatments: WT + X-ray irradiation WT - X-ray irradiation WT + OMI-inhibitor + X-ray irradiation WT + OMI-inhibitor - X-ray irradiation OMI-siRNA + X-ray irradiation OMI-siRNA - X-ray irradiation siRNA-empty vector (control) + X-ray irradiation siRNA-empty vector (control) - X-ray irradiation

### Sample Protocol
The samples were subjected to lysis and in solution tryptic digestion using the S-Trap method (by Protifi). The resulting peptides were fractionated offline using high pH reversed phase chromatography, followed by online nanoflow liquid chromatography (nanoAcquity) coupled to high resolution, high mass accuracy mass spectrometry (Thermo Q-Exactive HF). Samples from each fraction were analyzed on the instrument separately, and within each fraction samples were analyzed in a random order in discovery mode.

### Data Protocol
The raw data was processed with MaxQuant v1.6.6.0. The data was searched with the Andromeda search engine against the human proteome database appended with common lab protein contaminants and the following modifications: Fixed modification- cysteine carbamidomethylation. Variable modifications- methionine oxidation, and protein N-terminal acetylation. The quantitative comparisons were calculated using Perseus v1.6.0.7. Decoy hits were filtered out, and only proteins that were detected in at least two replicates of at least one experimental group were kept.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Senescence, Lc-ms/ms, Omi, X-ray irradiation

### Affiliations
The Weizmann Institute of Science
Department of Molecular Genetics Faculty of Biochemistry Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel

### Submitter
Alon Savidor

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Adi Kimchi
Department of Molecular Genetics Faculty of Biochemistry Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel


