### Accession
PXD042199

### Title
TOPBP1 Shapes XY Silencing Dynamics Independently of Sex Body Formation to Ensure Male Fertility

### Description
In mammals and several other taxa, the ability of males to cope with the limited synapsis of the X and Y chromosomes during prophase I of meiosis relies on the process of meiotic sex chromosome inactivation (MSCI). Components of the somatic DNA damage response machinery, including ATR, TOPBP1, MDC1 and BRCA1 play key roles in MSCI, although how they establish XY silencing remains incompletely understood. In particular, it remains unclear how DDR factors coordinate XY silencing with DNA repair, chromosome synapsis and the formation of the sex body, a distinct phase-separated sub-nuclear structure formed during prophase I to house the unsynapsed XY bivalent. Here we report a mutant mouse (Topbp1B5/B5), harboring mutations in the BRCT5 domain of Topbp1, that shows impaired XY silencing but grossly normal sex body formation. While Topbp1B5/B5 mice are viable, without detectable somatic defects, males are completely infertile. Distinct from mice lacking ATR or TOPBP1 specifically during meiosis, Topbp1B5/B5 males exhibit normal chromosome synapsis and canonical markers of DNA repair in early prophase I. ATR signaling is mostly intact in Topbp1B5/B5 spermatocytes, although specific ATR-dependent events are disrupted, including localization of the RNA:DNA helicase Senataxin to chromatin loops of the XY. Strikingly, while Topbp1B5/B5 spermatocytes are able to initiate MSCI the completion of gene silencing is defective, with a subset of X chromosome genes displaying distinct patterns of transcriptional deregulation. These findings suggest a non-canonical role for the ATR-TOPBP1 signaling axis in XY silencing dynamics at advanced stages in pachynema. This is the first DDR mutant that separates XY silencing from sex body formation, as well as TOPBP1’s role in spermatogenesis from its roles in organismal viability.

### Sample Protocol
Enrichment of testes phosphopeptides and TMT labeling  Whole decapsulated testes were collected from 8- to 12-week-old mice after which tissue was subject to lysis, protein quantification and normalization, denaturation, alkylation, precipitation, digestion, and solid-phase extraction (SPE) C18 cartridge clean up as described by Sims et. al1. Lyophilized tryptic peptides were then subject to phosphopeptide enrichment using a High-Select Fe-NTA Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Cat# A32992, Thermo Scientific). Phosphopeptide samples were dried in silanized glass shell vials, resuspended in 50 mM HEPES, and labeled with 100ug of TMT sixplex Isobaric Label Reagents (Thermo Scientific) using 3 TMT channels for each condition. The TMT-labeling reaction was done at room temperature for 1h and quenched with 5% hydroxylamine for 15 minutes. After quenching, TMT-labeled peptides from all six channels were pooled, acidified with 0.1% TFA, and desalted using a SPE 1cc C18 cartridge (Sep-Pak C18 cc vac cartridge, 50 mg Sorbent, WAT054955, Waters). Bound TMT-labeled phosphopeptides were eluted with 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% acetic acid in water before being dried via vacuum concentrator.  Mass spectrometric analysis of TMT-labeled phosphopeptides  The dried TMT-labeled phosphopeptides were prefractionated using offline HILIC HPLC prior to being analyzed by mass-spectrometry. The LC-MS/MS was performed on an UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano chromatographic system coupled to a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The chromatographic separation was achieved via a 35cm-long 100 µm inner diameter column packed in-house with 3 µm C18 reversed-phase resin (Reprosil Pur C18AQ 3 μm). The Q-Exactive HF was operated in data-dependent mode with survey scans acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer over the range of 380–1800 m/z with a mass resolution of 120,000. MS/MS spectra were performed after selecting the top 7 most abundant +2, +3, or +4 ions and a precursor isolation window of 0.7 m/z. Selected ions were fragmented by Higher-energy Collisional Dissociation (HCD) with normalized collision energies of 28, with fragment mass spectra acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer with a monitored first mass of 100 m/z, mass resolution of 15,000, AGC target set to 1 × 105, and maximum injection time set to 100 ms. A dynamic exclusion window of 30 seconds was specified.  Immunoprecipitation  Cell pellets were lysed in 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1% tergitol, 0.25% sodium deoxycholate, and 5 mM EDTA, supplemented with EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail, 5 mM sodium fluoride, 10 mM β-glycerolphosphate, 1 mM PMSF, and 0.4 mM sodium orthovanadate. The protein extracts were cleared by 10-min centrifugation and then were incubated with anti-FLAG agarose beads (Sigma-Aldrich) for 16h at 4°C. The beads were then washed four times with the same buffer used for IP and then eluted using three resin volumes of the elution buffer (100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, and 1% SDS, and 1mM DTT).  Mass spectrometric analysis of immunoprecipitates  Immunoprecipitates were prepared for mass spectrometry analysis by reduction, alkylation, precipitation, and digestion by trypsin. The peptides were desalted, dried, and then fractionated by hydrophilic interaction chromatography as previously described2. Fractions were dried and analyzed by liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry using a mass spectrometer (Q-Exactive HF Orbitrap; Thermo Fisher Scientific). The capillary column was 35 cm long with a 100-µm inner diameter, packed in-house with 3 µm C18 reversed-phase resin (Reprosil Pur C18AQ 3 μm). Peptides were separated over an 70-minute linear gradient of six to 40% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 300 nl/min as described previously3. Xcalibur 2.2 software (Thermo Fischer Scientific) was used for the data acquisition, and The Q-Exactive HF was operated in data-dependent mode with survey scans acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer over the range of 380–1800 m/z with a mass resolution of 120,000. The maximum ion injection time for the survey scan was 100 ms with a 3e6 automatic gain-control target ion. Tandem mass spectrometry spectra were performed by selecting up to the 20 most abundant ions with a charge state of 2, 3, or 4 and with an isolation window of 1.2 m/z. Selected ions were fragmented by higher energy collisional dissociation with a normalized collision energy of 28, and the tandem mass spectra was acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer with a mass resolution of 17,500 (at m/z 200).

### Data Protocol
For the IP-MS, the Trans Proteomic Pipeline (TPP) version 6.0.0 was used for peptide identification and SILAC quantification. MS data were converted to mzXML using msConvert as packaged with the TPP, after which spectral data files were searched using the Comet search engine (v2021 rev 1)4. The following parameters were used in the database search: semitryptic requirement, a mass accuracy of 15 ppm for the precursor ions, a differential modification of 8.0142 D for lysine and 10.00827 D for arginine, and a static mass modification of 57.021465 D for alkylated cysteine residues. Peptide identifications were validated using PeptideProphet and SILAC quantification was performed using XPRESS as described previously1,3. For the phosphoproteomics, the Trans Proteomic Pipeline (TPP) version 6.0.0 was used for phosphopeptide identification and quantification. MS data was converted to mzXML using msConvert as packaged with the TPP, after which spectral data files were searched using the Comet search engine (v2021 rev 1). Peptide identifications were validated using PeptideProphet, phosphorylation site localization was performed using PTM Prophet, and TMT channel quantification was performed using Libra. Results from Libra were exported as tab-delimited files for further processing via R scripts as previously described1.   Referencies  1. Sims, J. R. et al. Phosphoproteomics of ATR signaling in mouse testes. Elife 11, (2022). 2. Liu, Y. et al. TOPBP1Dpb11 plays a conserved role in homologous recombination DNA repair through the coordinated recruitment of 53BP1Rad9. J. Cell Biol. 216, 623–639 (2017). 3. Bastos de Oliveira, F. M. et al. Phosphoproteomics reveals distinct modes of Mec1/ATR signaling during DNA replication. Mol. Cell 57, 1124–1132 (2015). 4. Eng, J. K., Jahan, T. A. & Hoopmann, M. R. Comet: An open-source MS/MS sequence database search tool. PROTEOMICS vol. 13 22–24 Preprint at https://doi.org/10.1002/pmic.201200439 (2013).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Male meiosis, Topbp1, Mice, Msci and xy silencing

### Affiliations
Cornell University

### Submitter
Carolline Ascencao

### Lab Head
Dr Marcus Smolka
Cornell University


