### Accession
PXD013282

### Title
Systematic Discovery of Deeply Conserved Plan Protein Complexes, Broccoli leaves

### Description
The associated files are mass spec data from individual fractions of mixed-bed ion exchange fractionations of native extract made from broccoli plant leaves (Brassica oleracea var. italica).

### Sample Protocol
Green healthy leaf tissue was harvested from young broccoli plants purchased at a nursery.  Tissue was powdered in liquid nitrogen, and extracted in 50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM EGTA, 10% glycerol, 1% NP40, 0.1 mM DTT, phosphatase inhibitors, and plant-specific protease inhibitors with brief homogenization on ice with a Tissue Tearor (BioSpec Products, Inc).  Sample was diluted to and re-concentrated in a Vivaspin Turbo4 ultrafiltration unit, 30,000 MWCO to achieve loading of 1.6 mg at 23.5 mM NaCl.  Buffer exchange of ion exchange fractions was done with an AcroPrep Advance 96 filter plate Omega 3k MWCO (Pall) followed by reduction/alkylation and overnight trypsin digestion.  Peptides were desalted using C18 Lab-in-a-Plate (Glygen Corp.).  Samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap fusion mass spec using a data dependent 75 min TopSpeed CID method.

### Data Protocol
Data from .RAW files was processed using an in-house pipeline to be reported.  Briefly output from 3 search engines (Comet, MS-GF+, and X!Tandem) was combined using the MSBlender software and peptide assignments to in-house assigned orthogroups to enale inter-species comparison of proteins identified.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Brassica oleracea var. italica, Leaves, Broccoli, Ion exchange, Iex, Cf-ms

### Affiliations
University of Texas at Austin
Molecular Biosciences and the Center for Systems and Synthetic Biology, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA

### Submitter
Ophelia Papoulas

### Lab Head
Dr Edward M. Marcotte
Molecular Biosciences and the Center for Systems and Synthetic Biology, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA


