### Accession
PXD018868

### Title
Proteome responses of Grapevine to Downy mildew

### Description
A comparative proteomic analysis of grapevine leaves from the resistant genotype V. davidii ‘LiuBa-8’ (LB) and susceptible genotype V. vinifera ‘Pinot Noir’ (PN) at 12 hpi was conducted to understand the complex relationship between grapevine and P. viticola and the molecular mechanisms between difference resistant vitis genotypes at the early stage of infection. A total of 444 and 349 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were identified in LB and PN respectively at 12 hpi by iTRAQ. MapMan analysis showed that the majority of these DEPs were related to photosynthesis, metabolism, stress and redox. More up-expressed DEPs involved in photosynthesis and less down-expressed DEPs involved in metabolism contribute to the resistance in LB. PR10.2, PR10.3, HSF70.2 and HSP90.6 are proposed to be key proteins in both compatible and incompatible interactions. Accumulation H2O2 established the ROS signaling in incompatible interaction and APXs, GSTs maybe associated with the resistance of grapevine against downy mildew. Moreover, we verified four proteins to ensure the accuracy of proteome data using PRM. Overall, these data provide new insights into molecular events and provide valuable candidate proteins that could be used to illuminate molecular mechanisms underlying the incompatible and compatible interaction in early stage and eventually to be exploited to develop new protection strategy against downy mildew in grapevine.

### Sample Protocol
It has been reported that Vitis species and cultivars vary in resistance to P. viticola. Our previous study demonstrated that the Chinese wild grapevine V. davidii ‘LiuBa-8’ (LB) has relatively highly resistance to P. viticola which showed incompatible interaction with P. viticola while V. vinifera cultivars such as ‘Pinot noir’ (PN) are compatible to P. viticola (Liu et al. 2015; Yin et al. 2017). In the present study we performed iTRAQ labelling technique to assess proteome changes in resistant genotype LB and susceptible genotype PN response to P. viticola at early stage. Our aims were to gain insight into the molecular events underlying the early response to P. viticola infection in resistant and susceptible grapevine species and provide valuable candidate proteins that could be used to illuminate molecular mechanisms underlying the incompatible and compatible interaction and eventually to be exploited to develop new protection strategy against downy mildew in grapevine.

### Data Protocol
Differently expressed proteins (DEPs) were based on a quantification ratio > 1.2 or < 0.83 at p value < 0.05 with at least one unique peptide in at least two biological replicates.Among the 709 DEPs, 538 were characterized as hypothetical or unknown proteins under grape genomics information category in Uniprot (http://www.uniprot.org/). To gain functional information about these proteins, BLAST (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/BLAST/) was used to search for homologous proteins against the NCBI non redundant (Nr) protein database. In order to gain a more detailed description, MapMan was used to conduct the functional annotation and classification of the DEPs (Usadel et al. 2005). These DEPs were classified into 34 functional catagoried according to MapMan ontology as shown in (Figure4). The predominant proteins changed in response to downy mildew were assigned to photosynthesis, metabolism, stress and redox, no matter in LB or PN.

### Publication Abstract
Wild grapevines can show strong resistance to the downy mildew pathogen P. viticola, but the associated mechanisms are poorly described, especially at early stages of infection. Here, we performed comparative proteomic analyses of grapevine leaves from the resistant genotype V. davidii "LiuBa-8" (LB) and susceptible V. vinifera "Pinot Noir" (PN) 12&#x2009;h after inoculation with P. viticola. By employing the iTRAQ technique, a total of 444 and 349 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were identified in LB and PN, respectively. The majority of these DEPs were related to photosynthesis, respiration, cell wall modification, protein metabolism, stress, and redox homeostasis. Compared with PN, LB showed fewer downregulated proteins associated with photosynthesis and more upregulated proteins associated with metabolism. At least a subset of PR proteins (PR10.2 and PR10.3) was upregulated upon inoculation in both genotypes, whereas HSP (HSP70.2 and HSP90.6) and cell wall-related XTH and BXL1 proteins were specifically upregulated in LB and PN, respectively. In the incompatible interaction, ROS signaling was evident by the accumulation of H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub>, and multiple APX and GST proteins were upregulated. These DEPs may play crucial roles in the grapevine response to downy mildew. Our results provide new insights into molecular events associated with downy mildew resistance in grapevine, which may be exploited to develop novel protection strategies against this disease.

### Keywords
Compatible and incompatible interactions, P.viticola, Grapevine, Itraq

### Affiliations
College of Horticulture, Northwest A&F University
Northwest A&F University

### Submitter
Guotian Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Yan Xu
College of Horticulture, Northwest A&F University


