### Accession
PXD000931

### Title
Disclosure of selective advantages in the “modern” sublineage of the Mycobacterium tuberculosis Beijing genotype family by quantitative proteomics.

### Description
Using two different comparative proteomic approaches we studied the M. tuberculosis Beijing genotype.

### Sample Protocol
Cell were cultured to mid-log phase, washed, harvested, heat-killed, mechanically lysed, digested using FASP, dimethylated, fractionated using SCX, RP-LC-MS/MS

### Data Protocol
Data analyses of RAW ms-files was performed using MaxQuant and Perseus.

### Publication Abstract
The Mycobacterium tuberculosis Beijing genotype, consisting of the more ancient (atypical) and modern (typical) emerging sublineage, is one of the most prevalent and genetically conserved genotype families and has often been associated with multidrug resistance. In this study, we employed a 2D-LC-FTICR MS approach, combined with dimethylation of tryptic peptides, to systematically compare protein abundance levels of ancient and modern Beijing strains and identify differences that could be associated with successful spread of the modern sublineage. The data is available via ProteomeXchange using the identifier PXD000931. Despite the highly uniform protein abundance ratios in both sublineages, we identified four proteins as differentially regulated between both sublineages, which could explain the apparent increased adaptation of the modern Beijing strains. These proteins are; Rv0450c/MmpL4, Rv1269c, Rv3137, and Rv3283/sseA. Transcriptional and functional analysis of these proteins in a large cohort of 29 Beijing strains showed that the mRNA levels of Rv0450c/MmpL4 are significantly higher in modern Beijing strains, whereas we also provide evidence that Rv3283/sseA is less abundant in the modern Beijing sublineage. Our findings provide a possible explanation for the increased virulence and success of the modern Beijing sublineage. In addition, in the established dataset of 1817 proteins, we demonstrate the pre-existence of several, possibly unique, antibiotic efflux pumps in the proteome of the Beijing strains. This may reflect an increased ability of Beijing strains to escape exposure to antituberculosis drugs.

### Keywords
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Ltq-ft, Comparative proteomics

### Affiliations
LUMC Dept. IHB-E3Q Mass spectrometry group
LUMC

### Submitter
Jeroen de Keijzer

### Lab Head
Dr Peter van Veelen
LUMC Dept. IHB-E3Q Mass spectrometry group


