### Accession
PXD002299

### Title
Protein ubiquitination in Aspergillus nidulans

### Description
Protein ubiquitination, an evolutionarily conserved post-translational modification process in eukaryotes, and plays an important role in many biological processes. Aspergillus nidulans, a model filamentous fungus, contributes to our understanding of cellular physiology, metabolism and genetics, but its ubiquitination remains widely unknown. In this study, the ubiquitination sites in the proteome of A. nidulans were identified using a highly sensitive mass spectrometry combined with immuno-affinity enrichment of ubiquitinated peptides. The 4816 ubiquitination sites were identified in 1913 ubiquitinated proteins, accounting for 18.1% of total proteins in A. nidulans. Bioinformatic analysis suggested that the ubiquitinated proteins are associated with a number of biological functions and display various sub-cellular localizations. Meanwhile, seven motifs were revealed from the ubiquitinated peptides, and significantly over-presented in different pathways. This study presents a first proteome-wide view of ubiquitination in filamentous fungi, and provides an initial framework for exploring the physiological role of lysine ubiquitination in filamentous fungi.

### Sample Protocol
Filamentous fungus Aspergillus nidulans strain FGSC A4 was grown on potato dextrose medium at 28C. The 3-day old conidia were suspended in 0.02% Tween 80 solution at the concentration of 107 conidia/mL. In order to culture the mycelia, the standard complete medium was prepared as previously described.  Aliquot of 100-μL conidial suspension was evenly smeared on the cellophane attached to the medium surface, and incubated at 37C. The 1-day-old mycelia were harvested and freeze-dried for the subsequent experients. Mycelial sample was ground to powder in liquid nitrogen and suspended in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Triton-100, and 65 mM DTT) supplemented with 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail  and deubiquitinase inhibitor. The resultant suspension was centrifuged at 20,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min, and the clear supernatant was kept as protein sample. The protein in supernatant was precipitated with cold 15% trichloroacetic acid (TFA) for 2 h at -20°C. The protein pellets were collected by centrifugation at 4 °C for 10 min, and washed thrice with cold acetone. The precipitated protein was re-dissolved in buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM NH4HCO3, and pH 8.0) and its concentration was measured with 2-D Quant kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Before tryptic digestion, the protein was reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol for 1 h at 37°C and alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide for 45 min at 25C in darkness. Then, the resulting sample was diluted by adding 100 mM NH4HCO3 to make urea concentration less than 2M. Tryptic digestion was firstly performed overnight by using the sequencing grade modified trypsin at enzyme-to-protein ratio of 1:50, and then additional trypsin was added at EtP ratio of 1:100 for a subsequent digestion (4 h). Tryptic digestion of an ubiquitinated protein generates a di-glycine (GG) peptide covalently bound to the lysine residue (K) of the target protein, and this signature peptide (K-ε-GG) is used to identify the ubiquitination sites. To enrich ubiquitinated peptides, the digested peptides dissolved in NETN buffer (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0) were incubated with Anti-K-ε-GG beads at 4 °C overnight with gentle shaking. The beads were washed four times with NETN buffer and then twice with ddH2O. The bound peptides were dissociated from beads with 0.1% TFA and vacuum-dried. The resultant peptides were desalted with C18 Zip Tips (Millipore) according to the instruction manual and subjected to HPLC/MS analysis. Peptide identification was performed at PTM Biolabs (Hangzhou, China) with previous methods with some adjustments.  Three parallel analyses were performed for each fraction. Peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (FA), and were loaded onto a reversed-phase pre-column set on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The loaded peptides were resolved on a reversed-phase analytical column with the gradient elution procedure at a constant flow rate of 280 nL/min. The gradient included an increase from 6% to 23% solvent B (0.1% FA in 98% acetonitrile) with 24 min, 23% to 35% with 8 min and climbing to 80% in 4 min, and then held at 80% for the last 4 min. The eluted peptides were sprayed directly into tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) using a nanospray ionization source at the electrospray voltage of 2.0 kV.

### Data Protocol
Mascot search engine (v.2.3.0) was used to process the resulting MS/MS data. MS/MS spectra were searched against A. nidulans proteome database (Uniprot Proteome ID: UP000000560) concatenated with a reverse decoy database, and the overall false discovery rate (FDR) for peptides must be less than 1%. Trypsin is a specific proteolytic enzyme, and up to 3 missed cleavages were allowed in a peptide. Searching error was set to 5 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. All modification searches used the following settings: Carbamidomethylation on Cys residue was set as fixed modification, but oxidation on Met and di-Gly on Lys were set as variable modifications. Ubiquitination sites were determined when a localization probability was not less than 0.75 (high confidence).

### Publication Abstract
Protein ubiquitination is an evolutionarily conserved post-translational modification process in eukaryotes, and it plays an important role in many biological processes. Aspergillus nidulans, a model filamentous fungus, contributes to our understanding of cellular physiology, metabolism and genetics, but its ubiquitination is not completely revealed. In this study, the ubiquitination sites in the proteome of A. nidulans were identified using a highly sensitive mass spectrometry combined with immuno-affinity enrichment of the ubiquitinated peptides. The 4816 ubiquitination sites were identified in 1913 ubiquitinated proteins, accounting for 18.1% of total proteins in A. nidulans. Bioinformatic analysis suggested that the ubiquitinated proteins associated with a number of biological functions and displayed various sub-cellular localisations. Meanwhile, seven motifs were revealed from the ubiquitinated peptides, and significantly over-presented in the different pathways. Comparison of the enriched functional catalogues indicated that the ubiquitination functions divergently during growth of A. nidulans and Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Additionally, the proteins in A. nidulans-specific sub-category (cell growth/morphogenesis) were subjected to the protein interaction analysis which demonstrated that ubiquitination is involved in the comprehensive protein interactions. This study presents a first proteomic view of ubiquitination in the filamentous fungus, and provides an initial framework for exploring the physiological roles of ubiquitination in A. nidulans.

### Keywords
Ubiquitination, Mycelial dvelopment, Lc-msms, Aspergillus nidulans

### Affiliations
Zhejiang University
College of Life Sciences, Zhejiang University, China

### Submitter
Sheng-hua Ying

### Lab Head
Dr Sheng-hua Ying
College of Life Sciences, Zhejiang University, China


