### Accession
PXD011610

### Title
Ammonium resupply-triggered response mechanism of lysine crotonylome in tea leaves (Camellia sinensis L.)

### Description
Background: Lysine crotonylation (Kcr), as a novel evolutionarily conserved type of PTM, is ubiquitous and essential in cell biology. However, its functions in tea plant, an important beverage crop, are largely unknown. Our study firstly attempted to describe Kcr proteins in tea leaves under NH4+ deficiency/resupply, and provided significant insights into exploring the physiological role of Kcr in plants for N utilization. Results: We performed the global analysis of crotonylome in tea plants under NH4+ deficiency/resupply using high-resolution LC-MS/MS coupled with highly sensitive immune-antibody. A total of 2288 kcr sites on 971 proteins were identified, of which contained in 15 types of Kcr motifs. Most of Kcr proteins were located in chloroplast and cytoplasm. 120 and 151 Kcr proteins were significantly changed at 3 hours and 3days of NH4+ resupply, respectively. Bioinformatics analysis showed that differentially expressed Kcr proteins participated in diverse biological processes such as photosynthesis, carbon fixation and amino acid metabolism, suggesting Kcr plays important roles in these processes. Interestingly, a large number of enzymes were crotonylated, and the activity and Kcr level of these enzymes changed significantly after NH4+ resupply, indicating a potential function of Kcr in the regulation of enzyme activities. Moreover, the protein-protein interaction analysis revealed that the diverse interactions of identified Kcr proteins mainly involved in photosynthesis, carbon fixation, amino acid metabolism and ribosome.  Conclusions: The results suggested that lysine crotonylated proteins might play regulating roles in metabolic process in tea leaves under NH4+ deficiency/resupply. The critical regulatory roles mainly involved in diverse aspects of primary metabolic processes, especially in photosynthesis, carbon fixation and amino acid metabolism. The provided data may serve as important resources for exploring the physiological, biochemical, and genetic role of lysine crotonylation in tea plants.

### Sample Protocol
Plant materials and growth conditions  The 1-year-old seedlings of the tea plant cultivar ‘Longjing 43’ planted in pots at the greenhouse of the Tea Research Institute, Qingdao Agricultural University in Shandong Province of China (36°19’ N, 120°23’ E, 54.88 m above the sea level), were used to Hydroponics. For hydroponics, the tea plants were suspended in a hydroponic nutrient solution (Additional file 2). The growth conditions were set as follows: temperature, 25±1℃/15±1℃ (14h day/10h night); lighting, 260-280 μM•m-2•s-1 photon flux densities; and humidity, 75±5% relative humidity. After hydroponic seedlings were grown in the greenhouse for two weeks to recover, which used to perform the NH4+ deficiency/resupply experiments. Firstly, hydroponic seedlings were transferred to NH4+ deficiency nutrient solution ((NH4)2SO4 deleted) for 14 days (NH4+ deficiency). Then, these seedlings were retransferred to NH4+ resupply nutrient solution ((NH4)2SO4 added) for 3 days. Finally, the third and/or fourth mature leaves from the terminal bud were sampled at 0 hour (0hN, NH4+ deficiency), 3 hours (3hN) and 3days (3dN) of NH4+ resupply. All samples were quickly frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80 °C for further study. Three biological replicates were performed for each sampling time point. Physiological determinations    For physiological experiments, more than ten plants were harvested and pooled for each treatment group at 0h, 3h and 3d of NH4+ resupply, and the leaves were collected three times as biological replicates. The nitrogen content (NC) of tea leaves were measured after Kjeldahl digestion. The chlorophyll content (CC) of samples were measured as described by Lichtenthaler et al [13]. The measurement of obtain maximum photochemical quantum yield of PS II (Fv/Fm) refered to Zheng et al [14]. Samples were analyzed for the contents of free amino acids (AA), and measurement followed the Sate Standard of China for tea content determination recorded as: GB 8314-87. Western blot   The samples of tea leaves that in been grown in the presence of NH4+ deficiency(0hN), 3hN and 3dN, were performed by western blotting (WB) analysis based on a previously described method [15]. Protein extraction and digestion  The protein extraction and digestion of the samples were following by previous method [16]. And the more detailed information was shown in supplementary file 1. HPLC fractionation and Affinity enrichment For global proteome analysis, the tryptic peptides were fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Agilent 300Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, peptides were first separated with a gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile (pH 9.0, Fisher Chemical) over 60 min into 60 fractions. Then, the peptides were combined into four fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging.      To enrich Kcr peptides, tryptic peptides dissolved in NETN buffer (100 mMNaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mMTris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0) were incubated with pre-washed antibody beads (PTM Bio) at 4°C overnight with gentle shaking. Then the beads were washed four times with NETN buffer and twice with H2O. The bound peptides were eluted from the beads with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. Finally, the eluted fractions were combined and vacuum-dried. For LC-MS/MS analysis, the resulting peptides were desalted with C18 ZipTips (Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s instructions, followed by LC-MS/MS analysis.  LC-MS/MS analysis

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis  The tryptic peptides were dissolved in solvent A (water on 0.1% formic acid) and directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). For global proteome analysis, the gradient of was comprised of an increase from 6% to 23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 90% acetonitrile) over 40 min, 23% to 35% in 14 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. For crotonylome analysis, the gradient of was comprised of an increase from 7% to 25% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 90% acetonitrile) over 38 min, 25% to 40% in 14 min and climbing to 80% in 4 min then holding at 80% for the last 4 min, all at a constant flow rate of 700 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system.  he peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 Kv for crotonylome analysis or 2.1 Kv for global proteome analysis. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17500. In order to improve the efficiency of mass spectrometry, automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4, signal threshold was set at 10000 ions/s for crotonylome analysis or 20000 ions/s for global proteome analysis, the maximum injection time was set at 200 ms for crotonylome analysis or 100 ms for global proteome analysis, and the dynamic exclusion time of tandem mass spectrometry was set at 15.0s for crotonylome analysis or 30s for global proteome analysis. Database search and bioinformatic analysis For protein and Kcr quantification, the resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against Camellia sinensis database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 4 missing cleavages for lysine crotonylome, and 2 missing cleavages for global proteome. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. For global proteome analysis, carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification, oxidation on Met and acetylation on the protein N-terminus was specified as variable modifications. For crotonylome analysis, carbamidomethyl on Cys for fixed modification and oxidation on Met, crotonylation on lysine and acetylation on the protein N-terminus for variable modifications. And then, Label-free quantification method was LFQ, FDR was adjusted to < 1% and minimum score for peptides or modified peptides were set > 40.  Soft motif-x (http://motif-x.med.harvard.edu/) was used to analyze the model of sequences with amino acids in specific positions of modify-21-mers (10 amino acids upstream and downstream of the site) in all protein sequences. The subcellular localization was performed by wolfpsort (http://www.genscript.com/wolf-psort.html). The Gene Ontology (GO) annotation and enrichment analyses were done by UniProt-GOA database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/). Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database was adopted for the enrichment of pathways by functional annotation tool of DAVID against the background of Camellia sinensis. To perform a protein−protein interaction (PPI) network analysis, the STRING database (http://string-db.org/) was used and then functional protein interaction networks were visualized by using Cytoscape.  Enzyme Assays  The activity of Rubisco, TK，PRK, SGAT, GGAT and SHMT were measured at 0N, 3hN and 3dN in tea leaves, using ELISA kit from Jiangsu Meimian industrial Co. Ltd. And the more detail information was shown in Supplementary file 2.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Enzymatic activity, Lysine crotonylation, Crotonylome, Carbon fixation, Photosynthesis, Amino acid metabolism, Camellia sinensis l.

### Affiliations
Tea Research Institute, Qingdao Agricultural University, Qingdao, Shandong 266109, China
PTM Biolabs Inc.

### Submitter
lihuan Qin

### Lab Head
Dr Zhaotang Ding
Tea Research Institute, Qingdao Agricultural University, Qingdao, Shandong 266109, China


