### Accession
PXD028158

### Title
Proteomics of epicardial adipose tissue in heart failure patients with preserved ejection fraction

### Description
Background: Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF) has become a major public health problem with a morbidity and mortality similar to heart failure with reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF). Recently, it has been proved epicardial adipose tissue (EAT) played an important role in the pathogenesis of HFpEF, however the underlying mechanisms are not yet fully elucidated. This study attempted to describe comprehensive proteomic analysis of EAT in HFpEF patients and non-HF patients as controls, and identify local candidate molecules characterizing EAT in HFpEF patients. EAT samples were collected from patients undergoing heart surgery in two groups. Proteins was identified in liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) experiments. Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) analysis was conducted and protein-protein interaction network was constructed with Cytoscape software. A total of 2416 proteins were identified in LC-MS/MS experiments and 2349 proteins were quantified. Amongst them, totally 96 significant proteins (including 71 upregulated proteins in abundance and 25 downregulated proteins) were differently expressed between HFpEF and non-HF group. GO-enrichment, KEGG pathway analysis and interaction network construction showed these differentially expressed proteins were predominantly involved in HFpEF-related processes including lipid metabolic disorder, inflammation and mitochondrial dysfunction including FABP5, CD36, CFB, ADSL, POSTN, TRAP1 et al., which might contribute to the pathogenesis of HFpEF. In conclusion, this is the first demonstration to describe the parts of EAT proteome in HFpEF patients. Our findings provide a comprehensive understanding for linking EAT to the pathogenesis of HFpEF, which may offer new insights into the treatment of HFpEF targeting on EAT.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from frozen EAT in a lysis buffer including RadioImmuno Precipitation Assay buffer (modified) supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail (Shanghai,China). Protein concentration of each sample was calculated with Pierce BCA protein assay kit according to the calibration curve. Get 100μg protein, dilute samples to ~1mg/ml, and put pre‐chilled acetone to alkylated protein. To re-suspend protein for tryptic digest, extracted proteins were dissolved in 100 mmol/L ammonium bicarbonate with 1% sodium deoxycholate (SDC) and add 5 mM tris 2‐carboxyethyl phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP) for 10 minutes at 55°C, then incubated by alkylation with 10 mmol/L iodoacetamide (IAA) for 15 minutes in the dark at room temperature. The concentration was then mixed well and spined down for 8 hours or overnight at 37°C with sequencing grade modified trypsin solution (protein: trypsin=50:1). After cleaning up of SDC with 2% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), the tryptic peptides were desalted using C18 columns (3M, St.Louis, MO, USA) and the eluted peptides were dried in a vacuum concentrator under 4°C.

### Data Protocol
To make comparative quantitative proteomic analyses of human EAT, the extracted proteins from EAT were processed and analyzed in a label-free quantitative proteomic workflow. For each sample, ~2ug peptide were separated and analyzed with a nano-UPLC (EASY-nLC1200) coupled to Q-Exactive mass spectrometry (Thermo Finnigan). Separation of extracted peptides were performed using a reversed‐phase column (100 μm, ID× 15 cm, 3μm Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9μm, Dr. Math) at a 300 nL/min flow rate. Mobile phases were H2O with 0.1% formic acid (FA), 2% acetonitrile (ACN) (phase A) and 80% ACN, 0.1% FA (phase B). Separation of sample was executed with a 120 min gradient at 300 nL/min flow rate. Gradient B elution were performed as followed: 8 to 30% for 92 min, 30 to 40% for 20 min, 40 to 100% for 2 min, 100% for 2 min, 100 to 2% for 2 min and 2% for 2 min. Peptides were analyzed using a Q‐Extractive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fish Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled with MS. The full mass and subsequent MS/MS analyses were performed in an Orbitrap analyzer with a resolution of 70000 for MS1 (@200 m/z) and 17500 for MS2 with a dynamic first mass. The automatic gain control (AGC) target for MS1 was set to 3.0 E+6 with max IT 50 ms, and 5.0 E+4 for MS2 with max IT 100 ms. The top 20 most intense ions were fragmented by HCD with normalized collision energy (NCE) of 27% and isolation window of 2 m/z. The dynamic exclusion was set at 30 seconds. Raw MS files were processed with MaxQuant software (version 1.5.6.0). The protein sequence database (Uniprot_organism_2016_09) was downloaded from UNIPROT. This database and its reverse decoy were then searched against by MaxQuant software. The quantification type was LFQ with match between run and iBAQ; Trypsin was set as specific enzyme with up to 3 miss cleavage; Oxidation [M] and Acetyl[protein N-term] were considered as variable modification (max number of modifications per peptide is 3), Carbamidomethyl [C] was set as fixed modification. The false discovery rates (FDRs) were adjusted <0.01. Only unique & razor peptides were used for quantification. If proteins could be confirmed at greater than 99% probability with at two correct assigned peptides obtained, they were considered to be successfully identified. Protein abundance was figured on the basis of the normalized spectral protein label-free quantification intensity (LFQ intensity). The significance of Log2LFQ intensity of proteins between HFpEF and non‐HF group was calculated using Perseus program. Scatter do plots were generated, and parameters were statistically analyzed using unpaired student's t test. P value < 0.05 was considered statistically significant. The intracellular pathway analysis was carried out using cluster Profiler in R package to search in Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database. In order to analyze protein‐protein interaction network, the classification of differentially expressed proteins was performed based on the UniProt functional annotations for hierarchically clustering the proteins into several clusters. Based on the raw data from MS, proteins matched in clusters were extracted by searching STRING database, defined the biological and functional molecular interactions in these proteins and then interpreted by Cytoscape into visualized network.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Hfpef, Eat

### Affiliations
Heart Center, Beijing Chaoyang Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing, China
Beijing Chaoyang Hospital

### Submitter
Shan He

### Lab Head
Dr Xinchun Yang
Heart Center, Beijing Chaoyang Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing, China


