### Accession
PXD034517

### Title
MYC sensitises cells to apoptosis by driving energetic demand

### Description
The MYC oncogene is a potent driver of growth and proliferation but also sensitises cells to apoptosis, which limits its oncogenic potential. MYC induces several biosynthetic programmes and primary cells overexpressing MYC are highly sensitive to glutamine withdrawal suggesting that MYC-induced sensitisation to apoptosis may be due to an imbalance of metabolic/energetic supply and demand. Here we show that MYC elevates global transcription and translation, even in the absence of glutamine, revealing metabolic demand without corresponding supply. Glutamine withdrawal from MRC-5 fibroblasts depleted key TCA cycle metabolites and, in combination with MYC activation, led to AMP accumulation and nucleotide catabolism indicative of energetic stress. Further analyses revealed that glutamine supports viability through TCA cycle energetics rather than asparagine biosynthesis and that TCA cycle inhibition confers tumour suppression on MYC- driven lymphoma in vivo. In summary, glutamine supports the viability of MYC- overexpressing cells through an energetic rather than a biosynthetic mechanism.

### Sample Protocol
Following labelling of cells for 6 hours with 13C6,15N2-lysine, cell pellets were extracted with 8M urea. DTT was added to 10 mM and samples were incubated at RT for an hour. Iodoacetamide was then added to 25 mM and incubated at RT for an hour and DTT was then added to final concentration of 25 mM. Samples were incubated overnight at 37*C with lysC (estimated ratio of lysC to protein of 1:50 to 1:200) and peptides were acidified by addition of TFA to 0.5%. Estimated 10 μg of the resulting peptide solution was loaded onto an activated (20 μl methanol), equilibrated (100 μl 0.1% TFA) C18 StAGE tip (Rappsilber et al., 2003), and washed with 100 μl 0.1% TFA. The bound peptides were eluted into a Protein LoBind 1.5ml tube (Eppendorf) with 20uL 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA and concentrated to less than 4 μl in a vacuum concentrator. The final volume was adjusted to 6 μl with 0.1% TFA. Online LC was performed using a Dionex RSLC Nano HPLC. Following the C18 clean- up, 5 μg peptides were injected onto a C18 packed emitter and eluted over a gradient of 2%- 80% ACN in 120 minutes, with 0.1% acetic acid throughout. Eluting peptides were ionised at +2kV before data-dependent analysis on a Thermo Q-Exactive Plus. MS1 was acquired with mz range 300-1650 and resolution 70,000, and top 12 ions were selected for fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 26, and an exclusion window of 30 seconds. MS2 were collected with resolution 17,500. The AGC targets for MS1 and MS2 were 3e6 and 5e4 respectively, and all spectra were acquired with 1 microscan and without lockmass.

### Data Protocol
Data were analysed using MaxQuant (v 1.5.8.3) (Cox and Mann, 2008) in conjunction with UniProt FASTA database (UP000005640_9606.fasta (Human) 2017_05 release), with match between runs (MS/MS not required), LFQ with 1 peptide required, and statistical analyses performed in R (Team, 2014; Wickham, 2009)

### Publication Abstract
The MYC oncogene is a potent driver of growth and proliferation but also sensitises cells to apoptosis, which limits its oncogenic potential. MYC induces several biosynthetic programmes and primary cells overexpressing MYC are highly sensitive to glutamine withdrawal suggesting that MYC-induced sensitisation to apoptosis may be due to imbalance of metabolic/energetic supply and demand. Here we show that MYC elevates global transcription and translation, even in the absence of glutamine, revealing metabolic demand without corresponding supply. Glutamine withdrawal from MRC-5 fibroblasts depletes key tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle metabolites and, in combination with MYC activation, leads to AMP accumulation and nucleotide catabolism indicative of energetic stress. Further analyses reveal that glutamine supports viability through TCA cycle energetics rather than asparagine biosynthesis and that TCA cycle inhibition confers tumour suppression on MYC-driven lymphoma in vivo. In summary, glutamine supports the viability of MYC-overexpressing cells through an energetic rather than a biosynthetic mechanism.

### Keywords
Metabolic flux, Energy, Adenylate kinase, Myc, Nucleotide catabolism, Pentose phosphate pathway, Nucleotide biosynthesis, Apoptosis, Glutamine

### Affiliations
Centre for Tumour Biology, Barts Cancer Institute, Queen Mary University of London, London, UK
Firefinch Software Ltd
formerly Univeristy of Edinburgh

### Submitter
Jimi Wills

### Lab Head
Dr Andrew J Finch
Centre for Tumour Biology, Barts Cancer Institute, Queen Mary University of London, London, UK


