### Accession
PXD027729

### Title
Trypanosoma brucei Trypanothione synthetase modification by Ebselen

### Description
Identification of Ebselen modification sites on T. brucei Trypanothione synthetase

### Sample Protocol
To establish the residue of Trypanosoma brucei TryS that is target of covalent modification by Ebselen, 100 µL samples containing 1.44 µM recombinant enzyme in TryS reaction buffer were prepared and incubated for 1 h with or withoutEbselen. Next, samples  were desalted using a Zeba Spin Desalting Column 7kDa Molecular Weight Cut-Off (Thermo Fisher Scientific) pre-equilibrated in distilled water and then treated for 1 h with 15 mM IAM.Equal amounts of protein digested overnight at 37oC using sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) at a final protease:protein ratio of 1:20 (w/w). Peptide samples were concentrated under vacuum in a CentriVap concentrator and desalted using ZipTip® C18 tips (Merck Millipore). Eluted peptides were finally resuspended with 0.1% formic acid. Liquid chromatography-MS/MS analysis was performed with an UltiMate 3000 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer equipped with an Easy-SprayTM source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were loaded into a precolumn (AcclaimTM PepMapTM 100, C18, 75 µm × 2 cm, 3 µm particle size. Thermo Fisher Scientific,) and separated with an Easy-SprayTM analytical column (PepMapTM RSLC, C18, 75 µm × 50 cm, 2 µm particle size. Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 40°C using a two solvent system: (A) 0.1% formic acid in water, (B) 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. Column was equilibrated at 1% buffer B followed by a gradient elution performed as follows: 1% to 50% buffer B for 115 min, 50% to 99% buffer B for 10 min, 99% B for 5 min and 1% A for 10 min, with a constant flow rate of 200 nL/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in a positive mode. Ion spray voltage was set at 2.5 kV; capillary temperature at 250°C and S-lens radio frequency level 50. A top-12 data-dependent method was used for mass data acquisition. Full mass scans were acquired in a range of 200-2000 m/z with a resolution of 70000 at 200 m/z, automatic gain control target value of 1×106 and a maximum ion injection time of 100 ms. Precursor fragmentation occurred in a high-energy collision dissociation cell with a resolution of 17500 at 200 m/z, automatic gain control target value of 1×105 and a maximum ion injection time of 50 ms. Normalized collision energy was used in a stepped mode (25, 30 and 35). Precursor ions with single, unassigned or eight and higher charge states were excluded. A dynamic exclusion time was set to 30s.

### Data Protocol
PatternLab for Proteomics 4.0 (PatternLab) software was used to process raw data files. The sequence of recombinant TbTryS was added to the Escherichia coli proteome downloaded from Uniprot on July 2020 and a target-reverse database was generated using PatternLab. Search parameters were set as follows: Methionine oxidation, cysteine di and tri oxidation, cysteine carbamidomethylation, and Ebselen covalent modification (+274.985 Da) in cysteine/lysine were defined as variable modifications. A maximum of 2 missed cleavages and 3 variable modifications per peptide were allowed. Search results were filtered by PatternLab Search Engine Processor algorithm with a maximum false discovery rate value ≤ 1% at protein level. The inspection of the MS/MS spectra of Ebselen-modified peptides identified by Patternlab allowed us to recognize a very characteristic fragmentation pattern dominated by the release of Ebselen modification and the presence of low intensity sequence ions. To cover possible modification sites not identified by the search engine, we rely on the presence of the Ebselen modification reporter ions (an intense signal of m/z=275.993 corresponding to protonated Ebselen plus the signal of its most intense fragmentation product of m/z= 196.075). Raw data were mass filtered using Thermo Scientific XcaliburTM 4.0 software to identify MS/MS spectra containing these ions, and the putative modification by Ebselen was further manually validated.

### Publication Abstract
Trypanothione synthetase (TryS) catalyses the synthesis of <i>N</i><sup>1</sup><i>,N<sup>8</sup></i>-bis(glutathionyl)spermidine (trypanothione), which is the main low molecular mass thiol supporting several redox functions in trypanosomatids. TryS attracts attention as molecular target for drug development against pathogens causing severe and fatal diseases in mammals. A drug discovery campaign aimed to identify and characterise new inhibitors of TryS with promising biological activity was conducted. A large compound library (<i>n</i>&#x2009;=&#x2009;51,624), most of them bearing drug-like properties, was primarily screened against TryS from <i>Trypanosoma brucei</i> (<i>Tb</i>TryS). With a true-hit rate of 0.056%, several of the <i>Tb</i>TryS hits (IC<sub>50</sub> from 1.2 to 36&#x2009;&#xb5;M) also targeted the homologue enzyme from <i>Leishmania infantum</i> and <i>Trypanosoma cruzi</i> (IC<sub>50</sub> values from 2.6 to 40&#x2009;&#xb5;M). Calmidazolium chloride and Ebselen stand out for their multi-species anti-TryS activity at low &#xb5;M concentrations (IC<sub>50</sub> from 2.6 to 13.8&#x2009;&#xb5;M). The moieties carboxy piperidine amide and amide methyl thiazole phenyl were identified as novel <i>Tb</i>TryS inhibitor scaffolds. Several of the TryS hits presented one-digit &#xb5;M EC<sub>50</sub> against <i>T. cruzi</i> and <i>L. donovani</i> amastigotes but proved cytotoxic against the human osteosarcoma and macrophage host cells (selectivity index &#x2264; 3). In contrast, seven hits showed a significantly higher selectivity against <i>T. b. brucei</i> (selectivity index from 11 to 182). Non-invasive redox assays confirmed that Ebselen, a multi-TryS inhibitor, induces an intracellular oxidative milieu in bloodstream <i>T. b. brucei</i>. Kinetic and mass spectrometry analysis revealed that Ebselen is a slow-binding inhibitor that modifies irreversible a highly conserved cysteine residue from the TryS's synthetase domain. The most potent <i>Tb</i>TryS inhibitor (a singleton containing an adamantine moiety) exerted a non-covalent, non-competitive (with any of the substrates) inhibition of the enzyme. These data feed the drug discovery pipeline for trypanosomatids with novel and valuable information on chemical entities with drug potential.

### Keywords
Trypanothione synthetase, Ebselen

### Affiliations
Institut Pasteur de Montevideo
Analytical Biochemistry and Proteomics Unit,IIBCE & Institut Pasteur de Montevideo

### Submitter
Rosario Durán

### Lab Head
Dr Rosario Durán
Analytical Biochemistry and Proteomics Unit,IIBCE & Institut Pasteur de Montevideo


