### Accession
PXD026751

### Title
Proteomics of Outermembrane Vesicles (OMV) from Acinetobacter baumannii DS002

### Description
Outer membrane vesicles from A. baumannii DS002 were isolated using Diafilteration and Ultracentrifugation. The proteins of OMVs were separated on a 12.5% SDS-PAGE gel. The protein bands were excised and in-gel digetion was carried out using trypsin. The resultant peptides were analysed on LC-ESI-MS/MS. The proteins were identified with the help of Proteome Discoverer software.

### Sample Protocol
The in-gel digested peptides were extracted with 30% acetonitrile in water and concentrated with the help of speedvac concentrator.The peptides were desalted after dissolving them in 5% acitonitrile containing 0.1% TFA using Ziptips. These peptides were analysed on Q-Exactive Orbitrap mass spetrometer obtained from thermo scientific

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS data was analysed using database of Acinetobacter baumannii from NCBI with accession number: CP027704.1 using proteome discoverer.we set trypsine enzyme with one missed cleavage, oxidised methionin as partial modification and carbamido methyl cysteine as fixed modification for the identification of the proteins. The precursor ion mass accuracy was 5ppm and the fragment ion mass acucuracy was set at 0.1Da for the identification of prteins.

### Publication Abstract
Outer membrane vesicles (OMVs) of Acinetobacter baumannii DS002 carry proteins which perform selective biological functions. The proteins involved in cell wall/membrane biogenesis and inorganic ion transport and metabolism occupied a significant portion of the 302 proteins associated with OMVs. Interestingly, the TonB-dependent transporters (TonRs), linked to the active transport of nutrients across the energy-deprived outer membrane, are predominant among proteins involved in inorganic ion transport and metabolism. The OMVs of DS002 contain TonRs capable of transporting iron complexed to catecholate, hydroximate, and mixed types of siderophores. Consistent with this observation, the OMVs were firmly bound to ferric-enterobactin (<sup>55</sup>Fe-Ent) and successfully transported iron into A. baumannii DS002 cells grown under iron-limiting conditions. In addition to the TonRs, OMVs also carry proteins known to promote pathogenesis, immune evasion, and biofilm formation. Our findings provide conclusive evidence for the role of OMVs in the transport of nutrients such as iron and show the presence of proteins with proven roles in pathogenicity and immune response. <b>IMPORTANCE</b> TonB-dependent transporters (TonRs) play a crucial role in transporting nutrients such as iron, nickel, copper, and complex carbohydrates across the energy-deprived outer membrane. Due to their unique structural features, TonRs capture nutrients in an energy-independent manner and transport them across the outer membrane by harvesting energy derived from the inner membrane-localized Ton-complex. In this study, we report the presence of TonRs capable of transporting various nutrients in OMVs and demonstrate their role in capturing and transporting ferric iron complexed with enterobactin into A. baumannii DS002 cells. The OMV-associated TonRs appear to play a critical role in the survival of A. baumannii, listed as a priority pathogen, under nutrient-deprived conditions.

### Keywords
Proteins, Membrane vesicles, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
University of Hyderabad
Professor, Supervisor

### Submitter
Medicharla V. Jagannadham

### Lab Head
Dr Dayananda Siddavattam
Professor, Supervisor


