### Accession
PXD002979

### Title
Equine tendon LC-MSMS, C4PR_LIV

### Description
the aim of this study was to isolate, characterise and compare the proteome of the IFM and fascicular matrix (FM) in the equine superficial digital flexor tendon (SDFT). We hypothesised that the proteomic profile would differ between the FM and the IFM, with greater complexity and faster turnover in the IFM. Regions of the SDFT were isolated using laser capture microdissection and the protein profile assessed using mass spectrometry. 246 proteins were identified in the IFM, and 141 were identified in the FM. 60 proteins showed a 2-fold difference in abundance between the IFM and FM, including greater abundance of collagen-III and cellular proteins in the IFM, and higher levels of collagens-I and XII, and fibromodulin in the FM. A greater number of neopeptides were identified in the IFM, indicating more rapid turnover than in the FM. There were few alterations in protein abundance with ageing, but the number of neopeptides decreased with age in the IFM specifically, suggesting a decrease in IFM turnover in aged individuals. These results support the hypothesis, showing distinct protein profiles and indicating more rapid turnover in the IFM than in the FM, which appears to decline with ageing in the IFM specifically. This may result in alterations in IFM mechanical properties in aged tendon, contributing to age-related tendon injury.

### Sample Protocol
For mass spectrometry analysis, laser capture microdissection samples (approximately 10 mm x 5 mm x 5 mm) were taken from the mid-metacarpal region of the tendon, embedded in Optimal Cutting Temperature solution, snap frozen in hexane cooled on dry ice, and stored at -80 °C.  Protein Extraction - Samples were thawed and 50 µL of 0.1% (w/v) Rapigest (Waters, Manchester,UK) was added to the tubes and the tubes inverted to cover the tissue in the cap of the tube. Samples were incubated cap-side down for 30 min. at room temperature then heated at 60C for 60 min. Samples were trypsin digested and acidified as described previously (25). C18 zip-tips were prepared with 3 membrane discs, following the Rubicon protocol: 40µL wetting step with methanol followed by 70% (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN), followed by equilibration with 0.1% (v/v) TFA. 20µL of sample was added and peptides were washed with 40µL 0.1% (v/v) TFA. Peptides eluted with 50% (v/v) ACN/ 0.1% TFA (v/v) in ultrapure water. Samples were eluted into 1.5mL low bind tubes and the volume reduced to approximately 3µL by vacuum centrifugation. 12µL of 3% (v/v) ACN/0.1% (v/v) TFA was added to each sample. Samples were centrifuged and transferred to total recovery vials for high resolution liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis. LC Separation- All peptide separations were carried out using an Ultimate 3000 Nano system (Dionex/Thermo Fisher Scientific) as described previously (25), with 5 µl of sample injected.  Analyses on a Quadrupole-Orbitrap instrument- The Q Exactive (Thermo-Scientific, Waltham, USA) instrument was operated in data dependent positive electrospray ionisation mode to automatically switch between full scan MS and MS/MS acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (m/z 300-2000) were acquired in the Orbitrap with 70,000 resolution (m/z 200) after accumulation of ions to 1x106 target value based on predictive automatic gain control values from the previous full scan. Dynamic exclusion was set to 20s. The 10 most intense multiply charged ions (z ≥ 2) were sequentially isolated and fragmented in the octopole collision cell by higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with a fixed injection time of 100ms and 35,000 resolution. Typical mass spectrometric conditions were as follows: spray voltage, 1.9kV, no sheath or auxillary gas flow; heated capillary temperature, 250C; normalised HCD collision energy 30%. The MS/MS ion selection threshold was set to 1 x 104 count and a 2Da isolation width was set.

### Data Protocol
Peptide Identification¬ - Proteins within the IFM and FM were identified using Peaks® 7 PTM software (Version 6, Bioinformatics Solutions, Waterloo, Canada), searching against the UniHorse database, with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%, a minimum of 2 peptides per protein and a confidence score  Label-free Peptide Quantification - For label-free quantification of proteins within the FM and IFM, the Thermo raw files of the acquired spectra from in-solution tryptic digests of FM and IFM samples were analysed by the Progenesis QI software (Version 4, Waters, Manchester, UK) for label-free quantification. Briefly, after the selection of a reference sample, the retention times of the other samples were aligned. Feature picking used the top five spectra for each feature. These were exported from Progenesis QI and utilized for peptide identification with a locally implemented Mascot server (Version 2.3.01) in theUniProt horse database. Search parameters used were: 10 ppm peptide mass tolerance and 0.01 Da fragment mass tolerance; one missed cleavage allowed; fixed modification, carbamidomethylation; variable modifications, methionine oxidation. Only unique peptides were used for quantification, and greater than 2 fold changes with FDR adjusted p values < 0.05 were considered to be significant.

### Publication Abstract
Tendon is a simple aligned fibre composite, consisting of collagen-rich fascicles surrounded by a softer interfascicular matrix (IFM). The composition and interactions between these material phases are fundamental in ensuring tissue mechanics meet functional requirements. However the IFM is poorly defined, therefore tendon structure-function relationships are incompletely understood. We hypothesised that the IFM has a more complex proteome, with faster turnover than the fascicular matrix (FM). Using laser-capture microdissection and mass spectrometry, we demonstrate that the IFM contains more proteins, and that many proteins show differential abundance between matrix phases. The IFM contained more protein fragments (neopeptides), indicating greater matrix degradation in this compartment, which may act to maintain healthy tendon structure. Protein abundance did not alter with ageing, but neopeptide numbers decreased in the aged IFM, indicating decreased turnover which may contribute to age-related tendon injury. These data provide important insights into how differences in tendon composition and turnover contribute to tendon structure-function relationships and the effects of ageing.

### Keywords
Ifm, Lc-msms, Fm, Equine, Tendon

### Affiliations
University of Liverpool
Institute of Bioengineering, School of Engineering and Materials Science, Queen Mary University of London, Mile End Road,  London, E1 4NS, UK

### Submitter
Deborah Simpson

### Lab Head
Dr Dr ChavaunneThorpe
Institute of Bioengineering, School of Engineering and Materials Science, Queen Mary University of London, Mile End Road,  London, E1 4NS, UK


