### Accession
PXD026828

### Title
Nascent Ribo-Seq measures ribosomal loading time and reveals kinetic impact on ribosome density

### Description
mRNAs are generally assumed to be loaded instantly with ribosomes upon entry into the cytoplasm. To measure ribosome density on nascent mRNA, we developed nascent Ribo-Seq (nRibo-Seq) by combining Ribo-Seq with progressive 4-thiouridine labelling. In mouse macrophages, we experimentally determined, for the first time, the lag between the appearance of nascent RNA and its association with ribosomes, which was calculated to be 20 - 22 min for bulk mRNA, and approximated the time it takes for mRNAs to be fully loaded with ribosomes to be 41 - 44 min. Notably, ribosomal loading time is adapted to gene function as rapid loading was observed with highly regulated genes. The lag and ribosomal loading time correlate positively with ORF size and mRNA half-life, and negatively with tRNA adaptation index. Similar results were obtained in mouse embryonic stem cells, where the lag in ribosome loading was even more pronounced with 35 - 38 min. We validated our measurements after stimulation of macrophages with lipopolysaccharide, where the lag between cytoplasmic and translated mRNA leads to uncoupling between input and ribosome-protected fragments. Uncoupling is stronger for mRNAs with long ORFs or half-lives, a finding we also confirmed at the level of protein production by nascent chain proteomics. As a consequence of the lag in ribosome loading, ribosome density measurements are distorted when performed under conditions where mRNA levels are far from steady state expression, and transcriptional changes affect ribosome density in a passive way. This study uncovers an unexpected and considerable lag in ribosome loading, and provides guidelines for the interpretation of Ribo-Seq data taking passive effects on ribosome density into account.

### Sample Protocol
For PUNCH-P measurements, 4 × 107 RAW264.7 cells were seeded on the day before the experiment and treated with LPS (100 ng/ml) for 1 h. Cells were detached, pelleted at 1000 g and washed with cold PBS before lysis in PUNCH lysis buffer (50 mM Tris HCl pH 7.5, 10 mM MgCl2, 25 mM KCl, 1% sodium deoxycholate, 1% Triton X-100, complete protease inhibitors, 200 U/ml RNasin). Nuclei were pelleted by centrifugation at 17,000 g for 10 min at 4°C and the resulting cytoplasmic lysate was layered on half the volume of 2 M sucrose in PUNCH polysome buffer (50 mM Tris HCl pH 7.5, 10 mM MgCl2, 25 mM KCl). Polysomes were pelleted by ultracentrifugation at 50,000 g for 2 h 40 min at 4°C in a Beckman S120AT2 rotor. The pellet was washed with ice-cold RNase-free water and dissolved in 100 μl PUNCH polysome buffer (50 mM Tris HCl pH 7.5, 10 mM MgCl2, 25 mM KCl, complete protease inhibitors, 200 U/ml RNAsin). Biotin-labelled puromycin (Jena Biosciences) was added to the samples in proportion to A260 units (100 pmol biotin-puromycin per 1 A260 unit ribosomes). Samples were incubated at 37°C for 30 min with occasional gentle vortexing and input samples corresponding to 1 A260 unit were taken for assessment of puromycin incorporation. As control for contaminating proteins, control samples were incubated without biotin-labelled puromycin and processed in parallel with the labeled samples. High-capacity streptavidin agarose beads (Thermo) were added to the samples in proportion to A260 units (10 μl agarose slurry per 1 A260 unit of ribosomes), samples were filled up to 1 ml with high stringency wash buffer (100 mM Tris HCl pH 7.5, 2% SDS, 8 M urea, 150 mM NaCl) and incubated rotating at RT overnight. Beads were pelleted at 1000 g and 1 A260 unit of the supernatant was taken for assessment of binding of puromycylated proteins to agarose beads. Beads were washed once for 30 min and for 5 times with high stringency wash buffer, for 30 min with high salt buffer (100 mM Tris HCl pH 7.5, 1 M NaCl) and twice with ultrapure water. 1 A260 unit beads were taken to assess the amount of bound protein and proteins were eluted from the beads by boiling in 20 μl elution buffer (2% SDS, 3 mM biotin, 8 M urea in PBS) for 30 min at 95°C. Purified nascent chains were reduced and alkylated for mass spectrometry. For this, beads were resuspended in 1 M DTT and incubated rotating for 30 min at RT. Following this, beads were pelleted and resuspended in 50 mM Iodoacetamide and incubated for 30 min rotating at RT protected from light. The supernatant was removed and the beads were washed once with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Beads were resuspended in 100 μl 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate containing 0.4 μg sequencing grade trypsin and incubated rotating at 37°C over night. The samples were acidified to 0.1% trifluoracetic acid (TFA), the beads were pelleted and the supernatant was transferred to a new tube. The beads were washed with 100 μl 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and the wash buffer was pooled with the supernatant of the previous step.

### Data Protocol
The supernatants containing peptides were desalted on C18 stage tips40, vacuum dried and resuspended in 2% acetonitrile/0.1%TFA. Samples were analyzed by liquid-chromatography using the EASY-nLC1000 HPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to Q-Exactive (QE) Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). 50% of the peptide sample was loaded onto a 75µm x 50cm long EASY-spray PepMap column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with Buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and eluted with a gradient of 5-28% Buffer B (80% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid), over a 4-hour gradient. MS acquisition was performed in a data-dependent manner, with selection of the top 10 peptides from each MS scan for fragmentation at MS/MS level. Raw files were analyzed using MaxQuant software (version 1.5.0.36) with integrated Andromeda search engine41,42. MS/MS spectra were searched against the Mus musculus FASTA file from the Uniprot database (November 2014). N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation was set as variable modifications and cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification. Trypsin was selected as the specified protease and maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. The ‘match between runs’ feature and ‘LFQ normalization’43 was enabled and a false discovery rate cutoff of 1% was applied at both the protein and peptide identification levels.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Translatome, Nascent peptides, Ribo-seq

### Affiliations
German Cancer Research Center
Weizmann Institute of Science

### Submitter
Tamar Geiger

### Lab Head
Dr Georg Stoecklin
German Cancer Research Center


