### Accession
PXD006392

### Title
Potato leaf apoplast of field and greenhouse grown potato

### Description
Potato leaf apoplast of field and greenhouse grown potato analysed using LC-MS/MS

### Sample Protocol
Apoplastic fluid was isolated from five fully expanded leaves of a plant by vacuum infiltration-centrifugation using a mobile laboratory and stored at -80 until extraction. Protein extraction and trypsin digestion were performed as in Andreasson et al. 2017.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were converted to mzML and MGF using ProteoWizard. MGF files were searched in Mascot and X!tandem against a database consisting of all Solanum proteins in Uniprot and the potato genome project (https://solgenomics.net/) and protein sequences based on de novo assembled transcripts of potato clones Desiree, Sarpo Mira and SW93-1015 (Ali et al. 2014), with an equal number of decoy (reverse) sequences appended. Precursor tolerance was set to 7 ppm and MS/MS fragment tolerance to 0.5 Da. Trypsin specificity with a maximum of one missed cleavage, fixed cysteine Carbamido methylation and variable oxidation of methionines were used as search settings.

### Publication Abstract
Multiple biotic and abiotic stresses challenge plants growing in agricultural fields. Most molecular studies have aimed to understand plant responses to challenges under controlled conditions. However, studies on field-grown plants are scarce, limiting application of the findings in agricultural conditions. In this study, we investigated the composition of apoplastic proteomes of potato cultivar Bintje grown under field conditions, i.e., two field sites in June-August across two years and fungicide treated and untreated, using quantitative proteomics, as well as its activity using activity-based protein profiling (ABPP). Samples were clustered and some proteins showed significant intensity and activity differences, based on their field site and sampling time (June-August), indicating differential regulation of certain proteins in response to environmental or developmental factors. Peroxidases, class II chitinases, pectinesterases, and osmotins were among the proteins more abundant later in the growing season (July-August) as compared to early in the season (June). We did not detect significant differences between fungicide Shirlan treated and untreated field samples in two growing seasons. Using ABPP, we showed differential activity of serine hydrolases and &#x3b2;-glycosidases under greenhouse and field conditions and across a growing season. Furthermore, the activity of serine hydrolases and &#x3b2;-glycosidases, including proteins related to biotic stress tolerance, decreased as the season progressed. The generated proteomics data would facilitate further studies aiming at understanding mechanisms of molecular plant physiology in agricultural fields and help applying effective strategies to mitigate biotic and abiotic stresses.

### Keywords
Field, Potato, Apoplast

### Affiliations
Lund University,
Department of Immunotechnology
Lund University

### Submitter
Fredrik Levander

### Lab Head
Dr Fredrik Levander
Lund University


