### Accession
PXD014337

### Title
A synthetic crosslinked peptide library for benchmarking crosslinking mass spectrometry search engines

### Description
We have created a synthetic crosslinked peptide library to benchmark crosslinking mass spectrometry search engines. The unique benefit of the library is knowing which identified crosslinks are true and which are false. The data collected from mass spectrometry measurements of the peptide library were used to assess the most frequently used search algorithms. The datasets included will provide an important resource for the crosslinking community to evaluate and optimise search engines, results from which have far-reaching implications.

### Sample Protocol
The synthetic peptide library was crosslinked using DSS, DSBU or DSSO, as described in Beveridge et al.

### Data Protocol
Data can be processed using approprate crosslinking mass spectrometry search engines. In this study we used pLink, StavroX, Xi, Kojak and MetaMorpheus to analyse the DSS-crosslinked peptide library, and MeroX and XlinkX to analyse cleavable crosslinkers DSBU and DSSO.

### Publication Abstract
Crosslinking-mass spectrometry (XL-MS) serves to identify interaction sites between proteins. Numerous search engines for crosslink identification exist, but lack of ground truth samples containing known crosslinks has precluded their systematic validation. Here we report on XL-MS data arising from measuring synthetic peptide libraries that provide the unique benefit of knowing which identified crosslinks are true and which are false. The data are analysed with the most frequently used search engines and the results filtered to an estimated false discovery rate of 5%. We find that the actual false crosslink identification rates range from 2.4 to 32%, depending on the analysis strategy employed. Furthermore, the use of MS-cleavable crosslinkers does not reduce the false discovery rate compared to non-cleavable crosslinkers. We anticipate that the datasets acquired during this research will further drive optimisation and development of XL-MS search engines, thereby advancing our understanding of vital biological interactions.

### Keywords
Crosslinking mass spectrometry peptide library

### Affiliations
Institute for Molecular Pathology, Vienna, Austria.  Institute of Molecular Biotechnology, Vienna Austria
Institute for Molecular Pathology

### Submitter
Rebecca Beveridge

### Lab Head
Dr Karl Mechtler
Institute for Molecular Pathology, Vienna, Austria.  Institute of Molecular Biotechnology, Vienna Austria


