### Accession
PXD017274

### Title
The porcine granulocyte proteome: expression changes in a transgenic pig model for diabetes

### Description
As transgenic INSC94Y-pigs develop a stable diabetic phenotype we were able to study the influence of elevated blood glucose levels on primary immune cells in vivo. We investigated the neutrophil proteome and compared data of transgenic animals to a control group. A total of 2371 proteins describing the whole neutrophil proteome were identified, including 396 proteins (17% of proteome) newly associated to expression in porcine neutrophils. Our studies provide novel information on the porcine granulocyte proteome and contribute to a better understanding of molecular mechanisms involved in altered immune cell function in diabetes. The data presented here is highly relevant for veterinary medicine and has translational quality for diabetes in human.

### Sample Protocol
We isolated primary granulocytes from porcine whole blood through density gradient centrifugation followed by hypotone erythrolysis. In order to ensure a pure population of neutrophils, the cells were incubated with neutrophil specific antibody 6D10 (Bio-Rad AbD Serotec, Puchheim, Germany) and magnetic-activated cell sorting (Miltenyi Biotec,Bergisch Gladbach, Germany) was performed. Granulocyte suspension from both groups (3 controls, 4 transgenic) was divided into aliquots of 6 x 105 cells. Aliquot from each animal was centrifuged and pellet was stored at -20°C.  Each cell pellet was directly lysed in urea buffer (8M in 0.1M Tris/HCl pH 8.5) assisted by sonication and vortexing. Samples were proteolysed with LysC and trypsin by a modified filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) as described (Grosche et al., 2016). Acidified eluted peptides were analyzed on a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) in the data-independent mode. Approximately 0.5 µg per sample spiked with 1 injection unit of the hyper reaction monitoring (HRM) Calibration Kit (Biognosys, Schlieren, Switzerland, cat. no. Ki-3003) for retention time indexing were automatically loaded to the online coupled ultra-high-performance liquid chromatography (UHPLC) system (Ultimate 3000, Thermo Fisher Scientific). A nano trap column was used (300-µm ID X 5mm, packed with Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 5 µm, 100 Å; LC Packings, Sunnyvale, CA) before separation by reversed phase chromatography (Acquity UHPLC M-Class HSS T3 Column 75 µm ID X 250 mm, 1.8 µm; Waters, Eschborn, Germany) at 40°C. Peptides were eluted from the column at 250 nL/min using increasing ACN concentration (in 0.1% formic acid) from 3% to 41% over a 105-min gradient. The DIA method consisted of a survey scan from 300 to 1,650 mass-to-charge ratio at 120,000 resolution and an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3e6 or 120 ms maximum injection time. Fragmentation was performed with higher energy collisional dissociation and a target value of 3e6 ions determined with predictive AGC. Precursor peptides were isolated with 37 variable windows spanning from 300 to 1,650 mass-to-charge ratio at 30,000 resolution with an AGC target of 3e6 and automatic injection time. The normalized collision energy was 28, and the spectra were recorded in profile mode.  Grosche A, Hauser A, Lepper MF, Mayo R, von Toerne C, Merl-Pham J and Hauck SM. The proteome of native adult Muller glial cells from murine retina. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2016 Feb;15(2):462-80.

### Data Protocol
For label-free quantification of DIA data, the DIA LC-MS/MS data set was analyzed by comparing the MS2 fragment spectra from the recorded windows (see above) against a spectral library collected from data-dependent acquisition data (30 raw files, derived from high pH fractionated porcine granulocytes and lymphocytes) from the same instruments. The spectral library was generated directly in Spectronaut (Biognosys, Schlieren, Switzerland; version 12.0.20491.17.25792). Spectronaut was equipped with the Ensembl Pig database (Release 75 (Sscrofa10.2), 25,859 sequences, https://www.ensembl.org) with a few spiked peptides (e.g., Biognosys HRM peptide sequences) and searches were performed with carbamidomethylation of cysteins set as fixed modification, and methionine oxidation and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine residues were set as variable modifications. Search parameters included 10 ppm peptide mass tolerance, 0.02 Da fragment mass tolerance and allowed one missed cleavage. The final spectral library generated in Spectronaut contained 4,511 protein groups and 62,248 peptide precursors. Quantification was based on cumulative MS2 area levels. Briefly, raw files were imported into Spectronaut and XIC extraction settings were set to dynamic with a correction factor of one. Automatic calibration mode was chosen with nonlinear local retention time recalibration based on the spiked HRM peptides enabled. Interference correction on MS1 and MS2 level was enabled. Peptide identification was filtered to satisfy an FDR of 1% by the mProphet approach (Reiter et al., 2011). Only proteotypic peptides were considered for protein quantification applying summed precursor quantities based on MS2 area quantity. A match between runs was enabled with the q-value percentile mode 0.3 threshold. This setting filters for peptides that fulfill the 1% FDR threshold in at least 30% of all samples.  Reiter L, Rinner O, Picotti P, Hüttenhain R, Beck M, Brusniak MY, Hengartner MO, Aebersold R. mProphet: automated data processing and statistical validation for large-scale SRM experiments. Nat Methods 8: 430 –435, 2011. doi:10.1038/nmeth.1584.

### Publication Abstract
INS<sup>C94Y</sup> transgenic pigs develop a stable diabetic phenotype early after birth and therefore allow studying the influence of hyperglycemia on primary immune cells in an early stage of diabetes mellitus in vivo. Since immune response is altered in diabetes mellitus, with deviant neutrophil function discussed as one of the possible causes in humans and mouse models, we investigated these immune cells in INS<sup>C94Y</sup> transgenic pigs and wild type controls at protein level. A total of 2371 proteins were quantified by label-free LC-MS/MS. Subsequent differential proteome analysis of transgenic animals and controls revealed clear differences in protein abundances, indicating a deviant behavior of granulocytes in the diabetic state. Interestingly, abundance of myosin regulatory light chain 9 (MLC-2C) was increased 5-fold in cells of diabetic pigs. MLC-2C directly affects cell contractility by regulating myosin ATPase activity, can act as transcription factor and was also associated with inflammation. It might contribute to impaired neutrophil cell adhesion, migration and phagocytosis. Our study provides novel insights into proteome changes in neutrophils from a large animal model for permanent neonatal diabetes mellitus and points to dysregulation of neutrophil function even in an early stage of this disease. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD017274. SIGNIFICANCE: Our studies provide novel basic information about the neutrophil proteome of pigs and contribute to a better understanding of molecular mechanisms involved in altered immune cell function in an early stage diabetes. We demonstrate proteins that are dysregulated in neutrophils from a transgenic diabetic pig and have not been described in this context so far. The data presented here are highly relevant for veterinary medicine and have translational quality for diabetes in humans.

### Keywords
Neutrophil granulocyte, Diabetes, Innate immune cell, Differential proteomics

### Affiliations
LMU Munich, Veterinary Sciences, Chair of Physiology, Lena-Christ-Straße 48, 82152 Planegg/Martinsried,  Germany
Chair of Animal Physiology, Veterinary Sciences, LMU Munich, Germany

### Submitter
Roxane Degroote

### Lab Head
Dr Cornelia Annette Deeg
Chair of Animal Physiology, Veterinary Sciences, LMU Munich, Germany


