### Accession
PXD009773

### Title
Soil Metaproteomics LC-MS

### Description
Sensitive models of climate change impacts would require a better integration of multi-omics approaches that connect the abundance and activity of microbial populations. Here, we show that climate is a fundamental driver of the protein abundance of microbial populations (metaproteomics), yet not their genomic abundance (16S rRNA gene amplicon sequencing), supporting the hypothesis that metabolic activity may be more closely linked to climate than community composition.

### Sample Protocol
Sampling sites Soils were collected using a sampling design entender to maximize variation in climatic conditions and biome types. Sites included: Bonanza Creek, Alaska 64.85 °N, -147.84 °E (BNZ); Coweeta LTER, North Carolina 35 °N, -83.5 °E (CWT); Hubbard Brook Experimental Forest, New Hampshire 43.94 °N, -71.75 °E (HBR); Konza Prairie Biological Station, Kansas 39.09 °N, -96.57 °E; pre-desertic semiarid grassland, Murcia 37° 54’ N, 1° 24’ °W (GEB); pre-desertic semiarid forest Murcia 37° 54’ N, 1° 24’ °W (GEP); Mediterranean forest  Albacete 38° 22’ N, 2° 20’ °W (ALB); and Mediterranean forest, Granada 38° 0’ N, 2° 2’ °W (MOJ). Soil physical and chemical analysis The contents of soil organic C and N were analyzed on an elemental analyzer (LECO, St. Joseph, MI, USA). Sand, silt and clay contents were determined following Bouyoucos (1927). As aqueous solution 1:5 (w:v) was used to measure pH (pHmeter  Crison mod.2001, Barcelona, Spain). Protein extraction from soil, mass spectrometric analysis and bioinformatics Protein extraction was performed according to the method described by Chourey et al. (2010), which has been found suitable for semiarid soils (Bastida et al., 2014). The cell lysis and disruption of soil aggregates were performed by boiling at 100ºC for 10 min in sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) buffer. The concentration and purification steps were performed using trichloroacetic acid (TCA) and three acetone washing steps. Protein pellets were resuspended in SDS lysis buffer, containing 4% SDS, 0.1 mM dithiothreitol, and 100 mM Tris HCl, and incubated for 5 min at 95°C. The resuspended proteins were loaded on SDS gels (4% stacking gel, 12% separating gel) and run into the separating gel for 10 min. After electrophoresis, the gels were stained with colloidal Coomassie brilliant blue (Bastida et al., 2016). The gel area containing the protein mixture of each sample was sliced into one piece. Gel pieces were destained and subsequently digested using 100 ng of trypsin (Sigma, Munich, Germany), overnight at 37ºC. The peptide mixture was extracted twice with 100% acetonitrile and concentrated by vacuum centrifugation for 15 min. Tryptic peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid prior LC-MS measurement (Bastida et al., 2016). The peptide lysates were separated on a UHPLC system (Ultimate 3000, Dionex/Thermo Fisher Scientific, Idstein, Germany). Five µL samples (correspond to about 1 µg peptide lysate) were first loaded for 5 min on the precolumn (µ-precolumn, Acclaim PepMap, 75 µm inner diameter, 2 cm, C18, Thermo Scientific) at 4% mobile phase B (80% acetonitrile with 0.08% formic acid), 96% mobile phase A (nanopure water with 0.1% formic acid), then eluted from the analytical column (PepMap Acclaim C18 LC Column, 25 cm, 3 µm particle size, Thermo Scientific) over a 120 min linear gradient of mobile phase B (4-55% B). Mass spectrometry was performed on a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) with a TriVersa NanoMate (Advion, Ltd., Harlow, UK) source in LC chip coupling mode. with the following settings: MS resolution 120,000, MS automatic gain control (AGC) target 3,000,000 ions, maximum injection time for MS 80 ms, intensity threshold for MS/MS of 17,000 ions, dynamic exclusion 30 s, TopN =20, isolation window 1.4 m/z, MS/MS resolution 15,000, MS/MS AGC target 50,000 ions, maximum injection time for MS/MS 120 ms.

### Data Protocol
Raw data from the MS instrument were searched using Proteome Discoverer v1.4.1.14 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) against a FASTA-formatted database (protein-coding sequences of bacteria, fungi and archaea, Uniprot 05/2016) using the SEQUEST HT algorithm. Database searches were performed with carbamidomethylation on cysteine as fixed modification and oxidation on methionine as variable modification. Enzyme specificity was selected to trypsin with up to two missed cleavages allowed using 10 ppm peptide ion and 0.02 Da MS/MS tolerances. Only peptides with a false discovery rate (FDR) <1% estimated by Percolator (Käll et al., 2007), and only rank 1 peptides were accepted as identified. Unipept v3.2 (Mesuere et al., 2015) was applied to assign proteins to their phylogenetic origin. GhostKoala (Kaneshihsa et al., 2016) and KEGG classifiers were used for functional annotation.

### Publication Abstract
Sensitive models of climate change impacts would require a better integration of multi-omics approaches that connect the abundance and activity of microbial populations. Here, we show that climate is a fundamental driver of the protein abundance of Actinobacteria, Planctomycetes and Proteobacteria, supporting the hypothesis that metabolic activity of some dominant phyla may be closely linked to climate. These results may improve our capacity to construct microbial models that better predict the impact of climate change in ecosystem processes.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Climate change, Metaproteomics, Soil, Shotgun

### Affiliations
Dr. Nico Jehmlich Department Molekulare Systembiologie Helmholtz-Zentrum für Umweltforschung GmbH - UFZ Permoserstraße 15 | 04318 Leipzig Telefon +49 341 235 4767 | Fax +49 341 235 450823 E-Mail: nico.jehmlich@ufz.de | http://www.ufz.de Webseite: http://www.ufz.de/index.php?de=40882
Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ

### Submitter
Nico Jehmlich

### Lab Head
Dr Nico Jehmlich
Dr. Nico Jehmlich Department Molekulare Systembiologie Helmholtz-Zentrum für Umweltforschung GmbH - UFZ Permoserstraße 15 | 04318 Leipzig Telefon +49 341 235 4767 | Fax +49 341 235 450823 E-Mail: nico.jehmlich@ufz.de | http://www.ufz.de Webseite: http://www.ufz.de/index.php?de=40882


