### Accession
PXD004154

### Title
Metalloprotease SPRTN/DVC1 Orchestrates Replication-Coupled DNA-Protein Crosslink Removal

### Description
Cytotoxicity of DNA-protein crosslinks (DPCs) is ascribed largely to their ability to block the progression of DNA replication fork. DPCs are frequently occurring in cells, either as a consequence of metabolism or exogenous agents. The mechanism of DPCs removal is not completely understood. Here, we characterize SPRTN (DVC1) as specialised DNA-dependent metalloprotease for DPC removal in humans. SPRTN has an N-terminal metalloprotease domain that cleaves various DNA binding substrate during S-phase progression. SPRTN is a part of replisome and removes DPCs during DNA replication fork progression, thus protecting proliferative cells from DPCs toxicity. Ruijs-Aalfs Syndrome (RJALS) patient cells with monogenic mutations in SPRTN are hypersensitive to DPC-inducing agents due to DPC removal defect and DNA replication fork stalling. We propose a model where SPRTN protease forms specialised DNA-replication coupled DPC removal pathway essential for DNA replication fork progression and genome stability. We conclude RJALS is the first human syndrome linked to this pathway

### Sample Protocol
Dried tryptic peptides were reconstituted in 15µl of LC-MS grade water containing 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. Samples were subsequently analysed by nano-LC_MS/MS using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UPLC coupled to a QExactive  (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) as described previously (Michalski A et al. 2011, Lochmatter C et al. 2016, Chung VY et al. 2016). Briefly, peptides were desalted on a PepMapC18 column (300µm x 5mm, 5µm particle size, Thermo Fischer) for 1minute at a flow rate of 20 μl/min and separated on a directly coupled nEASY column (PepMap C18, 75 μm x500mm, 2 μm particle, Thermo Fischer) using a multistep gradient starting with 3 min at 2% Acetonitrile in 5% DMSO with 0.1% Formic acid (buffer B), followed by 60 min linear gradient up to 35% buffer B at 250nl/min flow rate, 7 min  linear gradient up to 99% buffer B and maintained at 99% buffer B for 5 min at a flow rate of 250nl/min before reverting to 2% buffer B for 3 min prior to a last 4 min at 99% solvent B. Full MS scans were acquired over the m/z range of 380—1800 at a resolution of 70,000 at 200m/z (AGC target of 3x106 ions). MS/MS data was acquired in a data dependent manner by selecting the 15 most abundant precursor ions for HCD fragmentation (CE of 28) and on MS/MS resolution of 17500.

### Data Protocol
Label-free quantitation was used to identify overexpressed proteins in SPRTN depleted cells. Raw LC-MS/MS data was uploaded into Progenesis QI Proteomics v2.0 software (Waters). After sample runs alignment, filtering, peak detection and quantification/normalisation (using default parameters), a peak list containing all peptide precursor ions detected across all experimental conditions and biological replicates was generated and exported as mgf file. Peptide and protein identifications was performed using MASCOT v2.5. Data was searched against the Human UniProt SwissProt database (20,268 Homo sapiens sequences; retrieved 20151126) using the Decoy function, whilst selecting trypsin as enzyme (allowing 1 miscleavages), peptide charge of +2, +3, +4 ions, peptide tolerance of 10 ppm and MS/MS of 0.05 Da; #13C at 1; Carboamidomethylation as fixed modification, and Oxidation (M) and Deamidation (N and Q) as a variable modification. MASCOT data search results were filtered using ion score cut off at 20 and a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%. Filtered data was imported into Progenesis for subsequent revision of normalization and statistical analysis. Only proteins identified with at least two peptides (peptide counts) and quantified with at least two peptides (unique peptides) were considered for statistical analysis. Differentially expressed proteins and in particular proteins overexpressed in SPRTN depleted cells were selected by p-Anova p<0.05 and fold change. The gene ontology tool (PANTHER; Protein ANalysis THrough Evolutionary relationships, version 10.) was used to determine the protein function class of the proteins significantly overexpressed in SPRTN depleted cells.

### Publication Abstract
The cytotoxicity of DNA-protein crosslinks (DPCs) is largely ascribed to their ability to block the progression of DNA replication. DPCs frequently occur in cells, either as a consequence of metabolism or exogenous agents, but the mechanism of DPC repair is not completely understood. Here, we characterize SPRTN as a specialized DNA-dependent and DNA replication-coupled metalloprotease for DPC repair. SPRTN cleaves various DNA binding substrates during S-phase progression and thus protects proliferative cells from DPC toxicity. Ruijs-Aalfs syndrome (RJALS) patient cells with monogenic and biallelic mutations in SPRTN are hypersensitive to DPC-inducing agents due to a defect in DNA replication fork progression and the inability to eliminate DPCs. We propose that SPRTN protease represents a specialized DNA replication-coupled DPC repair pathway essential for DNA replication progression and genome stability. Defective SPRTN-dependent clearance of DPCs is the molecular mechanism underlying RJALS, and DPCs are contributing to accelerated aging and cancer.

### Keywords
Dna-protein crosslink

### Affiliations
Target Discovery Institute, University of Oxford, UK
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Roman Fischer

### Lab Head
Dr Roman Fischer
Target Discovery Institute, University of Oxford, UK


