### Accession
PXD032912

### Title
Proteome Profiling Identifies Serum Biomarkers in Rheumatoid Arthritis

### Description
Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) causes serious disability and productivity loss, and there is an urgent need for appropriate biomarkers for diagnosis, treatment assessment, and prognosis evaluation. To identify serum markers of RA, we performed mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics, and we obtained 24 important markers in normal and RA patient samples using a random forest machine learning model and 11 protein-protein interaction (PPI) network topological analysis methods. Re-analyze markers using additional proteomics datasets, immune infiltration status, tissue specificity, subcellular localization, correlation analysis with disease activity-based diagnostic indications, diagnostic receiver-operating characteristic analysis We discovered that ORM1 in serum is significantly differentially expressed in normal and RA patient samples, which is positively correlated with disease activity, and is closely related to CD56dim natural killer cell, effector memory CD8+ T cell and natural killer cell in the pathological mechanism, which can be better utilized for diagnosis, monitoring disease progression and efficacy assessment. This study supplies a comprehensive strategy for discovering potential serum biomarkers of RA, and provides a different perspective for comprehending the pathological mechanism of RA, identifying potential therapeutic targets, and disease management.

### Sample Protocol
Bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay was used for protein quantification, taking 500 μg of protein and use High Select™ Top14 Abundant Protein Depletion Resin to remove high abundance protein. After adding the supernatant obtained in the previous step to dithiothreitol (DTT) at a final concentration of 10 mM, polypeptide samples were prepared using filter aided sample preparation (FASP) method from previous literatures (Zhang et al., 2017;Zhang et al., 2018). In brief, proteins were added onto 30 kDa cut-off filter and centrifuged at 11000 rpm at 20 C for 15 min. 50 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in urea buffer was used to alkylate proteins at 20 C for 15 min. After few washes with urea and 50 mM ABC buffer, 100 ng of trypsin in 50 mM ABC buffer was used to digest proteins in a wet chamber overnight at 37 C. Peptides was extracted by 50 mM ABC buffer and acidified by trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). After the FASP protocol as described above, the peptides were desalted and concentrated using C18 stage-tips. Each of these samples was measured in a 1 hr gradient of LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Tryptic peptides were separated using a 60 min of total data collection for peptide separation, with an Easy-nLC 1200 connected online to a Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometer equipped with FAMIS Pro (Thermo). Scans were collected in data-dependent top-speed mode with dynamic exclusion at 90 s. Raw data were analyzed using MaxQuant version 1.6.17.0 search against Human Fasta database, with label free quantification and match between runs functions enabled. The identification of proteins that were differentially expressed between patients with RA and HCs was conducted based on the empirical Bayes method using the limma R package. The differentially expressed proteins (DEGs) were analyzed and screened using the 2-sample-test (P＜0.05) method.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rheumatoid arthritis; biomarker; proteomics; orm1

### Affiliations
Department of Rheumatology, First Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou University of Chinese Medicine,China
Department of Rheumatology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou University of Chinese Medicine, Guangzhou, China.

### Submitter
congqi hu

### Lab Head
Dr Congqi Hu
Department of Rheumatology, First Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou University of Chinese Medicine,China


