### Accession
PXD004303

### Title
Cysteine-targeted proteomics analysis

### Description
The protein cysteine residue is one of the amino acids most susceptible to oxidative modifications, frequently caused by oxidative stress. Several applications have enabled cysteine-targeted proteomics analysis with simultaneous detection and quantitation. In this study, we employed a quantitative approach using a set of iodoacetyl-based cysteine reactive isobaric tags (iodoTMT) and evaluated the transient cellular oxidation ratio of free and reversibly modified cysteine thiols under DTT and hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) treatments.

### Sample Protocol
Cell proteins were precipitated with 10% w/v TCA. Samples were centrifuged and cell pellets collected and sonicated in a Bioruptor ultrasonicator under cold water. Pellets were sonicated again under cold water with acetone, and this was repeated two times. Equivalent volumes of each sample suspension were collected and dissolved in Tris-denaturing buffer (200 mM Tris pH 8, 2% (w/v) SDS, 7M Urea, 5mM EDTA, 1mM neocuproine). Pellets dissolved in Tris-denaturing buffer containing 1 mM iodoTMT reagent. Samples were sonicated briefly and incubated at room temperature (RT) overnight in the dark. After incubation, the mixtures were precipitated with methanol/chloroform and then washed three times in ice-cold acetone. The iodoTMT-labeled proteins were redissolved in Tris/SDS buffer (200 mM Tris pH 8, 2% (w/v) SDS, 5 mM EDTA) and reduced with 50 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 37 °C for 1 h. After methanol/chloroform precipitation, pellets were dissolving in Tris/SDS buffer containing 1 mM iodoTMT reagent and incubating at RT overnight in the dark. After methanol/chloroform precipitation, the protein pellet was resuspended with 200 mM Tris pH 8, 8 M urea, 1 M ammonium bicarbonate and 0.01% decyl β-D-glucopyranoside (DG) containing lysyl endoprotease (LysC). After incubating at 37 °C for 3 h, samples were diluted 8-fold in 100 mM Tris (pH 8) and 0.01% DG buffer containing trypsin, and digested at 37 ° C for 3 h. Undigested proteins were removed by centrifugation at 15000g at RT for 30 min. The peptides were then diluted 5-fold with Tris-buffered saline Triton (TBST) buffer (25 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 0.15 M NaCl, 0.01% Triton X-100). The peptide samples were incubated with 200 μl anti-TMT antibody resin overnight at 4 °C with end-over-end rocking. After the supernatant was removed, the resin was washed four times with one column volume of TBST and three times with one column volume of Milli-Q water. Peptides were finally eluted with four column volumes of elution buffer (2% acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1% trifluoroacetic (TFA), pH ~2, estimated with a pH indicator) and purified on a C18 spin column. For peptide enrichment, the above samples were lyophilized and redissolved in 20 μl 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer (pH 8.8) containing 1.4 M guanidine hydrochloride. Samples were analyzed with a custom-made nanopump system (LC-Assist, Tokyo, Japan) coupled to a TripleTOF 5600 MS/MS (AB Sciex, Framingham, MA, USA). Samples were loaded on a custom-made C18 column (150 μm × 500 mm) packed with Mightysil RP-18 GP (3 μm). The MS survey spectrum was acquired in the range of 400 to 1250 m/z in 250 ms. For information-dependent acquisition (IDA), the 25 highest intensity precursor ions above 50 counts threshold with charge states +2 and +3 were selected for MS/MS scans. Each MS/MS experiment set the precursor m/z on a 12 s dynamic exclusion and scan range was 100 to 1500 m/z in 100 ms.

### Data Protocol
Protein identifications were performed with the Mascot Server v.2.3 search engine (Matrix Science, Inc., Boston, MA, USA) using the NCBI non-redundant human protein dataset (NCBInr RefSeq Release 71) after transferring the original MS/MS file data (*.wiff) to the *.mgf format. The search was set up for full tryptic peptides with a maximum of 2 missed cleavage sites. Charge states of peptides were set to +2 and +3. IodoTMT6plex at cysteine was included as variable modification. The false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide identification was set to 5% in all analyses using Mascot Percolator. The other search parameters were set as follows: MS/MS fragment ion mass tolerance of ±0.25 Da and peptide tolerance of ±250 ppm. The relaxed tolerance setting was selected based on the better yields of FDR.

### Publication Abstract
The protein cysteine residue is one of the amino acids most susceptible to oxidative modifications, frequently caused by oxidative stress. Several applications have enabled cysteine-targeted proteomics analysis with simultaneous detection and quantitation. In this study, we employed a quantitative approach using a set of iodoacetyl-based cysteine reactive isobaric tags (iodoTMT) and evaluated the transient cellular oxidation ratio of free and reversibly modified cysteine thiols under DTT and hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) treatments. DTT treatment (1 mM for 5 min) reduced most cysteine thiols, irrespective of their cellular localizations. It also caused some unique oxidative shifts, including for peroxiredoxin 2 (PRDX2), uroporphyrinogen decarboxylase (UROD), and thioredoxin (TXN), proteins reportedly affected by cellular reactive oxygen species production. Modest H2O2 treatment (50 &#x3bc;M for 5 min) did not cause global oxidations but instead had apparently reductive effects. Moreover, with H2O2, significant oxidative shifts were observed only in redox active proteins, like PRDX2, peroxiredoxin 1 (PRDX1), TXN, and glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH). Overall, our quantitative data illustrated both H2O2- and reduction-mediated cellular responses, whereby while redox homeostasis is maintained, highly reactive thiols can potentiate the specific, rapid cellular signaling to counteract acute redox stress.

### Keywords
Hek293t, Iodotmt6plex

### Affiliations
AIST
Molecular Profiling Research Center for Drug Discovery, National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), Japan

### Submitter
Kazutaka Araki

### Lab Head
Dr Kazuhiko Fukui
Molecular Profiling Research Center for Drug Discovery, National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), Japan


