### Accession
PXD019543

### Title
A cell-free platform for characterizing and producing therapeutic bacteriophages against biohazardous and antibiotic-resistant bacteria

### Description
Bacteriophages are potent therapeutics against biohazardous bacteria that are rapidly acquiring multidrug resistance. However, routine administration of bacteriophage therapy is currently impeded by a lack of safe phage production methodologies and insufficient phage characterization. We thus developed a versatile cell-free platform for host-independent production of phages targeting gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria. A few microliters of a one-pot reaction produces effective doses of phages against potentially antibiotic-resistant bacteria such as enterohemorrhagic E. coli (EAEC) and Yersinia pestis, which also possibly pose threats as biological warfare agents. We also introduce a method for transient, non-genomic phage engineering to safely confer additional functions, such as a purification tag or bioluminescence for host detection, for only one replication cycle. Using high-resolution and time-resolved mass spectrometry, we validated the expression of 40 hypothetical proteins from two different phages (T7 and CLB-P3) and identified genes in the genome of phage T7 that express exceptionally late during phage replication. Our comprehensive methodology thus allows for accelerated reverse and forward phage engineering as well as for safe and customized production of clinical-grade therapeutic bacteriophages.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for mass spectrometry For sample preparation, 3 μl cell-free phage- or 5 μL native sample (stock concentration > 106 pfu/mL) were diluted with NuPAGE LDS sample buffer (ThermoFisher). The samples were reduced with 50 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 70°C for 10 min and alkylated with 55 mM chloroacetamide (CAA) at room temperature for 30 min in the dark. The samples were run on a NuPAGE 4-12% Bis-Tris protein gel (ThermoFisher) for 5 min (200V, 500 mA, 1x MOPS buffer), 30 min fixated (40%MeOH, 2% AA), colored (1x RotiBlue, Carl Roth, Germany) and destained (25% EtOH, 1% AA). All samples were prepared via in-gel digest (Shevchenko et al., 2006). The collected supernatant (130 µL) was dried in a centrifugal evaporator (Centrivap Cold Trap -50, Labconco, USA). The sample was freshly suspended before MS measurement in 20 µL washing solution (2% ACN, 0.1 FA), and 5 µL was injected into the mass spectrometer per measurement. Proteomic data acquisition For LC-MS/MS the Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system was coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Bremen, Germany). For each analysis, a final injection amount of around 0.1 µg of peptides was delivered to a trap column (ReproSil-pur C18-AQ, 5 μm, Dr. Maisch, 20 mm × 75 μm, self-packed) at a flow rate of 5 μL/min in 100% solvent A (0.1% formic acid in HPLC grade water). After 10 min of loading, peptides were transferred to an analytical column (ReproSil Gold C18-AQ, 3 μm, Dr. Maisch, 400 mm × 75 μm, self-packed) and separated using a 50 min gradient from 4% to 32% of solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile and 5% (v/v) DMSO) at 300 nL/min flow rate. Both nanoLC solvents contained 5% (v/v) DMSO. The Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent acquisition and positive ionization mode. MS spectra (360–1300 m/z) were recorded at a resolution of 60,000 using an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 4e5 and maximum injection time (maxIT) of 50 ms. After peptide fragmentation using higher-energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD), MS2 spectra of up to 20 precursor peptides were acquired at a resolution of 15.000 with automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 5e4 and maximum injection time (maxIT) of 22 ms. The precursor isolation window width was set to 1.3 m/z and normalized collision energy to 30%. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with 20 s exclusion time (mass tolerance +/-10 ppm). MS/MS spectra were singly-charged, unassigned, or with charge states >6+ were excluded.

### Data Protocol
Raw data processing and statistical analysis Peptide identification and quantification were performed using MaxQuant version 1.6.3.4 (Cox and Mann, 2008). and the reference proteomes E. coli BL21(DE3) (NCBI: 469008), phage CLB-P3 (de-novo assembled: P3.prot.fa) and phage T7 (Unirpot: UP000000840). A contaminant list (a built-in option in MaxQuant) was also added. For all MaxQuant searches, typical default parameters were employed. Those included carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications. Trypsin/P was specified as the proteolytic enzyme. The precursor tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm, and fragment ion tolerance to 20 ppm. Results were adjusted to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) on the peptide spectrum match (PSM) level employing a target-decoy approach using reversed protein sequences. The minimal peptide length was defined as 7 amino acids.

### Publication Abstract
Bacteriophages are potent therapeutics against biohazardous bacteria, which rapidly develop multidrug resistance. However, routine administration of phage therapy is hampered by a lack of rapid production, safe bioengineering, and detailed characterization of phages. Thus, we demonstrate a comprehensive cell-free platform for personalized production, transient engineering, and proteomic characterization of a broad spectrum of phages. Using mass spectrometry, we validated hypothetical and non-structural proteins and could also monitor the protein expression during phage assembly. Notably, a few microliters of a one-pot reaction produced effective doses of phages against enteroaggregative Escherichia coli (EAEC), Yersinia pestis, and Klebsiella pneumoniae. By co-expressing suitable host factors, we could extend the range of cell-free production to phages targeting gram-positive bacteria. We further introduce a non-genomic phage engineering method, which adds functionalities for only one replication cycle. In summary, we expect this cell-free methodology to foster reverse and forward phage engineering and customized production of clinical-grade bacteriophages.

### Keywords
Bacteriophage, E. coli

### Affiliations
Bavarian Center for Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry Gregor-Mendel-Strasse 4 85354 Freising Germany
TU Munich

### Submitter
Christina Ludwig

### Lab Head
Dr Chen Meng
Bavarian Center for Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry Gregor-Mendel-Strasse 4 85354 Freising Germany


