### Accession
PXD022707

### Title
Oncogene-dependent sloppiness in mRNA translation

### Description
mRNA translation is a highly conserved and tightly-controlled mechanism for protein synthesis. However, despite protein quality control mechanisms, amino-acid shortage in melanoma induces aberrant proteins by ribosomal frameshifting. The extent and the underlying mechanisms related to this phenomenon are yet unknown. Here, we show that tryptophan-depletion-induced ribosomal frameshifting is a widespread phenomenon in cancer. We termed this event sloppiness and strikingly observed its association with MAPK pathway hyperactivation. Indeed, sloppiness is stimulated by RAS activation in primary cells, suppressed by pharmacological inhibition of the oncogenic MAPK pathway in sloppy cells, and is restored in cells with acquired resistance to MAPK pathway inhibition. Interestingly, sloppiness causes aberrant peptide presentation at the cell surface, allowing recognition and specific killing of drug-resistant cancer cells by T lymphocytes. Thus, while oncogenes empower cancer progression and aggressiveness, they also expose a vulnerability by provoking the production of aberrant peptides through sloppiness.

### Sample Protocol
At the end of each experiment intended for V5-tag pulldown, cells were treated with 10μM MG-132 for 4hrs and subsequently collected by trypsinization and centrifugation. Next, cells were lysed in 300μL ELB lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES, 125 mM NaCl, 0.5% (v/v) Tween-20 and 0.1% (v/v) Nonidet P40 Substitute). Next, 3μL mouse anti-V5 antibody solution (1.0 mg/mL, Invitrogen) was added to the lysate and the samples were incubated on a rotating wheel at 4°C overnight. Pulldowns were performed with Dynabeads protein G (Invitrogen) according to manufacturer’s protocol. All pulled down protein was eluted in 30μL of 1x Laemmli buffer.  Next, the eluates were run briefly into a 4-12% Criterion XT Bis-Tris gel (Bio-Rad) and short, coomassie-stained gel lanes were excised for each sample. Proteins were reduced with 6.5mM DTT, alkylated with 54mM iodoacetamide and digested in-gel with trypsin (Gold, mass spectrometry grade, Promega, 3ng/μL) overnight at 37°C. Extracted peptides were vacuum dried, reconstituted in 10% formic acid and analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer equipped with a Proxeon nLC1000 system. Peptides were loaded directly on the analytical column and separated in a 90-minutes gradient containing a non-linear increase from 5% to 26% solvent B.

### Data Protocol
Search DBs were generated consisting of the original human ATF4 in-frame protein sequence, the ATF4 sequence until W93 and frame-shifted (+1) at W-codon until the first stop codon. Database searches were performed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.0.16) (Tyanova et al., 2016) as described previously (Bartok and Pataskar et al., Nature 2021) . The parameters of the search were optimized for increasing sensitivity and is deposited in the PRIDE DB(Perez-Riverol et al., 2019).

### Publication Abstract
mRNA translation is a highly conserved and tightly controlled mechanism for protein synthesis. Despite protein quality control mechanisms, amino acid shortage in melanoma induces aberrant proteins by ribosomal frameshifting. The extent and the underlying mechanisms related to this phenomenon are yet unknown. Here, we show that tryptophan depletion-induced ribosomal frameshifting is a widespread phenomenon in cancer. We termed this event sloppiness and strikingly observed its association with MAPK pathway hyperactivation. Sloppiness is stimulated by RAS activation in primary cells, suppressed by pharmacological inhibition of the oncogenic MAPK pathway in sloppy cells, and restored in cells with acquired resistance to MAPK pathway inhibition. Interestingly, sloppiness causes aberrant peptide presentation at the cell surface, allowing recognition and specific killing of drug-resistant cancer cells by T lymphocytes. Thus, while oncogenes empower cancer progression and aggressiveness, they also expose a vulnerability by provoking the production of aberrant peptides through sloppiness.

### Keywords
Human, Translation, Immunoprecipitation, Ribosomal frameshifting, Lc-ms/ms, Tryptophan depletion, Cancer

### Affiliations
The Netherlands Cancer Institute
Division of Oncogenomics, Oncode institute, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Plesmanlaan 121, 1066CX, Amsterdam, the Netherlands

### Submitter
Onno Bleijerveld

### Lab Head
Dr Reuven Agami
Division of Oncogenomics, Oncode institute, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Plesmanlaan 121, 1066CX, Amsterdam, the Netherlands


