### Accession
PXD022840

### Title
Tetramethylpyrazine improves cognitive impairment and modifies the hippocampal proteome in two mouse models of Alzheimer's disease

### Description
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is one of the most common neurodegenerative diseases. So far, there is no effective treatment for this condition. Tetramethylpyrazine (TMP) is an alkaloid extracted from traditional Chinese medicine chuanxiong, which is mainly used in the treatment of ischemic stroke some related diseases. In this study, we studied the potential effects of TMP on AD progression by using two AD mouse models. 8-month-old 3xTg-AD mice received TMP treatment (10mg/kg/d) for 1 month, and 4-month-old APP/PS1-AD mice received TMP treatment (10mg/kg/d) for 2 months. The behavioral tests by step-down passive avoidance test (SDA), new object recognition (NOR) and Morris water maze (MWM) showed that TMP significantly improved the learning and memory impairment of two AD transgenic mice. In addition, TMP reduced Aß levels and tau phosphorylation. Venny analysis showed that 116 differentially expressed proteins were commonly changed in 3xTg mice vs WT mice and TMP treated mice vs untreated mice. The same, 130 differentially expressed proteins were commonly changed in APP/PS1 mice vs WT mice and TMP treated mice vs untreated mice. The functions of the common proteins modified by TMP in the two models were mainly related to mitochondrial function, synaptic function, cytoskeleton, GTP binding, ATP binding. Mitochondrial omics analysis revealed 21 and 20 differentially expressed mitochondrial proteins modified by TMP in 3xTg-AD mice and APP/PS1 mice, respectively. These differential proteins were located in mitochondrial inner membrane, mitochondrial outer membrane, mitochondrial gap and mitochondrial matrix, and the function of some proteins is closely related to oxidative phosphorylation of (OXPHOS). Western-blot further validated that TMP changed the expression of OXPHOS complex proteins (sdhb, ndufa10, uqcrfs1, cox5b, atp5a) in the hippocampus of the two AD mice. Taken together, our study demonstrated that TMP improved the cognitive impairment and AD-like pathology, and modified hippocampal proteome in the two AD mice models. The improvement of the behavioral and pathology might be associated with modification of mitochondrial protein profile by TMP. Our study suggested that TMP had the potential for the treatment of AD.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction and digestion Hippocampal protein samples were prepared according to the method in reference (Xu, Zhang et al., 2018). The hippocampus was collected and stored at -80°C until used. The hippocampal tissue of mice was placed in 8M urea phosphate buffer solution by ultrasound, and then centrifuged. The supernatant was collected and the protein concentration was determined. The hippocampus of 3xTg mice (6 mice in each group) was mixed into 100μg protein according to (1:1:1:1:1:1). The hippocampal proteins of APP / PS1 mice (3 in each group) were taken 100μg protein. 10mM DTT was incubated at 55 °C for 30 minutes and incubated with 25mM diamine iodoacetate (IAA) for 1 hour at room temperature. Digested with trypsin at 37 °C, adjusted to pH 1-2 by adding 1% trifluoroarboxylic acid (TFA), and centrifuged at 12000g for 20 minutes to collect the supernatant. Inverse phase column chromatography (HLB, Waters OASIS, USA) was used for desalting. After desalination, it is dried in a vacuum centrifuge and dissolved in a buffer of triethylamine bicarbonate (TEAB, 200mM, pH 8.5). Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) Labeling The samples were labeled with TMT reagent (0.8mg TMT dissolved in 41μL acetonitrile) at room temperature, and then 5μL 5% hydroxylamine was added at room temperature and the reaction was terminated after incubation. The peptide was labeled with different TMT Tags: TMT-126, WT mice; TMT-127, 3xTg mice; TMT-128, TMP treated mice, TMT-129, APP / PS1 wild mice; TMT-130, APP / PS1 positive mice, TMT-131, TMP treated mice. The total peptides labeled in each group were mixed, desalted, dried and fractionated. High performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) separation The TMT-labeled peptide was graded using the previous method (He, Nie et al., 2019). Briefly, peptides were loaded onto chromatography columns (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) for HPLC (Ultra3000 UHPLC; Thermo Fisher Science, Waltham, MA) separation. The components were collected, dried, and stored at -80°C for LC-MS analysis. LC-MS/MS analysis and database searching According to the previous method (Chen, Jiang et al., 2019), analysis was carried out by LC-MS/MS. In short, the system is connected to the uswma system (thermosa, schma, USA). An analytical capillary column (Upthorch, Oak Harbor, Washington, USA) was used to separate peptides and filled with C18 silicone resin (Varian, Lexington, Massachusetts, USA). The data used UniProt muscle database (released in October 2018), and the original mass spectra were searched using Proteome Finder 2.1 software (Thermo Fisher science, Walsham, Ma, USA). The search criteria were based on previous research (Chen et al., 2019).

### Data Protocol
Bioinformatics analysis We used Venny 2.1 to analyze differentially expressed proteins. Functional enrichment analysis of biological processes (BP) and molecular function (MF) was performed using DAVID Bioinformatics Resources 6.8. STRING database version 10.5 was used for protein-protein interaction network analysis. The interaction network was mapped by Cytoscape software.

### Publication Abstract
Alzheimer's disease (AD), one of the most common neurodegenerative diseases, has no effective treatment. We studied the potential effects of tetramethylpyrazine (TMP), an alkaloid in the rhizome of <i>Ligusticum chuanxiong</i> Hort. used in Traditional Chinese Medicine (<i>chu&#x101;nxiong</i>) to treat ischemic stroke, on AD progression in two AD mouse models. Eight-month-old 3xTg-AD mice received TMP treatment (10 mg/kg/d) for 1 month, and 4-month-old APP/PS1-AD mice received TMP treatment (10 mg/kg/d) for 2 months. Behavioral tests, including step-down passive avoidance (SDA), new object recognition (NOR), Morris water maze (MWM), and Contextual fear conditioning test showed that TMP significantly improved the learning and memory of the two AD-transgenic mice. In addition, TMP reduced beta-amyloid (A&#xdf;) levels and tau phosphorylation (p-tau). Venny map pointed out that 116 proteins were commonly changed in 3xTg mice vs. wild type (WT) mice and TMP-treated mice vs. -untreated mice. The same 130 proteins were commonly changed in APP/PS1 mice vs. WT mice and TMP-treated mice vs. -untreated mice. The functions of the common proteins modified by TMP in the two models were mainly involved in mitochondrial, synaptic, cytoskeleton, ATP binding, and GTP binding. Mitochondrial omics analysis revealed 21 and 20 differentially expressed mitochondrial proteins modified by TMP in 3xTg-AD mice and APP/PS1 mice, respectively. These differential proteins were located in the mitochondrial inner membrane, mitochondrial outer membrane, mitochondrial gap, and mitochondrial matrix, and the function of some proteins is closely related to oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS). Western-blot analysis confirmed that TMP changed the expression of OXPHOS complex proteins (sdhb, ndufa10, uqcrfs1, cox5b, atp5a) in the hippocampus of the two AD mice. Taken together, we demonstrated that TMP treatment changed the hippocampal proteome, reduced AD pathology, and reduced cognitive impairment in the two AD models. The changes might be associated with modification of the mitochondrial protein profile by TMP. The results of the study suggest that TMP can improve the symptoms of AD.

### Keywords
Tetramethylpyrazine; alzheimer’s disease (ad); proteomics; mitochondria; oxphos

### Affiliations
School of Pharmacy & School of Medicine, Changzhou University, Changzhou, China
Key Laboratory of Modern Toxicology of Shenzhen, Shenzhen Center for Disease Control and Prevention, No. 8, Longyuan Road, Nanshan District, Shenzhen, China 518055.

### Submitter
Jinyao Yang

### Lab Head
Dr Xifei Yang
Key Laboratory of Modern Toxicology of Shenzhen, Shenzhen Center for Disease Control and Prevention, No. 8, Longyuan Road, Nanshan District, Shenzhen, China 518055.


