### Accession
PXD027548

### Title
Global quantitative phosphoproteomic analysis and Mass spectrometry analysis of GCA effects on BMSCs.

### Description
During aging, senescent cells accumulate in bone marrow and secrete the dysfunctional factors, termed senescence associated secretory phenotype (SASP), which is implied to regulate bone metabolism. To identify the key SASP factors in bone marrow that influence skeletal aging, we analyzed the dysregulated factors in the bone marrow supernatant from young and aged rat through mass spectrometry. In another hand, BMSCs treated with rGCA, transfection of siRNA-Plxnb2 or controls were subjected to global quantitative phosphoproteomic analysis.

### Sample Protocol
For preparation of bone marrow supernatant, femora obtained from animal models were dissected free of soft tissue from young and aged rat. A needle is used to drill a hole at the two ends of the femora and then the femora was placed into a 0.5ml new Eppendorf tube with a hole drilled at the bottom by needle. Then the 0.5ml Eppendorf Tubes loaded with femora were placed in 1.5ml new Eppendorf tube for centrifugation at 400 g for 15 min to collect supernatant. BMSCs treated with rGCA (50nM), transfection of siRNA-Plxnb2 or controls were subjected to global quantitative phosphoproteomic analysis.

### Data Protocol
For phosphopeptide enrichment, the phosphopeptides were enriched according to a published protocol 63. Peptides were digested with 800 µl of acetonitrile (ACN), 150 μL of 3.2M KCl, 55 μL of 150mM KH2PO4, and 95 µl of trifluoroacetic acid. TiO2 beads were added to peptides and then pelleted. After wash, the beads were suspended in 100 µl of a transfer buffer (80% ACN and 0.5% acetic acid), transferred onto the top of a C18 StageTip (ThermoFisher Scientific). Bound phosphopeptides were eluted twice with 30 µl of an elution buffer (40% ACN and 15% NH4OH; highperformance liquid chromatography grade). Samples of the phosphopeptides were concentrated in a SpeedVac for 15 min.    For mass spectrometry analysis, phosphopeptide samples were fractionated followed a described protocol 63. Vacuum-dried peptides were dissolved in pH 10 buffer (10mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 10, adjusted by NH4OH) and subjected to pH 10 C18 reverse-phase column chromatography. Peptides were eluted with a step gradient of 150 µl each of 6, 9, 12, 15, 18, 21, 25, 30, and 35% ACN (pH 10), pooled into six pools and vacuum-dried for nano-high-performance liquid chromatography-tandem MS. Peptides were loaded onto a 10-cm column with a 150-μM inner diameter, packed in-house with 1.9 µM C18, and subjected to nano-high-performance liquid chromatography-tandem MS analysis by using a nano-LC 1000 coupled with an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides were separated with a 75-min discontinuous gradient of 2–24%, 4–24%, or 8–26% ACN/0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 800 nl/minute. The mass spectrometer was set to data-dependent mode, the precursor MS spectrum was scanned at 375–1300 m/z with 240k resolution at 400 m/z (2 × 106 AGC target), and the 25 strongest ions were fragmented via collision-induced dissociation with 35 normalized collision energy and 1 m/z isolation width and detected by using an ion trap with 30 s of dynamic exclusion time, 1 × 104 AGC target, and 100 ms of maximum injection time.  For mass spectrometry data analysis, raw MS data were processed by the Max- Quant software program (version 1.5.2.8; Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsreid, Germany) with a false-discovery rate <0.01 at the protein, peptide, and modification level using default settings. Peptides and proteins were quantified by using MaxQuant. Significance was assessed with t-tests. The differentially expressed phosphopeptides were subsequently filtered for median fold-change >1.5 and p value < 0.05 (t-test). A site localization probability of 0.7 was used as the cut-off for localization of phosphorylation sites. Function annotation was done by Ingenuity Pathway Analysis software (QIAGEN, Redwood City, CA) and reference mining.

### Publication Abstract
Exercise can prevent osteoporosis and improve immune function, but the mechanism remains unclear. Here, we show that exercise promotes reticulocalbin-2 secretion from the bone marrow macrophages to initiate bone marrow fat lipolysis. Given the crucial role of lipolysis in exercise-stimulated osteogenesis and lymphopoiesis, these findings suggest that reticulocalbin-2 is a pivotal regulator of a local adipose-osteogenic/immune axis. Mechanistically, reticulocalbin-2 binds to a functional receptor complex, which is composed of neuronilin-2 and integrin beta-1, to activate a cAMP-PKA signaling pathway that mobilizes bone marrow fat via lipolysis to fuel the differentiation and function of mesenchymal and hematopoietic stem cells. Notably, the administration of recombinant reticulocalbin-2 in tail-suspended and old mice remarkably decreases bone marrow fat accumulation and promotes osteogenesis and lymphopoiesis. These findings identify reticulocalbin-2 as a novel mechanosensitive lipolytic factor in maintaining energy homeostasis in bone resident cells, and it provides a promising target for skeletal and immune health.

### Keywords
Plexin-b2 pathway., Grancalcin, Bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells, Skeletal aging, Immune cells

### Affiliations
PTM BIO
Department of Endocrinology, Endocrinology Research Center, Xiangya Hospital of Central South University, 87# Xiangya Road, Changsha, Hunan 410008, PR China

### Submitter
ying mei

### Lab Head
Dr Chang-Jun Li
Department of Endocrinology, Endocrinology Research Center, Xiangya Hospital of Central South University, 87# Xiangya Road, Changsha, Hunan 410008, PR China


