### Accession
PXD017754

### Title
Proteomic Analysis of Ubiquitin Chain Types in Murine Cells and Tissues

### Description
Mass spectrometry-based proteomics has become an integral approach for characterising ubiquitin chain-linkage compositions and architectures. In this study, we optimised sample preparation and chromatographic separation of Ubiquitin peptides for Absolute Quantification by Parallel Reaction Monitoring (Ub-AQUA-PRM). Using this refined Ub-AQUA-PRM assay, we were able to quantify all ubiquitin chain types in 10-minute LC-MS/MS runs. We used this method to determine the ubiquitin chain-linkage composition in murine bone marrow-derived macrophages (BMDMs) and different mouse tissues. We could show tissue-specific differences in ubiquitin levels in murine tissues, with polyubiquitin chain types contributing a small proportion to the total pool of ubiquitin. Interestingly, we observed enrichment of atypical ubiquitin chain types (K29 and K33) in heart and muscle. Ubiquitin chain topology profiling using tandem ubiquitin binding entities, directed at K29/K33 ubiquitin chains (TRABID), and mass spectrometry analysis identified several mitochondrial proteins as putatively associated with these atypical ubiquitin chain types. Our approach enabled high-throughput screening of ubiquitin chain-linkage composition in different murine tissues and highlighted a possible role for atypical ubiquitylation in contractile tissues. Our results contribute to our understanding of in vivo ubiquitin chain-linkage composition in murine tissues.

### Sample Protocol
Samples: Bone marrow-derived macrophages (BMDMs) were stimulated with 10 μM MG-132. Cells were lysed by sonication in lysis buffer (5% SDS in 50 mM TEAB pH 7.5 with 100 mM NEM). Tissues (brain, heart, lung, kidney, muscle and spleen) were collected from C57BL/6J mice, ground in liquid nitrogen and lysed by sonication in lysis buffer. Tissue lysates were centrifuged (10,000 xg, 5 min, RT) and the supernatants used for methanol chloroform precipitation.  Sample preparation for targeted proteomics: Fifty μg of protein was used for sample preparation by S-Trap, with minor modifications (ProtiFi). Samples were reduced with 5 mM TCEP for 15 min at 37°C, and alkylated with 10 mM NEM for 15 min at 37°C in the dark. Five µl of 12% phosphoric acid was added to each sample after reduction and alkylation, followed by the addition of 330 µl S-Trap binding buffer (90% methanol in 100 mM TEAB pH 7.1). Acidified samples were added to S-trap mini-spin columns and centrifuged at 4,000 xg for 1 minute. Each S-trap mini-spin column was washed with 400 µl S-trap binding buffer and centrifuged at 4,000 xg for 1 minute. This process was repeated for five washes. Twenty-five µl of 50 mM TEAB pH 8.0 containing sequencing-grade trypsin (1:10 ratio of trypsin:protein) was added to each sample, followed by proteolysis for 2 hours at 47°C. Peptides were eluted with 50 mM TEAB pH 8.0 by centrifugation at 1,000 xg for 1 minute. Elution steps were repeated using 0.2% FA and 0.2% FA in 50% acetonitrile, respectively. The eluates from each sample were combined and dried using a speed-vac before storage at -80°C. Peptides were reconstituted to 1 μg/μl using 5% FA in water and prepared for PRM, on ice, by combining reagents in the following order: 30 μl of water, 10 μl peptide digest at 1 μg/μl, 10 μl of heavy master mix at 100 fmol/μl, 40 μl of 10% FA and 10 μl of 10% H2O2. Samples were incubated for 2h at 60°C for oxidation before targeted mass spectrometry analysis. Parallel Reaction Monitoring: Peptide samples were injected on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC connected to a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer. Fifty fmol of each ubiquitin peptide was injected, along with 500 ng of tryptic peptide mixture. Samples are injected onto a 150 μm x 150 mm EASY-Spray LC column using the nano-pump and 100% buffer A (96.9% water, 3% DMSO, 0.1% FA) at 1.5 μl/min. After 4 min, the column oven valve was switched to bypass the loop and peptides were eluted by increased concentration of buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 16.9% water, 3% DMSO, 0.1% FA) using a multistep gradient. The source was heated to 320°C and 2.5 kV was applied between the column emitter and the MS. The Q-Exactive HF was operated in PRM mode using a resolution of 15,000, AGC target of 2E5 and maximum injection time of 25 ms.  TRABID pulldowns: Murine muscle was lysed in non-denaturing lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 250 mM NaCl, 1% NP40, 10% glycerol, protease inhibitors, 5 mM β-mercaptoethanol and 100 mM NEM) by sonication. Lysates were clarified by centrifugation (4,000 xg, 20 min, 4°C) and either incubated with TRABID-linked beads or TARBID mutant-linked beads overnight at 4°C with constant agitation. The samples were then centrifuged at 200 xg for 1 minute and the supernatant discarded. Beads were washed with non-denaturing lysis buffer and the proteins wre eluted from the beads using lysis buffer. Elutes were processed for proteomic analysis without the additional oxidation step.   LC-MS/MS analysis of TUBE pulldowns: Peptides were injected on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC connected to a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer. Peptides were dissolved in 40 µl of 5% FA, and 5 µl of each sample was injected onto an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 LC trap column (100 μm ID × 20 mm, 3 μm, 100 Å), followed by separation on an EASY-Spray nanoLC C18 column (75 ID μm × 500 mm, 2 μm, 100 Å) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Solvent A was 96.9% water, 3% DMSO and 0.1% FA. Solvent B was 80% acetonitrile, 16.9% water, 3% DMSO and 0.1% FA. The gradient used for analysis was as follows: solvent B was maintained at 1% for 5 min, followed by an increase from 1 to 35% B in 120 min, 35-90% B in 0.5 min, maintained at 90% B for 4 min, followed by a decrease to 3% in 0.5 min and equilibration at 3% for 10 min. The Q-Exactive HF was operated in positive-ion data-dependent mode. Precursor ion scans were performed in the Orbitrap in the range of 350-1,500 m/z with a resolution of 120,000 at 200 m/z, an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 1 E6 and an ion injection time of 50 ms. The Top20 precursors were selected for MS/MS analysis in the Orbitrap after high-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation. An HCD collision energy of 25% was used, the AGC target was set to 2E5 and a 50 ms injection time was allowed for MS/MS analysis. Dynamic exclusion of ions was implemented using a 45 s exclusion duration. An electrospray voltage of 2.0 kV and capillary temperature of 275°C, with no sheath and auxiliary gas flow, was used.

### Data Protocol
Targeted proteomic data analysis: All Ub-AQUA-PRM RAW mass spectrometry files were analysed using Skyline-daily (version 4.1.1.11871). Fragment ion intensities were extracted and light to heavy (L/H) ratios of peptide pairs were automatically determined in Skyline. All extracted ion chromatograms were manually inspected. Standard curves were generated from log transformed L/H ratios and peptide concentrations, to determine the lower limit of detection (LLOD) and lower limit of quantification (LLOQ) for each peptide. The R2 was determined based on the LLOQ of each peptide. Only curves with a R2 value > 0.99 were used for determining the absolute concentration of total ubiquitin and the different ubiquitin chain types. Group comparisons were performed using a Student’s t-test, and multiple group comparisons were performed using an analysis of variance (ANOVA), followed by a Tukey’s HSD test for determining significance for pairwise comparisons.   Discovery proteomics data analysis: All discovery proteomics RAW mass spectra were analysed using MaxQuant 1.6.7.0, and searched against a SwissProt Mus musculus database (containing 25273 database entries with isoforms) downloaded on 13 November 2019. Peak list generation was performed within MaxQuant and searches were performed using default parameters and the built-in Andromeda search engine. The enzyme specificity was set to consider fully tryptic peptides, and two missed cleavages were allowed. Oxidation of methionine, N-terminal acetylation and diglycine remnant on lysine residues were allowed as variable modifications. N-ethylmaleimide on cysteine was set as fixed modification. A protein and peptide false discovery rate (FDR) of less than 1% was employed in MaxQuant. Proteins that contained similar peptides and that could not be differentiated on the basis of MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Data handling and analysis was performed in Perseus. Reverse hits, contaminants and proteins only identified by site were removed before downstream statistical and bioinformatics analysis. Intensity data were transformed (log 2) and filtered to contain at least three valid values in one group for comparisons. Missing values were imputed using random numbers drawn from a normal distribution that simulates signals from low abundance proteins within Perseus. A Students t-test was performed to identify statistically significant differences between TRABID and TRABID mutant, which served as negative control, pulldowns.

### Publication Abstract
Ubiquitylation is an elaborate post-translational modification involved in all biological processes. Its pleotropic effect is driven by the ability to form complex polyubiquitin chain architectures that can influence biological functions. In this study, we optimised sample preparation and chromatographic separation of Ubiquitin peptides for Absolute Quantification by Parallel Reaction Monitoring (Ub-AQUA-PRM). Using this refined Ub-AQUA-PRM assay, we were able to quantify all ubiquitin chain types in 10-min LC-MS/MS runs. We used this method to determine the ubiquitin chain-linkage composition in murine bone marrow-derived macrophages and different mouse tissues. We could show tissue-specific differences in ubiquitin levels in murine tissues, with polyubiquitin chain types contributing a small proportion to the total pool of ubiquitin. Interestingly, we observed enrichment of atypical (K33) ubiquitin chains in heart and muscle. Our approach enabled high-throughput screening of ubiquitin chain-linkage composition in different murine tissues and highlighted a possible role for atypical ubiquitylation in contractile tissues. SIGNIFICANCE: Large knowledge gaps exist in our understanding of ubiquitin chain-linkage composition in mammalian tissues. Defining this in vivo ubiquitin chain-linkage landscape could reveal the functional importance of different ubiquitin chain types in tissues. In this study, we refined the previously described Ub-AQUA-PRM assay to enable quantification of all ubiquitin chain types in a high-throughput manner. Using this assay, we provided new data on the ubiquitin chain-linkage composition in primary murine macrophages and tissues, and revealed an enrichment of atypical ubiquitin chains in contractile tissues. Our approach should thus enable rapid, high-throughput screening of ubiquitin chain-linkage composition in different sample types, as demonstrated in murine primary cells and tissues.

### Keywords
Absolute quantification, Parallel reaction monitoring, Murine tissues, Ubiquitin chain-linkage composition

### Affiliations
Newcastle University Biosciences Institute, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE2 4HH, UK
Newcastle University

### Submitter
Matthias Trost

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Trost
Newcastle University Biosciences Institute, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE2 4HH, UK


