### Accession
PXD041451

### Title
Plasmodium PEXEL protein processing

### Description
We identified the mature N terminials of several PEXEL protein reporters

### Sample Protocol
The protein gel bands were subjected to in-gel digestion. Each gel band was washed in 100 mM Ammonium Bicarbonate (AmBic)/Acetonitrile (ACN), reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol, and cysteines were alkylated with 100mM iodoacetamide. Gel bands were washed in 100mM AmBic/ACN prior to adding 1 µg trypsin for overnight incubation at 37°C. The supernatant containing peptides was saved into a new tube. Gel was washed at room temperature for ten minutes with gentle shaking in 50% ACN/5% FA, and the supernatant was saved to peptide solution. The wash step was repeated each by 80% ACN/5% FA, and 100% ACN, and all supernatant was saved and then subject to the speedvac dry. After lyophilization, peptides were reconstituted with 0.1% FA in water. Peptides were injected onto a Neo trap cartridge coupled with an analytical column (75 µm ID x 50 cm PepMapTM Neo C18, 2 µm). Samples were separated using a linear gradient of solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) and solvent B (0.1% formic acid in ACN) using a Vanquish Neo UHPLC System coupled to an Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid Mass Spectrometer with FAIMS Pro Duo interface (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The resulting tandem MS data was queried for protein identification against the custom database, Plasmodium falciparum 3D7 database plus the 3 custom proteins (The cleaved form of EMP3(i), (ii), and (iii)), using Mascot v.2.8.0 (Matrix Science). The following modifications were set as search parameters: peptide mass tolerance at 20 ppm, trypsin enzyme, 3 allowed missed cleavage sites, carbamidomethylated cysteine (static modification), and oxidized methionine, deaminated asparagine/glutamine, and protein N-term acetylation (variable modification). The search results were validated with 1% FDR of protein threshold and 90% of peptide threshold using Scaffold v5.2.1 (Proteome Software).

### Publication Abstract
Malaria parasites export hundreds of proteins to the cytoplasm of the host red blood cells for their survival. A five amino acid sequence, called the PEXEL motif, is conserved among many exported proteins and is thought to be a signal for export. However, the motif is cleaved inside the endoplasmic reticulum of the parasite, and mature proteins starting from the fourth PEXEL residue travel to the parasite periphery for export. We showed that the PEXEL motif is dispensable for export as long as identical mature proteins can be efficiently produced via alternative means in the ER. We also showed that the exported and non-exported proteins are differentiated at the parasite periphery based on their mature N-termini; however, any discernible export signal within that region remained cryptic. Our study resolves a longstanding paradox in PEXEL protein trafficking.

### Keywords
Plasmodim pexel

### Affiliations
David M. and Paula L. Kipnis Distinguished Professor, Departments of Medicine and Molecular Microbiology
Washington University in St. Louis

### Submitter
Md Mahmudul Hasan

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel E Goldberg
David M. and Paula L. Kipnis Distinguished Professor, Departments of Medicine and Molecular Microbiology


