### Accession
PXD026722

### Title
Skeletal muscle wt and OXPHOS inhibited 18 months-old mice treated with edaravone

### Description
Chronic skeletal muscle mitochondria dyshomeostasis drives tubular aggregate formation. TMT sixplex Isobaric Mass Tagging analysis was carried out in the CBMSO Protein Chemistry Facility (ProteoRed, PRB3-ISCIII and UAM University, Spain.

### Sample Protocol
In-Gel Digestion (Stacking gel).Protein extracts were fractionated in a SDS-PAGE gel (0.75 mm-thick, 4% stacking, and 10% resolving). Then run was stopped as soon as the front entered 3 mm into the resolving gel, so that the whole proteome became concentrated in the stacking/resolving gel interface. The unseparated protein bands were visualized by Coomassie staining, excised, cut into cubes (2 x 2 mm), and placed in 0.5 ml microcentrifuge tubes. The gel pieces were destained in acetonitrile:water (ACN:H2O, 1:1), reduced and alkylated (disulfide bonds from cysteinyl residues were reduced with 10 mM DTT for 1 h at 56 ºC, and then thiol groups were alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in darkness) and digested in situ with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI). The gel pieces were shrunk by removing all liquid using sufficient ACN. Acetonitrile was pipetted out and the gel pieces were dried in a speedvac. The dried gel pieces were re-swollen in 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, 10mM CaCl2 with 60 ng/µL trypsin at 5:1 protein:enzyme (w/w) ratio. The tubes were kept in ice for 2 h and incubated at 37°C for 12 h. Digestion was stopped by the addition of 1% TFA. Whole supernatants were dried down and then desalted onto OMIX Pipette tips C18 (Agilent Technologies) until the mass spectrometric analysis. TMT labeling and high ph fractionation. TMT. The resultant peptide mixture from desalted proteins tryptic digest (60 µg) was labeled using chemicals from the TMT sixplex Isobaric Mass Tagging Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) as described by manufacturer. Briefly, peptides were dissolved in 50 μL of 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), adjusted to pH 8. For labeling, each TMT reagent was dissolved in 41 μL of ACN and added to the respective peptide mixture and then incubated at room temperature for 1 h. Labelling was stopped by the addition of 8 μL 5% hidroxilamine. Whole supernatants were dried down and the four samples were mixed to obtain the “4plex-labeled mixture”. The mixture was analysed by RP-LC-MS/MS to check the efficiency of the labelling. Fractionation. The sample was then fractionated using the Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) with minor modifications. Sample were re-swollen in 0.1%TFA and then, loaded onto an equilibrated, high-pH, reversed-phase fractionation spin column. A step gradient of increasing acetonitrile concentrations (5-80%) in a volatile high-pH (Triethylamine (0.1%)) is then applied to the columns to elute bound peptides into nine different fractions collected by centrifugation. The fractions obtained from high-pH, reversed-phase 6plex-labeled mixture were dried and stored until analysis by mass spectrometry for quantification. Quantitative analysis by reverse phase-liquid chromatography rp-lc-ms/ms. The fractions were resuspended in 10 µL of 0.1% formic acid and analysed by RP-LC-MS/MS in an Easy-nLC II system coupled to an ion trap LTQ-Orbitrap-Velos-Pro hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The peptides were concentrated (on-line) by reverse phase chromatography using a 0.1mm × 20 mm C18 RP precolumn (Thermo Scientific), and then separated using a 0.075mm x 250 mm C18 RP column (Thermo Scientific) operating at 0.3 μl/min. Peptides were eluted using a 90-min dual gradient. The gradient profile was set as follows: 5−25% solvent B for 68 min, 25−40% solvent B for 22 min, 40−100% solvent B for 2min and 100% solvent B for 18 min (Solvent A: 0,1% formic acid in water, solvent B: 0,1% formic acid, 80% ACN in water). ESI ionization was done using a Nano-bore emitters Stainless Steel ID 30 μm (Proxeon) interface at 2.1 kV spray voltage with S-Lens of 60%. The instrument method consisted of a data-dependent top-20 experiment with an Orbitrap MS1 scan at a resolution (m/Δm) of 30,000 followed by either twenty high energy collision dissociation (HCD) MS/MS mass-analyzed in the Orbitrap at 7,500 (Δm/m) resolution. MS2 experiments were performed using HCD to generate high resolution and high mass accuracy MS2 spectra. The minimum MS signal for triggering MS/MS was set to 500. The lock mass option was enabled for both MS and MS/MS mode and the polydimethylcyclosiloxane ions (protonated (Si(CH3)2O))6; m/z 445.120025) were used for internal recalibration of the mass spectra. Peptides were detected in survey scans from 400 to 1600 amu (1 μscan) using an isolation width of 1.3 u (in mass-to-charge ratio units), normalized collision energy of 40% for HCD fragmentation, and dynamic exclusion applied during 60 seconds periods. Charge-state screening was enabled to reject unassigned and singly charged protonated ions.

### Data Protocol
Quantitative data analysis. Peptide identification from raw data (a single search was performed with all nine raws from the fractionation) was carried out using PEAKS Studio Xpro search engine (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, Ontario, Canada). Database search was performed against uniprot-mus-musculus.fasta (55466 entries; UniProt release 08/2020) (decoy-fusion database). The following constraints were used for the searches: tryptic cleavage after Arg and Lys (semispecific), up to two missed cleavage sites, and tolerances of 20 ppm for precursor ions and 0.05 Da for MS/MS fragment ions and the searches were performed allowing optional Met oxidation and Cys carbamidomethylation and fixed TMT 6plex reagent labeling at the N-terminus and lysine residues. False discovery rates (FDR) for peptide spectrum matches (PSM) was limited to 0.01. Only those proteins with at least two distinct peptides and at least one unique peptides being discovered from LC/MS/MS analyses were considered reliably identified and sent to be quantified. Quantitation of TMT labeled peptides was performed with PEAKS Studio Xpro search engine, selected “Reporter Ion Quantification iTRAQ/TMT” under the “Quantifications” options. We use Auto normalization mode that calculate a global ratio from the total intensity of all labels in all quantifiable peptides. The -10LgP, Quality (13) and Reporter Ion Intensity (1e4) were used for Spectrum filter and Significance (20, PEAKSQ method) was used for peptide and protein abundance calculation. For the Protein quantification we consider protein groups for peptide uniqueness and use only unique peptides for protein quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Tubular aggregates (TA) are honeycomb-like arrays of sarcoplasmic-reticulum (SR) tubules affecting aged glycolytic fibers of male individuals and inducing severe sarcomere disorganization and muscular pain. TA develop in skeletal muscle from Tubular Aggregate Myopathy (TAM) patients as well as in other disorders including endocrine syndromes, diabetes, and ageing, being their primary cause unknown. Nowadays, there is no cure for TA. Intriguingly, both hypoxia and calcium dyshomeostasis prompt TA formation, pointing to a possible role for mitochondria in their setting. However, a functional link between mitochondrial dysfunctions and TA remains unknown. Herein, we investigate the alteration in muscle-proteome of TAM patients, the molecular mechanism of TA onset and a potential therapy in a preclinical mouse model of the disease. We show that in vivo chronic inhibition of the mitochondrial ATP synthase in muscle causes TA. Upon long-term restrained oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS), oxidative soleus experiments a metabolic and structural switch towards glycolytic fibers, increases mitochondrial fission, and activates mitophagy to recycle damaged mitochondria. TA result from the overresponse of the fission controller DRP1, that upregulates the Store-Operate-Calcium-Entry and increases the mitochondria-SR interaction in a futile attempt to buffer calcium overloads upon prolonged OXPHOS inhibition. Accordingly, hypoxic muscles cultured ex vivo show an increase in mitochondria/SR contact sites and autophagic/mitophagic zones, where TA clusters grow around defective mitochondria. Moreover, hypoxia triggered a stronger TA formation upon ATP synthase inhibition, and this effect was reduced by the DRP1 inhibitor mDIVI. Remarkably, the muscle proteome of TAM patients displays similar alterations in mitochondrial dynamics and in ATP synthase contents. In vivo edaravone treatment in mice with restrained OXPHOS restored a healthy phenotype by prompting mitogenesis and mitochondrial fusion. Altogether, our data provide a functional link between the ATP synthase/DRP1 axis and the setting of TA, and repurpose edaravone as a possible treatment for TA-associated disorders.

### Keywords
Tubular agregate myopathy, Soleus, Mouse skm, Oxphos, Edaravone

### Affiliations
1. Departamento de Biología Molecular, Centro de Biología Molecular ‘“Severo Ochoa’” (CBMSO), c/ Nicolás Cabrera 1, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain. 2. Centro de Investigación Biomédica en red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), ISCIII, Madrid, Spain. 3. Instituto de Investigación Hospital 12 de Octubre, i+12, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain. (lab head)
Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa - Universidad Autónoma de Madrid (CBMSO-UAM)

### Submitter
Cristina Sánchez González

### Lab Head
Dr Laura Formentini
1. Departamento de Biología Molecular, Centro de Biología Molecular ‘“Severo Ochoa’” (CBMSO), c/ Nicolás Cabrera 1, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain. 2. Centro de Investigación Biomédica en red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), ISCIII, Madrid, Spain. 3. Instituto de Investigación Hospital 12 de Octubre, i+12, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain. (lab head)


