### Accession
PXD015209

### Title
Cathepsin B and Cathepsin Z tumor secretome of murine breast cancers

### Description
MS-based proteomics study of the cancer secretome and tumor interstitial fluid of tumor cell/macrophage co-cultures and breast tumors in cells and mice lacking both cathepsin B and cathepsin Z

### Sample Protocol
The cell conditioned media (CCM) of co-cultures of tumor cells with macrophages lacking or not cathepsin B (CTSB) and cathepsin Z (CTSZ), as well the tumor interstial fluid (TIF) of murine breast tumors lacking or not CTSB and CTSZ was collected. TIF samples were depleted of the most highly abundant proteins using a Seppro spin column. All samples were precipitated, digested, and isotopically labeled by dimethylation. CCM samples and the first experimental sample from the TIF samples (AGA129-134) were pre-fractionated by strong-cation exchange chromatography and desalted. The rest of the TIF samples were fractionated by high pH reversed-phase fractionation followed by fractions concatenation (12 fractions); an unfractionated sample was also processed. Samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS with a QSTAR Elite (CCM samples) or a Q Exactive plus (TIF samples).

### Data Protocol
QSTAR analysis files (wiff) from CCM samples, were converted to mzXML using the mzWiff converter (v.4.3.1). Options included centroiding at MS and MS/MS level, deisotoping, and determining precursor charge for peptide and protein identification. For quantitation wiff files were converted to mzML with the ProteoWizard msconvert (v.3.0.10385). Obtained RAW files from the Q Exactive (TIF samples) were converted to mzML using the ProteoWizard converter. Peptide and protein identification was carried out using Comet (v.2018.01rev.1), X! Tandem (v.2013.06.15.1), and MSGF+ (v.2018.04.09). Two static searches, one for the light and one for the heavy formaldehyde modification were run. Cysteine carbamidomethylation and oxidation on methionine were employed as fixed and variable modifications, respectively.  The following parameters were used on QSTAR files: X! Tandem: 0.15 Da fragment monoisotopic mass error and plus 200, minus 100 ppm parent monoisotopic mass error were. Comet and MSGF+: precursor mass tolerance of 100 ppm.  For Q Exactive files: X! Tandem: 20 ppm fragment monoisotopic mass error and 10 ppm parent monoisotopic mass error. Comet and MSGF+: precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm.  In both analysis, no miss-cleavages were allowed (Comet and X! Tandem). Search results were processed with PeptideProphet (Trans-Proteomic Pipeline TPP v.5.1) and combined with iProphet. Protein inference was carried out using ProteinProphet. A 1% FDR at both peptide and protein level was used. Quantitation was done in OpenMS (2.3) using the FeatureFinderMultiplex tool, mapping the identified peptides (iProphet) with IDMapper, followed by IDConflictResolver and MultiplexResolver. Peptide and protein identification together with their corresponding abundances were assembled in R (v3.6.1). Only peptides without miss-cleavages were used.

### Publication Abstract
Previous clinical and experimental evidence strongly supports a breast cancer-promoting function of the lysosomal protease cathepsin B. However, the cathepsin B-dependent molecular pathways are not completely understood. Here, we studied the cathepsin-mediated secretome changes in the context of the MMTV-PyMT breast cancer mouse model. Employing the cell-conditioned media from tumor-macrophage co-cultures, as well as tumor interstitial fluid obtained by a novel strategy from PyMT mice with differential cathepsin B expression, we identified an important proteolytic and lysosomal signature, highlighting the importance of this organelle and these enzymes in the tumor micro-environment. The Cellular Repressor of E1A Stimulated Genes 1 (CREG1), a secreted endolysosomal glycoprotein, displayed reduced abundance upon over-expression of cathepsin B as well as increased abundance upon cathepsin B deletion or inhibition. Moreover, it was cleaved by cathepsin B in vitro. CREG1 reportedly could act as tumor suppressor. We show that treatment of PyMT tumor cells with recombinant CREG1 reduced proliferation, migration, and invasion; whereas, the opposite was observed with reduced CREG1 expression. This was further validated in vivo by orthotopic transplantation. Our study highlights CREG1 as a key player in tumor-stroma interaction and suggests that cathepsin B sustains malignant cell behavior by reducing the levels of the growth suppressor CREG1 in the tumor microenvironment.

### Keywords
Mouse, Tumor interstitial fluid, Secretome, Ccm

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute of Immunobiology and Epigenetics
Institute of Molecular Medicine and Cell Research, University of Freiburg, D-79104 Freiburg, Germany

### Submitter
Alejandro Gomez-Auli

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Reinheckel
Institute of Molecular Medicine and Cell Research, University of Freiburg, D-79104 Freiburg, Germany


