### Accession
PXD044519

### Title
sBioSITe enables sensitive identification of the cell surface proteome through direct enrichment of biotinylated peptides

### Description
Background: Cell surface proteins perform critical functions related to immune response, signal transduction, cell-cell interactions, and cell migration. Expression of specific cell surface proteins can determine cell-type identity, and can be altered in diseases including infections, cancer and genetic disorders. Identification of the cell surface proteome remains a challenge despite the development of several enrichment methods exploiting their biochemical and biophysical properties.   Methods: We report a novel method for enrichment of proteins localized to the cell surface. We developed surface Biotinylation Site Identification Technology (sBioSITe) by adapting our previously published method for direct identification of biotinylated peptides. The primary amine groups of lysines on cell surface proteins in live PC3 cells in culture were first labeled with biotin with subsequent enrichment of biotinylated peptides with anti-biotin antibodies. The enriched peptides containing biotin were analyzed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Biotinylated peptides identified in triplicate were mapped to proteins.  Results: By direct detection of biotinylated lysines using sBioSITe, we identified 5,851 peptides biotinylated on the cell surface derived from 1,409 proteins. 533 of these proteins have been previously shown or predicted to be localized to the cell surface, or secreted into the extracellular space. Importantly, several of the identified markers have known associations with prostate cancer and metastasis including CD59, epithelial growth factor receptor (EGFR), 4F2 cell-surface antigen heavy chain (SLC3A2) and Adhesion G protein-coupled receptor E5 (ADGRE5) thus highlighting the robustness of this method.   Conclusions: Detection of biotinylation sites on cell surface proteins modified in vitro provides a reliable method for the identification of cell surface proteins. This method is an excellent tool that complements existing methods for the analysis of surface expressed proteins in qualitative as well as comparative studies.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture and labeling of surface proteins  PC-3 cells were cultured in RPMI 1640 medium with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) and 1% penicillin-streptomycin to ~80% confluence in 15 cm dishes, with 4 dishes used per replicate. The medium was aspirated and the cells were washed thrice with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). The cells were then incubated in 10 ml of 0.4 mM of membrane-impermeant amine-reactive biotinylation agent sulfo-NHS-LC-biotin (APExBIO, Boston, MA) in ice-cold PBS for 30 min at 4 °C with gentle swirling of the dish once every 5 minutes. The solution was then discarded and the reaction quenched twice with 6 ml of 50 mM glycine in ice-cold PBS. The quenching solution was removed and the surface-labeled cells were gently scraped in 500 l of 50 mM glycine in PBS and collected in a 1.5 ml microcentrifuge tube. The tube was centrifuged at 300 x g for 5 minutes and supernatant was discarded. The cells were washed with ice-cold PBS twice and pelleted down by centrifugation at 300 x g for 5 minutes and the supernatant removed.   Protein extraction and digestion  Cell lysis was carried out in 500 l of modified radio-immunoprecipitation assay (mRIPA) buffer with probe sonication. The lysate was centrifuged at 14,000 x g for 5 minutes and the supernatant was collected as the protein fraction, and the pellet discarded. Bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay was performed to estimate protein amount. 6 mg of protein was taken from each replicate and prepared for digestion. Proteins were reduced with dithiothreitol (Sigma) at a final concentration of 10 mM for 45 min with mild shaking at 37 °C. The sample was then cooled to room temperature and alkylation was carried out with iodoacetamide (Sigma) at a final concentration of 40 mM by incubation at room temperature for 15 min in the dark. Sequencing grade trypsin was added to a final amount of 1:50 (trypsin : total protein), and the samples incubated overnight at 37 °C with mild shaking. The resulting peptides were desalted using TopTips (GlyGen), dried in a vacuum centrifuge and a quantitative colorimetric BCA assay was performed to estimate the amount of peptide.  Enrichment of biotinylated peptides  Biotinylated peptides were enriched using agarose immobilized rabbit anti-Biotin antibody (Bethyl laboratories, A150109A). First, the antibody-coupled beads were washed thrice with PBS and BioSITe capture buffer (50 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5% Triton X-100) thrice. Peptides were dissolved in 600 L of BioSITe capture buffer. After dissolving peptides, pH was adjusted to neutral (7.0 to 7.5) and peptide BCA was performed to estimate peptide concentration. Peptides were subsequently incubated with anti-biotin antibody- bound protein G beads for 2 h at 4 °C. The bead slurry was sequentially washed two times with BioSITe capture buffer, two times with 50 mM Tris, and two times with ultrapure water. Biotinylated peptides were eluted four times using elution buffer (80% acetonitrile and 0.2% trifluoroacetic acid in water). The eluent was further cleaned up using C18 reversed phase column as previously described.   LC-MS/MS analysis  Previously published LC-MS/MS parameters were used with some modifications. Briefly, samples enriched for biotinylated peptides were analyzed by Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated by liquid chromatography on an EASY-Spray column (75 µm × 50 cm, PepMap RSCL C18, Thermo Fisher Scientific) packed with 2 μm C18 particles, maintained at 50 °C. 0.1% formic acid in water (solvent A) and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (solvent B) were used as solvents. Peptides were trapped on a trap column (100 mm × 2 cm, Acclaim PepMap100 Nano-Trap, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 20 µl/min. LC separation was performed at a flow rate of 300 nl/min and the following gradient was used: equilibration at 5% solvent B from 0 to 10 min, 5% to 40% sol B from 10.1 to 125 min, 40% to 95% sol B from 125 to 137 minutes followed by equilibration for next run at 5% sol B for 13 min. Experiments were done in DDA mode with top 15 ions isolated at a window (m/z) of 1.2 and default charge state of +2. Precursors with charge states ranging from +2 to +5 were considered for MS/MS events. Normalized collision energy was applied to fragment precursors at energies of 30%. Precursor ions were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer in m/z range of 340-1,600 at a resolution of 120,000 (at m/z 200). Automatic gain control for MS and MS/MS were 106 and 105 and injection time to reach AGC were 50 ms and 250 ms respectively. Exclude isotopes feature was set to “on” and 20 s dynamic exclusion was applied. Data acquisition was performed with option of “lock mass” (m/z 441.12002) for all data.

### Data Protocol
Database searching was performed using Sequest HT on ProteomeDiscoverer 2.5. Uniprot Human Reviewed protein sequences (20,432 entries, downloaded February 1, 2021) were used as protein sequence FASTA file. Fully tryptic cleavage specificity with 4 missed cleavages was used and precursor and fragment tolerance were set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da respectively. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Biotinylation with NHS-LC-Biotin (+339.162 Da) was set as a variable modification at lysine (K). Target false discovery rate (FDR) target was set at 0.01. Minora feature detection was used for precursor ion quantitation. MS/MS spectra of all peptides identified with biotinylated lysine residues were filtered for those containing a signature ion of the biotin tag (m/z=340.1698 ± 10 ppm) and 22 peptides without this signature were removed from analysis. Peptides identified in all replicates were mapped to proteins and considered for further analysis as described.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Biotinylation, Biosite, Surfaceome, Label-free quantitation

### Affiliations
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 55905, United States

### Submitter
Akhilesh Pandey

### Lab Head
Dr Akhilesh Pandey, M.D., Ph.D.
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 55905, United States


