### Accession
PXD001940

### Title
Ramie LC-MSMS -  Isobaric Tags for Relative and Absolute Quantitation (iTRAQ)-Based Comparative Proteome Analysis of the Response of Ramie under Drought Stress

### Description
Ramie is an important natural fiber crop. Drought is an abiotic stress that strongly influences plant growth, development and productivity. There has been little research on the molecular mechanisms of ramie related to drought and then it is poorly understood. In this study, we conducted for the first time an iTRAQ-based (isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation) comparative proteomic analysis

### Sample Protocol
Digestion and iTRAQ labeling  Approximately 100μg protein for each sample was digested with trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) overnight at 37 °C in a 1:20 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio. After trypsin digestion, peptide was dried by vacuum centrifugation. Peptides was reconstituted in 0.5M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for 8-plex iTRAQ kit (Applied Biosystems). Briefly, one unit of iTRAQ reagent (defined as the amount of reagent required to label 100 μg of protein) was thawed and reconstituted in 70 μL isopropanol. Peptides from treatment and control subgroup were labeled with different iTRAQ tags respectively, by incubation at room temperature for 2 h. The peptide mixtures were then pooled and dried by vacuum centrifugation. The pooled mixtures of iTRAQ-labeled peptides were fractionated by SCX chromatography.  LC-ESI-MS/MS analysis Each fraction was resuspended in certain volume of buffer A (5% ACN, 0.1%FA) and centrifuged at 20000g for 10min. In each fraction, the final concentration of peptide was about 0.5ug/ul on average. 8μl supernatant was loaded on the Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system by the autosampler onto a C18 trap column at 8 μL/min for 4min and the peptides were eluted onto an analytical C18 column (inner diameter 75 μm) packed in-house. The 40 min gradient was run at 300 nL/min starting from 2 to 35% B (95%ACN, 0.1%FA), followed by 5 min linear gradient to 80%, and maintenance at 80% B for 4 min, and finally return to 5% in 1 min. The peptides were subjected to nanoelectrospray ionization followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in a nano-ESI LTQ-Velos Pro Orbitrap-Elite mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) coupled online to the UPLC. Intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 60 000. Peptides were selected for MS/MS using high energy colldision dissociation (HCD) operating mode with a normalized collision energy setting of 27.0 and stepped NCE of 12.0%; ion fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 15000. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 15 MS/MS scans was applied for the 15 most abundant precursor ions above a threshold ion count of 20000 in the MS survey scan with a following Dynamic Exclusion duration of 10 s. The electrospray voltage applied was 1.8 kV. The AGC target for full MS was 3e6 and 1e5 for MS2. For MS scans, the m/z scan range was 350 to 2000 Da.

### Data Protocol
The raw mass data were transferred to mgf.file with Proteome Discover 1.3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and then imported with in-house MASCOT software 2.3.02 (Matrix Science, London, U.K.) against the plant protein database of NCBI (national center for biotechnology information). In the database search, full tryptic specificity was required with tolerance set at one missed cleavage. Carbamido methylation of cysteine were set as fixed modifications. Gln->pyro-Glu of the N terminus, deamination of the N terminus, and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications. The initial precursor mass tolerance was set to 15 ppm, and the fragment ion level was set to 0.02 Da. iTRAQ 8-plex was set as quantitation. The cutoff value for the down-regulated proteins was 0.67-fold and for the up-regulated proteins was 1.5-fold.

### Publication Abstract
In this study, we conducted the first isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (<i>isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation</i> (iTRAQ))-based comparative proteomic analysis of ramie plantlets after 0 (minor drought stress), 24 (moderate drought stress), and 72 h (severe drought stress) of treatment with 15% (<i>w</i>/<i>v</i>) poly (ethylene glycol)6000 (PEG6000) to simulate drought stress. In our study, the association analysis of proteins and transcript expression revealed 1244 and 968 associated proteins identified in leaves and roots, respectively. L1, L2, and L3 are leaf samples which were harvested at 0, 24, and 72 h after being treated with 15% PEG6000, respectively. Among those treatment groups, a total of 118, 216, and 433 unique proteins were identified as differentially expressed during L1 vs. L2, L2 vs. L3, and L1 vs. L3, respectively. R1, R2, and R3 are root samples which were harvested at 0, 24, and 72 h after being treated with 15% PEG6000, respectively. Among those treatment groups&#xff0c;a total of 124, 27, and 240 unique proteins were identified as differentially expressed during R1 vs. R2, R2 vs. R3, and R1 vs. R3, respectively. Bioinformatics analysis indicated that glycolysis/gluconeogenesis was significantly upregulated in roots in response to drought stress. This enhancement may result in more glycolytically generated adenosine triphosphate (ATP) in roots to adapt to adverse environmental conditions. To obtain complementary information related to iTRAQ data, the mRNA levels of 12 proteins related to glycolysis/gluconeogenesis in leaves and 7 in roots were further analyzed by qPCR. Most of their expression levels were higher in R3 than R1 and R2, suggesting that these compounds may promote drought tolerance by modulating the production of available energy.

### Keywords
Plant proteomics, Drought stress, Ramie, Itraq, Seedlings

### Affiliations
Key Laboratory of Crop Ecophysiology and Farming Systems in the Middle Reaches of the Yangtze River, Ministry of Agriculture, P.R. China; College of Plant Science and Technology, Huazhong Agricultural University, 430070, Wuhan, Hubei, China
huazhongnongda

### Submitter
An Xia

### Lab Head
Dr Bo Wang
Key Laboratory of Crop Ecophysiology and Farming Systems in the Middle Reaches of the Yangtze River, Ministry of Agriculture, P.R. China; College of Plant Science and Technology, Huazhong Agricultural University, 430070, Wuhan, Hubei, China


