### Accession
PXD021367

### Title
The Impact of Blood-Processing Time on the Proteome of Human Peripheral Blood Mononuclear Cells

### Description
Human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) are key to several diagnostics assays and basic science research. Blood pre-analytical variations that occur before obtaining the PBMC fraction can have a significant impact on the results of the assays, including viability, composition, integrity, and gene expression changes of immune cells. With this as motivation, we performed a quantitative shotgun proteomics analysis using Isobaric Tag for Relative and Absolute Quantitation (iTRAQ 8plex) labeling to compare PBMC obtained from fresh versus 24h-stored blood at room temperature. We identified 3,195 proteins, of which 245 were differentially abundant. Our results revealed enriched pathways in the fresh-PBMC samples related to exocytosis, localization, vesicle-mediated transport, cell activation, and secretion. In contrast, pathways related to exocytosis, neutrophil degranulation and activation, granulocyte activation, leukocyte degranulation, and myeloid leukocyte activation involved in immune response were enriched in the 24h-PBMC samples, which may indicate probable granulocyte contamination and activation due to blood storage time and temperature. Examples of upregulated proteins in the 24h-PBMC sample are: CAMP, S100A8, LTA4H, RASAL3, and S100A6, which are involved in an adaptive immune system and antimicrobial activity, proinflammatory mediation, aminopeptidase activities, and naïve T cells survival.  Moreover, examples of downregulated proteins are: NDUFA5, TAGLN2, H3C1, TUBA8, and CCT2 that are related to the cytoskeleton, cell junction, mitochondrial respiratory chain. In conclusion, blood-processing time directly impacts the proteomic profile of human PBMC.

### Sample Protocol
2.3. Proteomic Preparation  The PBMCs proteins were extracted with RapiGestTM surfactant to a final concentration of 0.1%, at ratio of 1:2 (v/v for cells:surfactant). It is important to note that the RapiGest manufacturer's protocol recommended to resuspend it in 50 mM of ammonium bicarbonate, here we use triethylammonium bicarbonate in order not to interfere with the following iTRAQ labeling. PBMCs were lysed using by applying mechanical force with an insulin syringe was performed. Afterward, the proteins were centrifuged at 20.000 x g for 20 minutes at 4⁰C, and the protein content was quantified by a fluorometric assay using the Qubit® 2.0 platform according to the manufacturer's instructions.    Subsequently, two hundred micrograms of protein from each PBMCs sample were reduced with 10 mM of Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP) at 60 °C for 30 min. After that, all samples were cooled to room temperature and incubated in the dark with 30 mM of iodoacetamide (IAA) for 25 minutes. Finally, the samples were digested overnight (20 hours) with high sequence grade modified trypsin at a 1:50 (E/S) ratio at 37 °C.   After 20 hours, all samples were acidified with 10% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (0.5% v/v final concentration) and incubated for an additional 40 minutes at 37 °C to degrade the surfactant according to the manufacturer's instructions. Finally, the samples were centrifuged for 20 min at 20,000 x g at 20°C to remove insoluble materials.  2.4. Isobaric Tags for Relative and Absolute Quantitation Labeling  We used Isobaric Tags for Relative and Absolute Quantitation (iTRAQ® 8plex) for peptides labeling [18]. Thirty micrograms of tryptic peptides obtained from each PBMCs sample were labeled with the iTRAQ® reagents according to the manufacturer's directions. Briefly, for each iTRAQ® 8plex reagent vial, 70 μL of isopropanol was individually added at room temperature. Each vial was vortexed, and its contents were transferred to another tube containing thirty micrograms of digested peptides labeled as described in Table 1.   Table 1: Experimental design of the labeled PMCs from the four human healthy volunteers. A - Fresh PBMC and B - for 24h PBMC samples. SAMPLE iTRAQ reagent PBMCs of volunteer 1A 113 PBMCs of volunteer 2A 114 PBMCs of volunteer 3A 115 PBMCs of volunteer 4A 116 PBMCs of volunteer 1B 117 PBMCs of volunteer 2B 118 PBMCs of volunteer 3B 119 PBMCs of volunteer 4B 121  Subsequently, the samples were incubated for 2 hours at room temperature. The labeled peptides were combined into a single tube and concentrated by using a SpeedVac™ (Thermo Fischer Scientific). After that, peptides were desalted with a C18 spin column, according to the manufacturer's instructions.  2.5. Hydrophilic Interaction Chromatography (HILIC) of previously labeled peptides  One hundred micrograms of labeled peptides were loaded into a TSKgel® Amide-80 HPLC column (3 µm, 2 mm inner diameter x 5 cm length), using an LC­20AT HPLC instrument (Shimadzu Corporation; Kyoto, Japan). Peptides were fractionated in a gradient of 82 min and a flow rate of 0.2 ml/min. The gradient was 100% of phase A (TFA 0.1%) for 10 min, 0-12% phase B (90% Acetonitrile and 0.1%) for 2 min, 12-20% phase B for 30 min, 20-30% phase B for 30 min, 100% phase B for 5 min, and then back to 100% phase A for 5 min, resulting in 8 fractions obtained from the original peptide mixture.

### Data Protocol
2.7. Peptide Spectrum Matching – PSM  Our bioinformatic analysis followed the steps described in the PatternLab for proteomics (PL4) protocol (2); PL4 is freely available at http://www.patternlabforproteomics.org. Sequences from Homo sapiens were downloaded from the Swiss-Prot database on February 28th, 2020. A target-decoy database was generated using PatternLab to include a reversed version of each sequence found in the database plus those from 127 common mass spectrometry contaminants. The Comet [19] search engine (2016.01 rev. 3) version, available in PatternLab for proteomics 4, was used for comparing experimental spectra against those theoretically generated from the sequence database. The search was limited to fully and semi-tryptic peptide candidates and considered carbamidomethylation of cysteine and the iTRAQ-8 modification in the N-terminal and lysine (K) residues fixed modifications. The search engine accepted peptide candidates within a 40-ppm tolerance from the measured precursor m/z and used the XCorr as the primary search engine score.  2.8. Validation of PSMs  The Search Engine Processor (SEPro), built into PatternLab 4, was used for converging to a list of identifications with less than 1% of false discovery rate (FDR) at the protein level, as previously described [20]. Briefly, the identifications were grouped by charge state (2+ and ≥3+), and then by tryptic status, resulting in four distinct subgroups. For each group, the XCorr, DeltaCN, DeltaPPM, and Peaks Matched values were used to generate a Bayesian discriminator. The identifications were sorted in non-decreasing order according to the discriminator score. A cutoff score was established to accept a false-discovery rate (FDR) of 1% at the peptide level based on the number of labeled decoys [21]. This procedure was independently performed on each data subset, resulting in an FDR that was independent of charge state or tryptic status. Additionally, a minimum sequence length of six amino-acid residues was required. Results were post-processed to only accept peptide spectrum match (PSMs) with less than 10 ppm from the global identification average. One-hit wonders (i.e., proteins identified with only one mass spectrum) with the peptide having an XCorr of less than 2.0 were discarded. This last filter led to FDRs, now at the protein level, to be lower than 1% for all search results [22].  2.9. Relative quantitation of proteins  Chimera spectra, composed of two or more co-fragmenting peptides, produce artificial iTRAQ quantitation data; these spectra were identified and removed using YADA [23] as per PL4's protocol [24]. PL's Isobaric Analyzer module was used for pinpointing differentially abundant proteins when comparing time Fresh-A with time 24h-B.  For this, iTRAQ signal normalization was performed independently for each LC-MS/MS analysis and iTRAQ marker [24]. PL's normalization also calibrated reporter ions according to the software correction factors provided in the iTRAQ kit. Our proteomic comparison considered only proteins identified with two or more unique peptides (i.e., peptides that map to a single sequence in the database). Next, we performed Gene Ontology analysis of the identified proteins with an online PANTHER website, using a cutoff of p-value < 0.01 and FDR < 0.01 [25].

### Publication Abstract
Human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) are key to several diagnostics assays and basic science research. Blood pre-analytical variations that occur before obtaining the PBMC fraction can significantly impact the assays results, including viability, composition, integrity, and gene expression changes of immune cells. With this as motivation, we performed a quantitative shotgun proteomics analysis using Isobaric Tag for Relative and Absolute Quantitation (iTRAQ 8plex) labeling to compare PBMC obtained from 24&#xa0;h-stored blood at room temperature versus freshly isolated. We identified a total of 3195 proteins, of which 245 were differentially abundant (101 upregulated and 144 downregulated). Our results revealed enriched pathways of downregulated proteins related to exocytosis, localization, vesicle-mediated transport, cell activation, and secretion. In contrast, pathways related to exocytosis, neutrophil degranulation and activation, granulocyte activation, leukocyte degranulation, and myeloid leukocyte activation involved in immune response were enriched in upregulated proteins, which may indicate probable granulocyte contamination and activation due to blood storage time and temperature. Examples of upregulated proteins in the 24&#xa0;h-PBMC samples are CAMP, S100A8, LTA4H, RASAL3, and S100A6, which are involved in an adaptive immune system and antimicrobial activity, proinflammatory mediation, aminopeptidase activities, and na&#xef;ve T cells survival. Moreover, examples of downregulated proteins are NDUFA5, TAGLN2, H3C1, TUBA8, and CCT2 that are related to the cytoskeleton, cell junction, mitochondrial respiratory chain. In conclusion, the delay in blood-processing time directly impacts the proteomic profile of human PBMC, possibly through granulocyte contamination and activation.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Immunology., Itraq, Pbmc, Blood

### Affiliations
Computational Mass Spectrometry & Proteomics Group - Fiocruz
Laboratory for Structural and Computational Proteomics, Carlos Chagas Institute, Fiocruz–PR, Brazil.

### Submitter
Marlon D M Santos

### Lab Head
Dr Paulo Costa Carvalho
Laboratory for Structural and Computational Proteomics, Carlos Chagas Institute, Fiocruz–PR, Brazil.


