### Accession
PXD024790

### Title
LC-MSMS of Extracellular Vesicles Derived from Human Mesenchymal Stem Cells after Priming

### Description
The purpose of the study was to determine whether priming with poly(I:C) altered the protein content of extracellular vesicles (EVs) released from bone marrow-derived MSCs and whether priming with hydrogen peroxide altered the protein content of EVs from adipose-derived MSCs

### Sample Protocol
Samples were analyzed by LC-MS using Nano LC-MS (Dionex Ultimate 3000 RLSCnano System) interfaced wutg Eclipse Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermofisher).

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed with Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermofisher) and mapped to SwissProt Human and to a database of common lab contaminants. The Percolator node in the processing workflow was used for results validation. A concatenated reverse database was used as a target-decoy search strategy. Data were filtered using 1% protein and peptide false discovery rate and requiring at least 2 unique peptides per protein. A label-free quantification method based on the Minora algorithm was used for chromatographic feature detection, and protein abundance was calculated using summed abundance of all peptides for that sample.

### Publication Abstract
Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) help fight infection by promoting direct bacterial killing or indirectly by modulating the acute phase response, thereby decreasing tissue injury. Recent evidence suggests that extracellular vesicles (EVs) released from MSCs retain antimicrobial characteristics that may be enhanced by pretreatment of parent MSCs with the toll-like receptor 3 (TLR3) agonist poly(I:C). Our aim was to determine whether poly(I:C) priming can modify EV content of miRNAs and/or proteins to gain insight into the molecular mechanisms of their enhanced antimicrobial function. Human bone marrow-derived MSCs were cultured with or without 1 &#x3bc;g/ml poly(I:C) for 1 h and then conditioned media was collected after 64 h of culture in EV-depleted media. Mass spectrometry and small RNA next-generation sequencing were performed to compare proteomic and miRNA profiles. Poly(I:C) priming resulted in 49 upregulated EV proteins, with 21 known to be important in host defense and innate immunity. In contrast, EV miRNA content was not significantly altered. Functional annotation clustering analysis revealed enrichment in biological processes and pathways including negative regulation of endopeptidase activity, acute phase, complement and coagulation cascades, innate immunity, immune response, and <i>Staphylococcus aureus</i> infection. Several antimicrobial peptides identified in EVs remained unaltered by poly(I:C) priming, including dermcidin, lactoferrin, lipocalin 1, lysozyme C, neutrophil defensin 1, S100A7 (psoriasin), S100A8/A9 (calprotectin), and histone H4. Although TLR3 activation of MSCs improves the proteomic profile of EVs, further investigation is needed to determine the relative importance of particular functional EV proteins and their activated signaling pathways following EV interaction with immune cells.

### Keywords
Human, Hydrogen peroxide, Lc-msms, Poly(i:c), Orbitrap eclipse, Extracellular vesicles, Priming, Mesenchymal stem cells

### Affiliations
Tripler Army Medical Center
Tripler Army Medical Center, USA

### Submitter
Lisa Pierce

### Lab Head
Dr Lisa M. Pierce
Tripler Army Medical Center, USA


