### Accession
PXD007139

### Title
N-terminomic analysis of RPE secretome

### Description
Identification of HtrA1 substrate in the context of RPE secretome

### Sample Protocol
Conditional cell medium were harvested from RPE overexpressing empty vector, active HtrA1 or inactive HtrA1. After free amine of lysine and N-terminal were stable labeled with isotopic formadehyde, samples were 1:1:1 mixed, trypsined, enriched and desalted.

### Data Protocol
Sample were measured by Thermo Q-exactive Mass spectrometer and data were analyzed by TPP.

### Publication Abstract
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is the leading cause of irreversible blindness in the elderly population. Variants in the HTRA1-ARMS2 locus have been linked to increased AMD risk. In the present study we investigated the impact of elevated HtrA1 levels on the retina pigment epithelial (RPE) secretome using a polarized culture system. Upregulation of HtrA1 alters the abundance of key proteins involved in angiogenesis and extracellular matrix remodeling. Thrombospondin-1, an angiogenesis modulator, was identified as a substrate for HtrA1 using terminal amine isotope labeling of substrates in conjunction with HtrA1 specificity profiling. HtrA1 cleavage of thrombospondin-1 was further corroborated by in vitro cleavage assays and targeted proteomics together with small molecule inhibition of HtrA1. While thrombospondin-1 is anti-angiogenic, the proteolytically released N-terminal fragment promotes the formation of tube-like structure by endothelial cells. Taken together, our findings suggest a mechanism by which increased levels of HtrA1 may contribute to AMD pathogenesis. The proteomic data has been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the data set identifier. For quantitative secretome analysis, project accession: PXD007691, username: reviewer45093@ebi.ac.uk, password: 1FUpS6Yq. For TAILS analysis, project accession: PXD007139, username: reviewer76731@ebi.ac.uk, password: sNbMp7xK.

### Keywords
Human rpe, Htra1

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Medicine and Cell Research, University Freiburg

### Submitter
Chia-yi Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Oliver Schilling
Institute of Molecular Medicine and Cell Research, University Freiburg


