### Accession
PXD022664

### Title
A commercial antibody to the human condensin II subunit NCAPH2 cross-reacts with a SWI/SNF complex component

### Description
Condensin complexes compact and disentangle chromosomes in preparation for cell division. Commercially available antibodies raised against condensin subunits have been widely used to characterise their cellular interactome. Here we have assessed the specificity of a polyclonal antibody (Bethyl A302-276A) that is commonly used as a probe for NCAPH2, the kleisin subunit of condensin II, in mammalian cells. We find that, in addition to its intended target, this antibody cross-reacts with one or more components of the SWI/SNF family of chromatin remodelling complexes in an NCAPH2-independent manner. This cross-reactivity with an abundant chromatin-associated factor is likely to affect the interpretation of protein and chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments that make use of this antibody probe.

### Sample Protocol
trypsinised suspensions of E14 mESC (WT or NCAPH2-FLAG) were lysed in 1% triton buffer (20mM Tris-HCl, 137mM NaCl, 1% triton X-100, 2mM EDTA, protease inhibitors (Calbiochem), phosphatase inhibitors (Roche)). Protein concentration was quantified using a Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo, 23228) following manufacturer’s instructions. 1mg of total protein was used for immunoprecipitation, which was performed on a Kingfisher Duo robot using 1µg of antibody, magnetic beads, and 500µl of lysate at 2mg/mL. Lysate, antibodies and beads were incubated with mixing at 5 °C for 2 hours, then beads were transferred for two washes in lysis buffer without detergent, and three washes in TBS.   Tryptic digest (2M urea, 100 mM tris, 1 mM DTT, 5µg/mL trypsin), was overnight.  Peptides were separated and ionised on Ultimate 3000 series Nano UHPLC using a C18 RP packed emitter in a column oven (IonOpticks, Sonation, Proxeon). Ionised peptides were analysed on a Q Exactive Plus (Thermo) in data-dependent mode.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched against the 2018_01 release of Uniprot mouse reference proteome using MaxQuant version 1.6.1.0, with LFQ (Cox et al. 2014). Statistical analysis was conducted using Wasim Aftab’s implementation of Kammers et al 2015 (https://github.com/wasimaftab; (Kammers et al. 2015)).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ncaph2, Swi/snf, Antibody, Cross-react, Condensin

### Affiliations
University of Edinburgh
MRC Human Genetics Unit, Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, The University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, EH4 2XU, UK

### Submitter
Jimi Wills

### Lab Head
Dr Andrew J Wood
MRC Human Genetics Unit, Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, The University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, EH4 2XU, UK


