### Accession
PXD002707

### Title
LC-MS/MS analysis of IαI proteoglycopeptides

### Description
The inter-alpha-trypsin inhibitor (IαI) complex is a macromolecular arrangement of structurally related heavy chain proteins covalently cross-linked to the chondroitin sulfate (CS) chain of the proteoglycan bikunin. The IαI complex is abundant in plasma and associated with inflammation, kidney diseases, cancer and diabetes. Bikunin is modified at Ser-10 by a single low-sulfated CS chain of 23-55 monosaccharides with 4-9 sulfate groups. The innermost four monosaccharides (GlcA3Gal3Gal4Xyl-O-) compose the linkage region, believed to be uniform with a 4-O-sulfation to the outer Gal. The cross-linkage region of the bikunin CS chain is located in the non-sulfated non-reducing end, (GalNAc4GlcA3)n ,to which heavy chains (H1-H3) may be bound in GalNAc to Asp ester linkages. In this study we employed a glycoproteomics protocol to enrich and analyze light and heavy chain linkage and cross-linkage region CS glycopeptides derived from the IαI complex of human plasma, urine and cerebrospinal fluid samples. The samples were trypsinized, enriched by strong anion exchange chromatography, partially depolymerized with chondroitinase ABC and analyzed by LC-MS/MS using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD). The analyses demonstrated that the CS linkage region of bikunin is highly heterogeneous. In addition to sulfation of the Gal residue, Xyl phosphorylation was observed although exclusively in urinary samples. We also identified novel Neu5Ac and Fuc modifications of the linkage region as well as the presence of mono- and disialylated core 1 O-linked glycans on Thr-17. Heavy chains H1 and H2 were identified cross-linked to GalNAc residues one or two GlcA residues apart and H1 was found linked to either the terminal or subterminal two GalNAc residues. The fragmentation behavior of CS glycopeptides under variable HCD conditions displays an energy dependency that may be used to obtain complementary structural details. Finally, we show that the analysis of sodium adducts provides confirmatory information about the positions of glycan substituents.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation and enrichment of linkage region glycopeptides was conducted essentially as already published (20) although with some minor modifications. Briefly, plasma samples were treated with ProteoPrep Immunoaffinity Albumin and IgG Depletion Kit (PROTIA, Sigma-Aldrich, Saint Louis, USA) according to the manufacturer’s specifications. Urine samples were mixed with SDS to a final concentration of 0.1% and run through a PD-10 column (GE Healthcare) using 0.1% SDS. The eluted samples were thereafter run through a second PD-10 column, equilibrated in dH2O, to remove the SDS. CSF, urine and depleted plasma samples (initial volumes of 2 mL, 8 mL and 100 μL, respectively) were lyophilized and reduced with 10 mM DTT for 1h at 56 ºC. Alkylation was conducted with 55 mM iodoacetamide for 45 min, in darkness at room temperature. Thereafter, the samples were digested overnight with sequence grade porcine trypsin (Promega). The trypsin-digested samples were diluted in 10 mL coupling buffer (50 mM sodium acetate, 200 mM NaCl, pH 4.0) and loaded onto a SAX spin column (Vivapure, Q Mini H). Samples were washed (50 mM Tris-HCl, 200 mM NaCl, pH 8.0) and the flow through and wash fractions were set aside. GAG-modified peptides were eluted in three steps in 50 mM Tris-HCl buffer pH 8 (0.4 M, 0.8 M and 1.6 M NaCl). The three fractions were collected, desalted and subjected to chondroitinase ABC treatment (Sigma-Aldrich, Saint-Louis, MO, USA). Depolymerization of the CS chains was conducted either for 1h at 37 ºC to achieve partial degradation of the glycosaminoglycan or for complete degradation, overnight at 37 ºC. The samples were then purified using C18 spin column (Pierce), according to the manufacturer’s protocol, and lyophilized pending MS/MS analysis. The day of analysis the samples were reconstituted in 0.2% formic acid in water containing 5% acetonitrile. For nLC-MS/MS analysis with sodium adducts, stock solution of 5 M sodium acetate and 5 M formic acid in water was used for preparing a fresh 500 mM sodium formate solution directly pipetted into the MS vials. nLC-MS/MS analysis The samples were analyzed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer coupled onto an Easy-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc., Waltham, MA, USA). Ions were injected into the mass spectrometer under a spray voltage of 1.6 kV in positive ion mode. MS precursor scans were performed at 70 000 resolution (at m/z 200), an Automatic Gain Control (AGC)- target value of 3×106 with a mass range of m/z 600-2000. MS2 spectra were generated by HCD of the six largest precursor peaks using an isolation window of m/z 2.0 at a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 20 and 30% using profile mode at a resolution of 35 000. A dynamic exclusion of 30 s was used. Glycopeptides (10 μL injection volume) were separated using an in-house constructed trap column and analytical column set up (45x0.075 14 mm I.D and 200x0.050 mm I.D., respectively) packed with 3 μm Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ particles (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany). The following gradient was run at about 150 nL/min; 7-37 % B-solvent (acetonitrile in 0.2% formic acid) over 60 min, 37-80 % B over 5 min with a final hold at 80 % B for 10 min.

### Data Protocol
Peptide search specifications: Mascot distiller (version 2.3.2.0, Matrix Science) was used to convert .raw spectra into singly protonated peak lists in .mgf format. Searches were performed against Homo sapiens (20 209 entries) in the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database (546 000 entries, 194 259 968 residues) using an in-house Mascot server (version 2.3.02). The following constraints were applied: MS tolerance, 10 ppm; MS/MS tolerance 0.1 Da; enzyme, trypsin or semi-trypsin with 1 or 2 missed cleavages allowed; fixed carbamidomethyl modifications of Cys residues and variable Met oxidation. Glycosaminoglycan search specifications: Variable modifications corresponding to CSlinkage regions on Ser residues were defined as their predicted chondroitinase ABC cleavage products: [ΔGlcAGalNAcGlcAGalGalXyl] without sulfate (C37H55NO30, 993.2809 Da), with one (C37H55NO33S, 1073.2377 Da) or two (C37H55NO36S2, 1153.1945 Da) sulfate groups attached. Loss of these masses for b- and y-ions including the arbitrarily assigned glycosylation site was also specified. In separate searches, the allowed modification of ΔGlcAGalNAc and ΔGlcAGalNAcGlcAGalNAc were included. For these modifications, the neutral loss of ΔGlcAGalNAc and ΔGlcAGalNAcGlcAGalNAc, minus the mass of an acetyl group, were added. The acetyl shift (42.01 amu) was used since we experimentally observed fragmentation-generated acetylation of the y-ions including the C-terminal glycosylation site. Since the database employed (UniProtKB) does not contain known processing sites, and to potentially identify novel proteins cross-linked to the CS chain, these searches were performed using semitrypsin to allow for the identification of non-tryptic C-terminal Asp of any cross- linking glycopeptide. For the beta-eliminated samples, the allowed modification of methylamine (–O, +NCH3, +13.0316 amu) on Ser and Thr residues was used in the Mascot search.

### Publication Abstract
The inter-&#x3b1;-trypsin inhibitor complex is a macromolecular arrangement of structurally related heavy chain proteins covalently cross-linked to the chondroitin sulfate (CS) chain of the proteoglycan bikunin. The inter-&#x3b1;-trypsin inhibitor complex is abundant in plasma and associated with inflammation, kidney diseases, cancer and diabetes. Bikunin is modified at Ser-10 by a single low-sulfated CS chain of 23-55 monosaccharides with 4-9 sulfate groups. The innermost four monosaccharides (GlcA&#x3b2;3Gal&#x3b2;3Gal&#x3b2;4Xyl&#x3b2;-O-) compose the linkage region, believed to be uniform with a 4-O-sulfation to the outer Gal. The cross-linkage region of the bikunin CS chain is located in the nonsulfated nonreducing end, (GalNAc&#x3b2;4GlcA&#x3b2;3)(n), to which heavy chains (H1-H3) may be bound in GalNAc to Asp ester linkages. In this study we employed a glycoproteomics protocol to enrich and analyze light and heavy chain linkage and cross-linkage region CS glycopeptides derived from the I&#x3b1;I complex of human plasma, urine and cerebrospinal fluid samples. The samples were trypsinized, enriched by strong anion exchange chromatography, partially depolymerized with chondroitinase ABC and analyzed by LC-MS/MS using higher-energy collisional dissociation. The analyses demonstrated that the CS linkage region of bikunin is highly heterogeneous. In addition to sulfation of the Gal residue, Xyl phosphorylation was observed although exclusively in urinary samples. We also identified novel Neu5Ac and Fuc modifications of the linkage region as well as the presence of mono- and disialylated core 1 O-linked glycans on Thr-17. Heavy chains H1 and H2 were identified cross-linked to GalNAc residues one or two GlcA residues apart and H1 was found linked to either the terminal or subterminal GalNAc residues. The fragmentation behavior of CS glycopeptides under variable higher-energy collisional dissociation conditions displays an energy dependence that may be used to obtain complementary structural details. Finally, we show that the analysis of sodium adducts provides confirmatory information about the positions of glycan substituents.

### Keywords
Proteoglycan, Protein ambp, Chondroitin sulfate, Linkage region, Mass spectrometry, Heavy chain

### Affiliations
UCSD
Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg

### Submitter
Alejandro Gómez

### Lab Head
Dr Göran Larson
Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg


