### Accession
PXD006813

### Title
Bladder Tumours O-Glycoproteomics

### Description
Bladder carcinogenesis and tumour progression is accompanied by profound alterations in protein glycosylation. These include the presence of short chain O-glycans such as Tn and T antigens and their sialylated counterparts sialyl-Tn(STn) and sialyl-T(ST). The presence of such structures is commonly associated with poor prognosis. In search for prognosis biomarkers and novel therapeutic targets we have screened, using immunohistochemistry, a series of bladder tumours with differing clinicopathology for these short-chain O-glycans. Aiming at identifying protein targets, we have studied the O-glycoproteome of a pool of STn positive tumours from muscle invasive bladder cancer (MIBC) patients.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from FFPE STn-positive bladder tumours of male MIBC patients (n = 5) using Qproteome FFPE tissue kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) expressing the STn antigen, determined by immunohistochemistry. Approximately 1 mg of total protein was precipitated by the addition of four volumes of -20 °C acetone to a sample extract and dried under vacuum on a speedvac. The extract was resuspended in 0.05% RapiGest (Waters, Milford, MA, USA), digested with PNGase F (10 U PNGase F from Elizabethkingia meningoseptica; Sigma Aldrich) to remove N-glycans, facilitating downstream trypsin digestion and peptide identification. Subsequently, the extract was subjected to neuraminidase treatment [10 U C. perfringens neuraminidase type VI (Sigma Aldrich)] to remove neuraminic acids from STn, thereby exposing the GalNAc residue (Tn antigen). The sample was then loaded on 300 lL of agarose-bound Vicia villosa agglutinin (VVA; Vector Laboratories) column to enrich the extract in Tn-expressing glycoproteins. The column was then washed with 10 column volumes of 0.4 M glucose in LAC A buffer (20 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1 M urea, 1 mM CaCl2, MgCl2, MnCl2 and ZnCl2) followed by 1 mL 50 mM NH4HCO3 (all reagents were purchased from Sigma Aldrich). The glycoproteins were then eluted by 4 x 500 µL 0.05% RapiGest (Waters) with heating to 90 °C for 10 min. The glycoprotein fraction was then directly reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin. Protein identification was obtained by a conventional mass spectrometry based proteomics bottom-up shot-gun approach. A nanoLC system (3000 Ultimate nano-LC; Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) was coupled online to a LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source (EASY-Spray source; Thermo Scientific). Eluent A was aqueous formic acid (0.2%), and eluent B was formic acid (0.2%) in acetonitrile. Samples (20 µL) were injected directly into a trapping column (C18 PepMap 100, 5 µm particle size) and washed over with an isocratic flux of 95% eluent A and 5% eluent B at a flow rate of 30 µL/min. After 3 min, the flux was redirected to the analytical column (EASY-Spray C18 PepMap, 100 Å, 150 mm x 75 µm ID and 3 µm particle size) at a flow rate of 0.3 µL/min. Column temperature was set at 35 °C. Peptide separation occurred using a linear gradient of 5–40% eluent B over 117 min, 50–90% eluent B over 5 and 5 min with 90% eluent B. In order to favour the separation and identification of peptides presenting high hydrophobicity, samples were also analysed with a two-step gradient protocol: 5–35% eluent B over 37 min, 35–65% eluent B over 80 min, followed by 65–90% eluent B over 5 min and 5 min with 90% buffer B. 2 analytical replicates were obtained in each elution protocol. The mass spectrometer was operated in the positive ion mode, with a spray voltage of 1.9 kV and a transfer capillary temperature of 250 °C. Tube lens voltage was set to 120 V. MS survey scans were acquired at an Orbitrap resolution of 60 000 for an m/z range from 300 to 2000. Tandem MS (MS/MS) data were acquired in the linear ion trap using a data-dependent method with dynamic exclusion: the top six most intense ions were selected for collision induced dissociation (CID). CID settings were 35% normalized collision energy, 2-Da isolation window, 30-ms activation time, and an activation Q of 0.250. A window of 90 s was used for dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control was enabled and target values were 1.00e+6 for the Orbitrap and 1.00e+4 for LTQ MSn analysis. Data were recorded with XCALIBUR software version 2.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Data were analysed automatically using the SequestHT search engine with the Percolator algorithm for validation of protein identifications (Proteome Discoverer 1.4; Thermo Scientific). The four data files were combined in a single search using the Proteome Discoverer Daemon. Data were searched against the human proteome obtained from the SwissProt database on 22/11/2015, selecting trypsin as the enzyme and allowing for up to two missed cleavage sites, a precursor ion mass tolerance of 10 p.p.m. and 0.6 Da for product ions. Carbamidomethylcysteine was selected as a fixed modification, while oxidation of methionine (+15.994u) and modification of serine and threonine with HexNAc (Tn) (+203.08u), HexHexNAc (T) (+365.13u) were defined as variable modifications. Sequest results of low confidence peptides were also considered. Protein grouping filters were set to consider glycosylations with low confidence and ΔCn lower than 0.05. The strict maximum parsimony principle was applied. A protein filter counting peptides only on top-scored proteins was also set. Peptides were filtered for Xcorr ≥ 1.0.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bladder cancer; glycoproteomics; siaic acids; stn

### Affiliations
REQUIMTE/LAQV, Departamento de Química e Bioquímica, Faculdade de Ciências, Universidade do Porto, Portugal
Experimental Pathology and Therapeutics Group, Portuguese Institute of Oncology, Porto, Portugal

### Submitter
André Silva

### Lab Head
Dr José Alexandre Ferreira
Experimental Pathology and Therapeutics Group, Portuguese Institute of Oncology, Porto, Portugal


