### Accession
PXD007783

### Title
Immunoproteomic analysis of the excretory-secretory products of the Trichinella pseudospiralis adult worms and newborn larvae

### Description
In this study, we used Two-dimensional gel electrophoresis (2-DE)-based Western blotting coupled with MALDI-TOF / TOF-MS / MS to separate and identify the T. pseudospiralis adult worms (Ad) ES products immunoreaction-positive proteins. In total, 400 protein spots were separated by 2-DE. 28 protein spots were successfully identified using the sera from infected pigs and were characterized to correlate with twelve different proteins of T. pseudospiralis.

### Sample Protocol
T. pseudospiralis (ISS13) ML were isolated by pepsin-HCl digestion from infected mice at 30 days. Ad and NBL were isolated from the infected mouse intestines at 6 days postinfection (dpi) .Trichinella pseudospiralis-infected pig sera were collected from 4 pigs orally infected with 10,000 ML / pig for 26 days. Uninfected sera from the same pigs before infection were collected as negative controls.

### Data Protocol
All mass spectra data were analysed using Mascot software. Mascot adopts a probabilistic scoring algorithm for the identification of proteins, which was adapted from MOWSE algorithm. A p<0.05 was considered as statistically significant.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Trichinella pseudospiralis, Maldi-tof / tof-ms / ms, Immunoproteomics, Excretory-secretory proteins

### Affiliations
student
Key Laboratory of Zoonosis Research, Ministry of Education, Institute of Zoonosis/ College of Veterinary Medicine,Jilin University, Changchun, China.

### Submitter
yang wang

### Lab Head
Dr ming yuan liu
Key Laboratory of Zoonosis Research, Ministry of Education, Institute of Zoonosis/ College of Veterinary Medicine,Jilin University, Changchun, China.


