### Accession
PXD019102

### Title
Screen Identifies DYRK1B Network as Mediator of Transcription Repression on Damaged Chromatin

### Description
The uploaded data are described within "Screen Identifies DYRK1B Network as Mediator of Transcription Repression on Damaged Chromatin". In short, peptides from RPE1 epithelial cells with either normal expression of DYRK1B, over expression, of knockout of the kinase were TMT11 plex labeled and enriched by tandem phosphopeptide enrichment.

### Sample Protocol
Parental RPE1, RPE1 TRE-DYRK1B-SFB, RPE1-DYRK1B-control, RPE1 DYRK1B KO#1, and RPE1 DYRK1B KO#2 were cultured in DMEM supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum and 1% Penicillin and Streptomycin. RPE1 TRE-DYRK1B-SFB cells were induced with 1µg/mL doxycycline for 36 hours prior to harvesting.  Cells were harvested by trypsin, washed with PBS, flash frozen and stored at -80ºC until needed. Frozen cell pellets were thawed on ice and resuspended in lysis buffer (2% SDS, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6) supplemented with fresh protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Pierce) and incubated on ice for 20 minutes. Viscosity of the samples was reduced using QIAshredders (Qiagen). Briefly, the lysed samples were applied to the QIAshredder spin column and centrifuged at 16,000 x g for 5 minutes. Protein concentration within the flowthrough was then quantified using a BCA protein assay (Pierce). Volumes equivalent to 300µg protein were aliquoted into a fresh 1.5 mL tube and volume adjusted to 100µL using lysis buffer. Proteins were reduced by addition of TCEP to a final concentration of 5 mM for 30 minutes at 37ºC. The free cysteine residues were alkylated by incubating with 10 mM iodoacetimide for 30 minutes protected from light.  Proteins were then extracted by chloroform methanol extraction modified. The samples were then dried in a SpeedVac. The samples were then resuspended in 300 µL of 100 mM Triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) and sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) in a protein:trypsin ration of 50:1. Samples were tryptically digested overnight at 37ºC. The following day the samples were acidified to 0.1% formic acid. Acidified samples were desalted using a Water’s C18 Sep-PaK and dried using a SpeedVac. Dried peptide samples were resuspended in 100µl 100 mM TEAB. 120µg of peptide for each sample was used for labeling and 10µL of each sample was combined to create a pooled sample for normalization between batches. 11-plex TMT labels were equilibrated to room temperature and centrifuged prior to resuspension in 60 µL acetonitrile. 30µL of TMT label was added to a unique sample see experimental design template and incubated at room temperature for 1 hour. The labeling reaction was quenched by addition of 8µL 5% hydroxylamine and incubation for 15 minutes at room temperature. 5µl of each labeled sample were combined and analyzed by mass spectrometry to check for proper mixing. Mixing was adjusted according to the results and the combined samples were desalted by Waters C18 Sep-Pak and dried by SpeedVac. Pooled TMT-labeled, tryptic peptides previously dried by SpeedVac were resuspended in phosphopeptide binding/wash buffer from the High-Select TiO2 Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit (Pierce) and processed for enrichment. The flowthrough from the TiO2 column was applied to a second phosphopeptide enrichment kit, the High-Select Fe-NTA Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit (Pierce) and the eluates of both kits were dried immediately following elution to prevent loss of phosphopeptides due to the high pH. Eluates from both kits were resuspended in basic buffer A (10 mM ammonium hydroxide, pH 10) and were separated into 36 fractions on a 100 x 1.0 mm Acquity BEH C18 column (Waters) using an UltiMate 3000 UHPLC system (Thermo) with a 40 min gradient from 99:1 to 60:40 basic buffer A:B ratio (buffer B: 10 mM ammonium hydroxide, 99.9% acetonitrile, pH 10), and then consolidated into 18 super-fractions. Each super-fraction from off-line bHPLC  was further separated by reverse phase Jupiter Proteo resin (Phenomenex) on an in-line 200 x 0.075 mm column using a nanoAcquity UPLC  system (Waters).  Peptides were eluted using a 95 min gradient from 97:3 to 67:33 buffer A:B ratio, (Buffer A: 0.1% formic acid, 0.5% acetonitrile, Buffer B: 0.1% formic acid, 99.9% acetonitrile) .  Eluted peptides were ionized by electrospray (2.15 kV) followed by mass spectrometric analysis on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo) using multi-notch MS3 parameters.  MS data were acquired using the FTMS analyzer in top-speed profile mode at a resolution of 120,000 over a range of 375 to 1500 m/z.  Following CID activation with normalized collision energy of 35.0, MS/MS data were acquired using the ion trap analyzer in centroid mode over a range of 400-2000 m/z.  Using synchronous precursor selection, up to 10 MS/MS precursors were selected for HCD activation with normalized collision energy of 65.0, followed by acquisition of MS3 reporter ion data using the FTMS analyzer in profile mode at a resolution of 50,000 over a range of 100-500 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Phosphopeptides were identified and reporter ions quantified using MaxQuant (Max Planck Institute) with a parent ion tolerance of 3 ppm, a fragment ion tolerance of 0.5 Da, and a reporter ion tolerance of 0.001 Da. Oxidation of methionine and STY phosphorylation were searched as variable modifications, and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues and TMT-10plex labeling of lysine residues and N-termini of peptides were set as fixed modifications. The data was searched against the human UniProt database UP000005640 (74,458 proteins and added known contaminants). MaxQuant data was further analyzed using R, and the packages LIMMA, ggplot2, and heatmaply. A significance criteria of LIMMA Adjusted P-Value < 0.05 and a Log2 Fold Change of ≥ 1 was employed to produce a “significantly enriched phosphopeptide” list for each groupwise comparison. Pathway analysis was performed on the enriched phosphopeptides for each group using the webtool Enrichr.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Cell culture, Phosphopeptide, Tmt, Epithelial

### Affiliations
Department of Radiation Oncology, College of Medicine, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR 72205, USA
University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences

### Submitter
Kirk West

### Lab Head
Dr Justin Wai Chung Leung
Department of Radiation Oncology, College of Medicine, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR 72205, USA


