### Accession
PXD039546

### Title
Proteome characterization of germ cell tumor-related somatic-type malignancies for the identification of tissue origin, cisplatin resistance mechanisms, and putative therapeutic options

### Description
Germ cell tumors (GCT) can be distinguished into seminoma and non-seminoma. The latter comprises embryonal carcinoma, which can further differentiate into choriocarcinoma, teratoma (TER), and yolk-sac tumors (YST). However, GCT can transform into a somatic-type malignancy (STM), eventually resulting in an unfavorable outcome. This study aimed at enlightening the molecular mechanisms leading to STM formation by comparing them to TER and YST as presumable tissues of origin, thereby paving the way for the identification of novel druggable targets.

### Sample Protocol
FFPE tissues were deparaffinized in Xylene, resuspended in lysis buffer (300 mM TRIS / HCl, 2 % SDS, pH 8.0), shock-frozen in liquid nitrogen and heated at 99 °C for 25 minutes. Subsequently, tissues were ultrasonicated and centrifuged. Protein concentration of supernatants was determined by the Pierce 660 nm Protein Assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific) before being subjected to LC-MS.

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed with Proteome Discoverer 2.4.1.15 by using a standard SequestHT LFQ workflow with a precursor mass toletance of 10 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.6 Da. The databases used for the search were the homo sapiens database (downloaded 23. Jan 2020) and the Maxquant contaminants (downloaded 20. Jan 2021). As modifications the methionine oxidation, N-terminal acetylation, N-terminal methionine loss and N-terminal methionine loss combined with acetylation were set as dynamic modification and the Carbamidomethylation was set as static modification. The enzyme used for digestion was trypsin and for this a maximum missed cleavage of 2 was set for the search.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Somatic-type malignancy, Therapy resistance, Germ cell tumors, Yolk-sac tumors

### Affiliations
Molecular Proteomics Laboratory
Molecular proteomics laboratory (MPL), Institut für Molekulare Medizin, Medizinische Fakultät, Heinrich-Heine-Universität, Universitätsstraße 1, D-40225 Düsseldorf

### Submitter
Stella Pauls

### Lab Head
Dr Kai Stühler
Molecular proteomics laboratory (MPL), Institut für Molekulare Medizin, Medizinische Fakultät, Heinrich-Heine-Universität, Universitätsstraße 1, D-40225 Düsseldorf


