### Accession
PXD019697

### Title
Mitochondrial regulation of the 26S proteasome

### Description
The proteasome is the main proteolytic system for targeted protein degradation in the cell. Its function is fine-tuned according to cellular needs. Inhibition of the respiratory chain impairs proteasome activity, regulation of proteasome function by mitochondrial metabolism, however, is unknown.  Here, we demonstrate that mitochondrial dysfunction reduces the assembly and activity of the 26S proteasome. Defects in respiratory chain caused metabolic reprogramming of the Krebs cycle and deficiency in the amino acid aspartate resulting in reduced 26S proteasome function. Aspartate supplementation fully restored assembly and activity of 26S proteasome complexes. This metabolic reprogramming involved sensing of aspartate via the mTORC1 pathway and the mTORC1-dependent transcriptional activation of defined proteasome assembly factors. Metabolic regulation of 26S function was confirmed in patient-derived skin fibroblasts with respiratory dysfunction containing a single mitochondrial mutation. Importantly, treatment of primary human lung fibroblasts with the respiratory chain inhibitor and anti-diabetic drug metformin similarly reduced assembly and activity of 26S proteasome complexes, which was fully reversible and rescued by supplementation of aspartate or pyruvate.  Our study uncovers a fundamental novel mechanism of how mitochondrial metabolism adaptively adjusts protein degradation by the proteasome. It thus unravels unexpected consequences of defective mitochondrial metabolism in disease or drug-targeted mitochondrial reprogramming for proteasomal protein degradation in the cell. As metabolic inhibition of proteasome function can be alleviated by treatment with aspartate or pyruvate, our results also have therapeutic implications.

### Sample Protocol
Phosphopeptide enrichment  C8 StageTips (Supelco) (were prepared for each sample as described in the protocol by Rappsilber et al. (Rappsilber et al, 2007). Before adding 100 µL EP enrichment buffer (48 % (vol/vol) Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), 8 mM KH2PO4) to the samples (mix 1.500 rpm, 30 sec), 400 µL isopropanol was added and mixed for 30 sec, 1.500 rpm to prevent precipitation. The ratio of TiO2 beads to protein should be 12:1 (wt:wt). The beads were resuspended in EP loading buffer (6 % (vol/vol) TFA/80 % (vol/vol) acetonitrile (ACN)) at a concentration of 1 mg/µL and an aliquot of suspended beads was pipetted to the samples and the samples were shaken for 5 min, 40 °C, 2.000 rpm. The beads were pelleted via centrifugation at 2.000 g for 1 min. The supernatant (the non-phosphopeptides) was discarded. The pellets were the washed 4x with 1 mL EP wash buffer (5 % (vol/vol) TFA/60 % isopropanol (vol/vol)) by shaking at RT for 30 sec, 2000 rpm. After each washing step the beads were pelleted (2.000 g, 1 min) and the supernatant was discarded. After the final washing step the beads were resuspended in 75 µL EP transfer buffer (0.1 % TFA/60 % (vol/vol) isopropanol) and transferred onto the top of a C8 StageTip. To ensure all beads were transferred from the vial another 75 mL EP transfer buffer were added to each sample and transferred to the C8 StageTip. The StageTips were then centrifuged at 1500 g for 8 min at RT to dryness to pack the TiO2 beads on the top of the C8 material. Elution of the phosphopeptides was conducted with 30 µL EP elution buffer (200 μl of ammonia solution (NH4OH) added to 800 μl of 40 % (vol/vol) ACNacetonitril) and centrifugation at 1500 g, 4 min at RT to dryness. The eluates were collected into clean PCR strip tubes and elution was repeated with 30 µL EP elution buffer into the same tubes. The tubes were then placed into an evaporative concentrator and concentrated under vacuum at 45 °C until ~ 15 µL sample remained.  StageTip desalting of phosphopeptides SDB-RPS StageTips (Supelco) were prepared for each sample as described in the protocol by Rappsilber et al (Rappsilber et al, 2007). 100 µL of SDB-RPS loading buffer (1 % (vol/vol) TFA in isopropanol) were added to each sample and then transferred onto the top of a SDB-RPS StageTip. Centrifugation was carried out at 1500 g for 8 min, RT until dryness using the adapter for the StageTips. StageTips were washed with SDB-RPS wash buffer 1 (1 % (vol/vol) TFA in isopropanol) and centrifuged until dryness at 1500 g, 8 min, RT. Next, one washing step with SDB-RPS wash buffer 2 (0.2 % (vol/vol) TFA/5% (vol/vol) ACN) was performed. By addition of 60 µL SDB-RPS elution buffer (Add 20 μl of ammonia solution (NH4OH) to 4 mL of 60 % (vol/vol) ACNl) the phosphopeptides were eluted (1500 g, 5 min, RT) and collected into clean PCR strip tubes. Under vacuum at 45 °C the samples were dried in an evaporative concentrator. Samples were resuspended in 7 µL MS loading buffer (0.1 % TFA/2 % (vol/vol) ACN) by incubation in a sonicating water bath on low power for 5 min. Afterwards phophopeptides were spun down at 2000 g for 1 min at RT. Detection of phosphopeptides via Mass spectrometry was performed according to the EasyPhos protocol.  Proteomic analysis For LC-MS/MS acquisition a QExactive HF mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, Dreieich, Germany) coupled to a RSLC system (ThermoFisher Scientific) was used. Approx. 0.5 µg of peptides were automatically loaded to the HPLC system equipped with a nano trap column (300 μm inner diameter × 5 mm, packed with Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 5 μm, 100 Å; LC Packings, Sunnyvale, CA). After 5 min, peptides were eluted from the trap column and separated using reversed phase chromatography (Acquity UPLC M-Class HSS T3 Column, 1.8 µm, 75 µm x 250 mm, Waters, Milford, MA) by a nonlinear gradient of 0.1 % formic acid in acetonitrile ranging from 3 % to 41 %. The high-resolution (60.000 full width at half-maximum) MS spectrum was acquired with a mass range from 300 to 1.500 m/z with automatic gain control target set to 3 x 106 and a maximum of 50 ms injection time. From the MS prescan, the 10 most abundant peptide ions were selected for fragmentation (MSMS) if at least doubly charged, with a dynamic exclusion of 30 sec. MSMS spectra were recorded at 15.000 resolution with automatic gain control target set to 1 x 105 and a maximum of 100 ms injection time. Normalized collision energy was set to 28 and all spectra were recorded in profile type.

### Data Protocol
Phosphoproteomic analysis  The Phospho(STY)Sites.txt file of the MaxQuant output was used for analysis with Perseus (version 1.6.5.0).The table was filtered to retain only these sites that have a localization probability > 0.75. The data was log2 transformed and entries form reverse data base hits and potential contaminants were filtered out. Protein annotations were added and the data was filtered to have at least three out of four quantified values in either the WT or the mutator group. The data was normalized Zero values were imputed with a normal distribution of artificial values generated at 1.6 standard deviations, subtracted from the mean, of the total intensity distribution and a width of 0.3 standard deviations. To identify significantly regulated phosphosites a Student’s T-test was performed (S0 =1, FDR 0.1). Fisher exact test (FDR > 0.02) was used to find enriched kinase motifs in the regulated phosphosites. The fisher exact test determines if there are non-random associations between a categorical column and all terms in the other categorical columns.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mitochondria, 26s proteasome, Proteasome assembly factors, Respiratory complex i, Pyruvate, Aspartate, Metabolic reprogramming

### Affiliations
Comprehensive Pneumology Center (CPC), University Hospital, Ludwig-Maximilians University, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Munich, Member of the German Center for Lung Research (DZL), Germany
CPC/ILBD HemholtzZentrum München

### Submitter
Christoph Mayr

### Lab Head
Dr Silke Meiners
Comprehensive Pneumology Center (CPC), University Hospital, Ludwig-Maximilians University, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Munich, Member of the German Center for Lung Research (DZL), Germany


