### Accession
PXD029599

### Title
Doxycycline alters porcine renal proteome and degradome during hypothermic machine perfusion

### Description
Ischemia/reperfusion injury (IRI) is a hallmark of tissue injury in donation after circulatory death (DCD) kidneys. The implementation of hypothermic machine perfusion (HMP) provides a platform for repair of DCD kidneys. Doxycycline administration has shown protective effects during IRI. Here, we explore the impact of doxycycline on proteolytic degradation mechanisms and the urinary proteome of perfused kidney grafts. Porcine kidneys underwent 30 min of warm ischemia, 24 h of oxygenated HMP (control/doxycycline) and 240 min of ex-vivo reperfusion. A high-efficiency undecanal-based N-termini enrichment workflow (HUNTER) was performed to identify the tissue degradome. In addition, a proteomic analysis was applied on urine samples collected during reperfusion using label-free quantitation (LFQ) mass spectrometry. Hierarchical clustering showed distinctive clustering profiles between urine samples collected at T15 min (metabolism) and T240 min (complement and coagulation). At T10, significantly more degraded proteins were observed in perfusates of the control group. At T240, significantly more degraded proteins were observed in the doxycycline group, indicating that doxycycline alters protein degradation during HMP. In conclusion, doxycycline administration during HMP led to significant proteomic differences including protective effects by attenuating urinary NGAL levels. Ultimately, we unravelled multiple pathways that undergo alterations during machine perfusion that can be targeted to attenuate IRI induced injury.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics: To analyze the effect of doxycycline on the urinary proteome, urine samples collected at timepoint T15, T60, T120, T180 and T240 minutes of ex-vivo reperfusion were concentrated and resuspended in 100mM Tetraethylammonium bromide (Merck). Each sample was individually denatured and reduced using 5mM DTT and alkylated using 20mM iodoacetamide.  Afterwards, all samples were cleaned up using a methanol-chloroform precipitation, and protein concentrations were determined using Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific). 20 μg of protein per sample was digested using 0.4 μg of trypsin. Samples were acidified using trifluoroacetic acid. Samples were then cleaned up using the EVOSEP ONE (EVOSEP, Odense, Denmark) before high throughput label free quantification using the timsTOFFTM (Bruker, Massachusetts, United States).   Degradomics: To analyse protein degradation, snap frozen renal cortex tissue was collected before start of reperfusion (T-10) and post 240 minutes of reperfusion (T240) using a 23mm needle biopsy gun (Invivo, Best, The Netherlands). Proteins were labelled using tandem mass tags (TMT) and prepared according to a high efficiency undecenal N-terminal enrichment (HUNTER) degradomics workflow as described by Weng et al. 2019[67].  In short, tissue was homogenized in RIPA Lysis and Extraction Buffer (ThermoFisher) with 10% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) and cOmplete™ Mini EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Sigma) using Precellys 24 homogenizer (Bertin Instruments). Benzonase was added to degrade all DNA and RNA. Protein concentrations were determined using Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific).   150 µg of protein per sample was precipitated using acetone-methanol precipitation. Protein pellets were resuspended in 30 µL 6M guanidine hydrochloride, 50 µL nanopure H2O, and 20 µL 1M HEPES pH 8. Each sample was individually denatured and reduced using 10mM TCEP and alkylated using 25mM iodoacetamide.  Whole protein labelling at N-terminal α-amines site was performed using TMT 11-plex™ isobaric label reagents (Thermo Scientific). Labels were dissolved in anhydrous DMSO equal to sample volume and added to each sample and incubated for 1 hour at room temperature. Samples were then quenched using 25 µL 1M ethanolamine. Afterwards, all samples were combined creating three sample pools, cleaned up using an acetone-methanol precipitation, and digested using 30 µg of trypsin per sample pool for 20 hours. The combined sample was enriched for protein N termini using 50:1 w/w undecanal and 40 mM sodium cyanoborohydride. Samples were acidified with 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid in 40% ethanol and the undecanal with bound tryptic peptides was removed using 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in 40% ethanol and SOLA™ SPE Cartridges (Thermo Scientific). Samples were desalted using SOLA™ SPE Cartridges, dried down using a SpeedVac and resuspended in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid before nano-flow reversed phase chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry analysis (nLC-MS/MS) using an Ultimate 3000 UPLC system coupled to a Q Exactive HF with mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) as described previously by  Fye et al.[68] In short, samples were separated on an EASY-Spray PepMap RSLC C18 column (500 mm × 75 mm, 2 mm particle size, Thermo Scientific) over a 60-min gradient of 2–35% acetonitrile in 5% DMSO, 0.1% formic acid at 250 nl/min. MS1 scans were acquired at a resolution of 60 000 at 200 m/z and the top 12 most abundant precursor ions were selected for HCD fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics: Raw data files produced by the mass spectrometer containing peak lists and spectra were searched against a proteome database (Sus Scrofa) compiled from Uniprot using MaxQuant [65] with the following parameters: semi-trypsin for enzyme specificity, allowing up to 2 missed cleavages and a minimum peptide length of 6, precursor mass tolerance at 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance at 0.5 Da. Comprehensional analysis of the obtained data was performed using Perseus v1.6.7.0 [66]. Data was log2(x) transformed for normalization, rows were filtered based on 70% valid values, and data was imputed by replacing missing data from normal distribution.   Degradomics:  Raw data files produced by the mass spectrometer containing peak lists and spectra were searched against a proteome database (Sus Scrofa) compiled from Uniprot using Thermo Proteome Discoverer v2.3 software (Thermo Scientific). The following parameters were used: semi-trypsin for enzyme specificity, allowing up to 2 missed cleavages and a minimum peptide length of 6. Precursor mass tolerance at 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance at 0.5 Da. Comprehensional analysis was performed using Perseus v1.6.7.0 [66]. Protein data was log2(x) transformed for normalization, rows were filtered based on 50% valid values, and data was imputed by replacing missing data from normal distribution. Peptide data was log2(x) transformed for normalization and imputed by replacing missing data from normal distribution.

### Publication Abstract
Ischemia-reperfusion injury (IRI) is a hallmark for tissue injury in donation after circulatory death (DCD) kidneys. The implementation of hypothermic machine perfusion (HMP) provides a platform for improved preservation of DCD kidneys. Doxycycline administration has shown protective effects during IRI. Therefore, we explored the impact of doxycycline on proteolytic degradation mechanisms and the urinary proteome of perfused kidney grafts. Porcine kidneys underwent 30 min of warm ischemia, 24 h of oxygenated HMP (control/doxycycline) and 240 min of ex vivo reperfusion. A proteomic analysis revealed distinctive clustering profiles between urine samples collected at T15 min and T240 min. High-efficiency undecanal-based N-termini (HUNTER) kidney tissue degradomics revealed significantly more proteolytic activity in the control group at T-10. At T240, significantly more proteolytic activity was observed in the doxycycline group, indicating that doxycycline alters protein degradation during HMP. In conclusion, doxycycline administration during HMP led to significant proteomic and proteolytic differences and protective effects by attenuating urinary NGAL levels. Ultimately, we unraveled metabolic, and complement and coagulation pathways that undergo alterations during machine perfusion and that could be targeted to attenuate IRI induced injury.

### Keywords
Renal transplantation; ischemia/reperfusion injury; machine perfusion; proteomics

### Affiliations
Target Discovery Institute, Centre for Medicines Discovery, Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, OX3 7FZ, UK
University Medical Center Groningen

### Submitter
Leonie van Leeuwen

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. B.M. Kessler
Target Discovery Institute, Centre for Medicines Discovery, Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, OX3 7FZ, UK


