### Accession
PXD011303

### Title
SWATH-MS proteomics of seeds of healthy and diseased barley

### Description
Identification and relative quantification of proteins present in seeds of healthy and diseased barley measured by SWATH-MS.

### Sample Protocol
Barley seeds were ground, solubilzed, reduced/alkylated, precipitated, tryptic digested, peptides desalted by C18 Ziptip, peptides identified by LC-MS/MS on TripleTof 5600, SWATH measurement with identical LC on TripleTof5600

### Data Protocol
Protein identification using ProteinPilot 4 searched against complete Uniprot. SWATH data processed using Peakview 2.1.

### Publication Abstract
Barley is an important cereal grain used for beer brewing, animal feed, and human food consumption. Fungal disease can impact barley production, as it causes substantial yield loss and lowers seed quality. We used sequential window acquisition of all theoretical ions mass spectrometry (SWATH-MS) to measure and quantify the relative abundance of proteins within seeds of different barley varieties under various fungal pathogen burdens (ProteomeXchange Datasets PXD011303 and PXD014093). Fungal burden in the leaves and stems of barley resulted in changes to the seed proteome. However, these changes were minimal and showed substantial variation among barley samples infected with different pathogens. The limited effect of intrinsic disease resistance on the seed proteome is consistent with the main mediators of disease resistance being present in the leaves and stems of the plant. The seeds of barley varieties accredited for use as malt had higher levels of proteins associated with starch synthesis and beer quality. The proteomic workflows developed and implemented here have potential application in quality control, breeding and processing of barley, and other agricultural products.

### Keywords
Net form of net blotch, Barley, Net blotch, Proteomics, Spot form of net blotch, Leaf rust, Swath-ms

### Affiliations
University of Queensland
School of Chemistry and Molecular Biosciences, The University of Queensland, Australia

### Submitter
Edward Kerr

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin Luke Schulz
School of Chemistry and Molecular Biosciences, The University of Queensland, Australia


