### Accession
PXD026989

### Title
O-glycoproteome of Tannerella forsythia

### Description
Tannerella forsythia is a Gram-negative oral pathogen known to possess an O-glycosylation system responsible for targeting multiple proteins associated with virulence at the three-residue motif (D)(S/T)(A/I/L/V/M/T). Multiple proteins have been identified to be decorated with a decasaccharide glycan composed of a poorly defined core plus a species-specific portion whose biosynthesis is largely characterized. To date, the glycosylation of mainly the two S-layer glycoproteins, TfsA and TfsB has been studied yet the true extent of glycosylation within this species has not been explored. In the present study we explore the glycoproteome of T. forsythia employing FAIMS based glycopeptide enrichment of a cell membrane fraction. We demonstrate that at least 13 glycans are utilized within the T. forsythia glycoproteome varying with respect to the presence of the three terminal sugars and the presence of fucose and digitoxose branches at the reducing end. To improve the localization of glycosylation events and enhance the detection of glycopeptides we applied trifluoromethanesulfonic acid treatment to allow the selective chemical cleavage of glycans. By reducing the chemical complexity of glycopeptides this dramatically improved the number of glycopeptides identified and our ability to localize glycosylation sites by ETD fragmentation leading to the identification of 312 putative glycosylation sites in 145 glycoproteins. Glycosylation site analysis revealed that glycosylation occurs on a much broader glycosylation motif than initially reported with glycosylation found at (D)(S/T)(A/I/L/V/M/T/S/C/G/F). The data confirm earlier predictions of hundreds of possible O-glycoproteins present in this organism.

### Sample Protocol
Membrane-enriched fractions of T. forsythia were prepared and one portion was partially deglycosylated with trifluoromethanesulfonic acid. Proteins from both treated and untreated samples were separated by SDS-PAGE, excised into gel fractions, digested with trypsin and analysed by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
The data were analysed by Byonic v3.9.6 and the Byonic data is provided with the published paper. The data was also analysed with Mascot v2.6. Many manually defined modifications corresponding to the parts of the novel O-glycan were defined in the searches.

### Publication Abstract
Tannerella forsythia is a Gram-negative oral pathogen known to possess an O-glycosylation system responsible for targeting multiple proteins associated with virulence at the three-residue motif (D)(S/T)(A/I/L/V/M/T). Multiple proteins have been identified to be decorated with a decasaccharide glycan composed of a poorly defined core plus a partially characterized species-specific section. To date, glycosylation studies have focused mainly on the two S-layer glycoproteins, TfsA and TfsB, so the true extent of glycosylation within this species has not been fully explored. In the present study, we characterize the glycoproteome of <i>T. forsythia</i> by employing FAIMS-based glycopeptide enrichment of a cell membrane fraction. We demonstrate that at least 13 glycans are utilized within the <i>T. forsythia</i> glycoproteome, varying with respect to the presence of the three terminal sugars and the presence of fucose and digitoxose residues at the reducing end. To improve the localization of glycosylation events and enhance the detection of glycopeptides, we utilized trifluoromethanesulfonic acid treatment to allow the selective chemical cleavage of glycans. Reducing the chemical complexity of glycopeptides dramatically improved the number of glycopeptides identified and our ability to localize glycosylation sites by ETD fragmentation, leading to the identification of 312 putative glycosylation sites in 145 glycoproteins. Glycosylation site analysis revealed that glycosylation occurs on a much broader motif than initially reported, with glycosylation found at (D)(S/T)(A/I/L/V/M/T/S/C/G/F). The prevalence of this broader glycosylation motif in the genome suggests the existence of hundreds of potential O-glycoproteins in this organism. <b>IMPORTANCE</b> Tannerella forsythia is an oral pathogen associated with severe forms of periodontal disease characterized by destruction of the tooth's supporting tissues, including the bone. The bacterium releases a variety of proteins associated with virulence on the surface of outer membrane vesicles. There is evidence that these proteins are modified by glycosylation, and this modification is essential for virulence in producing disease. We have utilized novel techniques coupled with mass spectrometry to identify over 13 glycans and 312 putative glycosylation sites in 145 glycoproteins within <i>T. forsythia</i>. Glycosylation site analysis revealed that this modification occurs on a much broader motif than initially reported such that there is a high prevalence of potential glycoproteins in this organism that may help to explain its role in periodontal disease.

### Keywords
Tannerella forsythia, Trifluoromethanesulfonic acid, O-glycosylation

### Affiliations
Melbourne Dental School
Melbourne Dental School, University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Paul Veith

### Lab Head
Dr Eric Reynolds
Melbourne Dental School, University of Melbourne


