### Accession
PXD018781

### Title
Divergent features of the coenzyme Q:cytochrome c oxidoreductase complex in Toxoplasma gondii parasites

### Description
Apicomplexan parasites cause numerous diseases in humans and animals, including malaria (Plasmodium species) and toxoplasmosis (Toxoplasma gondii). Despite being a major drug target, the protein composition of the coenzyme Q:cytochrome c oxidoreductase complex (Complex III) in these parasites was previously unknown. Our work highlights the divergence of mitochondrial ETC Complex III composition in apicomplexan parasites and provides a broader understanding of Complex III evolution. Our study also provides important insights into what sets this major drug target apart from the equivalent complex in host species. Future studies can build on our findings to reveal how novel subunits contribute to Complex III function to further investigate this important drug target.

### Sample Protocol
For mass spectrometry sample preparation, parasite samples were solubilized in 1% (w/v) n-Dodecyl β-D-maltoside, and processed as described previously (11). Briefly, anti-HA affinity matrix bound with HA-tagged protein complexes were frozen at −80°C for 1 hr, then eluted at room temperature in 0.2 M glycine containing 1% (w/v) n-Dodecyl β-D-maltoside (pH 2.3). Samples were neutralized in ammonium bicarbonate, then extracted in chloroform:methanol as described (38). After extraction, the pellets were dried and stored at −80°C before mass spectrometry analysis. Mass spectrometry was conducted as previously described (11). Briefly, samples were resuspended in 8M Urea, 50 mM Tris pH=8.3 followed by reduction and alkylation. Solubilized proteins were submitted to trypsin digestion overnight and the resulting peptides purified using the C18 stage tips procedure.   For the analysis: peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile, loaded onto a trap column and washed for 6 min before switching the precolumn in line with the analytical column. The separation of peptides was performed as previously described. Data were collected on a Q Exactive HF (Thermo-Fisher Scientific) in Data Dependent Acquisition mode using m/z 350–1500 as MS scan range at 60 000 resolution, HCD MS/MS spectra were collected for the 10 most intense ions per MS scan at 15 000 resolution with a normalized collision energy of 28% and an isolation window of 1.4 m/z. Dynamic exclusion parameters were set as follows: exclude isotope on, duration 30 s and peptide match preferred. Other instrument parameters for the Orbitrap were MS maximum injection time 30 ms with AGC target 3 × 106, MSMS for a maximum injection time of 110 ms with AGT target of 1.1 × 104.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were uploaded into Peaks Studio 10.5 (Bioinformatics Solution Inc., Waterloo, Canada) and processed with de novo peptide sequencing and Peaks DB using the TaxoDB (https://toxodb.org/toxo/) database together with common contaminants (cRAP). For peptides identification, the default settings were with precursor-ion and product-ion tolerances set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively. Semispecific trypsin digest with a maximum of 1 missed cleavage was employed and peptides were searched with carbamidomethylation of cysteine set as fixed modification. To limit false-positive peptide identification, the false discovery rate (FDR) applied to peptide-spectrum match (PSM) was set to 1%, and at least 1 unique peptide per protein was used.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Electron transport chain, Apicomplexa, Mitochondria, Toxoplasma gondii, Coenzyme q:cytochrome c oxidoreductase

### Affiliations
Research School of Biology, Australian National University, Canberra, Australia
La Trobe University

### Submitter
Pierre Faou

### Lab Head
Dr Giel G. van Dooren
Research School of Biology, Australian National University, Canberra, Australia


