### Accession
PXD004550

### Title
Arabidopsis, protein turnover, plastid, leaf growth and development-15N progressive labelling

### Description
In order to characterize plant protein degradation rates and understand their determinants as they relate to plant growth rate, we have applied 15N labelling approaches in leaves of the Arabidopsis rosette. We found a series of leaves in Arabidopsis plants for which the proteome was stable over time and degradation rates of individual proteins could thus be measured by considering the dilution of total protein abundance through growth. By progressively labelling new peptides with 15N and measuring the decrease in the abundance of over 60,000 peptides with natural isotope abundance profiles we determined the degradation rate of 1228 proteins. The exponential constant of the decay rate (KD) for each protein calculated from the relative isotope abundance of each peptide and the fold change in protein abundance during growth showed a wide distribution, ranging from 0 to 2 per day. This showed Arabidopsis protein half-lives vary from several hours to several months. In assessing intrinsic factors to explain these protein degradation rates, little effect of the N-end amino acid of proteins or of protein aggregation propensity were found, however protein complex membership and specific protein domains were strong predictors of degradation rate. We found new rapidly degrading subunits in a variety of protein complexes in plastids, identified the set of plant proteins whose degradation rate changes in different leaves of the rosette and correlated with leaf growth rate, and calculated the protein turnover energy costs in different leaves and their key determinants within the proteome.

### Sample Protocol
Total proteins from 14N and partial 15N labelling were separated by SDS/PAGE electrophoresis. Thirty samples were fractionated into 360 gel pieces, in-gel digested and run in Agilent QTOF6550.

### Data Protocol
360 Agilent QTOF6550 raw (.d) files were first transferred to .mzml by MSconvert and then to .mgf by TPP. The .mgf files were searched by Mascot and output files exported as .dat files. 360 .mz files and 360 .dat files are provided.

### Publication Abstract
We applied <sup>15</sup>N labeling approaches to leaves of the <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i> rosette to characterize their protein degradation rate and understand its determinants. The progressive labeling of new peptides with <sup>15</sup>N and measuring the decrease in the abundance of &gt;60,000 existing peptides over time allowed us to define the degradation rate of 1228 proteins in vivo. We show that Arabidopsis protein half-lives vary from several hours to several months based on the exponential constant of the decay rate for each protein. This rate was calculated from the relative isotope abundance of each peptide and the fold change in protein abundance during growth. Protein complex membership and specific protein domains were found to be strong predictors of degradation rate, while N-end amino acid, hydrophobicity, or aggregation propensity of proteins were not. We discovered rapidly degrading subunits in a variety of protein complexes in plastids and identified the set of plant proteins whose degradation rate changed in different leaves of the rosette and correlated with leaf growth rate. From this information, we have calculated the protein turnover energy costs in different leaves and their key determinants within the proteome.

### Keywords
Leaf growth, Arabidopsis, Development, Plastid, Protein turnover

### Affiliations
ARC CoE Plant Energy Biology, The University of Western Australia
College of Life Sciences, Nankai University, Tianjin 300071

### Submitter
Lei Li

### Lab Head
Dr Harvey Millar
ARC CoE Plant Energy Biology, The University of Western Australia


