### Accession
PXD014652

### Title
Multifunctional temozolomide-loaded lipid superparamagnetic nanovectors: dual targeting and disintegration of glioblastoma spheroids by synergic chemotherapy and hyperthermia treatment

### Description
The recent develop of nanotechnology promises to revolutionize the delivery of chemotherapeutic agents across the blood-brain barrier and against cancer cells. Superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles have been successfully exploited in many different clinical trials for the remote hyperthermal treatment of cancer cells in response to alternated magnetic fields (AMF) and as nontargeted contrast agents for magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). In this work, the functionalization of SPIONs- and TMZ-loaded lipid magnetic nanovectors (LMNVs) with the antibody against the transferrin receptor (TfR) for the dual targeting of the endothelial cells of BBB and GBM cells is reported. The targeting efficiency of the functionalized nanovectors (AbLMNVs) has been demonstrated on a multicellular organoid system modeling the BBB and the microscopic GBM foci. Transcytosis through endothelial cells and penetration in GBM spheroids of functionalized nanovectors have been verified and quantified through flow cytometry analysis and different imaging techniques. Moreover, the lipid component of the functionalized nanovectors has been modified with a lipophilic temperature sensitive fluorescent dye to monitor the intraparticle temperature in response to AMF Chronic AMF treatments of microscopic GBM spheroids targeted with the functionalized nanovectors, plain or loaded with TMZ drug, were carried out and their elevated potential to induce spheroid disintegration, cell necrosis and apoptosis was revealed. Finally, magnetothermal ability of nanovectors was successfully tested on a post-mortem brain tissue.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were solubilized in 25 ul 2% SDC, 40 mM Chloroacetamide, 10 mM TCEP and 100 mM Tris HCl pH 8 at 100 °C for 10 min and sonicated with a Ultrasonic Processor  UP200St (Hielscher), 3 cycles of 30 sec. Lysates samples were digested with 0.7 ug Trypsin and 0.3 ug LysC over night at 37 °C. Then nanovectors were separated from the samples by a DynaMag-2 magnetic particle concentrator (Invitrogen) and treated with 30 ul of 5% NH4OH. The supernatant separated from the nanovectors was concentrated and joined with the rest of the sample and processed by iST protoco

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant software, version 1.6.5.0, was used to process the raw data, setting a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 for the identification of proteins, peptides and PSM (peptide-spectrum match), a minimum length of 6 amino acids for peptide identification was required. Andromeda engine, incorporated into MaxQuant software, was used to search MS/MS spectra against Uniprot human database (release UP000005640_9606 April 2019). In the processing the variable modifications are Acetyl (Protein N-Term), Oxidation (M), Deamidation (NQ), on the contrary the Carbamidomethyl (C) was selected as fixed modification. The intensity values were extracted and statistically evaluated using the ProteinGroup Table and Perseus software. Algorithm MaxLFQ was chosen for the protein quantification with the activated option ‘match between runs’ to reduce the number of the missing proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Chemotherapy, Lc-ms/ms, Hyperthermia treatment, Glioblastoma spheroids

### Affiliations
IRCCS G. Gaslini
Gaslini Children's Hospital

### Submitter
Andrea Petretto

### Lab Head
Dr Andrea Petretto
IRCCS G. Gaslini


