### Accession
PXD006717

### Title
Direct Interactions of RNA Polymerase with Ribosomes and Ribosomal Subunits in E. Coli

### Description
The interactions between RNA polymerase and ribosomes are critical for the coordination of transcription with translation. We report that RNA polymerase directly binds ribosomes and isolated large and small ribosomal subunits.

### Sample Protocol
The RNA polymerase-ribosome complexes from E. coli were incubated with the crosslinking agent:5 mM 1-ethyl-3-(3-dimethyl-aminopropyl) carbodiimide (EDC) and 5 mM sulfo N-hydroxysuccinimide (sulfo-NHS). The crosslink reaction was allowed to proceed at room temperature for 30 minutes before quenching with 50 mM Tris-HCl. The protein content of the crosslinked sample was analyzed SDS-PAGE, either with a discontinuous 6 – 10 % Tris-glycine or 6 – 9% Tris-acetate gradient gel. The compositions of the SDS-gel bands that occurred only in the presence of RNA polymerase and ribosomes were further analyzed by Western blot or excised and stored at 4 °C for further analysis by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified and quantified using MaxQuant (Version 1.5.3.8) software to search raw LC-MS/MS data against the E. coli database downloaded from Uniprot. The fixed modification option was set to include carboxyamidation and the maximum missed cleavages setting was set to two per peptide. The tolerance levels in mass accuracy for MS and MS/MS were set to 4.5 ppm and 0.6 Da, respectively. The false positive rate was set to 1 %. For each protein, the spectral index (SI) was calculated as the sum of the ion intensities of all the tryptic-digest protein fragments detected throughout the LC-MS/MS analysis of a sample. The weighted SI values for all identified proteins were normalized to the highest weighed SI value within the sample. Proteins were only considered enriched in the crosslink if they were present in all three biological replicates of the crosslinked band. We excluded proteins as potential RNA polymerase-ribosome interaction partners when present at the same relative mobility of the crosslinked species in either the crosslinked RNA polymerase or crosslinked ribosome sample and their spectral indices exceeded two thirds of the spectral index observed for the crosslinked RNA polymerase-ribosome sample. The spectral index of the remaining proteins was normalized to that of the highest index of each replica. The average normalized spectral index values were calculated.

### Publication Abstract
In prokaryotes, RNA polymerase and ribosomes can bind concurrently to the same RNA transcript, leading to the functional coupling of transcription and translation. The interactions between RNA polymerase and ribosomes are crucial for the coordination of transcription with translation. Here, we report that RNA polymerase directly binds ribosomes and isolated large and small ribosomal subunits. RNA polymerase and ribosomes form a one-to-one complex with a micromolar dissociation constant. The formation of the complex is modulated by the conformational and functional states of RNA polymerase and the ribosome. The binding interface on the large ribosomal subunit is buried by the small subunit during protein synthesis, whereas that on the small subunit remains solvent-accessible. The RNA polymerase binding site on the ribosome includes that of the isolated small ribosomal subunit. This direct interaction between RNA polymerase and ribosomes may contribute to the coupling of transcription to translation.

### Keywords
Rna polymerase, Ribosomes, Mass spectrometry, E. coli

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry, University of California, Riverside Riverside, CA, USA
University of California - Riverside

### Submitter
Preston Williams

### Lab Head
Dr Gregor M. Blaha
Department of Biochemistry, University of California, Riverside Riverside, CA, USA


