### Accession
PXD007988

### Title
Composition and structure of synaptic ectosomes exporting antigen receptor linked to functional CD40 ligand from helper T cells

### Description
Planar supported lipid bilayers (PSLB) presenting T cell receptor (TCR) ligands and ICAM-1 induce budding of extracellular microvesicles enriched in functional TCR, defined here as synaptic ectosomes (SE), from helper T cells. SE bind peptide-MHC directly exporting TCR into the synaptic cleft, but incorporation of other effectors is unknown. Here, we utilized bead supported lipid bilayers (BSLB) to capture SE from single immunological synapses (IS), determined SE composition by immunofluorescence flow cytometry and enriched SE for proteomic analysis by particle sorting. We demonstrate selective enrichment of CD40L and ICOS in SE in response to addition of CD40 and ICOSL, respectively, to SLB presenting TCR ligands and ICAM-1. SE are enriched in tetraspanins, BST-2, TCR signaling and ESCRT proteins. Super-resolution microscopy demonstrated that CD40L is present in microclusters within CD81 defined SE that are spatially segregated from TCR/ICOS/BST-2. CD40L+ SE retain the capacity to induce dendritic cell maturation and cytokine production.

### Sample Protocol
AF488+ BSLBs were sorted on a FACS ARIA III and lysed by sonication (Bioruptor Pico) in 0.5% NP-40 in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 6 M urea. Cysteines were reduced and alkylated by addition of first 5 µL of 200 mM DTT (30 minutes @ RT) and 10 µL of 200 mM Iodoacetamide (60 minutes at RT). The protein solution was then precipitated with Chloroform and Methanol, resuspended in 6 M Urea. For digest the protein solution was diluted in 50mM Ammonium bicarbonate and 0.6ug Trypsin was added for digest at 37°C overnight. Peptides were desalted with a C18 SPE cartridge (SOLA, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and resuspended in 15 µL 2% CH3CN in 0.1% TFA.

### Data Protocol
Proteomic data was analysed in Maxquant (V1.5.7.4, ref) using default parameters and Label Free Quantitation. The data was searched against the mouse canonical Uniprot database (29/07/2015) and the human Uniprot database (15/10/2014). FDR on peptide and protein level were set to 1%. Second peptide and “match between runs” options were enabled. Quantitative data has been normalized to the abundance of CD40, CD275 and ICAM-1 protein signals in the samples.

### Publication Abstract
Planar supported lipid bilayers (PSLB) presenting T cell receptor (TCR) ligands and ICAM-1 induce budding of extracellular microvesicles enriched in functional TCR, defined here as synaptic ectosomes (SE), from helper T cells. SE bind peptide-MHC directly exporting TCR into the synaptic cleft, but incorporation of other effectors is unknown. Here, we utilized bead supported lipid bilayers (BSLB) to capture SE from single immunological synapses (IS), determined SE composition by immunofluorescence flow cytometry and enriched SE for proteomic analysis by particle sorting. We demonstrate selective enrichment of CD40L and ICOS in SE in response to addition of CD40 and ICOSL, respectively, to SLB presenting TCR ligands and ICAM-1. SE are enriched in tetraspanins, BST-2, TCR signaling and ESCRT proteins. Super-resolution microscopy demonstrated that CD40L is present in microclusters within CD81 defined SE that are spatially segregated from TCR/ICOS/BST-2. CD40L<sup>+</sup> SE retain the capacity to induce dendritic cell maturation and cytokine production.

### Keywords
Exosomes

### Affiliations
Target Discovery Institute, University of Oxford
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Roman Fischer

### Lab Head
Dr Roman Fischer
Target Discovery Institute, University of Oxford


