### Accession
PXD031662

### Title
Characterization of RAS and SLC3A2 signaling in multiple myeloma

### Description
Oncogenic mutations within the RAS pathway are common in multiple myeloma (MM), an incurable malignancy of plasma cells.  However, the mechanisms of pathogenic RAS signaling in this disease remain enigmatic and difficult to inhibit therapeutically.  We employed an unbiased proteogenomic approach to dissect RAS signaling in MM by combining genome-wide CRISPR-Cas9 screening with quantitative mass spectrometry focused on RAS biology.  We discovered that mutant isoforms of RAS organized a signaling complex with the amino acid transporter, SLC3A2, and MTOR on endolysosomes, which directly activated mTORC1 by co-opting amino acid sensing pathways.  MM tumors with high expression of mTORC1-dependent genes were more aggressive and enriched in RAS mutations, and we detected interactions between RAS and MTOR in MM patient tumors harboring mutant RAS isoforms.  Inhibition of RAS-dependent mTORC1 activity synergized with MEK and ERK inhibitors to quench pathogenic RAS signaling in MM cells.  This study redefines the RAS pathway in MM and provides a mechanistic and rational basis to target this novel mode of RAS signaling.

### Sample Protocol
For Bio-ID2 experiments, proteins were eluted from the streptavidin matrix by boiling in LDS/TCEP sample buffer. After protein separation by SDS-PAGE the gel lanes were cut in 23 individual band and in-gel protein digestion with trypsin was conducted. The peptide mixtures were analyzed by nano-ESI-LC-MS/MS on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system coupled to an Orbitrap Q Exactive (HF) mass spectrometer. Quantitation of different experimental conditions was carried out using SILAC metabolic labeling by growing cell cultures in media containing either light, medium-heavy or heavy variants of lysine and arginine. For global profiling of phosphorylation events, tryptic digests of whole cell lysates were subjected to phospho-peptide enrichment using titanium dioxide metal oxide affinity chromatography. After pre-fractionation, the phospho-peptide mixtures were analyzed by LC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Q-Exactive (HF) or Orbitrap Fusion instrument. Quantitation of phosphorylation events was conducted by SILAC labeling or using tandem mass tags (TMT). For TMT quantitation a MS3-based method using synchronous precursor selection (SPS) was employed on the Fusion tribrid mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
MS raw data was processed with the MaxQuant software and its integrated Andromeda search engine. Protein identification was conducted by searching the human reference proteome downloaded from UniProt and an integrated collection of common laboratory contaminants. After initial recalibration, a mass tolerance of 4.5 ppm and 20 ppm was allowed for precursor and fragment ions, respectively. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification and acetylation of the protein N-terminus, oxidation of methionine and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine were considered as variable modifications. The peptide length was set to 7 amino acids, allowing up to 2 missed tryptic cleavages. Both on the peptide and protein level a maximum FDR of 1% was set by searching a reversed decoy database. SILAC-based quantitation was conducted by specifying the light (Lys-0/Arg-0), medium-heavy (Lys-4/Arg-6) or heavy (Lys-8/Arg-10) variants of lysine and arginine as metabolic labels. TMT-based quantitation was carried out on the MS3 level using the default software parameters. For downstream data processing, hits to the decoy database, potential contaminants and proteins identified solely with modified peptides were removed.

### Publication Abstract
Oncogenic RAS mutations are common in multiple myeloma (MM), an incurable malignancy of plasma cells. However, the mechanisms of pathogenic RAS signaling in this disease remain enigmatic and difficult to inhibit therapeutically. We employ an unbiased proteogenomic approach to dissect RAS signaling in MM. We discover that mutant isoforms of RAS organize a signaling complex with the amino acid transporter, SLC3A2, and MTOR on endolysosomes, which directly activates mTORC1 by co-opting amino acid sensing pathways. MM tumors with high expression of mTORC1-dependent genes are more aggressive and enriched in RAS mutations, and we detect interactions between RAS and MTOR in MM patient tumors harboring mutant RAS isoforms. Inhibition of RAS-dependent mTORC1 activity synergizes with MEK and ERK inhibitors to quench pathogenic RAS signaling in MM cells. This study redefines the RAS pathway in MM and provides a mechanistic and rational basis to target this mode of RAS signaling.

### Keywords
Nras, Bioid2, Multiple myeloma, Phosphoproteomes, Kras, Slc3a2

### Affiliations
National Cancer Institute  National Institutes of Health  Bethesda, MD  United States
National Institutes of Health, National Cancer Institute

### Submitter
Ryan Young

### Lab Head
Dr Ryan Young
National Cancer Institute  National Institutes of Health  Bethesda, MD  United States


