### Accession
PXD018165

### Title
Ethynylation of Cysteines from Peptides to Proteins in Living Cells

### Description
Efficient methods to introduce bioorthogonal groups, such as terminal alkynes, into biomolecules are important tools for chemical biology. State-of-the-art approaches are based on the introduction of a linker between the targeted amino acid and the alkyne, and still present limitations of either reactivity, selectivity or adduct stability. Herein, we present a new ethynylation method of cysteine residues based on the use of ethynylbenziodoxolone (EBX) reagents. In contrast to other approaches, the acetylene group is directly introduced onto the thiol group of cysteine and can be used in one-pot in a copper-catalyzed alkyne-azide cycloaddition (CuAAC) for further functionalization. Labeling proceeded with reaction rates comparable or higher than the most often used iodoacetamide on peptides or maleimide on the antibody trastuzumab. Under optimized conditions, high cysteine selectivity was observed. The reagents were also used in living cells for cysteine proteomic profiling and displayed a much-improved coverage of the cysteinome compared to previously reported iodoacetamide or hypervalent iodine-reagent based probes. Fine-tuning of the EBX reagents allowed optimization of their reactivity and physical properties for the desired application.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa lysate (2 mg/mL, 5 mL) was treated with 10 µM 6d (100x stock in DMSO) or DMSO for one hour at r.t. Photocleavable (PC) biotin azide 17 (Click Chemistry Tools, 60 µM, 50x stock in DMSO), tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP) (1 mM, 50x fresh stock in water), tris[(1-benzyl-1H-1,2,3-triazol-4-yl)methyl]amine (TBTA) (100 µM, 16x stock in DMSO:tBuOH 1:4), and copper(II) sulfate (1 mM, 50x stock in water) were added to the proteome and left to react for one hour at r.t. Protein was precipitated by adding MeOH (4 vol.), CHCl3 (1 vol.) and water (3 vol.) to the reaction mixture and the turbid mixture was centrifuged for 10 minutes at 20’000 x g at 4 °C yielding a protein layer between the aqueous and organic layers. The protein layer was isolated, dried and solubilized in 2 % SDS in PBS via sonication. Tube was centrifuged at 4’700 x g for five min. and soluble fraction was transferred to a new tube. PBS was added to give a final SDS concentration of 0.2 %. 500 µL of streptavidin agarose beads were added and the mixture was rotated overnight at r.t. Beads were washed with 1 % SDS in PBS (2x 10 mL), PBS (3x 10 mL), and water (3x 10 mL). Beads were resuspended in 6 M urea in PBS (500 μL), reduced with 10 mM neutralized TCEP (20x fresh stock in water) for 30 min. at r.t., and alkylated with 25 mM iodoacetamide (400 mM fresh stock in water) for 30 min. at r.t. in the dark. Beads were pelleted by centrifugation (1’400 x g, two min.) and resuspended in 300 μL of 2 M urea in 50 mM NH4HCO3, 1 mM CaCl2 (100x stock in water) and trypsin (Thermo Scientific, 2 μL of 0.5 μg/μL). The digestion was performed for 6 hours at 37 °C. Beads were washed with 1 % SDS in PBS (1x 10 mL), PBS (3x 10 mL), and water (3x 10 mL). Beads were resuspended in 2 mL PBS and photocleavage was performed with irradiation at 365 nm in a CL-1000 UV crosslinker (UVP) for one hour at 4 °C. Beads were centrifuged and supernatant was transferred to a new tube. Beads were resuspended in 1 mL PBS and incubated for one hour at 37 °C with shaking, centrifuged and supernatants were combined. Beads were resuspended in 1 mL PBS with 1 M NaCl and incubated overnight with shaking, centrifuged and supernatants were combined. Peptides were desalted over a self-packed C18 spin column and dried.Peptides were resuspended in water with 0.1 % formic acid (FA) and analyzed using EASY-nLC 1200 nano-UHPLC coupled to Q Exactive HF-X Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The chromatography column consisted of a 40 cm long, 75 μm i.d. microcapillary capped by a 5 μm tip and packed with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 2.4 μm beads (Dr. Maisch GmbH). LC solvents were 0.1 % FA in H2O (Buffer A) and 0.1 % FA in 90 % MeCN: 10 % H2O (Buffer B). Peptides were eluted into the mass spectrometer at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. over a 240 min. linear gradient (5-35 % Buffer B) at 65 °C. Data was acquired in data-dependent mode (top-20, NCE 28, R = 7’500) after full MS scan (R = 60’000, m/z 400-1’300). Dynamic exclusion was set to 10 s, peptide match to prefer and isotope exclusion was enabled.

### Data Protocol
The MS data was processed with Proteome Discoverer (V2.1.1.21) using the Sequest HT algorithm  and searched against the human proteome (Uniprot). Precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da was used for the fragment mass tolerance. Minimum peptide length was set to 6 amino acids, PEP-value to ≤ 1% and protein FDR to high. Methionine oxidation, carbamidomethylation of cysteine and 6d PC cleaved adducts (+124.0749 Da) on cysteine, arginine, aspartic acid, glutamic acid, histidine, lysine, serine, threonine, tyrosine were searched as a dynamic modification.

### Publication Abstract
Current approaches to introduce terminal alkynes for bioorthogonal reactions into biomolecules still present limitations in terms of either reactivity, selectivity, or adduct stability. We present a method for the ethynylation of cysteine residues based on the use of ethynylbenziodoxolone (EBX) reagents. The acetylene group is directly introduced onto the thiol group of cysteine and can be used for copper-catalyzed alkyne-azide cycloaddition (CuAAC) without further processing. Labeling proceeded with reaction rates comparable to or higher than the most often used iodoacetamide on peptides or maleimide on the antibody trastuzumab, and high cysteine selectivity was observed. The reagents were also used in living cells for cysteine proteomic profiling and displayed improved coverage of the cysteinome compared to previously reported iodoacetamide or hypervalent iodine reagents. Fine-tuning of the EBX reagents allows optimization of their reactivity and physical properties.

### Keywords
Human, Hela, Qexactive hf-x, Cysteine ethynylation

### Affiliations
The Scripps Research Institute
Department of Chemistry, The Scripps Research Institute, Jupiter, FL 33458, USA

### Submitter
Daniel Abegg

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Adibekian
Department of Chemistry, The Scripps Research Institute, Jupiter, FL 33458, USA


