### Accession
PXD029073

### Title
Redundancy and Specialisation of Cyclin Dependent Kinases

### Description
Cyclin dependent kinases (CDKs) lie at the heart of eukaryotic cell division, with different CDK complexes initiating DNA replication (S-CDKs) and mitosis (M-CDKs)1-3. However, the principles on which cyclin-CDKs organise the cell cycle are still contentious, with current theories suggesting that either M-CDKs and S-CDKs are redundant with each other, and simply serve as a source of CDK activity, or that they are functionally specialised and execute distinct tasks. Here we reconcile these two views, showing that although S-CDKs are unable to drive mitosis, global CDK phosphorylation in vivo between S-CDK and M-CDK is surprisingly similar. Remarkably, S-CDK has cryptic mitotic activity which can be exposed by the removal of Protein Phosphatase 1 (PP1). In particular, removal of centrosomal PP1 allows S-CDK to execute mitosis indistinguishably from M-CDK, demonstrating their functional redundancy. Thus, we reconcile the two opposing views of cell cycle control, showing that although there is a minor level of specialisation between S-CDKs and M-CDKs, that the core cell cycle engine is based upon modulation of CDK activity, with cyclins providing refinements to this core system.

### Sample Protocol
Each protein sample (400 µg) was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 25 min at 56 °C, alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in the dark and then quenched with 7.5 M DTT. Samples were digested using SP3 on-bead methodology (Hughes et al, 2019) with the variation that 50 mM HEPES (pH 8.5) was used in place of ammonium bicarbonate. Briefly, proteins were bound to the SP3 beads (10:1 beads:protein (w/w)) in 50 % ethanol (v/v) and then washed three times in 80 % ethanol, prior to resuspension in 50 mM HEPES (pH 8.5) with 1:40 (trypsin:protein (w/ w)) overnight at 37 °C. The digested samples were arranged in sets of 16 and labelled using the TMTpro 16plex Isobaric Label Reagent Set (Thermo Fisher), as per the manufacturer’s instructions. Following labelling and mixing, multiplexed samples were desalted using a C18 SepPak column. Phosphopeptide enrichment was performed by Sequential Enrichment from Metal Oxide Affinity Chromatography (SMOAC, Thermo Fisher) with initial enrichment using the HighSelect TiO2 Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit followed by the HighSelect Fe-NTA Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit (both Thermo Scientific) for the non-bound flow through fractions. Phosphopeptides and non-bound flow through fractions were desalted and fractionated using the High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Pierce) and analysed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) coupled to an UltiMate 3000 HPLC system for online liquid chromatographic separation. Each run consisted of a 3 h gradient elution from a 75 μm × 50 cm C18 column.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (version 1.6.14.0) was used for all data processing. The data were searched against a PomBase (Lock et al, 2019) extracted S. pombe proteome FASTA file. Default MaxQuant parameters were used with Phospho(STY) being added as a variable modification, MaxQuant output files were imported into Perseus (version 1.6.14.0).

### Publication Abstract
Cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) lie at the heart of eukaryotic cell cycle control, with different cyclin-CDK complexes initiating DNA replication (S-CDKs) and mitosis (M-CDKs)<sup>1,2</sup>. However, the principles on which cyclin-CDK complexes organize the temporal order of cell cycle events are contentious<sup>3</sup>. One model proposes that S-CDKs and M-CDKs are functionally specialized, with substantially different substrate specificities to execute different cell cycle events<sup>4-6</sup>. A second model proposes that S-CDKs and M-CDKs are redundant with each other, with both acting as sources of overall CDK activity<sup>7,8</sup>. In this model, increasing CDK activity, rather than CDK substrate specificity, orders cell cycle events<sup>9,10</sup>. Here we reconcile these two views of core cell cycle control. Using phosphoproteomic assays of in vivo CDK activity in fission yeast, we find that S-CDK and M-CDK substrate specificities are remarkably similar, showing that S-CDKs and M-CDKs are not completely specialized for S&#x2009;phase and mitosis alone. Normally, S-CDK cannot drive mitosis but can do so when protein phosphatase 1 is removed from the centrosome. Thus, increasing S-CDK activity in vivo is sufficient to overcome substrate specificity differences between S-CDK and M-CDK, and allows S-CDK to carry out M-CDK function. Therefore, we unite the two opposing views of cell cycle control, showing that the core cell cycle engine is largely based on a quantitative increase in CDK activity through the cell cycle, combined with minor and surmountable qualitative differences in catalytic specialization of S-CDKs and M-CDKs.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Fission yeast, S. pombe, Tmt

### Affiliations
The Francis Crick Institute

### Submitter
Andrew Jones

### Lab Head
Dr Paul Nurse
The Francis Crick Institute


