### Accession
PXD030821

### Title
Secretomics of human pluripotent stem cell derived neural progenitor cells and induced astrocytes.

### Description
This study examines and compares the protein content in conditioned media collected from neural cell types generated from human pluripotent stem cells.  Conditioned media was prepared for 48 hours at a final endpoint of differentiation day 12. Both groups are from parental line WTC11 and cultured as a monolayer on matrigel.  Both groups contain a transgene cassette for doxycycline-inducible expression of sox9 and nfia. Doxycycline was only included in the iAstro groups, whereas it was omitted in the neural progenitor cell groups.

### Sample Protocol
For mass spectrometry, samples were sent to a core facility for unbiased semi-quantitative secretomic analyses. Sample concentration, digestion aand peptide extraction was carried on STrap column (Protifi, NY). The peptides were desalted on C18 column and subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis using nanoLC1000 system coupled to Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometry (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA)

### Data Protocol
Obtained MS/MS spectra were searched against human NCBI refseq database updated 2019_0114 in the Proteome Discoverer (PD1.4, Thermo Fisher) with Mascot algorithm (Mascot 2.4, Matrix Science). Enzyme was set to 'Trpsin'. Dynamic modification of oxidized methionine and protein N-terminal Acetylation was allowed.  The precursor mass tolerance was confined within 20 ppm with fragment mass tolerance of 0.02dalton and a maximum of two missed cleavage was allowed. The peptides identified from mascot result file were validated with 5% false discover rate (FDR) and grouped into gene products using ‘gpGrouper’ algorithm (PMID: 30093420). Gene products quantification was performed using the label-free, intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) approach and normalized to FOT (a fraction of the total protein iBAQ amount per experiment).Relative fraction of total (iFOT) values were determined (reported as log10(iFOT x 105), in order to perform two-tailed t-tests between normally distributed groups). As described previously (Jung et al., 2017), missing values (iFOT = 0) were replaced with a value equal to one half of the minimum detected value in the dataset in order to determine fold change between groups (averaged across three replicates) using log2 transformation. Results were not considered for proteins whose iFOT values were zero for all samples.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Astrocytes, Transdifferentiation, Neural stem cells, Human pluripotent stem cells

### Affiliations
Baylor College of Medicine
Assistant Professor of Neurosurgery Department of Neurosurgery Houston Methodist Research Institute Weill Cornell Medical College

### Submitter
Nelufa Islam

### Lab Head
Dr Robert C. Krencik
Assistant Professor of Neurosurgery Department of Neurosurgery Houston Methodist Research Institute Weill Cornell Medical College


