### Accession
PXD008609

### Title
TTG1 interacting profile -  Site-specific phosphorylation of TRANSPARENT TESTA GLABRA1 mediates carbon partitioning in Arabidopsis seeds

### Description
Looking for TTG1 interacting parterners in plant protein extract from 4-days-after-pollination siliques.

### Sample Protocol
For LC-MS/MS analysis, Col-0 wild-type siliques were harvested 4 days after pollination for extraction of total protein. The total protein extract was incubated with the immobilized recombinant MBP-TTG1 for 3 h at 4C. After washing, the pull-downed protein-mixture was seprated by PAGE and analyzed by LC-MS/MS using a TripleTOF 5600 System

### Data Protocol
The MS analysis was performed on a TripleTOF 5600 system (AB SCIEX, Foster City, CA, USA) in Information Dependent Mode. MS spectra were acquired across the mass range of 400–1250 m/z in high resolution mode (>30000) using 250 ms accumulation time per spectrum. A maximum of 10 precursors per cycle were chosen for fragmentation from each MS spectrum with 100 ms minimum accumulation time for each precursor and dynamic exclusion for 8 s. Tandem mass spectra were recorded in high sensitivity mode (resolution >15000) with rolling collision energy on adjustment. Survey- IDA Experiment, with charge state 2 to 4  which exceeds 125 cps was selected. Peptide identification was carried on the ProteinPilot 4.5 software Revision 1656 (AB SCIEX) using the Paragon database search algorithm (4.5.0.0.1654) for peptide identification and the integrated false discovery rate (FDR) analysis function. The data were searched against a database consisting of 2015_Jan_uniprot_sprot fasta database (total 26830 entries).  The search parameters are as follows: Sample Type — Identification; Cys Alkylation — Iodoacetamide; Digestion — trypsin; Special Factors-None; Species —Arabidopsis thaliana. The processing was specified as follows: ID Focus—Biological Modifications; Search Effort — Thorough; Detected Protein Threshold — 0.05 (10.0%) and competitor Error Margin (ProtScore) – 2.00.

### Publication Abstract
Seed development is dependent on nutrients, such as a source of carbon, supplied by the parent plant. It remains largely unknown how these nutrients are distributed to zygotic and maternal tissues to coordinate storage of reserve compounds and development of protective tissues like seed coat. Here we show that phosphorylation of TRANSPARENT TESTA GLABRA1 (TTG1) is regulated by SHAGGY-like kinases 11/12 (SK11/12) and that this mediates carbon flow to fatty acid synthesis and seed coat traits in Arabidopsis seeds. SK11/12 phosphorylate TTG1 at serine 215, thus preventing TTG1 interaction with TRANSPARENT TESTA2. This compromises recruitment of TTG1 to the GLABRA2 locus and downregulates GLABRA2 expression, which enhances biosynthesis of fatty acids in the embryo, but reduces production of mucilage and flavonoid pigments in the seed coat. Therefore, site-specific phosphorylation of TTG1 by SK11/SK12 regulates carbon partitioning between zygotic and maternal sinks in seeds.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis, Silique, Ttg1

### Affiliations
Department of Biological Sciences, Faculty of Science, National University of Singapore, Singapore 117543, Singapore. Temasek Life Sciences Laboratory, National University of Singapore, Singapore 117604, Singapore.
Department of Biological Sciences, Faculty of Science, National University of Singapore

### Submitter
Chengxiang Li

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Yu Hao
Department of Biological Sciences, Faculty of Science, National University of Singapore, Singapore 117543, Singapore. Temasek Life Sciences Laboratory, National University of Singapore, Singapore 117604, Singapore.


