### Accession
PXD027615

### Title
HUVEC 3xHA.FoxO3.A3.ER +4-OHT vs vector +4-OHT

### Description
Forkhead Box O (FoxO) transcription factors are conserved proteins involved in the regulation of life span and age-related diseases, such as diabetes and cancer. Stress stimuli or growth factor deprivation promote nuclear localization and activation of FoxO proteins, which - depending on the cellular context - leads to cell cycle arrest or apoptosis. Moreover, FoxOs can control oxidative stress resistance and cell metabolism. In endothelial cells (ECs), they additionally regulate angiogenesis and may promote inflammation and vessel destabilization implicating a role of FoxOs in vascular diseases. In several cancers, FoxO transcription factors exert a tumor-suppressive function, due to their critical role in regulating proliferation and survival. Others and we have previously shown that FoxOs can regulate these processes via two different mechanisms: either by direct binding to FoxO-responsive elements (FRE) at the promoter of target genes or by a poorly understood alternative process that does not require direct DNA binding and regulates key targets in primary human ECs. Here we performed an interaction study in ECs to identify new nuclear FoxO3 interaction partners, which might contribute to FoxO-dependent gene regulation. Mass spectrometry analysis of FoxO3-interacting proteins revealed Transformation/Transcription Domain-Associated Protein (TRRAP), a member of multiple histone acetyltransferase (HAT) complexes, as novel binding partner of FoxO family proteins. TRRAP is required to support FoxO3 transactivation and FoxO3-dependent apoptosis in ECs via transcriptional activation of the proapoptotic Bcl-2 family member BIM. Moreover, FoxO-TRRAP interaction might explain FoxO-induced alternative gene regulation via TRRAP-dependent recruitment to target promoters lacking FRE sequences.

### Sample Protocol
HUVEC retrovirally infected with pBP-3x.HA.FoxO3.A3.ER or the empty vector were stimulated for 16 h with 4-OHT, lysed with E1A lysis buffer and proteins bound to 3xHA.FoxO3.A3.ER eluted by means of IP with α-HA magnetic beads. Protein precipitation was performed overnight at -20°C with fourfold volume of acetone. Pellets were washed with acetone at -20°C. Precipitated proteins were dissolved in NuPAGE® LDS sample buffer (Life Technologies), reduced with 50 mM DTT at 70°C for 10 min and alkylated with 120 mM Iodoacetamide at room temperature for 20 min. Separation was performed on NuPAGE® Novex® 4-12% Bis-Tris gels (Life Technologies) with MOPS buffer according to manufacturer’s instructions. Gels were washed three times for 5 min with water and stained for 1 h with Simply Blue™ Safe Stain (Life Technologies). After washing with water for 1 h, each gel lane was cut into 15 slices. The excised gel bands were destained with 30 % acetonitrile in 0.1 M NH4HCO3 (pH 8), shrunk with 100 % acetonitrile, and dried in a vacuum concentrator (Concentrator 5301, Eppendorf, Germany). Digests were performed with 0.1 µg trypsin per gel band overnight at 37°C in 0.1 M NH4HCO3 (pH 8). After removing the supernatant, peptides were extracted from the gel slices with 5 % formic acid, and extracted peptides were pooled with the supernatant. NanoLC-MS/MS analyses were performed on an Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a PicoView Ion Source (New Objective) and coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded on capillary columns (PicoFrit, 30 cm x 150 µm ID, New Objective) self-packed with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 µm (Dr. Maisch) and separated with a 30 min linear gradient from 3% to 30% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid and a flow rate of 500 nl/min.  Both MS and MS/MS scans were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer with a resolution of 60 000 for MS scans and 15 000 for MS/MS scans. HCD fragmentation with 35 % normalized collision energy was applied. A Top Speed data-dependent MS/MS method with a fixed cycle time of 3 sec was used. Dynamic exclusion was applied with a repeat count of 1 and an exclusion duration of 30 sec; singly charged precursors were excluded from selection. Minimum signal threshold for precursor selection was set to 50 000. Predictive AGC was used with AGC a target value of 2e5 for MS scans and 5e4 for MS/MS scans. EASY-IC was used for internal calibration.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data files were analyzed with MaxQuant version 1.6.2.2 . Database search was performed with Andromeda, which is integrated in the utilized version of MaxQuant. The search was performed against the UniProt human database extended by the sequence of 3xHA.FoxO3.A3.ER. Additionally, a database containing common contaminants was used. The search was performed with tryptic cleavage specificity with 3 allowed miscleavages. Protein identification was under control of the false-discovery rate (FDR; <1% FDR on protein and PSM level). In addition to MaxQuant default settings, the search was performed against following variable modifications: Protein N-terminal acetylation, Gln to pyro-Glu formation (N-term. Gln) and oxidation (Met). Carbamidomethyl (Cys) was set as fixed modification. Further data analysis was performed using R scripts developed in-house. Missing label free quantification (LFQ) intensities in the control samples were imputed with values close to the baseline. Data imputation was performed with values from a standard normal distribution with a mean of the 5% quantile of the combined log10-transformed LFQ intensities and a standard deviation of 0.1. For the identification of significantly enriched proteins, boxplot outliers were identified in intensity bins of at least 300 proteins. Log2 transformed protein ratios of sample versus control with values outside a 1.5x (significance 1) or 3x (significance 2) interquartile range (IQR), respectively, were considered as significantly enriched.

### Publication Abstract
Forkhead box O (FoxO) transcription factors are conserved proteins involved in the regulation of life span and age-related diseases, such as diabetes and cancer. Stress stimuli or growth factor deprivation promotes nuclear localization and activation of FoxO proteins, which-depending on the cellular context-can lead to cell cycle arrest or apoptosis. In endothelial cells (ECs), they further regulate angiogenesis and may promote inflammation and vessel destabilization implicating a role of FoxOs in vascular diseases. In several cancers, FoxOs exert a tumor-suppressive function by regulating proliferation and survival. We and others have previously shown that FoxOs can regulate these processes via two different mechanisms: by direct binding to forkhead-responsive elements at the promoter of target genes or by a poorly understood alternative process that does not require direct DNA binding and regulates key targets in primary human ECs. Here, we performed an interaction study in ECs to identify new nuclear FoxO3 interaction partners that might contribute to FoxO-dependent gene regulation. Mass spectrometry analysis of FoxO3-interacting proteins revealed transformation/transcription domain-associated protein (TRRAP), a member of multiple histone acetyltransferase complexes, as a novel binding partner of FoxO family proteins. We demonstrate that TRRAP is required to support FoxO3 transactivation and FoxO3-dependent G1 arrest and apoptosis in ECs via transcriptional activation of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p27<sup>kip1</sup> and the proapoptotic B-cell lymphoma 2 family member, BIM. Moreover, FoxO-TRRAP interaction could explain FoxO-induced alternative gene regulation via TRRAP-dependent recruitment to target promoters lacking forkhead-responsive element sequences.

### Keywords
Human, Huvec, Foxo3, Endothelium

### Affiliations
University Hospital Wuerzburg, Department of Dermatology, Venereology and Allergology

### Submitter
Marc Schmidt

### Lab Head
Dr Marc Schmidt
University Hospital Wuerzburg, Department of Dermatology, Venereology and Allergology


