### Accession
PXD009243

### Title
Twenty-four hour rhythms in the absence of the clock gene Bmal1

### Description
Circadian (~24 hour) clocks exist in almost all types of living organism and play a fundamental role in regulating daily physiological and behavioural processes. The transcription factor BMAL1 (ARNTL) is thought to be one of the principal drivers of the molecular clock in mammals since its deletion abolishes 24-hour activity patterning, an important physiological output of the clockwork. However, whether or not Bmal1-/- mice can nevertheless display molecular 24-hour rhythms is unknown. Here, we determined whether Bmal1 function is necessary for daily molecular oscillations in two tissues – skin fibroblasts and liver. Unexpectedly, both tissues exhibited robust 24-hour oscillations over 2-3 days in the absence of any exogenous synchronizers such as daily light or temperature cycles. This demonstrates a competent 24-hour molecular pacemaker in Bmal1 knockouts. Indeed, molecular oscillations were pervasive throughout the transcriptome, proteome and phosphoproteome of Bmal1-/- mice. In particular, several proteins exhibited rhythmic phosphorylation in both Bmal1-proficient and -deficient cells, highlighting an unanticipated role for post-translational regulators in 24-hour rhythms in the absence of any known clock mechanisms.

### Sample Protocol
MSF cells and liver tissue samples were homogenized in 300μL lysis buffer (50mM HEPES (pH 8.5), 8M urea, 0.4% NP40, protease and phosphatase inhibitors, and benzonase nuclease) for 1 min on ice using a pellet pestle (SIGMA). Then mild sonication was applied for 15 min (30 sec on, 30 sec off; medium power) using a Bioruptor Standard (Diagenode) instrument and lysates were centrifuged at 16,000 × g for 15 min at 4°C. Protein precipitation was performed with 1mL pre-chilled (-20°C) acetone for overnight at 4°C. After overnight incubation, lysates were centrifuged at 14,000 × g for 15 min at 4°C. Supernatants were discarded and the pellets were air-dried for 2-3 min to remove residual acetone. Then the pellets were dissolved in 300µL 100mM TEAB buffer.  Protein concentrations were determined by Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientiﬁc, Catalogue number 23225) following the manufacturer’s instructions. 300µg protein per condition was transferred into new microcentrifuge tubes and 15µL of 200mM TCEP was added to reduce the cysteine residues and the samples were incubated at 55°C for 1 hr. Subsequently, the reduced proteins were alkylated with 375mM iodoacetamide for 30 min under dark condition at room temperature. Then, trypsin (Trypsin Gold, Promega, Catalogue number: V5280) was added at a 1:40 (trypsin:protein) ratio and the samples were incubated at 37°C for 12 hrs. After in-solution digestion, peptide samples were labeled with TMT Isobaric Label Reagents (10-plex/6-plex) following the manufacturer's instructions (Thermo Fisher Scientific; Catalogue number(s):  90111 and 90066). Peptide samples were labeled with the corresponding TMT 10-plex/ 6-plex reagent for 1.30 hrs at room temperature. The reactions were quenched using 8µL of 5% hydroxylamine for 30 minutes. Phosphopeptides enrichment was performed using Pierce™ TiO2 Phosphopeptide Enrichment and Clean-up Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific; Catalogue number 88301) as per the manufacturer’s instructions. TMT-labeled peptides were fractionated using Pierce™ High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific; Catalogue number: 84868) following the manufacturer’s instructions. All fractions were desalted using Pierce™ C18 Spin Tips (Thermo Fisher Scientific; Catalogue number 84850). Kinase profiling of mice liver tissue samples was performed using ActivX desthiobiotin nucleotide (ATP and ADP, Thermo Fisher Scientific; Catalogue number(s) 88310 and 88312) probes in combination with TMT reagent-based quantitation following the manufacturer’s instructions. Peptide mixtures from TMT 10-plex labeled samples were chromatographically resolved on a EASY-spray PepMap RSLC C18 column (2µm, 100Å, 75µm X 50cm ID) using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano (Dionex) system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) over a 180 min gradient at 40°C. Six gradient segments (2-8% solvent B over 3.5 min, 8-25% B over 98.5 min, 25-40% B over 45 min, 40-95%B over 5 min, held at 95%B for 5 min and then reduced to 2%B over 1 min and for the rest of the acquisition) were applied with a flow rate of 250 nL/min. Solvent A was 0.1% FA and 5% DMSO in HPLC-grade water, and solvent B was 0.1% FA and 5% DMSO in 80% acetonitrile. All spectra were acquired using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Xcalibur 2.0 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used to control data acquisition. The instrument was operated in data dependent acquisition mode with the top 10 most abundant peptides selected for MS/MS by higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation techniques. MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 1,20,000 and an ion target of 4E5. HCD scans were performed with 38% normalized collision energy (NCE) at 50,000 resolution (at m/z 100), and the ion target settings were set to 1E5. Precursors were filtered with an intensity threshold of 5000, according to charge state (to include charge states 2-6) and with monoisotopic precursor selection.

### Data Protocol
Quantitative proteomics and phosphoproteomics raw data files were analyzed using the MaxQuant computational platform (version 1.5.2.8) with the Andromeda search engine [Cox and Mann, Nat. Biotechnol. 2008]. MS2 spectra were searched against UniProt database specifying Mus musculus (Mouse) taxonomy (Proteome ID: UP000000589; Organism ID: 10090; Protein count: 52026). All searches were performed using “Reporter ion MS2” with “6-plex or 10-plex TMT” as isobaric labels with a static modification for cysteine alkylation (carbamidomethylation), and oxidation of methionine (M) and protein N-terminal acetylation as the variable modifications. Phospho (STY) was included as an additional variable modification for the phosphopeptide enriched samples. Trypsin digestion with maximum two missed cleavages, minimum peptide length as seven amino acids, precursor ion mass tolerance of 5 ppm and fragment mass tolerance of 0.02 Da were specified in all analyses. The false discovery rate (FDR) was kept at 0.01 for peptide spectrum match (PSM), protein, and site decoy fraction level. Subsequent processing and statistical analysis of quantitative proteomics and phosphoproteomics datasets were performed using the Perseus workstation (version 1.5.5.3) [Tyanova et al. Nat Methods. 2016]. During data processing, reverse and contaminant database hits and the candidates identified only by site were filtered out. Normalization across each of the TMT 10-plex experiments for circadian proteomics and phosphoproteomics analyses were performed by quantile normalization using a script written in R language.

### Publication Abstract
Circadian (~24 hour) clocks have a fundamental role in regulating daily physiology. The transcription factor BMAL1 is a principal driver of a molecular clock in mammals. <i>Bmal1</i> deletion abolishes 24-hour activity patterning, one measure of clock output. We determined whether <i>Bmal1</i> function is necessary for daily molecular oscillations in skin fibroblasts and liver slices. Unexpectedly, in <i>Bmal1</i> knockout mice, both tissues exhibited 24-hour oscillations of the transcriptome, proteome, and phosphoproteome over 2 to 3 days in the absence of any exogenous drivers such as daily light or temperature cycles. This demonstrates a competent 24-hour molecular pacemaker in <i>Bmal1</i> knockouts. We suggest that such oscillations might be underpinned by transcriptional regulation by the recruitment of ETS family transcription factors, and nontranscriptionally by co-opting redox oscillations.

### Keywords
Bmal1; circadian rhythms; kinase network; non-transcriptional oscillators; rhythmic proteome and phosphoproteome

### Affiliations
University of Pennsylvania
The Francis Crick Institute, 1 Midland Road, London NW1 1AT, United Kingdom

### Submitter
Sandipan Ray

### Lab Head
Dr Akhilesh B. Reddy
The Francis Crick Institute, 1 Midland Road, London NW1 1AT, United Kingdom


