### Accession
PXD007091

### Title
Honeybee Brain LC-MS/MS -  Proteomics Reveals the Molecular Underpinnings of Stronger Learning and Memory in Eastern Compared to Western Beess

### Description
Honeybee brain has distHoneybee brain has distinct anatomical and functional regions, knowledge on molecular underpinnings of sub-organ to achieve the distinct neural function and the difference between the eastern and western honeybees are still missing. Here, the proteomes of three sub-organs of eastern and western honeybee brains were compared. Mushroom bodies (MBs) and optical lobes (OLs) may by employed similar proteome architectures to drive their domain-specific neural activity in both bee species. In MBs, protein metabolism and Ca2+ transmembrane transport are the key role players in driving the learning and memory by modulating the synaptic structure and signal transduction to consolidate memory trace. In OLs, ribonucleoside metabolism and energy production play major roles to underpin visual system by maintaining G-protein cycle and membrane electrical charge potential. However, in antennal lobes (ALs), it has evolved distinct proteome settings to prime the olfactory learning and memory in two bee species. In ALs of Apis cerana cerana (Acc), actin cytoskeleton organization is key for plasticity of glomeruli and intracellular transport to sustain the olfactory signaling. Whereas, in ALs of Apis mellifera ligustica (Aml), hydrogen and hydrogen ion transport are vital to support olfactory process by supplying energy and maintaining molecule transport. Noticeably, in ALs of Acc, the exclusively enriched functional groups acting as second messenger and neurontransmitter of signal transduction, and the enhanced protein metabolism to regulate the plasticity of synaptic structure for formation of memory, suggest that Acc may have evolved a better sense of smell than that of Aml. Our first proteome data is helpful as starting point for further analysis of neural activity in brain sub-area of honeybee and other insects.inct anatomical and functional regions, knowledge on molecular underpinnings of sub-organ to achieve the distinct neural function and the difference between the eastern and western honeybees are still missing. Here, the proteomes of three sub-organs of eastern and western honeybee brains were compared. Mushroom bodies (MBs) and optical lobes (OLs) may by employed similar proteome architectures to drive their domain-specific neural activity in both bee species. In MBs, protein metabolism and Ca2+ transmembrane transport are the key role players in driving the learning and memory by modulating the synaptic structure and signal transduction to consolidate memory trace. In OLs, ribonucleoside metabolism and energy production play major roles to underpin visual system by maintaining G-protein cycle and membrane electrical charge potential. However, in antennal lobes (ALs), it has evolved distinct proteome settings to prime the olfactory learning and memory in two bee species. In ALs of Apis cerana cerana (Acc), actin cytoskeleton organization is key for plasticity of glomeruli and intracellular transport to sustain the olfactory signaling. Whereas, in ALs of Apis mellifera ligustica (Aml), hydrogen and hydrogen ion transport are vital to support olfactory process by supplying energy and maintaining molecule transport. Noticeably, in ALs of Acc, the exclusively enriched functional groups acting as second messenger and neurontransmitter of signal transduction, and the enhanced protein metabolism to regulate the plasticity of synaptic structure for formation of memory, suggest that Acc may have evolved a better sense of smell than that of Aml. Our first proteome data is helpful as starting point for further analysis of neural activity in brain sub-area of honeybee and other insects.

### Sample Protocol
1 Five colonies and 100 foragers per colony were collect from entrance, and sub-organs of brain were dissected.2 Protein extraction and digestion.3 LC-MS/MS annlysis. 4 Protein identification and label-free quantitation of abundance level.4 Biological valadative.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS Analysis: The digested peptide samples were re-dissolved in 5 µL of 0.1% FA and 3 replicates of each sample were analyzed using an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled with LTQ-Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) via an ESI ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Prior to analytical separation, the samples were loaded onto a trap column (2 cm long, 100 μm inner diameter fused silica filling with 5.0 μm Aqua C18 beads, Thermo Fisher Scientific,) in buffer A (0.1% FA in water) for 2 min at a flow rate of 5 μL/min. Then, peptides were separated on an analytical column packed with 3 μm, 100Å, Aqua C18 beads (15cm long, 75 μm inner diameter, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 350 nL/min, using a 120-min gradient (from 3 to 8% buffer B (0.1% FA in acetonitrile (ACN)) in 5 min, from 8 to 20% buffer B in 80 min, from 20 to 30% buffer B in 20 min, from 30 to 90% buffer B in 5 min, and 90% buffer B in 10 min). The eluting peptides were directly injected into an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) via ESI. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode and the data was acquired in a dependent mode. Dynamic exclusion was performed (with a repeated count: 1, exclusion duration: 30 s, charge exclusion: unassigned 1, >8, peptide match: preferred, exclude isotopes: On). The MS1 precursor scan was acquired at a resolution of 60000, at m/z 400, and scan range: m/z 300-1800. The top 20 intensive scans were then fragmented by higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) in the linear ion trap (resolution: 15000, isolation window: 2 m/z, normalized collision energy: 30).  Protein Identification and Label-free Quantitation of Abundance Level: The MS/MS raw data were collected using Xcalibur (version 2.2, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Protein identification using in-house PEAKS software (version 7.5, Bioinformatics Solutions Inc. Waterloo, Canada) was done by searching against the sequence database (21,780 protein sequences of Apis mellifera, downloaded in February 2015 from the NCBI), coupled with a common repository of adventitious proteins database (cRAP, downloaded from The Global Proteome Machine Organization, April, 2012). The search parameters were: parent ion tolerance, 15 ppm; fragment tolerance, 0.05 Da; enzyme, trypsin; maximum missed cleavages, 2; maximum variable PTM per peptide, 3; fixed modification, carbamidomethyl (C,+57.02 Da); and variable modification, oxidation (M,+15.9 Da). A protein was considered to be confidently identified only if it contained at least one unique peptide with at least two spectra, applying a threshold of false discovery rate (FDR) ≤ 1.0% by a fusion-decoy database searching strategy, a more conservative FDR estimation than that of target-decoy approach (40). The LC-MS/MS data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org) via the PRIDE partner repository with the data set identifier: px-submission #197883. Relative protein abundance of the three sub-organs within and between the two species was quantified using a label-free quantification performed by PEAKS Q module (version 7.5 Bioinformatics Solutions Inc. Waterloo, Canada). Triplicates of each sample were subjected to the software and one sample was automatically selected as reference. Feature detection was made on each of the samples with an expectation-maximization algorithm. Furthermore, feature alignment of the same peptide from three replicates of each sample was done with an algorithm for high-performance retention time (41).Protein expressions of all samples of both bee species were quantified with the sum of three of the most abundant precursor ion peak intensities of the tryptic peptides. Proteins between different samples were considered to be significantly changed in their abundance levels only when they attained the criteria of p value <0.05 and a fold change of ≥1.5.

### Publication Abstract
The eastern (<i>Apis cerana cerana,</i> Acc) and western (<i>Apis mellifera ligustica,</i> Aml) honeybee are two major honeybee species. Surprisingly, little is known about the fundamental molecular neurobiology of brain suborgans of Acc and Aml. We characterized and compared the proteomes of mushroom bodies (MBs), antennal lobes (ALs) and optical lobes (OLs) in the brain of both species, and biologically validated the functions related to learning and memory. Acc and Aml have evolved similar proteome signatures in MBs and OLs to drive the domain-specific neural activities. In MBs of both species, commonly enriched and enhanced functional groups related to protein metabolism and Ca<sup>2+</sup> transport relative to ALs and OLs, suggests that proteins and Ca<sup>2+</sup> are vital for consolidating learning and memory via modulation of synaptic structure and signal transduction. Furthermore, in OLs of both species, the mainly enriched ribonucleoside metabolism suggests its vital role as second messenger in promoting phototransduction. Notably, in ALs of both species, distinct proteome settings have shaped to prime olfactory learning and memory. In ALs of Acc, this is supported by the enriched cytoskeleton organization to sustain olfactory signaling through modulation of plasticity in glomeruli and intracellular transport. In ALs of Aml, however, the enriched functional groups implicated in hydrogen ion transport are indicative of their importance in supporting olfactory processes by regulation of synaptic transmission. The biological confirmation of enhanced activities of protein metabolism and signal transduction in ALs and MBs of Acc relative to in Aml demonstrates that a stronger sense of olfactory learning and memory has evolved in Acc. The reported first in-depth proteome data of honeybee brain suborgans provide a novel insight into the molecular basis of neurobiology, and is potentially useful for further neurological studies in honeybees and other insects.

### Keywords
Honeybee mushroom bodies antennal lobes optical lobes proteome

### Affiliations
Institute of Apicultural Research,Chinese Academy of Agricultural Science
Institute of Apicultural Research, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences

### Submitter
Lifeng Meng

### Lab Head
Dr Jianke Li
Institute of Apicultural Research, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences


