### Accession
PXD029181

### Title
Dysregulation of circulating protease activity in COVID-19-associated superinfection

### Description
Infection by SARS-CoV-2 and subsequent COVID-19 can cause viral sepsis and septic shock. Our past studies demonstrated that dysregulated systemic proteolysis is associated with the pathological mechanism in bacterial septic shock. Thus, here we perform shotgun proteomics and peptidomics analysis by LC-MS/MS to identify and quantify the circulating protein and peptide profile of COVID-19 patient plasma. Plasma samples from four COVID-19 patients were collected at different time points of their ICU stay, including samples from a patient with COVID-19-induced sepsis and bacterial superinfection. By combining mass spectrometry analysis with enzymatic activity assays, our study elucidates the possible pathological involvement of proteolysis in COVID-19-induced sepsis, with particular insight into the dyregulation of protease-mediated systems, such as the coagulation cascade.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics: 2uL of plasma from COVID-19 patients was mixed into 100uL 6M guanidine and boiled for 5 min. After a repeat of boiling and cooling, 950uL of methanol was added to the sample, vortexed, and incubated for 30 minutes at room temperature. The sample was then centrifuged at 13,000g for 20 minutes at 4C. 8M urea in 200mM ammonium bicarbonate (AmmBic) was added to the precipitate and centrifuged at 1300rpm for 30 minutes at 37C. A TCEP/urea solution was added and centrifuged again, followed by overnight freezing. The following solutions were then added with an incubation time in between: 10uL chloroacetamide, 50uL of 50mM AmmBic /0.5ug LysC, 100uL of 50mM AmmBic/1ug trypsin. After overnight digestion at 37C, the solution was warmed to 42C for 1 hour and 75% formic acid was added. Solid-phase extraction was performed prior to UPLC (Dionex UltiMate™ 3000 RSLCnano System, Thermo Scientific) coupled with LC-MS/MS (Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Thermo Scientific) via nano-spray ionization. The digested peptides were loaded onto a pre-column (Acclaim™ PepMap™ 100 C18 CMD, Thermo Scientific) at a rate of 7µL/min for 5 minutes, followed by UPLC through a 1.7µm C18 BEH™ bead-filled 25cm-long glass capillary of 75µm inner diameter (Waters Corporation). Eluted peptides entered the mass spectrometer by a linear gradient (5-100%) of acetonitrile (ACN) at 395µL/min for 2 hours. Peptidomics: 100uL plasma from COVID-19 patients was combined with 900uL methanol and vortexed. After a 30-minute incubation, the sample was centrifuged at 12,000g for 10 minutes. The supernatant was collected and dried using a SpeedVac concentrator, then hydrolyzed in a 0.5mL solution of 0.5% formic acid and 5% CAN. C18 solid-phase extraction was performed following manufacturer’s protocol. Eluents were dried and underwent the same UPLC conditions, but the flow rate into the mass spectrometer was 375µL/min for 2 hours through a linear gradient (5-80%) of ACN. The ACN gradient was created using the following buffers: Buffer A (98% H2O, 2% ACN, 0.1% Formic Acid (FA)) and Buffer B (100% ACN, 0.1% FA).

### Data Protocol
PEAKS Studio 8.5 (Bioinformatics Solutions, Inc.) search engine was used with the following parameters: Parent Mass Error Tolerance: 15.0 ppm Fragment Mass Error Tolerance: 0.4 Da Precursore Mass Search Type: Monoisotropic Enzyme: Trypsin Max Missed Cleavages: 3 Non-Specific Cleave: Both Fixed Modifications: Carbamidomethylation: 57.02 Variable Modifications: Oxidation (HW) 15.99, Oxidation (M): 15.99, Phosphorylation (STY): 79.97, Deamidation (NQ): 0.98, Acetylation (K): 4.01, Methylation (KR): 14.02 Max Variable PTM Per Peptide: 3 Database: Human Uniprot Contamination Database: Contaminants Searched Entry: 7000 FDR Estimation: Enabled De Novo Score (ALC%) Threshold: 15

### Publication Abstract
<b>Introduction:</b> Infection by SARS-CoV-2 and subsequent COVID-19 can cause viral sepsis. We investigated plasma protease activity patterns in COVID-19-induced sepsis with bacterial superinfection, as well as plasma proteomics and peptidomics in order to assess the possible implications of enhanced proteolysis on major protein systems (e.g., coagulation). <b>Methods:</b> Patients (=4) admitted to the intensive care units (ICUs) at the University of California, San Diego (UCSD) Medical Center with confirmed positive test for COVID-19 by real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) were enrolled in a study approved by the UCSD Institutional Review Board (IRB# 190699, Protocol #20-0006). Informed consent was obtained for the collection of blood samples and de-identified use of the data. Blood samples were collected at multiple time points and analyzed to quantify a) the circulating proteome and peptidome by mass spectrometry; b) the aminopeptidase activity in plasma; and c) the endopeptidase activity in plasma using fluorogenic substrates that are cleaved by trypsin-like endopeptidases, specific clotting factors and plasmin. The one patient who died was diagnosed with bacterial superinfection on day 7 after beginning of the study. <b>Results:</b> Spikes in protease activity (factor VII, trypsin-like activity), and corresponding increases in the intensity of peptides derived by hydrolysis of plasma proteins, especially of fibrinogen degradation products and downregulation of endogenous protease inhibitors were detected on day 7 for the patient who died. The activity of the analyzed proteases was stable in survivors. <b>Discussion:</b> The combination of multiomics and enzymatic activity quantification enabled to i) hypothesize that elevated proteolysis occurs in COVID-19-induced septic shock with bacterial superinfection, and ii) provide additional insight into malfunctioning protease-mediated systems, such as hemostasis.

### Keywords
Covid-19, Enzymatic activity, Proteolysis, Proteomics, Sepsis, Peptidomics

### Affiliations
UC San Diego
Department of Anesthesiology, School of Medicine, University of California, San Diego, United States Department of Anesthesiology & Critical Care, VA San Diego Healthcare System, United States

### Submitter
Joyce Li

### Lab Head
Dr Erik B. Kistler
Department of Anesthesiology, School of Medicine, University of California, San Diego, United States Department of Anesthesiology & Critical Care, VA San Diego Healthcare System, United States


