### Accession
PXD021243

### Title
Differential proteomic response to bleaching in coral tissue versus skeletal matrix

### Description
On August 22 – 25, 2017, 3 colonies of Montipora capitata with a diameter of ~ 24 cm were collected from the inner lagoon surrounding the Hawaii Institute of Marine Biology (HIMB). The corals were acclimated in outdoor flow-through tanks at HIMB that were supplied with ambient seawater and covered with shade-cloth to mimic PAR levels on the reef. Each colony was split in half with a hammer and chisel to produce two colonies of identical genotype, so that each genotype would experience both ambient and increased temperatures. On August 28 - 29, the corals were equally divided among the experimental tanks, at ambient (n=3) or increased (n=3) temperature. Throughout the temperature treatment, corals were randomly rotated among tanks to minimize potential tank effects. On September 1, the temperature in the increased temperature tanks was turned up 2°C per day, 1°C at 0900 and 1°C at 1400, for four days, reaching an average temperature of 30 °C. The ambient tanks averaged 25 °C. On September 26, the heaters were turned off and the temperature returned to ambient levels by Sept. 29.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were collected at least 1 cm from the tip of the fragment to reduce the chance of collecting immature tissue. A cross-section (2mm x 0.5 cm diameter) was cut from the fragment and the outer tissue was exacted by slicing off only the exterior with a razor blade. The outside edge of the remaining skeletal material was cut away with a razor blade until there was a “pea-sized” piece of inner skeleton left. To lyse cells, coral samples were sonicated with a titanium micro-probe sonicator in 100 ul of 50 nM sodium bicarbonate with 6 M urea, then flash frozen for 30 s. The samples were centrifuged at 4°C at 5000 rpm for 10 min to separate and remove skeletal material. Samples were standardized by adding 50 ug of protein to a new microcentrifuge tube, then brought to a total volume of 100 uL using 50 mM NH4HCO3 with 6M urea. Trypsin digestion was performed by first adding 6.6 uL of 1.5 M Tris, pH 8.8 and 1 uL of 500 mM TCEP to each sample followed by incubation for 1 hour at 37° C. Next, 8 uL of 500 mM iodoacetamide was added followed by 1 hour incubation at room temperature in the dark. Then 8 uL of 500 mM diothiothreitol was added before another 1 hour incubation at room temperature. To dilute the urea, 800 uL of 25 mM NH4HCO3 and 200 uL of HPLC grade methanol were added to each tube. To cleave proteins, 2.5 ug of Trypsin was added to each sample (1:20 enzyme:protein) then 10 uL aliquots of 10% formic acid were added until pH was ≤ 2, followed by incubation overnight at 37° C. Samples were desalted using MicroSpinTM Columns. Liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry was performed on Thermo Fisher QExactive. Samples were prepared for each mass spectrometry run by adding 90 uL of 5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid, to 45 ug of peptide digest. Liquid chromatography was performed using a 28 cm long, 75 μm i.d., fused silica capillary column with a 2 cm, 100 mm i.d., precolumn.

### Data Protocol
Peptide and protein identification was performed by searching mass spectrometry results against the translated M. capitata genome using Comet version 2017.01 rev. 4. Modified parameters included a concatenated decoy search, peptide mass tolerance of 10 ppm, trypsin as the search enzyme, and allowed up to three missed cleavages.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dda, Coral, Bleaching, Skeletal matrix, Montipora capitata

### Affiliations
University of Washington
Genome Sciences, University of Washington

### Submitter
Emma Timmins-Schiffman

### Lab Head
Dr Brook Nunn
Genome Sciences, University of Washington


### SDRF
- Tissue/skeleton: Tisssue , Skeleton

