### Accession
PXD028874

### Title
The HLA ligandome comprises a limited repertoire of O-GlcNAcylated antigens preferentially associated with HLA-B07:02

### Description
Mass-spectrometry based immunopeptidomics has provided unprecedented insights into antigen presentation, not only charting an enormous ligandome of self-antigens, but also cancer neo-antigens and peptide antigens harbouring post-translational modifications. Here we concentrate on the latter, focusing on the small subset of HLA Class I peptides (less than 1%) that has been observed to be post-translationally modified (PTM) by a O-linked N-acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc). Just like neo-antigens these modified antigens may have specific immunomodulatory functions. Here we compiled from literature, and a new dataset originating from JY B cell lymphoblastoid line cells, a concise albeit comprehensive list of O-GlcNAcylated HLA class I peptides. The cumulative list of O-GlcNAcylated HLA peptides originates from diverse datasets, entailing normal and cancer cell lines as well as tissue samples. Interestingly, the overlap in detected O-GlcNAcylated HLA peptides as well as their source proteins is strikingly high. From the compiled list we extract that O-GlcNAcylated HLA Class I peptides are preferentially presented by the HLA-B07:02 allele. This allele accommodates a Proline anchoring site at position 2, and a binding groove that can accommodate the recently proposed consensus sequence for O-GlcNAcylation, P(V/A/T/S)g(S/T). Most of the O-GlcNAcylated HLA peptides originate from nuclear proteins, notably transcription factors. The conclusions drawn from the compiled list, may assist to predict novel O-GlcNAcylated HLA antigens, which will likely be presented best by patients harbouring HLA-B7:02, or related, alleles that uses Proline as anchoring residue.

### Sample Protocol
The B-lymphoblastoid cell line JY, homozygote in class I alleles (HLA-A∗02:01, HLA-B∗07:02, HLA-C∗07:02), used in this study was grown at 37 ℃ with 5 % CO2 in a medium consisting of RPMI 1640 supplemented with 10 % fetal bovine serum, 50 U/mL penicillin, and 50 μg/mL streptomycin to a final amount of 1 x 108 cells. Cells were lysed and the HLA class I molecules were immunoaffinity purified and their associated peptides were extracted as previously described.(17, 18) Im more detail, the HLA class I complexes were immunoprecipitated from the supernatant of lysed cells using –the pan-HLA class I mouse monoclonal IgG2a antibody W6/32.(19) HLA Class I peptide complexes were eluted using 10% (v/v) acetic acid, and the peptides ligands were further separated from the HLA molecules by filtration over a 10-kDa molecular weight cutoff membrane (Millipore). The flowthrough containing the HLA class I peptide ligands was freeze-dried, reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid for further cleanup by C18 STAGE tips (Thermo Fischer Scientific) and eluted with 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. The samples were dried by vacuum centrifugation and reconstituted in 2% formic acid before LC/MS-MS analysis.  LC-MS/MS analysis The HLA Class I peptides were analyzed using an Ultimate 3000 UHPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific). The peptides were trapped on (Dr Maisch Reprosil C18, 3 μM, 2 cm × 100 μM) for 5 min in solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) before being separated on an analytical column (Agilent Poroshell, EC-C18, 2.7 μm, 50 cm × 75 μm). Solvent B consisted of 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. The gradient was as follows: first 5 min of trapping, followed by 100 min gradient from 5 % to 40 % solvent B. Subsequently, 10 min of washing with 99 % solvent B and 10 min re-equilibration with 9 % solvent A. The mass spectrometer operated in data-dependent mode. Full scan MS spectra from m/z 350 to 1400 were acquired at a resolution of 120,000 in the Orbitrap after accumulation to a target value of 4 × 105 or a maximum injection time of 50 ms.   For peptide sequencing three fragmentation strategies were employed. First, to profile the JY immunopeptidome, higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) MS/MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 60,000. Charge states of 2 up to 4 starting at m/z 120 were chosen for fragmentation using the MIPS algorithm with 1.2 Da isolation window. The fragmentation was performed using 30% normalized collision energy (NCE) on selected precursors with 30s dynamic exclusion after accumulation of 5×104 ions. Additionally, especially to characterize the O-GlcNAcylated immunopeptidome, two triggered fragmentation methods used, namely electron transfer dissociation (ETD) and energy-stepped HCD, triggered when 2 out of the six O-GlcNAc signature fragment ions (m/z 204, 186, 168, 144, 138, and 126) were detected at >5% relative abundance. The HCD fragmentation was performed using 25, 30 and 35 % NCE while the triggered ETD was performed using 35% the “Use Calibrated Charge-Dependent ETD Parameters” toggle NCE on with maximum injection time of 100 ms.

### Data Protocol
Data Analysis All RAW files were searched using the PEAKS software against the Swiss-Prot human database (20,258 entries, downloaded in February 2018) edited with the JY-specific HLA proteins and 20 most abundant FBS contaminants, with no enzyme specificity in the search engine to identify the unmodified HLA ligandome. Precursor ion and MS/MS tolerances were set to 10 ppm and 0.03 Da. Methionine oxidation and cysteinylation were set as variable modifications. The peptide-spectrum matches were filtered for precursor tolerance 5 ppm, <1% FDR, XCorr > 1.7, and peptide rank 1. Only peptides between 8 and 12 amino acid long were selected for further analysis for unmodified peptides. Glycopeptide assignments were made by searching the same RAW files using Byonic software (v4.1). Precursor and MS/MS tolerance were set to 10 ppm and 0.03 Da. Allele predictions and binding affinities were predicted by the NetMHC 4.1algorithm for the identified HLA−peptide sequences. The O-GlcNAc modified serine/threonine residues were considered unmodified for binding affinity predictions of the O-GlcNAc HLA Class I peptides. Predictions were enabled for HLA-A∗02:01, HLA-B∗07:02 and HLA-C∗07:02 allele, and peptides were considered binders when % Rank <2.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hla-b07, Immunopeptidomics, Mhc, O-glcnacylation, Hla class i

### Affiliations
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences (UIPS)
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Alvaro Sanchez Bernabeu

### Lab Head
Dr Albert JR Heck
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences (UIPS)


