### Accession
PXD030783

### Title
SARS-CoV-2 Cysteine Disulfide Mapping

### Description
Mapping of SARS-CoV-2 (D614G) cysteine disulfides with treatment of benzylthiol-based reducting agents

### Sample Protocol
With an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer coupled with Easy-nLC1000 nano liquid chromatography system (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA), peptides were eluted from an EASY PepMapTM RSLC C18 column (2 µm, 100Å, 75 µm x 50cm, Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA) using a gradient of 5-25% solvent B (80/20 acetonitrile/water, 0.1% formic acid) in 45 min, followed by 25-44% solvent B in 15 min, 44-80% solvent B in 0.10 min, a 10 min hold of 80% solvent B, a return to 5% solvent B in 3 min, and finally a 3 min hold of 5% solvent B. The gradient was then extended for the purpose of cleansing the column by increasing solvent B to 98% in 3 min, a 98% solvent B hold for 10 min, a return to 5% solvent B in 3 min, a 5% solvent B fold for 3 min, an increase of solvent B to 98% in 3 min, a 98% solvent B hold for 10min, a return to 5% solvent B in 3 minutes and a 5% solvent B hold for 3 min and finally, another increase to 98% solvent B in 3 minutes and a hold of 98% solvent B for 10min. All flow rates were 250nL/min delivered using a Easy-nLC1000 nano liquid chromatography system (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA). Solvent A consisted of water and 0.1% formic acid. Ions were created at 1.9kV using the EASY-SprayTM ion source (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA) held at 50oC. Data dependent scanning was performed by the Xcalibur v 4.0.27.10 software using a survey scan at 120, 000 resolution in the Orbitrap analyzer scanning mass/charge (m/z) 380-2000 followed by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) at a normalized collision energy of 30% of the most intense ions at maximum speed, at an automatic gain control of 1.0E4. Precursor ions were selected by the monoisotopic precursor selection (MIPS) setting to peptide and MS/MS was performed on charged species of 1-8 at a resolution of 30,000. Dynamic exclusion was set to exclude ions after two times within a 30 sec window, for 20 sec.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched using pFind studio (http://pfind.ict.ac.cn/software/pFind/index.html). Precursor ion mass and fragmentation tolerance were set as 10 ppm and 20 ppm, respectively. The maximum number of modiﬁcations and missed cleavages allowed per peptide were both set as three. For all analyses, mass shifts of + 15.9949 Da (methionine oxidation) and + 57.0214 Da (iodoacetamide alkylation) and mass shifts caused by the tested chemicals were searched as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
The development of small-molecules targeting different components of SARS-CoV-2 is a key strategy to complement antibody-based treatments and vaccination campaigns in managing the COVID-19 pandemic. Here, we show that two thiol-based chemical probes that act as reducing agents, P2119 and P2165, inhibit infection by human coronaviruses, including SARS-CoV-2, and decrease the binding of spike glycoprotein to its receptor, the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2). Proteomics and reactive cysteine profiling link the antiviral activity to the reduction of key disulfides, specifically by disruption of the Cys379-Cys432 and Cys391-Cys525 pairs distal to the receptor binding motif in the receptor binding domain (RBD) of the spike glycoprotein. Computational analyses provide insight into conformation changes that occur when these disulfides break or form, consistent with an allosteric role, and indicate that P2119/P2165 target a conserved hydrophobic binding pocket in the RBD with the benzyl thiol-reducing moiety pointed directly toward Cys432. These collective findings establish the vulnerability of human coronaviruses to thiol-based chemical probes and lay the groundwork for developing compounds of this class, as a strategy to inhibit the SARS-CoV-2 infection by shifting the spike glycoprotein redox scaffold.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Cysteine, Reducing agent

### Affiliations
Scripps Research

### Submitter
Yunlong Shi

### Lab Head
Dr Yunlong Shi
Scripps Research


