### Accession
PXD005420

### Title
Ovarian serous cancer tumor microenvironment investigated by MALDI MSI associated to Top-down microproteomic: Evidence of a hidden proteome as novel potential target

### Description
Top-down tissue microproteomic was performed in order to investigate tumoral tissue microenvironment. 289 proteins with post-translational modifications have been isolated from biospies including Tumor, Borderline and healthy regions of serous ovarian cancers. Tumor tissue displays a majority of proteins from the nucleus and extracellular vesicles. By contrast proteins identified in the healthy tissue or bordeline are related to cellular trafficking and membranes. Global subnetwork analyses confirmed that tumor pathways displayed proteins involved in neoplasm, autophagy, apoptosis, cell proliferation, tumor immunity whereas in healthy tissue pathways are mainly in cell survival, growth, motion, adhesion, differentiation and vascularization. Interestingly, truncated proteins are in majority observed in tumor region reflecting a high level expression of enzymes in this region. Besides the reference proteome, a deeper analysis of the hidden proteome issued from Alternative ORF, led a total of 14 alternative proteins identified i.e. Six Altprot from healthy tissues, 4 from borderline tissues and 4 from tumors. Expression of one of the 4 tumoral alternative protein, AltGNL1 which is translated from an AltORF nested within the GNL1 canonical coding sequence have been performed. Co-expression of annotated and alternative proteins from the same gene, was realized by transfection in HEK 293 and HeLa cells with an expression plasmid containing a GNL1-Flag(V5) construct. Western blot and immunofluorescence experiments with an anti-FLAG confirmed that AltGNL1 is constitutively co-expressed with GNL1. AltGNL1 displays a nuclear localization whereas GNL1 is present in the cytosol. Thus were report here for the first time the co-localization of two proteomes: the one issued from the kozak code and the one from Alternative ORF, so called the Hidden Proteome.

### Sample Protocol
To ensure little-to-no protein hydrolysis by endogenous proteases, every step from buffer preparation to nanoLC-MS/MS analysis were carried out within day with on-ice conservation in between sample processing steps. A solution of 1% temperature and acid cleavable commercial detergent ProteaseMAX was prepared in 50 µM DTT and was directly aliquoted and immediately stored at - 20 °C until use according to manufacturer’s recommendations. Aliquots were processed within day of sample extraction to ensure minimal degradation of the detergent over time. Aliquot of 1 % ProteaseMAX 50 µM DTT was diluted in ice-cold 50 µM DTT to obtain a final detergent concentration of 0.1 % and stored on-ice until use. Each aliquot was used within day without conservation of remaining solution. LMJ experiments To ensure optimal protein extraction, lipids were removed from the tissue section by immersing glass slide in consecutives solvent bath consisting in washes of 1 minute in 70 % EtOH, 1 minute in 95 % EtOH and 30 seconds in chloroform with complete solvent evaporation under reduced pressure at room temperature between each washing step. Slide was then scanned again as washing steps improve structure visibility.LMJ tissue slide was placed on a TriVersa NanoMate (Advion, Ithaca, NY, USA). Proteins were then extracted from every ROI by completing six cycles of pipetting up 1.5 µL of detergent solution, dispensing 0.8 µL of the extraction buffer on the surface of the selected ROI with 10 iterations of up-and-down pipetting, aspiration of 2.5 µL by the device and 4 µL expulsion from the pipette tip into a clean tube to ensure complete retrieval of the initial 1.5 µL for each cycle. Per ROI, the final collected volume was 9 µL which was immediately stored on-ice until further processing. PAM experiments 10 µL of extraction buffer was transferred into a tube. Selected ROI(s) was manually dissected using a clean scalpel blade under microscope and transferred into the proteins extraction buffer and stored on-ice until further processing. nanoLC-MS/MS Every ROI-containing-tube, with either extracts obtained with the LMJ or PAM strategy into extraction buffer, were sonicated for 5 minutes into a sonication bath and denaturated at 55 °C for 15 minutes to ensure reduction of disulfide bonds. Tubes were then quickly centrifuged to rally condensation droplets at the bottom of the tube. Parafilm pieces were then carefully removed from tubes using a pipette tip without loss of liquid and tubes were then subjected to heat at 95°C for 10 minutes to ensure complete detergent dissociation. Tubes were then quickly centrifuged and stored on ice, 11 µL of 10 % ACN in 0.4 % FA in water were added to each tube to reach LC starting concentration of ACN and stored at 4 °C until nanoLC-MS/MS analysis on the same day. 5 µL of the sample was loaded onto a 2 cm * 150 µm internal diameter PLRP-S (Varian, Palo Alto, California, USA) IntegraFrit sample trap-column (New Objective, Woburn, Massachussetts, USA) at a maximum pressure 280 bar using a Proxeon EASY nLC-II (Proxeon, Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) and were separated on a 15 cm * 100 µm internal diameter PLRP-S column with a GRADIENT and a flow rate of 300 nL/min.  Data were acquired on a Q-Exactive (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) mass spectrometer equipped with a nanoESI source (Proxeon, Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) applying 1.6 kV on a PicoTip nanospray emitter (New Objective, Woburn, Massachussetts, USA). Data were acquired in a data dependent mode using a top 3 strategy. Full scans were acquired by averaging 4 microscans at 70 000 resolution within a mass range of 800 – 2000 m/z with an AGC target of 1 * 10 6 and a maximum accumulation time of 200 ms. The three most abundant ions with charge superior than 3 or unassigned were selected for fragmentation. Precursors were selected within a 15 m/z selection window by the quadrupole and fragmented by averaging two microscans at a resolution of 70 000 with a Normalized Collision Energy (NCE) of 25, the AGC target was set to 1 * 10 6 with a maximum accumulation time of 500 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set to 20 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis RAW files were processed with ProSight PC 3.0 (Thermo, BREMEN GERMANY). Spectral data were deisotoped using the cRAWler algorithm and searched against the complex Homo sapiens ProSightPC database version 2014_07. A second search was performed to detect alternative open reading frame products with a custom database composed of the Homo sapiens UniProt Reference proteome (canonical and isoforms) of 01.16.2015 and an in-silico translated database of the Homo sapiens of the transcripts from GenBank containing every open reading frame with potential protein product that had at least 30 amino acids. Files were searched with an absolute then biomarker strategy considering every PTM available. Identification were considered positive when one of the two strategy steps gave an expected score (E-value) that was lower than 10-4. UniProt accession numbers from each ovarian tissue technical triplicate were combined and exported to UniProt “Retrieve/ID mapping” tool to recover files with accession numbers, Gene names and protein names (supplementary Data 1). Venn diagrams were then generated by entering the UniProt combined accession number of each region into the University of Gent Venn diagram Webtool. Subnetwork Enrichment Pathway Analyses and statistical Testing The Elsevier’s Pathway Studio version 10.0 (Ariadne Genomics/Elsevier) was used to deduce relationships among differentially expressed proteomics protein candidates using the Ariadne ResNet database (27, 28). "Subnetwork Enrichment Analysis" (SNEA) algorithm was selected to extract statistically significant altered biological and functional pathways pertaining to each identified set of protein hits among the different groups. SNEA utilizes Fisher's statistical test set to determine if there are nonrandom associations between two categorical variables organized by specific relationship.  Integrated Venn diagram analysis was performed using “the InteractiVenn”: a web-based tool for the analysis of comlex data sets.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Alternative proteins, Maldi imaging, Top down micro-proteomics

### Affiliations
Laboratoire Protéomique, Réponse Inflammatoire et Spectrométrie de Masse (PRISM) - INSERM U1192 - Université Lille 1, Bât SN3, 1er étage, Cité Scientifique, F-59655 Villeneuve d’Ascq Cedex
PRISM-INSERM U1192

### Submitter
Julien Franck

### Lab Head
Dr Michel Salzet
Laboratoire Protéomique, Réponse Inflammatoire et Spectrométrie de Masse (PRISM) - INSERM U1192 - Université Lille 1, Bât SN3, 1er étage, Cité Scientifique, F-59655 Villeneuve d’Ascq Cedex


