### Accession
PXD040155

### Title
A novel antifolate suppresses growth of FPGS-deficient cells and overcomes methotrexate resistance

### Description
Thermal Proteome Profiling (TPP) allows for identification of drug (off-)targets by evaluating shifts in apparent melting temperature for proteins. In this study, we use TPP to identify the targets for a novel antifolate (C1).

### Sample Protocol
Cells were harvested after 1 hour of treatment with 10 μM compound C1 or DMSO, washed with PBS and 10 aliquots, each of 1×106 cells in 100 μL PBS, were distributed in a 96-well PCR plate. After centrifugation (300 × g for 3 min) and removal of most of the supernatant (80 μL), each aliquot was heated for three minutes to a different temperature (37°C, 40.4°C, 44°C, 46.9°C, 49.8°C, 52.9°C, 55.5°C, 68.6°C, 62°C, 66.3°C) in a PCR machine (Agilent SureCycler 8800) followed by 3 min at room temperature. Cells were lysed with 30 μL ice-cold lysis buffer (final concentration 0.8% NP-40, 1.5mM MgCl2, protease inhibitors, phosphatase inhibitors, 0.4 U/μL benzonase) on a shaker (500 rpm) at 4°C for one hour. The PCR plate was then centrifuged at 300 × g for 3 min at 4°C to remove cell debris, and the supernatant was filtered at 300 × g for 3 min at 4°C through a 0.45-μm 96-well filter plate (Millipore, MSHVN4550) to remove protein aggregates. Of the flow-through, 25 μL was mixed with 2× sample buffer (180 mM Tris pH 6.8, 4% SDS, 20% glycerol, 0.1 g bromophenol blue) and kept at -20°C until prepared for mass spectrometry analysis, while the remainder was used in a BCA (ThermoFisher Scientific), to determine the protein concentration. Samples were diluted to 1 μg/μL in 1x sample buffer based on the protein concentrations in the lowest two temperatures (37°C, 40.4°C). 10 μg of protein was added to a bead suspension (10 μg of beads (Thermo Fischer Scientific—Sera-Mag Speed Beads) in 10 μl 15% formic acid and 30 μl ethanol) and incubated on a shaker (500 rpm) for 15 min at RT. Beads were washed four times with 70% ethanol and proteins were digested overnight in 40 μl digest solution (5 mM chloroacetamide, 1.25 mM TCEP, 200 ng trypsin, and 200 ng LysC in 100 mM HEPES pH 8). Peptides were then eluted from the beads, vacuum-dried, reconstituted in 10 μl of water, and labeled for 1 h at RT with 18 μg of TMT10plex (ThermoFisher Scientific) dissolved in 4 μl of acetonitrile. The reaction was quenched with 4 μl of 5% hydroxylamine, and samples were combined by temperature. Samples were acidified and desalted using StageTips and eluted with 2x 30 μl of buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.01% TFA). Samples were fractionated using the Pierce™ High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (ThermoFisher Scientific) into 3 fractions (Fraction No. 4, 7 and 8). The flowthrough, wash and TMT wash fractions were pooled together with fraction 4. Peptides were applied to reverse-phase chromatography using a nanoLC-Easy1000 coupled online to a Thermo Orbitrap Q-Exactive HF-X. Using a 120 min gradient of buffer B, peptides were eluted and subjected to tandem mass spectrometry. The mass spectrometer was operated in Top20 mode and dynamic exclusion was applied for 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
MS data were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer (ThermoFisher Scientific, version 2.2). Data were searched against the human UniProt database. Search parameters: trypsin, missed cleavages 3, peptide tolerance 10ppm, 0.02Da for MS/MS tolerance. Fixed modifications were carbamidomethyl on cysteines and TMT10plex on lysine. Variable modifications included acetylation on protein N terminus, oxidation of methionine and TMT10plex on peptide N-termini. The Proteome Discoverer output files were loaded into R, merged filtered for duplicates and proteins with less than 2 unique peptides and saved in an ExpressionSet R-object. Potential batch effects were removed using limma and data were normalized using variance stabilization, vsn strategy. Normalization was done each temperature independently, to account for the decreasing signal intensity at the higher temperatures. The abundance score of each protein was calculated as the average log2 fold change at the two lowest temperatures (37°C, 40.4°C). The stability score of each protein was calculated by subtracting the abundance score from the log2 fold changes of all temperatures and calculating the sum of the resulting values. To assess the significance of abundance and thermal stability scores, we used a limma analysis, followed by an FDR analysis using the fdrtool package.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Antifolates, Dhfr, Fpgs, One-carbon metabolism, Targetable vulnerability

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Science, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Oncode Institute, Radboud University Nijmegen, 6525 GA Nijmegen, The Netherlands
Radboud Universiteit Nijmegen

### Submitter
Dick Zijlmans

### Lab Head
Dr Michiel Vermeulen
Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Science, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Oncode Institute, Radboud University Nijmegen, 6525 GA Nijmegen, The Netherlands


