### Accession
PXD004256

### Title
in vitro ubiquitination by E3 ligase Cbl-b

### Description
Fungal infections claim an estimated 1.5 million lives every year. Mechanisms that protect from fungal infections are still elusive. Recognition of fungal pathogens relies on C-type lectin receptors (CLR) and their downstream signaling kinase SYK. Here we report that the E3-ubiquitin-ligase CBL-B controls proximal C-type lectin receptor signaling in macrophages and dendritic cells. We show that CBL-B associates with SYK and ubiquitinates SYK, Dectin-1, and Dectin-2 upon fungal recognition. Functionally, CBL-B deficiency results in increased inflammasome activation, enhanced reactive oxygen species production, and increased fungal killing. Genetic deletion of Cblb protects mice from morbidity caused by cutaneous infection and markedly improves survival upon a lethal systemic infection with Candida albicans. Based on these findings, we engineered a cell-permeable CBL-B inhibitory peptide that protects mice from lethal C. albicans infections. We thus describe a key role for Cblb  in the regulation of innate anti-fungal immunity and establish a novel paradigm for the treatment of fungal sepsis.

### Sample Protocol
in vitro ubiquitination assay was performed using recombinant proteins E1, UbcH5B, human Cbl-b, ubiquitin and Syk as a substrate. ATP was added to initiate the reaction and incubated for 30 min. The sample was resolved by SDS-PAGE. The cut out gel bands were then reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin. The nano HPLC system used was an UltiMate 3000 HPLC RSLC nano system (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific), equipped with a Proxeon nanospray source (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded onto a trap column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Amsterdam, Netherlands, PepMap C18, 5 mm × 300 μm ID, 5 μm particles, 100 Å pore size) at a flow rate of 25 μL min-1 using 0.1% TFA as mobile phase. After 10 min, the trap column was switched in line with the analytical column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Amsterdam, Netherlands, PepMap C18, 500 mm × 75 μm ID, 2 μm, 100 Å). Peptides were eluted using a flow rate of 230 nl min-1, and a binary 2h gradient, respectively 165 min. The gradient started with the mobile phases: 98% A (water/formic acid, 99.9/0.1, v/v) and 2%B (water/acetonitrile/formic acid, 19.92/80/0.08, v/v/v) increases to 35%B over the next 120min, followed by a gradient in 5 min to 90%B, stays there for five min and decreases in 2min back to the gradient 98%A and 2%B for equilibration at 30°C.  The Q Exactive mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, using a full scan (m/z range 370-1650, nominal resolution of 70 000, target value 3E6) followed by MS/MS scans of the 12 most abundant ions. MS/MS spectra were acquired using normalized collision energy 27%, isolation width of 2 and the target value was set to 1E5. Precursor ions selected for fragmentation (charge state 2 and higher) were put on a dynamic exclusion list for 10 s. Additionally, the underfill ratio was set to 20% resulting in an intensity threshold of 4E4. The peptide match feature and the exclude isotopes feature were enabled.

### Data Protocol
For peptide identification, the .RAW-files were loaded into Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4.0.288, Thermo Scientific). All hereby created MS/MS spectra were searched using the search engine node MSAmanda (Dorfer V. et al., J. Proteome Res. 2014 Aug 1;13(8):3679-84) against the flybase sequence database (22,256 sequences; 20,222,850 residues) and also against the Swissprot sequence database, using the taxonomy human (20,170 sequences, 11,318,213 residues). The following search parameters were used: Beta-methylthiolation on cysteine was set as a fixed modification, oxidation on methionine, acetylation on lysine, phosphorylation on serine, threonine and tyrosine, deamidation on asparagine and glutamine and ubiquitinylation on lysine were set as variable modifications. Monoisotopic masses were searched within unrestricted protein masses for tryptic peptides. The peptide mass tolerance was set to ±5 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance to ± 0.03 Da. The maximal number of missed cleavages was set to 2. The result was filtered to 1% FDR using Percolator algorithm integrated in Proteome Discoverer. The localization of the sites of variable modifications within the peptides was performed with the tool ptmRS, integrated in Proteome Discoverer and based on phosphoRS (Taus T. et al., J. Proteome Res. 2011, 10, 5354-62).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Ubiquitin linkage, Cbl-b

### Affiliations
IMBA - Institute of Molecular Biotechnology
Institute of Molecular Biotechnology of the Austrian Academy of Sciences (IMBA), 1030 Vienna, Austria

### Submitter
Richard Imre

### Lab Head
Dr Josef Penninger
Institute of Molecular Biotechnology of the Austrian Academy of Sciences (IMBA), 1030 Vienna, Austria


