### Accession
PXD004890

### Title
Analysis of ablation of mitochondrial fission in adult forebrain neurons

### Description
Well-balanced mitochondrial fission and fusion processes are essential for nervous system development. Loss of function of the main mitochondrial fission mediator, dynamin-related protein 1 (Drp1), is lethal early during embryonic development or around birth, but the role of mitochondrial fission in adult neurons remains unclear. Here we show that inducible Drp1 ablation in neurons of the adult mouse forebrain results in progressive, neuronal subtype-specific alterations of mitochondrial morphology in the hippocampus that are marginally responsive to antioxidant treatment. Furthermore, DRP1 loss affects synaptic transmission and memory function. Although these changes culminate in hippocampal atrophy, they are not sufficient to cause neuronal cell death within 10 weeks of genetic Drp1 ablation. Collectively, our in vivo observations clarify the role of mitochondrial fission in neurons, demonstrating that Drp1 ablation in adult forebrain neurons compromises critical neuronal functions without causing overt neurodegeneration.

### Sample Protocol
Brain tissue samples were lysed in 2% sodium deoxycholate, 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer, reduced with 5 mM tris(2-chlorethyl)phosphate and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide. Proteins were then digested by incubation with sequencing-grade modified trypsin (1/50, w/w; Promega, Madison, WI, USA) overnight at 37 °C. The digested samples were subsequently labeled with isobaric tag (TMT 6-plex, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The TMT-labeled samples were re-solubilized to a final concentration of 1 mg/ml and separated on a 12-cm pH 3–10 IPG strip (GE Healthcare) with a 3100 OFFGEL fractionator (Agilent, Basel, Switzerland) as previously described.46 The setup of the μRPLC-MS system was as described previously.47 Chromatographic separation of peptides was carried out using an EASY nano-LC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific), equipped with a heated RP-HPLC column (75 μm× 50 cm) packed in-house with 1.9 μm C18 resin (Reprosil-AQ Pur, Dr. Maisch). Mass spectrometry analysis was performed on a dual pressure LTQ-Elite Orbitrap mass spectrometer equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source (both Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Using the MASCOT algorithm (Matrix Science, Version 2.4.0), the resulting mgf files were searched against a decoy database containing normal and reverse sequences of the predicted SwissProt entries of Mus musculus (www.ebi.ac.uk, release date 16/05/2012) and commonly observed contaminants (in total 33 832 sequences for Mus musculus) generated using the SequenceReverser tool from the MaxQuant software (Version 1.0.13.13; www.maxquant.org). Next, database search results were imported to the Scaffold Q+ software (version 4.3.3, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR, USA), and the protein false identification rate was set to 1% based on the number of decoy hits. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet program.48 Acquired reporter ion intensities in the experiments were employed for automated quantification and statistically analyzed using a modified version of our in-house developed SafeQuant R script.47 In brief, reporter ion intensities were corrected for isotopic impurities according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Intensities for each peptide and protein ID were summed, globally normalized across all acquisition runs and employed for ratio calculation and statistical analysis. For complete mass spectrometry materials and methods, please refer to the Supplementary Information.

### Publication Abstract
Well-balanced mitochondrial fission and fusion processes are essential for nervous system development. Loss of function of the main mitochondrial fission mediator, dynamin-related protein 1 (Drp1), is lethal early during embryonic development or around birth, but the role of mitochondrial fission in adult neurons remains unclear. Here we show that inducible Drp1 ablation in neurons of the adult mouse forebrain results in progressive, neuronal subtype-specific alterations of mitochondrial morphology in the hippocampus that are marginally responsive to antioxidant treatment. Furthermore, DRP1 loss affects synaptic transmission and memory function. Although these changes culminate in hippocampal atrophy, they are not sufficient to cause neuronal cell death within 10 weeks of genetic Drp1 ablation. Collectively, our in vivo observations clarify the role of mitochondrial fission in neurons, demonstrating that Drp1 ablation in adult forebrain neurons compromises critical neuronal functions without causing overt neurodegeneration.

### Keywords
Neurons, Synaptic dysfunction, Lc-ms/ms, Tmt

### Affiliations
Biozentrum, University of Basel, Klinglebergstrasse 50/70, CH-4056 Basel
Proteomics Core Facility

### Submitter
Alexander Schmidt

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Schmidt
Biozentrum, University of Basel, Klinglebergstrasse 50/70, CH-4056 Basel


