### Accession
PXD028515

### Title
Identification of plasma extracellular vesicle biomarkers after burn injury

### Description
Severe burn injury is a one of the most devastating forms of trauma with over 1.1 million burns each year requiring medical attention in the United States. Deaths from burn injury are commonly caused by immune-related sequelae such as pneumonia, organ failure and other opportunistic bacterial infections. Though there have been numerous studies to assess the immunological dysfunction associated with burn injury, there have yet to be a predictive biomarker, that can be used to assess high risk patients and their outcomes. We hypothesized that circulating extracellular vesicles (EVs) released early after burn injury would promote activate peripheral macrophages and specific cargo could be used as a biomarker to identify at-risk patients. To test this hypothesis, we assessed the immune consequences of adoptive transfer of EVs isolated after burn injury in vitro and used unbiased proteomic on EVs from mouse models and human burn patients from the UNC Jaycee Burn Center. Findings here suggest EVs serve as mediators of immune dysfunction and potential biomarkers.

### Sample Protocol
Sample Preparation for Proteomics Analysis: 8M urea was added to the in-solution protein samples (~10-20 µg per replicate, n=3), then reduced with 5mM DTT for 30 min and alkylated with 15mM iodoacetamide for 45 min. The samples were diluted to 1M urea, then digested with MS grade trypsin (Promega) at 37˚C overnight. The peptide samples were acidified to 1% TFA, then desalted using StrataX SPE cartridges (Phenomenex). The samples were dried via vacuum centrifugation, then resuspended in 0.1% formic acid for BCA colorimetric peptide quantitation assay (Pierce).   LC/MS/MS Analysis: Samples were normalized and 0.5 µg of each sample was analyzed by LC-MS/MS using an Easy nLC 1200 coupled to a QExactive HF (Thermo Scientific). Samples were injected onto an Easy Spray PepMap C18 column (75 μm id × 25 cm, 2 μm particle size) (Thermo Scientific) and separated over a 90 min method. The gradient for separation consisted of 5–32% mobile phase B at a 250 nl/min flow rate, where mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid in water and mobile phase B consisted of 0.1% formic acid in ACN. The QExactive HF was operated in data-dependent mode where the 15 most intense precursors were selected for subsequent HCD fragmentation. Resolution for the precursor scan (m/z 350–1700) was set to 60,000 with a target value of 3 × 106 ions, 100ms inject time. MS/MS scans resolution was set to 15,000 with a target value of 1 × 105 ions, 75ms inject time. The normalized collision energy was set to 27% for HCD, with an isolation window of 1.6 m/z. Peptide match was set to preferred, and precursors with unknown charge or a charge state of 1 and ≥ 7 were excluded.

### Data Protocol
Data Analysis: Raw data files were processed using MaxQuant version 1.6.3.4 and searched against the reviewed human database (containing 20245 sequences) or the reviewed mouse database (containing 16940 sequences) Andromeda within MaxQuant. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin, up to two missed cleavage sites were allowed, carbamidomethylation of Cys was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of Met was set as a variable modification. Label-free quantification (LFQ) using razor + unique peptides was enabled. A 1% false discovery rate (FDR) was used to filter all data.   Additional analysis was performed in Perseus. A minimum of 2 unique peptides per protein and >50% non-zero values across the datasets were required for quantification. Imputation of missing values based on normal distribution with width of 0.3 and downshift of 1.8, was performed. Student’s t-test was performed for each pairwise comparison (mouse burn_control; human burn_control) and a p-value<0.05 was considered statistically significant. A LFQ log2 fold change ratio for each pairwise comparison was calculated and a log2 ratio ±-1 was considered significant. Sample KEY: Sample ID (S#) --- Sample Type 1 --- Human Control 1 2 --- Human Control 2 3 --- Human Control 3 4 --- Human Burn 1 5 --- Human Burn 2 6 --- Human Burn 3 7 --- Mouse Control 1 8 --- Mouse Control 2 9 --- Mouse Control 3 10 --- Mouse Burn 1 11 --- Mouse Burn 2 12 --- Mouse Burn 3

### Publication Abstract
Severe burn injury is a devastating form of trauma that results in persistent immune dysfunction with associated morbidity and mortality. The underlying drivers of this immune dysfunction remain elusive, and there are no prognostic markers to identify at-risk patients. Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are emerging as drivers of immune dysfunction as well as biomarkers. We investigated if EVs after burn injury promote macrophage activation and assessed if EV contents can predict length of hospital stay. EVs isolated early from mice that received a 20% total body surface area (TBSA) burn promoted proinflammatory responses in cultured splenic macrophages. Unbiased LC-MS/MS proteomic analysis of early EVs (&lt;72 h post-injury) from mice and humans showed some similarities including enrichment of acute phase response proteins such as CRP and SAA1. Semi-unbiased assessment of early human burn patient EVs found alterations consistent with increased proinflammatory signaling and loss of inhibition of CRP expression. In a sample of 50 patients with large burn injury, EV SAA1 and CRP were correlated with TBSA injury in both sexes and were correlated with length of hospital stay in women. These findings suggest that EVs are drivers of immune responses after burn injury and their content may predict hospital course.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Extracellular vesicles, Label-free quantitation, Microvesicle

### Affiliations
Assistant Professor, Pharmacology Dept, UNC-Chapel Hill
UNC-Chapel Hill

### Submitter
Laura Herring

### Lab Head
Dr Leon Coleman
Assistant Professor, Pharmacology Dept, UNC-Chapel Hill


