### Accession
PXD009281

### Title
H4K20me2 SILAC Nucleosome Affinity Purification

### Description
Goal of this project was the identification of chromatin interacting proteins whose binding is differentially regulated by di-methylation of lysine 20 on histone H4 (H4K20me2). To achieve this unodified and H4K20me2-modified histone H4 were generated by native chemical ligation and assembled into recombinant di-nucleosomes. The di-nucleosomes were immobilized on streptavidin-coated beads via the biotinylated di-nucleosomal DNA and used for nucleosome affinity purifications to identify proteins regulated by H4K20me2 from SILAC-labelled HeLaS3 nuclear extracts (Arg10 and Lys8). SILAC affinity purifications were carried out in "forward" (heavy extract on modified nucleosome and light extract on unmodified nucleosome) and "reverse" (light extract on modified nucleosome and heavy extract on unmodified nucleosome) label-swap experiments and protein abundances were quantified by MaxQuant.

### Sample Protocol
Native chemical ligation of modified histone H4 Native chemical ligations of unmodified and H4K20me2-modified histone H4 were carried out in 550 μl of degassed ligation buffer (200 mM KPO4, 2 mM EDTA, 6 M Guanidine HCl) containing 1 mg of modified/unmodified H4 peptides spanning aa’s 1-28 and containing a C-terminal thioester (Cambridge Peptides), 4 mg of truncated H41-28I29C, 20 mg 4-Mercaptophenylacetic acid (MPAA) and 25 mg TCEP as reducing agent at a pH of 7.5. The reactions were incubated over night at 40°C and quenched by addition of 60μl 1 M DTT and 700 μl 0.5% acetic acid. After precipitation clearance by centrifugation, the ligation reactions were directly loaded and purified on a reversed phase chromatography column (Perkin Elmer Aquapore RP-300 C8 250x4.6 mm i.d.) using a gradient of 35-45% B (Buffer A: 0.1% trifluoroacetic in water; B: 90% acetonitrile, 0.1% trifluoroacetic) over 10 column volumes. Positive fractions containing ligated full-length histone H4 were combined and directly lyophilized. SILAC nucleosome affinity purifications (SNAP) SILAC-labelled nuclear extracts were prepared from HeLa S3 cells as previously described in Bartke et al., 2010. For each pull-down, di-nucleosomes were refolded with unmodified H4 or H4K20me2-containing octamers and biotinylated 601-di-nucleosomal DNA and used for SILAC nucleosome affinity pull-down as described in Bartke et al., 2010. Briefly, nucleosomes corresponding to 12.5 μg of octamer were immobilized on 10 μl Streptavidin Sepharose HP beads (GE Healthcare) in the final reconstitution buffer (10 mM Tris [pH 7.5], 250 mM KCl, 1 mM EDTA and 1 mM DTT; supplemented with 0.1% NP40) and then rotated with 0.5 mg HeLa S3 SILAC-labelled nuclear extract in 1 ml of SNAP buffer (20 mM HEPES [pH 7.9], 150 mM NaCl, 0.2 mM EDTA, 10% Glycerol) supplemented with 0.1% NP40, 1 mM DTT and protease inhibitors cocktail (Roche) for 4 hr at 4°C. After two washes with 1 ml SNAP buffer + 0.1% NP40 followed by two washes with 1 ml SNAP buffer without NP40, the beads from both SILAC pull-downs were pooled. The supernatant was completely removed, and bound proteins were eluted by on-bead digestion. On-bead digestion and peptide purification The beads were resuspended in 50 μl of Elution buffer (2M Urea, 100 mM Tris [pH 7.5], 10 mM DTT) and incubated on a shaker (1,000 rpm) at 25°C for 20 min. Iodoacetamide (Sigma I1149) was added to a final concentration of 50 mM and the sample was incubated on a shaker (1,000 rpm) at 25°C in the dark for 10 min. After digestion with 0.3 μg Trypsin (Promega V5113) for 2 hr on a shaker (1,000 rpm) at 25°C, the supernatant was transferred to a new tube and was further digested with 0.1 μg Trypsin overnight at 25°C. The digestion was stopped by adding 5.5 μl of 10% TFA. Eluted peptides were purified on C18 stage-tips (Glygen 10-200 μL TopTips) following the manufacturer’s instructions and dried with a SpeedVac. Mass Spectrometry Samples were loaded at 8 μl/min onto a trap column (Thermo Scientific Acclaim Pepmap 100; 100 μm internal diameter, 2 cm length, C18 reversed-phase material, 5 μm diameter beads, 100 Å pore size) in 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid.  Peptides were eluted on-line to an analytical column (Thermo Scientific Acclaim Pepmap RSLC; 75 μm internal diameter, 25 cm length, C18 reversed-phase material, 2 μm diameter beads, 100  Å pore size) and separated using a flow rate of 250 nl/min and gradient conditions of: Initial 5 minutes with 4% buffer B, then 90 minutes gradient 4-25% B, then 30 minutes gradient 25-45% B, then 1 minute gradient 45-90% B and finally 15 minutes isocratic at 100% B before returning to starting conditions for a 15 minute equilibration (Buffer A: 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in water; B: 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid).  The QExactive instrument acquired full scan survey spectra (m/z 300 to 1650) at 70,000 resolution. An AGC target value of 3E6 and a maximum injection time of 20 milliseconds were used. The top 10 most abundant multiply-charged ions were selected in a data-dependent manner, fragmented by higher-energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) and data were collected over the range 200-2000 m/z at 17,500 resolution. An AGC target value of 1E5 with a maximum injection time of 120 milliseconds were used. A dynamic exclusion time of 30 seconds was enabled References Bartke, T., Vermeulen, M., Xhemalce, B., Robson, S.C., Mann, M., Kouzarides, T., 2010. Nucleosome-interacting proteins regulated by DNA and histone methylation. Cell 143, 470–484. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2010.10.012

### Data Protocol
Protein abundances from the QExactive mass spectrometer were quantified by MaxQuant 1.6.0.16 using 2-plex labeling (Arg10 and Lys8). The search was run against human UP000005640 proteome (version GCA_000001405.26) from UniProt. Search parameters were set up to allow variable oxidation on methionines and acetylation on N-termini as well as fixed carbamidomethylation on cysteines. Tryptic peptides with up to 2 missed cleavages were considered for analysis and tolerance settings were set to Orbitrap instrument. Co-fragmented peptide identification and matching between runs has been enabled. For protein quantification, minimum ratio count was set to 1and remaining settings left default.

### Publication Abstract
Genotoxic DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) can be repaired by error-free homologous recombination (HR) or mutagenic non-homologous end-joining<sup>1</sup>. HR supresses tumorigenesis<sup>1</sup>, but is restricted to the S and G2 phases of the cell cycle when a sister chromatid is present<sup>2</sup>. Breast cancer type 1 susceptibility protein (BRCA1) promotes HR by antagonizing the anti-resection factor TP53-binding protein 1(53BP1) (refs. <sup>2-5</sup>), but it remains unknown how BRCA1 function is limited to the S and G2 phases. We show that BRCA1 recruitment requires recognition of histone H4 unmethylated at lysine 20 (H4K20me0), linking DSB repair pathway choice directly to sister chromatid availability. We identify the ankyrin repeat domain of BRCA1-associated RING domain protein 1 (BARD1)-the obligate BRCA1 binding partner<sup>3</sup>-as a reader of H4K20me0 present on new histones in post-replicative chromatin<sup>6</sup>. BARD1 ankyrin repeat domain mutations disabling H4K20me0 recognition abrogate accumulation of BRCA1 at DSBs, causing aberrant build-up of 53BP1, and allowing anti-resection activity to prevail in S and G2. Consequently, BARD1 recognition of H4K20me0 is required for HR and resistance to poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase inhibitors. Collectively, this reveals that BRCA1-BARD1 monitors the replicative state of the genome to oppose 53BP1 function, routing only DSBs within sister chromatids to HR.

### Keywords
Nucleosome affinity purification, H4k20me2, Silac, H4k20me0, Snap

### Affiliations
Institute of Functional Epigenetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Germany
Helmholtz Zentrum Munich

### Submitter
Saulius Lukauskas

### Lab Head
Dr Till Bartke
Institute of Functional Epigenetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Germany


