### Accession
PXD022560

### Title
Protein import defects induce mitophagy without membrane depolarization

### Description
Upon mitochondrial dysfunction, mitophagy has been described to be activated by a breakdown of membrane potential leading to PINK1 accumulation on the outer membrane and engulfment of mitochondria for degradation. However, recent findings have indicated that mitophagy may also be triggered in the absence of membrane potential alterations. Here, we report mechanistic details on how inhibition of protein import induces mitophagy independent of mitochondrial membrane depolarization. Carrying out a genome-wide CRISPR/Cas9 screen for regulators of mitophagy, we found that the pre-sequence translocase-associated motor complex PAM controls mitophagy induction. Loss of PAM caused defects in protein import and was sufficient to induce mitophagy without depolarization. Quantitative interaction and aggregation proteomics revealed that PAM was highly sensitive to proteostasis perturbation; upon misfolding conditions, PAM dissociated from the import machinery, sequestered into the insoluble fraction and caused mitophagy despite an intact membrane potential. Our findings extend the current mitophagy model and provide mechanistic insight into how proteostasis perturbation leads to mitophagy induction. They reveal the PAM complex as key folding sensor integrating proteostasis, import and mitophagy.

### Sample Protocol
Organelle-specific pulsed-SILAC MS sample preparation Cells were treated for the indicated time, while the last two hours the medium was exchanged with pre-warmed heavy SILAC medium consisting of RPMI160 medium for SILAC (GIBCO 88365) supplemented with 100 μg/mL Arg10 (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories), 100 μg/mL Lys8 (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories) and 10 % FBS. Crude mitochondria were isolated and samples prepared as previously described (Bozidis et al 2007). In brief, proteins were denatured, reduced and alkylated, and then purified by methanol/chloroform precipitation. Proteins were resuspended in 8M urea, 10 mM EPPS pH 8.2 and the protein concentration measured via Bicinchoninic Acid (BCA) Protein Assay Kit (ThermoFisher Scientific 23225). 20 µg protein were digested with 0.4 µg (1:50) LysC (Wako Chemicals) and 0.2 µg (1:100) Trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37°C. Peptides were purified over Empore C18 (Octadecyl) resin material (3M Empore). 10µg were labelled with TMT11 (Thermo Scientific, A34808), quenched and pooled for fractionation. Pierce high pH reversed phase peptide fractionation kit (Thermo Scientific 84868) was performed accordingly to manufacturer’s instructions. The fractions were dried by vacuum centrifugation for mass spectrometric measurement. Dried peptides were resuspended with 0.5 µg/µl in 2 % (v/v) acetonitrile / 1 % (v/v) formic acid solution. Samples were shot with settings similar to previously studies (Klann et al 2019). First, peptides were separated on an Easy nLC 1200 (ThermoFisher Scientific) and a 22 cm long, 75 mmID fused-silica column, which had been packed in house with 1.9 mm C18 particles (ReproSil-Pur, Dr. Maisch), and kept at 45°C using an integrated column oven (Sonation). Peptides were eluted by a non-linear gradient from 5%–38% acetonitrile over 120 min and subsequently sprayed into a QExactive HF mass spectrometer equipped with a nanoFlex ion source (ThermoFisher Scientific) at a spray voltage of 2.3 kV. Full scan MS spectra (350-1400 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200, a maximum injection time of 100 ms and an AGC target value of 3x 106. Up to 20 most intense peptides per full scan were isolated using a 1 Th window and fragmented using higher energy collisional dissociation (normalized collision energy of 35). MS/MS spectra were acquired with a resolution of 45,000 at m/z 200, a maximum injection time of 86 ms and an AGC target value of 1x 105. Ions with charge states of 1 and > 6 as well as ions with unassigned charge states were not considered for fragmentation. Dynamic exclusion was set to 20 s to minimize repeated sequencing of already acquired precursors.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometric raw data was analyzed using Proteome Discoverer (PD) 2.4 (ThermoFisher Scientific). Files were recalibrated using the Homo sapiens SwissProt database (TaxID = 9606, v. 2017-10-25) with methionine oxidation (+15.995) as dynamic modification and carbamidomethyl (Cys,+57.021464), TMT6 (N-terminal, +229.1629) and TMT6 (+229.1629) at lysines as fixed modifications, in organelle-specific pulsed-SILAC experiments, also TMT6+K8 (K, +237.177), Arg10 (R, +10.008) were set for dynamic modifications, as described in earlier studies (Klann et al 2020). Spectra were selected using default settings and database searches performed using SequestHT node in PD. Database searches were performed against a trypsin digested Homo sapiens SwissProt database and FASTA files of common contaminants (`contaminants.fasta` provided with MaxQuant) for quality control. Fixed modifications were set as TMT6 at lysine residues, TMT6 (N-terminal) and carbamidomethyl at cysteine residues. As dynamic modifications acetylation (N-terminal) and methionine oxidation were set. After search, posterior error probabilities were calculated and PSMs filtered using Percolator using default settings. The Consensus Workflow for reporter ion quantification was performed with default settings. For the organelle-specific pulsed-SILAC experiments, peptide files were exported and heavy SILAC-labelled peptides extracted.

### Publication Abstract
Mitophagy is essential to maintain mitochondrial function and prevent diseases. It activates upon mitochondria depolarization, which causes PINK1 stabilization on the mitochondrial outer membrane. Strikingly, a number of conditions, including mitochondrial protein misfolding, can induce mitophagy without a loss in membrane potential. The underlying molecular details remain unclear. Here, we report that a loss of mitochondrial protein import, mediated by the pre-sequence translocase-associated motor complex PAM, is sufficient to induce mitophagy in polarized mitochondria. A genome-wide CRISPR/Cas9 screen for mitophagy inducers identifies components of the PAM complex. Protein import defects are able to induce mitophagy without a need for depolarization. Upon mitochondrial protein misfolding, PAM dissociates from the import machinery resulting in decreased protein import and mitophagy induction. Our findings extend the current mitophagy model to explain mitophagy induction upon conditions that do not affect membrane polarization, such as mitochondrial protein misfolding.

### Keywords
Protein misfolding, Mitochondrial protein import, Mitophagy, Pulsed-silac

### Affiliations
Goethe University Frankfurt, Faculty of medicine, Institute of Biochemistry II, Münch Group
Goethe Universität Frankfurt am Main, Faculty of medicine, Institute of Biochemistry II, Münch Group

### Submitter
Jonas Michaelis

### Lab Head
Dr Christian Münch
Goethe University Frankfurt, Faculty of medicine, Institute of Biochemistry II, Münch Group


