### Accession
PXD009128

### Title
Human mitochondrial cysteine desulfurase complex data set 2

### Description
Cysteine desulfurase plays central role in mitochondrial iron-sulfur cluster biogenesis not only by providing sulfur through the catalysis of L-cysteine to L-alanine but also by serving as the platform for the assembly of other components of the biosynthetic machinery, including ISCU, frataxin, and ferredoxin. Human mitochondrial cysteine desulfurase complex consists of a homodimer with three components: NFS1, ISD11 and acyl carrier protein (ACP). In this study we used chemical crosslinking coupled with tandem mass spectrometry (XC-MS) to investigate the structures of cysteine desulfurase complexes.

### Sample Protocol
The chemical cross-linking reaction was started by mixing 1 mg/mL purified NIAU in PBS buffer with 20-fold BS3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific)After the reactions were incubated at room temperature for 30 min, the cross-linked products were analyzed by SDS-PAGE. Bands from the SDS–PAGE gel corresponding to cross-linked complexes were excised, and the proteins were reduced/alkylated and digested by addition of trypsin following standard protocols. Digested peptides were extracted with 50 µL Millipore water containing 1% TFA by vortexing 10 min at room temperature. An additional extraction was performed with 80 µL of 70% acetonitrile/25% H2O/5% TFA (v/v/v). Peptides were dried in a vacuum centrifuge, reconstituted with 20 µL H2O containing 0.1% TFA for injection onto a Linear Trap Quarupole (LTQ) Orbitrap XL using an Agilent 1100 LC system at the University of Wisconsin-Madison Mass Spectrometry/Proteomics Facility. The peptides were loaded directly onto an analytical column of 75 μm inner diameter and 360 μm outer diameter house-packed with ∼13 cm C18 resin (Magic-C18, 200Å, 3 μm, Bruker, Billerica, MA). MS1 spectra were collected using the Orbitrap at resolution 100,000 with preview mode enabled.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS data were processed into peak lists using Mascot server. The StavroX 3.5.1 software (Gotze et al., 2012) was used to generate a list of the crosslinked peptides. The false discovery rate (FDR) cut off was set to 5%, and precursor and fragment ion tolerances were set to 10 ppm and 0.6 Da, respectively. Each crosslinked peptide was also assigned a score by StavroX 3.5.1 software based on comparison between the theoretical fragmentation and the actual MS/MS spectrum of the crosslinked peptide.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mitochondrial cysteine desulfurase, Xc-ms

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry University of Wisconsin-Madison
University of Wisconsin-Madison

### Submitter
Kai Cai

### Lab Head
Dr John L. Markley
Department of Biochemistry University of Wisconsin-Madison


