### Accession
PXD026486

### Title
Structural and functional fine mapping of cysteines in mammalian glutaredoxin reveal a hierarchy of susceptibility to oxidative inactivation

### Description
Protein-S-glutathionylation (PSSG) is a post-translational modification involving the conjugation of glutathione to reactive protein thiols, which can modulate the activity and structure of key cellular proteins. Glutaredoxins (GLRX) are oxidoreductases that regulate this process by performing the reversible deglutathionylation reaction. Mammalian GLRX only requires the N-terminal cysteine in the thioredoxin domain to carry out deglutathionylation. However, GLRX has five cysteines that are potentially vulnerable to oxidative modification, and oxidation of GLRX itself has been reported in close association with aggregation and loss of activity. Further, the specific cysteines within GLRX that are vulnerable to oxidative modification and their relative reactivities with oxidants remain unknown. Herein, we utilized various molecular modeling approaches coupled with site-directed mutagenesis of each cysteine both individually and in combination to address how the five cysteines present in GLRX influence the enzyme’s biological activity and susceptibility to dimerization and inactivation. We report that mutation of cysteine 26 (C26) to serine of murine GLRX1 confers a higher rate of deglutathionylation. We further demonstrate that C8 and C83 are targets for PSSG in vitro while C79 is less vulnerable due to steric hindrance. Hydrogen peroxide also caused inactivation of GLRX that was only protected against with mutation of C8 or C83. Both experimental and modeling evidence indicates C8 contributes to dimer formation. Lastly, combinatorial mutation of C8, C26, and C83 results in increased biological activity and resistance to aggregation and oxidative inactivation. Overall, these results from our corroborated experimental and computational studies have valuable implications for the use of GLRX as a therapeutic in settings of dysregulated protein glutathionylation.

### Sample Protocol
Trypsin Digestion GLRX mutants were run briefly onto the SDS-PAGE, which was then stained with Coomassie blue and destained with 50% methanol and 5% acetic acid. Each GLRX mutant sample was excised from the gel, reduced with 10 mM DTT for 30 minutes at room temperature and alkylated with 100 mM iodoacetamide for 30 minutes at room temperature. The GLRX mutant samples were then digested with 20 ng/mL trypsin at 37*C for 16 hours and the peptides were extracted from the gel for LC-MS/MS analysis. WT GLRX was glutathionylated in vitro by incubation with GSSG (1 or 50 mM) prior to gel electrophoresis under non-reducing conditions. Peptides were prepared in the same way as GLRX mutants, with the exception of the disulfide reduction step.   Liquid chromatography- tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) The tryptic peptides resuspended in 2.5% acetonitrile (ACN)  and 2.5% formic acid (FA) in water were analyzed on the Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer coupled to an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  Samples were loaded onto a 100 μm i.d. capillary column packed with UChrom C18 (1.8 μm particle size, 120 Å, Cat. No: PN-80001; Nanolcms, CA) at a flow rate of 300 nl min-1.  The column end was laser pulled to a ~3 μm orifice and packed with minimal amounts of 5um Magic C18AQ before packing with the 1.8 um particle size chromatographic materials.  Peptides were separated by a solvent system composed of solvent A: 100% water/0.1% FA and solvent B: 80% ACN /0.1% FA with a gradient of 0-44% B over 60 min (for GLRX samples with multiple mutations) 0-44% B over 150 min (for glutathionylated GLRX and single mutation GLRX samples), 44-100% B in 1 min and then 100% B for 8 min, followed by an immediate return to 100% A and a hold at 100% A for 20 min before the next injection.  The GLRX samples with multiple mutations were randomized in run order and peptide standards (bovine serum albumin) were run between samples.  Mass spectrometry data was acquired in a data-dependent “Top 10” acquisition mode with lock mass function activated (m/z 371.1012; use lock masses: best; lock mass injection: full MS), in which a survey scan from m/z 350-1600 at 70, 000 resolution (AGC target 1e6; max IT 100 ms; profile mode) was followed by 10 higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) scans on the most abundant ions at 17,500 resolution (loop count = 10; AGC target 5e4; max IT 100 ms; centroid mode).  MS/MS scans were acquired with an isolation width of 1.6 m/z and a normalized collisional energy of 26%.  Dynamic exclusion was enabled (peptide match: preferred; exclude isotopes: on; underfill ratio: 1%; exclusion duration: 15 sec). Minimum AGC target = 5 e2.  Parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) was carried out with alternating MS-SIM and PRM scans (2 scan groups) using a shorter 60-min of 0-44% B gradient. Full scans were acquired from m/z 300-2,000 at 70, 000 resolution (AGC target 1e6; max IT 100 ms; profile mode). PRM were carried out with higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) MS/MS scans in profile mode at 17,500 resolution on the precursors of interest, with the following settings: AGC target 5e4; max IT 100 ms; isolation width of 1.6 m/z and a normalized collisional energy of 26%. Lock mass function was activated (m/z 371.1012; use lock masses: best; lock mass injection: full MS).

### Data Protocol
Database searches Raw files were analyzed using the Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and product ion spectra searched using the SEQUEST with the “Basic” Processing and Consensus workflows against a Uniprot Mus musculus protein database (UP000000589). Search parameters included full trypsin enzymatic activity; max two missed cleavages, mass tolerance at 10 ppm and 0.02 Da for precursor ions and fragment ions. Global dynamic modifications included: methionine oxidation (+15.995 Da), cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57.021 Da), oxidation (+15.995 Da), dioxidation (+31.990 Da), and trioxdiation (+47.985 Da), Cys->Ser (-15.977 Da (C) and S-glutathionylation (+305.068 Da). Dynamic Modification specific to the peptide terminus included: N-terminus acetylation (+42.011 Da), Met-loss (-131.040 Da), and Met-loss+Acetyl (-89.030 Da). PSM validation was completed with the Fixed Value PSM Validator. The “IMP-ptmRS”, “Peptide Isoform Grouper”, and “Modification Sites” nodes were included in the workflow for distinguishing peptides with multiple modification sites within the same peptide from glutathionylated GLRX samples.   Sequence validation of GLRX mutants  Mass spectra were manually inspected using Scaffold Q+S 4.11 (Proteome Software, OR) to confirm the mutation sites and glutathionylation sites in GLRX.  Quantification of glutathionylation in GLRX For quantifying glutathionylated GLRX peptides (two independent experiments), the search files (.msf) together with the raw files were imported into Skyline for selecting precursors or transitions for quantitation.  Abundance of the GLRX peptides was determined by extracting the target ion chromatograms (extracted ion chromatograms: XICs) and determining the areas under the Satvisky Golay-smoothed ion elution profiles using “Peak Areas/Replicate Comparison”.  Default parameters for peptide and transition settings were used with the following modifications. Peptide Settings: 1) Max missed cleavages = 2; 2) Max variable mods: = 4.  Transition settings: 1) resolution and mass tolerance were set to match the Orbitrap settings  (MS resolution: 70,000, MSMS resolution: 17,500 (PRM), Method/Ion match tolerance m/z: 0.05 Da), 2) Ion type: p (DDA) and p, b, y (PRM), 3) Precursor charges = 1, 2, 3 (DDA), and Ion charges = 1, 2 (PRM), and 4) MS1 filtering: Peaks = 1 and Precursor mass analyzer set as “Orbitrap”.  Various versions of the glutathionylated peptides with different combinations of modifications (CAM, GSH and SO3 on cysteines and methionine oxidation) were created via “modify …” to the target peptides.  After setting the above-mentioned parameters, the raw files and search results were re-imported through “Manage Results”.  The XICs were pinpointed by “Auto-Zoom”, and the retention times of the displayed XICs were compared with those determined by Proteome Discoverer for the elution profiles of the peptides of interest identified with the highest XCorr value.  Boundaries of integration were manually evaluated and adjusted according to the elution profiles. Additional quantification by PRM was performed on closely eluting VVVFIKPTC(GSH)PYC(O3)R and VVVFIKPTC(O3)PYC(GSH)R peptides, when necessary (in experimental replicate 1). The abundance value was determined by summing the area of the XIC of the 3 transitions that are unique to the peptides (VVVFIKPTC(GSSG)PYC(O3)R: m/z 939.433 ++ → 326.113 [y2]+,C(GSH), 489.176 [y3]+ Y, and 586.229 [y4]+ P, and VVFIKPTC(O3)PYC(GSH)R: ++ → 538.196 [y2]+C(O3), 746.260 [y3]+ Y, and 843.312 [y4]+ P).  The transitions were selected via “Pick Children”.    The spectra with the highest XCorr value acquired during peak elution.   Extracted ion chromatograms of the GLRX peptides are documented in June12021_Quant_Skyline.pdf and the quantification result is summarized in June012021_Quant_Table.xlsx.

### Publication Abstract
Protein-S-glutathionylation is a post-translational modification involving the conjugation of glutathione to protein thiols, which can modulate the activity and structure of key cellular proteins. Glutaredoxins (GLRX) are oxidoreductases that regulate this process by performing deglutathionylation. However, GLRX has five cysteines that are potentially vulnerable to oxidative modification, which is associated with GLRX aggregation and loss of activity. To date, GLRX cysteines that are oxidatively modified and their relative susceptibilities remain unknown. We utilized molecular modeling approaches, activity assays using recombinant GLRX, coupled with site-directed mutagenesis of each cysteine both individually and in combination to address the oxidizibility of GLRX cysteines. These approaches reveal that C8 and C83 are targets for S-glutathionylation and oxidation by hydrogen peroxide in vitro. In silico modeling and experimental validation confirm a prominent role of C8 for dimer formation and aggregation. Lastly, combinatorial mutation of C8, C26, and C83 results in increased activity of GLRX and resistance to oxidative inactivation and aggregation. Results from these integrated computational and experimental studies provide insights into the relative oxidizability of GLRX's cysteines and have implications for the use of GLRX as a therapeutic in settings of dysregulated protein glutathionylation.

### Keywords
Quantum mechanics, Molecular dynamics, Redox, Multiscale modeling, S-glutathionylation, Glutathione

### Affiliations
Vermont Genetics Network Proteomics Facility
Department of Biology
University of Vermont

Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine University of Vermont  Larner College of Medicine Burlington, Vermont, 05405, USA

### Submitter
Ying Wai Lam

### Lab Head
Dr Yvonne Janssen-Heininger
Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine University of Vermont  Larner College of Medicine Burlington, Vermont, 05405, USA


