### Accession
PXD025068

### Title
Shell protein degradation by TMT- LC-MS/MS

### Description
This study investigates the degradation of mineral-associated proteins from Spondylus gaederopus mollusc shell. We analysed intracrystalline proteins extracted from powdered shell samples that were artificially aged by heating at 110 °C for different time durations (0, 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 24, 48, 96, 240 h). TMT-labelled quantitative proteomics was used to study the degradation pathways and to identify peptide bonds that were unstable and prone to hydrolysis.

### Sample Protocol
1. Extraction. Shell proteins were extracted using FASP sample preparation method. In short, shell powders were demineralised using cold acetic acid (10% v/v), extracts were then centrifuged at 13.4k rpm for 10 min to separate acid soluble (ASM) and acid insoluble (AIM) matrices; the ASMs were loaded to PALL Nanosep centrifugal devices (3kDa, 0.5 mL), concentrated and desalted with water, then exchanged to buffer Ambic (50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 7.5-8). The AIMs were rinsed with water (5x times) and mixed with the ASM extracts; resulting proteins were reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin (0.5 μg, Promega, proteomics grade) overnight. Peptides were purified using C18 solid-phase extraction tips.  2. TMT labelling. The samples were resuspended in 50 µL 50% acetonitrile (ACN). HEPES buffer and ACN were then added for a total concentration of 50% ACN and 30 mM HEPES, with the pH checked to be around 8. Thermo-Scientific TMT labels (11-plex) were prepared by resuspending in anhydrous ACN and then 0.02 mg of label was added to each sample, which was then vortexed and incubated at room temperature (covered) for 1 hour. The reaction was quenched by adding 1% hydroxylamine and incubated at room temperature for a further 15 min. The samples were pooled and then cleaned using an in-house made C18 StageTip. Labelling details: 126-0 h; 127N-1 h; 127C-2 h; 128N-4 h; 128C-8 h; 129N-16 h; 129C-24 h; 130N-48 h; 130C-blank; 131-96 h; 131C-240 h.  3. LC-MS/MS analysis. The StageTip was eluted using 20 µl each of 40% then 60% ACN and vacuum centrifuged at 40 °C until approximately 3 µl remained. It was resuspended with 10 µL 0.1% TFA and 5% ACN solution. 5 µL was analysed by an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled to a Q-Exactive HF-X orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) on a 77 min gradient. Chromatographic and MS parameters were adjusted for ancient and degraded samples (Mackie et al. 2018), and for TMT analysis. Therefore, the isolation window was narrowed to 0.8 m/z and the normalised collision energy raised to 33. Other MS parameters were set as follows: MS1- 120,000 resolution at m/z 200 over the m/z range 350–1400, target of 3e6, maximum injection time (IT) of 25 ms; MS2- top 10 mode, 60,000 resolution, target of 2e5, maximum IT of 118 ms, and dynamic exclusion of 20 s.

### Data Protocol
Bioinformatic analyses were performed using PEAKS Studio X software. “Mollusca protein” database (created on 10/06/2020 by downloading all the sequences from the NCBI protein repository with taxonomy restricted to phylum Mollusca) was used to search the product ion spectra obtained by the de novo sequencing of the PeaksX algorithm. Search parameters: fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.05 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10 ppm and no enzyme digestion was selected to detect diagenetically cleaved peptides. Results obtained by SPIDER search were used for peptide identification and protein characterisation. The thresholds for peptide and protein identification: false discovery rate (protein FDR) = 0.5%, protein score −10lgP ≥ 30, unique peptides ≥ 1, de novo sequences scores (ALC%) ≥ 50. The search also included a database of common laboratory contaminants (cRAP; common Repository of Adventitious Proteins: http://www.thegpm.org/crap/), which were excluded from further data interpretation. The peptide sequences identified in shell proteins were also individually checked using the BLASTp tool to prevent any misidentifications with exogenous sequences and peptides that were homologous to common contaminants or bacterial proteins, any such matches were excluded from further analyses. TMT quantification was performed by measuring the intensities of fragment ion reporter ions released from the different labels in the tandem MS mode during peptide fragmentation. Quantitation was performed by PeaksX using the selected parameters: quantification mass tolerance: 0.2 Da, FDR Threshold (%): 0.5, spectrum filter ≥ 31.9, quality ≥ 0, reporter ion intensity ≥ 0E0, Protein significance ≥ 0, significance method – PEAKSQ, Unique peptides ≥ 1. Relative quantification of peptides/proteins in each of the samples was obtained by calculating the relative reporter ion intensity in respect to values found in blank samples (spg28, tagged with TMT11-130C label). The data were used to create relative abundance profiles of intracrystalline shell proteins and peptides, represented by bar plots and line graphs that show abundance in real time scale (presented in the manuscript).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Protein degradation, Quantitative proteomics, Intracrystalline proteins, Shells

### Affiliations
University of Turin 
Department of Life Sciences and Systems Biology, University of Turin, Italy

### Submitter
Jorune Sakalauskaite

### Lab Head
Dr Beatrice Demarchi
Department of Life Sciences and Systems Biology, University of Turin, Italy


