### Accession
PXD010104

### Title
Proteome-wide analysis of cysteine reactivity in Arabidopsis associated with biotic stress response

### Description
We used a method for the enrichment of proteins with oxidative post-translational modifications that enabled the comprehensive identification and label-free quantification of reversibly oxidized thiols across the plant proteome. The redoxomes were characterized in wild-type and the top1top2 null mutants in the early stages of effector-triggered immunity.

### Sample Protocol
Seeds of Arabidopsis thaliana (ecotype Columbia) and double-knockout mutant of both TOP1 (AT5G65620) and TOP2 (AT5G10540) genes were sown individually in 24-hole plug trays containing soil. After vernalization for 2 days at 4°C in the dark, plants were cultivated in a growth chamber for 4-weeks under medium-day conditions (12 h light/12 h dark) at 22°C and 60% relative humidity with 150 µmol/m2sec photon flux density.  Six leaves from each plant were syringe-infiltrated with either 10 mM MgCl2 (mock) or Pseudomonas syringae pv. tomato avrRpt2 (treatment) and plants were then moved back to the growth chamber. Plants mock-inoculated with 10 mM MgCl2 solution were harvested after 8 h to serve as experimental controls. Otherwise after 8 or 12 h, leaves were excised from plants by cutting the petiole with a razor blade and immediately frozen under liquid nitrogen before storage at -80°C.  Three biological replicates were used for 8 h mock-inoculated control, 8 hpi, and 12 hpi conditions for each genotype (e.g., wild-type and top1top2 mutants). Leaf tissue (0.2 g) was ground under liquid nitrogen to a fine powder before proteins were extracted using a Tris-buffered phenol method. The oxidized status of protein cysteines was quenched by performing cell lysis under denaturing conditions in the presence of iodoacetamide to block reduced thiols.  All reversibly oxidized cysteine residues were then reduced using dithiothreitol and nascent thiols enriched at the protein-level using Thiopropyl Sepharose 6B resin for thiol-disulfide exchange chromatography. On-resin trypsin digestion of cysteine-bound proteins was performed and unbound peptides were removed with extensive washing steps. Cysteine-bound peptides were then eluted from the resin using dithiothreitol and subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis to survey reversible oxidation.

### Data Protocol
Label-free quantification using Progenesis QI for proteomics v2.0, database searching with Mascot v2.5.1, and bioinformatics using R.

### Publication Abstract
A surge in the accumulation of oxidants generates shifts in the cellular redox potential during early stages of plant infection with pathogens and activation of effector-triggered immunity (ETI). The redoxome, defined as the proteome-wide oxidative modifications of proteins caused by oxidants, has a well-known impact on stress responses in metazoans. However, the identity of proteins and the residues sensitive to oxidation during the plant immune response remain largely unknown. Previous studies of the thimet oligopeptidases TOP1 and TOP2 placed them in the salicylic acid dependent branch of ETI, with a current model wherein TOPs sustain interconnected organellar and cytosolic pathways that modulate the oxidative burst and development of cell death. Herein, we characterized the ETI redoxomes in Arabidopsis (<i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i>) wild-type Col-0 and <i>top1top2</i> mutant plants using a differential alkylation-based enrichment technique coupled with label-free mass spectrometry-based quantification. We identified cysteines sensitive to oxidation in a wide range of protein families at multiple time points after pathogen infection. Differences were detected between Col-0 and <i>top1top2</i> redoxomes regarding the identity and number of oxidized cysteines, and the amplitude of time-dependent fluctuations in protein oxidation. Our results support a determining role for TOPs in maintaining the proper level and dynamics of proteome oxidation during ETI. This study significantly expands the repertoire of oxidation-sensitive plant proteins and can guide future mechanistic studies.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Redox proteomics, Pseudomonas syringae, Thimet oligopeptidase, Biotic stress

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599 USA
Graduate Research Assistant

### Submitter
Evan McConnell

### Lab Head
Dr Leslie M. Hicks
Department of Chemistry, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599 USA


