### Accession
PXD010081

### Title
FA-SAT ncRNA interactome

### Description
FA-SAT is a satellite DNA sequence present and transcribed in many Bilateria species, what may anticipate a conserved and significant function in these genomes. Here we prove that in cat and human cells, FA-SAT satellite transcripts play a nuclear function at the G1 phase of the cell cycle. We identified and demonstrated that the main FA-SAT non-coding RNA interactor is the PKM2 protein. Our work shows that the disruption of the FA-SAT ncRNA/PKM2 protein complex, by the depletion of either FA-SAT or PKM2, results in the same phenotype—apoptosis. Moreover, the ectopic overexpression of FA-SAT in tumour human cells did not affect the cell cycle progression. In sum, our data reveal a new player, FA-SAT RNA, a non-coding satellite RNA, which interacts with the PKM2 nuclear protein. This ribonucleoprotein is involved in apoptosis and cell cycle progression, what foresees a promising new target for studies in cancer processes that rely on these pathways.

### Sample Protocol
Short GeLC-SWATH applied to FA-SAT RNA interactome. Before the electrophoresis, each sample was spiked with 2 µg of recombinant green fluorescent protein (GFP) to monitor samples loss during the procedure and gel digestion was performed as described in Anjo et al. (2015). Samples were analysed on an AB Sciex 5600 TripleTOF in two phases: information-dependent acquisition (IDA) for protein identification followed by SWATH acquisition for relative protein quantification with the same parameters described in Anjo et al. (2015). IDA experiments were performed for each of the 3 fractions per sample, and the 3 fractions of each sample were combined into a single sample for quantitative analysis. Additionally, all the samples were combined and 4 technical replicates were acquired in the SWATH-MS mode.   References: Anjo, S. I., Santa, C. and Manadas, B. (2015), Short GeLC‐SWATH: A fast and reliable quantitative approach for proteomic screenings. Proteomics, 15: 757-762. doi:10.1002/pmic.201400221

### Data Protocol
A specific library of precursor masses and fragment ions was created by combining the IDA files from all samples except the negative controls (samples without the FA-SAT sequence) and used for subsequent SWATH processing. The library was obtained using ProteinPilot™ software (v4.5, ABSciex®) with the following search parameters: search against a database composed by Homo sapiens, Felis catus, Bos taurus and Escherichia coli species from SwissProt database (release at February 2014), GFP and iRT peptides sequences; trypsin digestion; acrylamide as cysteine alkylating reagent; special focus option for gel based approaches. The data analysis was based on an independent FDR analysis using the target-decoy approach. The data processing was performed using SWATH™ processing plug-in for PeakView™ (v1.2, ABSciex®) as described by Anjo et al. (2015). The peptides that met the 1% FDR threshold in all the experiments were retained, and the peak areas of the target fragment ions of those peptides were extracted across the experiments using an extracted-ion chromatogram (XIC) window of 3 min. with 0.020 Da XIC width. Protein levels were estimated by summing all the transitions from all the peptides for a given protein (an adaptation of Collins et al. (2013) and normalized to the internal standards spiked into the samples (GFP)).  References: Anjo, S. I., Santa, C. and Manadas, B. (2015), Short GeLC‐SWATH: A fast and reliable quantitative approach for proteomic screenings. Proteomics, 15: 757-762. doi:10.1002/pmic.201400221 Collins BC, Gillet LC, Rosenberger G, Rost HL, Vichalkovski A, Gstaiger M, et al. Quantifying protein interaction dynamics by SWATH mass spectrometry: application to the 14-3-3 system. Nat Methods. 2013; 10:1246-53.

### Publication Abstract
FA-SAT is a highly conserved satellite DNA sequence transcribed in many Bilateria species. To disclose the cellular and functional profile of FA-SAT non-coding RNAs, a comprehensive experimental approach, including the transcripts location in the cell and in the cell cycle, the identification of its putative protein interactors, and silencing/ectopic expression phenotype analysis, was performed. FA-SAT non-coding RNAs play a nuclear function at the G1 phase of the cell cycle and the interactomic assay showed that the PKM2 protein is the main interactor. The disruption of the FA-SAT non-coding RNA/PKM2 protein complex, by the depletion of either FA-SAT or PKM2, results in the same phenotype-apoptosis, and the ectopic overexpression of FA-SAT did not affect the cell-cycle progression,&#xa0;but promotes the PKM2 nuclear accumulation. Overall, our data first describe the importance of this ribonucleoprotein complex in apoptosis and cell-cycle progression, what foresees a promising novel candidate molecular target for cancer therapy and diagnosis.

### Keywords
Fa-sat; satellite dna; non-coding rna; apoptosis; interactome; swath-ms

### Affiliations
​Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology – University of Coimbra
Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology – University of Coimbra

### Submitter
Sandra Anjo

### Lab Head
Dr Bruno Manadas
Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology – University of Coimbra


