### Accession
PXD006876

### Title
Foetal and adult HSPCs -  Comprehensive Proteomic Characterization of Ontogenic Changes in Hematopoietic Stem and Progenitor Cells

### Description
Haematopoietic stem and progenitor cells (HSPCs) in the foetus and adult possess distinct molecular landscapes that regulate cell fate and change their susceptibility to initiation and progression of haematopoietic malignancies. The proteomic programs that govern these differences remain elusive. In this study, we have utilized a mass spectrometry-based quantitative proteomics approach to comprehensively describe and compare the proteome of foetal and adult HSPCs. We found that the proteome of foetal HSPCs is relatively simple, characterized by proteins involved in cell cycle and cell proliferation, while their adult counterparts are defined by a larger set of proteins that are involved in more diverse cellular processes. These adult characteristics include an arsenal of proteins important for viral and bacterial defence, as well as protection against ROS-induced protein oxidation. Our further analyses of Type I interferon signalling shows that foetal HSPCs are sensitive to Interferon a (IFNa), which impairs their production of mature lymphoid cells, whereas stimulation with IFNa to the pregnant mother enhances the production of early progenitors from foetal HSCs. Our results provide new and important insights into the molecular landscape of foetal and adult haematopoiesis that advance our understanding of normal and malignant haematopoiesis during foetal and adult life.

### Sample Protocol
FACS-sorted Lineage-cKit+Sca1+ cells (HSPCs) were collected into ice-cold HBSS, centrifuged and stored as dry pellets −80 °C until further usage. Cell pellets corresponding to 0,45x106 cells were lysed with 0.1% RapiGest (Waters) in 100 µl 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, then heated at 90 ºC for 5 minutes, followed by sonication for 20 minutes and removal of cell debris by centrifugation. Cysteine disulfide bonds were reduced with 5 mM DTT for 30 minutes at 56 ºC, alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 30 minutes at room temperature in the dark, and proteins were were digested with sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega, enzyme:protein ratio 1:50) at 37 °C overnight. The reaction was stopped by adding trifluoroacetic acid to a final concentration of 0.5% (v/v), and RapiGest was precipitated by further incubation at 37 °C for 20 min. Following centrifugation the supernatants were collected and protein digests were stored at −20 °C until further use. Protein digests were dimethyl labeled on column as previously described with slight modifications. Briefly, SepPak C18 cartridges (Waters) were washed with acetonitrile and conditioned with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. Acidified samples were loaded and washed with 0.1% formic acid. Samples were labeled by flushing the columns with labeling reagent (light or heavy using CH2O (Sigma-Aldrich) + NaBH3CN (Sigma-Aldrich) or CD2O (Sigma-Aldrich) + NaBH3CN (Sigma-Aldrich), respectively). After washing with 0.1% formic acid, labeled peptides were eluted with 80% (v/v) acetonitrile/0.1% (v/v) formic acid. Samples were dried by vacuum centrifugation, reconstituted in IPG rehydration buffer and fractionated according to manufacturer's instructions using pH 3–10 IPG strips and 3100 OFFGEL fractionator (Agilent). The 12 fractions resolved were acidified and desalted with C18 Ultra-Micro SpinColumns (Harvard). Peptide samples were dried by vacuum centrifugation and stored at -20ºC until further use. Samples were reconstituted in 4%acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid prior to MS analysis.  MS analyses were carried out on a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) connected to an Easy-nLC 1000 ultra-high-performance liquid chromatography system (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated on a C18 EASY-Spray column (ES802; Thermo Scientific; ID 75 µm, length: 25 cm, temperature 45°C). Column equilibration and sample load were performed using constant pressure of 250 or 800 bar. The mobile phases for LC separation were 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in LC-MS grade water (solvent A) and 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in acetonitrile (solvent B). A linear gradient from 3 to 35% solvent B was run for 120 min at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. One full scan spectrum from m/z 350 to 1700 at resolution 30,000 (at 200 m/z) was followed by MS/MS scans (resolution 17,500 at 200 m/z) of the most intense ions (up to 15) from the full scan MS. The precursor ions were isolated with 2 m/z isolation width and fragmented using higher-energy collisional-induced dissociation at a normalized collision energy of 27%. The dynamic exclusion time was set to 15 s. The automatic gain control was set to 1e6 for both MS and MS/MS with ion accumulation times of 100 ms (MS) and 60 ms (MS/MS). The intensity threshold for precursor ion selection was 1.7e4.

### Data Protocol
MS raw data files were processed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.0.0). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin/P and a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Cysteine carbamidomethylation and methionine oxidation were selected as fixed and variable modifications, respectively. The derived peak list was searched using the in-built Andromeda search engine in MaxQuant against the Uniprot mouse database (downloaded 2014.05.08) together with 265 frequently observed contaminants (Andromeda configured database) and reversed sequences of all entries. Initial maximal allowed mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for peptide masses, followed by 6 ppm in the main search, and 20 ppm for fragment ion masses. The minimum peptide length was set to seven amino acid residues. A 1% false discovery rate (FDR) was required at both the protein level and the peptide level. In addition to the FDR threshold, proteins were considered identified if they had at least one unique peptide. The protein identification was reported as an indistinguishable “protein group” if no unique peptide sequence to a single database entry was identified. The ‘match between runs’ was enabled for consecutive peptide fractions with a 1.5 minutes time window. The iBAQ algorithm was used for estimation of the abundance of different proteins within a single sample (proteome).

### Publication Abstract
Hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells (HSPCs) in the fetus and adult possess distinct molecular landscapes that regulate cell fate and change their susceptibility to initiation and progression of hematopoietic malignancies. Here, we applied in-depth quantitative proteomics to comprehensively describe and compare the proteome of fetal and adult HSPCs. Our data uncover a striking difference in complexity of the cellular proteomes, with more diverse adult-specific HSPC proteomic signatures. The differential protein content in fetal and adult HSPCs indicate distinct metabolic profiles and protein complex stoichiometries. Additionally, adult characteristics include an arsenal of proteins linked to viral and bacterial defense, as well as protection against ROS-induced protein oxidation. Further analyses show that interferon &#x3b1;, as well as Neutrophil elastase, has distinct functional effects in fetal and adult HSPCs. This study provides a rich resource aimed toward an enhanced mechanistic understanding of normal and malignant hematopoiesis during fetal and adult life.

### Keywords
Foetal liver, Mouse, Haematopoiesis, Adult bone marrow

### Affiliations
Lund Stem Cell Center, Division of Molecular Hematology, Lund University, Lund, Sweden
Lund University

### Submitter
Jenny Hansson

### Lab Head
Dr Jenny Hansson
Lund Stem Cell Center, Division of Molecular Hematology, Lund University, Lund, Sweden


