### Accession
PXD031557

### Title
Non-target molecular network and putative genes of flavonoid biosynthesis in Erythrina velutina, a Brazilian semiarid native woody plant

### Description
Erythrina velutina is widely used in traditional medicine, being a source of specialized metabolites with anti-inflammatory and central nervous system modulatory activities. To date, the specialized metabolic network of the genus Erythrina and its regulation are missing, in part due to the lack of genomic information. In an effort to fill this knowledge gap, leaves and seeds had their metabolic and proteomic profiles (LC/MS) analyzed and integrated with transcriptome (RNA-seq) data. These data sets were obtained from plants growing in their harsh natural habitat and examined with emphasis on differentially expressed transcripts, transcription factors, and genes putatively involved in the biosynthesis of flavonoids, the most abundant metabolite class annotated. Of the 96 metabolites distributed in different classes found in this study, 28 and 30 were exclusively found in seeds and leaves, respectively, whereas 38 metabolites occurred in both structures. It was possible to assemble a set of 17,822 transcripts, of which 3,937 transcripts were differentially expressed (2,815 down- and 1,122 up-regulated). Candidate transcripts involved in flavonoid accumulation and transcription factors amounted to 28 and 394, respectively. Expression patterns of transcripts involved in flavonoid biosynthesis and its regulation, as well as those involved in responses to biotic and abiotic stresses, are discussed in detail. Hopefully, these findings will provide a solid base to further the understanding of the molecular and metabolic responses in this important medicinal plant species, as well as identify key regulatory targets for future studies aiming at bioactive metabolite production.

### Sample Protocol
Leaves and seeds of Erythrina velutina in powdered form from the four natural populations (table S1 in the supplementary material) were weighed (150 mg) under liquid nitrogen and used for protein extraction with the Total Plant Protein Extraction Kit (Sigma Aldrich) as per the manufacturer's protocol. After obtaining the total proteins, the sample was ready to be identified. Protein concentration was estimated using the Bradford assay (Bradford, 1976). Each sample in technical triplicate was submitted to the reduction process (DTT 0.1 mol/L in Tris-HCl buffer 0.25 mol/L pH8.6), alkylation (iodoacetamide 0.05 mol/L) and digestion (trypsin 1:100 in 0.01 mol/L ammonium bicarbonate for 20 h). The obtained peptides were desalted in C-18 micro-columns and quantified using the Qubit system.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were analyzed in a chromatographic system (Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano UPLC, Thermo, USA), configured with a 3 cm x 100 µm trap column containing 5 µm, 120 Å C18 particles (ReprosilPur, Dr. Maich GmbH) connected in series to the 24 cm x 75 µm analytical column containing 3 µm, 120 Å C18 particles (ReprosilPur, Dr. Maich GmbH). The samples were injected to obtain 1µg in the column, submitted to a linear elution gradient between solvents A (0.1% formic acid in water) and B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) from 2% B to 35 % B for 155 min. The fractions separated in the chromatographic system were eluted directly from the ionization source of an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo, USA), configured to operate in DDA (data-dependent acquisition) mode, and the MS1 spectra were acquired in the orbitrap analyzer, with a resolution of 120000 and a range of m/z between 300 and 1650. The 20 most intense ions, above the intensity limit of 3000 were fragmented, generating MS2 spectra, in the CID ion trap analyzer (Kalli et al., 2013). The reanalysis of already fragmented ions was inhibited by dynamic exclusion (Andrews et al., 2011), favoring the identification of less abundant peptides. Data analysis was performed using the PatternLab for proteomics 5 software , available at http://www.patternlabforproteomics.org/. The predicted protein sequences from the Erythrina velutina transcriptome dataset were used as the database and matched against raw files from the experimental proteome, including the 123 common contaminants from mass spectrometry. The Comet 2021.01 rev. 0 search engine was used for identifying the mass spectra (Eng  et al., 2015). The search parameters considered: fully and semi-tryptic peptide candidates with masses between 500 and 6000 Da, up to two missed cleavages, 40 ppm for precursor mass, and bins of 1.0005 m/z for MS/MS with an offset of 0.4. The modifications were carbamidomethylation of cysteine and oxidation of methionine as fixed and variable, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Erythrina velutina</i> is a Brazilian native tree of the Caatinga (a unique semiarid biome). It is widely used in traditional medicine showing anti-inflammatory and central nervous system modulating activities. The species is a rich source of specialized metabolites, mostly alkaloids and flavonoids. To date, genomic information, biosynthesis, and regulation of flavonoids remain unknown in this woody plant. As part of a larger ongoing research goal to better understand specialized metabolism in plants inhabiting the harsh conditions of the Caatinga, the present study focused on this important class of bioactive phenolics. Leaves and seeds of plants growing in their natural habitat had their metabolic and proteomic profiles analyzed and integrated with transcriptome data. As a result, 96 metabolites (including 43 flavonoids) were annotated. Transcripts of the flavonoid pathway totaled 27, of which <i>EvCHI, EvCHR, EvCHS, EvCYP75A</i> and <i>EvCYP75B1</i> were identified as putative main targets for modulating the accumulation of these metabolites. The highest correspondence of mRNA vs. protein was observed in the differentially expressed transcripts. In addition, 394 candidate transcripts encoding for transcription factors distributed among the bHLH, ERF, and MYB families were annotated. Based on interaction network analyses, several putative genes of the flavonoid pathway and transcription factors were related, particularly TFs of the MYB family. Expression patterns of transcripts involved in flavonoid biosynthesis and those involved in responses to biotic and abiotic stresses were discussed in detail. Overall, these findings provide a base for the understanding of molecular and metabolic responses in this medicinally important species. Moreover, the identification of key regulatory targets for future studies aiming at bioactive metabolite production will be facilitated.

### Keywords
Flavonoids, Caatinga, Semiarid, Erythrina velutina

### Affiliations
University Federal of Rio Grande of Norte
Federal University of Rio Grande do Norte

### Submitter
Daisy Chacon

### Lab Head
Dr Daisy Sotero Chacon
University Federal of Rio Grande of Norte


