### Accession
PXD000341

### Title
Site-specific quantitation of TCR-induced phosphorylation in Jurkat T cell lines

### Description
The LC-MSMS data correspond to an investigation where we compared global dynamics of TCR signaling in Jurkat cell lines with or without LAT (Linker for activation of T cells). We used triple SILAC labelling. In each experiment two series of time points activation were generated with a common time point that we used to consolidate the two separate time series. The protein extracts in each time series were digested by trypsine and the peptide submitted to SCX fractionation and TiO2 enrichment of phosphopeptides. Each sample was injected 2-3 times. Raw data files were processed using an early version of MaxQuant software. In the first step, peak lists files (.msm files) for SILAC medium- and heavy-labeled peptide as well as unassigned labeling state were generated using the Quant.exe. These files were submitted to Mascot (version 2.3.01) search engine using Ensemble Human (GRCh37.59), in house generated, target decoy database.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
Signaling through the T cell receptor (TCR) initiates adaptive immunity and its perturbation may results in autoimmunity. The plasma membrane scaffolding protein LAT acts as a central organizer of the TCR signaling machinery to activate many functional pathways. LAT-deficient mice develop an autoimmune syndrome but the mechanism of this pathology is unknown. In this work we have compared global dynamics of TCR signaling by MS-based quantitative phosphoproteomics in LAT-sufficient and LAT-defective Jurkat T cells. Surprisingly, we found that many TCR-induced phosphorylation events persist in the absence of LAT, despite ERK and PLC&#x3b3;1 phosphorylation being repressed. Most importantly, the absence of LAT resulted in augmented and persistent tyrosine phosphorylation of CD3&#x3b6; and ZAP70. This indicates that LAT signaling hub is also implicated in negative feedback signals to modulate upstream phosphorylation events. Phosphorylation kinetics data resulting from this investigation is documented in a database (phosphoTCR) accessible online. The MS data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD000341.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, T cell, Jurakts, Lat

### Affiliations
Pathology

### Submitter
Mogjib SALEK

### Lab Head


