### Accession
PXD040869

### Title
Interspecies interaction reduces selection for antibiotic resistance in Escherichia coli

### Description
Supernatant from B. subtilis cultures was found to be inhibitory to E. coli MG1655 growth and reduce enrichment of nitrofurantoin-resistant strains in the presence of the antibiotic. Supernatant from six different supernatants with differential effects on E. coli growth was harvested and analysed to identify the protein component responsible for growth inhibition.

### Sample Protocol
Fully grown cultures of B. subtilis 168 in minimal media with glucose were centrifuged. The supernatant was then concentrated using PierceTM Protein Concentrators with MWCO of 3 KDa. Protein concentration in the concentrated supernatant was determined using Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific) with bovine serum albumin (BSA) solutions as standards. About 40 – 80 µg of total protein (200µl) was added to a buffer containing 24 µl 5% sodium deoxycholate (SDOC) and 12 µl 1M triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) to get 236 µl sample. Following reduction with DL-dithiothreitol (DTT), the samples were processed using the modified filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method (Wisniewski JR et. al. Nat Methods. 2009 May;6(5):359-62). Alkylation of the cysteine residues was performed using 10 mM methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS) diluted in digestion buffer (1% sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 50 mM TEAB) for 30 min at room temperature. Samples were double digested with trypsin. Samples were labelled with Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) reagents (Thermo Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The labelled samples were combined, SDC from the pooled sample was removed by acidification with 10% TFA and centrifugation using Pierce™ Peptide Desalting Spin Columns Thermo Fisher Scientific. The sample was eluted with 70µl+50µl 50% acetonitrile at 3000xg (5600rpm) for 1-2min. The eluate from the C18 columns containing 130 µl pure peptides in 70% ACN were dried in a vacuum centrifuge to 5 µl. Peptide separations were performed using a reversed-phase XBridge BEH C18 column (3.5 μm, 3.0x150 mm, Waters Corporation) and a linear gradient from 3% to 40% solvent B over 17 min followed by an increase to 100% B over 5 min. Solvent A was 10 mM ammonium formate buffer at pH 10.00 and solvent B was 90% acetonitrile, 10% 10 mM ammonium formate at pH 10.00. The primary fractions were concatenated into the final 10 final fractions (1+11+21+31+41, 2+12+22+32+42, … 10+20+30+40). The final fractions were evaporated and reconstituted in 15 μl of 3% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid for nLC MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Identification and relative quantification was performed using Proteome Discoverer version 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The reference B. subtilis 168 database was downloaded from Uniprot (September 2021). The database search was performed using the Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, London, UK) with MS peptide tolerance of 5 ppm. Only the unique identified peptides were taken into account for the relative quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Evolution of microbial traits depends on the interaction of a species with its environment as well as with other coinhabiting species. However, our understanding of the evolution of specific microbial traits, such as antibiotic resistance in complex environments is limited. Here, we determine the role of interspecies interactions on the dynamics of nitrofurantoin (NIT) resistance selection among Escherichia coli. We created a synthetic two-species community comprised of two variants of E. coli (NIT susceptible and resistant) and Bacillus subtilis in minimal media with glucose as the sole carbon source. We show that the presence of B. subtilis significantly slows down the selection for the resistant E. coli mutant when NIT is present and that this slowdown is not due to competition for resources. Instead, the dampening of NIT resistance enrichment is largely mediated by extracellular compounds produced by B. subtilis with the peptide YydF playing a significant role. Our results not only demonstrate the impact of interspecies interactions on the evolution of microbial traits but also show the importance of using synthetic microbial systems in unravelling relevant interactions and mechanisms affecting the evolution of antibiotic resistance. This finding implies that interspecies interactions should be considered to better understand and predict resistance evolution in the clinic as well as in nature.

### Keywords
Nitrofurantoin, Complex system, Evolutionary dynamics, Antibiotic resistance, Interspecies interactions

### Affiliations
Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, Infections and immunity
Uppsala University
Proteomics Core Facility at Sahlgrenska Academy Gothenburg University

### Submitter
Ramith Nair

### Lab Head
Dr Carina Sihlbom
Proteomics Core Facility at Sahlgrenska Academy Gothenburg University


