### Accession
PXD010138

### Title
Human brain Alzheimer's -  Proteomic signatures of brain regions affected by tau pathology in early and late stages of Alzheimer's disease

### Description
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is the most common neurodegenerative disorder being characterized by progressive impairment of memory and cognition, resulting in dementia. To investigate brain region vulnerability to AD and which pathways are altered in certain areas in AD, we performed proteomic profiling of human brain samples during AD progression in regions early (medial temporal lobe - MTL) and late affected (neocortex) by tau pathology. We employed a mass spectrometry-based approach to interrogate the human brain proteome during AD progression (B/B stages) in four distinct brain regions: entorhinal cortex (EC), parahippocampal cortex (PHC), temporal cortex (TC) and frontal cortex (FC). Importantly, we wanted to evaluate brain areas that are affected by tau pathology in different disease stages, in order to gain insights if there are common mechanisms or patterns shared between different brain regions during disease progression. A total of 103 samples were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen brain tissue was sectioned using a cryostat to obtain 10 µm slices (20 per sample). 200 µL of lysis buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 50 mM Tris pH 7.4, MS-SAFE protease inhibitor) was added to the sample, which was mixed in a vortex and sonicated on ice (Digital Branson Sonicator SFX 150): 20% amplitude, pulsed mode (9 pulses with 10 s each and intervals of 10 s between each pulse). The lysate was centrifuged at 21,000 xg at 4 ºC for 30 min (Eppendorf Nordic Aps) and the supernatant was transferred to a new tube to avoid cell debris.  Protein digestion was carried out using a modified Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP), 100 µg protein was used for digestion. The peptide ssamples were further desalted by reversed phase chromatography using C18 columns (MacroSpin Columns®, The Nest Group Inc.).  After desalting, tryptic peptides were resuspended in 50 µL of 0.1% formic acid. 1μg of tryptic peptides was injected for each analysis spiked with a retention time calibration mixture (25 fmol/injection) (PRTC, Thermo Fisher Scientific). For LC-MS/MS analysis, we used a Q Exactive MS equipped with a Dream ion source (AMR Inc) and connected to an Easy n-LC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were injected on a pre-column Acclaim PepMap 100 (100 μm x 2cm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated on a C18 column Zaplous α Pep-C18 (0.1 mm x 20cm, AMR Inc.) with a flow rate of 500 nL/min and column temperature of 24 ºC. A non-linear gradient was established using a mixture of solvents A (0.1 % formic acid in water) and B (0.1 % formic acid in acetonitrile) to elute the peptides. The gradient started with 5 % solvent B and increased to 22 % during 100 min. In the next 14 min, solvent B increased to 32 % and, finally, it augmented to 95 % in 12 min and it was kept at 95 % for 14 min, totalizing 140 min gradient. Samples were analyzed using a top 15 data dependent acquisition (DDA) method. MS1 scan was acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer with a 400-1600 m/z interval, 70,000 (@ 200 m/z) resolution, target AGC value of 1e6 and maximum injection time of 100 ms. The 15 most intense peaks (charge ≥ 2) were selected and fragmented in a HCD cell with a NCE of 30 %. MS2 spectra were acquired with a 17,500 (@ 200 m/z) resolution, target AGC value of 2e5 and maximum injection time of 120 ms. The ion selection threshold was set to 8,3e3 and dynamic exclusion was equivalent to 20 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was analyzed using Proteome Discoverer version 2.1. Peptide identification was done with the SEQUEST HT search engine using UniProt human database (version from 07/09/2016, canonical proteins only). The following search parameters were employed: cysteine carbamidomethylation as a static modification, methionine oxidation as a dynamic modification, 10 ppm tolerance for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. A maximum of 2 missed cleavages was allowed and peptide length was set between 7-144 amino acids. The following filters were applied: high confidence (FDR 0.01) and at least two peptides per protein. Protein quantification was done by using the Precursor Ions Area Detector node. The Top 3 method (average of the 3 most intense peptides) was used for protein quantification, being considered only unique peptides.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Qe, Human brain, Alzheimer's disease

### Affiliations
Lund University, Dept. Biomedical Engineering
Lund University

### Submitter
Melinda Rezeli

### Lab Head
Dr Gyögy Marko-Varga
Lund University, Dept. Biomedical Engineering


