### Accession
PXD013478

### Title
LKB1 is a suppressor of amino acid-driven gluconeogenesis in the liver

### Description
Excessive hepatic glucose production is a major contributor to the hyperglycemia observed in Type 2 diabetes mellitus. It is widely accepted that it is due to an increase in hepatic gluconeogenesis. While much attention has been devoted to the transcriptional regulation of key gluconeogenic enzymes, much less is known about the regulation of amino acid catabolism that provides gluconeogenic substrates. Here, we emphasize a novel role of LKB1 in this regulation. We show that mice with a hepatocyte-specific deletion of Lkb1 have increased hepatic amino acid catabolism for gluconeogenesis. This occurred during fasting, as well as during the postprandial period, identifying Lkb1 as a critical suppressor of hepatic postprandial gluconeogenesis. Hepatic Lkb1 deletion was also associated with severe alterations in whole body metabolism leading to decreased lean body mass deposition on MRI analysis and, at a longer term, cachexia and sarcopenia as a consequence of the diversion of amino acids for liver metabolism at the expense of muscle. Using genetic and pharmacological approaches, we identified the aminotransferases and Agxt and as critical effectors of the suppressor function of Lkb1 in amino acid-driven gluconeogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
Fifty mg of liver tissue were minced and homogenized in 500 µl Tris/SDS buffer (Tris/SDS buffer: 50 mM Tris/HCl, pH8.5, SDS 2%) using an Ultra Turrax apparatus. After 5 minutes at 95°C, the homogenate was centrifuged at 20 000g for 15 minutes. The protein concentration of the supernatant was determined by bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA, Pierce). Fifty µg of proteins were reduced and alkylated using 20 mM TCEP and 50mM chloroacetamide and digested by trypsin using the FASP method (Wisniewski et al., 2009). Peptides were cleaned and fractionated using C18 and SCX StageTips as previously described (Wisniewski et al., 2009). Mass spectrometry analysis of the peptides was performed using a Q-ExactivePlus mass spectrometer operating in data dependent scheme. Peptides from SCX StageTip fractions were separated on a C18 reverse phase column (2 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size, 75 μm inner diameter, 15 cm length from Dionex) with a 3-hour gradient starting from 99% of solvent A containing 0.1% formic acid in H2O and ending in 40% of solvent B containing 80% ACN and 0.085% formic acid in H2O. The mass spectrometer acquired data throughout the elution process. The MS scans spanned from 350 to 1500 Th with AGC target 1.106 with 60ms MIIT and resolution of 70 000. HCD fragmentations were performed on the 10 most abundant ions with a dynamic exclusion time of 30 s. Precursor selection window was set at 2Th. HCD Normalized Collision Energy (NCE) was set at 27% and MS/MS scan resolution was set at 17,500 with AGC target 1.105 within 60ms MIIT. Spectra were recorded in profile mode.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometry data were analyzed using Maxquant version 1.5.2.8 (Tyanova et al., 2014). The database used was a concatenation of murine sequences from the Uniprot-Swissprot database (Uniprot, release 2015-02) and the list of contaminant sequences from Maxquant. Cystein carbamidomethylation was set as constant modification and acetylation of protein N-terminus and oxidation of methionines were set as variable modifications. Second peptide search and the “match between runs” (MBR) options were allowed. False discovery rate (FDR) was kept below 1% on both peptides and proteins. Label-free protein quantification (LFQ) was done using both unique and razor peptides with at least 2 such peptides required for LFQ. Statistical analysis and data comparison were done using the Perseus software (Tyanova et al., 2016).

### Publication Abstract
Excessive glucose production by the liver is a key factor in the hyperglycemia observed in type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM). Here, we highlight a novel role of liver kinase B1 (Lkb1) in this regulation. We show that mice with a hepatocyte-specific deletion of Lkb1 have higher levels of hepatic amino acid catabolism, driving gluconeogenesis. This effect is observed during both fasting and the postprandial period, identifying Lkb1 as a critical suppressor of postprandial hepatic gluconeogenesis. Hepatic Lkb1 deletion is associated with major changes in whole-body metabolism, leading to a lower lean body mass and, in the longer term, sarcopenia and cachexia, as a consequence of the diversion of amino acids to liver metabolism at the expense of muscle. Using genetic, proteomic and pharmacological approaches, we identify the aminotransferases and specifically Agxt as effectors of the suppressor function of Lkb1 in amino acid-driven gluconeogenesis.

### Keywords
Sarcopenia, Mus musculus, Q-exactive, Maxquant, Liver, Amino acids, Lkb1, Label-free, Insulin, Gluconeogenesis

### Affiliations
INSERM, U1016, Institut Cochin, F-75014 Paris, France. CNRS, UMR8104, F-75014 Paris, France. Université de Paris, Université Paris Descartes, F-75014 Paris, France.
ICO Angers

### Submitter
François GUILLONNEAU

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Christine Perret
INSERM, U1016, Institut Cochin, F-75014 Paris, France. CNRS, UMR8104, F-75014 Paris, France. Université de Paris, Université Paris Descartes, F-75014 Paris, France.


