### Accession
PXD034554

### Title
Identification of proteins interacting with KaeA, the subunit of KEOPS complex in Aspergillus nidulans in vivo.

### Description
The Kae1/KaeA protein is a subunit of the highly evolutionarily conserved KEOPS complex (Kinase, Endopeptidase and Other Proteins of Small size). The Kae1/KaeA gene has been identified in all previously sequenced genomes of Archea, Bacteria and Eucaryota, except for the most reduced genomes. The KEOPS complex participates in the universal modification of the tRNA converting adenosine A37 to N6-threonylcarbamoyl adenosine (t6A37). This modification of A37, immediately 3’ of anticodons decoding ANN codons, is one of the few tRNA modifications present in all organisms and plays an extremely important role in the accuracy of the translation process.  We characterized two mutations in kaeA of filamentous fungus Aspergillus nidulans that result in the derepression of arginine catabolic enzymes and also showed that kaeA is involved in the regulation of several other genes that control various domains of cellular metabolism. This suggests that kaeA has additional function apart from t6A37 modification. To support this hypothesis we looked for proteins interacting with KaeA.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extracts from mycelium of A. nidulans  strains expressing KaeA::GFP fusion were bound  with GFP-Trap-A (Chromotek) bed, washed, eluted with 0.2 M glycine and precipitated. Eluted proteins were digested with trypsin. MS analysis was performed by LC-MS using a nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters) coupled to an Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide mixtures were applied in equal volumes of 20 ul to RP-18 pre-column (Waters, Milford, MA) using water containing 0.1% FA as a mobile phase and then transferred to a nano-HPLC RP-18 column (internal diameter 75 µM, Waters, Milford MA) using ACN gradient (0 – 35% ACN in 160 min) in the presence of 0.1% FA at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent MS2 mode, and data were acquired in the m/z range of 300-2000.

### Data Protocol
Data were pre-processed with Mascot Distiller (version 2.5, Matrixscience) and searched with Mascot software (version 2.5, Matrixscience) against Aspergillus nidulans database derived from FungiDB ver. 44. The rest of parameters was as follows: enzyme – Trypsin, fixed modification: Methylthio (C), variable modification: Oxidation (M). Data was recalibrated offline, with typical peptide mass tolerance 5 ppm and fragment mass tolerance of 0.01 Da. FDR was calculated using Decoy database and false positive rate was kept below 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Kae1 is a subunit of the highly evolutionarily conserved KEOPS/EKC complex, which is involved in universal (t6A<sub>37</sub>) tRNA modification. Several reports have discussed the participation of this complex in transcription regulation in yeast and human cells, including our previous observations of KaeA, an <i>Aspergillus nidulans</i> homologue of Kae1p. The aim of this project was to confirm the role of KaeA in transcription, employing high-throughput transcriptomic (RNA-Seq and ChIP-Seq) and proteomic (LC-MS) analysis. We confirmed that KaeA is a subunit of the KEOPS complex in <i>A. nidulans.</i> An analysis of <i>kaeA19</i> and <i>kaeA25</i> mutants showed that, although the (t6A<sub>37</sub>) tRNA modification is unaffected in both mutants, they reveal significantly altered transcriptomes compared to the wild type. The finding that KaeA is localized in chromatin and identifying its protein partners allows us to postulate an additional nuclear function for the protein. Our data shed light on the universal bi-functional role of this factor and proves that the activity of this protein is not limited to tRNA modification in cytoplasm, but also affects the transcriptional activity of a number of nuclear genes. Data are available via the NCBI's GEO database under identifiers GSE206830 (RNA-Seq) and GSE206874 (ChIP-Seq), and via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD034554 (proteomic).

### Keywords
Aspergillus nidulans, Interactomics

### Affiliations
IBB PAS
Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Polish Academy of Sciences, ul. Pawińskiego 5A, 02–106 Warsaw, Poland

### Submitter
Agata Malinowska

### Lab Head
Dr Agnieszka Dzikowska
Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Polish Academy of Sciences, ul. Pawińskiego 5A, 02–106 Warsaw, Poland


