### Accession
PXD011724

### Title
KILchip v1.0: A novel Plasmodium falciparum merozoite protein microarray to facilitate malaria vaccine candidate prioritization7

### Description
Passive transfer studies in humans clearly demonstrated the protective role of IgG antibodies against malaria. Identifying the precise parasite antigens that mediate immunity is essential for vaccine design, but has proved difficult. Completion of the Plasmodium falciparum genome revealed thousands of potential vaccine candidates, but a significant bottleneck remains in their validation and prioritization for further evaluation in clinical trials. Focusing initially on the Plasmodium falciparum merozoite proteome, we used peer-reviewed publications, multiple proteomic and bioinformatic approaches, to select and prioritize potential immune targets. We expressed 109 P. falciparum recombinant proteins, the majority of which were obtained using a mammalian expression system that has been shown to produce biologically functional extracellular proteins, and used them to create KILchip v1.0: a novel protein microarray to facilitate high throughput multiplexed antibody detection from individual samples.   The microarray assay was highly specific; antibodies against P. falciparum proteins were detected exclusively in sera from malaria-exposed but not malaria-naïve individuals. The intensity of antibody reactivity varied as expected from strong to weak across well-studied antigens such as AMA1 and RH5 (Kruskal-Wallis H test for trend: p-value <0.0001). The inter-assay and intra-assay variability was minimal, with reproducible results obtained in re-assays using the same chip over duration of 3 months. Antibodies quantified using the multiplexed format in KILchip v1.0 were highly correlated with those measured in the gold-standard monoplex ELISA (median (range) Spearman’s R of 0.84 (0.65-0.95)).   KILchip v1.0 is a robust, scalable and adaptable protein microarray that has broad applicability to studies of naturally acquired immunity against malaria by providing a standardized tool for the detection of antibody correlates of protection. It will facilitate rapid high-throughput validation and prioritization of potential Plasmodium falciparum merozoite-stage antigens paving the way for urgently needed clinical trials for the next-generation of malaria vaccines.

### Sample Protocol
5-15g of purified recombinant proteins were denatured in 50mM Tris-HCL pH 8.0 (Sigma) containing 8M urea (Sigma). Proteins were reduced with 40mM dithiothreitol (Sigma), alkylated with 80mM iodoacetamide (Sigma) and precipitated using cold acetone. Pelleted proteins were resuspended in 15l of 6M urea in 50mM Tris-HCL pH 8.0 and digested with trypsin/Lys-C mix (Promega) according to manufacturers instructions using the two step in-solution digestion. Peptides were desalted using P10 c18 pipette ZipTips (Millipore), dried using the Speedvac concentrator (Thermo Scientific) and resuspended in 15l of 99% H20, 1% acetonitrile, and 0.1% formic acid. Peptides (5μl) were loaded using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano-flow ultra-high-pressure liquid chromatography system (Thermo Scientific) on to a 75µm x 2cm C18 trap column (Thermo Scientific). Chromatographic separation of peptides was carried out on a reverse-phase 50cm-long column (Thermo Scientific) maintained at 40°C over a 60-min elution gradient (2 to 40% of mobile phase B; 80% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 0.3μl/min. Peptides were measured using LC instrumentation consisting of a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano-flow ultra-high-pressure liquid chromatography system (Thermo Scientific) coupled via a nano-electrospray ion source (Thermo Scientific) to a Q Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The ms^1 settings were: Resolution, 70000; Automatic gain control (AGC) target, 3e6; maximum injection time, 100ms; scan range, 380-1600m/z; while the ms^2 settings were: Resolution, 17500; AGC target, 5e4; maximum injection time, 100ms; isolation window, 1.6 m/z. The top 10 most intense ions were selected for ms^2 and fragmented with higher-energy collision fragmentation using normalized collision energy of 28 and these ions were subsequently excluded for the next 20s.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry raw files were searched on Proteome Discoverer software version 1.3.0.339 (Thermo Scientific) using the Mascot server (Matrix Science) using a concatenated database of human and 3D7 Plasmodium falciparum protein FASTA sequences. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification and deamidation of asparagine or glutamine and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 for both proteins and peptides and a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed in the database search. A minimum of two unique peptides for a protein was considered a positive identification.

### Publication Abstract
Passive transfer studies in humans clearly demonstrated the protective role of IgG antibodies against malaria. Identifying the precise parasite antigens that mediate immunity is essential for vaccine design, but has proved difficult. Completion of the <i>Plasmodium falciparum</i> genome revealed thousands of potential vaccine candidates, but a significant bottleneck remains in their validation and prioritization for further evaluation in clinical trials. Focusing initially on the <i>Plasmodium falciparum</i> merozoite proteome, we used peer-reviewed publications, multiple proteomic and bioinformatic approaches, to select and prioritize potential immune targets. We expressed 109 <i>P. falciparum</i> recombinant proteins, the majority of which were obtained using a mammalian expression system that has been shown to produce biologically functional extracellular proteins, and used them to create KILchip v1.0: a novel protein microarray to facilitate high-throughput multiplexed antibody detection from individual samples. The microarray assay was highly specific; antibodies against <i>P. falciparum</i> proteins were detected exclusively in sera from malaria-exposed but not malaria-na&#xef;ve individuals. The intensity of antibody reactivity varied as expected from strong to weak across well-studied antigens such as AMA1 and RH5 (Kruskal-Wallis H test for trend: <i>p</i> &lt; 0.0001). The inter-assay and intra-assay variability was minimal, with reproducible results obtained in re-assays using the same chip over a duration of 3 months. Antibodies quantified using the multiplexed format in KILchip v1.0 were highly correlated with those measured in the gold-standard monoplex ELISA [median (range) Spearman's R of 0.84 (0.65-0.95)]. KILchip v1.0 is a robust, scalable and adaptable protein microarray that has broad applicability to studies of naturally acquired immunity against malaria by providing a standardized tool for the detection of antibody correlates of protection. It will facilitate rapid high-throughput validation and prioritization of potential <i>Plasmodium falciparum</i> merozoite-stage antigens paving the way for urgently needed clinical trials for the next generation of malaria vaccines.

### Keywords
Plasmodium falciparum, Merozoite, Antibodies, Protein microarray, Bioinformatics, Vaccine candidates

### Affiliations
Biosciences Department, KEMRI-Wellcome Trust Research Programme, Centre for Geographic Medicine Research - Coast, Kilifi, Kenya
KEMRI Wellcome Trust Programme

### Submitter
James Njunge

### Lab Head
Dr James Njunge
Biosciences Department, KEMRI-Wellcome Trust Research Programme, Centre for Geographic Medicine Research - Coast, Kilifi, Kenya


