### Accession
PXD001973

### Title
Proteome Comparison of Different-Aged Cochlea

### Description
Our work describes the application of mass spectrometry-based label-free quantitative proteomics for the identification of differentially expressed proteins between different-aged cochlea. We report proteins exclusively present as well as up- and downregulated in the cochlear sensory epithelium at  significant developmental stages. Additionally, we report proteins exclusively present on P3 that were recently identified in the cochlea for the first time. We use bioinformatics to provide insight on biological functions and potential primary and secondary partners of the differentially expressed proteins. This study provides the first differentially expressed proteome in the mammalian cochlea at significant developmental stages; before hearing, during the onset of hearing, and when hearing is fully developed. We believe that these results will provide insights into the function of proteins that change during development and identify potential protein biomarkers related to hearing impairments.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted and their concentrations measured from cochlear sensory epithelia of 3-, 14- and 30-day-old mice (P3, P14 and P30). Three independent replicates were prepared from each age group. Samples were enzymatically digested using LysC and trypsin and the peptide extracts fractionated by strong cation exchange (SCX). LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on an LTQ-Orbitrap mass spectrometer and MS/MS spectra obtained from each fraction were searched by MASCOT.

### Data Protocol
Scaffold was used to validate peptide and protein identification and to calculate normalized spectral counts for relative quantification.Peptide and protein identifications were accepted if they were greater than 95% and 99% probability, respectively, and contained twoor more identified peptides. Statistical analysis using a one-way Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) followed by Bonferroni’s post-hoc test was used to show significant differences in protein expression. Gene ontology (GO) classifications of the differentially expressed proteins were obtained using UniProt GO program. Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) was used to determine biological functions of differentially expressed proteins from cochlear sensory epithelia of 3-, 14- and 30-day-old mice and  and Cytoscape was used to generate networks of these proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics, Cochlea, Development, Quantitative mass spectrometry, Sensory epithelium

### Affiliations
University of South Florida Morsani College of Medicine Department of Otolaryngology 12901 Bruce B. Downs Blvd.  Otology Laboratory MDC83 Tampa FL 33647
University of South Florida

### Submitter
Lancia Darville

### Lab Head
Dr Bernd Sokolowski
University of South Florida Morsani College of Medicine Department of Otolaryngology 12901 Bruce B. Downs Blvd.  Otology Laboratory MDC83 Tampa FL 33647


