### Accession
PXD022834

### Title
Comparative cell surface proteomic analysis of the primary human T cell and monocyte responses to type I interferon

### Description
The cellular response to interferon (IFN) is essential for antiviral immunity, IFN-based therapy and IFN-related disease. The plasma membrane (PM) provides a critical interface between the cell and its environment, and is the initial portal of entry for viruses. Nonetheless, the effect of IFN on PM proteins is surprisingly poorly understood, and has not been systematically investigated in primary immune cells. Here, we use multiplexed proteomics to quantify IFNα-stimulated PM protein changes in primary human CD14+ monocytes and CD4+ T cells from five donors, quantifying 606 and 482 PM proteins respectively. Comparison of cell surface proteomes revealed a remarkable invariance between donors in the overall composition of the cell surface from each cell type, but a marked donor-to-donor variability in the effects of IFNα. Furthermore, whereas only 2.7% of quantified proteins were consistently upregulated by IFNα at the surface of CD4+ T cells, 6.8% of proteins were consistently upregulated in primary monocytes, suggesting that the magnitude of the IFNα response varies according to cell type. Amongst these differentially regulated proteins, we found the viral target Endothelin-converting enzyme 1 (ECE1) to be an IFNα-stimulated protein exclusively upregulated at the surface of CD4+ T cells. We therefore provide a comprehensive map of the cell surface of IFNα-stimulated primary human immune cells, including previously uncharacterised interferon stimulated genes (ISGs) and candidate antiviral factors.

### Sample Protocol
Plasma Membrane Enrichment   Plasma membrane profiling was performed as described previously (Weekes et al, 2010, 2012).  Briefly, cells were centrifuged to collect and washed twice with ice-cold PBS with MgCl2 and CaCl2 (Sigma). An oxidation/biotinylation mix comprising 1 mM sodium meta-periodate (Thermo), 100 mM aminooxy-biotin (Biotium) and 10 mM aniline (Acros Organics) in ice-cold PBS pH 6.7 was applied. The samples were rocked for 30 mins at 4°C in the dark, and then the reaction was quenched with 1 mM glycerol for 5 mins on ice. Biotinylated cells were washed twice in PBS ph 7.4, centrifuged to collect, and lysed in 1% Triton X-100 lysis buffer (1% Triton, 10 mM Tris-HCL, 150 mM NaCl, cOmplete protease inhibitor, 5 mM IAA) for 30 mins on ice.  Nuclei were removed by centrifugation at 4°C, 13,000 g, 5 mins, and this was repeated three times.  Biotinylated glycoproteins were enriched with high affinity streptavidin agarose beads (Thermo) and washed extensively using a vacuum manifold and Poly-Prep columns (BioRad).  Washing was initially with lysis buffer, then 0.5% SDS and then urea. Captured protein was reduced with DTT, alkylated with iodoacetamide (IAA, Sigma) and digested on-bead with trypsin (Promega) in 100 mM HEPES pH 8.5 for 3h. Tryptic peptides were collected.   Peptide labelling with tandem mass tags  TMT reagents (0.8mg) were dissolved in 43 µl of anhydrous acetonitrile, and 5 µl was added to the peptide samples at a final concentration of 30% acetonitrile (v/v).  Following incubation for 1 hour at room temperature, the reaction was quenched with hydroxylamine to a final concentration of 0.05% (v/v). TMT labelled samples were combined 1:1 (THP-1 cells) and 1:1:1:1 (pan-monocytes), vacuum centrifuged to near dryness and then desalted using a StageTip (Rappsilber et al, 2007) before analysing a small fraction of the sample in a ‘single shot’ by LC-MS3.  For primary monocytes and CD4+ T cells, a small amount of each sample was initially labelled and combined 1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1 for a single shot, as described above. The remainder of the sample was then labelled and the amounts combined were adjusted to ensure equal loading of peptide from each sample, to avoid a requirement for excessive digital normalisation.  Samples were not quenched until adequate labelling had been confirmed by analysis of a single shot on the mass spectrometer, in some cases necessitating addition of more TMT reagent. For CD4+ T cells, single shot analysis was initially of stimulated and unstimulated samples derived from three donors, which was later extended to a 10-plex analysis on addition of samples from two further donors. Following single shot analysis of primary CD14+ monocytes and CD4+ T cells, TMT-labelled and combined samples were subject to C18 solid phase extraction (Sep-Pak, Waters) and SCX fractionation (see below) resulting in six fractions, in order to increase the overall number of peptides quantified.  Each fraction was then desalted using a StageTip prior to analysis by LC-MS3. Details of individual sample labelling, and mass spectrometry analyses are described in Table S5.  Offline Tip-Based Strong Cation Exchange SCX Fractionation   A protocol for solid-phase extraction based SCX peptide fractionation  was previously modified for small peptide amounts (Weekes et al, 2014). Briefly, 10 mg of PolySulfethyl A bulk material (Nest Group Inc) was loaded on to a fritted 200 µl tip in 100% Acetonitrile using a vacuum manifold.  The SCX material was conditioned slowly with 2x 400 µl SCX buffer A (7mM KH2PO4, pH 2.65, 30% Acetonitrile), 400 µl SCX buffer B (7mM KH2PO4, pH 2.65, 350mM KCl, 30% Acetonitrile) and then 4x 400 µl SCX buffer A. Dried peptides were resuspended in 400 µl SCX buffer A and added to the tip under vacuum, with a flow rate of ~150 µl/min.  The tip was then washed with 150 µl SCX buffer A.  Fractions were eluted in 150 µl washes using SCX buffer at increasing K+ concentrations (10, 25, 40, 60, 90, 150mM KCl), vacuum-centrifuged to near dryness then desalted using StageTips.  LC-MS3  Mass spectrometry data was acquired using an Orbitrap Fusion for all experiments apart from the two initial CD14+ monocyte single shots and the 10-plex CD4 single shot, where an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos was used instead (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA), as detailed in Table S5B. In both cases, an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano UHPLC equipped with a 300 µm ID x 5 mm Acclaim PepMap µ-Precolumn (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and a 75 µm ID x 50 cm 2.1 µm particle Acclaim PepMap RSLC analytical column was used.  Complete details of instrument settings for MS3-mass spectrometry can be found in the methods of the manuscript.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were processed using a Sequest-based software pipeline for quantitative proteomics, “MassPike”, through a collaborative arrangement with Professor Steve Gygi’s laboratory at Harvard Medical School. MS spectra were converted to mzXML using an extractor built upon Thermo Fisher’s RAW File Reader library (version 4.0.26). In this extractor, the standard mzxml format has been augmented with additional custom fields that are specific to ion trap and Orbitrap mass spectrometry and essential for TMT quantitation. These additional fields include ion injection times for each scan, Fourier Transform-derived baseline and noise values calculated for every Orbitrap scan, isolation widths for each scan type, scan event numbers, and elapsed scan times. This software is a component of the MassPike software platform and is licensed by Harvard Medical School.  The human UniProt database (26th January, 2017), was combined with a database of common contaminants such as porcine trypsin. The combined database was concatenated with a reverse database composed of all protein sequences in reversed order. Searches were performed using a 20 ppm precursor ion tolerance (Haas et al, 2006). Product ion tolerance was set to 0.03 Th. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (229.162932 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (57.02146 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (15.99492 Da) was set as a variable modification.  To control the fraction of erroneous protein identifications, a target-decoy strategy was employed (Elias & Gygi, 2007, 2010). Peptide spectral matches (PSMs) were filtered to an initial peptide-level false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% with subsequent filtering to attain a final protein-level FDR of 1% (Kim et al, 2011; Wu et al, 2011). PSM filtering was performed using a linear discriminant analysis, as described (Huttlin et al, 2010). This distinguishes correct from incorrect peptide IDs in a manner analogous to the widely used Percolator algorithm (Kall et al, 2007), though employing a distinct machine learning algorithm. The following parameters were considered: XCorr, ΔCn, missed cleavages, peptide length, charge state, and precursor mass accuracy. Protein assembly was guided by principles of parsimony to produce the smallest set of proteins necessary to account for all observed peptides (Huttlin et al, 2010).  Proteins were quantified by summing TMT reporter ion counts across all matching peptide-spectral matches using “MassPike”, as described (McAlister et al, 2012, 2014). A minimum one unique or shared peptide per protein was used for quantitation. Briefly, a 0.003 Th window around the theoretical m/z of each reporter ion (126, 127n, 127c, 128n, 128c, 129n, 129c, 130n, 130c, 131n) was scanned for ions, and the maximum intensity nearest to the theoretical m/z was used. The primary determinant of quantitation quality is the number of TMT reporter ions detected in each MS3 spectrum, which is directly proportional to the signal-to-noise (S:N) ratio observed for each ion (Makarov & Denisov, 2009). Conservatively, every individual peptide used for quantitation was required to contribute sufficient TMT reporter ions so that each on its own could be expected to provide a representative picture of relative protein abundance (McAlister et al, 2012). Additionally, an isolation specificity filter with a cut-off of 50% was employed to minimise peptide co-isolation (Ting et al, 2011). Peptide-spectral matches with poor quality MS3 spectra (more than 9 TMT channels missing and/or a combined S:N ratio of less than 25 for each channel used (as detailed in Table S5B) or no MS3 spectra at all were excluded from quantitation. Peptides meeting the stated criteria for reliable quantitation were then summed by parent protein, in effect weighting the contributions of individual peptides to the total protein signal based on their individual TMT reporter ion yields. Protein quantitation values were exported for further analysis in Excel.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, Monocyte, Interferon type i (ifn), T cell, Plasma membrane, Leukocytes, Cell surface, Antiviral restriction

### Affiliations
Cambridge Institute for Medical Research,  University of Cambridge,  Hills Road,  Cambridge,  CB2 0XY,  UK
University of Cambridge

### Submitter
Lior Soday

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Weekes
Cambridge Institute for Medical Research,  University of Cambridge,  Hills Road,  Cambridge,  CB2 0XY,  UK


