### Accession
PXD004666

### Title
Accessory subunits are integral for assembly and function of human mitochondrial complex I

### Description
Complex I (NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase) is the first enzyme of the mitochondrial respiratory chain (RC) and is composed of 44 different subunits in humans, making it one of the largest known multi-subunit membrane protein complexes. Complex I exists in supercomplex forms with RC complexes III and IV, which are together required for the generation of a transmembrane proton gradient used for the synthesis of ATP. Complex I is also a major source of damaging reactive oxygen species in the cell and its dysfunction is associated with mitochondrial disease, Parkinson’s disease and aging. Bacterial and human complex I share 14 core subunits that are essential for enzymatic function, however the role and requirement of the remaining 30 human accessory subunits is unclear. The incorporation of accessory subunits into the complex increases the energetic cost to the cell and has necessitated the involvement of a suite of assembly factors for complex I biogenesis. We used gene-editing to generate human knockout cell lines for each accessory subunit. We found that 25 subunits are strictly required for assembly of a functional complex and one subunit is essential for cell viability. Quantitative proteomic analysis of all 30 cell lines revealed that subunits belong to discrete complex I modules, and their loss affects the stability of subunits within these modules. Known assembly factors were found to correlate with most modules. Analysis of proteomic changes when other modules were destabilised revealed ATP5SL and DMAC1 as novel factors required to assemble the distal portion of the complex I membrane arm. Our results demonstrate the broad importance of accessory subunits in the structure and function of human complex I.  Coupling gene-editing technology with large-scale proteomics represents a powerful tool for dissecting large multi-subunit complexes and enabling the study of complex dysfunction at a cellular level.

### Sample Protocol
Whole cell quantitative mass-spectrometry performed from SILAC labelled, SDC solubilised whole-cell starting material fractionated over SCX substrate as described by Kulak et al. (2013), or from a SILAC labelled, 8M UREA solubilised mitochondria analysed through a single injection. AP-MS was performed using digested material material eluted from FLAG-affinity gel bound SILAC labelled mitochondria solubilised in digitonin or triton x-100 detergents. Analysis was performed on a Q Exactive Plus (whole-cell, mitochondria and AP-MS) or LTQ-Orbitrap Elite (mitochondria) as indicated in the raw file name. For the Q Exactive Plus, peptides were first loaded onto a trap column (Acclaim C18 PepMap nano Trap x 2 cm, 100 μm I.D, 5 μm particle size and 300 Å pore size; ThermoFisher Scientific) at 15 μL/min for 3 min before switching the pre-column in line with the analytical column (Acclaim RSLC C18 PepMap Acclaim RSLC nanocolumn 75 μm x 50 cm, PepMap100 C18, 3 μm particle size 100 Å pore size; ThermoFisher Scientific). The separation of peptides was performed at 250 nL/min using a non-linear ACN gradient of buffer A (0.1% FA, 2% ACN) and buffer B (0.1% FA, 80% ACN), starting at 2.5% buffer B to 35.4% followed by ramp to 99% over 60, 90 or 120 minutes as indicated in the raw file name. Data were collected in positive mode using Data Dependent Acquisition using m/z 375 - 1800 as MS scan range, HCD for MS/MS of the 12 most intense ions with z ≥ 2. Other instrument parameters were: MS1 scan at 70,000 resolution (at 200 m/z), MS maximum injection time 50 ms, AGC target 3E6, Normalized collision energy was at 27% energy, Isolation window of 1.8 Da, MS/MS resolution 17,500, MS/MS AGC target of 1E5, MS/MS maximum injection time 100 ms, minimum intensity was set at 1E3 and dynamic exclusion was set to 15 sec. For the LTQ-Orbitrap Elite instrument, peptides were loaded onto a trap column (C18 PepMap 100 µm I.D. x 2 cm trapping column, Thermo-Fisher Scientific) at 5 µL/min for 6 min, and washed for 6 min before switching the precolumn in line with the analytical column (Vydac MS C18, 3 µm, 300 Å and 75 µm I.D. x 25 cm, Grace Pty. Ltd.). The separation of peptides was performed at 300 nL/min using a non-linear ACN gradient of buffer A (0.1% formic acid, 2% ACN) and buffer B (0.1% formic acid, 80% ACN), starting at 5% buffer B to 55% over 180 minutes. Data were collected in Data Dependent Acquisition mode using m/z 350 - 1500 as MS scan range, CID for MS/MS of the 20 most intense ions. Other instrument parameters were: MS scan at 120,000 resolution, maximum injection time 150 ms, AGC target 1E6, CID at 35% energy for a maximum injection time of 150 ms with AGC target of 5,000.

### Data Protocol
All raw file names included identifiers for the batch, instrument and gradient used, knockout cell line being studied, and applicable label orientation. Raw files were analysed using the MaxQuant platform version 1.5.4.1 searching against the Uniprot human database containing reviewed, canonical and isoform variants in FASTA format (June 2015) and a database containing common contaminants by the Andromeda search engine. Default search parameters for a Arg10 and Lys8 labelled experiment were used with modifications. Briefly, cysteine carbamidomethylation was used as a fixed modification, and N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were used as variable modifications. False discovery rates of 1% for proteins and peptides were applied by searching a reverse database, and “Re-quantify” and “Match from and to”, “Match between runs” options were enabled with a match time window of 2 minutes. Experimental groups based on data gathered using different instrumentation and/or acquisition parameters were given odd numbered fractions to avoid falsely matched identifications, whereas fractionated whole-cell samples were given sequential fraction numbers. Unique and razor peptides with a minimum ratio count of 2 were used for quantification of mitochondria and whole-cell samples. Unique and razor peptides with a minimum ratio count of 1 were used for quantification of AP-MS samples.

### Publication Abstract
The emergence of small open reading frame (sORF)-encoded peptides (SEPs) is rapidly expanding the known proteome at the lower end of the size distribution. Here, we show that the mitochondrial proteome, particularly the respiratory chain, is enriched for small proteins. Using a prediction and validation pipeline for SEPs, we report the discovery of 16 endogenous nuclear encoded, mitochondrial-localized SEPs (mito-SEPs). Through functional prediction, proteomics, metabolomics and metabolic flux modeling, we demonstrate that BRAWNIN, a 71 a.a. peptide encoded by C12orf73, is essential for respiratory chain complex III (CIII) assembly. In human cells, BRAWNIN is induced by the energy-sensing AMPK pathway, and its depletion impairs mitochondrial ATP production. In zebrafish, Brawnin deletion causes complete CIII loss, resulting in severe growth retardation, lactic acidosis and early death. Our findings demonstrate that BRAWNIN is essential for vertebrate oxidative phosphorylation. We propose that mito-SEPs are an untapped resource for essential regulators of oxidative metabolism.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Human, Mitochondria, Ap-ms, Nadh, Hek293t, Talen, Crispr, Silac, Oxphos

### Affiliations
The University of Melbourne
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mitochondria lab, Monash University, Clayton 3800, Australia

### Submitter
David Stroud

### Lab Head
Dr David Arthur Stroud
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mitochondria lab, Monash University, Clayton 3800, Australia


