### Accession
PXD009469

### Title
Spop restrains inflammation-induced emergency hematopoiesis by targeting MyD88

### Description
Innate immune cells, and myeloid lineage cells in particular, constitute the first line ofdefense for the containment of invading pathogens. To meet the augmented demand of myeloidcells in response to systemic infections, inflammatory signals trigger a rapid transcriptional response inhematopoietic stem and progenitor cells (HSPCs), promoting their proliferation and preferential differentiation towards the granulocytic lineage

### Sample Protocol
TCA precipitated pellet from the sample was solubilized in TRIS-HCl pH8.5 and 8M Urea; TCEP (Tris(2-Carboxylethyl)-Phosphine Hydrochloride, Pierce) and CAM (Chloroacetamide, Sigma) were added to a final concentration of 5mM and 10mM, respectively.  The protein suspension was digested overnight at 37°C using Endoproteinase Lys-C at 1:50 wt/wt (Roche).  Sample was brought to a final concentration of 2M urea and 2mM CaCl2 before performing a second overnight digestion at 37°C using Trypsin (Promega) at 1:100 wt/wt. Formic acid (5% final) was added to stop the reactions.  Sample was loaded on triple-phase fused-silica micro-capillary column) and placed in-line with linear ion trap velos-pro mass spectrometer (LTQ-velos pro, ThermoScientific), coupled with quaternary Agilent 1260 series HPLC.  Fully automated 10-step chromatography run (for a total of 20 hours) was carried out for each sample, as described in (Florens and Washburn 2006), enabling dynamic exclusion for 90 sec.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS datasets were searched against the H. sapiens protein sequence database.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Spop

### Affiliations
Stowers Institute
Proteomics Center

### Submitter
Anita Saraf

### Lab Head
Dr Anita Saraf
Stowers Institute


