### Accession
PXD002250

### Title
proteome and pathway effects of chronic haoperidol treatment in mouse hippocampus

### Description
Seven male C57BL/6 mice, at 10 weeks of age, were injected daily intraperitoneally with 0.5 mg/kg of haloperidol, for 28 days. A control group of six animals was injected with vehicle only (saline).

### Sample Protocol
Seven male C57BL/6 mice, at 10 weeks of age, were injected daily intraperitoneally with 0.5 mg/kg of haloperidol, for 28 days. A control group of or six animals was injected with vehicle only (saline). Immediately after decapitation, the hippocampus was dissected, snap frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at -80°C. Samples were prepared for Liquid Chromotography/ tandem mass spectrometry (LC/MS/MS) as described previously in detail [31]. In brief, hippocampi were homogenized by sonication, and protein concentration of each homogenate was determined using the Bradford assay [32]. Homogenates were subsequently denatured, reduced, and alkylated before tryptic digestion. Peptides were then resuspended in 0.5% TFA, dried, and desalted using Zip-Tips (Millipore, USA). Label-free LC/MS/MS was conducted using a Thermo Scientific LTQ ORBITRAP XL mass spectrometer connected to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 (RSLCnano) chromatography system. Tryptic peptides were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid. Each sample was loaded onto Biobasic Picotip Emitter (120 mm length, 75 μm ID) packed with Reprocil Pur C18 (1.9 μm) reverse phase media column, and was separated by an increasing acetonitrile gradient, using a 120 min reverse phase gradient at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode with a capillary temperature of 200 °C, a capillary voltage of 45V, a tube lens voltage of 100V, and with a potential of 1800V applied to the frit. All data were acquired with the mass spectrometer operating in automatic data-dependent switching mode. A high-resolution MS scan (300-2000 Dalton) was performed using the Orbitrap to select the 7 most intense ions prior to MS/MS analysis using the Ion trap. Statistical analysis of Orbitrap data was carried out using Maxquant analysis software (Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany). Results were searched against rodent databases.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were then resuspended in 0.5% TFA, dried, and desalted using Zip-Tips (Millipore, USA). Label-free LC/MS/MS was conducted using a Thermo Scientific LTQ ORBITRAP XL mass spectrometer connected to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 (RSLCnano) chromatography system. Tryptic peptides were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid. Each sample was loaded onto Biobasic Picotip Emitter (120 mm length, 75 μm ID) packed with Reprocil Pur C18 (1.9 μm) reverse phase media column, and was separated by an increasing acetonitrile gradient, using a 120 min reverse phase gradient at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode with a capillary temperature of 200 °C, a capillary voltage of 45V, a tube lens voltage of 100V, and with a potential of 1800V applied to the frit. All data were acquired with the mass spectrometer operating in automatic data-dependent switching mode. A high-resolution MS scan (300-2000 Dalton) was performed using the Orbitrap to select the 7 most intense ions prior to MS/MS analysis using the Ion trap. Statistical analysis of Orbitrap data was carried out using Maxquant analysis software (Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany). Results were searched against rodent databases.

### Publication Abstract
Proteomic exploration of the effects of psychotropic drugs on specific brain areas in rodents has the potential to uncover novel molecular networks and pathways affected by psychotropic medications, and may inform etiologic hypotheses on mental disorders. Haloperidol, a widely used first-generation antipsychotic, has been shown to produce structural and functional changes of the hippocampus, a brain region also implicated in the neuropathology of disorders such as schizophrenia and bipolar disorder. Seven adult male C57BL/6 mice were injected daily intraperitoneally with 0.5 mg/kg of haloperidol, for 28 days. A control group of six animals was injected with vehicle only (saline). Protein levels of postmortem hippocampus homogenate were determined using label-free LC/MS/MS. In the treatment group, 216 differentially expressed hippocampal proteins were identified as compared to controls. Ingenuity pathway analysis implicated oxidative phosphorylation and mitochondrial function as top canonical pathways, and local networks involved in tubulin-mediated cytoskeleton dynamics, clathrin-mediated endocytosis, and extracellular signal-regulated kinase and c-Jun N-terminal kinase signaling. The findings of this study could stimulate further research into the cellular mechanisms associated with haloperidol treatment and the pathophysiology of psychotic disorders, assisting treatment biomarker discovery. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD002250 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD002250).

### Keywords
Antipsychotics, Mouse hippocampus, Chronic haloperidol treatment

### Affiliations
Department of Psychiatry Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland
Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland

### Submitter
Melanie Foecking

### Lab Head
Dr David Richard Cotter
Department of Psychiatry Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland


