### Accession
PXD028122

### Title
Ubiquitination of DEAD-box RNA helicase DDX3X by TRIM25

### Description
Tripartite motif protein 25 (TRIM25) is an E3 ligase that ubiquitinates multiple substrates within the RLR signalling cascade and plays both RING (really interesting new gene)-dependent and RING-independent roles in RIG-I-mediated IFN induction. We report that the PRY-SPRY domain of TRIM25 interacts with the N-terminal extension (NTE) of DEAD-box helicase 3X (DDX3X), a host protein with multiple roles in RLR signalling. Gene reporter assays and knockdown studies reveal DDX3X and TRIM25 cooperate to activate the IFN- promoter following RIG-I activation independent of DDX3X’s catalytic activity. We also show that TRIM25 ubiquitinates DDX3X at several lysine residues in vitro and in cells.

### Sample Protocol
His6-DDX3X(1‒580) was expressed and purified as described previously (PMID: 31575075). His6-UbE1 was expressed and purified as described previously (PMID: 21771579). His6-UbcH5, and 6His6-MBP-TRIM25  were expressed at 16 °C in E. coli strain BL21(DE3) following induction at OD600nm = 0.6 with 1 mM isopropyl 1-thio-β-D-galactopyranoside (IPTG). 20 h post-induction, bacteria were harvested by centrifugation and resuspended in lysis buffer (20 mM Tris-Cl pH 8.0, 500 mM NaCl, 10% (v/v) glycerol, 10 mM imidazole, 0.5 mM TCEP). Proteins were extracted by sonication and applied to Ni-NTA Superflow resin (Qiagen). Resin was extensively washed and bound proteins were eluted using elution buffer (lysis buffer + 300mM imidazole). Eluate was applied to a Superdex 200 16/60 size exclusion chromatography column pre-equilibrated in SEC buffer (20 mM Tris-Cl pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 10% glycerol, 1 mM TCEP). 6His-MBP-TRIM25 was incubated with TEV protease to cleave the N-terminal 6His-MBP fusion tag, then applied once more to a Superdex 200 16/60 size exclusion chromatography column pre-equilibrated in SEC buffer.  Recombinant TRIM25, Ube1 and UbcH5b were validated enzymatically, and all proteins were verified by SDS‒PAGE and immunoblot. For the In vitro ubiquitination assay, recombinant His6-DDX3X (0.75 μM), TRIM25 (with His6-MBP-tag cleaved, 0.75 μM), Ube1-His6 (0.25 μM), His6-UbcH5b (0.75 μM) and His6-ubiquitin (Boston Biochem, 5 μM) were incubated in a final volume of 20 μl in 1x ubiquitination reaction buffer (30 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 5 mM MgCl2•6H2O, 0.2 mM DTT) using a Thermomixer Comfort fitted with a 0.6 mL tube heating block (Eppendorf) set to 30 °C and 650 rpm for 1 h. Reactions were stopped by boiling with 2x Laemmli sample buffer prior to SDS‒PAGE and immunoblotting.  Following Coomassie staining, protein bands were excised and subject to in-gel trypsin digestion. The resulting tryptic peptides were resolved by reverse-phase chromatography on 0.075 X 200-mm fused silica capillaries (J&W) packed with Reprosil reversed phase material (Dr Maisch GmbH, Germany). The peptides were eluted with linear 65 minutes gradients of 5 to 45% and 15 minutes at 95% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid in water at flow rates of 0.25 μl/min. Mass spectrometry was performed by an hybrid ion-trap mass spectrometer (Orbitrap XL, Thermo) in a positive mode using repetitively full MS scan followed by collision induces dissociation (CID) of the 7 most dominant ion selected from the first MS scan.

### Data Protocol
MS data was performed by using MSFragger version 3.1.1 (PMID: 28394336) via FragPipe version 14.0 (https://fragpipe.nesvilab.org/). The searches were conducted using MSFragger’s “closed search” configuration against Human protein sequences downloaded from Uniprot (Uniprot version: 10/2020). Precursor mass tolerance was set to 50ppm, fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.8 Da with specific tryptic digestion, peptide length was set to be between 7 to 35 amino acids. Oxidation of methionine, protein N-terminal acetylation and lysine ubiquitination were set as variable modifications. Peptide validation for each modification (1% FDR) was done following PeptideProphet (PMID: 12403597) and iProphet (PMID: 21876204) analyses. The modifications and their localisation were validated and using PTMProphet (PMID: 31290668). Only DDX3X ubiquitinated peptides with localisation probability higher than 0.9 were considered. MS/MS spectra was generated using PDV (version 1.73) (PMID: 30169737).

### Publication Abstract
The cytoplasmic retinoic acid-inducible gene-I (RIG-I)-like receptors (RLRs) initiate interferon (IFN) production and antiviral gene expression in response to RNA virus infection. Consequently, RLR signalling is tightly regulated by both host and viral factors. Tripartite motif protein 25 (TRIM25) is an E3 ligase that ubiquitinates multiple substrates within the RLR signalling cascade, playing both ubiquitination-dependent and -independent roles in RIG-I-mediated IFN induction. However, additional regulatory roles are emerging. Here, we show a novel interaction between TRIM25 and another protein in the RLR pathway that is essential for type I IFN induction, DEAD-box helicase 3X (DDX3X). In vitro assays and knockdown studies reveal that TRIM25 ubiquitinates DDX3X at lysine 55 (K55) and that TRIM25 and DDX3X cooperatively enhance <i>IFNB1</i> induction following RIG-I activation, but the latter is independent of TRIM25's catalytic activity. Furthermore, we found that the influenza A virus non-structural protein 1 (NS1) disrupts the TRIM25:DDX3X interaction, abrogating both TRIM25-mediated ubiquitination of DDX3X and cooperative activation of the <i>IFNB1</i> promoter. Thus, our results reveal a new interplay between two RLR-host proteins that cooperatively enhance IFN-&#x3b2; production. We also uncover a new and further mechanism by which influenza A virus NS1 suppresses host antiviral defence.

### Keywords
Ddx3x, Ubiquitin, Trim25

### Affiliations
Technion
Center Biomol. Struct. & Organization Head, Immunity and Immune Evasion Lab Bachelor of Health and Biomedical Sciences Honours (BH058) Program Manager School of Health and Biomedical Sciences | RMIT University PO Box 71 | Bundoora 3083 | Australia

### Submitter
Oded Kleifeld

### Lab Head
Dr Natalie Borg
Center Biomol. Struct. & Organization Head, Immunity and Immune Evasion Lab Bachelor of Health and Biomedical Sciences Honours (BH058) Program Manager School of Health and Biomedical Sciences | RMIT University PO Box 71 | Bundoora 3083 | Australia


