### Accession
PXD010436

### Title
Host cell proteome analysis follwoing HIV-1 transduction

### Description
293T cells were infected with HIV-1 pseudovirions, and 0, 4 and 12 hours post-infection, the cell lysates were collected. Label-free proteomics was applied to examine the protein-level changes. Duplicate samples for six time points were collected  (0, 4, and 12 hours post-transduction, virus- and mock transduced samples) and analyzed in duplicates, allowing for the measurement of two technical and two biological replicates for each time point. The results were used for the analysis of protein networks implementing both the qualitative and quantitative information.

### Sample Protocol
293T cells in T25 cell culture flasks were either mock-treated or transduced at 50 % confluency with 5 ng RT equivalent of the HIV-based pseudovirion, in the presence of 4 µg/ml polybrene (Sigma), in 1 ml total volume, and incubated at 37 C°. After 0, 4, and 12 hours, cells were trypsinized for 10 min, then washed tree times with ice cold PBS to remove non-internalized pseudovirion particles. The final pellet was suspended in 4 ml RIPA A buffer (150 mM sodium chloride, 1.0% Triton X-100, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), and 50 mM Tris) pH 8.0, supplemented with cOmplete protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich), incubated for 30 min at room temperature, centrifuged and the supernatant was mixed with 24 ml cold (-20 C°) acetone and stored at -20 C° overnight in order to get rid of the non-protein components. The precipitates were re-dissolved in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA) and digested with MS grade trypsin (ABSciex, Framingham, MA, USA) in 1:25 enzyme to protein ratio (w/w) at 37 oC, overnight. Before digestion, the samples were denatured with 8 M urea, then reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA) in ammonium bicarbonate for 60 min at 56 oC, followed by alkylation with 20 mM iodoacetamide (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA) in ammonium bicarbonate at room temperature for 45 min in the dark. The tryptic fragments were used for LC-MS/MS analyses at Arizona Proteomics Consortium.  LC-MS/MS replicate analysis of in-solution trypsin digested human 293T cell protein lysate mixtures (500 ng per 5 µL injected spiked with 300 fmol of Rhodobacter capsulatus cytochrome c T33V mutant), was carried out using a LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) equipped with an Advion nanomate ESI source (Advion, Ithaca, NY), after Omix (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA) C18 sample clean-up according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Peptides were eluted from a C18 precolumn (100-μm id × 2 cm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) onto an analytical column (75-μm ID × 10 cm, C18, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a 5% hold of solvent B (acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) for 5 min, followed by a 5-7% gradient of solvent B over 5 min, 7-15% gradient of solvent B over 50 min, 15-35% gradient of solvent B over 60 min, 35-40% gradient of solvent B over 28 min, 40-85% gradient of solvent B over 5 min, 85% hold of solvent B for 10 min, a return to 5% solvent B in 1 min, and finally a 16 minute hold of solvent B. All flow rates were 500 nanoliters/minute. Solvent A consisted of water and 0.1% formic acid. Data-dependent scanning was performed by the Xcalibur v 2.1.0 software (Andon et al., 2002) using a survey mass scan at 60,000 resolution in the Orbitrap analyzer scanning mass/charge (m/z) 350-1600, followed by collision-induced dissociation (CID) tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) at 35 normalized collision energy of the 14 most intense ions in the linear ion trap analyzer. Precursor ions were selected by the monoisotopic precursor selection (MIPS) setting with selection or rejection of ions held to a +/- 10 ppm window. Singly charged ions were excluded from MS/MS. Dynamic exclusion was set to place any selected m/z on an exclusion list for 45 seconds after a single MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were searched against the UniprotKB/Swiss-Prot UniProt release available on December 12, 2014 without species restriction. At the time of the search, this database contained 459,734 entries. All MS/MS spectra were searched using Thermo Proteome Discoverer 1.3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) considering fully tryptic peptides with up to 2 missed cleavage sites. Variable modifications considered during the search included methionine oxidation (15.995 Da), and cysteine carbamidomethylation (57.021 Da). The parent ion mass tolerance was 10 ppm, while the fragment tolerance was 0.8 Da. Proteins were identified at 99% confidence with XCorr score cut-offs (Qian et al., 2005) as determined by a reversed database search. The protein and peptide identification results were also visualized with Scaffold v 4.3.4 (Proteome Software Inc., Portland OR), a program that relies on various search engine results (i.e.: Sequest, X!Tandem, MASCOT) and which uses Bayesian statistics to reliably identify more spectra (Keller et al., 2002). Proteins were accepted that passed a minimum of two peptides identified at 0.1% FDR and 99% protein confidence by the Peptide and Protein Profit algorithms, respectively, within Scaffold. The raw protein identification data were manually evaluated, and in the case of non-human or non-viral identifications, the sequences were verified. In many instances, they were mistakenly designated as non-human proteins, in which case it was corrected. In few instances, the non-human proteins could not be matched to any of the human or viral proteins, consequently, these sequences were omitted from further analyses. The data for Rhodobacter capsulatus cytochrome c, bovine pancreatic trypsin inhibitor, bovine serum albumin and pig trypsin were kept to serve as reference for quantitative analyses, but were not used for building the PPI networks.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hiv-1, Vector, Label-free quantification, Host cell response

### Affiliations
University of Debrecen
Proteomics Core Facility, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Debrecn

### Submitter
Eva Csosz

### Lab Head
Dr Eva Csosz
Proteomics Core Facility, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Debrecn


