### Accession
PXD017412

### Title
Comparative milk proteome analysis of Kashmiri and Jersey cattle identifies differential expression of key proteins involved in immune system regulation and milk quality

### Description
Exploration of the bioactive components of bovine milk has gained global interest due to their potential applications in human nutrition and health promotion. Despite advances in proteomics profiling, limited studies have been carried out to fully characterize the bovine milk proteome. This study explored the milk proteome of Jersey and Kashmiri cattle at day 90 of lactation using high-resolution mass spectrometry based quantitative proteomics nano-scale LC-MS/Q-TOF technique.

### Sample Protocol
The ethical clearance was approved by the Institutional Animal Ethics Committee (IAEC) of Sher-e-Kashmir University of Agricultural Sciences and Technology of Kashmir.  A total of three healthy Kashmiri and three Jersey cows in their 3rd lactation from the university dairy farm (Mountain Livestock Research Institute, Share-Kashmir University of Agricultural Sciences and Technology of Kashmir, India) were selected for the study. The animals were kept under similar feeding and management conditions to minimise environmental variation. Fresh milk samples (200 mL) were aseptically collected from all the four quarters (50 mL per quarter) at day 90 in milk (D90), mixed thoroughly, placed on ice and immediately transported to the laboratory for further analysis. Protein preparation Milk samples were processed differently for high and low abundance protein analysis. For high-abundance protein analysis, 50 mL of milk was immediately placed on ice after collection followed by centrifugation at 4,000 × g for 10 min at 4 °C within 2 h of collection. The fat layer was removed and skimmed fraction was stored at -20 °C. Whereas, for low abundance protein analysis, 0.24 mL (100X) mammalian protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma, Milwaukee, WI, USA) was added to 50 mL of milk followed by centrifugation at 4,000 × g for 15 min at 4 °C. The cream layer was removed and the skimmed or whey portion was depleted of casein using a previously described method [74]. Briefly, 60 mM CaCl2 was added to skimmed sample and the pH was adjusted to 4.3 using 30% acetic acid (Fisher Scientific, Fair Lawn, NJ, USA). Samples were then centrifuged at 189,000 × g at 4°C for 70 min and the supernatant was collected and stored at -80°C. Enrichment of low abundance proteins Low abundance minor proteins were enriched using the ProteoMiner Kit (BioRad Laboratories, Hercules, CA, USA) as per manufacturer’s protocol. Whey samples were placed in individual ProteoMiner columns, mixed thoroughly by shaking (gently) followed by incubation at room temperature for 2 h. Subsequently, samples were washed thoroughly using HPLC grade water to remove excess proteins by centrifugation at 7000 g for 5 min. Low abundance proteins were eluted off the beads by addition of 20 μl 4 x Laemmli sample buffer (8 % SDS, 40 % glycerol, 250 mM Tris, pH 6.8, 400 mM DTT with trace amount of bromophenol blue). The pellets after acetone precipitation (high abundant proteins) or TCA (Trichloroacetic acid)-acetone precipitation (low abundant proteins) were dissolved in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (dilution 1:3) and 0.1 % SDS. 100 µg of the extracted protein was subjected to in solution trypsin digestion with carbamidomethylation at cysteine (fixed) and oxidation at methionine (variable). The dissolved pellet was treated with 10 µl of 100 mM DTT (Dithiothreitol) followed by incubation on a thermo mixer (Eppendorf ThermoMixer® C,) at 95 °C for 1 h. The sample was treated with 18 µl of 250 mM IDA (Iodoacetamide) and then incubated in the dark for 45 min at room temperature. To stop the IDA reaction, 40 µl DTT was added at room temperature and incubated for 10 min. To this solution, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 0.1 % SDS was added to make up the volume to 300 µl. For Enzymatic cleavage of the protein, trypsin in the ratio 50:1 (w/v) was added to sample and incubated on the thermo mixer at 37 °C overnight. To stop the trypsin activity, the peptides were then extracted in 0.1 % formic acid followed by incubation at 37 °C for 45 min. The extracted mixture was then centrifuged at 13000 g for 10 min and the supernatant was placed in a separate Eppendorf tube. This supernatant was subjected to speed vac at 45°C. The resulting peptides were then dissolved in 20 µl of 0.1 % formic acid and 10 µL of this solution was used on C18 UPLC column for separation of peptides. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode, and MS spectra were acquired over a range of 375–1500 m/z. For MS and MS/MS scans, the resolution of the orbitrap fusion was set at 120,000 and 50,000 at 200 m/z, respectively. Data-dependent acquisition mode was set as top speed, and ions were fragmented (10 fragment files collected after every full scan) through higher energy collisional dissociation, and cycle time was 3 s with peptide mass tolerance and fragment mass tolerance of 50ppm and 100ppm, respectively. The automatic gain control target values for master scan modes and MS/MS were set to 4e5 and 1e5, respectively. Dynamic exclusion duration was 40 s.

### Data Protocol
The individual peptides MSMS spectra were searched against the Swiss-Prot databases using the Mascot Distiller Search engine (v. 2.6.0) for protein identification and expression analysis was performed with PLGS software (Protein Lynx Global Server, Waters, India) by Sandor’s Lifesciences, Hyderabad, India. The results were filtered based on the peptide Benjaminin and Hochberg corrected p-value < 0.1 (FDR < 0.1) or uncorrected p-value < 0.05. Both unique and razor peptides were selected for protein quantification, protein ratios were calculated as the median of only unique or razor peptides of the protein. All peptide ratios were normalized based on the median ratio. The protein species quantification results were statistically analysed by student's t-test, and the p-value was corrected by the method of Benjamin and Hochberg FDR analysis. An FDR <0.1 was considered significant due to the low number of samples analysed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bos taurus milk proteomics

### Affiliations
Division of Animal Genetics and Breeding, Faculty of Veterinary Sciences and Animal Husbandry, SKUAST-Kashmir, India
Division of Animal Biotechnology, Faculty of Veterinary Sciences and Animal Husbandry, SKUAST-Kashmir, India.


### Submitter
Syed M Ahmad

### Lab Head
Dr Syed Modasir
Division of Animal Genetics and Breeding, Faculty of Veterinary Sciences and Animal Husbandry, SKUAST-Kashmir, India


