### Accession
PXD037675

### Title
The massive solubility changes of neuronal proteins upon simulated traumatic brain injury

### Description
The molecular consequences of traumatic brain injuries or TBI are poorly understood. Here, we simulated TBI using an innovative laboratory apparatus employing a 5.1 kg dummy impact generating a ≤3,300 g-force acceleration and performed system-wide profiling of neuronal cells using Proteome Integral Solubility Alteration (PISA) assay. Dynamic impact leads to both reduction in neuron viability and massive solubility changes in the proteome. The affected proteins map not only to pathways such as cell adhesion, collagen and laminin structures, as well as response to stress, but also to other dense protein networks, such as immune response, complement and coagulation cascades. An energy absorbing material largely rescues the loss of cell viability and dampens proteome solubility changes. The cellular effects are found to be mainly due to the shockwave rather than the g-force acceleration. This study paves the way to introducing a proteome-based shock-meter as well as identifying TBI protein biomarkers and potential drug targets for prevention and intervention.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were processed according to PISA assay protocol. After the impact, the media were removed, and cells were washed with PBS. 350 μl of PBS was added to each plate, after which cells were scraped from the surface. Each sample was then divided into 10 aliquots in PCR plates. The plate was heated in an Eppendorf gradient thermocycler (Mastercycler X50s) in the temperature range of 48-59°C for 3 min. Samples were cooled for 3 min at room temperature and afterwards snap frozen in liquid nitrogen. Samples from each replicate were then combined. The samples were freeze-thawed in liquid nitrogen twice more, and then transferred into polycarbonate thick-wall tubes and centrifuged at 100,000 g and 4°C for 20 min.  The soluble protein fraction was transferred to new Eppendorf tubes. Protein concentration was measured in all samples using Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo), the volume corresponding to 25 µg of protein was transferred from each sample to new tubes and urea was added to a final concentration of 4 M. Dithiothreitol (DTT) was added to a final concentration of 10 mM and samples were incubated for 1h at room temperature. Subsequently, iodoacetamide (IAA) was added to a final concentration of 50 mM and samples were incubated at room temperature for 1h in the dark. The reaction was quenched by adding an additional 10 mM of DTT. The proteins were then precipitated using methanol/chloroform, and after drying, resuspended in 20 mM EPPS pH 8.5 with 8 M urea. The urea was diluted to 4 M with 20 mM EPPS and then Lysyl endopeptidase (LysC; Wako) was added at a 1:50 w/w ratio at room temperature overnight. Samples were diluted with 20 mM EPPS to the final urea concentration of 1 M, and trypsin was added at a 1:50 w/w ratio, followed by incubation for 6h at room temperature. Acetonitrile (ACN) was added to a final concentration of 20% and TMTpro-16plex reagents were added 4x by weight (200 μg) to each sample, followed by incubation for 2h at room temperature. The reaction was quenched by addition of 0.5% hydroxylamine. Samples within each replicate were combined, acidified by TFA, cleaned using Sep-Pak cartridges (Waters) and dried using DNA 120 concentrator (Thermo). The pooled samples were resuspended in 20 mM ammonium hydroxide and separated into 96 fractions on an XBrigde BEH C18 2.1x150 mm column (Waters; Cat#186003023), using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 2DLC system (Thermo Scientific) over a 48 min gradient of 1-63% B (B=20 mM ammonium hydroxide in acetonitrile) in three steps (1-23.5% B in 42 min, 23.5-54% B in 4 min and then 54-63%B in 2 min) at 200 µL min-1 flow. Fractions were then concatenated into 16 samples in sequential order. After drying, samples were dissolved in buffer A (0.1% formic acid and 2% ACN in water). The samples were loaded onto a 50 cm EASY-Spray column (75 µm internal diameter, packed with PepMap C18, 2 µm beads, 100 Å pore size) connected to a nanoflow Dionex UltiMate 3000 UHPLC system (Thermo) and eluted in an organic solvent gradient increasing from 4% to 26% (B: 98% ACN, 0.1% FA, 2% H2O) at a flow rate of 300 nL min-1 over 180 min. The eluent was ionized by electrospray and mass spectra of the molecular ions were acquired with an Orbitrap Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in data-dependent mode at MS1 resolution of 120,000 and MS2 resolution of 60,000, in the m/z range from 375 to 1500. Peptide fragmentation was performed via higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) with energy set at 35% NCE.

### Data Protocol
Thermo Xcalibur 4.0 was used to control and process the LC-MS data. The raw LC-MS data were analyzed by MaxQuant version 1.6.2.3. The Andromeda search engine matched MS/MS data against the UniProt complete proteome database (human, version UP000005640_9606, 92,957 entries), unless otherwise specified. Trypsin/P was selected as enzyme specificity. No more than two missed cleavages were allowed. A 1% false discovery rate was used as a filter at both protein and peptide levels. For all other parameters, the default settings were used. After removing all the contaminants, only proteins with at least two peptides were included in the final dataset.

### Publication Abstract
We investigated the immediate molecular consequences of traumatic brain injuries (TBIs) using a novel proteomics approach. We simulated TBIs using an innovative laboratory apparatus that employed a 5.1 kg dummy head that held neuronal cells and generated a &#x2264;4000 g-force acceleration upon impact. A Proteome Integral Solubility Alteration (PISA) assay was then employed to monitor protein solubility changes in a system-wide manner. Dynamic impacts led to both a reduction in neuron viability and massive solubility changes in the proteome. The affected proteins mapped not only to the expected pathways, such as those of cell adhesion, collagen, and laminin structures, as well as the response to stress, but also to other dense protein networks, such as immune response, complement, and coagulation cascades. The cellular effects were found to be mainly due to the shockwave rather than the g-force acceleration. Soft materials could reduce the impact's severity only until they were fully compressed. This study shows a way of developing a proteome-based meter for measuring irreversible shockwave-induced cell damage and provides a resource for identifying protein biomarkers of TBIs and potential drug targets for the development of products aimed at primary prevention and intervention.

### Keywords
Shock, Pisa, Stability, Neurons, Proteomics, Tbi, Dynamic impact

### Affiliations
Division of Physiological Chemistry I, Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, 171 65 Stockholm, Sweden
Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden

### Submitter
Amir Ata Saei 

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Roman A. Zubarev
Division of Physiological Chemistry I, Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, 171 65 Stockholm, Sweden


