### Accession
PXD037700

### Title
Quantitative proteomics analysis of lung tissue from E18.5 embryos with mesenchymal deletion of VLK

### Description
Vertebrate lonesome kinase (VLK) is the only known secreted tyrosine kinase and responsible for the phosphorylation of a broad range of secretory pathway-resident and extracellular matrix proteins. However, its cell-type specific functions in vivo are still largely unknown. Therefore, we generated mice with a mesenchyme-specific knockout of the VLK gene (protein kinase domain containing, cytoplasmic (Pkdcc)). Most of the homozygous mice die shortly after birth, most likely as a consequence of their lung abnormalities and consequent respiratory failure. E18.5 embryonic lungs showed a reduction of alveolar type II cells, smaller bronchi, and an increased lung tissue density. Global mass spectrometry-based quantitative proteomics identified 112 proteins with significantly and at least 1.5fold differential abundance between genotypes. Twenty-five of these had been assigned to the extracellular region and 15 to the mouse matrisome. Specifically, fibromodulin and matrilin 4, which are involved in extracellular matrix organization, were significantly more abundant in lungs from Pkdcc knockout embryos. These results support a role for mesenchyme-derived VLK in lung development through regulation of matrix dynamics and the resulting non-cell-autonomous modulation of alveolar epithelial cell differentiation.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction from lung tissue for proteomics analysis  Lung tissue samples from mice at E18.5 were soaked in 4M guanidine chloride, 250 mM HEPES pH7.8, supplemented with 1 x PMSF and 1x phosphatase inhibitors. Samples were processed using pressure cycling technology (PCT) as previously described [11], sonicated, (3 x 10 cycles; 30 sec ON, 30 sec OFF) at 4° C, and centrifuged for 10 min at 10,000 x g at 4° C. The supernatants containing the extracted proteins were transferred to a new Eppendorf tube, and the buffer was adjusted to 2.5 M guanidinium chloride, 250 mM HEPES pH 7.8. Samples were stored at -80° C before proceeding according to the quantitative proteomics workflow.  Quantitative proteomics  For 8plex-TMT quantitative proteomics analysis, the protein samples (50 μg per condition) were first denatured by incubation for 15 min at 65o C. Cysteine residues were reduced by adding 3.5 mM Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP) and incubation for 45 min at 65o C, and then alkylated by adding 5 mM of chloroacetamide (CAA) for 30 min at 65o C. The proteins in each sample were labeled at a 1:4 protein: TMT (w/w) ratio with TMT reagents for 1.5 h at room temperature (RT), after which the labeling reactions were quenched with 100 mM NH4HCO3 for 30 min. The labeled samples were then pooled and precipitated by adding seven sample volumes of ice-cold acetone and one sample volume of ice-cold methanol and incubated for 2h at -80o C. The samples were centrifuged at 5000 x g at 4o C for 30 min, washed with 5 ml ice-cold methanol, and centrifuged again. The pellet was air-dried, resuspended in 100 mM NaOH, and adjusted with 1 M HEPES, pH 7.8 to 1 mg/ml protein in 100 mM HEPES, pH 7.8. The protein samples were digested with trypsin (Trypsin Gold, V5280, Promega, Madison, WI; 1:100 enzyme: protein ration (w/w)) for 16 h at 37o C.  Desalting of unfractionated peptides  Before peptide fractionation, peptide samples were desalted with Sep-Pak C18 columns (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA). Columns were activated with 0.9 ml of 100% methanol, cleaned with 0.9 ml of 80% acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1% formic acid (FA), and equilibrated with 3 x 0.9 ml of 3% ACN, 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Next, the samples were acidified with 1% TFA and loaded on the column. The columns were washed with 3x 0.9 ml 0.1% FA, after which the samples were eluted with 3 x 200 μl 80% ACN, 0.1% FA. The eluted peptides were dried under vacuum and stored at -20o C.  Peptide fractionation and LC-MS/MS  Peptide mixtures were fractionated using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 UHPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) coupled to an Acclaim™ PA2 nano HPLC column (3 μm, 150 x 0.3mm, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were resuspended in 5 mM NH4HCO3, pH 10, and fractionated with the following gradient: 2 min 5% B; 50 min 35% B; 58 min 70% B; 65 min 70% B; 70 min 5% B with eluent A (5 mM NH4HCO3) and eluent B (100% ACN) at a flow rate of a 5 μl/min. Forty-five fractions were collected using a Dionex AFC-3000 fraction collector in a 96 deep-well plate and subsequently pooled into 22 samples. The peptide fractions were analyzed on a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer coupled to an LC Evosep One system. Samples were loaded onto Evotips (Evosep, Odense, Denmark), according to the manufacturer's instructions. Briefly, the Evotips were washed with Solvent B (80% ACN, 0.1% FA) and centrifuged for 1 min at 700 x g. Next, the tips were soaked for ~ 1 min in 1-propanol, equilibrated with Solvent A (0.1% FA), and centrifuged for 1 min at 700 x g. The samples were loaded and centrifuged for 1 min at 700 x g. Subsequently, they were washed with Solvent A and centrifuged. Finally, 100 μl Solvent A were added to the Evotips to prevent them from drying before injecting into the mass spectrometer. After the samples were loaded, they were analyzed with a pre-programmed 44 min gradient per injection using an Acclaim™ PepMap™ RSLC C18 column (2 μm, 75 μm x 150 mm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at RT. Data was recorded in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. A precursor MS1 scan (m/z 350–2,000) was acquired at a resolution of 120,000 with an AGC target 3e6 and a maximum fill time of 50 ms. The 20 most abundant precursor ions were selected from each MS scan for a subsequent higher-energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) fragmentation with a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 30%. Fragmentation was performed at resolution 45,000 with an AGC target of 1e5 and an injection time of 96 ms, using a precursor isolation window of 0.7 m/z and a dynamic exclusion of 20 s after single isolation and fragmentation of a given precursor.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were searched by Sequest HT from Proteome Discoverer 3.0 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) against the mouse UniProt database (sp_canonical TaxID=10090, v2022-01-30; 17067 sequences). The following parameters were used for database searches: semi-ArgC for enzyme specificity, allowing one missed cleavage; carbamidomethyl (C) and TMT6plex (K) as fixed modifications, and acetyl (N-term), TMT6plex (N-term), pyroQ (N-term), deamidation (NQ) oxidation (M), were set as variable modifications: Precursor mass error tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment mass error at 0.02 Da. Percolator was used for decoy control and FDR estimation (0.01 high confidence peptides, 0.05 medium confidence). TMT6plex-modified N-terminal modified peptides were excluded from protein quantification, data were normalized to ‘Total Peptide Amount’, scaling performed with mode ‘On All Average’, and differential abundance determined with ‘Protein Abundance Based’ ‘Protein Ratio Calculation’ and applying Proteome Discoverer’s ‘ANOVA (Individual Proteins)’ setting.

### Publication Abstract
Vertebrate lonesome kinase (VLK) is the only known secreted tyrosine kinase and responsible for the phosphorylation of a broad range of secretory pathway-resident and extracellular matrix proteins. However, its cell-type specific functions in vivo are still largely unknown. Therefore, we generated mice lacking the VLK gene (protein kinase domain containing, cytoplasmic (Pkdcc)) in mesenchymal cells. Most of the homozygous mice died shortly after birth, most likely as a consequence of their lung abnormalities and consequent respiratory failure. E18.5 embryonic lungs showed a reduction of alveolar type II cells, smaller bronchi, and an increased lung tissue density. Global mass spectrometry-based quantitative proteomics identified 97 proteins with significantly and at least 1.5-fold differential abundance between genotypes. Twenty-five of these had been assigned to the extracellular region and 15 to the mouse matrisome. Specifically, fibromodulin and matrilin-4, which are involved in extracellular matrix organization, were significantly more abundant in lungs from Pkdcc knockout embryos. These results support a role for mesenchyme-derived VLK in lung development through regulation of matrix dynamics and the resulting modulation of alveolar epithelial cell differentiation.

### Keywords
Embryo, Lung, Vertrebrate lonesome kinase

### Affiliations
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine, Technical University of Denmark

### Submitter
Ulrich auf dem Keller

### Lab Head
Dr Ulrich auf dem Keller
Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine, Technical University of Denmark


