### Accession
PXD037929

### Title
DDX3X associated proteins with or without circRIG-I

### Description
We use FLAG pulldown assay to find DDX3X associated proteins with or without circRIG-I in HEK293T.

### Sample Protocol
In brief, HEK293T cells were transfected with indicated plasmids. After 24 hours, cells were lysed with co-immunoprecipitation lysis buffer. FLAG-DDX3X or FLAG-NLS-RIG-I protein was enriched with anti-FLAG M2 beads (Sigma, F2426) at 4℃ for 4 hours. The binding components were eluted with 3×FLAG peptide (Sigma, F4799). The samples were subjected to NuPAGE 4%-12% gel (Invitrogen) and sliver staining (Pierce, 24612). The excised gel segments were subjected to mass spectrum analysis.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were dissolved in 10 μL 0.1% formic acid and auto-sampled directly onto a 100 μm × 10 cm fused silica emitter made in our laboratory packed with reversed-phase ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ resin (3 μm and 120 Å; Ammerbuch, Germany). Samples were then eluted for 50 min with linear gradients of 5–32% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Mass spectrometry data were acquired with an LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source (Proxeon Biosystems). Fragmentation in the LTQ was performed by collision-induced dissociation (normalized collision energy, 35%; activation Q, 0.250; activation time, 10 ms) with a target value of 3,000 ions. The raw files were searched with the SEQUEST engine against a database from the UniProt protein sequence database.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ddx3x, Hek293t, Circrig-i

### Affiliations
Peking University
Peking University Health Science Center

### Submitter
Jia Song

### Lab Head
Dr Dan Lu
Peking University


