### Accession
PXD012354

### Title
GPIF constrains Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 activity in germ cells

### Description
The project aimed at identifying the cofactors regulating Polycomb complex PRC2 enzymatic activity in gonads. We used a knock-in mouse model where the enzymatic subunit of PRC2 (either EZH2 or EZH1) is tagged (Flag-tag) to purify PRC2 from mouse adult testis. This experiment revealed the existence of a new cofactor for PRC2 that we called GPIF (AU022751).

### Sample Protocol
Mass spectrometry analysis was performed starting from either testis nuclear extracts or U2OS cell extracts. Nuclear extracts were subjected to a single step Flag-IP in triplicate (ipFLAG). Same IP was performed on extract not expressing the Flag-tagged protein. Nuclear extracts from the Flag-tagged cell line were also incubated with beads as control. Thus, nine pull-downs are performed in total, three specific pull-downs and six control pulldowns. The precipitated proteins were then subjected to on-bead trypsin digestion after which peptide mixtures are analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS on a QExactive mass spectrometer or LTQ‐Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo)

### Data Protocol
Raw data is processed using MaxQuant, the obtained label-free (LFQ) intensities were used to determine statistically enriched proteins in the Flag-IP as described previously 18. Next, iBAQ intensities for statistically enriched proteins were calculated in each of the nine pull-downs. The iBAQ values obtained in the six control samples indicate background binding. These iBAQ intensities were therefore subtracted from the iBAQ intensity in the Flag pull-downs. The resulting corrected iBAQ intensity for the Flag-tagged protein was set to 1 and the iBAQ values of the interacting proteins with their SD were scaled accordingly. This enables stoichiometry determination of all the interactors relative to the bait protein.

### Publication Abstract
The&#xa0;Polycomb group of proteins is required for the proper orchestration of gene expression due to its role in maintaining transcriptional silencing. It is composed of several chromatin modifying complexes, including Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2), which deposits H3K27me2/3. Here, we report the identification of a cofactor of PRC2, EZHIP (EZH1/2 Inhibitory Protein), expressed predominantly in the gonads. EZHIP limits the enzymatic activity of PRC2 and lessens the interaction between the core complex and its accessory subunits, but does not interfere with PRC2 recruitment to chromatin. Deletion of Ezhip in mice leads to a global increase in H3K27me2/3 deposition both during spermatogenesis and at late stages of oocyte maturation. This does not affect the initial number of follicles but is associated with a reduction of follicles in aging. Our results suggest that mature oocytes Ezhip-/- might not be fully functional and indicate that fertility is strongly impaired in Ezhip-/- females. Altogether, our study uncovers EZHIP as a regulator of chromatin landscape in gametes.

### Keywords
Chromatin, Polycomb., Histone, Methylation

### Affiliations
Institut Curie, Paris Sciences et Lettres Research University, INSERM U934/ CNRS, UMR3215
Radboud University

### Submitter
Pascal Jansen

### Lab Head
Dr Raphaël Margueron
Institut Curie, Paris Sciences et Lettres Research University, INSERM U934/ CNRS, UMR3215


