### Accession
PXD027905

### Title
A Network G Protein Gai Signaling Partners is Revealed by Proximity Labeling Proteomics and Includes PDZ-RhoGEF

### Description
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) that couple to the Gi family of G proteins are key regulators of cell and tissue physiology. Our previous work has revealed new roles for Gαi in regulating the migration of neutrophils and fibrosarcoma cells downstream of activated chemoattractant receptors. We used an intact cell proximity-based labeling approach using BioID2 coupled to tandem mass tag (TMT)-based quantitative proteomics to identify proteins that selectively interacted with the GTP-bound form of Gαi1. Multiple targets were identified and validated for selective biotinylation by a constitutively active BioID2-tagged Gai1 mutant, suggesting a network of interactions for activated Gαi proteins in intact cells. We showed that active Gαi1 stimulated one candidate protein, PDZ‐RhoGEF (PRG) and that despite over 85% sequence identity, the ability of Gαi1, Gαi2, and Gαi3 isoforms to activate PRG greatly differed. We also demonstrated that active Gαi likely regulates polarized myosin light chain kinase phosphorylation through activation of PRG in primary human neutrophils, suggesting functional relevance of this interaction. Identification and characterization of new targets regulated by Gαi both individually and in networks provide insights that will aid in the investigation of the functional roles of Gi-coupled GPCRs in multiple biological processes.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were reduced (10 mM DTT in 0.1 M TEAB at 45°C for 30 min), alkylated (55 mM 2-chloroacetamide at room temperature (RT) for 30 min in the dark, and subsequently digested using 1:25 trypsin (V5113, Promega): protein at 37 C with constant mixing using a thermomixer. 0.2% TFA was added to stop the proteolysis, and peptides were desalted using a Sep-Pak C18 cartridge (WAT036945, Waters Corp). The desalted peptides were dried in a Vacufuge and reconstituted in 100 µL of 0.1 M TEAB. A TMT10plexTM isobaric labeling kit (0090110, Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used to label each sample per manufacturer’s protocol. The samples were labeled with TMT 10-plex reagents at RT for 1 hr. The reaction was quenched by adding 8 µL of 5% hydroxylamine for 15 min, combined, and subsequently dried. An offline fractionation of the combined sample into 8 fractions was performed using a high pH reversed-phase peptide fractionation kit, as per manufacturer’s protocol (84868, Pierce). Fractions were dried and reconstituted in 12 µL of 0.1% formic acid/2% acetonitrile for LC-MS/MS analysis.  Liquid Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry Analysis  An Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and RSLC Ultimate 3000 nano-UPLC (Dionex) was used to acquire the data. To achieve superior quantitation accuracy, we employed multinotch-MS3. 2 µL of each fraction was resolved on a nano-capillary reverse phase column (PepMap RSLC C18 column, 75 µm i.d. × 50 cm; Thermo Scientific) at the flow-rate of 300 nL/min using 0.1% formic acid/acetonitrile gradient system (2-22% acetonitrile in 110 min;22-40% acetonitrile in 25 min; 6 min wash at 90% followed by 25 min re-equilibration) and directly sprayed onto the Orbitrap Fusion using EasySpray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Mass spectrometer was set to collect one MS1 scan (Orbitrap; 120K resolution; AGC target 2x105; max IT 50 ms) followed by data-dependent, “Top Speed” (3 seconds) MS2 scans (collision-induced dissociation; ion trap; NCD 35; AGC 5x103; max IT 100 ms). For multinotch-MS3, the top 10 precursors from each MS2 were fragmented by HCD followed by Orbitrap analysis (NCE 55; 60K resolution; AGC 5x104; max IT 120 ms, 100-500 m/z scan range).

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer (v2.4; Thermo Fisher) was used for data analysis. Tandem MS spectra were searched against SwissProt human protein database using the following search parameters: MS1 and MS2 tolerance were set to 10 ppm and 0.6 Da, respectively; carbamidomethylation of cysteines (57.02146 Da) and TMT labeling of lysine and N-termini of peptides (229.16293 Da) were considered static modifications; oxidation of methionine (15.9949 Da) and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine (0.98401 Da) were considered variable. Proteins and peptides that passed ≤1% false discovery rate threshold were retrained for subsequent analysis. Quantitation was performed using TMT reporter ion in MS3 spectra with an average signal-to-noise ratio of 10 and <50% isolation interference.

### Publication Abstract
G protein&#x2013;coupled receptors (GPCRs) that couple to the G&#x3b1;<sub>i</sub> family of G proteins are key regulators of cell and tissue physiology. Our previous work has revealed new roles for G&#x3b1;<sub>i</sub> in regulating the migration of neutrophils and fibrosarcoma cells downstream of activated chemoattractant receptors. Here, we used an intact cell proximity&#x2013;based labeling coupled to tandem mass tag (TMT)&#x2013;based quantitative proteomics analysis to identify proteins that selectively interacted with the GTP-bound form of G&#x3b1;<sub>i1</sub>. Multiple targets were identified and validated with a BioID2-tagged, constitutively active G&#x3b1;<sub>i1</sub> mutant, suggesting a network of interactions for activated G&#x3b1;<sub>I</sub> proteins in intact cells. We showed that active G&#x3b1;<sub>i1</sub>, but not G&#x3b1;<sub>i2</sub>, stimulated one candidate protein, PDZ-RhoGEF (PRG), despite more than 85% sequence identity between the G proteins. We also demonstrated in primary human neutrophils that active G&#x3b1;<sub>i</sub> likely regulated the polarization of phosphorylated myosin light chain, a process critical for migration, through the activation of PRG. The identification and characterization of new targets directly or indirectly regulated by G&#x3b1;<sub>i</sub> will aid in the investigation of the functional roles of G&#x3b1;<sub>i</sub>-coupled GPCRs in multiple biological processes.

### Keywords
Gαi proteins, Interactome, Pdz-rhogef, Cell-migration, Gpcr signaling, Mass spectrometry, Proximity labeling

### Affiliations
University of Michigan
Department of Pharmacology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA

### Submitter
Naincy Chandan

### Lab Head
Dr Alan V. Smrcka
Department of Pharmacology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA


