### Accession
PXD046675

### Title
Proteomic analysis of the Longissimus dorsi muscle of Wannanhua pigs

### Description
4D-Label-free quantitative proteomic analysis of the longissimus dorsi muscle tissue of the Wannanhua  pig during the rapid fat deposition stage (120d and 240d)

### Sample Protocol
Pigs were reared under the same environmental and nutritional conditions. LD muscle samples from WH pigs at two developmental stages (120d and 240d) were collected for proteomic analysis of three biological replicates, with at least three LD muscle samples collected for each replicate. Three individual landrace pigs at the same stage of development have similar weights. Commercial feed and water were offered ad libitum to all pigs. Pigs were housed in pens with concrete flooring, nipple bowl drinkers and feeders

### Data Protocol
Maxquant,Data-dependent acquisition,Label Free Quantitation

### Publication Abstract
Wannanhua (WH) is a pig breed indigenous to Anhui Province, China. This breed has a high intramuscular fat (IMF) content, making it an ideal model for investigating lipid deposition mechanisms in pigs. IMF content is one of the main indicators of meat quality in pigs and is regulated by multiple genes and metabolic pathways. Building upon our prior transcriptomic investigation, the present study focused on the longissimus dorsi muscle tissue of Wannanhua (WH) pigs in the rapid fat-deposition stages (120 and 240 days of age). Employing 4D label-free quantitative proteomic analysis, we identified 106 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs). Parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) technology was used to verify the DEPs, and the results showed that the 4D label-free results were reliable and valid. Functional enrichment and protein-protein interaction analyses showed that the DEPs were mainly involved in the skeletal-muscle-associated structural proteins, mitochondria, energy metabolism, and fatty acid metabolism. By integrating transcriptomic data, we identified seven candidate genes including ACADL, ACADM, ANKRD2, MYOZ2, TNNI1, UCHL1, and ART3 that play a regulatory role in fat deposition and muscle development. These findings establish a theoretical foundation for future analyses of lipid deposition traits, contributing to potential enhancements in pig meat quality during breeding and advancing the selection process for Chinese indigenous breeds.

### Keywords
Longissimus dorsi muscle, 4d-label-free quantitative proteomic analysis

### Affiliations
Anhui Science and Technology University
17730473889

### Submitter
fei xie

### Lab Head
Dr LI xiaojin
Anhui Science and Technology University


