### Accession
PXD030005

### Title
Phosphoproteomic profiling of D816V-KIT cells

### Description
Acute Myeloid Leukaemia (AML) carries a 5 year survival rate of just 24%. Toxic chemotherapy regimens remain the backbone of standard of care for AML. The KIT tyrosine kinase is a recognised AML oncogene, associated with poor outcome. We recently identified DNA-PK as a novel therapeutic target in FLT3 mutant AML. The similarity between KIT and FLT3 regulated signalling pathways led us to investigate DNA-PK in KIT-mutant AML.

### Sample Protocol
FDC-P1 cells were transduced with either an empty vector, or oncogenic mutant KIT (D816V, V560G). Parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) for phospho-DNA-PK was performed following phosphopeptide enrichment using EasyPhos (Humphrey et al, 2018). Samples were separated over 60 minutes on an Exploris 480 with FAIMS (CV -60). Full MS scans were acquired using a resolution of 60,000, with an automatic gain control of 1e6 and maximum injection time 50ms. MS/MS scans were acquired using a resolution of 15,000, with an automatic gain control of 1e6 and a maximum injection time of 120ms.   We undertook discovery phosphoproteomic analysis of D816V-KIT FDC-P1 cells, untreated or treated for 1 hour with 4uM M3814, 15nM dasatinib, or their combination, in biological triplicate. Phosphopeptide enrichment was performed using EasyPhos. Samples were separated over 90 minutes on an Exploris 480 with FAIMS (CV -60). Full MS scans were acquired at a resolution of 120,000, with an automatic gain control of 3e6 and maximum injection time 50ms. MS/MS scans were acquired using a resolution of 45,000, automatic gain control of 2.5e6, a normalised collision energy of 36, and maximum injection time of 100ms.

### Data Protocol
Skyline 20.2 (MacCoss Lab) was used to analyse PRM data files. Proteome Discoverer version 2.5 was used to search DDA data files with the Sequest HT search engine. Files were searched against the Uniprot Mus Musculus database (Sequest, downloaded 27.09.2021).

### Publication Abstract
Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is the most common and aggressive form of acute leukemia, with a 5-year survival rate of just 24%. Over a third of all AML patients harbor activating mutations in kinases, such as the receptor tyrosine kinases FLT3 (receptor-type tyrosine-protein kinase FLT3) and KIT (mast/stem cell growth factor receptor kit). FLT3 and KIT mutations are associated with poor clinical outcomes and lower remission rates in response to standard-of-care chemotherapy. We have recently identified that the core kinase of the non-homologous end joining DNA repair pathway, DNA-PK (DNA-dependent protein kinase), is activated downstream of FLT3; and targeting DNA-PK sensitized FLT3-mutant AML cells to standard-of-care therapies. Herein, we investigated DNA-PK as a possible therapeutic vulnerability in KIT mutant AML, using isogenic FDC-P1 mouse myeloid progenitor cell lines transduced with oncogenic mutant KIT (V560G and D816V) or vector control. Targeted quantitative phosphoproteomic profiling identified phosphorylation of DNA-PK in the T2599/T2605/S2608/S2610 cluster in KIT mutant cells, indicative of DNA-PK activation. Accordingly, proliferation assays revealed that KIT mutant FDC-P1 cells were more sensitive to the DNA-PK inhibitors M3814 or NU7441, compared with empty vector controls. DNA-PK inhibition combined with inhibition of KIT signaling using the kinase inhibitors dasatinib or ibrutinib, or the protein phosphatase 2A activators FTY720 or AAL(S), led to synergistic cell death. Global phosphoproteomic analysis of KIT-D816V&#xa0;cells revealed that dasatinib and M3814 single-agent treatments inhibited extracellular signal-regulated kinase and AKT (RAC-alpha serine/threonine-protein kinase)/MTOR (serine/threonine-protein kinase mTOR) activity, with greater inhibition of both pathways when used in combination. Combined dasatinib and M3814 treatment also synergistically inhibited phosphorylation of the transcriptional regulators MYC and MYB. This study provides insight into the oncogenic pathways regulated by DNA-PK beyond its canonical role in DNA repair and demonstrates that DNA-PK is a promising therapeutic target for KIT mutant cancers.

### Keywords
Aml, Phosphoproteomics, Kit

### Affiliations
School of Biomedical Sciences and Pharmacy, College of Health, Medicine and Wellbeing, University of Newcastle, Callaghan, and  Cancer Research Program, Hunter Medical Research Institute,  NSW, 2308, Australia
School of Biomedical Sciences and Pharmacy Faculty of Health and Medicine, University of Newcastle, and Cancer Research Program, Hunter Medical Research Institute, Callaghan, NSW, 2308, Australia

### Submitter
Nicole Verrills

### Lab Head
Dr Nicole Verrills
School of Biomedical Sciences and Pharmacy, College of Health, Medicine and Wellbeing, University of Newcastle, Callaghan, and  Cancer Research Program, Hunter Medical Research Institute,  NSW, 2308, Australia


