### Accession
PXD040407

### Title
H3K79 methyltransferase Dot1p/DOT1L is phosphorylated by proline-directed MAP kinases Hog1p and p38/MAPK11

### Description
In vitro phosphorylation assays were conducted to identify phosphorylation sites on Dot1p catalysed by Hog1p. As several other kinases were co-purified with Hog1p, dead kinase control assays (Hog1p-K52R and Hog1p-D144A) were performed to verify the identified Dot1p phospho-sites. This entry contains the data pertaining to the in vitro Hog1p dead kinase phosphorylation assays, which is in supplement to existing PRIDE entry PXD036747.

### Sample Protocol
Recombinant protein expression and purification: Hexahistidine-tagged enzymes (Dot1p, Hog1p, Hog1p-D144A and Hog1p-K52R) were recombinantly overexpressed in Rosetta E. coli or BY4741 S. cerevisiae, in 200 mL cultures, as described previously (Separovich et al., 2020; Erce et al., 2013; Winter et al., 2018. Following protein expression, cells were resuspended in 30 mL of hexahistidine-tag purification lysis buffer (46.6 mM Na2HPO4, 3.4 mM NaH2PO4, 500 mM NaCl, 40 mM imidazole, 20% (v/v) glycerol, 2% (v/v) Triton-X-100, pH 8.0) supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche, Basel, Switzerland) and pan phosphatase inhibitor (Roche Bacterial and yeast cells were then lysed by sonication (Erce et al., 2013) and glass-bead homogenisation (Winter et al., 2018), respectively, and resultant lysates were clarified by ultracentrifugation at 22,000 x g for 40 min at 4°C. Purification of hexahistidine tagged proteins was then done using immobilised metal affinity chromatography (IMAC) on 1 mL Ni NTA Superflow Cartridges (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) or 1 mL HisTrap HP affinity column (Cytiva, Washington DC, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.Eluted proteins were concentrated and buffer-exchanged into phosphate-buffered saline (PBS; 46.6 mM Na2HPO4, 3.4 mM NaH2PO4, 200 mM NaCl, pH 7.4) using Amicon Ultra-4 10K centrifugal filters (Merck Millipore, Burlington, MA, USA). In vitro phosphorylation assays: For in vitro protein assays, equimolar amounts of enzyme and substrate proteins were incubated at 30 °C in 20 µL reactions containing 1× kinase buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, 10 mM MgCl2, 2 mM DTT, pH 7.5) and ATP (3 mM). Note that kinase-treatment assays were done in biological triplicate, and that no enzyme and no ATP negative control assays were also performed. Assays were stopped by boiling in 1× Laemmli buffer (62.5 mM Tris-HCl (pH 6.8), 100 mM dithiothreitol, 2% (w/v) sodium dodecyl sulfate, 10% (v/v) glycerol, 0.001% (v/v) bromophenol blue), and then electrophoresed by gradient SDS-PAGE on NuPAGE 4-12% Bis Tris Mini protein gels (Invitrogen, Waltham, MA, USA). Coomassie-stained gel bands corresponding to Dot1p were then prepared for liquid chromatography mass spectrometry according to Hamey et al., 2016, without reduction or alkylation. Proteolytic digestion was done with chymotrypsin (Promega, sequencing-grade, 500 ng in 100 mM Tris HCl (pH 8.0), 10 mM CaCl2), as done previously (Separovich et al., 2020). Resultant peptides were extracted from gel bands and vacuum dried in a SpeedVac (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) before resuspension in 20 µL of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid, as per Hamey et al., 2016. Liquid chromatography mass spectrometry: Liquid chromatography mass spectrometry was performed on mass spectrometers housed at the Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Facility (BMSF) at UNSW. Briefly, peptide samples were separated and ionised by nano electrospray liquid chromatography, following previously described methods (Hart-Smith et al., 2011), before their analysis by tandem mass spectrometry. Analysis was done on a Q Exactive Plus (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD), as described previously (Hamey et al., 2016).

### Data Protocol
Phosphosite identification: To identify putative phosphosites, mass spectrometry data were converted to Mascot Generic Format (.mgf) using RawConverter (v1.1.0.20) and then searched against the SwissProt database (2022_05, 568,744 sequences) using the Matrix Science MASCOT search engine (v2.6, accessed at https://www.matrixscience.com/). Search parameters were as follows: taxonomy was set to Saccharomyces cerevisiae; precursor ion tolerance was set to 5 ppm; fragment ion tolerance was set to 20 ppm for analyses on the Q Exactive Plus, respectively; instrument was set to default; enzyme specificity was TrypChymo, with up to three missed cleavages permitted; variable modifications were oxidation (M) and phosphorylation (STY). Fragmentation spectra for putative phosphopeptides were manually inspected to confirm unambiguous phosphosite localisation. Exemplar spectra were visualised and annotated in GraphPad Prism v.9.5.0.730 (GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA, USA). Phosphosite quantification: Label-free quantification of phosphosite stoichiometry was done using extracted ion chromatograms (XICs) of identified phosphopeptides and their unmodified counterparts (see manuscript for details). We note that some phosphosites could not be reproducibly quantified across experiments and were thus excluded, that sites on the same peptide were combined for MS1-based quantification, and that phosphopeptides carrying multiple modification sites were not analysed. XICs were generated in Skyline (MacCoss Lab Software, v22.2.0.312) and areas under the curve of XIC peaks were used to quantify relative phosphorylation stoichiometry, as described previously (Separovich et al., 2020; Hamey et al., 2018). Statistical testing of changes in phosphorylation was done using an unpaired Student’s t-test in GraphPad Prism v.9.5.0.730 (GraphPad Software), with significance thresholds as specified in figure legends.

### Publication Abstract
Disruptor of telomeric silencing 1 (Dot1p) is an exquisitely conserved histone methyltransferase and is the sole enzyme responsible for H3K79 methylation in the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. It has been shown to be highly phosphorylated in vivo; however, the upstream kinases that act on Dot1p are almost entirely unknown in yeast and all other eukaryotes. Here, we used in vitro and in vivo kinase discovery approaches to show that mitogen-activated protein kinase HOG1 (Hog1p) is a bona fide kinase of the Dot1p methyltransferase. In vitro kinase assays showed that Hog1p phosphorylates Dot1p at multiple sites, including at several proline-adjacent sites that are consistent with known Hog1p substrate preferences. The activity of Hog1p was specifically enhanced at these proline-adjacent sites on Dot1p upon Hog1p activation by the osmostress-responsive MAP kinase kinase PBS2 (Pbs2p). Genomic deletion of HOG1 reduced phosphorylation at specific sites on Dot1p in vivo, providing further evidence for Hog1p kinase activity on Dot1p in budding yeast cells. Phenotypic analysis of knockout and phosphosite mutant yeast strains revealed the importance of Hog1p-catalysed phosphorylation of Dot1p for cellular responses to ultraviolet-induced DNA damage. In mammalian systems, this kinase-substrate relationship was found to be conserved: human DOT1L (the ortholog of yeast Dot1p) can be phosphorylated by the proline-directed kinase p38&#x3b2; (also known as MAPK11; the ortholog of yeast Hog1p) at multiple sites in vitro. Taken together, our findings establish Hog1p and p38&#x3b2; as newly identified upstream kinases of the Dot1p/DOT1L H3K79 methyltransferase enzymes in eukaryotes.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Yeast, Histone methyltransferase

### Affiliations
Systems Biology Initiative, School of Biotechnology and Biomolecular Sciences, University of New South Wales, Sydney, New South Wales 2052, Australia
University of New South Wales

### Submitter
Ryan Separovich

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Marc R Wilkins
Systems Biology Initiative, School of Biotechnology and Biomolecular Sciences, University of New South Wales, Sydney, New South Wales 2052, Australia


