### Accession
PXD023558

### Title
A genome-wide atlas of co-essential modules assigns function to uncharacterized genes

### Description
A central remaining question in the post-genomic era is how genes interact to form biological pathways. Measurements of gene dependency across hundreds of cell lines have been used to cluster genes into ‘co-essential’ pathways, but this approach has been limited by ubiquitous false positives. Here, we develop a statistical method that enables robust identification of gene co-essentiality and yields a genome-wide set of functional modules. This atlas recapitulates diverse pathways and protein complexes and predicts the functions of 155 uncharacterized genes. Validating top predictions, we show that TMEM189 encodes plasmanylethanolamine desaturase, the long-sought key enzyme for plasmalogen synthesis. We also show that C15orf57 binds the AP2 complex, localizes to clathrin-coated pits, and enables efficient transferrin uptake. Finally, we provide an interactive web tool for the community to explore our results. Our results establish co-essentiality profiling as a powerful resource for biological pathway identification and discovery of novel gene functions.

### Sample Protocol
For immunoprecipitations, HeLa cells that had been transduced with tagged constructs as described above were cultured in either T-150 flasks or 15 cm plates and harvested near confluency. Cell lysates for each cell line were prepared by detaching cells with trypsin, washing in PBS, resuspending in 1 mL IP buffer (50 mM HEPES, pH 6.8, 150 mM NaCl, 2mM EDTA, 1% Triton X-100, 1x cOmplete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche)) and incubating for 30 min on ice. Cell lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 5,000 g for 5 min before incubation with 50 µl pre-washed GFP-TRAP MA beads (Chromotek) for 1 h at 4 degrees Centigrade, with end-over-end rotation. Beads were washed 4 times for 5 min with 1mL IP buffer prior to elution with 30 µl SDS sample buffer at 70 degrees Centigrade. In Fig. 5e, a similar procedure was followed, except RFP-TRAP MA beads (Chromotek) were used. For analysis by mass spectrometry, elutions were loaded on 4-12% Bis-Tris NuPage SDS-PAGE gels (Thermo Fisher) and run at 100V for 30 minutes. Gels were stained with SimplyBlue SafeStain (Thermo Fisher) and equivalent gel fragments for each lane were extracted, sliced into small fragments, and stored in 1% acetic acid. Samples were processed as described previously108, with the following modifications. Briefly, gel slices were first resuspended in 100 μL 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate supplemented with 10 μl 50 mM dithiothreitol and incubated for 30 min at 55˚C, and subsequently alkylated with 10 μl 100 mM acrylamide for 30 min at room temperature. Solution phase was discarded, and gel pieces were washed 3 times with 100 μl 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate/50% acetonitrile for 10 min at room temperature. 100 µL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 1 μg trypsin was added to digest bound proteins during an overnight incubation at 37˚C. The overnight digests were spun down and the solution was collected. Peptides were extracted more two additional times with 50 µl of 70% acetonitrile/29% water/1% formic acid and incubated for 10 min at 37˚C and centrifuged at 10,000 x g for 2 minutes, and all three extractions were combined. The combined extracts were dried using a Speedvac and reconstituted in 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate for TMT10plex labelling (Thermo Fisher) following the manufacturer’s instructions, and samples were mixed to generate the final peptide mixture. Protein digests were loaded on a Waters Liquid Chromatography column coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). Peptides were separated using a 25 cm long and 100 µm inner diameter capillary column packed with Sepax 1.8 µm C18 resin. Peptides were eluted off in a 60 min gradient at a flow rate of 600 nl/min from 5% to 35% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. Mass spectrometry data was acquired by one full MS scan at 120k resolution followed with MS2 using HCD at 30k resolution. The instrument was set to run in top speed mode with 3 s cycle.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed using Thermo Proteome Discoverer software version 2.2. MS data were searched against a human proteome database with 1% FDR at peptide level. Protein quantification was based on the precursor ion peak intensity using the label free quantitation workflow. Keratins and proteins identified with only one peptide were excluded from analysis. P-values were generated from Student’s t-tests between duplicate samples of indicated tagged genes and all 6 other samples analyzed in the same run (including duplicate samples derived from cells expressing GFP-tagged JTB (an unrelated gene), and from cells expressing GFP alone).

### Publication Abstract
A central question in the post-genomic era is how genes interact to form biological pathways. Measurements of gene dependency across hundreds of cell lines have been used to cluster genes into 'co-essential' pathways, but this approach has been limited by ubiquitous false positives. In the present study, we develop a statistical method that enables robust identification of gene co-essentiality and yields a genome-wide set of functional modules. This atlas recapitulates diverse pathways and protein complexes, and predicts the functions of 108 uncharacterized genes. Validating top predictions, we show that TMEM189 encodes plasmanylethanolamine desaturase, a key enzyme for plasmalogen synthesis. We also show that C15orf57 encodes a protein that binds the AP2 complex, localizes to clathrin-coated pits and enables efficient transferrin uptake. Finally, we provide an interactive webtool for the community to explore our results, which establish co-essentiality profiling as a powerful resource for biological pathway identification and discovery of new gene functions.

### Keywords
Ip-ms, Tmem189, C15orf57

### Affiliations
Stanford University
Department of Genetics, Stanford University

### Submitter
Roarke Kamber

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Bassik
Department of Genetics, Stanford University


