### Accession
PXD014098

### Title
CLUH-dependent RNA granules coordinate mitochondrial catabolic pathways with mTORC1 signaling and mitophagy

### Description
Mitochondria house anabolic and catabolic processes that must be balanced and rapidly adjusted to meet the cellular demands. CLUH binds mRNAs of nuclear encoded mitochondrial proteins and is highly expressed in the liver, where it regulates metabolic plasticity by an ill-defined mechanism. Here, we show that CLUH-dependent regulation of mitochondrial function is spatially organized through the coalescence of CLUH and its target mRNAs in specific G3BP1-positive granules. These CLUH-dependent granules protect mRNAs involved in mitochondrial energy-converting pathways from decay and define their translational fate to match nutrient availability. CLUH granules suppress premature mTORC1 activation during nutrient deprivation, inhibiting mitochondrial anabolic pathways. Lack of spatial CLUH regulation causes mTORC1 hyperactivation, which impairs mitophagy and triggers cell death. Our data demonstrate that the temporal catabolic adaptation of mitochondria depends on a compartmentalized CLUH-dependent post-transcriptional mechanism that controls mTORC1 signaling and mitochondrial turnover, thus ensuring survival.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted in 4% SDS followed by acetone precipitation overnight at -20°C. After resuspension in 6 M Urea/ 2 M Thiourea protein were reduced with DTT and carbamidomethylated with IAA. LysC (Wako) and trypsin (Promega) were added for overnight digestion. Samples were then desalted using SDB-RPS StageTips as previously described 53. Proteomic analysis was performed using an Easy nLC 1000 UHPLC coupled to a QExactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). Peptides were resuspended in Solvent A (0.1% FA), picked up with an autosampler and loaded onto in-house made 50 cm fused silica columns (internal diameter (I.D.) 75 μm, C18 1.7 μm, Dr. Maisch beads) at a flow rate of 0.75 μL/min. A 240 min segmented gradient of 5-34% Solvent B (80% ACN in 0.1% FA) over 215 min, 34-55% Solvent B over 5 min, and 55-90% Solvent B over 5 min at a flow rate of 250 nL/min was used to elute peptides. Eluted peptides were sprayed into the heated transfer capillary of the mass spectrometer using a nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode, where the Orbitrap acquired full MS scans (300-1750 m/z) at a resolution (R) of 70,000 with an automated gain control (AGC) target of 3×106 ions collected within 20 ms. The dynamic exclusion time was set to 20 s. From the full MS scan, the 10 most intense peaks (z≥2) were fragmented in the high-energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) cell. The HCD normalized collision energy was set to 25%. MS/MS scans with an ion target of 5×105 ions were acquired with R = 17,500, with a maximal injection time of 60 ms and an isolation width of 2.1 m/z.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were processed using MaxQuant software and its implemented Andromeda search engine and LFQ algorithm 54. Parameters were set to default values. GO annotations, statistical analysis and Welch t test were performed using Perseus software 55. Significant protein fold changes were determined by permutation-based FDR approach (cutoff 0.05, number of permutations = 500, fudge factor [S0] = 0.1) 56. 1D enrichment of GO terms based on log2 fold changes was performed using the algorithm implemented in Perseus with a Benjamini-Hochberg FDR threshold of 0.02, and resulting Scores were used for the 2D score plots.

### Publication Abstract
Mitochondria house anabolic and catabolic processes that must be balanced and adjusted to meet cellular demands. The RNA-binding protein CLUH (clustered mitochondria homolog) binds mRNAs of nuclear-encoded mitochondrial proteins and is highly expressed in the liver, where it regulates metabolic plasticity. Here, we show that in primary hepatocytes, CLUH coalesces in specific ribonucleoprotein particles that define the translational fate of target mRNAs, such as Pcx, Hadha, and Hmgcs2, to match nutrient availability. Moreover, CLUH granules play signaling roles, by recruiting mTOR kinase and the RNA-binding proteins G3BP1 and G3BP2. Upon starvation, CLUH regulates translation of Hmgcs2, involved in ketogenesis, inhibits mTORC1 activation and mitochondrial anabolic pathways, and promotes mitochondrial turnover, thus allowing efficient reprograming of metabolic function. In the absence of CLUH, a mitophagy block causes mitochondrial clustering that is rescued by rapamycin treatment or depletion of G3BP1 and G3BP2. Our data demonstrate that metabolic adaptation of liver mitochondria to nutrient availability depends on a compartmentalized CLUH-dependent post-transcriptional mechanism that controls both mTORC1 and G3BP signaling and ensures survival.

### Keywords
Rna-binding proteins, Mitochondria, Catabolism

### Affiliations
Institute for Genetics/CECAD (AG Krüger)
Institute for Genetics, Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases (CECAD), University of Cologne, 50931 Cologne, Germany

### Submitter
Janica  Wiederstein

### Lab Head
Dr Elena Irene Rugarli
Institute for Genetics, Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases (CECAD), University of Cologne, 50931 Cologne, Germany


