### Accession
PXD046003

### Title
SUMOylation regulates Lem2 function in centromere clustering and silencing.

### Description
Regulation by the small modifier SUMO is heavily dependent on spatial control of enzymes that mediate the attachment and removal of SUMO on substrate proteins. Here we show that in fission yeast, delocalisation of the SUMO protease Ulp1 from the nuclear envelope results in centromeric defects that can be attributed to hyper-SUMOylation at the nuclear periphery. Unexpectedly, we find that while this localised hyper-SUMOylation impairs centromeric silencing, it can also enhance centromere clustering. Moreover, both effects are at least partially dependent on SUMOylation of the inner nuclear membrane protein Lem2. Lem2 has previously been implicated in diverse biological processes, including the promotion of both centromere clustering and silencing, but how these distinct activities are coordinated was unclear; our observations suggest a model whereby SUMOylation may serve as a regulatory switch, modulating Lem2 interactions with competing partner proteins to balance its roles in alternative pathways. Our findings also reveal a previously unappreciated role for SUMOylation in promoting centromere clustering.

### Sample Protocol
LC-MS/MS analyses were performed on a Q Exactive Plus and a Q Exactive mass spectrometers (both Thermo Scientific). For the Q Exactive Plus analysis, liquid chromatography for the LC-MS/MS runs was performed on an EASY-nLC 1000 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Scientific) coupled to spectrometers via modified NanoFlex sources (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded onto 250 mm × 75 µm PicoFrit (C18, 2 µm medium) analytical columns (New Objective) at a maximum pressure of 800 bar. Solutions A and B for ultra-performance LC were 0.1% FA in water and ACN, respectively. Peptides were eluted into the mass spectrometer at a flow rate of 200 nl/min using a gradient that incorporated a linear phase from 6% B to 30% B in 80 min, followed by a steeper phase and wash. The gradient run time was ∼120 min.  The Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent mode acquiring HCD MS/MS scans in the 300-1,800 m/z scan range with a resolution of 17,500 after each MS1 scan (Resolution= 70,000) on the 12 most abundant ions using an MS1 ion target of 3 × 106 ions and an MS2 target of 5 × 105 ions. The maximum ion time utilized for MS/MS scans was 120 ms; the HCD-normalized collision energy was set to 25 and the dynamic exclusion time was set to 20 s. The peptide match and isotope exclusion functions were enabled. The Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was coupled on-line to a 50cm Easy-Spray column (Thermo Fisher Scientific), which was assembled on an Easy-Spray source and operated constantly at 50oC. Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid, while mobile phase B consisted of 80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were loaded onto the column at a flow rate of 0.3 μL min-1 and eluted at a flow rate of 0.25 μL min-1 according to the following gradient: 2 to 40% buffer B in 120 min, then to 95% in 11 min (total run time of 160min). Survey scans were performed at 70,000 resolution (scan range 350-1400 m/z) with an ion target of 1.0e6 and injection time of 20ms. MS2 was performed with an ion target of 5.0E4, injection time of 60ms and HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 27. The isolation window in the quadrupole was set at 2.0 Thomson. Only ions with charge between 2 and 7 were selected for MS2.

### Data Protocol
The MaxQuant software platform (Cox and Mann, 2008) version 1.6.1.0 was used to process the raw files and search was conducted against the Schizosaccharomyces pombe (July, 2016) protein database, using the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al, 2011). For the first search, peptide tolerance was set to 20 ppm while for the main search peptide tolerance was set to 4.5 pm. Isotope mass tolerance was 2 ppm and maximum charge to 7. Digestion mode was set to specific with trypsin allowing maximum of two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification.  Oxidation of methionine, and the di-Gly residue on lysine were set as variable modifications. Peptide and protein identifications were filtered to 1% FDR.

### Publication Abstract
Regulation by the small modifier SUMO is heavily dependent on spatial control of enzymes that mediate the attachment and removal of SUMO on substrate proteins. Here, we show that in the fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe, delocalisation of the SUMO protease Ulp1 from the nuclear envelope results in centromeric defects that can be attributed to hyper-SUMOylation at the nuclear periphery. Unexpectedly, we find that although this localised hyper-SUMOylation impairs centromeric silencing, it can also enhance centromere clustering. Moreover, both effects are at least partially dependent on SUMOylation of the inner nuclear membrane protein Lem2. Lem2 has previously been implicated in diverse biological processes, including the promotion of both centromere clustering and silencing, but how these distinct activities are coordinated was unclear; our observations suggest a model whereby SUMOylation serves as a regulatory switch, modulating Lem2 interactions with competing partner proteins to balance its roles in alternative pathways. Our findings also reveal a previously unappreciated role for SUMOylation in promoting centromere clustering.

### Keywords
Ubiquitination, Centromere, Fission yeast, Sumoylation, Lem2

### Affiliations
University of Edinburgh

### Submitter
Joanna Strachan

### Lab Head
Dr Elizabeth Bayne
University of Edinburgh


