### Accession
PXD021267

### Title
Auxin-triggered changes in the Arabidopsis root tip (phospho)proteome reveal novel root growth regulators

### Description
Canonical auxin signalling starts with auxin binding to the receptor complex, followed by modulation of gene transcription and protein abundance (Tan et al., 2007; Chapman and Estelle, 2009; Slade et al., 2017). However, recent studies also showed an alternative mechanism in roots involving intra-cellular auxin perception, but not transcriptional reprogramming (Fendrych et al., 2018). Despite knowledge on effects of auxin on Arabidopsis root growth at the protein and phosphorylation level is increasing (Zhang et al., 2013; Mattei et al., 2013; Slade et al., 2017), it still remains incomplete. To address this gap in our knowledge, we explored the impact of auxin on the root tip proteome and phosphoproteome.

### Sample Protocol
For NAA experiment protein extraction, phosphopeptide enrichment, LC- MS/MS analysis (Nikonorova et al., 2018) were performed on 1 cm roots tips of Col-0 seedlings vertically grown in presence of different NAA concentrations. Proteome analysis of  mkk1-2 and mkk2-1 mutant allele was performed according to (Vu et al., 2016).

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed according to (Nikonorova et al., 2018). For data analysis a  hybrid approach was applied (please see Chapter 5 for details) treating intensity-based  (for identification of differentially abundant proteins/phosphopeptides) and  presence/absence data (for identification of unique proteins/phosphopeptides)  separately (filtering threshold = 75% replicates). As a filtering threshold we set at 75%  and 5 biological repeats were used per condition, maximum one missing value was  allowed to define protein/phosphopeptide as present (per condition) and minimum four  missing values were allowed to define protein/phosphopeptide as absent.

### Publication Abstract
Auxin plays a dual role in growth regulation and, depending on the tissue and concentration of the hormone, it can either promote or inhibit division and expansion processes in plants. Recent studies have revealed that, beyond transcriptional reprogramming, alternative auxin-controlled mechanisms regulate root growth. Here, we explored the impact of different concentrations of the synthetic auxin NAA that establish growth-promoting and -repressing conditions on the root tip proteome and phosphoproteome, generating a unique resource. From the phosphoproteome data, we pinpointed (novel) growth regulators, such as the RALF34-THE1 module. Our results, together with previously published studies, suggest that auxin, H<sup>+</sup>-ATPases, cell wall modifications and cell wall sensing receptor-like kinases are tightly embedded in a pathway regulating cell elongation. Furthermore, our study assigned a novel role to MKK2 as a regulator of primary root growth and a (potential) regulator of auxin biosynthesis and signalling, and suggests the importance of the MKK2 Thr<sup>31</sup> phosphorylation site for growth regulation in the <i>Arabidopsis</i> root tip.

### Keywords
Plant, Auxin, Phosphoproteomoics

### Affiliations
PhD student
Ghent University, Department of Plant Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, 9052 Ghent, Belgium VIB Center for Plant Systems Biology, 9052 Ghent, Belgium Division of Plant and Crop Sciences, School of Biosciences, University of Nottingham, Loughborough LE12 5RD, United Kingdom. Centre for Plant Integrative Biology, University of Nottingham, Loughborough LE12 5RD, United Kingdom.

### Submitter
Cassio Flavio Fonseca de Lima

### Lab Head
Dr Ive De Smet
Ghent University, Department of Plant Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, 9052 Ghent, Belgium VIB Center for Plant Systems Biology, 9052 Ghent, Belgium Division of Plant and Crop Sciences, School of Biosciences, University of Nottingham, Loughborough LE12 5RD, United Kingdom. Centre for Plant Integrative Biology, University of Nottingham, Loughborough LE12 5RD, United Kingdom.


