### Accession
PXD034143

### Title
Proteomic profiling of mouse Paneth cells microdissected from small intestinal tissue

### Description
Paneth cells are antimicrobial peptide-secreting cells located at the base of the crypts of the small intestine. The proteome of Paneth cells is not well defined because of their co-existence with stem cells making it difficult to culture Panth cells alone in vitro. Using a simplied toluidine blue O method for staining mouse intestinal tissue, laser capture microdissection (LCM) to isolate cells from the crypt region and surfactant assisted one pot protein digestion, we identified more than 1,300 proteins from crypts equivalent to 18,000 cells. Compared with the proteomes of villi and smooth muscle regions, the crypt proteome is highly enriched in defensins, lysozymes and other antimicrobial peptides that are characteristic of Paneth cells. The sensitivity of the LCM-based proteomics approach was also assessed using a smaller number of cell equivalent tissues, a comparable proteomic coverage can be achieved with 3,600 cells. This work is the first proteomics study of intestinal tissue enriched with Paneth cells. The simplied workflow enables profiling of Paneth cell associated pathological changes at the proteome level directly from frozen intestinal tissue. It may also be useful for proteomics studies of other spatially resolved cell types from other tissues.

### Sample Protocol
Three distinct regions were dissected in triplicate: the crypts, the villi, and smooth muscles region were captured in a single cap with a volume of 1,800,000 µm2, 7,200,000 µm2, or 36,000,000 µm. The lysis buffer was added to each chopped sample and sonicated for 10 min to extract and solubilize proteins. The lysate was reduced by adding 10 mM DTT and incubated at 70°C for 40 min followed by alkylation with 25 mM IAA at room temperature for 60 min in dark. Enzymatic digestion was performed by adding 1 µg Trypsin/Lys-C and incubating overnight at 37°C.

### Data Protocol
The peptide samples were loaded onto EvoTip trap columns according to manufacturer’s instuctions, followed by separation in 44 min on an Evosep One TM LC system. The effluents from LC was detected using an Orbitrap Exploris 240 mass spectrometer. Mass spectra were acquired from 375 to 1200 m/z at mass resolution of 60 k (at 200 m/z) followed by data-dependent MS/MS at mass resolution of 15 k (at 200 m/z) for the 20 most abundant ions. Other settings of the OE240 used for this study included a full MS AGC target of 3e6, MS/MS AGC target of 1e5, dynamic exclusion of 25 sec, mass isolation window of 1.6 m/z, and a minimum intensity threshold of 1e5, normalized HCD collision energy of 30. FragPipe (Ver. 17.1) proteomics pipeline tool with MSFragger search engine was utilized to search the database. Default parameter settings were used with slight modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Paneth cells are antimicrobial peptide-secreting cells located at the base of the crypts of the small intestine. The proteome of Paneth cells is not well defined because of their coexistence with stem cells, making it difficult to culture Paneth cells alone <i>in vitro</i>. Using a simplified toluidine blue O method for staining mouse intestinal tissue, laser capture microdissection (LCM) to isolate cells from the crypt region, and surfactant-assisted one-pot protein digestion, we identified more than 1300 proteins from crypts equivalent to 18,000 cells. Compared with the proteomes of villi and smooth muscle regions, the crypt proteome is highly enriched in defensins, lysozymes, and other antimicrobial peptides that are characteristic of Paneth cells. The sensitivity of the LCM-based proteomics approach was also assessed using a smaller number of cell equivalent tissues: a comparable proteomic coverage can be achieved with 3600 cells. This work is the first proteomics study of intestinal tissue enriched with Paneth cells. The simplified workflow enables profiling of Paneth cell-associated pathological changes at the proteome level directly from frozen intestinal tissue. It may also be useful for proteomics studies of other spatially resolved cell types from other tissues.

### Keywords
Paneth cell, Toluidine blue, Proteomics, Laser capture microdissection, Mouse small intestine, Villi

### Affiliations
The University of North Carolina at Greensboro
1. Center for Translational Biomedical Research, University of North Carolina at Greensboro 2. Department of Chemistry & Biochemistry,  University of North Carolina at Greensboro

### Submitter
Jongmin Woo

### Lab Head
Dr Qibin Zhang
1. Center for Translational Biomedical Research, University of North Carolina at Greensboro 2. Department of Chemistry & Biochemistry,  University of North Carolina at Greensboro


