### Accession
PXD010549

### Title
20170712-Leslie-3 -  A molecular switch orchestrates enzyme specificity and secretory granule morphology

### Description
190 proteins were identified from three samples. Among them41 proteins were detected in sample Layer 1 and/or Layer 2 but not in sample Layer 3, and one protein (SPCS2) was detected all three samples but its relative abundance is higher in Layer 1 than that in Layer 3. These 42 proteins can be considered as the most possible candidates proteins which are specifically present in the secretory granules prepared in this experiment.

### Sample Protocol
1) 1D SDS gel and fractionate each sample to two fractions 2) Perform in-gel trypsin digestion 3) Zip-tip cleanup 4) LC/MS/MS analysis

### Data Protocol
Raw data file was searched against public NCBI database of Drosophila Melanogaster using the Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software (Thermo, San Jose, CA) based on the SEQUEST algorithm. Carbamidomethylation (+57.021 Da) of cysteines was fixed modification, and Oxidation and Deamidation Q/N-deamidated (+0.98402 Da) were set as dynamic modifications. The minimum peptide length was specified to be five amino acids. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 15 ppm, whereas fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.05 Da. The maximum false peptide discovery rate was specified as 0.01. The resulting Proteome Discoverer Report contains all assembled proteins with peptides sequences and peptide spectrum match counts (PSM#).

### Publication Abstract
Regulated secretion is an essential process where molecules destined for export are directed to membranous secretory granules, where they undergo packaging and maturation. Here, we identify a gene (pgant9) that influences the structure and shape of secretory granules within the Drosophila salivary gland. Loss of pgant9, which encodes an O-glycosyltransferase, results in secretory granules with an irregular, shard-like morphology, and altered glycosylation of cargo. Interestingly, pgant9 undergoes a splicing event that acts as a molecular switch to alter the charge of a loop controlling access to the active site of the enzyme. The splice variant with the negatively charged loop glycosylates the positively charged secretory cargo and rescues secretory granule morphology. Our study highlights a mechanism for dictating substrate specificity within the O-glycosyltransferase enzyme family. Moreover, our in vitro and in vivo studies suggest that the glycosylation status of secretory cargo influences the morphology of maturing secretory granules.

### Keywords
Lc-msms

### Affiliations
Poochon Scientific
Poochon Scientific, LLC

### Submitter
Xianglin Zhai

### Lab Head
Dr Alex Zhai
Poochon Scientific, LLC


