### Accession
PXD032759

### Title
Potential anti-inflammatory effect of inulin in an inflammatory cell model (mouse macrophages with LPS)

### Description
A potential anti-inflammatory effect of inulin, a fructan found in thousands of plant species, has been described. In this study we look at the effect of inulin, at the proteome level, in a murine cellular model of inflammation. Our interest is focused on describing the molecular mechanisms involved in this possible anti-inflammatory bioactivity.

### Sample Protocol
RAW 264.7 macrophages were cultured under three different conditions: LPS (Escherichia coli lipopolysaccharides), LPS followed by inulin, andLPS followed by hydrocortisone. A fourth gropu consisted on control cells (not treated). Cells from the four groups (control, LPS, I-LPS and H-LPS), 5-6 biological replicates each, were collected and lysed, and protein extracts obtained by precipitation. Protein pellets were resuspended in 0.2% RapiGest. For each sample, 30 μg of protein were digested with trypsin in two steps (2 + 15 h). 200 ng protein digest on column were analyzed for each sample, on a timsTOF Pro coupled to a nanoElute LC system (with an IonOpticks C18 Aurora 22 cm x 75 μm id column). nHPLC gradient (300nL/min) from 5 to 30%B in 45 min. Samples were run with a diaPASEF method.

### Data Protocol
diaPASEF runs were processed using DIA-NN v1.8, using a library-free approach.

### Publication Abstract
Inulin is a natural polysaccharide classified as a soluble fiber with demonstrated prebiotic activity. Prebiotics can reduce intestinal and systemic inflammation through modulation of the gut microflora and their metabolites. Additionally, extensive research is illuminating the role of macrophages in the interaction between gut microbiota and many systemic inflammatory diseases. In this study, the anti-inflammatory properties of inulin were evaluated using a murine macrophage cell model (RAW 264.7) of inflammation, and the immunomodulatory mechanism was investigated using omics technologies. The cells underwent comprehensive transcriptomic and proteomic analyses to identify the mechanisms responsible for the observed anti-inflammatory phenotype. Functional analyses of these omics results revealed two potential mechanisms that may lead to an overall reduction in cytokine and chemokine transcription: the inhibition of the NF-&#x3ba;B signaling pathway, leading to the downregulation of proinflammatory factors such as COX2, and the promotion of the phase II defense protein Hmox1 via the Nrf2 pathway. This study provides promising targets for research on immune modulation by dietary fibers and offers new strategies for the design of functional ingredients, foods, and nutraceutical products, which could ultimately lead to personalized nutrition and improved consumer health.

### Keywords
Inulin; anti-inflammatory effect; diapasef; dia-nn; library-free

### Affiliations
IMIBIC
CSIC and INiBICA

### Submitter
Ignacio Ortea

### Lab Head
Dr Ignacio Ortea
CSIC and INiBICA


