### Accession
PXD019926

### Title
Expanding the depth and sensitivity of cross-link identification by differential ion mobility using FAIMS

### Description
In cross-linking mass spectrometry (XL-MS), the depth and sensitivity of cross-link detection is often limited by the low abundance of cross-links compared to non-cross-linked peptides in the digestion mixture. To improve the identification efficiency of cross-links, here we present a gas-phase separation strategy using high field asymmetric waveform ion mobility spectrometry (FAIMS) coupled to the Orbitrap Tribrid mass spectrometers. By enabling an additional peptide separation step in gas phase using the FAIMS device, we increase the number of cross-link identification by 22% for a medium complex sample and 59% for strong cation exchange-fractionated HEK293T cell lysate in XL-MS experiments using disuccinimidyl sulfoxide (DSSO) cross-linker. When disuccinimidyl suberate (DSS) cross-linker is in use, we are able to boost cross-link identification by 89% for the medium and 100% for the highly complex sample comparing to the analyses without FAIMS . Furthermore, we show that for medium complex samples, FAIMS enables the collection of single-shot XL-MS data with comparable depth to the corresponding sample fractionated by chromatography-based approaches. Altogether, we demonstrate FAIMS is highly beneficial for XL-MS studies by expanding the proteome coverage of cross-links while improving the efficiency and confidence of cross-link identification.

### Sample Protocol
Eight protein mixture: horse myoglobin, bovine hemoglobin, bovine serum albumin, bovine beta-casein, bovine beta-lactoglobulin, bovine cytochrom-c, chicken ovotransferrin and chicken ovalbumin (all Sigma Aldrich, except last two are purchased from GE). Proteins were prepared individually as 1 mg/ml solutions in 20 mM HEPES pH 7.8. HEK293T cells were lysed in 20 mM HEPES, 150 mM NaCl, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 0.5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) pH 7.8 in a 5 ml Dounce homogenizer. Cross-linking: 0.5 mM disuccinimidyl sulfoxide (Thermo Fisher Scientific), incubated at room temperature for 1 h and stopped by 50 mM Tris, pH 8.0. Samples processing: denatured in 8M Urea, reduced with DTT (5 mM, 1 h, 37 °C), alkylated with chloroacetamide (40 mM, 30 min), proteolyzed with Lys-C (1:75 w/w, 2h) and trypsin (1:100 w/w, overnight) at 37 °C. Desalting: By Sep-Pak C8 cartridges (Waters), dried under vacuum, and reconstituted in 0.05% (v/v) TFA, 1% (v/v) ACN for subsequent LC/MS measurements. For the protein mixture, tryptic peptides of respective eight proteins were mixed 1:1. Fractionation was performed on a Agilent 1260 Infinity II UPLC system equipped with a PolySULFOETHYL-A™ column (100 x 4.6 mm, 3µm particles, PolyLC inc.). 2 mg HEK293T cell digest was loaded. Solvent A consisted of 0.05% FA in 20% ACN, and solvent B consisted of the same buffer but with 0.5 M NaCl. A linear SCX gradient of 95 minutes was applied. A total of 70 fractions were collected (starting minute 35, collection every 30 sec.) and six equally spaced fractions along the gradient were selected for LC/MS experiments. Size exclusion chromatography was performed on a quaternary Agilent 1290 Infinity II UPLC system equipped with a SEC column (Superdex Peptide 3.2/300). 40 µg of the eight protein mixture was loaded and separated at a flow rate of 0.05 ml/min with running buffer (30%ACN, 0.1%TFA). The early five (20-30 min), cross-link enriched fractions were selected for LS/MS experiments. Samples were separated by RP-HPLC using a Thermo Scientific™ Dionex™ UltiMate™ 3000 system connected to a PepMap C-18 trap-column (Thermo Fischer Scientific) and an in-house packed C18 column for reversed phase separation (column material: Poroshell 120 EC-C18, 2.7 μm (Agilent Technologies)) at 300 nL/min flow rate. The HPLC was connected an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer with or without FAIMS Pro™ device (Thermo Fisher Scientific). A 60, 90, 120 min separation gradient (plus 30 min equilibration phase) was used for the eight protein mixture or 180 min gradient (separation for 160 min, plus 20 min equilibration) for HEK293T lysate. Separation gradient: 4-40% solvent B (A: water, 0.1% FA; B: 100% ACN, 0.1% FA).Cross-linked samples were analyzed using stepped collision energy (SCE) HCD-MS2-MS3 acquisition strategy. (SCE) HCD MS2 was triggered for charge states +4 to +8 and CID-MS3 was triggered if a unique mass difference (Δ=31.9721) was observed in the MS2 spectrum for two of the signature peaks. Orbitrap mass resolution was set to 120,000 (MS1) and 60,000 (MS2). MS3 scans were acquired in the ion trap. Isolation windows were set to 1.6 m/z at MS1 level and 2.5 m/z at MS2 level. The collision energy was 21-27-33% for (SCE) HCD-MS2 and 35% for CID-MS3. Top speed of 5 sec for non FAIMS or single CV experiments and 2 sec/CV for internal stepping was used. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30, 45 or 60 sec. for increasing LC-gradient. Protein identification and abundance estimation were performed using an LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and 180 min linear gradients.

### Data Protocol
For DSSO cross-linked samples and DSS cross-linked eight protein mixture, raw data were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 2.4 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with XlinkX node 2.0 for cross-linked peptides and SEQUEST HT search engine for unmodified peptides and mono-links. For DSS cross-linked cell lysate, raw data were analyzed using pLink227. The following parameters were applied for Proteome Discoverer: MS1 ion mass tolerance, 10 ppm; MS2 ion mass tolerance, 20 ppm; MS3 ion mass tolerance, 0.6 Da; maximal number of missed cleavages,: 2; minimum peptide length, 6; fixed modification, carbamidomethylation (+57.021 Da) for cysteins; variable modifications, DSSO cross-linked mass modifications were used as variable modifications for lysine or protein N-terminus, in addition to methionine oxidation (+15.995 Da) and N-terminal acetylation (+42.011 Da). Data were searched against a database containing Uniprot/SwissProt entries of the given individual proteins of the eight protein mixture or a reduced human SwissProt database (retrieved Feb. 2019) based on protein identifications from the single-shot proteomics experiment of HEK293T cell lysate. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% at CSM level using simple FDR validation. Additionally, cross-links were filtered with an identification score of ≥50 and Δ-score of ≥10. For pLink2 search, mass tolerance, maximal number of missed cleavages, and modifications were set the same as in Proteome Discoverer. FDR was set to 1% at CSM level with separate evaluation of inter-/intra-links. Protein abundances were estimated based on iBAQ28 and MS1 features were extracted using MaxQuant29 1.6.2a. Search parameters were: MS ion mass tolerance, 10 ppm; MS2 ion mass tolerance, 20 ppm; fixed modification, carbamidomethylation (cystein); variable modification, oxidation (methionine) and acetylation (protein N-term); allowed number of missed cleavages: 2; minimum peptide length: 7; database as above; FDR at 1%.

### Publication Abstract
In cross-linking mass spectrometry (XL-MS), the depth and sensitivity of cross-link detection is often limited by the low abundance of cross-links compared to non-cross-linked peptides in the digestion mixture. To improve the identification efficiency of cross-links, here, we present a gas-phase separation strategy using high-field asymmetric waveform ion mobility spectrometry (FAIMS) coupled to the Orbitrap Tribrid mass spectrometers. By enabling an additional peptide separation step in the gas phase using the FAIMS device, we increase the number of cross-link identifications by 22% for a medium complex sample and 59% for strong cation exchange-fractionated HEK293T cell lysate in XL-MS experiments using disuccinimidyl sulfoxide (DSSO) cross-linker. When disuccinimidyl suberate (DSS) cross-linker is in use, we are able to boost cross-link identification by 89% for the medium and 100% for the high complex sample compared to the analyses without FAIMS. Furthermore, we show that, for medium complex samples, FAIMS enables the collection of single-shot XL-MS data with a comparable depth to the corresponding sample fractionated by chromatography-based approaches. Altogether, we demonstrate FAIMS is highly beneficial for XL-MS studies by expanding the proteome coverage of cross-links while improving the efficiency and confidence of cross-link identification.

### Keywords
Cross-linking mass spectrometry, Xl-ms, Cx-ms, Whole proteome, Orbitrap fusion lumos, Faims

### Affiliations
Department of Chemical Biology, Leibniz-Forschungsinstitut für Molekulare Pharmakologie (FMP), Robert-Roessle-Str. 10, 13125, Berlin, Germany

### Submitter
Lennart Schnirch

### Lab Head
Dr Fan Liu
Department of Chemical Biology, Leibniz-Forschungsinstitut für Molekulare Pharmakologie (FMP), Robert-Roessle-Str. 10, 13125, Berlin, Germany


