### Accession
PXD025660

### Title
Proteomics informed by transcriptomics for a qualitative and quantitative analysis of the sialoproteome of Ornithodoros moubata adult ticks. SWATH Spectral Library building

### Description
The specific aim of the present work is to expand the data on the salivary proteome of O. moubata adult ticks, particularly of female ticks, by solving the aforementioned drawbacks, as part of the in depth characterization and analysis of the O. moubata sialome. Knowing this sialome will allow identifying and selecting novel salivary antigens as targets for tick vaccines, and their subsequent testing in animal immunization trials. We pay special attention to female ticks because they are a key developmental stage in the tick life cycle and vaccines may exert on them double deleterious effects, for instance an increase of mortality and a reduction/inhibition of the reproductive performance. With that aim, in the current work we have analysed samples of female and male saliva separately using two different mass spectrometry approaches: data-dependent acquisition (DDA) LC-MS/MS  and Sequential Window Acquisition of all Theoretical fragment ion spectra Mass Spectrometry (SWATH MS). This last technique is a specific variant of data-independent acquisition (DIA) methods and is emerging as a technology that combines deep proteome coverage capabilities with quantitative consistency and accuracy.

### Sample Protocol
The O. moubata specimens used in the present work come from the IRNASA colony, which was established from specimens donated by Dr. Philip Wilkinson (Institute for Animal Health, Pirbright, United Kingdom) captured in Malawi. This colony is kept at 28 ° C, 85% relative humidity and 12/12 hours of light / dark, and is regularly fed on rabbits.  Saliva was collected separately from each sex from newly molted 4 month-old female and male ticks after stimulation of secretion with pilocarpine following the protocol described by Baranda et al. (1997). Three replicated biological saliva samples from each sex were prepared, each containing the secretion of 20 female ticks/sample (F1, F2, F3) or of 40 male ticks/sample (M1, M2, M3). Saliva samples were centrifuged 10 min at 12.000 g and 4 ºC and the supernatants were recovered and stored at -20 °C. Protein concentration was assessed by measuring the absorbance at 280 nm in the NanoDrop 2000 spectrophotometer (ThermoFisher), and sample reproducibility was checked by SDS-PAGE. Salivary proteins in each female (F1, F2, F3) and male (M1, M2, M3) saliva samples were analysed using an in-solution digestion method. For this, 20 g of protein per sample were digested with Sequencing Grade Trypsin (Promega) as follows. First, protein samples were reduced using 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) (Sigma) to a final volume of 100 l and the mixture incubated for 20 min at 60 ºC. Then, proteins were alkylated with 5.5 mM iodoacetamide (IAM) (Sigma) to a final volume of 110 l and incubated at room temperature for 30 min in the dark. Finally, each sample was digested with 800 ng of trypsin in a final volume of 118 ul and incubated overnight at 37 ºC. The digestion was stopped with 12 µL of 10 % Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) (Fisher Scientific) in water. The mixtures were dried in a rotatory evaporator and dissolved in a final volume of 40 ul. All the reagents were prepared in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) (Sigma). In addition, one  1D Page gel was run with  con 20 ug of pooled sample protein. The run was sliced in 3 fragments and proteins were in gel digested as described above. The final digested peptides were set in 15 uL. The peptides recovered from the digestion processing were analysed in a microESI qQTOF mass spectrometer (6600plus TripleTOF, ABSCIEX) in a data dependent acquisition mode (DDA). Briefly, for LC-MS/MS analysis 5 µl from each digested sample (6 samples; 3 from females and 3 from males) were individually loaded onto a trap column (3µ C18-CL 120 A, 350 um x 0.5mm; Eksigent) and desalted with 0.1% TFA at 5 µl/min during 5 min. Then, the peptides were separated using an analytical LC column (3µ C18-CL 120 A, 0.075 x 150 mm; Eksigent) equilibrated in 5% acetonitrile (ACN) (Fisher Scientific) 0.1% formic acid (FA) (Fisher Scientific). Peptide elution was carried out with a linear gradient of 7- 40% of buffer B in A for 45 min (A: 0.1% FA in water; B: 0.1% FA in ACN) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min.  The eluted peptides were ionized in a source type Optiflow applying 3.0 kV to the spray emitted and the tripleTOF was operated in a DDA mode. Full profile MS scans were acquired in the mass range of m/z 350–1400 for 250 ms in positive ion mode. The Top 100 most intense ions with charge state from 2+ to 4+ were selected for fragmentation and MS/MS scans were acquired in mass range of m/z 100–1500 for 25 ms in “high sensitivity” mode. Switch criteria used were the following: charge of 2+ to 4+, minimum intensity and 100 counts per second (cps). The peptides from in gel digestion were analyzed in the same way by a 20 minutes gradient.

### Data Protocol
After LC-MS/MS, all the wiff data-files were processed using ProteinPilot v5.0 search engine (AB SCIEX). The Paragon algorithm (Shilov et al., 2007) of ProteinPilot was used to search against a recently published protein fasta database derived from O. moubata sialotranscriptome (Oleaga et al., 2021; BioProject PRJNA667315). Searches were done with trypsin specificity, cys-alkylation (IAM) and the search effort set to rapid.  To avoid using the same spectral evidence in more than one protein, the identified proteins were grouped based on MS/MS spectra by the Protein-Pilot Pro Group™ Algorithm, regardless of the peptide sequence assigned. The protein within each group that could explain more spectral data with confidence was depicted as the primary protein of the group.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ornithodoros moubata proteome, Label free quantitaion, Swath, Lc msms, Dia

### Affiliations
Universitat de Valencia
Parasitology Laboratory, Institute of Natural Resources and Agrobiology (IRNASA, CSIC). Cordel de Merinas, 40-52, 37008 Salamanca, Spain.

### Submitter
Luz Valero

### Lab Head
Dr Ana Oleaga Pérez
Parasitology Laboratory, Institute of Natural Resources and Agrobiology (IRNASA, CSIC). Cordel de Merinas, 40-52, 37008 Salamanca, Spain.


