### Accession
PXD007968

### Title
A quantitative mass spectrometry-based approach to monitor the dynamics of endogenous chromatin-associated protein complexes

### Description
Understanding the dynamics of endogenous protein-protein interactions in complex networks is pivotal in deciphering the mechanisms underlying diseases such as cancer. To enable the in-depth analysis of protein interactions in chromatin-associated protein complexes, we have previously developed a method termed RIME (Rapid Immunoprecipitation Mass spectrometry of Endogenous proteins). Here, we present a quantitative multiplexed method (qPLEX-RIME), which integrates RIME with isobaric labelling and tribrid mass spectrometry for the study of protein interactome dynamics in a quantitative fashion with increased sensitivity. Using the qPLEX-RIME method, we delineated the temporal changes of the Estrogen Receptor alpha (ERα) interactome in breast cancer cells treated with 4-hydrotamoxifen and we successfully identified endogenous ERα-associated proteins in human Patient Derived Xenograft (PDX) tumours and in primary human breast cancer clinical tissue. Our results demonstrate that the combination of RIME with isobaric labelling offers a powerful tool for the in-depth and quantitative characterization of protein interactome dynamics which is applicable to clinical samples.

### Sample Protocol
A volume of 10uL trypsin solution (15ng/ul) (Pierce) in 100mM AMBIC was added to the beads followed by overnight incubation at 37°C. A second digestion step was performed the next day for 4h. After proteolysis the tubes were placed on a magnet and the supernatant solution was collected after acidification by the addition of 2ul 5% formic acid. The resultant peptides were cleaned with the Ultra-Micro C18 Spin Columns (Harvard Apparatus) according to manufacturer’s instructions. The peptide samples were dried with speedvac, reconstituted in 100ul 0.1M TEAB (triethylammonium bicarbonate) and labelled using the TMT-10plex reagents (Thermo Fisher) with a randomized design. The peptide mixture was fractionated with Reversed-Phase cartridges at high pH (Pierce, #84868). Nine fractions were collected using different elution solutions in the range of 5% ACN to 50% ACN. For the total proteome analysis 200ul of 0.1M TEAB, 0.1% SDS buffer was added to each cell pellet followed by probe sonication and boiling at 950C. Protein concentration was estimated with Bradford assay (BIO-RAD-Quick start) according to manufacturer’s instructions. For each sample, 90ug of total protein were reduced for 1h at 60oC by the addition of 2uL 50mM ΤCEP (tris-2-carboxymethyl phosphine, Sigma). Cysteines were blocked for 10min on the bench with the addition of 1uL 200mM MMTS (methyl methanethiosulfonate, Sigma). For peptide generation, trypsin (Pierce #90058) solution was added at ratio protein/trypsin ~ 30:1 for overnight digestion at 37˚C. The next day peptides were allowed to react with the TMT-10plex reagents (Thermo Scientific) for one hour. The reaction was quenched with 8uL of 5% hydroxylamine (Thermo Scientific) and the labelled samples were mixed and dried with speedvac concentrator. The TMT mix was reconstituted and fractionated on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 system at high pH using the X-Bridge C18 column (3.5μm 2.1x150mm, Waters) with 1% gradient. UV signal was recorded at 280 and 215nm and 30 fractions were collected in a peak dependent manner.

### Data Protocol
The collected CID tandem mass spectra were processed with the SequestHT search engine on the Proteome Discoverer 2.1 software for peptide and protein identification. All spectra were searched against a UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot fasta file containing 20,199 reviewed human entries. The node for SequestHT included the following parameters: Precursor Mass Tolerance 20 ppm, Fragment Mass Tolerance 0.5 Da, Dynamic Modifications were Oxidation of M (+15.995 Da), Deamidation of N, Q (+0.984 Da) and Static Modifications were TMT6plex at any N-Terminus K (+229.163 Da) for the quantitative data. Methylthio at C (+45.988) was included for the total proteome data. The Reporter Ion Quantifier node included a TMT 6plex (Thermo Scientific Instruments) Quantification Method, for MS3 scan events, HCD activation type, integration window tolerance 20 ppm and integration method Most Confident Centroid.

### Publication Abstract
Understanding the dynamics of endogenous protein-protein interactions in complex networks is pivotal in deciphering disease mechanisms. To enable the in-depth analysis of protein interactions in chromatin-associated protein complexes, we have previously developed a method termed RIME (Rapid Immunoprecipitation Mass spectrometry of Endogenous proteins). Here, we present a quantitative multiplexed method (qPLEX-RIME), which integrates RIME with isobaric labelling and tribrid mass spectrometry for the study of protein interactome dynamics in a quantitative fashion with increased sensitivity. Using the qPLEX-RIME method, we delineate the temporal changes of the Estrogen Receptor alpha (ER&#x3b1;) interactome in breast cancer cells treated with 4-hydroxytamoxifen. Furthermore, we identify endogenous ER&#x3b1;-associated proteins in human Patient-Derived Xenograft tumours and in primary human breast cancer clinical tissue. Our results demonstrate that the combination of RIME with isobaric labelling offers a powerful tool for the in-depth and quantitative characterisation of protein interactome dynamics, which is applicable to clinical samples.

### Keywords
Patient derived xenografts (pdx), Clinical samples, Isobaric labelling, Interactome, Proteomics, 4-hydrotamoxifen, Rime, Breast cancer, Qplex-rime, Tmt, Estrogen receptor alpha

### Affiliations
Senior Group Leader
Senior Scientific Assistant

### Submitter
Evangelia Papachristou

### Lab Head
Dr Jason Carroll
Senior Group Leader


