### Accession
PXD010028

### Title
Effects of 4-phenylbutyrate on human keratinocytes

### Description
Keratins 5 and 14 are critical for cytoskeletal integrity, as shown by missense mutations in these genes, which cause the severe skin fragility disorder epidermolysis bullosa simplex (EBS). The complexity of the pathomechanisms in EBS is not fully understood and no effective management exists. In addition to fragility, EBS keratinocytes are characterized by aggregates of misfolded keratin. Here, we tested the chemical chaperone 4-phenylbutyrate (4-PBA) as a putative novel therapy, using keratinocytes from patients with severe generalized EBS due to distinct KRT5 and KRT14 mutations.

### Sample Protocol
SUPER-SILAC approach. Whole cell lysates of Super-SILAC mix, non-treated and treated cells were combined (1:1:1 on protein level), fractionated by SDS-PAGE, proteins in-gel digested (10 sclies per lane) and expression proteomics analyses were performed.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant 1.4.1.2 was used as processing software. Uniprot human December 2017 was used as database.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Epidermolysis bullosa, Keratinocytes, Lc-ms/ms, Skin

### Affiliations
University of Fribourg
Department of Biology, University of Fribourg  Chemin du Musée 10, 1700 Fribourg, Switzerland  T  +41 26 300 8631                  F  +41 26 300 9741

### Submitter
Joern Dengjel

### Lab Head
Dr Joern Dengjel
Department of Biology, University of Fribourg  Chemin du Musée 10, 1700 Fribourg, Switzerland  T  +41 26 300 8631                  F  +41 26 300 9741


