### Accession
PXD020816

### Title
Growth media-based proteome remodeling of three microorganisms using sample multiplexing

### Description
The choice of growth media is a very important consideration of any cell-based proteomics experiment. Alterations thereof may result in differences in basal proteomes simply due to disparities in the metabolite composition of the media. We investigate the effect of growth media on the proteomes of three microorganisms, specifically E. coli, S. cerevisiae, and S. pombe, using tandem mass tag (TMT)-based quantitative proteomics. We compared the protein abundance profiles of these microorganisms propagated in two distinct growth media that are commonly used for the respective organism. Our sample preparation strategy included SP3 bead-assisted protein isolation and digestion. In addition, we assembled a replicate set of samples in which we altered the proteolytic digestion from sequential treatment with LysC and trypsin to only LysC. Despite differences in peptides identified and a drop in quantified proteins, the results were similar between the two datasets for all three microorganisms. Approximately 10% of the respective microbial proteomes were significantly altered in each dataset. As expected, gene ontology analysis revealed that the majority of differentially expressed proteins are implicated in metabolism. We emphasize further the importance of growth media selection and the potential consequences thereof.

### Sample Protocol
Aseptic technique was practiced with all microbial samples. S. cerevisiae were grown at 30°C in either YPD or SC media. S. pombe were grown at 32°C in EMM or YES media. E. coli were grown at 37°C in LB or NB media. We harvested yeast cells at OD600nm=0.6 and E. coli at OD600nm=0.5 seeded from an overnight starter culture at OD600nm=0.05. We washed the pelleted cells twice with ice cold water and yeast cells were lysed by bead-beating in 8 M urea, 200 mM EPPS (4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazinepropanesulfonic acid), pH 8.5 supplemented with protease inhibitors, while E. coli were lysed using B-PER reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Protein concentration was determined with the BCA assay. The BCA assay was performed according to manufacturer’s instructions with samples that were diluted at least 1:20, to ensure that the urea concentration was below its non-compatibility limit. Samples were reduced with 5mM TCEP for 20 min, alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 20 min in the dark, and quenched with 10 mM DTT for 20 min in the dark, all at room temperature.

### Data Protocol
Spectra were converted to mzXML via MSconvert. Database searching included all entries from the Saccharomyces Genome Database (SGD; August 2019), Uniprot entries for S. pombe (December 2019), and Uniprot entries for E. coli (December 2019). Each database was concatenated with one composed of all protein sequences for that database in the reversed order. Searches were performed using a 50-ppm precursor ion tolerance for total protein level profiling. The product ion tolerance was set to 0.9 Da. These wide mass tolerance windows were chosen to maximize sensitivity in conjunction with Comet searches and linear discriminant analysis. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+229.163 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) was set as a variable modification. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were adjusted to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR). PSM filtering was performed using a linear discriminant analysis, as described previously (15) and then assembled further to a final protein-level FDR of 1%. Proteins were quantified by summing reporter ion counts across all matching PSMs, also as described previously. Reporter ion intensities were adjusted to correct for the isotopic impurities of the different TMT reagents according to manufacturer specifications. The signal-to-noise (S/N) measurements of peptides assigned to each protein were summed and these values were normalized so that the sum of the signal for all proteins in each channel was equivalent to account for equal protein loading. Finally, each protein abundance measurement was scaled, such that the summed signal-to-noise for that protein across all channels equaled 100, thereby generating a relative abundance (RA) measurement. Data analysis and visualization were performed in Microsoft Excel or R.

### Publication Abstract
The selection of growth media is a very important consideration of any cell-based proteomics experiment. Alterations thereof may result in differences in basal proteomes simply due to disparities in the metabolite composition of the media. We investigate the effect of growth media on the proteomes of three microorganisms, specifically E. coli, S. cerevisiae, and S. pombe, using tandem mass tag (TMT)-based quantitative proteomics. We compared the protein abundance profiles of these microorganisms propagated in two distinct growth media that are commonly used for the respective organism. Our sample preparation strategy included SP3 bead-assisted protein isolation and digestion. In addition, we assembled a replicate set of samples in which we altered the proteolytic digestion from sequential treatment with LysC and trypsin to only LysC. Despite differences in peptides identified and a drop in quantified proteins, the results were similar between the two datasets for all three microorganisms. Approximately 10% of the proteins of each respective microorganism were significantly altered in each dataset. As expected, gene ontology analysis revealed that the majority of differentially expressed proteins are implicated in metabolism. These data emphasize further the importance and the potential consequences of growth media selection. SIGNIFICANCE: Various microorganisms are used as model systems throughout in biological studies, including proteomics-based investigations. The growth conditions of these organisms are of utmost importance, of which one major consideration is the choice of growth media. We hypothesize that growth media selection has a considerable impact on the baseline proteome of a given microorganism. To test this hypothesis, we used tandem mass tag (TMT)-based quantitative multiplexed proteomics to profile the proteomes of E. coli, S. cerevisiae, and S. pombe each grown in two different, yet common, growth media for the respective species. Our data show that approximately 10% of the proteins of each respective microorganism were significantly altered and that many of the differentially expressed proteins are implicated in metabolism. We provide several datasets which are potentially valuable for growth media selection with respect to downstream biochemical analysis.

### Keywords
Sps-ms3, Multi-notch, Tmt, Microorganism, Lumos

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School
Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, USA

### Submitter
Joao Paulo

### Lab Head
Dr Joao A. Paulo
Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, USA


