### Accession
PXD021317

### Title
Morphological observation and protein expression of fertilized and abortive ovules in Castanea mollissima

### Description
In this study, the Chinese chestnut ‘Huaihuang’ was used to explore the possible mechanisms of ovule abortion with respect to proteomics. The chestnut anthesis starts mid-June. The development of the burs of C. mollissima cv. ‘Huaihuang’ were monitored from 15 to 25 days after anthesis (DAA) And the burs for different times were collected from the Chestnut Experiment Station in Huairou District, Beijing, China. This experiment was conducted at the Beijing Protein Innovation Co., Ltd.

### Sample Protocol
iTRAQ was used to identify differences in protein expression between fertilized ovules and abortive ovules in early Chinese chestnut ovaries. This experiment was conducted at the Beijing Protein Innovation Co., Ltd. Three replications were carried out. The experimental procedures included: (1) protein extraction; (2) protein digestion; (3) peptide marking; (4) high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) separation and determination; (5) peptide purification; (6) detection by mass spectrometry; and (7) qualitative and quantitative analysis of the proteins.

### Data Protocol
Proteins with fold-change ratios of log2 >1.2 or <0.8 and P-values <0.05 were selected as the differentially expressed proteins. The DEPs identified in fertilized and abortive ovules were functionally annotated using Blast2GO and the non-redundant protein database (NR; NCBI: http://www.geneontology.org/). Subsequently, each DEP was mapped to a pathway in the KEGG database (available online at: http://www.genome.jp/kegg/genes.html) to confirm the significance of the GO results.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Castanea mollissima blume; fertilized ovules; abortive ovules; itraq

### Affiliations
Beijing University of Agriculture, Beijing, China
Beijing University of Agriculture

### Submitter
Bingshuai Du

### Lab Head
Dr Kefeng Fang
Beijing University of Agriculture, Beijing, China


