### Accession
PXD023483

### Title
Nanobodies peptide/glycopeptide identification

### Description
Confirmation of Nanobody sequences and identification of Nanobody glycopeptide glycoforms.

### Sample Protocol
Tryptic digestion of gel separated Nanobody proteins. Gel bands were first destained in a solution of 100 mM NH4HCO3 / 50% ethanol for 15 minutes at room temperature with shaking at 750 rpm. Destaining was repeated twice to ensure removal of excess Coomassie. Destained bands were dehydrated with 100% ethanol for 5 minutes and then rehydrated in 50 mM NH4HCO3 containing 10 mM DTT. Protein bands were reduced for 60 minutes at 56 °C with shaking then washed twice in 100% ethanol for 10 minutes to remove DTT. Reduced ethanol washed samples were sequentially alkylated with 55 mM Iodoacetamide in 50 mM NH4HCO3 in the dark for 45 minutes at room temperature. Alkylated samples were then washed with milli-Q water followed by 100% ethanol twice for 5 minutes to remove residual Iodoacetamide then vacuum-dried for 10 minutes. Alkylated samples were then rehydrated with 20 ng/µl trypsin (Promega) in 50 mM NH4HCO3 at 4 °C for 1 hour. Excess trypsin was removed, gel pieces were covered in 40 mM NH4HCO3 and incubated overnight at 37 °C. Peptides were concentrated and desalted using C18 stage tips (64, 65) before analysis by LC-MS.

### Data Protocol
Identification of Nanobody derived peptides using reversed phase LC-MS. Purified peptides were re-suspended in Buffer A* (0.1% TFA, 2% acetonitrile) and separated using a two-column chromatography set up composed of a PepMap100 C18 20 mm x 75 μm trap and a PepMap C18 500 mm x 75 μm analytical column (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were concentrated onto the trap column at 5 μL/min for 5 minutes with Buffer A (0.1% formic acid, 2% DMSO) and then infused into a Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a FAIMS Pro interface at 300 nl/minute via the analytical column using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific). 125-minute gradients were run for each sample altering the buffer composition from 3% buffer B (0.1% formic acid, 77.9% acetonitrile, 2% DMSO) to 28% B over 95 minutes, then from 28% B to 40% B over 10 minutes, then from 40% B to 80% B over 7 minutes, the composition was held at 80% B for 3 minutes, and then dropped to 3% B over 0.1 minutes and held at 3% B for another 9 minutes. The Lumos™ Mass Spectrometer was operated in a stepped FAIMS data-dependent mode automatically switching between the acquisition of a single Orbitrap MS scan (120,000 resolution) every 2 seconds and HCD MS2 events (FTMS, 30K resolution, maximum fill time 80 ms, normalize collision energy 30, AGC of 250%) at three different FAIMS CVs -25, -45 and -65. Carbohydrate associated oxonium ions (204.0867; 138.0545 and 366.1396 m/z) within HCD scans triggered product-dependent MS/MS analysis with three additional scans to enhance the identification of potential glycopeptides; a EThcD (FTMS, 30K resolution, maximum fill time 350 ms, supplementary activation of normalize collision energy 25, AGC 500%) scan, a CID (ITMS, maximum fill time 35 ms, AGC 200%) scan and a stepped HCD (FTMS, 30K resolution, maximum fill time 250 ms, normalize collision energies of 28, 35 and 45 and a AGC of 250%).  The identification of nanobody associated peptides and glycopeptides was accomplished using Byonic (Protein Metrics, version 3.9.6). The MS raw files were searched with a MS1 tolerance of ±5 ppm and a tolerance of ±20 ppm for HCD / EThcD MS2 scans. Searches were performed using cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification, methionine oxidation as a variable modification in addition to allowing N-linked glycosylation on asparagine residues. The default Byonic N-linked glycan database, which is composed of 309 mammalian N-glycans was used. The proteases specificity was set to full trypsin specificity and a maximum of two miss-cleavage events. Data was searched against the expected nanobody protein sequences. Searches was filtered to a 1% protein FDR as set in the Byonic parameters.

### Publication Abstract
Neutralizing antibodies are important for immunity against SARS-CoV-2 and as therapeutics for the prevention and treatment of COVID-19. Here, we identified high-affinity nanobodies from alpacas immunized with coronavirus spike and receptor-binding domains (RBD) that disrupted RBD engagement with the human receptor angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) and potently neutralized SARS-CoV-2. Epitope mapping, X-ray crystallography, and cryo-electron microscopy revealed two distinct antigenic sites and showed two neutralizing nanobodies from different epitope classes bound simultaneously to the spike trimer. Nanobody-Fc fusions of the four most potent nanobodies blocked ACE2 engagement with RBD variants present in human populations and potently neutralized both wild-type SARS-CoV-2 and the N501Y D614G variant at concentrations as low as 0.1 nM. Prophylactic administration of either single nanobody-Fc or as mixtures reduced viral loads by up to 10<sup>4</sup>-fold in mice infected with the N501Y D614G SARS-CoV-2 virus. These results suggest a role for nanobody-Fc fusions as prophylactic agents against SARS-CoV-2.

### Keywords
Glycopeptides, Nanobodies, Ms-ms

### Affiliations
University of Melbourne
Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, Victoria, Australia

### Submitter
Nichollas Scott

### Lab Head
Dr Associate Professor Wai-Hong Tham
Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, Victoria, Australia


