### Accession
PXD043877

### Title
Microglial REV-ERBα regulates inflammation and lipid droplet formation to drive tauopathy

### Description
Alzheimer’s disease is associated with disrupted circadian rhythms and clock gene expression. REV-ERBα (Nr1d1) is a circadian transcriptional repressor involved in the regulation of lipid metabolism and macrophage function. While global REV-ERBα deletion increases microglial activation and mitigates amyloid plaque formation, the cell-autonomous effects of microglial REV-ERBα deletion in healthy brain and in tauopathy are unexplored. Here, we show that microglial REV-ERBα deficient enhances inflammatory signaling, disrupts lipid metabolism, and causes lipid droplet (LD) accumulation specifically in male microglia. Inflammation and LD accumulation combine to inhibit microglial tau phagocytosis, which can be partially rescued by blockage of lipid droplet formation. Microglial REV-ERBα deletion exacerbates tau aggregation and neuroinflammation in P301S and AAV-P301L tauopathy models in male, but not female mice. These data demonstrate the importance of microglial lipid droplets in tau accumulation and reveal REV-ERBα as a therapeutically accessible, sex-dependent regulator of microglial inflammatory signaling, lipid metabolism, and tauopathy.

### Sample Protocol
The proteins in Tau-Brain Extract (TBE) were precipitated by Acetone-TCA and the protein pellet was dissolved with 8M Urea-containing buffer to subject for in-solution digestion. The sample was reduced with 4 mM dithiothreitol, and cysteines were alkylated with 15mM iodoacetamide. The proteins were digested with adding trypsin (1:50 trypsin to protein ratio) for overnight incubation at 37°C. The tryptic peptide samples were desalted with SepPak C18 SPE cartridge and then subject to the SpeedVac dry. After lyophilization, peptides were reconstituted with 0.1% FA in water. Peptides were injected onto a Neo trap cartridge coupled with an analytical column (75 µm ID x 50 cm PepMapTM Neo C18, 2 µm). Samples were separated using a 2 hour of linear gradient of solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) and solvent B (0.1% formic acid in ACN) using a Vanquish Neo UHPLC System coupled to an Orbitrap Exploris 480 Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The resulting tandem MS data was queried for protein identification against the Mus musculus database using Mascot v.2.8.0 (Matrix Science). The following modifications were set as search parameters: peptide mass tolerance at 10 ppm, trypsin enzyme, 3 allowed missed cleavage sites, carbamidomethylated cysteine (static modification), and oxidized methionine, deaminated asparagine/glutamine, and protein N-term acetylation (variable modification). The search results were validated with 1% FDR of protein threshold and 90% of peptide threshold using Scaffold v5.2.1 (Proteome Software).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Alzheimer’s disease, Tau, Circadian, Rev-erbα, Microglia

### Affiliations
WashU
Department of Neurology and Center On Biological Rhythms And Sleep, Washington University in St. Louis School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO USA

### Submitter
Minsoo Son

### Lab Head
Dr Erik Musiek
Department of Neurology and Center On Biological Rhythms And Sleep, Washington University in St. Louis School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO USA


