### Accession
PXD035677

### Title
Identification of stably expressed reference genes for expression studies in Arabidopsis thaliana using mass spectrometry-based label-free quantification

### Description
Arabidopsis thaliana has been used regularly as a model plant in gene expression studies on transcriptional reprogramming upon pathogen infection, such as that by Pseudomonas syringae pv. tomato DC3000 (Pst DC3000), or when subjected to stress hormone treatments including jasmonic acid (JA), salicylic acid (SA), and abscisic acid (ABA). RT-qPCR has been extensively employed to quantitate these gene expression changes. However, the accuracy of the quantitation is largely dependent on the stability of the expressions of reference genes used for normalization. Recently, RNA-seq has been widely used to mine stably expressed genes for use as references in RT-qPCR. However, the amplification step in RNA-seq creates an intrinsic bias against those genes with relatively low expression levels, and therefore does not provide an accurate quantification of all expressed genes. In this study, we employed mass spectrometry-based label-free quantification (LFQ) in proteomic analyses to identify those proteins with abundances unaffected by Pst DC3000 infection. We verified, using RT-qPCR, that the levels of their corresponding mRNAs were also unaffected by Pst DC3000 infection. In addition, using RT-qPCR, we verified that the mRNAs were stably expressed upon stress hormone treatments including JA, SA, and ABA. Results indicated that the candidate genes identified here had stable expressions upon these stresses and are suitable to be used as reference genes for RT-qPCR. Among the 18 candidate reference genes reported in this study, many of them had greater expression stability than the commonly used reference genes, such as ACT7, in previous studies. Here, besides proposing more appropriate reference genes for Arabidopsis expression studies, we also demonstrated the capacity of mass spectrometry-based LFQ to quantify protein abundance and the possibility to extend protein expression studies to the transcript level.

### Sample Protocol
Total protein was extracted from the plant samples according to a previously described protocol (Marx et al., 2016; Cheng et al., 2022), with minor modifications. The plant samples were ground to a fine powder in liquid nitrogen using mortar and pestle. Around 100 mg of the powder was resuspended in five volumes of total protein extraction buffer [290 mM sucrose, 250 mM Tris (pH 7.6), 50 mM Na pyrophosphate, 25 mM EDTA (pH 8.0), 25 mM NaF, 10 mM KCl, 1 mM (NH4)6Mo7O24, 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF) , and 1X Halt™ Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Cat#78430, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA)]. The plant proteins in the extract were precipitated using the chloroform/methanol method (Wessel and Flügge, 1984). After that, the protein pellet was lyzed with five volumes of lysis buffer (w/v) [8 M urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 30 mM NaCl, 20 mM sodium butyrate, 1 mM CaCl2, and 1X Halt™ Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Cat.#78430, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA)]. The protein concentration was determined using the PierceTM BCA Protein Assay Kit (Cat#23225, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Then, 10 μg of each protein sample was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 37°C for 30 min, alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 30 min, and underwent a final reduction with 5 mM DTT at 37°C for 30 min. Then the protein mixture was incubated with trypsin in a ratio of 1/20 (w/w) of the protein amount at 37°C overnight.The peptides resulting from trypsin digestion were desalted using PierceTM C18 Spin Column (Cat.#89873, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA), and each sample was analyzed independently for protein identification using LC-MS/MS

### Data Protocol
The raw data files were generated using Xcalibur software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) for MS/MS identification using Proteome Discoverer v2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) against the A. thaliana protein database (TAIR10) with the built-in SEQUEST HT program at the following settings: MS precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance of 0.02 Da, a maximum of 2 missed trypsin cleavage, fixed N-terminal protein acetylation (+42.011 Da), dynamic cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57.021 Da) and methionine oxidation (+15.995 Da). Peptide validation using the built-in Percolator program was accepted at a false discovery rate (FDR) with a q-value < 0.01. Samples were compared using the label-free quantification (LFQ) method according to the protocol in Proteome Discoverer v2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA).

### Publication Abstract
<i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i> has been used regularly as a model plant in gene expression studies on transcriptional reprogramming upon pathogen infection, such as that by <i>Pseudomonas syringae</i> pv. <i>tomato</i> DC3000 (<i>Pst</i> DC3000), or when subjected to stress hormone treatments including jasmonic acid (JA), salicylic acid (SA), and abscisic acid (ABA). Reverse transcription-quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR) has been extensively employed to quantitate these gene expression changes. However, the accuracy of the quantitation is largely dependent on the stability of the expressions of reference genes used for normalization. Recently, RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) has been widely used to mine stably expressed genes for use as references in RT-qPCR. However, the amplification step in RNA-seq creates an intrinsic bias against those genes with relatively low expression levels, and therefore does not provide an accurate quantification of all expressed genes. In this study, we employed mass spectrometry-based label-free quantification (LFQ) in proteomic analyses to identify those proteins with abundances unaffected by <i>Pst</i> DC3000 infection. We verified, using RT-qPCR, that the levels of their corresponding mRNAs were also unaffected by <i>Pst</i> DC3000 infection. Compared to commonly used reference genes for expression studies in <i>A. thaliana</i> upon <i>Pst</i> DC3000 infection, the candidate reference genes reported in this study generally have a higher expression stability. In addition, using RT-qPCR, we verified that the mRNAs of the candidate reference genes were stably expressed upon stress hormone treatments including JA, SA, and ABA. Results indicated that the candidate genes identified here had stable expressions upon these stresses and are suitable to be used as reference genes for RT-qPCR. Among the 18 candidate reference genes reported in this study, many of them had greater expression stability than the commonly used reference genes, such as <i>ACT7</i>, in previous studies. Here, besides proposing more appropriate reference genes for Arabidopsis expression studies, we also demonstrated the capacity of mass spectrometry-based LFQ to quantify protein abundance and the possibility to extend protein expression studies to the transcript level.

### Keywords
Pathogen infection; jasmonic acid (ja); salicylic acid (sa); abscisic acid (aba); expression study; label-free quantification (lfq); rt-qpcr; reference gene

### Affiliations
Centre for Soybean Research of the State Key Laboratory of Agrobiotechnology and School of Life Sciences, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, China

### Submitter
Sau Shan Susan

### Lab Head
Dr Hon-Ming Lam
Centre for Soybean Research of the State Key Laboratory of Agrobiotechnology and School of Life Sciences, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, China


