### Accession
PXD005105

### Title
Enhanced limonene production in Synechococcus elongatus PCC 7942

### Description
In this study, through computational modeling and synthetic biology tools, we identified and overcame a key flux controlling node in MEP-derived terpene biosynthesis in cyanobacteria. This strategy bypasses the limitation in traditional stepwise metabolic engineering, and led to significantly higher terpene productivity. Moreover, our results revealed photosynthesis limitations during high level of terpene production. We suggest that fine-tuning energy and reductant requirement could be a key factor in establishing a viable ‘non-native’ terpene sink in photosynthetic systems.

### Sample Protocol
Protein was extracted from cyanobacterial cells by sonication. 100 ug of each protein sample was denatured by 8M urea and reduced by DTT, followed by trpsin digestion overnight. A mutidimentional protein identification technology (MudPIT) was used to separate peptides, and LTQ mass spec for peptide analysis.

### Data Protocol
ProLuCID was used to search the peptide info. DTASelect 2.0 was used to filter peptide to minimize the false positive rate to 0.05. PatternLab was used to compare differential expression of protein levels in comparible groups, in which the normalized spectral abundance factor (NSAF) was used to minize sample to sample variations.

### Publication Abstract
Terpenes are the major secondary metabolites produced by plants, and have diverse industrial applications as pharmaceuticals, fragrance, solvents, and biofuels. Cyanobacteria are equipped with efficient carbon fixation mechanism, and are ideal cell factories to produce various fuel and chemical products. Past efforts to produce terpenes in photosynthetic organisms have gained only limited success. Here we engineered the cyanobacterium Synechococcus elongatus PCC 7942 to efficiently produce limonene through modeling guided study. Computational modeling of limonene flux in response to photosynthetic output has revealed the downstream terpene synthase as a key metabolic flux-controlling node in the MEP (2-C-methyl-d-erythritol 4-phosphate) pathway-derived terpene biosynthesis. By enhancing the downstream limonene carbon sink, we achieved over 100-fold increase in limonene productivity, in contrast to the marginal increase achieved through stepwise metabolic engineering. The establishment of a strong limonene flux revealed potential synergy between photosynthate output and terpene biosynthesis, leading to enhanced carbon flux into the MEP pathway. Moreover, we show that enhanced limonene flux would lead to NADPH accumulation, and slow down photosynthesis electron flow. Fine-tuning ATP/NADPH toward terpene biosynthesis could be a key parameter to adapt photosynthesis to support biofuel/bioproduct production in cyanobacteria.

### Keywords
Limonene mep terpene modeling atp/nadph

### Affiliations
Texas A&M University
Department of Plant Pathology and Microbiology, Texas A&M University

### Submitter
XIN WANG

### Lab Head
Dr Joshua S. Yuan & Susie Y. Dai
Department of Plant Pathology and Microbiology, Texas A&M University


