### Accession
PXD007066

### Title
Proteomics Analysis of Human Breast Milk to Assess Breast Cancer Risk

### Description
Detection of breast cancer (BC) in young women is challenging because mammography, the most common tool for detecting BC, is not effective on the dense breast tissue characteristic of young women. In addition to the limited means for detecting their BC, young women face a transient increased risk of pregnancy-associated BC. As a consequence, reproductively active women could benefit significantly from a tool that provides them with accurate risk assessment and early detection of BC. One potential method for detection of BC is biochemical monitoring of proteins and other molecules in bodily fluids such as serum, nipple aspirate, ductal lavage, tear, urine, saliva and breast milk. Of all these fluids, only breast milk provides access to a large volume of breast tissue, in the form of exfoliated epithelial cells, and to the local breast environment, in the form of molecules in the milk. Thus, analysis of breast milk is a non-invasive method with significant potential for assessing BC risk. Here we analyzed human breast milk by mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics to build a biomarker signature for early detection of BC. Ten milk samples from 8 women provided 5 paired-groups (cancer versus control) for analysis of differentially expressed proteins: 2 within woman comparisons (milk from a diseased breast versus a healthy breast of the same woman) and 3 across women comparisons (milk from a woman with cancer versus a woman without cancer). Despite a wide range in the time between milk donation and cancer diagnosis (cancer diagnosis occurred from 1 month before to 24 months after milk donation), the levels of some proteins differed significantly between cancer and control in several of the 5 comparison groups. These pilot data are supportive of the idea that molecular analysis of breast milk will identify proteins informative for early detection and accurate assessment of BC risk, and warrant further research.

### Sample Protocol
Ten breast milk samples from an archived bank at the University of Massachusetts Amherst (UMass-Amherst) were selected for proteomics analysis. The parent study, approved by the UMass-Amherst Institutional Review Board, included secondary analyses at collaborating laboratories. Fresh and/or frozen milk samples were collected along with demographic data from women residing across the United States. Targeted recruitment of women who had a previous biopsy, together with annual follow-up gathering information on breast health, resulted in a subset of women who either had, or developed BC. Breast biopsy reports were obtained and diagnoses were extracted. Eight women, five diagnosed with BC and three with no cancer diagnoses, provided a total of ten breast milk samples. Two women diagnosed with cancer provided a milk sample from both the breast with cancer and the cancer-free breast. The remaining three women diagnosed with BC provided a sample containing a mixture of the milk from the diseased and disease-free breasts. Finally, samples representing a mixture of milk from the left and right breasts were selected from three cancer-free women. Of the five women with BC, three were diagnosed after they donated milk (cancer diagnosis was between 6 and 24 months after milk collection), and two women were diagnosed before they donated milk (cancer diagnosis was between one and two months before milk collection). Importantly, only samples 1 through 4 are each from a single breast.  Samples 5 through 10 are mixtures of milk from the left and right breasts. Unless otherwise stated, reagents and chemicals were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO). Protein concentration was determined using the Bradford assay and for each milk sample 400 μg of protein were separated using 11% SDS-PAGE. Coomassie Blue stained gel bands were then excised and subjected to in-gel trypsin digestion. The gel bands were cut into small pieces, followed by washing, reduction of disulfide bonds using dithiothreitol, and subsequent alkylation of the reduced cysteine residues using iodoacetamide. The gel pieces were then subjected to overnight in-gel trypsin digestion and the resulting peptides were extracted and cleaned using  Zip-Tip reversed phase chromatography (C18 Ziptip™; Millipore, Billerica, MA) to remove possible contaminations. The peptide mixture was then solubilized and analyzed by nanoliquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (nanoLC-MS/MS) using a nanoACQUITY® UPLC coupled with a QTOF Ultima API mass spectrometer (Waters, Milford, MA).

### Data Protocol
The resulting raw data files were processed and converted to pkl (peak list) files using ProteinLynx Global Server (PLGS version 2.4, Waters) software using the following parameters: polynomial order 5 with a threshold of 35% for background subtraction, smoothing of two, with a window of three channels and Savitzky-Golay as smoothing type and top 80% of peaks considered for centroid calculation along with four channels as a minimum peak width at half height. A database search was performed on the pkl files to identify proteins using in-house Mascot server (www.matrixscience.com, Matrix Science, London, UK, version 2.5.1). The Mascot parameters used for database search, were as follows: National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI), NCBI_20150706 (69146588 sequences; 24782014966 residues) database, selected for homo sapiens (human) (312165 sequences), trypsin enzyme, fixed modification= cysteine carbamidomethyl, variable modifications= lysine acetylation, methionine oxidation, serine, threonine and tyrosine phosphorylation, peptide mass tolerance of ±1.3 Da (one 13C isotope), fragment mass tolerance of ±0.8 Da, maximum missed cleavages=1. The outcome files from Mascot were submitted to the Scaffold software (Scaffold version 4.2.1, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) for quantitation and statistical analysis, as well as validation of MS/MS based peptide and protein identification. Peptide threshold of 20% probability was considered as the acceptable identification by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein threshold of 90% probability with minimum 2 peptides identified was considered as acceptable criteria for protein identification using Protein Prophet algorithm. Protein annotation was done with the gene ontology (GO) terms from NCBI (downloaded March 21 and 22, 2016). Fisher’s exact test was applied to compare the relative abundance between two samples (BC and control). Comparisons with p-value <0.05 were considered statistically significant.

### Publication Abstract
Detection of breast cancer (BC) in young women is challenging because mammography, the most common tool for detecting BC, is not effective on the dense breast tissue characteristic of young women. In addition to the limited means for detecting their BC, young women face a transient increased risk of pregnancy-associated BC. As a consequence, reproductively active women could benefit significantly from a tool that provides them with accurate risk assessment and early detection of BC. One potential method for detection of BC is biochemical monitoring of proteins and other molecules in bodily fluids such as serum, nipple aspirate, ductal lavage, tear, urine, saliva and breast milk. Of all these fluids, only breast milk provides access to a large volume of breast tissue, in the form of exfoliated epithelial cells, and to the local breast environment, in the form of molecules in the milk. Thus, analysis of breast milk is a non-invasive method with significant potential for assessing BC risk. Here we analyzed human breast milk by mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics to build a biomarker signature for early detection of BC. Ten milk samples from eight women provided five paired-groups (cancer versus control) for analysis of dysregulatedproteins: two within woman comparisons (milk from a diseased breast versus a healthy breast of the same woman) and three across women comparisons (milk from a woman with cancer versus a woman without cancer). Despite a wide range in the time between milk donation and cancer diagnosis (cancer diagnosis occurred from 1 month before to 24 months after milk donation), the levels of some proteins differed significantly between cancer and control in several of the five comparison groups. These pilot data are supportive of the idea that molecular analysis of breast milk will identify proteins informative for early detection and accurate assessment of BC risk, and warrant further research. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier&#xa0;PXD007066.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Biomarkers, Breast cancer, Mass spectrometry, Breast milk

### Affiliations
Clarkson University

### Submitter
Roshanak Aslebagh

### Lab Head
Dr Costel C. Darie
Clarkson University


