### Accession
PXD041023

### Title
A low-input proteomic analysis of mouse maternal-to-zygotic transition

### Description
Maternal-to-zygotic transition (MZT) is a conserved and fundamental process during which the maternal environment of oocyte transits to the zygotic genome driven expression program, and terminally differentiated oocyte and sperm are reprogrammed to totipotency. It is initiated by maternal mRNAs and proteins during the period of zygotic genome quiescence after fertilization, followed by a gradual switch to zygotic genome activation and accompanied by clearance of maternal RNAs and proteins. A key question for embryonic development is how MZT process is regulated. Here we used a low-input proteomic analysis to measure the proteomic dynamics during early development of mouse maternal-to-zygotic transition.

### Sample Protocol
Oocytes or embryos were collected and lysed in lysis buffer, then CAA and TCEP were added. After incubation for 5 min at 95 °C, reduced and alkylated proteins were incubated with pre-washed magnetic beads, then the protein-binding beads were washed thrice and digested by trypsin. The supernatant containing digested peptides was acidized and transferred to a C18 homemade StageTip for desalting. Clean peptides were lyophilized and resuspended in 0.1% (v/v) formate/ddH2O for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Database searching was processed with Spectronaut® (v16; Biognosys). Raw files were searched against a self-established hybrid spectral library with default params.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse embryo, Zygotic genome activation, Maternal-to-zygotic transition, Mouse oocyte, Low-input proteomic technology

### Affiliations
Center for Single-Cell Omics, School of Public Health, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine
Center for Single-Cell Omics, School of Public Health, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China

### Submitter
Lei Gu

### Lab Head
Dr Chen Li
Center for Single-Cell Omics, School of Public Health, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China


