### Accession
PXD004271

### Title
Nucleation of DNA Repair Factors by FOXA1 Links DNA Demethylation and Transcriptional Pioneering

### Description
We report that the winged helix transcription factor FOXA1 is unexpectedly associated with components of single and double stranded-DNA repair complexes. Biochemical studies and high-throughput approaches validated the hierarchical composition of this FOXA1-nucleated machinery and revealed the dependency on FOXA1 for global targeting of the key repair polymerase POLB. Genome-wide DNA methylomes at single-base resolution demonstrated that FOXA1-DNA repair complex is functionally linked to DNA demethylation in a lineage specific fashion. Loss-of-function studies indicate that a significant portion of FOXA1-bound regions display localized reestablishment of methylation and that the subsets with most consistent hypermethylation are represented by active promoters and enhancers that also exhibit the greatest depletion of POLB following FOXA1 removal. Consistently, forced expression of FOXA1 commits its binding sites to an active DNA demethylation in a POLB dependent manner. Finally, we showed that FOXA1-associated DNA demethylation is tightly coupled with genomic targeting of estrogen receptor and estrogen responsiveness. Together, our results link FOXA1-associated DNA demethylation to its transcriptional pioneering.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa cells expressing FLAG-FOXA1 were lysed in buffer A (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5% NP40, 50 mM NaF, 1mM DTT, 0.5% Sodium deoxycholate, 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF) plus protease inhibitors (Roche)) and incubated with anti-FLAG M2 beads (Sigma) for 2 h at 4°C. After washing with buffer B (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5% NP40) for three times, FLAG peptide (Sigma) was used to elute the protein complex from the beads following manufacturer’s instructions.The eluted protein complex was then collected and resolved on SDS-polyacrylamide gel, silver stained, and subjected to LC-MS/MS for sequencing and data analysis.

### Data Protocol
The raw data was processed with Bioworks 3.3.1 software following manufacturer's instructions.

### Publication Abstract
FOXA1 functions in epigenetic reprogramming and is described as a 'pioneer factor'. However, exactly how FOXA1 achieves these remarkable biological functions is not fully understood. Here we report that FOXA1 associates with DNA repair complexes and is required for genomic targeting of DNA polymerase &#x3b2; (POLB) in human cells. Genome-wide DNA methylomes demonstrate that the FOXA1 DNA repair complex is functionally linked to DNA demethylation in a lineage-specific fashion. Depletion of FOXA1 results in localized reestablishment of methylation in a large portion of FOXA1-bound regions, and the regions with the most consistent hypermethylation exhibit the greatest loss of POLB and are represented by active promoters and enhancers. Consistently, overexpression of FOXA1 commits its binding sites to active DNA demethylation in a POLB-dependent manner. Finally, FOXA1-associated DNA demethylation is tightly coupled with estrogen receptor genomic targeting and estrogen responsiveness. Together, these results link FOXA1-associated DNA demethylation to transcriptional pioneering by FOXA1.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-msms

### Affiliations
Peking University Health Science Center

### Submitter
Yu Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Yongfeng Shang
Peking University Health Science Center


