### Accession
PXD015269

### Title
High-resolution spatial proteome map of Toxoplasma gondii extracellular tachyzoite

### Description
Apicomplexans, such as malaria-causing Plasmodium species, Toxoplasma, and Cryptosporidium, are parasitic protists that invade cells of virtually every animal, including humans. Despite the great burden on human healthcare and global economy, and the role in the environment, our understanding of the biology of these microorganisms is still very limited. Apicomplexans have evolved a complex cell architecture featuring a range of subcellular compartments, both common to all eukaryotes and unique to the phylum, that enable invasion into the host cell and exploiting its resources for growth and replication, rendering apicomplexans such remarkably successful parasites. In such an intricate subcellular landscape, protein function and location in the cell are tightly linked, which is why localising proteins in the cell is a major strategy in the apicomplexan research. Yet, the majority of proteins in model apicomplexans is unknown. In this project, a state-of-the-art spatial proteomics technology hyperLOPIT has been successfully adapted and applied to a model apicomplexan Toxoplasma gondii. Three independent hyperLOPIT experiments have been conducted on T. gondii strain RH extracellular tachyzoites, the invasive stage of the parasite's life cycle responsible for acute infection, providing the first cell-wide protein location atlas of any apicomplexan. This provides revolutionary insight into the apicomplexan cell organization and biology, including greatly expanded proteomes of secretory invasion organelles, the range of adaptive and regulatory responses of the organelles, and the subcellular distribution of evolutionary selection pressure, innovation, and conservation.

### Sample Protocol
Toxoplasma gondii strain RH tachyzoites were maintained in a culture of human foreskin fibroblasts (HFF) following a standard routine. The parasites were allowed to egress naturally, purified by filtration, washed by centrifugation, and mechanically disrupted by nitrogen cavitation. Subcellular membranes and particles were enriched and separated from the soluble and cytosolic proteins by ultracentrifugation over a discontinuous density gradient of iodixanol. The membrane fraction was further fractionated by equilibrium ultracentrifugation in a continuous linear pre-formed density gradient of iodixanol, resulting in distinct organelle protein abundance distributions. Proteins from the gradient fractions and the supernatant fraction enriched in soluble and cytosolic proteins were extracted, reduced and alkylated, and digested with trypsin. The resulting peptide digests were labelled with TMT10plex reagents. The TMT-tagged peptide samples were mixed and fractionated by high-pH reversed-phase (RP) UPLC, yielding 15-18 fractions that were then analysed in a 2-hour run by nanoflow low-pH RP-LC hyphenated on-line with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent acquisition mode with an SPS-MS3 method for peptide fragmentation. In total, three independent hyperLOPIT experiments were carried out, each time deliberately introducing minor modifications to the cell disruption and fractionation steps to collectively account for a broader range of variance utilised in the data analysis step for protein localisation mapping.

### Data Protocol
Raw LC-MS data were processed in Proteome Discoverer v2.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide-spectrum matching (PSM) was performed against annotated protein sequences of T. gondii strain ME49 retrieved from the ToxoDB.org database (release 29, downloaded on 12.10.2016; https://toxodb.org/common/downloads/release-29/TgondiiME49/fasta/data/ToxoDB-29_TgondiiME49_AnnotatedProteins.fasta), and common contaminant proteins from the common Repository of Adventitious Proteins (cRAP) v1.0 (https://www.thegpm.org/crap/) using Mascot server v2.6.0 (Matrix Science). Percolator v2.05 was used to assess the false discovery rate (FDR) of PSMs. TMT10plex reporter ion intensity quantitation was performed by Proteome Discoverer’s “Reporter Ion Quantifier” node using Most Confident Centroid method and 20 ppm mass tolerance for peak integration. PSM to peptide to protein aggregation was done by Proteome Discovered. Protein-level data containing only full TMT10plex quantitation data and Medium or High FDR level were exported and analysed in the R software for statistical data analysis using Bioconductor packages MSnbase (v2.8.3) and pRoloc (v1.22.1).

### Publication Abstract
Apicomplexan parasites cause major human disease and food insecurity. They owe their considerable success to highly specialized cell compartments and structures. These adaptations drive their recognition, nondestructive penetration, and elaborate reengineering of the host's cells to promote their growth, dissemination, and the countering of host defenses. The evolution of unique apicomplexan cellular compartments is concomitant with vast proteomic novelty. Consequently, half of apicomplexan proteins are unique and uncharacterized. Here, we determine the steady-state subcellular location of thousands of proteins simultaneously within the globally prevalent apicomplexan parasite Toxoplasma gondii. This provides unprecedented comprehensive molecular definition of these unicellular eukaryotes and their specialized compartments, and these data reveal the spatial organizations of protein expression and function, adaptation to hosts, and the underlying evolutionary trajectories of these pathogens.

### Keywords
Apicomplexa, Parasite, Subcellular, Organelles, Protist, Localisation, Toxoplasma gondii, Tmt10plex, Spatial, Compartments, Machine learning, Sub-cellular, Sps-ms3, Localization

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge
Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, UK

### Submitter
Konstantin Barylyuk

### Lab Head
Dr Ross F. Waller
Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, UK


