### Accession
PXD014636

### Title
GIGANTEA recruits deubiquitylases, UBP12 and UBP13, to regulate accumulation of the ZTL photoreceptor complex

### Description
ZEILUPE (ZTL), a blue light photoreceptor with E3 ubiquitin ligase activity, communicates end-of-day light conditions to the circadian clock. To function properly, ZTL protein must accumulate but not destablilize target clock transcription factors before dusk, while in the dark ZTL mediates degradation of target proteins. It is not clear how ZTL can accumulate to high levels in the ligh while its targets remain stable. Two deubiquitylating enzymes, UBIQUITIN-SPECIFIC PROTEASE 12 and UBIQUITIN-SPECIFIC PROTEASE 13 (UBP12 and UBP13), which regulate colock period and protein ubiquitylation in a manner opposite to ZTL, were shown to associate with the ZTL protein complex. Here we demonstrate that the ZTL light-dependent interacting partner GIGANTEA (GI), recruites UBP12 and UBP13 to the ZTL photoreceptor complex.

### Sample Protocol
Twenty-one-day-old soil-grown plants were entrained in 12 h light/12 h dark at 22oC for 7 days prior to harvest. Leaf tissues were collected at 9 h after dawn for subsequent IP-MS. One-step IP-MS and MS spectral analysis were carried out as documented (Lee et al 2018 Plant Physiology 177:1170-1186) with minor changes.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS spectral were searched against the SwissProt_2017 tax:Arabidopsis thaliana (thale cress) database (February 2017) using MASCOT MS/MS ion search engine version 2.6.0 with the following parameters: up to 2 missed cleavages; variable modifications included Acetyl (K), GlyGly (K), Oxidation (M), Phospho (ST), Phospho (Y); Peptide tolerance ± 10ppm; MS/MS tolerance ± 5 Da; peptide charge 2+ and 3+.

### Publication Abstract
ZEITLUPE (ZTL), a photoreceptor with E3 ubiquitin ligase activity, communicates end-of-day light conditions to the plant circadian clock. It still remains unclear how ZTL protein accumulates in the light but does not destabilize target proteins before dusk. Two deubiquitylating enzymes, UBIQUITIN-SPECIFIC PROTEASE 12 and 13 (UBP12 and UBP13), which regulate clock period and protein ubiquitylation in a manner opposite to ZTL, associate with the ZTL protein complex. Here we demonstrate that the ZTL interacting partner, GIGANTEA (GI), recruits UBP12 and UBP13 to the ZTL photoreceptor complex. We show that loss of UBP12 and UBP13 reduces ZTL and GI protein levels through a post-transcriptional mechanism. Furthermore, a ZTL target protein is unable to accumulate to normal levels in ubp mutants. This demonstrates that the ZTL photoreceptor complex contains both ubiquitin-conjugating and -deconjugating enzymes, and that these two opposing enzyme types are necessary for circadian clock pacing. This shows that deubiquitylating enzymes are a core element of circadian clocks, conserved from plants to animals.

### Keywords
Circadian clock, Gigantea, Ubp, Arabidopsis, Zeitlupe, Deubiquitylases

### Affiliations
Yale University

### Submitter
Man Wah Li

### Lab Head
Dr Joshua M Gendron
Yale University


