### Accession
PXD018016

### Title
The RHOA-specific GTPase activating protein ARHGAP45 controls chemokine-driven migration of naïve T and B cells and of hematopoietic progenitors across blood endothelium

### Description
T cell recirculation and organ entry involve diapedesis through cytoskeleton remodeling. Part of this process is controlled by guanosine exchange factors (GEFs) and GTPase activating proteins (GAPs) that promote active and inactive forms of Rho family of GTPases. Among GAPs, we identified the ARHGAP45, also known as HMHA1 (human minor histocompatibility antigen 1) and determined its interactome by affinity purification coupled to quantitative mass spectrometry (AP-MS) in Jurkat cells. This dataset contains results of AP-MS of Jurkat cells expressing One-Strep-tagged (OST) ARHGAP45 prior to and after TCR stimulation. Each AP-MS purification of OST- protein is associated with a corresponding control (WT Jurkat) at the same time point of stimulation. For each time point, three independent biological replicates were performed and each biological replicate was analyzed in duplicate by mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
40x106 of WT or ARHGAP45OST Jurkat cells were left unstimulated or stimulated for 2 and 5 min with anti-CD3 antibody (UTHC1) at 37°C.  Stimulation was stopped by the addition of lysis buffer (100 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 270 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 20% glycerol and 0.2% n-dodecyl-β-maltoside) supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitors. After 10 min of incubation on ice, cell lysates were centrifuged at 20,000g for 5 min at 4 °C. Postnuclear lysates were incubated with StrepTactin beads for 1.5hrs at 4°C. Beads were washes five times with lysis buffer and associated protein complexes were subsequently eluted by addition of D-Biotin (2.5 mM). Protein extracts were loaded on NuPAGE 4–12% bis-Tris acrylamide gels (Life Technologies) to stack proteins in a single band that was stained with Imperial Blue (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and cut from the gel. Gels pieces were submitted to an in-gel trypsin digestion (Shevchenko et al., 1996). Peptides were extracted from the gel and dried under vacuum. Samples were reconstituted with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in 4% acetonitrile and analyzed by liquid chromatography (LC)-tandem MS (MS/MS) using a Q Exactive Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap online with a nanoLC Ultimate 3000 chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific™, San Jose, CA). For each biological sample, 5 microliters corresponding to 33 % of digested sample were injected in duplicate on the system. After pre-concentration and washing of the sample on a Acclaim PepMap 100 column (C18, 2 cm × 100 μm i.d. 100 A pore size, 5 μm particle size), peptides were separated on a LC EASY-Spray column (C18, 50 cm × 75 μm i.d., 100 A, 2 µm, 100A particle size) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min with a two steps linear gradient (2-22% acetonitrile/H20; 0.1 % formic acid for 100 min and 22-32% acetonitrile/H20; 0.1 % formic acid for 20 min). For peptides ionization in the EASYSpray source, spray voltage was set at 1.9 kV and the capillary temperature at 250 °C. All samples were measured in a data dependent acquisition mode. Each run was preceded by a blank MS run in order to monitor system background. The peptide masses were measured in a survey full scan (scan range 375-1500 m/z, with 70 K FWHM resolution at m/z=400, target AGC value of 3.00×106 and maximum injection time of 100 ms). Following the high-resolution full scan in the Orbitrap, the 10 most intense data-dependent precursor ions were successively fragmented in HCD cell and measured in Orbitrap (normalized collision energy of 25 %, activation time of 10 ms, target AGC value of 1.00×105, intensity threshold 1.00×104 maximum injection time 100 ms, isolation window 2 m/z, 17.5 K FWHM resolution, scan range 200 to 2000 m/z). Dynamic exclusion was implemented with a repeat count of 1 and exclusion duration of 20 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were processed with MaxQuant software (v.1.6.3.4) for database search with the Andromeda search engine and quantitative analysis. Data were searched against the Homo sapiens entries of the UniProtKB protein database (release Swiss-Prot reviewed 2019_01, 20,412 entries), and the set of common contaminants provided by MaxQuant. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification, whereas oxidation of methionine, protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Specificity of trypsin digestion was set for cleavage after K or R residues, and two missed trypsin cleavage sites were allowed. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the first search and 4.5 ppm for the main Andromeda database search. The mass tolerance in tandem MS mode was set to 0.5 Da. Minimum peptide length was set to seven amino acids, and minimum number of unique or razor peptides was set to 1 for validation. The I = L option of MaxQuant was enabled to avoid erroneous assignation of undistinguishable peptides belonging to very homologous proteins. Andromeda results were validated by the target decoy approach using a reverse database, with a FDR value set at 1% at both peptide sequence match and protein level. For label-free relative quantification of the samples, the match between runs option of MaxQuant was enabled with a match time window of 1 min, to allow cross-assignment of MS features detected in the different runs, after alignment of the runs with a time window of 20 min. Protein quantification was based on unique and razor peptides. The minimum ratio count was set to 1 for label-free quantification calculation, and computation of the iBAQ metric was also enabled.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Arhgap45, Interactome

### Affiliations
Life Sciences
Centre d'Immunologie de Marseille, Aix-Marseille Univerité, Inserm, CNRS, Centre d'immunophénomique, Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de Marseille, CRCM, Institut Paoli Calmettes, MARSEILLE PROTEOMIQUE

### Submitter
Luc Camoin

### Lab Head
Dr Marseille Proteomics
Centre d'Immunologie de Marseille, Aix-Marseille Univerité, Inserm, CNRS, Centre d'immunophénomique, Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de Marseille, CRCM, Institut Paoli Calmettes, MARSEILLE PROTEOMIQUE


