### Accession
PXD014485

### Title
Thermal proteome profiling of anti-HEV compound

### Description
We performed thermal proteome profiling (TPP) to identify targets of a new anti hepatitis E virus compound.

### Sample Protocol
After heating, lysing and extraction of remaining soluble protein fraction (with a modified thermal proteome profiling protocol - Savitski et al., Science (2014), samples were processed with a modified SP3 protocol, digested using trypsin and labeled with TMT. Shotgun proteomics using a Q-Exactive Orbitrap was then performed.

### Data Protocol
TMT quantification was used, by using the isobarquant python package (Franken et al., Nat Protoc (2015)), and Mascot 2.4 was used for protein identification. Search parameters: trypsin, missed cleavages 3, peptide tolerance 10ppm, 0.02Da for MS/MS tolerance. Fixed modifications were carbamidomethyl on cysteines and TMT10plex on lysine. Variable modifications included acetylation on protein N-terminus, oxidation of methionine and TMT10plex on peptide N-termini. The R programming language was used to analyze the output data.

### Publication Abstract
Hepatitis E virus (HEV) causes 14 million infections and 60,000 deaths per year globally, with immunocompromised persons and pregnant women experiencing severe symptoms. Although ribavirin can be used to treat chronic hepatitis E, toxicity in pregnant patients and the emergence of resistant strains are major concerns. Therefore there is an imminent need for effective HEV antiviral agents. The aims of this study were to develop a drug screening platform and to discover novel approaches to targeting steps within the viral life cycle. We developed a screening platform for molecules inhibiting HEV replication and selected a candidate, isocotoin. Isocotoin inhibits HEV replication through interference with heat shock protein 90 (HSP90), a host factor not previously known to be involved in HEV replication. Additional work is required to understand the compound's translational potential, however this suggests that HSP90-modulating molecules, which are in clinical development as anti-cancer agents, may be promising therapies against HEV.

### Keywords
Drugs, Thermal proteome profiling, Target engagement

### Affiliations
Princeton University
European Molecular Biology Laboratory

### Submitter
Andre Mateus

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Ploss
Princeton University


