### Accession
PXD016490

### Title
Proteome and Ubiquitome Changes during Rose Petal Senescence

### Description
Petal senescence involves numerous programmed changes in biological and biochemical processes. Ubiquitination plays a critical role in protein degradation, a hallmark of organ senescence. Therefore, we investigated changes in the proteome and ubiquitome of senescing rose (Rosa hybrida) petals to better understand their involvement in petal senescence. Of 3859 proteins quantified in senescing petals, 1198 were up-regulated and 726 were down-regulated during senescence. We identified 2208 ubiquitinated sites including 384 with increased ubiquitination in 298 proteins and 1035 with decreased ubiquitination in 674 proteins. Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) analyses revealed that proteins related to peptidases in proteolysis and autophagy pathways were enriched in the proteome, suggesting that protein degradation and autophagy play important roles in petal senescence. In addition, many transporter proteins accumulated in senescing petals, and several transport processes were enriched in the ubiquitome, indicating that transport of substances is associated with petal senescence and regulated by ubiquitination. Moreover, several components of the brassinosteroid (BR) biosynthesis and signaling pathways were significantly altered at the protein and ubiquitination levels, implying that BR plays important roles in petal senescence. Our data provide a comprehensive view of rose petal senescence at the posttranslational level.

### Sample Protocol
Protein Extraction Petal samples were ground in liquid nitrogen and transferred to 5-mL centrifuge tubes. Fourfold volume of lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Triton X-100, 10 mM dithiothreitol, 1% protease inhibitor (Calbiochem)，deubiquitinase inhibitors PR-619 (Sigma), and 2 mM EDTA) was added to the cell powder, and mixtures were sonicated three times on ice using a high-intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz). Sonicated products were centrifuged at 20,000 g at 4°C for 10 min to remove remaining debris. The supernatant was collected, and a final concentration of 20% (v/v) trichloroacetic acid (TCA) was added. The mixtures were kept at 4°C for 2 h and then centrifuged at 12,000 g at 4°C for 3 min; the supernatant was discarded, and the precipitate was washed three times with precooled acetone. Finally, the precipitate was dissolved in urea (8 M) and the protein concentration was determined with a BCA kit (Beyotime Biotechnology) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Trypsin Digestion Dithiothreitol (final concentration of 5 mM) was added to the protein solution and reduced for 30 min at 56°C. Iodoacetamide (final concentration of 11 mM) was then added and kept in darkness for 15 min at 23 °C. Protein samples were diluted with NH4HCO3 (100 mM) to a urea concentration of <2 M. Protein samples were first digested using a 1:50 trypsin/protein ratio at 37°C overnight and then digested using a 1:100 trypsin/protein ratio for 4 h. HPLC Fractionation Tryptic peptides were fractionated by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using an Agilent 300 extend C18 column (5-μm particles, 4.6-mm i.d., and 250-mm length) for proteome analysis, and a Thermo betasil C18 column (5-μm particles, 10-mm i.d., and 250-mm length) for ubiquitome analysis. Briefly, peptides were first separated with a gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile (pH 9.0) over 60 min into 60 fractions. The peptides were then combined into 10 fractions (proteome assay) or 4 fractions (ubiquitome assay) and dried by vacuum freezing.  Affinity Enrichment Since ubiquitinated proteins have a distinct di-Gly remnant (K-ε-GG), a high-quality anti-K-ε-GG antibody (PTM Biolabs) was used to enrich ubiquitinated proteins. Tryptic peptides were dissolved in immunoprecipitation buffer (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, and 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0). Dissolved peptides were incubated with prewashed anti-K-ε-GG antibody beads (lot number PTM1104, PTM Bio) and gently shaken at 4°C overnight. The beads were then washed four times with immunoprecipitation buffer and twice with deionized water. Finally, the bound peptides were eluted three times with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and the eluent was dried by vacuum freezing. For LC-MS/MS analysis, the resulting peptides were desalted with C18 ZipTips (Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. LC-MS/MS Analysis Tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A) and loaded onto a reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length and 75-μm i.d.). A gradient was achieved with solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 90% acetonitrile) increasing from 5% to 25% in 26 min, 25% to 40% in 8 min, and 25% to 80% in 3 min, and then held at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 350 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 ultraperformance liquid chromatography (UPLC) system (ThermoFisher Scientific).  Peptides were subjected to a nanospray ionization source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in a Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for full scan. Intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were selected for MS/MS using a normalized collision energy (NCE) setting of 28, and fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan and 20 MS/MS scans was applied with 15.0-s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control was set at 5E4.

### Data Protocol
Database Search MS/MS data were processed using the Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the rose (Rosa chinensis) genome database (https://lipm-browsers.toulouse.inra.fr/pub/RchiOBHm-V2/) concatenated with a reverse decoy database.  For proteomic peptides, trypsin/P was specified as the cleavage enzyme allowing up to two missing cleavages. Minimum length of peptides was set as 7, and the number of maximum modifications was set as 5. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in first search and 5 ppm in main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as the fixed modification. Oxidation on Met and acetylation on the N terminus of proteins were specified as variable modifications. The label-free quantification method was LFQ, false discovery rate (FDR) was adjusted to <1%, and minimum score for peptides was set to >40. For ubiquitinated peptides, trypsin/P was specified as the cleavage enzyme allowing up to four missing cleavages. Minimum length of peptides was set as 7, and the number of maximum labeled amino acids was set as 5. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as the fixed modification. Gly on Lys modification, oxidation on Met, and acetylation on the N terminus of proteins were specified as variable modifications. The label-free quantification method was LFQ, FDR was adjusted to <1%, and minimum score for modified peptides was set to >40.

### Publication Abstract
Petal senescence involves numerous programmed changes in biological and biochemical processes. Ubiquitination plays a critical role in protein degradation, a hallmark of organ senescence. Therefore, we investigated changes in the proteome and ubiquitome of senescing rose (<i>Rosa hybrida</i>) petals to better understand their involvement in petal senescence. Of 3859 proteins quantified in senescing petals, 1198 were upregulated, and 726 were downregulated during senescence. We identified 2208 ubiquitinated sites, including 384 with increased ubiquitination in 298 proteins and 1035 with decreased ubiquitination in 674 proteins. Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) analyses revealed that proteins related to peptidases in proteolysis and autophagy pathways were enriched in the proteome, suggesting that protein degradation and autophagy play important roles in petal senescence. In addition, many transporter proteins accumulated in senescing petals, and several transport processes were enriched in the ubiquitome, indicating that transport of substances is associated with petal senescence and regulated by ubiquitination. Moreover, several components of the brassinosteroid (BR) biosynthesis and signaling pathways were significantly altered at the protein and ubiquitination levels, implying that BR plays an important role in petal senescence. Our data provide a comprehensive view of rose petal senescence at the posttranslational level.

### Keywords
Rose hybrid; petal senescence; proteome; ubiquitination

### Affiliations
China Agricultural University

### Submitter
Jingyun Lu

### Lab Head
Dr Chao Ma
China Agricultural University


