### Accession
PXD021063

### Title
Essential role of translation factor eIF5a in cytokine and cell cycle regulation in primary mouse CD8 T lymphocyte

### Description
Translation of specific mRNAs is tightly regulated in primary T cells to ensure correct timing and precise delivery of protein syntheses in response to environmental cues. Translation factor eIF5a is known to be important for protein synthesis and is expected to regulate translation of certain difficult mRNA motifs such as consecutive prolines. Functional eIF5a is dynamically regulated upon T cell activation largely through addition of hypusine, a unique post-translational modification, to the mature protein and remarkably the eIF5a family are the only proteins to carry this modification. Here we show that knockout of eIF5a and its hypusination pathway affected both global and gene-specific protein synthesis, especially regulators of cytokine production and cell cycle progression. Furthermore, mRNA targets regulated by eIF5a in activated mouse primary CD8 T cells were systematically identified. AHA-labelled nascent proteins in GC7 (Dhps inhibitor)-treated and eIF5a knockout OT-1 cells (generated using CRSPR-Cas9) were measured using LC-MS. Authors: Thomas CJ Tan, Van Kelly, Xiaoyan Zhou, Tony Ly and Rose Zamoyska

### Sample Protocol
Cells were transferred to IL-2-containing RPMI media in the absence of methionine, at a concentration of 5 x 106 cells/mL. Cells were starved of methionine for one hour, before 4-Azido-L-homoalanine HCl (L-AHA) (Jena Bioscience) was added to the media (final concentration 40µM) and the labelling lasted for 2 hours at 37°C. Cells were then fixed in 2% formaldehyde for 20 min and permed with ice-cold 90% methanol for 1 hour. Staining was done using anti-eIF5a-C-terminus antibody (Abcam) and anti-rabbit secondary antibody at AlexaFluor 647 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Sorting was conducted using FACS Aria (BD). Total proteins from 7.5 x 106 fresh frozen cell samples (non-AHA-labelled, GC7 and Mock, 4 samples each) were extracted with the CHAPS Lysis buffer from Click Chemistry Capture Kit (Jena Bioscience). For sorted fixed cells, total proteins from 10 x 106 cells were extracted using 310µL of 200mM Tris, 0.5% SDS, 200mM NaCl, pH8.0, with brief sonications to disturb the cell pellet, followed by reverse crosslinking at 95°C for 45 min and cooled on ice, and then mixed with equal volume of 16M Urea to give 8M Urea finally. Extracted proteins were incubated overnight with Alkyne agarose beads (Jena Bioscience), and downstream preparations were done using Click Chemistry Capture Kit with manufacturer’s procedures. Purified trypsin-digested nascent peptides were desalted over C18. Tryptic peptides derived from pooled GC7 and Mock cells were used to generate a fractionated library using high pH reverse phase chromatography with concatenation into 12 fractions. All samples were analysed by LCMS with a 120min gradient over a 75um x 50cm easyspray C18 column. LC was coupled to an Orbitrap Elite where data was acquired with 120k resolution MS1 followed by top 20 CID MS2 in the ion trap.

### Data Protocol
Data was analysed using MaxQuant version 1.6.2.6. Match-between-runs was enabled to transfer identifications from the library and between samples. Full parameters can be found in the mqpar.xml file.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Eif5a, Cytokine, Proliferation, Lymphocyte, Hypusine

### Affiliations
Wellcome Centre for Cell Biology, University of Edinburgh
University of Edinburgh

### Submitter
Van Kelly

### Lab Head
Dr Tony Ly
Wellcome Centre for Cell Biology, University of Edinburgh


