### Accession
PXD025689

### Title
Investigation of post-translational histone modifications in pheochromocytomas and paragangliomas

### Description
Pheochromocytomas and paragangliomas (PPGLs) are neuroendocrine tumours affecting a range of body sites and have the highest degree of heritability of any cancer type.  SDHA, SDHB, SDHC, SDHD and SDHAF2 (collectively SDHx) code for subunits of succinate dehydrogenase, an enzyme complex in the tricarboxylic cycle that converts succinate to fumarate. Mutations in all SDHx genes play a role in PPGL pathogenesis and completely abolish succinate dehydrogenase enzymatic activity causing intracellular accumulation of oncometabolites which competitively inhibit 2-oxoglutarate-dependent oxygenases. This is a family of enzymes includes TET DNA demethylases and Jumonji C (JmjC) domain-containing histone demethylates. We and others have found that the inhibition of DNA demethylation leads to profound global DNA hypermethylation which influences expression of genes responsible for important clinical characteristics of these tumours but cannot explain the full spectrum of transcriptomic changes.  We profiled histone PMTs to complement DNA methylation data and fully characterise the epigenome of these tumours.

### Sample Protocol
FFPE blocks containing relevant tumour tissue were selected by an expert endocrine histopathologist. 5–10 μm sections were cut on a Leica microtome and mounted on SuperFrost microscopy slides (Thermo Fisher Scientific) or 1.0 polyethylene naphthalate (PEN) membrane slides (Carl Zeiss). Normal adrenal medulla tissue from one FFPE specimen of a patient with RET PCC was used as control. Tissue pieces obtained by LMD were transferred at the bottom of the tubes through centrifugation and histones were enriched. The yield of histones was estimated by SDS-PAGE gel by comparison with known amounts of recombinant histone H3.1, following protein detection with colloidal Comassie staining. Approximately 2-4 μg of histones were mixed with a heavy-labelled histone super-SILAC mix, which was generated as previously described and used as an internal standard for quantification. The samples were separated on a 17% SDS-PAGE gel and in-gel digested. A band corresponding to the histone octamer (H3, H4, H2A, H2B) was excised, chemically acylated with propionic anydride and in-gel digested with trypsin. After elution, the samples were derivatized with phenyl isocyanate. Peptide mixtures were separated by reversed-phase chromatography on an EASY-Spray column (Thermo Fisher Scientic), 25-cm long (inner diameter 75 µm, PepMap C18, 2 µm particles), which was connected online to a Q Exactive HF instrument through an EASY-Spray™ Ion Source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid (FA) in ddH2O and solvent B was 80% ACN plus 0.1% FA. Peptides were injected in an aqueous 1% TFA solution at a flow rate of 500 nl/min and were separated with a 50-min linear gradient of 10–45%. The Q Exactive instruments were operated in the data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. Survey full scan MS spectra (m/z 300–1350) were analyzed in the Orbitrap detector with a resolution of 60,000-70,000 at m/z 200. The 10 most intense peptide ions with charge states comprised between 2 and 4 were sequentially isolated to a target value for MS1 of 3×106 and fragmented by HCD with a normalized collision energy setting of 28%. The maximum allowed ion accumulation times were 20 msec for full scans and 80 msec for MS/MS, and the target value for MS/MS was set to 1×105. The dynamic exclusion time was set to 10 sec, and the standard mass spectrometric conditions for all experiments were as follows: spray voltage of 1.8 kV, no sheath and auxiliary gas flow.

### Data Protocol
The acquired RAW data were analyzed using Epiprofile 2.0 (PMID: 29790754), selecting the SILAC option, followed by manual validation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Histone post-translational modifications, Pheochromocytoma, Paraganglioma

### Affiliations
European Institute of Oncology
Istituto Europeo di Oncologia

### Submitter
Roberta Noberini

### Lab Head
Dr Tiziana Bonaldi
European Institute of Oncology


