### Accession
PXD029966

### Title
Establishment of fetomaternal tolerance via glycan-mediated B cell suppression

### Description
The immune system must be able to distinguish self from non-self. During pregnancy, the mother’s immune system does not recognize the placenta as foreign because proteins expressed by tropbholasts, the placental cells that interface with the maternal immune system, do not activate maternal T cells. These activation defects have been previously attributed to suppression by regulatory T cells, while mechanisms of maternal B cell tolerance to trophoblast antigens have not been identified. In this study, we provide evidence that glycan-mediated B cell suppression plays a key role in establishing fetomaternal tolerance in mice. We find that trophoblast antigen-specific B cells are profoundly suppressed via CD22/LYN inhibitory signaling, in turn implicating the antigens’ sialic acids as key suppressive determinants. We also find that B cells mediate the antigen’s MHCII-restricted presentation to CD4 T cells, leading to T cell suppression. The specific goal of the mass spectrometry undertaking deposited here was to identify sialylated “true” placental-derived proteins present in the human and mouse serum proteome during pregnancy. Overall, our findings reveal protein glycosylation as a fundamental feature of placental “self-recognition” and may have relevance to pregnancy complications and tumor immune evasion. Furthermore, we anticipate these findings will enhance synthetic efforts to harness glycans to control antigen-specific immune responses in the treatment of autoimmune diseases.

### Sample Protocol
Serum samples (200 µL aliquots) from three non-pregnant and three term women as well as three virgin and three term female mice were were processed according to the protocol by Drake et al. (https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ab.2010.08.010) with some modifications.  The samples were first spiked with AEBSF (to a final concentration of 100 µM), E-64 (10 µM), Pepstatin A (10 µM), Bestatin (10 µM) and EDTA (5 mM) to inhibit protease activity. The most abundant components in the human sera were removed with MARS Hu-14 HPLC column (4.6 × 100 mm, Agilent).  The flow-through fractions were buffer exchanged into 250 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 10 µM Pepstatin A, 10 µM Bestatin using spin filter (5 mL capacity 3000 MWCO Amicon Ultra, Millipore), concentrated to the filter’s stop volume (200 µL) and protein concentrations measured using BCA assay (Thermo Scientific).  The retentates were made 3.75 M in urea and reduced and alkylated with 10 mM TCEP and 40 mM iodoacetamide.  The samples were then diluted, and CaCl2 and trypsin (Thermo Scientific) were added such that the final concentrations are as follows: 1.5 M urea, 250 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 2 mM CaCl2, 1:50 trypsin-protein ratio, and total protein concentration 3 mg/mL.  The samples were digested on the filter for 18 h at room temperature, the peptides recovered and cleaned-up with SOLA C18 SPE cartridges (Thermo Scientific) and quantified with NanoDrop (Thermo Scientific).  The mouse sera were processed similarly after removal of the most abundant components with MARS Ms-3 spin cartridge (Agilent). For sialoglycopeptide analysis, identical fractions of the six human peptide samples (corresponding to 250 µg peptides from average non-pregnant sample) were loaded into SNA lectin agarose column (0.25 mL bed volume, Vector Laboratories) in 25 mM Tris (pH 7.4), 50 mM NaCl, 10 mM CaCl2, 10 mM MgCl2 buffer to capture sialoglycopeptides, and the bound materials eluted first with 500 mM lactose and then with 200 mM 500 mM lactose, 200 mM acetic acid.  The eluted sialoglycopeptides were neutralized with 2 M Tris and cleaned up using SOLA C18 cartridges.  The eluates were dried in vacuum, dissolved in 15 µL of 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and 5 µL of PNGase F (500,000 U/mL, glycerol free, New England Biolabs) was added.  The mixture was incubated at 37 C for 24 h to release the N-glycans, after which the PNGase F was removed by spin filtering the sample through spin filter (3000 MWCO NanoSep, Pall).  The filtrates were dried in vacuum, dissolved in 6 µL of 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid, and analyzed using LC-MS/MS in duplicate 2 µL injections.  Identical volumes of the six mouse samples (corresponding to 250 µg peptides from average virgin sample) were similarly processed for LC-MS-MS analysis. The LC-MS/MS analyses was performed using a nanoLC 425 Ultra system (Eksigent Technologies) interfaced with a 6600 TripleToF mass spectrometer (SCIEX).  Peptides were injected into a trap column (NanoLC Trap ChromXP C18, 350 µm i.d. × 0.5 mm, 3 µm particle size, 120 Å pore size) and then separated using ChromXP C18 column (75 µm i.d. × 15 cm, 3 µm particle size, 120 Å pore size) using mobile phase A (aq. 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) and mobile phase B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) in conjunction with a linear gradient of 2-40% B in 120 min at a constant 300 nL/min flow rate.  Using electrospray ionization, the 6600 TripleToF was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode for MS and MS/MS data collection.  An initial survey scan was acquired (m/z 400-1250) at mass resolution 30,000, followed by collision-induced dissociation of precursor ions to produce MS/MS spectra from the 15 most abundant precursor ions.

### Data Protocol
Peptide and protein identifications were determined by using the Paragon search engine in ProteinPilot (v5.0.2, SCIEX) against the corresponding proteome FASTA files obtained from UniProt (the mouse file appended with chicken ovalbumin, UniProt entry P01012).  Peptide was included in the sialoglycopeptide quantitation if it’s confidence is at least 95% and it has the best peptide-spectrum match (PSM) among the candidate hypotheses, and it contains at least one NX/STC sequon (where X is any amino acid except for glycine or proline), whose asparagine (N) has been deamidated as a distinguishing “scar” from the PNGase F treatment.

### Publication Abstract
Discrimination of self from non-self is fundamental to a wide range of immunological processes<sup>1</sup>. During pregnancy, the mother does not recognize the placenta as immunologically foreign because antigens expressed by trophoblasts, the placental cells that interface with the maternal immune system, do not activate maternal T&#x2009;cells<sup>2</sup>. Currently, these activation defects are thought to reflect suppression by regulatory T&#x2009;cells<sup>3</sup>. By contrast, mechanisms of B&#xa0;cell tolerance to trophoblast antigens have not been identified. Here we provide evidence that glycan-mediated B&#xa0;cell suppression has a key role in establishing fetomaternal tolerance in mice. B&#x2009;cells specific for a model trophoblast antigen are strongly suppressed through CD22-LYN inhibitory signalling, which in turn implicates the sialylated glycans of the antigen as key suppressive determinants. Moreover, B&#x2009;cells mediate the MHC-class-II-restricted presentation of antigens to CD4<sup>+</sup>&#x2009;T cells, which leads to T&#x2009;cell suppression, and trophoblast-derived sialoglycoproteins are released into the maternal circulation during pregnancy in mice and humans. How protein glycosylation promotes non-immunogenic placental self-recognition may have relevance to immune-mediated pregnancy complications&#xa0;and to tumour immune evasion. We also anticipate that our findings will bolster efforts to harness glycan biology to control antigen-specific immune responses in autoimmune disease.

### Keywords
Sialic acid, Fetomaternal tolerance, Lc-msms, Placenta glycoproteins, B cells, Cd22

### Affiliations
University of California, San Francisco
Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Reproductive Sciences, Center for Reproductive Sciences, University of California, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA Eli and Edythe Broad Center for Regeneration Medicine and Stem Cell Research, University of California, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA Department of Anatomy, University of California, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA

### Submitter
Sami Tuomivaara

### Lab Head
Dr Susan J Fisher
Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Reproductive Sciences, Center for Reproductive Sciences, University of California, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA Eli and Edythe Broad Center for Regeneration Medicine and Stem Cell Research, University of California, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA Department of Anatomy, University of California, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA


