### Accession
PXD015847

### Title
A proximity-labeling proteomic approach to investigate invadopodia molecular landscape in breast cancer cells

### Description
Invadopodia constitute a specialized machinery required for invasive tumor cells to travel through basement membranes and the interstitial matrix, and thus represent a key feature of metastatic cells. Therefore a better understanding of invadopodia biology and characteristics might permit the identification of markers of metastatic potential. Substantial efforts have been made to characterize invadopodia molecular composition, dynamics or triggering stimuli. However, the full molecular identity of these structures is still missing due to the fact that the isolation and purification of these structures has been challenging. To fill this gap, we developed a non-hypothesis driven proteomic approach based on the innovative BioID proximity biotinylation approach using the invadopodia-specific protein Tks5/FISH (its long form, Tks5) fused to the biotin ligase BirA as bait. As control, we also generated cells expressing the short form of Tks5 (Tks5) unable to localize to invadopodia. After validation of our cell models, Tks5 close neighbors were identified by label-free mass spectrometry after pulldown of biotinylated proteins. Known invadopodia components were identified revealing the pertinence of our strategy. Furthermore, this strategy allowed us to identify novel Tks5 in cellulo partners that appear as potential new invadopodia components/regulators and potential markers of metastasis.

### Sample Protocol
Wild type Tks5 (SH3PXD2A) or Tks5 deleted of its PX domain (PX-Tks5) without stop codon were amplified by PCR from peGFP-N1-Tks5 (gift from Courtneidge S.) and cloned N-terminally of the promiscuous biotin ligase BirA* (BirA(R118G)) using the pcDNA3.1 MCS-BirA(R118G)-HA (Addgene plasmid # 36047, a kind gift from K. J. Roux) as backbone to obtain Tks5 and PX-Tks5 fused to the N-terminus of BirA*-HA. Stable MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cell lines were generated by transfection of the obtained plasmid constructs or the empty vector by Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen) and selection with 1 mg/ml geneticin. Individual clones were generated by limiting dilution and clones expressing moderate levels of the transgenes were selected for further analysis. Cells were seeded on gelatin-coated plates to induce invadopodia formation. Cells stably expressing BirA* fusion proteins were seeded on gelatin-coated plates and treated overnight with 50 μM biotin, then lysed in a buffer composed of 50 mM Tris pH 7.4, 500 mM NaCl, 0.4 % SDS, 2 % Triton X-100, 5 mM EDTA and 1 mM DTT supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitors. Biotinylated proteins were isolated by incubating the cell lysates with Avidin-coated beads (ThermoFisher) for 1h at 4°C. After three washes with lysis buffer and one wash with 50 mM Tris pH 7.4 plus 50mM NaCl, beads were resuspended in SDS loading buffer supplemented with 2 mM D-biotin (Invitrogen).  Mass spectrometry analysis.  Biological sample were prepared in duplicate and each sample were further analyzed thrice by LC-MSMS. Protein extract were loaded on NuPAGE 4-12% Bis-Tris acrylamide gels (Life Technologies) to stack proteins in a single band that was stained with Imperial Blue (Pierce, Rockford, IL) and cut from the gel. Gels pieces were submitted to an in-gel trypsin digestion1 with slight modifications. Briefly, gel pieces were washed and destained using 100 mM NH4HCO3. Destained gel pieces were shrunk with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate in 50% acetonitrile and dried at room temperature. Protein spots were then rehydrated using 10 mM DTT in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0 for 45 min at 56 °C. This solution was replaced by 55 mM iodoacetamide in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0 and the gel pieces were incubated for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. They were then washed twice in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate and finally shrunk by incubation for 5 min with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate in 50% acetonitrile. The resulting alkylated gel pieces were dried at room temperature. The dried gel pieces were swollen by incubation in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0 supplemented with trypsin (12.5 ng/µL; Promega) for 1 h at 4°C and then incubated overnight at 37 °C. Peptides were harvested by collecting the initial digestion solution and carrying out two extractions; first in 5% formic acid and then in 5% formic acid in 60% acetonitrile. Pooled extracts were dried down in a centrifugal vacuum system. Samples were reconstituted with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in 4% acetonitrile and analyzed by liquid chromatography (LC)-tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) using an LTQ Velos Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Electron, Bremen, Germany) online with a an Ultimate 3000RSLCnano chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Sunnyvale, CA). Peptides were separated on a Dionex Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 column. First peptides were concentrated and purified on a pre-column from Dionex (C18 PepMap100, 2 cm × 100 µm I.D, 100 Å pore size, 5 µm particle size) in solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water). In the second step, peptides were separated on a reverse phase LC EASY-Spray C18 column from Dionex (PepMap RSLC C18, 15 cm × 75 µm I.D, 100 Å pore size, 2 µm particle size) at 300 nL/min flow rate. After column equilibration using 4% of solvent B (20% water - 80% acetonitrile - 0.1% formic acid), peptides were eluted from the analytical column by a two steps linear gradient (4-22% acetonitrile/H2O; 0.1 % formic acid for 110 min and 22-32% acetonitrile/H2O; 0.1 % formic acid for 10 min). For peptide ionization in the EASY-Spray nanosource, spray voltage was set at 1.9 kV and the capillary temperature at 275 °C. The LTQ velos Orbitrap was used in data dependent mode to switch consistently between MS and MS/MS. MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap in the range of m/z 300-1700 at a FWHM resolution of 30 000 measured at 400 m/z. For internal mass calibration the 445.120025 ions was used as lock mass. The more abundant precursor ions were selected and collision-induced dissociation fragmentation was performed in the ion trap on the 10 most intense precursor ions measured to have maximum sensitivity and yield a maximum amount of MS/MS data. The signal threshold for an MS/MS event was set to 500 counts. Charge state screening was enabled to exclude precursors with 0 and 1 charge states. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a repeat count of 1, exclusion list size 500 and exclusion duration of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification.  Relative intensity-based label-free quantification (LFQ) was processed using the MaxLFQ algorithm2 from the freely available MaxQuant computational proteomics platform, version 1.6.3.4.3 The acquired raw LC Orbitrap MS data were first processed using the integrated Andromeda search engine.4 Spectra were searched against the Human database (UniProt Proteome reference, date 2019.01; 20412 entries). This database was supplemented with a set of 245 frequently observed contaminants. The following parameters were used for searches: (i) trypsin allowing cleavage before proline; (ii) two missed cleavages were allowed; (ii) monoisotopic precursor tolerance of 20 ppm in the first search used for recalibration, followed by 4.5 ppm for the main search and 0.5 Da for fragment ions from MS/MS ; (iii) cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57.02146) as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation (+15.99491) and N-terminal acetylation (+42.0106) as variable modifications; (iv) a maximum of five modifications per peptide allowed; and (v) minimum peptide length was 7 amino acids and a maximum mass of 4,600 Da. The match between runs option was enabled to transfer identifications across different LC-MS/MS replicates based on their masses and retention time within a match time window of 0.7 min and using an alignment time window of 20min. The quantification was performed using a minimum ratio count of 1 (unique+razor) and the second peptide option to allow identification of two co-fragmented co-eluting peptides with similar masses. The false discovery rate (FDR) at the peptide and protein levels were set to 1% and determined by searching a reverse database. For protein grouping, all proteins that cannot be distinguished based on their identified peptides were assembled into a single entry according to the MaxQuant rules. The statistical analysis was done with Perseus program (version 1.6.1.3) from the MaxQuant environment (www.maxquant.org). The LFQ normalised intensities were uploaded from the proteinGroups.txt file. First, proteins marked as contaminant, reverse hits, and “only identified by site” were discarded. Protein LFQ normalized intensities were base 2 logarithmized to obtain a normal distribution. Quantifiable proteins were defined as those detected in at least 70% of the samples in one or more condition. Missing values were replaced using data imputation by randomly selecting from a normal distribution centred on the lower edge of the intensity values that simulates signals of low abundant proteins using default parameters (a downshift of 1.8 standard deviation and a width of 0.3 of the original distribution). To determine whether a given detected protein was specifically differential a two-sample t-test were done using permutation based FDR-controlled at 0.01 and employing 250 permutations. The p value was adjusted using a scaling factor s0 with a value of 1.

### Publication Abstract
Metastatic progression is the leading cause of mortality in breast cancer. Invasive tumor cells develop invadopodia to travel through basement membranes and the interstitial matrix. Substantial efforts have been made to characterize invadopodia molecular composition. However, their full molecular identity is still missing due to the difficulty in isolating them. To fill this gap, we developed a non-hypothesis driven proteomic approach based on the BioID proximity biotinylation technology, using the invadopodia-specific protein Tks5&#x3b1; fused to the promiscuous biotin ligase BirA* as bait. In invasive breast cancer cells, Tks5&#x3b1; fusion concentrated to invadopodia and selectively biotinylated invadopodia components, in contrast to a fusion which lacked the membrane-targeting PX domain (Tks5&#x3b2;). Biotinylated proteins were isolated by affinity capture and identified by mass spectrometry. We identified known invadopodia components, revealing the pertinence of our strategy. Furthermore, we observed that Tks5 newly identified close neighbors belonged to a biologically relevant network centered on actin cytoskeleton organization. Analysis of Tks5&#x3b2; interactome demonstrated that some partners bound Tks5 before its recruitment to invadopodia. Thus, the present strategy allowed us to identify novel Tks5 partners that were not identified by traditional approaches and could help get a more comprehensive picture of invadopodia molecular landscape.

### Keywords
Cancer invasion, Tks5/sh3pxd2a, Actin cytoskeleton

### Affiliations
Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de Marseille, CRCM Marseille Proteomique Inserm UMR1068, CNRS UMR7258, Aix Marseille Université U105,z Institut Paoli Calmettes 27 Boulevard Leï Roure CS30059 13273 Marseille Cedex 09 France
Marseille Proteomic, Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de Marseille, Inserm UMR1068, CNRS UMR7258, Aix Marseille Université U105, Institut Paoli Calmettes, 27 Boulevard Leï Roure CS30059 13273 Marseille Cedex 09 France 

### Submitter
AUDEBERT Stephane

### Lab Head
Dr Camoin Luc
Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de Marseille, CRCM Marseille Proteomique Inserm UMR1068, CNRS UMR7258, Aix Marseille Université U105,z Institut Paoli Calmettes 27 Boulevard Leï Roure CS30059 13273 Marseille Cedex 09 France


