### Accession
PXD017026

### Title
Mass spectrometry-based characterisation of human megakaryocyte CRLF3 interactome

### Description
Cytokine-receptor like factor 3 (CRLF3) is a protein with an as yet unknown function. CRLF3 has been shown to interact with the members of the Hippo pathway in HEK cells but the function of this interaction was not elucidated. Crlf3 null mice are viable and health but present with an isolated reduced platelet count from birth, confirming CRLF3 has a role in platelet production. We performed affinity purification followed by liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry to identify CRLF3’s binding partners in human megakaryocytes.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extracts from triplicates of 50 x 106 Tandem Affinity Purification (TAP)-CRLF3 or untagged CRLF3 expressing human induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) derived megakaryocytes were incubated with magnetic beads (Dynal protein G; Invitrogen) coated with anti-FLAG antibody (anti-FLAG M2; Sigma-Aldrich) for 1 hour at 4oC. Beads were then washed 3 times in lysis buffer (10mM Tris hydrochloride, 150mM sodium chloride, 0.1% NP-40) and twice in TEV buffer (10mM Tris hydrochloride, 150mM sodium chloride, 0.1% NP-40, 0.5mM EDTA, 1mM Dithiothreitol) to remove unbound proteins. Bead bound proteins were dissociated by incubation with 100U AcTEV protease (Invitrogen) in TEV buffer before collection of the eluates. The eluates were then diluted in calmodulin binding buffer (CBB; 10mM Tris-HCl, 150mM sodium chloride, 1mM magnesium acetate, 1mM Imidazole, 2mM calcium chloride, 10mM β-mercaptoethanol, 0.1% NP-40) before interacting proteins were further purified by incubation of the diluted eluates with calmodulin binding peptide (CBP) affinity resin (Agilent), pelleting and removal of the supernatant. CBP resin was then washed 3 times with CBB before incubation in calmodulin elution buffer (10mM Tris-HCl, 150mM sodium chloride, 0.02% NP-40, 1mM magnesium acetate, 1mM Imidazole, 20mM EGTA, 10mM β-mercaptoethanol) to dissociate bound proteins, which were collected in the eluates after pelleting of the CBP resin. Samples were mixed with SDS loading buffer and run on 12% SDS PAGE gel in order to remove MS incompatible detergents. Samples were only run till a dye front was about 2cm below the well.  Gel was stained with Coomassie blue colloidal stain and each lane cut into 4 equal pieces.  Each piece was finely chopped and transferred to 0.5ml Eppendorf tube and was treated as individual MS sample.  The gel pieces were distained by washing with 50% acetonitrile, 50% ammonium bicarbonate followed by wash with HPLC water. Distained samples were then treated with 100% acetonitrile, air dried and reduced with 10mM DTT in 100mM ammonium bicarbonate for 1 hour at 37OC.  The DTT solution was removed and replaced with 55mM iodoacetamide in 100mM ammonium bicarbonate and incubated for 45 minutes at RT in darkness.  Samples were then washed with 50% ammonium bicarbonate, 50% acetonitrile followed by addition of 100% acetonitrile.  Acetonitrile was removed and samples dried again, before resuspending in a 1:200 solution of trypsin in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate and incubating overnight at 37oC.  LC-MS/MS analysis  Post-trypsin digestion, the supernatant was pipetted into a sample vial and loaded onto an autosampler for automated LC-MS/MS analysis.  All LC-MS/MS experiments were performed using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nanoUPLC system and a Q Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (both Thermo Fisher Scientific). Separation of peptides was performed by reverse-phase chromatography at a flow rate of 300nL/min and a Thermo Scientific reverse-phase nano Easy-spray column (Thermo Scientific PepMap C18, 2µm particle size, 100Å pore size, 75nm i.d. x 50cm length). Peptides were loaded onto a pre-column (Thermo Scientific PepMap 100 C18, 5µm particle size, 100Å pore size, 300nm i.d. x 5mm length) from the Ultimate 3000 autosampler with 0.1% formic acid for 3 minutes at a flow rate of 10nL/min. After this period, the column valve was switched to allow elution of peptides from the pre-column onto the analytical column. Solvent A was water + 0.1% formic acid and solvent B was 80% acetonitrile, 20% water + 0.1% formic acid. The linear gradient employed was 2-40% B in 30 minutes.  The LC eluent was sprayed into the mass spectrometer by means of an Easy-Spray source (ThermoFisher Scientific). All m/z values of eluting ions were measured in an Orbitrap mass analyzer, set at a resolution of 70000 and was scanned between m/z 380-1500. Data dependent scans (Top 20) were employed to automatically isolate and generate fragment ions by higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD, NCE:25%) in the HCD collision cell and measurement of the resulting fragment ions was performed in the Orbitrap analyser, set at a resolution of 17500.  Singly charged ions and ions with unassigned charge states were excluded from being selected for MS/MS and a dynamic exclusion window of 20 seconds was employed.

### Data Protocol
Data was processed using Protein Discoverer (version 2.1., Thermo Scientific).  Briefly, all MS/MS data were converted to mgf files and the files were then submitted to the Mascot search algorithm (Matrix Science) and searched against the UniProt human database (UniProt_Human201701 201701, 70956 sequences; 23911858 residues) and a common contaminant sequences (115 sequences, 38274 residues).  Variable modifications of oxidation (M), deamidation (NQ) and carbamidomethyl were applied. The peptide and fragment mass tolerances were set to 5ppm and 0.1 Da, respectively. A significance threshold value of p<0.05 and a peptide cut-off score of 20 were also applied.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Megakaryocyte, Lc-ms/ms, Crlf3

### Affiliations
Department of Haematology, University of Cambridge 
Senior Lecturer in Transfusion Medicine / Consultant Haematologist, University of Cambridge / NHS Blood and Transplant, Wellcome-MRC Cambridge Stem Cell Institute, Jeffrey Cheah Biomedical Centre, Cambridge Biomedical Campus, University of Cambridge, Puddicombe Way, Cambridge, CB2 0AW, United Kingdom

### Submitter
Cavan Bennett

### Lab Head
Dr Cedric Ghevaert
Senior Lecturer in Transfusion Medicine / Consultant Haematologist, University of Cambridge / NHS Blood and Transplant, Wellcome-MRC Cambridge Stem Cell Institute, Jeffrey Cheah Biomedical Centre, Cambridge Biomedical Campus, University of Cambridge, Puddicombe Way, Cambridge, CB2 0AW, United Kingdom


