### Accession
PXD016145

### Title
Ewing sarcoma protein-mediated regulation of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase 1 dissociation

### Description
Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase 1 (PARP1) critically facilitates DNA damage response (DDR) that suppresses genomic instability. However, the physiological function of PARP1 in regulating genomic integrity is unclear. We investigated the Ewing’s sarcoma breakpoint region 1 (EWS) and found that it regulated the physiological function of PARP1. EWS was indispensable to dissociation of PARP1 from damaged DNA, promoting DDR and regulating DDR protein expression. Abnormal PARP1 accumulation due to EWS expression silencing, induced hyper-PARylation, which exhausted cellular NAD+ levels and caused cell death in in vitro and in vivo. Positively charged EWS arginine-glycine-glycine (Arg-Gly-Gly, RGG) domains directly interact with poly ADP-ribose (PAR) chains produced by PARP1 and are essential to dissociate PARP1 from damaged DNA. Consistently, Ewing’s sarcoma cells with defective EWS function accumulated PARP1 on chromatin and tissues from Ewing’s sarcoma patients, exhibiting high PARylation levels. Taken together, loss of EWS causes defects in PARP1 dissociation and results in genomic instability.

### Sample Protocol
Wild type (Ews-WT, Heavy) and Ews-KO (light) cells were grown continuously in SILAC medium containing arginine and lysine with light isotopes of carbon, hydrogen and nitrogen (i.e. 12C14N) (light), or with medium containing L-lysine-13C6 and L-arginine-13C6-15N4 (heavy). Proteins extracted from labeled cell nucleus were then analyzed by mass spectrometry to determine the incorporation ratios, which still indicated an enrichment of >95%, as above (data not shown). 1D-SDS PAGE was performed with 1:1 amount mixed protein samples prepared from both labeled cells. For LC-MS/MS analyses, the gel was de-stained and bands were cut and processed as follows. Briefly, acetylated proteins bands were divided into 10 mm sections and subjected to in-gel digestion with trypsin. The tryptic digests were separated by online reversed-phase chromatography using a Thermo Scientific Eazy nano LC 1200 UHPLC equipped with an autosampler using a reversed-phase peptide trap Acclaim PepMapTM 100 (75 μm inner diameter, 2 cm length) and a reversed-phase analytical column PepMapTM RSLC C18 (75 μm inner diameter, 15 cm length, 3 μm particle size), both from Thermo Scientific, followed by electrospray ionization at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The chromatography system was coupled in line with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer. Spectra were searched against the uniprot-proteome_mus database using the Proteome Discoverer Sorcerer 2.1 with SEQUEST-based search algorithm and comparative analysis of proteins identified in this study was performed by using the Scaffold 4 Q+S. The initial mass tolerance was set to 10 p.p.m. and MS/MS mass tolerance was 0.8 Da. Enzyme was set to Trypsin with 2 missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was searched as a fixed modification, whereas 13C6-Lys, 13C6-15N4, 13C N-acetyl protein and oxidation of methionine were searched as variable modifications. Identification was set to a false discovery rate of 1%.

### Data Protocol
DATABASE SEARCHING- All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Sequest (XCorr Only) (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA; version 2.1.1.21). Sequest (XCorr Only) was set up to search uniprot- proteome_mus.fasta (unknown version, 50282 entries) assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin. Sequest (XCorr Only) was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.60 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0  PPM. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified in Sequest (XCorr Only) as a fixed modification. Deamidated of asparagine, label:13C(6) of lysine, label:13C(6)15N(4) of arginine, oxidation of methionine and  acetyl of the n-terminus were specified in Sequest (XCorr Only) as variable modifications. CRITERIA FOR PROTEIN IDENTIFICATION & quantification- Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.8.4, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide  identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater  than 99.0% probability and contained at least 1 identified peptide.  Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii, Al et al Anal. Chem. 2003;75(17):4646-58). Proteins  that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.Scaffold Q+ (version Scaffold_4.8.4, Proteome Software Inc.,  Portland, OR) was used to quantitate Label Based Quantitation (SILAC) peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability  by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability and contained at least 1 identified peptide.  Protein probabilities  were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii, Al et al Anal. Chem. 2003;75(17):4646-58). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone  were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Normalization was performed iteratively (across samples and spectra) by subtracting the average ratios in log-space. Means were used for averaging.  Spectra data were log-transformed, pruned of those matched to multiple proteins, and weighted by an adaptive intensity weighting algorithm. Of 2611 spectra in the experiment at the given thresholds, 1134  (43%) were included in quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase 1 (PARP1) facilitates DNA damage response (DDR). While the Ewing's sarcoma breakpoint region 1 (EWS) protein fused to FLI1 triggers sarcoma formation, the physiological function of EWS is largely unknown. Here, we investigate the physiological role of EWS in regulating PARP1. We show that EWS is required for PARP1 dissociation from damaged DNA. Abnormal PARP1 accumulation caused by EWS inactivation leads to excessive Poly(ADP-Ribosy)lation (PARylation) and triggers cell death in both in&#xa0;vitro and in&#xa0;vivo models. Consistent with previous work, the arginine-glycine-glycine (RGG) domain of EWS is essential for PAR chain interaction and PARP1 dissociation from damaged DNA. Ews and Parp1 double mutant mice do not show improved survival, but supplementation with nicotinamide mononucleotides extends Ews-mutant pups' survival, which might be due to compensatory activation of other PARP proteins. Consistently, PARP1 accumulates on chromatin in Ewing's sarcoma cells expressing an EWS fusion protein that cannot interact with PARP1, and tissues derived from Ewing's sarcoma patients show increased PARylation. Taken together, our data reveal that EWS is important for removing PARP1 from damaged chromatin.

### Keywords
Ews, Par, Parylation, Parp-1, Dna damage response (ddr)

### Affiliations
Center for genomic integrity (CGI), Institute of basic science (IBS), UNIST, Ulsan, 44919, Republic of Korea
Center for Genomic Integrity, Institute for Basic Science, Ulsan, Korea

### Submitter
Byung-gyu kim

### Lab Head
Dr Kyungjae Myung
Center for Genomic Integrity, Institute for Basic Science, Ulsan, Korea


