### Accession
PXD021852

### Title
Identification of new immunomarkers of active antibody-mediated rejection through glomerular proteome analysis in kidney transplantation

### Description
Issues remain in the diagnosis of active antibody-mediated rejection (ABMR) in human kidney transplantation, as the hallmark criteria, the microcirculation inflammation scores and the C4d deposits, still lack reproducibility and sensitivity respectively. Using laser microdissection combined with mass spectrometry-based proteomics, this study presents the characterization of active antibody-mediated glomerular injuries, marked by evidences of leukocyte activation and migration, cellular stress through type I and II interferons and of microcirculation remodeling.

### Sample Protocol
Extracted proteins were loaded and short separated on a 10% acrylamide SDS-PAGE gel. Migration was stopped when samples were entered the resolving gel and proteins were visualized by colloidal blue staining. Each Protein lanes were cut and then individually cut into small pieces. Proteins were reduced, alkylated and digested in peptides by trypsin.NanoLC-MS/MS analysis were performed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC Nano-UPHLC system (Thermo Scientific, USA) coupled to a nanospray Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, California, USA). Each peptide extracts were loaded on a 300 µm ID x 5 mm PepMap C18 precolumn (Thermo Scientific, USA) at a flow rate of 10 µL/min. After a 3 min desalting step, peptides were separated on a 50 cm EasySpray column (75 µm ID, 2 µm C18 beads, 100 Å pore size, ES803, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a 4-40% linear gradient of solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80% ACN) in 55 min. The separation flow rate was set at 300 nL/min. The mass spectrometer operated in positive ion mode at a 2.0 kV needle voltage. Data was acquired using Xcalibur 4.1 software in a data-dependent mode. MS scans (m/z 375-1500) were recorded at a resolution of R=120000 (@ m/z 200) and an AGC target of 4x105 ions collected within 50 ms, followed by a top speed duty cycle of up to 3 seconds for MS/MS acquisition. Precursor ions (2 to 7 charge states) were isolated in the quadrupole with a mass window of 1.6 Th and fragmented with HCD@30% normalized collision energy. MS/MS data was acquired in the Orbitrap cell with a resolution of R=30000 (@m/z 200), AGC target of 5x104 ions and a maximum injection time of 100 ms. Selected precursors were excluded for 60 seconds.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification, Mascot 2.5 algorithm through Proteome Discoverer 1.4 Software (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) was used in batch mode by searching against the UniProt Homo sapiens database (73 658 entries, Reference Proteome Set, release date: December 13, 2018) from http://www.uniprot.org/ website. Two missed enzyme cleavages were allowed. Mass tolerances in MS and MS/MS were set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da. Oxidation of methionine, acetylation of lysine and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine were searched as dynamic modifications. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine was searched as static modification. Raw LC-MS/MS data were imported in Proline Studio for feature detection, alignment, and quantification. Proteins identification was accepted only with at least 2 specific peptides with a pretty rank=1 and with a protein FDR value less than 1.0% calculated using the “decoy” option in Mascot. Label-free quantification of MS1 level by extracted ion chromatograms (XIC) was carried out with parameters indicated previously. The normalization was carried out on median of ratios. The inference of missing values was applied with 5% of the background noise.

### Publication Abstract
Antibody-mediated rejection (ABMR) is the leading cause of allograft failure in kidney transplantation. Its histological hallmark is represented by lesions of glomerulitis i.e., inflammatory cells within glomeruli. Current therapies for ABMR fail to prevent chronic allograft damage i.e., transplant glomerulopathy, leading to allograft loss. We used laser microdissection of glomeruli from formalin-fixed allograft biopsies combined with mass spectrometry-based proteomics to describe the proteome modification of 11 active and 10 chronic active ABMR cases compared to 8 stable graft controls. Of 1335 detected proteins, 77 were deregulated in glomerulitis compared to stable grafts, particularly involved in cellular stress mediated by interferons type I and II, leukocyte activation and microcirculation remodeling. Three proteins extracted from this protein profile, TYMP, WARS1 and GBP1, showed a consistent overexpression by immunohistochemistry in glomerular endothelial cells that may represent relevant markers of endothelial stress during active ABMR. In transplant glomerulopathy, 137 proteins were deregulated, which favor a complement-mediated mechanism, wound healing processes through coagulation activation and ultimately a remodeling of the glomerular extracellular matrix, as observed by light microscopy. This study brings novel information on glomerular proteomics of ABMR in kidney transplantation, and highlights potential targets of diagnostic and therapeutic interest.

### Keywords
Biomarker, Proteomics, Glomerulus, Mass spectrometry, Antibody-mediated rejection, Kidney transplantation

### Affiliations
Univ. Bordeaux, CNRS, ImmunoConcEpT, UMR 5164, 146 rue Léo Saignat, F-33000 Bordeaux, France
Plateforme Proteome Bordeaux

### Submitter
Dupuy Jean-William

### Lab Head
Dr Pierre Merville
Univ. Bordeaux, CNRS, ImmunoConcEpT, UMR 5164, 146 rue Léo Saignat, F-33000 Bordeaux, France


