### Accession
PXD012744

### Title
DIA data analysis with unambiguously determined precursor mass

### Description
Proteomics research today no longer simply seeks exhaustive protein identification; now, robust, large-scale quantitative information is sought. For this purpose, data-independent acquisition (DIA) has emerged as a promising strategy largely owing to the developments in advanced mass spectrometers and sophisticated data analysis methods. However, the highly complex multiplexed MS/MS spectra produced by DIA remain challenging to interpret. Here, we present a novel strategy to analyze DIA data, based on unambiguous precursor mass assignment through the mPE-MMR (multiplexed post-experimental monoisotopic mass refinement) procedure, and combined with complementary multi-stage database searching. Compared to conventional spectral library searching, the accuracy and sensitivity of peptide identification were effectively increased by assigning precise precursor masses to DIA data. Additional peptides absent from spectral libraries, including sample-specific mutated peptides and post-translationally-modified peptides, were identified by MS-GF+ and MODa/MODi multi-stage database searching with the precursor masses determined. This first use of unambiguously-determined precursor masses to mine DIA data demonstrates considerable potential for further exploitation of this rich experimental data.

### Sample Protocol
The gastric tumor tissue sample was collected from a patient with gastric cancer. Protein extraction, and digestion procedures were performed. Unlabeled peptides (5 µg) derived from tumor tissue were analyzed individually using a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) linked to a dual-online UPLC system consisting of two binary nanoflow pumps (Ultimate 3000 NCP-3200RS, Dionex, Germering, Germany), an autosampler (Ultimate 3000 WPS-3000TPL RS, Dionex, Germering, Germany), two analytical columns (75 μm × 100 cm) and two trap columns (150 μm × 3 cm).

### Data Protocol
Accurate monoisotopic masses of multiple precursor ions corresponding to multiplexed MS/MS spectra produced by DIA were determined using the mPE-MMR procedure. MS/MS data for which precursor masses had been determined were searched against spectral libraries using an in-house spectral library search (SLS) tool, with specific precursor mass and normalized retention time tolerance (1st stage search). The remaining MS/MS data, for which no peptides were identified during the 1st stage SLS, were directly subjected to sequential spectrum-centric search engines, MS-GF+ (2nd stage search) followed by MODa/MODi (3rd stage search).

### Publication Abstract
Proteomics research today no longer simply seeks exhaustive protein identification; increasingly, it is also desirable to obtain robust, large-scale quantitative information. To accomplish this, data-independent acquisition (DIA) has emerged as a promising strategy largely owing to developments in advanced mass spectrometers and sophisticated data analysis methods. Nevertheless, the highly complex multiplexed MS/MS spectra produced by DIA remain challenging to interpret. Here, we present a novel strategy to analyze DIA data, based on unambiguous precursor mass assignment through the mPE-MMR (multiplexed post-experimental monoisotopic mass refinement) procedure and combined with complementary multistage database searching. Compared to conventional spectral library searching, the accuracy and sensitivity of peptide identification were significantly increased by incorporating precise precursor masses in DIA data. We demonstrate identification of additional peptides absent from spectral libraries, including sample-specific mutated peptides and post-translationally modified peptides using MS-GF+ and MODa/MODi multistage database searching. This first use of unambiguously determined precursor masses to mine DIA data demonstrates considerable potential for further exploitation of this type of experimental data.

### Keywords
Precursor mass, Dia

### Affiliations
Korea University
Department of Chemistry, Korea University

### Submitter
Dong-Gi Mun

### Lab Head
Dr Sang-Won Lee
Department of Chemistry, Korea University


