### Accession
PXD018078

### Title
ULK1-dependent phosphorylation of RIPK1 within the intermediate domain

### Description
Mass-spectrometric analysis of an in vitro kinase assay using recombinant active ULK1 (Sigma-Aldrich, SRP5096) as kinase and GST-RIPK1(250-475) as substrate

### Sample Protocol
Acetone precipitation of protein samples was performed for 4 h at -20°C. After incubation, the proteins were resuspended in 40 mM ammonium bicarbonate and digested with trypsin (Promega, trypsin:protein ratio 1:100) over night at 37°C. Digests were quenched by acidification with trifluoracetic acid (TFA) and concentrated in vacuum. Subsequently, mass spectrometry based analysis of peptides was carried out.  Peptide separation and analysis was performed on an UltiMate3000 LC system coupled online to an Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (both Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were concentrated using in-house packed 100 µm ID reversed-phase (RP) precolumn (ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 3 μm resin, Dr. Maisch GmbH) with 0.1% (v/v) TFA and then separated on a 75 µm ID x 18 cm RP column (in-house packed, ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 3 μm resin, Dr. Maisch GmbH) using a binary gradient (solvent A: 0.1% formic acid, solvent B: 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in 84% (v/v) acetonitrile) delivered at 230 nl/min: 40% solvent B in 65 min and 98% solvent B in 15 min. Peptides were directly eluted to nano-electrospray ion source equipped with distal coated SilicaTip Emitter (New Objective). The electrospray voltage was set at 1.5 V and the capillary temperature was maintained at 200°C. At first a full scan (m/z 350-2000, automatic gain control target value of 1e6, resolution r = 60,000 at m/z 400) was performed in the orbitrap analyzer. Up to the ten most intense multiple charged ions in each full scan MS/MS spectra were acquired in the linear ion trap with the following parameters: normalized collision energy 35%, dynamic exclusion 30 s, automatic gain control 5,000 ions. Multistage activation was enabled using neutral loss masses of phosphoric acid at 98, 49 and 32.6 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed with MaxQuant v. 1.5.3.30. (ref. (Cox and Mann, 2008)) MS/MS spectra were searched against protein sequences of generated fusion proteins and human ULK1 (Swiss-Prot 2016_08) with default search parameters unless otherwise stated. Phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine, oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N-termini were set as variable modifications. The resultant peptide list was filtered for phosphorylated peptides with a score greater than 40 and a posterior error probability score (PEP) less than 0.01. Only phosphorylation sites with a localization probability score over 0.75 were considered.

### Publication Abstract
Autophagy, apoptosis, and necroptosis are stress responses governing the ultimate fate of a cell. However, the crosstalk between these cellular stress responses is not entirely understood. Especially, it is not clear whether the autophagy-initiating kinase ULK1 and the cell-death-regulating kinase RIPK1 are involved in this potential crosstalk. Here, we identify RIPK1 as a substrate of ULK1. ULK1-dependent phosphorylation of RIPK1 reduces complex IIb/necrosome assembly and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-induced cell death, whereas deprivation of ULK1 enhances TNF-induced cell death. We observe that ULK1 phosphorylates multiple sites of RIPK1, but it appears that especially phosphorylation of S357 within the intermediate domain of RIPK1 mediates this cell-death-inhibiting effect. We propose that ULK1 is a regulator of RIPK1-mediated cell death.

### Keywords
Ulk1, Ripk1

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Medicine I, Medical Faculty, Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf, Germany
Institute of Molecular Medicine I
University Hospital Düsseldorf

### Submitter
Björn Stork

### Lab Head
Dr Björn Stork
Institute of Molecular Medicine I, Medical Faculty, Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf, Germany


