### Accession
PXD021507

### Title
Urine recirculation prolongs normothermic kidney perfusion for via more optimal metabolic homeostasis – a proteomics study

### Description
We describe a proteomics analysis to determine the molecular differences between normothermically perfused (normothermic machine perfusion, NMP) human kidneys with urine recirculation (URC) and urine replacement (UR). Proteins were extracted from 16 kidney biopsies with URC (n=8 donors after brain death (DBD), n=8 donors after circulatory death (DCD)) and three with UR (n=2 DBD, n=1 DCD), followed by quantitative analysis by mass spectrometry. Damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) were decreased in kidney tissue after six hours NMP with URC, suggesting reduced inflammation. Vasoconstriction was also attenuated in kidneys with URC as angiotensinogen levels were reduced. Strikingly, kidneys became metabolically active during NMP, which could be enhanced and prolonged by URC. For instance, mitochondrial succinate dehydrogenase enzyme levels as well as carbonic anhydrase were enhanced with URC, contributing to pH stabilisation. Levels of cytosolic and the mitochondrial phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase were elevated after 24 hours of NMP, more prevalent in DCD than DBD tissue. Key enzymes involved in glucose metabolism were also increased after twelve and 24 hours of NMP with URC, including mitochondrial malate dehydrogenase and glutamic-oxaloacetic transaminase, predominantly in DCD tissue. We conclude that NMP with URC permits prolonged preservation and revitalises metabolism to possibly minimize better cope with ischemia reperfusion injury in discarded kidneys.

### Sample Protocol
Methods Human kidneys were recovered for the purpose of transplantation but deemed untransplantable during post-recovery assessment at the donor hospital or at the transplant centre. After transport to Oxford, normothermic perfusions were performed at the Institute of Biomedical Engineering (IBME), University of Oxford.19 Donor characteristics, warm (WIT) and cold ischemia times (CIT) and perfusion parameters were collated and analysed. The study was evaluated and approved by the national ethics review committee of the United Kingdom (REC reference 12/EE/0273 IRAS project ID 106793). Kidney biopsy preparation, protein extraction and digestion Biopsies were taken at six different time points; zero biopsy at start of back table preparation, 1, 6, 12, 18 and 24h after perfusion start and at the end of perfusion respectively. Core needle biopsy specimens, 18 gauge, were taken and stored at - 80°C until use. The kidney biopsy retrieval protocol and –omics workflow are illustrated in figure 1. Detailed description in supplementary methods. Protein identification and quantitation by mass spectrometry Samples were analysed using liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LCMS/ MS) as described previously.34 In brief, a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano-ultra performance liquid chromatography system coupled to a Q Exactive High Field (HF) Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) acquiring data in electron spray ionisation (ESI) positive mode was used with a 75μm-inner diameter x 50cm C18 EASY-Spray column (2μm particle size, Thermofisher Scientific, United Kingdom). Peptides were separated with a 60 minutes gradient of 0% solvent A to 40% solvent B (solvent A: 99.9% H2O, 0.1% formic acid, 5% DMSO; solvent B: 94.9% ACN, 0.1% formic acid, 5% DMSO) at 250nl/min. MS survey acquisition was set with a resolution of 60,000 FWHM with a recording window between 300 and 2,000 m/z. A maximum of 20 MS/MS scans were triggered in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics data analysis Protein identification. Raw LC-MS/MS data were uploaded to Andromeda/Maxquant version 1.5.2.8 for MS/MS spectra matching against complete human data set (UPR_HumanSapiens, retrieved at 15/02/2017, 92,954 entries) with trypsin specificity.35 Two missed cleavages, NQ deamination and methionine oxidation were selected as variable modification, carbamidomethylation of cysteine was selected as fixed modification. For identification, the FDR (false discovery rate) at the peptide spectrum matches (PSM) and protein level were set to 0.01. Unmodified unique+razor peptides were chosen for label-free quantification (LFQ) with minute ratio count set as 2. Match between run was selected to increased number of proteins with quantitative value. PANTHER classification system was used to perform gene ontology enrichment analysis (over-represented or under-represented). KEGG (Kyoto Encyclopaedia of Genes and Genomes) was used for canonical pathway assignment. The mass spectrometry proteomics data will be deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with a dataset identifier. Quantitative analysis. Quantitative MS data were uploaded to the Perseus software package (v1.5.5.3)36 for data visualisation and statistical analysis. Label-free quantitation (LFQ) values were first log2 transformed, then plotted in histograms to check normality of the data. Scatter plot display was used to display data in figure 3. Hierarchical clustering analysis and heat maps were used to group samples based on abundance of identified proteins after Z-score normalisation and subtraction of mean values across columns (figure S2). Two-sample t-tests combined with Permutation FDR to correct for multiple testing were applied to detected differentially expressed proteins between comparisons. Statistical FDR set as 0.05, s0 as 0.1 in the volcano plot used to visualise differentially expressed proteins in figure 2.

### Publication Abstract
We describe a proteomics analysis to determine the molecular differences between normothermically perfused (normothermic machine perfusion, NMP) human kidneys with urine recirculation (URC) and urine replacement (UR). Proteins were extracted from 16 kidney biopsies with URC (n&#xa0;=&#xa0;8 donors after brain death [DBD], n&#xa0;=&#xa0;8 donors after circulatory death [DCD]) and three with UR (n&#xa0;=&#xa0;2 DBD, n&#xa0;=&#xa0;1 DCD), followed by quantitative analysis by mass spectrometry. Damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) were decreased in kidney tissue after 6&#xa0;hours NMP with URC, suggesting reduced inflammation. Vasoconstriction was also attenuated in kidneys with URC as angiotensinogen levels were reduced. Strikingly, kidneys became metabolically active during NMP, which could be enhanced and prolonged by URC. For instance, mitochondrial succinate dehydrogenase enzyme levels as well as carbonic anhydrase were enhanced with URC, contributing to pH stabilization. Levels of cytosolic and the mitochondrial phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase were elevated after 24&#xa0;hours of NMP, more prevalent in DCD than DBD tissue. Key enzymes involved in glucose metabolism were also increased after 12 and 24&#xa0;hours of NMP with URC, including mitochondrial malate dehydrogenase and glutamic-oxaloacetic&#xa0;transaminase, predominantly in DCD tissue. We conclude that NMP with URC permits prolonged preservation and revitalizes metabolism to possibly better cope with ischemia reperfusion injury in discarded kidneys.

### Keywords
Iri, Nephrology, Ischemia reperfusion injury, Organ perfusion, Proteomics, Mass spectrometry, Kidney transplantation

### Affiliations
Target Discovery Institute Nuffield Department of Medicine University of Oxford Roosevelt Drive Oxford OX3 FZ UK Tel: +44 (0) 1865 612 921 https://www.tdi.ox.ac.uk/research/research/tdi-mass-spectrometry-laboratory
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Benedikt Kessler

### Lab Head
Dr Benedikt Kessler
Target Discovery Institute Nuffield Department of Medicine University of Oxford Roosevelt Drive Oxford OX3 FZ UK Tel: +44 (0) 1865 612 921 https://www.tdi.ox.ac.uk/research/research/tdi-mass-spectrometry-laboratory


