### Accession
PXD006074

### Title
ZBTB48 is both a vertebrate telomere-binding protein and a transcriptional activator

### Description
Telomeres constitute the ends of linear chromosomes and together with the shelterin complex form a structure essential for genome maintenance and stability. In addition to the constitutive binding of the shelterin complex, other direct, yet more transient interactions are mediated by the CST complex and HOT1, while subtelomeric variant repeats are recognized by NR2C/F transcription factors. Recently, the Kruppel-like zinc finger protein ZBTB48 has been described as a novel telomere-associated factor in the vertebrate lineage. Here, we show that ZBTB48 binds directly both to telomeric as well as to subtelomeric variant repeat sequences. ZBTB48 is found at telomeres of human cancer cells regardless of the mode of telomere maintenance and it acts as a negative regulator of telomere length. In addition to its telomeric function, we demonstrate through a combination of RNAseq, ChIPseq and expression proteomics experiments that ZBTB48 acts as a transcriptional activator on a small set of target genes, including mitochondrial fission process 1 (MTFP1). This discovery places ZBTB48 at the interface of telomere length regulation, transcriptional control and mitochondrial metabolism.

### Sample Protocol
For in-gel digestion samples were reduced in 10 mM DTT (Sigma) for 1h at 56°C followed by alkylation with 55 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma) for 45 min in the dark. Tryptic digest was performed in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer with 1 μg trypsin (Promega) at 37°C overnight. Peptides were desalted on self-made C18 StageTips and analyzed with a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 system (Thermo) nanoflow liquid chromatography system. Peptides were separated on a C18-reversed phase capillary (25 cm long, 75 μm inner diameter, packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 μm resin (Dr. Maisch) directly mounted on the electrospray ion source. We used a 4.5 h gradient from 2% to 40% acetonitrile in 0.5% formic acid at a flow of 225 nl/min. The Q Exactive Plus was operated in positive ion mode with a Top10 MS/MS spectra acquisition method per MS full scan. MS scans were obtained with 70,000 resolution at a maximum injection time of 20 ms and MS/MS scans at 17,500 resolution with maximum IT of 120 ms and using HCD fragmentation. Peptides with unassigned or charge state 1 were excluded, peptide match was preferred and dynamic exclusion was set to 40 s.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were processed with MaxQuant (Cox & Mann 2008; PMID: 19029910) version 1.5.2.8 against the UNIPROT annotated human protein database (81,194 entries). Carbamidomethylation on cysteins was set as fixed modification while methionine oxidation and protein N-acetylation were considered as variable modifications. Peptide and protein FDR were enforced at 0.01 with match between runs option activated. LFQ quantitation was made on for unique peptides for protein groups with at least 2 ratio counts.

### Publication Abstract
Telomeres constitute the ends of linear chromosomes and together with the shelterin complex form a structure essential for genome maintenance and stability. In addition to the constitutive binding of the shelterin complex, other direct, yet more transient interactions are mediated by the CST complex and HOT1/HMBOX1, while subtelomeric variant repeats are recognized by NR2C/F transcription factors. Recently, the Kruppel-like zinc finger protein ZBTB48/HKR3/TZAP has been described as a novel telomere-associated factor in the vertebrate lineage. Here, we show that ZBTB48 binds directly both to telomeric and to subtelomeric variant repeat sequences. ZBTB48 is found at telomeres of human cancer cells regardless of the mode of telomere maintenance and it acts as a negative regulator of telomere length. In addition to its telomeric function, we demonstrate through a combination of RNAseq, ChIPseq and expression proteomics experiments that ZBTB48 acts as a transcriptional activator on a small set of target genes, including mitochondrial fission process 1 (MTFP1). This discovery places ZBTB48 at the interface of telomere length regulation, transcriptional control and mitochondrial metabolism.

### Keywords
Zbtb48; hela; u2os; knock-out

### Affiliations
Quantitative Proteomics
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB)
Institute of Molecular Biology Ackermannweg 4 55128 Mainz

### Submitter
F Butter

### Lab Head
Dr Falk Butter
Institute of Molecular Biology Ackermannweg 4 55128 Mainz


