### Accession
PXD010476

### Title
The natural product elegaphenone potentiates antibiotic effects against Pseudomonas aeruginosa

### Description
Natural products represent a rich source for antibiotics addressing versatile cellular targets. The deconvolution of their targets via chemical proteomics is often challenged by the introduction of large photocrosslinkers. Here we select elegaphenone, a largely uncharacterized natural product antibiotic bearing a native benzophenone core scaffold, for affinity-based protein profiling (AfBPP) in Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria. This study utilizes the alkynylated natural product scaffold as a probe to uncover intriguing biological interactions with the transcriptional regulator AlgP. Furthermore, proteome profiling of a Pseudomonas aeruginosa AlgP transposon mutant revealed unique insights into the mode of action. Elegaphenone enhanced the killing of intracellular P. aeruginosa in macrophages exposed to sub-inhibitory concentrations of the fluoroquinolone antibiotic norfloxacin.

### Sample Protocol
bacteria were cultivated until stationary phase. Cultures were collected in a 50 mL falcon tube and pelleted at 6,000 rpm for 5 min at 4 °C and washed with PBS. The pellet was then resuspended in cold lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1 mM EDTA, one tablet of protease inhibitor cocktail per 5 mL (complete, EDTA-free, Roche), 75 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.2 at 4 °C) to a final OD600 = 300. The suspension was lysed by homogenization with 5 x 20 sec. pulsed at 80% max. power on ice. The debris was removed by centrifugation (13,000 rpm, 30 min, 4°C) and the supernatant was filtered through 0.2 µm filter. The filtrate was collected in a new Protein LoBind tube from Eppendorf and the concentration of the proteins was measured by BCA assay. Adjust the samples to the same protein amount accordingly and add urea, thiourea to make a final concentration 7 M and 2 M respectively (add lysis buffer to make the right final concentration). Transfer 500 µg proteins to a new 1.5 mL tube, reduce with 1 mM DTT (500 rpm, 1h, 37 °C) and alkylate with 5.5 mM iodoacetamide (500 rpm, 30 min, RT, in the darkness). The reaction was quenched with 4 mM DTT (500 rpm, 30 min, RT) and the solution was pre-digested with Lys-C (1:200, 25 °C, 4 h). After a 1:4 dilution with 50 mM TEAB in ddH2O (tetraethylammonium bromide), the solution was digested with trypsin (1:100, 37 °C, 12 h). The digestion was stopped by addition of FA to a final concentration of 1%. The pH value had to be below 3 (if not, more formic acid was added). 50 mg SepPak C18 columns were pre-equilibrated by gravity flow with 1 mL acetonitrile, 0.5 mL elution buffer (80% ACN, 0.5% FA) and three times 1 mL aqueous 0.5% FA solution. Subsequently, the samples were loaded and washed with 1 mL aqueous 0.5% FA solution five times. For dimethyl labeling quantification method: Flush each of the columns with 1 mL of the respective isotope labeling reagent five times over 20 min (light labeling solution: 0.2% CH2O, 0.03 M NaBH3CN in 50 mM sodium phosphate, pH 7.5; medium labeling solution: 0.2% CD2O, 0.03 M NaBD3CN in ddH2O in 50 mM sodium phosphate, pH 7.5; heavy labeling solution: 0.2% 13CD2O, 0.03 M NaBD3CN in 50 mM sodium phosphate, pH 7.5). The columns were washed twice with 1 mL 0.5% FA aqueous solution. The peptides were then eluted into 2 mL Protein LoBind tubes with 250 ?L elution buffer twice (80% ACN, 0.5%FA) under reduced pressure until no liquid came out from the SepPak C18 columns. The differentially labeled peptide solutions were mixed and lyophilized to get the dried peptides which can be stored at - 20 °C. For label-free quantification method: Flush each of the columns with 1 mL 0.1% TFA three times and then wash with 250 ?L aqueous 0.5% FA solution. The peptides were then eluted into 2 mL Protein LoBind tubes with 250 ?L elution buffer twice (80% ACN, 0.5%FA) under reduced pressure until no liquid came out from the SepPak C18 columns. The differentially labeled peptide solutions were mixed and lyophilized to get the dried peptides which can be stored at - 20 °C.

### Data Protocol
The peptides were dissolved in 35 ?L 1% FA in ddH2O before MS measurement by pipetting up and down, vortexing and sonication for 15 min. The samples were spun down via centrifugation. The VWR 0.45 ?m centrifugal filter were pre-equilibrated with 500 ?L dd H2O twice, 500 ?L 0.05 N NaOH and 500 ?L 1 % FA twice (centrifugation of the filters: 13,000 rpm, 1 min, RT). Then the peptide solutions were filtered through the equilibrated filters (centrifugation: 13,000 rpm, 2 min, RT) and analyzed on Orbitrap Fusion™ Tribrid™ or Q Exactive™ Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap™ mass spectrometer with the parameters mentioned before. Statistical analysis was performed with Perseus 1.5.8.0. Putative contaminants, reverse peptides and peptides only identified by site were omitted from further processing. Dimethyllabeling ratios obtained from MaxQuant 1.5.3.8 were transformed with log2(x) and then normalized using z-score. -log10(p-value) were obtained by a two sided one sample t-test over three biological experiments with technical triplicates against Pseudomonas aeruginosa PA01 (downloaded on 22.01.2017 from Uniprot).

### Publication Abstract
Natural products represent a rich source of antibiotics that address versatile cellular targets. The deconvolution of their targets via chemical proteomics is often challenged by the introduction of large photocrosslinkers. Here we applied elegaphenone, a largely uncharacterized natural product antibiotic bearing a native benzophenone core scaffold, for affinity-based protein profiling (AfBPP) in Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria. This study utilizes the alkynylated natural product scaffold as a probe to uncover intriguing biological interactions with the transcriptional regulator AlgP. Furthermore, proteome profiling of a Pseudomonas aeruginosa AlgP transposon mutant provided unique insights into the mode of action. Elegaphenone enhanced the elimination of intracellular P.&#x2005;aeruginosa in macrophages exposed to sub-inhibitory concentrations of the fluoroquinolone antibiotic norfloxacin.

### Keywords
Antivirulence, Antimicrobials, Natural products, Chemical proteomics

### Affiliations
Technische Universität München, Chair of Organic Chemistry,Garching, Germany
TU Munich
Chair of Organic Chemistry 2
Lichtenbergstraße 4
85748 Garching
Germany

### Submitter
Weining Zhao

### Lab Head
Dr Stephan Axel Sieber
Technische Universität München, Chair of Organic Chemistry,Garching, Germany


