### Accession
PXD034844

### Title
Reanalysis of PXD009319: "An alliance of gel-based and gel-free proteomic techniques displays substantial insight into the proteome of a virulent and an attenuated Histomonas meleagridis strain"

### Description
The current work aimed to detect and identify significantly differentially expressed proteins between a virulent and an attenuated Histomonas meleagridis strain which were in vitro co-cultivated with Escherichia coli DH5alpha. This was done by applying 2D-DIGE and sequential window acquisition of all theoretical spectra (SWATH) MS as tools on the two well-defined strains. In the gel-based experiments, 49 identified protein spots were found to be differentially expressed, of which 37 belonged to the in vitro cultivated virulent strain and 12 to the attenuated one. The most frequently identified proteins in the virulent strain take part in cytoskeleton formation, carbohydrate metabolism and adaptation to stress. However, post-translationally modified or truncated ubiquitous cellular proteins such as actin and GAPDH were identified as upregulated in multiple gel positions. This indicated their contribution to processes not related to cytoskeleton and carbohydrate metabolism, such as fibronectin or plasminogen binding. On the other hand, proteins involved in cytoskeleton, cell division and cytoskeleton organization were frequently observed in the attenuated strain. The findings of the gel-based studies were supplemented by the gel-free SWATH MS analysis, which identified and quantified 42 significantly differentially regulated proteins. In this case proteins with peptidase activity, metabolic proteins and actin-regulating proteins were the most frequent findings in the virulent strain, while proteins involved in hydrogenosomal carbohydrate metabolism dominated the results in the attenuated one.

### Sample Protocol
For identification of the H. meleagridis proteins by LC-MS/MS, protein digestion was performed using a two-step in-solution digestion protocol with a combination of LysC and trypsin according to the manufacturer’s recommendation (https://www.promega.com/-/media/files/resources/protocols/technical-manuals/101/trypsinlysc-mix-mass-spec-grade-protocol.pdf?la=en). For each sample 10 µg of total protein were diluted with 8 M urea in 50 mM Tris pH 8.0, to a total volume of 10 µl. Proteins were reduced with 50 mM DTT (30 min, 37°C) and alkylated with 200 mM IAA (30 min, 25°C) before stepwise digestion with Trypsin/LysC mix (Promega) (4 h, 37°C; dilution with 50 mM Tris; 8 h, 37°C). After acidification with concentrated TFA, samples were frozen at -20°C until mass spectrometric analysis. An aliquot of peptides was analyzed by LC-MS/MS as described in the original manuscript’s chapter with the title “Identification of differentially abundant protein spots by LC-MS/MS”. MS parameters were adapted for SWATH. MS1 spectra were collected in the range of 400-1500 m/z with an accumulation time of 50 ms. Product ion spectra were collected in 34 windows in the range of 400-1250 m/z with a fixed width of 25 Da. For each window ions were accumulated for 80 ms. IDA identification results were used to create the SWATH ion library with SWATH Acquisition MicroApp 2.0 in PeakView 2.2 (both Sciex, USA). Peptides were chosen based on a FDR rate <1%, excluding shared and modified peptides. Up to 6 peptides per protein and up to 6 transitions per peptide were used.

### Data Protocol
The new database was derived by conceptual translation of coding genomic sequences from virulent and attenuated Histomonas meleagridis strains. It was combined with E. coli proteins (UniProt taxonomy ID: 562, EcolX https://www.uniprot.org/taxonomy/562) and proteins from the common Repository of Adventitious Proteins (cRAP) (n= 117) (ftp://ftp.thegpm.org/fasta/cRAP/crap.fasta). Acquired raw data were processed with ProteinPilot Software version 5.0.2 (Sciex, Framingham, MA, USA) for re-calibration and database searches. Mass tolerance in MS mode was set with 0.05 and 0.1 Da in MSMS mode for the rapid recalibration search, and 0.0011 Da in MS and 0.01 Da in MSMS mode for the final search. Parameters for database search were: trypsin digestion, cysteine alkylation set to iodoacetamide, search effort set to rapid ID. False discovery rate analysis (FDR) was performed using the integrated tools in ProteinPilot Software version 5.0.2 (Sciex, Framingham, MA, USA). Global false discovery rate was set to <1% on protein level. Statistical evaluation was performed using R programming language. Raw peak areas were exported for further analysis with the DEP package in R. Prior to the import into R, E.coli proteins were excluded. Afterwards the technical replicates were aggregated by the mean. Following statistical analysis of the virulent vs. the attenuated strain by a t-test was performed according to the DEP script including normalization of protein abundances. From these, proteins with more than two peptides displaying a fold change higher than 2-fold with an adjusted p-value lower than 0.05 were considered to be up-regulated in our analysis.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Histomonas meleagridis,</i> a poultry-specific intestinal protozoan parasite, is histomonosis's etiological agent. Since treatment or prophylaxis options are no longer available in various countries, histomonosis can lead to significant production losses in chickens and mortality in turkeys. The surfaceome of microbial pathogens is a crucial component of host-pathogen interactions. Recent proteome and exoproteome studies on <i>H. meleagridis</i> produced molecular data associated with virulence and <i>in vitro</i> attenuation, yet the information on proteins exposed on the cell surface is currently unknown. Thus, in the present study, we identified 1485 proteins and quantified 22 and 45 upregulated proteins in the virulent and attenuated strains, respectively, by applying cell surface biotinylation in association with high-throughput proteomic analysis. The virulent strain displayed upregulated proteins that could be linked to putative virulence factors involved in the colonization and establishment of infection, with the upregulation of two candidates being confirmed by expression analysis. In the attenuated strain, structural, transport and energy production proteins were upregulated, supporting the protozoan's adaptation to the <i>in vitro</i> environment. These results provide a better understanding of the surface molecules involved in the pathogenesis of histomonosis, while highlighting the pathogen's <i>in vitro</i> adaptation processes.

### Keywords
Comparative proteomic analysis, Protozoa, Virulence factors, Lc-ms/ms, Attenuation, Swath ms, Histomonas meleagridis

### Affiliations
Clinic for Poultry and Fish Medicine, University of Veterinary Medicine, Vienna
University Clinic for Poultry and Fish Medicine, University of Veterinary Medicine, Vienna, Austria

### Submitter
Ivana BILIC

### Lab Head
Dr Ivana Bilic
University Clinic for Poultry and Fish Medicine, University of Veterinary Medicine, Vienna, Austria


