### Accession
PXD016481

### Title
Bone morphogenetic protein 4 in human saliva during orthodontic therapy

### Description
In orthodontic therapy periodontal tissue responds to mechanical stimuli by bone remodeling mediated by specific molecules involved in periodontal regeneration and homeostasis. The resulting changes are reflected in the salivary proteome that is emerging as a valuable diagnostic tool.  We analyzed the changes of saliva proteome during orthodontic tooth movement in 12 healthy male patients, presented with malocclusion treated by placement of fixed orthodontic appliance. Six patients with identical dental pathology, but no orthodontic therapy were used as control samples. Saliva was collected a day before, immediately after, and 2, 7 and 30 days after the placement of the fixed orthodontic appliance and analyzed by LC-MS. Total of 198 proteins were identified and classified on the basis of their functional characteristics. Proteins involved in bone remodeling, inflammation and healing were detected mostly 30 days after placement of the fixed orthodontic appliance. At this time point, Bone morphogenetic protein 4 emerged as a central player in the ongoing dental bone remodeling. Besides BMP4, BMP antagonists:  BMP Binding Endothelial Regulator (BMPER), Insulin-like growth factor-binding protein 3 (IGFBP3), Cytoskeleton-associated protein 4 (CKAP4) and Fibroblast growth factor 5 (FGF5), were also identified. Presence of BMP4 in human saliva 30 days after the placement of orthodontic fixed appliance was confirmed by ELISA and concentration of BMP4 was 3.2 pg/ml. To date, there is no published data on the presence of BMP molecules or their antagonists in saliva or the gingival cervical fluid, regardless of different orthodontic treatments or disease. BMP4 is involved not only in orthodontic treatment, but also in processes involving tooth development and homeostasis. Therefore, a better understanding of its networks in bone remodeling during OTM is heralded.

### Sample Protocol
Study samples. Ethics committee at the School of Dental Medicine, University of Zagreb, approved the study and its protocol (05-PA-15-4/2017) and written Informed consent was obtained from the parents and the study participants. Samples were collected from 12 healthy male patients, aged from 12 to 14 years, presented with a malocclusion and designated for fixed orthodontic appliance placement. Six patients with identical dental pathology, but no orthodontic appliances were used as control samples. The study subjects refrained from eating and washed their teeth 60 minutes before sampling. Samples were collected a day before as well as immediately after, and then 2, 7 and 30 days after placement of the fixed orthodontic appliance. Saliva was expectorated into clean Petri dishes, transferred to Eppendorf tubes and immediately frozen at – 80 °C. All samples were pooled according to different collection time points. Pooled saliva samples were centrifuged for 10 min at 12 000 g at 4 °C to remove debris, and proteins were purified by acetone precipitation. Protein concentration was determined using RC DC Protein Assay Kit II (Biorad). Mass spectrometry. Protein samples (40 µg) were transferred into 10 kDa centrifugal filter units, denatured using 8 M urea and alkylated for 20 minutes in dark at room temperature (RT) using 55 mM iodoacetamide in 8 M urea. After two washing steps (15 min, 14 000 g, RT) using 8 M urea, the samples were washed twice with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and digested overnight at 37 °C by 0.8 µg of trypsin (Worthington, TPCK treated). Digested peptides were eluted through the 10 kDa filters into fresh Eppendorf tubes and then washed using 0.5 M sodium chloride. Peptides were then acidified using 20% acetic acid and separated by HPLC (Ultimate 3000, ThermoScientific). A C18 micro pre-column and a 50 cm C18 nano-column were used to purify and separate the peptides by polarity. Automated mass spectrometric measurement cycles (LTQ Orbitrap Discovery, Thermo Scientific) consisted of full MS scanning and MS/MS scanning of ten most intense ions. Full MS scans ranging from m/z 300 to 2 000, were obtained in the Orbitrap analyzer at a resolution of 100 000, with internal calibration of the instrument using the lock mass setting.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant software version 1.5.1.2. (Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry) was used to process the raw data and quantify the detected proteins using intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) algorithm. Trypsin was selected for in silico digestion, carbamidomethylation, N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were used as variable peptide modifications. False discovery rate at the peptide spectrum level and at the protein detection level was set at 1%. Minimum peptide length for protein identification was seven amino acids. The main search peptide mass tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm. Common laboratory contaminants were excluded from the analysis. Proteins were quantified using intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) - a continuous intensity value of protein expression in individual samples (i.e. the ratio of the sum of the experimentally determined intensities of all peptides and the intensity of the individual detected peptide). Experimental data was compared with the set of human proteins available in the UniProt database (http://www.uniprot.org). Samples were analyzed in technical triplicates and proteins identified with at least one peptide were considered relevant for analysis (Gupta and Pevzner 2009).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bmp4, Orthodontic tooth movement, Proteomics, Bmper, Bone remodeling, Saliva

### Affiliations
School of Medicine, University of Zagreb
Center for Translational and Clinical Research, Department of Proteomics, School of Medicine, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia  Drago Perović Department of Anatomy, School of Medicine, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia

### Submitter
Ruđer Novak

### Lab Head
Dr Lovorka Grgurević
Center for Translational and Clinical Research, Department of Proteomics, School of Medicine, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia  Drago Perović Department of Anatomy, School of Medicine, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia


