### Accession
PXD018835

### Title
Building a spectral library to analyze colorectal cancer organoids

### Description
The goal of this project was to build SWATH Spectral libraries to analyze colorectal cancer organoids.

### Sample Protocol
Pelleted and frozen organoids were lysed using 8 M Urea in 100 mM Ammonium Bicarbonate with the help of sonication for 10 min. The lysate was reduced using 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) for 30min at 37°C and alkylated using 40mM Iodacetamide for 45 min at 25°C in the dark. The protein amount was measured using the Bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay and 1 mg protein was digested with LysC (1:100) for 4 h and Trypsin (1:75) overnight. Samples were diluted to 6 M and 1.5 M Urea in 100mM Ammonium Bicarbonate using 100 mM Ammonium Bicarbonate for digestion with LysC or Trypsin respectively. The digestion was stopped by adding TFA until a pH~2-3 was reached. The digested peptides were desalted using C18-columns (Waters Sep-pak), washed with 0.1% trifluoroacetic in H2O, eluted with 50% acetonitrile and 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in H2O and subsequently dried in a speedvac. Before drying an aliquot was taken for the total cell lysate samples. The aliquot was dried and the peptides were dissolved in 2% acetonitrile and 0.1 formic acid in H2O and iRT peptides were added to the sample before injection.

### Data Protocol
The peptides were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA) connected to an Easy-nLC 1200 (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA) HPLC system. Between 1 μl and 4 μl of peptide solution was separated by nano-flow liquid chromatography using a 120 min gradient from 5 to 37% buffer B in buffer A (Buffer A: 2% acetonitrile, 98% H2O, 0.1% formic acid; Buffer B: 80% acetonitrile, 20% H2O, 0.1% formic acid) on an Acclaim PepMap RSLC 75 μm x 25cm column packed with C18 particles (2 μm, 100 Å) (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA). The peptides were ionized using a stainless steel nano-bore emitter (#ES542; Thermo Scientific) using 2000 V in positive ion mode. The data dependent acquisition (DDA) method consisted of a precursor scan followed by product ion scans using a 3s cycle time. The precursor scan was an Orbitrap full MS scan (120,000 resolution, 2 × 105 AGC target, 100 ms maximum injection, 350-1500 m/z, profile mode). The product ion scans were performed using Quadrupole isolation and HCD activation using 27% HCD Collision Energy. The Orbitrap was used at 30,000 resolution and setting the RF Lens at 40%. The AGC Target was set to 5 × 105 and 50 ms maximum injection time. Charge states of 2-5 were targeted and the dynamic exclusion duration was 30s.  The raw data was analyzed using MaxQuant version 1.5.2.8 against a FASTA file containing 20,386 reviewed human (downloaded on August 13, 2018 from www.uniprot.org) and iRT peptides and enzyme sequences. Carbamidomethyl was defined as a fixed modification, and Oxidation (M) as variable modifications. Standard MaxQuant settings for Orbitrap were used (e.g. peptide tolerance 20 ppm for first search and 4.5 for main search). In total, two searches were performed involving 54 injections of peptides and they resulted in the identification of 42’424, peptides from 4239 protein groups, respectively. The four searches were imported into Spectronaut Pulsar (version 14.0.200309.43655 (Copernicus) Biognosys, Schlieren) to build three spectral libraries with the following settings: PSM FDR Cut off of 0.01, fragment m/z between 200 and 1,800, peptides with at least 3 amino acids, fragment ions with a relative intensity of at least 5, precursors with at least 5 fragments. Moreover, an iRT calibration was performed with a minimum root mean square error of 0.8 and segmented regression. The spectral library contained coordinates for 54’551 precursors from 4’223 protein groups.

### Publication Abstract
Precision oncology approaches for patients with colorectal cancer (CRC) continue to lag behind other solid cancers. Functional precision oncology-a strategy that is based on perturbing primary tumor cells from cancer patients-could provide a road forward to personalize treatment. We extend this paradigm to measuring proteome activity landscapes by acquiring quantitative phosphoproteomic data from patient-derived organoids (PDOs). We show that kinase inhibitors induce inhibitor- and patient-specific off-target effects and pathway crosstalk. Reconstruction of the kinase networks revealed that the signaling rewiring is modestly affected by mutations. We show non-genetic heterogeneity of the PDOs and upregulation of stemness and differentiation genes by kinase inhibitors. Using imaging mass-cytometry-based profiling of the primary tumors, we characterize the tumor microenvironment (TME) and determine spatial heterocellular crosstalk and tumor-immune cell interactions. Collectively, we provide a framework for inferring tumor cell intrinsic signaling and external signaling from the TME to inform precision (immuno-) oncology in CRC.

### Keywords
Organoids, Colorectal cancer

### Affiliations
1) Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich, Switzerland 2) Faculty of Science, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland
Idorsia Pharmaceuticals Ltd

### Submitter
Peter Blattmann

### Lab Head
Dr Ruedi Aebersold
1) Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich, Switzerland 2) Faculty of Science, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland


