### Accession
PXD001241

### Title
ERLIC-based strategies for combined quantitative proteome and phosphoproteome analysis with limited sample amounts

### Description
The study aims the development of a sensitive strategy for combined quantitative proteomics and phosphoproteomics. 3 ERLIC-based strategies, applicable for low-sample-amount experiments (~150 µg per condition), were evaluated and compared . Three samle sets have been uploaded. 16 fractions ERLIC-1-SCX/RP (2 replicates) for phosphopeptide enrichment, 8 fractions SCX-EL (2 replicates), 12 fractions ERLIC-2 (2 replicates). The following 3 strategies were compared: A 2D strategy -> sample set ERLIC-1-SCX/RP. A pseudo-3Dstrategy -> sample sets ERLIC-1-SCX/RP + SCX-EL and a  3D strategy -> sample sets ERLIC-1-SCX/RP + ERLIC-2

### Sample Protocol
2x150 µg of a tryptic digest of a SILAC 2-plex sample (NIH-3T3 mouse fibroblasts, light: control, heavy: infected with cytomegalovirus) have been fractionated in a 16-fraction ERLIC-1 run for enrichment of phosphopeptides. The fractions 1-8 were purified by SCX-SPE (for further enrichment of phosphopeptides) and the flow-through (SCX-FT) was analysed by LC-MS, the fractions 9-16 were purified by RP-SPE and also analysed by LC-MS (sample set ERLIC-1-SCX/RP, 16 fractions). Peptides remaining on the SCX-material were eluated with a salt buffer and purified by RP-SPE before LC-MS analysis (sample set SCX-EL, 8 fractions). The remaining material (~50% of the fractions 1-8 SCX-FT+SCX-EL) was pooled and fractionated by ERLIC-2 for a homogeneous distribution of the non-phosphorylated peptides (sample set ERLIC-2, 12 fractions). LC-MS was done by C18-RP nanoHPLC online-coupled to a LTQ orbitrap velos pro (Top15 CID)

### Data Protocol
LC-MS data were processed via Proteome Discoverer 1.4. A Mascot search was done against Uniprot-Mouse and Uniprot/TrEMBL-cytomegalovirus, strain smith/K181 (04-01-2013), including four manually added cytomegalovirus sequences. Error tolerances were 10ppm and 0.5 Da for MS and MS/MS respectively. The false discovery rate was set to 1% (on PSM level) and only rank 1 hits have been considered. Phosphorylation sites were validate by phosphoRS 3.1. For quantification the "Precursor ion quantifier" node has been used (Heavy channel: with 13C6-Lys/Arg).

### Publication Abstract
Quantitative proteomics and phosphoproteomics have become key disciplines in understanding cellular processes. Fundamental research can be done using cell culture providing researchers with virtually infinite sample amounts. In contrast, clinical, pre-clinical and biomedical research is often restricted to minute sample amounts and requires an efficient analysis with only micrograms of protein. To address this issue, we generated a highly sensitive workflow for combined LC-MS-based quantitative proteomics and phosphoproteomics by refining an ERLIC-based 2D phosphoproteomics workflow into an ERLIC-based 3D workflow covering the global proteome as well. The resulting 3D strategy was successfully used for an in-depth quantitative analysis of both, the proteome and the phosphoproteome of murine cytomegalovirus-infected mouse fibroblasts, a model system for host cell manipulation by a virus. In a 2-plex SILAC experiment with 150 &#x3bc;g of a tryptic digest per condition, the 3D strategy enabled the quantification of ~75% more proteins and even ~134% more peptides compared to the 2D strategy. Additionally, we could quantify ~50% more phosphoproteins by non-phosphorylated peptides, concurrently yielding insights into changes on the levels of protein expression and phosphorylation. Beside its sensitivity, our novel three-dimensional ERLIC-strategy has the potential for semi-automated sample processing rendering it a suitable future perspective for clinical, pre-clinical and biomedical research.

### Keywords
Multidimensional separation, Quantitative proteomics, Erlic, Protein phosphorylation

### Affiliations
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften, Otto-Hahn-Straße 6b, 44227 Dortmund
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften - ISAS - e.V. Otto-Hahn-Straße 6b 44227 Dortmund, Germany

### Submitter
Stefan Loroch

### Lab Head
Dr Albert Sickmann
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften - ISAS - e.V. Otto-Hahn-Straße 6b 44227 Dortmund, Germany


