### Accession
PXD024295

### Title
RBM6 proximity interactions (RBM6-APEX)

### Description
We sought to map RBM6 interactome using ascorbate peroxidase (APEX2)-based proximity labelling combined with mass spectrometry. Toward this end, we used CRISPR-cas9 methodology to establish MCF10A cell line expressing APEX2 fused to the N-terminal of RBM6, hereafter called MCF10AAPEX2-RBM6. The peroxidase activity of APEX2-RBM6 fusion was confirmed. Next, RBM6 proximal proteins that were biotinylated by APEX2 activation using hydrogen peroxidase (H2O2) in the presence of biotin-phenol were isolated and subjected to mass spectrometry. We identified 173 (P-value<0.05) RBM6 proximity-interaction partners.

### Sample Protocol
Control and 3xFLAG-APEX2-RBM6-expressing cells were incubated with 0.5mM biotin-phenol reagent for 4hrs prior to start of the labeling reaction. The cells were washed with PBS and the labeling reaction was initiated by adding 1mM H2O2 in PBS for 2 min at room temperature. The reaction was terminated by washing cells thrice with a quencher solution containing 10mM sodium azide, 10mM sodium ascorbate, and 5mM Trolox in PBS. Subsequently, the cells were washed twice with ice-cold PBS and cytoplasmic and nuclear fractions were prepared as follows: cell pellet was resuspended with ~3 volume with ice-cold Buffer A (10 mM HEPES (pH=7.9), 10 mM KCl, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 0.34 M sucrose, 10% Glycerol) supplemented with 0.2% Triton and protease inhibitor mixture (Calbiochem) and incubated 15 minutes on ice. Next, Nuclei were collected by centrifugation at 2,000 g for 5 min at 4oC. The nuclear pellet was lysed with RIPA buffer (50mM Tris (pH 7.5), 1M sodium chloride, 1% NP-40, 0.1% sodium deoxycholate, 1mM EDTA) supplemented with complete protease inhibitor cocktail (Calbiochem), 1mM DTT, 5mM Trolox, 10 mM Sodium Azide, and 10 mM Sodium Ascorbate. Nuclear lysate was incubated on ice for 10 min, sonicated at amplitude 35 for 1 min, Samples were treated with benzonase for 20 min at room temperature before clarifying the lysate by centrifugation at 12,800 g for 15 min. Clarified lysate was collected and proteins were quantified by Bradford’s reagent. 40μg of nuclear lysate was resolved on SDS-PAGE gel and blotted with Streptavidin-HRP to validate APEX2 activation and functionality. Streptavidin magnetic beads (GenScript) were dimethylated by 2hrs incubation with 0.04M Formaldehyde and 0.02M Cyanoborohydrid at room temperature and pH=7, followed by 8hrs incubation at 4oC and pH=8.  Residual demethylation reagents were depleted by washing the beads with RIPA buffer before the addition of the nuclear lysate. 2.5mg nuclear lysates from control and 3xFlag-APEX2-RBM6 expressing cells were incubated with 15μl di-methylated Streptavidin magnetic beads (Cat# L00424) at 4°C with rotation overnight. Beads were then washed twice with RIPA buffer containing 200mM NaCl, followed by 5 washes with 0.1M Ammonium Bicarbonate (ABC). Next, beads were incubated with ABC supplemented with 10mM DTT at 65oC for 30 minutes followed by the addition of 25mM Chloroacetamide and incubation for 30 minutes at room temperature. Next, Trypsin was added to a final concentration of 200 ng/ μl and incubated overnight at 37oC for on-bead digestion. Digestion was quenched by the addition of 0.1% Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and supernatant was collected followed by additional extraction step with 0.1% TFA, 5% Acetonitrile, 0.1% ABC. Eluates were dried completely using SpeedVac and desalted on reversed-phase C18 StageTips before sending for Mass spectrometry analysis. Finally, peptides were resuspended in a buffer containing 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% Formic Acid before injecting into mass spectrometry (MS) at the Smoler Proteomics Center in the department of Biology in the Technion.

### Data Protocol
The samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using Q-Exactive plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific), coupled to Easy nano LC-1000 capillary UHPLC (Thermo Scientific). The resulted tryptic peptides from on-beads digestions were resolved by a reverse phase chromatography using homemade fused silica capillary (0.075x200mm) packed with Reprosil reversed phase material (Dr Maisch GmbH), in 0.1% formic acid. The peptides were eluted with a 120 min linear gradient of 5% to 28% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid (in water), followed by 15 min linear gradient 28% to 95%, and 10 min at 95% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid at flow rates of 0.15 µl/min. Mass-spectrometry was performed with data dependent acquisition mode for positive ions at mass range of 300-1800 m/z with resolution of 7000, selecting the 10 most intense ions (with charge>1) in each full MS. Ions fragmentation in MS/MS was done by collision-induced dissociation (CID) at 35 normalized collision energy. The AGC was set to 3 × 106 for the full MS and to 1 × 105 for the MS/MS scans. The intensity threshold for triggering MS/MS was set 1 × 104, and the dynamic exclusion duration was set to 20 sec. The MS data was clustered and analyzed using the Perseus software platform  and maxquant searching against the human section of the Uniprot database.

### Publication Abstract
RNA-binding proteins regulate mRNA processing and translation and are often aberrantly expressed in cancer. The RNA-binding motif protein 6, RBM6, is a known alternative splicing factor that harbors tumor suppressor activity and is frequently mutated in human cancer. Here, we identify RBM6 as a novel regulator of homologous recombination (HR) repair of DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs). Mechanistically, we show that RBM6 regulates alternative splicing-coupled nonstop-decay of a positive HR regulator, Fe65/APBB1. RBM6 knockdown leads to a severe reduction in Fe65 protein levels and consequently impairs HR of DSBs. Accordingly, RBM6-deficient cancer cells are vulnerable to ATM and PARP inhibition and show remarkable sensitivity to cisplatin. Concordantly, cisplatin administration inhibits the growth of breast tumor devoid of RBM6 in mouse xenograft model. Furthermore, we observe that RBM6 protein is significantly lost in metastatic breast tumors compared with primary tumors, thus suggesting RBM6 as a potential therapeutic target of advanced breast cancer. Collectively, our results elucidate the link between the multifaceted roles of RBM6 in regulating alternative splicing and HR of DSBs that may contribute to tumorigenesis, and pave the way for new avenues of therapy for RBM6-deficient tumors.

### Keywords
Rbm6 ; apex2 ; proximity interactions

### Affiliations
Technion
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology

### Submitter
Feras Machour

### Lab Head
Dr Nabieh Ayoub
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology


