### Accession
PXD007097

### Title
Effects of thermal stress on Lactobacillus casei GCRL163

### Description
Identification of biomarkers and mechanisms of adaptation to prolonged thermal stress in L casei strain GCRL163

### Sample Protocol
Cultures were harvested by centrifugation, cells washed then lysed by bead beating using Zircon beads (TissueLyser II).  After removal of cell debris, protein samples were ethanol precipitated and resuspended in trypsin digest buffer (40mM Tris, 7M urea, 2M thiourea) for peptide sample preparation.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant platform for LFQ used based on FDR of 0.01 for peptide and protein ID, Andromeda search engine used to interrogate the Lactobacillus casei database (strain W56).  Statistical analysis using the Perseus platform and bioinformatics using T-profiler.

### Publication Abstract
Prolonged heat stress is one of the harsh conditions Lactobacillus casei strains encounter as non-starter lactic acid bacteria in dairy product manufacture. To understand the physiological and molecular mechanisms through which Lb. casei GCRL163 adapts to persistent elevated temperature, label-free quantitative proteomics of cell-free extracts was used to characterize the global responses of the strain cultured anaerobically in bioreactors at 30 to 45&#xb0;C, pH 6.5, together with GC-MS for fatty acid methyl ester analysis at different growth phases. At higher growth temperatures, repression of energy-consuming metabolic pathways, such as fatty acid, nucleotide and amino acid biosynthesis, was observed, while PTS- and ABC-type transporter systems associated with uptake of nitrogen and carbon sources were up-regulated. Alkaline shock protein Asp23_2 was only detected at 45&#xb0;C, expressed at high abundance, and presumptive &#x3b1;-L-fucosidase only at 40 and 45&#xb0;C, with highly increased abundance (log2-fold change of 7) at 45&#xb0;C. We identified a novel SecB homolog as a protein export chaperone putatively involved in posttranslational translocation systems, which was down-regulated as growth temperature increased and where the modelled 3D-structure shared architectural similarities with the Escherichia coli SecB protein. Membrane lipid analyses revealed temporal changes in fatty acid composition, cyclization of oleic acid to cyclopropane and novel cyclopentenyl moieties, and reduced synthesis of vaccenic acid, at higher temperatures. An 18kDa &#x3b1;-crystallin domain, Hsp20 family heat shock protein was more highly up-regulated in response to heat stress compared to other molecular chaperones, suggesting this protein could be a useful biomarker of prolonged heat stress in Lb. casei GCRL163.

### Keywords
Lactic acid bacteria, Quantitative proteomics, Bioreactors, Heat stress

### Affiliations
Senior Research Fellow, Manager of proteomics facility
University of Tasmania

### Submitter
Richard Wilson

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Richard Wilson
Senior Research Fellow, Manager of proteomics facility


