### Accession
PXD018352

### Title
Niche stiffening compromises stem cell potential during aging by reducing chromatin accessibility at bivalent promoters

### Description
Tissue homeostasis and regeneration require activation and subsequent lineage commitment of tissue-resident stem cells (SCs). These state changes are controlled by epigenetic barriers. Using hair follicle stem cells (HFSCs) as paradigm, we studied how aging impacts the chromatin landscape and function of mammalian SCs. Analyses of genome-wide chromatin accessibility revealed that aged HFSCs displayed widespread reduction of chromatin accessibility specifically at key SC self-renewal and differentiation genes that were characterized by bivalent promoters carrying both activating and repressive chromatin marks. Consistently, aged HFSCs showed reduced self-renewing capacity and attenuated ability to activate expression of these bivalent genes upon regeneration. These functional defects were niche-dependent as transplantation of aged HFSCs into young recipients or into ex vivo niches restored SC functions and transcription of poised genes. Mechanistically, aged HFSC niche displayed wide-spread alterations in extracellular matrix composition and mechanics, resulting in compressive forces on SCs and subsequent transcriptional repression, leading to loss of bivalent promoters. Tuning tissue mechanics both in vivo and in vitro recapitulated age-related SC changes, implicating niche mechanics as a central regulator of genome organization and function leading to age-dependent SC exhaustion.

### Sample Protocol
Back skin of mice (200 mg wet weight) were snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and crushed using a mortar and pestle. Samples were resuspended in GdmCl reduction and alkylation buffer (6M GdmCl, 20mM TCEP, 80mM CAA, 100mM Tris pH 8.5), boiled for 10 min to denature proteins and subsequently mixed (six times for 30 s, cooled on ice in-between) using a FastPrep-24 instrument (MP Biomedicals). Lysates were then sonicated using a Bioruptor sonicator (Diagenode) (15 cycles of 30 s) and diluted with 25mM Tris, pH 8.5. 200 µg of protein was subsequently digested overnight with Lys-C (Promega Corp., VA1170) and Trypsin-Gold (Promega Corp., V5280) in a 1:50 ratio at 37 °C. On the following day, samples were sonicated again and further digested for 3 h with Lys-C and trypsin (1:100 ratio). Following digestion samples were acidified to block trypsin activity and peptides were cleaned with custom-packed C18-SD STAGE tips. Four micrograms of desalted peptides were labeled with tandem mass tags (TMT10plex, Thermo Fisher cat. No  90110) using a 1:20 ratio of peptides to TMT reagent. TMT labeling was carried out according to manufacturer’s instruction with the following changes: dried peptides were reconstituted in 9µL 0.1M TEAB to which 7µL TMT reagent in acetonitrile (ACN) was added to a final ACN concentration of 43.75%, after 60 min of incubation at room temperature the reaction was quenched with 2µL 5% hydroxylamine. Labeled peptides were pooled, dried, resuspended in 0.1% formic acid (FA), split into two samples, and desalted using home-made C18 STAGE. One of the two samples was fractionated on a 150mm, 300μm, 2μm C18, AcclaimPepMap (Product No. 164537, Thermo Fisher) column using a Ultimate3000 (Thermo Fisher). The column was maintained at 30°C. Buffer A was 5% acetonitrile 0.01M ammonium bicarbonate, buffer B was 80% acetonitrile 0.01M ammonium bicarbonate. Separation was performed using a segmented gradient from 1% to 50% buffer B, for 90min and 50% to 95% for 20 min with a flow of 4μL/min. Fractions were collected every 150 sec and combined into nine fractions by pooling every ninth fraction. Pooled fractions were dried in Concentrator plus (Eppendorf), resuspended in 2μL 0.1% FA for mass spectrometric analysis. Peptides were separated on a 50cm, 75µm Acclaim PepMap column (Product No. 164942 ThermoFisher) using a 120min linear, 6% to 31% buffer B; buffer A was 0.1% FA, buffer B was 0.1% FA, 80% ACN. The column was maintained at 40°C. Eluting peptides were analyzed on an Orbitrap Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). Synchronous precursor selection based MS3 was used for TMT reporter ion signal measurements.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics data was analysed using MaxQuant version 1.5.2.8. Differential expression analysis was performed using limma in R.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hair follicle stem cells, Orbitrap lumos, Tmt, Skin

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Biology of Ageing, 50931 Cologne, Germany Cologne Excellence Cluster for Stress Responses in Ageing-associated diseases (CECAD), University of Cologne, 50931 Cologne, Germany Helsinki Institute of Life Science and Wihuri Research Institute, Biomedicum Helsinki, University of Helsinki, 00290 Helsinki, Finland Stem Cells and Metabolism Research Program, Faculty of Medicine, University of Helsinki, 00290 Helsinki Finland
Max Planck Institute for Biology of Aging

### Submitter
Ilian  Atanassov

### Lab Head
Dr Sara Wickström
Max Planck Institute for Biology of Ageing, 50931 Cologne, Germany Cologne Excellence Cluster for Stress Responses in Ageing-associated diseases (CECAD), University of Cologne, 50931 Cologne, Germany Helsinki Institute of Life Science and Wihuri Research Institute, Biomedicum Helsinki, University of Helsinki, 00290 Helsinki, Finland Stem Cells and Metabolism Research Program, Faculty of Medicine, University of Helsinki, 00290 Helsinki Finland


