### Accession
PXD037324

### Title
Environmental signals act as a driving force for metabolic and defense responses in the Antarctic plant Colobanthus quitensis

### Description
Due to the progressive environmental change that the Antarctic Peninsula has undergone over time, a more comprehensive overview of the metabolic features of Colobanthus quitensis becomes particularly interesting to assess its ability to respond to environmental stresses. To this end, a differential proteomic approach has been used to study the response of C. quitensis to different environmental cues.

### Sample Protocol
One gram of leaf powder from each site was suspended in a lysis buffer containing 10% TCA in acetone and 10 mM DTT, left for 2 hours at −20°C and then centrifuged at 13500 rpm for 20 min at 4°C. Pellets were washed in acetone, containing 10 mM DTT, 2 mM EDTA and 1 mM PMSF and centrifuged again under the same conditions. The obtained pellet was dried in a Speed Vac Concentrator (Savant, ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Samples were solubilized in 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5, containing 8 M urea and 7.5 mM DTT. Samples solubilization started with a first vortex step (5 minutes) and then they were sonicated by using 2 min-cycles (6 times) at 40 KHz and 4°C. The samples were centrifuged at 15000 g for 40 minutes at 4 °C, then the supernatant was recovered and centrifuged again at 15000 g for 20 minutes at 4 °C. Protein quantification was conducted by BCA assay (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA) in triplicate. Disulfide bridges reduction was performed by 10 mM DTT for 45 min at 30°C. Alkylation was obtained by 50 mM 2-iodoacetamide for 20 min, under the dark. The buffer exchange was performed using Amicon Ultra-0.5 centrifugal filters (Merck Millipore Ctd, Ireland) using an ammonium bicarbonate 50 mM buffer solution pH 7.4.  Protein digestion was performed by treating the diluted samples with trypsin (Promega, Fitchburg, WI, USA) in an enzyme-to-protein ratio of 1:50, incubating the samples overnight at 37°C. Reactions were stopped by adding TFA to a final concentration of 0.5%. The resulting digestion mixtures were dried in a Speed Vac Concentrator (Savant).  Peptide digests were resuspended in a loading buffer (3% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid). In addition, all replicates per each condition were mixed into a single pool for subsequent spectral library generation. The iRT kit (Biognosys AG, Switzerland) was added to all samples according to the manufacturer’s instructions. In total, 2 µL peptide mixtures were loaded onto a 40 cm x 75 µm i.d. analytical column packed in-house with 1.9 µm C18 beads (Dr. Maisch, Reprosil-Pur 120) and separated using a linear gradient ranging from 3 to 30% buffer B (95% ACN in 0.1% FA). The flow rate is set to 300 nL/min throughout the gradient. An EASY-nLC 1200 system (ThermoFisher Scientific) was used and the column was heated to 50 °C using an integrated PRSO-V1 column oven (Sonation, Germany) interfaced online with an Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid mass spectrometer. For data-dependent acquisition (DDA) measurements of pooled samples, the mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode with an electrospray voltage of 2500 V. For data-independent acquisition (DIA) runs, 41 variable-width DIA isolation windows with a 1 m/z overlap between windows (see Table 1) were defined. DIA-MS2 spectra were acquired at an Orbitrap resolution of 30,000 over a scan range of 150-2000 m/z and a normalized AGC target of 400% for each window.

### Data Protocol
All DDA and DIA files were used to generate a spectral library using Spectronaut 14 (Biognosys AG, Switzerland) against a reference FASTA file (in-house Colobanthus quitensis protein database [Bertini et al., (2021) Biomolecules 11(8), 1094. doi:10.3390/biom11081094]) with the default settings. In brief, Trypsin/P was set as a digestion enzyme with up to 2 missed cleavages allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and acetylation (protein N-terminus) were set as variable modifications. DIA runs were searched against the generated spectral library in Spectronaut using the default settings, but protein quantification was performed on MS2 level using only tryptic peptides and no data imputation. Data analysis was performed using custom scripts in R (64-bit version 4.1.0) with a package protti (0.2.1). In brief, median-normalized protein intensities were log2-transformed and statistical hypothesis testing was performed with a moderated t-test based on the R package limma (version 3.15). Proteins that fulfilled the following cutoffs (p-value<0.05 and absolute log2 fold-change>0.58) were considered significantly regulated.

### Publication Abstract
During evolution, plants have faced countless stresses of both biotic and abiotic nature developing very effective mechanisms able to perceive and counteract adverse signals. The biggest challenge is the ability to fine-tune the trade-off between plant growth and stress resistance. The Antarctic plant <i>Colobanthus quitensis</i> has managed to survive the adverse environmental conditions of the white continent and can be considered a wonderful example of adaptation to prohibitive conditions for millions of other plant species. Due to the progressive environmental change that the Antarctic Peninsula has undergone over time, a more comprehensive overview of the metabolic features of <i>C. quitensis</i> becomes particularly interesting to assess its ability to respond to environmental stresses. To this end, a differential proteomic approach was used to study the response of <i>C. quitensis</i> to different environmental cues. Many differentially expressed proteins were identified highlighting the rewiring of metabolic pathways as well as defense responses. Finally, a different modulation of oxidative stress response between different environmental sites was observed. The data collected in this paper add knowledge on the impact of environmental stimuli on plant metabolism and stress response by providing useful information on the trade-off between plant growth and defense mechanisms.

### Keywords
Gene expression analysis, Enzymatic activity, Colobanthus quitensis, Ms/ms analysis, Response to stress, Environmental signals, Differential proteomic analysis

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, Department of Biology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland
Department of Ecological and Biological Sciences, University of Tuscia, Viterbo, Italy

### Submitter
Aleš Holfeld

### Lab Head
Dr Carla Caruso
Department of Ecological and Biological Sciences, University of Tuscia, Viterbo, Italy


