### Accession
PXD038048

### Title
Identification of Zdhhc20 knock-down cell palmitome

### Description
An shRNA screen to search for the mediators of pancreatic cancer metastasis identified palmitoyl transferase ZDHHC20 as a protein that mediates this process by promoting the outgrowth of metastatic cells in vivo. We sought to identify the changes in the palmitome of the cells expessing scrambled shRNA or shRNAs targeting Zdhhc20.

### Sample Protocol
Parental PDA530 Met cells were seeded at a density of 30 000 cells per 10 cm plate. After 24 hours, fresh medium with polybrene (10 µg/mL) was added, and cells were infected with lentivirus expressing Scr shRNA or two independent shRNA targeting Zdhhc20. Selection was carried out using 3 µg/mL puromycin, and cells were grown in SILAC heavy media, SILAC medium media or normal media. After 7 days of selection and growth in SILAC-media, cells were treated overnight with a palmitic acid analogue (50 µM) to label newly palmitoylated proteins. The samples were then lysed in cell lysis buffer (1% Triton X-100, 0.1% SDS in PBS, containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors) and protein concentration was determined via DC assay. Lysates were pooled and a Click-IT assay was carried out to facilitate binding of Biotin azide with 17-ODYA incorporated proteins. Proteins were precipitated using methanol/chloroform, resuspended, and biotin-conjugated proteins were pulled-down using NeutrAvidin beads (Thermo). There were 3 conditions: Scrambled shRNA with probe (Heavy), Zdhhc20 shRNA1 with probe (Medium), and Zdhhc20 shRNA2 with probe (Light). All three were contained within each mix. There were 3 mixes and two sets of injections for each band.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed in MaxQuant software (Version 1.5.6.5), and H/L and H/M from Protein Groups table imported into Perseus software (basic filtering and transformation, Significance B).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pdac, Pancreatic cancer, Zdhhc20

### Affiliations
The Francis Crick Institute
The Francis Crick Institute 1 Midland Road  NW1 1AT London, UK

### Submitter
Goran Tomic

### Lab Head
Dr Julian Downward
The Francis Crick Institute 1 Midland Road  NW1 1AT London, UK


