### Accession
PXD037037

### Title
Mechanisms of stop codon readthrough mitigation reveal principles of GCN1 mediated translational quality control

### Description
Readthrough into the 3′ untranslated region (3′UTR) of the mRNA results in the production of aberrant proteins. Metazoans efficiently clear readthrough proteins, but the underlying mechanisms remain unknown. Here, we show in C. elegans and mammalian cells that readthrough proteins are targeted by a coupled, two-level quality control pathway involving the BAG6 chaperone complex and the ribosome collision-sensing protein GCN1. Readthrough proteins with hydrophobic C-terminal extensions are recognized by SGTA-BAG6 and ubiquitylated by RNF126 for proteasomal degradation. Additionally, cotranslational mRNA decay initiated by GCN1 and CCR4/NOT limits the accumulation of readthrough products. Unexpectedly, selective ribosome profiling uncovered a general role of GCN1 in regulating translation dynamics when ribosomes encounter nonoptimal codons, a feature of 3′UTR sequences. Dysfunction of GCN1 results in mRNA and proteome imbalance, increasingly perturbing transmembrane proteins and collagens during aging. These results define GCN1 as a key factor acting during translation in maintaining protein homeostasis.

### Sample Protocol
Interactome: Worms were prepared as described for the mRNA pulldown and lysed in lysis buffer (25 mM Hepes-KOH pH 7.4, 100 mM KoAC, 10 mM MglCl2, 0.5 mM DTT, 2 tablets EDTA free protease inhibitor) using a Biorupter (Diagenode). The lysate was clarified by centrifugation at 2000 x g for 10 min at 4oC. For each sample, 50 μl of GFP-Trap Magnetic Agarose beads (Chromotek) were prepared by washing the beads twice in 1 ml lysis buffer. Worm lysate (50 mg protein total) was adjusted to 10 mg/ml and added to the equilibrated beads. The suspension was then incubated for 2 h at 4oC with vertical rotation. The beads were washed once with 2 ml of lysis buffer and twice with 1 ml lysis buffer containing 0.1% NP-40. After transferring the beads to a fresh 1.5 ml tube, the beads were washed 3 times with lysis buffer without detergent. The bound protein was digested on beads using the iST 8x Kit (PreOmics) following manufacturer′s instructions.  mRNA IP (vIPR): 3′-Biotin-TEG 20 nt antisense oligonucleotides targeting the coding region of YFP were designed as previously described {Chu, 2012 #140}. Probes were adjusted to a final concentration of 100 μM (10 μM each). Immunoprecipitation was performed as previously described with adaptations {Theil, 2019 #69}. Standard nematode growth medium (NGM) plates were seeded with 300 μl of an overnight OP50 bacteria culture. The bacterial lawn was grown for 4-6 days before 20 L4 hermaphrodites were transferred. Worms were cultured at 20oC and monitored till the bacterial lawn was fully consumed (6-7 days). The plates were washed with M9 buffer and synchronized worms were transferred to 500 mL S-Basal. The culture was grown for 3 days with shaking at 120 rpm at 20oC. Worms were pooled in 50 mL Falcon tubes and washed several times with M9 buffer. The worm suspension was then transferred to unseeded 15 cm plates and exposed to 254 nm UV light (1J/cm2) using a Stratalinker 1800 to crosslink interactions of RNA with proteins. The worm pellet was washed with lysis buffer (25 mM Hepes-KOH pH 7.4, 100 mM KoAC, 10 mM MglCl2, 0.5 mM DTT, 2 tablets EDTA free protease inhibitor, 0.1 U/μL SUPERase*In) and frozen by dripping small droplets into liquid nitrogen. Frozen worms were lysed using a Retsch Cryomill MM400 at 30 Hz (3 times 90 s with cooling between cycles). Lysate was thawed on ice and clarified at 2000 x g for 10 min at 4oC. Samples were adjusted to a concentration of 10 mg/ml protein and 250 pmol of probe (see Key Resource Table) was added per 100 mg protein. Formamide was added to a final concentration of 7.5% and samples were incubated at 20oC by vertical rotation for 2 h. 200 μL of Dynabeads MyOne Streptavidin C1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) were added to the lysate and incubated for 1 h at 20oC. The beads were washed 5 times and mRNA-bound proteins were digested on-bead using trypsin using the iST 8x kit (PreOmics), followed by analysis by mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed using MaxQuant version 1.5.0.25 with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 for peptides and proteins. MS/MS peaks were searched against the Uniprot reference proteome list of either Caenorhabditis elegans or Homo sapiens. Cysteine carbamiasddomethylation was set as a constant modification, whereas methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were selected as variable modifications. Depending on the experiment, the match-between-run option was enabled and proteins were quantified using the label-free quantification (LFQ) algorithm. LFQ values were further processed using the Perseus software.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hek293 c.elegans

### Affiliations
MPI of Biochemistry

### Submitter
Martin Mueller

### Lab Head
Dr Ulrich Hartl
MPI of Biochemistry


