### Accession
PXD033341

### Title
Identification of lysine succinylome and acetylome in vancomycin-intermediate Staphylococcus aureus XN108

### Description
In this study, we detected the first lysine succinylome and acetylome in a vancomycin-intermediate S. aureus (VISA) strain, XN108.Furthermore,Comparative analysis of the protein succinylation and acetylation between XN108-ΔcobB and XN108-WT strain was conducted on the basis of quantitative detection of both protein expression and protein modification

### Sample Protocol
Three biological samples for XN108 and XN108-ΔcobB were prepared. The six samples were grown in TSB overnight and bacterial cells were harvested by centrifugation at 5,000× g for 10 min at 4 °C. Cell pellets were washed twice with ice-cold phosphate buffer solution (PBS, pH 7.2), resuspended with lysis buffer (1% Sodium dodecyl sulfate(SDS), 1% protease inhibitor, 3 M Trichostatin A (TSA), 50 mM nicotinamide (NAM)), and then lysed by ultrasonication. After that, the lysate was centrifuged at 12,000 × g at 4 °C for 10 min to remove the remaining debris. Finally, the supernatants were collected and the protein concentration was determined by bicinchoninic acid (BCA) kit.  Equal quantities of proteins were used for trypsin digestion. One times the volume of cold acetone was added to the protein samples. After vortex mixing, four times the volume of cold acetone was added for precipitation at -20℃ for 2 h. After centrifugation at 4500g for 5min, the supernatant was discarded. The remaining precipitate was washed with cold acetone for twice. The precipitations were dissolved in 200 mM Tetraethylammonium bromide (TEAB) for sonication and added with trypsin for digestion overnight (the ratio of trypsin to protein was 1:50). The protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 30 min at 56 ℃ and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 15 min in darkness at room temperature. The peptides were dissolved in IP buffer solution（100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0), and the supernatants were transferred to the pre-washed succinylated resin (PTM-402, PTM Bio ) or acetylated resin (PTM-104, PTM Bio) at 4 °C overnight with gentle shaking. The resins were washed four times with IP buffer and twice with ddH2O. The resin-bound peptides were eluted three times by using 0.1% TFA,combined,and vacuum-dried. Before liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry analysis (LC-MS/MS), the obtained peptides were desalted with C18 ZipTips  according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant 1.6.6.0. Tandem mass spectra were searched against the S. aureus XN108 database concatenated with an inverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to four missing cleavages, seven modifications per peptide, and five charges. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in first search and 5 ppm in main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine was set as fixed modification and acetylation modification, oxidation on methionine, succinylation and acetylation on lysine were specified as variable modifications. Label-free quantification (LFQ) was used for quantitative method. The false discovery rate ( FDR)  thresholds for protein,peptide and modification site were specified at 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Post-translational modification； staphylococcus aureus；visa； succinylation； acetylation；sacobb.

### Affiliations
Army Medical University,
Department of Microbiology, Army Medical University

### Submitter
Li Tan

### Lab Head
Dr Li Tan
Department of Microbiology, Army Medical University


