### Accession
PXD019479

### Title
Interactome analysis of human RBMS1 protein in SW480 cells.

### Description
To identify protein binding partners of endogenous RBMS1, it was immunoprecipicated in triplicate, vs. IgG control, from SW480 colon adenocarcinoma cells, and subjected to MS analysis on an Q-exactive plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer. Raw files 13, 14, and 15 correspond to biological replicate IPs of RBMS1, and Raw files 16, 17, and 18 correspond to biological replicate IPs of IgG control.

### Sample Protocol
SW480 cells (10M per replicate) were washed with ice-cold 1X PBS and lysed in nuclei lysis buffer (100 mM Tris HCl pH 7.5, 0.5% SDS, 1 mM EDTA) containing 1X protease inhibitors (Thermo Scientific) on ice for 10 min. The lysates were then diluted with 4 volumes of IP dilution buffer (62.5 mM Tris HCl pH 7.5, 187.5 mM NaCl, 0.625% Triton X-100, 1 mM EDTA) with protease inhibitors, and passed through a 25G needle several times. The lysates were cleared for 10 min at 25,000 g at +4C, and RBMS1 (Abcam ab150353) or IgG control antibodies, covalently bound to the magnetic Protein A/G beads (3 µg of antibody per IP), were added to each replicate lysate for immunoprecipitations (2h at +4C). Beads were then washed three times in wash buffer (15 mM Tris HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% Triton X-100) and eluted in 1X NuPage LDS sample buffer with 0.1 M DTT for 10 min at 70C. Reduced eluates were then subjected to Trypsin digestion using Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) protocol with some modifications (Wisniewski et al., 2011). Briefly, reduced samples were diluted 1 in 7 in UA buffer (8M urea, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5), transferred to Vivacon-500 30kDa centrifugal filter units (Sartorius), and concentrated by centrifugation at 14,000 g for 15 min. Filters were then washed twice by addition of 0.2 mL of UA buffer and re-concentrating by centrifugation as before. Subsequently, the proteins were alkylated by addition of 100 µL of 50 mM iodoacetamide in UA buffer and incubation at room temperature in the dark for 30 min. The iodoacetamide solution was then removed by centrifugation at 14,000 g for 10 min, and samples were washed twice with 0.2 mL of UA buffer as before. This was followed by three washes with 0.2 mL of ABC buffer (0.04 M ammonium bicarbonate in water), prior to transferring the filters to new collection tubes, and addition of Digestion buffer (0.3 µg of MS grade Trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich) in 50 µL of ABC buffer per filter). The proteins were digested overnight in a thermo-mixer at 37C with gentle shaking (600 rpm). The next day, the resulting peptides were eluted from the filters by centrifugation at 14,000 g for 10 min, followed by two further elutions, each with 100 µL of the ABC solution. The combined eluates were then reconstituted in 2% Acetonitrile (ACN), 0.2% Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), and desalted using C18 StageTips (Rappsilber et al., 2007). The peptides were then dried in a speedvac and re-suspended in A* buffer (2%ACN, 0.5% Acetic acid, 0.1% TFA in water) before LC-MS/MS analysis. |85% of each digested IP sample was then analysed on a Q-Exactive plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer coupled with a nanoflow ultimate 3000 RSL nano HPLC platform (Thermofisher Scientific). Briefly, samples were resolved at a flow rate of 250 nL/min on an Easy-Spray 50 cm x 75 μm RSLC C18 column with 2 µm particle size (Thermofisher Scientific), using a 123 minutes gradient of 3% to 35% of buffer-B (0.1% formic acid in ACN) against buffer-A (0.1% formic acid in water), and the separated peptides were infused into the mass spectrometer by electrospray. The spray voltage was set at 1.95 kV and the capillary temperature was set to 255 ˚C. The mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent positive mode, with 1 MS scan followed by 15 MS/MS scans (top 15 method). The scans were acquired in the mass analyser at 375-1500 m/z range, with a resolution of 70,000 for the MS and 17,500 for the MS/MS scans. Fragmented peaks were dynamically excluded for 30 seconds. Three biological replicates per each experimental group (RBMS1 IP or IgG control IP) were analysed.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (version 1.6.3.3) software was used for database search and label-free quantification of mass spectrometry raw files (Tyanova et al., 2016a). The search was performed against a FASTA file of the Homo Sapiens proteome, extracted from Uniprot.org (2016). A precursor mass tolerance of 4.5 ppm, and a fragment mass tolerance of 20 ppm was applied. Methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were included as variable modifications whilst carbamidomethylation was applied as a fixed modification. Two trypsin miss-cleavages were allowed, and the minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids. Default MaxQuant parameters for Label-Free Quantification (LFQ) were used. All raw files were searched together, with the match between runs option enabled. All downstream data analysis was performed by Perseus (version 1.6.2.1)(Tyanova et al., 2016b), using the MaxQuant ProteinGroups.txt output file. Briefly, LFQ intensities were Log2 transformed, followed by filtering of reverse hits, contaminants, and proteins only identified by modified peptides. Proteins were further filtered based on having valid values in all biological replicates of at least one sample group (RBMS1 IP or IgG IP). Missing values were then imputated using the Perseus imputation function, with a downshift of 2 and a distribution width of 0.2 standard deviations. Two-sample t-test analysis was also performed by Perseus, using a permutation-based FDR cut-off 0.05 and S0 offset of 0.1.

### Publication Abstract
Identifying master regulators that drive pathologic gene expression is a key challenge in precision oncology. Here, we have developed an analytic framework, named PRADA, that identifies oncogenic RNA-binding proteins through the systematic detection of coordinated changes in their target regulons. Application of this approach to data collected from clinical samples, patient-derived xenografts, and cell line models of colon cancer metastasis revealed the RNA-binding protein RBMS1 as a suppressor of colon cancer progression. We observed that silencing <i>RBMS1</i> results in increased metastatic capacity in xenograft mouse models, and that restoring its expression blunts metastatic liver colonization. We have found that RBMS1 functions as a posttranscriptional regulator of RNA stability by directly binding its target mRNAs. Together, our findings establish a role for RBMS1 as a previously unknown regulator of RNA stability and as a suppressor of colon cancer metastasis with clinical utility for risk stratification of patients. SIGNIFICANCE: By applying a new analytic approach to transcriptomic data from clinical samples and models of colon cancer progression, we have identified RBMS1 as a suppressor of metastasis and as a post-transcriptional regulator of RNA stability. Notably, <i>RBMS1</i> silencing and downregulation of its targets are negatively associated with patient survival.<i>See related commentary by Carter, p. 1261</i>.<i>This article is highlighted in the In This Issue feature, p. 1241</i>.

### Keywords
Ip-ms; rbms1; lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Barts Cancer Institute, Queen Mary University of London.
Barts Cancer Institute

### Submitter
Faraz Mardakheh

### Lab Head
Dr Faraz K. Mardakheh
Barts Cancer Institute, Queen Mary University of London.


