### Accession
PXD025060

### Title
A PP2A-Integrator complex fine-tunes transcription by opposing CDK9

### Description
In this study, we discovered that CDK9-mediated, RNAPII-driven transcription is functionally opposed by a protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) complex that is recruited to transcription sites by the Integrator complex subunit INTS6. PP2A dynamically antagonises phosphorylation of key CDK9 substrates including DSIF and RNAPII-CTD. Loss of INTS6 results in resistance to tumor cell death mediated by CDK9 inhibition, decreased turnover of CDK9 phospho-substrates and amplification of acute cell growth and pro-inflammatory transcriptional responses. Pharmacological PP2A activation synergizes with CDK9 inhibition to kill both leukemic and solid tumor cells, providing therapeutic benefit in vivo.  These data demonstrate that finely-tuned gene expression relies on the balance of kinase and phosphatase activity throughout the transcription cycle.

### Sample Protocol
Affinity purification was performed by incubating 1-2mg of nuclear or chromatin extract with 4μg antibody and 50μL of Dynabeads Protein A or Protein G for 2 hours at 4°C. Dynabeads were washed three times with co-IP buffer (20mM Tris pH 7.9, 100mM NaCl, 0.1% NP-40, protease inhibitors), followed by a final wash with 0.05% NP-40 in PBS. Elution was performed by agitation in 0.1M glycine pH 3.0 for one minute, and 1M Tris base pH 11.0 was added to neutralize the pH of the eluate. Eluates were prepared for SDS-PAGE and run on a Novex WedgeWell 10% Tris-Glycine Gel (Invitrogen) with Tris-Glycine-SDS buffer (Bio-Rad), at 110V for 10 minutes. The gel was stained with Colloidal Blue staining kit (Invitrogen), and further processed at the proteomics facility at the Wistar Institute. Gel Lanes were excised (0.5cm each), reduced with TCEP, alkylated with iodoacetamide, and digested with trypsin. Tryptic digests were analyzed using the standard 1.5-h LC gradient on the Thermo Q Exactive Plus or Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer. Antibodies used were as follows: Anti-PP2A C subunit (clone 1D6, mouse monoclonal, Millipore-Sigma, catalog# 05-421), Anti-DICE1 (INTS6) (clone H-6, mouse monoclonal, Santa Cruz, catalog# sc-376524)

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra generated from the LC-MS/MS runs were searched with full tryptic specificity against the UniProt human database (www.uniprot.org; 10/01/2018) using the MaxQuant 1.6.2.3 program. MS data were also searched for the common protein N-terminal acetylation, Asn deamidation, and Met oxidation. False discovery rates for protein and peptide identification were set at 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Gene expression by RNA polymerase II (RNAPII) is tightly controlled by cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) at discrete checkpoints during the transcription cycle. The pausing checkpoint following transcription initiation is primarily controlled by CDK9. We discovered that CDK9-mediated, RNAPII-driven transcription is functionally opposed by a protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) complex that is recruited to transcription sites by the Integrator complex subunit INTS6. PP2A dynamically antagonizes phosphorylation of key CDK9 substrates including DSIF and RNAPII-CTD. Loss of INTS6 results in resistance to tumor cell death mediated by CDK9 inhibition, decreased turnover of CDK9 phospho-substrates, and amplification of acute oncogenic transcriptional responses. Pharmacological PP2A activation synergizes with CDK9 inhibition to kill both leukemic and solid tumor cells, providing therapeutic benefit in&#xa0;vivo. These data demonstrate that fine control of gene expression relies on the balance between kinase and phosphatase activity throughout the transcription cycle, a process dysregulated in cancer that can be exploited therapeutically.

### Keywords
Human, Transcription, Integrator, Pp2a

### Affiliations
Wistar Institute
Assistant Professor, Gene Expression & Regulation Program, Wistar Institute Cancer Center, Philadelphia PA, USA

### Submitter
Sarah Welsh

### Lab Head
Dr Alessandro Gardini
Assistant Professor, Gene Expression & Regulation Program, Wistar Institute Cancer Center, Philadelphia PA, USA


