### Accession
PXD006116

### Title
Identification of thioredoxin-dependent regulatory cysteines in Chlamydomonas reinhardtii using the reductome approach.

### Description
Thiol-based redox post-translational modifications have emerged as important mechanisms of signaling and regulation in all organisms. In this context, the small ubiquitous oxido-reductase thioredoxin (Trx) plays a key role by controlling the thiol-disulfide status of target proteins. Recent redox proteomic studies revealed hundreds of proteins regulated by glutathionylation and nitrosylation in the unicellular green alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii while much less is known about the thioredoxin interactome, called thioredoxome hereafter, in this photosynthetic model organism. Using a quantitative large scale proteomic analysis based on the in vitro reconstitution of the enzymatic thioredoxin system (NADPH, NTR, Trx) within an acellular extract and followed by an isotopic labeling with cleavable Isotopic-Coded Affinity Tag reagents, we identified 1052 Trx-targeted cysteines spread over 602 proteins. These Trx-targets participate in a wide variety of metabolic pathways and cellular processes. This approach, combined with the affinity purification approach study (PXD006097) broadens not only the redox regulation to new enzymes involved in metabolic pathways already known to be regulated by thioredoxins (carbon, lipid and energy metabolism) but also shed light on cellular processes for which data supporting a putative redox regulation in these processes are scarce (aromatic amino-acid biosynthesis, nuclear transport,…). Moreover, by comparing this thioredoxome with proteomic data for glutathionylation and nitrosylation at the protein and cysteine levels, this work confirms the existence of a complex redox regulation network in Chlamydomonas and provides evidence of a tremendous selectivity of redox post-translational modifications for specific cysteines residues.

### Sample Protocol
Chlamydomonas cultures and protein extraction - Conditions used for Chlamydomonas D66 cell-wall-less strain (CC-4425 cw nit2- 203mt+ strain) were similar as those described in (Rochaix et al. 1998 Biochim Biophys Acta). Briefly, Chlamydomonas cells were grown at 25°C under mixotrophic conditions in Tris-Acetate-Phosphate (TAP) medium under continuous fluorescent white light (80 µE.m-2.s-1) and constant agitation (120 rpm). Cells in exponential growth phase (3-5 x 106 cells/mL) were harvested by centrifugation (4,200 g; 5 min), washed with 10 mL of fresh TAP medium and centrifuged again. Cells were resuspended in 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.9, 1 mM EDTA supplemented with a cocktail of antiproteases (SigmaFast, EDTA-free, Sigma) and broken by at least three freeze/thaw cycles in liquid nitrogen. After centrifugation (25,500 g; 30 min; 4°C), pellets were discarded and concentration of total soluble protein extracts was determined by the bicinchoninic acid assay using bovine serum albumin as standard (Smith Klenk 1985. Anal. Biochem. 150 (1): 76–85). Two independent cell cultures were prepared for affinity chromatography.  In vitro protein reduction and cICAT protein labeling – The total protein extract (10 mg) was first incubated for 20 min in the dark at room temperature with 20 mM IAM in 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.9 in a final volume of 1.8 mL. A second alkylation step was performed for 20 min in the presence of 20 mM N-ethylmaleimide. Excess of cysteine alkylating agents was eliminated by gel filtration using a 5 mL Sephadex G-25 column equilibrated in 50 mM Tris-HCl buffer pH 7.9. The desalted fraction was then separated into eight equal parts: four for enzymatic reduction, two for TCEP chemical reduction and the two others as control. Enzymatic reduction of Trx targets was performed by incubating 560 µg of blocked and desalted proteins with the NADPH-dependent TRX system which consisted of 2.5 mM NADPH, 10 µM CrTRXh1 and 0.5 µM A. thaliana NTR-B. The reaction was carried out for 15 min at 25°C in 50 mM Tris-HCl buffer pH 7.9 in a final volume of 254 µL. Two chemically reduced samples were prepared by incubating blocked and desalted proteins (560 µg each) with 1.2 mM TCEP under the same conditions as enzymatic reduction. Two control samples (560 µg each) were also prepared and subjected to the same treatment as the enzymatic reduction by replacing the NADPH, NTR and TRX with 50 mM Tris-HCl buffer pH 7.9. After protein reduction, proteins were biotinylated for 30 min at 25°C in the dark with the content of two tubes of cICAT reagents which were previously dissolved in 30 µL of ACN and further diluted with 50 µL of 50 mM Tris-HCl buffer pH 7.9 (1.4 mM estimated cICAT final concentration). Excess of alkylating agents was quenched with 7 mM DTT for 10 min at 25°C in a final volume of 345 µL. Thus, corresponding heavy (9x13C) cICAT and light (9x12C) cICAT labeled samples were mixed.  Purification of cICAT-labeled peptides by monomeric avidin affinity chromatography - Multiplexed samples were subjected to denaturation in the presence of 6 M urea and 5 mM DTT in a 700 µL final volume. After 15 min incubation at 25°C, free cysteines were alkylated for 25 min at 25°C in the dark with 40 mM IAM and the excess of IAM was finally quenched with 7 mM DTT for 10 min at 25°C in a 797 µL final volume. Each sample was then dialyzed against 50 mM AMBIC on Amicon-Ultra centrifugal filters (MWCO, 10 kDa; 14,000 g; dilution factor > 32). After concentration to 200 µL, Lys-C endoproteinase was added in a 1:100 (w/w) enzyme/proteins ratio and incubated at 37°C for 3 h. Then, trypsin was added in a 1:50 (w/w) enzyme/proteins ratio and incubated for overnight proteolysis at 37°C. All samples were heated for 5 min at 95°C to inactivate Lys-C and trypsin and diluted with 800 µL of 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.9 containing 1 mM EDTA and 100 mM NaCl before enrichment of cICAT-labeled peptides by avidin chromatography. For each sample, a 350 µL‑packed monomeric avidin column was prepared and equilibrated with 5 mL of 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.9 containing 100 mM NaCl and 1 mM EDTA. After centrifugation (21,500 g; 10 min; 4°C), samples were loaded by gravity on the columns and flow-through samples were directly reloaded without any other precaution. Columns were first washed with 2 mL of TEN-100 buffer and then with 2 mL of 50 mM AMBIC containing 20% methanol. cICAT‑labeled peptides were eluted in 1 mL of an aqueous solution containing 30% ACN and 0.4% TFA. Cleavage of the biotin tag was performed on one-third of the elution volume as recommended in the standard manufacturer’s protocol and peptides containing Trx-targeted cysteines were subsequently purified by C-18 reverse phase spin column (Thermo Scientific, Les Ulis) as recommended by the supplier. Desalted peptides were then concentrated with a SpeedVac (Eppendorf) and prepared in 20 µL of 3% ACN, 0.1% FA (Buffer A).

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectrometry of peptides containing Trx-targeted cysteines - Samples (1 µL) were loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap C18 precolumn (2 cm x 75 µm i.d., 3 µm, 100 Å) equilibrated in buffer A and separated at a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min on a PepMap RSLC C18 analytical column (25 cm x 75 µm i.d., 2 µm, 100 Å) using an Easy-nLC 1000 ultra-high performance liquid chromatography system (Proxeon; San José, CA, USA). The separation was performed by three successive linear gradients of solvent B (100% ACN, 0.1% FA) from 0% to 20% in 90 min, from 20% to 32% in 12 min and up to 85% in 10 min followed by an isocratic step at 85% for 10 min. The eluted peptides were injected via the nanoelectrospray nanoEasy ion source into a hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q-Exactive plus, Thermo Fisher Scientific, San José, CA, USA). Data acquisition was performed in positive and data-dependent modes. Full scan MS spectra were acquired with a mass range of m/z 400-1800 at a resolution of 70,000 (at m/z 200 Da). Up to 10 of the most intense precursor ions (except unassigned or +1 charge state ions) present in the survey scan were fragmented in the HCD cell (normalized collision energy fixed at 27) and then dynamically excluded for 60 s. MS/MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 17,500 (at m/z 200). AGC target was fixed to 3x106 ions in MS and 105 ions in MS/MS with, in each case, a maximum ion accumulation time set to 100 ms. All other parameters were set as follows: capillary temperature, 250°C; S-lens RF level, 60; isolation window, 2 Th. Acquisitions were performed with Excalibur software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San José, CA, USA) and to improve the mass accuracy of full-scan MS spectra, a permanent recalibration of the instrument was allowed using protonated polycyclodimethylsiloxane ((C2H6SiO)6, m/z 445.12003 Th) as lock mass (Cox, Michalski and Mann 2011 JASMS). Data analysis and cICAT quantification - The raw data were processed with Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San José, CA, USA) and searched against the NCBI database restricted to the C. reinhardtii taxonomy (31,910 entries, downloaded in September 2014) using an in-house Mascot search server (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.4). Mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm for the parent ion mass and 20 mmu for fragments and up to two missed cleavages per peptide were allowed. Methionine oxidation (15.99491 Th) and cysteine modifications (carbamidomethylation (57.02146 Th), N-ethylmaleimide (125.047679 Th), 9x12C cICAT (227.126991 Th), 9x13C cICAT (236.157185 Th)) were taken into account as variable modifications. For each analysis, peptide false discovery rates (FDRs) were determined by searching against a reversed decoy database. Peptides having a FDR < 0.001 and containing at least one cysteine in their sequence were automatically validated. Intensities of light or heavy cICAT-labeled peptides were determined by Proteome Discoverer 1.4 after integration of their corresponding extracted ion chromatogram at an accuracy of 2 ppm between full-scan MS spectra. The replacement of missing quantification values with minimum intensity was allowed in Proteome Discoverer 1.4. This data-imputation is based on the assumption that missing values are mainly due to the fact that protein cysteines were either blocked by the preliminary alkylating treatment or already fully oxidized in the total protein extract even if we cannot exclude it can be due to the detection limit of the Orbitrap mass analyzer. Five analytical replicates were performed for each sample and only identified peptides having at least 3 ratio counts were taken into account for further analyses. Quantitative ratios from TCEP/TCEP or Trx/Trx cICAT labeling experiments were transformed as Log2 ratio. Logarithmized significance thresholds were determined as the ± (|Global Mean Ratio| + 3 x Standard Deviation).

### Publication Abstract
Thiol-based redox post-translational modifications have emerged as important mechanisms of signaling and regulation in all organisms, and thioredoxin plays a key role by controlling the thiol-disulfide status of target proteins. Recent redox proteomic studies revealed hundreds of proteins regulated by glutathionylation and nitrosylation in the unicellular green alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, while much less is known about the thioredoxin interactome in this organism. By combining qualitative and quantitative proteomic analyses, we have comprehensively investigated the Chlamydomonas thioredoxome and 1188 targets have been identified. They participate in a wide range of metabolic pathways and cellular processes. This study broadens not only the redox regulation to new enzymes involved in well-known thioredoxin-regulated metabolic pathways&#xa0;but also sheds light on cellular processes for which data supporting redox regulation are scarce (aromatic amino acid biosynthesis, nuclear transport, etc). Moreover, we characterized 1052 thioredoxin-dependent regulatory sites and showed that these data constitute a valuable resource for future functional studies in Chlamydomonas. By comparing this thioredoxome with proteomic data for glutathionylation and nitrosylation at the protein and cysteine levels, this work confirms the existence of a complex redox regulation network in Chlamydomonas and provides evidence of a tremendous selectivity of redox post-translational modifications for specific cysteine residues.

### Keywords
Redox proteomics, Disulfide bonds, Thioredoxin targets, Isotope-coded affinity tag, Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, Redox regulation

### Affiliations
Institut de Biologie Physico-Chimique, UMR8226, CNRS, Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06, 13 rue Pierre et Marie Curie, 75005 Paris
Institut de Biologie Physico-Chimique, UMR8226, CNRS, Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06, 13 rue Pierre et Marie Curie, 75005 Paris,France

### Submitter
Christophe H. MARCHAND

### Lab Head
Dr Stephane Lemaire
Institut de Biologie Physico-Chimique, UMR8226, CNRS, Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06, 13 rue Pierre et Marie Curie, 75005 Paris,France


