### Accession
PXD008728

### Title
Ablation of Sirtuin5 in the postnatal mouse heart results in persistent accumulation of protein succinylation and normal survival in response to chronic pressure overload

### Description
Mitochondrial Sirtuin 5 (SIRT5) is an NAD+-dependent demalonylase, desuccinylase, and deglutarylase that controls several metabolic pathways. A number of recent studies point to SIRT5 desuccinylase activity being important in maintaining cardiac function and metabolism under stress. Previously, we described a phenotype of increased mortality in whole-body SIRT5KO mice exposed to chronic pressure overload compared to their littermate WT controls. We developed a tamoxifen-inducible, heart-specific SIRT5KO mouse model to determine if the survival phenotype we reported was due to a cardiac-intrinsic or cardiac-extrinsic effect of SIRT5. We discovered that postnatal cardiac ablation of Sirt5 resulted in persistent accumulation of protein succinylation up to 30 weeks after SIRT5 depletion. Succinyl proteomics revealed that succinylation increased on proteins of oxidative metabolism between 15 and 31 weeks post ablation. Heart-specific SIRT5KO mice were exposed to chronic pressure overload to induce cardiac hypertrophy. We found that, in contrast to whole-body SIRT5KO mice, there was no difference in survival between heart-specific SIRT5KO mice and their littermate controls. Overall, the data presented here suggest that survival in SIRT5KO mice may be dictated by a multi-tissue or prenatal effect of SIRT5.

### Sample Protocol
Animals:  We performed succinyl-proteomics in the fl/fl and fl/fl;MCM mice at 15 weeks and 31 weeks post-tamoxifen diet feeding. Immediately after weaning, fl/fl and fl/fl;MCM mice were fed tamoxifen for 8 days and then returned to a regular chow diet. One group of mice were sacrificed 15 weeks after tamoxifen-induced ablation of Sirt5 (n=2 fl/fl and n=3 fl/fl;MCM) and a second group of mice were sacrificed 31 weeks after tamoxifen-induced ablation of Sirt5 (n=2 fl/fl and n=2 fl/fl;MCM). The left ventricle of hearts were pulverized and processed at the same time for succinyl proteomics analysis using a workflow leveraging peptide labeling with Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) 10-plex reagents (ThermoFisher Scientific), immunoprecipitation with anti-succinyl lysine antibody (Cell Signaling Technologies), and nanoflow LC-MS/MS analysis on a Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap. Our proteomics workflow is summarized below—see Hershberger et. al. 2018 for further details. Protein Digestion: Left ventricle tissue was pulverized using a Bessman Tissue Pulverizer (Spectrum Labs) in liquid nitrogen and approximately 20 mg of tissue was weighed out for further sample preparation. Each sample was resuspended in 300 μL of 8M urea-containing lysis buffer, supplemented with protease and deacetylase inhibitors and disrupted with a TissueLyzer (Qiagen). Samples were frozen on dry ice and thawed at 32 °C for three freeze-thaw cycles. Samples were sonicated with a pencil-tip probe sonicator. Samples were centrifuged  and the supernatant was placed in clean tube and BCA assay (Sigma) was performed to determine protein concentration, after which 500 μg of each sample were diluted in 200 μL urea lysis buffer. Samples were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide (IAM), and the reaction quenched with 15 mM DTT. To each sample, 5 μg of LysC (Wako) was added and digestion proceeded for four hours at 32 °C. Samples were subsequently diluted to 1.5 M urea and 10 μg sequence grade trypsin (Promga) was added. Samples were digested overnight at 32 °C. Samples were acidified to 0.5% TFA and de-salted using a tC18 Sep-Pak SPE column (Waters). Samples were dried using a Speed Vac.  Peptide Isobaric Labeling: Samples were resuspended in 100 μL of 200 mM TEAB. Labeling reagents (Thermo TMT10plex) were resuspended in 50 μL ACN and subsequently added to the sample tubes to incubate for four hours at RT while shaking. Reactions were quenched by adding 0.8 μL of hydroxylamine and shaking for 15 minutes at RT. All samples were combined into a single tube, which was vortexed, and dried in a Speed Vac. The sample was re-constituted in 0.5% TFA and desalted on a tC18 Sep-Pak SPE column (Waters), and eluted. Subsequently, 5% of the "input" material was removed for quantification of unmodified peptides—leaving the remaining 95% in a second aliquot for succinylpeptide enrichment. Both aliquots of the de-salted peptide mixture were dried on a Speed Vac.   Succinylpeptide enrichment: Beads conjugated with succinyl-lysine antibody (CST, PTMscan Succinyl- Lysine Motif) were washed two times in ice cold PBS. Beads were transferred to a new tube and washed two more times with ice cold PBS. TMT-labeled sample (the larger aliquot from above containing 95% of the peptide mixture) was resuspended in 1.4 mL 1X IAP buffer (CST, PTMscan Succinyl-Lysine Motif) and centrifuged. The supernatant was added to the washed succinyl-lysine antibody beads and incubated on a rotator overnight at 4 °C. The sample was centrifuged and the flow-through was saved. The beads were washed two times with 1X IAP with gentle mixing by inversion in between washes. Beads were washed three times with milli-Q H2O and transferred to a new tube. Succinyl peptides were eluted from the beads by adding 100 μL of 0.15% TFA and letting sit at room temperature for 10 minutes with gentle mixing every 2-3 minutes. Sample was centrifuged and supernatant transferred to new tube. This elution step was repeated once and sample was brought to a final concentration of 0.5% TFA. Sample was desalted with a tC18 Sep-Pak SPE column (Waters) and dried on a Speed Vac. Sample was resuspended in 22.5 μL0.1% formic acid (FA).  Proteomics: Input fractionation—Input sample was resuspended in 0.5 mL of 0.1% TFA and diluted to 0.33 mg/mL in 0.1% TFA. Fractionation columns (Pierce, High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit) were conditioned according to the manufacturer’s instructions and 300 μL of sample was loaded onto a fractionation column and centrifuged. Sample was washed with 300 μL water followed by 300 μL of 5% ACN, 0.1% TFA. Sample was eluted in 8 fractions containing increasing amount of ACN. Fractions were dried in Speed Vac. Sample fractions were resuspended in 10 μL of 0.1% FA. Peptide fractions were quantified using Pierce Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay (Thermo Scientific) and sample fractions were brought to a final concentration of 0.15 mg/mL in 0.1% FA.

### Data Protocol
Mass Spectrometry: Samples were subjected to nanoLC-MS/MS analysis using an EASY-nLC UPLC system coupled to a Q ExactivePlus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer via an EASY-Spray nanoelectrospray ionization source (Thermo Fischer Scientific). The succinylpeptide and each of the HPRP fractions of the input material were resuspended in 0.1% FA. The succinylpeptide sample was analyzed with technical triplicate runs and the 8 input HPRP fractions were analyzed in singlicate. For each injection, the sample was first trapped on an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 trapping column (3 um, 75 μm × 20 mm) with solvent A (0.1 % FA), after which the analytical separation was performed over a 105 minute gradient (300 nL/minute) of 5 to 40% solvent B (90% ACN, 0.1% FA) using an Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 analytical column (2 um, 75 μm × 500 mm column) with a column temperature of 55 ºC. MS1 (precursor ions) was performed at 70,000 resolution, with an AGC target of 3x10^6 ions and a maximum injection time of 60 ms. MS2 spectra were collected by DDA of the top 10 most abundant precursor ions with a charge greater than 1 per MS1 scan, with dynamic exclusion enabled for a window of 30 seconds. Precursor ions were filtered with a 0.7 m/z isolation window and fragmented with a normalized collision energy of 30. MS2 scans were performed at 35,000 resolution, with an AGC target of 1x10^5 ions and a maximum injection time of 60 ms. Raw data processing: Raw LC-MS/MS data were processed in Proteome discoverer v2.2 (PD2.2, Thermo Fisher Scientific), using both the Sequest HT and MS Amanda 2.0 search engines. Data were searched against the UniProt mouse complete proteome database (download 9/23/2017). Default search parameters included oxidation (15.995 Da on M) as a variable modification and carbamidomethyl (57.021 Da on C) and TMT (229.163 Da on peptide N-term and K). Succinyl runs added succinyl (100.01604 Da on K) as a variable modification and changed TMT to a variable modification on K (remaining fixed on peptide N-term). Data were searched with a 10 ppm precursor mass and 0.02 Da product ion tolerance. The maximum number of missed cleavages was set to a default value of 2 (but changed to 4 for succinyl runs) and enzyme specificity was trypsin (full). Considering each data type (succinyl, input) separately, PSMs from each search algorithm were filtered to a 1% FDR using Percolator. For succinyl data, site localization probabilities were determined for succinyl lysines using ptmRS. PSMs were grouped to unique peptides while maintaining a 1% FDR at the peptide level and using a 90% site localization threshold for succinyl lysines. Peptides from all samples (succinyl, input) were grouped to proteins together using the rules of strict parsimony and proteins were filtered to 1% FDR using Protein FDR Validator. Reporter ion intensities for all PSMs having co-isolation interference below 50% and average reporter S/N>2.5 were summed together at the peptide group and protein level, but keeping quantification for each data type (succinyl, input) separate. Peptides shared between protein groups were excluded from protein quantitation calculations.   Statistical analysis: Protein and peptide groups tabs in the PD2.2 results were exported as tab delimited .txt. files, opened and analyzed in Microsoft EXCEL. First, peptide group reporter intensities for each peptide group in the input material were summed together for each TMT channel, each channel’s sum was divided by the average of all channels’ sums, resulting in channel-specific loading control normalization factors to correct for any deviation from equal protein/peptide input between each sample. Reporter intensities for peptide groups from the succinyl fraction and for proteins from the input fraction were divided by the loading control normalization factors for each respective TMT channel. Analyzing the acetylpeptide and protein datasets separately, all loading control-normalized TMT reporter intensities were converted to log2space, and the average value from the six samples was subtracted from each sample-specific measurement to normalize the relative measurements to the mean. For each genotype-age condition, condition average and standard deviation were calculated. For each comparison, Log2 fold change, p-value (two-tailed student’s t-test, assuming equal variance), and adjusted p-value (Padjusted, Benjamini Hochberg FDR correction) were calculated. For protein-level quantification, only Master Proteins—or the most statistically significant protein representing a group of parsimonious proteins containing common peptides identified at 1% FDR—were used for quantitative comparison. Succinylpeptide measurements were calculated both alone and with normalization to any change in the corresponding Master Protein, calculated by subtracting Log2 Master Protein values from succinylpeptide quantitation values on a sample-specific basis.

### Publication Abstract
Mitochondrial Sirtuin 5 (SIRT5) is an NAD<sup>+</sup>-dependent demalonylase, desuccinylase, and deglutarylase that controls several metabolic pathways. A number of recent studies point to SIRT5 desuccinylase activity being important in maintaining cardiac function and metabolism under stress. Previously, we described a phenotype of increased mortality in whole-body SIRT5KO mice exposed to chronic pressure overload compared with their littermate WT controls. To determine whether the survival phenotype we reported was due to a cardiac-intrinsic or cardiac-extrinsic effect of SIRT5, we developed a tamoxifen-inducible, heart-specific SIRT5 knockout (SIRT5KO) mouse model. Using our new animal model, we discovered that postnatal cardiac ablation of <i>Sirt5</i> resulted in persistent accumulation of protein succinylation up to 30 weeks after SIRT5 depletion. Succinyl proteomics revealed that succinylation increased on proteins of oxidative metabolism between 15 and 31 weeks after ablation. Heart-specific SIRT5KO mice were exposed to chronic pressure overload to induce cardiac hypertrophy. We found that, in contrast to whole-body SIRT5KO mice, there was no difference in survival between heart-specific SIRT5KO mice and their littermate controls. Overall, the data presented here suggest that survival of SIRT5KO mice may be dictated by a multitissue or prenatal effect of SIRT5.

### Keywords
Protein succinylation, Heart function, Sirt5

### Affiliations
Associate Professor, Department of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism, and Nutrition, Department of Pharmacology and Cancer Biology Duke University Medical Center
Duke Molecular Physiology Institute

### Submitter
Paul Grimsrud

### Lab Head
Dr Matthew D. Hirschey
Associate Professor, Department of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism, and Nutrition, Department of Pharmacology and Cancer Biology Duke University Medical Center


