### Accession
PXD003884

### Title
Peptidomics of Acanthoscurria gomesiana spider venom reveals new toxins with potential antimicrobial activity

### Description
Acanthoscurria gomesiana is a Brazilian spider from the Theraphosidae family inhabiting regions of Southeastern Brazil. Potent antimicrobial peptides as gomesin and acanthoscurrin have been discovered from the spider hemolymph in previous works. Spider venoms are also recognized as sources of biologically active peptides, however the venom peptidome of A. gomesiana remained unexplored to date. In this work, a MS-based workflow was applied to the investigation of the spider venom peptidome. Data-independent and data-dependent LC-MS/MS acquisitions of intact peptides and of peptides submitted to multiple enzyme digestions, followed by automated chromatographic alignment, de novo analysis, database and homology searches with manual validations showed that the venom is composed by less than 165 features, with masses ranging from 0.4-15.8 kDa. A total of 135 peptides from 17 proteins were identified, including three new mature peptides: U1-TRTX-Agm1a, U1-TRTX-Agm2a and U1-TRTX-Agm3a, containing 3, 4 and 3 disulfide bonds, respectively. U1-TRTX-Agm1a differed by only one amino acid from U1-TRTX-Ap1a from A. paulensis and U1-TRTX-Agm2a was derived from the genicutoxin-D1 precursor from A. geniculata. These toxins have potential applications as antimicrobial agents, as the peptide fraction of A. gomesiana showed activity against Escherichia coli strains.

### Sample Protocol
Multiple enzyme digestion Dried venom fractions were dissolved in solutions of pH 7.4-8.0 and separately digested with four enzymes under the following conditions: 50 mM NH4HCO3 or 100 mM Tris-HCl, 10 mM CaCl2 for digestion with trypsin/Lys-C (enzyme:protein ratio, 1:100) or chymotrypsin (1:100), respectively, or in 50 mM sodium phosphate, 0.5 mM CaCl2 for digestion with Glu-C (1:100) and thermolysin (1:250). All samples were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 60ºC and alkylated with 14 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark at room temperature. Incubation with the enzymes were conducted for 15 minutes at 37ºC, except for thermolysin, for which 75ºC was used.  Mass spectrometry The mass spectrometric experiments of venom peptidic fractions were performed on a Synapt G2 mass spectrometer coupled to a nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters, Milford, MA, USA). The peptide mixture was loaded online for 5 min at a flow rate of 8 µL/min of phase A (0.1% formic acid) using a Symmetry C18 trapping column (5 µm particles, 180 µm x 20 mm length; Waters, Milford, MA, USA). The mixture of trapped peptides was subsequently separated by elution with a gradient of 7-35% of phase B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) through a BEH 130 C18 column (1.7 µm particles, 75 x 150 mm; Waters, Milford, MA, USA) in 93 min, at 275 nL/min. Data were acquired in the in data-independent mode (UDMSE [35]) in the m/z range of 50-1600 in resolution mode. Collision energies were alternated between 4 eV and a ramp of 17-60 eV for precursor ion and fragment ions, respectively, using scan times of 1.25 s. The ESI source was operated in positive mode with a capillary voltage of 3.0 kV, block temperature of 70°C, and cone voltage of 50 V. For lock mass correction, [Glu1]-Fibrinopeptide B solution (500 fmol/mL in 50% acetonitrile, 0.1 formic acid; Waters, Milford, MA, USA) was infused through the reference sprayer at 500 nL/min and sampled every 60 s. Venom peptidomic fractions were analyzed in triplicate. Analyses of enzyme-digested samples were performed in a LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, GA, USA) coupled to an Easy-nLC II (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, GA, USA). All columns were packed in house. The trap column (100 μm x 50 mm) was packed with Jupiter C18 resin (10 m, Phenomenex Inc, Torrance, CA, USA) and the analytical column (75 μm x 100 mm) was packed with ACQUA C18 resin (5 m, Phenomenex Inc, Torrance, CA, USA). The sample was delivered to the trap column at 2 L/min in phase A. Gradient elution was performed with a linear gradient of 5-40% of phase B over 60 min at a flow rate of 200 nL/min. The ESI source was operated in positive mode, with voltage and temperature adjusted to 2.5 kV and 200°C, respectively. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode, in which a scanning in the m/z range of 400-2,000 was employed (with a target value of 106 ions) using the LTQ-Orbitrap analyzer with 60,000 resolution (at m/z 400), followed by higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) of the 10 most intense ions at 7,500 resolution. The isolation window for precursor ions was set to 2 m/z, the minimum count to trigger events (MS2) was 10,000 cps and the dynamic exclusion time was set to 90 sec. Normalized collision energy was set to 40%. Enzyme-digested samples were analyzed in duplicate.

### Data Protocol
Bioinformatic analysis Mass spectrometry raw data of peptide fractions were loaded in Progenesis QI for Proteomics (Nonlinear Dynamics, Newcastle, UK). A reference run for the triplicates was automatically selected. Precursor ion retention times were processed for alignment, peak picking and normalized to a reference run with default parameters. The MS data were processed by the Apex3D module using low energy threshold of 150 counts, elevated energy threshold of 30 counts and intensity threshold of 750 counts. The MS/MS spectra were exported as a *.pkl file through ProteinLynx Global Server v3.0.1 and imported in PEAKS Studio 7.5 (Bioinformatics Solution Inc., Waterloo, Canada) [36] for de novo analysis and multi-round database search. De novo analysis was carried out with precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance of 0.05 Da, non-specific peptide cleavage and considering Met oxidation and pyroglutamic acid from N-terminal Gln or Glu as variable modifications. De novo sequenced peptides with average local confidence (ALC) scores ≥50% were selected for database searches against the Araneae database from UniprotKB (48,696 sequences, downloaded in September 21st, 2015 from www.uniprot.org) in the first round and against the A. geniculata database  (76489 sequences) in the second round with the same parameters of de novo analysis. Databases were combined with a list of 251 common contaminants. Post-translational modifications and homology searches were performed by PEAKS PTM and SPIDER, respectively. The peptide false discovery rate was estimated by the decoy fusion method [36] and was set at a maximum of 1%. Peptide ion data were exported from Progenesis QI as *.csv files and edited in Excel (Microsoft, Redmond, WA, USA). Only features detected above the intensity threshold of 150 and in at least 2 out of 3 replicates were considered for further analysis. Mass map of the A. gomesiana peptidome and chromatograms were plotted in Origin Pro 2016 (Originlab, Northampton, USA). Enzyme-digested samples were processed and submitted to database, PTM and SPIDER searches in PEAKS Studio using tolerance of precursor and fragment mass of 10 ppm and 0.025 Da, respectively, and the same databases. The enzyme specificity was considered for each sample and up to three missed cleavages and one non-specific cleavage were allowed. Cys carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification and Met oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation and deamidation of Asn/Gln were set as variable modifications. All peptide spectra were manually verified and validated if a minimum of 5 fragments matching the b+ or y+ ion series were found.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Theraphotoxin., Acanthoscurria gomesiana, Peptidomics, Antimicrobial peptide

### Affiliations
Departamento de Bioquimica, Escola Paulista de Medicina, Universidade Federal de Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil
Universidade Federal de Sao Paulo

### Submitter
Alexandre Keiji Tashima

### Lab Head
Dr Alexandre Keiji Tashima
Departamento de Bioquimica, Escola Paulista de Medicina, Universidade Federal de Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil


