### Accession
PXD031152

### Title
Protein interactions with HA-tagged cytoplasmic dynein-2 DATASET2

### Description
To identify those proteins interacting with the cytoplasmic dynein-2 using mammalian cell lines stably expressing HA-tagged intermediate chain subunits, WDR34 (DYNC2I2) or WDR60 (DYNC2I1).

### Sample Protocol
To identify those proteins interacting with the cytoplasmic dynein-2 using mammalian cell lines stably expressing HA-tagged intermediate chain subunits, WDR34 (DYNC2I2) or WDR60 (DYNC2I1).

### Data Protocol
RPE-1 cells stably expressing the cDNA constructs were washed with PBS and incubated with crosslinker solution (1 mM DSP, Thermo Fisher Scientific #22585) for 30 min on ice. The reaction was quenched by adding 500 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5 for 15 min. Immunoprecipitation of lysates of hTERT-RPE1 cells stably expressing HA-tagged WDR60 or WDR34 using anti-HA agarose beads (Sigma-Aldrich).    Lysis buffer contained 50 mM Tris/HCl, pH 7.4, 1 mM EDTA, 150 mM NaCl, 1% Igepal and protease inhibitors (539137, Millipore). Subsequently, cells were incubated on a rotor at 4 ˚C for 30 min and then lysates were centrifuged at 13,000 g at 4 ˚C for 10 min. Cell lysates were added to the equilibrated HA or GFP beads and incubated on a rotor at 4 ˚C. Next, the HA beads were washed in washing buffer containing 50 mM Tris-HCl, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA, Triton X-100 0.3% SDS 0.1% and GFP beads were washed in a buffer of 10mM Tris/Hcl pH7.4, 50mM NaCl, 0.5mM EDTA.

### Publication Abstract
The dynein-2 complex must be transported anterogradely within cilia to then drive retrograde trafficking of the intraflagellar transport (IFT) machinery containing IFT-A and IFT-B complexes. Here, we screened for potential interactions between the dynein-2 and IFT-B complexes and found multiple interactions among the dynein-2 and IFT-B subunits. In particular, WDR60 (also known as DYNC2I1) and the DYNC2H1-DYNC2LI1 dimer from dynein-2, and IFT54 (also known as TRAF3IP1) and IFT57 from IFT-B contribute to the dynein-2-IFT-B interactions. WDR60 interacts with IFT54 via a conserved region N-terminal to its light chain-binding regions. Expression of the WDR60 constructs in WDR60-knockout (KO) cells revealed that N-terminal truncation mutants lacking the IFT54-binding site fail to rescue abnormal phenotypes of WDR60-KO cells, such as aberrant accumulation of the IFT machinery around the ciliary tip and on the distal side of the transition zone. However, a WDR60 construct specifically lacking just the IFT54-binding site substantially restored the ciliary defects. In line with the current docking model of dynein-2 with the anterograde IFT trains, these results indicate that extensive interactions involving multiple subunits from the dynein-2 and IFT-B complexes participate in their connection.

### Keywords
Dynein-2, Intraflagellar transport, Cilia

### Affiliations
University of Bristol

### Submitter
David Stephens

### Lab Head
Dr DAvid Stephens
University of Bristol


