### Accession
PXD010393

### Title
A novel LC system embeds analytes in pre-formed gradients for rapid, ultra-robust proteomics

### Description
To further integrate mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics into biomedical research and especially into clinical settings, high throughput and robustness are essential requirements. They are largely met in high-flow rate chromatographic systems for small molecules but these are not sufficiently sensitive for proteomics applications. Here we describe a new concept that delivers on these requirements while maintaining the sensitivity of current nano-flow LC systems. Low-pressure pumps elute the sample from a disposable trap column, simultaneously forming a chromatographic gradient that is stored in a long storage loop. An auxiliary gradient creates an offset, ensuring the re-focusing of the peptides before the separation on the analytical column by a single high-pressure pump. This simplified design enables robust operation over thousands of sample injections. Furthermore, the steps between injections are performed in parallel, reducing overhead time to a few minutes and allowing analysis of more than 200 samples per day. From fractionated HeLa cell lysates, deep proteomes covering more than 130,000 sequence unique peptides and close to 10,000 proteins were rapidly acquired. Using this data as a library, we demonstrate quantitation of 5200 proteins in only 21 min. Thus, the new system - termed Evosep One - analyzes samples in an extremely robust and high throughput manner, without sacrificing in depth proteomics coverage.

### Sample Protocol
and 1% penicillin−streptomycin (Life Technologies, Inc.). Cells were counted using an Invitrogen countess cell counter and stored after snap freezing at -80°C. Tryptophan fluorescence emission assay for protein quantification – Protein concentrations were determined in 8 M urea by tryptophan fluorescence emission at 350 nm, using an excitation wavelength of 295 nm. Tryptophan at a concentration of 0.1 µg/µl in 8 M urea was used to establish a standard calibration curve (0 - 4 µl). We estimated that 0.1 µg/µl tryptophan are equivalent to the emission of 7 µg/µl of human protein extract, assuming that tryptophan on average accounts for 1.3% of human protein amino acid composition.  Protein digestion – For sample preparation we used the iST kit for proteomic samples (Kulak et al., 2014), starting with 106 HeLa cells according to the manufacturer’s instructions (P.O. 00001, PreOmics GmbH).  Robustness optimization – To test and optimize robustness, we injected and analyzed over 2000 times tryptic peptides of HeLa cells, initially in exploratory batches. For this experiment, we used the breadboard model of the Evosep One coupled to a LTQ Orbitrap instrument. All issues were protocolled and the system was optimized during the test and in the exploratory phase, the instrument was only stopped for the optimization of hardware and software components. The last 1500 HeLa samples were analyzed on a single column to analyze variation in the system and the wear of the column. Plasma proteomics – Blood was taken by venipuncture using a commercially available winged infusion set and collection tubes containing EDTA and centrifuged for 15 min at 2000 g to harvest plasma. Blood was sampled from a healthy donor, who provided written informed consent, with prior approval of the ethics committee of the Max Planck Society. The plasma was distributed into a 96 well plate and subsequently processed with an automated sample preparation for Plasma Proteome Profiling as described previously (Geyer et al., 2016a). High throughput of low complexity samples – the “UPS1 Proteomic Standard” (Sigma-Aldrich) was digested as indicated above using the PreOmics iST kit and the peptides were analyzed with the 200 samples/day method (5.6 min gradient) with a 2 µl/min flow on a 5 cm C18 column (3 µm particle size).   Pre-fractionation – Peptides for deep proteome analysis were fractionated using a reversed-phase Acquity CSH C18 1.7 µm 1 x 150 mm column (Waters, Milford, MA) on an Ultimate 3000 high-pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC) system (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA) operating at 30 µl/min. Buffer A (5 mM ammonium bicarbonate) and buffer B (100% ACN) were used. Peptides were separated by a linear gradient from 5% B to 35% B in 55 min, followed by a linear increase to 70% B in 8 min. In total, 46 fractions were collected without concatenation. For nano-flow LC-MS/MS, the loading amount was kept constant at 500 ng per injection for the Easy-nLC 1200, while 500 ng from each fraction was loaded on an Evotip.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis – MS raw files were analyzed by the MaxQuant software (Cox and Mann, 2008) and fragments lists were searched against the human Uniprot Reference Proteome without isoforms (April 2017 release with 21,042 protein sequences) by the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011) with cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification and N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidations as variable modifications. The experiment for the 200 samples/day method was analyzed with the UPS1 FASTA file, downloaded from the homepage of Sigma-Aldrich (April 2018). We set the false discovery rate (FDR) to 0.01 at the peptide and protein levels and specified a minimum length of 7 amino acids for peptides. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to arginine and lysine as expected using trypsin and LysC as proteases, and a maximum of two missed cleavages. An initial precursor mass deviation up to 7 ppm and a fragment mass deviation of 20 ppm were specified.  Data independent analysis (DIA) results were processed with Spectronaut version (11.0.15038.19.19667) (Biognosys, Zurich, Switzerland). A project specific spectral library was imported from the separate MaxQuant analysis of the combined analysis of the 46 pre-fractionated HeLa fractions, and DIA files were analyzed using default settings.  All bioinformatics analyses were done with the Perseus software (Tyanova, 2016) of the MaxQuant computational platform.

### Publication Abstract
To further integrate mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics into biomedical research and especially into clinical settings, high throughput and robustness are essential requirements. They are largely met in high-flow rate chromatographic systems for small molecules but these are not sufficiently sensitive for proteomics applications. Here we describe a new concept that delivers on these requirements while maintaining the sensitivity of current nano-flow LC systems. Low-pressure pumps elute the sample from a disposable trap column, simultaneously forming a chromatographic gradient that is stored in a long storage loop. An auxiliary gradient creates an offset, ensuring the re-focusing of the peptides before the separation on the analytical column by a single high-pressure pump. This simplified design enables robust operation over thousands of sample injections. Furthermore, the steps between injections are performed in parallel, reducing overhead time to a few minutes and allowing analysis of more than 200 samples per day. From fractionated HeLa cell lysates, deep proteomes covering more than 130,000 sequence unique peptides and close to 10,000 proteins were rapidly acquired. Using this data as a library, we demonstrate quantitation of 5200 proteins in only 21 min. Thus, the new system - termed Evosep One - analyzes samples in an extremely robust and high throughput manner, without sacrificing in depth proteomics coverage.

### Keywords
Clinic, Plasma, Liquid chromatography

### Affiliations
Proteomics and Signal Transduction Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry Am Klopferspitz 18 D-82152 Martinsried
Proteomics

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Proteomics and Signal Transduction Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry Am Klopferspitz 18 D-82152 Martinsried


