### Accession
PXD003977

### Title
Expanding proteome coverage with CHarge Ordered Parallel Ion aNalysis (CHOPIN) combined with broad specificity proteolysis

### Description
The "deep" proteome has been accessible by mass spectrometry for some time. However, the number of proteins identified in cells of the same type has plateaued at ~8,000-10,000 without ID transfer from reference proteomes/data. Moreover, limited sequence coverage hampers the discrimination of protein isoforms when using trypsin as standard protease. Multi-enzyme approaches appear to improve sequence coverage and subsequent isoform discrimination. Here, we expanded proteome and protein sequence coverage in MCF-7 breast cancer cells to an as yet unmatched depth, by employing a workflow that addresses current limitations in deep proteome analysis at multiple stages: We used i) Gel-aided sample preparation (GASP) and combined trypsin/elastase digests to increase peptide orthogonality, ii) concatenated high pH pre-fractionation and iii) CHarge Ordered Parallel Ion aNalysis (CHOPIN)- available on an Orbitrap Fusion (Lumos) mass spectrometer- to achieve 57% median protein sequence coverage in 13,728 protein groups (8,949 Unigene IDs) in a single cell line. CHOPIN allows the use of both detectors in the Orbitrap on predefined precursor types that optimizes parallel ion processing, leading to the identification of a total of 179,549 unique peptides covering the deep proteome in unprecedented detail.

### Sample Protocol
MCF-7 cells were lysed in SDS and Urea and digested with Elastase or Trypsin using the GASP protocoll. Offline prefractionation was done using high pH reversed phase chromatography and samples analysised with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos in the universal mode or using CHOPIN.

### Data Protocol
Data was analysed using PEAKS PTM searches apllying an FDR or 1%. CID and HCD results derived from the CHOPIN acquisition were combined followed by fraction combination.

### Publication Abstract
The "deep" proteome has been accessible by mass spectrometry for some time. However, the number of proteins identified in cells of the same type has plateaued at &#x223c;8000-10&#x202f;000 without ID transfer from reference proteomes/data. Moreover, limited sequence coverage hampers the discrimination of protein isoforms when using trypsin as standard protease. Multienzyme approaches appear to improve sequence coverage and subsequent isoform discrimination. Here we expanded proteome and protein sequence coverage in MCF-7 breast cancer cells to an as yet unmatched depth by employing a workflow that addresses current limitations in deep proteome analysis in multiple stages: We used (i) gel-aided sample preparation (GASP) and combined trypsin/elastase digests to increase peptide orthogonality, (ii) concatenated high-pH prefractionation, and (iii) CHarge Ordered Parallel Ion aNalysis (CHOPIN), available on an Orbitrap Fusion (Lumos) mass spectrometer, to achieve 57% median protein sequence coverage in 13&#x202f;728 protein groups (8949 Unigene IDs) in a single cell line. CHOPIN allows the use of both detectors in the Orbitrap on predefined precursor types that optimizes parallel ion processing, leading to the identification of a total of 179&#x202f;549 unique peptides covering the deep proteome in unprecedented detail.

### Keywords
Fusion lumos, Deep proteome

### Affiliations
Target Discovery Institute, Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, Roosevelt Drive, Oxford OX3 7FZ, UK
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Roman Fischer

### Lab Head
Dr Roman Fischer
Target Discovery Institute, Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, Roosevelt Drive, Oxford OX3 7FZ, UK


### SDRF
- Characteristics[organism: Homo sapiens
- Characteristics[organism part: breast
- Characteristics[disease: breast adenocarcinoma
- Characteristics[cell type: epithelial
- label: AC=MS:1002038;NT=label free sample
- instrument: NT=Orbitrap Fusion Lumos;AC=MS:1002732
- modification parameters: NT=Oxidation;MT=variable;TA=M;AC=UNIMOD:35
- modification parameters.1: NT=Deamidated;TA=N,Q;AC=UNIMOD:7;MT=variable
- modification parameters.2: NT=Propionamide;AC=UNIMOD:24;TA=C;MT=fixed
- modification parameters.3: NT=Propionamide;AC=UNIMOD:24;TA=K;PP=Any N-term;MT=variable

