### Accession
PXD019273

### Title
Posttranslational modification of the RHO of plants protein RACB by phosphorylation and cross-kingdom conserved ubiquitination

### Description
Small RHO-type G-proteins act as signaling hubs and master regulators of polarity in eukaryotic cells. Their activity is tightly controlled, as defective RHO signaling leads to aberrant growth and developmental defects. Two major pathways regulate G-protein activity: canonical switching of the nucleotide bound state and posttranslational modification (PTM). PTMs can support or suppress RHO signaling, depending on each individual case. In plants, regulation of Rho of plants (ROPs) has been shown to act through nucleotide exchange and hydrolysis, as well as through lipid modification, but there is little data available on phosphorylation or ubiquitination of ROPs. Hence, we applied proteomic analyses to identify PTMs of the barley ROP RACB. Data show in vitro phosphorylation by barley ROP Binding Kinase 1 and in vivo ubiquitination of RACB.

### Sample Protocol
In-vitro kinase assays were performed with CA-RACB and either RBK1 or the kinase-dead version RBK1_K245D. Protoplasts were isolated from stable transgenic barley leaves overexpressing 3xHA-CA-RACB and additionally transformed with GFP-RBK1 to stimulate phosphorylation events of proteins associated with the RACB/RBK1 pathway. Protoplasts were treated with MG132 before proteins extraction, immunoprecipitation and tryptic digestion. Phosphopeptides were enriched using Fe(III+)-IMAC and fractionated on basic reverse phase StageTip microcolumns. In-gel digestion was performed according to standard protocols. Liquid chromatography-coupled mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis was performed on Orbitrap mass spectrometer systems coupled on-line to a Dionex 3000 HPLC. The liquid chromatography setup consisted of a 75 μm × 2 cm trap column and a 75 μm × 40 cm analytical column. Separation of the peptides was performed by using a 60min linear gradient from 4% to 32% ACN with 5% DMSO, 0.1% formic acid in water. For phosphopeptide measurements, the gradient was adjusted to a two-step gradient from 4% to 27% ACN. The instruments were operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS2 scans.

### Data Protocol
Peptide and protein identification and quantification was performed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.8.3) using standard settings. Raw files were searched against a barley database (160517_Hv_IBSC_PGSB_r1_proteins_HighConf_REPR_annotation.fasta; IPK Gatersleben), phosphopeptide library sequences and common contaminants. For the kinase assay dataset, we used the recombinant protein sequences and an E. coli reference database (uniprot-proteome_UP000000625). Carbamidomethylated cysteine was set as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine, and N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications. Lysine ubiquitylation, phosphorylation of serine, threonine or tyrosine were set as variable modification were applicable. An m/z value of 115.0502 was specified as diagnostic ion for lysine glyglycylation. Trypsin/P was specified as the proteolytic enzyme, with up to two missed cleavage sites allowed. The match between run function was enabled for matching samples and between fractions. Results were filtered to 1% PSM, protein and Site FDR.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Barley, Ubiquitination, Phosphorylation, Rho-type g-protein

### Affiliations
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, TU Munich
TUM

### Submitter
Julia Mergner

### Lab Head
Dr Bernhard Kuster
TUM


