### Accession
PXD005063

### Title
Identification of human membrane proteins

### Description
Typically, integral membrane and membrane associate proteins are underrepresented in proteomic experiments due to their low abundance and solubility during sample preparation. We collected two fractions upon cell lysis, one comprising the insoluble membrane fraction the other the soluble cytosolic fraction. Using detergents and additives we were able to release the proteins from the membrane fraction and subsequently perform trypsin digestion for analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Two proteine fraction, cytosolic and membrane bound proteins were generated by lysing HeLa cells in water. Qctylglucoside and urea were added to solubilize the membrane fraction, perfrom predigestion with LysC and subsequent tryptic digest. Obtained peptide fractions were desalted on C18 stage tips and submitted to LC-MSMS analysis using an Ultimate 3000 nano-chromatography system (Thermo) equipped with a reversed phase-C18 column (Dr. Maisch, ReprosilC18-AQ, 250x0.075 mm, 2.4 um, 100A) and coupled to an QTOF mass spectrometer 6600 TripleTOF (Sciex). Sample were acquired in data-dependent acqisition mode in positive ionization. For peptide separation a linear gradient from 3.5 to 32% ACN in 0.1% Fa was established over 140 min. A MS duty cycle with 1 survey scan and up to 40 fragment ion spectra was employed, resulting a cycle time of 2.9 seconds. For precursor selaction, a charge state between 2+ and 5+ was required and a minimal intensity of 100 cps. Previously selected precusor ions and their isotopes were excluded from multiple fragmentation for 45 seconds and with a mass accuracy of 15 ppm.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analyzed by database searching with the Andromeda algorithm within MaxQuant 1.5.3.12 against a combined forward/reversed, canonical protein database comprising the human proteome (Uniprot, 05/2015). Results were filtered for 1% false discoveries on the PSM level and up to 5% false discoveries on the protein level. PSMs required a minimal score for unmodified peptides and 35 for modified peptides. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and acetylation of the protein N-terminus as variable modification were enabled. A maximal mass deviation of 35 ppm was set for the first search, MS/MS deviation was set to 55 ppm. Protein hits with at least one razor or unique peptide were reported in the result table (proteingroups.txt)

### Publication Abstract
Spectral libraries play a central role in the analysis of data-independent-acquisition (DIA) proteomics experiments. A main assumption in current spectral library tools is that a single characteristic intensity pattern (CIP) suffices to describe the fragmentation of a peptide in a particular charge state (peptide charge pair). However, we find that this is often not the case. We carry out a systematic evaluation of spectral variability over public repositories and in-house data sets. We show that spectral variability is widespread and partly occurs under fixed experimental conditions. Using clustering of preprocessed spectra, we derive a limited number of multiple characteristic intensity patterns (MCIPs) for each peptide charge pair, which allow almost complete coverage of our heterogeneous data set without affecting the false discovery rate. We show that a MCIP library derived from public repositories performs in most cases similar to a "custom-made" spectral library, which has been acquired under identical experimental conditions as the query spectra. We apply the MCIP approach to a DIA data set and observe a significant increase in peptide recognition. We propose the MCIP approach as an easy-to-implement addition to current spectral library search engines and as a new way to utilize the data stored in spectral repositories.

### Keywords
Quantitatie proteomics, Membrane proteins

### Affiliations
CECAD, University of Cologne, AG Krüger
Protein Analysis Unit ZfP LMU Munich BioMedical Center Grosshaderner Strasse 9 82152 Planegg-Martinsried Tel. +49 89 2180 71804

### Submitter
Andreas Schmidt

### Lab Head
Dr Axel Imhof
Protein Analysis Unit ZfP LMU Munich BioMedical Center Grosshaderner Strasse 9 82152 Planegg-Martinsried Tel. +49 89 2180 71804


