### Accession
PXD008367

### Title
H2 drives metabolic rearrangements in gas-fermenting Clostridium autoethanogenum

### Description
Background: The global demand for affordable carbon has never been stronger, and there is an imperative in many industrial processes to use waste streams to make products. Gas-fermenting acetogens offer a potential solution and several commercial gas fermentation plants are currently under construction. As energy limits acetogen metabolism, supply of H2 should diminish substrate loss to CO2 and facilitate production of reduced and energy-intensive products. However, the effects of H2 supply on CO-grown acetogens have yet to be experimentally quantified under controlled growth conditions. Results: Here, we quantify the effects of H2 supplementation by comparing growth on CO, syngas, and a high-H2 CO gas mix using chemostat cultures of Clostridium autoethanogenum. Cultures were characterised at the molecular level using metabolomics, proteomics, gas analysis, and a genome-scale metabolic model (GEM). CO-limited chemostats operated at two steady-state biomass concentrations facilitated co-utilisation of CO and H2. We show that H2 supply strongly impacts carbon distribution with a four-fold reduction in substrate loss as CO2 (61% vs. 17%) and a proportional increase of flux to ethanol (15% vs. 61%). Notably, H2 supplementation lowers the molar acetate/ethanol ratio by five-fold. At the molecular level, quantitative proteome analysis showed no obvious changes leading to these metabolic rearrangements suggesting the involvement of post-translational regulation. Metabolic modelling showed that H2 availability provided reducing power via H2 oxidation and saved redox as cells reduced all the CO2 to formate directly using H2 in the Wood-Ljungdahl pathway. Modelling further indicated that the methylene-THF reductase reaction was ferredoxin-reducing under all conditions. In combination with proteomics, modelling also showed that ethanol was synthesised through the acetaldehyde:ferredoxin oxidoreductase (AOR) activity. Conclusions: Our quantitative molecular analysis revealed that H2 drives rearrangements at several layers of metabolism and provides novel links between carbon, energy, and redox metabolism advancing our understanding of energy conservation in acetogens. We conclude that H2 supply can substantially increase the efficiency of gas fermentation and thus the feed gas composition can be considered an important factor in developing gas fermentation-based bioprocesses.

### Sample Protocol
2 mL of culture was pelleted by immediate centrifugation (25,000 × g for 1 min at 4 °C) and stored at -80 °C until analysis. Frozen cell pellets were thawed, washed with phosphate-buffered saline, resuspended in 500 µL of lysis buffer (pH 7.6) containing 2% (w/v) SDS (L4390; Sigma-Aldrich), 0.1 M DTT (V3155; Promega), 0.1 M Trizma® base (T1503; Sigma-Aldrich), and vortexed. The cell suspension was transferred to a 2 mL screw cap microtube (522-Q; Thermo Fisher Scientific) containing 0.1 mm glass beads (11079101; BioSpec Products). Cell lysis was performed by repeating the following ‘lysis cycle’ four times: incubation for 10 min at 100 °C; bead beating using program ‘cycle 5’ on the PrecellysTM 24 instrument (Bertin Technologies); centrifugation at 14,000 rpm for 10 min at room temperature; vortexing (excluded from the final fourth lysis cycle). Next, 400 µL of lysate was carefully removed without withdrawing glass beads. Protein concentration in cell lysates was determined using the 2D Quant Kit (80-6483-56; GE Healthcare Life Sciences). Alkylation of sulfhydryl groups and protein digestion was based on the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol [60].Samples were desalted using C18 ZipTips (ZTC18S096; Merck Millipore). Finally, peptides were eluted with 0.1% FA in 70% ACN. Total peptide concentration in each sample was determined using the PierceTM Quantitative Fluorometric Peptide Assay (23290; Thermo Fisher Scientific) to ensure that the same total peptide amount across samples could be injected for DIA MS analysis. To further increase the accuracy of relative protein quantification, each sample was spiked with the same amount of a mix of SIL-peptides derived from the 20 SIL-proteins. Finally, samples were freeze-dried and reconstituted with 10 µL of 2% (v/v) ACN containing 0.05% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to which 1 µL of an iRT Peptide mix (Ki-3003; Byognosis) were added, pre-diluted one in five to meet the manufacturer's recommendations. To increase the proteome coverage in DIA MS analysis, a pool of samples from each gas mix was fractionated using high pH reverse-phase fractionation, based on the protocol of the Thermo Fisher Scientific product 84868. For both the DDA spectral library generation and DIA sample runs, a Thermo Scientific U3000 nano HPLC system was used in a trap column configuration for concentration and separation of the peptide samples. The samples were initially loaded onto a Thermo Acclaim PepMap C18 trap reversed-phase column (75 µm x 2 cm nano viper, 3 µm particle size) at a flow rate of 8 µL/min using 2% ACN containing 0.05% TFA for 6 min. For each DDA sample run, a volume of 5 µL equating to ~1.5 µg of protein digest was injected. Likewise, for each DIA sample run, a volume of 5 µL equating to 0.5 µg of protein digest was injected. The eluted peptides from the C18 column were introduced to the MS via a nano-ESI and analysed using the Q-Exactive HF. The electrospray voltage was 1.8 kV, and the ion transfer tube temperature was 250 °C. Employing a top-20 ddMS2 acquisition method, full MS-scans were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer over the range m/z 400–1200 with a mass resolution of 120,000 (at m/z 200). The AGC target value was set at 3.00E+06. The 20 most intense peaks with a charge state between 2 and 6 were fragmented in the high energy collision dissociation (HCD) cell with a normalised collision energy of 28%. MSMS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer with a mass resolution of 15,000 at m/z 200. The AGC target value for MSMS was set to 1.0E+05 while the ion selection threshold was set to 1.8E+05 counts. The maximum allowed ion accumulation times were 50 ms for full MS-scans and 40 ms for MSMS. For all the experiments, the dynamic exclusion time was set to 20 s, and undetermined charge state species were excluded from MSMS. As for the DDA method, eluted peptides were introduced to the MS via a nano-ESI and analysed using the Q-Exactive HF. The electrospray voltage was 1.9 kV, and the ion transfer tube temperature was 250 °C. DIA was achieved using an inclusion list: m/z 400‒1000 in steps of 15 amu and a quadruple isolation window of 16 amu, scans cycled through the list of 40 isolation windows interspersed with an MS1 scan for every 10 targets. Full MS-scans were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyser over the range m/z 400–1200 with a mass resolution of 120,000 (at m/z 200). Identical to the DDA method, the AGC target value was set at 3.00E+06 with a maximum injection time of 50 ms. All DIA scans implemented an NCE collision energy of 28% while MSMS detection in the Orbitrap was at a resolution setting of 30,000 (at m/z 200). The AGC target was set to 1e6 with a maximum injection time of 45 ms. A first fixed mass of m/z 200 was applied, and default charge state of 2 was set for scanning MS2 events.

### Data Protocol
Identification results from DDA analysis were used to build a spectral library for DIA MS data confirmation and quantification using Skyline [61] (see below). For this, raw DDA data files were analysed with Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using SEQUEST HT against a C. autoethanogenum DSM 10061 [31] database containing ~3750 sequences while also annotated to include the 20 SIL-proteins and a fusion of the 11 iRT peptides. The NCBI annotation of sequence NC_022592.1 [59] was used as the annotation genome here, with CAETHG_RS07860 removed and replaced with the carbon monoxide dehydrogenase genes named CAETHG_RS07861 and CAETHG_RS07862 with initial IDs of CAETHG_1620 and 1621 [59], respectively. The workflow editor was used to create customised searches and result reports where RAW data files were processed to generate a Magellan Server File (MSF) result file and a .pd result output file, which was later incorporated in Skyline for the DIA MS spectral library build.  The SEQUEST HT search parameters included: 10 ppm precursor ion mass tolerance; product ion mass tolerance of 0.05 m/z; full trypsin specificity with two missed cleavages allowed for peptides with a length of 6-150 AAs. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification, while methionine oxidation, deamidation of glutamine and asparagine as well as N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. The mass analyser used was Fourier Transform Mass Spectrometry while the activation type was HCD. A full scan in the positive mode of polarity was collected, and the peaks were filtered with a signal to noise (S/N) threshold of 1.5. A separate SEQUEST HT search node was included with fixed modifications set to include 13C(6)15N(2)/+8.014 Da (K) and 13C(6)15N(4)/+10.008 Da (R) for the SIL-proteins. Within this search node, cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57) was set as a fixed modification, while methionine oxidation (+16), deamidation of glutamine and asparagine (+0.984) as well as N-terminal acetylation (+42) were set as variable modifications. Database searching against the corresponding decoy database containing reversed protein sequences was performed using Percolator to evaluate the FDR of peptide identifications. The final .pd result file contained peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) with q-values estimated at 1% FDR for peptides ≥4 AAs.  DIA MS data analysis was performed with the software Skyline [61]. The .pd result file from Proteome Discoverer was used to build the DIA MS spectral library within Skyline using only PSMs with q-value<0.01. The following parameters were used for DIA MS data analysis: six of the most intense y and b (only y for SIL-protein-aided label-based quantification) product ions from ion 3 to last ion of charge state 1 and 2 among precursor charges 2, 3, and 4 were picked while product ions falling within the DIA precursor window were excluded; chromatograms were extracted with a library match mass tolerance of 0.05 m/z for product ions with an extraction window within 5 min of the predicted retention time after iRT alignment; full trypsin specificity with two missed cleavages allowed for peptides with a length of 8-25 AAs; cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed peptide modification. Additionally, for SIL-protein-aided label-based quantification, peptide modifications included heavy labels for lysine and arginine as 13C(6)15N(2)/+8.014 Da (K) and 13C(6)15N(4)/+10.008 Da (R), respectively, and these heavy labels were set as ‘internal standard type’ to aid peak picking.  Next, for both datasets (label-free and label-based), shared peptides were removed, a minimum of five transitions per precursor and two peptides per protein were allowed. The mProphet peak picking algorithm [62] within Skyline was used and trained with shuffled sequence decoys to separate true from false positive peak groups (per sample) and only peak groups with q-value<0.01 (representing 1% FDR) were used for further quantification. For the proteome-wide dataset (label-free), we confidently quantitated 14,705 peptides and 1,655 proteins across all samples, and 10,134 peptides and 1,403 proteins on average within each sample with at least two peptides per protein.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Acetogen; gas fermentation; quantitative proteomics; data-independent acquisition; genome-scale modelling; metabolomics

### Affiliations
Australian Institute for Bioengineering and Nanotechnology (AIBN), The University of Queensland
Australian Institute for Bioengineering and Nanotechnology,The University of Queensland

### Submitter
Kaspar Valgepea

### Lab Head
Dr Esteban Marcellin
Australian Institute for Bioengineering and Nanotechnology (AIBN), The University of Queensland


