### Accession
PXD004979

### Title
Charting Organellar Importomes by Quantitative Mass Spectrometry -SAM50

### Description
Protein import into organelles is essential for all eukaryotes and facilitated by multi-protein translocation machineries. Analyzing whether a protein is transported into an organelle is largely restricted to single constituents. This renders knowledge about imported proteins incomplete, limiting our understanding of organellar biogenesis and function. Here, we introduce a method that enables to chart an organelle’s importome. Our method relies on inducible RNAi-mediated knockdown of an essential subunit of a translocase to impair import, metabolic labeling and quantitative mass spectrometry. To highlight its potential, we established the mitochondrial importome of Trypanosoma brucei, comprising 1,120 proteins including 331 new candidates. An exciting feature of this method is that it overcomes limitations in identifying proteins with dual or multiple locations. We demonstrate the specificity and versatility of this novel ImportOmics method by targeting import machineries in mitochondria and glycosomes demonstrating its high potential for globally studying protein import and inventories of organelles.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC labeling and LC/MS sample preparation: Transgenic cells enabling the RNAi-mediated knockdown of SAM50 were grown in modified SDM-80 medium containing 5.55 mM glucose, 15% (v/v) dialyzed FCS, and either the unlabeled "light" or stable isotope-labeled "heavy" versions of arginine (1.1 mM; Arg0 or Arg10) and lysine (0.4 mM; Lys0 or Lys8). Induction of SAM50 RNAi with tetracycline for 3 days was started 2 - 3 days after beginning SILAC labeling of the cells. Differentially labeled tetracycline-treated and untreated RNAi cells were mixed in equal amounts. Cells were collected by centrifugation (1,400 rcf, 4°C, 10 min) and washed with PBS. Plasma membranes were lysed by incubating the cells in SoTE buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 2 mM EDTA pH 8.0, 600 mM sorbitol) containing 0.015% (w/v) digitonin (5 min on ice). Subsequent differential centrifugation (6,800 rcf, 4°C, 5 min) yielded an organelle-enriched pellet fraction. Organelle-enriched fractions of SILAC-labeled SAM50-RNAi cells were prepared in three independent replicates including a label-switch.  Fractions were resuspended in 8 M urea/50 mM NH4HCO3. Proteins (4 µg protein per LC-MS analysis) were reduced with 10 mM Tris(2-carboxy-ethyl)phosphine dissolved in 10 mM NH4HCO3 (incubation for 30 min at 37°C). Free thiol groups were subsequently alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide/10 mM NH4HCO3 (30 min at room temperature in the dark). Urea concentration was adjusted to 2 M with 50 mM NH4HCO3 and proteins were tryptically digested in solution (37°C, overnight). Peptide mixtures were dried and reconstituted in 0.1% (v/v) TFA.  LC/MS analysis: Nano-HPLC-ESI-MS/MS analyses were performed on an Orbitrap Elite instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) connected to an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Dreieich, Germany). The RSLC system was equipped with PepMap C18 precolumns (5 mm x 300 µm inner diameter; Thermo Scientific) for washing and preconcentration of the peptides and a C18 reversed-phase nano LC columns (Acclaim PepMap RSLC columns; 50 cm x 75 µm inner diameter; particle size 2 µm, pore size 100 Å; Thermo Scientific) for peptide separation at 40°C and a flow rate of 250 nl/min. Peptides were separated applying an LC gradient ranging from 5 - 57% solvent B (B: 30% ACN/50% methanol/0.1% FA; A: 0.1% FA) in 265 min followed by 57 -  99% B in 50 min and 5 min at 99% B. Samples were analyzed in two technical replicates. The MS instrument, equipped with a Nanospray Flex ion source with DirectJunction and stainless steel emitters (Thermo Scientific), was externally calibrated using standard compounds. Mass spectrometric parameters were as follows: MS scans, m/z 370 - 1,700; resolution, 120,000 (at m/z 400); automatic gain control (AGC), 10E6 ions; and max. fill time, 200 ms. A TOP15 method was applied for low-energy collision-induced dissociation of multiply charged peptides in the linear ion trap applying a normalized collision energy of 35%, an activation q of 0.25, an activation time of 10 ms, an AGC of 5 x 10E5, and a max. fill time of 150 ms. The dynamic exclusion time for previously selected precursor ions was set to 45 s.

### Data Protocol
MS data analysis: For protein identification and quantification, MS raw data were processed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.8) and its integrated search engine Andromeda.MS/MS data were searched against all entries for T. brucei TREU927 listed in the respective fasta file downloaded from the TriTryp database (version 8.1; 11,067 entries; http://tritrypdb.org/tritrypdb/), to which the 18 mitochondrially encoded proteins (http://dna.kdna.ucla.edu/trypanosome/seqs/index.html) were added. The database search was performed with tryptic specificity (with a maximum of two missed cleavages) not allowing cleavage N-terminal to proline (Trypsin/P), mass tolerances of 4.5 ppm for precursor and 0.5 Da for fragment ions, carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed and N-terminal acetylation and oxidation of methionine as variable modifications. Arg10 and Lys8 were set as heavy labels. Protein identification by MaxQuant/Andromeda was based on at least one unique peptide with a minimum length of seven amino acids and a false discovery rate of 0.01 applied to both peptide and protein level. For SILAC-based protein quantification, only unique peptides were considered and the minimum ratio count was set to one. The options “re-quantify” and “match between runs” were enabled. Only proteins identified with at least two peptides (one of which unique) and quantified in at least two biological replicates were considered for further bioinformatics and statistical data analyses. SILAC ratios (i.e., RNAi +/-Tet) were log2-transformed and mean log2 RNAi +/-Tet ratios determined across all replicates were plotted against the p-value calculated for each protein using a two-sided Student's t-test.

### Publication Abstract
Protein import into organelles is essential for all eukaryotes and facilitated by multi-protein translocation machineries. Analysing whether a protein is transported into an organelle is largely restricted to single constituents. This renders knowledge about imported proteins incomplete, limiting our understanding of organellar biogenesis and function. Here we introduce a method that enables charting an organelle's importome. The approach relies on inducible RNAi-mediated knockdown of an essential subunit of a translocase to impair import and quantitative mass spectrometry. To highlight its potential, we established the mitochondrial importome of Trypanosoma brucei, comprising 1,120 proteins including 331 new candidates. Furthermore, the method allows for the identification of proteins with dual or multiple locations and the substrates of distinct protein import pathways. We demonstrate the specificity and versatility of this ImportOmics method by targeting import factors in mitochondria and glycosomes, which demonstrates its potential for globally studying protein import and inventories of organelles.

### Keywords
Importomics, Mitochondria, Proteomics, Glycosomes, Rnai-mediated protein knockdown, Silac, Organellar protein import, Trypanosoma brucei

### Affiliations
AG Warscheid
Biologie II
Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg
Schänzlestr. 1
79104 Freiburg
Germany

Department of Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics, Institute of Biology II, Faculty of Biology and BIOSS Centre for Biological Signalling Studies, University of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany

### Submitter
Friedel Drepper

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Bettina Warscheid
Department of Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics, Institute of Biology II, Faculty of Biology and BIOSS Centre for Biological Signalling Studies, University of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany


