### Accession
PXD004647

### Title
Human Tankyrases TAP-LC-MSMS -  Proteomic Analysis of the Human Tankyrase Protein Interaction Network Reveals Its Role in Pexophagy

### Description
Tankyrase 1 (TNKS1) and tankyrase 2 (TNKS2) belong to the poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) family of proteins, which use NAD+ to modify substrate proteins with ADP-ribose modifications. Tankyrases are implicated involving in multiple cellular functions, including the telomere length control, Wnt/b-catenin pathway regulation, glucose uptake and cell cycle regulation. Emerging evidences reveal the pathological relevance of tankyrase in diseases and propose these two key enzymes as potential drug targets. However, the cellular functions and regulatory machineries of tankyrases are still largely unknown. Through this proteomic analysis, we not only defined the protein-protein interaction map for the tankyrases which revealed 100~150 high confident interacting proteins for tankyrases in various cellular functions, but also uncovered the novel regulating function of tankyrase in peroxisome homeostasis.

### Sample Protocol
Excised gel bands were cut into approximately 1 mm3 pieces. Gel pieces were then subjected to in-gel trypsin digestion and dried. All Cysteins (C) are modified by iodoacetamide (MOD:01214). Some Cysteins are dynamically modified to S-carboxamidoethyl-L-cysteine (MOD: 00417). The search was set up to be able to find alkylated cysteine if the cysteines were treated with iodoacetamide or if they were not to find the presence of mono-acrylamide adducts on cysteine. Samples were reconstituted in 5 µl of HPLC solvent A (2.5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). A nano-scale reverse-phase HPLC capillary column was created by packing 5 µm C18 spherical silica beads into a fused silica capillary (100 µm inner diameter x ~20 cm length) with a flame-drawn tip. After equilibrating the column each sample was loaded via a Famos autosampler (LC Packings, San Francisco CA) onto the column. A gradient was formed and peptides were eluted with increasing concentrations of solvent B (97.5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). As peptides eluted they were subjected to electrospray ionization and then entered into an LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher, San Jose, CA). Peptides were detected, isolated, and fragmented to produce a tandem mass spectrum of specific fragment ions for each peptide.

### Data Protocol
Peptide sequences (and hence protein identity) were determined by matching protein databases with the acquired fragmentation pattern by the software program, SEQUEST (ver. 28). (ThermoFisher, San Jose, CA). Enzyme specificity was set to partially tryptic with 2 missed cleavages. Modifications included carboxyamidomethyl (cysteines, fixed) and oxidation (methionine, variable). Mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for precursor ions and 0.5 Da for fragment ions. The database searched was the Swiss-Prot reviewed database (release 2016.4). Spectral matches were filtered to contain less than 1% FDR at the peptide level based on the target-decoy method. Finally, only tryptic matches were reported and spectral matches were manually examined. When peptides matched to multiple proteins, the peptide was assigned so that only the most logical protein was included (Occam's razor). This same principle was used for isoforms when present in the database. The Sequest output files were further processed by Scaffold 4.6.1 to ensure the protein FDR is less than 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Tankyrase 1 (TNKS) and tankyrase 2 (TNKS2) belong to the poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase family of proteins, which use nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide to modify substrate proteins with ADP-ribose modifications. Emerging evidence has revealed the pathological relevance of TNKS and TNKS2, and identified these two enzymes as potential drug targets. However, the cellular functions and regulatory mechanisms of TNKS/2 are still largely unknown. Through a proteomic analysis, we defined the protein-protein interaction network for human TNKS/2 and revealed more than 100 high-confidence interacting proteins with numerous biological functions in this network. Finally, through functional validation, we uncovered a role for TNKS/2 in peroxisome homeostasis and determined that this function is independent of TNKS enzyme activities. Our proteomic study of the TNKS/2 protein interaction network provides a rich resource for further exploration of tankyrase functions in numerous cellular processes.

### Keywords
Human, Tap, Lc-msms, Tankyrase

### Affiliations
Experimental Radiation Oncology, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA
Experimental Radiation Oncology

### Submitter
Xu Li

### Lab Head
Dr Junjie Chen
Experimental Radiation Oncology, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA


