### Accession
PXD017823

### Title
Full-featured, real-time database searching platform enables fast and accurate multiplexed quantitative proteomics.

### Description
Multiplexed quantitative analyses of complex proteomes enable deep biological insight. While a multitude of workflows have been developed for multiplexed analyses, the most quantitatively accurate method (SPS-MS3) suffers from long acquisition duty cycles. We built a new, real-time database search (RTS) platform, Orbiter, to combat the SPS-MS3 method’s longer duty cycles. RTS with Orbiter eliminates SPS-MS3 scans if no peptide matches to a given spectrum. With Orbiter’s online proteomic analytical pipeline, which includes RTS and false discovery rate analysis, it was possible to process a single spectrum database search in less than 10 milliseconds. The result is a fast, functional means to identify peptide spectral matches using Comet, filter these matches, and more efficiently quantify proteins of interest. Importantly, the use of Comet for peptide spectral matching allowed for a fully featured search, including analysis of post-translational modifications, with well-known and extensively validated scoring. These data could then be used to trigger subsequent scans in an adaptive and flexible manner. In this work we tested the utility of this adaptive data acquisition platform to improve the efficiency and accuracy of multiplexed quantitative experiments. We found that RTS enabled a two-fold increase in mass spectrometric data acquisition efficiency. Orbiter’s RTS quantified more than 8000 proteins across 10 proteomes in half the time of an SPS-MS3 analysis (18 hours for RTS, 36 hours for SPS-MS3).

### Sample Protocol
Yeast cells (Saccharomyces cerevisae, BY4742) were grown in 500mL YPD cultures to an OD600 of 0.8 then washed twice with ice-cold PBS, pelleted, and stored at -80oC until use. Cells were resuspended in lysis buffer (8M urea, 50mM EPPS pH 8.5, 150mM NaCl, Roche protease inhibitor tablet) and lysed by bead beating. After lysis and bead removal, the lysate was centrifuged to remove cellular debris and the supernatant was collected for use. Cell lines were grown to confluence in DMEM containing 10% fetal bovine serum and 1% streptomycin/puromycin. Cells were harvested by manual scraping and washed twice with PBS. Cells were syringe lysed in lysis buffer (8M urea, 50mM EPPS pH 8.5, 150mM NaCl, and Roche protease inhibitor tablet) and the resulting lysates were cleared via centrifugation.   Desired protein amounts were aliquoted and chloroform methanol precipitated, followed by digestion with LysC (overnight at room temperature, vortex speed 2; Wako) and trypsin (6 hours, 37oC; Promega) digestion. Peptides were labeled with TMT reagents as described previously. Labeled peptides were mixed, and dried to remove organic solvent prior to clean-up via Sep-Pak (50mg C18 SepPak; Waters). As needed, labeled peptide mixtures were separated via high-pH reversed phase chromatography and pooled into 12 fractions. Samples were dried and stored at -80oC prior to analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were converted to mzXML format using an in-house adapted version of RawFileReader6 and searched using SEQUEST or Comet. Briefly, spectra were searched against a target-decoy database for the yeast, human, or concatenated human-yeast proteomes, including isoforms6. Searches were performed with a 20 ppm peptide mass tolerance, 0.9 Da fragment ion tolerance, trypsin enzymatic cleavage with up to 2 missed cleavages, and three variable modifications allowed per peptide. Unless otherwise noted, all searches were performed with variable methionine oxidation (+15.9949146221), static cysteine carboxyamido-methylation (+57.02146) and static tandem mass tag modifications on lysine and the peptide N-termini (+229.16293). Peptide spectral matches were filtered to a peptide and protein false discovery rate (FDR) of less than 1%15. Statistical analyses and plotting was done using the R project for statistical computing16.  Unless otherwise noted, peptides identified using HRMS or SPS-MS3 methods were considered quantified if the reporter ion summed signal:noise was greater than 100 and isolation specificity was greater than 0.5; peptides identified using RTS methods were considered quantified if the reporter ion summed signal:noise was greater than 100.

### Publication Abstract
Multiplexed quantitative analyses of complex proteomes enable deep biological insight. While a multitude of workflows have been developed for multiplexed analyses, the most quantitatively accurate method (SPS-MS3) suffers from long acquisition duty cycles. We built a new, real-time database search (RTS) platform, Orbiter, to combat the SPS-MS3 method's longer duty cycles. RTS with Orbiter eliminates SPS-MS3 scans if no peptide matches to a given spectrum. With Orbiter's online proteomic analytical pipeline, which includes RTS and false discovery rate analysis, it was possible to process a single spectrum database search in less than 10 ms. The result is a fast, functional means to identify peptide spectral matches using Comet, filter these matches, and more efficiently quantify proteins of interest. Importantly, the use of Comet for peptide spectral matching allowed for a fully featured search, including analysis of post-translational modifications, with well-known and extensively validated scoring. These data could then be used to trigger subsequent scans in an adaptive and flexible manner. In this work we tested the utility of this adaptive data acquisition platform to improve the efficiency and accuracy of multiplexed quantitative experiments. We found that RTS enabled a 2-fold increase in mass spectrometric data acquisition efficiency. Orbiter's RTS quantified more than 8000 proteins across 10 proteomes in half the time of an SPS-MS3 analysis (18 h for RTS, 36 h for SPS-MS3).

### Keywords
Multiplexed, Orbiter, Real-time search

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School
Professor, Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Devin Schweppe

### Lab Head
Dr Steven Gygi
Professor, Harvard Medical School


