### Accession
PXD017067

### Title
The dynamic surface proteome of allergenic fungal conidia

### Description
Fungal spores and hyphal fragments are major contributors to the allergic response in the human lung. In this study, using a trypsin-shaving-proteomics approach, we identified  the surface-exposed and secreted/shed proteins of Aspergillus fumigatus conidia and investigated the dynamics of the surface proteome under different conditions, including  temperature variation and germination. We find that the surface proteome of resting A. fumigatus conidia is quite dynamic, as evidenced by drastically different surface  proteomes under different growth conditions. We further investigated two observed A. fumigatus surface proteins, ScwA and CweA; ScwA is specific to the Aspergillus genus and  only expressed on conidia grown at higher temperatures, whereas CweA is found throughout the Aspergillus and Penicillium genera. We extended our analysis of the surface  proteome of A. fumigatus to other allergy-inducing pathogens; Alternaria alternata, Penicillium rubens, and Cladosporium herbarum, and performed comparative proteomics on  resting and swollen conidia, as well as secreted proteins from germinating conidia. In this dataset, we detected 125 protein orthologs in the extracellular region of all four  organisms, and 42 nonorthologous proteins produced by A. fumigatus, which may be useful in the development of future diagnostics. This study highlights the dynamic nature of  the conidial surface and implicates growth conditions in the antigenicity of fungal conidia.

### Sample Protocol
Surface proteins were extracted as follows: Cells were washed twice with 25 mM NH4HCO3 and collected by centrifugation (1,800 × g for 10 min at RT). Samples were resuspended in 800 µl of 25 mM NH4HCO3 and treated with 5 µg trypsin for 5 min at 37°C with gentle agitation. Samples were then immediately passed through a 0.2 µm cellulose acetate filter and collected in an Eppendorf tube, followed by washing of the syringe with 200 µl of 25 mM NH4HCO3. 9 µl of 89% (v/v) HCOOH was added to stop  the tryptic digestion. The samples were dried using a SpeedVac, resuspended in 25 µl of 2% (v/v) ACN and 0.05% (v/v) TFA, and centrifuged for 15 min through a 10 kDa cutoff centrifuge column. Conidia were collected after trypsin treatment and tested for lysis using a brief (15 min) staining with 40 µM propidium iodide followed by imaging with a Zeiss Axio Imager.M2 microscope (Zeiss). For the identification of secreted proteins, ~2e9 resting conidia were germinated as described above for 5 h, before collection of the supernatant by filtration through a 0.22 µm filter and addition of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 0.1% (v/v). Protein was purified by solid phase extraction with a Chromabond SPE-C4 cartridge (Machery-Nagel, Germany). Briefly, columns were washed with 4 mL MeOH and reconstituted with 4 mL 0.1% (v/v) TFA. Sample supernatants were aspirated through columns, washed with 2 mL 5% (v/v) MeOH / 0.1% (v/v) TFA, and eluted in 4 mL 0.1% (v/v) TFA 80/10 acetonitrile (ACN)/H2O (v/v). Samples were then dried by SpeedVac, resolubilized in 100 µL denaturation buffer (50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) in 50/50 trifluoroethanol (TFE)/H2O (v/v)), sonicated for 15 min, and homogenized by Vortex. Following 10 min at 90°C, samples were collected by centrifugation and cooled on ice. Protein content was measured with a Merck Millipore Direct Detect spectrometer. The samples were then reduced by adding 2 µL of reduction buffer (500 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine in 100 mM TEAB) to 100 µL of sample (<1 µg/µL) for 1 h at 55°C. 2 µL of fresh alkylation buffer (625 mM iodacetamid) was added to each sample and incubated for 30 min at room temperature, in the dark. Following evaporation by SpeedVac, the samples were resolubilized in 95 µL of 100 mM TEAB and sonicated for 10 min. The samples were treated with 2 µg of trypsin (Serva) for 18 h at 37°C. The reaction was stopped with 10 µL of 10% (v/v) HCOOH and evaporated using the SpeedVac. Peptides were resolubilized in 25 µL 0.05%  (v/v) TFA in 2/98 ACN/H2O (v/v) and sonicated for 15 min in a water bath before centrifugation in 10 kDa molecular weight cut-off spin filters at 14,000 × g (20°C) for 15 min. LC-MS/MS analysis of trypsin-shaved surface peptides (method #1 and #2) and tryptic peptides of secreted proteins (method #3) was performed on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano instrument coupled to either a QExactive Plus (method #1 and #3) or an HF (method #2) mass spectrometer (Thermo). Tryptic peptides were trapped for 4 min on  an Acclaim Pep Map 100 column (2 cm × 75 µm, 3 µm) at a flow-rate of 5 µL/min. The peptides were then separated on an Acclaim Pep Map column (50 cm×75 µm, 2 µm) using a binary gradient (A: 0.1% (v/v) HCOOH in H2O; B: 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in 90:10 (v/v) ACN/H2O). Method #1: 0-4 min at 4% B, 10 min at 7% B, 40 min at 10% B, 60 min at  15% B, 80 min at 25% B, 90 min at 35% B, 110 min at 50% B, 115 min at 60% B, 120-125 min at 96% B, 125.1-150 min at 4 % B. Method #2: 0-4 min at 4% B, 5 min at 8% B, 20 min at 12% B, 30 min at 18% B, 40 min at 25% B, 50 min at 35% B, 57 min at 50% B, 62-65 min at 96% B, 65.1-90 min at 4% B. Method #3: 0-5 min at 4% B, 30 min at 7% B, 60 min at 10%  B, 100 min at 15% B, 140 min at 25% B, 180 min at 45% B, 200 min at 65% B, 210-215 min at 96% B, 215.1-240 min at 4 % B. Positively charged ions were generated by a Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo) using a stainless steel emitter with 2.2 kV spray voltage. Ions were measured in Full MS / dd MS2 (Top10) mode, i.e. precursors were scanned at m/z 300-1500 (R: 70,000 (#1 and #3)/60,000 (#2) FWHM; AGC target: 1e6; max. IT: 120 (#1 and # 3)/ 100 (#2) ms). Fragment ions generated in the HCD cell at 30% normalized collision energy using N2 were scanned (R: 17,500 (#1 and #3) / 15,000 (#2) FWHM; AGC target: 2e5; max. IT: 120 (#1 and #3) / 100 (#2) ms) in a data-dependent manner (dynamic exclusion: 30 s).

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS data produced by trypsin-shaving were searched against the A. fumigatus Af293 genome of the Aspergillus Genome Database (AspGD); Uniprot Proteome ID UP000000724 for  Penicilium rubens; Uniprot Proteome ID UP000077248 for Alternaria alternata; and the Joint Genome Institute MycoCosm annotation against the proteome of the related organism  Cladosporium fulvum (described in [26, 27]) for Cladosporium herbarum, using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 and 2.2 and the algorithms of Mascot 2.4.1, Sequest HT, and MS Amanda. Two  missed cleavages for tryptic peptides were allowed. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm, and the fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. The dynamic  modification was set as oxidation of Met. For secretome analysis (method #3) the static modification was set to carbamidomethylation of Cys. In all cases, at least 2 peptides  per protein and a strict target false discovery (FDR) rate of < 1% were required for positive protein hits.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cladosporium herbarum, Surfome, Hyphae, Lc-ms/ms, Secretome, Penicillium rubens, Alternaria alternata, Aspergillus fumigatus, Germling

### Affiliations
Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knöll Institute
Department of Molecular and Applied Microbiology Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knöll Institute

### Submitter
Thomas Krüger

### Lab Head
Dr Axel A. Brakhage
Department of Molecular and Applied Microbiology Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knöll Institute


