### Accession
PXD036583

### Title
Macrophage exosome, LC-MS/MS-based proteomics

### Description
This study provides new insights for the proteins in macrophage exosomes, as well as supplying some potential values for understanding the role of exosomes in macrophage.

### Sample Protocol
Macrophages were treated with or without 10 M NE for 3 days. The culture medium was centrifuged 1000×g for 10 minutes and filtrated by 0.45 m filter in order to eliminate the cells and debris. The culture medium was then ultracentrifugated at 200,000×g for 120 minutes (Type 70 Ti rotor, Beckman Coulter Optima L-80 XP). The exosome pellet was washed with PBS and collected after another ultracentrifugation at 200,000×g for 120 minutes. The purified exosomes were sequenced by LC-MS/MS-based proteomics.  Exsomes were lysed by SDT (4% (w/v) SDS, 100mM Tris/HCl pH7.6, 0.1M DTT). The proteins were extracted and quantified using the BCA method and then were digested using the Filter aided proteome preparation method, and the peptides were desalted by C18 Cartridge, lyophilized and quantified (OD280). LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scienti c, Waltham, MA, USA) coupled to an Easy nLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific)

### Data Protocol
The MS data were analyzed using MaxQuant software version 1.5.3.17 (Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany). MASCOT engine (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.2) was used to search MS/MS spectra embedded into Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Electron, San Jose, CA.).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Exosome, Lc-ms/ms-based proteomics, Macrophage

### Affiliations
Tianjin Medical University
Department of Pharmacology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Tianjin Medical University

### Submitter
Huiwen Ren

### Lab Head
Dr Ying Yu
Department of Pharmacology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Tianjin Medical University


