### Accession
PXD025575

### Title
Analysis of circ101093 binding proteins in A549 cells after RNA pull-down.

### Description
We used circular RNA 101093 and its antisense to perform RNA pull-down, and analyzed the peptides in blank group, antisense group and circular RNA 101093 group. The object of this group is to analyze circ101093-binding protein. Blank and antisense group are used as negative control group.

### Sample Protocol
The sample was thawed in a refrigerator at 4°C, then transferred to 0.22 μm rotary filter, centrifuged at 4°C for 10 min, and the filtrate was collected; Take the filtrate into a 10 kd ultrafiltration tube, centrifugate at 12000 rpm for 10 min, and discard the filtrate; Add 100 μl 8M urea buffer, centrifuge at 12000 rpm for 10 min, and repeat twice; Add 40 μl protein reduction buffer, and incubate at 37°C for 1 h; Add 40 μl protein alkylation buffer, react in dark at room temperature for 30 min, centrifuge at 12000 rpm for 10 min, and discard the solution at the bottom of the collection tube; Add 150 μl 25mM NH4HCO3, centrifuge at 12000 rpm for 20 min, discard the solution at the bottom of the collection tube, and repeat for three times; Replace the collection tube, add sequencing grade trypsin solution with the concentration of 12ng / μl into the ultrafiltration tube, and incubate at 37 °C for 16 h; After centrifugation at 12000 rpm for 5 min, the peptides were collected. Then 50 μl 25mm NH4HCO3 was added into the ultrafiltration tube, centrifuged at 12000 rpm for 5 min, repeated for 3 times, and the solution at the bottom of the tube was collected and combined with the previous solution to volatilize. Preparation of C18 membrane packed column; The dried peptide was dissolved in nano HPLC buffer a; 40 μl methanol was centrifuged once through the column, and the liquid at the bottom of EP tube was discarded and repeated twice; 40 μl nano HPLC buffer A was centrifuged once, and the liquid at the bottom of EP tube was discarded and repeated twice; The peptide sample was centrifuged once through the column, and then the liquid at the bottom of the EP tube was passed through the column once again; 40 μl nano HPLC buffer A was centrifuged once, and the liquid at the bottom of EP tube was discarded and repeated twice; Replace the EP tube with a new one, centrifugation with 40 μl nano HPLC buffer B, collect the liquid at the bottom of the EP tube and repeat once. After desalination, 80 μl nano HPLC buffer B containing peptide samples was volatilized. All analyses were performed by a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo, USA) equipped with a Nanospray Flex source (Thermo, USA). Samples were loaded and separated by a C18 column (15 cm × 75 μm) on an EASY-nLCTM 1200 system (Thermo, USA). The flow rate was 300 nL/min and linear gradient was 30 min (0~20 min, 5-30% B; 20~24 min, 30-50% B; 24~25 min, 50-100% B; 25~30 min, 100%B; mobile phase A = 0.1% FA in water and B = 80% ACN/0.1% FA in water). Full MS scans were acquired in the mass range of 300 – 1600 m/z with a mass resolution of 35000 and the AGC target value was set at 1e6 and a max injection time of 50 ms. The ten most intense peaks in MS were fragmented with higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with NCE of 28. MS/MS spectra were obtained with a resolution of 17500 with an AGC target of 2e5 and a max injection time of 50 ms. The Q-E dynamic exclusion was set for 30.0 s and run under positive mode.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer (v.2.4) was used to search all of the raw data thoroughly against the protein database (UniProt_***). Database searches were performed with Trypsin digestion specificity. The database search parameters were as follows: static modified with Carbamidomethyl(C), dynamic modified with Acetyl (Protein N-term), Deamidated (NQ), Oxidation (M), Met-loss(Protein M), Met-loss+Acetyl (Protein M). For protein quantification, the MS1 tolerance was set to 10 ppm and the MS1 tolerance was set to 0,02Da.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Fabp3, Luad, Circular rna, Rna pull-down, Cancer

### Affiliations
tongji university
Shanghai Institute of Thoracic Oncology, Shanghai Chest Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200030

### Submitter
zhang xiao

### Lab Head
Dr Jiayi Wang
Shanghai Institute of Thoracic Oncology, Shanghai Chest Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200030


