### Accession
PXD021460

### Title
The temperature quickly modulates protein expression by Codon Usage in wheat filling grain

### Description
The protein content determines the cell state. The variation in protein abundance is crucial when organisms are in the early stages of heat stress, but the reasons affecting their changes are largely unknown. We quantified 47,535 mRNAs and 3,742 proteins in filling grain of wheat under two thermal environments. The impact of mRNA abundance and sequence features which implicated in protein translation and degradation on protein expression was evaluated by regression analysis. Transcription, codon usage and amino acid frequency mainly drive the changes in protein expression under heat stress, and their combined contribution explains 58.2% and 66.4% of protein variation in 30 and 40 °C, respectively. Of which, transcription contributes more to the alteration in protein content under 40 °C (31%) than to 30 °C (6%). Codon usage plays a stable and powerful role in protein expression under heat stress, even surpassing transcription. What’s more, the usage of AAG is a key factor regulating rapid protein expression under heat stress.

### Sample Protocol
Common wheat (T. aestivum cv. Chinese Spring) were grown in a greenhouse, daily care to avoid stress. The main stem of the plant was labeled when the first flower appeared on the spike. After flowering 12 days, plants were transferred to growth chambers with a temperature regime of 20 °C, day/night (14/10 h) cycle for three days adaptation, which has the same anthesis and in good condition. All plants were divided into three groups (about 50 plants), two groups were quickly shifted to the incubators which pre-heated to 30 °C and 40 °C respectively, the other one remained 20 °C as control. The grains on the main stem were collected at the same time after been exposed to three temperature environments for 1 h (in light), immediately frozen in liquid N2, and stored at -80 °C freezer for transcriptomic and proteomic analysis.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS spectra were processed using the Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the wheat protein database (https://urgi.versailles.inra.fr/download/iwgsc/IWGSC_RefSeq_Annotations/v1.1/iwgsc_refseqv1.1_genes_2017July06.zip) concatenated with the reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as a cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missings. The first search and main search range were set to 5 ppm, and 0.02 Da of fragment ions. Carbamidomethylation on Cys was specified as a fixed modification, and oxidation on Met, and oxidation on Met and acetylation on the protein N-terminus were specified as variable modifications. False discovery rate (FDR) thresholds for protein, peptide, and modification sites were specified at 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Heat stress; post-transcriptional regulation; codon usage; aag frequency; wheat

### Affiliations
Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi, 712100, China
Northwest A&F University

### Submitter
Bingjin Wu

### Lab Head
Dr Bingjin Wu
Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi, 712100, China


