### Accession
PXD026377

### Title
Proteomic profiling of Labeo Rohita; a widely cultivated fish

### Description
The aim of this study was to develop a Peptide Atlas repository for Labeo rohita. Using LC-MS/MS, we have performed in-depth proteomics analysis of 19 different sample types, including 17 tissue samples, plasma from female fish and embryo 4-day post fertilization. Whole analysis resulted in the identification of more than 6015 confident canonical proteins along with ~3000 non canonical peoteins corresponding to more than 150 thousands peptides. This proteomic dataset would complement the recently published genome to accelerate further research.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction from 17 tissue samples was done using urea lysis buffer composed of 8M urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 75 mM NaCl and 1 mM MgCl2. Tissues were first homogenised, sonicated, bead-beated for 90 sec followed by centrifugation at 8,000 x g for 15 minutes at 4-degree C. For embryo sample, conventional trizol method was followed for extracting proteins. Plasma was directly taken as protein extract. Protein in all the samples was quantified using Bradford assay and fractionated on 1D-SDS-PAGE. Fractionated protein bands were performed in-gel digestion using trypsin as protease. Protein digest was extracted from gel pieces using gradient solution of Acetonitrile. Peptides were desalted using c-18 zip tips, vacuum dried and stored till further use for mass spectrometry. For LC-MS/MS, peptides were quantified and around 1 ug of peptides were subjected to mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
The DDA-MS data obtained after mass spectrometry was subjected to Trans Proteomic Pipeline (TPP) tool. The raw data (.raw) files were first converted into MzML file using msconvert tool built in TPP. The data was performed comet search against L. rohita protein database (ProteomeID- UP000290572) obtained from unassembled WGS sequence and NCBI protein sequences (Bio project: PRJNA437789) of Labeo rohita.  An equal number of decoy sequences generated using “randomize sequences and interleave entries” decoy algorithm and contaminant sequences from common Repository of Adventitious Proteins, cRAP, database. Comet search was followed by other steps in TPP pipeline as peptideProphet, reSpect, iProphet, ProteinProphet. MAYU tool was used for data filtering and finally the ROHU peptide Atlas was developed.

### Publication Abstract
Proteomics has enormous applications in human and animal research. However, proteomic studies in fisheries science are quite scanty particularly for economically important species. Few proteomic studies have been carried out in model fish species, but comprehensive proteomics of aquaculture species are still scarce. This study aimed to perform a comprehensive organ-based protein profiling of important tissue samples for one of the most important aquaculture species,<i>Labeo rohita</i>.Deep proteomic profiling of 17 histologically normal tissues, blood plasma, and embryo provided mass-spectrometric evidence for 8498 proteins at 1% false discovery rate that make up about 26% of the total annotated protein-coding sequences in Rohu. Tissue-wise expression analysis was performed, and the presence of several biologically important proteins was also verified using a targeted proteomic approach. We identified the global post-translational modifications (PTMs) in terms of acetylation (N-terminus and lysine), methylation (N-terminus, lysine, and arginine), and phosphorylation (serine, threonine, and tyrosine) to present a comprehensive proteome resource. An interactive web-based portal has been developed for an overall landscape of protein expression across the studied tissues of <i>Labeo rohita</i> (www.fishprot.org). This draft proteome map of <i>Labeo rohita</i> would advance basic and applied research in aquaculture to meet the most critical challenge of providing food and nutritional security to an increasing world population.

### Keywords
Rohu peptideatlas, Labeo rohita, Orbitrap fusion

### Affiliations
Indian Institute of Technology Bombay
Department of biosciences and Bioengineering, IIT Bombay

### Submitter
Mehar Un Nissa

### Lab Head
Dr Sanjeeva Srivastava
Department of biosciences and Bioengineering, IIT Bombay


