### Accession
PXD045274

### Title
Pilot study on the field-grown pollen proteome from maize W22.

### Description
This was a pilot project carried out by Dr Wojciech Majeran to determine the maize pollen proteome harvested from field-grown W22 (T43) plants in plots on the Musgrave Research Farm  (Cornell CALS) in Aurora (NY). To enhance proteome coverage, the pollen were separated into soluble and membrane bound protein fractions, and separated by SDS-PAGE followed by in-gel digestion and shot-gun proteomics using a nanoLC-Orbitrap system.

### Sample Protocol
Pollen was isolated from field-grown maize cv W22-T43 in July2008 in experimental fields of Musgrave Research Farm  (Cornell Cals) in Aurora (NY).  Pollen was collected from flowering panicles by shaking within morning hours (9 to 11 am) to preserve pollen viability.  The pollen was separated from stamens by filtering through folded pollen bags. This yields high pollen purity by removing flower pieces or bigger particles. The isolated pollen was resupended in 10 mM Hepes (pH8 - KOH), and 2.5 mM MgCl2 and sonicated by short pulse (4s). Soluble and membrane fraction were separated by centrifugation (65.000 xg, 10 min). The supernatant and membrane fractions were then each solubilized in SDS Laemmli solubilization buffer and denaturated at 100C for 60 s.  After short centrifugation (to remove insoluble material), both fractions were separated on 12% Tricine SDS-PAGE gels and stained with Coomassie BB. Each gel lane was cut in 12 consecutive slices, reduced and alkylated, digested with trypsin, and the extracted peptides were analyzed by nano-LC LTQ-Orbitrap MS using data-dependent acquisition and dynamic exclusion, as described (Friso et al., 2010).

### Data Protocol
Peak lists (.mgf format) were generated using DTA supercharge (version 1.19) software (http://msquant.sourceforge.net/) and searched with Mascot version 2.2 (Matrix Science) against maize genome release 4a.53 (with 53,764 models) from http://www.maizesequence.org/, supplemented with the plastid-encoded proteins (111 protein models) and mitochondria-encoded proteins (165 protein models). MS-based information for all identified proteins was extracted from the Mascot search pages and filtered for significance (e.g. minimum ion scores, etc.), ambiguities, and shared spectra as described (Friso et al., 2010). All filtered results were uploaded into the PPDB (http://ppdb.tc.cornell.edu/; Sun et al., 2009).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Shot-gun, Pollen soluble and pollen membrane proteomes., Proteomics, Pollen, Maize, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Institute for Systems Biology
School of Integrative Plant Science Plant Biology Section, Cornell University

### Submitter
Tami Leppert

### Lab Head
Dr Klaas van
School of Integrative Plant Science Plant Biology Section, Cornell University


### SDRF
- organism: Zea mays
- organism part: pollen
- cell type: not applicable
- disease: not applicable
- label: label free sample
- instrument: LTQ Orbitrap
- modification parameters: Carbamidomethyl

