### Accession
PXD019739

### Title
The identification of bacterial protein interaction partners pointed out to new intracellular functions of Francisella tularensis glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase

### Description
Glyceraldehyde-3-phopshate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) is well-known for its involvement in numerous non-metabolic processes inside the mammalian cells. Alternative functions of prokaryotic GAPDH are mainly deduced from its extracellular localization and the ability to bind to selected host proteins. Data on its participation in intracellular bacterial processes are scarce as there is so far only one study dealing with this issue. We previously reported several evidence that the GAPDH homologue of Francisella tularensis, GapA, might also exert additional non-enzymatic functions. To follow up our former observation, here we decided to find out GapA’s interacting partners within the bacterial proteome to explore its new roles at the intracellular level. The quantitative proteomics approach based on stable isotope labelling of amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) in combination with affinity purification and mass spectrometry enabled us to identify 18 proteins potentially interacting with GapA, six of those interactions were further confirmed by alternative methods. Half of the identified proteins were involved in non-metabolic processes. Further analysis together with the quantitative label-free comparative analysis of proteomes isolated from the wild-type strain and strain with deleted gapA gene suggests that the GapA is implicated in DNA repair processes. The absence of GapA promotes secretion of its most potent interaction partner, the hypothetical protein with peptidase propeptide domain (PepSY) indicating its impact on subcellular distribution of some proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial strain, plasmids and culture conditions. The F. tularensis and E. coli strains and plasmids used in this study are listed in Supplementary Table 1. Francisella strains were cultured on McLeod agar enriched with bovine hemoglobin (Becton Dickinson, Cockeysville, MD, USA) and IsoVitaleX (Becton Dickinson) and in liquid Chamberlain’s chemically defined medium (CDM) (17) at 37°C. If not further specified, the E. coli strains were grown on Luria–Bertani (LB) agar and in liquid LB broth or TB medium (Terrific Broth) at 37°C. When necessary, following antibiotics were used: chloramphenicol 2.5μg/mL (F. tularensis) or 25 μg/mL (E. coli), polymyxin B 75 μg/mL (F. tularensis), carbenicillin 50 μg/mL (F. tularensis), kanamycin 50 µg/ml (E. coli) or 20 µg/ml (F.tularensis). Construction of F. tularensis strain expressing Strep-tagged GapA protein. The gapA gene (locus tag FTS_1117) was fused to the coding sequence of the Strep-Tag (8 amino acids: WSHPQFEK) on its C-terminus using PCR amplification with specific primers (see Supplementary Table 2). The final sequence (gapA-Strep) was introduced into the chromosome of F. tularensis FSC200 gapA deletion mutant strain by in-cis complementation strategy as described in (15). SILAC Metabolic Labelling, Cell Lysate Preparation, Affinity purification. For metabolic labelling the F. tularensis wild type strain (wt) or strain expressing Strep-tagged GapA protein (FSC200/gapA_S) were cultivated in CDM containing of heavy labelled amino acids L-arginine hydrochloride [13C6 15N4] and L-lysine hydrochloride [13C6 15N2] (Sigma Aldrich, Schnelldorf, Germany) in the same concentration as in the light medium. After three generation times, the incorporation levels were checked by MS and the labelled bacteria were stored as frozen stocks at -150°C. For the experiment the labelled bacterial stock was cultivated in heavy medium overnight at 37°C, 200 rpm. Non-labelled bacteria were grown in the light medium. The overnight cultures were diluted with fresh media to OD 600 nm 0.1 and cultivated to OD600nm 0.8 (approximately 3,2x109 bacteria/mL, late exponential phase). Bacteria were then harvested by centrifugation and washed with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS, pH 7.4). At this point, the light and heavy bacteria were mixed in a 1:1 cell ratio. Three sets of biological replicates were prepared. Each set consisted of 3 samples. In two samples the wt FSC200 was grown in light medium and the FSC200/gapA_S in heavy medium, for the third sample, the SILAC groups were swapped (the FSC200/gapA_S was cultivated in light medium, the wt FSC200 strain in heavy medium). After the supplementation with protease inhibitor cocktail Complete EDTA-free (Roche Diagnostics, Germany) and benzonase (150 U/mL, Sigma-Aldrich), the bacterial cells were disrupted in a French press (Thermo IEC, Needha Heights, MA, USA) by two passages at 16000 psi. Unbroken cells were removed by centrifugation 6,000 x g for 40 min at 4°C. The clarified lysate supplemented with appropriate amount of Avidin (11U/mg, IBA) was applied on column containing Strep-Tactin® affinity resin and the GapA/S protein was purified using Strep-tag® purification system according to the manufacturer’s instructions (IBA Lifesciences).

### Data Protocol
SILAC quantification. Peptides and proteins were identified by searching the raw files against the F. tularensis subsp. holarctica (wt FSC200) protein sequences database (1423 entries, downloaded from UniProt) appended with common protein contaminants (245 sequences, downloaded from MaxQuant homepage) using the Mascot v2.3 search engine (Matrix Science) within the Proteome Discoverer v2.2 software (Thermo Scientific). The parameters were: trypsin was used as the enzyme, 2 missed cleavages were allowed, carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification, oxidation of methionine was selected as a variable modification, and the mass tolerance of the precursor and fragment ions was set to 20 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively. Arginine (13C6, 15N4) and lysine (13C6, 15N2) were set as labels in the heavy channel for peptide quantitation. A false discovery rate of 0.01, estimated by target-decoy approach, was used for accepting the identifications on the peptide-to-spectrum match and protein levels. The SILAC based approach was used to reveal the candidate interacting proteins of GapA. These are expected to be detected in a single SILAC quantitation channel, contrary to background proteins, resulting in extreme abundance ratio values. Therefore, the low abundance resampling algorithm of the Proteome Discoverer was used to impute missing values of single-channel quantitative data on the peptide level. The GapA interacting proteins were found as significantly up-regulated proteins using a global mean rank test (18) (R package MeanRankTest, https://www.evotec.com/en/execute/science-pool/resources) with parametric FDR level set to 0.05. Only the Francisella proteins quantified in all four replicates were allowed for testing. Data visualization was done in the Perseus v1.6.2.3 software (19). Label-free quantification. Proteome Discoverer software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA, v. 2.4.0.305) was used for identification of MS/MS spectra. The raw files from the QExactive mass spectrometer were processed within the processing workflow containing spectrum files RC, spectrum selector, non-fragment filter, top N peaks filter, precursor detector, SequestHT search engine and target decoy PSM validator. The parameters for SequestHT database searching were: protein database – UniProt Francisella tularensis subsp. holarctica FSC200 reference proteome UP000006302 (May 11, 2018), enzyme – trypsin, maximum missed cleavage sites – 1, min. peptide length – 7, precursor mass tolerance – 15 ppm, fragment mass tolerance – 0.02 Da, weight of b- and y-ions – 1; static modifications – Carbamidomethyl / +57.021 (C); dynamic modifications – Oxidation / +15.995 Da (M); dynamic modifications (protein terminus) – Acetyl / +42.011 Da (N-terminus), Met-loss / -131.040 Da (M), Met-loss+Acetyl / -89.030 Da (M); dynamic modifications (peptide terminus) – Gln->pyro-Glu / -17.027 Da (Q). The obtained search results in the msf file were further processed in the consensus workflow containing PSM Grouper, Peptide Validator, Protein and Peptide Filter, Protein Scorer, Protein FDR Validator, Protein Grouping, Protein in Peptide Annotation nodes, Protein Marker, Modification Sites, Feature Mapper and Precursor Ions Quantifier. Only proteins identified with two peptides at the FDR level 0.01 with p-value less than 0.01 of the quantitation change greater than 1.5 were considered. The heat maps were visualized in the Proteome Discoverer graphic tools for Venn diagrams reports.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Interaction partners, Francisella tularensis

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Pathology and Biology Faculty of Military Health Sciences, University of Defence Trebesska 1575, 50001 Hradec Kralove, Czech Republic
Department of Molecular Pathology and Biology FMHS UD, Trebesska 1575, CZ-50001 Hradec Kralove, Czech Republic

### Submitter
Pavel Rehulka

### Lab Head
Dr Jiri Stulik
Department of Molecular Pathology and Biology Faculty of Military Health Sciences, University of Defence Trebesska 1575, 50001 Hradec Kralove, Czech Republic


