### Accession
PXD002545

### Title
Phosphoproteomic studies of role of LAR protein tyrosine phosphatase in mouse embryonic fibroblasts

### Description
To gain insights into the signalling pathways regulated by Leukocyte common antigen-related protein (LAR), including those that are PDGF-dependent, we have carried out the first systematic analysis of LAR-regulated signal transduction using SILAC-based quantitative proteomic and phosphoproteomic techniques. We have analysed differential phosphorylation between wild-type mouse embryo fibroblasts (MEFs) or MEFS in which the LAR cytoplasmic phosphatase domains had been deleted (LARΔP).

### Sample Protocol
10 mg of “light”, “medium” and “heavy” lysates were pooled prior to trypsin digestion. Five biological replicates were carried out; Expt1 (WT Light with PDGF, WT Medium no PDGF and LARΔP Heavy with PDGF), Expt2 (WT Heavy with PDGF, LARΔP Light with PDGF and LARΔP Medium no PDGF), Expt3 (WT Light with PDGF, LARΔP Medium no PDGF and LARΔP Heavy with PDGF), Expt4 (WT Light with PDGF, WT Medium no PDGF and LARΔP Heavy with PDGF), Expt5 (WT Light with PDGF, WT Medium no PDGF and LARΔP Heavy no PDGF). Proteins were reduced with 8 mM DTT, alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and digested with trypsin Gold (1:100 enzyme: protein ratio; Promega) at 37 °C overnight. Digested samples were acidified by addition of 0.5% TFA. Peptides were desalted using Sep-Pak C18 Cartridges (Waters, Milford, MA) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Desalted and dried peptides were resuspended in 100 μL mobile phase A (10 mM KH3PO4, 20 % acetonitrile, pH 3) and loaded onto a 100×4.6 mm polysulfoethyl A column (5 μm particle size, 200 nm pore size, PolyLC). Separation used a gradient elution profile that started with 100% mobile phase A, increased from 0 to 50% mobile phase B (10 mM KH3PO4, 20 % acetonitrile, 500 mM KCl, pH 3) over 30 min, increased to 100% B over 5 min, and then returned to 100% A. Each of the 20 resulting fractions was desalted using C8 macrotrap cartridge (Michrom BioResources) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Phosphopeptides were enriched using TiO2 tips (GL Sciences), according to the manufacturer’s instructions. All resulting peptide mixtures were analysed in duplicate by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). For proteome analysis samples from each experiment were run on an SDS PAGE gel. Lanes were cut into 10 gel slices and digested with trypsin using standard in-gel digestion protocols.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were processed using the MaxQuant software (version 1.5.3.8). Data were searched, using the Andromeda search engine within MaxQuant, against the mouse Swiss-Prot database (downloaded 6.10.15). The mouse database contained 16,719 reviewed protein entries. The search parameters were: minimum peptide length 7, peptide tolerance 20 ppm (first search) and 6 ppm (second search), mass tolerance 0.5 Da, cleavage enzyme trypsin/P, and 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as a fixed modification. Oxidation (M), acetylation (Protein N-term), and phospho (STY) were set as variable modifications. The appropriate SILAC labels were selected and the maximum labelled amino acids was set to 3. All experiments were filtered to have a peptide and protein false-discovery rate (FDR) below 1 %. Within the MaxQuant output, phosphorylation sites were considered to be localised correctly if the localisation probability was at least 0.75 (75 %) and the score difference at least 5. For MaxQuant analysis an exoerumental template was used in order to seoarate biological and technical repeats into distinct experiments for data analysis. Replicates 1, 3, 4, and 5 were grouped and assigned the following labels for MaxQuant analysis: Heavy R0K0, Medium R6K4, Light R10K8. Replicate 2 was assigned the following labels: Heavy R10K8, Medium R6K4, Light R0K0.

### Publication Abstract
Intracellular signaling pathways are reliant on protein phosphorylation events that are controlled by a balance of kinase and phosphatase activity. Although kinases have been extensively studied, the role of phosphatases in controlling specific cell signaling pathways has been less so. Leukocyte common antigen-related protein (LAR) is a member of the LAR subfamily of receptor-like protein tyrosine phosphatases (RPTPs). LAR is known to regulate the activity of a number of receptor tyrosine kinases, including platelet-derived growth factor receptor (PDGFR). To gain insight into the signaling pathways regulated by LAR, including those that are PDGF-dependent, we have carried out the first systematic analysis of LAR-regulated signal transduction using SILAC-based quantitative proteomic and phosphoproteomic techniques. We haveanalyzed differential phosphorylation between wild-type mouse embryo fibroblasts (MEFs) and MEFs in which the LAR cytoplasmic phosphatase domains had been deleted (LAR&#x394;P), and found a significant change in abundance of phosphorylation on 270 phosphosites from 205 proteins because of the absence of the phosphatase domains of LAR. Further investigation of specific LAR-dependent phosphorylation sites and enriched biological processes reveal that LAR phosphatase activity impacts on a variety of cellular processes, most notably regulation of the actin cytoskeleton. Analysis of putative upstream kinases that may play an intermediary role between LAR and the identified LAR-dependent phosphorylation events has revealed a role for LAR in regulating mTOR and JNK signaling.

### Keywords
Ltq orbitrap elite, Mouse, Phosphoproteomics, Fibroblast

### Affiliations
University of Birmingham
School of Biosciences, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham, B15 2TT, UK

### Submitter
Debbie Cunningham

### Lab Head
Dr Debbie L Cunningham
School of Biosciences, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham, B15 2TT, UK


