### Accession
PXD013608

### Title
NIST Candidate RM 8461 Human Liver for Proteomics

### Description
Advances in mass spectrometry (MS) instrumentation resulting in higher mass resolution and higher duty cycles have allowed deeper coverages of proteomes. The development of candidate RM 8461 Human Liver for Proteomics was undertaken to provide the community with a sample with suitable complexity for method development and validation, instrument and data validation, and determining identification QC thresholds. Herein we describe a comparison of methods and homogeneity assessment in which candidate RM 8461 Human Liver for Proteomics is solubilized, the proteins reduced, alkylated, digested and the tryptic peptides and their modifications are identified by bottom up LC/MS/MS to assess deep (e.g. thousands of identifications) protein coverage.

### Sample Protocol
Candidate RM 8461 Human Liver for Proteomics was processed using various methods therefore details of sample processing protocol provided in word document RM_8461_Human_Liver_Sample_Processing_Protocols

### Data Protocol
Resulting raw files were processed and searched with Swith Mascot (v2.6.2) for public upload and data archival.  The following search parameters were used: trypsin was specified as the enzyme allowing for two mis-cleavages; carbamidomethyl (C) was fixed and oxidation (M) was a variable modification; 10 ppm precursor mass tolerance and 10 ppm fragment ion tolerance.

### Publication Abstract
The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) is creating new, economical, qualitative reference materials and data for proteomics comparisons, benchmarking and harmonization. Here we describe a large dataset from shotgun proteomic analysis of RM 8461 Human Liver for Proteomics, a reference material being developed. Consensus identifications using multiple search engines and sample preparations demonstrate a homogeneous and fit-for-purpose material that can be incorporated into automated or manual sample preparation workflows, with the resulting data used to directly assess complete sample-to-data workflows and provide harmonization and benchmarking between laboratories and techniques. Data are available via PRIDE with identifier PXD013608.

### Keywords
Human, Qc material, Lc-msms, Liver, Reference material, Nist, Orbitrap

### Affiliations
National Institute of Standards and Technology
National Institute of Standards and Technology Chemical Sciences Division Charleston, SC, USA

### Submitter
W. Clay Davis

### Lab Head
Dr Clay Davis
National Institute of Standards and Technology Chemical Sciences Division Charleston, SC, USA


