### Accession
PXD035547

### Title
A transcriptional switch controls sex determination in Plasmodium falciparum – whole cell proteomics

### Description
We aim to characterize the function of P. falciparum Md1 protein in sex determination.

### Sample Protocol
For whole cell proteomics, culture suspensions were lysed by resuspension in 150µl of lysis buffer (50 mM Tris pH 8, 150 mM NaCl, 1 % NP40, 4 mM EDTA, 1X protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich)) and incubated for 4h at 4 °C on a rotating wheel. To improve homogeneity and fluidity, lysates were passed 10 times on a 27G syringe, sonicated 3 times 5 sec separated by 25 sec cooling on ice (Branson Sonifier) before centrifugation at 15 000 rpm for 15 min at 4 °C. 50µl Laemmli 4x (Biorad) and 10µl β-mercaptoethanol were added to the supernatants. Protein digestion was done on S-TrapTM micro spin columns (Protifi) according to the manufacturer’s protocol (https://files.protifi.com/protocols/s-trap-micro-long-4-7.pdf) with 1 µg of trypsin (Gold Promega) during 2 hours at 47 °C. Peptides were fractionated by reverse phase with steps of ACN in eigh fractions (High Ph Reverse-Phase peptide fractionation kit, Thermofisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
MS data analysis was performed using the MaxQuant software with default settings (v2.0.3.0). All MS/MS spectra were searched using the Andromeda search engine against the UniProt Reference proteome of Plasmodium falciparum (isolate 3D7, Proteome ID UP000001450) (release 2022_01; https://www.uniprot.org/), Streptavidin and truncated PF3D7_1438800 sequences and 250 frequently observed contaminants as well as reversed sequences of all entries. Default search parameters were applied. Oxidation and Acetylation were used as variable modifications and Carbamidomethyl was used as fixed modification. FDR was set to 1% for peptides and proteins. A representative protein ID in each protein group was automatically selected using an in-house bioinformatics tool (Leading v3.4). Graphical representation and some statistical analysis of MS/MS data were performed using Perseus (v1.6.10.43).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Malaria, Sex determination, Large scale proteomics

### Affiliations
FPP CNRS
MIVEGEC, Université de Montpellier, IRD, CNRS, Montpellier, France.

### Submitter
Functional Proteomics Platform FPP

### Lab Head
Dr Arthur Talman
MIVEGEC, Université de Montpellier, IRD, CNRS, Montpellier, France.


### SDRF
- organism: Plasmodium falciparum
- organism part: not applicable
- cell type: not applicable
- disease: not applicable
- label: label free sample 
- instrument: Q Exactive HF

