### Accession
PXD022607

### Title
The PI3Kδ interactome in naïve and activated mouse CD4+ T cells

### Description
Phosphoinositide 3-kinases (PI3Ks) play a central role in adaptive immunity by transducing signals from the T cell antigen receptor (TCR) via production of PIP3. PI3Kδ is a heterodimer composed of a p110δ catalytic subunit associated with a p85α or p85β regulatory subunit and is preferentially engaged by the TCR upon T cell activation. The molecular mechanisms leading to PI3Kδ recruitment and activation at the TCR signalosome remain unclear. In this study, we have used affinity purification coupled with quantitative mass spectrometry to uncover the p110δ interactome in primary CD4+ T cells. Moreover, we have determined how the PI3Kδ interactome changes upon the differentiation of small naïve T cells into T cell blasts expanded in the presence of IL-2.

### Sample Protocol
Affinity purification samples (p110δ and control; TCR-stimulated and unstimulated) were generated from fresh, cleared lysates of 1 × 108 CD4+ T cell blasts or 0.19 × 108 naïve CD4+ T cells, from p110δAviTagBirATg and BirATg mice, using streptavidin-conjugated Dynabeads®. Beads were washed three times with 1 ml ice-cold lysis buffer then resuspended in 1X NuPAGE LDS Sample Buffer and boiled at 95°C for 5 mins to elute proteins. Peptide sample preparation for MS analysis: Denatured affinity purification samples were subjected to SDS-PAGE on Bolt 10% Bis-Tris Plus Gels (Invitrogen) until samples fully entered the gel. Proteins were visualised with Imperial Protein Stain (ThermoFisher Scientific) and excised. Coomassie dye was removed from 1 × 1 mm gel pieces by sequential washes in 12.5 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AMBI) and 50 % acetonitrile (ACN) with 20 minutes sonication. Samples were dehydrated with 100 % ACN for 10 minutes with sonication then rehydrated and reduced with 10 mM DTT in 25 mM AMBI for 60 minutes at 50°C. Samples were alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide in 25 mM AMBI for 60 min at room temperature with shaking in the dark. Reduced and alkylated samples were washed with 25 mM AMBI followed by dehydration with 100 % ACN and 10 minutes sonication, repeated twice, and drying in a vacuum centrifuge. Gel pieces were rehydrated for 20 minutes at room temperature with trypsin solution (10 ng/μl trypsin in 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate with 0.1% octylglucoside) then digested overnight at 30°C in a total volume of 50 μl. For quantitative MS analyses, samples were subjected to in-gel tandem mass tag (TMT) labelling. Each 0.2 mg aliquot of TMT10plex Isobaric Label Reagent (ThermoFisher Scientific) was resuspended in 20 μl 100 % ACN and added to individual digested samples, followed by incubation for 1 hour at room temperature with sonication and vortexing every 15 minutes. Labelling was quenched with 0.3 % hydroxylamine for 30 minutes at room temperature with sonication. TMT-labelled peptides were extracted from gel pieces with 100 % ACN in a series of 3 washes with 25 μl 100 % ACN and 10 minutes sonication per wash. Final extracts from all 10 samples were combined in a 1:1 ratio and dried in a vacuum centrifuge. The dried sample was resuspended in 16 μl 0.2 % NH3 for high-pH reversed-phase fractionation on the UltiMate 3000 system (ThermoFisher Scientific). An in-house made microcolumn (0.53 x 200 mm packed with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ resin, 3 μm particle size (Dr. Maisch, Germany)) was used for peptide separation at 20 μl/min following a linear gradient from 0 - 40% ACN over 30 minutes. Eluted peptides were manually collected into 1-minute fractions and stored at -80°C until nLC-MS/MS analysis. nLC-MS/MS analysis: TMT-labelled peptide-enriched fractions were analysed by nano-liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (nLC-MS/MS) using an EASY-nLC System (ThermoFisher Scientific) interfaced via a nano-electrospray ion source onto a Q Exactive Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). Peptide separation was performed using an in-house made pre-column (100 μm ID fritted fused silica packed with POROS 20 R2 Reversed-Phase Resin) and analytical column (75 μm ID x 15 cm fused silica capillary with integrated emitter (New Objective) packed with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ resin (2.1 μm; Dr. Maisch, Germany)). Half of each fraction was used. Samples were loaded onto the pre-column in solvent A (0.1 % formic acid) at a flow rate corresponding to 60 bar. Peptides were then separated over the analytical column at a flow rate of 300 nl/min following a linear gradient from 5 – 35 % solvent B (100 % ACN) over 60 - 90 minutes. Eluted peptides were ionised by applying a 1.6 - 1.7 kV voltage and introduced to the mass spectrometer as gas-phase ions. MS1 scans were only triggered when a threshold of 3e6 ions or 50 ms was reached and were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyser with a mass resolution of 70,000 and a scan range of m/z 350-1800. The 12 most intense ions from each MS1 spectrum were isolated in the quadrupole mass analyser using a 1.2 m/z window and fragmented using higher-energy collisional dissociation with normalised collision energy of 30 and 35. MS2 scans of fragment ions were only triggered when a threshold of 5e4 ions or 500 ms was reached and were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyser with a mass resolution of 35,000 and mass range starting at 100 m/z. Fragmented ions were excluded from repeated analysis for 30 seconds. MS and MS2 spectra were recorded in Xcalibur 3.0 (ThermoFisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification: Acquired MS data from the TMT labelled experiments were processed in Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (ThermoFisher Scientific). Spectra from all fractions were combined and searched against the mouse UniProt reference proteome (UP000000589, 52026 entries) and Global Proteome Machine database of common contaminants (57 entries) using Mascot search engine. Trypsin was set as the specific protease with a maximum of two missed cleavage sites allowed. Peptide mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance was set to 20 mmu. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine and TMT modification of the peptide N-terminus and lysine side chains were set as fixed modifications. Oxidation of methionine was set as a variable modification. Only high confidence peptides were used, with a 0.01 target peptide FDR, and a minimum of 1 unique peptide was required for successful protein identification. For TMT-labelled datasets, reporter ion intensities were extracted from MS2 spectra that exceeded an average reporter signal-to-noise threshold of 10 with a co-isolation interference lower than 50%. Reporter ion intensities were normalised to the total peptide amount per channel within Proteome Discoverer 2.1.

### Publication Abstract
Phosphoinositide 3-kinases (PI3Ks) play a central role in adaptive immunity by transducing signals from the T cell antigen receptor (TCR) via production of PIP<sub>3</sub>. PI3K&#x3b4; is a heterodimer composed of a p110&#x3b4; catalytic subunit associated with a p85&#x3b1; or p85&#x3b2; regulatory subunit and is preferentially engaged by the TCR upon T cell activation. The molecular mechanisms leading to PI3K&#x3b4; recruitment and activation at the TCR signalosome remain unclear. In this study, we have used quantitative mass spectrometry, biochemical approaches and CRISPR-Cas9 gene editing to uncover the p110&#x3b4; interactome in primary CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells. Moreover, we have determined how the PI3K&#x3b4; interactome changes upon the differentiation of small na&#xef;ve T cells into T cell blasts expanded in the presence of IL-2. Our interactomic analyses identified multiple constitutive and inducible PI3K&#x3b4;-interacting proteins, some of which were common to na&#xef;ve and previously-activated T cells. Our data reveals that PI3K&#x3b4; rapidly interacts with as many as seven adaptor proteins upon TCR engagement, including the Gab-family proteins, GAB2 and GAB3, a CD5-CBL signalosome and the transmembrane proteins ICOS and TRIM. Our results also suggest that PI3K&#x3b4; pre-forms complexes with the adaptors SH3KBP1 and CRKL in resting cells that could facilitate the localization and activation of p110&#x3b4; at the plasma membrane by forming ternary complexes during early TCR signalling. Furthermore, we identify interactions that were not previously known to occur in CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells, involving BCAP, GAB3, IQGAP3 and JAML. We used CRISPR-Cas9-mediated gene knockout in primary T cells to confirm that BCAP is a positive regulator of PI3K-AKT signalling in CD4<sup>+</sup> T cell blasts. Overall, our results provide evidence for a large protein network that regulates the recruitment and activation of PI3K&#x3b4; in T cells. Finally, this work shows how the PI3K&#x3b4; interactome is remodeled as CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells differentiate from na&#xef;ve T cells to activated T cell blasts. These activated T cells upregulate additional PI3K&#x3b4; adaptor proteins, including BCAP, GAB2, IQGAP3 and ICOS. This rewiring of TCR-PI3K signalling that occurs upon T cell differentiation may serve to reduce the threshold of activation and diversify the inputs for the PI3K pathway in effector T cells.

### Keywords
T-cells, Tcr, Ap-ms, Pi3k, Pi3kδ, Mouse, 10-plex, Interactome, Nlc-ms/ms, Cd4+, Tmt

### Affiliations
The Francis Crick Institute, London, UK
Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK

### Submitter
Daisy Luff

### Lab Head
Dr Klaus Okkenhaug
Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK


