### Accession
PXD025574

### Title
Click-enabled analogues reveal pregnenolone interactomes in cancer and immune cells

### Description
Click-enabled analogues reveal pregnenolone interactomes in cancer and immune cells. TMT-6 experiment of tryptic, carbamidomethylated peptides of mouse CD8+ T-cells after protein pull-down on pregnenolone beads.

### Sample Protocol
The sample and data processing protocol is described in detail in the publication "Click-enabled analogues reveal pregnenolone interactomes in cancer and immune cells".  In brief, the proteins were eluted from the beads with Laemmli buffer at 95 degree celsius. After reduction and carbamidomethylation proteins were cleaned and digested with the published SP3 protocol.The resulting peptides were separated on a C18-phase at pH10, fractionated and pooled to 6 fractions. The fractionated samples were analyzed on an UltiMate 3000 nano LC system from Dionex coupled to a QExactive plus from Thermo mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
IsobarQuant and Mascot (v2.2.07) were used to process the acquired data, which was searched against the Uniprot reference database of Mus musculus after the addition of common contaminants and reversed sequences. The false discovery rate (FDR) on peptide and protein level was set to 0.01. The limma R package was used to remove potential batch-effects.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pregnenolone pull-down cd8+ t-cells

### Affiliations
Department for Cell Physiology and Metabolism, University of Geneva, 1 rue Michel Servet, 1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland
Cellzome

### Submitter
Marco L. Hennrich

### Lab Head
Dr Anne-Claude Gavin
Department for Cell Physiology and Metabolism, University of Geneva, 1 rue Michel Servet, 1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland


