### Accession
PXD016433

### Title
Quantitative proteomic analysis of CKD urine samples

### Description
Urinary proteomics studies have primarily focused on identifying markers of chronic kidney disease (CKD) progression. Here, we aimed to specify CKD-related injury markers through proteomics analysis in urine of patients with CKD. Label-free quantitative proteomics analysis based on liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry was performed on urine samples obtained from 6, 9, 11, and 10 patients in health control, CKD stage 1, 3 and 5, respectively.

### Sample Protocol
Urine supernatants were concentrated using an Amicon Ultra centrifugal filter device (3 kDa MWCO, Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA) at 14,000 g to a volume of approximately 50ul. The protein content of the final concentrated solution was determined using the Bradford method (Biorad Protein Assay, Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA). For label-free quantification, 100 ug of urine proteins was precipitated by adding a 6-fold volume of ice-cold acetone prior to the digestion step. Precipitated proteins were dissolved in sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS)-containing denaturation buffer. After being heated, the denatured proteins were digested using a modified filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using a Q Exactive HF-X (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Ultimate 3000 RSLC system (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) equipped with an EASY nano-spray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
For label-free quantification, MS raw files for CKD urine were analyzed in a Maxquant (version 1.6.1.0) environment. Mass tolerance was set to 6 ppm for monoisotopic precursor ions and 20 ppm for MS/MS peaks. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin/P and a maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed. A minimal peptide length of six amino acids was required. Cysteine carbamidomethylation and methionine oxidation were considered as fixed and variable modifications, respectively. The spectra were searched using the Andromeda search engine against the human UniProt sequence databasewith 248 common contaminants and concatenated with the reversed versions of all sequences. The FDR was set to 1% for peptide and protein identifications. The peptide identifications across different LC-MS runs and the spectral library were matched by enabling the “match between runs” feature in MaxQuant

### Publication Abstract
Urinary proteomics studies have primarily focused on identifying markers of chronic kidney disease (CKD) progression. Here, we aimed to determine urinary markers of CKD renal parenchymal injury through proteomics analysis in animal kidney tissues and cells and in the urine of patients with CKD. Label-free quantitative proteomics analysis based on liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry was performed on urine samples obtained from 6 normal controls and 9, 11, and 10 patients with CKD stages 1, 3, and 5, respectively, and on kidney tissue samples from a rat CKD model by 5/6 nephrectomy. Tandem mass tag-based quantitative proteomics analysis was performed for glomerular endothelial cells (GECs) and proximal tubular epithelial cells (PTECs) before and after inducing 24-h hypoxia injury. Upon hierarchical clustering, out of 858 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) in the urine of CKD patients, the levels of 416 decreased and 403 increased sequentially according to the disease stage, respectively. Among 2965 DEPs across 5/6 nephrectomized and sham-operated rat kidney tissues, 86 DEPs showed same expression patterns in the urine and kidney tissue. After cross-validation with two external animal proteome data sets, 38 DEPs were organized; only ten DEPs, including serotransferrin, gelsolin, poly ADP-ribose polymerase 1, neuroblast differentiation-associated protein AHNAK, microtubule-associated protein 4, galectin-1, protein S, thymosin beta-4, myristoylated alanine-rich C-kinase substrate, and vimentin, were finalized by screening human GECs and PTECs data. Among these ten potential candidates for universal CKD marker, validation analyses for protein S and galectin-1 were conducted. Galectin-1 was observed to have a significant inverse correlation with renal function as well as higher expression in glomerulus with chronic injury than protein S. This constitutes the first multisample proteomics study for identifying key renal-expressed proteins associated with CKD progression. The discovered proteins represent potential markers of chronic renal cell and tissue damage and candidate contributors to CKD pathophysiology.

### Keywords
Human, Urine, Label free quantification, Ckd

### Affiliations
Proteomics core facility, Biomedicial Research Institute, Seoul National University Hospital
Proteomics Core Facility, Biomedical Research Institute, Seoul National University Hospital

### Submitter
Dohyun Han

### Lab Head
Dr Dohyun Han
Proteomics core facility, Biomedicial Research Institute, Seoul National University Hospital


