### Accession
PXD039702

### Title
Membrane complexome of Pseudomonas aeruginosa

### Description
Studies of membrane protein-protein interactions are very important to fully understand the biological function of a cell. The solubilization of proteins from the native membrane environment is a critical step in the preparation of membrane proteins that might affect the stability of protein complexes. In this work, we used the amphiphilic diisobutylene / maleic acid copolymer (DIBMA) to create a soluble library of the membrane proteome of the opportunistic pathogen Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Size fractionation of polymer nanodisc-embedded proteins and subsequent mass spectrometry led to the identification of 3358 proteins. The library showed a very good overall coverage compared to previous proteome data. The pattern of size fractionation indicated the preservation of protein complexes in the library. More than 20 previously described complexes, e.g., the SecYEG and Pili complexes, were identified and analyzed for coelution. Although most protein complexes seem to be preserved in the library, the data set does not permit the de novo prediction of protein complexes. However, the experimental approach to identify protein interactions in the soluble library using pulldown assays in combination with mass spectrometry was successful. Employing the membrane phosphodiesterase NbdA, a member of the c-di-GMP network as a bait, 35 novel candidate proteins for interaction were identified. With the ATPase PilB, a novel interaction partner of NbdA was confirmed using the bacterial adenylate cyclase two hybrid assay. Taken together, this work describes the versatility of the soluble membrane proteome library of P. aeruginosa for the investigation of protein interactions and membrane protein complexes.

### Sample Protocol
Growth of P. aeruginosa cells: P. aeruginosa PAO1 was cultured in a baffled erlenmeyer flasks. OD600 was initially set to 0.01 from an overnight culture in LB medium and grown at 37° C and 100 rpm for 7 hours (to stationary phase). Cells were harvested by centrifugation at 17 500 x g for 15 min. Pellets were stored at -20°C. For nbdA overexpression, P. aeruginosa PAO1 carrying a plasmid for overproduction of NbdA-Strep or untagged NbdA as a control were grown in LB media supplemented with 150 µg/ml tetracycline (Tab. S1). OD600 was initially set to 0.05 from an overnight culture in LB medium and grown at 37° C and 100 rpm. When cells reached OD600 of 0.5, gene expression was induced with 0.1% L-arabinose and cells were further grown for 5 hours. Cells were harvested at 17 500 x g for 15 min, and pellets were stored at -20°C. Membrane preparation: Cell pellets were thawed at 4°C and lysis buffer (50 mM Tris HCl, 300 mM NaCl pH 8, with cOmplete® Protease inhibitor mix (Roche) was added in a ratio 1:2 gram per cell wet weight. Subsequently, cells were treated with lysozyme and DNAse I for 20 min on ice. Cell disruption was performed by sonication (Sonorex Sonoplus, Bandelin) for 3 min total, with 20 s pulse intervals followed by 30 s cooling. The crude extract was centrifuged for 15 min at 7000 x g at 4°C. Membranes were isolated by ultracentrifugation at 100 000 x g for 1 hour at 4°C. Membrane pellets were resuspended in solubilization buffer (50 mM Tris HCl, 300 mM NaCl, 10 mM MgCl2, pH 6.8, with cOmplete® Protease inhibitor mix (Roche) to 200 mg/ml membrane wet weight.  Solubilization: Polymer Stocks were prepared by dialyzing 10% DIBMA (ACUSOL 460 ND by Brenntagl) in solubilization buffer in 300-fold volume twice for 36 hours (membrane: MWCO 3.5 kDa). Polymer solutions were filtered (0.45 µm pore size) and concentration was measured using an Abbemat 500 refractometer as previously described (Grethen et al. 2017). Solubilization for complexome analysis was carried out using 40 mg/ml membrane wet weight and DIBMA concentration at 3.5% (ratio polymer/membrane of 0.875). Samples were incubated at room temperature over night with gentle shaking. The non-solubilized membrane fraction was removed by ultracentrifugation (200 000 x g for 10 min at 4°C). Supernatant was filtered (0.45 µm PVDF).  Determination of protein content: Protein content was measured using a PierceTM BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s recommendations. Size exclusion chromatography: Polymer nanodiscs were separated by size exclusion chromatography on an ÄKTA Purifier 10 system with a Superose 6 Increase GL 10/300 column (GE Healthcare) in solubilization buffer (50 mM Tris HCl, 300 mM NaCl, 10 mM MgCl2, pH 6.8). 200 µl sample (300 - 400 mg protein) was run with a flow rate of 0.2 ml/min at 4°C and 250 µl fractions were collected. Fractions from 8.22 ml to 10.22 ml were pooled to 1 ml fraction size, and between 17.22 ml and 23.22 ml fractions were pooled to a fraction size of 500 µl. Fractions between 8.22 ml and 23.22 ml elution volume were subjected to mass spectrometry analysis. Protein precipitation: Protein fractions were precipitated with six volumes of acetone at -80°C overnight. Samples were centrifuged at 20 000 x g for 20 min at 4°C and protein pellets were washed with five volumes of 80% acetone and centrifuged again at 20 000 x g for 25 min at 4°C. Pellets were dried and resuspended in 25 µl urea buffer (8 M urea, 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate, MS-grade). Sample preparation and mass spectrometry: In solution digest of samples was carried out as previously described (Glueck et al. 2022). Tryptic peptides were desalted on C18-StageTips according to a published protocol (Rappsilber, Mann, and Ishihama 2007) and analyzed on a Q Exactive HF™ Mass Spectrometer coupled in-line to EASY-nLC 1200 ultra-high pressure chromatography system (both Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA). For MS analysis, desalted peptides were separated on a 50 cm reverse phase column with an inner diameter of 75 m (New Objective from Woburn, Massachusetts) packed in-house with 1.8 m ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ particles (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbruch-Entrigen, Germany) using a 90 min non-linear gradient of 2–95% buffer B (0.1% (v/v) formic acid, 80% (v/v) acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. All MS data was recorded with a data dependent acquisition strategy. Survey scans were acquired with a resolution of 60’000 at m/z = 200. The top 15 most abundant precursor with charge > 2 were selected for fragmentation. MS/MS scans were acquired with a resolution of 15’000 at m/z = 200. All other parameters can be obtained from raw files available at the ProteomExchange repository.

### Data Protocol
MS data was processed with the MaxQuant software (version 2.0.1.0). Peak lists were searched against protein sequences derived from the Pseudomonas genome database (version 20.2, (Winsor et al. 2016)) applying a false-discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 for peptides and proteins,  a minimal peptide length of 7 amino acids and at least two peptides for quantification. “Match between run” was disabled. MS data ststistical analysis: Mass spectrometry data was analyzed with Perseus (version 1.6.15.0) (Tyanova et al. 2016). For the membrane complexome data, intensity based absolute quantification (IBAQ) values were scaled to an interval spanning from 0 to 1. For clustering Pearson correlation was used as a distance measure. Remaining data analysis was carried out in Excel® (version 2112, Microsoft®). Correlation coefficients were calculated with Excel® data analysis plugin. Plots were made with Origin lab (version 2022 SR).

### Publication Abstract
Studies of protein-protein interactions in membranes are very important to fully understand the biological function of a cell. The extraction of proteins from the native membrane environment is a critical step in the preparation of membrane proteins that might affect the stability of protein complexes. In this work, we used the amphiphilic diisobutylene/maleic acid copolymer to extract the membrane proteome of the opportunistic pathogen <i>Pseudomonas aeruginosa</i>, thereby creating a soluble membrane-protein library within a native-like lipid-bilayer environment. Size fractionation of nanodisc-embedded proteins and subsequent mass spectrometry enabled the identification of 3358 proteins. The native membrane-protein library showed a very good overall coverage compared to previous proteome data. The pattern of size fractionation indicated that protein complexes were preserved in the library. More than 20 previously described complexes, e.g. the SecYEG and Pili complexes, were identified and analyzed for coelution. Although the mass-spectrometric dataset alone did not reveal new protein complexes, combining pulldown assays with mass spectrometry was successful in identifying new protein interactions in the native membrane-protein library. Thus, we identified several candidate proteins for interactions with the membrane phosphodiesterase NbdA, a member of the c-di-GMP network. We confirmed the candidate proteins CzcR, PA4200, SadC, and PilB as novel interaction partners of NbdA using the bacterial adenylate cyclase two-hybrid assay. Taken together, this work demonstrates the usefulness of the native membrane-protein library of <i>P. aeruginosa</i> for the investigation of protein interactions and membrane-protein complexes. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifiers PXD039702 and PXD039700.

### Keywords
Dibma polymer, Membrane complexome, Nanodiscs

### Affiliations
Molecular Genetics, RPTU Kaiserslautern, Germany
Technical University Kaiserslautern

### Submitter
Markus Räschle

### Lab Head
Dr Markus Räschle
Molecular Genetics, RPTU Kaiserslautern, Germany


