### Accession
PXD032200

### Title
SILAC proteomics of isolated lipid droplets from wild-type and PEX19-compromised HeLa cells

### Description
SILAC proteomics of isolated lipid droplets from wild-type and PEX19-compromised HeLa cells

### Sample Protocol
For stable isotope labeling, SILAC DMEM medium (Thermo) was supplemented with 10% dialized FBS, 200 µg/ml L-Proline (Sigma) and differentially isotope-labeled L-arginine (84 µg/ml) and L-lysine (146.2 µg/ml). Wild-type, Pex19-/- and Pex19-/-PEX19C296S cells were cultivated in medium containing light- (R0 and K0, Sigma), medium- (R6, K4, Cambridge Isotopes) or heavy- (R10, K8, Cambridge Isotopes) labeled amino acids, respectively, for 11 days (about 11 doubling times) with regular splitting before expansion and the induction of LD biogenesis by the addition of 200 µM oleate complexed to 0.2% BSA for 18 h. Per cell line, 6 sub-confluent 10 cm dishes of oleate-treated cells were washed three times in PBS and then collected in ice-cold PBS using a cell scraper. Pelleted cells (4 min 500 xg at 4 ºC) were resuspended in 3 ml in HLM buffer (20 mM Tris/CL pH 7.5 / 1 mM EDTA with freshly added Complete EDTA-free protease inhibitors (Roche)) containing 250 mM sucrose. After 10 min incubation on ice, cells were mechanically lysed by passing the suspension 11 times through a ball-bearing homogenizer (Isobiotec) with 14 µm clearance. Protein concentrations of the post-nuclear supernatants (10 min, 500 xg centrifugation at 4 ºC) were determined using a BCA Protein Assay Kit (Pierce). From each cell line, post-nuclear supernatants containing 3 mg of proteins were pooled together (final total protein amount: 9 mg) and adjusted to a final concentration of 20% sucrose. The sample was transferred to a thin-walled ultracentrifugation tubes, overlaid with HLM containing 5% sucrose and with HLM without sucrose. After 1 h centrifugation at 100,000 xg at 4 ºC in a SW41Ti rotor (Beckman), the buoyant LD fraction was collected using a tube slicer (Beckman). Proteins in the LD fraction were solubilized for 10 min in 2% Triton-X100 at 65 ºC, TCA precipitated and washed twice with ice-cold acetone. Pellets were resuspended in 0.25% Rapigest (Waters) / 8 M urea / 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8 by extensive vortexing and incubation at RT overnight. Proteins were reduced in 5 mM DTT for 1 h at RT and alkylated with 14 mM iodoacetamide for 45 min at RT in the dark. The urea concentration in the sample was reduced to 4M by adding equal volumes of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8. Peptides were digested by the addition of LysC (Promega) in an enzyme:substrate ratio of 1:50 for 4 h at RT. The urea concentration was further reduced to 1M by the addition of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate before tryptic (Promega) digestion with an enzyme:substrate ratio of 1:50 at RT overnight. Rapigest was removed by acidification of the trypsinized samples to pH 2 with HCL followed by sequential incubation at RT, on ice, at RT for 30 mins each. Samples were cleared by centrifugation (13,000 xg for 20 min at RT) and subjected to desalting using home-made C18 (Empore cat. no. 25515-C18) stage tips. Dried peptides were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid and subjected to mass spectrometry. All mass spectrometry experiments were performed by the Vincent Coates Foundation Mass Spectrometry Laboratory, Stanford University Mass Spectrometry (SUMS; RRID:SCR_017801) using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA) with an attached Acquity M-Class UPLC (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA) liquid chromatograph. A pulled-and-packed fused silica C18 with an internal diameter of 100 microns was used as a reverse phase column for analytical separations. This silica column contains 1.8 micron C18 beads (Dr. Maisch HPLC GmbH) and has a length of ~25 cm. Separations were performed over an 80 minute gradient at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Mobile phase A consists of aqueous 0.2% formic acid and mobile phase B consists of 0.2% formic acid in acetonitrile. Peptides were directly injected onto the analytical column and the mass spectrometer was operated in a data dependent fashion with a 30s dynamic exclusion. A Top N strategy was used, MS1 data collected in the orbitrap, and MS2 data collected in the ion trap using CID fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
For SILAC quantitative analysis, Proteome Discoverer 2.0 (Thermo Scientific) was used in the standard fashion to perform integration, with the Byonic v2.10.5 (Protein Metrics, Cupertino, CA) node being used for protein identification assuming the SILAC heavy labeling as variable modifications. These searches were performed against a Uniprot protein database for homo sapiens including isoforms concatenated with synthesized sequences. Proteolysis was assumed to be tryptic in nature, and allowed for up to two missed cleavage sites. Precursor mass accuracies were held within 12 ppm, with MS/MS fragments held to a 0.4 Da mass accuracy. Proteins were held to a false discovery rate of 1%, using standard approaches (Elias and Gygi, 2007).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hela, Lipid droplet, Silac, Pex19

### Affiliations
Saarland University, 
Medical Biochemistry and Molecular Biology / Center for Molecular Signaling (PZMS)
Saarland University, Medical Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Center for Molecular Signaling, PZMS, Kirrberger Straße 100, 66421 Homburg (Saar), Germany

### Submitter
Bianca Schrul

### Lab Head
Dr Bianca Schrul
Saarland University, Medical Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Center for Molecular Signaling, PZMS, Kirrberger Straße 100, 66421 Homburg (Saar), Germany


