### Accession
PXD027539

### Title
ESRRB Facilitates the Conversion of Trophoblast-like Stem Cells from Induced Pluripotent Stem cells by Directly Regulating KRT8 and CDX2

### Description
Porcine induced pluripotent stem cells (piPSCs) could serve as a great model system for human stem cell pre-clinical research. However, the pluripotency gene network of piPSCs, especially the function for the core transcription factor ESRRB, was poorly understood. Here, we constructed ESRRB-overexpressing piPSCs (ESRRB-piPSCs). Compared with the control piPSCs (CON-piPSCs), the ESRRB-piPSCs showed flat, monolayered colony morphology. Moreover, the ESRRB-piPSCs showed greater chimeric capacity into trophectoderm than CON-piPSCs. We found that ESRRB could directly regulate the expressions of trophoblast stem cell (TSC)-specific markers, including KRT8, KRT18 and CDX2, through binding to their promoter regions. Mutational analysis proved that the N-terminus zinc finger domain is indispensable for ESRRB to regulate the TSC markers. Furthermore, this regulation needs the participation of OCT4. Accordingly, the cooperation between ESRRB and OCT4 facilitates the conversion from pluripotent state to the trophoblast-like state.

### Sample Protocol
The cells were dissociated, pelleted, and cytoplasm was removed by incubation in hypotonic buffer. The nuclei were pelleted, washed, and permeabilized with 0.1% n-Octyl-β-D-glucopyranoside. Nuclei were digested with MNase at concentration 2 U/μL at 37°C for 5 min. Nucleosomes with associated proteins were extracted in IP buffer, incubated with anti-FLAG magnetic beads overnight at 4°C, washed five times with IP buffer and eluted with FLAG peptide at 150 ng/ml. Immunoprecipitants were subjected to SDS-PAGE and probed with indicated antibodies or detected by silver staining according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Then the Gel pieces were sent to PTM Biolab Technology Corporation (China).

### Data Protocol
The resulting IP-mass spectrometry data were processed using Proteome Discoverer 1.3. Tandem mass spectra were searched against the UniPort database. Trypsin/P (or other enzymes if any) was specified as cleavage enzymes allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for-fragment ions. Carbamidomethyl on Cys were specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met was specified as variable modification. Peptide confidence was set at high, and peptide ion score was set > 20

### Publication Abstract
Porcine-induced pluripotent stem cells (piPSCs) could serve as a great model system for human stem cell preclinical research. However, the pluripotency gene network of piPSCs, especially the function for the core transcription factor estrogen-related receptor beta (ESRRB), was poorly understood. Here, we constructed ESRRB-overexpressing piPSCs (ESRRB-piPSCs). Compared with the control piPSCs (CON-piPSCs), the ESRRB-piPSCs showed flat, monolayered colony morphology. Moreover, the ESRRB-piPSCs showed greater chimeric capacity into trophectoderm than CON-piPSCs. We found that ESRRB could directly regulate the expressions of trophoblast stem cell (TSC)-specific markers, including KRT8, KRT18 and CDX2, through binding to their promoter regions. Mutational analysis proved that the N-terminus zinc finger domain is indispensable for ESRRB to regulate the TSC markers. Furthermore, this regulation needs the participation of OCT4. Accordingly, the cooperation between ESRRB and OCT4 facilitates the conversion from pluripotent state to the trophoblast-like state. Our results demonstrated a unique and crucial role of ESRRB in determining piPSCs fate, and shed new light on the molecular mechanism underlying the segregation of embryonic and extra-embryonic lineages.

### Keywords
Cdx2, Trophoblast stem cells (tscs), Esrrb, Krt8, Induced pluripotent stem cells (ipscs)

### Affiliations
College of Veterinary Medicine, Shaanxi Centre of Stem Cells Engineering & Technology, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi, 712100, China
Northwest A&F University

### Submitter
Shuai YU

### Lab Head
Dr YU SHUAI
College of Veterinary Medicine, Shaanxi Centre of Stem Cells Engineering & Technology, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi, 712100, China


