### Accession
PXD022078

### Title
MS-based in situ proteomics reveals AMPylation of host proteins during bacterial infection

### Description
Bacteria utilize versatile strategies to propagate infections within human cells, e.g. by the injection of effector proteins which alter crucial signaling pathways. One class of such virulence-associated proteins is involved in the AMPylation of eukaryotic Rho GTPases with devastating effects on viability. In order to get an inventory of AMPylated proteins, several technologies have been developed. However, as they were designed for the analysis of cell lysates, knowledge about AMPylation targets in living cells is largely lacking. We here implement a chemical-proteomic method for deciphering AMPylated host proteins in situ during bacterial infection. HeLa cells treated with a previously established cell permeable pronucleotide probe (pro-N6pA) were infected with Vibrio parahaemolyticus and modified host proteins were identified upon probe enrichment and LC-MS/MS analysis. Three already known targets of the AMPylator VopS - Rac1, RhoA and Cdc42 - could be confirmed and several other Rho GTPases were additionally identified. Applying an inactive VopS mutant validated these hits. The utility was further demonstrated by connecting the virulence phenotype of cell rounding with VopS mediated AMPylation of essential targets as well as deciphering the sites of modification. Overall, the methodology provides a reliable detection of host AMPylation in situ and thus a versatile tool in monitoring infection processes.

### Sample Protocol
For detailed procedure, see: MS-based in situ proteomics reveals AMPylation of host proteins during bacterial infection. Hela cells were seeded and treated with 100 µM pro-N6pA / DMSO for 16 h. For experiments without infection, cells were 2x washed with ice-cold PBS, and scratched off during the 2nd washing step. Intact cells were pelletized and resuspended in 150 µL ice-cold lysis buffer. The insoluble fraction was separated from the soluble fraction. A BCA assay was performed. Samples were further processed via the standard MS workflow. For infection assays, two dishes of Hela cells were counted. Volume containing a MOI of 10 of the respective bacteria (Vibrio parahaemolyticus RIMD 2210633, taxon identifier: 223926; Pseudomonas aeruginosa PAO1, taxon identifier: 208964, and Escherichia coli CFT073, taxon identifier: 199310 or a mutant) were taken and resuspended in DMEM (plus 2 mM L-glutamine) and either 10 µM pro-N6pA or 0.01 % DMSO. Dishes were incubated at 37 °C and 5 % CO2 for a defined period of time. The human cells were scraped off, washed in PBS and lysed in 250 µL lysis buffer. A BCA assay was performed. For all samples, protein concentration was adjusted to equal protein amounts. Click reactions were performed for 1.5 h at 25 °C and 450 rpm using azide-PEG3-biotin conjugate, TCEP, TBTA ligand and CuSO4 (for site-ID, azide-TEV-biotin was used instead of azide-PEG3-biotin conjugate). Proteins were precipitated by adding acetone and storing the samples at -20 °C overnight. Proteins were 2x washed with ice-cold MeOH. For each sample, 50 µL of avidin-agarose beads were 3x washed with 0.2 % SDS in PBS. Protein pellets were resuspended in 0.2 % SDS in PBS, the insoluble part separated and the supernatant was transferred to the beads and incubated under rotation. The beads were washed and the proteins reduced and alkylated. The alkylation reaction was stopped and the proteins were pre-digested prior to being digested overnight. Digestion was stopped and peptides were desalted. The C18 material of each column was equilibrated and digested proteins added. As soon as the peptides were loaded on the cartridges, they were washed and eluted. Afterwards, peptides were freeze-dried using a speedvac centrifuge and reconstituted in 1 % FA.  For SILAC, half of the dishes of "heavy" and "light" labeled HeLa cells were treated with bacteria (MOI 10), the rest without bacteria (MOI 0). The cell lysate was divided into two portions for further analysis: protein enrichment (250 µg) and full proteome analysis (250 µg). For the enrichment, "light" lysate being treated with bacteria was combined with "heavy" lysate treated without bacteria and vice versa. The full proteome was dissolved in 200 ?L digestion buffer prior or alkylation and reduction.  For Site-ID experiments, beads were transferred onto membrane filters after digestion. They were washed and resuspended in TEV buffer. They were transferred into 1.5 mL low-bind Eppendorf tubes, centrifuged, the supernatant was removed and the resuspended in 150 µL TEV buffer. AcTEV protease was added and digestion was conducted (29 °C). As next step, the beads were spun down and washed. The flow through was collected and acidified with FA.  Samples were desalted on equilibrated stage tips. The peptides were transferred onto the membranes, spun down and. Peptides were eluted and lyophilized prior to being reconstituted in 1 % FA.   Enrichment samples: Q Exactive Plus instrument coupled to an UltiMate 3000 nano-HPLC with an Acclaim C18 PepMap100 75 µm ID x 2 cm trap column, an 25 cm Aurora Series emitter column (25 cm x 75 µm ID, 1.6 µm FSC C18) in an EASY-spray setting. Columns were heated to 40 °C. 4 µL of each sample were injected. They were loaded on the trap column with 0.1 % TFA, flow rate of 5 µL/min. They were transferred to the separation column (flow rate of 0.400 µL/min, 152 min gradient, buffer A: H2O with 0.1 % FA, buffer B: ACN with 0.1 % FA: buffer B at 5 % for 7 min, increasing to 22 % during 105 min, to 32 % the next 10 min and to 90 % within 10 min. Once buffer B reached 90 %, solvent ratio was maintained for 10 min before decreasing it to 5 % in 0.1 min. Peptides were ionized at a capillary temperature of 275 °C, the instrument was operated in a Top12 data dependent mode. For full scan acquisition, the orbitrap mass analyzer was set to: R = 140000, AGC target of 3e6, a maximal injection time of 80 ms, a scan range of 300-1500 m/z. Precursors having a charge state of >1, a minimum AGC target of 1e3 and intensities higher than 1e4 were selected for fragmentation. Peptide fragments were generated by HCD with a normalized collision energy of 27 % and recorded in the orbitrap at R = 17500. Moreover, the AGC target was set to 1e5 with a maximum injection time of 100 ms scan range. Dynamic exclusion duration was set to 60 s and isolation was performed in the quadrupole using a window of 1.6 m/z.   For Fusion settings please see manuscript.

### Data Protocol
Bioinformatics and statistics For peptide and protein identification, MS data were processed with MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.10) having Andromeda as search engine.39 Searches were performed against the Uniprot database for homo sapiens (taxon identifier: 9606, canonical version, reviewed and unreviewed proteome, not older than three month prior to MS measurements). For infection assays, all proteins in the uniport database of the respective bacteria (Vibrio parahaemolyticus serotype O3:K6, strain RIMD 2210633, taxon identifier: 223926; Pseudomonas aeruginosa PAO1, taxon identifier: 208964, and Escherichia coli CFT073, taxon identifier: 199310; canonical versions, reviewed and unreviewed proteomes, not older than three month prior to MS measurements) were added to the MaxQuant contaminants file. As search parameters, mostly default settings were applied (trypsin/P as digest enzyme, max. 2 missed cleavages, oxidation (M) and acetylation (protein N-term) as variable modifications, carbamido-methylation (C) as fixed modification, label-free quantification LFQ with a minimal ratio count of 2, min. peptide length 7, 20 ppm for precursor mass tolerance (FTMS MS/MS match tolerance) and 0.5 Da for fragment mass tolerance (ITMS MS/MS match tolerance)). Furthermore, proteins were identified using PSM FDR 0.01, protein FDR 0.01, min. peptides 2, min. razor + unique peptides 2, min. unique peptides 2, razor protein FDR enabled, second peptides enabled. Additionally, the match between run function with its settings match time window of 0.7 min and alignment time window of 20 min was also enabled. Multiplicity was set to 2 for SILAC experiments. Then, parameter groups were defined and in the setting group-specific parameters, labels were selected. For samples containing bacterial treated (MOI 10) "heavy" lysate and bacteria free (MOI 0) "light" lysate, Arg10 and Lys8 were selected for the first and Arg6 and Lys4 for the latter. For samples containing bacterial treated (MOI 10) "light" lysate and bacteria free (MOI 0) "heavy" lysate, Arg 10 and Lys8 were selected for the first and Arg6 and Lys 4 for the latter. The re-quantify option was enabled for SILAC samples.  Peptides of the site-ID experiments were searched for the fixed carbamidomethyl (C) modification (57.02146) as well as for the variable modification of the "light" TEV linker coupled to AMP (751.2915) on serine, tyrosine or threonine residues. Furthermore, the options min. peptides, min razor + unique peptides as well as min. unique peptides were used with default settings (1 - 1 - 0).  For further statistical data analysis, the Perseus software (version 1.6.2.3) was used. Therefore, the protein groups table in the txt folder resulting from the MaxQuant analysis was uploaded into the program. LFQ intensities or SILAC ratios were log2 transformed and putative contaminants as well as reverse hits were removed. Next, all samples were categorical annotated according to their treatment conditions. Then, the resulting matrix was filtered against 75 % of valid values in at least one group. Missing values were imported from normal distribution (width 0.3, down shift 1.8, total matrix) and p-values were obtained by a two-sided two sample t-test over replicates with a Benjamini-Hochberg false discovery rate correction (FDR 0.05). Data were visualized by generating scatter plots (student's t-test difference (treated/control) against -log student's t-test p-value (treated/control)). For SILAC experiments, rows were filtered for 75 % of valid values in total and a one-sample student's t-test was performed.

### Publication Abstract
Bacteria utilize versatile strategies to propagate infections within human cells, <i>e.g.</i>, by the injection of effector proteins, which alter crucial signaling pathways. One class of such virulence-associated proteins is involved in the AMPylation of eukaryotic Rho GTPases with devastating effects on viability. In order to get an inventory of AMPylated proteins, several technologies have been developed. However, as they were designed for the analysis of cell lysates, knowledge about AMPylation targets in living cells is largely lacking. Here, we implement a chemical-proteomic method for deciphering AMPylated host proteins <i>in situ</i> during bacterial infection. HeLa cells treated with a previously established cell permeable pronucleotide probe (<b>pro-N6pA</b>) were infected with <i>Vibrio parahaemolyticus</i>, and modified host proteins were identified upon probe enrichment and LC-MS/MS analysis. Three already known targets of the AMPylator VopS-Rac1, RhoA, and Cdc42-could be confirmed, and several other Rho GTPases were additionally identified. These hits were validated in comparative studies with <i>V.&#xa0;parahaemolyticus</i> wild type and a mutant producing an inactive VopS (H348A). The method further allowed to decipher the sites of modification and facilitated a time-dependent analysis of AMPylation during infection. Overall, the methodology provides a reliable detection of host AMPylation <i>in situ</i> and thus a versatile tool in monitoring infection processes.

### Keywords
Human, Infection, Hela, V. parahaemolyticus, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry, Technical University of Munich, Lichtenbergstraße 4,85748 Garching, Germany
Chair of Organic Chemistry II
Department of Chemistry, Chair of Organic Chemistry II, Technical University of Munich, Germany

### Submitter
Theresa Rauh

### Lab Head
Dr Stephan Axel Sieber
Department of Chemistry, Chair of Organic Chemistry II, Technical University of Munich, Germany


