### Accession
PXD038929

### Title
Systems-level temporal immune-metabolic profile in Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever virus infection

### Description
Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever (CCHF) caused by CCHF virus (CCHFV) is one of the epidemic-prone diseases prioritized by the World Health Organisation as public health emergency with an urgent need for accelerated research. The trajectory of host response against CCHFV is multifarious and remains unknown. Here, we reported the temporal spectrum of pathogenesis following the CCHFV infection using genome-wide blood transcriptomics analysis followed by advanced systems biology analysis, temporal immune-pathogenic alterations, and context-specific progressive and postinfection genome-scale metabolic models (GSMM) on samples collected during the acute (T0), early convalescent (T1), and convalescent-phase (T2). The interplay between the retinoic acid-inducible gene-I-like/nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain-like receptor and tumor necrosis factor signaling governed the trajectory of antiviral immune responses. The rearrangement of intracellular metabolic fluxes toward the amino acid metabolism and metabolic shift toward oxidative phosphorylation and fatty acid oxidation during acute CCHFV infection determine the pathogenicity. The upregulation of the tricarboxylic acid cycle during CCHFV infection, compared to the noninfected healthy control and between the severity groups, indicated an increased energy demand and cellular stress. The upregulation of glycolysis and pyruvate metabolism potentiated energy generation through alternative pathways associated with the severity of the infection. The downregulation of metabolic processes at the convalescent phase identified by blood cell transcriptomics and single-cell type proteomics of five immune cells (CD4+ and CD8+ T cells, CD14+ monocytes, B cells, and NK cells) potentially leads to metabolic rewiring through the recovery due to hyperactivity during the acute phase leading to post-viral fatigue syndrome.

### Sample Protocol
Protein was extracted from cell pellets, and liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) was performed at the Proteomics Biomedicum core facility, Karolinska Institutet using an analytical workflow previously described with some adjustments. In brief, the cell pellets were solubilized with 10 µL of 8M urea and 10 µL of 0.2% ProteaseMAX (Promega) in 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5 with 1 µL of 100x protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche) following sonication in the water bath for 5 min. Samples were probed and sonicated with VibraCell probe (Sonics & Materials, Inc.) for 30 s, with pulse 2/2, at 20% amplitude after adding 69 µL Tris-HCl buffer and 10 µL acetonitrile (ACN). Protein concentration was measured by BCA assay (Thermo Scientific). An aliquot of 2 or 5 µg samples (CD8, NK, and CD4, monocyte, B cells, respectively) was taken to further preparation, including reduction with dithiothreitol (Sigma) at 37°C for 45 min and alkylation with iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature (RT) in the dark. Proteolytic digestion was performed by adding 0.4 or 1 µg sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) in an enzyme-to-protein ratio of 1:5, incubating overnight at 37°C. Following clean up on the C18 Hypersep plate with 5 µL bed volume (Thermo Fisher Scientific), the biological samples were labeled with TMTpro reagents in random order adding 150 µg TMT-reagent in 30 µL dry ACN and incubating at RT for 2h. The reaction was quenched before combining and replicated into an analytical sample in a vial.

### Data Protocol
The TMTpro-labeled samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS as described previously. Acquiring raw data files were used for protein identification and reporter ion abundance-based quantification with Proteome Discoverer v2.5 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using the Mascot Server v5.1 search engine against the human protein database (SwissProt). The results were filtered with 5% FDR using the Percolator. The data were normalized using R package NormalyzerDE v1.12.0, and differential expression analysis was performed using R package limma v3.50.0.

### Publication Abstract
Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever (CCHF) caused by CCHF virus (CCHFV) is one of the epidemic-prone diseases prioritized by the World Health Organisation as public health emergency with an urgent need for accelerated research. The trajectory of host response against CCHFV is multifarious and remains unknown. Here, we reported the temporal spectrum of pathogenesis following the CCHFV infection using genome-wide blood transcriptomics analysis followed by advanced systems biology analysis, temporal immune-pathogenic alterations, and context-specific progressive and postinfection genome-scale metabolic models (GSMM) on samples collected during the acute (T0), early convalescent (T1), and convalescent-phase (T2). The interplay between the retinoic acid-inducible gene-I-like/nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain-like receptor and tumor necrosis factor signaling governed the trajectory of antiviral immune responses. The rearrangement of intracellular metabolic fluxes toward the amino acid metabolism and metabolic shift toward oxidative phosphorylation and fatty acid oxidation during acute CCHFV infection determine the pathogenicity. The upregulation of the tricarboxylic acid cycle during CCHFV infection, compared to the noninfected healthy control and between the severity groups, indicated an increased energy demand and cellular stress. The upregulation of glycolysis and pyruvate metabolism potentiated energy generation through alternative pathways associated with the severity of the infection. The downregulation of metabolic processes at the convalescent phase identified by blood cell transcriptomics and single-cell type proteomics of five immune cells (CD4<sup>+</sup> and CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells, CD14<sup>+</sup> monocytes, B cells, and NK cells) potentially leads to metabolic rewiring through the recovery due to hyperactivity during the acute phase leading to post-viral fatigue syndrome.

### Keywords
Crimean-congo hemorrhagic fever virus, Singe cell-type proteomics

### Affiliations
Karolinska Institutet

### Submitter
Akos Vegvari

### Lab Head
Dr Akos Vegvari
Karolinska Institutet


