### Accession
PXD023256

### Title
Blocking ERK activity has a selective but critical impact on activating T cells

### Description
The mitogen activated kinases ERK1/2 are activated by antigen receptor engagement and control T cell differentiation. We have used mass spectrometry to explore how ERK1/2 control antigen receptor driven cell growth and proteome restructuring in CD8 T cells. Quantitative analysis of >8000 proteins provides new understanding of the highly selective role of ERK1/2 in controlling T cell protein systems. The data reveal that ERK signalling is not a dominant regulator of the metabolic and biosynthetic programs that drive T cell growth. Rather, the dominant function of ERK1/2 is to control the repertoire of transcription factors, cytokines and cytokine receptors expressed by activated T cells. This study provides a comprehensive map of how T cell phenotypes are selectively shaped by ERK1/2 and reveals that ERK1/2 controls the transcriptional reprogramming of activated T cells that is pivotal for T cell differentiation and acquisition of effector function.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics sample preparation and peptide fractionation All cells were cultured at 37 ˚C with 5 % CO2 in RPMI 1640 containing glutamine (Invitrogen) and supplemented with 10 % FBS (Gibco), 50 uM B-mercaptoethanol (Sigma) and penicillin/streptomycin (Gibco). For proteomics experiments in vitro TCR stimulation of lymphocytes was performed as follows: lymph nodes from P14 transgenic mice were removed and mashed in RPMI media before filtering through a 70-μm cell strainer. Cells were suspended in RPMI media and stimulated for 24 hours with 100 ng/ml antigenic peptide GP33 (glycoprotein amino acids 33–41) and +/- 2 uM PD184352. After 24 hours, cells were collected by centrifugation and prepared for cell sorting to generate a pure population of CD8+ cells. Harvested cells were treated with 1 ug Fc block (BD Pharmingen) per million cells, to block Fc receptors. Cells were stained with CD8-PE and DAPI and sorted on a Influx cell sorter (Becton Dickinson). CD8+ viable cells were collected and washed with HBSS before being snap frozen in liquid nitrogen. Naïve CD8 T cells were isolated from the lymph nodes of CD4cre+ male mice (from a C57BL/6 background) as described by Marchingo et al., 2020. Cells were sorted for CD8 positive, CD4 negative, DAPI negative, CD44 low and CD62L high. Cells were collected and washed with HBSS before being snap frozen in liquid nitrogen. Cell pellets were lysed as described previously (Howden et al 2019). In brief, cells were lysed in 400 ul lysis buffer (4% sodium dodecyl sulfate, 50 mM tetraethylammonium bromide (pH 8.5) and 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine-hydrochloride). Lysates were boiled and sonicated with a BioRuptor (30 cycles: 30 s on and 30 s off) before alkylation with 20 mM iodoacetamide for 1 h at 22 °C in the dark. Cell lysates were subjected to the SP3 procedure for protein clean-up before elution into digest buffer (0.1% sodium dodecyl sulfate, 50 mM tetraethylammonium bromide (pH 8.5) and 1 mM CaCl2) and digested with LysC and Trypsin, each at a 1:50 (enzyme:protein) ratio. Peptide clean-up was performed as described in the SP3 protocol and were eluted in 2 % DMSO for fractionation.   Peptides were fractionated using high pH reverse-phase chromatography. Samples were loaded onto a XbridgeTM BEH130 C18 column with 3.5 μm particles (Waters). Using a Dionex BioRS system, the samples were separated using a 25-min multistep gradient of solvents A (10 mM formate at pH 9 in 2% acetonitrile) and B (10 mM ammonium formate at pH 9 in 80% acetonitrile), at a flow rate of 0.3 ml min−1. Peptides were separated into 16 fractions. The fractions were subsequently dried, and the peptides were dissolved in 5% formic acid and analyzed by liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry.  Liquid chromatography mass spectrometry analysis (LC- MS/MS) LC-MSMS was performed as described previously but with slight modifications (Marchingo et al 2020). For each sample, 1 ug of peptides was injected onto a nanoscale C18 reverse-phase chromatography system (UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano, Thermo Scientific) and electrosprayed into an Orbitrap mass spectrometer (LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro; Thermo Scientific). For chromatography the following buffer conditions were used: HPLC buffer A (0.1% formic acid), HPLC buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 0.08% formic acid) and HPLC buffer C (0.1% formic acid). Peptides were loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap100 nanoViper C18 trap column (100 µm inner diameter, 2 cm; Thermo Scientific) in HPLC buffer C with a constant flow of 10 µl/min. After trap enrichment, peptides were eluted onto an EASY-Spray PepMap RSLC nanoViper, C18, 2 µm, 100Å column (75 µm, 50 cm; Thermo Scientific) using the buffer gradient: 2% B (0 to 6 min), 2% to 35% B (6 to 130 min), 35% to 98% B (130 to 132 min), 98% B (132 to 152 min), 98% to 2% B (152 to 153 min), and equilibrated in 2% B (153 to 170 min) at a flow rate of 0.3 µl/min. The eluting peptide solution was automatically electrosprayed using an EASY-Spray nanoelectrospray ion source at 50ºC and a source voltage of 1.9 kV (Thermo Scientific) into the Orbitrap mass spectrometer (LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro; Thermo Scientific). The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode. Full-scan MS survey spectra (mass/charge ratio, 335 to 1800) in profile mode were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 60,000. Data were collected using data- dependent acquisition: the 15 most intense peptide ions from the preview scan in the Orbitrap were fragmented by collision-induced dissociation (normalized collision energy, 35%; activation Q, 0.250; activation time, 10 ms) in the LTQ after the accumulation of 5000 ions. Precursor ion charge state screening was enabled, and all unassigned charge states as well as singly charged species were rejected. The lock mass option was enabled for survey scans to improve mass accuracy.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spec data files were searched using the MaxQuant software package (version 1.6.2.6). Proteins and peptides were identified using a hybrid database from the Uniprot release 2019 07. The hybrid database was generated using all manually annotated mouse SwissProt entries, combined with mouse TrEMBL entries with protein level evidence available and a manually annotated homologue within the human SwissProt database. The following search parameters within MaxQuant were selected: protein N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was selected as a fixed modification; trypsin and LysC were selected as digestion enzymes with up to 2 missed cleavages; the false discovery rate was set at 1 % for protein and peptide and the match between runs function was disabled. Proteins were removed from the data set which were categorised as “reverse”, “contaminant” or “only identified by site”. Estimates of protein copy numbers per cell were calculated using the histone ruler method within the Perseus software package.  Statistics and calculations To identify significant changes in protein abundance P values were calculated using a two-tailed t-test on log-normalised protein copy numbers. Proteins were considered to change significantly with a P value <0.05 and a fold change >1.5 or <0.67. To identify processes that may be enriched upon ERK inactivation a more stringent fold change cut-off was established. The standard deviation of the log2(fold change) for all proteins was calculated and a significance cut-off was set as 2 standard deviations from the mean log2(fold change). The mass of individual proteins was estimated using the following formula: CN × MW/NA = protein mass (g cell−1), where CN is the protein copy number, MW is the protein molecular weight (in Da) and NA is Avogadro’s Constant. Heat maps were generated using the Morpheus tool from the Broad Institute (https://software.broadinstitute.org/morpheus).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Erk1/2, Immunology, Mapk, T cells

### Affiliations
University of Dundee
Cell Signalling and Immunology, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee, UK

### Submitter
Andrew Howden

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Doree Cantrell
Cell Signalling and Immunology, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee, UK


