### Accession
PXD047458

### Title
RNA sequencing and proteomic profiling reveal alterations by MPTP in chronic stomach mucosal injury in tree shrew Chinese (Tupaia belangeri chinensis)

### Description
1-Methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP) is a neurotoxin that can cause gastrointestinal ulcers by affecting dopamine levels. Therefore, MPTP has been considered a toxic substance that causes gastric ulcer disease in experimental animals. In this study, tree shrews were used as the animal model of gastric mucosa injury, and MPTP was intraperitoneally injected for 13 weeks, while tree shrews were not injected as the control group. Under the light microscope, local congestion or diffuse bleeding points of gastric mucosa and multiple redness and swelling bleeding symptoms on the inner wall were observed in the treatment group, as well as immune cell infiltration was found in HE staining, but no such phenomenon was observed in the control group. In order to explore the molecular basis of changes in MPTP induced gastric mucosa injury, the transcriptome and proteome data of gastric mucosa were analyzed. We observed significant differences in mRNA and protein expression levels under the influence of MPTP. The changes in mRNA and proteins are related to increased immune infiltration, cellular processes and angiogenesis. More differentially expressed genes play a role in immune function, especially the candidate genes RPL4 and ANXA1 with significant signal and core role. There are also differentially expressed genes that play a role in mucosal injury and shedding, especially candidate genes GAST and DDC with certain signaling and corresponding functions. Understanding the factors and molecular basis that affect the expression of related genes is crucial for coping with Emotionality gastric mucosa injury disease and developing new treatment methods to establish the ability to resist disease.

### Sample Protocol
In this study, tree shrews were used as the animal model of gastric mucosa injury, and MPTP was intraperitoneally injected for 13 weeks, while tree shrews were not injected as the control group.The protein concentration was determined by BCA protein quantitative kit. DTT and iodoacetamide were used to break the disulfide bond and reductively alkalize the protein, so as to fully enzymolize the protein later. Enzymatic hydrolysis of proteins using trypsin. The iTRAQ/TMT technique was used for proteome quantification. Mix the labeled peptide segments in equal amounts and perform reverse pre separation at high PH. Perform low pH nano-HPLC-MS/MS (Orbitrap Fusion)

### Data Protocol
After mass spectrometry, the raw data were extracted, analyzed, and removed isotopes by Mascot Distiller version 2.6 36, and then converted into Mascot Generic Format (MGF). We perform database searches of MS/MS maps using Mascot (v2.3.2) 36. The MGF file was submitted to Mascot, and the established database was selected for database search.

### Publication Abstract
1-Methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP) is a neurotoxin that can cause gastrointestinal ulcers by affecting dopamine levels. Therefore, MPTP has been considered a toxic substance that causes gastric ulcer disease in experimental animals. In this study, tree shrews were used as the animal model of gastric mucosa injury, and MPTP was intraperitoneally injected at a lower MPTP dosage 2&#xa0;mg/kg/day for 13&#xa0;weeks, while tree shrews were not injected as the control group. Under the light microscope, local congestion or diffuse bleeding points of gastric mucosa and multiple redness and swelling bleeding symptoms on the inner wall were observed in the treatment group, as well as immune cell infiltration was found in HE staining, but no such phenomenon was observed in the control group. In order to explore the molecular basis of changes in MPTP induced gastric mucosa injury, the transcriptome and proteome data of gastric mucosa were analyzed. We observed significant differences in mRNA and protein expression levels under the influence of MPTP. The changes in mRNA and proteins are related to increased immune infiltration, cellular processes and angiogenesis. More differentially expressed genes play a role in immune function, especially the candidate genes RPL4 and ANXA1 with significant signal and core role. There are also differentially expressed genes that play a role in mucosal injury and shedding, especially candidate genes GAST and DDC with certain signaling and corresponding functions. Understanding the factors and molecular basis that affect the expression of related genes is crucial for coping with Emotionality gastric mucosa injury disease and developing new treatment methods to establish the ability to resist disease.

### Keywords
Tree shrew, Proteomic profiling, Rna sequencing, Mptp, Chronic stomach mucosal injury

### Affiliations
Institute of Medical Biology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences/Peking Union Medical College
Medical Primate Research Center, Institute of Medical Biology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences/Peking Union Medical College, Kunming , China

### Submitter
Tang Dong hong

### Lab Head
Dr Dong-hong Tang
Medical Primate Research Center, Institute of Medical Biology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences/Peking Union Medical College, Kunming , China


