### Accession
PXD025507

### Title
Actinomycin targets NPM1c-primed mitochondria in AML

### Description
Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) pathogenesis often involves a mutation in the NPM1 nucleolar chaperone, but the bases for its transforming properties and association with favorable outcome remain incompletely understood. Here we demonstrate that an oncogenic mutant form of NPM1 (NPM1c) hampers formation of PML nuclear bodies (NBs), key senescence effectors, and impairs mitochondrial function to drive an integrated stress response. Actinomycin D (ActD), an antibiotic with unambiguous clinical efficacy in relapsed/refractory NPM1c-AMLs, preferentially targets these primed mitochondria, activating cGAS signaling and boosting ROS production. The later restores PML NB formation to drive senescence of NPM1c-AMLs cells. Dual targeting of mitochondria by Venetoclax and ActD synergized for AML elimination. Our studies reveal a central role of mitochondria downstream of NPM1c and implicate a mitochondrial/ROS/PML/TP53 senescence pathway as a key effector of ActD-based, and possibly others, chemotherapies.

### Sample Protocol
Label free quantification (LFQ) proteomic analysis Experiments were performed at the 3P5 proteomics facility of the Université Paris Descartes as previously described ( Hospital MA, Jacquel A, Mazed F, Saland E, Larrue C, Mondesir J, Birsen R, Green AS, Lambert M, Sujobert P, Gautier EF, Salnot V, Le Gall M, Decroocq J, Poulain L, Jacque N, Fontenay M, Kosmider O, Récher C, Auberger P, Mayeux P, Bouscary D, Sarry JE, Tamburini J.  RSK2 is a new Pim2 target with pro-survival functions in FLT3-ITD-positive acute myeloid leukemia  Leukemia 2017 vol. 32, 597–605. doi : 10.1038/leu.2017.284 ). One million cells of AML2 with exogenous expression of NPM1 or NPM1c, mock- or Actinomycin D-treated, were lysed in 100µl lysis buffer (100 mM Tris (pH 8.5), 2% SDS, 20 mM TCEP, 50 mM chloroacetamide) and heated 5 min at 95°C. 50µg of proteins from whole cell lysate were trypsin-digested overnight using the filtered-aided sample preparation (FASP) method as described in Wisniewski JR, Zougman A, Nagaraj N, Mann M. Universal sample preparation method for proteome analysis. Nature methods 2009 May; 6(5): 359-362). Filtered peptides were desalted on C18 reverse-phase StageTips, fractionated in 5 fractions on Strong Cationic Exchange (SCX) StageTips, dried and solubilized in 10µl of a 10% acetonitrile (ACN) and 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) solution.  Liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry analyses were performed on anU3000 RSLC nanoflow-HPLC system coupled to a Q-Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (both from Thermo Fisher Scientific). Twenty percent of each fraction were concentrated and washed on a C18 reverse-phase precolumn (3μm particle size, 100 Å pore size, 75 μm inner diameter, 2 cm length, Thermo Fischer Scientific), then separated using a C18 reverse-phase analytical column (2 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size, 75 μm inner diameter, 25 cm length from Thermo Fischer Scientific) with a 3 h gradient starting from 99% of solvent A (0.1% formic acid) to 40% of solvent B (80% ACN and 0.085% formic acid). The mass spectrometer acquired data throughout the elution process and operated in a data-dependent scheme with full MS scans acquired, followed by up to 10 successive MS/MS HCD-fragmentations on the most abundant ions detected. Settings for Q-Exactive were: full MS AGC target 1.106 with 60ms maximum ion injection time (MIIT) and resolution of 70 000. The MS scans spanned from 350 to 1500 Th. Precursor selection window was set at 2 Th. HCD Normalized Collision Energy (NCE) was set at 27% and MS/MS scan resolution was set at 17,500 with AGC target 1.105 within 60ms MIIT. Dynamic exclusion time was set to 30 s and spectra were recorded in profile mode.

### Data Protocol
The analyses of raw data were performed by LFQ on Maxquant software (Cox J, Hein MY, Luber CA, Paron I, Nagaraj N, Mann M. Accurate proteome-wide label-free quantification by delayed normalization and maximal peptide ratio extraction, termed MaxLFQ. Molecular & cellular proteomics : MCP 2014 Sep; 13(9): 2513-2526) with a maximum of 1% FDR and match between runs enabled within a 0.7 min match time window and 20 min alignment time window. Maxquant LFQ data quality was assessed with PTXQC (Bielow C, Mastrobuoni G, Kempa S. Proteomics Quality Control: Quality Control Software for MaxQuant Results.  J Proteome Res. 2016 Mar 4;15(3):777-87. doi: 10.1021/acs.jproteome.5b00780.), and analyzed with Perseus (Tyanova S, Temu T, Sinitcyn P, Carlson A, Hein MY, Geiger T, Mann M, Cox J. The Perseus computational platform for comprehensive analysis of (prote)omics data. Nat Methods. 2016 Sep;13(9):731-40. doi: 10.1038/nmeth.3901.) and Excel software from Microsoft. First the reversed sequence proteins and contaminants hits were removed and proteins with at least 3 label-free quantification (LFQ)>0 in at least one of the four conditions were selected for further statistical analysis. A Student's t-test was applied to identify differentially expressed genes between the different conditions. Only proteins with a p-value under 0.01 were considered as significant. They were then singled out in a new matrix and Z-scored. Hierarchical clustering by Pearson's dissimilarity and average linkage was conducted in an unsupervised fashion to control for experimental bias or outlier samples.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Actinomycin d, Mitochondria, Npm1c, Senescence, Qexactive, Lfq, Pml

### Affiliations
Collège de France, Oncologie Cellulaire et Moléculaire, PSL University, INSERM UMR 1050, CNRS UMR 7241, INSERM UMR 944, CNRS UMR 7212, Université de Paris, IRSL, Hôpital St. Louis Paris France
ICO Angers

### Submitter
François GUILLONNEAU

### Lab Head
Dr Hugues de Thé
Collège de France, Oncologie Cellulaire et Moléculaire, PSL University, INSERM UMR 1050, CNRS UMR 7241, INSERM UMR 944, CNRS UMR 7212, Université de Paris, IRSL, Hôpital St. Louis Paris France


