### Accession
PXD017448

### Title
Immunopeptidome on MC38 Cell line

### Description
PTM – driven antigenicity – immunopeptidome of MC38 cell line

### Sample Protocol
H2-Kb and H2-Db -bound peptides were isolated from three independent preparations of MC-38 cell line, each containing XX cells, as in (Milner et al. 2013). Briefly, cells were lysed with lysis buffer comprised of PBS supplemented with 0.25% sodium deoxycholate, 0.2 mM iodoacetamide, 1 mM EDTA, 1:200 protease inhibitors cocktail (Sigma, St. Louis, MO), 1 mM PMSF, and 1% octyl-β-D-glucopyranoside. The lysate was then shaken on a shaking table gently for one hour at 4°C, cleared by centrifugation at 4°C and 47,580g, for 60 min (Sorval RC 6+ centrifuge, Thermo Fisher Scientific). After centrifugation, the supernatant was passed through a column containing the Y3 antibody (anti-H2-Kb) or 28-14-8 antibody (anti-H2-Db) covalently bound to protein G Sepharose resin with dimethylpimelimidate. Next, the columns were preconditioned with two column volumes of 0.1 N acetic acid, and next with two column volumes of 20 mM Tris/HCl, pH 8.0. After passing the cleared cell extracts, the columns were washed with five column volumes of 400 mM NaCl and 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, followed by another wash with 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8. The MHC-bound peptides were eluted with 1% trifluoroacetic acid, desalted, concentrated and separated from the MHC molecules by reversed-phase fractionation using disposable Micro-Tip Columns C-18 (Harvard Apparatus, Holliston, MA). The peptides were eluted with 30% acetonitrile in 0.1% TFA, dried by vacuum centrifugation, and dissolved in 0.1% TFA for analysis by capillary chromatography combined with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Samples were resolved by capillary chromatography using an UltiMate 3000 RSLC coupled by electrospray, to a Q-Exactive-Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Elution of the peptides was performed with a linear two-hour, 5-28% acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% formic acid, at a flow rate of 0.15 μl/min. The 10 most intense ions in each full-MS spectrum, with single to triple-charged states, were selected for fragmentation by higher energy collision dissociation (HCD), at a relative collision energy of 25. Ion times were set to 100 msec. automatic gain control (AGC) target was set to 3*106 for the full MS, and to 1*105 for ms2. The intensity threshold was set at 1*104

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw spectra were analyzed using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.0.16) with the default parameters for the analysis of proteins and peptides (LFQ) minimum ratio count of 1, minimum peptide length for unspecific search of 8 , maximum peptide length for unspecific search of 15, peptide FDR was set to 0.05 and match between runs enabled. Masses were searched against the mouse proteome database from UniprotKB (14/11/2018)

### Publication Abstract
Post-translational modification (PTM) of antigens provides an additional source of specificities targeted by immune responses to tumors or pathogens, but identifying antigen PTMs and assessing their role in shaping the immunopeptidome is challenging. Here we describe the Protein Modification Integrated Search Engine (PROMISE), an antigen discovery pipeline that enables the analysis of 29 different PTM combinations from multiple clinical cohorts and cell lines. We expanded the antigen landscape, uncovering human leukocyte antigen class I binding motifs defined by specific PTMs with haplotype-specific binding preferences and revealing disease-specific modified targets, including thousands of new cancer-specific antigens that can be shared between patients and across cancer types. Furthermore, we uncovered a subset of modified peptides that are specific to cancer tissue and driven by post-translational changes that occurred in the tumor proteome. Our findings highlight principles of PTM-driven antigenicity, which may have broad implications for T cell-mediated therapies in cancer and beyond.

### Keywords
Immunopeptidome, Ptm

### Affiliations
Weizmann Institute of Science

### Submitter
Assaf Kacen

### Lab Head
Dr Yifat Merbl
Weizmann Institute of Science


