### Accession
PXD035073

### Title
comparative proteomics and elemental analysis reveal molecular adaption of Mollusca radula to different lifestyles

### Description
Radula is a unique foraging organ to Mollusca, which is important for their evolution and taxonomic classification. Many radulae are mineralized with metals. Although the remarkable mechanical properties of mineralized radula are well-studied, the formation of mineralization from nonmineralized radula is poorly understood. Taking advantage of the recently sequenced octopus and chiton genome, we were able to identify more species-specific radula proteins by proteomics. Comparing these proteomes enable us to gain insight into the molecular components of nonmineralized and mineralized radula, highlighting that iron mineralization in chiton radula is possibly due to the evolution of ferritins and peroxiredoxins. Through in vitro binding assay, ferritin is shown to be important to iron accumulation into the nonmineralized radula. Moreover, radula proteomes are well adapted to their functionality. Octopus radula has many scaffold modification proteins to suit flexibility while chiton radula has abundant sugar metabolism proteins (e.g. glycosyl hydrolases) to adapt to algae feeding. This study provides a foundation for the understanding of Mollusca radula formation and evolution and may inspire the synthesis of iron nanomaterials.

### Sample Protocol
Chitons (Acanthopleura loochooana) were collected from the coastal area of Fujian Province, China. Octopuses (Octopus variabilis) were purchased from a local aquaculture market of Nanjing, Jiangsu Province, China, which were originated from the Yellow Sea of China. Animals were kept at -20°C until use.

### Data Protocol
Identification of proteins was performed using Blastp searches against the NCBI database. Conserved domains were predicted using SMART (http://smart.embl-heidelberg.de/).

### Publication Abstract
The radula is a unique foraging organ to Mollusca, which is important for their evolution and taxonomic classification. Many radulae are mineralized with metals. Although the remarkable mechanical properties of mineralized radulae are well-studied, the formation of mineralization from nonmineralized radulae is poorly understood. Taking advantage of the recently sequenced octopus and chiton genomes, we were able to identify more species-specific radular proteins by proteomics. Comparing these proteomes with the known limpet radula proteome enabled us to gain insight into the molecular components of nonmineralized and mineralized radula, highlighting that iron mineralization in the chiton radula is possibly due to the evolution of ferritins and peroxiredoxins. Through an in vitro binding assay, ferritin is shown to be important to iron accumulation into the nonmineralized radula. Moreover, radular proteomes reflect their adaption to dietary habits to some extent. The octopus radula has many scaffold modification proteins to suit flexibility while the chiton radula has abundant sugar metabolism proteins (e.g., glycosyl hydrolases) to adapt to algae feeding. This study provides a foundation for the understanding of molluscan radula formation and evolution and may inspire the synthesis of iron nanomaterials.

### Keywords
Radula

### Affiliations
Hohai University, Nanjing, China
Hohai University

### Submitter
Chuang Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Chuang Liu
Hohai University


