### Accession
PXD024035

### Title
Orphan nuclear receptor COUP-TFII enhances myofibroblasts glycolysis leading to kidney fibrosis

### Description
Recent studies demonstrated that metabolic disturbance, such as augmented glycolysis, contributes to fibrosis. The molecular regulation of this metabolic perturbation in fibrosis, however, has been elusive. COUP-TFII (also known as NR2F2) is an important regulator of glucose and lipid metabolism. Its contribution to organ fibrosis is undefined. Here, we found increased COUP-TFII expression in myofibroblasts in human fibrotic kidneys, lungs, kidney organoids, and mouse kidneys after injury. Genetic ablation of COUP-TFII in mice resulted in attenuation of injury-induced kidney fibrosis. A non-biased proteomic study revealed the suppression of fatty acid oxidation and the enhancement of glycolysis pathways in COUP-TFII overexpressing fibroblasts. Overexpression of COUP-TFII in fibroblasts induced augmented glycolysis and production of alpha smooth muscle actin (αSMA) and collagen1. Knockout of COUP-TFII decreased glycolysis and collagen1 levels in fibroblasts. Chip-qPCR revealed the binding of COUP-TFII on the promoter of PGC1α. Overexpression of COUP-TFII reduced the cellular level of PGC1α. Targeting COUP-TFII serves as a novel treatment approach for mitigating fibrosis in chronic kidney disease and potentially fibrosis in other organs.

### Sample Protocol
Naïve (WT) and COUP-TFII overexpression (OE) cells were both treated with TGFβ (10ng/ml) for 48 hours to induce myofibroblast differentiation. After trypsinization, cells were washed twice in PBS. Cell pellets were frozen in – 80 C° for proteomics experiments.  Protein extraction and digest: PBS was removed, followed by addition of SDS lysis buffer (2% SDS, 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris, pH 8.7) containing protease inhibitors (Complete, Roche). Lysates were homogenized over Qiashredder columns (Qiagen, ref. 79656) and centrifuged at 13,000 rpm for 1 minute at room temperature. Reductive methylation of cysteine residues was performed by adding dithiothreitol (DTT) to a final concentration of 5 mM and heating to 37 C° for 1 hour, followed by alkylation with iodoacetamide at a final concentration of 15 mM and incubation at room temperature in the dark for 30 minutes and quenching with DTT. Protein concentration was determined using a Micro BCATM Protein Assay Kit (ThermoFisher, Catalog# 23235). Detergent was removed by methanol/chloroform protein precipitation as described previously (Wessel & Flugge, 1984). Lys-C protease digests (Wako, Catalog# 129-02541) in 2M urea 20mM EPPS, pH 8.5 at 37oC for 3 hours were followed by further digestion at 37 oC for 6 hours with trypsin (Promega, Catalog# V5113). Missed cleavage rate was determined by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were converted to mzXML format and peptide ID used Sequest (Eng, McCormack et al., 1994) (version 28 (http://fields.scripps.edu/yates/wp/?page_id=17)) with searches against the Human UniProt database (February 2014). The database search included reversed protein sequences and known contaminants such as human keratins that were excluded for subsequent analyses. Linear discriminant analysis was performed (Elias & Gygi, 2007) and peptide false discovery rate (FDR) was < 1% after applying a target-decoy database search strategy. Filtering was performed as described previously (McAlister et al., 2014). Variable modification for oxidized methionine (+15.99 Da) was used during searches. For protein identification and quantification, shared peptides were collapsed into the minimally sufficient number of proteins using rules of parsimony. Peptides with a total TMT value of > 200 and an isolation specificity of > 0.7 were included for quantification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Fibrosis, Coup-tfii, Myofibroblasts, Kidney

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School
Renal Division, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

### Submitter
Marian Kalocsay

### Lab Head
Dr Li Li
Renal Division, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.


