### Accession
PXD004043

### Title
Time-course Activation of Human Peripheral Blood Eosinophils by Cytokines

### Description
Activated eosinophils contribute to airway dysfunction and tissue remodeling in asthma, and thus are considered an important factor in asthma pathology. We report here comparative proteomic and phosphoproteomic changes upon activation of eosinophils using eight cytokines individually and in selected cytokine combinations, in time-course reactions. Differential protein and phosphoprotein expressions were determined by mass spectrometry after 2-dimensional gel electrophoresis (2DGE) followed by protein identification by MS, and by label-free LC-MS/MS. We found that each cytokine-stimulation produced significantly different changes in the eosinophil proteome and phosphoproteome, with phosphoproteomic changes being more pronounced and having an earlier onset. Furthermore, we observed that IL-5, GM-CSF, and IL 3 showed the greatest change in protein expression and phosphorylation, and this expression differed markedly from those of the other five cytokines evaluated. Comprehensive univariate and multivariate statistical analyses were employed to evaluate the comparative results. We also monitored eosinophil activation using flow cytometry (FC) analysis of CD69 expression. In agreement with our proteomic studies, FC indicated that IL-5, GM-CSF, and IL-3 were more effective than the other five cytokines studied in stimulating a cell surface CD69 increase indicative of eosinophil activation. Moreover, selected combinations of cytokines revealed proteomic patterns with many proteins in common with single cytokine expression patterns but also showed a greater than additive effect of the two cytokines employed, indicating a more complex signaling pathway that was reflective of a more typical inflammatory pathology.

### Sample Protocol
Quiescent eosinophils from human peripheral blood were separately stimulated with 8 different cytokines, or selected pairs or cytokines, for 15 min, 1 h, 4 h, and 24 h. Using 2-dimensional gel electrophoresis (2DGE) and label-free LC-MS/MS platforms, protein expression and phosphorylation differences between the stimulated eosinophils and unstimulated control samples were measured for each cytokine (or pair), at each time point. 2DGE experiments: All samples (both single and paired cytokine-stimulated) and controls were in triplicate. Protein expression and phosphorylation were determined using Sypro Ruby- and Pro-Q Diamond-stained gels, respectively. Gel images were analyzed by the software SameSpots (TotalLab). Significant spots were excised, digested with trypsin, and protein identification was performed by mass spectrometry (AB Sciex 5800 MALDI-TOF/TOF), followed by MASCOT (Matrix Science) search of Uniprot human data base. Bottom-up proteomics: After trypsin digestion, samples were analyzed by nano-LC-MS/MS (Thermo Fisher Scientific). RAW files were analyzed quantitatively by Progenesis QI for Proteomics software (Waters). Mascot program (Matrix Science) was used as above for protein identification. Only proteins identified from ≥2 peptides, at least one of which was proteotypic, were accepted as valid identifications.

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed by parametric t-test of the log-transformed normalized volumes (2DGE) or intensities (MS) to compare stimulated eosinophil samples with their appropriate control samples. P-values were subjected to Bonferroni correction as appropriate for the number of comparions in each case, and the fold change threshold used was 1.5. The same method was used for protein differential phosphorylation analysis (2DGE) as for differential expression. The Multivariate analysis techniques hierarchical clustering and principal component analysis were used to discover global (proteome level) patterns in expression/phosphorylation.

### Publication Abstract
Activated eosinophils contribute to airway dysfunction and tissue remodeling in asthma and thus are considered to be important factors in asthma pathology. We report here comparative proteomic and phosphoproteomic changes upon activation of eosinophils using eight cytokines individually and in selected cytokine combinations in time-course reactions. Differential protein and phosphoprotein expressions were determined by mass spectrometry after 2-dimensional gel electrophoresis (2DGE) and by LC-MS/MS. We found that each cytokine-stimulation produced significantly different changes in the eosinophil proteome and phosphoproteome, with phosphoproteomic changes being more pronounced and having an earlier onset. Furthermore, we observed that IL-5, GM-CSF, and IL-3 showed the greatest change in protein expression and phosphorylation, and this expression differed markedly from those of the other five cytokines evaluated. Comprehensive univariate and multivariate statistical analyses were employed to evaluate the comparative results. We also monitored eosinophil activation using flow cytometry (FC) analysis of CD69. In agreement with our proteomic studies, FC indicated that IL-5, GM-CSF, and IL-3 were more effective than the other five cytokines studied in stimulating a cell surface CD69 increase indicative of eosinophil activation. Moreover, selected combinations of cytokines revealed proteomic patterns with many proteins in common with single cytokine expression patterns but also showed a greater effect of the two cytokines employed, indicating a more complex signaling pathway that was reflective of a more typical inflammatory pathology.

### Keywords
Flow cytometry, Cytokines, Phosphoproteomics, Proteomics, Activation, Mass spectrometry, Asthma, Eosinophils

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology
Professor, Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX

### Submitter
Kizhake Soman

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Kurosky, Ph.D.
Professor, Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX


