### Accession
PXD030308

### Title
PfAP2-MRP DNA-binding protein is a master regulator of parasite pathogenesis during malaria parasite blood stages

### Description
The pathogenicity of the malaria parasites results from their ability to invade and remodel red blood cells (RBCs), expressing antigenic variant proteins for immune evasion and survival, and then to egress from the host cell.  These sequential processes require concerted actions of a large number of proteins during the intraerythrocytic developmental cycle (IDC)(Boddey and Cowman, 2013; Cowman et al., 2017; Tan and Blackman, 2021), but the molecular basis of the required regulation is only partially understood. Here, we have characterized an essential Apicomplexan AP2 (ApiAP2) transcription factor (we refer to it as PfAP2-MRP; Master Regulator of Pathogenesis) that shows two peaks of expression during the IDC at 16- and 40-hour post-invasion (h.p.i.). When expression of PfAP2-MRP at 40 h.p.i. was disrupted using an inducible gene knockout approach, ∆PfAP2-MRP parasites unable to form mature merozoites and egress from the host RBCs owing to strong down-regulation of several known egress- and invasion-associated genes, in addition to several novel hypothetical genes thought to be involved in these key life cycle processes. Disruption of PfAP2-MRP  expression at 16 h.p.i. results in transcriptional activation of the majority of silenced var genes observed at both bulk and single-cell level. This is also reflected by a significantly higher level of immuno-recognition of the exported proteins on the ∆PfAP2-MRP parasite-infected RBCs by pooled sera from malaria-exposed individuals from an endemic region. In addition, overexpression of many early gametocyte marker genes was also observed in ∆PfAP2-MRP parasites at both 40 h.p.i., and at 16 h.p.i. PfAP2-MRP directly regulates these genes by binding to their promoter region or indirectly through 14 other downstream AP2 transcription factors. Taken together, we conclude that PfAP2-MRP is an upstream transcriptional regulator that participates in mutually exclusive expression patterns shown by the var family of genes and is a critical determinant of parasite's growth during the IDC.

### Sample Protocol
To identify the AP2 interacting proteins, the on beads digestion with trypsin approach was used after immunoprecipitation of AP2 complex. Before performing the on beads digestion, after TE buffer washes the immunoprecipitated complex was washed two times with exchange buffer (100 mM NaCl, Tris 50 mM pH 7.5) for 10 minutes at 4°C. Subsequently, the beads were resuspended in 100 μl of 100 mM Triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) and reduction of beads bound proteins was done with 1mM DTT at 37°C for 30 minutes on thermo mixture with constant shaking at 750 rpm. The sample was brought to room temperature and alkylated in dark with 3mM iodoacetamide for 45 minutes, the excess iodoacetamide was quenched with 3mM DDT for 10 minutes (Sigma Aldrich). Afterwards, the sample was digested with 2.5μg trypsin (Promega) overnight on thermo mixture with constant shaking at 1000 rpm. The resulting digested peptides were purified from beads and trypsin digestion was stopped by adding 2% TFA to the final concertation.  The acidified peptide was desalted by using Sep-Pak C18 1 cc Vac Cartridge, 50 mg Sorbent per Cartridge (Waters). In brief, the Sep-Pak column was conditioned with 1 ml 100% methanol twice and equilibrated with 1 ml of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) twice. After that the digested acidified peptides were loaded, the bound peptides were washed with 1 ml of 0.1% TFA twice and eluted with 300 μl of elution buffer (Acetonitrile 75% with 0.1% TFA in water) twice. The eluted peptide was dried in SpeedVac and kept at -80°C till further use.  The LC-MS analysis was performed on Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer coupled with an UltiMate™ 3000 UHPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% Formic acid (FA) Sigma Aldrich, and approximately 1μg of peptides was separated on an Acclaim PepMapTM C18 column (75 μm I.D. X 250 mm, 2 μm particle sizes, 100 Å pore sizes) with a gradient of 5-35% mobile phase A and B respectively for 55 minutes, ramping up to 90% phase B for 5 minutes, 90% phase B for 5 minutes and the column was conditioned to 2% phase B for 10 minutes with the flow rate of 300 flow rate of 300 nl/min-1 (Phase A 0.1% FA, Phase B 99.9 % ACN with 0.1%FA). The peptides were introduced into mass spectrometer through Nanospray Flex with an electrospray potential of 2.5 kV. Data were acquired in the Orbitrap at the resolution of 60,000 in the mass range of 350-16000 m/z with a maximum ion accumulation time set was 50 ms. The 20 most intense ions with a threshold of more than 1x e6 and having the multiple charges were further fragmented by using higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) at 15000 resolution. The Dynamic exclusion for HCD fragmentation was 30 seconds, the maximum time for fragmented ion accumulation was 30 ms, a target value of 2.50xe3, the normalized collision energy at 28% and the isolation width of 1.6. During the acquisition the ion transfer tube temperature was set at 160°C, data was acquired in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode and the total run time was 75 minutes.

### Data Protocol
Raw LC-MS data files from Q-Exactive HF were converted to. mgf files using Proteo Wizard MS covertgui 64 bit and analyzed using Mascot v2.4. The annotated protein sequence for Plasmodium falciparum was downloaded from https://plasmodb.org (Release 51). The trypsin was set as the enzyme of choice with maximum missed cleavage 1, fixed modification Carbamidomethyl (K), variable modification Deamidated and oxidation of N, Q and M respectively, the peptide and fragment mass tolerance at 0.6 Da.

### Publication Abstract
Malaria-associated pathogenesis such as parasite invasion, egress, host cell remodelling and antigenic variation requires concerted action by many proteins, but the molecular regulation is poorly understood. Here we have characterized an essential Plasmodium-specific Apicomplexan AP2 transcription factor in Plasmodium falciparum (PfAP2-P; pathogenesis) during the blood-stage development with two peaks of expression. An inducible knockout of gene function showed that PfAP2-P is essential for trophozoite development, and critical for var gene regulation, merozoite development and parasite egress. Chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing data collected at timepoints matching the two peaks of pfap2-p expression demonstrate PfAP2-P binding to promoters of genes controlling trophozoite development, host cell remodelling, antigenic variation and pathogenicity. Single-cell RNA sequencing and fluorescence-activated cell sorting revealed de-repression of most var genes in &#x394;pfap2-p parasites. &#x394;pfap2-p parasites also overexpress early gametocyte marker genes, indicating a regulatory role in sexual stage conversion. We conclude that PfAP2-P is an essential upstream transcriptional regulator at two distinct stages of the intra-erythrocytic development cycle.

### Keywords
Var, Epigenetics, P.falciparum, Egress, Invasion, Apiap2

### Affiliations
KING ABDULLAH UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
Microbial Genomic Laboratory Division of Biological and Environmental Sciences and Engineering, Level 4, 4326-WS10, Building 2, King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST),

### Submitter
AMIT KUMAR SUBUDHI

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Arnab Pain
Microbial Genomic Laboratory Division of Biological and Environmental Sciences and Engineering, Level 4, 4326-WS10, Building 2, King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST),


