### Accession
PXD027226

### Title
Capillary electrophoresis coupled to electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry (CE-MS/MS) for ultra-sensitive proteomic analysis of limited sample

### Description
In this work, we developed an ultra-sensitive CE-MS/MS method for bottom-up proteomics analysis of limited samples, down to sub-nanogram levels of total protein. Analysis of 880 pg and 88 pg of HeLa protein digest standard by CE-MS/MS yielded ~1,100±46 and ~160±59 proteins, respectively, demonstrating higher protein and peptide identifications than the current state-of-the-art CE-MS/MS-based proteomic analyses with similar amounts of sample. To demonstrate potential applications of our ultra-sensitive CE-MS/MS method for analysis of limited biological samples, we digested 500 and 1,000 HeLa cells using a miniaturized in-solution digestion workflow. From 1-, 5-, and 10-cell equivalents injected from the resulted digests, we identified 744±127, 1,139±24, and 1,271±6 proteins and 3,353±719, 5,709±513, and 8,527±114 peptide groups, respectively. Furthermore, we performed a comparative assessment of CE-MS/MS and two reversed-phased nano-liquid chromatography (RP-nLC-MS/MS) methods (monolithic and packed columns) for the analysis of a ~10 ng HeLa protein digest standard. Our results demonstrate complementarity in the protein-, and especially peptide-level identifications of the evaluated CE-MS- and RP-nLC-MS-based methods. The techniques were further assessed to detect post-translational modifications and highlight the strengths of the CE-MS/MS approach in identifying potentially important and biologically relevant modified peptides. With a migration window of ~60 min, CE-MS/MS identified ~2,000±53 proteins on average from a single injection of ~8.8 ng HeLa protein digest standard. Additionally, an average of 232±10 phosphopeptides and 377±14 N-terminal acetylated peptides were identified in CE-MS/MS analyses at this sample amount corresponding to 2- and 1.5-fold more identifications for each respective modification found by nLC-MS/MS methods.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa-S3 cells were converted to grow in suspension culture following a published protocol,36 after which they were cultured in F-12K medium supplemented with 10% FBS, 100 I.U./mL penicillin, and 100 μg/mL streptomycin. HeLa cells were washed 3 times with ice-cold 1X PBS prior to resuspension in 1X PBS. After resuspension, cells were counted using a Hemacytometer and dilution to 1,000 cells/μL or 500 cells/μL. Cell suspension (1 μL) was then transferred to a plastic CE vial insert for 1,000 cell or 500 cell processing. Lysis buffer (2 μL) containing 10 M urea, 2.5 M thiourea, 6 mM TCEP, 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8 was added to each replicate and incubated for 10 min at room temperature shaking at 300 RPM for cell lysis and protein extraction, denaturation, and reduction to occur. Proteins were then alkylated for 30 min at room temperature in the dark with a final concentration of 5 mM iodoacetamide in a total volume of 4 μL (pH 8). The total volume was then brought to 20 μL with 2 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8), and trypsin and Lys-C were added at enzyme to substrate ratios of 1:50 (w/w) each (assuming 0.4 ng protein/cell). Digestion occurred overnight at 37°C, shaking at 300 RPM (pH 8). The following morning, 3% formic acid (0.5 μL) was added to quench proteolysis before drying down samples using a SpeedVac. Finally, peptides were resuspended in 200 mM ammonium acetate pH 9 and sonicated for 20 seconds prior to injection.

### Data Protocol
All raw files were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer (v. 2.3 & v 2.5) software (Thermo Fisher Scientific).The SequestHT algorithm was used to search against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot human database (downloaded on 3/13/2018, containing 20,587 sequences). Limited cell samples were also analyzed using the Sequest HT algorithm with INFERYS rescoring2 and the Byonic3 search engine. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as a static modification for all analyses, and oxidation of methionine residues, phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine residues were set as dynamic modifications for all analyses except those with INFERYS rescoring. N-terminal acetylation and methionine loss with N-terminal acetylation were set as dynamic modifications for the protein N-terminus except when INFERYS rescoring was used. At least one high confidence peptide sequence was required for protein identifications, and a target false discovery rate (³1% FDR) was used for protein identification.

### Publication Abstract
In this work, we developed an ultra-sensitive CE-MS/MS method for bottom-up proteomics analysis of limited samples, down to sub-nanogram levels of total protein. Analysis of 880 and 88 pg of the HeLa protein digest standard by CE-MS/MS yielded &#x223c;1100 &#xb1; 46 and &#x223c;160 &#xb1; 59 proteins, respectively, demonstrating higher protein and peptide identifications than the current state-of-the-art CE-MS/MS-based proteomic analyses with similar amounts of sample. To demonstrate potential applications of our ultra-sensitive CE-MS/MS method for the analysis of limited biological samples, we digested 500 and 1000 HeLa cells using a miniaturized in-solution digestion workflow. From 1-, 5-, and 10-cell equivalents injected from the resulted digests, we identified 744 &#xb1; 127, 1139 &#xb1; 24, and 1271 &#xb1; 6 proteins and 3353 &#xb1; 719, 5709 &#xb1; 513, and 8527 &#xb1; 114 peptide groups, respectively. Furthermore, we performed a comparative assessment of CE-MS/MS and two reversed-phased nano-liquid chromatography (RP-nLC-MS/MS) methods (monolithic and packed columns) for the analysis of a &#x223c;10 ng HeLa protein digest standard. Our results demonstrate complementarity in the protein- and especially peptide-level identifications of the evaluated CE-MS- and RP-nLC-MS-based methods. The techniques were further assessed to detect post-translational modifications and highlight the strengths of the CE-MS/MS approach in identifying potentially important and biologically relevant modified peptides. With a migration window of &#x223c;60 min, CE-MS/MS identified &#x223c;2000 &#xb1; 53 proteins on average from a single injection of &#x223c;8.8 ng of the HeLa protein digest standard. Additionally, an average of 232 &#xb1; 10 phosphopeptides and 377 &#xb1; 14 N-terminal acetylated peptides were identified in CE-MS/MS analyses at this sample amount, corresponding to 2- and 1.5-fold more identifications for each respective modification found by nLC-MS/MS methods.

### Keywords
Rp-nlc-ms, Capillary electrophoresis, Ultra-sensitive proteomics, Ultra-low flow liquid phase separation, Monolithic columns, Ce-ms

### Affiliations
Barnett Insititute of Chemical and Biological Analysis, Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Northeastern University
Northeastern University, Barnett Institute of Chemical andBiological Analysis, Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology

### Submitter
Kendall Johnson

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander R. Ivanov
Northeastern University, Barnett Institute of Chemical andBiological Analysis, Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology


