### Accession
PXD019810

### Title
HDX-MS of VDR-RXR in complex with ZK168281

### Description
Characterization of the interaction between the full nuclear receptor VDR-RXR heterodimer and VDR antagonist ZK168281

### Sample Protocol
Prior deuterium incorporation experiments, 10 µM of full-length hVDR/hRXRNTD heterodimers were incubated with a 10x excess of ligand or equal volume of ethanol (vehicle) for 30 min at room temperature. Exchange reactions were performed with a CTC PAL sample handling robot (LEAP Technologies). Reactions were conducted by incubating 4 µl of protein for 30, 60, 180, 600 or 1800 s in 50 µl of D2O buffer (50 mM Tris pH 8.0, 200 mM NaCl, 2% Glycerol, 1 mM TCEP). The exchange reaction was quenched by the addition of 50 µl 3 M Urea containing 0.1% TriFluoro Acetic acid followed by immediate injection into a Aspergillopepsin protease 2.1 x 20 mm column (Affipro) for protein digestion (2 min at 24°C). Peptic digest was injected on a Waters nanoACQUITY UPLC System where peptides were first desalted by trapping for 3 min on a VanGuard Pre-Column Acquity UPLC BEH C18 (1.7 μm; 2.1 × 5 mm), and eluted over 9-min with 5–40% (vol/vol) acetonitrile (containing 0.1% formic acid) gradient into a Waters Synapt G2-Si mass spectrometer. Peptide separation was conducted at 0.1°C. All exchange reactions were performed in triplicates.

### Data Protocol
As reference, peptides from three non-deuterated samples were identified using the ProteinLynx Global Server (PLGS Waters, U.K.). Peptides with an intensity of over 5000, a mass error <5 ppm and present in at least two of the three data acquisitions were pooled and imported into the DynamX data analysis software (Waters, U.K.). After a first round of automated spectral processing using DynamX, each peptide was inspected manually for suitability for further analysis. For the full-length hVDR, a total of 179 peptides remained with a 92.1% coverage and a mean redundancy of 3.99 per amino acid. For hRXRNTD, a total of 127 peptides remained with a 88.7% coverage and a mean redundancy of 3.98 per amino acid. MEMHDX software was used to identify statistically significant changes of deuterium uptake that occurred upon compound binding.

### Publication Abstract
The bioactive vitamin D<sub>3</sub>, 1&#x3b1;,25(OH)<sub>2</sub>D<sub>3</sub>, plays a central role in calcium homeostasis by controlling the activity of the vitamin D receptor (VDR) in various tissues. Hypercalcemia secondary to high circulating levels of vitamin D<sub>3</sub> leads to hypercalciuria, nephrocalcinosis and renal dysfunctions. Current therapeutic strategies aim at limiting calcium intake, absorption and resorption, or 1&#x3b1;,25(OH)<sub>2</sub>D<sub>3</sub> synthesis, but are poorly efficient. In this study, we identify WBP4 as a new VDR interactant, and demonstrate that it controls VDR subcellular localization. Moreover, we show that the vitamin D analogue ZK168281 enhances the interaction between VDR and WBP4 in the cytosol, and normalizes the expression of VDR target genes and serum calcium levels in 1&#x3b1;,25(OH)<sub>2</sub>D<sub>3</sub>-intoxicated mice. As ZK168281 also blunts 1&#x3b1;,25(OH)<sub>2</sub>D<sub>3</sub>-induced VDR signaling in fibroblasts of a patient with impaired vitamin D degradation, this VDR antagonist represents a promising therapeutic option for 1&#x3b1;,25(OH)<sub>2</sub>D<sub>3</sub>-induced hypercalcemia.

### Keywords
Hdx-ms, Antagonist, Nuclear receptors

### Affiliations
Medicinal Chemistry, Early Respiratory and Inflammation, BioPharmaceuticals R&D, AstraZeneca

Medicinal Chemistry, Early Respiratory and Immunology, Biopharmaceuticals R&D, AstraZeneca

### Submitter
Anna Belorusova

### Lab Head
Dr Tomas Leek
Medicinal Chemistry, Early Respiratory and Immunology, Biopharmaceuticals R&D, AstraZeneca


