### Accession
PXD015164

### Title
Dataset of proteins of mouse macrophage cell line PMJ2R samples infected with Tick-borne encephalitis virus, strain Hypr original isolate

### Description
Dataset for a comparative analysis of protein profiles of three series of mouse macrophage cell line PMJ2R samples including the control uninfected series (sample M) and infected with Tick-borne encephalitis virus, strain Hypr original isolate on the second (H2) and sixth day (H6) after infection was carried out using panoramic ultra-high resolution mass spectrometry. The analysis of measurements was performed using the proteomics search engine. The findings of the panoramic mass spectrometric analysis indicated that the protein composition of the cell samples is quite similar with respect to the number of identified proteins, protein composition and relative abundance. We identified a group of proteins specific for cell series H2 and H6.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation: the sample an amount of 50 µg was dissolved in the 20 µL denaturation solution. The sample was diluted up to 200 µL with 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate. Trypsin was added in the ratio 1:50. Digestion was performed at 37 °C overnight. After digestion completed, formic acid was added to samples to the final concentration of 1%. Samples were centrifuged for 10 minutes at 10 °C at 12.000 g. The supernatant was purified using C18 StageTip. The mass spectrometric analysis of the peptide composition of plasma samples was conducted for depleted plasma samples. HPLC-MS/MS registration of peptides was carried out using high resolution mass spectrometer Q Exactive (Thermo Scientific, USA, Catalog # IQLAAEGAAPFALGMBDK) by chromatographic separation using Ultimate 3000 Nano-flow HPLC system (Thermo Scientific, USA, Catalog # ULTIM3000RSLCNANO).

### Data Protocol
Peak lists obtained from MS/MS spectra were identified using OMSSA. Protein identification was conducted against a concatenated target/decoy version of the Mouse complement of the UniProtKB. The decoy sequences were created by reversing the target sequences in SearchGUI. The identification settings were as follows: Trypsin specific with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages; 20.0 ppm as MS1 and 0.05 Da as MS2 tolerances; variable modification Oxidation of Methionine was selected as variable modifications. Peptide Spectrum Matches (PSMs), peptides and proteins were validated at a 1.0% False Discovery Rate (FDR) estimated using the decoy hit distribution.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Panoramic mass spectrometry, Tbev hypr, Mouse macrophage, Protein, Label-free quantification

### Affiliations
Institute of Biomedical Chemistry
Biobanking Group, Branch of IBMC "Scientific and Educatioanl Center"

### Submitter
Anna Kaysheva

### Lab Head
Dr Anna Kaysheva
Biobanking Group, Branch of IBMC "Scientific and Educatioanl Center"


