### Accession
PXD015786

### Title
Herpesvirus infection reduces Pol II occupancy of host promoters but spares viral promoters

### Description
In mammalian cells, widespread acceleration of cytoplasmic mRNA degradation is linked to impaired RNA polymerase II (Pol II) transcription. This mRNA decay-induced transcriptional repression occurs during infection with gammaherpesviruses including Kaposi’s sarcoma associated herpesvirus (KSHV) and murine gammaherpesvirus 68 (MHV68), which encode an mRNA endonuclease that initiates widespread RNA decay. Here, we show that MHV68-induced mRNA decay leads to a genome-wide reduction of Pol II occupancy at mammalian promoters. Viral genes, despite the fact that they require Pol II for transcription, escape this transcriptional repression. Protection is not governed by viral promoter sequences; instead, location on the viral genome is both necessary and sufficient to escape the transcriptional repression effects of mRNA decay. We hypothesize that the ability to escape from transcriptional repression is linked to the localization of viral DNA in replication compartments, providing a means for these viruses to counteract decay-induced viral transcript loss.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were infected, fractionated into nuclei and cytoplasm, digested with trypsin, TMT labeled, and analyzed no a Q Exactive HF in data dependent mode.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched using Proteome Discoverer 2.3 with a Sequest search for fully tryptic peptides. The background based t-test in PD2.3 was used for significance determination.

### Publication Abstract
In mammalian cells, widespread acceleration of cytoplasmic mRNA degradation is linked to impaired RNA polymerase II (Pol II) transcription. This mRNA decay-induced transcriptional repression occurs during infection with gammaherpesviruses including Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) and murine gammaherpesvirus 68 (MHV68), which encode an mRNA endonuclease that initiates widespread RNA decay. Here, we show that MHV68-induced mRNA decay leads to a genome-wide reduction of Pol II occupancy at mammalian promoters. This reduced Pol II occupancy is accompanied by down-regulation of multiple Pol II subunits and TFIIB in the nucleus of infected cells, as revealed by mass spectrometry-based global measurements of protein abundance. Viral genes, despite the fact that they require Pol II for transcription, escape transcriptional repression. Protection is not governed by viral promoter sequences; instead, location on the viral genome is both necessary and sufficient to escape the transcriptional repression effects of mRNA decay. We propose a model in which the ability to escape from transcriptional repression is linked to the localization of viral DNA within replication compartments, providing a means for these viruses to counteract decay-induced transcript loss.

### Keywords
Infection, Mhv68, Tmt, Rna pol ii, Herpesvirus

### Affiliations
Princeton University
Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, USA

### Submitter
Joel Federspiel

### Lab Head
Dr Ileana M Cristea
Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, USA


