### Accession
PXD020210

### Title
A Protein Kinase G -interacting protein regulates critical calcium signals in malaria parasites (Co-IP)

### Description
In malaria parasites, cGMP signalling is mediated by a single cGMP-dependent protein kinase (PKG) . One of the major functions of PKG is to control calcium signals essential for the parasite to exit red blood cells or for the transmission of the gametocyte stages to the mosquito . However, how PKG controls these signals in the absence of known second messenger-dependent calcium channels or scaffolding proteins remains a mystery. Here we use pull-down approaches to identify a PKG partner protein in both Plasmodium falciparum schizonts and P. berghei gametocytes. This partner, named ICM1, is a polytopic membrane protein with homologies to transporters and calcium channels, raising the possibility of a direct functional link between PKG and calcium homeostasis. Phosphoproteomic analyses in both Plasmodium species highlight a densely phosphorylated region of ICM1 with multiple phosphorylation events dependent on PKG activity. Conditional disruption of the P. falciparum ICM1 gene results in reduced cGMP-dependent calcium mobilisation associated with defective egress and invasion. Stage-specific depletion of ICM1 in P. berghei gametocytes blocks gametogenesis due to the inability of mutant parasites to mobilise intracellular calcium upon PKG activation. These results provide us with new insights into the atypical calcium homeostasis in malaria parasites.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation. Co-immunoprecipitations (IPs) of proteins were performed with purified gametocytes. The following IPs were performed: ICM1-3xHA in schizonts or gametocytes (15 sec pa +/- Compound A), PKG- 3xHA in schizonts or gametocytes (15 sec pa +/- Compound A). IPs from wild type non-activated gametocytes lacking an epitope tag were used as controls. Samples were fixed for 10 min with 1% formaldehyde. Parasites were lysed in RIPA buffer (50 mM Tris HCl pH 8, 150 mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS) and the supernatant was subjected to affinity purification with anti-HA antibody (Sigma) conjugated to magnetics beads. Beads were re-suspended in 100 μl of 6 M urea in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AB). Two μl of 50 mM dithioerythritol (DTE) were added and the reduction was carried out at 37°C for 1h. Alkylation was performed by adding 2 μl of 400 mM iodoacetamide for 1 h at room temperature in the dark. Urea was reduced to 1 M by addition of 500 μl AB and overnight digestion was performed at 37 °C with 5 μl of freshly prepared 0.2 μg/μl trypsin (Promega) in AB. Supernatants were collected and completely dried under speed-vacuum. Samples were then desalted with a C18 microspin column (Harvard Apparatus) according to manufacturer’s instructions, completely dried under speed-vacuum and stored at -20°C. Liquid chromatography electrospray ionisation tandem mass spectrometry (LC-ESI-MSMS). Samples were diluted in 20 μl loading buffer (5% acetonitrile [CH3CN], 0.1% formic acid [FA]) and 2 μl were injected onto the column. LC-ESI-MS/MS was performed either on a Q-Exactive Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with an Easy nLC 1000 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) or an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with an Easy nLC 1200 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were trapped on an Acclaim pepmap100, 3 μm C18, 75 μm x 20 mm nano trap-column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated on a 75 μm x 250 mm (Q-Exactive) or 500 mm (Orbitrap Fusion Lumos), 2μm C18, 100 Å Easy-Spray column (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The analytical separation used a gradient of H2O/0.1% FA (solvent A) and CH3CN/0.1 % FA (solvent B). The gradient was run as follows: 0 to 5 min 95 % A and 5 % B, then to 65 % A and 35 % B for 60 min, then to 10 % A and 90 % B for 10 min and finally for 15 min at 10 % A and 90 % B. Flow rate was 250 nL/min for a total run time of 90 min. Data-dependant analysis (DDA) was performed on the Q-Exactive Plus with MS1 full scan at a resolution of 70,000 Full width at half maximum (FWHM) followed by MS2 scans on up to 15 selected precursors. MS1 was performed with an AGC target of 3 x 106, a maximum injection time of 100 ms and a scan range from 400 to 2000 m/z. MS2 was performed at a resolution of 17,500 FWHM with an automatic gain control (AGC) target at 1 x 105 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Isolation window was set at 1.6 m/z and 27% normalised collision energy was used for higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD). DDA was performed on the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos with MS1 full scan at a resolution of 120,000 FWHM followed by as many subsequent MS2 scans on selected precursors as possible within a 3 sec maximum cycle time. MS1 was performed in the Orbitrap with an AGC target of 4 x 105, a maximum injection time of 50 ms and a scan range from 400 to 2000 m/z. MS2 was performed in the Ion Trap with a rapid scan rate, an AGC target of 1 x 104 and a maximum injection time of 35 ms. Isolation window was set at 1.2 m/z and 30% normalised collision energy was used for HCD.

### Data Protocol
Database searches. Peak lists (MGF file format) were generated from raw data using the MS Convert conversion tool from ProteoWizard. The peak list files were searched against the PlasmoDB_P.berghei ANKA database (PlasmoDB.org, release 38, 5076 entries) combined with an in-house database of common contaminants using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.5.1). Trypsin was selected as the enzyme, with one potential missed cleavage. Precursor ion tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment ion tolerance to 0.02 Da for Q-Exactive Plus data and to 0.6 for Lumos data. Variable amino acid modifications were oxidized methionine and deamination (Asn and Gln) as well as phosphorylated serine, threonine and tyrosine. Fixed amino acid modification was carbamidomethyl cysteine. The Mascot search was validated using Scaffold 4.8.4 (Proteome Software) with 1% of protein false discovery rate (FDR) and at least 2 unique peptides per protein with a 0.1% peptide FDR. PCA analysis. Enrichment and principal component analysis were performed in the statistical programming package ‘R’ (www.r-project.org). Quantitative values were analysed as log-transformed spectral count values and displayed in principal components with greatest degrees of variance.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Plasmodium, Lc-msms, Gametocytes, Co-ip

### Affiliations
Department of Microbiology and Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Geneva, Geneva, CH-1211 Switzerland
University of Geneva

### Submitter
alexandre Hainard

### Lab Head
Dr Mathieu Brochet
Department of Microbiology and Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Geneva, Geneva, CH-1211 Switzerland


