### Accession
PXD008645

### Title
HeLa and U2OS long term culture adhesion isolations

### Description
Integrin adhesion complexes have been previously isolated and analysed by mass-spectrometry from cells largely spread on matrix proteins over a couple of hours. Here we wished to determine the composition of adhesion complexes from cells cultured for 72 hours under standard cell culture conditions and identify which integrin heterodimers are utilised under these conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Adhesion complexes were isolated using protocols described previously (Jones et al., 2015). In particular, adhesion complexes were stabilised by cross-linking (DTBP, 6 mM, 5 min) and cells were lysed by RIPA buffer incubation and a high pressure water wash. Isolated complexes were collected in biological tripliacte and proteins were seperated by SDS-PAGE until all protein material had migrated into the gel ('gel-top' approach). The gel was cut into small cubes, washed twice with 50% acetonitrile (in 12.5 mM NH4HCO3) and twice with undilted acetonitrile. Dried proteins were incubated in dithiothreitol (10 mM, 1 h, 56 °C) followed by iodoacetamide (55 mM, 45 min, room temperature in the dark). Gel pieces were washed twice in 25 mM NH4HCO3 follwed by acetonitrile. Proteins were digested with trypsin (12 µg/mL, overnight, 37 °C). Peptides were extracted with acetonitrile in 0.2 % formic acid and 50% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were desalted using OLIGO R3 beads and were analysed by LC-MSMS on a LTQ-Velos

### Data Protocol
RAW files were processed to peak list files (.mgf) used for a database search using Mascot Daemon. Mascot output files (.dat) were imported to Scaffold and filtered using 90% peptide, 99% protein with at least 2 unique peptides per protein to generate lists of identified proteins

### Publication Abstract
Adhesion to the extracellular matrix persists during mitosis in most cell types. However, while classical adhesion complexes, such as focal adhesions, do and must disassemble to enable mitotic rounding, the mechanisms of residual mitotic cell-extracellular matrix adhesion remain undefined. Here, we identify 'reticular adhesions', a class of adhesion complex that is mediated by integrin &#x3b1;v&#x3b2;5, formed during interphase, and preserved at cell-extracellular matrix attachment sites throughout cell division. Consistent with this role, integrin &#x3b2;5 depletion perturbs mitosis and disrupts spatial memory transmission between cell generations. Reticular adhesions are morphologically and dynamically distinct from classical focal adhesions. Mass spectrometry defines their unique composition, enriched in phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate (PtdIns(4,5)P<sub>2</sub>)-binding proteins but lacking virtually all consensus adhesome components. Indeed, reticular adhesions are promoted by PtdIns(4,5)P<sub>2</sub>, and form independently of talin and F-actin. The distinct characteristics of reticular adhesions provide a solution to the problem of maintaining cell-extracellular matrix attachment during mitotic rounding and division.

### Keywords
Human, Cell culture, Integrin, Adhesion complex, Proteomics, Cancer cell

### Affiliations
Professor of Biochemistry, Faculty of Biology, Medicine & Health, Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell-Matrix Research, University of Manchester, UK
University of Manchester

### Submitter
Matthew Jones

### Lab Head
Dr Martin J Humphries
Professor of Biochemistry, Faculty of Biology, Medicine & Health, Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell-Matrix Research, University of Manchester, UK


