### Accession
PXD005621

### Title
An integrative, multi-omics analysis of the Hfq regulon

### Description
The ability of bacteria to respond to environmental change is based on the exploration of sophisticated regulatory landscapes. While we can learn a great deal from reductive analyses of individual pathways, and global approaches to gene regulation, a deeper understanding of these complex signalling networks requires the simultaneous consideration of several regulatory layers at the genome-scale. To highlight the power of this approach we analysed the Hfq transcriptional/translational regulatory network in the plant-associated rhizobacterium Pseudomonas fluorescens. Extensive multi-omics analyses including proteomics quantification using isobaric isotope labelling (iTRAQ )were used to assess how hfq deletion affects gene transcription, translation and protein abundance. The subsequent integration of these datasets highlighted the discrete contributions by Hfq to gene regulation at different levels, confirmed previous predictions, and suggested novel regulatory principles for Hfq function. The integrative approach to regulatory analysis described here has significant potential, for both dissecting individual signalling pathways and understanding the strategies bacteria use to cope with external challenges.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were pelleted by centrifugation and washed three times with 10 mM HEPES pH 8.0 + protease inhibitors, before re-suspension to a final volume of 200 μL. 700 μL pre-cooled RLT + β-mercaptoethanol buffer (RNeasy Mini Kit, QIAGEN) was added and samples lysed with two 30 second Ribolyser pulses at speed 6.5. The supernatant was removed, and the soluble fraction separated by ultracentrifugation (279,000 g, 30 minutes, 4°C). Soluble proteomes were acetone precipitated, and protein concentrations were determined. The proteomic samples were then subjected to iTRAQ quantitative mass spectrometry. Specifically, samples were reduced, alkylated and trypsin digested (66), then labelled with iTRAQ tags according to the manufacturer’s instructions (AB Sciex). Labelled samples were mixed, desalted on a SepPak column (Waters) and fractionated by high-pH reversed phase chromatography on an Xterra HPLC column (Waters). The fractionated samples (14 fractions) were then analysed by LC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo).

### Data Protocol
Data was processed and quantified with Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo).

### Publication Abstract
The ability of bacteria to respond to environmental change is based on the ability to coordinate, redirect and fine-tune their genetic repertoire as and when required. While we can learn a great deal from reductive analysis of individual pathways and global approaches to gene regulation, a deeper understanding of these complex signaling networks requires the simultaneous consideration of several regulatory layers at the genome scale. To highlight the power of this approach we analyzed the Hfq transcriptional/translational regulatory network in the model bacterium <i>Pseudomonas fluorescens</i>. We first used extensive 'omics' analyses to assess how <i>hfq</i> deletion affects mRNA abundance, mRNA translation and protein abundance. The subsequent, multi-level integration of these datasets allows us to highlight the discrete contributions by Hfq to gene regulation at different levels. The integrative approach to regulatory analysis we describe here has significant potential, for both dissecting individual signaling pathways and understanding the strategies bacteria use to cope with external challenges.

### Keywords
Hfq, Isobaric labelling, Proteomics, Pseudomonas fluorescens, Posttranscriptional regulation, Multi-omics

### Affiliations
Group Leader, John Innes Institue Norwich, UK, Dept. Molecular MIcrobiology,
Biological Chemistry

### Submitter
Gerhard Saalbach

### Lab Head
Dr Jacob George Malone
Group Leader, John Innes Institue Norwich, UK, Dept. Molecular MIcrobiology,


