### Accession
PXD008592

### Title
Identification of Clostdridium difficile Immunoreactive Spore Proteins of the Epidemic strain R20291

### Description
Clostridium difficile infections are the leading cause of diarrhea associated to the use of antibiotics. During infection, C. difficile initiates a sporulation cycle leading to the persistence of C. difficile spores in the host and disease dissemination. Nowadays, the development of vaccine and passive immunization therapies against C. difficile have focused on toxins A and B. In the present study, we used an immunoproteome-based approach to identify immunogenic proteins located on the outer layers of C. difficile spores as potential candidates for the development of immunotherapy and/or diagnostic methods against this devastating infection. Experimental design. To identify potential immunogenic proteins on the surface of C. difficile R20291, spore coat/exosporium extracts were separated by two-dimensional electrophoresis (2-DE) and analyzed for reactivity against C. difficile spore-specific goat sera. Finally, the proteins present at the spot of the interest were in-gel digested with chymotrypsin, and the peptides generated were separated by nanoUPLC followed by MS/MS using a Quad-TOF MS, and corroborated by Ultimate 3000RS nano UHPLC coupled to QExactive Plus Orbitrap MS.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial strain and culture conditions. C. difficile R20291 wild type, R20291∆cdeC strains utilized in this study were growth from Cooked Meat (Difco) stock culture, on Brain Heart Infusion (Difco) agar plates supplemented with 0.5% Yeast Extract (Difco) (BHIS) broth. For sporulation, C. difficile was grown on Tryptone (Difco) 0.3% and Yeast Extract (Difco) 0.05% (TY) agar plates under anaerobic conditions.  Spore preparation. Purification of C. difficile spores were made as previously described [1]. Briefly, BHIS was inoculated with C. difficile overnight culture from Cooked Meat stock and incubated overnight under anaerobic conditions at 37°C into anaerobic workstation Bactron-II (Shellab, Oregon, USA). These cultures were diluted to an OD600 of 0.2, plated onto 1.5 % TY agar plates and incubated under anaerobic conditions at 37°C for 5 days. TY agar plates were then flooded with 5 ml of ice cold sterile miliQ water, washed five times with sterile miliQ water at 15000 x g for 5 minutes and followed by purification through 50% HistoDenz and washed other five times with 150 mM NaCl to eliminate traces of HistoDenz and cell debris. Spore suspensions were >99% free of vegetative cells, sporulating cells and cell debris as determined by phase contrast microscopy. Spore suspensions were stored at −80°C until use. Spore treatments. To extract the exosporium and furthermore coat fragments (i.e., decoated spores), C. difficile spores (~5×108 spores) were treated with 8 M Urea, 2 M Thiourea, 4% CHAPS and 65 mM DTT, for 90 min at 37 °C with no shaking. Treated spores were centrifuged at 15000 x g for 10 minutes and the supernatant containing the spore exosporium/coat solubilized proteins were collected and stored at −80 °C until use. Two-dimensional gel electrophoresis. Protein extract quantitation: BCA method (Thermo). 400 µg of protein resuspended in 400 µl of rehydratation buffer (8 M Urea, 2 M Thiourea, 4% CHAPS, 65 mM DTT, 0.001% Bromophenol Blue and 0.2% pH 4/10 ampholytes (Bio-Rad)) for 1 min of agitation on vortex at low speed. After 1h of incubation at 37ºC, the sample containing the proteins was charged on a lane of the IEF tray and covered with a ReadyStrip™ IPG Strip (Bio-Rad) of pH 4-7, and incubated at room temperature until the sample in the rehydration buffer was completely absorbed by the strip (~ 1 h). Then, the strip was covered with mineral oil (Bio-Rad) and incubated overnight at RT into a humidified chamber. Tray was placed in the Hoefer IEF100 (Hoefer, Inc) and strips subjected to isoelectro-focusing (IEF). The IEF steps for 7 cm IPG`S strip were: 1) at constant watt (0.1 W) for 1 h; 2) at constant watt (0.5 W) and 8000 V for 1 h; 3) constant voltage (1000 V) for 1h. For the second dimension on SDS-PAGE, strips were subjected to two equilibration steps as previously described [2], and carefully placed (using appropriate strip-forceps) on a 10 x 10 (7 cm strips) cm gel (1mm thickness, 12% acrylamide) and coupled to the gel using 1% agarose containing Tris-Glycine buffer 1X (pH 8.0) and 0.001% Bromophenol Blue. Gels were run for 2-7 h (35 mA/gel) until the front reached the bottom of the gel. Gel stain: Coomassie brilliant Blue G-250 colloidal (Bio-Rad). Immunoblot analysis. Immunoreactive proteins were detected using duplicated 2-DE gels. One gel was transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane at 80 V for 60 minutes. Membrane was blocked overnight with 3% BSA (Sigma) and incubated with goat polyclonal antisera against purified spores of C. difficile (primary antibody) for 3 h at room temperature and incubated with anti-goat-HRP secondary antibody for 1 h at room temperature and revealed using standard procedures.  Protein identification by mass spectrometry analysis. The excised spots containing the protein were in-gel digested using chymotrypsin sequencing grade (Promega, Madison Wi) and nanoRPLC in-line desalted. Peptide analysis was performed using nanoUPLC-ESI-MS/MS. The peptides desalting were in-line column: RP-Trap column Symmetry C18, 5 µm, 180 µm (id) X 20 mm nanoAcquity UPLC column (Waters Corp., Milford, MA); analytical separation: BEH130 C18 RP, 1.7 µm , 100  µm (id) X 100 mm nanoAcquity UPLC column (Waters Corp., Milford, MA). Gradient: standard 0-2 min, 3% B isocratic; 2-40 min, 3-80 % B linear. Mobile phase A: water/formic acid (99.9:0.1, v/v), and phase B: acetonitrile/formic acid (99.9:0.1 v/v); flow rate: 400 nl/min. Chromatography system: nanoAcquity UPLC (Waters Corp., Milford, MA). Ions analysis: one full precursor MS scan (400-1500 m/z) followed by four MS/MS scans of the most abundant ions detected in the precursor MS scan in positive mode under dynamic exclusion or direct data acquisition system in a nano ESI Q-Tof Synapt G1 HDMS mass spectrometer (Waters, Milford, MA).

### Data Protocol
Deconvolution: MassLynx software 4.1 (Waters, USA). A peak list (PKL format) was generated to identify +1 or multiple charged precursor ions from the mass spectrometry data file (see suppl. Information DDA_Experimental_2). Parent mass (MS) and fragment mass (MS/MS) peak ranges were 400-1500 Da and 65-1500 Da, respectively. Search engine: Mascot server v2.5.1 (www.matrix-science.com, UK) in MS/MS ion search mode (local licenses); database: Peptoclostridium difficile strain R20291 from Uniprot (http://www.uniprot.org) v20171130 (3507 sequences; 1134223 residues). Fixed modifications: carbamidomethyl (C) on cysteine; variable modifications: asparagine and glutamine deamidation and methionine oxidation. Missed cleavage: one; monoisotopic masses; precursor peptide mass tolerance: 20ppm; fragment mass tolerance: 0.3 Da; ion score or expected cut-off: 5. The MS/MS spectra were searched with MASCOT using a 95% confidence interval (C.I. %) threshold (p<0.05), minimum score for peptide identification: 17. Error tolerant mode was set up at Mascot search to corroborate potential peptides unidentified at the first search. When the peptides identified match equally well to multiple protein IDs, only those proteins that appeared in at least two or more replicates were considered.to be included at the list. Additional analysis was conducted using an Ultimate 3000RS UHPLC (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled to QExactive Plus (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) quadrupole Orbitrap through a nanoelectrospray ion source. Mascot Distiller v2.6.2.0 (www.matrixscience.com) and Proteome Discoverer v2.1 (Thermo Scientific) were used to generated the peak list at the mascot generic format (mgf) from the original raw file

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Clostridium difficile, Immunoblotting, Isoelectric focusing, Two-dimensional electrophoresis, Cdi patients, Serologic reactivity, Spores

### Affiliations
University of South Dakota
Microbiota-Host Interaction & Clostridia Research Group, Departamento de Ciencias Biológicas, Facultad de Ciencias Biológicas, Universidad Andres Bello, Santiago, Chile

### Submitter
Eduardo Callegari

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel Paredes-Sabja
Microbiota-Host Interaction & Clostridia Research Group, Departamento de Ciencias Biológicas, Facultad de Ciencias Biológicas, Universidad Andres Bello, Santiago, Chile


