### Accession
PXD030734

### Title
DOT1L regulates chromatin reorganization and gene expression during sperm differentiation

### Description
Spermatozoa have a unique genome organization: their chromatin is almost completely devoid of histones and is formed instead of protamines which confer a high level of compaction and preserve paternal genome integrity until fertilization. Histone-to-protamine transition takes place in spermatids and is indispensable for the production of functional sperm. Here we show that the H3K79-methyltransferase DOT1L controls spermatid chromatin remodelling and subsequent reorganization and compaction of spermatozoon genome. Using a mouse model in which Dot1l is knocked-out (KO) in postnatal male germ cells, we found that Dot1l-KO sperm chromatin is less compact and has an abnormal content, characterized by the presence of transition proteins, immature protamine 2 forms and a higher level of histones. Proteomics and transcriptomics analyses performed on spermatids reveal that Dot1l-KO modifies the chromatin prior to histone removal, and leads to the deregulation of genes involved in flagellum formation and apoptosis during spermatid differentiation. As a consequence of these chromatin and gene expression defects, Dot1l-KO spermatozoa have less compact heads and are less motile, which results in impaired fertility. 

### Sample Protocol
Histones were enriched from mouse testis or from purified male germ cells (round spermatids and elongating spermatids) using a classical protocol of acid precipitation. Precipitated proteins were separated on an SDS-PAGE gel, to cut bands corresponding to histones. These bands were digested using trypsin. The resulting peptide samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were interpreted with Mascot while specifying the following variable modifications: acetyl (K), methyl (K or R), dimethyl (K or R), trimethyl (K), GG (K) for ubiquitination and crotonyl (K), as well as Protein N-terminal acetylation. Validation of peptide identifications and quantification was performed with the program Proline.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dotl, Mouse spermatogenesis

### Affiliations
CNRS
Studying the Dynamics of Proteomes, Large-Scale Biology, CEA Grenoble

### Submitter
Delphine PFLIEGER

### Lab Head
Dr Yohann Couté
Studying the Dynamics of Proteomes, Large-Scale Biology, CEA Grenoble


