### Accession
PXD014387

### Title
FBXO9 in Murine Inversion 16 AML

### Description
The hematopoietic system is maintained throughout life by hematopoietic stem cells that are capable of differentiation to all hematopoietic lineages. An intimate balance between self-renewal, differentiation, and quiescence is required to maintain hematopoiesis. Disruption of this balance can result in hematopoietic malignancy, including acute myeloid leukemia (AML). FBXO9, from the F-box ubiquitin E3 ligases, is down-regulated in patients with AML compared to normal bone marrow. FBXO9 is a substrate recognition component of the Skp1-Cullin-F-box (SCF)-type E3 ligase complex. FBXO9 is highly expressed in hematopoietic stem and progenitor populations, which contain the tumor-initiating population in AML. In AML patients, decrease in FBXO9 expression is most pronounced in patients with the inversion of chromosome 16 (Inv(16)), a rearrangement that generates the transcription factor fusion gene, CBFB-MYH11. To study FBXO9 in malignant hematopoiesis, we generated a conditional knockout mouse model using a novel CRISPR/Cas9 strategy. Our data shows that deletion of Fbxo9 in mice expressing Cbfb-MYH11 leads to markedly accelerated and aggressive leukemia development. In addition, we find loss of FBXO9 leads to increased proteasome expression and tumors are more sensitive to bortezomib suggesting that FBXO9 expression may predict patient response to bortezomib treatment.

### Sample Protocol
For global proteome quantification, splenic tumor cells were isolated, strained through 0.45µm strainer and treated with ACK lysing buffer to remove red blood cells from 2-3 mice per genotype. Samples were prepared and TMT-labeled per manufacturer’s protocol (ThermoScientific TMT10plex Mass Tag Labeling Kits). Following TMT labeling, acetonitrile was removed by speedvac and samples were resuspended in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. Sample cleanup with C18 tips was performed per manufacturer’s protocol (Pierce). Sample concentrations were re-quantified (Pierce Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay kit) and combined in equal concentration. Following combination, samples were dried by speedvac and fractionated by ThermoScientific high pH reverse phase fractionation kit following manufacturer’s protocol for TMT. Resulting fractions were dried in a speedvac and resuspended in 0.1% Formic Acid for MS analysis. Samples 1 and 8 were combined and samples 2 and 7 were combined prior to analysis. Samples were loaded onto trap column Acclaim PepMap 100 75 µm x 2 cm C18 LC Columns (Thermo ScientificTM) at flow rate of 5 µl/min then separated with a Thermo RSLC Ultimate 3000 (Thermo ScientificTM) from 5-20% solvent B (0.1% FA in 80% ACN) from 10-98 minutes at 300 nL/min and 50 ºC with a 120 minutes total run time for fractions one and two. For fractions three to six, solvent B was used at 5-45% for the same duration. Eluted peptides were analyzed by a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid (Thermo ScientificTM) mass spectrometer in a data dependent acquisition mode using synchronous precursor selection method. A survey full scan MS (from m/z 375-1500) was acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 120000. The AGC target for MS2 in iontrap was set as 1 x 104 and ion filling time set as 150ms and fragmented using CID fragmentation with 35% normalized collision energy. The AGC target for MS3 in orbitrap was set as 1 x 105 and ion filling time set as 200 ms with a scan range of 100-500 and fragmented using HCD with 65% normalized collision energy.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was performed using proteome discoverer software version 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) by searching MS/MS data against the UniProt mouse protein database. The search was set up for full tryptic peptides with a maximum of 2 missed cleavage sites. Oxidation, TMT6plex of the amino terminus, GG and GGQ ubiquitination, phosphorylation, and acetylation were included as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation and TMT6plex of the amino terminus were set as fixed modifications. The precursor mass tolerance threshold was set at 10 ppm for a maximum fragment mass error of 0.6 Da with a minimum peptide length of 6 and a maximum peptide length of 144. The significance threshold of the ion score was calculated based on a false discovery rate calculated using the percolator node. Protein accessions were put into Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (QIAGEN Inc.) to identify gene symbols and localizations. Gene ontology pathway analysis was performed using DAVID Bioinformatics Database 6.8 using the functional annotation tool.

### Publication Abstract
The hematopoietic system is maintained throughout life by stem cells that are capable of differentiating into all hematopoietic lineages. An intimate balance between self-renewal, differentiation, and quiescence is required to maintain hematopoiesis and disruption of this balance can result in malignant transformation. <i>FBXO9</i>, the substrate recognition component from the SCF E3 ubiquitin ligase family, is downregulated in patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML) compared to healthy bone marrow, and this downregulation is particularly evident in patients with inv(16) AML. To study FBXO9 in malignant hematopoiesis, we generated a conditional knockout mouse model using a novel CRISPR/Cas9 strategy. Deletion of Fbxo9 in the murine hematopoietic system showed no adverse effects on stem and progenitor cell function but in AML lead to markedly accelerated and aggressive leukemia development in mice with inv(16). Not only did <i>Fbxo9</i> play a role in leukemia initiation but it also functioned to maintain AML activity and promote disease progression. Quantitative mass spectrometry from primary tumors reveals tumors lacking <i>Fbxo9</i> highly express proteins associated with metastasis and invasion as well as components of the ubiquitin proteasome system. We confirmed that the loss of <i>FBXO9</i> leads to increased proteasome activity and tumors cells were more sensitive to in vitro proteasome inhibition with bortezomib, suggesting that <i>FBXO9</i> expression may predict patients' response to bortezomib.

### Keywords
Fbxo9 aml inv(16) spleen

### Affiliations
University of Nebraska Medical Center
Department of Genetics, Cell Biology, & Anatomy Buckley Lab University of Nebraska Medical Center Omaha, Nebraska United States of America

### Submitter
Samantha Swenson

### Lab Head
Dr Shannon Mychel Buckley
Department of Genetics, Cell Biology, & Anatomy Buckley Lab University of Nebraska Medical Center Omaha, Nebraska United States of America


