### Accession
PXD027076

### Title
Proteomic analysis of the pathogen surface in cholera identifies host proteins involved in defense and microbiota recognition

### Description
The microbial cell surface is a critical site of microbe-host interactions that often control infection outcomes. Defining the set of host proteins present at this interface has been challenging. Here, we used a surface biotinylation approach coupled to quantitative mass spectrometry to identify and quantify both bacterial and host proteins present on the surface of diarrheal fluid-derived V. cholerae in an infant rabbit model of cholera. Our data showed that V. cholerae surfaces were coated with numerous host proteins, whose abundance were driven by the presence of cholera toxin, including the C type lectin SP-D. Mice lacking SP-D had enhanced V. cholerae intestinal colonization. Additional host proteins (AnxA1, LPO and ZAG) capable of binding V. cholerae were also found to recognize distinct taxa of the murine intestinal microbiota, suggesting that these host factors may play roles in intestinal homeostasis in addition to host defense. Proteomic analysis of microbial surfaces is valuable for identifying host interactions that regulate infection and homeostasis with both pathogens and endogenous microbiota alike.

### Sample Protocol
Diarrheal fluid was harvested 16-18 hr after inoculation of infant rabbits. The fluid was then filtered through a 5 μM filter to remove particulate matter and eukaryotic cells. Bacteria were isolated from diarrheal fluid by centrifugation (5000 × g, 5 min at RT). Bacterial pellets were washed twice and resuspended in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) supplemented with 1 mM CaCl2, 0.5 mM MgCl2 and 1.5 mM D-biotin at RT. Cell surface biotinylation were performed as described (83) with modifications. Sulfo-NHS-LC-biotin (ThermoFisher, 21335) was added to a final concentration of 200 μM for 20 min at RT. The reaction was stopped by addition of 2 volumes of buffer (80mM Tris pH7, 100mM NaCl, 30mM KCl, 1mM CaCl2 and 0.5mM MgCl2). After washing the bacterial cells 3x with the same buffer they were resuspended in 50 mM Tris pH 7, 50 mM NaCl, 10 mM MgCl2, DNAse (0.1mg/ml), lysozyme (0.1mg/ml) and Complete protease inhibitor mixture (Roche). Cells were broken using an Emulsiflex-C3 (Avestin) and the crude membrane fraction was isolated by ultracentrifugation at 45,000 g for 45 min. Membrane-containing fractions were washed twice in 50 mM Tris pH 7, 150 mM KCl, 10 mM EDTA and Complete protease inhibitor mixture (Roche). Membranes were then solubilized overnight at 4°C in presence of 0.5% n-Dodecyl β-D-maltoside (DDM) (Sigma, D4641). Lysates were used for co-immunoprecipitation using Dynabeads M-280 Streptavidin (ThermoFisher, 11205D) overnight at 4°C.  Magnetic beads were washed thrice with 1 ml of Tris pH 7, 100 mM NaCl and 0.2% Tween 20 and resuspended in 50 μL of 1X blue loading buffer (NEB, B7703S) and heated for 10 min at 96°C.Samples were submitted in 1X blue loading buffer (NEB, B7703S) to the Thermo Fisher Center for Multiplexed Proteomics at Harvard Medical School (Boston, MA, USA) for Isobaric Tandem Mass Tag (TMT)-based quantitative proteomics. Briefly, after adjusting proteins to equal concentrations, 40 μl of each sample was loaded on 10% Bis/Tris gels and run at 120V for 10 min in MES buffer. Gel bands were cut out, destained, reduced and alkylated. In-gel Trypsin digests were performed overnight and peptides were extracted and labeled with TMT10 reagents. Labeling reactions were combined, cleaned, and dried down. Peptides were resuspended in 5% Acetonitrile, 5% formic acid and 1/3 of the sample was shot on an Orbitrap Fusion Mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were detected (MS1) and quantified (MS3) in the Orbitrap Fusion Mass spectrometer. Peptides were sequenced (MS2) in the ion trap. MS2 spectra were searched using the SEQUEST algorithm against a Uniprot composite database derived from the combined V. cholerae and Oryctolagus cuniculus (rabbit) proteomes containing its reversed complement and known contaminants. Peptide spectral matches were filtered to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) using the target-decoy strategy combined with linear discriminant analysis. Proteins were quantified only from peptides with a summed signal/noise (SN) threshold of >=200 and MS2 isolation specificity of 0.5.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Oryctolagus cuniculus, Vibrio cholerae

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School - Brigham and Women's Hospital
Harvard Medical School, Brigham and Women's Hospital

### Submitter
Abdelrahim Zoued

### Lab Head
Dr Matthew K Waldor
Harvard Medical School, Brigham and Women's Hospital


