### Accession
PXD015167

### Title
Global proteomic analysis for stress response of Mycobacterium tuberculosis

### Description
To expand an insight into the stress adaptation in Mycobacterium tuberculosis H37Rv (Mtb), we approached the iTRAQ analysis to understand the global proteome profile of stressed Mtb under Acid (5.5 pH), Diamide (5mM) and Hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) (5mM) conditions and compared with gene expression of Mtb incubated in 7H9 rich medium (pH 7.0). The experiment was performed for overnight treatment of aforementioned stress. Whole cell lysate (WCL) from three independent repeats of control and stressed samples were labelled with three set of 4-plex iTRAQ labelling reagents (AB SCIEX) in proportion to manufacturer’s protocol.

### Sample Protocol
Control and stressed samples Acid (5.5 pH), Diamide (5mM) and Hydrogen peroxide (5mM) were lysed using bead beater and 50 µg of whole cell extract (WCE) samples were trypsin digested. For the Set 1 and Set 3 Control, Acid, Diamide, H2O2 samples were labelled with 4-plex dyes 114, 115,116, 117, respectively. In Set 2 Control, Acid, Diamide, H2O2 samples were labelled with 4-plex dye 117, 116,115, 114, respectively. Each set of Labelled peptides were pooled and fractionated on strong cation exchange cartridge by increasing the concentration of Ammonium Formate from 20mM to 500mM manually. Peptides were fractionated using 20 mM, 40 mM, 60 mM , 80 mM, 100 mM, 120 mM and 500 mM of Ammonium formate and 25% Acetonitrile. All the fractions were dried using speed Vac and reconstituted in 0.1% Formic acid Water. Flow-through of SCX was also dried and desalted using C18 cartridge. All the desalted samples were dried and reconstituted in 20 µl of 0.1% Formic acid water and 5 µl of samples were injected into Acclaim PepMap ( Thermo nano viper ) 75 µm X 250mm ,C18, 3 µm, 100 Å column. Fractions were resolved with water and Acetonitrile gradient and spectra was acquired on 5600 TF ( Sciex) in high resolution mode.

### Data Protocol
All the fraction data were pooled together and searched using Paragon algorithm with deamindated N& Q , Cabidomethyl C , oxided M and iTRAQ 4 plex against the Mtb Uniprot FASTA file.

### Publication Abstract
The fundamental to the pathogenicity of <i>Mycobacterium tuberculosis</i> (Mtb) is the modulation in the control mechanisms that play a role in sensing and counteracting the microbicidal milieu encompassing various cellular stresses inside the human host. To understand such changes, we measured the cellular proteome of Mtb subjected to different stresses using a quantitative proteomics approach. We identified defined sets of Mtb proteins that are modulated in response to acid and a sublethal dose of diamide and H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> treatments. Notably, proteins involved in metabolic, catalytic, and binding functions are primarily affected under these stresses. Moreover, our analysis led to the observations that during acidic stress Mtb enters into energy-saving mode simultaneously modulating the acid tolerance system, whereas under diamide and H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> stresses, there were prominent changes in the biosynthesis and homeostasis pathways, primarily modifying the resistance mechanism in diamide-treated bacteria while causing metabolic arrest in H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub>-treated bacilli. Overall, we delineated the adaptive mechanisms that Mtb may utilize under physiological stresses and possible overlap between the responses to these stress conditions. In addition to offering important protein signatures that can be exploited for future mechanistic studies, our study highlights the importance of proteomics in understanding complex adjustments made by the human pathogen during infection.

### Keywords
Itraq mtb stres response

### Affiliations
Professor
Translational Helath Science and Technology Institute, NCR Biotech Science Cluster, Faridabad , Haryana, India ( lab head )

### Submitter
Nisheeth Agarwal

### Lab Head
Dr Nisheeth Agarwal
Translational Helath Science and Technology Institute, NCR Biotech Science Cluster, Faridabad , Haryana, India ( lab head )


