### Accession
PXD012026

### Title
Chemical phosphoproteomic approaches reveal substrate specificity of protein phosphatases-1 and -2

### Description
The phosphatases PP1 and PP2A are responsible for the majority of dephosphorylation reactions on phosphoserine (pS) and –threonine (pT), and are involved in basically all cellular processes and many related diseases. They are thought to have no appreciable intrinsic substrate specificity, but to gain specificity only in their holoenzyme forms. Through the development of a peptide library approach and application of a complementary phosphoproteomics assay, we uncover that PP1 and PP2A show intrinsic specificity towards pT over pS, as well as toward the sequence context surrounding the phospho-site. Our substrate specificity data reveal that PP1 is a key regulator of the 14-3-3 protein binding motif, which enabled us to establish an unknown role for PP1 as a regulator of the GRB-associated-binding-protein 2 downstream (Gab2)/14-3-3 complex, exemplifying predictive potential of the data. Thus, this data should serve as a rich resource for (de)phosphorylation studies covering multiple cellular processes and phosphoproteins.

### Sample Protocol
Mass spectrometric analysis of 14-3-3 interactome Co-enriched proteins were eluted using 40 μl LDS sample buffer (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, USA), and subjected to standard in-gel tryptic digestion [1]. The samples were analyzed via LC-MS/MS on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano-HPLC coupled online to a Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). Peptides were delivered to a trap column (75 μm x 2 cm, packed in-house with 5 μm C18 resin; Reprosil PUR AQ, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbruch-Entringen, Germany) and washed using 0.1% FA at a flow rate of 5 μl/min for 10 min. Subsequently, peptides were transferred to an analytical column (75 μm × 45 cm, packed in-house with 3 μm C18 resin; Reprosil Gold, Dr. Maisch) applying a flow rate of 300 nL/min and separated using a 60 min linear gradient from 4% to 32% LC solvent B (0.1% FA, 5% DMSO in ACN) in LC solvent A (0.1% FA in 5% DMSO). The eluate from the analytical column was sprayed via a stainless steel emitter (ThermoFisher Scientific) at a source voltage of 2.1 kV into the mass spectrometer. The transfer capillary was heated to 275 °C. The Fusion Lumos was operated in positive ionization mode and data dependent acquisition (DDA), automatically switching between MS1 and MS2 spectrum acquisition. Full scan MS1 spectra were recorded in the Orbitrap from 360 to 1300 m/z at a resolution of 60k (automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 4e5 charges, maximum injection time (maxIT) of 50 ms). Up to 20 peptide precursors were isolated (isolation window, 1.7 m/z; maximum injection time, 25 ms; and AGC value, 1e5), fragmented by high-energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) using 30% normalized collision energy (NCE), and analyzed at a resolution of 15k in the Orbitrap. Precursor ions that were singly charged, unassigned, or with charge states > 6+ were excluded. The dynamic exclusion duration of fragmented precursor ions was 20 s. Mass spectrometric analysis of PP1 treated phosphoproteomes Treated lysates were subjected to standard tryptic in/solution digestion. TMT labeling was performed as previously described [6]. Phosphopeptides were enriched from the desalted and labeled digests using Fe-IMAC as previously described [7]. Fe-IMAC eluate was desalted using C18 StageTips as described [8]. High-pH reversed-phase tip fractionation into four fractions was performed in Stage Tips as described previously [6]. LC-MS/MS analysis of TMT 6-plex-labeled phosphopeptides was performed using a Dionex Ultimate3000 nano HPLC coupled online to a Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). Peptides were dissolved in 15 μL citrate solution (0.1% FA and 50 mM citric acid) and one third was injected. Peptides were delivered to a trap column (75 μm x 2 cm, packed in-house with 5 μm C18 resin; Reprosil PUR AQ, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbruch-Entringen, Germany) and washed using 0.1% FA at a flow rate of 5 μl/min for 10 min. Subsequently, peptides were transferred to an analytical column (75 μm × 45 cm, packed in-house with 3 μm C18 resin; Reprosil Gold, Dr. Maisch) applying a flow rate of 300 nL/min and separated using a 90 min linear gradient from 4% to 32% LC solvent B (0.1% FA, 5% DMSO in ACN) in LC solvent A (0.1% FA in 5% DMSO). The eluate from the analytical column was sprayed via a stainless steel emitter (ThermoFisher Scientific) at a source voltage of 2.1 kV into the mass spectrometer. The transfer capillary was heated to 275 °C. The Fusion Lumos was operated in positive ionization mode and data dependent acquisition (DDA), automatically switching between MS1, MS2 and MS3 spectrum acquisition. Full scan MS1 spectra were recorded in the Orbitrap from 360 to 1300 m/z at a resolution of 60k (automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 4e5 charges, maximum injection time (maxIT) of 50 ms). Precursor ions that were singly charged, unassigned, or with charge states > 6+ were excluded. Up to 10 peptide precursors were isolated (isolation window, 0.7 m/z; maximum injection time, 22 ms; and AGC value, 5e4), fragmented by collision-induced dissociation (CID) using 35% normalized collision energy (NCE) and multistage activation (-80 Da trigger), and analyzed at a resolution of 15k in the Orbitrap. For subsequent MS3 spectral acquisition, fragment ions were selected by multi-notch isolation, allowing a maximum of 10 notches and an charge-state dependent isolation window (2+: 1.2 m/z, 3+: 0.9 m/z, 4+: 0.7 m/z, 5+ and 6+: 0.6 m/z). These ions were fragmented by higher-energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) at 55% NCE (AGC target value 1.2e5, maximal injection time 120 ms), and the resultant MS3-fragment ions were recorded in the Orbitrap with a m/z range of 100-1000 and a resolution of 50k. The dynamic exclusion duration of fragmented precursor ions was 90 s.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometric analysis of 14-3-3 interactome Peptide and protein identification and label-free quantification were performed using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.1.0; [2]) by searching the against all canonical protein sequences as annotated in the Swissprot reference database (human proteins only, 20193 entries, downloaded 22.03.2016, internally annotated with PFAM domains) using the embedded search engine Andromeda [3]. The MaxQuant search was performed using two variable modifications; oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation. Carbamidomethylation on cysteines was specified as a fixed modification. Trypsin (Trypsin/P) was specified as the proteolytic enzyme with up to two allowed missed cleavage sites. Label-free quantification [4] and match-between-runs (matching time window of 0.7 min and alignment time window of 20 min) were enabled, and the results were filtered for a minimal length of seven amino acids and 1% peptide and protein false discovery rate (FDR).   Mass spectrometric analysis of PP1 treated phosphoproteomes Proteins and peptides were identified and quantified using MaxQuant (v 1.6.0.16) [2] with enabled MS3-based TMT quantification using default parameters and searching the against all canonical protein sequences as annotated in the Swissprot reference database (human proteins only, 20193 entries, downloaded 22.03.2016, internally annotated with PFAM domains) using the embedded search engine Andromeda [3]. Oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation as well as phosphorylation on S, T and Y and oxidation of M were specified as variable modification. Carbamidomethylation on cysteines was specified as a fixed modification. Trypsin (Trypsin/P) was specified as the proteolytic enzyme with up to two allowed missed cleavage sites. Quantification based on TMT6plex MS3 reporter ion intensity was enabled, and the results were filtered for a minimal length of seven amino acids and 1% peptide and protein false discovery rate (FDR) [1] Shevchenko A, Tomas H, Havlis J, Olsen JV, Mann M (2006) In-gel digestion for mass spectrometric characterization of proteins and proteomes. Nat Protoc 1:2856–2860.  https://doi.org/10.1038/nprot.2006.468 [2] Cox J, Mann M (2008) MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat Biotechnol 26:1367–1372.  https://doi.org/10.1038/nbt.1511 [3] Cox J, Neuhauser N, Michalski A, Scheltema RA, Olsen JV, Mann M (2011) Andromeda: a peptide search engine integrated into the MaxQuant environment. J Proteome Res 10:1794–1805.  https://doi.org/10.1021/pr101065j [4] Cox J, Hein MY, Luber CA, Paron I, Nagaraj N, Mann M (2014) Accurate proteome-wide label-free quantification by delayed normalization and maximal peptide ratio extraction, termed MaxLFQ. Mol Cell Proteomics 13:2513–2526.  https://doi.org/10.1074/mcp.M113.031591 [5] Tyanova S, Cox J. Perseus: A Bioinformatics Platform for Integrative Analysis of Proteomics Data in Cancer Research. Methods Mol Biol. 2018;1711:133-148. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-7493-1_7. [6] Ruprecht B, Zecha J, Zolg DP, Kuster B. High pH Reversed-Phase Micro-Columns for Simple, Sensitive, and Efficient Fractionation of Proteome and (TMT labeled) Phosphoproteome Digests. Methods Mol Biol. 2017;1550:83-98. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-6747-6_8. PMID: 28188525 [7] Ruprecht B1, Koch H2, Medard G2, Mundt M2, Kuster B3, Lemeer S3. Comprehensive and reproducible phosphopeptide enrichment using iron immobilized metal ion affinity chromatography (Fe-IMAC) columns. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2015 Jan;14(1):205-15. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M114.043109. [8] Rappsilber J1, Mann M, Ishihama Y. Protocol for micro-purification, enrichment, pre-fractionation and storage of peptides for proteomics using StageTips. Nat Protoc. 2007;2(8):1896-906.

### Publication Abstract
The phosphatases PP1 and PP2A are responsible for the majority of dephosphorylation reactions on phosphoserine (pSer) and phosphothreonine (pThr), and are involved in virtually all cellular processes and numerous diseases. The catalytic subunits exist in cells in form of holoenzymes, which impart substrate specificity. The contribution of the catalytic subunits to the recognition of substrates is unclear. By developing a phosphopeptide library approach and a phosphoproteomic assay, we demonstrate that the specificity of PP1 and PP2A holoenzymes towards pThr and of PP1 for basic motifs adjacent to the phosphorylation site are due to intrinsic properties of the catalytic subunits. Thus, we dissect this amino acid specificity of the catalytic subunits from the contribution of regulatory proteins. Furthermore, our approach enables discovering a role for PP1 as regulator of the GRB-associated-binding protein 2 (GAB2)/14-3-3 complex. Beyond this, we expect that this approach is broadly applicable to detect enzyme-substrate recognition preferences.

### Keywords
Phosphatase substrates, Co-immunoprecipitation, Quantitative phosphoproteomics

### Affiliations
Technical University of Munich TUM School of Life Scienes Weihenstephan Freising, Germany
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technische Universität München, Germany

### Submitter
Stephanie Wilhelm 

### Lab Head
Dr BayBioMS Bavarian Center for Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry
Technical University of Munich TUM School of Life Scienes Weihenstephan Freising, Germany


