### Accession
PXD036206

### Title
Identification of host dependency factors involved in SARS-CoV-2 replication organelle formation through proteomics and ultrastructural analysis

### Description
Positive-strand RNA viruses subvert the cellular endomembrane system for the generation of distinct compartments termed replication organelles (ROs) that harbor the site where viral RNAs are generated. In this study, we corroborate that the SARS-CoV-2 non-structural proteins 3 and 4 (nsp3 and nsp4) suffice to remodel the endoplasmic reticulum to form double membrane vesicles similar to ROs observed in viral infection. Cellular membrane alterations induced by nsp3/4 expression were evaluated through electron tomography and confocal microscopy and nsp3/4 associated host factors were identified using mass spectrometry. The role of these host factors in virus infection was determined using gene silencing, identifying several host proteins involved in the SARS-CoV-2 replication cycle. Combining the gene silencing approach with ultrastructural analysis of nsp3/4-expressing cells, we found that the host dependency factors FAM149B1, CCAR2 and ZC3HAV1 play a role in the formation of double membrane vesicles in a replication-independent manner. 

### Sample Protocol
All steps of the IP procedure were performed on ice and in presence of protease inhibitors (cOmpleteTM EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail, Sigma-Aldrich) to prevent protein degradation. For IP under membrane-solubilizing conditions, HEK293T were transfected as described, the cells washed 24 hours post-transfection and lysed by addition of 1 mL of membrane-solubilizing lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 0.5% DDM, 5% Glycerol). After incubation for 10 min on ice with regular inverting, samples were centrifugated at 15,000 x g for 15 min at 4°C. The supernatant was transferred into a fresh tube and protein concentration measured by Bradford assay (BioRad). Protein amounts were equalized to 1 mg total protein as input and the volume equalized before mixing with 50 µl µMACS anti-HA beads (Miltenyi Biotec). Magnetic columns (Miltenyi Biotec) were inserted in the magnetic stand and pre-washed with 300 µl of lysis buffer. After incubation under constant rotation for 1.5 h at 4°C, the mix was added on top of the column, the column washed with 3 mL of lysis buffer before incubation with 25 µl elution buffer (3% SDS in 50 mM Tris-HCl pH [7.4]). After 5 min, an additional 75 µl of elution buffer was added and the elution collected. After detergent removal by acetone precipitations, samples were resuspended in 40 µL U/T buffer (6 M urea, 2 M thiourea in 10 mM HEPES, pH 8.0) and cyteine residues were reduced and alkylated with DTT and IAA as previously described. Protein digestion was performed by subsequent addition of 1 µg LysC (3 h, 25 °C; FUJIFILM Wako Pure Chemical Corporation, Richmond, VA, USA) and 1 µg Trypsin (Promega, Walldorf, Germany) in 160 µL digestion buffer (50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.0) at 25 °C overnight. Peptides were desalted and concentrated using C18 Stage-Tips as described previously [DOI: 10.1038/nprot.2007.261], and processed for LC-MS/MS. Samples were analysed on a nanoElute (plug-in v.1.1.0.27; Bruker) coupled to a trapped ion mobility spectrometry quadrupole time of flight (timsTOF Pro) (Bruker) equipped with a CaptiveSpray source. Peptides  were injected into a Trap cartridge (5 mm × 300 μm, 5 μm C18; Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated on a 25 cm × 75 μm analytical column, 1.6 μm C18 beads with a packed emitter tip (IonOpticks) as previously described. The timsTOF Pro was operated in parallel accumulation-serial fragmentation (PASEF) mode using Compass Hystar v.5.0.36.0 and the following settings: mass range 100–1700 m/z, 1/K0 start 0.6 V⋅s/cm2End 1.6 V⋅s/cm2; ramp time 110.1 ms; lock duty cycle to 100%; capillary voltage 1,600 V; dry gas 3 l min−1; dry temperature 180 °C. The PASEF settings were: 10 tandem mass spectrometry (MS) scans (total cycle time, 1.27 s); charge range 0–5; active exclusion for 0.4 min; scheduling target intensity 10,000; intensity threshold 2,500; collision-induced dissociation energy 42 eV.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data were processed with the MaxQuant software v.1.6.17 using the built-in Andromeda search engine to search against the human proteome (UniprotKB, release 2019_10) containing forward and reverse sequences concatenated with the SARS-CoV-2 polyprotein with the individual viral open reading frames manually annotated, and the label-free quantitation algorithm. Additionally, the intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) algorithm and match between runs option were used. In MaxQuant, carbamidomethylation was set as fixed and methionine oxidation and N-acetylation as variable modifications. Search peptide tolerance was set at 70 p.p.m. and the main search was set at 30 p.p.m.. Experiment type was set as TIMS-DDA with no modification to the default settings. Search results were filtered with a false discovery rate of 0.01 for peptide and protein identification. The Perseus software v.1.6.10.43 was used to process the data further. Protein tables were filtered to eliminate the identifications from the reverse database and common contaminants. When analysing the MS data, only proteins identified on the basis of at least one peptide and a minimum of three quantitation events in at least one experimental group were considered. The iBAQ protein intensity values were log-transformed; missing values were filled by imputation with random numbers drawn from a normal distribution calculated for each sample, and principal component analysis (PCA) was used to identify and remove outliers. In total 1 biological replicate was removed from each experimental condition with the exception of the pcDNA3.1 group.

### Publication Abstract
Remodeling of the cellular endomembrane system by viruses allows for efficient and coordinated replication of the viral genome in distinct subcellular compartments termed replication organelles. As a critical step in the viral life cycle, replication organelle formation is an attractive target for therapeutic intervention, but factors central to this process are only partially understood. In this study, we corroborate that two viral proteins, nsp3 and nsp4, are the major drivers of membrane remodeling in SARS-CoV-2 infection. We further report a number of host cell factors interacting with these viral proteins and supporting the viral replication cycle, some of them by contributing to the formation of the SARS-CoV-2 replication organelle.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Ap-ms/ms, Interaction, Fam149b1, Label-free, Nsp4, Nsp3

### Affiliations
Systems Arbovirology, Leibniz Institute of Virology
Systems Arbovirology, Leibniz Institute of Virology, Hamburg, Germany

### Submitter
Pietro Scaturro

### Lab Head
Dr Pietro Scaturro
Systems Arbovirology, Leibniz Institute of Virology, Hamburg, Germany


