### Accession
PXD010214

### Title
Dynamic variation in ejaculate expenditure and seminal fluid proteome over a mating sequence: the signature of female novelty and male social status in red junglefowl

### Description
Seminal fluid sample were collected from dominant and subdominant males who were re peatedly mated to first female followed by a mating to the novel second female. The goal in to monitor seminal fluid investment and composition changed dynamically over the successive matings. Our results indicate that ejaculate expenditure over a mating sequence is associated with dynamic SFP changes driven by a combination of depletion and strategic allocation.

### Sample Protocol
RJF seminal fluid samples were separated on Nupage Bis-Tris gels and then cut horizontally into 5 slices.  Slices were first reduced and alkylated and then successively treated with dithiothreitol and iodoacetamide followed by digestion with trypsin. LC-MS/MS experiments were performed using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nanoUPLC system and an Orbitrap Lumos mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
RAW files were converted to mzML and searched against the Gallus gallus RefSeq genome using X!Tandem and Comet. Search results were processed using peptideProphet, interProphet and proteinProphet.

### Publication Abstract
Theory predicts that males will strategically invest in ejaculates according to the value of mating opportunities. While strategic sperm allocation has been studied extensively, little is known about concomitant changes in seminal fluid (SF) and its molecular composition, despite increasing evidence that SF proteins (SFPs) are fundamental in fertility and sperm competition. Here, we show that in male red junglefowl, Gallus gallus, along with changes in sperm numbers and SF investment, SF composition changed dynamically over successive matings with a first female, immediately followed by mating with a second, sexually novel female. The SF proteome exhibited a pattern of both protein depletion and enrichment over successive matings, including progressive increases in immunity and plasma proteins. Ejaculates allocated to the second female had distinct proteomic profiles, where depletion of many SFPs was compensated by increased investment in others. This response was partly modulated by male social status: when mating with the second, novel female, subdominants (but not dominants) preferentially invested in SFPs associated with sperm composition, which may reflect status-specific differences in mating rates, sperm maturation and sperm competition. Global proteomic SF analysis thus reveals that successive matings trigger rapid, dynamic SFP changes driven by a combination of depletion and strategic allocation.

### Keywords
Seminal fluid, Gallus, Coolidge asdf, Red jungle fowl

### Affiliations
Syracuse University
Biology Department, Syracuse University, USA

### Submitter
Kirill Borziak

### Lab Head
Dr Steve Dorus
Biology Department, Syracuse University, USA


