### Accession
PXD010121

### Title
Analysis of Plasmodium sporozoites collected from mosquito saliva

### Description
Plasmodium sporozoites are injected, in addition to saliva, into animal hosts when a female Anopheles mosquito takes a blood meal. The molecular components of saliva that interact with Plasmodium during this process are poorly characterized. Here we collected Plasmodium sporozoites directly from salivating Anopheles mosquitoes and looked for the presence of vector proteins that could be interacting with the parasites during transmission for further characterization.

### Sample Protocol
Sporozoites collected in Anopheles saliva (pooled 30-50 mosquitoes) were washed one to three times in PBS to remove as many non-specific interacting proteins without comprosing the number of parasites. Samples were digested with trypsin and analyzed with a Q-Exactive or Elite-Orbitrap mass spectrometers equipped with Waters nano-Acquity UPLCs.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched with Mascot using databases consisting of the proteomes for Anopheles, Plasmodium, and common contaminants.

### Publication Abstract
The key step during the initiation of malaria is for motile Plasmodium parasites to exit the host dermis and infect the liver. During transmission, the parasites in the form of sporozoites, are injected together with mosquito saliva into the skin. However, the contribution of vector saliva to sporozoite activity during the establishment of the initial infection of the liver is poorly understood. Here we identify a vector protein by mass spectrometry, with similarity to the human gamma interferon inducible thiol reductase (GILT), that is associated with saliva sporozoites of infected Anopheles mosquitoes and has a negative impact on the speed and cell traversal activity of Plasmodium. This protein, referred to as mosquito GILT (mosGILT) represents an example of a protein found in mosquito saliva that may negatively influence sporozoite movement in the host and could lead to new approaches to prevent malaria.

### Keywords
Plasmodium, Malaria, Anopheles gambiae, Sporozoites, Saliva

### Affiliations
Yale School of Medicine, Yale University
Infectious Diseases, Department of Internal Medicine, Yale School of Medicine, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520, USA; Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, MD, 20815, USA

### Submitter
Tyler Schleicher

### Lab Head
Dr Erol Fikrig
Infectious Diseases, Department of Internal Medicine, Yale School of Medicine, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520, USA; Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, MD, 20815, USA


