### Accession
PXD010454

### Title
Comparative glycomics study of N-glycans in breast cancer cell line MCF7 versus normal cell line

### Description
This study designed to characterize the differences in N-glycan expressions between normal and breastcancer cells, MCF10A and MCF7. Permethylated N-glycans released by PNGase F were enriched and then  analyzed by LC-ESI/MS. The in-house-developed software GlySeeker was used to search IDs of N-glycans.

### Sample Protocol
N-glycans of MCF7 vs. MCF10A cells were obtained by PNGase F digestion, PGC enrichment, CH3I  permethylation, C18-RPLC-ESI-MS/MS analysis and GlySeeker database search

### Data Protocol
The human N-glycan database has 79,611 linkage structures (996 compositions) consisting of 73,516  complex N-glycans, 6,062 hybrid N-glycans, and 33 high-mannose N-glycans. Each N-glycan is  represented with a pseudo 2D graph, and one-letter symbols are adopted to represent monosaccharides (fucose-F, glucose-G, mannose-M, galactose-L, N-acetylglucosamine-Y, N-acetylgalactosamine-V,  N-acetylneuramic acid-S).   Initial target and decoy searches of N-glycan spectrum matches (GSMs) in the forward and random human N-glycan databases were carried out with following parameters: isotopic peak abundance cutoff (IPACO, in %), isotopic peak m/z deviation (IPMD, in ppm), and isotopic peak abundance deviation (IPAD,  in %) for the matched experimental precursor and product ions are 40%/15.0 ppm/50% and 20%/15.0 ppm/ 30%, respectively; matched B/Y/C/Z ions (excluding those containing only one monosaccharide) per GSM must be no less than 1; number-of-best-hits (NoBHs)≤500; and for each MS/MS spectrum, only Top1 hits (GSMs with the lowest P score) are kept. After searches, the score distribution of GSMs from forward and decoy databases were simulated with the finite mixture model to give a cutoff P score and GSMs  with a spectrum-level FDR≤ 1%. Forward GSMs with P scores no bigger than this cutoff P score were  rearranged firstly in the increasing order of NoBHs and secondly in the increasing order of P score, and duplicates were then removed to give the final N-glycan IDs.   For label-free quantitation, extracted ion chromatograms (EICs) from the full MS scans were  generated using MultiGlycan. Different charge states of the same precursor ion were merged to get the total peak area. The mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm. The minimum length of chromatographic peaks  was set to 0.2 min and the minimum abundance was set to 10,000. All peak areas were normalized by Loess-R after evaluation of 12 different methods with Normalyzer, a tool for normalizing data from  label-free proteomics.

### Publication Abstract
Cell-surface N-glycans play important roles in both inter- and intracellular processes, including cell adhesion and development, cell recognition, as well as cancer development and metastasis; detailed structural characterization of these N-glycans is thus paramount. Here we report our comparative N-glycomics study of cell-surface N-glycans of the hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) HepG2 cells vs the normal liver LO2 cells. With sequential trypsin digestion of proteins, C18 depletion of peptides without glycosylation, PNGase F digestion of N-glycopeptides, PGC enrichment of N-glycans, CH<sub>3</sub>I permethylation of the enriched N-glycans, cell-surface N-glycomes of the HepG2 and LO2 cells were analyzed using C18-RPLC-MS/MS (HCD). With spectrum-level FDR no bigger than 1%, 351 and 310 N-glycans were identified for HepG2 and LO2, respectively, with comprehensive structural information (not only monosaccharide composition, but also sequence and linkage) by N-glycan database search engine GlySeeker. The percentage of hybrid N-glycans with tetra-antennary structures was substantially increased in the HepG2 cells. This comprehensive discovery study of differentially expressed cell-surface N-glycans in HepG2 vs LO2 serves as a solid reference for future validation study of glycosylation markers in HCC.

### Keywords
Breast cancer, Mcf7 cell, Lc-esi/ms

### Affiliations
Tongji University
Department of Chemistry Tongji University Shanghai, China

### Submitter
Bingbing Xue

### Lab Head
Dr Zhixin Tian
Department of Chemistry Tongji University Shanghai, China


