### Accession
PXD000147

### Title
Proteomics Analysis of Burkholderia Kirkii

### Description
Protein extract from symbiontic Burkholderia Kirkii (3 replicates: A,B,C): each fractionated by SDS-PAGE and digested using Trypsin, each fraction measured twice in LC-MSMS, once in discovery mode and once using an exclusion list based on first run. Mass spectra were searched against a protein sequence database containing products of both predicted protein coding genes and pseudogenes for B. kirkii, genes predicted by the Prodigal software, genes predicted by in-house software, P. kirkii chloroplastic proteins, as well as protein sequences of 256 common contaminants. We used Mascot search engine (version 2.3.0) with the following search parameters: Carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification on all Cysteines, oxidation of Methionines, deamidation of Asparagines and Glutamines, as well as cyclization of N-terminal Glutamines were considered as optional modifications. Precursor ion mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm, fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.8 Da, and the automatic decoy search option was enabled. Spectra were searched for a match to fully-tryptic and semi-tryptic peptides with up to two missed cleavage sites. The built-in version of Mascot Percolator was used to improve the peptide spectrum match (PSM) scores. Peptides were assessed with the PeptideClassifier software. Additional genome annotation is held at ENA under the accession: WGS project CAFE00000000.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
Several plant species of the genus Psychotria (Rubiaceae) harbor Burkholderia sp. bacteria within specialized leaf nodules. The bacteria are transmitted vertically between plant generations and have not yet been cultured outside of their host. This symbiosis is considered to be obligatory because plants devoid of symbionts fail to develop into mature individuals. The genome of 'Candidatus Burkholderia kirkii' has been sequenced recently and has revealed evidence of reductive genome evolution, as shown by the proliferation of insertion sequences and the presence of numerous pseudogenes. We employed shotgun proteomics to investigate the expression of 'Ca. B. kirkii' proteins in the leaf nodule. Drawing from this dataset and refined comparative genomics analyses, we designed a new pseudogene prediction algorithm and improved the genome annotation. We also found conclusive evidence that nodule bacteria allocate vast resources to synthesis of secondary metabolites, possibly of the C7N aminocyclitol family. Expression of a putative 2-epi-5-valiolone synthase, a key enzyme of the C7N aminocyclitol synthesis, is high in the nodule population but downregulated in bacteria residing in the shoot apex, suggesting that production of secondary metabolites is particularly important in the leaf nodule.

### Keywords
Burkholderia kirkii

### Affiliations
CeMM - Research Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Ulrich Goldmann

### Lab Head


