### Accession
PXD003267

### Title
Changes in the plasma proteome of Manduca sexta larvae in relation to the transcriptome variations after an immune challenge: evidence for high molecular weight immune complex formation

### Description
Manduca sexta is a lepidopteran model widely used to study insect physiological processes including innate immunity. In this study, we explored the proteomes of cell-free hemolymph from larvae injected with a sterile buffer (C for control) or a mixture of bacteria (I for induced). Of the 654 proteins identified, 70 showed 1.67 to >200 fold abundance increases after the immune challenge; 51 decreased to 0−60% of the control levels. While there was no strong parallel between plasma protein levels and their transcript levels in hemocytes or fat body, the mRNA level changes (i.e. I/C ratios of normalized read numbers) in the tissues concurred with their protein level changes (i.e. I/C ratios of normalized spectral counts) with correlation coefficients of 0.44 and 0.57, respectively. Better correlations support that fat body contributes a more significant portion of the plasma proteins involved in various aspects of innate immunity. Consistently, ratios of mRNA and protein levels were better correlated for immunity-related proteins than unrelated ones. There is a set of proteins whose apparent molecular masses differ considerably from the calculated Mr’s, suggestive of post-translational modifications. In addition, some low Mr proteins were detected in the range of 80 to >300 kDa on a reducing SDS-polyacrylamide gel, indicating the existence of high Mr covalent complexes. We identified 30 serine proteases and their homologs, eleven of which are known members of an extracellular immune signaling network. Along with our quantitative transcriptome data, the protein identification, inducibility, and association provide leads toward a focused exploration of humoral immunity in M. sexta.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of cell-free hemolymph from buffer- and bacteria-injected M. sexta larvae — The same plasma samples used in our previous work (24) were analyzed using a gel-LC approach (25). Briefly, each of day 1, 5th instar larvae was injected with a mixture of Escherichia coli, Micrococcus luteus, and insoluble β-1,3-glucan from Alcaligenes faecalis or with sterile phosphate buffered saline as a negative control. At 24 h after the injection, prolegs of the insects were cut and hemolymph was collected using tubes containing a crystal of 1-phenyl-2-thiourea and 1 mM p-aminobenzamidine. After centrifugation, equal volumes of the plasma samples from three immune challenged insects were pooled as induced plasma-1 (IP1). Similarly, control plasma-1 (CP1) was prepared from three larvae injected with the saline. This experiment was repeated twice on different days to obtain CP2, CP3, IP2, and IP3. SDS-PAGE separation of plasma proteins, in-gel trypsinolysis, and sample preparation for MS analysis — The pooled plasma samples (40 μl each) were separately mixed with 6×SDS sample buffer (8 μl) and heated at 95°C for 5 min. Sixty μg of protein from each sample were loaded onto a 4−15% precast gradient polyacrylamide gel (Bio-Rad), and run at constant current of 30 mA for 45 min. After brief staining with Coomassie Brilliant Blue R-250, the gel was destained in 30% methanol and 10% acetic acid. Each of the six lanes was cut into nine gel slices (Fig. 1) and the 54 slices were individually cut into small pieces prior to extensive destaining by 50% acetonitrile (ACN)/50 mM NH4HCO3, pH 8.0. The gel pieces were then dehydrated with 100% ACN, dried briefly, and rehydrated with 10 mM tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine in 50 mM NH4HCO3 for 1 h at room temperature. The reducing solution was replaced with 55 mM iodoacetamide in 50 mM NH4HCO3 to alkylate Cys residues for 1 h at 25°C in the dark. After further rinsing with 50 mM NH4HCO3, the gel pieces were dehydrated with ACN and then infiltrated with sequencing-grade trypsin (8 µg/ml) in 50 mM NH4HCO3. After digestion for 16 h at 37°C, trypsinolytic peptides were extracted from the gel pieces with 1% trifluoroacetic acid for subsequent LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis — The 54 control and induced samples were individually analyzed on an LTQ-OrbitrapXL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a New Objective PV-550 nanoelectrospray ion source and an Eksigent NanoLC-2D chromatography system (24). Briefly, peptides were separated using a 5−40% acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% formic acid performed over 40 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. During each one-second full-range FT-MS scan, the six most intense ions were analyzed via MS/MS in the linear ion trap mode. MS/MS spectra were collected using a trigger threshold of 8,000 counts and monoisotopic precursor selection. Parental ions were rejected for MS/MS if their charge states were not assignable, if they were previously identified as contaminants on blank gradient runs, or if they had already been twice selected for MS/MS. Three to six technical replicates were performed for each biological sample in the LC-MS/MS analyses. Protein database, identification, and validation — The MS/MS spectra were searched against a high-quality, non-redundant database (denoted here as Msexta_060614) for protein identification. The database consisted of immunity-related protein sequences (6-10) and complete protein sequences deduced from the rectified open reading frames and confirmed by homology and domain search (26). Centroided ion masses were extracted by extract_msn.exe utility from Bioworks (v3.3.1) for database searching with Mascot (v2.2.04, Matrix Science). The following parameters were used in the search: no charge state deconvolution or deisotoping, trypsin digestion, maximum missed cleavage of 1, parental ion mass tolerance of 5.0 PPM, fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.60 Da, formylation or acetylation of protein N-termini, Met oxidization, cyclization of glutamate to pyroglutamate, iodoacetamide or acrylamide derivatization of Cys as variable modifications. Scaffold (v4.2.0, Proteome Software Inc.) was used to validate MS/MS-based peptide or protein identifications. Protein probabilities were assigned by Protein Prophet algorithm (27), and identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 98.0% probability and contained at least two identified peptides. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principle of parsimony. Reversed protein sequences of the same database were used as decoys, demonstrating a project-wide false discovery rate of 0.5%. Average values of the unique spectral counts (USCs) in three biological replicates for individual proteins were used to analyze distributions of proteins in different gel slices.

### Publication Abstract
Manduca sextais a lepidopteran model widely used to study insect physiological processes, including innate immunity. In this study, we explored the proteomes of cell-free hemolymph from larvae injected with a sterile buffer (C for control) or a mixture of bacteria (I for induced). Of the 654 proteins identified, 70 showed 1.67 to &gt;200-fold abundance increases after the immune challenge; 51 decreased to 0-60% of the control levels. While there was no strong parallel between plasma protein levels and their transcript levels in hemocytes or fat body, the mRNA level changes (i.e.I/C ratios of normalized read numbers) in the tissues concurred with their protein level changes (i.e.I/C ratios of normalized spectral counts) with correlation coefficients of 0.44 and 0.57, respectively. Better correlations support that fat body contributes a more significant portion of the plasma proteins involved in various aspects of innate immunity. Consistently, ratios of mRNA and protein levels were better correlated for immunity-related proteins than unrelated ones. There is a set of proteins whose apparent molecular masses differ considerably from the calculatedMr's, suggestive of posttranslational modifications. In addition, some lowMrproteins were detected in the range of 80 to &gt;300 kDa on a reducing SDS-polyacrylamide gel, indicating the existence of highMrcovalent complexes. We identified 30 serine proteases and their homologs, 11 of which are known members of an extracellular immune signaling network. Along with our quantitative transcriptome data, the protein identification, inducibility, and association provide leads toward a focused exploration of humoral immunity inM. sexta.

### Keywords
Hemolymph proteins, Tobacco hornworm, Phenoloxidase activation, Spectral counting, Lc-ms/ms, Insect immunity, Protein processing

### Affiliations
Department of Entomology and Plant Pathology, 127 Noble Research Center, Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, Oklahoma, USA, 74078
Oklahoma State University

### Submitter
Xiaolong Cao

### Lab Head
Dr Haobo Jiang
Department of Entomology and Plant Pathology, 127 Noble Research Center, Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, Oklahoma, USA, 74078


