### Accession
PXD003133

### Title
HEK293 Quality Control example dataset

### Description
A simple HEK293 lysate, which can be used to benchmark the performance of both the LC system and the mass spectrometer. The four files uploaded here were aqcuired on different timepoints and show distinct LC column differences.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293 lysate, digested with Trypsin, run on a 300 minute LC, measured on a Thermo Orbitrap Velos

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant 1.5.2 with default parameters plus a second run using a maximal RT alignment window of 100 min (20 min default). Complete mqpar files are attached.

### Publication Abstract
Mass spectrometry-based proteomics coupled to liquid chromatography has matured into an automatized, high-throughput technology, producing data on the scale of multiple gigabytes per instrument per day. Consequently, an automated quality control (QC) and quality analysis (QA) capable of detecting measurement bias, verifying consistency, and avoiding propagation of error is paramount for instrument operators and scientists in charge of downstream analysis. We have developed an R-based QC pipeline called Proteomics Quality Control (PTXQC) for bottom-up LC-MS data generated by the MaxQuant software pipeline. PTXQC creates a QC report containing a comprehensive and powerful set of QC metrics, augmented with automated scoring functions. The automated scores are collated to create an overview heatmap at the beginning of the report, giving valuable guidance also to nonspecialists. Our software supports a wide range of experimental designs, including stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC), tandem mass tags (TMT), and label-free data. Furthermore, we introduce new metrics to score MaxQuant's Match-between-runs (MBR) functionality by which peptide identifications can be transferred across Raw files based on accurate retention time and m/z. Last but not least, PTXQC is easy to install and use and represents the first QC software capable of processing MaxQuant result tables. PTXQC is freely available at https://github.com/cbielow/PTXQC .

### Keywords
['Hek293', 'Ptxqc']

### Affiliations
['MDC Berlin']

### Submitter
['Chris Bielow']

### Lab Head
[{'title': 'Dr', 'affiliation': 'MDC Berlin', 'email': 'stefan.kempa@mdc-berlin.de', 'country': '', 'orcid': '', 'name': 'Stefan Kempa', 'id': '33290100'}]

### SDRF
characteristics[organism]: ['Homo sapiens']
characteristics[organism part]: ['kidney']
characteristics[cell type]: ['not applicable']
characteristics[disease]: ['not available']
comment[instrument]: ['AC=MS:1001742;NT=LTQ Orbitrap Velos']
comment[label]: ['AC=MS:1002038;NT=label free sample']
comment[modification parameters]: ['not available']

