### Accession
PXD035199

### Title
Benchmarking blood collection tubes and processing intervals for extracellular vesicle performance metrics

### Description
Extracellular vesicle (EV) analysis from blood samples is under intense investigation and holds the potential to deliver clinically meaningful biomarkers for health and disease. Technical variation must be minimized to confidently assess EV-associated biomarkers but the impact of pre-analytics on EV characteristics in blood samples remains minimally explored. We present the results from the first large-scale EV Blood Benchmarking (EVBB) study in which we systematically compared 11 blood collection tubes (BCT; 6 preserving and 5 non-preserving) and 3 blood processing intervals (BPI; 1h, 8h and 72h) on defined performance metrics (n=9). The EVBB study identifies a significant impact of multiple BCT and BPI on a diverse set of metrics reflecting blood sample quality, ex-vivo generation of blood-cell derived EV, EV recovery and EV-associated molecular signatures. The results assist the informed selection of the optimal BCT and BPI for EV analysis. The proposed metrics serve as a platform to guide future research on EV pre-analytics and further support methodological standardization of EV studies.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were processed for LC-MS/MS by filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) 45. Lysates were prepared by mixing samples with SDT-lysis buffer (2 % SDS, 500 mM Tris-HCL (pH 7.6), 0.5 M DTT) at a 4:1 sample to buffer ratio and incubated at 95 °C for 5 min. After clarification of lysates by centrifugation (16,000 g for 5 min), samples were mixed with 300 μl UA (8 M urea, 0.1 M Tris-HCl (pH 8.5)) in a Microcon YM-10 centrifugal filter device (Merck Millipore). Filters were centrifuged twice (14,000 g for 40 min at 20 °C) with the addition of 200 µl UA in between. Proteins were alkylated by addition of 100 μl IAA solution (0.05 M iodoacetamide in UA buffer) and incubated for 30 min at room temperature, followed by centrifugation. This was followed twice by addition of 100 µl UA and twice by addition of 100 µl DB buffer (1 M urea, 0.1 M Tris-HCl (pH 8.5), with centrifugation in between. Filter units were transferred to new collection tubes and proteins were resuspended in 40 µL DB with Trypsin/Lys-C mix (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) for overnight proteolytic digestion at 37 °C. Digests were collected by addition of 100 µl DB and centrifugation for 15 min at 14,000 g. This step was repeated once. Collected peptides were acidified with 1 % trifluoroacetic acid to a pH of 2-3, followed by desalting with C18-StageTips (C18 Empore Disks, 3M, St. Paul, MN, USA). Desalted peptides were vacuum dried, dissolved in 0.1 % formic acid and analyzed by LC-MS/MS. Peptides were loaded on a nanoflow HPLC system (Easy- nLC1000, Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Q Exactive HF Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nano‐electrospray ionization source. The mobile phase consisted of 0.1 % formic acid (solvent A) and acetonitrile/water (95:5 (v/v)) with 0.1 % formic acid (solvent B).  The peptides were separated with a 40 min gradient from 8 to 35% of solvent B. Before the end of the run, the percentage of solvent B was raised to 100% in 2 min and kept there for 8 min. Data dependent acquisition was enabled, and higher energy collisional dissociation of top 10 most intense ions (isolation width of 2.0 m/z, dynamic exclusion time of 20 s enabled) from the survey scan over the mass-to-charge (m/z) range 300-2000 (140,000 resolution, automatic gain control of 3E6, maximum injection time of 100 ms) was performed with a normalized collision energy of 27%. MS/MS spectra over m/z range 200-2000 were collected (17,500 resolution, automatic gain control of 5E4, maximum injection time of 250 ms). Two repeated runs per sample were performed.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were searched using the MaxQuant software (version 1.5.2.8) against a database containing both reviewed (SwissProt) and unreviewed (TrEMBL) sequences of homo sapiens, including different isoforms, of UniProtKB release 2018_07. Peptide-spectrum-match- and protein-level false discovery rates were set at 0.01. Carbamidomethyl (C), as a fixed modification, and oxidation (M) and acetylation of the protein N-terminus as dynamic modifications were included. A maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed. The LC-MS profiles were aligned, and the identifications were transferred to non-sequenced or non-identified MS features in other LC-MS runs (matching between runs). The protein was determined as detected in the sample if its identification had been derived from at least two unique peptide identifications. Filtering for contaminating proteins, reverse identification and identification by site was used.

### Publication Abstract
The analysis of extracellular vesicles (EV) in blood samples is under intense investigation and holds the potential to deliver clinically meaningful biomarkers for health and disease. Technical variation must be minimized to confidently assess EV-associated biomarkers, but the impact of pre-analytics on EV characteristics in blood samples remains minimally explored. We present the results from the first large-scale EV Blood Benchmarking (EVBB) study in which we systematically compared 11 blood collection tubes (BCT; six preservation and five non-preservation) and three blood processing intervals (BPI; 1, 8 and 72&#xa0;h) on defined performance metrics (n&#xa0;=&#xa0;9). The EVBB study identifies a significant impact of multiple BCT and BPI on a diverse set of metrics reflecting blood sample quality, ex-vivo generation of blood-cell derived EV, EV recovery and EV-associated molecular signatures. The results assist the informed selection of the optimal BCT and BPI for EV analysis. The proposed metrics serve as a framework to guide future research on pre-analytics and further support methodological standardization of EV studies.

### Keywords
Biomarkers; proteomics; extracellular vesicles; exosomes; serum; plasma; anticoagulants; preservatives; cancer

### Affiliations
University of Turku
Laboratory of Experimental Cancer Research, Department of Human Structure and Repair, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium

### Submitter
Pekka Rappu

### Lab Head
Dr Olivier De Wever
Laboratory of Experimental Cancer Research, Department of Human Structure and Repair, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium


