### Accession
PXD038685

### Title
Identification and characterization of proteins that form the inner core Ixodes scapularis tick attachment cement layer.

### Description
Ixodes scapularis and other hard ticks are long-term blood feeders. This feeding behavior is facilitated by a tick secreted bio adhesive (tick cement) that attaches tick mouthparts to skin tissue and prevents the host from dislodging the tick from its feeding site. Understanding tick cement formation is highly sought after as its disruption will prevent tick feeding. This study describes proteins that form the inner core layer of I. scapularis tick cement as disrupting these will stop formation of the outer cortical layer. As the inner core cement layer completes forming by 24 h of attachment, we used laser capture to isolate cement from cryosections of 6 h and 24 h tick attachment sites and to distinguish between early and late inner core cement proteins. LC-MS/MS analysis identified 138 tick cement proteins (TCPs) of which 37 and 35 were unique in cement of 6 and 24 h respectively, and 66 shared proteins. The 138 TCPs are classified in 14 functional categories: cuticular protein (16%), tick specific proteins of unknown function, cytoskeletal proteins, and enzymes (at 13% each), enzymes (10%), antioxidant, glycine rich, scaffolding, heat shock, histone, histamine binding, proteases and protease inhibitors, and miscellaneous (at 3-6% each). Gene ontology analysis confirm that TCPs are enriched for bio adhesive properties. Our data offer insights into yet unknown tick cement bonding patterns and set the foundation for understanding the molecular basis of I. scapularis tick cement formation.

### Sample Protocol
Protein digestion and sample preparation I. scapularis tick LCM cement protein extracts (at least 2 μg total protein per run X3) for each time point was digested in solution with trypsin. Samples were diluted in 8 M urea/0.1 M Tris, pH 8.5, reduced with 5 mM Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP, Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO, USA) and alkylated with 25 mM iodoaceamide (Sigma-Aldrich). Proteins were digested overnight at 37°C in 2 M urea/0.1M Tris pH 8.5, 1 mM CaCl2 with trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) with a final ratio of 1:20 (enzyme:substrate). Digestion reactions, in a final concentration of 0.15 μg/mL, were quenched with formic acid (5% final concentration) and centrifuged for debris removal. Pre-columns and analytical columns Reversed phase pre-columns were prepared by first creating a Kasil frit at one end of a deactivated 250 μm ID/360 μm OD capillary (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA). Kasil frits were prepared by dipping 20 cm capillary in 300 μL Kasil 1624 (PQ Corporation, Malvern, PA, USA) and 100 μL formamide solution, curing at 100°C for 3 h and adjusting the length. Pre-columns were packed in-house (John Yates III's Laboratory, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA, USA) with 2 cm of 5 μm ODS-AQ C18 (YMC America, Inc., Allentown, PA, USA) particles from particle slurries in methanol. Analytical reversed phase columns were fabricated by pulling a 100 μm ID/360 μm OD silica capillary (Molex Polymicro Technologies, Austin, TX, USA) to a 5 μm ID tip. The same packing material was packed until 20 cm directly behind the pulled tip. Reversed phase pre-columns and analytical columns were connected using a zero-dead volume union (IDEX Corp., Upchurch Scientific, Oak Harbor, WA, USA). LC-MS/MS Peptide mixtures were analyzed by nanoflow liquid chromatography mass spectrometry using an Easy NanoLC II and a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Peptides eluted from the analytical column were electrosprayed directly into the mass spectrometer. Buffer A and B consisted of 5% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid and 80% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid, respectively. The flow rate was set to 400 nL/min. Feeding time saliva samples (1.5 μg per injection) were separated in 155 min chromatographic runs, as follows: 1–10% gradient of buffer B in 10 min, 10–40% of buffer B in 100 min, 40–50% of buffer B in 10 min and 50–90% of buffer B in 10 min. Column was held at 90% of buffer B for 10 min, reduced to 1% of buffer B and re-equilibrated prior to next injection.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis Tandem mass spectra were extracted from Thermo RAW files using RawExtract 1.9.9.2 and searched with ProLuCID against a non-redundant database containing an Ixodes scapularis database from National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI, www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov) (21,210 entries) concatenated with Oryctolagus cuniculus from Uniprot (www.uniprot.org) reference database (23,316 entries) and reverse sequences of all entries. To remove redundancies, CD-HIT was used to remove sequences at 98% identity.Searches were done using Integrated Proteomics Pipeline–IP2 (Integrated Proteomics Applications, Inc., San Diego, CA, USA). The search space included all fully-tryptic and half-tryptic peptide candidates. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was used as static modification. Data was searched with 50 ppm precursor ion tolerance and 20 ppm fragment ion tolerance.

### Publication Abstract
Ixodes scapularis long-term blood feeding behavior is facilitated by a tick secreted bio adhesive (tick cement) that attaches tick mouthparts to skin tissue and prevents the host from dislodging the attached tick. Understanding tick cement formation is highly sought after as its disruption will prevent tick feeding. This study describes proteins that form the inner core layer of I. scapularis tick cement as disrupting these proteins will likely stop formation of the outer cortical layer. The inner core cement layer completes formation by 24&#xa0;h of tick attachment. Thus, we used laser-capture microdissection to isolate cement from cryosections of 6&#xa0;h and 24&#xa0;h tick attachment sites and to distinguish between early and late inner core cement proteins. LC-MS/MS analysis identified 138 tick cement proteins (TCPs) of which 37 and 35 were unique in cement of 6 and 24&#xa0;h attached ticks respectively. We grouped TCPs in 14 functional categories: cuticular protein (16%), tick specific proteins of unknown function, cytoskeletal proteins, and enzymes (13% each), enzymes (10%), antioxidant, glycine rich, scaffolding, heat shock, histone, histamine binding, proteases and protease inhibitors, and miscellaneous (3-6% each). Gene ontology analysis confirm that TCPs are enriched for bio adhesive properties. Our data offer insights into tick cement bonding patterns and set the foundation for understanding the molecular basis of I. scapularis tick cement formation.

### Keywords
Ixodes scapularis tick cement, Lc-ms/ms, Laser capture micro dissection

### Affiliations
Texas A&M University
Department of Veterinary Pathobiology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas,United States of America

### Submitter
Albert Mulenga

### Lab Head
Dr Albert Mulenga
Department of Veterinary Pathobiology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas,United States of America


