### Accession
PXD032015

### Title
Mass spectrometry analysis of the impact of replication stress upon phosphorylation and protein interaction of human RIF1 protein

### Description
Wild-type or S2265A version of GFP-RIF1 protein (isoform 1) was over-expressed in Flp-In-T-REx cells (Watts et al. 2020. eLife 9:e58020) and immunopurified using GFP-Trap magnetic agarose beads.  Proteins were subjected to on-beads trypsin digestion and resulting peptides were analysed by mass spectrometry for protein identification/quantification and identification of phosphorylated residues.  Raw MS file names and descriptions: IP_RIF1_A.raw = GFP-RIF1-L immunoprecipitated from cells without aphidicolin treatment. IP_RIF1_B.raw = GFP-RIF1-L immunoprecipitated from cells treated with 1 µM aphidicolin for 24 hr before harvesting. IP_RIF1_C.raw = GFP-RIF1-L (S2265A) immunoprecipitated from cells treated with 1 µM aphidicolin for 24 hr before harvesting.

### Sample Protocol
Induction of GFP-RIF1 protein, and aphidicolin treatment Flp-In T-REx GFP-RIF1-L and Flip-In T-REx GFP-RIF1-L-S2265A cells were cultivated in DMEM.  For 48 hr before cell harvesting, cells were induced for GFP-RIF1-L expression by 1 µg/ml DOX, and treated with 1 µM APH or DMSO for the final 24 hr.  Immunoprecipitation Cells in dishes were gently washed with ice-cold Tris-buffered saline (TBS). Cells were lysed and gently scraped off in the ice-cold TBS IP buffer (1x TBS supplemented with 1% CHAPS, 1x Halt protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Thermo Fisher), and 1 mM PMSF) supplemented with 3 mM MgCl2.  One µl of Benzonase (250U) was added and lysates were incubated for 30 min at 4ºC with gentle agitation.  The lysate was spun at 20,000 for 10 min, and the supernatant was used for the immunoprecipitation using GFP-Trap Magnetic-agarose beads (Chromotek).  Immunoprecipitation was carried out as manufacturer’s instruction but in the Tris IP buffer.  Beads were further washed with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate and on-beads trypsin digestion was performed essentially as described (Garzon et al. 2019.  Cell Rep 27: 2558-2566.e4) but without Cys alkylation.    MS analysis on Orbitrap Q Exactive+ Peptides were analyzed using an Orbitrap Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer equipped with a Dionex U3000 RSLCnano liquid chromatography system configured for pre-concentration on C18 PepMap 100 (300 µm i.d. x 5 mm) at 10 µl/min then peptide separation on EASY-Spray PepMap RSLC C18 (75 µm i.d. x 25 cm) at 300 nl/min over a 69-min elution gradient of acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. Mass spectra were acquired in Full MS/data-dependent MS2 mode using a ‘Top 10’ method. MS1 scans were performed from 375 – 1750 m/z with a resolution of 70,000, an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3e6, and maximum injection time (max IT) of 50 ms. The 10 most abundant precursor ions with charge states of +2 to +5 were selected from each MS1 scan for sequential trapping and fragmentation by higher-energy collisional dissociation (normalised collision energy 26%). MS2 scans were performed with a resolution of 17,500, an AGC target of 5e4, and max IT of 100 ms. Previously selected ions were dynamically excluded for 40 s, and peptide ions were preferred.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS datasets were analyzed by MaxQuant software (version 1.6.2.3) using the standard settings for Orbitrap against Uniprot Human Reference proteome (UP000005640_9606; release-2021_01). Phosphorylation (at serines, threonines, and tyrosines), oxidation of methionines, deamidation of asparagines and glutamines, conversion of glutamines to glutamic acids, and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications.  Minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and a maximum of two missed Trypsin/P cleavages was allowed.  iBAQ label-free quantification method was used for protein quantifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rif1, Replication stress, Protein phosphorylation

### Affiliations
University of Aberdeen
Institute of Medical Sciences, University of Aberdeen, Foresterhill, Aberdeen, AB25 2ZD, United Kingdom

### Submitter
David Stead

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Shin-ichiro Hiraga
Institute of Medical Sciences, University of Aberdeen, Foresterhill, Aberdeen, AB25 2ZD, United Kingdom


