### Accession
PXD033081

### Title
Ion-based Proteome Integrated Solubility Alteration Assay for System-wide Profiling of Protein-Molecule Interactions - full curve data

### Description
Unbiased drug target engagement deconvolution and mechanism of action elucidation are major challenges in drug development. Modification-free target engagement methods, such as thermal proteome profiling, have gained increasing popularity over the last several years. However, these methods have limitations, and, in any case, new orthogonal approaches are needed. Here we present a novel isothermal method for comprehensive characterization of protein solubility alterations using the effect on protein solubility of cations and anions in the Hofmeister series. We combine this ion-based protein precipitation approach with Proteome Integrated Solubility Alteration (PISA) analysis and use this I-PISA assay to delineate the targets of several anti-cancer drugs both in cell lysate and in living cells. Lastly, we demonstrate that I-PISA can detect solubility changes in minute amounts of sample, opening chemical proteomics applications to small and rare biological material.

### Sample Protocol
A defined amount of soluble proteins were incubated at a final concentration of 4 M Urea and 5 mM Dithiothreitol for 1 h at room temperature, followed by alkylation using 15 mm Iodoacetamide in the dark for 1 h. Thereafter, proteins were precipitated by chloroform/methanol precipitation. In brief, 4 volumes (relative to the samples) of methanol were added to the samples, followed by 1 volume of chloroform, and 3 volumes of water. Samples were vortexed and centrifuged at 20’000 g for 10 min at 4 °C. The organic phase was removed, and the protein pellet was rinsed with 1 volume of methanol before the samples were centrifuged again. All liquid was removed, and samples were let to dry until appearing whitish. Samples were resuspended in 20 mM EPPES at pH 8.5 and 8 M Urea, then the urea concentration was diluted to 4 M and Lysyl Endopeptidase (Wako, Fujifilm) was added (1:100 w/w) and incubated for 2 h. Then samples were diluted to 1 M urea and Trypsin (Promega) was added and incubated overnight at room temperature. TMT-10plex or TMTpro-16plex (Thermo Fischer Scientific) reagents were resuspended into dry ACN and added to each sample with four times excess relative to protein amount. The ACN amount in the samples was adjusted to 20 % and samples were incubated for 2 h at room temperature. Labeling was quenched by adding hydroxylamine (Thermo Fischer Scientific) to a final concentration of 0.5% and incubated for 15 min. Samples were combined, ACN was evaporated in the SpeedVac (Genevac), acidified with TFA pH < 3 and samples were desalted by SepPack (Waters).

### Data Protocol
All raw files acquired by data dependent acquisition were searched on MaxQuant version (2.0.1.0) using the Andromeda search engine. For the TMTpro labeled samples, a custom modified version of MaxQuant was used, recognizing TMTpro as an isobaric label, otherwise TMT10-plex was used. For peptides search, acetylation of the N-terminal and oxidation of methionine were selected as variable modifications whereas carbamidomethylation of the cysteine was selected as fixed modification. Trypsin with up to 2 missed cleavages was set as protease and the spectrum was searched against the SwissProt homo sapiens database (20’382 entries). The FDR was set to 0.01 for both peptide and protein identification. For all other parameters the default settings were used. Protein solubility curves were analyzed with a modified version of our SIESTA R package.

### Publication Abstract
Unbiased drug target engagement deconvolution and mechanism of action elucidation are major challenges in drug development. Modification-free target engagement methods, such as thermal proteome profiling, have gained increasing popularity in the last several years. However, these methods have limitations, and, in any case, new orthogonal approaches are needed. Here, we present a novel isothermal method for comprehensive characterization of protein solubility alterations using the effect on protein solubility of cations and anions in the Hofmeister series. We combine the ion-based protein precipitation approach with Proteome-Integrated Solubility Alteration (PISA) analysis and use this I-PISA assay to delineate the targets of several anticancer drugs both in cell lysates and intact cells. Finally, we demonstrate that I-PISA can detect solubility changes in minute amounts of sample, opening chemical proteomics applications to small and rare biological material.

### Keywords
Drug target deconvolution, Thermal protein profiling, Proteomics, Mechanism of action, Cancer

### Affiliations
Division of Chemistry I
Department of Medical Biochemistry & Biophysics
Karolinska Institutet
Chemistry I, Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm 17177, Sweden

### Submitter
Christian Beusch

### Lab Head
Dr Roman Zubarev
Chemistry I, Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm 17177, Sweden


