### Accession
PXD025095

### Title
Epulorhiza-responsive proteins found in tubers of Dactylorhiza

### Description
Orchid (Dactylorhiza) tubers after fungal inoculation.

### Sample Protocol
Total protein extracts were prepared as previously described (Hallmark et al., 2020), and portions of samples corresponding to 5 µg of peptide were analyzed by nanoflow reverse-phase liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry using a 15 cm C18 Zorbax column (Agilent), a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano-UPLC system and the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo).

### Data Protocol
The measured spectra were recalibrated and searched against genomes of Phalaenopsis equestris (Cai J et al. Nat Genet 2015), Dendrobium catenatum (Zhang GQ et al. Sci Rep 2016), and common contaminants. Next, all unassigned spectra were exported and analyzed by Peaks Studio (BSI). The de novo identified peptides were searched against the UniProt database. All matching protein sequences and peptides missing annotations were compiled into the new FASTA files and included in the final search and quantitation by Proteome Discoverer. The quantitative differences were determined by Minora, employing precursor ion quantification followed by normalization and calculation of relative peptide/protein abundances.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Orchid tubers, Epulorhiza

### Affiliations
Mendel University in Brno

### Submitter
Martin Cerny

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Cerny
Mendel University in Brno


