### Accession
PXD016623

### Title
USP7 counteracts the activation of the mitotic program

### Description
Chemical inhibitors of the deubiquitinase USP7 are currently being developed as anticancer agents, due to their capacity to activate P53.  Regardless of this activity, USP7 inhibitors also generate DNA damage in a p53-independent manner. However, the mechanism of this genotoxicity remains unknown. Surprisingly, even if USP7 inhibitors stop DNA replication, this occurs concomitant to a premature activation of mitotic kinases such as CDK1, which impairs chromosome segregation and is toxic for mammalian cells. Mechanistically, we show that USP7 interacts with the phosphatase PP2A and regulates its function. Accordingly, USP7 or PP2A inhibition trigger similar changes on the phosphoproteome, with a particular bias towards mitotic targets. Supporting our model, the toxicity of USP7 inhibitors is alleviated by lowering CDK1 activity or by the chemical activation of PP2A. Our work sheds light into the mechanism of action of USP7 inhibitors and provides the first example of triggering premature mitotic entry through perturbation of ubiquitin signaling.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were digested, labeled with TMT 11plex and fractionated using High pH reverse phase chromatography. Phosphopeptide enrichment was perform using TiO2 micro-columns. LC-MS/MS was done by coupling an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano LC system to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed with MaxQuant. Statistical analysis was perform using Prostar.Differential analysis was done using the empirical Bayes statistics Limma. Sites with a p.value < 0.05 and a log2 ratio >0.3 or <-0.3 were defined as regulated. The FDR was estimated to be below 5% by Benjamini-Hochberg.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Usp7

### Affiliations
Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Oncológicas
CNIO

### Submitter
Eduardo Zarzuela

### Lab Head
Dr Javier Muñoz
CNIO


