### Accession
PXD009002

### Title
Comparative proteomics revealed the role of Jasmonate ZIM Domain 7 (JAZ7) in plant drought tolerance

### Description
we focused on characterizing proteomicchanges involving JAZ7 when Arabidopsis thaliana plants were withhold water. To understand the phenotypes and elucidate the regulatory function of JAZ7, leaves from wild type(WT), jaz7 knock out(KO), jaz7 overexpression(OE)were harvested for proteomics analysis after drought treatment for 18days. Using TMT-based isobaric labeling quantitative proteomics approach,

### Sample Protocol
Protein Extraction, Digestion, TMT Labeling and Strong Cation Exchange (SCX) Extraction of samples for proteomics analysis has been described previously (36). Briefly, Protein concentration of the samples was determined by the EZQ method using ovalbumin egg as a standard (Thermo Scientific, Eugen, OR). 100µg proteins from each samples were first reduced by 10mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) at 37 ˚C for 1 h, and then alkylated by 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAM) at RT for 30 min in the dark. The samples were digested with trypsin (Promega, Fitchburg, WI) at an enzyme/substrate ratio of 1/80 at 37 °C for 14 h. The peptides were cleaned by solid phase extraction (SPE) using C18 columns (The Nest Group, Southborough, MA) and then dried by a speedvac concentrator.  TMT 10plex tags label peptides as previously described(31). In short, the lyophilized peptides were dissolved in 50 µL of 100 mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), and then labeled with half volume of TMT label reagents that were dissolved in 60 µL of anhydrous acetonitrile (ACN). After incubation at RT for 3 h, Adding 4 µL of 5% hydroxylamine. Samples were then pooled and desalted by SPE. The tagged peptide mixture was fractionated by SCX according to previously described methods (37). Proteomics analysis by Liquid Chromatography coupled with Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS) For each SCX fraction, LC-MS was performed on an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA) coupled online with an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Peptide samples were first loaded to an Acclaim PepMap100 C18 precolumn (2 cm length, 75 μm inner diameter, 100 Å pore size, and 3 μm particle size), and then separated using an Acclaim® PepMap analytical column (25 cm length, 75 μm inner diameter, 100 Å pore size, and 2 μm particle size). The solvent A: 0.1% formic acid in water; solvent B: 0.1% formic acid and 99.9% acetonitrile. The  flow rate is 300 nL/min using the following parameters: 2 5% of B over 0-5 min; 5-35% of B over 5-40 min, 35-60% of B over 40-45 min, 60-95% of B over 45-46 min and isocratic at 95% of B over 46-60 min. Nano-electrospray source (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA) integrated with the LC-MS system (31) .Positive mode with a spray voltage of 1.8 kV at 285 °C ion tube transfer temperature. a full MS scan, a MS2 scan and a MS3 scan within a cycle of 3 s  to data acquisition using a top-speed method. mass range, 400-1800 m/z; resolution, 120,000; automatic gain control (AGC), 2×105; maximum injection time (MIT), 50 ms; radiofrequency (RF) lens, 30%. Peptides with 2-6 charges were isolated using a 1.3 m/z isolation window and fragmented by CID. The resulting MS2 spectra parameter: datatype, centroid; AGC, 1×104; MIT, 50 ms. The ion trap was 2 m/z to isolate TMT-tagged peptide. Selected ions were fragmented by HCD, 65% of normalized collision energy and the MS3 spectra were detected in the Orbitrap: mass range,100-500 m/z; resolution, 60,000; AGC, 1 × 105; MIT, 120 ms; radiofrequency (RF) lens, 30%.  A dynamic exclusion of 36s was set to prevent repeated sampling of high abundance peptides.

### Data Protocol
The raw data of proteomics were searched against the Arabidopsis thaliana Tair 10 database (32785 entries, https://www.arabidopsis.org/download/) using Proteome Discoverer (version 2.1.1.21) with the SEQUESTHT algorithm. Proteins were identified with the requirement of at least two peptides with at least one unique peptide. The peptides with FDR less than 1% were used for further analysis. The abundance of universal control in samples (quantified by TMT 131) was used to adjust the abundance among three replicates. Then, TMT quantification channel within an individual replicate was normalized based on the total reporter ion intensity. For proteins that had quantification values in two out of three replicates, the missing values were filled with minimum value in the associated quantification channels. Reproducibility among different replicates was evaluated by Pearson correlation test in R (version 3.3.1). Fold change (FC) of a protein was calculated as the ratio between the log10 transformed protein abundance between each TMT quantification channel. A protein was defined as significantly changed when 1) FC > 1.2 or FC < 0.8 and 2) the associated statistical test between the comparison groups was significant (p < 0.05). Hierarchical clustering of the protein abundance data was conducted using the Euclidean method for calculating the distance and building the linkage trees.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Jaz7, Tmt, Drought

### Affiliations
University of Florida
Heilongjiang University

### Submitter
Li Meng

### Lab Head
Dr Sixue Chen
University of Florida


