### Accession
PXD039156

### Title
Structural basis of gRNA stabilization and mRNA recognition in trypanosomal RNA editing

### Description
Structures of RNA editing substrate binding complexes reveal the mechanisms of guide RNA stabilization and messenger RNA recognition in the Trypanosoma brucei mitochondrion.

### Sample Protocol
Affinity-purified complexes were sequentially digested with LysC peptidase and trypsin prior to MS analysis. LC-MS/MS was carried out by nanoflow reversed phase liquid chromatography (RPLC) using an UltiMate 3000 RSLC (Thermo Scientific) coupled on-line to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). A cycle of full FT scan mass spectrum (m/z 375-1500, resolution of 60,000 at m/z 400) was followed by MS/MS spectra acquired in the linear ion trap for 3 seconds at top speed with normalized collision energy (HCD, 30%).

### Data Protocol
Following data extraction to an MGF format using MSConvert (ProteoWizard), the resultant peak lists for each LC-MS/MS experiment were submitted to Protein Prospector (UCSF) for database searching (5) . Each project was searched against a normal form concatenated with the random form of the T. brucei database (http://tritrypdb.org/tritrypdb/). The mass accuracies for parent ions and fragment ions were set as ± 15 ppm and 0.6 Da, respectively. Trypsin was set as the enzyme, with a maximum of two missed cleavages allowed. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification, and protein N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation, and N-terminal conversion of glutamine to pyroglutamic acid were selected as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
In <i>Trypanosoma brucei</i>, the editosome, composed of RNA-editing substrate-binding complex (RESC) and RNA-editing catalytic complex (RECC), orchestrates guide RNA (gRNA)-programmed editing to recode cryptic mitochondrial transcripts into messenger RNAs (mRNAs). The mechanism of information transfer from gRNA to mRNA is unclear owing to a lack of high-resolution structures for these complexes. With cryo-electron microscopy and functional studies, we have captured gRNA-stabilizing RESC-A and gRNA-mRNA-binding RESC-B and RESC-C particles. RESC-A sequesters gRNA termini, thus promoting hairpin formation and blocking mRNA access. The conversion of RESC-A into RESC-B or -C unfolds gRNA and allows mRNA selection. The ensuing gRNA-mRNA duplex protrudes from RESC-B, likely exposing editing sites to RECC-catalyzed cleavage, uridine insertion or deletion, and ligation. Our work reveals a remodeling event facilitating gRNA-mRNA hybridization and assembly of a macromolecular substrate for the editosome's catalytic modality.

### Keywords
Resc, Recc, Trypanosoma brucei

### Affiliations
Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Molecular Genetics, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA
University of California, Irvine

### Submitter
Clinton Yu

### Lab Head
Dr Z. Hong Zhou
Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Molecular Genetics, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA


