### Accession
PXD025819

### Title
Determining the KRAS-regulated kinome in PDAC

### Description
Oncogenic KRAS drives cancer growth by activating diverse signaling networks, not all of which have been fully delineated. We set out to establish a system-wide profile of the KRAS-regulated kinase signaling network (kinome) in KRAS-mutant pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC). We knocked down KRAS expression in a panel of six cell lines, and then applied Multiplexed Inhibitor Bead/Mass Spectrometry (MIB/MS) chemical proteomics to monitor changes in kinase activity and/or expression. We hypothesized that depletion of KRAS would result in downregulation of kinases required for KRAS-mediated transforming activities, and in upregulation of other kinases that could potentially compensate for the deleterious consequences of the loss of KRAS. We identified 15 upregulated and 13 downregulated kinases in common across the panel. In agreement with our hypothesis, all 15 of the upregulated kinases have established roles as cancer drivers (e.g., SRC, TGFBR1, ILK), and pharmacologic inhibition of the upregulated kinase, DDR1, suppressed PDAC growth. Interestingly, 11 of the 13 downregulated kinases have established driver roles in cell cycle progression, particularly in mitosis (e.g., WEE1, Aurora A, PLK1). Consistent with a crucial role for the downregulated kinases in promoting KRAS-driven proliferation, we found that pharmacologic inhibition of WEE1 also suppressed PDAC growth. The unexpected paradoxical activation of ERK upon WEE1 inhibition led us to inhibit both WEE1 and ERK concurrently, which caused further potent growth suppression and enhanced apoptotic death than WEE1 inhibition alone. We conclude that system-wide delineation of the KRAS-regulated kinome can identify potential therapeutic targets for KRAS-mutant pancreatic cancer.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were prepared according to the RNAi knockdown protocol outlined in Experimental procedures. Following 72 h of RNAi knockdown with either non-specific siRNA or siKRAS 1, the cell plates were placed on ice and the cells were washed 5x with large-volume, ice cold phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). The final PBS wash was thoroughly aspirated and MIB/MS lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES (pH 7.5), 0.5% Triton X-100, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA, 10 mM sodium fluoride, 2.5 mM sodium orthovanadate, protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche), 1% phosphatase inhibitor cocktail 2 (Sigma-Aldrich), and 1% of phosphatase inhibitor cocktail 3 (Sigma-Aldrich) was added to the adherent cells and permitted to incubate on ice for 5 min. Using a rubber cell scraper, cell lysates were transferred from the plates to 1.7 ml microcentrifuge tubes and placed on ice for 10 min. Cell lysates were subsequently sonicated four times for 15 sec at 50% power, alternating between samples to allow cooling on ice between pulses. Cell lysates were then centrifuged at top speed (13,200 rpm) for 10 min at 4°C. Supernatants were clarified using a 0.2 µm filter, transferred into labeled tubes and stored at -80°C (~5 mg protein per experiment). A small portion of lysate was removed for Bradford assay estimation of protein concentration. The lysates were thawed and gravity-flowed over multiplexed kinase inhibitor beads (MIBs; Sepharose conjugated to VI-16832, CTx-0294885, PP58, Purvalanol B, UNC8088A, and UNC21474). MIBs were then washed with high salt (1 M NaCl) and low salt (150 mM NaCl + 0.1% SDS) lysis buffers without the inhibitors. The samples were boiled with the elution buffer (100 mM tris-HCl, 0.5% SDS, and 1% β-mercaptoethanol, pH 6.8) at 100°C for 5 min to elute the bound kinases from MIBs. The eluted kinases (proteins) were concentrated with Amicon Ultra-4 (10K cutoff) spin columns (Millipore), purified by removing the detergent using methanol/chloroform extraction, and digested by sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37°C. Hydrated ethyl acetate extraction was used to remove Triton, and PepClean C18 spin columns (Thermo Scientific) were used to de-salt the digested peptides. Biological triplicates of the MIB samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS as we described previously (33). Briefly, each sample was injected onto an EASY-Spray PepMap C18 column (75 mm id 3 25 cm, 2 mm particle size) (Thermo Scientific) and separated over a 2-h method. The gradient for separation consisted of 5%–32% mobile phase B at a 250 nl/min flow rate, where mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid in water and mobile phase B consisted of 0.1% formic acid in ACN. The Thermo QExactive HF was operated in data-dependent mode where the 15 most intense precursors were selected for subsequent HCD fragmentation (set to 27%).

### Data Protocol
Following MaxQuant processing of data and generation of Label-free quantification (LFQ) intensity values, data files were analyzed using R (version 3.5.2). Kinases were excluded if they were not present in >50% of samples or if they contained two or more peptides. For imputation of missing values, a normal distribution was modeled on the non-missing LFQ intensity values of the kinases containing missing intensity values. Imputed values were drawn randomly from this distribution. Following filtering and imputation, LFQ intensity values were log2 transformed and the fold change over the median vehicle value was calculated for each kinase. Kinases significantly different between treatments with siNS and siKRAS, or with DMSO and ERKi, were determined using one-way ANOVA (Benjamini-Hochberg adjusted p value < 0.05). Euclidean distance and average linkage were utilized for unsupervised hierarchical clustering of log2 fold-change values for significant kinases.

### Publication Abstract
Oncogenic KRAS drives cancer growth by activating diverse signaling networks, not all of which have been fully delineated. We set out to establish a system-wide profile of the KRAS-regulated kinase signaling network (kinome) in KRAS-mutant pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC). We knocked down KRAS expression in a panel of six cell lines and then applied multiplexed inhibitor bead/MS to monitor changes in kinase activity and/or expression. We hypothesized that depletion of KRAS would result in downregulation of kinases required for KRAS-mediated transformation and in upregulation of other kinases that could potentially compensate for the deleterious consequences of the loss of KRAS. We identified 15 upregulated and 13 downregulated kinases in common across the panel of cell lines. In agreement with our hypothesis, all 15 of the upregulated kinases have established roles as cancer drivers (e.g., SRC, TGF-&#x3b2;1, ILK), and pharmacological inhibition of one of these upregulated kinases, DDR1, suppressed PDAC growth. Interestingly, 11 of the 13 downregulated kinases have established driver roles in cell cycle progression, particularly in mitosis (e.g., WEE1, Aurora A, PLK1). Consistent with a crucial role for the downregulated kinases in promoting KRAS-driven proliferation, we found that pharmacological inhibition of WEE1 also suppressed PDAC growth. The unexpected paradoxical activation of ERK upon WEE1 inhibition led us to inhibit both WEE1 and ERK concurrently, which caused further potent growth suppression and enhanced apoptotic death compared with WEE1 inhibition alone. We conclude that system-wide delineation of the KRAS-regulated kinome can identify potential therapeutic targets for KRAS-mutant pancreatic cancer.

### Keywords
Human, Pdac, Cell line, Pancreatic cancer, Mib, Lc-ms/ms, Kras

### Affiliations
UNC-Chapel Hill
Department of Pharmacology, Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, UNC-Chapel Hill

### Submitter
Laura Herring

### Lab Head
Dr Channing Der
Department of Pharmacology, Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, UNC-Chapel Hill


