### Accession
PXD003382

### Title
CEP215_gallus_interactome -  A CEP215-HSET complex links centrosomes with spindle poles and drives centrosome clustering in cancer

### Description
To  establish  the  molecular  basis  for  CEP215  function  in  centrosome-spindle  pole  attachment,  we  employed  an  unbiased  proteomic  approach  to  isolat e  and  identify  CEP215 interactors. To this end, affinity purification tags ( Gs TAP containing protein G  and streptavidin-binding protein) were inserted in-frame  into  both alleles of the CEP215  gene  (CEP215-TAP  cell  line)  in  the  chicken  B  cell  line,  DT40.  Following  affinity  purification,   protein   complexes   were   analysed   by   mass   spectr ometry

### Sample Protocol
For  affinity  purification  of  CEP215-TAP  complexes,  2X109 cells  were  pelleted  and  lysed  in  5  ml  of  lysis  buffer  containing  10  mM  Tris-HCl  (pH8),  100  mM  KCl,  1.5 mM    MgCl2  0.5%   Triton-X-100,   5%   Glycerol   and   10 uM b-mercaptoethanol  supplemented  with  protease  inhibitor  cocktail   . Cleared  cytoplasmic extracts  were  obtained  by  centrifuging  cell  lysates  at  16000g  for 15  minutes  at  4oC  and incubated  with  200 ul  of  Streptavidin  Dynabeads.  After  3  washes  with  lysis  buffer  containing  0.2%  Triton-X-100  and  3  washes  with 100 mM  ammonium  bicarbonate.Bead  bound  proteins  were  digested  by  the  addition  of  10μl  trypsin  solution  15ng/μl   in  100  mM  ammonium  bicarbonate.  The  beads  were  then  incubated  at  37°C  overnight. A second step digestion was performed the following day for 4h. Sample tubes were  placed  on  a  magnetic  rack  and  the  supernatant  solution  was  collected  and  acidified  by the addition of 2μl 5% formic acid. The samples were then cleaned using Ultra-Micro C18   Spin   Columns   (Harvard   Apparatus)   prior   to   the   MS   analysis   according   to manufacturer’s  instructions. The LC- MS analysis  was performed on the Dionex Ultimate 3000  UHPLC  system  coupled  with  the  Orbitrap  Velos  mass  spectrometer  (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The  CID  tandem  mass  spectra  were  processed  using  the  Sequest HT  and  Mascot  search  engines  implemented  on  the  Proteome  Discoverer  software   version  1.4  for  peptide  and  protein  identifications.  All  spectra  were  searched  against  a   UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot  and  UniProtKB/TrEMBL  fasta  file.  The  Nodes  for  SequestHT  and  Masc ot  included  the  following  parameters:  Precursor  Mass  Tolerance  10ppm,  Fra gment  Mass  Tolerance  0.5  Da, Dynamic Modifications were Oxidation of M (+15.995 Da) and Deam idation of N, Q  (+0.984  Da). The  level  of  confidence  for  peptide  identificatio ns  was  estimated  using  the  Percolator node with decoy database search. FDR<1% was appli ed in all the experiments.

### Publication Abstract
Numerical centrosome aberrations underlie certain developmental abnormalities and may promote cancer. A cell maintains normal centrosome numbers by coupling centrosome duplication with segregation, which is achieved through sustained association of each centrosome with a mitotic spindle pole. Although the microcephaly- and primordial dwarfism-linked centrosomal protein CEP215 has been implicated in this process, the molecular mechanism responsible remains unclear. Here, using proteomic profiling, we identify the minus end-directed microtubule motor protein HSET as a direct binding partner of CEP215. Targeted deletion of the HSET-binding domain of CEP215 in vertebrate cells causes centrosome detachment and results in HSET depletion at centrosomes, a phenotype also observed in CEP215-deficient patient-derived cells. Moreover, in cancer cells with centrosome amplification, the CEP215-HSET complex promotes the clustering of extra centrosomes into pseudo-bipolar spindles, thereby ensuring viable cell division. Therefore, stabilization of the centrosome-spindle pole interface by the CEP215-HSET complex could promote survival of cancer cells containing supernumerary centrosomes.

### Keywords
Micr ocephaly, Mitosis, Hset, Centrosome  clustering, Centrosome, Cancer, Cep215

### Affiliations
Cancer Research UK Cambridge Institute, Li Ka Shing Centre ,   University of Cambridge, Robinson Way, Cambridge CB2 0RE, UK
University of cambridge

### Submitter
Pavithra Lakshminarasimhan

### Lab Head
Dr Fanni gergely
Cancer Research UK Cambridge Institute, Li Ka Shing Centre ,   University of Cambridge, Robinson Way, Cambridge CB2 0RE, UK


