### Accession
PXD016089

### Title
Identification of novel blood biomarkers of treatment response in cystic fibrosis pulmonary exacerbations by label-free quantitative proteomics

### Description
Pulmonary exacerbations (PEx) are clinically impactful events for individuals with CF. Unfortunately, many CF individuals with PEx fail to regain their baseline lung function despite treatment. The objective of this study was to use unbiased proteomic technology (LC-MS/MS) to identify novel blood protein biomarkers that change following intravenous (IV) antibiotic treatment and to explore if changes correlate with clinical response by the end of treatment. Blood samples from 25 PEx events derived from 22 unique CF adults were collected within 24 hours of hospital admission, day 5, day 10, and IV antibiotic completion. Three-hundred and forty-six blood proteins were evaluated with label-free liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) quantitative proteomics and immunoassays. Forty-seven plasma proteins changed significantly following 5 days of IV antibiotic treatment (q-value ≤ 0.10). Early change in IGF2R from hospital admission to day 5 correlated with overall change in symptom score (CFRSD-CRISS) by the end of treatment (r = -0.48, p-value = 0.04). Several plasma proteins identified and quantified by label-free LC-MS/MS changed early following treatment with IV antibiotics and many of these proteins are involved in complement activation and inflammatory/immune-related pathways. Early change in IGF2R correlated with symptom response following IV antibiotic treatment and requires further validation as a predictive biomarker of symptom response.

### Sample Protocol
Blood samples (serum, EDTA-treated) were collected and processed following standard operating procedures and then stored at -80℃ until thawing for batched analysis. Plasma samples were analyzed with label-free liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). In brief, to facilitate the analysis of less abundant plasma proteins, fourteen of the most highly abundant proteins were first immunodepleted using the Human 14 Multiple Affinity Removal Spin Cartridge (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA), which removes albumin, immunoglobulin (Ig) G, alpha 1-antitrypsin, IgA, transferrin, haptoglobin, fibrinogen, alpha 2-macroglobulin, alpha 1-acid glycoprotein, IgM, apolipoprotein AI, apolipoprotein AII, complement C3 and transthyretin. Remaining plasma samples were trypsin-digested overnight as previously described. Resulting peptides were desalted and purified with C-18 STop And Go Extraction (STAGE) Tips. Purified peptides were fractionated using the Agilent 1100 HPLC system at 50 L/min flow rate. The analytical column was operated at 50°C using an in-house packed 75 μm C18 column heater. The trap column that was added onto the analytical column was a 2 cm-long, 100 μm-inner diameter fused silica, packed with 5 μm-diameter Aqua C-18 beads (Phenomenex, Torrance, CA). Analytical gradient was set at 75 minutes: changing from 10% to 35% Buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) for the first 60 minutes and then wash with 100% Buffer B for 15 minutes. The sample was initially fractionated into 96 wells (45 seconds per well) then pooled in a noncontiguous manner (every 6th well was pooled) resulting into 6 fractions for further LC-MS/MS analysis. Six fractions were then loaded into the Impact II Q-ToF mass spectrometer (Bruker, Germany). All plasma samples were evaluated in duplicate and mean values were used for analyses.

### Data Protocol
Peptides identified by LC-MS/MS were searched with MaxQuant software (version 1.5.3.30) with default label-free-quantitation setting and match-between runs options enabled. Proteins were excluded if they were identified as reversed and/or contaminated by MaxQuant software during peptide searching or detected in less than 25% of blood samples. Three-hundred and forty-one proteins passed the quality control matrix. Missing values from these 341 proteins were imputed with half of the minimum abundance of each protein across the analyzed samples and then, the levels of proteins were log2 transformed before subsequent analyses. Fold-changes of blood proteins from hospital admission to treatment day 5 and hospital admission to IV antibiotic completion measured with LC-MS/MS were analyzed with the limma R software package and adjusted for baseline lung function, sex, age, and an interaction term between sex and age. The Benjamini-Hochberg method was applied to correct for multiple comparisons and false discovery rate (FDR) adjusted p-values (q-value) ≤ 0.10 were reported for differentially expressed (DE) proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Pulmonary exacerbations (PEx) are clinically impactful events for individuals with CF. Unfortunately, many CF individuals with PEx fail to regain their baseline lung function despite treatment. The objective of this study was to use unbiased proteomic technology to identify novel blood protein biomarkers that change following intravenous (IV) antibiotic treatment and to explore if changes correlate with clinical response by the end of treatment. Blood samples from 25 PEx events derived from 22 unique CF adults were collected within 24&#x2009;hours of hospital admission, day 5, day 10, and IV antibiotic completion. Three-hundred and forty-six blood proteins were evaluated with label-free liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) quantitative proteomics and immunoassays. Forty-seven plasma proteins changed significantly following 5 days of IV antibiotic treatment (q-value&#x2009;&#x2264;&#x2009;0.10). Early change in IGF2R from hospital admission to day 5 correlated with overall change in symptom score (CFRSD-CRISS) by the end of treatment (r&#x2009;=&#x2009;-0.48, p-value&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.04). Several plasma proteins identified and quantified by label-free LC-MS/MS changed early following treatment with IV antibiotics and many of these proteins are involved in complement activation and inflammatory/immune-related pathways. Early change in IGF2R correlated with symptom response following IV antibiotic treatment and requires further validation as a predictive biomarker of symptom response.

### Keywords
Human, Plasma, Pulmonary exacerbations, Lc-ms/ms, Cystic fibrosis, Blood

### Affiliations
University of British Columbia
Centre for Heart Lung Innovation, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada Division of Respiratory Medicine, Department of Medicine, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada

### Submitter
Jenny Moon

### Lab Head
Dr Bradley S. Quon
Centre for Heart Lung Innovation, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada Division of Respiratory Medicine, Department of Medicine, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada


