### Accession
PXD001800

### Title
Branch retinal vein occlusion in a porcine model

### Description
Branch retinal vein occlusion (BRVO) is a common retinal vascular disease, but global protein changes following the disease remain largely unelucidated. To bring new insights into pathological processes and elucidate potential therapeutic targets, large-scale retinal protein changes following BRVO were studied by combining a porcine model of experimental BRVO with proteomic analysis by label-free liquid chromatography mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Experimental BRVO was induced by standard argon laser by indirect ophthalmoscopy was used to induce BRVO in the right eye of the pigs by creating a patch of laser burns around an inferior branch vein to create a narrowing of the vein followed by laser application directly on the vein until stagnation of the venous blood flow was observed. The left eye served as control.  Sample preparation for proteomic analysis Eye balls were thawed on ice. The cornea and the iris were removed cutting around the iris 2 mm posteriorly to the limbus. The lens and the vitreous body were lifted gently and the retina was peeled from the eye cup and transferred to an Eppendorf tube containing five 2.3 mm chromium balls. The retinal tissue was homogenized by applying the Eppendorf tube to a Vortex mixer for approximately 30 seconds. A volume of 500 µL cold PBS was added to the Eppendorf tube followed by further homogenization for 30 seconds on the Vortex mixer generating a homogenous slurry of retinal tissue. Samples were centrifuged at 15.000g for 5 min. An aliquot of 50 µL of the retinal homogenate was transferred to a bead beading tube with 500 µL 5% sodium deoxycholate (NaDOC), pH 8.5, followed by two rounds of bead beading using a Precellys 24 homogenizer (Berting Technologies, Rockville, MD, USA) at 6,000 rpm for 20 seconds pr. round. The samples were cooled on ice between the runs. The retinal samples were transfered to YM-10 Spinfilters (Millipore) and buffer exchange performed to digestion buffer (1% NaDOC in 0.1M TEAB; pH 7.8). The sample was reduced at 37 ºC using 12 mM TCEP for 30 minutes and alkylated using 40 mM iodoacetamide for 30 minutes followed by two times buffer exchange by centrifugation at 14.400g into 0.5% NaDOC in 0.1M TEAB; pH 7.8. Two ug trypsin (modified, Promega) were added to the samples and incubated overnight. The filtrate was recovered by centrifugation followed by sodium deoxycholate precipitation by acid based precipitation with 5% formic acid (FA) and soluble peptides were recovered. The peptide samples were supplemented with 20 fmole/uL BSA digest (Waters Massprep) as internal standard and analyzed by nanoUPLC tandem mass spectrometry.    Liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry data acquisition Prior to nanoUPLC tandem mass spectrometry the protein concentration was determined by absorption at 280nm by uv-vis-spectroscopy (IMPLEN NanoPhotometer P-300). A volume of 1.5 uL was applied for measurement using lid factor x 50 and blank calibration using dissolution solvent (2% AcN in 0.1% FA). A sample volume of 5 µl was injected onto a Dionex RSLC nanoUPLC system that was connected to a Quadrupole Orbitrap (Q Exactive Plus) mass spectrometer equipped with a NanoSpray Flex ion source (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The flow settings were 8 uL per min for the sample loading onto a trapping column (Acclaim PepMap100 C18 5um, Thermo Scientific). The nanoflow was set to 300 nL per min for the peptide separation on the analytical column, which was a 50 cm Acclaim Pepmap RSLC, 75 um ID connected with nanoviper fittings. The nano-electrospray was done using a Picotip ‘Silicatip’ emitter from New Objectives. The LC buffers were buffer A (0.1% FA) and buffer B (99.9% AcN, 0.1% FA). The applied gradient was from 10% to 30% buffer B over 230 min.    The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode. A full MS scan in the mass range of 350 to 1400 m/z was acquired at a resolution of 70,000 with an AGC target of 1 x 106 and maximum fill time set to 100 ms. Instrument lock mass correction was applied using the contaminant ion at 391.28429 m/z.  In each cycle, the mass spectrometer would trigger up to 12 MS/MS acquisition on abundant peptide precursors ions. The MS/MS scans were acquired with a dynamic mass range at a resolution of 17,500, and with an AGC target of 5 x 105 and max fill time of 50 ms. The precursor ions were isolated using a quadrupole isolation window of 2.0 m/z and fragmented in the HCD trap with a normalized collision energy set to 30. The under-fill ratio was set to 1.0 % with the intensity threshold at 1.0 x 105. Apex triggering was 3 to 10 s with charge and isotopes exclusion on. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s. All samples were analyzed in three technical replicates.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data were searched using the open-source software MaxQuant (v 1.5.0.22) against a pig protein database optimized from Uniprot containing Sus Scofa proteins and the closest related human protein gene identified based on BLAST.  The label free quantification (LFQ) algorithm was activated in MaxQuant. Standard settings included a peptide and protein false discovery rate of 1%. P-values were calculated by a two-tailed, heteroscedastic t-test. Quantitative values were the averages of Maxquant LFQ values from at least 1 value per condition.  Raw data were submitted to Perseus version 1.5.0.9. Technical replicates were averaged by mean and proteins were filtered requiring at least 2 unique peptides per protein followed by removal of proteins identified from a peptide that was found to be part of a protein derived from the reversed part of the decoy database. The resulting matrix was exported to Excel (Microsoft Office Standard 2007) for statistic analysis by paired t-test that was conducted for all proteins that were identified in all eyes. Fold-changes of all significantly expressed proteins were calculated in Excel. For bioinformatic analysis gene names corresponding to significantly expressed proteins were entered in GeneCodis3 (Carmona-Saez et al., 2007; Nogales-Cadenas et al., 2009; Tabas-Madrid et al., 2012) that was used to conduct GeneOntology analysis as well as enrichment analysis of KEGG pathways. To ensure that all proteins were recognized and could be analyzed by GeneCodis3, Homo sapiens was selected as organism. Hypergeometric analysis corrected by a false discovery rate method was used for obtainment of p-values.

### Publication Abstract
Branch retinal vein occlusion (BRVO) is a common retinal vascular disease, but global protein changes following the condition remain largely unelucidated. To bring new insights into pathological processes and identify potential therapeutic targets, large-scale retinal protein changes following BRVO were studied by combining a porcine model of experimental BRVO with proteomic analysis by label-free liquid chromatography mass spectrometry. Among a total set of 1974 proteins, 52 significantly upregulated proteins and 10 significantly downregulated proteins were identified in retinas with BRVO after 15 days. Significantly upregulated proteins were involved in signaling pathways of focal adhesion via integrin and blood coagulation. Proteins involved in focal adhesion signaling included collagen &#x3b1;-2 chain, laminin subunit &#x3b2;-2, laminin subunit &#x3b3;-1, lipocalin-7, nidogen-2, osteopontin, integrin-&#x3b2;, &#x3b1;-actinin-1, isoform 2 of &#x3b1;-actinin-1, talin-2 and filamin C. The identified proteins indicate that BRVO was associated with extracellular matrix remodeling processes. The present study identified focal adhesion signaling and ECM remodeling as important biological mechanisms to evaluate in the search for signaling pathways that promote neovascularisation and macular edema following BRVO.

### Keywords
Brvo, Retina, Pig

### Affiliations
Aalborg University

### Submitter
Allan Stensballe

### Lab Head
Dr Allan Stensballe
Aalborg University


