### Accession
PXD031780

### Title
Integrated systems-level proteomics and metabolomics reveals the diel molecular landscape of diverse Kale cultivars

### Description
Brassica oleracea and Brassica napus are comprised of diverse cultivars that collectively constitute an important global food source. Of those, the Brassica oleracea convar. acephala cultivar group containing var. sabellica and var. palmifolia and Brassica napus var. pabularia, collectively known as kale, are nutritious leafy greens consumed for their abundance of vitamins and micronutrients. Typified by their curly, serrated or wavy leaves, kale varieties have been primarily defined based on their leaf morphology and geographic origin, despite maintaining complex genetic backgrounds. With changes in the diel molecular environment directly tied to multiple agronomic traits across the food production landscape (e.g. time-of-day nutritional content) and kale representing a candidate crop for vertical farming, we selected nine diverse kale varieties encompassing a wide swath of consumer kale varieties for growth under LED lights using precise real-world dawn/dusk growth conditions followed by quantitative GC-MS metabolomic and LC-MS proteomic analyses. With plant growth and development driven by the day-to-day molecular activities of plants, we harvested kale leaf tissue at end-of-day (ED) and end-of-night (EN) time-points for all metabolomic and proteomic analyses. Our results reveal that kale forms 2 distinct groups, defined by their diel metabolome and proteome signatures primarily involving amino acids and sugars along, with proteome changes in carbon and nitrogen metabolism, mRNA splicing, protein translation and light harvesting. Together, our analysis have derived robust quantitative insights into the diel growth and development landscape of kale, significantly advancing our fundamental understanding of this nutritious leafy green for next-generation breeding and biotechnology.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction and nanoflow LC-MS analysis Protein Extraction and Data Acquisition - Quick-frozen cells were ground to a fine powder under liquid N2 using a mortar and pestle. Ground samples were aliquoted into 400 mg fractions. Aliquoted samples were then extracted at a 1:2 (w/v) ratio with a solution of 50 mM HEPES-KOH pH 8.0, 50 mM NaCl, and 4% (w/v) SDS. Samples were then vortexed and placed in a 95oC table-top shaking incubator (Eppendorf) at 1100 RPM for 15 mins, followed by an additional 15 mins shaking at room temperature. All samples were then spun at 20,000 x g for 5 min to clarify extractions, with the supernatant retained in fresh 1.5 mL Eppendorf tubes. Sample protein concentrations were measured by bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay (23225; ThermoScientific). Samples were then reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 95oC for 5 mins, cooled, then alkylated with 30 mM iodoacetamide (IA) for 30 min in the dark without shaking at room temperature. Subsequently, 10 mM DTT was added to each sample, followed by a quick vortex, and incubation for 10 min at room temperature without shaking. Total proteome peptide pools were generated by performing sample digestion overnight using sequencing grade trypsin (V5113; Promega), with generated peptide pools quantified by Nanodrop, acidified with formic acid to a final concentration of 5% (v/v) and then dried by vacuum centrifugation. Peptides were then dissolved in 3% ACN / 0.1% TFA, desalted using ZipTip C18 pipette tips (ZTC18S960; Millipore) as previously described7, then dried and dissolved in 3.0% ACN/0.1% FA prior to MS analysis. Digested samples were then analysed using a Fusion Lumos Tribrid Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) in a data independent acquisition (DIA) mode using the BoxCarDIA method 31. Dissolved peptides (1 µg) were injected using an Easy-nLC 1200 system (LC140; ThermoScientific) and separated on a 50 cm Easy-Spray PepMap C18 Column (ES903; ThermoScientific). A spray voltage of 2.2 kV, funnel RF level of 40 and heated capillary at 300oC was deployed, with all data were acquired in profile mode using positive polarity with peptide match off and isotope exclusion selected. All gradients were run at 300 nL/min with analytical column temperature set to 50oC. Peptides were eluted using a segmented solvent B gradient of 0.1% (v/v) FA in 80% (v/v) ACN from 4% - 41% B (0 - 107 min). BoxCar DIA acquisition was as previously described (Mehta et al 2021). MS1 analysis was performed by using two multiplexed targeted SIM scans of 10 BoxCar windows each, with detection performed at a resolution of 120,000 at 200 m/z and normalized AGC targets of 100% per BoxCar isolation window. Windows were custom designed as described in Mehta et al 2022. An ACG target value for MS2 fragment spectra was set to 2000%. Twenty-eight 38.5 m/z windows were used with an overlap of 1 m/z. Resolution was set to 30,000 using a dynamic maximum injection time and a minimum number of desired points across each peak set to 6.

### Data Protocol
Proteomic Data Analysis – All acquired BoxCar DIA data was analyzed in a library-free DIA approach using Spectronaut v14 (Biognosys AG) using default settings. Data were searched using the Brassica oleracea var oleracea proteome (Uniprot: https://www.uniprot.org/ containing 58,545 proteins). Default search parameters for proteome quantification were used, with specific search parameters including: a protein, peptide and PSM FDR of 1%, trypsin digestion with 1 missed cleavage, fixed modification including carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues and variable modifications including methionine oxidation. Data was Log2 transformed and globally normalized by median subtraction with significantly changing differentially abundant proteins determined and corrected for multiple comparisons (Bonferroni-corrected p-value ≤ 0.05; q-value).

### Publication Abstract
Kale is a group of diverse <i>Brassicaceae</i> species that are nutritious leafy greens consumed for their abundance of vitamins and micronutrients. Typified by their curly, serrated and/or wavy leaves, kale varieties have been primarily defined based on their leaf morphology and geographic origin, despite having complex genetic backgrounds. Kale is a very promising crop for vertical farming due to its high nutritional content; however, being a non-model organism, foundational, systems-level analyses of kale are lacking. Previous studies in kale have shown that time-of-day harvesting can affect its nutritional composition. Therefore, to gain a systems-level diel understanding of kale across its wide-ranging and diverse genetic landscape, we selected nine publicly available and commercially grown kale cultivars for growth under near-sunlight LED light conditions ideal for vertical farming. We then analyzed changes in morphology, growth and nutrition using a combination of plant phenotyping, proteomics and metabolomics. As the diel molecular activities of plants drive their daily growth and development, ultimately determining their productivity as a crop, we harvested kale leaf tissue at both end-of-day (ED) and end-of-night (EN) time-points for all molecular analyses. Our results reveal that diel proteome and metabolome signatures divide the selected kale cultivars into two groups defined by their amino acid and sugar content, along with significant proteome differences involving carbon and nitrogen metabolism, mRNA splicing, protein translation and light harvesting. Together, our multi-cultivar, multi-omic analysis provides new insights into the molecular underpinnings of the diel growth and development landscape of kale, advancing our fundamental understanding of this nutritious leafy green super-food for horticulture/vertical farming applications.

### Keywords
Light emitting diodes, Boxcar dia proteomics, Kale

### Affiliations
University of Alberta
Department of Biological Sciences University of Alberta

### Submitter
Richard Uhrig

### Lab Head
Dr Richard Glen Uhrig
Department of Biological Sciences University of Alberta


