### Accession
PXD030620

### Title
Antisense affinity selection of the lncRNA NTRAS in HeLa lysate

### Description
Biochemical characterization of the hypoxia-induced long non coding RNA NTRAS. NTRAS was found to regulate cell cycle progression, in vitro sprouting angiogenesis, and the paracellular permeability in human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs). Using desthiobiotinylated 2’O-Me-RNA probes, we purified endogenous NTRAS-protein-complexes and identified NTRAS interacting proteins by mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa cells were lysed (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, 50 mM NaCl, 0.5 % NP-40, 80 U RiboLock, protease inhibitor) and volumes were adjusted to 1 ml with the same buffer lacking NP-40. Lysates were pre-cleared for 2 h at 4°C using blocked streptavidin C1 beads (yeast tRNA and glycogen, both 0.2 mg/ml). Next, lysates were incubated with 100 pmol desthiobiotin-labeled 2′O-Me-RNA oligonucleotides overnight at 4°C. RNA-protein-complexes were captured using 25 µl blocked beads for 1 h at 37°C. Beads were washed thoroughly with washing buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, 50 mM NaCl, 0.05 % NP-40) and eluted with biotin (50 µM) at RT. Eluates were resuspended in 20 µl 6M Guanidinhydrochlorid (GdmCl), 100 mM Tris/HCl, pH 8.5, 10 mM DTT and incubated at 95°C for 50 min. Reduced thiols were alkylated with 40 mM chloroacetamid and sample were diluted with 25 mM Tris/HCl, pH 8.5, 10% acetonitrile to obtain a final GdmCl concentration of 0.6 M. Proteins were digested with 1 µg Trypsin/LysC (sequencing grade, Promega) overnight at 37°C under gentle agitation. Digestion was stopped by adding trifluoroacetic acid to a final concentration of 0.1 %. Peptides were loaded on multi-stop-and-go tip (StageTip) containing three strong cation exchange (SCX) disks and a stack of three C18-disks on top. SCX fractionation by StageTips was performed as described in Rappsilber et al. (2007). Four fractions of each sample were eluted in wells of microtiter plates and peptides were dried and resolved in 1% acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid. Liquid chromatography / mass spectrometry (LC/MS) was performed on Thermo Scientific™ Q Exactive Plus equipped with an ultra-high performance liquid chromatography unit (Thermo Scientific Dionex Ultimate 3000) and a Nanospray Flex Ion-Source (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded on a C18 reversed-phase precolumn (Thermo Scientific) followed by separation on a with 2.4 µm Reprosil C18 resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH) in-house packed picotip emitter tip (diameter 100 µm, 30 cm long from New Objectives) using an gradient from mobile phase A (4% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) to 30 % mobile phase B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) for 60 min followed by a second gradient to 60% B for 30 min with a flow rate 250 nl/min. Run was finished by washout with 99% B for 5 min and reequilibration in 1% B. MS data were recorded by data dependent acquisition Top10 method selecting the most abundant precursor ions in positive mode for HCD fragmentation.  Lock mass option (Olsen et al., 2005) was enabled to ensure high mass accuracy during many following runs. The Full MS scan range was 300 to 2000 m/z with resolution of 70000, and an automatic gain control (AGC) value of 3E6 total ion counts with a maximal ion injection time of 160 ms.  Only higher charged ions (2+) were selected for MS/MS scans with a resolution of 17500, an isolation window of 2 m/z and an automatic gain control value set to E5 ions with a maximal ion injection time of 150 ms. Selected ions were excluded in a time frame of 20s following fragmentation event. Fullscan data were acquired in profile and Fragments in centroid mode by Xcalibur software.

### Data Protocol
MS Data were analyzed by MaxQuant (v 1.5.3.30) [Cox et al. 2008] default using settings. Proteins were identified using Home sapiens reference proteome database UniProtKB released in 4/2015. The enzyme specificity was set to Trypsin. Oxidation of methionine (+15.99) was selected as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation (+57.02) as fixed modification on cysteines. False discovery rate (FDR) for the identification protein and peptides was 1%.   Rappsilber J, Mann M, Ishihama Y. (2007) Protocol for micro-purification, enrichment, pre-fractionation and storage of peptides for proteomics using StageTips. Nat Protoc. 2:1896-906.  Olsen JV, et al. (2005) Parts per million mass accuracy on an Orbitrap mass spectrometer via lock mass injection into a C-trap. Mol Cell Proteomics 4:2010- 2021.  Cox J, Mann M. (2008) MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat Biotechnol. 26:1367-72.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lncrna, Antisense affinity selection, Rna-protein-interaction

### Affiliations
Institute of Cardiovascular Regeneration Centre of Molecular Medicine, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany
Functional Proteomics, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main , Germany

### Submitter
Ilka Wittig

### Lab Head
Dr Nicolas Jaé
Institute of Cardiovascular Regeneration Centre of Molecular Medicine, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany


