### Accession
PXD000475

### Title
Yersinia enterocolitica SOR17 -  The RNA chaperone Hfq impacts growth, metabolism and production of virulence factors in Yersinia enterocolitica

### Description
We work with the bacterium Yersinia enterocolitica, a gastrointestinal pathogen.  In this study we characterized a bacterial mutant strain called SOR17.  We compared the protein extracts of SOR17 with that of the parental strain JB580v.  Bacteria were grown in triplicate for 5 h at 37°C, and following bacterial disruption by French press, proteins were fractionated into soluble or membrane proteins.  We also compared total protein extracts of bacteria grown for 16 h at 27°C. Two-dimensional electrophoresis were performed and proteins were stained with Coomassie brilliant blue.  Spots whose abundance changed more than 2 fold were excised and sent to mass spectrometry for identification by either MALDI-TOF PMF or LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
To adapt to changes in environmental conditions, bacteria regulate their gene expression at the transcriptional but also at the post-transcriptional level, e.g. by small RNAs (sRNAs) which modulate mRNA stability and translation. The conserved RNA chaperone Hfq mediates the interaction of many sRNAs with their target mRNAs, thereby playing a global role in fine-tuning protein production. In this study, we investigated the significance of Hfq for the enteropathogen Yersina enterocolitica serotype O:8. Hfq facilitated optimal growth in complex and minimal media. Our comparative protein analysis of parental and hfq-negative strains suggested that Hfq promotes lipid metabolism and transport, cell redox homeostasis, mRNA translation and ATP synthesis, and negatively affects carbon and nitrogen metabolism, transport of siderophore and peptides and tRNA synthesis. Accordingly, biochemical tests indicated that Hfq represses ornithine decarboxylase activity, indole production and utilization of glucose, mannitol, inositol and 1,2-propanediol. Moreover, Hfq repressed production of the siderophore yersiniabactin and its outer membrane receptor FyuA. In contrast, hfq mutants exhibited reduced urease production. Finally, strains lacking hfq were more susceptible to acidic pH and oxidative stress. Unlike previous reports in other Gram-negative bacteria, Hfq was dispensable for type III secretion encoded by the virulence plasmid. Using a chromosomally encoded FLAG-tagged Hfq, we observed increased production of Hfq-FLAG in late exponential and stationary phases. Overall, Hfq has a profound effect on metabolism, resistance to stress and modulates the production of two virulence factors in Y. enterocolitica, namely urease and yersiniabactin.

### Keywords
Yersinia, Sor17, Enterocolitica

### Affiliations
Max von Pettenkofer-Institut

### Submitter
Ombeline Rossier

### Lab Head


