### Accession
PXD019317

### Title
ozone-derived oxisterols impair lung macrophage phagocytosis via adduction of phagocytosis receptors

### Description
Inhalation of the amibient air polution ozone causes lung inflammation and can suppress host defense mechanisms, including impairing macrophage phagocytosis. Ozone reacts with cholesterol in the lung to form oxysterols, like secosterol A and secosterol B, which can form covalent adducts on cellular proteins. How oxysterol-protein adduction modifies the function of lung macrophages is unknown. Herein, we used a preoteomic screen to identify lung macrophage proteins that fomr adducts with ozone-derived oxysterols. Analysis show that the phagocytic receptor CD206 and CD64 formed adducts with secosterol A. Adduction of these receptors with ozone-derived oxysterols impaired ligand binding and corresponded with reduced macrophage phagocytosis. This work suggests a novle mechanism for the suppression of macrophage phagocytosis following ozone exposure through the generation of oxysterols and the formation of oxysterol-protein adducts on phagocytic receptors.

### Sample Protocol
Human BAL macrophages obtained from voluteers were treated with either DMSO (control) or alkynyl-secosterol A (SecoA) for 4h. The Seco A adducted proteins were obtained after "catch-and-release" using click chemistry, sterptavidin beads purification, and photorelease. Total proteins were cleaned with short-stacking gel followed by in-gel Trypsin digestion. Trypsinized peptides were loaded onto a self-packed biphasic C18/SCX MudPIT column cosisted of 360 micro-m OD x 150 micro m ID fused silica, which was fritted with a filter-end fitting and packed with 6 cm of Phenomenex Luna SCX material followed by 4 cm of Phenomenex Jupiter C18 material. Once the sample was loaded, the MudPIT column was connected using an Inline MicroFilter union to analytical column (360 micro m OD x 100 micro m ID), equipped with a laser-pulled emitter tip and packed with 20 cm of C18 reverse phase materil. Using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCNano and autosampler, MudPIT analysis was performed with a 8-step salt pulse gradient, 25, 50, 100, 300, 500, 750mM, and 1M.Following each salt pulse, peptides were gradient-eluted from the reverse analytical column at a flow rate of 350 nL/min, with the mobile phase solvents consisting of 0.1% formic acid, 99.9% water (solvent A) and 0.1% formic acid, 99% acetonitril (Solvent B). For the petides from the 8 SCX fractions, the reverse phase gradient consisted of 0-1 min 2%B -> 5%B for 5 min -> 60%B for 64 min -> 99%B for 10 min -> 99%B for 5 min followed by an equilibrium @2%B. Peptides were introduced via nano-electrospray into a Q Exactive Plus hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo). The Q Exactive was operated in the data dependent mode acquiring HCD MS/MS scans (R=17,500) after each MS1 scan (R=79,000)on the 15 most abundant ions using an MS1 ion target of 3x10^6 ions and an MS2 target of 5x10^4ions. The max ion time for MS/MS scans was set to 40ms, the HCD-normalzed collision energy was set to 27, dynamic exclusion was set to 30s, and peptide match and isotope exclusion were enabled.

### Data Protocol
RAW datafiles from data-dependent mode were converted to an mzML format using Proteowizard (v. 3.0.5211). The mzML files were searched using GF+beta (v9517) against humanRefSeq_Version54 database (34589 proteins). 1 Fixed mod:Cys (+57.0215 Da), 3 Dynamic mod: M (+15.9949 Da), N-term Gln (-17.0265 Da), and Lys (+541.3880 Da, C32H51N3O4).Modified peptide precusor tolerance within 10 ppm and a fragment ion tolerance 20 ppm. Iniital protein identifications required a minimum of 2 distinct peptides, 2 minimum spectra, and 1 additional peptide per protein allowing 1% FDR. For protein assembly and visualization, IDPicker (3.1.9288 64-bit) was used. For ambiguous assignment of the a-SecoA modification, the individual MS/MS were mannually inspected following the criteria (1) modified peptide precursor error <10ppm (2) MS/MS contains dignostic frangment m/z 512

### Publication Abstract
Inhalation of the ambient air pollutant ozone causes lung inflammation and can suppress host defense mechanisms, including impairing macrophage phagocytosis. Ozone reacts with cholesterol in the lung to form oxysterols, like secosterol A and secosterol B (SecoA and SecoB), which can form covalent adducts on cellular proteins. How oxysterol-protein adduction modifies the function of lung macrophages is unknown. Herein, we used a proteomic screen to identify lung macrophage proteins that form adducts with ozone-derived oxysterols. Functional ontology analysis of the adductome indicated that protein binding was a major function of adducted proteins. Further analysis of specific proteins forming adducts with SecoA identified the phagocytic receptors CD206 and CD64. Adduction of these receptors with ozone-derived oxysterols impaired ligand binding and corresponded with reduced macrophage phagocytosis. This work suggests a novel mechanism for the suppression of macrophage phagocytosis following ozone exposure through the generation of oxysterols and the formation of oxysterol-protein adducts on phagocytic receptors.

### Keywords
Human, Secosterol a/b, Bronchoalveolar lavage, Lung macrophage, Ozone, Cd206, Click

### Affiliations
University of North Carolina, Curriculum in Toxicology and Environmental Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC, USA
Vanderbilt University

### Submitter
Hye-Young Kim

### Lab Head
Dr Ilona, Jaspers
University of North Carolina, Curriculum in Toxicology and Environmental Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC, USA


