### Accession
PXD045033

### Title
Human U2OS DNApk GLASS-ChIP LC-MS/MS

### Description
The Mre11-Rad50-Nbs1 (MRN) complex recognizes and processes DNA double-strand breaks for homologous recombination by performing short-range removal of 5ʹ strands. Endonucleolytic processing by MRN requires a stably bound protein at the break site—a role we postulate is played by DNA-dependent protein kinase (DNA-PK) in mammals. Here we interrogate sites of MRN-dependent processing by identifying sites of CtIP association and by sequencing DNA- PK-bound DNA fragments that are products of MRN cleavage. These intermediates are generated most efficiently when DNA-PK is catalytically blocked, yielding products within 200 bp of the break site, whereas DNA-PK products in the absence of kinase inhibition show greater dispersal. Use of light-activated Cas9 to induce breaks facilitates temporal resolution of DNA- PK and Mre11 binding, showing that both complexes bind to DNA ends before release of DNA- PK-bound products. These results support a sequential model of double-strand break repair involving collaborative interactions between homologous and non-homologous repair complexes.

### Sample Protocol
Human U2OS cells with inducible AsiSI 15 were grown to 50-60% confluency in 150 mm dishes and treated with 600 nM 4-OHT for 4 h at 37°C. When used, 10 µM NU7441 was added 30 min. prior to 4-OHT addition. After 4-OHT treatment, cells were fixed with 1% formaldehyde for 7 min at RT with gentle rotation. Crosslinking was stopped by addition of 125 mM glycine for 5 min, washed twice with cold PBS, harvested, flash frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C. For the GLASS-ChIP assay, we modified a standard protocol (Abcam) with a gentle lysis procedure and minimal, low-level sonication to rupture cells without extensive DNA damage . The formaldehyde fixed cells were thawed at RT for 5 min, resuspended in RIPA buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 2 mM EDTA pH8.0, 1% NP-40, 0.5% Sodium Deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS) with 1x protease inhibitors (Pierce #A32955) and sonicated using a Cell Ruptor at low power, for 10 sec followed by 10 pulses after a 20 sec interval. Cell lysates were then centrifuged at 3000 rpm for 3 min at RT to remove the bulk of chromatin. The supernatant was then incubated with 1.6 µg of anti-DNA-PKcs pS2056 antibodies (Abcam 124918) overnight at 4°C or no antibody for control samples, followed by incubation with 25 µl Protein A/G magnetic beads (Pierce) at RT for 2 h. Beads were then washed sequentially once in low salt wash buffer (0.1%SDS, 1% Triton X-100, 2 mM EDTA, 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl), once in high salt wash buffer (0.1% SDS, 1% Triton X-100, 2 mM EDTA, 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 500 mM, 20 NaCl), once in LiCl wash buffer (0.25 M LiCl, 1% NP-40, 1% Sodium Deoxycholate, 1 mM EDTA, 10 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0).  Beads were then resuspended in TE buffer (10 mM Tris pH 8.0, 0.1 mM EDTA) and transferred to a fresh tube and finally eluted with 100 µl elution buffer (1% SDS, 100mM NaHCO 3 ). Crosslinks were reverted for the elutions (65°C for 24 h) and DNAwas purified with a Qiagen Nucleotide Clean up kit. GLASS-ChIP was performed in  two biological replicates, except that the cells were crosslinked with formaldehyde for only 1 min. Samples eluted from the ProteinA/G beads were processed through a modified Filter-Assisted Sample Preparation protocol.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification by LC-MS/MS was provided by the University of Texas at Austin Proteomics Facility on an Orbitrap Fusion following previously published procedures 68 . Raw files were analyzed using label-free quantification with Proteome Discoverer 2.2. embedded with SEQUEST (Thermo Scientific) using the Uniprot Human reference proteome database.  The search parameters used were as follows: two missed cleavages on a trypsin digest were permitted, no fixed modifications. Peptide identifications were filtered using Percolator, where a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% (q &lt; 0.01) was applied.  Results were further refined by two additional methods; first, all proteins were cross-referenced for common contaminants, in which case they were removed from final analysis, and any polypeptides with less than two unique peptides identified were removed from final analysis.  Low value imputation was used to substitute for missing values. Proteins identified in both biological replicates with ratio of recovery in +Ab greater than -Ab samples by a value of 5 or higher are reported

### Publication Abstract
The Mre11-Rad50-Nbs1 (MRN) complex recognizes and processes DNA double-strand breaks for homologous recombination by performing short-range removal of 5' strands. Endonucleolytic processing by MRN requires a stably bound protein at the break site-a role we postulate is played by DNA-dependent protein kinase (DNA-PK) in mammals. Here we interrogate sites of MRN-dependent processing by identifying sites of CtIP association and by sequencing DNA-PK-bound DNA fragments that are products of MRN cleavage. These intermediates are generated most efficiently when DNA-PK is catalytically blocked, yielding products within 200&#x2009;bp of the break site, whereas DNA-PK products in the absence of kinase inhibition show greater dispersal. Use of light-activated Cas9 to induce breaks facilitates temporal resolution of DNA-PK and Mre11 binding, showing that both complexes bind to DNA ends before release of DNA-PK-bound products. These results support a sequential model of double-strand break repair involving collaborative interactions between homologous and non-homologous repair complexes.

### Keywords
Human, Dnapk, U2os, Lc-ms/ms, Glass-chip

### Affiliations
University of Texas at Austin
University of Texas at Austin, College of Natural Sciences, Department of Molecular Biosciences

### Submitter
Nicolette Ender

### Lab Head
Dr Tanya T. Paull
University of Texas at Austin, College of Natural Sciences, Department of Molecular Biosciences


