### Accession
PXD022826

### Title
A 9-kDa matricellular SPARC fragment released by cathepsin D exhibits pro-tumor activity in cancer

### Description
The remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM) by proteases releases fragments that promote tumor progression and metastasis. The protease cathepsin D (cath-D), a marker of poor prognosis in triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC), is aberrantly secreted in the ECM. Using degradomics, we discovered that the matricellular protein SPARC is a substrate of extracellular cath-D. In vitro, cath-D induced limited proteolysis of SPARC C-terminal extracellular Ca2+ binding domain at acidic pH, leading to the production of SPARC fragments (34-, 27-, 16-, 9-, and 6-kDa). Cath-D secreted by TNBC cells cleaved fibroblast- and cancer cell-derived SPARC at the tumor pericellular pH. SPARC cleavage also occurred in TNBC tumors. Among these fragments, the 9-kDa SPARC fragment inhibited TNBC cell adhesion and spreading, and stimulated their migration, endothelial transmigration and invasion more potently than full-length SPARC. Our study establishes a novel crosstalk between proteases and matricellular proteins in the ECM through limited proteolysis of SPARC, revealing a novel targetable 9-kDa bioactive SPARC fragment for TNBC.

### Sample Protocol
To prepare secretomes from MDA-MB-231/HMF co-cultures, cells (ratio 1:5, respectively) were plated in 150 mm Petri dishes in DMEM with 10% FCS. At a 90% confluence, MDA-MB-231/HMF cells were washed extensively as described above. The 24h-conditioned medium in 50 mM HEPES (pH 7.5) was then concentrated to 0.2 mg/ml through Amicon filters (3 kDa cut-off, Millipore), and incubated in cleavage buffer with or without pepstatin A (12.5 µM) at pH 5.5 and at 37° for 60 min. Samples were concentrated by TCA/acetone precipitation (Heumuller et al., 2019). The mass spectrometry analysis of protein N-termini in cell culture samples was achieved after enrichment of N-terminal peptides by TAILS (Kleifeld et al., 2010) with isotopic labelling of proteins with TMT reagents. The TMT labels (126, 127N, 127C, 128N; TMT 10-plex kit 90110 from Thermo Scientific) dissolved in DMSO were added in a 1:5 (total protein/ TMT label) mass ratio to one of the four samples (60 µg of total protein per condition) for 60 min. Labelling reactions were stopped with 5% hydroxylamine (Sigma) for 30 min, and the four samples were mixed and precipitated with cold methanol/acetone (8:1) (v/v). After two washes with cold methanol, the pellet was resuspended in 100mM HEPES at pH 8 at a final protein concentration of 2 mg/ml and digested with trypsin (trypsin/total protein (1:100); Trypsin V511A, Promega) overnight. N-terminal peptide enrichment was performed on the digested sample by removing the internal tryptic peptides with a 1:5 mass excess of dialyzed HPG-ALD polymer, desalted with a C18 spin column (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The eluate fraction was freeze-dried, resuspended in 0.1% FA and analysed by LC-MS/MS on a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer in three replicates.

### Data Protocol
Data files were analysed with Proteome Discover 2.4 using the SEQUEST-HT algorithm against the human protein database (SwissProt release 2019-12 , 48385 entries). Precursor mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance was set at 0.02 Da, and up to 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Oxidation (M,P), Pyroglutamate N-ter (Q,E),  acetylation (Protein N-terminus), and TMT6Plex (N-term, K) were set as variable modifications, and carbamidomethylation (C) as fixed modification. Peptides and proteins were filtered using Percolator and a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%. Peptides with N-terminal TMT labelling were manually validated. Quantification was performed with the Reporter Ions Quantifier node. The peak integration was set to the Most Confidence Centroid with 20 ppm Integration Mass Tolerance on the reporter ions. The cath-D without pepstatin A/cath-D with pepstatin A ratios were calculated for the two time points (0 min (126/127N) and 60 min (127C/128N)) and ratios at 60 min were normalized to the ratios at 0 min. Ratios showing at least a two-fold change are conserved except for peptides corresponding to the mature N-Terminus.

### Publication Abstract
<b>Rationale:</b> Alternative therapeutic strategies based on tumor-specific molecular targets are urgently needed for triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC). The protease cathepsin D (cath-D) is a marker of poor prognosis in TNBC and a tumor-specific extracellular target for antibody-based therapy. The identification of cath-D substrates is crucial for the mechanistic understanding of its role in the TNBC microenvironment and future therapeutic developments. <b>Methods</b>: The cath-D substrate repertoire was investigated by N-Terminal Amine Isotopic Labeling of Substrates (TAILS)-based degradome analysis in a co-culture assay of TNBC cells and breast fibroblasts. Substrates were validated by amino-terminal oriented mass spectrometry of substrates (ATOMS). Cath-D and SPARC expression in TNBC was examined using an online transcriptomic survival analysis, tissue micro-arrays, TNBC cell lines, patient-derived xenografts (PDX), human TNBC samples, and mammary tumors from MMTV-PyMT <i>Ctsd<sup>-/-</sup></i> knock-out mice. The biological role of SPARC and its fragments in TNBC were studied using immunohistochemistry and immunofluorescence analysis, gene expression knockdown, co-culture assays, western blot analysis, RT-quantitative PCR, adhesion assays, Transwell motility, trans-endothelial migration and invasion assays. <b>Results:</b> TAILS analysis showed that the matricellular protein SPARC is a substrate of extracellular cath-D. <i>In vitro</i>, cath-D induced limited proteolysis of SPARC C-terminal extracellular Ca<sup>2+</sup> binding domain at acidic pH, leading to the production of SPARC fragments (34-, 27-, 16-, 9-, and 6-kDa). Similarly, cath-D secreted by TNBC cells cleaved fibroblast- and cancer cell-derived SPARC at the tumor pericellular acidic pH. SPARC cleavage also occurred in TNBC tumors. Among these fragments, only the 9-kDa SPARC fragment inhibited TNBC cell adhesion and spreading on fibronectin, and stimulated their migration, endothelial transmigration, and invasion. <b>Conclusions:</b> Our study establishes a novel crosstalk between proteases and matricellular proteins in the tumor microenvironment through limited SPARC proteolysis, revealing a novel targetable 9-kDa bioactive SPARC fragment for new TNBC treatments. Our study will pave the way for the development of strategies for targeting bioactive fragments from matricellular proteins in TNBC.

### Keywords
Matricellular protein, Tumor microenvironment, Protease, Proteolysis, Tnbc, Ecm

### Affiliations
CNRS UMS3444 Protein Science Facility
Montpellier Cancer Research Institute lab : Protease, Microenvironment and Cancer

### Submitter
Frederic DELOLME

### Lab Head
Dr Emmanuelle LIAUDET-COOPMAN
Montpellier Cancer Research Institute lab : Protease, Microenvironment and Cancer


