### Accession
PXD042667

### Title
Using a Dual CRISPR/Cas9 Approach to Gain Insight into the Role of LRP1B in Glioblastoma

### Description
LRP1B remains one of the most altered genes in cancer, although its relevance in cancer biology is still unclear. Recent advances in gene editing techniques, particularly CRISPR/Cas9 systems, offer new opportunities to evaluate the function of large genes, like LRP1B. Using a dual sgRNA CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing approach, this study aimed to assess the impact of disrupting LRP1B in glioblastoma cell biology. Four sgRNAs were designed for the dual targeting of two LRP1B exons (1 and 85). The U87 glioblastoma (GB) cell line was transfected with CRISPR/cas9 PX459 vectors. To assess LRP1B gene alterations and expression, PCR, Sanger DNA sequencing, qRT-PCR were carried out. Three clones (clones B9, E6 and H7) were further evaluated. All clones presented altered cellular morphology, increased cellular and nuclear size and changes in ploidy. Two clones (E6 and H7) showed a significant decrease in cell growth, both in vitro and in the in vivo CAM assay. Proteomic analysis of the clones’ secretome identified differentially ex-pressed proteins, that had not been previously associated with LRP1B alterations. This study demonstrates that the dual sgRNA CRISPR/Cas9 strategy can effectively edit LRP1B in GB cells, providing new insights into the impact of LRP1B deletions in GBM biology.

### Sample Protocol
Protein from each sample (100 µg) was processed for proteomic analysis following a solid-phase-enhanced sample-preparation (SP3) protocol as described in  [1]. Enzymatic digestion was performed with 2µg trypsin/LysC overnight at 37 °C at 1000 rpm. The resulting peptide concentration was measured by fluorescence. 1. Hughes, C.S., et al., Single-pot, solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation for proteomics experiments. Nature Protocols, 2019. 14(1): p. 68-85.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantitation were performed by nanoLC-MS/MS equipment [1] composed of an Ultimate 3000 liquid chromatography system coupled to a Q-Exactive Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) as previously described [1]. 1. Osório, H., et al., Proteomics Analysis of Gastric Cancer Patients with Diabetes Mellitus. J Clin Med, 2021. 10(3).

### Publication Abstract
<i>LRP1B</i> remains one of the most altered genes in cancer, although its relevance in cancer biology is still unclear. Recent advances in gene editing techniques, particularly CRISPR/Cas9 systems, offer new opportunities to evaluate the function of large genes, such as <i>LRP1B</i>. Using a dual sgRNA CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing approach, this study aimed to assess the impact of disrupting <i>LRP1B</i> in glioblastoma cell biology. Four sgRNAs were designed for the dual targeting of two <i>LRP1B</i> exons (1 and 85). The U87 glioblastoma (GB) cell line was transfected with CRISPR/Cas9 PX459 vectors. To assess <i>LRP1B</i>-gene-induced alterations and expression, PCR, Sanger DNA sequencing, and qRT-PCR were carried out. Three clones (clones B9, E6, and H7) were further evaluated. All clones presented altered cellular morphology, increased cellular and nuclear size, and changes in ploidy. Two clones (E6 and H7) showed a significant decrease in cell growth, both in vitro and in the in vivo CAM assay. Proteomic analysis of the clones' secretome identified differentially expressed proteins that had not been previously associated with <i>LRP1B</i> alterations. This study demonstrates that the dual sgRNA CRISPR/Cas9 strategy can effectively edit <i>LRP1B</i> in GB cells, providing new insights into the impact of <i>LRP1B</i> deletions in GBM biology.

### Keywords
Ploidy, Glioblastoma, Crispr/cas9, Secretome, Lrp1b

### Affiliations
i3S - Institute for Research and Innovation in Health, University of Porto
i3S—Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde, Universidade do Porto, 4200-135 Porto, Portugal

### Submitter
Hugo Osorio

### Lab Head
Dr Raquel Lima
i3S—Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde, Universidade do Porto, 4200-135 Porto, Portugal


