### Accession
PXD034996

### Title
Plasma Biomarkers of Postinfectious Bronchiolitis Obliterans and Asthma in Children

### Description
Asthma and postinfectious bronchiolitis obliterans (PIBO) are chronic lung diseases characterized by recurrent episodes of wheezing. Mycoplasma, adenovirus, and respiratory syncytial virus infections can trigger both asthma and PIBO. These two diseases have common etiologic mechanisms that cause airway epithelial injury. They are often difficult to differentiate clinically in preschool children because both are exacerbated by viral infections and respond similarly to steroids and β2 agonists. PIBO, which is occasionally observed in children, is diagnosed through characteristic findings of air trapping on computed tomography or in biopsy samples of lung tissue. However, researchers have not clearly identified the specific blood markers that can distinguish these diseases or the differences in the mechanisms of development. We performed proteomic analysis of plasma to identify specific biomarkers that can be helpful in differentiating asthma from PIBO. This study discovered plasma biomarker candidates by measuring plasma proteome sequential window acquisition of all theoretical mass spectra (SWATH-MS) and included 30 healthy children, 18 with asthma and 15 with PIBO. was used to measure proteins in plasma samples. We identified and quantified 354 proteins across all 63 samples in the SWATH-MS analysis.

### Sample Protocol
1. Sample Preparation  First, 40 μl of plasma was injected into a MARS14 depletion column (Agilent, CA, USA) to remove the top 14 most abundant plasma proteins (albumin, IgA, IgG, IgM, a1-antitrypsin, a1-acid glycoprotein, apolipoprotein A1, apolipoprotein A2, complement C3, transferrin, a2-marcoglobulin, transthyretin, haptoglobin, and fibrinogen) with immunoaffinity chromatography. For this, the plasma was diluted four times with “Buffer A” and loaded onto a MARS14 column on a Shimadzu HPLC system. An unbound fraction was added to the lysis buffer (5% SDS in 50mM TEAB (pH 7.1)) to prevent plasma protease activity, lyophilized with a cold trap (CentriVap Cold Traps, LABCONCO), and stored at -80°C until use. Then, the lyophilized plasma protein was resuspended via 200 μL of lysis buffer and 100 μL of water. Additionally, dithiothreitol was added to the protein solution to a final concentration of 20 mM and heated for 10 min at 95 C. Then, protein samples were alkylated by the addition of iodoacetamide (IAA) to a final concentration of 40 mM and incubated in the dark for 30 min at room temperature. The alkylated plasma proteins were digested to tryptic peptides using the S-Trap based digestion platform, following the manufacturer’s instructions (PMID: 29754492), using Lys-C/trypsin mixture (6 ug; Promega V5071) at 37°C for 16 h. The digested peptides were lyophilized with a cold trap and stored at -80°C until use.   2.High-pH RPLC-HPLC separation for in-house plasma proteome spectrum library Pooled plasma mixture separation was performed on an XBridge C-18 column (4.6 mm i.d. × 250 mm length; pore size 130 Å and particle size 5 μm; Waters Corporation, USA), using a Shimadzu Prominence HPLC instrument (Shimadzu, Japan) at a flow rate of 0.5 mL/min. 4.5 mM ammonium formate (pH 10) in 2% acetonitrile and 98% water as mobile phase A and 4.5 mM ammonium formate in 90% acetonitrile (pH 10) as mobile phase B were used. The sample was dissolved in 200 μL of mobile phase A, then injected into a 2100 μL sample loop. A gradient of 0-0% B for 7 min, 0-5% B for 5 min, 5-40% B for 60 min, 40-44% B for 5 min, 44-60% B for 4 min, 60-60% B for 12 min, and 60-5% B for 4 min were applied, followed by washing the column with 100 and 50% mobile phase B for 30 min. Through the fractionation, the eluents were collected every minute on a 96-well plate in FRC-10A of the Shimadzu Prominence (Shimadzu, Tokyo, Japan). The resulting 96 fractions were mixed in a concatenate manner to form 48 fractions. Each fraction was dried and stored at -20°C until use.  3.Nano-LC-ESI-MS/MS analysis LC‐MS analysis of peptide samples was performed in both data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode for library establishment and data-independent acquisition (DIA) mode for Sequential window acquisition of all theoretical mass spectra (SWATH) data collection, respectively, on an Ekisigent nanoLC-Ultra 2D plus coupled with a TripleTOF 5,600+ instrument (SCIEX, USA) and a Digital PicoView nanospray source (New objective, USA). The detailed operation parameters were: gas 1, nitrogen (20 psi); ion spray voltage, 2300; ion-source temperature,150°C; curtain gas, nitrogen (35 psi); declustering potential, 60 eV; and collision energy, rolling eV. Peptide samples were separated on an Acclaim  PepMap 100 C18 column (75 μm mm i.d. × 250 mm length; pore size 100 Å and particle size 3 μm; Thermo Scientific, USA) equipped with an Acclaim PepMap  100 C18 trap column (100 μm i.d. × 20 mm, 5 μm, 100 Å; Thermo Scientific, USA) in buffer A (0.1% formic acid in H2O) and buffer B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) at 300 nL/min flow for 130 min. After trapping the sample at 3 uL/min flow for 10 min, sample was injected into the analytical column as the following gradient setting for buffer B: 0-10 min 5%; 10-110 min increase to 30%; 110-112 min increased to 95%; 112-122 min hold 95%; 122-123 min decrease to 5%; and 123-135 min hold 5%.  In DDA, MS1 survey spectra were acquired for the range of 350-1,800 m/z with a 100 ms fill time cap. The top 30 most intense precursors of charge state 2-5 were selected for CID fragmentation, and MS2 spectra were collected at the range of 100-2,000 m/z, with 50 ms fill time cap and dynamic exclusion of precursor ions from reselection for 10 s. SWATH data acquisition was performed using an updated scheme of 64 variably sized precursor co‐isolation windows optimized using human HeLa protein digest standard (Thermo Scientific, USA) MS signal density (SWATH® 2.0). SWATH cycles (64 × 50 ms accumulation time) were interspersed by MS1 survey scans for 400-1,250 m/z with a 50 ms fill time cap, resulting in an overall period cycle time of 3,128 ms. The MS2 mass range was set to 50-1,800 m/z.

### Data Protocol
1. Spectrum library generation From the 48 DDA-MS/MS spectrum data, protein identification and quantification were performed using ProteinPilot software package (version 5.0.2, SCIEX, USA) with the human SwissProt reference database (downloaded June‐2019). The lysine and arginine residues were set as the cleavage sites. The cysteine carbamidomethyl was set as a stable modification. The false discovery rates (FDRs) for both peptides and proteins were controlled under 1%. All identified proteins had an Unused Protscore of >1.0 (which corresponds to proteins identified with >90% confidence), as calculated by the software, and a global false discovery rate (FDR) of ≤1% determined at the protein level by the proteomics system performance evaluation pipeline software (PSPEP) algorithm.   2. SWATH data analysis and normalization SWATH data were analyzed via targeted, peptide‐centric analysis based on the combined in-house library in the SWATH fragment ion chromatograms using PeakView software (version 2.2.0.11391, SCIEX). For the peptide filters, two peptides and six transition and peptide confidence threshold: 99%, FDR: 1%. In the XIC filters, extraction window: 5 min and width 50 ppm. Normalization of protein quantity was calculated based on the selection of the six most stable plasma proteins (OAF, FAP, PTPRG, NAGLU, GP1BA, and ENG) by NormFinder software (Pubmed: 15289330). Details on how to normalize using this protein are documented in a previous study (Pubmed: 30442939).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Plasma, Lc-msms, Swath-ms, Asthma, Postinfectious bronchiolitis obliterans

### Affiliations
Department of Convergence Medicine, Convergence Medicine Research Center/Biomedical Research Center, Asan Medical Center, Asan Institute for Life Sciences, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, 88 Olympic-ro 43-gil, Songpa-gu, Seoul 05505, Republic of Korea.
Asan Medical Center

### Submitter
Kyunggon Kim

### Lab Head
Dr Kyunggon Kim
Department of Convergence Medicine, Convergence Medicine Research Center/Biomedical Research Center, Asan Medical Center, Asan Institute for Life Sciences, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, 88 Olympic-ro 43-gil, Songpa-gu, Seoul 05505, Republic of Korea.


