### Accession
PXD044412

### Title
Metabolite interactions in the bacterial Calvin cycle and implications for flux regulation

### Description
Metabolite-level regulation of enzyme activity is important for microbes to cope with environmental shifts. Knowledge of such regulations can also guide strain engineering to improve industrial phenotypes. Recently developed chemoproteomics workflows allow for genome-wide detection of metabolite-protein interactions that may regulate pathway activity. We applied limited proteolysis small molecule mapping (LiP-SMap) to identify and compare metabolite-protein interactions in the proteomes of two cyanobacteria and two lithoautotrophic bacteria that fix CO2 using the Calvin cycle. Clustering analysis of the hundreds of detected interactions showed that some metabolites interacted in a species-specific manner, such as interactions of glucose-6-phosphate in Cupriavidus necator and of glyoxylate in Synechocystis sp.sp PCC 6803. These are interpreted in light of the different central carbon conversion pathways present. Metabolites interacting with the Calvin cycle enzymes fructose-1,6/sedoheptulose-1,7-bisphosphatase (F/SBPase) and transketolase were tested for effects on catalytic activity in vitro. The Calvin cycle intermediate glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate activated both Synechocystis and Cupriavidus F/SBPase, which suggests a feed-forward activation of the cycle in both photoautotrophs and chemolithoautotrophs. In contrast to the stimulating effect in reduced conditions, glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate inactivated the Synechocystis F/SBPase in oxidized conditions by accelerating protein aggregation. Thus, metabolite-level regulation of the Calvin cycle is more prevalent than previously appreciated and may act in addition to redox regulation.

### Sample Protocol
Proteome extraction  Frozen aliquots were thawed on ice and lysed mechanically through bead beating by a FastPrep-24 5G lysis machine over six cycles of 45 seconds at 6.5 m/s with 30 seconds on ice between cycles. The lysate was spun down and the supernatant was run through a Zeba Spin Desalting Column (size exclusion chromatography). Protein concentration in the desalted lysate was evaluated using a Bradford assay. The samples were kept at 4 °C throughout the procedure.  Limited proteolysis  For every experiment three sample groups were created, one with no added metabolite and two with different concentrations of metabolite specified in Table S1. Each sample group was prepared as four technical replicates with 1 µg/µL extracted protein. For limited proteolysis on purified syn-F/SBPase, purified enzyme was reconstituted to a final concentration of  0.1 µg/uL in lysis buffer. Proteinase K was simultaneously added to all samples at a 1:100 protease to protein ratio and incubated at 25 °C for exactly 10 minutes before immediate denaturation. All sample groups originated from the same cell extract, were treated in parallel with the same reagent aliquots and run on the LC-MS on the same plate.  Complete digestion  The protein mix was incubated at 96 °C for 3 min prior to treatment with 5% sodium deoxycholate and 10 mM DTT and another 10 min at 96 °C after. The samples were then alkylated by 10 mM iodoacetamide at RT for 30 min in the dark, after which proteases LysC and trypsin were applied at a 1:100 protease to protein ratio and incubated at 37 °C and 400 RPM in a thermocycler for 3 and 16 hours, respectively. Digestion was halted by addition of formic acid to reduce pH below 2 which caused sodium deoxycholate to precipitate. Samples were then centrifuged at 14,000g for 10 min after which the supernatant was removed and stored at -20 °C.  Peptide purification  Pipette tips packed with six layers of C18 matrix discs (20-200 µL; Empore SPE Discs) were activated with acetonitrile and equilibrated with 0.1% formic acid prior to being loaded with thawed peptide mixes. The matrix was then washed twice with one loading volume of 0.1% formic acid before being eluted with a mixture of 4:1 ratio of acetonitrile to 0.1% formic acid. The eluate was stored at -20 °C until analysis by LC-MS.  LC-MS analysis  Analysis was performed on a Q-exactive HF Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer coupled with an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano System with an EASY-Spray ion source. 2 ?L of each sample was loaded onto a C18 Acclaim PepMap 100 trap column (75 ?m x 2 cm, 3 ?m, 100 Å) with a flow rate of 7 ?L per min, using 3% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid and 96.9% water as solvent. The samples were then separated on ES802 EASY-Spray PepMap RSLC C18 Column (75 ?m x 25 cm, 2 ?m, 100Å) with a flow rate of 3.6 ?L per minute for 40 minutes using a linear gradient from 1% to 32% with 95% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid and 4.9% water as secondary solvent.   For proteome samples, MS analysis was performed using one full scan (resolution 30,000 at 200 m/z, mass range 300 ? 1200 m/z) followed by 30 MS2 DIA scans (resolution 30,000 at 200 m/z, mass range 350 ? 1000 m/z) with an isolation window of 10 m/z. The maximum injection times for the MS1 and MS2 were 105 ms and 55 ms respectively, and the automatic gain control was set to 3·106 and 1·106 respectively. For purified protein samples, the full scan (resolution 60,000 at 200 m/z, mass range 300-1200 m/z) was followed by 10 MS2 DDA scans for the 10 most abundant peptides (resolution 60,000 at 200 m/z with an isolation window of 2 m/z). For MS1 the maximum injection time was set to 205 ms and the automatic gain control to 1·106. For MS2 the settings were 105 ms and 2·105 respectively. Precursor ion fragmentation was performed with high-energy collision-induced dissociation at an NCE of 26 for all samples.

### Data Protocol
The EncyclopeDIA and Prosit workflows were used to generate a predicted library from a fasta file of the appropriate organisms UniProt proteome set (C. necator: UP000008210, Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803: UP000001425, Synechococcus elongatus sp. PCC 7942: UP000002717, H. pseudoflava: UP000293912) against which an EncyclopeDIA search was performed to generate a list of detected peptides. Spectra for purified proteins were deconvoluted using MaxQuant v. 2.0.3.0, using Oxidation (M) and Acetyl (Protein N-term) as variable modifications and Carbamidomethyl (C) as a fixed modification. A maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed and the false discovery rate was set to 1%.  Peptides detected in at least three replicates in every sample group were tested for differential peptide abundance using the MSstats package (version 3.18.5) in R (version 3.6.3). For every peptide in each metabolite concentration comparison MSstats estimated fold changes and p-values adjusted for multiple hypothesis testing (Benjamini-Hochberg method) with a significance threshold of 0.01. A protein was considered to interact with a metabolite supplied at low or high concentration if at least one peptide showed significant change. General data and quality assessment statistics and visualizations were generated by the pipeline available at https://github.com/Asplund-Samuelsson/lipsmap, implemented in R version 4.1.1 with Tidyverse version 1.3.1.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cupriavidus necator, Ralstonia eutropha, Hydrogenophaga pseudoflava, Interaction proteomics, Lip-smap, Cyanobacteria, Synechocystis sp. pcc6803, Carbon fixation, Synechococcus sp. pcc7942, Encyclopedia, Prosit

### Affiliations
Royal Institute of Technology (KTH)
Head of the Department of Protein Science, Division of Systems Biology at the Royal Institute of Technology (KTH), Stockholm, Sweden

### Submitter
Emil Sporre

### Lab Head
Dr Elton Paul Hudson
Head of the Department of Protein Science, Division of Systems Biology at the Royal Institute of Technology (KTH), Stockholm, Sweden


