### Accession
PXD010006

### Title
Characterization of the phospho-signalling mediated by the sodium-potassium ATPase in response to ouabain

### Description
In this project we applied a workflow for phosphoproteomics analysis to characterize the phosphorylation signalling that is triggered by the cardiotonic steroid ouabain. Ouabain is a ligand for the sodium-potassium ATPase (NKA). Low concentration of ouabain trigger oscillation of intracellular calcium concentration and modulate the phosphorylation of several signaling molecules, impacting cellular proliferation, apoptosis and cell-to-cell contacts. Monkey kidney cells (COS-7) were either treated for 10 or 20 minutes with 100 nM ouabain, or left untreated. We identify 15,348 phospho-sites, of which 1,941 are significantly regulated at either one of the time points employed. Analysis of the significantly regulated phospho-sites shed light on the molecular mechanisms by which ouabain affects cell junctions, proliferation and apoptosis.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted using 0.5% sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 0.35% sodium lauroyl sarcosinate (SLS) and 1mM dithiothreitol (DTT) with Halt Protease and Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail (Thermo Fisher). Lysates were heated at 95°C for 10 min prior to sonication followed by centrifugation for 15 min at 14,000g and 4°C. Supernatants were transferred to new vials and protein levels quantified using the DC-protein assay (Bio-Rad Laboratories). For protein digestion, we followed the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol, employing Lys-C 1:50 w/w (Wako Chemicals GmbH) at 37°C for 4 hours, followed by trypsin 1:25 (w/w) (Thermo Fisher) overnight at 37°C. The peptides were collected by centrifugation of the FASP filters and the samples were desalted using Polymeric Reversed Phase-Solid Phase Extraction (RP-SPE) cartridges (Phenomenex). Peptide concentration was measured with DC protein assay (BioRad) and separate 500 μg and 50 μg aliquots of peptides per sample were lyophilized and set aside for phosphoproteomics and proteomics analysis respectively.  Phospho-peptide enrichment  Phospho-peptide enrichment was performed on peptide samples set aside for phosphoproteomics analysis using STAGE tips loaded with TiO2 beads (GL Sciences), as previously reported. After binding the peptides to the beads and washing three times, phospho-peptides were eluted with 2 x 100 μl of 100 μl 3% triethylamine buffer into vials containing 200 μl of 10% formic acid (FA) to neutralize the pH. Phospho-peptide elution employing triethylamine instead of ammonia buffer is advantageous since the triethylamine buffer is volatile and it doesn’t require sample desalting, therefore avoiding sample losses connected with this cleaning step. Eluates were lyophilized prior to TMT 10-plex labeling.  Tandem Mass Tag labeling  Phospho-peptide and peptide samples were labeled with 10-plex Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) (Thermo Fisher Scientific) reagents as described before. The efficiency of labeling was determined by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) prior to pooling samples. Pooled samples were desalted with RP-SPE cartridges (Phenomenex) and then lyophilized in a speedvac prior to focusing on immobilized pH gradient (IPG) gel strips (GE Healthcare Bio-Sciences AB).  Peptide level high-resolution isoelectric focusing  High-resolution isoelectric focusing (HiRIEF) was performed using linear pH ranges of 2.5-3.7 (“ultra-acidic” range, a strip prototype provided by GE Healthcare Bio-Sciences AB) or 3-10 (“wide-range”, commercially available from GE Healthcare). The sample containing TMT-labeled phospho-peptides was split in two and pre-fractionated using the ultra-acidic and wide-range IPG strips (Phospho HiRIEF). The sample not enriched for phosphorylated peptides was fractionated using the wide-range IPG strip (Standard HiRIEF). Strips were divided into 72 fractions (fraction numbering proceeds from the strip acidic end to the basic end) and extracted to V-bottom 96-well plates with a liquid handling robot (GE Healthcare prototype modified from Gilson liquid handler 215). Plates were lyophilized in a speedvac prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.  Liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry  To examine phospho-peptides using HiRIEF (Phospho HiRIEF LC-MS/MS), all 72 fractions from the ultra-acidic IPG strip plate along with the first 55 fractions from the wide-range IPG strip plate were analyzed with LC-MS/MS. For Standard HiRIEF, all 72 fractions from the wide-range IPG strip plate were analyzed with LC-MS/MS (Standard HiRIEF LC-MS/MS). From an initial composition of 3% phase B (90% ACN, 5% DMSO, 5% water, 0.1% formic acid) the reversed phase gradient proceeded to 45% phase B over 50 min. Total LC-MS/MS run time was 74 min. A nano EASY-Spray column (pepmap RSLC, C18, 2µm bead size, 100Å, 75µm internal diameter, 50cm long, Thermo Scientific) was used on the nano electrospray ionization (NSI) EASY-Spray source (Thermo Scientific) at 60°C. Online LC-MS/MS was performed using a hybrid Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Fourier transform-based mass spectrometer (FTMS) master scans with a resolution of 70,000 (and mass range 300-1,700 m/z) were followed by data-dependent MS/MS (35,000 resolution) on the 5 most abundant ions using higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) at 30% normalized collision energy. Precursor ions were isolated with a 2 m/z window. Automatic gain control (AGC) targets were 1*106 for MS1 and 1*105 for MS2. Maximum injection times were 100 ms for MS1 and 150 ms (for proteomics) or 400 ms (for phosphoproteomics) for MS2. The entire duty cycle lasted ~1.5 s. Automated precursor ion dynamic exclusion was used with a 60 s duration. Precursor ions with unassigned charge states or a charge state of +1 were excluded. An underfill ratio of 1% was applied.

### Data Protocol
All tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) spectra were searched by Sequest/Percolator under the Proteome Discoverer software platform (PD 1.4, Thermo Scientific) using a target-decoy strategy. The reference database was the Chlorocebus sabaeus protein subset of Uniprot, release 2017-04-05, 16,415 entries. Precursor ion and product ion mass tolerances of 10 ppm and 0.02 Da respectively were used for HCD-FTMS. Additionally, peptide spectral matches (PSMs) allowed for up to two missed trypsin cleavages (Lys-Pro and Arg-Pro were not considered cleavage sites). Carbamidomethylation on cysteine and TMT 10-plex on lysine and N-terminus were set as fixed modifications and oxidation of methionine was set as a dynamic modification while searching all MS/MS spectra. Phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine were included as dynamic modifications while searching MS/MS spectra from the Phospho HiRIEF LC-MS/MS analysis. Quantitation of TMT 10-plex reporter ions was performed using an integration window tolerance of 10 ppm. A false discovery rate cutoff of 1% was applied at the peptide level. The phosphoRS algorithm node was added to the workflow for the phosphoproteomics search to obtain probabilities of localization of phosphorylation sites, and only sites with high confidence of localization (>= 95 pRS score) were used for quantification.

### Publication Abstract
The ion pump Na<sup>+</sup>, K<sup>+</sup>-ATPase (NKA) is a receptor for the cardiotonic steroid ouabain. Subsaturating concentration of ouabain triggers intracellular calcium oscillations, stimulates cell proliferation and adhesion, and protects from apoptosis. However, it is controversial whether ouabain-bound NKA is considered a signal transducer. To address this question, we performed a global analysis of protein phosphorylation in COS-7 cells, identifying 2580 regulated phosphorylation events on 1242 proteins upon 10- and 20-min treatment with ouabain. Regulated phosphorylated proteins include the inositol triphosphate receptor and stromal interaction molecule, which are essential for initiating calcium oscillations. Hierarchical clustering revealed that ouabain triggers a structured phosphorylation response that occurs in a well-defined, time-dependent manner and affects specific cellular processes, including cell proliferation and cell-cell junctions. We additionally identify regulation of the phosphorylation of several calcium and calmodulin-dependent protein kinases (CAMKs), including 2 sites of CAMK type II-&#x3b3; (CAMK2G), a protein known to regulate apoptosis. To verify the significance of this result, CAMK2G was knocked down in primary kidney cells. CAMK2G knockdown impaired ouabain-dependent protection from apoptosis upon treatment with high glucose or serum deprivation. In conclusion, we establish NKA as the coordinator of a broad, tightly regulated phosphorylation response in cells and define CAMK2G as a downstream effector of NKA.-Panizza, E., Zhang, L., Fontana, J. M., Hamada, K., Svensson, D., Akkuratov, E. E., Scott, L., Mikoshiba, K., Brismar, H., Lehti&#xf6;, J., Aperia, A. Ouabain-regulated phosphoproteome reveals molecular mechanisms for Na<sup>+</sup>, K<sup>+</sup>-ATPase control of cell adhesion, proliferation, and survival.

### Keywords
Sodium-potassium atpase, Camk, Phosphoproteomics, Ip3r, Calcium, Nka, Ouabain, Calcium-calmodulin-dependent protein kinase, Akt, Mapk, Insp3 receptor, Na-k-atpase, Calcium oscillations, Apoptosis

### Affiliations
Department of Women and Children’s Health, Science for Life Laboratory, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden
Cornell University

### Submitter
Elena Panizza

### Lab Head
Dr Anita Aperia
Department of Women and Children’s Health, Science for Life Laboratory, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden


