### Accession
PXD010694

### Title
β-actin RNA-BioID

### Description
Function and fate of mRNAs is controlled by RNA binding proteins (RBPs) but determining the proteome of a specific mRNA in vivo is still challenging. RNA proximity biotinylation on the transported β-actin mRNA tagged with MS2 aptamers (RNA-BioID) is used to characterize the dynamic proteome of the β-actin mRNP in mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs). We have identified > 60 β-actin associated RBPs including all six previously known as well as novel interactors. By investigating the dynamics of the β-actin mRNP in MEFs, we expand the set of β-actin mRNA associated RBPs and characterize the changes of the interacting proteome upon serum-induced mRNA localization. We report that the KH-domain containing protein FUBP3 represents a new β-actin associated RBP that binds to its 3’-untranslated region outside the known RNA localization element but is required for β-actin RNA localization. RNA-BioID will allow to obtain a dynamic view on the composition of endogenous mRNPs.

### Sample Protocol
For RNA-BioID, cells were incubated with 50 µM biotin at least for 6 hrs. Following incubation, cells were washed twice with 1x PBS and lysed in IP lysis buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 2.5 mM MgCl2, 1 mM DTT, 1% tween-20, and 1× proteinase inhibitor) and passed through 10-12 times through a 21G needle. The lysate was cleared by centrifugation (12,000 x g for 10 min at 4°C) to remove cell debris. 10 µg of protein from the supernatant (‘total cell lysate’) were used to check for protein biotinylation. In the remaining lysate, NaCl was added to a final concentration of 500 mM. 200 µl of a streptavidin Mag bead suspension (GE Healthcare) were added and the high salt lysate incubated overnight at 4°C with end to end rotation. On the next day, the beads were collected (by keeping the beads on the magnetic stand for 2 min) and washed twice for 5 min with 0.3 ml wash buffer 1 (2% SDS), once with wash buffer 2 (0.1% (w/v) deoxycholate, 1% (w/v) tween-20, 350 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA pH), once with wash buffer 3 (0.5% (w/v) deoxycholate 0.5% (w/v) tween-20, 1 mM EDTA, 250 mM LiCl, 10 mM Tris·Cl pH 7.4) and 50 mM Tris pH 7.5, once with wash buffer 4 (50 mM NaCl and 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4), and finally twice with 500 µl of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. 20 µl of the beads were used for western blot and silver staining, and 180 µl was subjected to mass spectrometry analysis. To release captured proteins for western blot analysis from streptavidin beads, the beads were incubated in 2x Laemmli buffer containing 2 mM saturated biotin and 20 mM DTT for 10 min at 95 degree.  For biotinylation after serum induction, cells were starved for 24 hrs with DMEM without FBS and induced with 10% serum containing media containing 50 µM biotin for at least for 6 hrs to 24 hrs.  For mass spectrometric analysis Beads were resuspended in denaturation buffer (6M urea, 2M thiourea, 10 mM Tris buffer, pH 8.0), and proteins were reduced by incubation in 1 mM dithiotreitol (DTT) for 1 h at room temperature. Alkylation of reduced cysteines was performed in 5.5 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) buffer for 1 h at room temperature in the dark.  On beads digestion of proteins was started with endoproteinase LysC (2µg per 100µg protein) for 3 h of incubation at pH 8.0 and room temperature. Tryptic digestion (2µg per 100µg protein) was performed overnight at room temperature after diluting the sample with four volumes of 20 mM ABC and adjusting the pH to 8.0. Acidified peptides were purified via PHOENIX Peptide Cleanup Kit (PreOmics) according to user manual, and separated on an EasyLC nano-HPLC (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Scientific). The peptide mixtures were injected onto the column in HPLC solvent A (0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 500 nl/min and subsequently eluted with an 87 minute segmented gradient of 5–33-50-90% of HPLC solvent B (80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 200 nl/min. Precursor ions were acquired in the mass range from m/z 300 to 2000 in the Orbitrap mass analyzer at a resolution of 120,000. Accumulation target value of 106 charges was set. The 15 most intense ions were sequentially isolated and fragmented in the linear ion trap using collision-induced dissociation (CID) at the ion accumulation target value of 5000 and default CID settings. Sequenced precursor masses were excluded from further selection for 60 s.

### Data Protocol
Acquired MS spectra were processed with MaxQuant software package version 1.5.2.8 with integrated Andromeda search engine. Database search was performed against a target-decoy Mus musculus database obtained from Uniprot, containing 60,752 protein entries, the sequence of MCP-eGFP-BirA and 284 commonly observed contaminants. Endoprotease trypsin was defined as protease with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were specified as variable modifications, whereas carbamidomethylation on cysteine was set as fixed modification. Initial maximum allowed mass tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm (for the survey scan) and 0.5 Da for CID fragment ions. Peptide, protein and modification site identifications were reported at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01, estimated by the target/decoy approach. The label-free algorithm was enabled, as was the “match between runs” option.

### Publication Abstract
The molecular function and fate of mRNAs are controlled by RNA-binding proteins (RBPs). Identification of the interacting proteome of a specific mRNA in vivo remains very challenging, however. Based on the widely used technique of RNA tagging with MS2 aptamers for RNA visualization, we developed a RNA proximity biotinylation (RNA-BioID) technique by tethering biotin ligase (BirA*) via MS2 coat protein at the 3' UTR of endogenous MS2-tagged &#x3b2;-actin mRNA in mouse embryonic fibroblasts. We demonstrate the dynamics of the &#x3b2;-actin mRNA interactome by characterizing its changes on serum-induced localization of the mRNA. Apart from the previously known interactors, we identified more than 60 additional &#x3b2;-actin-associated RBPs by RNA-BioID. Among these, the KH domain-containing protein FUBP3/MARTA2 has been shown to be required for &#x3b2;-actin mRNA localization. We found that FUBP3 binds to the 3' UTR of &#x3b2;-actin mRNA and is essential for &#x3b2;-actin mRNA localization, but does not interact with the characterized &#x3b2;-actin zipcode element. RNA-BioID provides a tool for identifying new mRNA interactors and studying the dynamic view of the interacting proteome of endogenous mRNAs in space and time.

### Keywords
Rna localization, Bioid, Mouse, Rbps

### Affiliations
Proteome Center Tuebingen
University of Tuebingen - Interfaculty Institute of Biochemistry

### Submitter
Mirita Franz-Wachtel

### Lab Head
Dr Ralf-Peter Jansen
University of Tuebingen - Interfaculty Institute of Biochemistry


