### Accession
PXD028908

### Title
Extracellular Matrix Proteomics of Human Heart Failure

### Description
MS analysis of human cardiac samples from left ventricles of patients undergoing cardiac transplantation due to ischaemic heart failure (n=5) or non-ischaemic heart failure (n=10), as well as controls samples (n=6). Analysis of extracellular matrix protein enriched extracts.

### Sample Protocol
Protein was extracted from cardiac samples using a 3-step methodology described in Barallobre-Barreiro et al (Circulation, 2012). This experiment concerns extracellular extracts (GuHCl extracts). 20μg of Deglycanated GuHCl protein extract per sample was loaded and separated on Bis-Tris discontinuous 4-12% polyacrylamide gradient gels (NuPage, Life Technologies). Ten gel bands were excised across the entire lanes, leaving no empty gel pieces behind. Subsequently, all gel bands were subjected to in-gel digestion with trypsin. Tryptic peptides were lyophilized, reconstituted with 0.05% formic acid.Peptides were separated on a nanoflow LC system (Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano, Thermofisher Scientific). 15µl of peptide solution were injected onto a trap column (Thermo Scientific, Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, inner diameter 0.1mm × length 20mm, particle size 5µm, pore size 100Å) at a flow rate of 8µl/min for 5min, using 0.1% formic acid (FA, aq). The following nano LC gradient was then used to separate the peptides at 0.3µl/min: 0–5min, 3% B; 5–10min, 3–10% B; 10−40min, 10−40% B; 40–45min, 40–80% B; 45–49min, 80% B; 49–50min, 80–3% B; 50–65min, 3% B; where A = 0.1% FA (aq), and B = 0.1% FA, 80% acetonitrile (aq). The nano column (Thermo Scientific, Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, 0.075mm × 500mm, 3µm, 100Å) was kept at 40°C. The LC eluate was analysed using a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) operating in data-dependent TopN mode (loop count 10). Survey full scan spectra were acquired over the mass-to-charge (m/z) range 400–2000 using Orbitrap detection (resolution 70,000). Data-dependent MS2 scans were performed in the Orbitrap (resolution 17,500) following higher-energy C-trap dissociation.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer software (Thermo Scientific, version 2.4.1.15) was used to search raw data files against a human database (UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot version from January 2020, 20,365 protein entries) using Mascot (Matrix Science, version 2.6.0). Mass tolerance was set at 10ppm for precursor ions and 20mmu for fragment ions. Trypsin was used as the protein-digesting enzyme with up to two missed cleavages being allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was chosen as a static modification. Oxidations of lysine, methionine and proline were chosen as dynamic modifications. Spectral counts were calculated using Scaffold (Proteome Software, version 4.11.1). Peptide identification threshold was set to 95% and protein identification threshold to 99% with a minimum number of two peptides per protein.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Heart failure, Extracellular matrix

### Affiliations
King's College London

### Submitter
Javier Barallobre-Barreiro

### Lab Head
Dr Javier Barallobre-Barreiro
King's College London


