### Accession
PXD034376

### Title
Phagosome proteome of mock and Atg8 silenced Entamoeba histolytica strains

### Description
The enteric protozoan parasite Entamoeba histolytica have high phagocytic ability. Phagocytosis is also important for the pathogenicity of this parasite; molecular mechanisms of phagocytosis and phagosome maturation is focused. Atg8 is well studied autophagy marker protein. We previously shown that E. histolytica Atg8 translocate to nascent trogosomes and expression silencing of the Atg8 caused retardation of phagosome acidification. To investigate how Atg8 regulates phagosome maturation, here we conducted proteome analysis of phagosomes isolated from an E. histolytica strain in which atg8 gene expression are silenced (atg8 gene silenced, atg8-gs) and its mock control strain (transfected with psAP2-Gunma).

### Sample Protocol
Phagocytosis was performed with human serum-coated paramagnetic beads and cocultured for 30 min. Phagosomes recovered after cross-linking with DSP and mechanical homogenization by Dounce homogenizer. Bead-containing phagosomes were concentrated from the lysates by paramagnetic separation. The isolated phagosomes were briefly electrophoresed on SDS–PAGE to allow entry of proteins into the gel, visualized by silver stain, and the bands containing the whole mixture were excised and subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis. Proteins were in-gel digested with trypsin, extracted, then analyzed by the LC-MS system consisting of a Thermo Electron Velos Orbitrap ETD mass spectrometer system with a Protana nanospray ion source interfaced to a self-packed 8 cm x 75 um id Phenomenex Jupiter 10 um C18 reversed-phase capillary column. The nanospray ion source was operated at 2.5 kV. The digest was analyzed using the rapid switching capability of the instrument acquiring a full scan mass spectrum to determine peptide molecular weights followed by product ion spectra (20) to determine the amino acid sequence in sequential scans.

### Data Protocol
The proteome data were analyzed by the Sequest search against E. histolytica proteome. The quantitative values (QV), normalized with unweighted spectrum counts, were used to estimate relative quantities of individual proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Autophagy is one of the bulk degradation systems and is conserved throughout eukaryotes. In the enteric protozoan parasite&#xa0;<i>Entamoeba histolytica</i>, the causative agent of human amebiasis, Atg8 is not exclusively involved in autophagy per se but also in other membrane traffic-related pathways such as phagosome biogenesis. We previously reported that repression of&#xa0;<i>atg8</i>&#xa0;gene expression by antisense small RNA-mediated transcriptional gene silencing (gs) resulted in growth retardation, delayed endocytosis, and reduced acidification of endosomes and phagosomes. In this study, to better understand the role of Atg8 in phagocytosis and trogocytosis, we conducted a comparative proteomic analysis of phagosomes isolated from wild type and&#xa0;<i>atg8</i>-gs strains. We found that 127 and 107 proteins were detected &gt;1.5-fold less or more abundantly, respectively, in phagosomes isolated from&#xa0;<i>the atg8</i>-gs strain, compared to the control strain. Among 127 proteins whose abundance was reduced in phagosomes from&#xa0;<i>atg8</i>-gs, a panel of proteins related to fatty acid metabolism, phagocytosis, and endoplasmic reticulum (ER) homeostasis was identified. Various lysosomal hydrolases and their receptors also tend to be excluded from phagosomes by&#xa0;<i>atg8</i>-gs, reinforcing the notion that Atg8 is involved in phagosomal acidification and digestion. On the contrary, among 107 proteins whose abundance increased in phagosomes from&#xa0;<i>atg8</i>-gs strain, ribosome-related proteins and metabolite interconversion enzymes are enriched. We further investigated the localization of several representative proteins, including adenylyl cyclase-associated protein and plasma membrane calcium pump, both of which were demonstrated to be recruited to phagosomes and trogosomes <i>via</i> an Atg8-dependent mechanism. Taken together, our study has provided the basis of the phagosome proteome to further elucidate molecular events in the Atg8-dependent regulatory network of phagosome/trogosome biogenesis in&#xa0;<i>E. histolytica</i>.

### Keywords
Lysosome, Serum coated beads, Entamoeba histolytica, Atg8, Phagosome, Autophagy

### Affiliations
Department of Parasitology, National Institute of Infectious Diseases
National Institute of Infectious Diseases

### Submitter
Kumiko Tsukui

### Lab Head
Dr Kumiko Nakada-Tsukui
Department of Parasitology, National Institute of Infectious Diseases


