### Accession
PXD032921

### Title
Post-translational changes in Phialophora verrucosa via lysine lactylation during prolonged presence in a patient with a CARD9-related immune disorder

### Description
Lysine lactylation (Kla) is a newly discovered histone post-translational modification (PTM), playing important roles in regulating transcription in macrophages. Increasing evidence demonstrates that lysine lactylation plays an important regulatory role in metabolic processes in both bacterial and human cells. However, little is known about the extent and function of lysine lactylation in fungi, here investigated with the black yeast Phialophora verrucosaverrucose as a model organism. WeHere, we report the first proteomic survey of this modification in P. verrucosa. We performed a global lactylation analysis of P. verrucosa using high accuracy bottom-up nano-LC-MS/MS in combination wwith the enrichment of lactylated peptides from digested cell lysates and subsequent peptide identification. In total, 636 lactylation sites on 420 lactylated proteins were identified in this pathogen, of which contained in 26 types of modification motifs. Our results show that over 85% of lactylated proteins were distributed in cytoplasm, mitochondria, and nucleus. The identified proteins were found to be involved associated toin diverse biological processes and were significantly enriched in the melanin biosynthesis process. Most strikingly, Kla was found in 23 structural constituent proteins of ribosome, indicating an impact of Kla in protein synthesis . Moreover, 12 lactylated proteins participated in fungal pathogenicity, suggesting a potential role for Kla in this process. Protein interaction network analysis suggested that a mass of protein interactions are regulated by lactylation.  Together, our findings reveal widespread roles for lysine lactylation in regulating metabolism and melanin biosynthesis in P. verrucosa. Our data provide a rich resource for functional analyses of lactylation and facilitate the dissection of metabolic networks in this pathogen. The combined data sets represent the first report of the lactylome of P. verrucosa and provide a good foundation for further explorations of Kla in clinical fungal pathogens.

### Sample Protocol
Protein Extraction  Fungal material was grinded to powder using liquid nitrogen and transferred to a 5-mL centrifuge tube. Four volumes of lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Triton-100, 10 mM dithiothreitol [DTT], 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche cOmplete™) was added, followed by sonication three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Ningbo Scientz Biotechnol., Zhejiang, China). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 20,000 g at 4°C for 10 min. Protein was precipitated with cold 20% trichloroacetic acid (TCA) for 2 h at –20°C. After centrifugation at 12,000 g, 4°C for 10 min, the supernatant was discarded. The remaining precipitate was washed three times with cold acetone. The protein was redissolved in 8 M urea and the concentration was determined with BCA kit (Tiangen, Beijing, China) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

### Data Protocol
Database  Search The resulting MS/MS data were processed using the MaxQuan t search engine (v1.6.15.0). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the database Phialophora_verrucosa_39412_TX_BMU5_combine_20201207_cdhit1.fasta (27369 sequences), an anti-library  was added to calculate the false positive rate (FDR ) caused by random matching, and a common contamination library was added to the database to eliminate the influence of contaminating proteins in the identification results.

### Publication Abstract
<i>CARD9</i>-related inherited immune disorders are a major risk factor for chronic disseminated fungal infection. In addition to pathogens of <i>Candida</i> and dermatophytes, the environmental opportunists of the black yeast-like fungi are relatively frequent in this patient cohort. Particularly the genus <i>Phialophora</i> is overrepresented. We investigated two isolates of a strain of <i>P. verrucosa</i> residing in a <i>CARD9</i> patient, sampled with a period of ten years apart. Genomes, melanization and antifungal susceptibility of progenitor and derived strains were compared, and potential adaptation to the host habitat was investigated with proteomic techniques using post-translational modification as a proxy. Global lactylation analysis was performed using high accuracy nano-LC-MS/MS in combination with enrichment of lactylated peptides from digested cell lysates, and subsequent peptide identification. The genome of the derived isolate had accumulated 6945 SNPs, of which 31 were detected in CDS. A large number of identified proteins were significantly enriched, e.g. in melanin biosynthesis. A total of 636 lactylation sites on 420 lactylated proteins were identified, which contained in 26 types of modification motifs. Lysine lactylation (Kla) was found in 23 constituent proteins of the ribosome, indicating an impact of Kla in protein synthesis. Twelve lactylated proteins participated in pathogenicity. A protein-protein interaction (PPI) network analysis suggested that protein lactylations are widely distributed influencing various biological processes. Our findings reveal widespread roles for lysine lactylation in regulating metabolism and melanin biosynthesis in black fungi. Several large rearrangements and inversions were observed in the genome, but genomic changes could not be linked to adaptation or to known clinically relevant properties of progenitor to derived isolate; <i>in vitro</i> antifungal susceptibility had largely remained unaltered.

### Keywords
Phialophora verrucosa, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Peking University First Hospital
peling university first hospital

### Submitter
Yinggai Song

### Lab Head
Dr Yinggai Song
peling university first hospital


