### Accession
PXD042533

### Title
Matrix Metalloproteinase-7 in Urinary Extracellular Vesicles Identifies Rapid Disease Progression in Autosomal Dominant Polycystic Kidney Disease

### Description
Background: In autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) there is an unmet need for early markers of rapid disease progression to facilitate counseling and selection for kidney-protective therapy. Our aim was to identify markers for rapid disease progression in urinary extracellular vesicles (uEVs).  Methods: uEVs were isolated at baseline in two independent cohorts including patients with rapid disease progression and stable disease; patients were matched by age, sex, total kidney volume and mutation. uEV biomarker candidates were identified by mass spectrometry and further analyzed in a third and fourth cohort using immunoblotting and an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Single-nucleotide RNA sequencing of healthy and ADPKD tissue was used to confirm findings and identify the cellular origin of the uEV biomarker. Results: In the first two cohorts matrix metalloproteinase-7 (MMP-7) was significantly higher in uEVs of patients with rapid disease progression compared to stable disease. In the third cohort, immunoblotting confirmed a >2-fold increase in uEV-MMP-7 in patients with rapid disease progression compared to stable disease. In the fourth cohort, whole urine rather than uEVs were analyzed with MMP-7 ELISA demonstrating a significant but weak correlation with kidney function decline. Single-nucleotide RNA sequencing showed higher MMP-7 expression in ADPKD kidney tissue than in healthy kidney tissue and localized MMP-7 to the proximal tubule and thick ascending limb.    Conclusion: uEV-associated MMP-7 is elevated in ADPKD patients with rapid disease progression and should be further investigated as predictive biomarker. Our findings also suggests that MMP-7 performs better when analyzed in uEVs than in whole urine.

### Sample Protocol
Sample collection and uEV isolation Fifty milliliter spot urine samples that had been stored at -80°C after addition of a protease inhibitor (cOmplete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, Roche Diagnostics, Mannheim, Germany) were used for uEV isolation. uEVs were isolated using a differential ultracentrifugation protocol (18, 19). Briefly, frozen samples were thawed, vortexed and centrifuged at 2,000 x g for 10 minutes, with the supernatant then centrifuged at 17,000 x g for 20 minutes. The resultant supernatant was temporarily stored on ice, the pellet was suspended in a 200 mg/ml dithiothreitol (DTT) solution, kept at 37 °C and intermittently vortexed for seven minutes to dissociate THP polymers. After DTT treatment the remaining non-EV material was pelleted by centrifuge at 17,000 x g for 20 minutes. The resultant supernatant was combined with the stored supernatant from the first 17,000 x g cycle, and uEVs were initially pelleted by 120 minutes 200,000 x g (cohort 1), which was later adapted to 160 minutes at 150,000 x g (cohorts 2 and 3) because of a restriction of the maximum RPM of the rotor, reaching the same calculated pelleting efficiency. The final supernatant was discarded and the uEV pellet was dissolved in 150 μl PBS and stored at -80°C until analysis.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry uEV isolates from our first two cohorts were lysed in 100 mM TEAB buffer containing 1 % SDC (sodium deoxycholate), 1 % SDS (sodium dodecyl sulfate) and 2% Triton X100  by sonication for 10 minutes using a Bioruptor (Diagenode). Proteins were quantified using the BCA protein kit (ThermoFisher Scientific / Pierce, #23225). Twenty µg of protein was digested using the SP3 protocol (20) and individual peptide samples were isobarically labeled using the Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) 10-plex isobaric reagent kit (ThermoFisher Scientific, catalog # A34808) according to the supplier’s instructions. TMT labeled samples were then combined for each cohort and analyzed using nanoflow liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (nLC-MS/MS) on an EASY-nLC coupled to an Orbitrap Lumos Tribid mass spectrometer (Thermo) operating in positive mode. Peptides were separated on a ReproSil-C18 reversed phase column (Dr Maisch; 25 cm × 75 μm) using a linear gradient of 0–80% acetonitrile (in 0.1% formic acid) during 90 min at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. Spectra were acquired according to a data dependent acquisition (DDA) regime in continuum mode; fragmentation of the peptides was performed by HCD using the multinotch SPS MS3 reporter ion-based quantification method. Peptide spectra were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 2.5 (ThermoFisher Scientific) and total peptide abundances were normalized for all TMT channels before protein abundance computation and further statistical processing in R. Cohort 1 (baseline + follow-up) and cohort 2 were all quantified in their own pooled TMT analysis, maximizing sample comparability within experiments. Identified proteins were compared to the Vesiclepedia uEV proteome database (21).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Matrix metalloproteinase-7, Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease, Urinary extracellular vesicles

### Affiliations
Erasmus MC
Proteomics Center, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Jeroen Demmers

### Lab Head
Dr Jeroen Demmers
Erasmus MC


