### Accession
PXD010111

### Title
Crosslinking MS to elucidate the Architecture of the Nucleosome Remodelling and Deacetylase (NuRD) complex

### Description
The Nucleosome Remodeling and Deacetylase (NuRD) complex is essential for development in complex animals but has been refractory to detailed analysis because of its low abundance and resistance to recombinant production. In combination with other techniques, crosslinking mass spectrometry was used to elucidate the structure of the Nucleosome Remodelling and Deacetylase (NuRD) complex. Natively-purified NuRD, and four recombinantly-expressed NuRD subcomplexes, and a PWWP2A-MTA-HDAC-RBBP alternative ‘NuRD-like’ complex were subjected to crosslinking with DSS, ADH, BS3 and DMTMM.

### Sample Protocol
Crosslinking was performed as previously described (Leitner et al., MCP, 2012; Leitner et al., PNAS, 2014). Crosslinked samples were digested with endo-lysC and trypsin, fractionated by size exclusion chromatography (SEC) and SEC fractions were analysed by DDA-LC-MS/MS. Instruments used for mass analysis were the Q-Exactive and Q-Exactive Plus.  Additional details are provided in the accompanying publication.

### Data Protocol
Data generated by the Q-Exactive and Q-Exactive Plus (HCD fragmentation) was searched using pLINK 2 (Yang et al., Nat Methods, 2012). pLINK search parameters that differ from the default settings were as follows: precursor mass tolerance ± 15 ppm, product-ion mass tolerance ± 20 ppm, variable modifications of oxidation (M) and carbamidomethyl (C), enzyme specificity of trypsin with up to two missed cleavages (excluding the site of crosslinking) per chain. For DSS/BS3 crosslinkers, in addition to lysine residues, serines, tyrosines and threonines were also included as possible sites of crosslinking. The protein database used for searching consisted of all the NuRD components (CHD4, MTA1, MTA2, MTA3, HDAC1, HDAC2, HDAC3, GATAD2A, GATAD2B, RBBP4, RBBP7, MBD2, MBD3), and the PWWP2A protein, and plus the top 10 contaminants, identified from a standard database search, in the samples.

### Publication Abstract
The nucleosome remodeling and deacetylase (NuRD) complex is essential for metazoan development but has been refractory to biochemical analysis. We present an integrated analysis of the native mammalian NuRD complex, combining quantitative mass spectrometry, cross-linking, protein biochemistry, and electron microscopy to define the architecture of the complex. NuRD is built from a 2:2:4 (MTA, HDAC, and RBBP) deacetylase module and a 1:1:1 (MBD, GATAD2, and Chromodomain-Helicase-DNA-binding [CHD]) remodeling module, and the complex displays considerable structural dynamics. The enigmatic GATAD2 controls the asymmetry of the complex and directly recruits the CHD remodeler. The MTA-MBD interaction acts as a point of functional switching, with the transcriptional regulator PWWP2A competing with MBD for binding to the MTA-HDAC-RBBP subcomplex. Overall, our data address the long-running controversy over NuRD stoichiometry, provide imaging of the mammalian NuRD complex, and establish the biochemical mechanism by which PWWP2A can regulate NuRD composition.

### Keywords
Crosslinking ms, Structural proteomics, Nurd

### Affiliations
The University of Sydney
School of Life and Environmental Sciences, University of Sydney, NSW Australia

### Submitter
Jason Low

### Lab Head
Dr Joel Mackay
School of Life and Environmental Sciences, University of Sydney, NSW Australia


