### Accession
PXD003633

### Title
S.wolfei membrane proteins -  Membrane Complexes of Syntrophomonas wolfei Involved in Syntrophic Butyrate Degradation and Hydrogen Formation

### Description
Analyze S. wolfei membrane proteins separated on Blue Native gel bands

### Sample Protocol
Membrane proteins were isolated and separated on Blue Native gel. The gel bands were excised for MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched with Mascot against NCBI S. wolfei protein database. Data were also searached against the datase of M. hungatei for contamination from the co-cultured partner and S. aciditrophus that is grown in the lab

### Publication Abstract
Syntrophic butyrate metabolism involves the thermodynamically unfavorable production of hydrogen and/or formate from the high potential electron donor, butyryl-CoA. Such redox reactions can occur only with energy input by a process called reverse electron transfer. Previous studies have demonstrated that hydrogen production from butyrate requires the presence of a proton gradient, but the biochemical machinery involved has not been clearly elucidated. In this study, the gene and enzyme systems involved in reverse electron transfer by <i>Syntrophomonas wolfei</i> were investigated using proteomic and gene expression approaches. <i>S. wolfei</i> was grown in co-culture with <i>Methanospirillum hungatei</i> or <i>Dehalococcoides mccartyi</i> under conditions requiring reverse electron transfer and compared to both axenic <i>S. wolfei</i> cultures and co-cultures grown in conditions that do not require reverse electron transfer. Blue native gel analysis of membranes solubilized from syntrophically grown cells revealed the presence of a membrane-bound hydrogenase, Hyd2, which exhibited hydrogenase activity during in gel assays. Bands containing a putative iron-sulfur (FeS) oxidoreductase were detected in membranes of crotonate-grown and butyrate grown <i>S. wolfei</i> cells. The genes for the corresponding hydrogenase subunits, <i>hyd2ABC</i>, were differentially expressed at higher levels during syntrophic butyrate growth when compared to growth on crotonate. The expression of the FeS oxidoreductase gene increased when <i>S. wolfei</i> was grown with <i>M. hungatei</i>. Additional membrane-associated proteins detected included F<sub>o</sub>F<sub>1</sub> ATP synthase subunits and several membrane transporters that may aid syntrophic growth. Furthermore, syntrophic butyrate metabolism can proceed exclusively by interspecies hydrogen transfer, as demonstrated by growth with <i>D. mccartyi</i>, which is unable to use formate. These results argue for the importance of Hyd2 and FeS oxidoreductase in reverse electron transfer during syntrophic butyrate degradation.

### Keywords
Wolfei, Syntrophomonas, Membrane, Protein

### Affiliations
UCLA
Oklahoma University

### Submitter
Hong Nguyen

### Lab Head
Dr Michael McInerney
Oklahoma University


