### Accession
PXD020444

### Title
Urinary peptides enable assessment of disease severity in COVID-19

### Description
In this article, we report first data on the urinary test COVID31 that enables prediction of critical progression and death outcomes in COVID-19 patients. COVID31 is composed of 31 endogenous peptides mainly derived from various collagen chains that enable differentiation of moderate and severe disease courses from those that progress to a critical state or death. The test is based on non-invasive urine analysis and expected to have a major impact on the management of COVID-19 outpatients by guiding patient’s stratification towards timely and targeted intervention to improve disease outcome.

### Sample Protocol
Shortly before the CE-MS analysis, lyophilisates were resuspended in HPLC-grade water to a final protein concentration of 0.8 mg/ml, based on the BCA assay (Interchim, Montlucon, France). CEMS analysis was performed as described using a P/ACE MDQ capillary electrophoresis system (Beckman Coulter, Fullerton, USA) on-line coupled to a MicroTOF MS (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany). The electrospray ionization (ESI) source (Agilent Technologies, Palo Alto, CA, USA) was grounded, and the ion spray interface potential was set at 4.5 kV. CE-MS data acquisition was automatically controlled by the CE via contact-close relays. Spectra were accumulated every 3 s, over a range of mass to charge ratio (m/z) 350 to 3000.

### Data Protocol
CE-MS data were processed using MosaiquesVisu software (Mosaiques Diagnostics GmbH, Hannover, Germany). Migration time and ion signal intensity (amplitude) were normalized using ‘internal polypeptide standards’, as described. The resulting peak list characterizes each peptide by its molecular mass [Da], normalized migration time [min] and signal intensity. All detected polypeptides were deposited, matched, and annotated in a Microsoft SQL database. Cluster analysis was used to align peptides by mass across samples. During initial clustering, peptides across different samples were considered identical, if mass deviation was < 50 ppm for small or 75 ppm for larger peptides. Due to analyte diffusion effects, CE peak widths increase with CE-migration time. In the data clustering process, this effect was considered by linearly increasing cluster widths over the entire electropherogram (19 min to 45 min) from 2–5%

### Publication Abstract
SARS-CoV-2 infection results in a mild-to-moderate disease course in most patients, allowing outpatient self-care and quarantine. However, in approx. 10% of cases a two- or three-phasic critical disease course with starting from day 7 to 10 is observed. To facilitate and plan outpatient care, biomarkers prognosing such worsening at an early stage appear of outmost importance. In this accelerated article, we report on the identification of urinary peptides significantly associated with SARS-CoV-2 infection, and the development of a multi-marker urinary peptide based test, COVID20, that may enable prognosis of critical and fatal outcomes in COVID-19 patients. COVID20 is composed of 20 endogenous peptides mainly derived from various collagen chains that enable differentiating moderate or severe disease from critical state or death with 83% sensitivity at 100% specificity. Based on the performance in this pilot study, testing in a prospective study on 1000 patients has been initiated. This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Covid-19, Covid31, Proteome

### Affiliations
Clinical Proteomics
Mosaiques Diagnostics GmbH

### Submitter
Martin Pejchinovski

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Pejchinovski
Clinical Proteomics


