### Accession
PXD034935

### Title
Protein interactors of 3-O sulfated heparan sulfates in human MCI and age-matched control cerebrospinal fluid

### Description
Heparan (HS) proteoglycans (HSPGs) are common on the cell surface and mediate many physiological processes. Binding of HSPG ligands is determined by the sulfation code on the heparan sulfate chain and the HS chain can be N-/2-O/6-O- or 3-O-sulfated, generating a heterogenous sulfation pattern. 3-O sulfated HS (3S-HS) have been reported to play a role in several pathological processes such as the coagulation system, viral pathogenesis, or in the binding and internalization of tau in Alzheimer’s disease. Few 3S-HS-specific interactors are known and the role of 3S-HS in health and disease is limited, especially in the central nervous system. Using human CSF as a surrogate for the extracellular compartment of the CNS, we determined the interactome of synthetic heparan sulfate oligosaccharides with defined sulfation patterns. These AE-MS studies significantly expand the proteins that can interact with HS and for which 3O sulfation is required. LRP1 was found as a novel 3S-HS interactor, requiring GlcA-GlcNS6S3S for binding, similar to ATIII. Both interactions were validated via Western blot. Our dataset brings forward new HS and 3S-HS ligands which can be pertinent to unravel molecular mechanisms dependent on 3S-HS in (patho)physiological conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Shotgun on CSF was done by adding 100 µl of 100 mM HEPES (pH 7.5) to 100 µg of protein material of each sample and. Proteins were reduced and alkylated by adding TCEP-HCl and IAA.Next, proteins were digested by first adding 1 µg of endo-LysC (Wako) and incubating the samples for 3 h at 37 °C, following by the addition of 1 µg of sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega) and incubation of the samples overnight at 37 °C. To stop the digestion, 10% TFA was added until a pH of 2-3 was reached. The peptide mixtures were then purified using OMIX C18 tips (Agilent) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Peptides were vacuum-dried completely and stored at -20 °C. Each peptide sample was solubilized in 20 µL loading solvent A (0.1% TFA in water/Acetonitrile (ACN) (98/2, v:v)). The peptide concentration was measured using a Dropsense16 (Unchained Labs) and per sample, 2 µg was injected for LC-MS/MS analysis using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system in-line connected to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). Peptide trapping was performed at 10 μl/min for 4 min in loading solvent A on a 20 mm trapping column (made in-house, 100 μm internal diameter (I.D.), 5 μm beads, C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch). The peptides were separated on a 200 cm µPAC™ column (C18-end-capped functionality, 300 µm wide channels, 5 µm porous-shell pillars, inter pillar distance of 2.5 µm and a depth of 20 µm; PharmaFluidics) kept at a constant temperature of 50 °C. Peptides were eluted using a linear gradient reaching 55% solvent B (0.1% formic acid (FA) in water/ACN (20/80, v/v)) after 115 min and 99% MS solvent B at 120 min, followed by a 10-min wash at 99% solvent B and re-equilibration with solvent A’ (0.1% FA). During the first 15 min, the flow rate was set to 750 nl/min, after which it was kept constant at 300 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition in TopSpeed mode. Full-scan MS spectra (300-1500 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 120,000 in the Orbitrap analyzer after accumulation to a target AGC value of 200,000 with a maximum IT of 250 ms. The precursor ions were filtered for charge states (2-7 required), dynamic exclusion (60 s; ±10 ppm window) and intensity (minimal intensity of 3E4). The precursor ions were selected in the IRM with an isolation window of 1.2 Da and accumulated to an AGC target of 5E3 or a maximum IT of 40 ms and activated using HCD fragmentation (34% NCE). Peptide fragments were analyzed in the Ion Trap Analyzer at a normal scan rate. To profile the interactome of 3-O sulfated heparan sulfates (3S-HS), four different synthetic biotinylated HS were used as baits to pull-down their interacting proteins from the CSF samples.  Pull-downs were performed using Streptavidin Mag Sepharose (GE Healthcare) magnetic beads, following the manufacturer’s protocol. The beads were resuspended in 150 µl trypsin digestion buffer. This protocol was repeated using the four different synthetic HS and for the CSF samples from the 10 different individuals.  An on-beads digestion protocol was used with trypsin. To purify the peptides, OMIX C18 tips (Agilent) were used, following which peptides were vacuum-dried. Peptides were re-dissolved in 20 µl loading solvent A (0.1% TFA in water/ACN (98/2; v/v)) of which 5 µl was injected for LC-MS/MS analysis on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano-LC (Thermo Fisher) in-line connected to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). The sample was loaded on a trapping column (made in-house, 100 μm I.D. × 20 mm, 5 μm beads C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch). After flushing from the trapping column, the peptides were separated on a 50 cm µPAC™ column with C18-end-capped functionality (PharmaFluidics) kept at a constant temperature of 35 °C. Peptides were eluted by a stepped gradient from 98% solvent A’ (0.1% FA) to 30% solvent B′ (0.1% FA in water/acetonitrile, 20/80 (v/v)) in 75 min up to 50% solvent B′ in 15 min, followed by a 5 min wash reaching 95% solvent B’, all at a stepped flow rate starting from 750 nl/min for 9 min to 300 nL/min until the end.   The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent, positive mode, automatically switching between MS and MS2. The source voltage was 3 kV, and the capillary temperature 275 °C. One MS1 scan (m/z 400−2,000, AGC target 3 ×E6 ions, maximum ion injection time 80 ms), acquired at a resolution of 70,000 (at 200 m/z), was followed by up to 5 tandem MS scans (resolution 17,500 at 200 m/z) of the most intense ions fulfilling predefined selection criteria (AGC target 50,000 ions, maximum ion injection time 80 ms,isolation window 2 Da, fixed first mass 140 m/z, centroid, intensity threshold 1.3E4, exclusion of unassigned, 1, 5-8, >8 positively charged precursors,peptide match preferred,exclude isotopes on, dynamic exclusion time 12 s). The HCD CE was set to 25% NCE and the background ion at 445.120025 Da was used as lock mass.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis for proteome profiling Analysis of the mass spectrometry data was performed in MaxQuant (version 1.6.17.0) with mainly default search settings including a false discovery rate set at 1% on peptide-to-spectrum matches (PSMs), peptide and protein level. Spectra were searched against the human protein sequences stored in the Swiss-Prot database (UPhuman_9606, database release version of January 2021, containing 20,394 protein sequences, downloaded from http://www.uniprot.org). The mass tolerance for precursor and fragment ions was set to 4.5 and 20 ppm, respectively, during the main search. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to arginine and lysine, also allowing cleavage at arginine- and lysine-proline bonds with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionine residues and acetylation of protein N-termini. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification. Matching between runs was enabled with a matching time window of 0.7 min and an alignment time window of 20 min. Only proteins with at least one unique or razor peptide were retained.  Proteins were quantified by the MaxLFQ algorithm integrated into the MaxQuant software. A minimum ratio count of two unique or razor peptides was required for quantification. A total of 53,296 PSMs were identified, resulting in 4,054 identified unique peptides corresponding to 759 proteins, of which 434 protein groups could be reliably quantified (i.e., protein groups with at least 3 valid LFQ intensity values in one of the experimental conditions). Data analysis was performed with the Perseus software (version 1.6.2.1) after loading the proteingroups file from MaxQuant. Reverse database hits and contaminants were removed, and LFQ intensity values were log2-transformed. The data were imputed to replace missing values with random, low numbers that are drawn from a normal distribution. Missing values represent low abundance measurements; hence the default parameters were used as they mimic this case. To assess the data variability, between replicas within each sample group, correlation plots with all LFQ values of the identified proteins were performed. In addition, a principal component analysis (PCA) was performed on the replicate samples using all quantified proteins as variables. To compare protein intensities in both sample sets, statistical testing for differences between the means of the two sample groups was performed using the package limma23.   Data analysis for the interactome profiling MS/MS data analysis for the identification and quantification of proteins was performed as described above (section Data analysis for the proteome profiling). Here, in all 25 samples of the interactome isolated from the control group, 158,803 PSMs, 4,899 peptides, and 827 protein groups were identified. Of those, 569 proteins were considered reliably quantified, i.e., proteins with at least 3 valid LFQ intensity values in one of the experimental conditions. In all 25 samples of the interactome isolated from the MCI sample group, 168,765 PSMs, 5,574 peptides, and 936 protein groups were identified. Of those, 590 proteins were considered reliably quantified. A total of 698 proteins were quantified between MCI and controls groups.   Data analysis was performed with the Perseus software (version 1.6.2.1) after loading the proteingroups file from MaxQuant. Reverse database hits and contaminants were removed, and LFQ intensity values were log2-transformed. The data were imputed to replace missing values with random numbers that are drawn from a normal distribution. Missing values represent low abundance measurements; hence the default parameters were used as they mimic this case. To assess the data variability, between replicas within each sample group, correlation plots with all identified proteins as variables were performed. To evaluate the variability of the samples, a PCA was performed on the replicate samples using all quantified proteins as variables.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hs-protein interaction; hs 3-o sulfation interactome; heparan sulfates; alzheimer’s disease;

### Affiliations
Medical Protein Chemistry
VIB-UGent Center for Medical Biotechnology Gent Department of Biomolecular Medicine

### Submitter
An Staes

### Lab Head
Dr Kris Gevaert
VIB-UGent Center for Medical Biotechnology Gent Department of Biomolecular Medicine


