### Accession
PXD039270

### Title
USING DESIGN OF EXPERIMENTS (DoE) TO OPTIMIZE PERFORMANCE AND STABILITY OF BIOMIMETIC CELL MEMBRANE-COATED NANOSTRUCTURES FOR CANCER THERAPY

### Description
The present study aimed to develop and optimize cell derived membrane-coated nanostructures by applying a design of experiments (DoE) to improve the therapeutic index by homotypic targeting in cancer cells. The protein composition of the extracted cell membrane from tumoral cells were assessed by mass spectrometry-based proteomics. PLGA-based nanoparticles encapsulating temozolomide (TMZ NPs) were successfully developed. The coating technology applying the isolated U251 cell membrane (MB) was optimized using a fractional two-level three-factor factorial design. All the formulation runs were systematically characterized regarding their diameter, polydispersity index (PDI), and zeta potential (ZP). Experimental conditions generated by DoE were also subjected to morphological studies using negative-staining transmission electron microscopy (TEM). MicroRaman, Fourier-Transform Infrared (FTIR) spectroscopies and Confocal microscopy were used as characterization techniques for evaluating the NP-MB nanostructures. Internalization studies were carried out to evaluate the homotypic targeting ability. The results have shown that nearly 80% of plasma membrane proteins were retained in the cell membrane vesicles after the isolation process, including key proteins to the homotypic binding. DoE analysis considering acquired TEM images reveals that condition run five should be the best-optimized procedure to produce the biomimetic cell-derived membrane-coated nanostructure (NP-MB). Raman, FTIR, and confocal characterization results have shown the successful encapsulation of TMZ drug and provided evidence of the effective coating applying the MB. Cell internalization studies corroborate the proteomic data indicating that the optimized NP-MB achieved specific targeting of homotypic tumor cells. The structure should retain the complex biological functions of U251 natural cell membranes while exhibiting physicochemical properties suitable for effective homotypic recognition. Together, these findings provide coverage and a deeper understanding regarding the dynamics around extracted cell membrane and polymeric nanostructures interactions and an in-depth insight into the cell membrane coating technology and the development of optimized biomimetic and bioinspired nanostructured systems.

### Sample Protocol
U251 cultured cell, freshly isolated cell membranes (MB), and isolated MB stored in PBS with protease inhibitors (Sigma Aldrich, Brazil) at −80 °C (during 6 months) were resuspended in lysis buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 10 mM DTT, and 0.01% Triton X-100) at room temperature for 2 h. Following, the lysis buffer was removed using Amicon® Ultra 0.5 3KD (Millipore). The protein content was quantified using QuantiPro™ BCA Assay Kit (Sigma Aldrich, Brazil) and NanoDrop One (Thermo Scientific, USA). To confirm protein quantification and to check the protein banding pattern, a 10% SDS-Page gel analysis of the samples was performed by applying 10 ug of BSA as a standard protein sample.  Samples (10 µg) were incubated with RapiGestTM SF Surfactant (Waters, USA) for 15 min, 80 ºC, and 100 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 30 min. Alkylation was performed using 300 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 min in the dark, following digestion with trypsin (1:100 w/w trypsin: protein) overnight, at room temperature. Finally, the peptides were acidified using 1% v/v formic acid to stop the trypsin digestion and lyophilized before desalting. Samples were resuspended in 0.1% v/v trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and desalted using ZipTipC18 Pipette Tip with C18 Resin (Sigma Aldrich, Brazil) following the manufacturer's instructions. The mass spectrometry analysis were carried out using the nanoElute nanoflow chromatographic system (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) coupled online to a hybrid trapped ion mobility spectrometry-quadrupole mass spectrometer time-of-flight mass spectrometer-timsTof Pro (Bruker Daltonics). An aliquot (1 µL) of the sample, equivalent to 200 ng of peptides, was injected into an Aurora 2 C18 trap column (1.6µm, 250mm x 75µm) (ionOpticks, Australia). A typical RP gradient (Solvent A: 0.1% AF, 99.9% H2O MilliQ; Solvent B: 0.1% AF, 99.9% CH3CN) was established in a liquid chromatography nanoflow system and separated at a flow rate of 400 nL.min- 1. The column temperature was maintained at 50 °C. The chromatographic run was 120 min (2% to 15% Solvent B for 60 min; raised to 25% at 90 min; raised to 37% at 100 min; raised to 95% at 110 min and finally 95% for 10 min for column washing).  The column was coupled, online, to a timsTOF-Pro with a CaptiveSpray ion source, (Bruker Daltonik GmbH). The temperature of the capillary ion transfer line was set to 180 °C. Ion accumulation for 123 ms and separation by mobility were obtained with an input potential ramp from -160 V to -20 V within 123s. During the acquisition, to enable the PASEF method, i.e., the accumulation parallel to the fragmentation of the ions, the precursor m/z and mobility information was first derived from a Tims-MS full scan experiment, with an m/z range of 100-1700. Monocharged precursors were excluded for their position in the m/z-ion plane of mobility, and precursors that reached the target value of 20,000 a.u. were dynamically excluded for 0.4 min. The operational mode of the TIMS-ToF, MS and PASEF were controlled and synchronized with the aid of the instrumental control software OtofControl 5.1 by Bruker Daltonik.

### Data Protocol
Data processing, protein identification and relative quantification analyzes were performed using the MaxQuant Software (https://www.maxquant.org/). Processing parameters included: carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed amino acid modification. Methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were considered variable variations. Trypsin was used as a proteolytic enzyme, with a maximum of 2 possible cleavage errors. The ion mass shift tolerance for peptides and fragments was adjusted to 20 ppm and 0.05 Da, respectively. A maximum false positive rate (FDR) of 1% was used for peptide and protein identification, considering at least one single peptide for protein identification as a criterion. All the proteins were identified with a confidence level ≥ 95% using the MaxQuant algorithm and searching within the revised Human Uniprot database (https://www.uniprot.org/uniprotkb?facets=reviewed%3Atrue%2Cmodel_organism%A9606&query=Human), with 20,401 sequences.

### Publication Abstract
<b>Introduction:</b> Cell membrane-covered biomimetic nanosystems have allowed the development of homologous nanostructures to bestow nanoparticles with enhanced biointerfacing capabilities. The stability of these structures, however, still represents a challenge for the scientific community. This study is aimed at developing and optimizing cell derived membrane-coated nanostructures upon applying design of experiments (DoE) to improve the therapeutic index by homotypic targeting in cancer cells. <b>Methods:</b> Important physicochemical features of the extracted cell membrane from tumoral cells were assessed by mass spectrometry-based proteomics. PLGA-based nanoparticles encapsulating temozolomide (TMZ NPs) were successfully developed. The coating technology applying the isolated U251 cell membrane (MB) was optimized using a fractional two-level three-factor factorial design. All the formulation runs were systematically characterized regarding their diameter, polydispersity index (PDI), and zeta potential (ZP). Experimental conditions generated by DoE were also subjected to morphological studies using negative-staining transmission electron microscopy (TEM). Its short-time stability was also assessed. MicroRaman and Fourier-Transform Infrared (FTIR) spectroscopies and Confocal microscopy were used as characterization techniques for evaluating the NP-MB nanostructures. Internalization studies were carried out to evaluate the homotypic targeting ability. <b>Results and Discussion:</b> The results have shown that nearly 80% of plasma membrane proteins were retained in the cell membrane vesicles after the isolation process, including key proteins to the homotypic binding. DoE analysis considering acquired TEM images reveals that condition run five should be the best-optimized procedure to produce the biomimetic cell-derived membrane-coated nanostructure (NP-MB). Storage stability for at least two weeks of the biomimetic system is expected once the original characteristics of diameter, PDI, and ZP, were maintained. Raman, FTIR, and confocal characterization results have shown the successful encapsulation of TMZ drug and provided evidence of the effective coating applying the MB. Cell internalization studies corroborate the proteomic data indicating that the optimized NP-MB achieved specific targeting of homotypic tumor cells. The structure should retain the complex biological functions of U251 natural cell membranes while exhibiting physicochemical properties suitable for effective homotypic recognition. <b>Conclusion:</b> Together, these findings provide coverage and a deeper understanding regarding the dynamics around extracted cell membrane and polymeric nanostructures interactions and an in-depth insight into the cell membrane coating technology and the development of optimized biomimetic and bioinspired nanostructured systems.

### Keywords
Cell membrane coating technology; mass spectrometry-based proteomics; biomimetic systems; stability; design of experiments; homotypic recognition; glioblastoma; temozolomide drug.

### Affiliations
Nanomedicine and Nanotoxicology Group, Physics Institute of São Carlos, São Paulo University. Avenida Trabalhador São Carlense, 400, CEP13560970 (Brazil) Phone: (+55) 16 3373 8656, São Carlos – SP – Brazil.

### Submitter
Natália  Ferreira 

### Lab Head
Dr Valtencir Zucolotto
Nanomedicine and Nanotoxicology Group, Physics Institute of São Carlos, São Paulo University. Avenida Trabalhador São Carlense, 400, CEP13560970 (Brazil) Phone: (+55) 16 3373 8656, São Carlos – SP – Brazil.


