### Accession
PXD042826

### Title
Quantitative ChIP-MS analysis of proteins associated with H3K4me1- and H3K4me3-enriched mono-nucleosomes purified from crosslinked IMR-90 cells

### Description
Here we used ChIP-MS to quantitatively profile chromatin-associated proteins that are specifically associated with H3K4me1- and H3K4me3-modified nucleosomes in IMR-90 chromatin.

### Sample Protocol
IMR90 human fibroblast cells were cultured at 37˚C with 5% CO 2 in DMEM containing 4.5 mg/ml glucose, 10% fetal calf serum, 1 mM sodium pyruvate, 1% pen/strep and 1% L-glutamine. Cells were washed three times with PBS and cross-linked on the plate with 1.25 µM EGS and 0.75 µM DSG in PBS for 30 min. at RT. After the first cross-linking reaction, cells were washed twice with PBS and cross-linked with 1% formaldehyde in PBS at RT for 10 min. Cross-linking reactions were quenched by the addition of glycine solution in PBS to a final concentration of 125 mM and incubation at RT for 5 min. Cells were then washed three times with ice-cold PBS, harvested by scraping and pelleted by centrifugation (1,000 g, 5 min., 4°C). Cells were lysed in a hypotonic buffer (10 mM Tris (pH 7.6), 5 mM NaCl, 1.5 mM MgCl 2 ) supplemented with 0.1% NP-40, protease inhibitors cocktail,10 mM sodium butyrate, and 1mM DTT using a Dounce homogenizer as described previously. Nuclei were pelleted by centrifugation (3,000g, 5 min., 4°C), washed in hypotonic buffer supplemented with 300 mM NaCl, and pelleted again (3,000 g, 5 min., 4°C). Nuclei were resuspended in nuclear lysis buffer (15 mM Tris (pH 7.6), 10% glycerol, 1% SDS) and incubated for 5 min. on ice. Chromatin was pelleted by centrifugation (5,000 g, 5 min., 4°C), washed in a chromatin washing buffer (15 mM Tris (pH 7.6), 300 mM NaCl, 1.5 mM MgCl 2 , 0.5% NP-40, 0.5% Triton-X-100), pelleted again (5,000 g, 5 min., 4°C), and resuspended in ChIP buffer (20 mM Tris (pH 7.6), 150 mM NaCl, 2 mM EDTA, 1% Triton-X-100, 0.01% SDS) supplemented with protease inhibitors cocktail and 10 mM sodium butyrate. DNA was fragmented to an average size of 150-300 bp by sonication (Qsonica Q800R2, 70% amp, 10 sec “off”, 10 sec “on”, 40 min. active sonication time, 4°C). Chromatin debris was pelleted by centrifugation (16,000 g, 10 min., 4°C). 25 µl of supernatant were used for DNA purification to check the average DNA fragment size and another 25 µl supernatant aliquot was transferred to a fresh tube, de-crosslinked as described below, and stored at 4°C until it was later used as an “input” sample for histone PTM analysis to define the average levels of core histone PTMs in bulk chromatin. Approximately 0.2 mg chromatin (as measured by DNA content) was used for each ChIP reaction with the following antibodies: anti-H3K4me1 (Abcam, ab8895), anti-H3K4me3 (Millipore, 17-614), anti-H3 (Active motif, 39163), anti-H4 (Abcam, ab31830). For H3K4me3 ChIP reactions 0.6 mg chromatin was used. The antibody-chromatin mixture was incubated overnight on a rotation wheel (25 rpm) at 4 °C. Antibodies were captured using a 1:1 mixture of protein A and protein G Dynabeads™ (ThermoFisher Scientific); 40 µl of beads mixture were used per ChIP sample. Beads were washed three times with ice-cold ChIP buffer and twice with ice-cold ChIP buffer supplemented with NaCl to a final concentration of 500mM. Antibodies and co-bound chromatin were eluted by boiling the beads in 30 µl of Laemmli sample buffer containing 1% SDS and supplemented with 300 mM NaCl for 10 min. at 95°C. The eluate was transferred to a fresh tube and incubated in a thermomixer at 65°C and 500 rpm for 12 h. For the identification and quantification of co-purified chromatin proteins, a 10 µl aliquot of the eluted proteins in Laemmli sample buffer was subjected to trypsin digestion using a FASP protocol and analyzed by LC-MS as described below. LC-MS/MS analysis of ChIP-MS proteomics samples was performed on a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, U.S.A.) coupled in-line to a nanoEasy LC (Thermo Scientific, Odense, Denmark). Samples were loaded in solvent A (0.1% formic acid) on a two-column setup consisting of a 3.5 cm, 100 µm ID pre-column packed with Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ (5 µm; Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany) and an 18 cm, 75 µm ID analytical column packed with Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ (3 µm; Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany). A gradient of solvent B (95% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) was applied at a flow of 250 nl/min. as follows: 3% to 25% B in 90 minutes, 25% to 45% B in 30 minutes, 45% to 100% B in 3 minutes, and 100% B in 8 minutes. MS was obtained at a resolution of 120,000 and MS/MS as top 15 at a resolution of 15,000 and with a dynamic exclusion of 30 sec. The maximum injection time was set to 100 ms for both MS and MS/MS and only peptides of charge state 2, 3, and 4 were selected for MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification were performed using the Proteome Discoverer 2.5 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) software. Data were searched against the human SwissProt database using Mascot as a search engine, with a precursor mass tolerance of 5 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.05 Da. Two missed cleavages were allowed for trypsin and carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a static modification, while oxidation of methionine was set as dynamic. Label-free quantification was achieved as a match between runs by utilizing the Minora Feature Detector, the Feature Mapper, and the Precursor Ions Quantifier. The maximum retention time shift for chromatographic alignment was set to 2 minutes and the retention time tolerance for mapping features was set to 1 minute. Peptide quantification was done as peak area normalized to total peptide amount and protein quantification as the average of the top 3 unique peptides.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
H3k4me1, H3k4me3, Chip-ms

### Affiliations
Institute of Functional Epigenetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, 85764 Neuherberg, Germany

### Submitter
Andrey Tvardovskiy

### Lab Head
Dr Till Bartke
Institute of Functional Epigenetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, 85764 Neuherberg, Germany


