### Accession
PXD015653

### Title
Comprehensive analysis of symmetric arginine dimethylation in colorectal cancer tissues from patients using immuniaffinity enrichment followed by LC-MS/MS analysis

### Description
Post-translational arginine methylation is responsible for regulation of a variety of biological processes. The protein arginine methyltransferase 5 (PRMT5) is the major enzyme responsible for generating monomethyl- and symmetric dimethyl arginine (MMA and SDMA, respectively) in proteins. PRMT5 is essential for viability and normal development, and overexpressed in a wide variety of cancer types. In the present study, we found that the levels of PRMT5 and symmetric dimethylation in proteins from colorectal cancer (CRC) tissues are more highly maintained relative to adjacent normal tissues from patients. Using immunoaffinity enrichment of methylated peptides combined with high resolution mass spectrometry, a total of 147 SDMA sites from 94 proteins were identified. Most abundant methylated proteins identified from normal and CRC tissues are RNA processing proteins, transcriptional and translational regulators. Furthermore, when quantitative analysis of the two tissue types of samples was carried out, 77 SDMA sites exhibited statistically significant changes (>2.0-fold, p-value <0.05) between normal and CRC tissues. We confirmed KSRP, G3BP2 and TRIP6 which are more highly maintained in cancer tissues relative to adjacent normal tissues from same patients as well as the expression levels of the proteins. This study is the first comprehensive analysis of symmetric arginine dimethylation using clinical samples and suggests that the modification can be used in clinical application.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of colon tissue All clinical samples were obtained from the Samsung Medical Center Biobank, and approved by the Institutional Research Board (No. 2017-05-065) for research purposes. Twelve frozen CRC tissues and their matched adjacent normal tissues were collected after surgery, and the tissue samples were immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen. For protein extraction, 50 to 100 mg of tissue was homogenized using a TissueLyser (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) in lysis buffer (20 mM HEPES, pH 8.0, 9.0 M urea, 1mM sodium vanadate, 1 mM glycerol phosphate, and 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate), and sonicated with 3 bursts for 30 s each at 15 W. The extracts were then centrifuged at 20,000  g at 4°C for 15 min, and the supernatant was stored at -80 °C until use. The protein concentration of tissue lysate was measured using the Bradford method. For the purification of methylarginine-containing peptides, 3 mg of protein extracts obtained from each CRC tissue were combined to make up a total of 30 mg of protein extracts, and 15 mg of extracts were used to analyze symmetric arginine modification. The extracts were reduced with 4.5 mM DTT for 30 min at 55 °C, and then alkaylated with iodoacetamide (10 mM) for 15 min at room temperature (RT) in the dark. The samples were then diluted greater than 4-fold with 20 mM HEPES, pH 8.0, to make the extract concentration 1 mg/mL, and digested with trypsin (10 µg/mL) overnight at RT. The digests were acidified with 1 % TFA, and the peptides were desalted over Sep-Pak C18 columns (WAT051910, Waters, Milford, MA), eluted with 40 % acetonitrile in 0.1 % TFA, lyophilized, and stored at -80 °C. Purification of methylarginine-containing peptides was performed using PTMScan symmetric dimethyl arginine motif kit (Cell Signaling Technology #13563), according to the manufacturer’s instructions. After peptide incubation with the antibody-conjugated beads for 2 hours at 4°C, the immunoprecipitates were washed twice in ice-cold IAP buffer followed by three washes in water; then, bound methyl peptides were eluted with 2 x 50 uL of 0.15% TFA. Peptide eluates were desalted on reversed-phase C18 StageTips, as described previously [26], prior to nano-LC-MS/MS analysis. LC-MS/MS Analysis Methylarginine-containing peptides purified by immunoaffinity enrichment were dissolved in 0.125% formic acid with 5% acetonitrile and separated on a PicoFrit capillary reversed-phase column (75 ㎛ x 10 cm ) packed with Magic C18 AQ (100 A x 3 μM, Michrom, Auburn, CA) reversed-phase resin. Two replicate injections of each type of sample were run non-sequentially. Peptides were eluted using a 120-min linear gradient of (5–30) % acetonitrile in 0.125% formic acid delivered at 280 nL/min using an Easy nLC (Thermo Fisher). Tandem mass spectra were collected in a data-dependent manner by a LTQ-Orbitrap-Velos mass spectrometer. The LTQ-Orbitrap-Velos utilized a top-20 method, collecting MS spectra in the Orbitrap mass analyzer at a resolution of 60,000 [m/z (300 to 1,500)] with an automatic gain control target of 1x106 (maximum ion time: 1000 ms) and collision-induced dissociation (CID) MS/MS spectra in the ion trap with an automatic gain control target of 5  103 (maximum ion time: 150 ms). The dynamic exclusion parameters were employed with a repeat count of 1, and a repeat duration of 30 s. Ions that had a charge of 1 or were unassigned were excluded from MS/MS analysis. Real time recalibration of mass error was performed using lock mass (Olsen) with a singly charged polysiloxane ion m/z = 371.101237. CID scans were acquired in a linear trap quadrupole (LTQ) with 35 % normalized collision energy (NCE), and a 2.0 Da isolation window for MS/MS fragmentation was applied.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched using SEQUEST Files were searched against the SwissProt Homo sapiens FASTA database (released April 19th, 2015). A mass accuracy of +/-5 ppm was used for precursor ions and 1.0 Da for product ions. Enzyme specificity was limited to trypsin, with at least one tryptic (K- or R-containing) terminus required per peptide and up to four mis-cleavages allowed. Cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57.02146374) was specified as a static modification, oxidation of methionine (+15.9949146221) and methylation (+14.0156500642 for monomethyl and +28.0313001284 for dimethyl) on arginine residues were allowed as variable modifications. Reversed decoy databases were included for all searches to estimate false discovery rates and filtered using a 5% FDR in the Linear Discriminant module of Core. Peptides were also manually filtered using a +/-5ppm mass error range and presence of a methylated arginine residue. Sites of arginine methylation were determined using a slight variation on the Ascore algorithm [17], with sites scoring >13 considered confidently assigned.      All quantitative results were generated using Progenesis (Nonlinear Dynamics) and Skyline (MacLean) to extract the integrated peak area of the corresponding peptide assignments. The intensity of identified peptides was represented by the peak area of the extracted ion chromatogram of their monoisotopic peaks. The peptide with the highest intensity was picked to represent one methylation site of a protein when multiple peptides were identified for the same methylation site. For statistical analysis, the peptide peak intensity values were first log-transformed followed by Student’s t-test comparison of the log2(peptide peak intensity) values obtained from the two LC-MS/MS replicates of the peptides containing methylarginine from each type of sample.  Heat maps of the quantitative data were generated and clustered in Perseus software (version 1.6.1.1, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry).

### Publication Abstract
Protein arginine methyltransferase 5 (PRMT5) is a major enzyme responsible for generating monomethyl and symmetric dimethyl arginine in proteins. PRMT5 is essential for cell viability and development, and its overexpression is observed in a variety of cancers. In the present study, it is found that levels of PRMT5 protein and symmetric arginine dimethylation in colorectal cancer (CRC) tissues are increased compared to those in adjacent noncancerous tissues. Using immunoaffinity enrichment of methylated peptides combined with high-resolution mass spectrometry, a total of 147 symmetric dimethyl-arginine (SDMA) sites in 94 proteins are identified, many of which are RNA binding proteins and enzymes. Quantitative analysis comparing CRC and normal tissues reveals significant increase in the symmetric dimethylation of 70 arginine sites in 46 proteins and a decrease in that of four arginine sites in four proteins. Among the 94 proteins identified in this study, it is confirmed that KH-type splicing regulatory protein is a target of PRMT5 and highly expressed in CRC tissues compared to noncancerous tissues. This study is the first comprehensive analysis of symmetric arginine dimethylation using clinical samples and extends the number of known in vivo SDMA sites. The data obtained are available via ProteomeXchange with the identifier PXD015653.

### Keywords
Prmt5, Symmetric arginine methylation, Colorectal cancer, Mass spectrometry, Immunoaffinity enrichment

### Affiliations
Center for Teragnosis, biomedical research institute, Korea Institute of Science and Technology, Seoul, Korea
KIST

### Submitter
Yae Eun Park

### Lab Head
Dr Ji Eun Lee
Center for Teragnosis, biomedical research institute, Korea Institute of Science and Technology, Seoul, Korea


