### Accession
PXD003434

### Title
Homogenization of tissues via picosecond-infrared laser (PIRL) ablation: Giving a closer view on the in-vivo composition of protein species as compared to mechanical homogenization

### Description
Tissue samples from human tonsils and rat pancreas were subjected to a novel laser-based homogenization method, the PIRL-DIVE homogenization, and to a conventional mechanical tissue homogenization procedure (bead mill and a cryo-grinder). The protein species composition of the protein extracts were compared by differential proteome analysis using two-dimensional gel electrophoresis followed by LC-MS/MS analysis and one-dimensional gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) followed by quantitative LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Sample Protocol
The 1DE-LC-MS/MS study includes three biological replicates for both tissues, as well as three biological replicates of pancreas tissue spiked with alpha-S1/S2-casein. The SDS-PAGE lanes were cut into bands covering the entire mass range of the gel and subjected to tryptic in-gel digestion and subsequent LC-MS/MS analysis with an Orbitrap Q Exactive or an Orbitrap Fusion instrument (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The 2DE-LC-MS/MS study includes one biological replicate of the human tonsil. Selected spots were cut from the two-dimensional gel, tryptically digested, and subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis (Orbitrap Fusion and Orbitrap Q Exactive, Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometric data of the 1DE-LC-MS/MS approach were processed with MaxQuant 1.5.2.8, including protein identification with the Andromeda search engine and quantification with MaxQuant's Label Free Quantification algorithm (MaxLFQ). Identification was performed with a precursor tolerance of 10 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.5 Da (Orbitrap Fusion) or 20 ppm (Orbitrap Q Exactive). Mass spectrometric data of the 2DE-LC-MS/MS approach were analyzed with Proteome Discoverer 2.0 (Thermo Scientific). Identification was performed with Sequest HT with a precursor tolerance of 10 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.5 Da (Orbitrap Fusion).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sample preparation, Lc-msms, Proteolysis, Pirl, Tissue homogenization, Pirl-dive, Protein species

### Affiliations
Mass Spectrometric Proteomics, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany

### Submitter
Marcus Wurlitzer

### Lab Head
Dr Hartmut Schlüter
Mass Spectrometric Proteomics, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany


