### Accession
PXD007170

### Title
Human Salivary Cystatins -  SALIVARY CYSTATINS: EXPLORING NEW POST-TRANSLATIONAL MODIFICATIONS AND POLYMORPHISMS BY TOP-DOWN HIGH RESOLUTION MASS SPECTROMETRY

### Description
In the present study various proteoforms of cystatin A, cystatin B, cystatin D, cystatin S, cystatin SN and cystatin SA were detected and characterized by a top-down HPLC-ESI-MS platform integrated by bottom-up strategies in the acidic soluble fraction of human saliva. The several proteoforms derive from polymorphisms of the coding sequence and post-translational modifications, typically phosphorylation, N-terminal processing, and oxidation. The protein species detected in saliva collected from healthy subjects were: (i) cystatin AT96→M and its acetylated derivative; (ii) cystatin B N-terminally acetylated and carboxymethylated at C3; (iii) N-terminally truncated cystatin D with the N-terminal Q converted to pyro-E and lacking the first 5 amino acid residues (pGlu-cystatin D Des1-5); (iv) N-terminally truncated forms of cystatin SN and SNP11→L lacking the first 4 amino acids (cystatin SN Des1-4 and cystatin SNP11→L Des1-4) and the first 7 amino acids (cystatin SN Des1-7 and cystatin SNP11→L Des1-7); (v) N-terminally truncated cystatin SA lacking the first 7 amino acids (cystatin SA Des1-7); (vi) oxidized derivatives of cystatins SN and S1 at W23 and W107.

### Sample Protocol
Sample Collection: Unstimulated whole saliva (WS) was collected from 54 adult healthy donors (40 ± 10 years old, males n = 23, females n = 31), recruited from the general population. Donors did not eat or drink at least 2 h before the collection, which was performed in the morning between 10:00 A.M. and 12:00 A.M. with a soft plastic aspirator. Saliva was transferred to a plastic tube in an ice bath, and 0.2% 2,2,2-trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was immediately added in 1:1 v/v ratio. The solution was thencentrifuged at 10000 x g for 10 min at 4 °C. The acidic supernatant was separated from the precipitate, and either immediately analyzed by HPLC-ESI-MS (33 µl, corresponding to 16.5 µl of saliva) or stored at -80° C until the analysis. Enriched fraction preparation and bottom-up experiments: Enriched fractions were obtained by preparative RP-HPLC (Dionex Ultimate 3000 instrument, ThermoFisher Scientific, Sunnyvale CA) of selected saliva samples. The chromatographic column was a reversed phase Vydac (Hesperia, CA) C8 column with 5 µm particle diameter (250 x 10 mm). The following eluents were used: (eluent A) 0.056% (v/v) aqueous TFA and (eluent B) 0.05% (v/v) TFA in acetonitrile-water 80/20. The step gradient was from 0 to 50% B in 30 minutes, from 50 to 65% B in 20 minutes, and from 65 to 100% B in 1 minutes with a flow rate of 2.8 ml/min. Fractions corresponding to peaks eluting between 30 and 37 minutes were collected separately and lyophilized. Each fraction was solubilized in 100 µl of ultrapure H2O, and 1/3 of the solution was acidified with 0.2% TFA (1:1 v/v ratio) to be checked by HPLC low-resolution ESI-MS. The remaining sample was lyophilized for HPLC high-resolution-ESI-MS/MS experiments. For the structural characterization of cystatin D proteoforms, an aliquot of the lyophilized sample was submitted to reduction of disulfide bonds at 100 °C for 5 min followed by an incubation at 50 °C for 15 min in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer pH 8.0 containing 10 mM dithiotreitol (DTT) in a final volume of 35 µl. The reaction sample was alkylated in the dark at 30 °C for 45 min using 55 mM iodoacetamide (IAM) and subsequently submitted to enzyme digestion. The trypsin digestion was performed by the kit “Trypsin Singles Proteomic Grade” (Sigma-Aldrich) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Digestion was stopped after 8 h by acidification with 0.1% FA, lyophilized, and stored at -80° C until the analysis by HPLC high-resolution ESI-MS/MS. HPLC High-resolution ESI-MS/MS experiments: The experiments were carried out by an Ultimate 3000 RSLC Nano System HPLC apparatus (ThermoFisher Scientific, Sunnyvale, CA) coupled to a LTQ Orbitrap Elite apparatus (ThermoFisher Scientific). The columns were a Zorbax 300SB-C8 column (3.5 µm particle diameter; 1.0 x 150 mm) for the top-down analysis, and a Zorbax 300SB-C18 column (3.5 µm particle diameter; 1.0 x 150 mm) for the bottom-up. Eluents were: (eluent A) 0.1% (v/v) acqueous FA, and (eluent B) 0.1% (v/v) FA in acetonitrile-water 80/20. For both top-down and bottom-up analyses the gradient was: 0–2 min 5% B, 2-40 min from 5% to 55% B (linear), 40-45 min from 70% to 99% B, at a flow rate of 50 µL/min. MS and MS/MS spectra were collected in positive mode with the resolution of 60000. The acquisition range was from 350 to 2000 m/z for the top-down experiments and the bottom-up experiments. Tuning parameters: capillary temperature was 300 °C, and the source voltage 4.0 kV, S-Lens RF level 60% in the top-down and the bottom-up experiments. In data-dependent acquisition mode the five most abundant ions were selected and fragmented by using collision-induced dissociation (CID) or higher energy collision dissociation (HCD), with 35% normalized collision energy for 30 ms, isolation width of 5 m/z, activation q of 0.25. The inject volume was 20 μL.

### Data Protocol
HPLC-ESI-MS and MS/MS data were generated by Xcalibur 2.2 SP1.48 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using default parameters of the Xtract program for the deconvolution. In top-down experiments protein sequences and sites of covalent modifications were validated by manual inspection of the experimental fragmentation spectra against the theoretical ones generated by MS-Product software available at the ProteinProspector website (http://prospector.ucsf.edu/prospector/mshome.htm). In bottom-up experiments, MS/MS data were analyzed by the Proteome Discoverer 1.4 program, based on SEQUEST HT cluster as a search engine (University of Washington, licensed to Thermo Electron Corp., San Jose, CA) against the Swiss-Prot Homo Sapiens proteome (UniProtKB, Swiss-Prot, release 2017_02). The settings were: trypsin enzyme with a maximum of two missed cleavage sites, precursor mass search tolerance was 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance 0.5 Da. Target FDR was: 0.01 (strict), 0.05 (relaxed). The following modifications were selected: in dynamic mode oxidation of methionine and carbamidomethylation of cysteine in static mode.  Files Associations:  File: ManualAnnotation_Cyst_A_Ac_TopDown; Raw: SM005, CysA var 191107  File: ManualAnnotation_Cyst_A_T96M_TopDown; Raw: CSM021, CysA var 191107, SM015 File: ManualAnnotation_Cyst_B_CMC_TopDown; Raw: AIH003msms 16022017, AIH003 msmsm 09032017  File: ManualAnnotation_Cyst_D_C26R_Des1-8_TopDown; Raw: CSM028  File: ManualAnnotation_Cyst_D_C26R_Des1-5_pGlu_TopDown; Raw: CSM028  File: ManualAnnotation_Cyst_SA_Des1-7_TopDown; Raw: SM014  File: ManualAnnotation_Cyst_SN_Des1-7_TopDown; Raw: SM009  File: ManualAnnotation_Cyst_SN_Des1-4_TopDown; Raw: SM049  File: ManualAnnotation_Cyst_SN_P11L_Des1-4_TopDown; Raw: SM001  File: ManualAnnotation_Cyst_SN_P11L_TopDown; Raw: SM001  File: ManualAnnotation_Cyst_S1_W23_monoOX_TopDown; Raw: CSM002, PBC001cid 090320147  File: ManualAnnotation_Cyst_S1_W23_diOX_TopDown; Raw: CSM002, PBC001cid 090320147 File: ManualAnnotation_Cyst_SN_W23_monoOX_TopDown; Raw: CSM014, PBC001 msms 09032017  File: ManualAnnotation_Cyst_S1_W23_W107_diOX_TopDown; Raw: CSM002, PBC001cid 090320147 File: ManualAnnotation_Cyst_D_ C26R_ Fr 4-26_BottomUp; Raw: DT40108

### Publication Abstract
Cystatins are a complex family of cysteine peptidase inhibitors. In the present study, various proteoforms of cystatin A, cystatin B, cystatin S, cystatin SN, and cystatin SA were detected in the acid-soluble fraction of human saliva and characterized by a top-down HPLC-ESI-MS approach. Proteoforms of cystatin D were also detected and characterized by an integrated top-down and bottom-up strategy. The proteoforms derive from coding sequence polymorphisms and post-translational modifications, in particular, phosphorylation, N-terminal processing, and oxidation. This study increases the current knowledge of salivary cystatin proteoforms and provides the basis to evaluate possible qualitative/quantitative variations of these proteoforms in different pathological states and reveal new potential salivary biomarkers of disease. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD007170.

### Keywords
Post-translational modifications, Top-down high-resolution mass spectrometry., S-type cystatins, Cystatin b, Cystatin a, Cystatin d, Human saliva

### Affiliations
University of Cagliari
Department of Life and Environmental Sciences, Biomedical Section, University of Cagliari, Monserrato, CA, Italy.

### Submitter
Barbara Manconi

### Lab Head
Dr Barbara Manconi
Department of Life and Environmental Sciences, Biomedical Section, University of Cagliari, Monserrato, CA, Italy.


