### Accession
PXD031170

### Title
Replisome composition of stalled, terminating replication forks

### Description
Topological stress can cause replication forks to stall as they converge upon one another during termination of vertebrate DNA synthesis. However, replication forks ultimately overcome topological stress and complete DNA synthesis, suggesting that alternative mechanisms can overcome topological stress. We performed a proteomic analysis of converging replication forks that were stalled by topological stress induced by loss or inhibition of topoisomerase IIα (TOP2α). Plasmid DNA was replicated in mock- or TOP2α-depleted Xenopus egg extracts as previously described (Heintzman et al. 2019). In parallel, replication was performed in the presence of the TOP2 inhibitor ICRF-193 (‘TOP2-i’) as an alternate means of preventing TOP2 activity (Heintzman et al. 2019). Chromatinized plasmid DNA was recovered 18 minutes after the onset of DNA synthesis, when most forks have normally merged but are stalled when TOP2 activity is prevented (Heintzman et al. 2019). Chromatin-bound proteins were recovered (Larsen et al. 2019) then analyzed by chromatin mass spectrometry and quantified by label free quantification.

### Sample Protocol
Plasmid DNA was replicated in egg extracts at 5 ng/uL (final concentration). At 18 minutes, 3 µL of the reaction were withdrawn and plasmids and associated proteins were recovered by plasmid pull down using LacI coated beads (Larsen et al. 2019). After 30 min incubation at 4°C, samples were washed twice in 10 mM Hepes pH 7.7, 50 mM KCl, 2.5 mM MgCl2, 0.03% Tween 20, and once in 10 mM Hepes pH 7.7, 50 mM KCl, 2.5 mM MgCl2. Samples were washed one additional time in 50 µL of 10 mM Hepes pH 7.7, 50 mM KCl, 2.5 mM MgCl2 and transferred to a new tube to remove residual detergent. Beads were dried out and resuspended in 50 µL denaturation buffer (8 M Urea, 100 mM Tris pH 8.0). Cysteines were reduced (1 mM DTT, 15 minutes at RT) and alkylated (5 mM iodoacetamide, 45 min at RT). Proteins were digested and eluted from beads with 1.5 µg LysC (Sigma) for 2.5 hr at RT. Eluted samples were transferred to a new tube and diluted 1:4 with ABC (50 mM ammonium bicarbonate). 2.5 µg trypsin was added an incubated 16 hours at 30°C. NaCl was added to 400 mM final concentration and peptides were acidified and purified by stage tipping on C18 material. Three independent experiments were performed for each condition.

### Data Protocol
Samples were analyzed by nanoflow LC-MS/MS using a data-dependent top20 method on a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer. MS/MS spectra were searched against a Xenopus laevis database and normalization was performed with MaxQuant-LFQ as previously described (Räschle et al. 2015).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Xenopus, Lc-msms, Egg extracts, Topoisomerase, Dna replication, Termination

### Affiliations
Vanderbilt University Proteomics Core
Vanderbilt university

### Submitter
Kristie Lindsey Rose

### Lab Head
Dr Kristie Lindsey Rose
Vanderbilt University Proteomics Core


