### Accession
PXD022989

### Title
Target search for self-reactive antibodies in human renal allograft rejection

### Description
Self-reactive antibodies cloned from B cells infiltrating in a human renal allograft were subjected to IP-mass spectrometry using nuclear lysates of HEp-2 cells.

### Sample Protocol
IP from a nuclear fraction of HEp-2 cell lysates HEp-2 nuclear lysates were precleared with Protein A Agarose beads, and incubated with 5 μg of antibodies at 4 °C overnight. The beads were washed with Tween20-containing PBS, and captured antibody-antigen complexes were eluted and resolved by SDS-PAGE. Gels were stained with InstantBlue® Protein Stain (Expedeon) at 4 °C overnight. Stained gels were destained in deionized water, excised leaving molecular weight higher than IgG heavy chain, and used for mass spectrometry.  Sample preparation for mass spectrometry Gel Samples were excised by sterile razor blade and chopped into ~1 mm3 pieces. Each section was washed in distilled water and destained using 100 mM NH4HCO3 pH7.5 in 50 % acetonitrile. A reduction step was performed by addition of 100 μL 50 mM NH4HCO3 pH 7.5 and 10 μL of 200 mM tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine HCl at 37 °C for 30 minutes. The proteins were alkylated by addition of 100 μL of 50 mM iodoacetamide prepared fresh in 50 mM NH4HCO3 pH 7.5 buffer, and allowed to react in the dark at 20 °C for 30 minutes. Gel sections were washed in water, then acetonitrile, and vacuum dried. Trypsin digestion was carried out overnight at 37 °C with 1:50 - 1:100 enzyme-protein ratio of sequencing grade-modified trypsin (Promega) in 50 mM NH4HCO3 pH 7.5, and 20 mM CaCl2. Peptides were extracted first with 5 % formic acid, then with 75 % ACN : 5 % formic acid, combined and vacuum dried. Digested peptides were cleaned up on a C18 column (Pierce), speed vacuumed and sent for liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) to the Proteomics Core at Mayo Clinic.  High-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) for mass spectrometry All samples were resuspended in Burdick & Jackson HPLC-grade water containing 0.2 % formic acid (Fluka), 0.1% TFA (Pierce), and 0.002% Zwittergent 3-16 (Calbiochem), a sulfobetaine detergent that contributes the following distinct peaks at the end of chromatograms: MH+ at 392, and in-source dimer [2M + H+] at 783, and some minor impurities of Zwittergent 3-12 seen as MH+ at 336. The peptide samples were loaded to a 0.25 μL C8 OptiPak trapping cartridge custom-packed with Michrom Magic (Optimize Technologies) C8, washed, then switched in-line with a 20 cm by 75 μm C18 packed spray tip nano column packed with Michrom Magic C18AQ, for a 2-step gradient. Mobile phase A was water/acetonitrile/formic acid (98/2/0.2) and mobile phase B was acetonitrile/isopropanol/water/formic acid (80/10/10/0.2). Using a flow rate of 350 nL/min, a 90-minute 2-step LC gradient was run from 5 % B to 50 % B in 60 minutes, followed by 50 % - 95 % B over the next 10 minutes, hold 10 minutes at 95 % B, back to starting conditions and re-equilibrated.  LC-MS/MS data acquisition and analysis The samples were analyzed via data-dependent electrospray tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) on a Thermo Q-Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer, using a 70,000 RP survey scan in profile mode, m/z 360-2000 Da, with lockmasses, followed by 20 HCD fragmentation scans at 17,500 resolution on doubly and triply charged precursors. Single charged ions were excluded, and ions selected for MS/MS were placed on an exclusion list for 60 seconds.

### Data Protocol
All LC-MS/MS *.raw Data files were analyzed with MaxQuant version 1.5.2.8, searching against the UniProt Human database (Download 9/16/2019 with isoforms, 192928 entries) *.fasta sequence, using the following criteria: LFQ was selected for Quantitation with a minimum of 1 high confidence peptide to assign LFQ Intensities. Trypsin was selected as the protease with maximum missing cleavage set to 2. Carbamidomethyl (C) was selected as a fixed modification. Variable modifications were set to Oxidization (M), Formylation (N-term), Deamidation (NQ). Orbitrap mass spectrometer was selected using an MS error of 20 ppm and a MS/MS error of 0.5 Da. 1% FDR cutoff was selected for peptide, protein, and site identifications. Ratios were reported based on the LFQ Intensities of protein peak areas determined by MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.8) and reported in the proteinGroups.txt. The proteingroups.txt file was processed in Perseus (version 1.6.7). Proteins were removed from this results file if they were flagged by MaxQuant as “Contaminants”, “Reverse” or “Only identified by site”. Three biological replicates were performed. Samples were filtered to require hits to have been seen in at least two replicates per condition. Intensities were normalized by median intensity within each sample. Then, log2 fold changes over the means of negative controls were obtained for the three antinucleolar antibodies.

### Publication Abstract
Intrarenal B cells in human renal allografts indicate transplant recipients with a poor prognosis, but how these cells contribute to rejection is unclear. Here we show using single-cell RNA sequencing that intrarenal class-switched B cells have an innate cell transcriptional state resembling mouse peritoneal B1 or B-innate (Bin) cells. Antibodies generated by Bin cells do not bind donor-specific antigens nor are they enriched for reactivity to ubiquitously expressed self-antigens. Rather, Bin cells frequently express antibodies reactive with either renal-specific or inflammation-associated antigens. Furthermore, local antigens can drive Bin cell proliferation and differentiation into plasma cells expressing self-reactive antibodies. These data show a mechanism of human inflammation in which a breach in organ-restricted tolerance by infiltrating innate-like B cells drives local tissue destruction.

### Keywords
Keywords: renal allograft rejection, Human, Q-exactive, Autoantibodies, Transcription, Lfq, Tolerance, Innate b cells, Inflammation, Scrna-seq

### Affiliations
University of Chicago
Section of Rheumatology and The Knapp Center for Lupus and Immunology Research, Department of Medicine, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.

### Submitter
Donald Wolfgeher

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Marcus R. Clark
Section of Rheumatology and The Knapp Center for Lupus and Immunology Research, Department of Medicine, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.


