### Accession
PXD006241

### Title
Dietary effect on the proteome of the common octopus (Octopus vulgaris) paralarvae, LC-MS/MS data

### Description
Nowadays, the common octopus (Octopus vulgaris) culture is hampered by massive mortalities occurring during early life-cycle stages (paralarvae). Despite the causes of the high paralarvae mortality are not yet well defined and understood, the nutritional stress caused by inadequate diets is pointed out as one of the main factors. In this study the effects of diet on paralarvae is analyzed through a proteomic approach, to search for novel biomarkers of nutritional stress. A total of 43 proteins showing differential expression in the different conditions studied have been identified. The analysis highlights proteins related with the carbohydrate metabolism: glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate-dedydrogenase (GAPDH), triosephosphate isomerase; other ways of energetic metabolism: NADP+-specific isocitrate dehydrogenase, arginine kinase; detoxification: glutathione-S-transferase (GST); stress: heat shock proteins (HSP70); structural constituent of eye lens: S-crystallin 3; and cytoskeleton: actin, actin-beta/gamma1, beta actin. These results allow defining characteristic proteomes of paralarvae depending on the diet; as well as the use of several of these proteins as novel biomarkers to evaluate their welfare linked to nutritional stress. Notably, the changes of proteins like S-crystallin 3, arginine kinase and NAD+ specific isocitrate dehydrogenase, may be related to fed versus starving paralarvae, particularly in the first 4 days of development.

### Sample Protocol
A total of 24 protein samples (6 experimental groups x 4 biological replicates) were combined in pairs as shown in supplementary Table 1, and analyzed on a total of twelve 2D gels following the experimental design given in supplementary Table 2. 24 cm- IPG strips (pH = 3-11NL) were rehydrated in 8 M urea, 4% CHAPS, DeStreak (12 µL mL-1), and 1% ampholytes (pH = 3-10 NL) overnight at room temperature. Cy-labelled samples were applied onto IPG rehydrated strips via anodic cup loading, and IEF (first dimension) was performed on a EttanIPGphor II horizontal electrophoresis system (GE Healthcare) at 20 °C using the following IEF protocol: step 1:300 V 4 h, gradient to 1000 V 6h, gradient to 8000 V 3 h; step 2: 8000 V until reached 32000 V h.   After IEF, the strips were reduced in equilibration buffer (Tris 50 mM, urea 6 M and glycerol 30% (v/v), 2% SDS (w/v)) containing 2% DTT (w/v), for 15 min at room temperature; followed by alkylation in equilibration buffer containing 2.5% (w/v) iodoacetamide, for 15 min at room temperature. The proteins were then separate (second dimension) on 12.5% acrylamide SDS-PAGE gels (25 cm x 21 cm x 1 mm) using an EttanDalt Six Unit (GE Healthcare) electrophoresis system at 2 W per gel for 1 h and 15 W per gel for 6 h.   After electrophoresis, the 2-D gels were scanned with a TyphoonTM 9400 Variable Mode Imager, at 100µm resolution to visualize the labelled proteins. Excitation/emission wavelengths were chosen specifically for Cy2, Cy3 and Cy5 according to manufacturer’s recommendations (GE Healthcare).   LC-MS/MS analysis Protein spots without a positive identification were analyzed by LC-MS/MS. 5 µL of each sample were loaded onto a trap column (NanoLC Colum, 3µ C18-CL, 350 µm x 0.5 mm; Eksigen) and desalted with 0.1% TFA at 3 µL/min for 5 min. Then, peptides were loaded onto an analytical column (LC Column, 3µ C18-CL, 75 µm x 12 cm, Nikkyo) and equilibrated in 5% acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1% FA(formic acid). The peptide elution was carried out with a linear gradient of 5a 45% B in A for 15 min (A: 0.1% FA; B: ACN, 0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Peptides were analyzed in a nanoESI qQTOF mass spectrometer 5600 Triple TOF (ABSciex). The tripleTOF was operated in information-dependent acquisition mode, followed by 0.05-s product ion scan from 100-1500 m/z on the 50 most intensive 2-5 charged ions. LC-MS/MS information wasanalyzed using Protein Pilot search engine software (v.4.5; ABSciex).

### Data Protocol
For LC-MS/MS data Protein Pilot search engine software (v.4.5; ABSciex) was used. Protein Pilot default parameters were used to generate a peak list directly from 5600TripleTof wiff files. The Paragon algorithm of Protein Pilot was used to search NCBI protein database with the following parameters: trypsin specificity, iodoacetamidecys-alkylation, no taxonomy restriction, and the search effort set to rapid.   For ESTs identifications, the MGF (mascot generic file) generated by Protein Pilot were sent to MASCOT via the Deamon software (Matrix Science). Database search was performed on ESTs database: EST_cephalopoda cephalopoda_140224 (684204 sequences; 143385132 residues).  Searches were done with tryptic specificity allowing one missed cleavage and a tolerance on the mass measurement of 50 ppm in MS mode and 0.6 Da in MSMS mode. Carbamidomethylation of Cys was used as a fixed modification and oxidation of Met and deamidation of Asn and Gln as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Welfare, Novel biomarkers, Paralarvae, Octopus vulgaris, Nutritional stress, Proteome

### Affiliations
Instituto de Acuicultura Torre de la Sal (IATS-CSIC), 12595 Ribera de Cabanes, Castellón, Spain
Universitat de Valencia

### Submitter
Luz Valero

### Lab Head
Dr Inmaculada Varó
Instituto de Acuicultura Torre de la Sal (IATS-CSIC), 12595 Ribera de Cabanes, Castellón, Spain


