### Accession
PXD009084

### Title
Identification and characterization of a ribosome receptor for starvation-induced ribophagy

### Description
The lysosome degrades and recycles macromolecules, signals to the master growth regulator mTORC1, and is associated with human disease. Here, we performed quantitative proteomic analyses of lysosomes rapidly isolated using the LysoIP method and find that nutrient levels and mTOR dynamically modulate the lysosomal proteome. We focus on NUFIP1, a protein that upon mTORC1 inhibition redistributes from the nucleus to autophagosomes and lysosomes. Upon these conditions, NUFIP1 interacts with ribosomes and delivers them to autophagosomes by directly binding to LC3B. The starvation-induced degradation of ribosomes via autophagy (ribophagy) depends on the capacity of NUFIP1 to bind LC3B and promotes cell survival. We conclude that NUFIP1 is a receptor for the selective autophagy of ribosomes.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were solubilized by the addition of 20% (w/v) SDS to a final concentration of 2% followed by sonication in a Bioruptor Plus (Diagenode) (5 cycles: 1 min on, 30 sec off, 20°C) at the highest settings. Samples were spun down at 20,800x g for 1 min and the supernatant transferred to fresh tubes. Reduction was performed with 2.9 μL DTT (200 mM) for 15 min at 45°C before alkylation with 200 mM IAA (5 μL, 30 minutes, room temperature, in the dark). Proteins were then precipitated with 4 volumes ice cold acetone to 1 volume sample and left overnight at -20°C. The samples were then centrifuged at 20,800x g for 30 min at 4°C. After removal of the supernatant, the precipitates were washed twice with 500 μL 80% (v/v) acetone (ice cold). After each wash step, the samples were vortexed, then centrifuged again for 2 min at 4°C. The pellets were then allowed to air-dry before being dissolved in digestion buffer (50 μL, 3M urea in 0.1 M HEPES, pH 8) containing 0.1 μg of LysC (Wako), and incubated for 4 h at 37°C with shaking at 600 rpm. Then the samples were diluted 1:1 with milliQ water (to reach 1.5 M urea) and incubated with 0.1 μg trypsin (Promega) for 16 h at 37 °C. The digests were then acidified with 10% trifluoroacetic acid and then desalted with Waters Oasis® HLB μElution Plate 30μm in the presence of a slow vacuum following manufacturer instructions. The samples were then dried in a Speed-Vac and resuspended in 10 μL reconstitution buffer (5% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) TFA in water) prior to MS analysis. Peptides were spiked with retention time HRM kit (Biognosys AG), and analyed using the nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters) fitted with a trapping (nanoAcquity Symmetry C18, 5 μm, 180 μm x 20 mm) and an analytical column (nanoAcquity BEH C18, 2.5 μm, 75 μm x 250 mm). The outlet of the analytical column was coupled directly to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using the Proxeon nanospray source. Solvent A was water, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid and solvent B was acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. Approx. 1 μg of peptides were loaded for each sample with a constant flow of solvent A at 5 μL/min, onto the trapping column. Trapping time was 6 min. Peptides were eluted via the analytical column at a constant flow of 0.3 μL/min, at 40°C, via a nonlinear gradient from 0% to 40% in 90 min. Total runtime was 115 minutes, including clean-up and column re-equilibration. The RF lens was set to 30%. For spectral library generation, 4 pooled samples were generated by mixing equal portions of each sample belonging to a biological condition, and each pool was injected in triplicate (12 runs in total), and measured in Data Dependent Acquisition (DDA) mode. The conditions for DDA data acquisition were as follows: full scan MS spectra with mass range 350-1650 m/z were acquired in profile mode in the Orbitrap with resolution of 60000. The filling time was set at maximum of 50 ms with limitation of 2 x 105 ions. The “Top Speed” method was employed to take the maximum number of precursor ions (with an intensity threshold of 5 x 104) from the full scan MS for fragmentation (using HCD collision energy, 30%) and quadrupole isolation (1.4 Da window) and measurement in the Orbitrap (resolution 15000, fixed first mass 120 m/z), with a cycle time of 3 seconds. The MIPS (monoisotopic precursor selection) peptide algorithm was employed but with relaxed restrictions when too few precursors meeting the criteria were found. The fragmentation was performed after accumulation of 2 x 10e5 ions or after filling time of 22 ms for each precursor ion (whichever occurred first). MS/MS data were acquired in centroid mode. Only multiply charged (2+ - 7+) precursor ions were selected for MS/MS. Dynamic exclusion was employed with maximum retention period of 15s and relative mass window of 10 ppm. Isotopes were excluded. For data acquisition and processing of the raw data Xcalibur 4.0 (Thermo Scientific) and Tune version 2.1 were employed. For the Data Independent Acquisition (DIA) data the same gradient conditions were applied to the LC as for the DDA and the MS conditions were varied as follows: full scan MS spectra with mass range 350-1650 m/z were acquired in profile mode in the Orbitrap with resolution of 120000. The filling time was set at maximum of 20ms with limitation of 5 x 10e5 ions. DIA scans were acquired with 34 mass window segments of differing widths across the MS1 mass range. HCD fragmentation (30% collision energy) was applied and MS/MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 30000 over the mass range 200-2000 m/z after accumulation of 2 x 10e5 ions or after filling time of 70 ms (whichever occurred first). Ions were injected for all available parallelizable time. Data were acquired in profile mode.

### Data Protocol
For library creation, the DDA data was searched using the Pulsar search engine (version 1.0.15764.0, Biognosys AG). The data were searched against a human database (Swiss-Prot entries of the Uniprot KB database release 2016_01, 20198 entries). The data were searched with the Biognosys default settings with the following modifications: Carbamidomethyl (C) and Oxidation (M)/ Acetyl (Protein N-term) (Variable). A maximum of 2 missed cleavages were allowed. The identifications were filtered to satisfy FDR of 1 % on peptide and protein level. The library contained 70796 precursors, corresponding to 5401 protein groups using Spectronaut protein inference. DIA data were then searched against this library. Precursor matching, protein inference and quantification was performed in Spectronaut (version 11) using default settings(44). Peptide and protein level FDR for DIA data were controlled to 1% (45). Differential protein expression was evaluated using a pairwise t-test performed at the precursor level followed by multiple testing correction according to (46). The data (candidate table, Supplementary Tables 1 and 2) was exported from Spectronaut and used for further data analyses. The sne files can be opened and viewed with Spectronaut Viewer (free upon registration).

### Publication Abstract
The lysosome degrades and recycles macromolecules, signals to the master growth regulator mTORC1 [mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR) complex 1], and is associated with human disease. We performed quantitative proteomic analyses of rapidly isolated lysosomes and found that nutrient levels and mTOR dynamically modulate the lysosomal proteome. Upon mTORC1 inhibition, NUFIP1 (nuclear fragile X mental retardation-interacting protein 1) redistributes from the nucleus to autophagosomes and lysosomes. Upon these conditions, NUFIP1 interacts with ribosomes and delivers them to autophagosomes by directly binding to microtubule-associated proteins 1A/1B light chain 3B (LC3B). The starvation-induced degradation of ribosomes via autophagy (ribophagy) depends on the capacity of NUFIP1 to bind LC3B and promotes cell survival. We propose that NUFIP1 is a receptor for the selective autophagy of ribosomes.

### Keywords
Lysosome, Ribophagy, Mtor

### Affiliations
Leibniz Institute on Aging
Leibniz Institute on Aging  – Fritz Lipmann Institute (FLI

### Submitter
Ivonne Heinze

### Lab Head
Dr Alessandro Ori
Leibniz Institute on Aging  – Fritz Lipmann Institute (FLI


