### Accession
PXD032860

### Title
DNA methyltransferase (DNMT) associated proteins in human malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum

### Description
This study identified Plasmodium falciparum DNA methyltransferase (DNMT)associated proteins in parasite cytosol and nucleus, including RNA binding proteins and AP2-domain containing proteins, indicating this protein is involved in RNA process and transctiptional regulation.

### Sample Protocol
DNMT was tagged by PTP and GFP tag for tandem affinity purification (TAP) and GFP-trap purification. TAP was performed using the PTP-tagged PfGCN5 parasite line. Briefly, Parasites pellet was lysed in 5 volumes of a hypotonic buffer (5 mM Na2HPO4, pH 8.0) containing a protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche) for 5 min at 4°C, the supernatant was harvested as cytosolic extract. The pellete was lysed in 5 volumes of the PA150 buffer (150 mM KCl, 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.7, 3 mM MgCl2, 0.5 mM DTT, and 0.1% Tween 20) containing a protease inhibitor cocktail. The lysate was centrifuged for 10 min at 16,000× g and the supernatant was incubated with 100 μl (settled volume) of IgG agarose beads (GE Healthcare) at 4°C for 2h. The beads were washed twice with PA150 and equilibrated twice with the TEV buffer (150 mM KCl, 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.7, 3 mM MgCl2, 0.5 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT, and 0.1% Tween 20). To release the PfGCN5 and its associated proteins from IgG beads, the beads were incubated with 2 ml of TEV buffer containing 150 U of TEV protease and rotated overnight at 4°C. The supernatant was collected, and the beads were rinsed with another 4 ml of the PC-150 buffer (150 mM KCl, 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.7, 3 mM MgCl2, 1 mM CaCl2, 0.1% Tween 20). Then, 7.5 μl of 1 M CaCl2 were added to titrate the EDTA from the TEV buffer and the combined supernatant was incubated with anti-protein C beads for 2 h at 4°C. The beads were washed four times with PC150 and eluted with the buffer containing 10 nM EGTA/5 mM EDTA. GFP-trap (Chromotek) beads were used for purification of GFP tagged protein complex according to the manufacture’s protocol. The proteins in the elution were concentrated by Amicon Ultra centrifugal filters (Millipore Sigma) and separated briefly in a 10% Bis-Tris SDS-PAGE gel for 10 min. Proteins in gel were excised and in-gel digestion was conducted.

### Data Protocol
The digests were analyzed by nano-liquid chromatography followed by tandem mass spectrometry (LC/MS/MS) using a Waters NanoAcquity HPLC system interfaced to a Q Exactive™ Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded on a trapping column and eluted over a 75 μm analytical column at 350 nL/min. MS and MS/MS were performed at 70,000 FWHM and 17,500 FWHM resolutions, respectively. The fifteen most abundant ions were selected for MS/MS. Parasite proteins were identified by searching the Uniprot P. falciparum protein database (v01/2014). Data were filtered at 1% protein and 0.2% peptide false discovery rates (FDR), and at least two unique peptides per protein. Mascot DAT files were parsed into the Scaffold software for validation and filtering to create a non-redundant list per sample.

### Publication Abstract
DNA modifications are critical in fine-tuning the biological processes in model organisms. However, the presence of cytosine methylation (5mC) and the function of the putative DNA methyltransferase, PfDNMT2, in the human malaria pathogen, Plasmodium falciparum, remain controversial. Here, we revisited the 5mC in the parasite genome and the function of PfDNMT2. Low levels of genomic 5mC (0.1-0.2%) during asexual development were identified using a sensitive mass spectrometry procedure. Native PfDNMT2 displayed substantial DNA methylation activities, and disruption or overexpression of PfDNMT2 resulted in reduced or elevated genomic 5mC levels, respectively. PfDNMT2 disruption led to an increased proliferation phenotype, with the parasites having an extended schizont stage and producing a higher number of progenies. Consistent with PfDNMT2's interaction with an AP2 domain-containing transcription factor, transcriptomic analyses revealed that PfDNMT2 disruption led to a drastic alteration in the expression of many genes, some of which provided the molecular basis of enhanced proliferation after PfDNMT2 disruption. Furthermore, levels of tRNAAsp and its methylation rate at position C38, and the translation of a reporter containing an aspartate repeat were significantly reduced after PfDNMT2 disruption, while the levels of tRNAAsp and its C38 methylation were restored after complementation of PfDNMT2. Our study sheds new light on the dual function of PfDNMT2 during P. falciparum asexual development.

### Keywords
Plasmodium falciparum, Dna methyltransferase (dnmt)

### Affiliations
University of Sourth Florida
Department of Internal Medicine, Morsani College of Medicine, University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida, USA

### Submitter
JUN MIAO

### Lab Head
Dr Jun Miao
Department of Internal Medicine, Morsani College of Medicine, University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida, USA


