### Accession
PXD020175

### Title
Impairment of the rough endoplasmic reticulum/mitochondria compartment in human cardiomyocytes with phospholamban p.Arg14del mutation

### Description
Background: The phospholamban (PLN) p.Arg14del mutation belongs to the established causes of dilated cardiomyopathy, with the molecular disease mechanisms incompletely understood. We used human induced pluripotent stem cell (hiPSC)-derived cardiomyocytes, CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing and patient heart samples to investigate the molecular pathomechanisms of PLN p.Arg14del cardiomyopathy. Methods and results: Patient dermal fibroblasts carrying the PLN p.Arg14del mutation were reprogrammed into hiPSC, isogenic controls were established by CRISPR/Cas9. Cells were differentiated into cardiomyocytes and characterized in 2D and 3D-engineered heart tissue (EHT) format. Mutant cardiomyocytes revealed significantly prolonged Ca2+ transient decay time, Ca2+-load dependent irregular beating pattern and lower peak force compared to isogenic controls. While this data support the reported super-inhibitory effect of PLN p.Arg14del on the sarcoplasmic/endoplasmic reticulum Ca2+ ATPase, an unchanged SR Ca2+ content argued against disturbed SR Ca2+ cycling as the sole cause of contractile dysfunction. Label-free proteomic analysis of p.Arg14del EHTs revealed less endoplasmic reticulum (ER), ribosomal and mitochondrial proteins. Electron microscopy showed dilation of the rough ER, large lipid droplets in close association with mitochondria and reduced mitochondrial number. Follow-up experiments confirmed impairment of the rough ER/mitochondria compartment and enhanced oxidative stress in PLN p.Arg14del. Relevance for human disease was demonstrated by immunohistochemistry of human heart samples. PLN p.Arg14del end-stage heart failure samples revealed perinuclear aggregates positive for ER marker proteins and oxidative stress in comparison to ischemic heart failure - and non-failing donor heart samples. Surprisingly, transduction of PLN p.Arg14del EHTs with the Ca2+ binding protein GCaMP6f reversed the contractile, molecular and morphological disease phenotype. Conclusion: This study identified impairment of the rough ER/mitochondria compartment without SR dysfunction as a novel disease mechanism underlying PLN p.Arg14del cardiomyopathy. The pathology was improved by Ca2+-scavenging, suggesting impaired local Ca2+ cycling as an important disease culprit.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were denatured by 6M urea, 2M thiourea and reduced with 5mM DTT at 37°C for 1h. Afterwards, proteins were alkylated by 25mM iodoacetamide and incubated in the dark for 1 hour. Proteins were precipitated by adding 1 mL of ice-cold acetone and precipitated at -20°C overnight. Samples were centrifuged at 16000xg at 4°C for 30 min and the supernatant was discarded. The pellets were dried by SpeedVac (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 10 min and resuspended in 100 μl triethylammonium bicarbonate (100 mM). Samples were digested with trypsin (protein: enzyme = 50:1) at 37°C overnight. Digestion was stopped by 1% trifluoroacetic acid and the samples were purified using Bravo AssayMAP robot (Agilent) using C18 cartridges. Eluted peptides were SpeedVac dried and resuspended in 40 μl of 2% acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1% formic acid (FA). Peptides samples were injected and separated by an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (EASY-Spray column, 75μm x 50cm, 2 μm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using the following LC gradient: 0-10 min: 4-10% B; 10-75 min: 10-30% B; 75-80 min: 30-40% B; 80-85 min: 40-99% B; 85-90 min: 99% B; 90-120 min: 4% B (A=0.1% FA in H2O, B=80% ACN, 0.1% FA in H2O). The separated peptides were directly injected into an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Full MS scan range was 350-1500 m/z and a resolution = 120,000. Most abundant ions in the full MS scan were selected for MS2 scan with CID fragmentation in a linear ion trap, and cycle time was set to 3 seconds. Dynamic exclusion of 60 sec and lock mass = 445.12003m/z were used.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed by Proteome Discoverer 2.2 and searched against UniProt/SwissProt human database (2018_05, 20349 protein entries) using Mascot 2.6.0. Trypsin was used for the enzymatic digest and 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation on cysteines was selected as a fixed modification and oxidation on methionine as a variable modification. Precursor ion mass tolerance was set at 10ppm and for fragment ion at 0.8 Da. Protein identification FDR confidence was set to High and minimum number of peptides per protein was 2. Precursor peak area was used for quantification and normalized to total peak area of each sample and scaled to average 100 across all samples.

### Publication Abstract
The phospholamban (PLN) p.Arg14del mutation causes dilated cardiomyopathy, with the molecular disease mechanisms incompletely understood. Patient dermal fibroblasts were reprogrammed to hiPSC, isogenic controls were established by CRISPR/Cas9, and cardiomyocytes were differentiated. Mutant cardiomyocytes revealed significantly prolonged Ca<sup>2+</sup> transient decay time, Ca<sup>2+</sup> -load dependent irregular beating pattern, and lower force. Proteomic analysis revealed less endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and ribosomal and mitochondrial proteins. Electron microscopy showed dilation of the ER and large lipid droplets in close association with mitochondria. Follow-up experiments confirmed impairment of the ER/mitochondria compartment. PLN p.Arg14del end-stage heart failure samples revealed perinuclear aggregates positive for ER marker proteins and oxidative stress in comparison with ischemic heart failure and non-failing donor heart samples. Transduction of PLN p.Arg14del EHTs with the Ca<sup>2+</sup> -binding proteins GCaMP6f or parvalbumin improved the disease phenotype. This study identified impairment of the ER/mitochondria compartment without SR dysfunction as a novel disease mechanism underlying PLN p.Arg14del cardiomyopathy. The pathology was improved by Ca<sup>2+</sup> -scavenging, suggesting impaired local Ca<sup>2+</sup> cycling as an important disease culprit.

### Keywords
Engineered heart tissue, Cardiomyopathy, Proteomics, Crispr/cas9, Hipsc, Phospholamban

### Affiliations
King’s British Heart Foundation Centre of Research Excellence, King's College London, United Kingdom
Cardiovascular Division, King's College London

### Submitter
Xiaoke Yin

### Lab Head
Dr Manuel Mayr
King’s British Heart Foundation Centre of Research Excellence, King's College London, United Kingdom


