### Accession
PXD020221

### Title
Centrosome-mediated microtubule remodeling during  axon formation in human iPSC-derived neurons

### Description
Local microtubule remodeling is critical for axon formation, the first step in establishing neuronal polarity. However, the function of the microtubule organizing centrosomes during the onset of axon formation, is still under debate. Here, we demonstrate that centrosomes play an essential role in controlling axon formation in human induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC)-derived neurons. Depleting centrioles, the core components of centrosomes, in unpolarized human neuronal stem cells results in various axon developmental defects at later stages, including immature action potential firing, mistargeting of microtubule associated protein Trim46, suppressed expression of growth cone proteins and affected growth cone morphologies. Live-cell imaging of dynamic microtubules reveals that centriole loss prevents axonal microtubule reorganization towards the unique parallel plus-end out microtubule bundles in growing axons. We propose that centrosomes mediate microtubule remodeling during axon specification in human iPSC-derived neurons, thereby setting the foundation for further axon development and function.

### Sample Protocol
To obtain sample preparations for mass spectrometry (TMT labeling), biological replicates of control and Centrinone-B treated human iPSC-derived neurons were harvested at three different time points (days 1, 3, and 7) of differentiation with lysis buffer (8 M urea, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma), EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche)). Lysates were sonicated on ice using Bioruptor (Diagenode) and cleared by centrifugation at 2500g for 10 minutes. Protein concentration was determined using Bradford assay. From each condition 100 µg of proteins were reduced (5 mM DTT, 55˚C, 1 hour), alkylated (10 mM Iodoacetamide, 30 minutes in the dark) and sequentially digested by LysC (Protein-enzyme ratio 1:50, 37˚C, 4 h) and trypsin (Protein-enzyme ratio 1:50, 37˚C, overnight). After overnight digestion, samples were acidified with formic acid (final concentration 3%) and resulting peptides were then desalted using Sep-Pak C18 columns (Waters). Samples were subjected to stable isotope TMT-6plex labeling according to manufacturer’s instruction (Thermo Fisher Scientific). In brief, peptides were resuspended in 80 µl of 50 mM HEPES buffer, 12.5% ACN with pH 8.5 while TMT reagents were dissolved in 50 µl anhydrous ACN. For labeling, 25 µl of each dissolved TMT reagent were added to the correspondent sample according to the following scheme: Control human iPSC sample, day 1 = TMT-126  /  Centrinone-B human iPSC sample, day 1 = TMT-129   Control human iPSC sample, day 3  = TMT-127  /  Centrinone-B human iPSC sample, day 3 = TMT-130   Control human iPSC sample, day 7 = TMT-128  /  Centrinone-B human iPSC sample, day 7 = TMT-131   Following incubation at room temperature for 1 hour, the reaction was quenched using 5% hydroxylamine. Differentially TMT-labeled peptides were mixed in equal ratios and dried in a vacuum concentrator. Peptide fractionation Mixed TMT-labeled peptides were solubilized in 10mM ammonium hydroxide, pH 10.0 and subsequently fractionated using basic pH reverse phase HPLC. Peptides were loaded on a Gemini 3µm C18 110A 100 x 1.0 mm column (Phenomenex) using an Agilent 1100 pump equipped with a degasser and a photodiode array (PDA) detector. Peptides were concentrated on the column at 100µl/min using 100% buffer A (10mM ammonium hydroxide, pH 10) after which the fractionation gradient was applied as follow: 5% solvent B (10mM ammonium hydroxide in 90% ACN, pH 10) to 30% B in 53 mins, 70% B in 7 min and increased to 100% B in 3 min at a flow rate of 100µl/min. In total 60 fractions of 1 min were collected using an Agilent 1260 infinity fraction collector and then concatenated into 12 final fractions. Collected fractions were vacuum-dried, reconstituted in 5% formic acid/5% DMSO and stored at -80°C prior to mass spectrometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry analysis We analyzed the samples on an Orbitrap Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled online to an Agilent UPLC 1290 system (Agilent Technologies). Peptides were loaded onto a trap column (Reprosil C18, 3 µm, 2 cm × 100 µm; Dr. Maisch) and separated on an analytical column (Poroshell 120 EC-C18, 2.7µm, 50cm x 75µm; Agilent Technologies). Peptides were trapped for 10 min at 5 µl/min in solvent A (0.1M acetic acid in H20) and then separated at a flow rate of approximately 300 nl/min (split flow from 0.2ml/min) by applying a 120 min linear gradient as follows: 13% up to 40% solvent B (0.1M acetic acid in 80% ACN) in 95 min, 40-100% in 3 min and finally 100% for 1 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode. Full MS spectra from m/z 375-1600 were acquired at a resolution of 60.000 with an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 3e6 and maximum injection time (IT) of 20 ms. The 15 most intense precursor ions were selected for HCD fragmentation. HCD fragmentation was performed at a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 32%. MS/MS spectra were obtained at a 30.000 resolution with an AGC target of 1e5 and maximum injection time (IT) of 50 ms. Isolation window was set at 1.0 m/z and dynamic exclusion to 16.0s.  Data processing proteomics Raw MS files were processed for data analysis with Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). A database search was performed using the Swissprot homo sapiens database and Mascot (version 2.5.1, Matrix Science, UK) as search engine. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine, acetylation at the N-termini, TMT-6plex of lysine residues and TMT-6plex at the peptide N-termini were set as variable modifications. Trypsin was set as cleavage specificity, allowing a maximum of two missed cleavages. Data filtering was performed using percolator, resulting in 1% false discovery rate (FDR). Additional filters were search engine rank 1 and mascot ion score > 20. Only unique peptides were included for quantification and the obtained TMT ratios were normalized to the median. Common contaminant proteins (such as keratins and albumin) were removed from the list.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Centrosome; axon; development; human; hipsc-derived neuron

### Affiliations
Cell biology, neurobiology and biophysics, Utrecht University, Utrecht, Netherlands
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Robbelien Kooistra

### Lab Head
Dr Casper Hoogenraad
Cell biology, neurobiology and biophysics, Utrecht University, Utrecht, Netherlands


