### Accession
PXD037154

### Title
PARP1 proximity proteomics reveals interaction partners at stressed replication forks

### Description
PARP1 mediates poly-ADP-ribosylation of proteins on chromatin in response to different types of DNA lesions. PARP inhibitors are used for the treatment of BRCA1/2-deficient breast, ovarian, and prostate cancer. Loss of DNA replication fork protection is proposed as one mechanism that contributes to the vulnerability of BRCA1/2-deficient cells to PARP inhibitors. However, the mechanisms that regulate PARP1 activity at stressed replication forks remain poorly understood. Here, we performed proximity proteomics of PARP1 and isolation of proteins on stressed replication forks to map putative PARP1 regulators. We identified TPX2 as a direct PARP1-binding protein that regulates the auto-ADP-ribosylation activity of PARP1. TPX2 interacts with DNA damage response proteins and promotes homology-directed repair of DNA double-strand breaks. Moreover, TPX2 mRNA levels are increased in BRCA1/2-mutated breast and prostate cancers, and high TPX2 expression levels correlate with the sensitivity of cancer cells to PARP-trapping inhibitors. We propose that TPX2 confers a mitosis-independent function in the cellular response to replication stress by interacting with PARP1.

### Sample Protocol
Proximity biotinylation with APEX2 and Neutravidin pulldown Cells were transiently transfected with a construct expressing full-length PARP1 tagged on the N-terminus with APEX2(57). After 48 hours, cells were pre-treated with 500 µM biotin phenol (Iris Biochem) for 2 hours at 37°C, followed by a 2-minute incubation with 1 mM H2O2 (Sigma-Aldrich) at RT. Cells were washed with quenching solution (10 mM sodium azide, 10 mM sodium ascorbate, 5 mM Trolox (all from Sigma-Aldrich) 3 times and then washed with PBS 3 times. Cell lysis and nuclei isolation was performed as described above. For affinity purification of biotinylated proteins, an equal amount of differentially SILAC labeled extracts, one H2O2-treated and the other untreated, were combined before the IP and incubated with pre-equilibrated NeutrAvidin agarose beads (Thermo Scientific) for 2 hours at 4°C on the wheel. Then the beads were washed once with lysis buffer (modified RIPA or Buffer C depending on the extract used), twice with 8 M Urea (Sigma) and 1% SDS in PBS, and once with 1% SDS in PBS. Bound proteins were eluted in 2× NuPAGE LDS Sample Buffer (Life Technologies) supplemented with 1 mM DTT and heated at 95°C for 15 min. The eluates, after cooling down to RT, were alkylated by incubating with 5.5 mM chloroacetamide for 30 min in the dark and then loaded onto 4-12% gradient SDS-PAGE gels. Proteins were stained using the Colloidal Blue Staining Kit (Life Technologies) and digested in-gel using trypsin. Peptides were extracted from the gel and desalted on reversed phase C18 StageTips.  Affinity purification For GFP affinity purification, differentially labeled extracts were incubated with pre-equilibrated GFP Trap beads (Chromotek) for 1 hour on the wheel at 4°C followed by 5 washes with modified RIPA buffer. During the last wash, the beads of the control IP and the specific IP were combined and boiled in 2×LDS supplemented with 1 mM DTT (70°C for 10 min), followed by alkylation and in-gel digestion. For label-free GFP pull-down, 3 control and 3 specific IPs were performed as described, with 2 additional PBS washes, in the end, followed by on-bead digestion. Isolation of proteins on nascent DNA (iPOND) iPOND assays were performed as described (64). Briefly, cells were treated with 10 uM EdU (Jena Bioscience) for 10 minutes at 37°C. Differently labeled SILAC cells were treated differentially (2 hr 2 mM HU treatment, 18 hr 2 mM HU treatment, or mock-treated). Then cells were crosslinked with 1% formaldehyde for 20 min at RT, neutralized with 0.125 M glycine, and washed twice with PBS. Cells were scraped off the plates, counted and the same number of cells from each condition were combined and permeabilized with 0.25% Triton X-100 for 30 min at RT. After several washes (1× 0.5% BSA in PBS and 1xPBS), a click reaction was initiated by adding 10 mM sodium ascorbate, 0.1 mM biotin, and 2 mM copper. The samples were rotated on the wheel for 2 hr at 4°C, washed 1x 0.5% BSA in PBS and 1×PBS, and lysed with lysis buffer (1% SDS in 50mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0) supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitors and NEM. After a 15 min incubation on ice, the lysates were sonicated (20 cycles with 30 sec on, 90 sec off) and clarified by high-speed centrifugation (16000×g, 30 min, 4°C). Lysates were diluted 1:1 in PBS and the concentration was estimated using the QuickStart Bradford Protein assay. Lysates were incubated with pre-equilibrated NeutrAvidin agarose beads on the wheel for 1 hr at 4°C. Then the beads were washed 2× with lysis buffer, 1× with low salt buffer (1% Triton X-100, 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 2mM EDTA, 150mM NaCl), 1× with high salt buffer (1% Triton X-100, 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 2mM EDTA, 500mM NaCl), 1× with LiCl buffer (100mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 500 mM LiCl, 1%  Nonidet P-40) and 2× with lysis buffer. All washes were performed for 5 min on the wheel at 4°C. Biotinylated proteins were eluted in 100 µl 2× LDS with 1 mM DTT, boiling at 95°C for 30 min. MS analysis Peptide fractions were analyzed on a quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive Plus, Thermo Scientific) equipped with a UHPLC system (EASY-nLC 1000, Thermo Scientific) as described (65, 66). Peptide samples were loaded onto C18 reversed-phase columns (15 cm length, 75 µm inner diameter, 1.9 µm bead size) and eluted with a linear gradient from 8 to 40% acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid for 2 hours. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS2 acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (m/z 300 – 1700) were acquired in the Orbitrap. The 10 most intense ions were sequentially isolated and fragmented by higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) (67). An ion selection threshold of 5,000 was used. Peptides with unassigned charge states, as well as with charge state less than +2 were excluded from fragmentation. Fragment spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification Raw data files were analyzed using MaxQuant (development version 1.5.2.8) (68). Parent ion and MS2 spectra were searched against a database containing 92,607 and 96,817 human protein sequences obtained from the UniProtKB released in May 2016 (for iPOND and TPX2 interactome) or  February 2020 (for PARP1 proximal proteome), respectively using Andromeda search engine (69). Spectra were searched with a mass tolerance of 6 ppm in MS mode, 20 ppm in HCD MS2 mode, strict trypsin specificity, and allowing up to 3 miscleavages. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was searched as a fixed modification, whereas protein N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were searched as variable modifications. The dataset was filtered based on posterior error probability (PEP) to arrive at a false discovery rate of below 1% estimated using a target-decoy approach. Computational analysis Processed data from MaxQuant was analyzed in RStudio (version 4.1). For the iPOND experiments, SILAC protein ratios were log2-transformed and normalized by z-scoring under a normal distribution assumption (z=(x– mean)/standard deviation). For the PARP1-proximal proteome non-normalized ratios were used. P-values for the iPOND experiment and the PARP1-proximal proteome were assessed using LIMMA (72) and corrected for multiple hypothesis testing using the FDR method within LIMMA. For iPOND data, only proteins with an FDR < 0.05 and for PARP1-APEX with an FDR < 0.01 were considered significantly enriched.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Adp-ribosylation, Tpx2, Replication stress, Parp1, Ipond, Olaparib, Proximity proteomics

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB), Mainz, Germany
Institute of Molecular Biology, Mainz

### Submitter
Petra Beli

### Lab Head
Dr Petra Beli
Institute of Molecular Biology, Mainz


