### Accession
PXD041496

### Title
Nuclear pore complexes mediate subtelomeric gene silencing by regulating PCNA levels on chro atin

### Description
The nuclear pore complex (NPC) physically interacts with chromatin and regulates gene expression. The Saccharomyces cerevisiae inner ring nucleoporin Nup170 has been implicated in chromatin organization and the maintenance of gene silencing in subtelomeric regions. To gain insight into how Nup170 regulates this process, we used protein-protein interactions, genetic interactions, and transcriptome correlation analyses to identify the Ctf18-RFC complex, an alternative proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) loader, as a facilitator of the gene regulatory functions of Nup170. The Ctf18-RFC complex is recruited to a subpopulation of NPCs that lack the nuclear basket proteins Mlp1 and Mlp2. In the absence of Nup170, PCNA levels on DNA are reduced, resulting in the loss of silencing of subtelomeric genes. Increasing PCNA levels on DNA by removing Elg1, which is required for PCNA unloading, rescues subtelomeric silencing defects in nup170Δ. The NPC therefore mediates subtelomeric gene silencing by regulating PCNA levels on DNA.

### Sample Protocol
To perform affinity capture of C-terminally GFP tagged proteins, cells were grown in YPD to a final OD600 of 1 - 1.5 and harvested by centrifugation. The cell pellets were washed twice with 20 mM HEPES-KOH, pH 7.4 followed by a wash with 20 mM HEPES-KOH, pH 7.4, 1.2% polyvinylpyrrolidone, 1:100 protease inhibitor cocktail. The cell pellet was pushed through a syringe directly into liquid nitrogen to flash freeze and make “yeast noodles”. Yeast noodles were cryomilled into fine powder using a 50-ml stainless steel jar and a ball mill. , yeast protein lysates were prepared by resuspending 200 mg of cell powder in 450 µl of extraction buffer containing 20 mM HEPES Buffer (pH 7.4), 110 mM CH3CO2K, 2 mM MgCl2, 100 mM NaCl, antifoam-B emulsion (1:5000), 1:100 protease inhibitor cocktail, 1% Triton X-100. When scaling up, the same ratio of cell powder to extraction buffer was maintained. The clarified protein lysate was mixed with 1.5 mg magnetic beads (Dynabead M-270 Epoxy, ThermoFisher) conjugated with in-house GFP nanobody (Fridy et al., 2014), and the mixture was incubated with gentle agitation for 20 min at 4 °C. The beads were washed four times with the extraction buffer. The captured protein complexes were eluted from the beads by adding 35 µl 1.5× LDS sample buffer (NuPAGE) and incubated at room temperature for 10 min. The load samples from the cleared cell lysates were prepared by TCA precipitation. Protein complexes from the eluate were resolved by SDS-PAGE and stained with Coomassie blue. Gel bands were cut, and processed by in-gel tryptic digestion. peptide digests were desalted using c18 Ziptips and analyzed by LCMS.

### Data Protocol
Raw LC/MS data were searched with MaxQuant (v.1.6.1.0) (Cox and Mann, 2008) against a custom protein database comprised of 6,729 total yeast protein sequences. MaxQuant search parameters were as follows: peptide spectral match (PSM) false discovery rate (FSD) = 0.01; Protein identification FSD = 0.01; fixed peptide modifications = Oxidation (M) and Acetylation (Protein N-terminal); MS/MS tolerance = 0.5 Da. The common coeluting Saccharomyces cerevisiae contaminants as listed on the CRAPOME (Mellacheruvu et al., 2013) were excluded from the list and proteins that were identified with 4 or more unique peptides were included in downstream analyses. Nuclear proteins were identified based on their cellular component annotation on PantherDB

### Publication Abstract
The nuclear pore complex (NPC) both mediates exchange of proteins and RNA between the nucleus and the cytoplasm and physically interacts with chromatin to regulate transcription. In this issue of JCB, Kumar et al. (2023. J. Cell Biol.https://doi.org/10.1083/jcb.202207060) provide new insight into the molecular basis for NPC-mediated epigenetic silencing through loading of the replication processivity factor PCNA.

### Keywords
Subtelomeric gene silencing, Pcna, Nuclear pore complex, Ctf18-rfc, Nucleoporin, Nup170

### Affiliations
Seattle Children's Hospital
Center for Global Infectious Disease Research, Seattle Children's Research Institute, Seattle, Washington 98109, USA  Departments of Pediatrics and Biochemistry, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195, USA

### Submitter
Arti Navare

### Lab Head
Dr John D. Aithicson
Center for Global Infectious Disease Research, Seattle Children's Research Institute, Seattle, Washington 98109, USA  Departments of Pediatrics and Biochemistry, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195, USA


