### Accession
PXD004108

### Title
Mouse liver regeneration quantitative proteomics

### Description
The liver is the only organ in mammals, which fully regenerates after injury. To identify novel regulators of liver regeneration, we performed quantitative large-scale proteomics analysis of subcellular fractions from normal versus regenerating mouse liver. Proteins of the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway were rapidly regulated by partial hepatectomy, with the ubiquitin ligase Nedd4-1 being among the top hits. Knock-down of Nedd4-1 in hepatocytes in vivo through nanoparticle-mediated delivery of siRNA caused severe liver damage after partial hepatectomy and impaired regeneration, resulting in liver failure. Mechanistically, we demonstrate that Nedd4-1 is required for efficient activation of Erk1/2 signaling by receptor tyrosine kinases involved in liver regeneration through inhibition of receptor internalization, thus controlling a major pro-mitogenic and cytoprotective signaling pathway in the regenerating liver. These results highlight the power of large-scale proteomics to identify key players in liver regeneration and the importance of posttranslational regulation of growth factor signaling in this process.

### Sample Protocol
iTRAQ proteomics Protein samples were fractionated into subcellular compartments by different rounds of centrifugation as previously described in T. Kislinger et al. (2006), Cell 125, 173-186. For each sample, 62µg of protein were digested with sequencing grade trypsin (0.14µg/µl) and labeled with iTRAQ 8-plex reagents according to the manufacturer`s protocol (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA). The entire peptide mix was offline fractionated on an Agilent Technologies 1100 series HPLC system (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA) using strong cation exchange chromatography (SCX, Polysulfoethyl A 2.1mm x 200mm column (PolyLC Inc., Columbia, MD)). Thirty fractions were collected and pooled to ten fractions using C18 OMIX tips (Agilent Technologies) during sample clean up according to the 214/280 nm absorption chromatogram.  Pooled peptide fractions were analyzed on an LTQ-Orbitrap VELOS ETD mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled to an Eksigent-Nano-HPLC system (Eksigent Technologies, Dublin, CA). The solvent compositions were 0.1% formic acid and 1% acetonitrile for channel A and 0.1% formic acid and 80% acetonitrile for channel B. Peptides were loaded onto a self-made tip column (75 μm × 80 mm) packed with reverse-phase C18 material (AQ, 3 μm, 200 Å, Bischoff GmbH, Leonberg, Germany) and eluted (flow rate, 250 nl/min; solvent B gradient: from 0.1% to 4.8% in 3 min, from 3% to 30% in 59 min, and from 30% to 48% in 3 min and finally to 97% in 4 min). Full-scan MS spectra (300-1700 m/z) were acquired with a resolution of 30000 at 400 m/z. Collision induced dissociation (CID) MS/MS spectra were recorded in data dependent manner in the ion trap from the eight most intense signals above a threshold of 1000 with an isolation width of 1.2 Da, using a normalized collision energy of 35% and an activation time of 10ms. Subsequently, MS/MS spectra of the same precursors were recorded using high energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy of 45%, a resolution of 7500 and an activation time of 0.1ms. Charge state screening was enabled and single charge states were rejected. Precursor masses already selected for MS/MS were excluded for further selection for 60s. The exclusion window was set to 10ppm and the generated list was limited to maximally 500 entries. For a second analysis of the same samples an exclusion list was used containing all previously found m/z values coupled to their retention times (time window of 5min). Label-free liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LC-MS) 1-2 mg fresh weight biopsies were prepared from frozen, perfused mouse liver using a sharpened 16-gauge needle (Hamilton, P/N: 90516/00) and placed in PCT MicroTubes (PBI, C/N: MT-96). After adding 30 μl of freshly prepared lysis buffer (8M urea, 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 1x complete protease inhibitors, EDTA-free) tubes were sealed using a PCT microPestle (PBI, C/N: MTWS-MP96-B). Pressure assisted protein extraction and tandem digestion were performed as originally described (29). The resulting C18-cleaned peptides were diluted to 0.3 A280 U/μl using 3% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid (FA) and mixed with iRT peptides (Biognosys, Schlieren, Switzerland; P/N: Ki-3002) at a ratio of 1/20 (v/v).  Peptide samples were analyzed in data independent acquisition (DIA) mode on a hybrid quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive HF, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA) operated in line with a nano UHPLC system (Easy-nLC 1000, Thermo Scientific).  For each sample 2 μl of purified peptide mixture was loaded onto a custom-made fused-silica column (150 mm x 75 um ID) filled with porous reverse-phase chromatography resin (Reprosil-Pur C18 AQ, 1.9 μm spherical silica particles, 120 Å pore diameter, M/N: r119.aq, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany). Bound peptides were eluted from the analytical column by running a linear gradient from 2% to 35% B in 120 min (Solvent A: 0.1% FA in water, solvent B: 0.1% FA in acetonitrile) at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min. The column was maintained at 50°C using a column heater (Phoenix S%T, Chester, PA). Eluted peptides were injected into the MS utilizing a nano ESI source (10 μm fused-silica spray emitter and Digital PicoView 565, O/N: DPV-565, New Objective, Woburn, MA).  Mass spectra were recorded at a resolution of 30000 (@ 200 m/z) in profile mode using positive polarity. MS1 scans covering 350-1250 m/z were acquired using an AGC target of 3e6 and a maximum IT of 45 ms. Each MS1 scan was followed by 38 multiplexed fragment ion scans (MS2) tiling the m/z range of 350 to 1250 in 25 Da windows. The maximum injection time per MS2 scan was selected automatically by the instrument software to assure acquisition at a fixed scan rate of 12 Hz. Accordingly, the instrument cycle time was around 2.4 s at a chromatographic peak width of 20-30 s. The AGC target for MS2 scans was set to 3e6 and isolated precursors were fragmented using HCD at a NCE of 28.

### Data Protocol
iTRAQ proteomics Mascot Distiller v.2.4.3.3 (Matrix Science, Boston, MA) was used to extract peak lists from raw files and an in-house Perl script for merging of corresponding CID/HCD spectra pairs, which were searched by Mascot v2.3 search engine against a mouse UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database (release 2010_12; 50029 entries), to which reversed decoy sequences as well as sequences for common contaminants had been added and using iTRAQ 8-plex quantitation, accepting maximally one missed trypsin cleavage, fixed modifications (methylthio (C), iTRAQ-8plex (N-term, K)) and variable modifications (iTRAQ-8plex (Y), oxidation (M)). Peptide mass tolerance was set to 10ppm and the fragment mass tolerance to 0.8 Da. The Mascot search results were then validated and the data were further analyzed by the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline (TPP v3 JETSTREAM). Spectrum to peptide assignments were subjected to secondary validation by PeptideProphet using accurate mass binning and resulting peptides were further analyzed by ProteinProphet. No protein groups were assembled and only proteins with a minimum ProteinProphet probability score corresponding to an error rate of ≤ 2% were used for further analysis. iTRAQ reporter ion intensities were extracted from merged mgf (Mascot generic format) files by a modified version of i-Tracker using a minimum threshold intensity of 20 and a mass tolerance of 0.1 Da. Relative intensities for each protein were then calculated by first summing up all values for multiple peptide CIDs and subsequently for the set of peptides per protein in each iTRAQ channel, followed by normalization to the sum of all channels by an in-house Perl script. The intensities of each iTRAQ channel of one 8-plex experiment were normalized by quantile normalization. For comparison between 8-plex experiments, a reference channel containing the same peptide mix in each experiment was added. For the final data evaluation, this reference channel was however omitted, since one aliquot of iTRAQ channel 113 (used to label the reference samples) showed only poor labeling efficiency and could not be used. Proteins with statistically significant differences in abundance between conditions were determined with help of one-sample t-tests on intraexperimental log2(PH/sham)-ratios from at least three replicate experiments. Label-free liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LC-MS) Raw MS data were analyzed in Skyline 3.5. First, target peptides were selected from spectral libraries generated by shotgun MS from pooled Nedd4-1 knock-down and control samples using the BiblioSpec implementation in Skyline. Only peptides being unique with respect to the mouse UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database, having a length between 8-35 AA, and being 2+ or 3+ charged were considered. Second, in order to assist RT-restricted mass chromatogram import, empirical RTs of the PSMs were converted to normalized RT using the iRT scoring system (31). Third, based on the library spectra, the top 5 most intense fragment ions from the y and b ion series (3rd to last-1 ion, and 1+ or 2+), and outside of the respective DIA isolation window, were selected for targeted data extraction and supplemented with the monoisotopic precursor mass (M) and its M+1 and M+2 isotopes (giving up to 8 transitions per target peptide in total). For each target peptide a corresponding decoy instance was generated using the approach of sequence reversal. Mass traces for all target+decoy transitions were imported within a 5 min window centered at the expected normalized RT. Resulting transition groups were scored according to a fitted mProphet model (using decoys for model training. Transition groups scoring below a critical value (corresponding to a q-value > 0.001) were not integrated, thereby generating missing values (NAs). For statistical analysis only peak areas of target fragment ions were exported to MSstats 3.3.3. In a pre-processing step, truncated peaks (flagged by Skyline) were removed from the dataset and one replaced peak areas equal to zero. Subsequently, peak areas were log2 transformed and rescaled by equalizing the median signal intensity across MS injections. Next, signals were summarized on the protein level using Tukey's median polish with missing values being imputed based on an accelerated failure model.

### Publication Abstract
The liver is the only organ in mammals that fully regenerates even after major injury. To identify orchestrators of this regenerative response, we performed quantitative large-scale proteomics analysis of cytoplasmic and nuclear fractions from normal versus regenerating mouse liver. Proteins of the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway were rapidly upregulated after two-third hepatectomy, with the ubiquitin ligase Nedd4-1 being a top hit. In&#xa0;vivo knockdown of Nedd4-1 in hepatocytes through nanoparticle-mediated delivery of small interfering RNA caused severe liver damage and inhibition of cell proliferation after hepatectomy, resulting in liver failure. Mechanistically, we demonstrate that Nedd4-1 is required for efficient internalization of major growth factor receptors involved in liver regeneration and their downstream mitogenic signaling. These results highlight the power of large-scale proteomics to identify key players in liver regeneration and the importance of posttranslational regulation of growth factor signaling in this process. Finally, they identify an essential function of Nedd4-1 in tissue repair.

### Keywords
Mouse, Partial hepatectomy, Itraq, Dia, Liver regeneration

### Affiliations
ETH Zurich
Technical University of Denmark

### Submitter
Ulrich auf dem Keller

### Lab Head
Dr Sabine Werner
ETH Zurich


