### Accession
PXD021351

### Title
Whole-cell and plasma membrane proteomics of herpes simplex virus-1 infection reveals cell surface remodelling via pUL56-mediated GOPC degradation

### Description
Herpesviruses are ubiquitous in the human population and they extensively remodel the cellular environment during infection. Multiplexed quantitative proteomic analysis over the time-course of herpes simplex virus (HSV)-1 infection was used to characterize changes in the host-cell proteome and the kinetics of viral protein production. Several host-cell proteins are targeted for rapid degradation by HSV-1, including the cellular trafficking factor GOPC. We show that the poorly-characterized HSV-1 pUL56 directly binds GOPC, stimulating its ubiquitination and proteasomal degradation. Plasma membrane profiling revealed that pUL56 mediates specific changes to the cell surface proteome of infected cells, including loss of IL18 receptor and Toll-like receptor 2, and that cell surface expression of Toll-like receptor 2 is GOPC-dependent. Our study provides significant resources for future investigation of HSV-host interactions and highlights an unanticipated and efficient mechanism whereby a single virus protein targets a cellular trafficking factor to modify the surface of infected cells.

### Sample Protocol
Sample processing for WCL proteomics: Cells were washed twice with PBS, and 250 µL lysis buffer was added (6M guanidine, 50 mM HEPES pH 8.5). Cell lifters (Corning) were used to scrape cells in lysis buffer, which was removed to a microcentrifuge tube, vortexed extensively, and then sonicated and snap frozen in liquid nitrogen. After harvest, samples were stored at -70°C until all time points were harvested. Samples were thawed and cell debris was removed by centrifuging at 21,000×g for 10 min twice. Dithiothreitol (DTT) was added to a final concentration of 5 mM and samples were incubated for 20 min. Cysteines were alkylated with 14 mM iodoacetamide and incubated 20 min at room temperature in the dark. Excess iodoacetamide was quenched with DTT for 15 mins. Samples were diluted with 200 mM HEPES pH 8.5 to 1.5 M guanidine, followed by digestion at room temperature for 3 h with LysC protease at a 1:100 protease-to-protein ratio. Samples were further diluted with 200 mM HEPES pH 8.5 to 0.5 M guanidine. Trypsin (Pierce) was then added at a 1:100 protease-to-protein ratio followed by overnight incubation at 37°C. The reaction was quenched with 5% (v/v) formic acid (FA; Thermo-Fisher), then centrifuged at 21,000×g for 10 min to remove undigested protein. Peptides were subjected to C18 solid-phase extraction (SPE; Sep-Pak, Waters) and vacuum-centrifuged to near-dryness.  Peptide labelling with tandem mass tags for WCL experiments: In preparation for TMT labelling, desalted peptides were dissolved in 200 mM HEPES pH 8.5. Peptide concentration was measured by microBCA (Pierce), and >25 µg of peptide were labelled with TMT reagent as previously described. An unfractionated sample was analyzed initially to ensure similar peptide loading across each TMT channel, to avoid the need for excessive (>2-fold) electronic normalization. Samples were combined according to the correction factors from the unfractionated analysis and subjected to C18 SPE (Sep-Pak, Waters) and vacuum-centrifuged to near-dryness. The dried pellet was resuspended in 200 mM ammonium formate pH 10 and subjected to high pH reversed-phase (HpRP) fractionation using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific), as described previously (Nightingale et al., 2018). Mass spectrometry data was acquired using an Oribtrap Fusion mass spectrometer.  Sample preparation for plasma membrane profiling: Plasma membrane profiling was performed as described previously with minor modifications (Weekes et al., 2010). Cells were washed twice in ice-cold PBS and surface sialic acid residues were oxidized and biotinylated for 30 min on ice in the dark using an oxidation/biotinylation mix comprising 1 mM sodium meta-periodate, 100 mM aminooxy-biotin and 10 mM aniline in ice-cold PBS pH 6.7. The reaction was quenched by glycerol to 1 mM final concentration and cells were washed twice in ice-cold PBS. Biotinylated cells were scraped into lysis buffer (1% Triton X-100, 150 mM NaCl, 1× protease inhibitor (complete, without EDTA), 5 mM iodoacetamide, and 10 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6) then incubated on ice for 30 mins. Nuclei were removed by centrifugation at 4°C. Biotinylated glycoproteins were enriched by incubation for 2 h at 4°C with high affinity streptavidin agarose beads. Extensive washing was performed on a vacuum manifold, using lysis buffer, then PBS/0.5% (w/v) SDS. Beads were incubated for 20 min at RT with PBS/0.5% (w/v) SDS/100 mM DTT. Further washing was performed with UC buffer (6 M urea, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5), followed by alkylation for 20 min at room temperature with UC buffer containing 50 mM iodoacetamide. Beads were washed using UC buffer, 5 M NaCl, then water. Captured protein was digested on-bead with trypsin in 100 mM HEPES pH 8.5 for 3 h. Tryptic peptides were collected and fractionated by tip-based SCX strong cation exchange, generating six fractions for MS analysis. For the TMT-based GOPC knockout plasma membrane experiment, plasma membrane profiling was performed as described above. Tryptic peptides were labelled with TMT as described for whole cell experiments, except 10 µL TMT reagent was added to the entire peptide sample and the reaction was not immediately quenched after labelling. To assess TMT incorporation and to ensure equal peptide loading, 10% of each labelled sample was quenched and combined for initial analysis. If incorporation was below 95%, samples were re-labelled with a further 10 µL TMT reagent prior to quenching. Six fractions were generated by HpRp fractionation and samples were quantified by M3 mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Data processing for TMT-based proteomics: Mass spectra were processed using a Sequest-based software pipeline for quantitative proteomics, “MassPike”, through a collaborative arrangement with Professor Steve Gygi’s laboratory at Harvard Medical School. MS spectra were converted to mzxml using an extractor built upon Thermo Fisher’s RAW File Reader library (version 4.0.26). This software is a component of the MassPike software platform and is licensed by Harvard Medical School. A combined database was constructed from (a) the human UniProt database (26th January, 2017), (b) HSV-1 strain KOS (Genbank entry JQ673480.1, manually updated with a single amino acid polymorphism in the ICP4 sequence identified in the KOS BAC strain used for virus generation), (c) common contaminants such as porcine trypsin and endoproteinase LysC. The combined database was concatenated with a reverse database composed of all protein sequences in reversed order. Searches were performed using a 20 ppm precursor ion tolerance (Haas et al., 2006). Product ion tolerance was set to 0.03 Th. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (229.162932 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (57.02146 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (15.99492 Da) was set as a variable modification.  To control the fraction of erroneous protein identifications, a target-decoy strategy was employed (Elias and Gygi, 2010). Peptide spectral matches (PSMs) were filtered to an initial peptide-level false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% with subsequent filtering to attain a final protein-level FDR of 1% (Kim et al., 2011; Wu et al., 2011). PSM filtering was performed using a linear discriminant analysis (Huttlin et al., 2010). This distinguishes correct from incorrect peptide IDs in a manner analogous to the widely used Percolator algorithm (Kall et al., 2007), though employing a distinct machine learning algorithm. Protein assembly was guided by principles of parsimony to produce the smallest set of proteins necessary to account for all observed peptides (Huttlin et al., 2010). Proteins were quantified by summing TMT reporter ion counts across all matching peptide-spectral matches using ”MassPike”, as described (McAlister et al., 2012; McAlister et al., 2014). Briefly, a 0.003 Th window around the theoretical m/z of each reporter ion (126, 127n, 127c, 128n, 128c, 129n, 129c, 130n, 130c, 131n, 131c) was scanned for ions, and the maximum intensity nearest to the theoretical m/z was used. The primary determinant of quantitation quality is the number of TMT reporter ions detected in each MS3 spectrum, which is directly proportional to the signal-to-noise (S:N) ratio observed for each ion (Makarov and Denisov, 2009). Conservatively, every individual peptide used for quantitation was required to contribute sufficient TMT reporter ions (minimum of ~1250 per spectrum) so that each on its own could be expected to provide a representative picture of relative protein abundance (McAlister et al., 2012). Additionally, an isolation specificity filter was employed to minimize peptide co-isolation (Ting et al., 2011). Peptide-spectral matches with poor quality MS3 spectra (more than 9 TMT channels missing and/or a combined S:N ratio of less than 250 across all TMT reporter ions) or no MS3 spectra at all were excluded from quantitation. Peptides meeting the stated criteria for reliable quantitation were then summed by parent protein, in effect weighting the contributions of individual peptides to the total protein signal based on their individual TMT reporter ion yields. Protein quantitation values were exported for further analysis in Excel (Microsoft).  Data processing for SILAC-based PMP: Mass spectra were processed in Maxquant 1.5.8.3 using medium (Arg6, Lys4) and heavy (Arg10, Lys8) labels. Data was searched against the human and HSV-1 strain KOS proteomes as used for TMT analysis (above). Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as a fixed modification, oxidation (M) and acetylation (protein N termini) set as variable modifications. Protein and peptide FDR were both set to 0.01, re-quantify was enabled and minimum ratio count was set to 2. Hierarchical centroid clustering based on uncentered Pearson correlation of the normalised ratios generated by MaxQuant was performed using Cluster 3.0 (Stanford University) (de Hoon et al., 2004) and visualised with Java Treeview (http://jtreeview.sourceforge.net) (Saldanha, 2004).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteasomal degradation, Quantitative proteomics, Uncharacterized orf, Membrane trafficking, Immune evasion, Virus host interaction, Herpesvirus

### Affiliations
Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, University of Cambridge, Hills Road, Cambridge, CB2 0XY, UK
University of Cambridge

### Submitter
Leah Hunter

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Weekes
Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, University of Cambridge, Hills Road, Cambridge, CB2 0XY, UK


