### Accession
PXD001964

### Title
Mesorhizobium loti proteomics

### Description
We performed proteomics of M. loti bacteroid harvested at 2, 3, and 4 WPI to disclose the transition of proteome profile during nodule maturation

### Sample Protocol
We extracted bacteroid from Lotus japonicus nodules, and proteins were extracted from them. We used gel-free digestion protocol for peptide preparation, and TMT label for quantification. nanoLC (Dionex) equipped with monolothic silica column (500 cm) and LTQ Orbitrap Velos were used for measurement.

### Data Protocol
Mascot was used for protein identification working on Proteome Discoverer 1.4, and  PD 1.4 were also used for quantification by its algorhithm

### Publication Abstract
Rhizobia are nitrogen-fixing bacteria that establish a symbiotic relationship with leguminous plants. To understand the mechanism by which rhizobia alter their metabolism to establish successful nitrogen-fixing symbiotic relationship with hosts, Lotus japonicus were inoculated with Mesorhizobium loti. Bacteroids were isolated from nodules harvested at 2weeks (the early stage of nodule development), and at 3 and 4weeks (the intermediate stage of nodule development) post-inoculation. Using a quantitative time-course proteome analysis, we quantified the variations in the production of 537 proteins in M. loti bacteroids during the course of nodule maturation. The results revealed significant changes in the carbon and amino acid metabolisms by M. loti upon differentiating into bacteroids. Furthermore, our findings suggested that M. loti enters a nitrogen-deficient condition during the early stages of nodule development, and then a nitrogen-rich condition during the intermediate stages of nodule development. In addition, our data indicated that M. loti assimilated ammonia during the intermediate stages of nodule development. Our results provide new insights into the course of physiological transitions undergone by M. loti during nodule maturation.

### Keywords
Proteomics of mesorhizobium loti bacteroid

### Affiliations
Division of Applied Life Science,  Graduate School of Agriculture
Professor at Grad. Sch. Agric., Kyoto Univ.

### Submitter
Mitsuyoshi Ueda

### Lab Head
Dr Mitsuyoshi Ueda
Professor at Grad. Sch. Agric., Kyoto Univ.


