### Accession
PXD017699

### Title
Cul4b promotes CD4 T cell expansion by aiding the repair of damaged DNA

### Description
The capacity for T cells to become activated and clonally expand during pathogen invasion is pivotal for protective immunity. Our understanding of how T cell receptor (TCR) signaling prepares cells for this rapid expansion remains limited. We have identified an E3 ubiquitin ligase, Cul4b, that regulates this process. Cul4b levels and activity increase following TCR stimulation. Disruption of Cul4b resulted in impaired proliferation and survival of activated T cells. Additionally, Cul4b-deficient CD4 T cells accumulated DNA damage. In T cells, Cul4b preferentially associated with the substrate receptor DCAF1, and Cul4b and DCAF1 were found to interact with proteins that promote the sensing or repair of damaged DNA. While Cul4b-deficient CD4 T cells showed evidence of DNA damage sensing, downstream phosphorylation of SMC1A did not occur. These findings reveal an essential role for Cul4b in promoting the repair of damaged DNA to allow survival and expansion of activated T cells.

### Sample Protocol
CD4 T cells were isolated by MACS from control and Cul4bfl/fl-CD4Cre mice. Cells were stimulated for 3 days and rested in IL-2 (50 IU/ml) for two days. After rest cells were stimulated with anti-CD3/CD28 mAbs for 4 h and cell pellets were stored at -80°C. For whole cell protein analysis sample preparation was done as described by Mertins et al (Mertins et al., 2013). Briefly, Cell pellets were lysed using urea buffer (8 M urea, 75 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris HCl pH 8.0, 1 mM EDTA, 21µM aprotinin, 307 nM leupeptin, 1 mM PMSF, 10 mM NaF, 5 mM sodium butyrate, 5 mM iodoacetamide and 25 µM PR-619.  Protein concentration was determined by a MicroBCA assay.  The protein samples were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 45 min followed by alkylation with 20 mM iodoacetamide for 45 min in dark. Proteins from each sample were then diluted with 50 mM Tris HCl pH 8.0 to reduce urea concentration to 1.1 M before trypsin digestion. Trypsin digestion was done overnight at 37°C.  The peptides were desalted with the SepPak columns conditioned with acetonitrile, and equilibrated with trifluoroacetic acid. After loading, tryptic peptides were desalted with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid.  Peptides were eluted from the column with 80% acetonitrile/0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. Eluted peptides were lyophilized and stored at -80°C.   Peptides were fractionated by basic Reverse Phase-High Performance Liquid Chromatographic (RP-HPLC), the peptides prepared were reconstituted in 20 mM ammonium formate, pH 10.0.  They were centrifuged at 20,000 g for 5min before being transferred into an auto sampler. Peptides concentration was determined with a NanoDrop under UV280 before they were injected to HPLC instrument. RP-HPLC was conducted on a Zorbax 300 Å Extend-C18 4.6 mm × 250 mm column (Agilent, 3.5 μm bead size). Prior to peptides separation, the column was monitored for efficient separation with standard mixtures of BSA and Fetuin in house tryptic digests.  Solvent A (2% acetonitrile, 5 mM ammonium formate, pH 10), and solvent B (90% acetonitrile, 5 mM ammonium formate, pH 10) were used to separate peptides based on their hydrophobicity. For separation of ~ 3.8 mg total peptides , a flow rate of 1 ml/min was used and increased the percentage of solvent B in a nonlinear gradient is the same as published before (Mertins et al., 2013). Peptide samples were combined into 6 fractions to be used for proteome analysis. Subfractions were collected in a serpentine, concatenated pattern to generate subfractions of similar complexities that contain both hydrophilic as well as hydrophobic peptides.  5% of the volumetric sample was taken from each subfraction for proteome analysis. These peptide subfractions were subsequently dried by lyophilizition. For proteomics analysis, the peptides were dissolved in water/0.1% TFA and 2ug of peptides were injected to the Liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry (LC-MS). For diglycine remnant profiling, K-ε-GG peptides were enriched using antibody specific for diglycine peptide, the peptides from the 6 fractions (95% of the total peptides) were recombined non-contiguously into 3 fractions with ~ 1mg peptide per fraction for immunoprecipitation. PTMscan ubiquitin remnant antibody, non-covalently conjugated to beads (Cell Signaling Technologies) was cross-linked as described (Udeshi et al., 2013b), and validated by SDS-PAGE. Cross-linked antibody (~ 31μg) was used for each 1mg peptide fraction. The beads and the peptides were under mixed end to end in IAP buffer (50 mM MOPS, 50 mM NaCl, 10 mM Na2HPO4, pH ~7) for 1 hr at 4°C. The beads were washed twice with 1mL IAP, then with 0.5 mL of 0.05% RapiGest SF surfactant in IAP, followed with final washes (3 times) of 1 mL PBS; The lysine acetylated peptides were eluted with 40uL 0.15 % TFA.  The eluted peptides were desalted via Oasis HLB uElution plate 30μM.  The eluted samples were dried overnight in speed vacuum dyer, and they were prepared in 0.1% TFA/water for LCMS analysis.HRM peptides (Biognosys) were all included in the samples for LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Protein and peptide identification/quantification was performed with MaxQuant (1.6.3.4) (Tyanova et al., 2016a) using a mouse reference database from Uniprot (reviewed canonical and isoforms; downloaded on 20180104) appended with the sequence of HRM peptides.  Carbamidomethyl of Cys was defined as a fixed modification. Oxidation of Met and Acetylation of protein N-terminal were set as variable modifications. Trypsin/P was selected as the digestion enzyme, and a maximum of 3 labeled amino acids and 2 missed cleavages per peptide were allowed.  The False Discovery Rate for peptides and proteins were set at 1%.  Fragment ion tolerance was set to 0.5 Da.  The MS/MS tolerance was set at 20 ppm.  The minimum peptide length was set at 7 amino acids.  The rest of the parameters were kept as default. The quality of the generated results by MaxQuant was further verified by Proteomics Quality Control (PTXQC) (Bielow et al., 2016).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dcaf1, T cell receptor, Crl4, Cell cycle, Adaptive immune response, E3 ubiquitin ligase, Proliferation, T cells, Smc1a, Dna damage response, Cul4b, Apoptosis

### Affiliations
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia
Director, Protein and Proteomics Core Children's Hospital of Philadelphia Research Institute

### Submitter
Hossein Fazelinia

### Lab Head
Dr Steven H. Seeholzer
Director, Protein and Proteomics Core Children's Hospital of Philadelphia Research Institute


