### Accession
PXD018026

### Title
Proteomic analysis of the secretome of Salmonella-infected Hela cells

### Description
It is becoming increasingly clear that cells infected with pathogens can signal to bystander cells. Infected cells have the ability to alert and instruct bystander cells to mount pro-inflammatory cytokine response, thus contributing to clearing infections. Here we analyse secretome of HeLa cells infected with Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium strain SL1344. Cells were infected with a MOI of 100 for 14 hours. Secretome from mock- and Salmonella-infected cells was collected for mass-spectrometry analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Twenty-two milliliters of cell culture medium from HeLa cells mock-treated or infected with Salmonella (MOI 100) were collected at 14 hpi and processed as described above. Secretomes were concentrated by centrifugation using Amicon filters with a 3 kDa cut-off value (Merk-Millipore, UFC900308).

### Data Protocol
IsobarQuant (DOI: doi:10.1038/nprot.2015.101) and Mascot (v2.2.07; Matrix Science, London, UK) were used to process the acquired data, which was searched against the Uniprot Homo sapiens proteome database (UP000005640) containing common contaminants and reversed sequences. The following modifications were included into the search parameters: Carbamidomethyl (C) and TMT10 (K) (fixed modification), Acetyl (N-term), Oxidation (M) and TMT10 (N-term) (variable modifications). For the full scan (MS1) a mass error tolerance of 10 ppm and for MS/MS (MS2) spectra of 0.02 Da was set. Further parameters were set as follows: Trypsin as protease with an allowance of maximum two missed cleavages; a minimum peptide length of seven amino acids; at least two unique peptides were required for a protein identification. The false discovery rate on peptide and protein level was set to 0.01. The raw output files of IsobarQuant (protein.txt – files) were processed using the R programming language (ISBN 3-900051-07-0). Only proteins that were quantified with at least two unique peptides were considered for the analysis. Moreover, only proteins which were identified in two out of two mass spec runs were kept. 948 proteins passed the quality control filters. Raw signal-sums (signal_sum columns) were first cleaned for batch effects using the ‘removeBatchEffect’ function of the limma package (PMID: 25605792) and further normalized using vsn (variance stabilization normalization - PMID: 12169536). The four replicates of the HeLa wild-type condion was normalized separately to maintain the higher protein abundance in this condition. Proteins were tested for differential expression using the limma package. A protein was annotated as a hit with a false discovery rate (fdr) smaller 5 % and a fold-change of at least 100 % and as a candidate with an fdr below 20 % and a fold-change of at least 50 %.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Salmonella, Hela cells, Secretome

### Affiliations
EMBL
RNA & Infection Laboratory Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology (CNC) University of Coimbra (Portugal)

### Submitter
Frank Stein

### Lab Head
Dr Ana Eulalio
RNA & Infection Laboratory Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology (CNC) University of Coimbra (Portugal)


