### Accession
PXD015411

### Title
The novel chemical growth regulator ‘Heatin’ stimulates thermomorphogenesis by inhibiting the Arabidopsis thaliana NIT1-subfamily of nitrilases

### Description
Temperature passively affects many biological processes. It is therefore challenging to study dedicated temperature signalling pathways orchestrating plant thermomorphogenesis, a suite of elongation growth-based adaptations that enhance leaf cooling capacity. We screened a chemical library for compounds that restored abolished hypocotyl elongation in the pif4-2 deficient mutant background in the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana to identify novel regulators of thermomorphogenesis. The small aromatic compound ‘Heatin’, with 1-aminomethyl-2-naphthol as minimal active moiety, was isolated as potent enhancer of elongation growth. Following a chemical proteomics approach, the NITRILASE1-subfamily auxin biosynthesis enzymes were identified as molecular targets of Heatin. We show that Heatin inhibits NIT1-subfamily enzymatic activity and that accumulation of its substrate indole-3-acetonitrile (IAN) is sufficient for elongation growth in a NIT1-subfamily-dependent manner. Our work assigns a role for NITRILASE1-subfamily in mediating elongation growth. Moreover, Heatin and its functional analogues present novel chemical entities for understanding auxin biology.

### Sample Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on an Orbitrap Elite (Thermo38) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 liquid chromatography (LC) system (Thermo) operated in the one-column mode. The analytical column was a fused silica capillary (75 µm × 30 cm) with an integrated PicoFrit emitter (New Objective) packed in-house with Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 1.9 µm resin. The analytical column was encased by a column oven (Sonation) and attached to a nanospray flex ion source (Thermo). The column oven temperature was adjusted to 45°C during data acquisition. The LC was equipped with two mobile phases: solvent A (0.1% formic acid, FA, in water) and solvent B (0.1% FA in acetonitrile, ACN) of UPLC grade (Sigma). Peptides were directly loaded onto the analytical column. Peptides were subsequently separated on the analytical column by running a 140 min gradient of solvent A and solvent B (start with 7% B; gradient 7% to 35% B for 120 min; gradient 35% to 80% B for 10 min and 80% B for 10 min) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated using Xcalibur software (version 2.2 SP1.48). The mass spectrometer was set in the positive ion mode. Precursor ion scanning was performed in the Orbitrap analyzer (FTMS; Fourier Transform Mass Spectrometry) in the scan range of m/z 300-1800 and at a resolution of 60000 with the internal lock mass option turned on (lock mass was 445.120025 m/z, polysiloxane)39. Product ion spectra were recorded in a data-dependent fashion in the ion trap (ITMS) in a variable scan range and at a rapid scan rate. The ionization potential (spray voltage) was set to 1.8 kV. Peptides were analyzed using a repeating cycle consisting of a full precursor ion scan (3.0 × 106 ions or 50 ms) followed by 15 product ion scans (1.0 × 104 ions or 50 ms) where peptides are isolated based on their intensity in the full survey scan (threshold of 500 counts) for tandem mass spectrum (MS2) generation that permits peptide sequencing and identification. Collision induced dissociation (CID) energy was set to 35% for the generation of MS2 spectra. During MS2 data acquisition dynamic ion exclusion was set to 120 seconds with a maximum list of excluded ions consisting of 500 members and a repeat count of one. Ion injection time prediction, preview mode for the FTMS, monoisotopic precursor selection and charge state screening were enabled. Only charge states higher than 1 were considered for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
RAW spectra were submitted to an Andromeda40 search in MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.30) using the default settings41. Label-free quantification and match-between-runs was activated42. MS/MS spectra data were searched against the Uniprot Arabidopsis thaliana UP000006548_3702.fasta; 33439 entries. All searches included a contaminants database (as implemented in MaxQuant, 245 sequences). This contaminants database contains known MS contaminants (i.e. human proteins picked up during sample preparation) and was included to estimate the level of contamination. Andromeda searches allowed oxidation of methionine residues (16 Da) and acetylation of the protein N-terminus (42 Da) as dynamic modifications and the static modification of cysteine (57 Da, alkylation with iodoacetamide). Digestion mode was set to “specific”, Enzyme specificity was set to “Trypsin/P” with 2 missed cleavages allowed, the instrument type in Andromeda searches was set to Orbitrap and the precursor mass tolerance to ±20 ppm (first search) and ±4.5 ppm (main search). The MS/MS match tolerance was set to ±0.5 Da and the peptide spectrum match FDR and the protein FDR to 0.01 (based on target-decoy approach and decoy mode “revert”). Minimum peptide length was 7 amino acids. Minimum score for unmodified peptides was set to 0. For protein quantification modified peptides (minimum score 40) and unique and razor peptides were allowed. Further analysis, filtering and annotation of identified peptides was done in Perseus v1.5.5.343. Processed data can be found in supplemental file X. Only protein groups with at least two identified unique peptides over all runs were considered for further analysis. Comparison of protein group quantities (relative quantification) between different MS runs is based solely on the Label-free quantifications (LFQ’s) as calculated by MaxQuant (MaxLFQ algorithm). Briefly, Label-free protein quantification was switched on, and unique and razor peptides were considered for quantification with a minimum ratio count of 2. Retention times were recalibrated based on the built-in nonlinear time-rescaling algorithm. MS/MS identifications were transferred between LC-MS/MS runs with the “Match between runs” option in which the maximal match time window was set to 0.7 min and the alignment time window set to 20 min. The quantification is based on the “value at maximum” of the extracted ion current. At least two quantitation events were required for a quantifiable protein.

### Publication Abstract
Temperature passively affects biological processes involved in plant growth. Therefore, it is challenging to study the dedicated temperature signalling pathways that orchestrate thermomorphogenesis, a suite of elongation growth-based adaptations that enhance leaf-cooling capacity. We screened a chemical library for compounds that restored hypocotyl elongation in the pif4-2-deficient mutant background at warm temperature conditions in Arabidopsis thaliana to identify modulators of thermomorphogenesis. The small aromatic compound 'Heatin', containing 1-iminomethyl-2-naphthol as a pharmacophore, was selected as an enhancer of elongation growth. We show that ARABIDOPSIS ALDEHYDE OXIDASES redundantly contribute to Heatin-mediated hypocotyl elongation. Following a chemical proteomics approach, the members of the NITRILASE1-subfamily of auxin biosynthesis enzymes were identified among the molecular targets of Heatin. Our data reveal that nitrilases are involved in promotion of hypocotyl elongation in response to high temperature and Heatin-mediated hypocotyl elongation requires the NITRILASE1-subfamily members, NIT1 and NIT2. Heatin inhibits NIT1-subfamily enzymatic activity in vitro and the application of Heatin accordingly results in the accumulation of NIT1-subfamily substrate indole-3-acetonitrile in vivo. However, levels of the NIT1-subfamily product, bioactive auxin (indole-3-acetic acid), were also significantly increased. It is likely that the stimulation of hypocotyl elongation by Heatin might be independent of its observed interaction with NITRILASE1-subfamily members. However, nitrilases may contribute to the Heatin response by stimulating indole-3-acetic acid biosynthesis in an indirect way. Heatin and its functional analogues present novel chemical entities for studying auxin biology.

### Keywords
Label-free quantification, Heatin

### Affiliations
University Duisburg-Essen
Analytics Core Facility Essen (ACE), Chemische Biologie, Universität Duisburg-Essen, ZMB, Germany

### Submitter
Farnusch Kaschani

### Lab Head
Dr Farnusch Kaschani
Analytics Core Facility Essen (ACE), Chemische Biologie, Universität Duisburg-Essen, ZMB, Germany


