### Accession
PXD006030

### Title
MULTI-TARGETED FLAVONOID INHIBITION OF THE PATHOGENIC  BACTERIUM STAPHYLOCOCCUS AUREUS: A Proteomic Characterization

### Description
Growth inhibition of the pathogen Staphylococcus aureus with currently available antibiotics is problematic in part due to bacterial biofilm protection. While Although the recently characterized natural products, including 3´,4´,5-trihydroxy-6,7-dimethoxy-flavone [1], 3´,4´,5,6,7-pentahydroxy-flavone [2] and 5-hydroxy-4´,7-dimethoxy-flavone [3] exhibit both antibiotic and biofilm inhibitory activities, the mode of action of such hydroxylated flavonoids with respect to S. aureus inhibition has is yet to be characterized. Enzymatic digestion and high- resolution MS mass spectral  analysis of differentially expressed proteins from S. aureus, with and without exposure to antibiotic flavonoids (1-3) has allowed for the characterization of global -protein alterations induced by metabolite treatment. A total of 56, 92, and 110 proteins are were differentially expressed with bacterial exposure to 1, 2 or 3, respectively. Connectivity of identified proteins is characterized using a search tool for the retrieval of interacting genes/proteins (STRING) with multi-targeted S. aureus inhibition of energy metabolism and biosynthesis by the assayed flavonoids observed.  Identifying the mode of action of natural products as antibacterial agents is expected to provide insight into the potential use of flavonoids alone or in combination with known therapeutic agents to effectively control S. aureus infection.

### Sample Protocol
The cellulose discs (S. aureus AH133, ca. 1 x 105-106 CFU/mL) were removed from the LB plates and biofilm disrupted by vortexing in 1 mL of PBS. Each cell pellet was lysed in 250 µL extraction buffer (150 mM NaCl, 20 mM Tris, 2.5 mM Na2HPO4, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA, 0.5% w/v CHAPS). Samples were then sonicated for 45 min at 4°C prior to centrifugation for 10 min at 14,800 rpm with the centrifuge held at 4°C. The supernatant was collected in separate containers. The buffer of the extracted proteins was exchanged into 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate using Amicon Ultra – 0.5mL centrifugal filters (3K nominal molecular weight limit, EMD Millipore Ltd., Billericam, MA). This buffer was utilized for efficient tryptic digestion.   A 10 μg aliquot of each sample, determined by BCA, bicinchoninic acid, protein assay (Thermo Scientific/Pierce, Rockford, IL), was diluted to 50 μL final volume by 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Thermal denaturation was performed at 65oC for 10 min. The protein was reduced by 5 mM at 60oC for 45 min, alkylated by 20 mM IAA at 37.5o C for 45 min in the dark. Excess IAA was consumed by the addition of DTT to a final concentration of 10 mM and incubated at 37.5oC for 30 min. The tryptic digestion was performed at 37.5oC for 18 h followed by microwave digestion at 45oC and 50 W for 30 min. A 0.5 μL aliquot of neat formic acid was added to quench the digestion. The resulting peptides were vacuum dried and stored at -20oC until LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
LC-ESI-MS/MS raw data was transformed to mascot generic format file (*.mgf) by Proteome Discover version 1.2 software (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA) then searched using UniPuniprot database (2014_08, taxonomy Staphylococcus Aures, strain NCTC 8325, 2896 entries) in MASCOT version 2.4 (Matrix Science Inc., Boston, MA). Iodoacetamide modification of cysteine was set as a fixed modification, while oxidation of methionine was set as a variable modification. The MS and MS/MS m/z tolerance was set to 6 ppm and 0.8 Da, respectively. Maximum peptide missed cleavages was set to 2. MASCOT search result was validated and quantified through spectral counting by Scaffold (version Scaffold 3.6.3, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR). Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability as specified by the Peptide Prophet algorithm (17). Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by a Protein Prophet algorithm (18).  Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. The nNormalized spectral count was used to quantify the relative abundance of each identified protein among different samples.

### Publication Abstract
Growth inhibition of the pathogen Staphylococcus aureus with currently available antibiotics is problematic in part due to bacterial biofilm protection. Although recently characterized natural products, including 3',4',5-trihydroxy-6,7-dimethoxy-flavone [1], 3',4',5,6,7-pentahydroxy-flavone [2], and 5-hydroxy-4',7-dimethoxy-flavone [3], exhibit both antibiotic and biofilm inhibitory activities, the mode of action of such hydroxylated flavonoids with respect to S. aureus inhibition is yet to be characterized. Enzymatic digestion and high-resolution MS analysis of differentially expressed proteins from S. aureus with and without exposure to antibiotic flavonoids (1-3) allowed for the characterization of global protein alterations induced by metabolite treatment. A total of 56, 92, and 110 proteins were differentially expressed with bacterial exposure to 1, 2, or 3, respectively. The connectivity of the identified proteins was characterized using a search tool for the retrieval of interacting genes/proteins (STRING) with multitargeted S. aureus inhibition of energy metabolism and biosynthesis by the assayed flavonoids. Identifying the mode of action of natural products as antibacterial agents is expected to provide insight into the potential use of flavonoids alone or in combination with known therapeutic agents to effectively control S. aureus infection.

### Keywords
Antibacterial flavonoids; lc-ms/ms proteomics; multi-targeted bacterial inhibition, Staphylococcus aureus

### Affiliations
Texas Tech University
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Texas Tech University

### Submitter
Wenjing Peng

### Lab Head
Dr Yehia Mechref
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Texas Tech University


