### Accession
PXD011542

### Title
Spliceosome disassembly factors ILP1 and NTR1 promote microRNA biogenesis in Arabidopsis

### Description
A battery of spliceosome-associated proteins has been identified in microRNA (miRNA) biogenesis; however, the underlying mechanisms remain elusive. The intron lariat spliceosome (ILS) complex is highly conserved among eukaryotes and its disassembly marks the end of a canonical splicing cycle. In this study, we show that two conserved disassembly factors of the ILS complex, ILP1 and NTR1, positively regulate microRNA biogenesis through facilitating transcriptional elongation in Arabidopsis. ILP1 and NTR1 form a stable complex and co-regulate alternative splicing of more than a hundred genes across the genome including the core circadian gene LHY and some pri-miRNAs. Dysfunction in either ILP1 or NTR1 result in reduced RNA polymerase II occupancy at elongated regions of MIR chromatins, without affecting MIR promoter activity, pri-miRNA decay and DCL1 processing. Our results provide insights into the molecular mechanisms of spliceosomal machineries in non-coding RNA regulation.

### Sample Protocol
GFP-Trap beads (Chromotek, gta-20) were used to do the immunopreciptation assay of GFP and ILP1-GFP from the flowers extracting solution. And after 4h IP at 4°，we eluted the total immunoprecipitates on GFP-Trap beads for running the 8% SDS-PAGE gel. After the protein running into polyacrylamide gels (Bio-Rad) 5mm of the way down the gel, we cutted the immunopreciptates included gel area. Each lane was cut into equally sized pieces and each section cut into 1-mm3 cubes. Gel pieces were washed with 100 mM NH4HCO3 and acetonitrile before reduction and alkylation with 10 mM DTT and 55 mM iodoacetamide, respectively. Proteins were subject to in-gel digestion with sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega) and digestions were carried out at 37°C overnight. peptide samples were dried down using a vacuum centrifuge before being readjusted to a final volume of 20 ul with 1% trifluoroacetic acid.

### Data Protocol
LC-ESI-MS/MS analysis LC-ESI-MS/MS analysis was performed using a nanoflow EASY-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Odense, Denmark) coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). An in-house packed two-column system was adopted for all analyses. Samples were first loaded onto a C18 reverse-phased precolumn (5 μm, 100 Å, 100 μm i.d. × 2 cm) and then analyzed on C18 column (2 μm, 100 Å, 75 μm i.d. × 25 cm). The mobile phases consisted of Solvent A (0.1% formic acid) and Solvent B (0.1% formic acid in ACN). The peptides were eluted using the following gradients: 5-40% B in 40min, 40-90% B in 5 min, 90% B for 5 min, 90-0% B in 1 min and 0% B for 9 min at a flow rate of 200 nL/min. Data-dependent analysis was employed in MS analysis: the 15 most abundant ions in each MS scan were automatically selected and fragmented in HCD mode.  Database searching and Data Analysis The raw data were analyzed by Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using an in-house Mascot server (version 2.3, Matrix Science, London, UK). Arabidopsis thaliana protein database were downloaded from UniProt. Data were searched using the following parameters: trypsin/P as the enzyme; up to two missed cleavage sites were allowed; 10 ppm mass tolerance for MS and 0.05 Da for MS/MS fragment ions; carbamidomethyl on cysteine as fixed modifications; oxidation on methionine as variable modifications. The incorporated Target Decoy PSM Validator in Proteome Discoverer and the mascot expectation value was used to validate the search results and only the hits with FDR ≤ 0.01 and MASCOT expected value ≤ 0.05 were accepted for discussion.

### Publication Abstract
The intron-lariat spliceosome (ILS) complex is highly conserved among eukaryotes, and its disassembly marks the end of a canonical splicing cycle. In this study, we show that two conserved disassembly factors of the ILS complex, Increased Level of Polyploidy1-1D (ILP1) and NTC-Related protein 1 (NTR1), positively regulate microRNA (miRNA) biogenesis by facilitating transcriptional elongation of MIRNA (MIR) genes in Arabidopsis thaliana. ILP1 and NTR1 formed a stable complex and co-regulated alternative splicing of more than a hundred genes across the Arabidopsis genome, including some primary transcripts of miRNAs (pri-miRNAs). Intriguingly, pri-miRNAs, regardless of having introns or not, were globally down-regulated when the ILP1 or NTR1 function was compromised. ILP1 and NTR1 interacted with core miRNA processing proteins Dicer-like 1 and Serrate, and were required for proper RNA polymerase II occupancy at elongated regions of MIR chromatin, without affecting either MIR promoter activity or pri-miRNA decay. Our results provide further insights into the regulatory role of spliceosomal machineries in the biogenesis of miRNAs.

### Keywords
Circadian clock, Alternative splicing, Intron lariat spliceosome, Transcription, Mirna

### Affiliations
Fuan University
State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering & Institute of Plant Biology, School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai 200438, China

### Submitter
Junli Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Guogong Ren
State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering & Institute of Plant Biology, School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai 200438, China


