### Accession
PXD029117

### Title
GM1 promotes early Aβ oligomer formation and maintenance

### Description
The aggregation of amyloid beta (Aβ) peptide is associated with Alzheimer’s disease (AD) pathogenesis. Cell membrane composition, especially monosialotetrahexosylganglioside (GM1), is known to promote the formation of Aβ fibrils, yet little is known about the roles of GM1 in the early steps of Aβ oligomer formation. Here, by using GM1-contained liposomes as a mimic of neuronal cell membrane, we demonstrate that GM1 is a critical trigger of Aβ oligomerization and aggregation. We find that GM1 not only promotes the formation of Aβ fibrils, but also facilitates the maintenance of Aβ oligomers on liposome membranes. We structurally characterize the Aβ oligomers formed on the membrane and find that GM1 captures Aβ by binding to its arginine-5 residue. To interrogate the mechanism of Aβ oligomer toxicity, we design a new liposome-based Ca2+-encapsulation assay and provide new evidence for the Aβ ion channel hypothesis. Finally, we conduct cell viability assay to determine the toxicity of Aβ oligomers formed on membranes. Overall, by uncovering the roles of GM1 in mediating early Aβ oligomer formation and maintenance, our work provides a novel direction for pharmaceutical research for AD.

### Sample Protocol
To obtain stable Aβ oligomers, particularly the Aβ oligomers formed on membranes, we utilize the photo-induced cross-linking of unmodified proteins (PICUP) method (Bitan and Teplow, 2004) to cross-link. We add ammonium persulfate (APS 1 mM, 10µL, Dot Scientific) and Tris (2,2-bipyridyl)dichlororuthenium(II) hexahydrate (Ru(II)Bpy32+ 0.05 mM, 10 µL, Sigma-Aldrich) in 10 mM HEPES (pH 7.4) to the incubated Aβ oligomer solution (180 µL). We irradiate the resulting solution with a 500 W lamp for 5 seconds and quench the cross-linking process with 47.6 mM dithiothreitol (DTT 1M, 10 µL, Dot Scientific). We incubate Aβ42 monomers with GM1 liposomes at room temperature for 3 days and cross-link Aβ before further purification. We use 1000 kDa MWCO centrifugation tubes, spun at 1300 rpm, to remove Aβ oligomers that did not insert into liposomes. We treat sample with N-octylglucoside, leammli SDS sample buffer dye, heater, and SDS-PAGE as described above. After gel electrophoresis, we cut out the gel. We crush the cut gel portion containing the Aβ oligomers of interested and dissolve them in HEPES buffer overnight in a shaker at 4oC. We centrifuge the resulting samples at 10000 g for 10 min and save the supernatants for further concentration by centrifugation. We determine the concentration of purified Aβ sample using a bicinchoninic acid (BCA) protein assay kit. Then, we digest purified Aβ oligomers and fibrils with pepsin. We add 1 N HCl to the Aβ samples to a final concentration of 0.04 N and suspend pepsin in 100 mM acetate buffer (pH 3.5). We add the pepsin to Aβ solution as the ratio of 1:20 (enzyme:protein W:W) and incubate them for 1 h at 37oC. We add 1 M Tris buffer (pH 8) to a final concentration of 150 mM to stop the reaction. And then we determine the resulting peptides with Sciex 5600 triple tof (AB SCIEX) and analyze them using the ProteinPilot software.

### Data Protocol
We analyze the data using the ProteinPilot software.

### Publication Abstract
The aggregation of the amyloid beta (A&#x3b2;) peptide is associated with Alzheimer's disease (AD) pathogenesis. Cell membrane composition, especially monosialotetrahexosylganglioside (GM1), is known to promote the formation of A&#x3b2; fibrils, yet little is known about the roles of GM1 in the early steps of A&#x3b2; oligomer formation. Here, by using GM1-contained liposomes as a mimic of the neuronal cell membrane, we demonstrate that GM1 is a critical trigger of A&#x3b2; oligomerization and aggregation. We find that GM1 not only promotes the formation of A&#x3b2; fibrils but also facilitates the maintenance of A&#x3b2;42 oligomers on liposome membranes. We structurally characterize the A&#x3b2;42 oligomers formed on the membrane and find that GM1 captures A&#x3b2; by binding to its arginine-5 residue. To interrogate the mechanism of A&#x3b2;42 oligomer toxicity, we design a new liposome-based Ca<sup>2+</sup>-encapsulation assay and provide new evidence for the A&#x3b2;42 ion channel hypothesis. Finally, we determine the toxicity of A&#x3b2;42 oligomers formed on membranes. Overall, by uncovering the roles of GM1 in mediating early A&#x3b2; oligomer formation and maintenance, our work provides a novel direction for pharmaceutical research for AD.

### Keywords
Oligomers, Amyloid beta, Gm1, Alzheimer's disease

### Affiliations
Penn State College of Medicine
Department of Pharmacology, Penn State College of Medicine

### Submitter
Nikolay Dokholyan

### Lab Head
Dr Nikolay V. Dokholyan
Department of Pharmacology, Penn State College of Medicine


