### Accession
PXD003364

### Title
S. japonicum exosome-like vesicles LC-MS/MS

### Description
Secreted extracellular vesicles play an important role in pathogen-host interactions. Increased knowledge of schistosome extracellular vesicles could provide insights into schistosome-host interactions and enable the development of novel intervention strategies to inhibit parasitic processes and lessen disease transmission. Here, we describe biochemical characterization of Schistosoma japonicum exosome-like vesicles (S. japonicum EVs) by  LC-MS/MS

### Sample Protocol
Schistosomes at the liver stage were collected from rabbits infected with S. japonicum at 28 d post infection (dpi). Parasites were thoroughly washed with PBS and maintained in preheated RPMI-1640 culture medium containing 100 U of penicillin and 100 mg/mL of streptomycin. A total exosome isolation kit (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, USA) was used for exosome isolation according to the manufacturer’s instructions with minor modifications.The purified exosomal samples that dissolved in PBS were diluted in 30 μL SDT buffer (4% SDS, 100mM DTT, 150 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0) and boiled for 5 min. The detergent, DTT and other low-molecular-weight components were removed using 200 μl UA buffer (8 M Urea, 150 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0) by repeated ultrafiltration (Millipore, 10 kD). Subsequently, the samples were carboxymethylated with iodoacetamide（IAA, 50 mM IAA in UA）in darkness for 30 min at room temperature. After 10 min centrifugation at 14,000g, filters were washed three times with 100 μL UA buffer and then 100 μL of dissolution buffer (50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.5) twice. The tryptic peptides resulting from the digestion were extracted with 0.1 % formic acid in 60 % acetonitrile. The extracts were pooled and completely dried using a vacuum centrifuge.liquid chromatography/mass spectroscopy (LC-MS/MS, Thermo Scientific) analysis was performed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer that was coupled to Easy nLC (Thermo Scientific). Trypsin-digested peptides (~5 μg) were trapped and desalted on a Zorbax 300SB-C18 peptide traps (Agilent Technologies, Wilmington, DE) and separated on a C18-reversed phase column (0.15 mm × 150 mm, Column Technology Inc. Fremont, CA). The Easy nLC system (Thermo Scientific) was used to deliver mobile phases A (0.1% Formic acid in HPLC-grade water) and B (0.1% Formic acid in 84% acetonitrile) with a linear gradient of 4–50% B (50 min), 50–100% B (4 min), and then 100% B (6 min) at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. To acquire the MS data, a data-dependent top ten method, in which the ten most abundant precursor ions were selected for HCD fragmentation. For survey scans (300–1800 m/z), the target value was determined based on predictive Automatic Gain Control at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200 and dynamic exclusion duration of 25 s. Resolution for HCD spectra was set to 17,500 at m/z 200. Normalized collision energy was 27 eV and the under fill ratio, which specifies the minimum percentage of the target value likely to be reached at maximum fill time, was defined as 0.1%.

### Data Protocol
Data interpretation and protein identification were performed with the MS/MS spectra data sets using the Mascot search algorithm (v 2.2, Matrix Science,) against the UniProtKB Schistosoma database (download at May 11, 2015, with 16,273 entries). The search parameters were trypsin enzyme, two missed cleavages, fixed modifications of carbamidomethyl, variable modifications of oxidation, a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.10 Da, and peptide tolerance of 20 ppm. Only proteins with at least two peptide (filter by ion score ≥20 and false discovery rate < 0.01) uniquely assigned to the respective sequence were considered identified.

### Publication Abstract
Secreted extracellular vesicles play an important role in pathogen-host interactions. Increased knowledge of schistosome extracellular vesicles could provide insights into schistosome-host interactions and enable the development of novel intervention strategies to inhibit parasitic processes and lessen disease transmission. Here, we describe biochemical characterization of Schistosoma japonicum exosome-like vesicles (S. japonicum EVs). A total of 403 proteins were identified in S. japonicum EVs, and bioinformatics analyses indicated that these proteins were mainly involved in binding, catalytic activity, and translation regulatory activity. Next, we characterized the population of small RNAs associated with S. japonicum EVs. Further studies demonstrated that mammalian cells could internalize S. japonicum EVs and transfer their cargo miRNAs to recipient cells. Additionally, we found that a specific miRNA, likely originating from a final host, ocu-miR-191-5p, is also associated with S. japonicum EVs. Overall, our findings demonstrate that S. japonicum EVs could be implicated in the pathogenesis of schistosomiasis via a mechanism involving the transfer of their cargo miRNAs to hosts. Our findings provide novel insights into the mechanisms of schistosome-host interactions.

### Keywords
S. japonicum  exosome  lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
SHVRI CAAS
Shanghai Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences

### Submitter
Lihui Zhu

### Lab Head
Dr Guofeng Cheng
Shanghai Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences


