### Accession
PXD036191

### Title
Discovery of a small molecule inhibitor of the UBE2F-CRL5 axis that induces apoptosis and G2/M arrest and confers radiosensitization

### Description
Protein neddylation modification is catalyzed by a neddylation activating enzyme (NAE, E1), an E2 conjugating enzyme and an E3 ligase. In various types of human cancers, the neddylation pathway was abnormally activated. Our previous study validated that neddylation E2 UBE2F is a promising lung cancer target. However, although NAE inhibitor MLN4924/pevonedistat is currently in few clinical trials for anticancer application, no small molecule was reported that targets UBE2F. Here, we report, for the first time, the discovery, via structure-based virtual screen and chemical optimization, of such a small molecule, designated as HA-9104. HA-9104 binds to UBE2F, reduces its protein levels, and consequently inhibits cullin-5 neddylation to inactivate CRL5 (cullin-RING ligase-5) ligase, leading to accumulation of CRL5 substrate, NOXA, to induce apoptosis. Moreover, HA-9104 appears to form the DNA adduct via its 7-azaindole group to induce DNA damage and G2/M arrest. Biologically, HA-9104 effectively suppresses the growth and survival of lung cancer cells and confers radiosensitization in both in vitro cell culture and in vivo xenograft tumor models. Taken together, our study discovered a small molecule HA-9104 that targets the UBE2F-CRL5 axis with anticancer activity alone or in combination with radiation.

### Sample Protocol
H2170 cells were treated with DMSO or HA-9104 (10 μM) for 24 hours in duplicates, washed with ice-cold PBS for 3 times, and sonicated three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% protease inhibitor cocktail). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the supernatant was collected and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions.  For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to urea concentration less than 2 M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion. Finally, the peptides were desalted by C18 SPE column. The tryptic peptides were dissolved in solvent A (0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile/in water), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (25-cm length, 75/100 μm i.d.). Peptides were separated with a gradient from 6% to 24% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) over 70 min, 24% to 35% in 14 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 450 nL/min on a nanoElute UHPLC system (Bruker Daltonics). The peptides were subjected to capillary source followed by the timsTOF Pro (Bruker Daltonics) mass spectrometry. The electrospray voltage applied was 1.60 kV. Precursors and fragments were analyzed at the TOF detector, with a MS/MS scan range from 100 to 1700 m/z. The timsTOF Pro was operated in parallel accumulation serial fragmentation (PASEF) mode. Precursors with charge states 0 to 5 were selected for fragmentation, and 10 PASEF-MS/MS scans were acquired per cycle. The dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using MaxQuant search engine (v.1.6.15.0). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the human SwissProt database (20422 entries) concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in first search and 5 ppm in main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification, and acetylation on protein N-terminal and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications. Target-decoy database searches were used for calculation of the false discovery rate (FDR), and FDR was adjusted to < 1%. A 2-fold change threshold, and CV (coefficient of variation) < 0.1 was set as the cut-off in which the difference after HA-9104 treatment was considered significant.

### Publication Abstract
Protein neddylation is catalyzed by a neddylation activating enzyme (NAE, E1), an E2 conjugating enzyme, and an E3 ligase. In various types of human cancers, the neddylation pathway is abnormally activated. Our previous study validated that the neddylation E2 UBE2F is a promising therapeutic target in lung cancer. Although the NAE inhibitor MLN4924/pevonedistat is currently under clinical investigation as an anti-cancer agent, there are no small molecules available that selectively target UBE2F. Here, we report, for the first time, the discovery, via structure-based virtual screen and chemical optimization, of such a small molecule, designated as HA-9104. HA-9104 binds to UBE2F, reduces its protein levels, and consequently inhibits cullin-5 neddylation. Blockage of cullin-5 neddylation inactivates cullin-RING ligase-5 (CRL5) activity, leading to accumulation of the CRL5 substrate, NOXA, to induce apoptosis. Moreover, HA-9104 appears to form the DNA adduct via its 7-azaindole group to induce DNA damage and G2/M arrest. Biologically, HA-9104 effectively suppresses the growth and survival of lung cancer cells and confers radiosensitization in both in vitro cell culture and in vivo xenograft tumor models. In summary, we discovered a small molecule, designated HA-9104, that targets the UBE2F-CRL5 axis with anti-cancer activity alone or in combination with radiation.

### Keywords
Ube2f; neddylation; apoptosis; cell cycle arrest; small molecule inhibitor

### Affiliations
Institute of Translational Medicine, Zhejiang University School of Medicine
1Cancer Institute, the Second Affiliated Hospital, and Institute of Translational Medicine, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou 310029, China  2Cancer Center, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310058, China  3Research Center for Life Science and Human Health, Binjiang Institute of Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310053, China

### Submitter
Tiantian Xu

### Lab Head
Dr Yi Sun
1Cancer Institute, the Second Affiliated Hospital, and Institute of Translational Medicine, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou 310029, China  2Cancer Center, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310058, China  3Research Center for Life Science and Human Health, Binjiang Institute of Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310053, China


