### Accession
PXD035508

### Title
Dataset 1 from 'Protein complexes in Bacillus subtilis by AI-assisted structural proteomics'

### Description
We generated a whole cell interaction network using crosslinking mass spectrometry. We crosslinked B. subtilis cells in suspension with the membrane permeable crosslinker DSSO, which can be cleaved in the mass spectrometer to aid identification of the crosslinking peptides (Kao et al. 2011; Kolbowski et al. 2021). To crudely simplify the proteome prior to tryptic digestion, we lysed the crosslinked cells and separated the soluble proteome (Dataset 1), and the cell debris (Dataset 2) (see Fig. S1a and methods). These two samples were digested, crosslinked peptides were enriched and fractionated by cation exchange and then all fractions were further separated by size exclusion chromatography. To further increase the depth of analysis, we also separated the soluble proteome further by size exclusion chromatography to produce 9 pools that were each analyzed separately (Dataset 3) (Fig. S1A and methods). A 2% protein-protein interaction false discovery rate (PPI-FDR) was imposed on each of the datasets and together 560 protein interactions are reported at a combined FDR of 2.5% (with a 5% residue pair-level FDR (Lenz et al. 2020)) (Supplementary Table 1). These 560 protein interactions are underpinned by 1268 unique residue pairs.

### Sample Protocol
The samples were processed further by desalting them with C18 StageTips, eluting, drying, and storing them at −80°C. To enrich crosslinked peptides, we separated each SCX fraction by size exclusion chromatography for a second dimension of fractionation. The desalted peptides were then fractionated using a Superdex 30 Increase 10/300 GL column with a flow rate of 10 μl/min. We collected 6 × 50 μl fractions at elution volumes between 1.1 ml and 1.4 ml, which were then dried in a vacuum concentrator. To prepare the samples for analysis, we resuspended them in 0.1% v/v formic acid and 3.2% v/v acetonitrile before conducting LC–MS/MS analysis in duplicate for SEC fractions. This was performed on a Q Exactive HF Orbitrap LC–MS/MS coupled on-line with an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system. The MS data were acquired in data-dependent mode using the top-speed setting with a 2.5 s cycle time. For every cycle, the full-scan mass spectrum was recorded in profile mode in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000 in the range 400–1,450 m/z. Fragmentation was done with stepped-HCD collision energies 18, 24, and 30% and spectra were recorded with a resolution of 60,000 with the Orbitrap.

### Data Protocol
A recalibration of the precursor m/z was conducted based on high-confidence (< 1% FDR) linear peptide identifications. The recalibrated peak lists were searched against the sequences and the reversed sequences (as decoys) of crosslinked peptides using the Xi software suite (version 1.7.6.4; https://github.com/Rappsilber-Laboratory/xiSEARCH) for identification (Mendes et al, 2019). The following parameters were applied for the search: MS1 accuracy = 2 ppm; MS2 accuracy = 5 ppm; missing mono-isotopic peaks = 2; enzyme = trypsin (with full tryptic specificity) allowing up to two missed cleavages; crosslinker = DSSO (with reaction specificity for lysine, serine, threonine, tyrosine, and protein N-termini); noncovalent interactions = true; maximum number of modifications per peptide = 1; fixed modifications = propionamide on cysteine; variable modifications = oxidation on methionine, methylation on glutamic acid, deamidation of asparagine (only when followed by glycine in the sequence), and hydrolyzed/aminolyzed DSSO from reaction with ammonia or water on a free crosslinker end. For DSSO, additional loss masses for crosslinker-containing ions were defined accounting for its cleavability (“A” 54.01056 Da, “S” 103.99320 Da, and “T” 85.98264 Da). The database used was all proteins identified in each sample with an iBAQ > 1e6 (1,716 proteins for dataset 1 and 1,726 proteins for dataset 2). Prior to FDR estimation, matches were filtered for those with at least four matched fragments per peptide, for crosslinking to lysines or N-termini, and for having cleaved DSSO signature doublet peaks representing each matched peptide. The candidates were filtered to 2% FDR on protein pair level using xiFDR version 2.1.5.5 (https://github.com/Rappsilber-Laboratory/xiFDR; Fischer & Rappsilber, 2017).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bacillus subtilis, Crosslinking mass spectrometry, Dsso

### Affiliations
NCI-NIH

### Submitter
Francis O'Reilly 

### Lab Head
 Juri Rappsilber 
NCI-NIH


