### Accession
PXD020350

### Title
Proteomic responses to ocean acidification in the brain of juvenile coral reef fish

### Description
Elevated CO2 levels predicted to occur by the end of the century can affect the physiology and behaviour of marine fishes. For one important survival mechanism, the response to chemical alarm cues from conspecifics, substantial among-individual variation in the extent of behavioural impairment when exposed to elevated CO2 has been observed in previous studies. Whole brain transcriptomic data has further emphasized the importance of parental phenotypic variation in the response of juvenile fish to elevated CO2. In this study, we investigate the genome-wide proteomic responses of this variation in the brain of 5-week old spiny damselfish, Acanthochromis polyacanthus. We compared the accumulation of proteins in the brains of juvenile A. polyacanthus from two different parental behavioural phenotypes (sensitive and tolerant) that had been experimentally exposed to short-term, long-term and inter-generational elevated CO2. Our results show differential accumulation of key proteins related to stress response and epigenetic markers with elevated CO2 exposure. Proteins related to neurological development and glucose metabolism were also differentially accumulated particularly in the long-term developmental treatment, which might be critical for juvenile development. By contrast, exposure to elevated CO2 in the parental generation resulted in only three differentially accumulated proteins in the offspring, revealing potential for inter-generational acclimation. Lastly, we found a distinct proteomic pattern in juveniles due to the behavioural sensitivity of parents to elevated CO2, even though the behaviour of the juvenile fish was impaired regardless of parental phenotype. Our data shows that developing juveniles are affected in their brain protein accumulation by elevated CO2, but the effect varies with the length of exposure as well as due to variation of parental phenotypes in the population.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction Proteins from whole brain tissue were extracted along with DNA and RNA with a Qiagen AllPrep DNA/RNA Mini Kit. The flow through at the RNA purification in the manufacturer’s instruction was kept and placed on ice for protein extraction. 3.5 µl of Halt protease & phosphatase inhibitor cocktail 100X, Thermo Fisher Scientific, was added, vortexed and split equally into two tubes and placed on ice for 15 minutes. Then 1000 µl of ice-cold acetone were added and placed on ice for 30 minutes for protein precipitation. Samples were then spun at full speed in a centrifuge at 4oC for 10 minutes at full speed of 16,873 RCF. The supernatant of acetone was discarded then without disturbing the protein pellet and the samples were left to dry for 15 minutes and then stored at -80oC.   Protein digestion and iTRAQ labeling Dried protein pellets extracted from fish brains were resuspended in 8 M urea lysis buffer with the help of a cooled stick sonicator for ten seconds at an amplitude of 20 (Fisher Scientific Q55) while kept on ice. Protein concentrations were measured using a 2-D Quant kit (GE Healthcare, UK). ITRAQ labelling allows for the relative comparison of protein accumulation across a maximum of eight labeled samples. To increase the number of biological samples and get a more representative picture we used three biological replicates of the same treatment and parental phenotype and pooled them at equal concentrations to a final volume of 100 μg. The pools of protein samples were then diluted 1:7 with 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate and digested using trypsin (Promega, USA) at an enzyme:protein ratio of 1:40 and left overnight at 37°C. Triflouroacetic acid at 2% was used to inactivate the digestion and peptides were desalted using Sep-Pak C18 cartridges (100 mg, Water Corporation, USA). Each sample (of three pooled biological replicates) was then labelled with iTRAQ Reagents-8plex reagents (Applied Biosystems) and incubated for 60 minutes. All eight samples (four CO2 treatments for two parental phenotypes) were then mixed together and dried by speedvac (Chandramouli et al., 2015). To further increase the representation of biological replicates to six per treatment and parental phenotype (for a total of 48 biological samples) we used two family lines and produced two complete iTraq experiments, each with eight treatment samples (of three pooled biological samples) for a total of 16 treatment samples.   Peptide fractionation and mass spectrometry analysis The labeled pool of peptides was fractionated by strong cation exchange chromatography (SCX)26 using an Accela 1250 LC system (Thermo Scientific, USA). We obtained a total of 15 peptide fractions and then desalted, dried and resuspended them in 20 μL of LC-MS sample buffer (97% H20, 3% ACN, 0.1% formic acid). The samples were analyzed through three technical replicates using a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Germany) coupled with an UltiMate™ 3000 UHPLC (Thermo Scientific). Introduction of the sample into mass spectrometer was done through a Nanospray Flex (Thermo Scientific) with an electrospray potential of 1.5 kV and the ion transfer tube temperature was set at 160°C. The Q Exactive was set to perform data acquisition in the positive ion mode. A full MS scan (350-1400 m/z range) was acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 60,000 (at 200 m/z) in a profile mode, a maximum ion accumulation time of 100 milliseconds and a target value of 3 × e6. Charge state screening for precursor ion was activated. The ten most intense ions above a 2e4 threshold and carrying multiple charges were selected for fragmentation using higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) and the resolution was set as 15000. Dynamic exclusion for HCD fragmentation was 20 seconds. Other setting for fragment ions included a maximum ion accumulation time of 100 milliseconds, a target value of 1 × e5, a normalized collision energy at 28%, and isolation width of 1.8.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification Mascot generic format (mgf) files was used to convert the raw MS data in the Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software (Thermo Scientific) and submitted to MASCOT v2.4 (Matrix Sciences Ltd, United Kingdom) for database search against an A. polyacanthus brain protein dataset developed in-house from the genome assembly (Schunter et al., 2016). The mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm for precursors, and 0.5 Da for the MS/MS fragment ion with a maximum allowance of one missed cleavage. Variable modifications included 8-plex iTRAQ at tyrosine and oxidation at methionine. The fixed modifications were set to methylethanethiosulfonate at cysteine and lysine, and 8-plex iTRAQ at N-terminal. The MASCOT result files were processed using Scaffold v4.1.1 (Proteome Software Inc. USA) software for validation of peptide and protein identifications with a threshold of 95% using the Prophet algorithm with Scaffold delta-mass correction. iTRAQ label-based quantitation of the identified proteins was performed using the Scaffold Q+ algorithm. The intensities of all labeled peptides were normalized across all runs (Zhang et al., 2010) and individual quantitative data acquired in each run were normalized using the i-Tracker algorithm (Shadforth et al., 2005). Peptide intensity was normalized within the assigned protein. The reference channel was normalized to produce a 1:1 fold change, and the iTRAQ ratios were then transformed to a log scale. P-values were calculated using a paired t-test with significance level of 0.05. We allowed for missing data in one of the three technical replicates and accepted differential accumulation at a fold-change level of 1.5 (consistent over technical replicates).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Brain, Acanthochromis polyacanthus, Itraq

### Affiliations
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology
The University of Hong Kong (address: Swire Institute of Marine Science & School of Biological Sciences, Kadoorie Building, Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong SAR)

### Submitter
Huoming Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Celia Schunter
The University of Hong Kong (address: Swire Institute of Marine Science & School of Biological Sciences, Kadoorie Building, Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong SAR)


