### Accession
PXD020227

### Title
Quantitative mapping of proteome dynamics during polarization of human iPSC-derived neurons

### Description
Early neuronal development is a well-coordinated process in which neuronal stem cells differentiate into polarized neurons. This process has been well studied in classical non-human model systems, but to what extent this is recapitulated in human neurons remains unclear. To study neuronal polarization in human neurons, we cultured human iPSC-derived neurons, characterized early developmental stages, measured electrophysiological responses, and systematically profiled transcriptomic and proteomic dynamics during these steps. We found extensive remodeling of the neuron transcriptome and proteome, with altered mRNA expression of ~1,100 genes and different expression profiles of ~1,500 proteins during neuronal differentiation and polarization. We also identified a distinct stage in axon development marked by an increase in microtubule remodeling and apparent relocation of the axon initial segment from the distal to proximal axon. Our comprehensive characterization and quantitative map of transcriptome and proteome dynamics provides a solid framework for studying polarization in human neurons.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for mass spectrometry (TMT labeling) Replicates of hiPSC-derived neurons were harvested with lysis buffer (8 M Urea, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma), EDTA-free protease inhibitor Cocktail (Roche)) at three distinct differential time points (days 1, 3, and 7). Lysates were sonicated on ice with a Bioruptor (Diagenode) and cleared by centrifugation at 2500 g for 10 min. The protein concentration of the samples was determined by Bradford assay. Per sample 100 µg of proteins were reduced (5 mM DTT, 55˚C, 1 hour), alkylated (10 mM Iodoacetamide, 30 min in the dark) and sequentially digested by LysC (Protein-enzyme ratio 1:50, 37˚C, 4 h) and trypsin (Protein-enzyme ratio 1:50, 37˚C, overnight). After digestion (overnight), formic acid (final concentration 3%) was used to acidify the samples and resulting peptides were afterwards desalted with Sep-Pak C18 columns (Waters). Samples were labeled with stable isotope TMT-6plex labeling, according to manufacturer’s instruction (Thermo Fisher Scientific). In short, peptides were resuspended in 80 µl of 50 mM HEPES buffer, 12.5% ACN (pH 8.5), while TMT reagents were dissolved in 50 µl anhydrous ACN. We added 25 µl of each dissolved TMT reagent to a correspondent sample according to the following scheme: day 1 (replicate A) = TMT-126  /  day 1 (replicate B) = TMT-129   day 3 (replicate A) = TMT-127  /  day 3 (replicate B) = TMT-130   day 7 (replicate A) = TMT-128  /  day 7 (replicate B) = TMT-131   Following incubation (room temperature) for 1 hour, the reaction was quenched with 5% hydroxylamine. Differentially TMT-labeled peptides were mixed in equal ratios and dried in a vacuum concentrator.  Peptide fractionation Mixed TMT-labeled peptides were solubilized in 10mM ammonium hydroxide, pH 10.0 and subsequently fractionated using basic pH reverse phase HPLC. Peptides were loaded on a Gemini 3µm C18 110A 100 x 1.0 mm column (Phenomenex) using an Agilent 1100 pump equipped with a degasser and a photodiode array (PDA) detector. Peptides were concentrated on the column at 100µl/min using 100% buffer A (10mM ammonium hydroxide, pH 10) after which the fractionation gradient was applied as follow: 5% solvent B (10mM ammonium hydroxide in 90% ACN, pH 10) to 30% B in 53 mins, 70% B in 7 min and increased to 100% B in 3 min at a flow rate of 100µl/min. In total 60 fractions of 1 min were collected using an Agilent 1260 infinity fraction collector and then concatenated into 12 final fractions. Collected fractions were vacuum-dried, reconstituted in 5% formic acid/5% DMSO and stored at -80°C prior to mass spectrometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry analysis We analyzed the samples on an Orbitrap Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled online to an Agilent UPLC 1290 system (Agilent Technologies). Peptides were loaded onto a trap column (Reprosil C18, 3 µm, 2 cm × 100 µm; Dr. Maisch) and separated on an analytical column (Poroshell 120 EC-C18, 2.7µm, 50cm x 75µm; Agilent Technologies). Peptides were trapped for 10 min at 5 µl/min in solvent A (0.1M acetic acid in H20) and then separated at a flow rate of approximately 300 nl/min (split flow from 0.2ml/min) by applying a 120 min linear gradient as follows: 13% up to 40% solvent B (0.1M acetic acid in 80% ACN) in 95 min, 40-100% in 3 min and finally 100% for 1 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode. Full MS spectra from m/z 375-1600 were acquired at a resolution of 60.000 with an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 3e6 and maximum injection time (IT) of 20 ms. The 15 most intense precursor ions were selected for HCD fragmentation. HCD fragmentation was performed at a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 32%. MS/MS spectra were obtained at a 30.000 resolution with an AGC target of 1e5 and maximum injection time (IT) of 50 ms. Isolation window was set at 1.0 m/z and dynamic exclusion to 16.0s.  Data processing proteomics Raw MS files were processed for data analysis with Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). A database search was performed using the Swissprot homo sapiens database and Mascot (version 2.5.1, Matrix Science, UK) as search engine. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine, acetylation at the N-termini, TMT-6plex of lysine residues and TMT-6plex at the peptide N-termini were set as variable modifications. Trypsin was set as cleavage specificity, allowing a maximum of two missed cleavages. Data filtering was performed using percolator, resulting in 1% false discovery rate (FDR). Additional filters were search engine rank 1 and mascot ion score > 20. Only unique peptides were included for quantification and the obtained TMT ratios were normalized to the median. Common contaminant proteins (such as keratins and albumin) were removed from the list.  Bioinformatic analysis proteomics All mass spectrometry data were analyzed using R statistical software (R Core Team, 2017). To infer protein dynamics upon differentiation, TMT reporter intensity values of hiPSC neurons at time point day 3 and day 7 were normalized to their correspondent day 1 or alternatively day 7 was normalized to day 3. TMT generated ratios (previously normalized to the median) were then log2-transformed. A log2-transformed mean of the TMT-ratios of the individual replicates was calculated. Proteins with less than 3 peptides used for TMT quantification or with a reporter ion variability > 100% in at least one TMT-ratio (high reporter ions variability) or with a median log2 fold-change > 0.4 between the replicates in at least one TMT-ratio (high replicate variability) were excluded from the analyses. Good correlation of replicates was assessed by comparing TMT ratios of all quantified proteins at different time points using Pearson correlation. Proteins with an absolute log2 fold-change > 0.3 between day 3 and day 1 or between day 7 and day 3 or between day 7 and day 1 were considered significantly regulated. Only significant regulated proteins were subjected to cluster analysis by using K-means clustering in R. Functional enrichment analysis within different clusters of expression profiles was performed using gProfilerR package in R (Raudvere et al., 2019). Network analyses were performed using the GeneMania plugin (Montojo et al., 2010) within Cytoscape (Shannon et al., 2003).  Heatmaps in the figures were prepared applying hierarchical clustering using Euclidean distance.

### Publication Abstract
The differentiation of neuronal stem cells into polarized neurons is a well-coordinated process which has mostly been studied in classical non-human model systems, but to what extent these findings are recapitulated in human neurons remains unclear. To study neuronal polarization in human neurons, we cultured hiPSC-derived neurons, characterized early developmental stages, measured electrophysiological responses, and systematically profiled transcriptomic and proteomic dynamics during these steps. The neuron transcriptome and proteome shows extensive remodeling, with differential expression profiles of ~1100 transcripts and ~2200 proteins during neuronal differentiation and polarization. We also identified a distinct axon developmental stage marked by the relocation of axon initial segment proteins and increased microtubule remodeling from the distal (stage 3a) to the proximal (stage 3b) axon. This developmental transition coincides with action potential maturation. Our comprehensive characterization and quantitative map of transcriptome and proteome dynamics provides a solid framework for studying polarization in human neurons.

### Keywords
Npc, Human neurons, Hipsc, Differentiation

### Affiliations
Cell biology, neurobiology and neurophysics, Utrecht University, Utrecht, Netherlands
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Robbelien Kooistra

### Lab Head
Dr Casper Hoogenraad
Cell biology, neurobiology and neurophysics, Utrecht University, Utrecht, Netherlands


