### Accession
PXD027528

### Title
Hypoxia induced sex-difference in zebrafish brain proteome profile reveals the crucial role of H3K9me3 in recovery from acute hypoxia

### Description
Understanding the molecular basis of sex differences in neural response to acute hypoxic insult has profound implications for the effective prevention and treatment of ischemic stroke. Global hypoxic-ischemic induced neural damage has been studied recently under the well-controlled, non-invasive, reproducible conditions using zebrafish model. Our earlier report on sex difference in global acute hypoxia induced neural damage and recovery in zebrafish prompted us for comprehensive study on the mechanisms underlying the recovery. An omics approach for studying quantitative changes in brain proteome upon hypoxia insult following recovery was undertaken using iTRAQ-based LC-MS/MS approach. The results shed light on altered expression of many regulatory proteins in zebrafish brain upon acute hypoxia following recovery. The sex difference in differentially expressed proteins along with the proteins expressed in uniform direction in both the sexes was studied. Core expression analysis by Ingenuity Pathway analysis (IPA) showed a distinct sex difference in the disease function heatmap. Most of the upstream regulators obtained through IPA were validated at the transcriptional level. Translational upregulation of H3K9me3 in male led us to elucidate the mechanism of recovery by confirming transcriptional targets through ChIP-qPCR. The upregulation of H3K9me3 level in male at 4 hr post-hypoxia appears to affect the early neurogenic markers nestin, klf4 and sox2, which might explain the late recovery in male, compared to female. Acute hypoxia-induced sex-specific comparison of brain proteome led us to reveal many differentially expressed proteins, which can be further studied for the development of novel targets for better therapeutic strategy.

### Sample Protocol
. Protein extraction for iTRAQ: The animals were euthanatized and decapitated to remove the brain. The whole brain from each animal was homogenized in lysis buffer (50 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0, 0.1% SDS with protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma) and for further efficient disruption and homogenization of tissue, a mild sonication was done using Bioruptor®. The obtained lysates were cold-centrifuged at 14,000 rpm for 15 min and the supernatant was quantified using Bradford assay with BSA as standard. Further protein samples were cleaned up by acetone precipitation. For each group 80 µg of protein was taken and six-volumes of chilled acetone were added for precipitation. After decantation of acetone the samples were air dried.  Before trypsin digestion, all the protein samples were reduced and cysteine blocked using the reagents provided in the iTRAQ® Reagents-4plex Applications kit-Protein (AB Sciex). Digestion and labelling of proteins were done according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The samples from normoxia male and female were labelled with reagents 114 and 116 and the samples from hypoxia male and female were labelled with reagents 115 and 117, respectively. Subsequently, all the labelled samples were pooled and vacuum dried and further cleaned up using the C18 desalting column (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The final fraction was concentrated using a vacuum concentrator and reconstituted in 10 µl of 0.1% formic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis. LC-MS/MS analysis of the trypsin digested iTRAQ labelled and purified fractions were performed in LTQ - Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Scientific, Germany). The fragmentation was carried out using higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) with 50% normalized collision energy. The MS data were analysed using Proteome Discoverer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Version 1.4). MS/MS search was carried out using the SEQUEST search engine against the NCBI zebrafish protein database. Search parameters included trypsin as an enzyme with maximum 2 missed cleavage allowed; precursor and fragment mass tolerance were set to 10 ppm and 0.2 Da respectively; Methionine oxidation was set as a dynamic modification while methylthio modification at cysteine and iTRAQ modification at N-terminus of the peptide were set as static modifications. The FDR was calculated by enabling the peptide sequence analysis using a decoy database. High confidence peptide identifications were obtained by setting a target FDR threshold of 1% at the peptide level. Relative quantitation of proteins was determined based on the ratios of relative intensities of the reporter ions from hypoxia treated and untreated samples released during MS/MS fragmentation of each peptide. Appropriate quality control filters at the level of peptides/peptide spectral matches (PSMs) and then at the protein level were applied to the iTRAQ data. Proteins identified from the triplicate runs having more than 1.5-log-fold changes in the hypoxia samples against the normoxia samples were selected for upregulation and having less than 0.5-log fold change considered to be down-regulated for its differential expression. Proteins based on their regulation were analysed for putative associations in different network pathways.  2.4. Protein enrichment analysis To perform the functional enrichment tests of the candidate proteins, we used Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) software for both canonical pathways and molecular networks altered. The IPA system provides a more comprehensive pathway resource based on manual collection and curation. The rich information returned by IPA is also suitable for pathway crosstalk analysis as it has more molecules and their connections included. For analysis we have provided the identified peptides with relative and absolute expression fold change values and performed core IPA analysis, biomarkers, and molecular and functional comparison analysis.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis of the trypsin digested iTRAQ labelled and purified fractions were performed in LTQ - Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Scientific, Germany). The fragmentation was carried out using higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) with 50% normalized collision energy. The MS data were analysed using Proteome Discoverer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Version 1.4). MS/MS search was carried out using the SEQUEST search engine against the NCBI zebrafish protein database. Search parameters included trypsin as an enzyme with maximum 2 missed cleavage allowed; precursor and fragment mass tolerance were set to 10 ppm and 0.2 Da respectively; Methionine oxidation was set as a dynamic modification while methylthio modification at cysteine and iTRAQ modification at N-terminus of the peptide were set as static modifications. The FDR was calculated by enabling the peptide sequence analysis using a decoy database. High confidence peptide identifications were obtained by setting a target FDR threshold of 1% at the peptide level. Relative quantitation of proteins was determined based on the ratios of relative intensities of the reporter ions from hypoxia treated and untreated samples released during MS/MS fragmentation of each peptide. Appropriate quality control filters at the level of peptides/peptide spectral matches (PSMs) and then at the protein level were applied to the iTRAQ data. Proteins identified from the triplicate runs having more than 1.5-log-fold changes in the hypoxia samples against the normoxia samples were selected for upregulation and having less than 0.5-log fold change considered to be down-regulated for its differential expression. Proteins based on their regulation were analysed for putative associations in different network pathways.  2.4. Protein enrichment analysis To perform the functional enrichment tests of the candidate proteins, we used Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) software for both canonical pathways and molecular networks altered. The IPA system provides a more comprehensive pathway resource based on manual collection and curation. The rich information returned by IPA is also suitable for pathway crosstalk analysis as it has more molecules and their connections included. For analysis we have provided the identified peptides with relative and absolute expression fold change values and performed core IPA analysis, biomarkers, and molecular and functional comparison analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Understanding the molecular basis of sex differences in neural response to acute hypoxic insult has profound implications for the effective prevention and treatment of ischemic stroke. Global hypoxic-ischemic induced neural damage has been studied recently under well-controlled, non-invasive, reproducible conditions using a zebrafish model. Our earlier report on sex difference in global acute hypoxia-induced neural damage and recovery in zebrafish prompted us to conduct a comprehensive study on the mechanisms underlying the recovery. An omics approach for studying quantitative changes in brain proteome upon hypoxia insult following recovery was undertaken using iTRAQ-based LC-MS/MS approach. The results shed light on the altered expression of many regulatory proteins in the zebrafish brain upon acute hypoxia following recovery. The sex difference in differentially expressed proteins along with the proteins expressed in a uniform direction in both the sexes was studied. Core expression analysis by Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) showed a distinct sex difference in the disease function heatmap. Most of the upstream regulators obtained through IPA were validated at the transcriptional level. Translational upregulation of H3K9me3 in males led us to elucidate the mechanism of recovery by confirming transcriptional targets through ChIP-qPCR. The upregulation of H3K9me3 level in males at 4&#xa0;h post-hypoxia appears to affect the early neurogenic markers nestin, klf4, and sox2, which might explain the late recovery in males, compared to females. Acute hypoxia-induced sex-specific comparison of brain proteome led us to reveal many differentially expressed proteins, which can be further studied for the development of novel targets for better therapeutic strategy.

### Keywords
Pathway analysis, Ipa, Hypoxia-ischemia recovery, Itraq, Sex difference

### Affiliations
CSIR-Indian Institute of chemical Technology
CSIR-IICT

### Submitter
Tapatee Das

### Lab Head
Dr Tapatee Das
CSIR-Indian Institute of chemical Technology


