### Accession
PXD005994

### Title
Aspergillus fumigatus melanin manipulates the cargo and kinetics of neutrophil-derived extracellular vesicles

### Description
Neutrophil-derived extracellular vesicles have regained scientific interest as potent ‘wireless’ modulators with pleiotropic effects on the immune system. A few studies have addressed their role in the context of microbial pathogenesis showing their bacteriostatic effects against Staphylococcus aureus in vitro and their potential as diagnostic markers in the onset of bacterimic sepsis in vivo. Here, we provided first insights into the vesicle release driven by the clinically relevant pathogenic fungus Aspergillus fumigatus that causes invasive infections in immunocompromised individuals worldwide often with a lethal outcome. Neutrophils, stimulated with fungal spores, potently produced vesicles that we refer as anti-fungal extracellular vesicles (afEVs). We revealed that the conidial surface pigment of A. fumigatus dihydroxynaphthalene (DHN) melanin - a well known fungal virulence factor - is a key ‘switch-on/off’ governing vesicle production. We profiled the kinetics of afEV formation and showed that DHN-melanin interferes with the vesicle number, vesicle surface maturation markers such as CD11b, CD63 and CD177 and governs the enrichment of distinct afEV subpopulations unrelated to apoptosis. Simultaneously we tracked down the fate of neutrophils during afEV formation and observed mulivesicular body formation that led to active export of CD11b, CD63 and CD177 by shedding from the surface of neutrophils onto the surface afEVs. By dissecting the proteome cargo of afEVs produced against wild-type and melanin-free conidia we verified that DHN-melanin also manipulates the type of cargo neutrophils accumulate in the vesicles upon confronting conidia with different cell wall integrity. afEVs contained higher amounts of antimicrobial peptides than spontaneously released EVs from uninfected neutrophils. Last but not least afEVs exhibit fungistatic effects and also modulate cell wall morphogenesis of hyphae.

### Sample Protocol
Purified ectosomes from 20 different donors were combined and resuspended in HBSS and stored at -80°C for no longer than 1 week prior to protein extraction. Ectosome suspensions from the same group were combined and loaded onto 3 kDa MWCO centrifugal filters and centrifuged for 5 min, 14 000 rpm, 4°C. The volume of the retenate was measured and transferred into fresh 1.5 mL Eppendorf tubes. Samples were snap frozen in liquid N2 and delipidated and precipitated by MeOH/chloroform/H2O precipitation. The protein precipitate was resolubilized in 50 µL 50 mM TEAB and 50% Trifluoroethanol buffer via sonication on a water bath sonicator at RT for 15 min. Reconstitution was followed by heat denaturation step on a thermoblock (Eppendorf) for 10 min at 90°C and 400 rpm. Samples were briefly cooled down on ice for 5 min. Protein quantification was performed using the assay-free Direct Detect® infrared spectrometer (Merck Millipore). Equal amounts of proteins (25-100 µg) were diluted in 100 mM TEAB to a final volume of 100 µL. Proteins were reduced with 2 µL 500 mM TCEP in 100 mM TEAB buffer at 55°C, 60 min, cooled down to RT and alkylated with 5µL freshly prepared alkylation buffer (625 mM IAA in 100 mM TEAB) at RT for 30 min in the dark. A second clean-up with MeOH/chloroform/H2O extraction has been performed as described above. Successively, proteins were digested for 2h, 37°C with Lys C protease (Promega) and 16h at 37°C with Trypsin Gold (Promega).  For TMT labeling digested peptides were directly subjected to labeling with the 6-plex labeling Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions (126: WT1, 127: WT2, 128: ΔpksP1, 129: ΔpksP2, 130: sEV1, 131: sEV2). Labelled peptides were pooled and fractionated offline by solid phase extraction (SPE) on cation exchange columns HyperSep SCX 50mg (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The following fractions have been collected: F0 (25% ACN, 0.05% HCOOH), F1 (F0 + 25mM NH4HCO3), F2 (F0 + 50mM NH4HCO3), F3 (F0 + 100mM NH4HCO3), F4 (F0 + 400mM NH4HCO3). Fractions F0-F4 were evaporated until dryness using a SpeedVac. TMT-labeled tryptic peptides were reconstituted in 25 µL of 0.05 % TFA and 2 % ACN and sonicated for 15 minutes at RT in a waterbath sonicator. Prior to  nLC-MS/MS analysis peptides were filtered through 10 KDa MWCO PES membrane centrifugal filters (VWR International) via centrifugation at 14 000 rpm for 15 minutes.  LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out on an Ultimate 3000 nano RSLC system coupled to a QExactive Plus mass spectrometer (both Thermo Fisher Scientific). Three LC-MS/MS runs were applied as analytical replicates (1 µL injection volume) for each SCX fraction. Peptides were enriched and desalted online based on a pre-concentration set-up using a nano trap column (Acclaim Pep Map 100, 2 cm x 75 µm, 3 µm) at a flow rate of 5 µL/min. After 4 min, a valve switch was performed to elute the pre-concentrated peptides onto the analytical column. For separation of peptides, an Acclaim Pep Map RSLC column (50 cm x 75 µm, 2 µm) was used as stationary phase (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The binary mobile phase consisting of A) 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in H2O and B) 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in 90/10 ACN/H2O  was applied for ultralong 10 h gradient elution: 0-4 min at 4% B, 15 min at 5.5% B, 30 min at 6.5% B, 220 min at 12.5% B, 300 min at 17% B,  400 min at 26% B,  450 min at 35% B, 475 min at 42% B, 490 min at 51% B, 500 min at 60% B, 515-529 min at 96% B, 530-600 min at 4% B. LC performance was routinely checked by cytochrome C standard digest and blind injections prior and after analysis and by monitoring UV absorption at λ = 214 nm during analysis. The Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo Fisher Scientific) provided with a stainless steel emitter was used to generate positively charged ions at 2.2 kV spray voltage. The capillary temperature was set to 220 °C and the S-lens RV level to 50. The hybrid quadrupole/orbitrap mass analyser was operated in Full MS / dd MS2 (TopN) mode. Precursor ions were measured in full scan mode within a mass range of m/z 300-1500 at a resolution of 140k FWHM using a maximum injection time of 120 ms and an AGC (automatic gain control) target of 3e6 (TMT)/ 1e6 (LFQ). For data-dependent acquisition, up to 10 most abundant precursor ions per scan cycle with an assigned charge state of z = 2-5 were selected in the quadrupole for further fragmentation using an isolation width of m/z 0.8 (TMT) / m/z 2.0 (LFQ). Fragment ions were generated in the HCD cell at a normalized collision energy of 36 V (TMT) /30 V (LFQ) using nitrogen gas. Dynamic exclusion of precursor ions was set to 40 s. Fragment ions were monitored at a resolution of 17.5k (FWHM) using a maximum injection time of 120 ms and an AGC target of 2e5. The fixed first mass was set to m/z 100 (TMT) / m/z 120 (LFQ).

### Data Protocol
Protein database search and reporter ion quantification  Thermo raw files were processed by the Proteome Discoverer (PD) software v2.1 (Thermo). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the UniProt protein database of Homo sapiens; status: 2016/08/22) using the algorithms of Mascot v2.4.1 (Matrix Science, UK), Sequest HT and MS Amanda. Two missed cleavages were allowed for tryptic peptides. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. Dynamic modifications were oxidation of Met and for the label-based quantitation experiment TMT-6plex reaction on Tyr (not considered for quantification). Static modifications were based on the carbamidomethylation of Cys by iodoacetamide and TMT-6plex reactions on Lys and the peptide N-terminus for reporter ion quantitation. Percolator node and a reverse decoy database was used for (qvalue) validation of the peptide spectral matches (PSMs) using a maximum Delta CN of 0.05 and a strict target false discovery (FDR) rate of < 1%. At least 2 peptides per protein were required for positive protein hits. TMT quantification was restricted to an integration tolerance of 5 ppm using the most confident centroid and a co-isolation threshold of <25%. TMT reporter ion ratios were calculated as follows : 127/126, 129/128, 131/130,  (128+129)/(126+127), (126+127)/(130+131), and (128+129)/(130+131). The reporter ion abundance values were normalized based on the total peptide amount. Only unique peptides were considered for quantification. Quan channel correction was applied and the reporter ion ratios were normalized based on the protein median. The significance threshold for differential protein regulation was set to factor ≥1.5 (up- or down-regulation) based on a reporter ion count of at least 3. Label-free quantification was performed by two different methods: 1.) The Precursor Ions Area - Top3 method compares the 3 most abundant peptides of each protein by using  the peak area of the respective  precursor ion. The mass tolerance was set to 2 ppm and the signal-to-noise ratio should be >3. For the 2.) OpenMS method a max. retention time difference of 0.33 min, a max. m/z difference of 10 ppm, a q-value threshold of 0.01 and a protein level false discovery rate of <0.05 was used. The abundance values were normalized based on the total peptide amount. Only unique peptides were considered for quantification. The significance threshold for differential protein regulation was set to factor ≥2.0 (up- or down-regulation).

### Publication Abstract
Polymorphonuclear granulocytes (PMNs) are indispensable for controlling life-threatening fungal infections. In addition to various effector mechanisms, PMNs also produce extracellular vesicles (EVs). Their contribution to antifungal defense has remained unexplored. We reveal that the clinically important human-pathogenic fungus <i>Aspergillus fumigatus</i> triggers PMNs to release a distinct set of antifungal EVs (afEVs). Proteome analyses indicated that afEVs are enriched in antimicrobial proteins. The cargo and the release kinetics of EVs are modulated by the fungal strain confronted. Tracking of afEVs indicated that they associated with fungal cells and even entered fungal hyphae, resulting in alterations in the morphology of the fungal cell wall and dose-dependent antifungal effects. To assess as a proof of concept whether the antimicrobial proteins found in afEVs might contribute to growth inhibition of hyphae when present in the fungal cytoplasm, two human proteins enriched in afEVs, cathepsin G and azurocidin, were heterologously expressed in fungal hyphae. This led to reduced fungal growth relative to that of a control strain producing the human retinol binding protein 7. In conclusion, extracellular vesicles produced by neutrophils in response to <i>A. fumigatus</i> infection are able to associate with the fungus, limit growth, and elicit cell damage by delivering antifungal cargo. This finding offers an intriguing, previously overlooked mechanism of antifungal defense against <i>A. fumigatus</i><b>IMPORTANCE</b> Invasive fungal infections caused by the mold <i>Aspergillus fumigatus</i> are a growing concern in the clinic due to the increasing use of immunosuppressive therapies and increasing antifungal drug resistance. These infections result in high rates of mortality, as treatment and diagnostic options remain limited. In healthy individuals, neutrophilic granulocytes are critical for elimination of <i>A. fumigatus</i> from the host; however, the exact extracellular mechanism of neutrophil-mediated antifungal activity remains unresolved. Here, we present a mode of antifungal defense employed by human neutrophils against <i>A. fumigatus</i> not previously described. We found that extracellular vesicles produced by neutrophils in response to <i>A. fumigatus</i> infection are able to associate with the fungus, limit growth, and elicit cell damage by delivering antifungal cargo. In the end, antifungal extracellular vesicle biology provides a significant step forward in our understanding of <i>A. fumigatus</i> host pathogenesis and opens up novel diagnostic and therapeutic possibilities.

### Keywords
Antifungal extracellular vesicles, Neutrophils, Aspergillus fumigatus, Melanin

### Affiliations
Institute for Microbiology, Friedrich Schiller University, Jena, Germany and Department of Molecular and Applied Microbiology, Leibniz Institute for Natural Product and Infection Biology (HKI), Hans Knöll Institute, Jena, Germany
Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knöll Institute

### Submitter
Thomas Krüger

### Lab Head
Dr Axel A. Brakhage
Institute for Microbiology, Friedrich Schiller University, Jena, Germany and Department of Molecular and Applied Microbiology, Leibniz Institute for Natural Product and Infection Biology (HKI), Hans Knöll Institute, Jena, Germany


