### Accession
PXD007048

### Title
Cell-specific proteome analyses of human bone marrow upon aging.

### Description
Diminishing potential to replace damaged tissues is a hallmark for aging of somatic stem cells, but the mechanisms leading to aging remain elusive. We performed a proteome-wide analysis of human hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells (CD34+) along with five other cell types that constitute the bone marrow niche, namely, lymphocytes and precursors; monocytes/macrophages and precursors; granulocytic precursors and erythroid precursors, as well as mesenchymal stem/stromal cells. In total, we analyzed 270 samples from 59 human subjects. The data represents a valuable resource for further in-depth mechanistic analyses, and for validation of knowledge gained from animal models.

### Sample Protocol
Bone marrow aspirates were filtered and mononuclear cells (MNCs) were separated by FICOLL density centrifugation. MNCs were separated by fluorescence assisted cell sorting and mesenchymal stem/stromal cells were expanded in vitro. Sorted cells were lysed in HEPES buffer containing RapiGest surfactant and protease inhibitors. Subsequently, proteins were reduced with dithiothreitol and carbamidomethylated with iodoacetamide and digested with Lys-C for 3 hours followed by trypsin overnight. The peptides from five samples of the same cell type and one internal standard were labeled with TMT-6plex and pooled. RapiGest was cleaved with trifluoroacetic acid, followed by centrifugation and desalting of the supernatant. The labeled peptides were separated by reversed phase HPLC at pH10 and fractionated into 90 fractions. The 90 fractions were desalted and pooled in one step into 18 pooled fractions. These 18 fractions of each TMT-6plex experiment were analyzed by nanoflow LC-MS.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed with Proteome Discoverer 1.4.1.14 using Mascot version 2.5.1 as search algorithm. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was calculated with Percolator version 2.04. For comparison of the same protein within a cell population all samples were also analyzed with MaxQuant 1.5.3.17 to estimate protein abundances by label-free quantification. Details are described in Materials & Methods.

### Publication Abstract
Diminishing potential to replace damaged tissues is a hallmark for ageing of somatic stem cells, but the mechanisms remain elusive. Here, we present proteome-wide atlases of age-associated alterations in human haematopoietic stem and progenitor cells (HPCs) and five other cell populations that constitute the bone marrow niche. For each, the abundance of a large fraction of the ~12,000 proteins identified is assessed in 59 human subjects from different ages. As the HPCs become older, pathways in central carbon metabolism exhibit features reminiscent of the Warburg effect, where glycolytic intermediates are rerouted towards anabolism. Simultaneously, altered abundance of early regulators of HPC differentiation reveals a reduced functionality and a bias towards myeloid differentiation. Ageing causes alterations in the bone marrow niche too, and diminishes the functionality of the pathways involved in HPC homing. The data represent a valuable resource for further analyses, and for validation of knowledge gained from animal models.

### Keywords
Human, Aging, Tmt, Hematopoietic stem cells, Label-free quantification, Mesenchymal stem/stromal cells

### Affiliations
EMBL Heidelberg

### Submitter
Marco L. Hennrich

### Lab Head
Dr Anne-Claude Gavin
EMBL Heidelberg


