### Accession
PXD030922

### Title
Pcyox1l controls neutrophil maturation and functionality

### Description
Little is known about how commensal colonization controls neutrophil differentiation and  functions. Using system immunology approaches we discovered commensal and infection induced changes in neutrophil proteomes. The identified differentially expressed genes were  CRISPRed out in immortalized neutrophil progenitor cell lines transduced with lenti-guides.  Analysis of maturation and bactericidal capacity of the generated CRISPRed clones ascribed a  function to a currently unknown protein-termed Prenylcysteine oxidase 1 like (Pcyox1l). Pcyox1l  deficient neutrophils show dramatic defects in longevity, autophagy, and bactericidal functions  associated with reductions in SerpinB1a transcripts and protein. Metabolic labeling experiments  revealed that Pcyox1l controls levels of protein prenylation, highlighting its key enzymatic  function. The Pcyox1l deficiency phenotype is phenocopied by SerpinB1a deficiency in  neutrophils signifying linked mechanisms. Commensal colonization increases Pcyox1l and  SerpinB1a levels in polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMNs) in specific pathogen free (SPF) mice when compared to germ free  (GF) mice and, conversely, Pcyox1l KO mice demonstrated altered commensal microbiome and  elevated susceptibility to bacterial infection. Cumulatively, our data highlight a novel metabolic pathway which is controlled by commensal colonization and governs neutrophil functionality,  longevity, and bactericidal properties. In lieu with the impairment of neutrophil bactericidal functions, Pcyox1l KO mice showed elevated susceptibility to infection with the Gram-negative  pathogen Pseudomonas aeruginosa

### Sample Protocol
PMNs from infected and noninfected SW and GF SW mice (in quadruplicate) were subjected to  in-solution trypsin digestion. Briefly, 200 μl of 8 M Urea (Sigma-Aldrich, Cat # U1250, Saint  Louis, MO, USA) containing 40 mM HEPES (Sigma-Aldrich, Cat #H4034, Saint Louis, MO,  USA) was added to the samples, sonicated in a rotating water bath at 4°C for 15 min (30 s on, 30  s off). The samples were then reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT, Sigma-Aldrich, Cat  #D0632, Saint Louis, MO, USA), alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide (IAA, Cat #I6125, Sigma-Aldrich, Saint Louis, MO, USA), followed by digestion with LysC and trypsin (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat #A40007, Waltham, MA, USA)  (protein:enzyme ratio 50:1). Digestion was stopped by addition of 10%  v/v trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, Sigma-Aldrich, Cat #30203, Saint Louis, MO, USA) per sample  and the acidified peptides were loaded onto StageTips (containing three layers of C18) to desalt  and purify according to the standard protocol18. Each sample was divided onto two StageTips  (one “working” and one “back-up”) and stored at 4 °C until the LC-MS/MS measurement.  Samples were eluted from StageTips with 50 μl buffer B (80% acetonitrile (ACN, Thermo Fisher  Scientific, Cat # TS-51101, Waltham, MA, USA) and 0.5% acetic acid (Thermo Fisher  Scientific, Cat #A38-212, Waltham, MA, USA), the organic solvent was removed in a SpeedVac  concentrator for 20 min, and peptides were resuspended in 10 μl of Buffer A (2% ACN and 0.1%  TFA). Three μl of each sample was analyzed by nanoflow liquid chromatography on an EASY-nLC  system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) on-line coupled to an Q Exactive HF-X  quadrupole orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) through a  nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). A 50 cm column  with 75 μm inner diameter was used for the chromatography, in-house packed with 3 μm  reversed-phase silica beads (ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany). Peptides were  separated and directly electrosprayed into the mass spectrometer using a linear gradient from 5%  to 60% ACN in 0.5% acetic acid over 120 min at a constant flow of 300 nl/min. The linear  gradient was followed by a washout with up to 95% ACN to clean the column for the next run.  The overall gradient length was 145 min. The QExactive HF-X was operated in a data-dependent  mode, switching automatically between one full-scan and subsequent MS/MS scans of the fifteen  most abundant peaks (Top15 method), with full-scans (m/z 300–1650) acquired in the Orbitrap  analyzer with a resolution of 60,000 at 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed together using MaxQuant software (version 1.5.6.2)19. The derived peak  list was searched with the built-in Andromeda search engine 20,21 against the reference Mus  musculus proteome downloaded from Uniprot (http://www.uniprot.org/) (53,106 sequences). The  parameters were as follows: strict trypsin specificity was required with cleavage at the C terminal after K or R, allowing for up to two missed cleavages. The minimum required peptide  length was set to seven amino acids. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed  modification (57.021464 Da) and N-acetylation of proteins N termini (42.010565 Da) and  oxidation of methionine (15.994915 Da) were set as variable modifications. PSM and protein 10 identifications were filtered using a target-decoy approach at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%.  ‘Match between runs’ was enabled with a match time window of 0.7 min and an alignment time  window of 20 min. Relative, label-free quantification of proteins was done using the MaxLFQ  algorithm 21 integrated into MaxQuant using a minimum ratio count of 2, enabled FastLFQ  option, LFQ minimum number of neighbors at 3, and the LFQ average number of neighbors at 6. Further analysis of the MaxQuant-processed data was performed using the Perseus software  environment (version 1.5.5.5)22. The “proteingroups.txt” file was loaded into Perseus. Hits to the  reverse database, contaminants, and proteins only identified with modified peptides were  eliminated. LFQ intensities were converted to a log scale (log2), and only those proteins which  were present in triplicate within at least one sample set were used for further statistical analysis  (valid-value filter of 3 in at least one group). Missing values were imputed from a normal  distribution (downshift of 1.8 standard deviations and a width of 0.3 standard deviations). The  total matrix was imputed using these values, enabling statistical analysis. A Student’s t-test was  performed to identify proteins with a significant differential expression (p-value < 0.05) between  baseline and infected SW and C57BL6/N (S0 = 1) samples employing a 5% permutation-based  FDR filter. A Principle Component Analysis (PCA) was performed to determine proteome  differences at the experiment level, as well as Pearson correlation with hierarchical clustering by  Euclidean distance to determine replicate reproducibility. A two-sample Student’s t-test (S0 =1)  was performed on the entire data set and a 1D-annotation enrichment based on the t-test differences with a Benjamini-Hochberg FDR cutoff at 0.05 allowed for visualization of enrichment by keywords within the RStudio platform (http://www.R-project.org/). Specifically,  annotation enrichment categories meeting the p-value (0.05) and FDR (0.05)cut-offs, along with  scores < -0.5 and < 0.5 were plotted.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Infection, Bacterial pathogens, Neutrophils, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Guelph, Guelph, Ontario, Canada, N1H 1N8
University of Guelph

### Submitter
Jennifer Geddes-McAlister

### Lab Head
Dr Jennifer Geddes-McAlister
Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Guelph, Guelph, Ontario, Canada, N1H 1N8


