### Accession
PXD034886

### Title
Sortilin-driven cancer secretome in HCC

### Description
To understand the secretome changes induced by sortilin in HCC cells.

### Sample Protocol
Conditioned medium was collected from MHCC97L EV and MHCC97L SORT1-overexpressing cells. Concentrated CM were prepared using Amicon® ultra-4 centrifugal filter units with 3kDa membrane (MilliporeSigma). Concentrated CM was subjected to albumin depletion using PierceTM albumin depletion kit according to manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Protein (25 μg) from albumin-depleted concentrated MHCC97L SORT1-OE CM and EV CM (3 biological replicates per group) were digested using standard tryptic digestion method. Samples were acidified using formic acid (5%) and were stored at -80oC prior to desalting analysis and fluorometric peptide quantification. LC-MS/MS was performed using Thermo ScientificTM Orbitrap FusionTM LumosTM TribridTM mass spectrometer coupled to a LC system (Dionex Ultimate3000 nanoRSLC). Peptides were separated on a commercial C18 column (75 μm i.d. × 50 cm length × 2 μm particle size) coupled to a nanoTrap column (75 μm i.d. × 2 cm length × 3 μm particle size) (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Separation was attained using a linear gradient of increasing buffer B (80% ACN and 0.1% FA) and declining buffer (0.1% FA) at 300 nL/min. Buffer B was increased to 30% B in ca. 150 min and ramped to 40% B in the next 20 min followed by a quick ramp to 90% B, where it was held for 10 min before a quick ramp back to 5% B, where it was held and the column was re-equilibrated. Mass spectrometer was operated in positive polarity mode with capillary temperature of 300 °C. Full MS survey scan resolution was set to 120 000 with an automatic gain control target value of 4 × 105, maximum ion injection time (IT) of 30 ms, and for a scan range of 400−1500 m/z. A data-dependent top speed method with a time interval of 3 s between every survey scan was operated during which higher-energy collisional dissociation was used. Spectra were obtained at 30 000 MS2 resolution with automatic gain control target of 4 × 105 and maximum ion IT of 60 ms, 1.6 m/z isolation width, and normalized collisional energy of 30. Preceding precursor ions targeted for higher-energy collisional dissociation were dynamically excluded of 50 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw files from LC-MS/MS experiments were searched against the Uniprot Human database (UP000005640) with MaxQuant search engine, specified with trypsin digestion (allowed up to 3 missed cleavages) and cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57.02146) as a static modification. The search also allowed up to 5 variable modifications for methionine oxidation (+15.99491) and N-terminal acetylation (+42.01056). With a decoy search strategy, the peptide false discovery rate was set to 1%. Label-free quantification option was enabled with normalization. Only proteins showing non-zero label-free quantification intensities across 2 of the 3 replicate experiments, and having at least 2 different peptides identified were analyzed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Sortilin, Lc-ms/ms, Hcc

### Affiliations
The University of Hong Kong
Department of Pathology, School of Clinical Medicine, LKS Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, HKSAR

### Submitter
Kristy Chan

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Regina Cheuk Lam Lo
Department of Pathology, School of Clinical Medicine, LKS Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, HKSAR


