### Accession
PXD025783

### Title
Mycobacterium smegmatis cultured in different carbon sources to induce in vitro cholesterol consumption reveals alterations in immune response after infection: a macrophage proteomics analysis.

### Description
During Tuberculosis, Mycobacterium uses host macrophage cholesterol as a carbon and energy source. To mimic these conditions Mycobacterium smegmatis cultured in minimal medium (MM) has been used to induce cholesterol consumption in vitro. During cultivation, M. smegmatis con-sumes MM cholesterol and changes the accumulation of the cell wall compounds such as PIMs, LM and LAM, which plays an important role in its pathogenicity. These changes led to cell sur-face hydrophobicity modifications and H2O2 susceptibility. Furthermore, when M. smegmatis in-fects J774A.1 macrophages it induces granuloma-like structures formation. The present study aims to access macrophage molecular disturbances caused by M. smegmatis after cholesterol con-sumption through proteomics analyses.

### Sample Protocol
Murine macrophage cell line J774A.1 (ATCC TIB-67, Banco de Células do Rio de Janeiro – BCRJ, Rio de Janeiro, RJ) was cultured as a monolayer in DMEM medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum containing 100 U/ml penicillin and 100 μg/ml streptomycin and maintained at 37ºC in a 5% CO2-humidified atmosphere. For infection, macrophages cells (6,6 x 105/flask) were seeded onto cell culture flasks and incubated for 2 days until reaching 90% confluence. Bacterial cultures at the early stationary phase were pelleted, washed twice in PBS pH 7.4, bath-sonicated for 15 minutes to disrupt bacterial clumps, and resuspended in DMEM medium to a final OD600: 0.1. Macrophages were infected with M. smegmatis (grown in three different mediums) at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 100:1. In each experiment, after 1 h infection gentamicin (10 µg/ml) was added to kill ex-tracellular bacteria. After 12 h of infection, the cells were washed three times with cold PBS p.H 7.4. Macrophages without infection were used as a control group. After infection, the cells were washed three times with cold PBS pH 7.4 and harvested by scraping in PBS. Cells were centrifuged at 1500 x g for 5 minutes on ice and resuspended in 6 M urea, 2 M thiourea, and 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for lysis and reduction for 2h at 37ºC. After incubation, the samples were diluted in 10X 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 7.5 and sonicated on ice. To alkylation, 200 mM of iodoacetamide in 20 mM of tri-ethylammonium bicarbonate to achieve a final concentration of 20 mM iodoacetamide was added and incubated for 20 minutes in the dark at room temperature, to reduce and alkylate cysteine residues. Protein concentrations were measured using the Qubit Protein Assay Kit (Invitrogen). The samples were digested with trypsin at 1:50 (w:w; tryp-sin:sample) and incubated at 37°C overnight. The digestion process was stopped by add-ing 10 μL of 5% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). The samples were desalted using a C18 column (SepPack 50 ng Waters), assembling a vacuum system with manifold (Waters) and vacuum pump (Millipore). The column was activated with 100% acetonitrile (ACN), equilibrated with 50% ACN on 0.1% formic acid (FA), and equilibrated again with 1 ml of 0.1% TFA. The sample was previously acidified with 0.4% TFA, loaded into C18, and the salt removed from the sample with 0.1% TFA and the column was equilibrated again with FA. The sample was eluted with 50% ACN on 0.1% FA, and 80% CAN on 0.1% FA. The samples were concentrated in a SpeedVac evaporator at 25ºC for 24 hours, and resuspended in 20 mM ammonium formate, diluted 10 times, in the proportion of 75 μL for each 50 ng of protein in the samples. Proteomic analyses were performed in a bidimensional nanoUPLC tandem nanoESI-MS/MS platform by multiplexed data-independent acquisition experiments (MSE) using a 2D-RP/RP Nano Acquity UPLC System (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA, United States) coupled to a Synapt G2 mass spectrometer (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA, United States). The samples were fractionated using a one-dimension reversed-phase (RP) approach. Peptide samples (0.5 µg) were loaded into a Acquity UPLC M-Class CSH (C18 packed with changed surface hybrid) Column (100 Å, 1.8 µm, 100 µm × 100 mm; Waters Corporation, MA). The fractionation was achieved using an acetonitrile gradient from 3 % to 40 % v/v for 40 min at a flow rate of 0.4 µL/min directly into a Synapt G2. For every measurement, the mass spectrometer was operated in the resolution mode with a m/z resolving power of about 20 000 FWHM. MS and MS/MS data were acquired in positive ion mode in the range of 50–1200 m/z. Precursor ion information was collected in low-energy MS mode by applying a constant collision energy of 4 eV. Fragment ion information was obtained in the elevated energy scan using a ramped collision energy (19-45 eV) applied to the collision-induced dissociation cell. The lock mass channel was sampled every 30 sec. The mass spectrometer was calibrated with an MS/MS spectrum of [Glu1]-Fibrinopeptide B human (785.8426 m/z) solution that was delivered through the reference sprayer of the NanoLock Spray source.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified and quantified using dedicated algorithms and searching against the UniProt Proteomic Database of Mus musculus, version 2019/06 (55.197 proteins). The databases used were reversed “on the fly” during the database queries by the software to assess the false-positive identification rate. For correct spectral processing and database searching conditions, we used the Progenesis QI for Proteomics software pack-age with Apex3D, Peptide 3D, and Ion Accounting informatics (Waters Corporation). This software starts with the loading of the LC-MS data, followed by alignment and peak detec-tion, which creates a list of interesting peptide ions that are explored within Peptide Ion Stats by multivariate statistical methods. The processing parameters used were 500 counts for the low-energy threshold and 50.0 counts for the elevated energy threshold. Automatic alignment of the runs (all runs in the experiment were assessed for suitability) was used for the processing. In peak picking, it was used eight as the maximum ion charge and the sensitivity value was selected as four. Moreover, the following parameters were consid-ered in the identification of peptides/proteins: (1) digestion by trypsin with at most two missed cleavage; (2) variable modification by oxidation (M) and fixed modification by carbamidomethyl (C); and (3) a false discovery rate (FDR) less than 1%. Two or more ion fragments per peptide, five or more fragments per protein and one or more peptides per protein, were required for ion matching. Data were analyzed by one-way analysis of vari-ance (ANOVA) with treatment factor p-value <0.05 compared to vehicle group. Identifica-tions that did not satisfy these criteria were rejected. The experiment design was defined (Group 1–3) and label free protein quantitation was done using Hi-N (N = 3) method.

### Publication Abstract
During tuberculosis, <i>Mycobacterium</i> uses host macrophage cholesterol as a carbon and energy source. To mimic these conditions, <i>Mycobacterium smegmatis</i> can be cultured in minimal medium (MM) to induce cholesterol consumption in vitro. During cultivation, <i>M. smegmatis</i> consumes MM cholesterol and changes the accumulation of cell wall compounds, such as PIMs, LM, and LAM, which plays an important role in its pathogenicity. These changes lead to cell surface hydrophobicity modifications and H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> susceptibility. Furthermore, when <i>M. smegmatis</i> infects J774A.1 macrophages, it induces granuloma-like structure formation. The present study aims to assess macrophage molecular disturbances caused by <i>M. smegmatis</i> after cholesterol consumption, using proteomics analyses. Proteins that showed changes in expression levels were analyzed in silico using OmicsBox and String analysis to investigate the canonical pathways and functional networks involved in infection. Our results demonstrate that, after cholesterol consumption, <i>M. smegmatis</i> can induce deregulation of protein expression in macrophages. Many of these proteins are related to cytoskeleton remodeling, immune response, the ubiquitination pathway, mRNA processing, and immunometabolism. The identification of these proteins sheds light on the biochemical pathways involved in the mechanisms of action of mycobacteria infection, and may suggest novel protein targets for the development of new and improved treatments.

### Keywords
Mycobacterium; proteomics; cholesterol; infection; macrophages.

### Affiliations
Institute of Biological Sciences, Federal University of Pará, Belém/PA, Brazil.
University of Campinas

### Submitter
Juliana Cassoli

### Lab Head
Dr Juliana Silva Cassoli
Institute of Biological Sciences, Federal University of Pará, Belém/PA, Brazil.


