### Accession
PXD045723

### Title
Interplay between cultured human osteoblastic and skeletal muscle cells: Effects of conditioned media on glucose and fatty acid metabolism

### Description
The interplay between skeletal muscle and bone is primarily mechanical, however, biochemical crosstalk by secreted mediators has recently gained increased attention. The aim of this study was to investigate metabolic effects of conditioned medium from osteoblasts (OB-CM) on myotubes and vice versa. Human skeletal muscle cells incubated with OB-CM showed increased glucose uptake and oxidation, and expression of the glucose transporter (GLUT) 1, while fatty acid uptake and oxidation, and expression of the fatty acid transporter CD36 were decreased. This was supported by proteomic analysis where expression of proteins involved in glucose uptake, glycolytic pathways and TCA cycle were enhanced, and expression of several proteins involved in fatty acid metabolism were reduced. Similar effects on energy metabolism were observed in human bone marrow stromal cells differentiated to osteoblastic cells incubated with conditioned medium from myotubes (SKM-CM), with increased glucose uptake and reduced oleic acid uptake. Proteomic analyses of the two conditioned media revealed many common proteins. Thus, our data may indicate a shift in fuel preference from fatty acid to glucose metabolism in both cell types, induced by conditioned media from the opposite cell type, possibly indicating a more general pattern in communication between these tissues.

### Sample Protocol
For secretome analysis, the cells were washed with PBS and incubated with serum-free media for 24 h before CM collection. For analysis of cell lysates, the cells were washed twice with PBS. harvested in PBS, centrifuged at 160 g for 5 min at 4°C and the cell pellet frozen at -80°C. Cell pellet was thawed, dissolved in RIPA buffer and sonicated for 2x30 sec with interval of 30 seconds. Cell debris was removed by centrifugation (14000 g) for 10 min. Total protein concentration was determined by the Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit and for each replicate equal amount (10 µg) of total protein was precipitated on amine beads as previously described [24]. CM samples for secretome analysis was concentrated with 10 kD cutoff filter by spinning at 3000 g for 30 min. The precipitated proteins on beads and concentrated secretome samples were dissolved in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin  (1:50 enzyme:protein ratio) at 37°C overnight. Digested peptides were acidified, and the peptides were loaded to Evosep C18 tips. LC-MS/MS analysis of the whole cell lysates was carried out using an EvosepOne LC system (Evosep) coupled to the timsTOF fleX mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics) and for the secretomes using EvosepOne coupled to QExactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo). Peptide digest from cell lysate (200 ng) or 20 uL of peptide digest from secretomes was loaded on a capillary C18 Evosep column (15 cm length, 150 μm inner diameter, 1.5 μm particle size, 120; Evosep) and peptides were separated using a 44 min gradient.

### Data Protocol
Raw files from LC-MS/MS analyses were submitted to MaxQuant 2.0.3.0 software for protein identification and label-free quantification. Parameters were set as follow: Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as a fixed modification and protein N-acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. First search error window of 20 ppm and mains search error of 6 ppm. Trypsin without proline restriction enzyme option was used, with two allowed miscleavages. Minimal unique peptides were set to one, and FDR allowed was 0.01 (1%) for peptide and protein identification. The Uniprot human database was used. Generation of reversed sequences was selected to assign FDR rate. Perseus version 1.6.15.0 was used for further analysis of MaxQuant data. Intensity based absolute quantification (iBAQ) intensity was used to determine the abundance of secreted proteins, and protein detection in three of four OB-CM sample and five of seven SKM-CM samples are listed. A paired two-tailed Student’s t-test (p<0.05) was performed to determine differences in protein expression between myotubes stimulated with OB-CM and control myotubes (Ctr). STRING version 11.5 (https://string-db.org/) was used to group differentially regulated protein into protein classes and Gene Ontology (GO) Biological Process annotations for the conditioned media, while KEGG and Reactome annotations were used for myotube lysate proteome analysis. The human MitoCarta 3.0 [25] was used to identify proteins related to mitochondrial function from our list of significantly regulated proteins

### Publication Abstract
The interplay between skeletal muscle and bone is primarily mechanical; however, biochemical crosstalk by secreted mediators has recently gained increased attention. The aim of this study was to investigate metabolic effects of conditioned medium from osteoblasts (OB-CM) on myotubes and vice versa. Human skeletal muscle cells incubated with OB-CM showed increased glucose uptake and oxidation, and mRNA expression of the glucose transporter (<i>GLUT</i>) <i>1</i>, while fatty acid uptake and oxidation, and mRNA expression of the fatty acid transporter <i>CD36</i> were decreased. This was supported by proteomic analysis, where expression of proteins involved in glucose uptake, glycolytic pathways, and the TCA cycle were enhanced, and expression of several proteins involved in fatty acid metabolism were reduced. Similar effects on energy metabolism were observed in human bone marrow stromal cells differentiated to osteoblastic cells incubated with conditioned medium from myotubes (SKM-CM), with increased glucose uptake and reduced oleic acid uptake. Proteomic analyses of the two conditioned media revealed many common proteins. Thus, our data may indicate a shift in fuel preference from fatty acid to glucose metabolism in both cell types, induced by conditioned media from the opposite cell type, possibly indicating a more general pattern in communication between these tissues.

### Keywords
Energy metabolism; myokines; osteoblastic cells; osteokines; primary human myotubes;

### Affiliations
Section for Pharmacology and Pharmaceutical Biosciences, Department of Pharmacy, University of Oslo,
Proteomics core facility, Olso University hospital,  Norway

### Submitter
Sachin  Singh

### Lab Head
Dr G. Hege Thoresen
Section for Pharmacology and Pharmaceutical Biosciences, Department of Pharmacy, University of Oslo,


