### Accession
PXD037227

### Title
Phospho heavy-labeled-spiketide FAIMS stepped-CV DDA (pHASED) provides real-time phosphoproteomics data to aid in cancer drug selection

### Description
Global high-throughput phosphoproteomic profiling is increasingly being applied to cancer specimens as a means to identify the oncogenic signaling cascades responsible for promoting disease initiation and disease progression; pathways that are often invisible to genomics analysis. Hence, phosphoproteomic profiling has enormous potential to inform and improve individualized anti-cancer treatment strategies. However, to achieve the adequate phosphoproteomic depth and coverage necessary to identify the activated, and hence, targetable kinases responsible for driving oncogenic signaling pathways; affinity phosphopeptide enrichment techniques are required and often coupled with offline high-pressure liquid chromatographic (HPLC) separation prior to nanoflow liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry (nLC-MS/MS). These complex and time-consuming procedures, limit the utility of phosphoproteomics for the analysis of individual cancer patient specimens in real-time, and restrict phosphoproteomics to specialized laboratories often outside of the clinical setting. To address these limitations, here we have optimized a new protocol, phospho-Heavy-labeled-spiketide FAIMS Stepped-CV DDA (pHASED), that employs online phosphoproteome deconvolution using high-field asymmetric waveform ion mobility spectrometry (FAIMS) and internal phosphopeptide standards to provide accurate label-free quantitation (LFQ) data in real-time. Compared with traditional LFQ using shotgun phosphoproteomics workflows, pHASED provided increased phosphoproteomic depth and coverage (phosphopeptides = 4,617 pHASED, 2,789 LFQ), whilst eliminating the variability associated with offline prefractionation. pHASED was optimized using tyrosine kinase inhibitor (sorafenib) resistant isogenic FLT3-mutant acute myeloid leukemia (AML) cell line models. Bioinformatic analysis identified differential activation of the Serine/threonine protein kinase ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM) pathway, responsible for sensing and repairing DNA damage in sorafenib-resistant AML cell line models, thereby uncovering a potential therapeutic opportunity. Herein, we have optimized a rapid, reproducible, and flexible protocol for the characterization of complex cancer phosphoproteomes in real-time; a step towards the implementation of phosphoproteomics in the clinic to aid in the selection of anti-cancer therapies for patients.

### Sample Protocol
Snap frozen transduced FDC-P1 cells expressing AML associated FLT3-mutations were lysed in 100 μL of ice-cold 0.1 M Na2CO3, pH 11.3 containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Sigma, cat. #P8340-5ML, and #4906837001 respectively), by sonication (2 × 20 s cycles, 100% output power) (as described [23, 26, 27]). Protein concentration was determined using a Bicinchoninic acid (BCA) protein estimation assay, as per manufacturer’s instructions. Protein samples were then diluted in 6 M Urea/2 M Thiourea and reduced using 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) by incubation for 30 min at room temperature (RT). Reduced cysteine residues were then alkylated using 20 mM iodoacetamide by incubation for 30 min at RT in the dark. Enzymatic digestion was achieved using Trypsin/Lys-C mixture (Promega) at an enzyme-to-substrate ratio of 1:50 (w/w) and incubated for 3 h at RT. Triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB, 50 mM, pH 7.8) was then added to dilute urea concentration below 1 M, and samples were incubated overnight at RT. Lipid precipitation was performed using formic acid and trichloroacetic acid (TCA). Briefly, a final concentration of 2% formic acid was added to each sample, prior to centrifugation at 14,000 g for 10 min. Remaining lipopeptides were then precipitated with 20% (w/w) TCA and incubated on ice for at least 1 h prior to centrifugation. Pellets were washed with ice cold 0.01 M hydrochloric acid (HCl)/90% acetone and supernatants containing peptides were combined. Peptides were desalted using Oasis HLB solid phase extraction (SPE) cartridges and a VisiprepTM SPE Vacuum Manifold (12-port model; Sigma). The SPE cartridges were activated using 100% acetonitrile (ACN), equilibrated using 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), and blocked with 33 µg of trypsin-digested bovine serum albumin (BSA) peptides prior to sample clean-up. Acidified samples (pH < 3) were loaded onto SPE cartridges with liquid passed through the solid phase dropwise using vacuum pressure. The cartridges were washed with 0.1% TFA followed by sequential elution of peptides using 60% ACN/0.1% TFA and 80% ACN/0.1% TFA. Eluted peptides were then resuspended in TEAB (50 mM, pH 8) and quantified using a Qubit 2.0 Fluorometer, as per manufacturer’s instructions. A total of 200 µg of peptide per sample was utilized for TiO2 enrichment. Spike-in heavy-labeled phosphorylated peptides (Suppl. Table S1; including individually tyrosine, threonine or serine phosphorylated heavy-labeled spiketides, 8 fmol/200 μg of sample) were added as internal controls. Phosphopeptide enrichment was modified based on previous protocols. In brief, each peptide sample was suspended in 80% ACN, 5% TFA, and 1 M glycolic acid (loading buffer). TiO2 beads were added at 0.6 mg per 100 µg peptide (w/w), and samples were mixed at RT for 15 min. The supernatant was incubated with half the amount of fresh TiO2 beads, and resultant supernatants containing non-phosphorylated peptides (non-modified = NM fraction) were removed and stored. The two sets of beads with bound phosphopeptides were pooled using 100 μL of loading buffer, followed by sequential washing with 80% ACN/1% TFA, and 10% ACN/0.1% TFA. Phosphopeptides were eluted with 28% ammonia hydroxide solution (1% v/v, pH 11.3) then passed through a C8 stage tip to remove residual beads. Phosphopeptides were lyophilized completely prior to resuspension in 2% ACN/0.1% TFA for nLC-MS/MS analysis.Reverse phase nanoflow LC-MS/MS was performed using a Dionex Ultimate 3000RSLC nanoflow high-performance liquid chromatography system coupled with an Orbitrap Exploris 480 MS equipped with or without a front-end FAIMS Interface for pHASED or single-shot injection, respectively. Approximately 700 ng of phosphopeptide (single-shot injection, or per CV in pHASED) were loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 75 μm × 20 mm trap column for pre-concentration and online de-salting. The same chromatographic conditions were used in both experiments. Separation was achieved using an EASY-Spray PepMap C18 75 μm × 25 cm, employing a gradient of 0-35% solvent B (solvent A = 0.1% formic acid, solvent B = 90% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min over 75 min. For pHASED, the mass spectrometer was operated in positive mode with the FAIMS Pro interface. Four compensation voltages (CV; -70, -60, -50, -40) were individually run for each biological triplicate. Full MS/data dependent acquisition (DDA) was performed using the following parameters: Orbitrap mass analyzer set at a resolution of 60,000, to acquire full MS with an m/z range of 350-1200, incorporating a standard automatic gain control target of 1e6 and maximum injection time of 50 ms. The 20 most intense multiply charged precursors were selected for higher-energy HCD with a collisional energy of 30. MS/MS fragments were measured at an Orbitrap resolution of 15,000 incorporating a normalized automatic gain control target of 250% and a maximum injection time of 120 ms.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Sequest HT was used to search against UniProt Mus musculus database (17,091 sequences, downloaded 25/04/2022) and Homo sapiens FLT3 FASTA file containing WT and mutant FLT3 sequences (3 sequences, downloaded 21/02/20). Database searching parameters included up to two missed cleavages, precursor mass tolerance set to 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance of 0.02 Da. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification while dynamic modifications included phosphorylation (S, T, Y), and heavy-labeled 13C(6)15N(2) (K), and 13C(6)15N(4) (R) to identify spiked-in heavy-labeled phospho-spiketides. Interrogation of the database was performed to evaluate the false discovery rate (FDR) of peptide identification based on q-values estimated from the target-decoy search approach using Percolator. An FDR rate of 1% was set at the peptide level to filter out target peptide spectrum matches over the decoy-peptide spectrum matches. To account for variations in sample injection, reporter ion abundances were normalized to the spiked-in heavy-labeled phosphopeptides included as a FASTA file (Suppl. Fig. S1). For quantification and comparison, each ratio was transformed to log2 scale (log2 ratio).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Resistance, Phased, Phosphoproteomics, Drug targets, Clinical phosphoproteomics, Oncogenic signaling, Atm, Combination therapy, Acute myeloid leukemia, Cancer

### Affiliations
1School of Biomedical Sciences and Pharmacy, College of Health, Medicine and Wellbeing, University of Newcastle, NSW, 2308, Australia 2 Precision Medicine Research Program, Hunter Medical Research Institute, New Lambton Heights, NSW, 2305, Australia
University of Newcastle

### Submitter
Dilana Staudt

### Lab Head
Dr Matt Dun
1School of Biomedical Sciences and Pharmacy, College of Health, Medicine and Wellbeing, University of Newcastle, NSW, 2308, Australia 2 Precision Medicine Research Program, Hunter Medical Research Institute, New Lambton Heights, NSW, 2305, Australia


