### Accession
PXD019623

### Title
Investigation of Resistant Starch effect on gut microbiome in 5/6 nephrectomy mouse model of Chronic Kidney Disease

### Description
Background. Resistant Starch (RS) improves CKD outcomes. In this report we study how RS modulates host-microbiome interactions in CKD by measuring changes in abundance of proteins and bacteria in the gut. In addition, we demonstrate RS-mediated reduction in CKD-induced kidney damage. Methods.  Eight mice underwent 5/6 nephrectomy to induce CKD and 8 served as healthy controls. CKD and Healthy (H) groups were further split into those receiving RS (CKDRS, n=4; HRS, n=4) and those on normal diet (CKD, n=4, H, n=4).  Kidney injury was evaluated by measuring BUN/creatinine and by most-mortem histopathological evaluation. Cecal contents were analyzed mass spectrometry-based metaproteomics. PEAKS Studio was used to identify peptides via de novo sequencing. A set of R/Bioconductor packages and in house written scripts was further used to infer bacteria present, to evaluate changes in proteins and bacterial abundances, and to perform statistical analysis and hierarchical clustering. Results. The 5/6 nephrectomy compromised kidney function as seen by an increase in creatinine and BUN. Representative photomicrographs of trichrome-stained kidney sections showed reduced tubulointerstitial injury in CKD mice fed HAM-RS2 diet comparing to CKD mice fed normal diet. Identified organisms and proteins point toward a higher population of butyrate-producing bacteria, and reduced abundance of mucin-degrading bacteria.  Conclusion. Resistant starch slows the progression of chronic kidney disease. Gut barrier function through maintenance of the mucin barrier plays a role in RS-associated improvements in CKD phenotype.  Resistant starch supplementation leads to the active bacterial proliferation and the reduction of harmful bacterial metabolites.  

### Sample Protocol
Mice from two groups (CKD-induced and healthy controls) were divided into four groups. Each group received semi purified pelleted diets either the regular diet (Harlan Laboratories) or a high-fiber diet containing 59% high amylose maize resistant starch (HI-MAIZE 260) for four weeks (n=4 mice/diet). As a result, there were four groups: CKD-induced mice fed with regular diet, CKD-induced mice fed with Resistant Starch diet, healthy mice fed with regular diet, healthy mice fed with Resistant Starch diet. All animals received semipurified pelleted isocaloric (3.4 kcal/g) diets with energy content of 4.5%/66.9%/18.6% protein/carbohydrate/fat respectively. Mice were housed three per cage and mice in the same cage were on the same diet. All animals were provided ad libitium access to food and water. The animals were then anesthetized (Ketamine/Xylazine IP) and euthanized via overdose of carbon dioxide followed by cervical dislocation.  After sacrificing, cecal contents were removed, frozen on dry ice, and stored at -70°C until processed. Kidneys were excised and immersed in 10% Formalin overnight and then washed with PBS. Kidney samples were transferred to Arkana Laboratories for trichrome staining and scoring. Trichrome staining was performed according to standard protocol [Carson, FL. Histotechnology: A Self-Instructional Text, 2nd Edition] Kidney histology images were blindly scored by the third author of this paper, Dr. Zeljko Dvanajscak, a board certified pathologist on scale from 0 to 3+. Tubulointerstitial scarring was scored in a semiquantitative fashion, 0-3+, as for human renal biopsies. The scores were calibrated to severity based on a comparison amongst all the cases. The score included a combination of interstitial fibrosis and tubular atrophy (as for human renal biopsies), extending from the capsular surface through the cortex and into the medulla. Images were taken at a magnitude of 40χ and 400χ utilizing an Olympus BX53 microscope.  Soluble protein extraction.  Briefy, 500 µl of PBS with protease inhibitor cocktail was added to the 100 mg of the frozen cecal content and vortexed vigorously for 5 min followed by sonication for 5 min. The supernatant (soluble proteins) was collected and protein concentration was determined using a BCA assay. Reproducibility of the extraction was evaluated by total de novo peptides identified and matched using online metaproteomics tool Unipept. Bacterial-to-host proteins ratio was used as an extraction/sample quality criteria.  Peptide identification and protein inference using database search 20 µg of protein for each sample was resolved on 4-20% Tris-Gly gel. The gels lanes were then cut in 24 pieces, in-gel digested and analyzed on a ThermoScientific Orbitrap-Tribrid-Fusion instrument using the standard protocol at the UAMS Proteomics Core. Each SDS-PAGE gel band was subjected to in-gel trypsin digestion as follows. Gel slices were destained in 50% methanol (Fisher), 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma-Aldrich), followed by reduction in 10 mM Tris[2-carboxyethyl]phosphine (Pierce) and alkylation in 50 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich). Gel slices were then dehydrated in acetonitrile (Fisher), followed by addition of 100 ng porcine sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega) in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma-Aldrich) and incubation at 37◦ C for 12-16 hours.  Peptide products were then acidified in 0.1% formic acid (Pierce). Tryptic peptides were separated by reverse phase XSelect CSH C18 2.5 um resin (Waters) on an in-line 150 x 0.075 mm column using a nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters). Peptides were eluted using a 30 min gradient from 97:3 to 67:33 buffer A:B ratio.  [Buffer A = 0.1% formic acid, 0.5% acetonitrile; buffer B = 0.1% formic acid, 99.9% acetonitrile.]. Eluted peptides were ionized by electrospray (2.25 kV) followed by MS/MS analysis using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo) in top-speed data-dependent mode. MS data were acquired using the FTMS analyzer in profile mode at a resolution of 240,000 over a range of 375 to 1500 m/z. Following HCD activation, MS/MS data were acquired using the ion trap analyzer in centroid mode and normal mass range with precursor mass-dependent normalized collision energy between 28.0 and 31.0.

### Data Protocol
For peptide identification and protein inference, a multi-step database search strategy was used in PEAKS Studio to arrive at the final list of identified proteins. Files that were acquired on the Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer in “.raw” format, were submitted to the de novo sequencing using PEAKS Studio v. 8 (Bioinformatics Solutions, Waterloo, ON, Canada). The following parameters were used for the data refinement: Merge Scans – left unchecked; Correct Precursor – mass only; Filter Scans – unchecked. The following parameters were used for the de novo sequencing: Parent Mass Error Tolerance – 5 ppm; Fragment Mass Error Tolerance – 0.5 Da; Enzyme – Trypsin; Fixed Modifications – Carbamidomethylation (C); Variable Modifications – Oxidation (M), Deamidation (NQ); Max Variable PTM Per Peptide – 3; Report # Peptides – 5. List of quantified proteins across different experimental groups is presented in Supplemental Table 0A. Preliminary taxonomy analysis  De novo peptides identified by PEAKS were filtered using the average local confidence score (ALC%), and the peptides with ALC% above 80 were submitted to the online metaproteomics tool UniPept (16). In the Unipept/metaproteomics analysis tab the following parameters were set: Equate I and L - checked, Filter duplicate peptides – unchecked, Advanced missed cleavage handling – checked.  The taxonomy information was visualized using tree diagram provided by UniPept. For protein quantification, Scaffold v. 4 with quantitation module (Proteome Software) was used. Data and the custom fasta database were exported from PEAKS into Scaffold as mzIdentML and mascot generic format files. To analyze proteins: the total spectral counts for each protein were converted to NSAF values (17) using Scaffold, NSAF values were summed for identical proteins in different species, log2 transformed, and missing values imputed using Perseus (version 1.5.6.0, Max Planck Institute).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse, Metaproteomics, Kidney, Microbiome

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR, USA
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology

### Submitter
Boris Zybailov

### Lab Head
Dr Boris Zybailov
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR, USA


