### Accession
PXD029196

### Title
Data from “A biocodicological analysis of the medieval library and archive from Orval Abbey, Belgium.

### Description
The dataset contains the first-ever comprehensive biocodicological analysis of medieval library books and chapters using zooarchaeological mass spectrometry (ZooMS). Here, we analyze 68 codices and 59 charters (1490 samples in total) from one single monastic institution, namely the Cistercian abbey of Orval in present-day Belgium. This dataset contains LC-MSMS analysis of samples from all charters (59 samples) and manuscript 22 (27 samples)

### Sample Protocol
Sampling of parchment was conducted by non-invasive triboelectric extraction of collagen following a previously described method (Fiddyment et al. 2015). Subsequently the samples were subjected to peptide mass fingerprinting using MALDI-ToF and peptide sequencing using LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Peptide sequencing by LC-MS/MS: Samples from all charters (59 samples) and manuscript 22 (27 samples) were analysed by liquid chromatography (UltiMate 3000, ThermoFisher) coupled to electrospray ionisation tandem mass spectrometry (MaXis Impact UHR-TOF, Bruker) at MaSUN mass spectrometry platform at the University of Namur, Belgium. Compass HyStar 3.2 (Bruker) was used to control the instruments. Raw files (.mgf format) were generated using the software DataAnalysis 4.0 (Bruker) for downstream data analysis using Mascot 2.4 (Matrix Science).  Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.8, Proteome Software Inc., Portland) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 90.0% probability by the Peptide Prophet algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides.  Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii, Al et al Anal. Chem. 2003;75(17):4646-58).

### Publication Abstract
Biocodicological analysis of parchments from manuscript books and archives offers unprecedented insight into the materiality of medieval literacy. Using ZooMS for animal species identification, we explored almost the entire library and all the preserved single leaf charters of a single medieval Cistercian monastery (Orval Abbey, Belgium). Systematic non-invasive sampling of parchment collagen was performed on every charter and on the first bifolium from every quire of the 118 codicological units composing the books (1490 samples in total). Within the genuine production of the Orval scriptorium (26 units), a balanced use of calfskin (47.1%) and sheepskin (48.5%) was observed, whereas calfskin was less frequent (24.3%) in externally produced units acquired by the monastery (92 units). Calfskin was preferably used for higher quality manuscripts while sheepskin tends to be the standard choice for 'ordinary' manuscript book production. This finding is consistent with thirteenth-century parchment accounts from Beaulieu Abbey (England) where calfskin supply was more limited and its price higher. Our study reveals that the making of archival documents does not follow the same pattern as the production of library books. Although the five earliest preserved charters are made of calfskin, from the 1230s onwards, all charters from Orval are written on sheepskin.

### Keywords
Orval, Charters, Lc-msms, Codices

### Affiliations
University of Namur - Belgium
University of Namur - MaSUN

### Submitter
Marc Dieu

### Lab Head
Dr DEPARIS Olivier
University of Namur - Belgium


