### Accession
PXD012680

### Title
Identification of FET-oncoprotein-interacting proteins by immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry analysis in sarcoma cell lines

### Description
The FET family of fusion oncogenes carry one of the three genes, FUS, EWSR1 or TAF15, as 5’‑partners juxtaposed to one of many different DNA binding transcription factor genes as 3’‑partners. FET fusion oncogenes are pathognomonic for many types of sarcoma and leukemia, such as FUS-DDIT3 in myxoid liposarcoma (MLS) and EWSR1-FLI1 in Ewing sarcoma (EWS). We used recombinant FET N-terminal domains in a pulldown screen to find interaction partners to the FET proteins and identified components of the SWI/SNF complex. The ~2 MDa SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complex utilizes energy from ATP hydrolysis to remodel nucleosomes and expose DNA. We used immunoprecipitation followed by mass spectrometry or western blot analysis to extensively characterize the interaction between FET fusion oncoproteins and the SWI/SNF complex.

### Sample Protocol
Sample Processing Protocol: The experiments are divided into three parts: 1. Project ID 874 [Study 1]: Mass spectrometry analysis of Coomassie gel pieces after pulldown with GST-tagged FET N-terminal domains. Gel pieces [Study 1] were destained with 25 mM NH4HCO3 in 50% CH3CN followed by 25 mM NH4HCO3 in 50% CH3OH. Gel pieces were dried and incubated with digestion buffer (50mM NH4HCO3 and 10 ng/μL trypsin) at 37°C overnight. Peptides were extracted with 50% CH3CN in 1% CH3COOH and dried. The peptides were reconstituted in 0.2% formic acid (FA) for analysis  2. Project IDs 2205, 2334 [Study 2]: Mass spectrometry analysis of formic acid eluates after anti-BRG1 immunoprecipitation in four different sarcoma cell lines. 3. Project ID 2459 [Study 3]:, 2714 [Study 4]: Mass spectrometry analysis of LDS eluates after immunoprecipitation with anti-DDIT3 in MLS 402‑91 and anti-FLI1 in EWS TC‑71. Formic acid eluates [Study 2] or LDS eluates [Study 3, Study 4] from the immunoprecipitation (IP) were digested with trypsin using the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method [REF: Wisniewski JR et. al. Nat Methods. 2009 May; 6(5):359-62).]. Briefly, samples were reduced with 100 mM dithiothreitol at 60°C for 30 min, transferred to 30 kDa MWCO Pall Nanosep centrifugal filters (Sigma-Aldrich), washed with 8M urea repeatedly and alkylated with 10 mM methyl methanethiosulfonate. Digestion was performed in 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate, 1% sodium deoxycholate (SDC) buffer at 37°C by addition of 0.30 µg Pierce MS grade Trypsin and incubated overnight. An additional portion of trypsin was added and incubated for another two hours. Peptides were collected by centrifugation and SDC was removed by acidification with 10% trifluoroacetic acid. Samples were desalted using PepClean C18 spin columns (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturers guidelines and dried down. Sample in Study 4 was processed thought HiPPR detergent removal spin column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) prior to C18 desalting. Samples were reconstituted in 3% ACN in 0.2% formic acid (FA).

### Data Protocol
Database search was performed using Proteome Discoverer version 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) against the Human Swissprot Database version February 2019 [Study 1],May 2016 [Study 2], September 2016 [Study 3] and February 2017 [Study 4]. Mascot (2.3 or 2.5.1Matrix Science) was used as a search engine with precursor mass tolerance of 5 ppm and fragment mass tolerance of 500 mmu for the FT-ICR and the Orbitrap Fusion data, and 200 mmu for the Q Exactive HF data. Tryptic peptides were accepted with 1 missed cleavage, variable methionine oxidation and static cysteine propionamide modifications [Study 1],or zero to one missed cleavages and variable methionine oxidation, static cysteine methylthio modifications [Study 2, 3, 4]. The detected peptide confidence threshold in Proteome Discoverer was set to a significance level of Mascot95% [Study 1] or Mascot99% [Study 2, 3, 4] by searching against a reversed decoy database.

### Publication Abstract
Members of the human FET family of RNA-binding proteins, comprising FUS, EWSR1, and TAF15, are ubiquitously expressed and engage at several levels of gene regulation. Many sarcomas and leukemias are characterized by the expression of fusion oncogenes with FET genes as 5' partners and alternative transcription factor-coding genes as 3' partners. Here, we report that the N terminus of normal FET proteins and their oncogenic fusion counterparts interact with the SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complex. In contrast to normal FET proteins, increased fractions of FET oncoproteins bind SWI/SNF, indicating a deregulated and enhanced interaction in cancer. Forced expression of FET oncogenes caused changes of global H3K27 trimethylation levels, accompanied by altered gene expression patterns suggesting a shift in the antagonistic balance between SWI/SNF and repressive polycomb group complexes. Thus, deregulation of SWI/SNF activity could provide a unifying pathogenic mechanism for the large group of tumors caused by FET fusion oncoproteins. These results may help to develop common strategies for therapy.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Ft icr, Immunoprecipitation, Sarcoma, Orbitrap

### Affiliations
Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Sweden
University of Gothenburg

### Submitter
Sahlgrenska Academy Proteomics Core

### Lab Head
Dr Malin Linden
Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Sweden


