### Accession
PXD027900

### Title
Relative quantitative analysis of mouse lung tissue from bleomycin induced pulmonary lung fibrosis mice model through iTRAQ (isobaric tagging for relative and absolute quantification) quantitative proteomics

### Description
Purpose: iTRAQ performed for proteomic analysis in BLM induced  mice lung tissues. The goals of this study is to compare differentially expressed proteomic in BLM induced IPF mice models and control models to evaluate protocols for optimal high-throughput data analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Methods: For bleomycin induced pulmonary fibrotic mice model, C57BL/6 mice were treated with 3 mg/kg bleomycin or the same amount of sterile saline via intratracheal administration. After protein extraction, peptide digestion, iTRAQ labeling, chromatographic fractionation, liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) data acquisition, protein identification and quantitative analysis, the protein samples that passed quality filters were screened for differentially expressed proteins.

### Data Protocol
In this experiment, total of 6369 proteins were identified in mice, and the differentially expressed proteins were screened according to the fold change of more than 1.2 times (up-regulation greater than 1.2 times or down-regulation less than 0.83 times) and p value < 0.05, and the subsequent GO analysis and KEGG analysis were performed. The maojor function of these protiens were: catalytic activity, signal transducer activitu, structural molecular activity, transporter activity and binding.

### Publication Abstract
Alveolar epithelial injury is one of the important pathological changes in idiopathic pulmonary interstitial fibrosis (IPF), but the regulatory mechanism remains unclear. Here, we reported that alveolar epithelial type-II cells (AT II) play important roles in pathological process of pulmonary fibrosis. Through iTRAQ (isobaric tagging for relative and absolute quantification) quantitative proteomics, TSSK4 was identified to be upregulated in bleomycin-induced fibrotic mice model, which was further confirmed in clinical IPF patients' tissue specimens. TSSK4 is a germ-related protein, but its expression in other tissues and the association with other diseases are not reported. Immunofluorescence staining showed that TSSK4 selectively expressed in AT-II cells, which are essential for inflammation-induced AT-II loss during fibrosis. Luciferase assay and other molecular biological experiments proved that TSSK4 expression is regulated by TNF-&#x3b1;-mediated NF-&#x3ba;B signaling. The TSSK4 kinase activity is found to be closely related to the function of HSP90-AKT pathway that TSSK4 can phosphorylate its substrate HSP90&#x3b2; on serine 255, to inhibit the ATPase activity of HSP90&#x3b2; and reduce its molecular chaperone function on AKT. Under this condition, kinase activity of AKT is diminished to interfere its survival function, subsequently facilitating AT-II cellular apoptosis through the mitochondrial death machinery. Our findings highlight the importance of TSSK4 in regulating pulmonary fibrosis by facilitating AT-II loss through HSP90-AKT signaling, all of which suggest TSSK4 and the regulating mechanism as attractive targets for the clinical intervention of pulmonary injury and fibrosis.

### Keywords
Bleomycin, Lung, Ipf

### Affiliations
The Second Affiliated Hospital, Guangzhou Medical University
The second affiliated Hospital, Guangzhou Medical University

### Submitter
Jie Yan

### Lab Head
Dr Jie Yan
The second affiliated Hospital, Guangzhou Medical University


