### Accession
PXD008445

### Title
Patients with early stage oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma can be identified with label-free serum proteomics

### Description
Increased incidence of oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma (OPSCC) is mainly related to Human Papilloma Virus (HPV) infection. As OPSCCs are often diagnosed at an advanced stage, mortality and morbidity remain high. There are no diagnostic biomarkers for early stage detection of OPSCC.  Serum from 25 patients with stage I-II OPSCC and 12 disease- individuals were studied with quantitative label-free proteomics using ultra-definition MSE. Statistical analyses were performed to identify proteins most reliably distinguishing early stage OPSCCs from controls. P16 was used as a surrogate marker for HPV. P16-positive and -negative tumours were also analysed separately.  With two or more unique proteins per identification, 176 proteins were quantified. A clear separation between patients with early-stage tumours and controls was seen in principal component analysis. Latent structures discriminant analysis identified 96 proteins most reliably differentiating OPSCC patients from controls, with 13 upregulated and 83 downregulated in study cases. The set of proteins was studied further with network, pathway and protein-protein interaction analyses, and found to participate in e.g. lipid metabolism.  We identified patients with early stage OPSCC from controls based on their serum proteome, and suggest a protein set for further evaluation as a diagnostic biomarker panel for OPSCC.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation: Serum samples from 25 patients diagnosed with stage I-II OPSCC were collected prior to treatment between the years 2012 and 2015 at the Department of Otorhinolaryngology – Head and Neck Surgery, Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland. After the collection, the samples were adjusted at room temperature and centrifuged to separate serum. Serums were stored at -70 Celsius until all were assayed at the same time.   At the time of serum treatment and protein digestion: samples were thawed, and after the depletion of the top 12 proteins with Pierce Top 12 protein depletion columns, the protein concentration was measured by bicinchonic acid assay kit (Pierce, Thermo Scientific, Rockform, IL, USA) for the total protein concentration. Top 12 protein-depleted serum samples corresponding to 350 µg of protein were dried in speed vacuum (Savant, Thermofisher), and then dissolved in 6 M urea and 100mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4). Reconstitution was performed with 10mM of dithiothreitol (DTT) for 60 min at room temperature (RT), and thereafter 30mM iodoacetamide for 60 min in the dark at room temperature (RT). Protein digestion was performed with trypsin (18 h at +37°C) after the consumption of abundant iodoacetamide (30mM DTT, 60 min at RT) and 1:10 dilution with high-purity Milli-Q water (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA). Finally, the samples were purified in C18 spin columns, and dried in speed vacuum following the dissolution in 0.1% formic acid containing 12.5 fmol Hi3 peptide mixture (Waters) per µl. The top 12-depleted samples containing 30 mg peptides were stored at -20°C until analysis. All the procedures described were performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions, wherever applicable.  Liquid chromatography: Four microlitre samples corresponding to 1.4 µg of total protein were injected to the ultra performance liquid chromatography (UPLC) system (Waters Corporation, Billerica, MA, USA) (Distler et al, 2014). TRIZAIC nanoTile 85 µm x 100mm HSS-T3u wTRAP was applied as a separating device before mass spectrometry (MS). After loading and trapping, the samples were washed for 2 min at 8.0 µL/min with 1% buffer B. The analytical gradient was used as follows: 0–1 min 1% B; at 2 min 5% B; at 65 min 30% B; at 78 min 50% B; at 80 min 85% B; at 83 min 85% B; at 84 min 1% B; and at 90 min 1% B with 450 nL/min. Buffer A consists of 0.1% formic acid in water and buffer B of 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (Sigma-Aldrich).  The data was acquired with UDMSE with Synapt G2-S UDMS (Waters Corporation) including ion mobility spectroscopy (IMS). The data range was 100–2000m/z, scan time 1 s, IMS wave velocity 650ms_1 and collision energy ramped in trap between 20 and 60 V. Calibration was performed by Glu1- fibrinopeptide B MS2 fragments and Glu1- fibrinopeptide B precursor ion, used during the acquisitions as a lock mass. 10% of the samples were acquired as triplicates to validate the results, and further analysis was done with Progenesis QI for Proteomics software (Nonlinear Dynamics, Newcastle, UK) (Supplement S2 – triplets).

### Data Protocol
The data analysis is described previously in detail (Saraswat et al, 2017a). Briefly, Progenesis QI for proteomics software (Version 3, Nonlinear Dynamics) was used for processing of raw files. Peptide identification was run with Uniprot human FASTA sequences (UniprotKB Release 2015_09, 20205 sequence entries), and label-free protein quantification performed with Hi-N method (Protein Lynx Global Server) (Silva et al, 2006). The samples were spiked with 12.5 fmol/µL of CLPB_ECOLI (P63285, ClpB protein) peptides (Hi3 E. Coli Standard, Waters).   The peptide identification parameters were: fixed modification of cysteine (carbamidomethyl) and variable modification of methionine (oxidation). The peptide error tolerance was set to maximally 10ppm and the false discovery rate limited to less than 2% and default values (in Progenesis QI for Proteomics) were used for the rest of the parameters.     The quantified proteins in all comparisons were compared by ANOVA on a protein-to-protein basis and their expression levels were considered significantly different, if ANOVA p-value was less than 0.05. Principal component analysis (PCA), offering the visualization of the main axes of variation in the data groups, was performed by Progenesis QI for proteomics. Processing the Progenesis QI data with EZinfo 3.0 software (a statistical tool released in December 2014, Umetrics, Sweden), supervised OPLS-DA modelling was performed. With a p(corr) cut-off of ±0.80, a variance versus correlation plot (S-Plot) and a list of S-plot proteins was generated from OPLS-DA data.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma; serum proteomics; multivariate data analysis; complement factor h-related protein 2; myosin regulatory light chain 12a

### Affiliations
Helsinki University
Department of Otorhinolaryngology – Head and Neck Surgery, University of Helsinki and Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki 00130, Finland and Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm 11382, Sweden

### Submitter
Sakari Joenväärä

### Lab Head
Dr Suvi Renkonen
Department of Otorhinolaryngology – Head and Neck Surgery, University of Helsinki and Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki 00130, Finland and Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm 11382, Sweden


