### Accession
PXD001051

### Title
Shotgun proteome analysis of the bacterium Clostridium cellulolyticum

### Description
Biofuel production from lignocellulosic waste and residues is a promising option to mitigate the environmental costs associated to energy production. However, the difficulty to cost-effectively overcome lignocellulose recalcitrance hampers a widespread application of such bioprocesses. Through an integrated approach, we focused on the factors affecting cellulose reactivity and their impact on downstream fermentation. Three cellulosic manufactured materials were characterized in details: facial tissue, Whatman paper, cotton pads. The model mesophilic cellulolytic bacterium Clostridium cellulolyticum was used to study colonization and metabolic patterns during fermentation of these materials. Facial tissue was extensively colonized and exhibited the fastest degradation and the highest ethanol-to-acetate ratio. Comparing facial tissue fermentation to Whatman paper fermentation by label-free quantitative shotgun proteomics and statistical analyses, 187 proteins showed a different behavior; higher concentration levels were detected for many enzymes from the carbohydrate central metabolic pathway; distinct patterns of expression levels were observed for carbohydratases degrading cellulose and hemicellulose. Overall, lower degrees of polymerization, lower crystallinity index, and the presence of hemicelluloses could explain the higher biological reactivity and bioethanol production yields.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction from the culture pellet and supernatant separately: phenol extraction followed by precipitation with ammonium acetate in methanol; SDS-PAGE with short duration migration; excision of the gel fragment containing all the migrated proteins; tryptic digestion; MS/MS shotgun proteomics with a LTQ Orbitrap discovery.

### Data Protocol
Peptide and protein identification was performed using 2 independent pipe-lines based on mass-matching. The first pipe-line relied on X!Tandem software (X!Tandem CYCLONE 2011.12.01.1)  and the X!TandemPipeline (3.3.0, INRA MICALIS PAPPSO, France). The second pipe-line (developed by Omics Services, France) was designed using TOPPAS software and it relied on X!Tandem software (X!Tandem Sledgehammer 2013.09.01.1). In both cases, the C. cellulolyticum (strain ATCC 35319 / DSM 5812 / JCM 6584 / H10) Uniprot database was used. Among the project files, names with "1-SC_" correspond to files from the first pipe-line, while names with "2-AUC_" correspond to files from the second pipe-line.

### Publication Abstract
Lignocellulosic materials from municipal solid waste emerge as attractive resources for anaerobic digestion biorefinery. To increase the knowledge required for establishing efficient bioprocesses, dynamics of batch fermentation by the cellulolytic bacterium Ruminiclostridium cellulolyticum were compared using three cellulosic materials, paper handkerchief, cotton discs and Whatman filter paper. Fermentation of paper handkerchief occurred the fastest and resulted in a specific metabolic profile: it resulted in the lowest acetate-to-lactate and acetate-to-ethanol ratios. By shotgun proteomic analyses of paper handkerchief and Whatman paper incubations, 151 proteins with significantly different levels were detected, including 20 of the 65 cellulosomal components, 8 non-cellulosomal CAZymes and 44 distinct extracytoplasmic proteins. Consistent with the specific metabolic profile observed, many enzymes from the central carbon catabolic pathways had higher levels in paper handkerchief incubations. Among the quantified CAZymes and cellulosomal components, 10 endoglucanases mainly from the GH9 families and 7 other cellulosomal subunits had lower levels in paper handkerchief incubations. An in-depth characterization of the materials used showed that the lower levels of endoglucanases in paper handkerchief incubations could hypothetically result from its lower crystallinity index (50%) and degree of polymerization (970). By contrast, the higher hemicellulose rate in paper handkerchief (13.87%) did not result in the enhanced expression of enzyme with xylanase as primary activity, including enzymes from the "xyl-doc" cluster. It suggests the absence, in this material, of molecular structures that specifically lead to xylanase induction. The integrated approach developed in this work shows that subtle differences among cellulosic materials regarding chemical and structural characteristics have significant effects on expressed bacterial functions, in particular the cellulolysis machinery, resulting in different metabolic patterns and degradation dynamics.

### Keywords
Label-free quantitative proteomics, Cellulose, Clostridium cellulolyticum, Lc-ms/ms, Bioenergy, Bioethanol

### Affiliations
Irstea
Biomic Team, Environmental Technologies Department, Irstea, France

### Submitter
Ariane Bize

### Lab Head
Dr Théodore Bouchez
Biomic Team, Environmental Technologies Department, Irstea, France


