### Accession
PXD033771

### Title
SPT6 functions in transcriptional pause/release via PAF1C recruitment

### Description
In vitro studies identified various factors including P-TEFb, SEC, SPT6, PAF1, DSIF, and NELF functioning at different stages of transcription elongation driven by RNA polymerase II (RNA Pol II). What remains unclear is how these factors cooperatively regulate pause/release and productive elongation in the context of living cells. Using an acute 5 protein-depletion approach, prominent release and a subsequent increase in mature transcripts, whereas long genes fail to yield mature transcripts due to a loss of processivity. Mechanistically, loss of SPT6 results in loss of PAF1 complex (PAF1C) from RNA Pol II, leading to NELF-bound RNA Pol II release into the gene bodies. Furthermore, SPT6 and/or PAF1 depletion impairs heat shock-induced pausing, pointing to a role for SPT6 in regulating RNA Pol II pause/release through the recruitment of PAF1C during the early elongation.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were run on SDS-PAGE gel and a gel band was 5 subject for in-gel digestion. Gel band was washed in 100 mM Ammonium Bicarbonate (AmBic)/Acetonitrile (ACN) and reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol at 50°C for 30 minutes. Cysteines were alkylated with100 mM iodoacetamide in the dark for 30 minutes in room temperature. Gel band was washed in 100mM AmBic/ACN prior to adding 600 ng trypsin for overnight incubation at 37 °C. Supernatant contain peptides was saved into a new tube. Gel was washed at room temperature for ten minutes with gentle shaking in 50% ACN/5% FA, and supernatant was saved to peptide solution. Wash step was repeated each by 80% ACN/5% FA, and 100% ACN, and all supernatant was saved then subject to the speedvac dry. After lyophilization, peptides were reconstituted with 5% ACN/0.1% FA in water. Peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 Rapid Separation nanoLC coupled to the Orbitrap Elite Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc, San Jose, CA). Samples were loaded onto the trap column, which was 150 μm x 3 cm in-house packed with 3 um ReproSil-PurR beads. The analytical column was a 75 um x 10.5 cm PicoChip column packed with 3 um ReproSil-PurR beads (New Objective, Inc. Woburn, MA). The flow rate was kept at 300nL/min. Solvent A was 0.1% FA in water and Solvent B was 0.1% FA in ACN. The peptide was separated on a 120-min analytical gradient from 5% ACN/0.1% FA to 40% ACN/0.1% FA. MS1 scans were acquired from 400-2000m/z at 60,000 resolving power and automatic gain control (AGC) set to 1x106. The 15 most abundant precursor ions in each MS1 scan were selected for fragmentation by collision-induced dissociation (CID) at 35% normalized collision energy in the ion trap. Previously selected ions were dynamically excluded from re-selection for 60 seconds. Samples were analyzed in 6 or 3 biological replicates.

### Data Protocol
Protein Tandem MS data was queried for protein identification and label-free quantification against Swiss-Prot Homo Sapiens database using MaxQuant. The following modifications were set as search parameters: peptide mass tolerance at 20 ppm, trypsin digestion cleavage after K or R (except when followed by P), 2 allowed missed cleavage site, carbamidomethylated cystein (static modification), and oxidized methionine, protein N-term acetylation (variable modification). Search results were validated with peptide and protein FDR both at 0.01. MaxQuant quantification data were normalized to RNA Pol II levels using MSstats with GlobalStandards method using RPB2 and RPB3 as standard proteins. Run summarization from subplot model was performed with Tukey’s median polish robust estimation. Imputation of missing values was carried out using QRILC method in imputeLCMD v2.0. Moderated t-test with ≥ 3 biological replicates was carried out using limma. The p values were adjusted to q values using Storey’s method.

### Publication Abstract
It is unclear how various factors functioning in the transcriptional elongation by RNA polymerase II (RNA Pol II) cooperatively regulate pause/release and productive elongation in living cells. Using an acute protein-depletion approach, we report that SPT6 depletion results in the release of paused RNA Pol II into gene bodies through an impaired recruitment of PAF1C. Short genes demonstrate a release with increased mature transcripts, whereas long genes are released but fail to yield mature transcripts, due to a reduced processivity resulting from both SPT6 and PAF1C loss. Unexpectedly, SPT6 depletion causes an association of NELF with the elongating RNA Pol II on gene bodies, without any observed functional significance on transcriptional elongation pattern, arguing against a role for NELF in keeping RNA Pol II in the paused state. Furthermore, SPT6 depletion impairs heat-shock-induced pausing, pointing to a role for SPT6 in regulating RNA Pol II pause/release through PAF1C recruitment.

### Keywords
Human, Paf1c, Spt6

### Affiliations
Washington University in St. Louis
Mass Spectrometry Technology Access Center at McDonnell Genome Institute (MTAC@MGI) at Washington University School of Medicine

### Submitter
Byoung-Kyu Cho

### Lab Head
Dr Young Ah Goo
Mass Spectrometry Technology Access Center at McDonnell Genome Institute (MTAC@MGI) at Washington University School of Medicine


