### Accession
PXD037311

### Title
AP-MS of small molecule that selectively destabilizes Cryptochrome 1

### Description
Cryptochromes are negative transcriptional regulators of the circadian clock in mammals. It is not clear how reducing the level of endogenous CRY1 in mammals will affect circadian rhythm and the relation of such a decrease with apoptosis.   Here, we discovered a molecule (M47) that destabilizes Cryptochrome 1 (CRY1) both in vitro and in vivo. The M47 selectively enhanced the degradation rate of CRY1 by increasing its ubiquitination and resulted in increasing the circadian period length of U2OS Bmal1-dLuc cells. In addition, subcellular fractionation studies from mice liver indicated that M47 increased degradation of the CRY1 in the nucleus. Furthermore, M47-mediated CRY1 reduction enhanced cisplatin-induced apoptosis in Ras-transformed p53 null fibroblast cells. Systemic repetitive administration of M47 increased the median lifespan of p53-/- mice by ~25%. Collectively our data suggest that M47 is a very promising molecule to treat forms of cancer depending on the p53 mutation.

### Sample Protocol
The whole cell lysate was prepared with ice-cold lysis buffer (50 mm Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, 2 mm EDTA, 1 mm MgCl2, 0.2% Nonidet P-40, 1 mm sodium orthovanadate, 1 mm sodium fluoride and protease inhibitor mixture) from HEK293T.  Lysate was diluted with ice-cold 2× binding buffer (100 mm Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, 300 mm NaCl, 0.2% Nonidet P-40, 2 mm sodium orthovanadate, 2 mm sodium fluoride, and protease inhibitor mixture) and divided into three fractions to be treated with either DMSO, or 100 μM bitoinylated-M47 (bait) with and without 500 μM M47(competitor). After equilibrating NeutroAvidin-agarose resin (Thermo Scientific, catalogue number 29200) with lysis buffer, the lysate-compound mixture and NeutroAvidin-agarose resin were incubated and mixed continuously at 4 °C for 2h. The beads were washed four times with 1× binding buffer. To elute the bound proteins Laemmli buffer was added, and samples were heated at 95°C for 7 min. The pulldown precipitates were subjected to SDS-PAGE and transferred to a polyvinylidene difluoride membrane (Millipore). Anti-MYC was used MYC-tagged CRY1 and CRY2 proteins, respectively.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS examination of the pulldown precipitates (Thermo Proteome Discoverer versions 1.4 and 2.3) was performed at Koc University's Proteomics Facility (Istanbul, Turkey)

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ap-ms, Mouse, Small molecule

### Affiliations
Koc University
Istanbul

### Submitter
Ali Yurtseven

### Lab Head
Dr Halil Kavakli
Koc University


