### Accession
PXD014762

### Title
Proteomics on formalin-fixed and stained laser-capure microdissected human lung sections

### Description
A broad range of tissues have been examined by microscopy following a process of formalin fixation, paraffin embedment, sectioning and staining. Haematoxylin and eosin (H&E) – which respectively stain nuclei blue and other cellular and stromal material pink – are routinely used for clinical diagnosis based on the identification of morphological features. A richer characterisation can be achieved by coupling spatially resolved methods to mass spectrometry (MS), giving an unbiased assay of the proteins that make up the tissue. However, the process of fixing, embedding and staining tissues for histological analysis is poorly compatible with standard sample preparation methods for mass spectrometry, resulting in a reduction in the number of proteins identified. Here we describe a microproteomics technique optimised to analyse H&E-stained, formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) sections of human lung tissue. Laser capture microdissection (LCM) was used to isolate sections of morphologically normal alveoli and blood vessels from tissue-banked specimens of human idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF). Following sample digestion and clean-up, MS was able to identify 1252 differentially expressed proteins. This work provides an optimised pipeline for the analysis of FFPE tissue sections by LCM-MS. Furthermore, it offers proof of principal that MS can identify distinct, characteristic proteomic compositions of anatomical features within complex tissues.

### Sample Protocol
Laser capture microdissection. The 5-micron H&E sections were loaded onto the MMI CellCut Laser Microdissection system (Molecular Machines & Industries). We used a power setting of 75% laser moving at 40 microns/second for automated cutting and collected laser microdissected specimens using MMI transparent caps (MMI, 50204).  Mass spectrometry preparation: Laser microdissected tissue was resuspended in 25 µL 50 mM Triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) (Sigma, T7408), 5% SDS (pH 7.5) and subjected to 95oC for 20 minutes, then 60oC for 2 hours while shaking at 1,400 RPM (Eppendorf, ThermoMix C). To select for ECM proteins, we then add 75 µL of to the sample after it has cooled to room temperature to create a final volume of 100 µL of 50 mM TEAB, 5% SDS, 7.5M urea (pH 7.5). Samples are then placed into a Covaris microtube (Covaris, 520045) and sheared using the LE220-Plus Focused Ultrasonicator (Covaris, UK) with a setting of: duration of 50 seconds, peak power 500, duty factor of 20.0%, cycles/burst of 200, average power at 100, and then delayed for 10 second. This was repeated for a total of 10 cycles (10-minute total tun time). After shearing, samples are alkylated by the addition of 8 µL of 500 mM IAM (Sigma, I1149) and incubated for 30 minutes in the dark. Samples are then acidified by the addition of 12 µL of 12% aqueous phosphoric acid (Sigma, 345245) and centrifuged at 12,000 RPM for 5 minutes. The supernatant is collected and resuspended with 600 µL of 90% methanol, 100 mM TEAB (pH 7.10). The sample was then added to a S-Trap column (Protifi, C02-micro) and centrifuged at 2,000 RPM using 200 µL at a time until all the sample had passed through and collected in the column. After discarding the flow through, the S-Trap column was washed by adding 150 µL of 90% methanol, 100 mM TEAB (pH 7.10) and centrifuging at 2,000 RPM. Washing was repeated a further 9 times, discarding the flow through each time. In-column digest was performed by adding 25 µL of a solution containing 2 µg trypsin (Promega, V5111) in 50 mM TEAB pH 8.0. Trypsin digestion was performed at 47oC for 1 hour without shaking. Samples were eluted by adding 40 µL of 50 mM TEAB and centrifuging at 2,000 RPM, followed by the addition of 40 µL of 0.2% aqueous Formic Acid (Sigma Aldrich, 27001) and centrifuging, and finally adding 50% aqueous acetonitrile (Fisher, A955-212) and centrifuging. Eluted fractions were combined and the total 120 µL sample was then lyophilised using a speed-vac (Heto Cooling System). Desalting of samples was performed using Oligo R3 resin beads. Briefly, 100 µL of a 10 mg/mL Oligo R3 resin (ThermoScientific, 1-1339-03) in aqueous 50% acetonitrile was placed into a 96-well 0.2 um PVDF plate (Corning, 3504). The plate was centrifuged at 1,400 RPM (ThermoScientific, Megafuge 16) for 1 minute to clear Oligo R3 resin with a blank 96-well plate underneath to catch the flow through which was then discarded. 100 µL of aqueous 50% acetonitrile was mixed with the resin and centrifuged again, discarding the flow through. Finally, 100 µL of aqueous 0.1% formic acid were mixed with the resin and centrifuged for a total of two repeats, while discarding the flow through. Samples were then resuspended in 100 µl of aqueous 5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic and mixed with the now washed Oligo R3 Resin and allowed to shake on a plate shaker (Eppendorf, Thermomixer Comfort) for 5 minutes at 800 RPM, and then centrifuged (flow through was discarded). The sample peptides were now bound to the Oligo R3 Resin and washed for a total of ten times by the addition of 100 µL of aqueous 0.1% formic acid, mixed for 2 minutes at 800 RPM, centrifuged, and flow through discarded. Finally, the washed peptides were eluted by mixing with 50 µL of aqueous 50% acetonitrile for 2 minutes, centrifuged, collecting the flow through in a clean 96-well capture plate. Elution was repeated with an additional 50 µL of aqueous 50% acetonitrile and retained. Desalted peptides were lyophilised in a speed-vac and stored at 4oC until needed.   Liquid chromatography mass spectrometry:  Isolated peptides are analyzed by liquid chromatography (LC) coupled tandem MS (LC-MS/MS) using an UltiMate® 3000 Rapid Separation LC system (RSLC, Dionex Corporation) coupled to a Q Exactive HF (Thermo Fisher), peptide mixtures were separated using a multistep gradient from 95% A (0.1% formic acid, FA, Thermo Fisher, in water) and 5% B (0.1% FA in acetonitrile) to 7% B at 1 min, 18% B at 58 min, 27% B at 72 min and 60% B at 74 min at 300 nL/min, using a 75 mm x 250 μm i.d. 1.7 μm CSH C18, analytical column (Waters). Peptides were selected for fragmentation automatically by data dependent analysis.

### Data Protocol
Mass Spectrometry Analysis: Raw spectra were automatically aligned using Progenesis QI for proteomics (version 3.0; Nonlinear Dynamics, Waters). Spectra from different tissue sections (blood vessel or alveoli) were analysed either separately (without alignment between sections; Figure 2) or together (with alignment between sections; Figure 3). Peak-picking in Progenesis QI was performed using default parameters and subsequent features were filtered to leave only peptides with a charge of +1 to +4, with 3 or more isotopes. remaining features were searched using Mascot (server version 2.5.1, parser version 2.5.2.0; Matrix Science), against the SwissProt and TREMBL human database. The peptide database was modified to search for alkylated cysteine residues (monoisotopic mass change, +57.021 Da) as a fixed modification, with oxidized methionine (+15.995 Da), hydroxylation of asparagine, aspartic acid, proline or lysine (+15.995 Da) and phosphorylation of serine, tyrosine, threonine (+79.966 Da) as variable modifications. A maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed. Peptide tolerance and MS/MS tolerance were set to 8 ppm and 0.015 Da, respectively. Peptide detection intensities were exported from Progenesis QI as comma separated variable (.csv) spreadsheets for further processing. Peptides assigned to proteins with ‘unreviewed’ status in the UniProt database were reassigned to the most abundant ‘reviewed’ protein with sequence identity in the dataset. Peptides shared between different protein groups were excluded from subsequent analysis. For differential expression analysis in Figure 3, fold changes were calculated using the Matlab (version 2015a; The MathWorks) implementation of BayesENproteomics [preprint doi.org/10.1101/295527], available from: https://github.com/VenkMallikarjun/BayesENproteomics. BayesENproteomics fits regularized regression models to take into account donor variability and variable behaviour of peptides assigned to a single protein group (due to post-translational modifications or differential splicing), weighting observations based on confidence in peptide identification (inferred via Mascot scores). These features allow BayesENproteomics to calculate fold changes for the dominant proteoforms of proteins represented in a complex clinical dataset. Missing values were imputed within BayesENproteomics model fitting using an adaptive multiple imputation method that attempts to discern whether a given missing value is missing at random (MAR) or non-randomly (MNR) and imputes from appropriate distributions [preprint doi.org/10.1101/295527]. Reactome Pathway enrichment analysis was performed as described in [preprint doi.org/10.1101/295527], by fitting linear models for each pathway represented in the dataset, based on protein-level fold changes calculated as described above.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Spatial proteomics, Lung, Laser-capture, Dissection, Fixed

### Affiliations
University of Manchester
Division of Cell Matrix Biology and Regenerative Medicine, School of Biological Sciences, Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, University of Manchester, Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, Manchester, M13 9PL, UK.

### Submitter
Venkatesh Mallikarjun

### Lab Head
Dr Jeremy Herrera
Division of Cell Matrix Biology and Regenerative Medicine, School of Biological Sciences, Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, University of Manchester, Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, Manchester, M13 9PL, UK.


