### Accession
PXD012981

### Title
Proteomics of endometriosis

### Description
This project aims at comparing endometrium from women with and without endometriosis during the secretory phase of menstrual cycle. The present results constitute a first step towards identifying potential diagnosis biomarkers and may provide a better understanding of endometriosis especially the etiology of the disease.

### Sample Protocol
Total proteins from human endometriosis were extracted and digested with trypsin before LC-MS-MS analysis in data-dependent acquisition mode using TIMS TOF Pro mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Ion mobility resolved mass spectra, nested ion mobility vs m/Z distributions, as well as summed fragment ion intensities were extracted from the raw data file with DataAnalysis 5.1 (Bruker Daltonik GmbH, Bremen, Germany).  Signal-to-noise (S/N) ratio were increased by summations of individual TIMS scans. Mobility peak positions and peak half-widths were determined based on extracted ion mobilograms (±0.05 Da) using the peak detection algorithm implemented in the DataAnalysis software. Features detection were also performed using DataAnalysis 5.1 software and exported in .mgf format. Peptides identification were then performed with Mascot version 2.5.1 applying the previously described search parameters and using its automatic decoy database search to calculate the false discovery rate (FDR) (Jumeau et al. 2015, Melaine et al. 2018). Briefly, MS/MS spectra were searched against the UniProt Homo sapiens reference proteome database (UP000005640, release 2018–06–20; 21044 sequences which contains canonical) The enzyme selectivity was set to full trypsin with one missed cleavage allowed. Modifications selected were set as fixed carbamidomethylation of cysteines, variable oxidation of methionine and variable deamination of asparagine and glutamine. Proline Studio software (version 1.6.1 http://www.profiproteomics.fr/proline/) was used for validation and spectral count comparison as previously described (Colinet et al. 2017). Identified peptides were validated with a peptide rank of 1 and filtered based on mascot score values to obtain a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%. For each identified and validated protein, weighted spectral counts were calculated as suggested in Abacus (Fermin et al. 2011) where shared peptides are combined and weighted according to the associated protein sets.

### Publication Abstract
Endometriosis is a common chronic gynaecological disease causing various symptoms, such as infertility and chronic pain. The gold standard for its diagnosis is still laparoscopy and the biopsy of endometriotic lesions. Here, we aimed to compare the eutopic endometrium from women with or without endometriosis to identify proteins that may be considered as potential biomarker candidates. Eutopic endometrium was collected from patients with endometriosis (n = 4) and women without endometriosis (n = 5) during a laparoscopy surgery during the mid-secretory phase of their menstrual cycle. Total proteins from tissues were extracted and digested before LC-MS-MS analysis. Among the 5301 proteins identified, 543 were differentially expressed and enriched in two specific KEGG pathways: focal adhesion and PI3K/AKT signaling. Integration of our data with a large-scale proteomics dataset allowed us to highlight 11 proteins that share the same trend of dysregulation in eutopic endometrium, regardless of the phase of the menstrual cycle. Our results constitute the first step towards the identification of potential promising endometrial diagnostic biomarkers. They provide new insights into the mechanisms underlying endometriosis and its etiology. Our results await further confirmation on a larger sample cohort.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-msms, Endometriosis, Endometrium

### Affiliations
Protim, Univ Rennes, Inserm, EHESP, Irset - UMR_S 1085
Protim, Irset, Inserm U1085

### Submitter
E Com

### Lab Head
Dr Charles Pineau
Protim, Univ Rennes, Inserm, EHESP, Irset - UMR_S 1085


