### Accession
PXD046189

### Title
Feasibility of phosphoproteomics to uncover oncogenic signalling in secreted extracellular vesicles using glioblastoma-EGFRVIII cells as a model

### Description
Cancer cells secrete extracellular vesicles (EVs) that contain molecular information, including proteins and RNA. Oncogenic signalling can be transferred via the cargo of EVs to recipient cells and may influence the behaviour of neighbouring cells or cells at a distance. This cargo may contain cancer drivers, such as EGFR, and also phosphorylated (activated) components of oncogenic signalling cascades. Till date, the cancer EV phosphoproteome has not been studied in great detail. In the present study, we used U87 and U87EGFRvIII cells as a model to explore EV oncogenic signalling components in comparison to the cellular profile. EVs were isolated using the VN96 ME-kit and subjected to LC-MS/MS based phosphoproteomics and dedicated bioinformatics.

### Sample Protocol
U87-wild type (U87WT) and U87ΔEGFRvIII (U87vIII) cells were cultured in Dulbecco's modified essential medium (DMEM) and F12 (50/50 v/v) supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated fetal calf serum (FCS, Lonza, Verviers, Belgium) and 100 U of penicillin/streptomycin (Lonza) at a humidified atmosphere at 37 °C and 5% C02. Cells were tested to be mycoplasma free prior to EV isolation. For EV isolation, cells were grown to 80% confluency in T175 culture flasks (Falcon, Landsmeer, The Netherlands). Cells were washed three times with pre-warmed PBS to remove residual FCS. Subsequently, cells were incubated in 50 ml DMEM/F12 + 100 U penicillin and streptomycin for 16 h. Conditioned medium was collected and centrifuged at 500 xg for 10 min at 4 °C to remove the cells. Exosome isolation, digestion and TiOx phosphopeptide enrichment are specified in [Bijnsdorp IV, Schelfhorst T, Luinenburg M, Rolfs F, Piersma SR, de Haas RR, Pham TV, Jimenez CR. Feasibility of phosphoproteomics to uncover oncogenic signalling in secreted extracellular vesicles using glioblastoma-EGFRVIII cells as a model. J Proteomics. 2021 Feb 10;232:104076]. Phospho-peptides were dried in a speed-vac at 45 °C and dissolved in 20 μl loading solvent(4% Acetonitrile/0.5% TFA). For each phosphopeptide sample the 20 μl of sample (everything) was injected in partial loop injection mode. For global protein expression, tryptic digests were adjusted to 0.1 μg/μl in loading solvent and 10 μl (1 μg) was injected in partial loop injection mode. Peptides were separated by an Ultimate 3000 nanoLC-MS/MS system (Dionex, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) equipped with a 50 cm × 75 μm ID fused silica column packed with 1.9 μm Pepmap Acclaim C18 material (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany). After injection, peptides were trapped at 3 μl/min on a 10 mm × 75 μm ID trap column packed with 3 μm Pepmap Acclaim C18 at 2% buffer B (buffer A: 0.1% formic acid (Fischer Scientific), buffer B: 80% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) and separated at 300 nl/min in a 1040% buffer B gradient in 90 min (120 min inject-to-inject) at 35 °C in a column oven. Eluting peptides were ionized at a potential of +2 kVa into a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany). Intact masses were measured at resolution 70.000 (at m/z 200) in the orbitrap using an AGC target value of 3E6 charges. The top 15 for peptide signals (charge-states 2+ and higher) were submitted to MS/MS in the HCD (higher-energy collision) cell (1.4 amu isolation width, 25% normalized collision energy, 80 ms maximum IT). MS/MS spectra were acquired at resolution 15,000 (at m/z 200) in the orbitrap using an AGC target value of 4E5 charges and an underfill ratio of 0.1%. Dynamic exclusion was applied with a repeat count of 1 and an exclusion time of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
MS and MS/MS spectra were searched against the Swissprot human FASTA file downloaded In February 2019 (Swissprot_2019_02_cannonical_and_isoforms_iRT.fasta, 42,418 entries) using MaxQuant (v1.6.4.0). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Cysteine carboxamidomethylation (Cys, +57.021464 Da) was treated as fixed modification and serine, threonine and tyrosine phosphorylation (+79.966330 Da), methionine oxidation (Met,+15.994915 Da) and N-terminal acetylation (N-terminal, +42.010565 Da) as variable modifications. Peptide precursor ions were searched with a maximum mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and fragment ions with a maximum mass deviation of 20 ppm. Peptide, protein and site identifications were filtered at an FDR of 1% using the decoy database strategy. The minimal peptide length was 7 amino-acids and the minimum Andromeda score for modified peptides was 40 and the corresponding minimum delta score was 6 (default MaxQuant settings).

### Publication Abstract
Cancer cells secrete extracellular vesicles (EVs) that contain molecular information, including proteins and RNA. Oncogenic signalling can be transferred via the cargo of EVs to recipient cells and may influence the behaviour of neighbouring cells or cells at a distance. This cargo may contain cancer drivers, such as EGFR, and also phosphorylated (activated) components of oncogenic signalling cascades. Till date, the cancer EV phosphoproteome has not been studied in great detail. In the present study, we used U87 and U87EGFRvIII cells as a model to explore EV oncogenic signalling components in comparison to the cellular profile. EVs were isolated using the VN96 ME-kit and subjected to LC-MS/MS based phosphoproteomics and dedicated bioinformatics. Expression of (phosphorylated)-EGFR was highly increased in EGFRvIII overexpressing cells and their secreted EVs. The increased phosphorylated proteins in both cells and EVs were associated with activated components of the EGFR-signalling cascade and included EGFR, AKT2, MAPK8, SMG1, MAP3K7, DYRK1A, RPS6KA3 and PAK4 kinases. In conclusion, EVs harbour oncogenic signalling networks including multiple activated kinases including EGFR, AKT and mTOR. SIGNIFICANCE: Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are biomarker treasure troves and are widely studied for their biomarker content in cancer. However, little research has been done on the phosphorylated protein profile within cancer EVs. In the current study, we demonstrate that EVs that are secreted by U87-EGFRvIII mutant glioblastoma cells contain high levels of oncogenic signalling networks. These networks contain multiple activated (phosphorylated) kinases, including EGFR, MAPK, AKT and mTOR.

### Keywords
Phospho-proteomics, Exosome, Lc-ms/ms, Extracellular vesicles, Inka, Glioblastoma multiforme, Egfr

### Affiliations
Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Medical Oncology, Cancer Center Amsterdam, OncoProteomics Laboratory, Amsterdam, Netherlands
Amsterdam UMC

### Submitter
Thang Pham

### Lab Head
Dr Connie Jimenez
Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Medical Oncology, Cancer Center Amsterdam, OncoProteomics Laboratory, Amsterdam, Netherlands


