### Accession
PXD004546

### Title
Human Rheumatoid Arthritis LC-MSMS

### Description
Malondialdehyde-modified epitopes (MDA-epitopes) can elicit specific autoantibody that expressed oxidative stress arising in rheumatoid arthritis (RA). The purpose of this study was to discover and validate MDA-peptide adducts as novel biomarkers using concanavalin A affinity chromatography, 1D SDS-PAGE, in-gel digestion, and label-free nano-LC-MS, and evaluate levels of serum MDA, MDA-protein adducts, proteins and autoantibody isotypes against an unmodified and MDA-peptide from Taiwanese female patients with RA and healthy controls (HCs).  Levels of serum MDA and MDA-protein adducts were significantly higher in RA patients versus HCs. Four differentially expressed novel MDA-peptides were selected that relative modification ratio were 2-fold differences to examine protein levels and assess autoantibodies to MDA-peptides in RA patients compared with HCs. Four of peptides are autoantigens. Furthermore, 4 MDA-peptides can induce more autoantibody isotypes that are statistical significance in RA patients compared to HCs. Serum IgG and IgM against MDA-peptides showed excellent diagnostic performance in discriminating among RA patients and HCs: area under the curve (AUC, 0.96 ~ 0.98), sensitivity (88.9% ~ 97.8%) and specificity (88.9% ~ 100%). Autoantibodies to MDA-epitopes indicate oxidative modifications occurring in RA, and might be useful as clinical markers fro RA diagnosis if further investigated.

### Sample Protocol
One hundred microliters of pooled serum was mixed with 300 μL of agarose-bound Con A (Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA, USA) at 4 °C overnight. The Con A-bound serum was captured by washing with an 8x volume of binding buffer (25 mM Tris, 1 mM MnCl2, 1 mM CaCl2, and 500 mM NaCl; pH 7.6), eluting with 200 μL of elution buffer (500 mM alpha-methyl mannoside in 20 mM Tris, pH 7.6) 6 times, and then concentrating with Microcon YM-10 (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA). Con A-captured serum proteins were quantified using the Bradford assay (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA, USA).

### Data Protocol
Tryptic peptide of individual gel slice was pooled and used in LC-MS/MS and LC-MS (Supplementary Figure 1). The unmodified and it's MDA-peptide sequence list were established by MS/MS spectra using nano-LC-MS/MS and our PTM finder-in-house program [20]. The unmodified and it's MDA-peptide adducts were relative quantified by integrating peak areas of extracted ion chromatograms (XICs) from the MS scans according to the above-mentioned peptide list using a nano-LC-MS and our PTM Q-in-house program [20]. The relative modification ratio (%) was defined as XICs (MDA-peptide)/[XICs (unmodified peptide + MDA-peptide)] ×100% in the quantitative analyses. Minor modified details are provided in the supplementary information.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rheumatoid arthritis, Autoantibody isotypes, Serum, Malondialdehyde

### Affiliations
School of Medical Laboratory Science and Biotechnology, College of Medical Science and Technology, Taipei Medical University,
No.250, Wuxing Street, Taipei 11031, Taiwan.
School of Medical Laboratory Science and Biotechnology, College of Medical Science and Technology, Taipei Medical University

### Submitter
Ching-Yu Lin

### Lab Head
Dr Ching-Yu Lin
School of Medical Laboratory Science and Biotechnology, College of Medical Science and Technology, Taipei Medical University


