### Accession
PXD029157

### Title
Card19 Iinteraction Partners in Murine Macrophages

### Description
The function of the mitochondrial protein CARD19 remains largely unknown. To begin to understand the molecular function of CARD19, we performed mass spectrometry-based proteomics to identify interacting partners of CARD19 in murine macrophages. We analyzed anti-MYC tag immunoprecipitates of 3xMYC-CARD19, expressed at approximately endogenous levels in raf-myc-immortalizd macrophages from a Card19-/- strain (Jackson Labs stock # 036463).

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed and washed in a buffer containing 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl and 1% Triton-X 100 along with cOmpleteTM ULTRA protease inhibitor tablets (Millipore Sigma, #5892970001) and PhosSTOPTM phosphatase inhibitor tablets (Millipore Sigma, #4906845001). For mass spectrometry, cell lysates were pelleted for 10 min at 10,000×g and supernatants were immunoprecipitated with Myc-Trap agarose beads or negative control agarose beads (ChromoTek) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Each gel band was destained with 25 mM NH4HCO3, 50% Acetonitrile, pH 8.3. After lyophilization, the gel bands were digested with 100 uL of trypsin (Promega) solution (20 ug/mL) at 37 °C for 16 h. The digested peptides were extracted by adding 100 uL 70% acetonitrile, 5% formic acid in a sonication bath. Each peptide sample was lyophilized and then resuspended in 16 μL 0.1% TFA. With a nanoflow LC system (EASY-nLC 1200, ThermoFisher Scientific) coupled online with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid MS (Thermo Fisher Scientific), samples were loaded on a C18 nano trap column, (Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 2 cm, nanoViper, Thermo Scientific) and resolved on a C18 Easy-Spray column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18, 2 um, 100 Å, 75 um × 500 mm, nanoViper, Thermo Scientific) with a linear gradient of 2% mobile phase B (95 % acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid) to 32% mobile phase B within 60 min at a constant flow rate of 250 nL/min. The C18 Easy-Spray column was heated at 50 °C during the analysis. The most intense molecular ions in each MS scan within 3s were sequentially selected for high-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) using a normalized collision energy of 35%. The mass spectra were acquired at the mass range of m/z 400-1600. The Easy-Spray Ion Source (Thermo Scientific) capillary voltage and temperature were set at 1.9 kV and 275 °C, respectively. Dynamic exclusion (30 s) was enabled during the MS2 data acquisition to minimize redundant peptide fragmentation events. The RF lens was set to 30% during the MS analysis and both MS1 and MS2 spectra were collected in profile mode.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched against a Swiss-Prot mouse protein database (http://www.uniprot.org/uniprot/) using Proteome Discoverer (v.2.20.388, Thermo Fisher Scientific) via Mascot (v. 2.6.0, Matrix Science, Inc.) with the automatic decoy search option. Data was searched with a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and a fragment ion tolerance of 0.05 Da, a maximum of two tryptic miscleavages and dynamic modifications for oxidation (15.9949 Da) on methionine residues, phosphorylation (79.9799 Da) on serine, threonine and tyrosine residues. Resulting peptide spectral matches (PSMs) were filtered using an FDR of ≤ 1% (Percolator q-value ≤ 0.01).

### Publication Abstract
CARD19 is a mitochondrial protein of unknown function. While CARD19 was originally reported to regulate TCR-dependent NF-&#x3ba;B activation via interaction with BCL10, this function is not recapitulated ex vivo in primary murine CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells. Here, we employ a combination of SIM, TEM, and confocal microscopy, along with proteinase K protection assays and proteomics approaches, to identify interacting partners of CARD19 in macrophages. Our data show that CARD19 is specifically localized to the outer mitochondrial membrane. Through deletion of functional domains, we demonstrate that both the distal C-terminus and transmembrane domain are required for mitochondrial targeting, whereas the CARD is not. Importantly, mass spectrometry analysis of 3&#xd7;Myc-CARD19 immunoprecipitates reveals that CARD19 interacts with the components of the mitochondrial intermembrane bridge (MIB), consisting of mitochondrial contact site and cristae organizing system (MICOS) components MIC19, MIC25, and MIC60, and MICOS-interacting proteins SAMM50 and MTX2. These CARD19 interactions are in part dependent on a properly folded CARD. Consistent with previously reported phenotypes upon siRNA silencing of MICOS subunits, absence of CARD19 correlates with irregular cristae morphology. Based on these data, we propose that CARD19 is a previously unknown interacting partner of the MIB and the MIC19-MIC25-MIC60 MICOS subcomplex that regulates cristae morphology.

### Keywords
Chchd6, Mitochondria, Bincard, Micos, Mtx2, Samm50, Chchd3, Card19, C9orf89, Immt

### Affiliations
Inova Health System
Department of Microbiology and Immunology and Biomedical Instrumentation Center, Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, Maryland, 20814

### Submitter
Thomas Conrads

### Lab Head
Dr Brian C. Schaefer
Department of Microbiology and Immunology and Biomedical Instrumentation Center, Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, Maryland, 20814


