### Accession
PXD038098

### Title
Plastics investigated can be mineralized by bacteria naturally occurring within the marine environment

### Description
Biodegradable plastics are one possible solution for reducing plastic waste, yet the mechanisms and organisms involved in their degradation in the aquatic environment remain understudied. In this study, we have enriched a microbial community from North Sea water and sediment, capable of growing on the polyester poly(butylene succinate). This culture was grown on two other biodegradable polyesters, polycaprolactone and ecovio® FT (a PBAT-based blended biodegradable plastic), and the differences between community structure and activity on these three polymers were determined by metagenomics and metaproteomics. We have seen that the plastic supplied drives the community structure and activity. Setups growing on ecovio® FT were more diverse, yet showed the lowest degradation, while poly(butylene succinate) and polycaprolactone resulted in a less diverse community but much higher degradation efficiencies. The dominating species were Alcanivorax sp., Thalassobius sp., or Pseudomonas sp., depending on the polymer supplied. Furthermore, we have observed that Gammaproteobacteria were more abundant and active within the biofilm and Alphaproteobacteria within the free-living fraction of the enrichments. Two of the three PETase-like enzymes isolated were expressed as tandems (Ple -tan1 &Ple – tan2) and all three were produced by Pseudomonas sp. Of those, Ple-tan1 was most active on all three substrates and also the most thermostable. Overall, we could show that all three plastics investigated can be mineralized by bacteria naturally occurring within the marine environment and characterize some of the enzymes involved in the degradation process.

### Sample Protocol
Seawater and coastal aerobic sediment for samples were collected from List/Sylt Germany (55°01'30.5"N 8°25'53.0"E) in June 2019. All cultivations were carried out in a mineral media as described before for Pirellula (600a. M13a DSMZ medium) with some modifications: Artificial sea water (ASW 1X), Hutner’s salts and metals solutions were prepared according to DSMZ 590 medium. The carbon and nitrogen sources described for these media (600a. M13a and 590 DSMZ media) were replaced by NH4Cl (1 mM) and K2HPO4 (0.1 mM). For DNA and protein extraction, 1 mL of pre-culture of NS was inoculated to 99 mL of marine mineral media supplied with 5x5 cm films of either ecovio® FT, PBS and PCL. Each condition consisted of four replicates. The cultures were incubated at 20 °C, 120 rpm in a MaxQTM 4000 orbital shaker (Fischer Scientific, Germany). Before film disintegration, the cultures were harvested by filtering the whole content of each flask through a 50 µM sieve which has been previously sterilized with ethanol. The free-living bacterial fraction of each culture was collected with clean beaker flasks placed under the sieve and transferred to clean 50 mL Falcon tubes. Each plastic film (attached bacterial fraction) retained on the sieve were washed 3x with Milli-Q water. Subsequently, the plastic films were separately transferred to sterile Petri dishes and submerged in 5 mL of phosphate buffer, pH 7.4. While submerged, biofilms were scratched out of each plastic film with clean scalpels. The suspended biofilms were homogenized by pipetting and transferred to sterile 50 mL Falcon tubes. Free-living and attached fractions were centrifuged 10,000 rpm, 10 min at 4 °C. Pellets were stored at -80 °C. The protein precipitates were dissolved in SDS-PAGE sample loading buffer, loaded on an SDS-gel and run for 10 min. The gel pieces were cut, washed and incubated with 25 mM 1,4-dithiothreitol (in 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate) for 1 h and 100 mM iodoacetamide (in 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate) for 30 min. The pieces were further destained, dehydrated and proteolytically cleaved overnight at 37 ∘C with trypsin (Promega, Walldorf, Germany). The digested peptides were extracted and desalted using ZipTip-C18 tips (Merck Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany). Afterwards, the peptide lysates were re-suspended in 0.1% formic acid and injected to a nanoliquid chromatography mass spectrometry (nano LC-MS/MS). Mass spectrometric analysis of peptides was performed on a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Fisher Scientific, Massachusetts, USA) coupled with a TriVersa NanoMate (Advion, Ltd., Harlow, UK) source in LC chip coupling mode.

### Data Protocol
Data resulting from LC-MS/MS experiments were analyzed using the Proteome Discoverer v. 2.4 (Fischer Scientific, Massachusetts, USA) using SEQUEST HT. As a database, the protein-coding sequences of the metagenome were used. Search settings were set to trypsin (Full), max. missed cleavage: 2, precursor mass tolerance: 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance: 0.02 Da. The false discovery rates (FDR) were determined with the node Percolator embedded in Proteome Discoverer and the FDR threshold was set at a peptide level of  <1%. The same threshold was set for the protein FDR.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Marine environment, Metaproteomics, Biodegradable plastic

### Affiliations
Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research GmbH - UFZ  Department of Molecular Systems Biology Permoserstraße 15, 04318 Leipzig, Germany
Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ

### Submitter
Nico Jehmlich

### Lab Head
Dr Nico Jehmlich
Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research GmbH - UFZ  Department of Molecular Systems Biology Permoserstraße 15, 04318 Leipzig, Germany


