### Accession
PXD007740

### Title
A system-wide approach to monitor responses to synergistic BRAF and EGFR inhibition in colorectal cancer cells

### Description
Molecular heterogeneity of tumors, epigenetic changes and a diverse range of molecular mechanisms are main contributors to drug resistance, which represents one of the great challenges in cancer treatment. A deeper understanding of the molecular biology of cancer has resulted in better targeted therapies, where one or multiple drugs are adopted in novel therapies to tackle resistance. This beneficial effect of using combination treatments has to some extent also been observed in colorectal cancer (CRC) patients harboring the BRAF(V600E) mutation, whereby dual inhibition of BRAF(V600E) and EGFR increases antitumor activity. Notwithstanding this success, it is not clear whether this combination treatment is the only or most effective treatment to block resistance. Here, we investigate molecular responses upon single and multi-target treatments, over time, using BRAF(V600E) mutant CRC cells as a well-define model system. Through integration of transcriptomic, proteomic and phosphoproteomics data we obtain a comprehensive overview, revealing both well-known and novel responses. We primarily observe widespread upregulation of tyrosine kinases (RTKs) and and metabolic pathways. This points to by which the treated cells switch energy sources as a defensive response entering a quiescent like state, while activating signalling to re-activate the MAPK pathway.

### Sample Protocol
WiDr and WiDr PTPN11 KO cells were plated in three biological replicates, in two different experiments for (phospho)protoemics and transcriptomics for a total of 156 dishes. For both studies, cells were starved 24 h and later treated with 3 µM PLX4032 (BRAFi, BRAFi in PTPN11 KO), 3 µM gefitinib (EGFRi) or combination of the two inhibitors (BRAFi+EGFRi). Unstimulated cells were used as control (T=0 h). Following EGFR stimulation cells were harvested at subsequent timepoints 2, 6, 24 and 48 h. Proteins were first lysed in urea 8M buffer containing phospho- and protease inhibitor and then sonicated on ice. After measuring the total amount using Bradford assay, proteins were reduced with 8 mM DTT, alkylated with 16 mM iodoacetamide and reduced again with 8 mM DTT. Lys-C (enzyme/substrate ratio 1:65) and trypsin (enzyme/substrate ratio 1:50) were used subsequently for protein digestion. After quenching the reaction with 5 % FA, peptides were desalted using Sep-Pak C18 cartridges. For phosphopeptide enrichment, 200 ug of peptides were loaded on homemade columns containing Ti4+-IMAC material. After sequential steps of washing, samples were eluted first with 10% ammonia in 10% FA and finally with 80% ACN, 2% FA. Phosphopeptides were further desalted using SPE C18 cartridge homemade. For LC-MS/MS measurements Agilent 1290 Infinity II LC system was coupled to a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer. After reconstituting samples in 10% FA, (phospho)peptides were first trapped at 5 μL/min in 100% solvent A (0.1% FA in water) for 10 min, and then eluted with solvent B (100 % ACN/0.1 % formic acid). Proteome analysis was performed in 180 min gradient as follows: 0-10 min 100 % solvent A, 10–10.1 min 13 % solvent B, 10.1-165 min 40 % solvent B, 165-168 min 100 % B, 169-180 min 100 % solvent A.  Phoshoproteome analysis was performed instead in 120 min gradient as follows: 0-10 min 100 % solvent A, 10–105 min 4 % solvent B, 105-108 min 36 % solvent B, 108-109 min 100 % B, 109-120 min 100 % solvent A.  The electrospray voltage was set to 1.7 kV. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode. Scan range selected was from 375 to 1600 m/z (resolution 35,000) followed by higher collision energy dissociation fragmentation of the 10 most intense peaks (25 % normalized collision energy at a target value of 50,000 ions, resolution 17,500).

### Data Protocol
After a preliminary quality control, 383 RAW phosphoproteomics and proteomics spectra were uploaded in MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.8) and searched against a mutant-modified Swissprot database Homo sapiens (24,126 entries, released on 05_2015). Trypsin was specified as enzyme and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification while methionine oxidation, protein N-term acetylation were set as variable modifications. Phosphorylation on serine, threonine and tyrosine was also selected as variable modification for phosphopeptide analysis. The allowed fragment mass deviation was set to 20 ppm for FTMS, and both minimum peptide length and the maximum peptide charge were set to 7. Fast Label free quantification (LFQ) was performed and ‘match between runs’ was enabled. Peptide and protein identification was set to 1 % FDR. The quantified output (proteinGroups.txt, phospho (STY)Sites.txt) were processed using a custom Python package (PaDuA). Potential contaminants and reverse peptides were removed, and filters for Class I phosphosites (localization probability > 75 %) and ‘only identified by site’ were applied for phospho- and protein data respectively. Normalization was performed by subtracting the median of log2 transformed intensities from each column. For phospho-data, ‘expand side table’ function was applied before normalization. Median of technical replicates was performed for each dataset and resulting values were filtered to ensure each protein or phosphosite had valid measurements in at least one timepoint of any of the six cell culture conditions. Enrichment analysis was calculated using modificationSpecificPeptides.txt table. Final processed output were exported for subsequent analysis in R.

### Publication Abstract
Intrinsic and/or acquired resistance represents one of the great challenges in targeted cancer therapy. A deeper understanding of the molecular biology of cancer has resulted in more efficient strategies, where one or multiple drugs are adopted in novel therapies to tackle resistance. This beneficial effect of using combination treatments has also been observed in colorectal cancer patients harboring the BRAF(V600E) mutation, whereby dual inhibition of BRAF(V600E) and EGFR increases antitumor activity. Notwithstanding this success, it is not clear whether this combination treatment is the only or most effective treatment to block intrinsic resistance to BRAF inhibitors. Here, we investigate molecular responses upon single and multi-target treatments, over time, using BRAF(V600E) mutant colorectal cancer cells as a model system. Through integration of transcriptomic, proteomic and phosphoproteomics data we obtain a comprehensive overview, revealing both known and novel responses. We primarily observe widespread up-regulation of receptor tyrosine kinases and metabolic pathways upon BRAF inhibition. These findings point to mechanisms by which the drug-treated cells switch energy sources and enter a quiescent-like state as a defensive response, while additionally compensating for the MAPK pathway inhibition.

### Keywords
Braf(v600e), Phosphoproteomics, Transcriptomics, Proteomics, Colorectal cancer, Ptpn11, Drug resistance, Multi-omics, Egfr

### Affiliations
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences Utrecht University
Pepscope BV

### Submitter
Anna Ressa

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. dr. Albert J. R. Heck
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences Utrecht University


