### Accession
PXD001066

### Title
Reference proteome of highly purified human Th1 cells reveals strong effects on metabolism and protein ubiquitination upon differentiation

### Description
The differentiation of human CD4+ T cells into different subtypes of T helper cells and regulatory T cells is crucial for an appropriate immunological response. Among all subtypes Th1 cells are the most prominent specific cell type, representing about 50% of all lymphocytes. So far most global proteomic studies have used either only partially purified T helper cell subpopulations and/or have employed artificial protocols for inducing specific T helper cell subtypes and/or applied gel based approaches. These studies have shed light on molecular details of certain aspects of the proteome. Nevertheless a more global analysis of highly pure primary naïve and Th1 cells by LC-MS/MS is needed in order to contribute to the proteome based T cell subtype characterization. We were able to identify 1757 proteins in total, out of which 49 were significantly regulated. The utilization of highly purified Th1 cells for a global proteome assessment and the bioinformatical comparison to naïve cells reveals the relevance of changes in the metabolism and the ubiquitination pathways upon T cell differentiation.

### Sample Protocol
To purify naïve CD4+- and Th1-lymphocytes from humans, cells were initially isolated by Ficoll HiPaque density gradient centrifugation out of blood from healthy donors, followed by magnetic enrichment of CD4+ cells (CD4 isolation kit, Miltenyi Biotec) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Naïve CD4+ T cells (CXCR3+CD4+CD45RO-) and Th1 cells (CXCR3+CD4+CD45RO+) were then isolated via FACS on an Aria III sorter (BD).  For enhancing the coverage of LC-MS/MS, 20 µg of each sample were precipitated. The pellets were resolved in SDS-running buffer and further pre-fractionated by 1D-PAGE prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. Each lane was cut into 16 slices and processed by tryptic digestion. Mass spectrometric analysis of the obtained peptides was performed in with a nano-HPLC system (nanoAquity, Waters, Milford, USA), online coupled to a LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass-spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, USA).  Liquid chromatography was carried out using a 110 min gradient. Samples were injected on a trapping column (nanoAcquity UPLC column, C18, 180 µm x 20 mm, 5 µm particles, Waters), followed by separation on a C18 column (nanoAquity UPLC column, C18, 7 µm x 150 mm, 1.7 µm particles, Waters) using the following gradient of solvent B (0.1% FA in acetonitrile) in solvent A (0.1% FA in water): 0 min – 2%, 5 min – 6 %, 45 min – 20%, 70 min – 30%, 75 min – 40 %, 80 min – 85%, 95 -110 min – 2%, with a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Full-scan MS spectra (from 300 to 2000 m/z, R = 60000) were acquired in a positive ion mode in the LTQ-Velos Orbitrap. Up to 10 most intense ions per scan with a charge >2 were fragmented and analysed in the linear trap. Peptide ions exceeding an intensity of 3000 were chosen for collision induced dissociation within the linear ion trap (isolation width 4 m/z, normalized collision energy 35%, activation time 30ms, activation q = 0.25). For MS/MS acquisition, a dynamic exclusion of 2 min was applied.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra analysis was performed using the MaxQuant software (version 1.2.0.18). Proteins were identified using the Andromeda peptide search engine integrated into the MaxQuant environment using the international protein index protein sequence database (ipi.HUMAN.v3.68.fasta). The digestion enzyme was set as trypsin/P. The search was adjusted with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.5 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 20 ppm. Peptide and protein FDR were set to 1%. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified as a fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine and acetylation of the peptide N-terminus was set as variable modifications. Proteins were unambiguously identified with one unique and at least two matching peptides.

### Publication Abstract
The differentiation of human CD4(+) T cells into T helper cell subtypes and regulatory T cells is crucial to the immune response. Among subtypes, Th1 cells are dominant, representing approximately 50% of all lymphocytes. Thus far, most global proteomic studies have used only partially purified T helper cell subpopulations and/or have employed artificial protocols for inducing specific T&#xa0;helper cell subtypes and/or used gel-based approaches. These studies have shed light on molecular details of certain aspects of the proteome; nevertheless a global analysis of high purity primary na&#xef;ve and Th1 cells by LC-MS/MS is required to provide a reference dataset for proteome-based T cell subtype characterization. The utilization of highly purified Th1 cells for a global proteome assessment and the bioinformatic comparison to na&#xef;ve cells reveals changes in cell metabolism and the ubiquitination pathway upon T cell differentiation. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD001066 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD001066).

### Keywords
Human, Th1 cells, Cd4+, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Departments of Proteomics and Metabolomics Helmholtz Centre for environmental research - UFZ Permoserstrasse 15 04318 Leipzig Germany
Helmholtzzentrum für Umweltforschung - UFZ

### Submitter
Janina Tomm

### Lab Head
Dr Martin von Bergen
Departments of Proteomics and Metabolomics Helmholtz Centre for environmental research - UFZ Permoserstrasse 15 04318 Leipzig Germany


