### Accession
PXD003422

### Title
A proteomics approach to the protein normalization problem

### Description
The approach suggested here can be used more widely to determine the suitability of proteins or sets of proteins as loading and normalization controls for any biological system. As we have shown here, historically selected ‘household proteins’ may not be the most suitable for this task for technical or biological reasons. Conversely, expression data across diverse systems can inform the selection of proteins to serve as a biomarker.

### Sample Protocol
Protein lysates were processed by MED-FASP protocol.  Endoproteinase Lys-C and trypsin were used for sequential digestion of proteins. The enzyme to protein ratios were 1/50. Analysis of the peptide mixtures was performed in Orbitrap instrument

### Data Protocol
The MS data was analyzed in MaxQuant software8 (version 1.5.3.14). Proteins were identified by searching MS and MS/MS data of peptides against a decoy version of the UniProtKB (August 2015) containing 50807 sequences. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification. N-terminal acetylation and oxidation of methionines were set as variable modifications. Up to two missed cleavages were allowed. The initial allowed mass deviation of the precursor ion was up to 6 ppm and for the fragment masses it was 0.5 Da. Mass accuracy of the precursor ions was improved by time-dependent recalibration algorithms of MaxQuant. The ‘match between runs’ option enabled to match identifications across samples within a time window of 2 min of the aligned retention times. The maximum false peptide discovery rate was specified as 0.01. sProtein titers were calculated on the basis of the raw spectral protein intensity using the Total Protein Approach

### Publication Abstract
Proteomics and other protein-based analysis methods such as Western blotting all face the challenge of discriminating changes in the levels of proteins of interest from inadvertent changes in the amount loaded for analysis. Mass-spectrometry-based proteomics can now estimate the relative and absolute amounts of thousands of proteins across diverse biological systems. We reasoned that this new technology could prove useful for selection of very stably expressed proteins that could serve as better loading controls than those traditionally employed. Large-scale proteomic analyses of SDS lysates of cultured cells and tissues revealed deglycase DJ-1 as the protein with the lowest variability in abundance among different cell types in human, mouse, and amphibian cells. The protein constitutes 0.069 &#xb1; 0.017% of total cellular protein and occurs at a specific concentration of 34.6 &#xb1; 8.7 pmol/mg of total protein. Since DJ-1 is ubiquitous and therefore easily detectable with several peptides, it can be helpful in normalization of proteomic data sets. In addition, DJ-1 appears to be an advantageous loading control for Western blot that is superior to those used commonly used, allowing comparisons between tissues and cells originating from evolutionarily distant vertebrate species. Notably, this is not possible by the detection and quantitation of housekeeping proteins, which are often used in the Western blot technique. The approach introduced here can be applied to select the most appropriate loading controls for MS-based proteomics or Western blotting in any biological system.

### Keywords
Data normalization

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry. Martinsried, Germany
Proteomics

### Submitter
Jacek Wisniewski

### Lab Head
Dr Jacek R Wisniewski
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry. Martinsried, Germany


