### Accession
PXD012997

### Title
Isolation of repaired chromatin of UVC-irradiated human skin fibroblasts

### Description
To further study and understand the DNA damage responses, we developed aniFOUND, a new method for capturing under native conditions the repaired DNA and the proteins associated with it after UVC irradiation. hTert-immortalised human skin fibroblasts were irradiated with 20 J/m2 UVC and the nascent DNA that resulted from the Unscheduled DNA Synthesis was specifically labeled with nucleotide analogues (EdU). This newly repaired/synthesized DNA together with the bound proteins were pulled-down with streptavidin beads. For negative controls we used both irradiated, but non-labelled samples (+UV/-EdU) and labelled, but not irradiated cells (-UV/+EdU). The pulldowns were eluted from the beads by boiling in 0.1 % SDS.

### Sample Protocol
The pulldowns were eluted from the beads by boiling in 0.1 % SDS. Next, they were mixed with 200 μL of 8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris/HCl (pH 8.5) and passed twice through Vivacon 500 10 kDa MW cutoff filters. The flow-through solvents were discarded and the peptides on the filters were alkylated with 100 μL of 1.5 mg/ml iodoacetamide for 20 min in the dark at room temperature. Three washes were done with 100 μL of 8 M urea and three more with 100 μl of 0.05 M ammonium bicarbonate in H2O. Digestion was done by adding onto the filters 80 μl of ammonium bicarbonate buffer containing 1 μg trypsin/LysC for 16 hours at 37°C with shaking. Peptides were eluted by adding 40 μl of water to the filter and centrifugation. The peptides were collected and dried down by speed-vac and next were reconstituted in a solution of 2 % (v/v) ACN and 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid and their concentration was determined by nanodrop. 2.5 μg peptides were pre-concentrated with a flow of 3 μl/min for 10 min using a C18 trap column (Acclaim PepMap100, 100 μm x 2 cm, Thermo Scientific) and then loaded onto a 50 cm long C18 column (75 μm ID, particle size 2 μm, 100Å, Acclaim PepMap100 RSLC, Thermo Scientific). The binary pumps of the HPLC (RSLCnano, Thermo Scientific) consisted of Solution A (2% (v/v) ACN in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid) and Solution B (80% (v/v) ACN in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid). The peptides were separated using a linear gradient of 4% B up to 40% B in 210 min with a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The column was placed in an oven operating at 35°C. The eluted peptides were ionized by a nanospray source and detected by an LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) operating in a data dependent mode (DDA). Full scan MS spectra were acquired in the orbitrap (m/z 300–1600) in profile mode with the resolution set to 60000 at m/z 400 and automatic gain control target at 106 ions. The six most intense ions were sequentially isolated for collision-induced (CID) MS/MS fragmentation and detection in the linear ion trap. Dynamic exclusion was set to 1 min and activated for 90 sec. Ions with single charge states were excluded. Lockmass of m/z 445,120025 was used for continuous internal calibration. XCalibur (Thermo Scientific) was used to control the system and acquire the raw files.

### Data Protocol
The Raw MS files were processed using MaxQuant software (1.5.8.3). Default parameters were used for protein identification and quantification. Trypsin specificity with two missed cleavages was allowed and minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed, and methionine oxidation, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. A maximum of 5 modifications per peptide was set. The false discovery rate both for peptide and protein were set to 5%. For the calculation of the protein abundances, label-free quantification (LFQ) was performed with both “second peptide” and “match between run” options were enabled. The complete human database was downloaded from Uniprot 05/17.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Chromatin, Nucleotide excision repair-ner, Human fibroblasts, Dna repair, Mass spectrometry, Uv-c radiation, Anifound, Dna damage responses

### Affiliations
Biomedical Sciences Research Center 'Alexander Fleming' 34 Fleming St., 16672, Vari, Greece.
Protein Analysis Laboratory
B.S.R.C. "Alexander Fleming",
Alexander Fleming Street 34
16672, Vari,
Greece

### Submitter
Martina Samiotaki

### Lab Head
Dr Maria Fousteri
Biomedical Sciences Research Center 'Alexander Fleming' 34 Fleming St., 16672, Vari, Greece.


