### Accession
PXD004991

### Title
Analysis of oak stem lesions in Acute Oak Decline using shotgun proteomics

### Description
Acute Oak Decline (AOD) is a decline-disease currently spreading in Britain, threatening oak trees. Here, we analyze and compare the proteomes of inner bark tissue sampled from oak stems of trees symptomatic with AOD and non-symptomatic trees.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from approximately 50 mg of homogenised oak tissue using a modified method for protein extraction from woody tissue. Briefly, the oak tissue was ground in 2 ml solubilisation buffer (50mM Tris-HCl, 25mM EDTA, 500mM thiourea, 0.5% DTT). The mixture underwent shaking (150 rpm) for 1 h at ambient temperature. The samples were subsequently centrifuged at 20 000g for 20 minutes and the supernatant was extracted and stored at 4 ºC. The procedure was repeated using the remaining pellet. The supernatant was extracted and pooled with the previous supernatant. Ice cold 20% trichloric acid in acetone with 0.5% DTT was added in a 1:1 ratio to the supernatant pool, and precipitated at -20 ºC overnight. After precipitation, the mixture was centrifuged at 20 000g for 60 minutes, and washed with ice cold acetone (centrifuged at 20 000g for 30 minutes). The pellet was air dried, re-suspended in 3% SDS solution and stored at -80 ºC.  TMT Labelling and High pH reversed-phase chromatography  Aliquots of eight samples were digested with trypsin (2.5µg trypsin per 100µg protein; 37°C, overnight), labelled with Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) ten plex reagents according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Loughborough, LE11 5RG, UK) and the labelled samples pooled. The pooled sample was evaporated to dryness and resuspended in buffer A (20 mM ammonium hydroxide, pH 10) prior to fractionation by high pH reversed-phase chromatography using an Ultimate 3000 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  In brief, the sample was loaded onto an XBridge BEH C18 Column (130Å, 3.5 µm, 2.1 mm X 150 mm, Waters, UK) in buffer A and peptides eluted with an increasing gradient of buffer B (20 mM Ammonium Hydroxide in acetonitrile, pH 10) from 0-95% over 60 minutes.  The resulting fractions were evaporated to dryness and resuspended in 1% formic acid prior to analysis by nano-LC MSMS using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).  Nano-LC Mass Spectrometry High pH RP fractions were further fractionated using an Ultimate 3000 nanoHPLC system in line with an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).  In brief, peptides in 1% (vol/vol) formic acid were injected onto an Acclaim PepMap C18 nano-trap column (Thermo Scientific). After washing with 0.5% (vol/vol) acetonitrile 0.1% (vol/vol) formic acid peptides were resolved on a 250 mm × 75 μm Acclaim PepMap C18 reverse phase analytical column (Thermo Scientific) over a 150 min organic gradient, using 7  gradient segments (1-6% solvent B over 1min., 6-15% B over 58min., 15-32%B over 58min., 32-40%B over 5min., 40-90%B over 1min., held at 90%B for 6min and then reduced to 1%B over 1min.) with a flow rate of 300 nl min−1.  Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid and Solvent B was aqueous 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid.  Peptides were ionized by nano-electrospray ionization at 2.0kV using a stainless steel emitter with an internal diameter of 30 μm (Thermo Scientific) and a capillary temperature of 275°C.  All spectra were acquired using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer controlled by Xcalibur 2.0 software (Thermo Scientific) and operated in data-dependent acquisition mode using an SPS-MS3 workflow.  FTMS1 spectra were collected at a resolution of 120 000, with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 200 000 and a max injection time of 50ms. The TopN most intense ions were selected for MS/MS.  Precursors were filtered according to charge state (to include charge states 2-7) and with monoisotopic precursor selection. Previously interrogated precursors were excluded using a dynamic window (40s +/-10ppm). The MS2 precursors were isolated with a quadrupole mass filter set to a width of 1.2m/z. ITMS2 spectra were collected with an AGC target of 5000, max injection time of 120ms and CID collision energy of 35%. For FTMS3 analysis, the Orbitrap was operated at 60 000 resolution with an AGC target of 50 000 and a max injection time of 120ms.  Precursors were fragmented by high energy collision dissociation (HCD) at a normalised collision energy of 55% to ensure maximal TMT reporter ion yield.  Synchronous Precursor Selection (SPS) was enabled to include up to 5 MS2 fragment ions in the FTMS3 scan.

### Data Protocol
Data Analysis The raw data files were processed and quantified using Proteome Discoverer software v1.4 (Thermo Scientific) and searched against the XXX database using the SEQUEST algorithm.  Peptide precursor mass tolerance was set at 10ppm, and MS/MS tolerance was set at 0.6Da.  Search criteria included oxidation of methionine (+15.9949) as a variable modification and carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.0214) and the addition of the TMT mass tag (+229.163) to peptide N-termini and lysine as fixed modifications. Searches were performed with full tryptic digestion and a maximum of 1 missed cleavage was allowed.  The reverse database search option was enabled and all peptide data was filtered to satisfy false discovery rate (FDR) of 5%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Acute oak decline, Metaproteomics, Oak stem

### Affiliations
University of Bangor
Bangor University

### Submitter
Martin Broberg

### Lab Head
Dr James McDonald
University of Bangor


