### Accession
PXD019099

### Title
A membrane-associated condensate ensures paternal epigenetic inheritance in C. elegans

### Description
Transgenerational epigenetic inheritance (TEI) describes the transmission of gene-regulatory information across generations without altering DNA sequences. TEI allows priming of offspring towards changing environmental conditions and plays a role in the maintenance of gene silencing of selfish genetic elements like transposons. Small regulatory RNAs are well known to act in TEI, and can be transmitted via the male. Such inheritance via sperm requires dedicated mechanisms, as much of the cellular content is extruded during spermatogenesis. We identify a phase separation-based mechanism, which couples the paternal inheritance of a specific small RNA-bound silencing factor via S-palmitoylation to the transport of membranous organelles. Our findings uncover a thus far unknown paternal TEI mechanism, and describe a novel mode of transport of phase-separated condensates.

### Sample Protocol
IP samples resuspended in NuPAGE LDS sample buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, #NP0008) were boiled at 70°C for 10 min   and separated on a Novex™ NuPAGE® 4-12 % Bis-Tris Mini Protein gel (Art. No. NP0321, Thermo Fisher Scientific) in 1x Novex™ NuPAGE™ MOPS SDS Running Buffer (Art. No. NP0001, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 180 V for 10 min. After separation the samples were processed by in-gel digest as previously described (Shevchenko, 2006) Following protein digest, the peptides were desalted using a C18 StageTip (Rappsilber, 2007). For measurement the digested peptides were separated on a 25 cm reverse-phase capillary (New Objective, 75 µm inner diameter) packed with Reprosil C18 material (Dr. Maisch GmbH). Elution was carried out along a two hour gradient of 2 to 40 % of a mixture of 80% acetonitrile/0.5% formic acid with the EASY-nLC 1000 system (Art. No. LC120, Thermo Scientific™). A Q Exactive™ Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific™) operated with a Top10 data-dependent MS/MS acquisition method per full scan was used for measurement.

### Data Protocol
Processing of the obtained results was performed with the MaxQuant software, version 1.5.2.8 against the Wormbase protein database (version WS263) for quantitation (Cox and Mann, 2008).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ip-ms; ago; pirna

### Affiliations
Quantitative Proteomics
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB)
Institute of Molecular Biology Ackermannweg 4 55128 Mainz

### Submitter
F Butter

### Lab Head
Dr Falk Butter
Institute of Molecular Biology Ackermannweg 4 55128 Mainz


