### Accession
PXD017139

### Title
Site-specific N-glycan Analysis of Neonatal Mouse Hearts

### Description
The heart of a newborn mouse has an exceptional capacity to regenerate from myocardial injury but lose it after a week of life, which has been utilized as a valuable model to explore the cues for heart regeneration. More and more researches indicated that glycoprotein played an important role in cardiac regeneration. Elucidating the glycosylation processes associated with heart regeneration will be beneficial for the molecular mechanism studies of heart regeneration as well as discovery of potential therapeutic strategies for human cardiac diseases. In this work, an integrated glycoproteomic and proteomic analysis were performed to investigate the differences in glycoprotein abundances and site-specific glycosylation occupancy between neonatal day 1 (P1) and day 7 (P7) of mouse hearts. The intact glycoepeptides were enriched and identified in both P1 and P7 hearts. To screen for differentially regulated glycoproteins, we compared the expression levels of intact glycopeptides between P1 and P7 hearts using label free quantification. Eventually, the glycosylation occupancy of site-specific N-glycans were obtained by comparing the alterations of intact glycopeptides with their corresponding protein expression levels obtained from global proteomic analysis. These altered glycosylation patterns among proteins between P1 and P7 mouse hearts have a significant potential to aid our understanding of the regenerative capacity loss in neonatal mouse hearts during the first week, thus leading to novel therapeutic approaches to recover the capacity.

### Sample Protocol
Neonatal C57 BL/6 mice at post-neonatal day 1 (P1) and day 7 (P7) were obtained from the Central Animal Breeding House of Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, Shaanxi and sacrificed for the heart tissue sampling. The whole proteins were extracted from heart tissues and digested using sequencing grade trypsin, followed by desalting using Oasis HLB columns. The intact glycopeptides were enriched using Oasis MAX columns.Then peptide and intact glycopeptide samples underwent LC-MS/MS runs on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Mass Spectrometer equipped with an Easy-nLC™ 1200 system.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS data of peptides were searched against Proteome Discoverer and quantified using LFQ. Intact glycopeptides were identified by an in-house software and quantified using MaxLFQ. 1% FDR was used as the identification cutoffThe gene ontology (GO) and KEGG pathway analysis were performed using David Bioinformatics Resources (http://david.abcc.ncifcrf.gov). The thresholds of count > 2 and p-value < 0.05 were applied as filters.

### Publication Abstract
Myocardial infarction (MI) is one of the leading causes of deaths worldwide. Because of the incapability of regeneration, the cardiomyocyte loss with MI is replaced by fibrotic scar tissue, which eventually leads to heart failure. Reconstructing regeneration of an adult human heart has been recognized as a promising strategy for cardiac therapeutics. A neonatal mouse heart, which possesses transient regenerative capacity at the first week after birth, represents an ideal model to investigate processes associated with cardiac regeneration. In this work, an integrated glycoproteomic and proteomic analysis was performed to investigate the differences in glycoprotein abundances and site-specific glycosylation between postneonatal day 1 (P1) and day 7 (P7) of mouse hearts. By large-scale profiling and quantifying more than 2900 intact <i>N</i>-glycopeptides in neonatal mouse hearts, we identified 227 altered <i>N</i>-glycopeptides between P1 and P7 hearts. By extracting protein changes from the global proteome data, the normalized glycosylation changes for site-specific glycans were obtained, which showed heterogeneity on glycosites and glycoproteins. Systematic analysis of the glycosylation changes demonstrated an overall upregulation of sialylation and core fucosylation in P7 mice. Notably, the upregulated sialylation was a comprehensive result of increased sialylated glycans with Neu5Gc, with both Neu5Gc and core fucose, and decreased sialylated glycans with Neu5Ac. The upregulated core fucosylation resulted from the increase of glycans containing both core fucose and Neu5Gc but not glycans containing sole core fucose. These data provide a valuable resource for future functional and mechanism studies on heart regeneration and discovery of novel therapeutic targets. All mass spectrometry proteomic data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the data set identifier PXD017139.

### Keywords
Glycoproteomics, Neonatal mouse heart, Site-specific glycosylation, Intact glycopeptides, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Northwest University

### Submitter
Jun Li

### Lab Head
Dr Jun Li
Northwest University


