### Accession
PXD015854

### Title
Regulatory Role of S100A6 in Hematopoetic Stem Cells

### Description
The fate options of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) include self-renewal, differentiation, migration and apoptosis, but the interaction between intracellular Ca2+ and cytoplasmic chaperon protein in regulating fate options of long term-HSCs (LT-HSC) is unknown. We created a S100A6 conditional knockout mouse model in the hematopoietic system and our studies showed that in S100A6KO, the number of LT-HSCs was significantly reduced and HSCs engrafted poorly. After 5FU challenge, the frequency of S100A6KO HSCs remained significantly low. Our data showed that S100A6 failed to self-renew through Akt pathway in an intracellular calcium (Cai2+)-dependent manner. Expression profiling of S100A6KO obtained from gene signatures revealed that cytosolic calcium level and proteins translocation to mitochondria were decreased. Mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation was impaired in S100A6KO. Proteomic data indicated Hsp90 protein and chaperonin family were reduced. Our findings demonstrated that S100A6 regulates fate options of HSCs self-renewal through integrating Akt signaling, specifically governing mitochondria metabolic function and protein quality.

### Sample Protocol
Cells (2500 in each sample) were suspended in 3 µL of 20% PBS and 80% water and 17 µL of 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) buffer, pH 8, vortexed and quickly centrifuged following sonication in ultrasound back for 10 min. Sonication of the samples was repeated for 10 min after adding 60 µL of 50 mM TEAB. Tryptic digestion was performed using 1.5 µg trypsin (sequence grade, Promega) in 50 mM TEAB buffer and incubated over night at 37°C with shaking at 600 rpm in a block heater.  TMT-10plex (Thermo Scientific) reagents in 100 µg aliquots were dissolved in 35 µL dry acetonitrile (AcN) and mixed with the digested samples (30% AcN), following incubation at 25°C for 2 h at 600 rpm. The reaction was then quenched with 12 µL of 5% hydroxylamine at 25°C for 15 min at 400 rpm. The labeled samples were pooled and dried on a speedvac (miVac).  TMT-labeled tryptic peptides were cleaned on C18 StageTips (Thremo Scientific) following solubilization with 40 µL of 5% formic acid (FA) and dried on a speedvac. The reconstituted samples (7 µL of 20 µL of 2% AcN/0.1% FA) were injected into an nano LC-1000 system on-line coupled to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The chromatographic separation of the peptides was achieved using a 50 cm long C18 EASY spray column (Thermo Scientific), with the following gradient: 4-26% AcN in 120 min, 26-80% AcN in 5 min and 80% AcN for 8 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The MS acquisition method was comprised of one survey full scan ranging from m/z 350 to 1600, acquired with a resolution of R=140,000 (at m/z 200), followed by data-dependent HCD fragmentations from maximum 16 most intense precursor ions with a charge state 2+ and 3+. The tandem mass scans were acquired with a resolution of R=70,000, targeting 2x105 ions, setting isolation width to m/z 2 and normalized collision energy to 33.

### Data Protocol
The raw data files were directly loaded in Proteome Discoverer v2.2 and searched against mouse SwissProt protein database (42,793 entries) using the Mascot 2.5.1 search engine (Matrix Science Ltd.). Parameters were chosen as follows: up to two missed cleavage sites for trypsin, precursor and fragment ion mass tolerance set to 10 ppm, and 0.05 Da, respectively. Dynamic modifications of oxidation on methionine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine and acetylation of N-termini were used. For quantification both unique and razor peptides were requested. Proteins with P-values above the confidence level of 0.05 were submitted to STRING search (https://string-db.org) identifying biological functions and related pathways.

### Publication Abstract
The fate options of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) include self-renewal, differentiation, migration, and apoptosis. HSCs self-renewal divisions in stem cells are required for rapid regeneration during tissue damage and stress, but how precisely intracellular calcium signals are regulated to maintain fate options in normal hematopoiesis is unclear. S100A6 knockout (KO) HSCs have reduced total cell numbers in the HSC compartment, decreased myeloid output, and increased apoptotic HSC numbers in steady state. S100A6KO HSCs had impaired self-renewal and regenerative capacity, not responding to 5-Fluorouracil. Our transcriptomic and proteomic profiling suggested that S100A6 is a critical HSC regulator. Intriguingly, S100A6KO HSCs showed decreased levels of phosphorylated Akt (p-Akt) and Hsp90, with an impairment of mitochondrial respiratory capacity and a reduction of mitochondrial calcium levels. We showed that S100A6 regulates intracellular and mitochondria calcium buffering of HSC upon cytokine stimulation and have demonstrated that Akt activator SC79 reverts the levels of intracellular and mitochondrial calcium in HSC. Hematopoietic colony-forming activity and the Hsp90 activity of S100A6KO are restored through activation of the Akt pathway. We show that p-Akt is the prime downstream mechanism of S100A6 in the regulation of HSC self-renewal by specifically governing mitochondrial metabolic function and Hsp90 protein quality.

### Keywords
Mouse, Hematopoetic stem cell, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Karolinska Institutet
Proteomics Biomedicum Core Facility, Div. of Chemistry I, Dept. Biochemistry & Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden

### Submitter
Akos Vegvari

### Lab Head
Dr Akos Vegvari
Proteomics Biomedicum Core Facility, Div. of Chemistry I, Dept. Biochemistry & Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden


