### Accession
PXD042326

### Title
Engineering stringent genetic biocontainment of yeast with a protein stability switch

### Description
Synthetic biology holds immense promise to tackle key problems we are facing, for instance in resource use, environmental health, and human health care. However, comprehensive safety measures are needed to deploy genetically engineered microorganisms in open-environment applications. Intrinsic, genetically encoded biocontainment systems, which control cell survival based on environmental cues, can solve this issue. Here, we describe a genetic biocontainment system based on conditional stability of essential proteins. We used a yeast-adapted destabilizing domain degron, which can be stabilized by estradiol addition (ERdd). Leveraging the yeast GFP collection and lab automation platforms, we ERdd-tagged 775 essential genes and screened for strains with estradiol dependent growth. Three genes, SPC110, DIS3 and RRP46, were found to be particularly suitable targets. Respective strains showed no growth defect in the presence of estradiol and strong growth inhibition in its absence. SPC110-ERdd offered the most stringent containment, with an escape frequency of 7.0x10-8, and full growth restoration at 100 nM estradiol. By systematically analyzing the containment escapees, we identified the non-essential C-terminal region of SPC110 as target for escape mutations. Its removal decreased the escape frequency with a single ERdd tag further to 4.9x10-9. Combining SPC110-ERdd with a second ERdd tag on either DIS3 or RRP46 resulted in escape frequencies below the detection limit of the used assay (<2x10-10). Being based on conditional protein stability, this approach is mechanistically orthogonal to previously reported intrinsic biocontainment systems. It thus can be readily combined with other systems, for instance ones based on transcriptional or translational control of essential gene expression, to achieve multiplexed, extremely stringent control over the survival of engineered organisms.

### Sample Protocol
Four replicates of genetically contained yeast strains and the parental strain BY4742 were grown overnight in permissive medium (YPD with 1 µM estradiol). Dense overnight cultures were diluted back 1:50 with YPD with 1 µM estradiol and grown for 4h at 30°C. From each culture, 1 ml samples were pelleted and washed twice with PBS. Cells were lysed in 5% SDS and 50 mM TEAB pH 7.5 using a Covaris LE220+ sonicator. Protein lysates were reduced, alkylated, acidified with phosphoric acid and the protein bound to wells of an S-Trap plate. After a tryptic digest, peptides were eluted and desalted using Corning FiltrEX desalt filter plates and OLIGO R3 beads. The liquid chromatography was performed on a Waters nanoEase M/Z Peptide CSH C18 Column using a Thermo RSCL system with a multistage gradient using 0.1% formic acid in water as buffer A and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile as buffer B with a runtime of 60 min. Mass spectrometry of the eluted peptides was carried out with a Thermo Exploris 480.

### Data Protocol
Analysis of MS spectra was performed with Proteome Discoverer v2.5.0.400 using NCBI txid559292 v2022-04-30 (Saccharomyces cerevisiae S288C) as reference for identification of proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Synthetic biology holds immense promise to tackle key problems in resource use, environmental remediation, and human health care. However, comprehensive safety measures are lacking to employ engineered microorganisms in open-environment applications. Genetically encoded biocontainment systems may solve this issue. Here, we describe such a system based on conditional stability of essential proteins. We used a destabilizing domain degron stabilized by estradiol addition (ERdd). We ERdd-tagged 775 essential genes and screened for strains with estradiol dependent growth. Three genes, SPC110, DIS3 and RRP46, were found to be particularly suitable targets. Respective strains showed no growth defect in the presence of estradiol and strong growth inhibition in its absence. SPC110-ERdd offered the most stringent containment, with an escape frequency of &lt;5&#xd7;10<sup>-7</sup>. Removal of its C-terminal domain decreased the escape frequency further to &lt;10<sup>-8</sup>. Being based on conditional protein stability, the presented approach is mechanistically orthogonal to previously reported genetic biocontainment systems.

### Keywords
Genomic safeguards, High-throughput genome engineering, Biocontainment, Biosafety

### Affiliations
University of Manchester, Manchester Institute of Biotechnology
Manchester Institute of Biotechnology, The University of Manchester, UK

### Submitter
Stefan Hoffmann

### Lab Head
Dr Yizhi Cai
Manchester Institute of Biotechnology, The University of Manchester, UK


