### Accession
PXD029048

### Title
Hydrodynamic conditions affect the proteomic profile of marine biofilms formed by filamentous cyanobacterium

### Description
Cyanobacterial blooms associated with the benthic mat have been rising. Besides the ongoing concern about toxins production, cyanobacteria are actively involved in marine biofilms, representing several economic and environmental impacts. Proteomic studies on cyanobacterial biofilms could be an effective approach to establish metabolic pathways that affect these fouling organisms and, consequently, obtain novel control strategies against them. Currently, there are few studies in this field on filamentous cyanobacteria. Thus, standard methodologies for following cyanobacterial biofilm development for a long-term assay and a quantitative proteomics analysis were performed in this work. Biofilm development from unidentified filamentous Synechococcales LEGE 06021 was evaluated on different surfaces, glass and perspex, and at two significant shear rates for marine environments (4 s-1 and 40 s-1). Higher biofilm development was observed at 4 s-1, and these biofilms showed a lower roughness coefficient value than those formed at higher shear. Overall, about 1,877 proteins were identified, and differences in proteome were more noticeable between the two hydrodynamic conditions than those found between the two surfaces. 20 Differentially Expressed Proteins (DEPs) were found between 4 s-1 vs. 40 s-1, of which 15 DEPs were found on glass, whereas five DEPs were found on perspex. On the glass, some of these DEPs include phage tail proteins, orange carotenoid protein, enzymes like cyanophynase, glutathione-dependent formaldehyde dehydrogenase, and MoaD/ThiS family protein, while on perspex, the DEPs include enzymes such as transketolase, dihydroxy-acid dehydratase, iron ABC transporter substrate-binding protein or transcription termination/antitermination protein NusG. In summary, the biofilm structure, chlorophyll a content, total biomass, and proteomic profile are more affected by the hydrodynamic conditions than by the surfaces employed. These findings suggest that most of the metabolic changes could be produced to counterbalance the different shear rates. However, the differential expression of some proteins could be associated with the surfaces used. This study helps to consolidate the knowledge of the main factors affecting biofilm development, and sheds new lights on putative targets to address new antimicrobial strategies.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction and sample preparation for proteomic analysis  Briefly, cyanobacterial biofilms were detached from the coupons by immersing each coupon in 2 ml of 8.5 g.l-1 sodium chloride solution and vortexing, as previously described (Romeu et al., 2021. The pooled samples from four coupons of the same condition were centrifuged at 3,202 g for 10 min at room temperature, and the pellet of biomass from 24 biofilm samples comprising six independent-replicates from four different growing conditions were kept at -20 ºC for further processing. The amount of sample was calculated, and an appropriate volume of SDT buffer (0.5 g fw/ml SDT) + Protease inhibitors (PIs, Roche, 11697498001, Basel, Switzerland) was added to the samples, sonicated 10 x 3 s and 23 kHz – 105 µm (amplitude) and incubated for 4 hours at room temperature. Afterward, samples were heated for 3 min at 95 ºC and subsequently centrifuged at 16, 000 g for 20 min. Finally, the supernatant was collected, and total protein concentration was measured indirectly by optical density (OD) at 280 nm using a DeNovix DS-11 Spectrophotometer (DeNovix Technologies, Wilmington, Delaware, USA). Samples containing the extracted protein were stored for 24 h at -20 ºC. The extracted proteins were processed according to Romeu et al., 2021, which used a modified version of two distinct protocols based on FASP protocol described by (Wiśniewski et al., 2009) and the SP3 (Hughes et al., 2019) technology. Herein, the samples containing 40 µg of the extracted proteins were processed by the FASP using centrifugal filter units with nominal molecular weight limit (NMWL) of 30 kDa (MRCPRT030, Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA), whereas 200 µg of the extracted proteins were reduced prior the digestion in the SP3 protocol as previously described by Romeu et al., 2021.  LC-MS/MS analysis  Considering both sample preparation methods are complementary, tryptic peptides from both methods were mixture in the same tube to a final concentration of 0.1 µg and 0.5 µg from FASP and SP3, respectively. Then, protein digests from both protocols were analyzed in the same run with a nano LC-MS/MS, composed by an Ultimate 3000 liquid chromatography system coupled to a Q-Exactive Hybrid Quadrupole – Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany), as previously described (Osório et al., 2021). Separation was performed in a 15 cm by 75 μm inner diameter EASY-Spray column (ES803, PepMap RSLC, C18, 3 μm, Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) at 300 nl.min-1 by generated by mixing A: 0.1 % FA and B: 80 % ACN, with the following gradient: 5 min (2.5 % B to 10% B), 120 min (10 % B to 30 % B), 20 min (30 % B to 50 % B), 5 min (50% B to 99% B) and 10 min (hold 99 % B). Subsequently, the column was equilibrated with 2.5 % B for 17 min. Data acquisition was controlled by Xcalibur 4.0 and Tune 2.11 software (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The specific LC-MS parameters were full scan settings: 70k resolution (m/z 200), AGC target 3e6, maximum injection time 120 ms. dd settings: minimum AGC target 8e3, intensity threshold 7.3e4, charge exclusion: unassigned, 1, 8, >8, peptide match preferred, exclude isotopes on, dynamic exclusion 45s. MS2 settings: microscans 1, resolution 35k (m/z 200), AGC target 2e5, maximum injection time 110 ms, isolation window 2.0 m/z, isolation offset 0.0 m/z, spectrum data type profile.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification  The raw data were analyzed and processed using the Proteome Discoverer 2.5.0.400 software (Thermo Scientific) and searched against the UniProt database for Cyanobacteria taxonomic selection (2020_04 release) together with a common contaminant database from MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.6, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Munich, Germany). The Sequest HT search engine was used for protein identification. The ion mass tolerance was 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for-fragment ions. Maximum allowed missing cleavage sites was set to 2. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was defined as a constant modification. Methionine oxidation, asparagine and glutamine deamidation, peptide N-terminus pyro-glutamine, protein N-terminus acetylation, Met-loss and Met-loss+acetylation, were defined as variable modifications. Peptide confidence was set to high. The processing node Percolator was enabled with the following settings: maximum delta Cn 0.05; decoy database search target false discovery rates (FDR) 1 %, validation was based on q-value. Protein label-free quantitation was performed with the Minora feature detector node at the processing step. Precursor ions quantification was performed at the processing step with the following parameters: unique plus razor peptides were considered for quantification, and precursor abundance was based on intensity.

### Publication Abstract
Proteomic studies on cyanobacterial biofilms can be an effective approach to unravel metabolic pathways involved in biofilm formation and, consequently, obtain more efficient biofouling control strategies. Biofilm development by the filamentous cyanobacterium Toxifilum sp. LEGE 06021 was evaluated on different surfaces, glass and perspex, and at two significant shear rates for marine environments (4&#x2009;s<sup>-1</sup> and 40&#x2009;s<sup>-1</sup>). Higher biofilm development was observed at 4&#x2009;s<sup>-1</sup>. Overall, about 1877 proteins were identified, and differences in proteome were more noticeable between hydrodynamic conditions than those found between surfaces. Twenty Differentially Expressed Proteins (DEPs) were found between 4&#x2009;s<sup>-1</sup> vs. 40&#x2009;s<sup>-1</sup>. On glass, some of these DEPs include phage tail proteins, a carotenoid protein, cyanophynase glutathione-dependent formaldehyde dehydrogenase, and the MoaD/ThiS family protein, while on perspex, DEPs include transketolase, dihydroxy-acid dehydratase, iron ABC transporter substrate-binding protein and protein NusG. This study contributes to developing a standardized protocol for proteomic analysis of filamentous cyanobacterial biofilms. This kind of proteomic analysis can also be useful for different research fields, given the broad spectrum of promising secondary metabolites and added-value compounds produced by cyanobacteria, as well as for the development of new antibiofilm strategies.

### Keywords
Cyanobacterial biofilms, Marine biofouling, Shear rates, Hydrodynamics, Shotgun proteomics, Fouling surfaces

### Affiliations
CIIMAR
BBE-CIIMAR – Interdisciplinary Centre of Marine and Environmental Research, University of Porto, Rua General Norton de Matos s/n, Terminal de Cruzeiros do Porto de Leixões, 4450-208 Matosinhos, Portugal

### Submitter
Dany Domínguez Pérez

### Lab Head
Dr Alexandre Campos
BBE-CIIMAR – Interdisciplinary Centre of Marine and Environmental Research, University of Porto, Rua General Norton de Matos s/n, Terminal de Cruzeiros do Porto de Leixões, 4450-208 Matosinhos, Portugal


