### Accession
PXD020365

### Title
Spleen proteomics data from high fat diet fed mice

### Description
The composition of the diet affects many processes in the body, including body weight and endocrine system. We have previously shown that dietary fat also affects the immune system. Mice fed high fat diet rich in polyunsaturated fatty acids survive S. aureus infection to a much greater extent than mice fed high fat diet rich in saturated fatty acids. Here we present data regarding the dietary effects on protein expression in spleen from mice fed three different diets, I) low fat/chow diet (LFD, n=4), II) high fat diet rich in saturated fatty acids (HFD-S, n=4) and III) high fat diet rich in polyunsaturated fatty acids (HFD-P, n=4). We performed mass spectrophotometry based quantitative proteomics analysis of isolated spleen by implementing the isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification (iTRAQ) approach. Mass spectrometry data were analysed using Proteome Discoverer 2.4 software using the search engine mascot against Mus musculus in SwissProt. 924 proteins are identified in all sets (n=4) for different dietary effects taken for statistical analysis using Qlucore Omics Explorer software. Only 20 proteins were found to be differentially expressed with a cut-off value of false discovery rate < 0.1 (q-value) when comparing HFD-S and HFD-P but no differentially expressed proteins were found when LFD was compared with HFD-P or HFD-S. We identified a subset of proteins that showed an inverse expression pattern between two high fat diets. These differentially expressed proteins were further classified by gene ontology for their role in biological processes and molecular functions.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomic analysis for relative quantification using iTRAQ The proteomic analysis was performed the Proteomic Core Facility at the Sahlgrenska Academy, Gothenburg University. Samples were homogenized in 200 µl (8 M urea, 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) using FastPrep®-24 instrument (MP Biomedicals, OH, USA). A volume of 100 µl lysis buffer (50 mM TEAB, 8 M Urea, 4% Chaps, 0.2 % SDS, 5 mM EDTA , pH 8.5) was added and total protein concentration was determined with Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay (Thermo Scientific).  Aliquots containing 100 μg from each sample were reduced and alkylated according to the manufacturer’s instructions and using buffers supplied in the kit (AB Sciex, iTRAQ Reagents Multi(4)-Plex Kit). A reference sample consisting of an aliquot from all samples, was included in every set. Samples were in-solution digested by addition of trypsin (1:50, trypsin to protein ratio, Promega) overnight at 37 ºC. The resulting peptide samples were labeled with the iTRAQ4plex reagents and the samples were pooled into four independent sets. The sets were fractionated into 22 fractions by Strong Cation Exchange Chromatography (ÄKTA-system, Amersham-Pharmacia) on a PolySULFOETHYL A™ column (100x2.1mm, 5µm 300Å, PolyLC inc.) over 40 minutes (0 to 100% 500 mM ammonium formate, pH 2.8 in 20% ACN).   Each fraction was desalted using PepClean C18 spin columns (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s guidelines. Samples were analyzed on an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer interfaced to an Easy-nLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on a C18 analytical column (220x0.075 mm I.D, 3 μm Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ particles, Dr. Maisch, Germany.) over a 90 min gradient from 5 to 80% ACN in 0.2% formic acid. The MS scans was performed at the resolution 60 000 with a mass range of m/z 400-1800. MS/MS analysis was performed in a data-dependent mode at 7 500 in resolution and m/z 120-2000, with the top ten most abundant doubly or multiply charged precursor ions in each MS scan selected for MS/MS fragmentation. A parent mass list was used during the analysis. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 sec.

### Data Protocol
For relative quantification, the MS raw data files for each iTRAQ set were merged in the search using Proteome Discoverer version 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The database search was performed with the Mascot search engine (Matrix Science) against Mus musculus in SwissProt version July 2019 (Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Switzerland). The data were searched with MS peptide tolerance of 10 ppm and MS/MS tolerance for the identification of 100 mmu. Tryptic peptides were accepted with zero missed cleavage, variable modifications of methionine oxidation and fixed cysteine alkylation, N-terminal iTRAQ4plex and lysine iTRAQ4plex were selected. Perculator was used for PSM validation with the strict false discovery rate (FDR) threshold of 1%. Identified proteins were filtered at 5% FDR and grouped by sharing the same sequences to minimize redundancy.The quantification was normalized on the total peptide amount.. Only peptides unique for a given protein were considered for relative quantitation, excluding those common to other isoforms or proteins of the same family. The results were then exported into Excel for manual data interpretation

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Diet, Polyunsaturated fatty acids, Low fat diet, Proteomics, Itraq, Saturated fatty acids, High fat diet

### Affiliations
Proteomics Core Facility / University of Gothenburg
Proteomics Core Facility, University of Gothenburg

### Submitter
Carina Sihlbom

### Lab Head
Dr Carina Sihlbom
Proteomics Core Facility, University of Gothenburg


