### Accession
PXD017933

### Title
Identification of AXL interactome by proximity-dependent protein identification (BioID)

### Description
AXL is a receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) which, together with TYRO3 and MER, belongs to the TAM receptor family. A ligand for AXL is growth arrest specific 6 (GAS6), which is able to bind all three TAMs with the highest affinity for AXL. AXL is overexpressed in a variety of different cancers, which correlates with poor prognosis, metastasis and drug resistance. However, its biology is still not fully understood and data concerning proteins that interact with this receptor are almost completely lacking.  To identify mechanisms underlying the role of GAS6-AXL signaling in cancer, we established an AXL interactome using proximity-dependent biotin identification (BioID) assay. Experiments were conducted in HEK293 cells and human glioblastoma LN229 cells, which do not express and express AXL, respectively. The Gene Ontology (GO) analysis of biological processes indicated enrichment of proteins implicated in cell junction organization, axonogenesis, supramolecular fiber organization, angiogenesis and actin-related processes in bot, non-stimulated and GAS6-stimulated samples. Importantly, in samples with activated AXL, proteins implicated in actin-related processes were overrepresented. Consistent with this, we found that GAS6 stimulation triggered actin remodeling manifested by intense membrane ruffling and macropinocytosis.  Our study provides comprehensive data about proteins interacting with AXL. Thus, the obtained results will help to understand the biology of the AXL receptor, particularly with respect to its involvement in cancer invasion.

### Sample Protocol
Biotinylated proteins were reduced with 5 mM TCEP (for 60 minutes at 60°C). To block reduced cysteines, 200 mM MMTS at a final concentration of 10 mM was added and the sample was incubated at room temperature for 10 minutes. Trypsin (Promega) was added at a 1:20 vol./vol. ratio and incubated at 37˚C overnight. Finally, trifluoroacetic acid was used to inactivate trypsin. Peptide mixtures were analyzed by liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) using Nano-Acquity (Waters Corporation) UPLC system and LTQ-FT-Orbitrap (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer. Measurements were carried out in the positive polarity mode, with capillary voltage set to 2.5 kV. A sample was first applied to the Nano-ACQUITY UPLC Trapping Column using water containing 0.1% formic acid as a mobile phase. Next, the peptide mixture was transferred to Nano-ACQUITY UPLC BEH C18 Column using an acetonitrile gradient (5–35% acetonitrile over 160 minutes) in the presence of 0.1% formic acid with a flow rate of 250 nl/min. Peptides were eluted directly to the ion source of the mass spectrometer. Each LC run was preceded by a blank run to ensure that there was no carry-over of material from previous analysis. HCD fragmentation was used. Up to 10 MS/MS events were allowed per each MS scan.

### Data Protocol
Acquired raw data were processed by Mascot Distiller followed by Mascot Search (Matrix Science, London, UK, on-site license) against the SwissProt database restricted to human sequences. Search parameters for precursor and product ions mass tolerance were 30 ppm and 0.1 Da, respectively, enzyme specificity: trypsin, missed cleavage sites allowed: 1, fixed modification of cysteine by methylation and variable modification of methionine oxidation. Peptides with Mascot score exceeding the threshold value corresponding to <5% expectation value, calculated by Mascot procedure, were considered to be positively identified.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bioid, Hek293, Axl, Ln229, Gas6

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Cell Biology, International Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Warsaw, Poland
International Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology in Warsaw

### Submitter
Agata Poswiata

### Lab Head
Dr Marta Miaczynska
Laboratory of Cell Biology, International Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Warsaw, Poland


