### Accession
PXD036475

### Title
Global profiling of the RNA and protein complexes of Escherichia coli by size exclusion chromatography followed by RNA sequencing and mass spectrometry (SEC-seq)

### Description
21 total proteome samples from E. coli MG1655 wild type fractionated by size exclusion chromatography resulting in 20 fractions. A lysate sample is given as input control.

### Sample Protocol
The peptides were loaded on capillary columns (PicoFrit, 30 cm × 150 μm ID, New Objective) filled with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 μm (Dr. Maisch), which is connected with an Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a PicoView Ion Source (New Objective) and an EASY-nLC 1000 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were then separated with a 140 min linear gradient from 3% to 40% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 500 nl/min. Both MS and MS/MS scans were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer with a resolution of 60,000 for MS scans and 15,000 for MS/MS scans. HCD fragmentation with 35% normalized collision energy was applied. A Top Speed data-dependent MS/MS method with a fixed cycle time of 3 s was used. Dynamic exclusion was applied with a repeat count of 1 and an exclusion duration of 60 s; singly charged precursors were excluded from selection. The minimum signal threshold for precursor selection was set to 50,000. Predictive AGC was used with a target value of 2×105 for MS scans and 5×104 for MS/MS scans. EASY-IC was used for internal calibration.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data files were analyzed with MaxQuant version 1.5.7.4. The search was performed against the UniProt database for E. coli MG1655 (organism identifier: ECOLI), UPS2 spike-in, and common contaminants. The search was conducted with tryptic cleavage specificity with 3 allowed miscleavages. Protein identification was under the control of a false-discovery rate of 1% on both protein and peptide levels. In addition to the MaxQuant default settings, the search was performed against the following variable modifications: Protein N-terminal acetylation, Gln to pyro-Glu formation (N-terminal Q), and oxidation on Met. For protein quantitation, the LFQ intensities were used. Proteins with less than 2 identified razor/unique peptides were dismissed.

### Publication Abstract
New methods for the global identification of RNA-protein interactions have led to greater recognition of the abundance and importance of RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) in bacteria. Here, we expand this tool kit by developing SEC-seq, a method based on a similar concept as the established Grad-seq approach. In Grad-seq, cellular RNA and protein complexes of a bacterium of interest are separated in a glycerol gradient, followed by high-throughput RNA-sequencing and mass spectrometry analyses of individual gradient fractions. New RNA-protein complexes are predicted based on the similarity of their elution profiles. In SEC-seq, we have replaced the glycerol gradient with separation by size exclusion chromatography, which shortens operation times and offers greater potential for automation. Applying SEC-seq to Escherichia coli, we find that the method provides a higher resolution than Grad-seq in the lower molecular weight range up to ~500 kDa. This is illustrated by the ability of SEC-seq to resolve two distinct, but similarly sized complexes of the global translational repressor CsrA with either of its antagonistic small RNAs, CsrB and CsrC. We also characterized changes in the SEC-seq profiles of the small RNA MicA upon deletion of its RNA chaperones Hfq and ProQ and investigated the redistribution of these two proteins upon RNase treatment. Overall, we demonstrate that SEC-seq is a tractable and reproducible method for the global profiling of bacterial RNA-protein complexes that offers the potential to discover yet-unrecognized associations between bacterial RNAs and proteins.

### Keywords
Size exclusion chromatography, Lc-ms/ms, E. coli

### Affiliations
Helmholtz Institute for RNA-based Infection Research (HIRI), Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research (HZI), D-97080 Würzburg, Germany Institute of Molecular Infection Biology, University of Würzburg, D-97080 Würzburg, Germany
Helmholtz institute for RNA-based infection research

### Submitter
Kotaro Chihara

### Lab Head
Dr Jörg Vogel
Helmholtz Institute for RNA-based Infection Research (HIRI), Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research (HZI), D-97080 Würzburg, Germany Institute of Molecular Infection Biology, University of Würzburg, D-97080 Würzburg, Germany


