### Accession
PXD012144

### Title
Comparative interactome analysis of Nematostella vectensis Hsp70 isoforms reveals unique clientome remodeling upon heat stress.

### Description
Comparative interactome analysis of Nematostella vectensis Hsp70 isoforms reveals unique clientome remodeling upon heat stress.  Three isoforms of nvHSP70 (A, B, and D) were IP'd from either Heat Shock conditions (HS) or non-Heat Shock (UN) and their interactomes were compared.  Mass Spec was run on a Q-Exactive (Orbitrap).

### Sample Protocol
Trypsin digestion of samples from SDS-PAGE Gel Plugs.  The gel plugs for each sample to be analyzed were excised by sterile razor blade, divided into 2 sections ~1cm each, and chopped into ~ 1 mm3 pieces. Each section was washed in dH2O and destained using 100 mM NH4HCO3 pH 7.5 in 50% acetonitrile. A reduction step was performed by addition of 100 μl 50 mM NH4HCO3 pH 7.5 and 10 μl of 200 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine HCl at 37 °C for 30 min. The proteins were alkylated by addition of 100 μl of 50 mM iodoacetamide prepared fresh in 50 mM NH4HCO3 pH 7.5 buffer, and allowed to react in the dark at 20 °C for 30 min. Gel sections were washed in water, then acetonitrile, and vacuum dried. Trypsin digestion was carried out overnight at 37 °C with 1:50-1:100 enzyme–protein ratio of sequencing grade-modified trypsin (Promega) in 50 mM NH4HCO3 pH 7.5, and 20 mM CaCl2. Peptides were extracted with 5% formic acid and vacuum dried and sent to the Mayo Clinic Proteomics Core facility for HPLC and LC-MS/MS data acquisition.  HPLC for mass spectrometry  All samples were re-suspended in Burdick & Jackson HPLC-grade water containing 0.2% formic acid (Fluka), 0.1% TFA (Pierce), and 0.002% Zwittergent 3–16 (Calbiochem), a sulfobetaine detergent that contributes the following distinct peaks at the end of chromatograms: MH+ at 392, and in-source dimer [2 M + H+] at 783, and some minor impurities of Zwittergent 3–12 seen as MH+ at 336. The peptide samples were loaded to a 0.25 μl C8 OptiPak trapping cartridge custom-packed with Michrom Magic (Optimize Technologies) C8, washed, then switched in-line with a 20 cm by 75 μm C18 packed spray tip nano column packed with Michrom Magic C18AQ, for a 2-step gradient. Mobile phase A was water/acetonitrile/formic acid (98/2/0.2) and mobile phase B was acetonitrile/isopropanol/water/formic acid (80/10/10/0.2). Using a flow rate of 350 nl/min, a 90 min, 2-step LC gradient was run from 5% B to 50% B in 60 min, followed by 50%–95% B over the next 10 min, hold 10 min at 95% B, back to starting conditions and re-equilibrated.  LC–MS/MS analysis  Electrospray tandem mass spectrometry (LC–MS/MS) was performed at the Mayo Clinic Proteomics Core on a Thermo Q-Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer, using a 70,000 RP survey scan in profile mode, m/z 340–2000 Da, with lockmasses, followed by 20 MSMS HCD fragmentation scans at 17,500 resolution on doubly and triply charged precursors. Single charged ions were excluded, and ions selected for MS/MS were placed on an exclusion list for 60 s.

### Data Protocol
LC–MS/MS data analysis, statistical analysis   All LC-MS/MS *.raw Data files were analyzed with MaxQuant version 1.5.2.8, searching against the the SPROT Saccharomyces cerevisiae database downloaded 1/9/2018, and modified by the removal of Sc HSP70 proteins SSA1, SSA2, SSA3, SSA4, and with the addition of the Nematostella vectensis HSP70 bait proteins (NvHSP70A, NvHSP70B, and NvHSP70D), and searched using the following criteria:  LFQ quantification with a min of 1 high confidence peptide.  Trypsin was selected as the protease with max miss cleavage set to 2.  Carbamiodomethyl (C) was selected as a fixed modification. Variable modifications were set to Deamidation (NQ), Oxidization (M), Formylation (n-term), and Phosphorylation (STY). Orbitrap mass spectrometer was selected using an MS error of 20 ppm and a MS/MS error of 0.5 Da.  1% FDR cutoff was selected for peptide, protein, and site identifications.  LFQ Intensities were reported based on the MS level peak areas determined by MaxQuant and reported in the proteinGroups.txt file as.  Proteins were removed from this results file if they were flagged by MaxQuant as “Contaminants”, “Reverse” or “Only identified by site”. Complete three biological replicates were performed.  The abundance data from each biological replicate were normalized to the ratio of the Nematostella Vectensis HSP70 Isoform bait protein in that run (e.g. normalized to the NvHSP70A, NvHSP70B, or NvHSP70D respectively).  LFQ Peak intensities were analyzed in each run to determine protein hits that fell into the category of either Unstressed only hits or Stressed only hits and retained if they confirmed to this state across all 3 runs.  LFQ Sig cutoffs are Sig Up > 1.2 ratio (Log2 0.26)  and Sig Down < 0.8 ratio (Log2 -0.32) Any hits that were not seen in at least 2 replicates each were labeled 'no quant' (a normalized ratio was still calculated but not included in final data set analysis).  Venn diagrams were performed with Venny 2.1.

### Publication Abstract
Heat shock protein 70s (Hsp70s) are a highly conserved class of molecular chaperones that fold a large proportion of the proteome. Nematostella vectensis (Nv) is an estuarine sea anemone that has emerged as a model species to characterize molecular responses to physiological stressors due to its exposure to diverse, extreme abiotic conditions. Previous transcriptional data has shown dramatic differences among expression profiles of three NvHsp70 isoforms (NvHsp70A, B and D) under stress but it is unknown if, and to what extent, the client proteins for these chaperones differ. In order to determine client specificity, NvHsp70A, B and D were expressed in Saccharomyces cerevisiae budding yeast lacking native Hsp70 and interacting proteins for each Hsp70 were determined with mass spectrometry in yeast ambient and heat shock conditions. Our analyses showed &lt;50% of identified interacting proteins were common to all three anemone Hsp70s and 3-18% were unique to an individual Hsp70. Mapping of temperature induced interactions suggest that under stress a proportion of clients are transferred from NvHsp70A and NvHsp70D to NvHsp70B. Together, these data suggest a diverse set of interacting proteins for Hsp70 isoforms that likely determines the precise functions for Hsp70s in organismal acclimation and potentially adaptation. BIOLOGICAL SIGNIFICANCE: Although the Hsp70 family of molecular chaperones has been studied for &gt;50&#x202f;years, it is still not fully understood why organisms encode and express many highly-similar Hsp70 isoforms. The prevailing theory is that these isoforms have identical function, but are expressed under unique cellular conditions that include heat shock to cope with increased number of unfolded/misfolded proteins. The sea anemone Nematostella vectensis encodes three Hsp70 isoforms A, B and D that when expressed in yeast demonstrate unique functionalities. This study provides the interactome of NvHsp70s A, B and D and demonstrates that Hsp70 isoforms, while highly similar in sequence, have unique co-chaperone and client interactors.

### Keywords
Lfq quantification, Q-exactive, Qe, Interactome, Nvhsp70, Heat shock

### Affiliations
University of Chicago
Department of Biological SciencesUniversity of North Carolina CharlotteCharlotteUSA

### Submitter
Donald Wolfgeher

### Lab Head
Dr Andrew W. Truman
Department of Biological SciencesUniversity of North Carolina CharlotteCharlotteUSA


