### Accession
PXD030331

### Title
Identification of novel glycan modification on S-layer protein from Methanoculleus Marisnigri

### Description
Mass spectrometry and NMR were used to characterize the N- and O-glycan modifications expressed by Methanoculleus marisnigri, a mesophilic methanogen from the Order Methanomicrobiales. The S-layer protein was identified as a PGF-CTERM sorting domain-containing protein encoded by MEMAR_RS02690 and is both N- and O-glycosylated. Two N-glycans were identified by NMR and MS analysis: a trisaccharide alpha-GlcNAc-4-beta-GlcNAc3NGaAN-4-beta-Glc-Asn where the 2nd residue is 2-N-acetyl, 3-N-glyceryl-glucosamide and a disaccharide beta-GlcNAc3NAcAN-4-beta-Glc-Asn, where the terminal residue is 2,3 di-N-acetyl-glucosamide. The S-layer protein is also extensively modified in the threonine-rich region near the C-terminus with O-glycans composed exclusively of hexoses.  While the S-layer protein has a predicted PGF-CTERM processing site, no evidence of a truncated and lipidated C-terminus, the expected product of processing by an archaeosortase, was found. This is the first report of N- and O-glycosylation in an archaeon from the Order Methanomicrobiales.

### Sample Protocol
Methanoculleus marisnigri JR1 as grown in Balch medium III under a headspace of CO2/H2 (20/80) at 30°C with gentle shaking. The cells were lysed in ice-cold distilled water and the S-layer protein was isolated using a two step process involving deoxycholate and then urea. The protein was digested with trypsin or endoproteinase Glu-C and analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS using an M-Class nanoUPLC system (Waters, Milford MA) coupled to a Synapt G2Si hybrid quadrupole time-of-flight (QTOF) mass spectrometer (Waters, Milford MA). The peptides were injected onto an Acclaim PepMax100 C18 µ-pre-column (5 mm x 300 µm inner diameter, Dionex/Thermo Scientific, Sunnyvale, CA) and resolved on a 1.7 µm BEH130 C18 column (100 x 100 µm inner diameter; Waters Milford, CA) using gradient elution conditions. The O-glycopeptides in the Endo Glu-C digest were also analyzed by nanoLC-softCID-MS/MS using an Ultimate 3000 nanoHPLC coupled to an Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermofisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The nanoLC-MS/MS files were converted to Mascot Generic Files (.mgf) using autoPLGS 1.0.0 (Waters) and searched against the NCBInr (version nr_20161204) (for in-gel digests) as well as a M marisnigri protein sequence database using an in-house Mascot search engine (Matrix Science Ltd, London UK). The search conditions for the in-gel digests were as follows: protease = trypsin or endo Glu-C or None, up to one missed cleavage (in-gel digests); variable modifications = methionine oxidation, asparagine deamidation; fixed modifications = none; precursor mass tolerance = 0.2 Da; fragment mass tolerance = 0.2 Da; threshold peptide score = 25.

### Publication Abstract
The glycosylation of structural proteins is a widespread posttranslational modification in Archaea. Although only a handful of archaeal N-glycan structures have been determined to date, it is evident that the diversity of structures expressed is greater than in the other domains of life. Here, we report on our investigation of the N- and O-glycan modifications expressed by Methanoculleus marisnigri, a mesophilic methanogen from the Order Methanomicrobiales. Unusually, mass spectrometry (MS) analysis of purified archaella revealed no evidence for N- or O-glycosylation of the constituent archaellins, In contrast, the S-layer protein, identified as a PGF-CTERM sorting domain-containing protein encoded by MEMAR_RS02690, is both N- and O-glycosylated. Two N-glycans were identified by NMR and MS analysis: a trisaccharide &#x3b1;-GlcNAc-4-&#x3b2;-GlcNAc3NGaAN-4-&#x3b2;-Glc-Asn where the second residue is 2-N-acetyl, 3-N-glyceryl-glucosamide and a disaccharide &#x3b2;-GlcNAc3NAcAN-4-&#x3b2;-Glc-Asn, where the terminal residue is 2,3 di-N-acetyl-glucosamide. The same trisaccharide was also found N-linked to a type IV pilin. The S-layer protein is also extensively modified in the threonine-rich region near the C-terminus with O-glycans composed exclusively of hexoses. While the S-layer protein has a predicted PGF-CTERM processing site, no evidence of a truncated and lipidated C-terminus, the expected product of processing by an archaeosortase, was found. Finally, NMR also identified a polysaccharide expressed by M. marisnigri and composed of a repeating tetrasaccharide unit of [-2-&#x3b2;-Ribf-3-&#x3b1;-Rha2OMe-3-&#x3b1;-Rha&#xa0;-&#xa0;2-&#x3b1;-Rha-]. This is the first report of N- and O-glycosylation in an archaeon from the Order Methanomicrobiales.

### Keywords
Post-translational modification, S-layer protein, Archaea, O-glycosylation, N-glycosylation

### Affiliations
Human Health Therapeutics, National Research Council of Canada
Human Heath Therapeutics, National Research Council of Canada, 100 Sussex Drive, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada K1A 0R6

### Submitter
John Kelly

### Lab Head
Dr John Kelly
Human Heath Therapeutics, National Research Council of Canada, 100 Sussex Drive, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada K1A 0R6


