### Accession
PXD006461

### Title
mTORC2 regulates amino acid metabolism in cancer by phosphorylation of the cystine-glutamate antiporter xCT

### Description
Mutations in cancer reprogram amino acid metabolism to drive tumor growth, but the molecular mechanisms are not well understood. Using an unbiased proteomic screen, we identified mTORC2 as a critical regulator of amino acid metabolism in cancer via phosphorylation of the cystine-glutamate antiporter xCT. mTORC2 phosphorylates serine 26 at the cytosolic N-terminus of xCT, inhibiting its activity. Genetic inhibition of mTORC2, or pharmacologic mTOR kinase inhibition, promotes glutamate secretion, cystine uptake and incorporation into glutathione linking growth factor receptor signaling with amino acid uptake and utilization. These results identify an unanticipated mechanism of amino acid metabolic reprogramming in cancer, enabling tumor cells to adapt to changing environmental conditions.

### Sample Protocol
U87EGFRvIII cells stably expressing the vector control or FLAG-xCT were cultured in SILAC media (Thermo Scientific) that lacks lysine and arginine and supplemented with 10% dialyzed FBS (Gibco). 12C6, 14N4  L-arginine and 12C6, 14N2 L-lysine (Sigma) were supplemented to the vector control cells and 13C6, 15N4 L-arginine and 13C6, 15N2 L-lysine (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories) were supplemented to the FLAG-xCT cells. Cells were passaged at least five times to ensure complete labeling (Ong and Mann, 2006). SILAC labelled cells were lysed in Pierce IP lysis buffer (Thermo Scientific) supplemented with 100x Halt Protease and Phosphatase cocktail (Thermo Scientific). Protein lysates were cleared by centrifugation and incubated with anti-FLAG M2 affinity gel (Sigma) overnight at 4 °C. FLAG-xCT and its binding proteins were eluted with 0.1 M glycine, pH 2.5 at room temperature with rotation for 2 min and then neutralized with 1 M Tris-HCl, pH 7.8. The eluted proteins were then reduced, alkylated and digested with 1 μg of trypsin. Digested peptides were desalted using a 50mg Sep-Pak C18 cartridge and fractionated using HILIC (Hydrophilic Interaction Liquid Chromatography) with a linear gradient from 19%- 32% H2O with 0.01%TFA over 24 minutes on a TSKgel Amide-80 1mm inner diameter column (TOSOH BioSci). The HILIC fractions were analyzed by LC-MS/MS on a LTQ XL-Orbitrap Discovery mass spectrometer (MS) with one full scan followed by 10 MS2 dependent scans. A Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano pump was used with a 70min gradient from 12-33 % acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid and a flow rate of 300nl/min.

### Data Protocol
MS data were searched on Sorcerer2-SEQUEST using the reviewed Swiss-Prot human database with the following static and variable modifications for the two IPs. The modifications for the SILAC IP were K 8.0142 (variable, heavy lysine), R 10.00827(variable, heavy arginine), M 15.994920 (static, oxidation), and C 57.021465 (static, carbamidomethyl). The modifications for the phosphorylation identification IP were STY 79.963311(variable, phosphorylation), M 15.994920 (static, oxidation), and C 57.021465 (static, carbamidomethyl). The Trans-Proteomic Pipeline V4.3 JETSTREAM rev1 was used to analyze the search result. A PeptideProphet of 0.8 was applied and the common contaminants were removed; the identified peptides were quantified using XPRESS and a minimal ion intensity of 1.0E3 was used to calculate the abundance ratio. At least three unique peptides were required for a protein or a protein complex to be identified as an xCT binding protein, and the median abundance ratio for each identified protein was calculated and plotted.

### Publication Abstract
Mutations in cancer reprogram amino acid metabolism to drive tumor growth, but the molecular mechanisms are not well understood. Using an unbiased proteomic screen, we identified mTORC2 as a critical regulator of amino acid metabolism in cancer via phosphorylation of the cystine-glutamate antiporter xCT. mTORC2 phosphorylates serine 26 at the cytosolic N terminus of xCT, inhibiting its activity. Genetic inhibition of mTORC2, or pharmacologic inhibition&#xa0;of the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) kinase, promotes glutamate secretion, cystine uptake, and incorporation into glutathione, linking growth factor receptor signaling with amino acid uptake and utilization. These results identify an unanticipated mechanism regulating amino acid metabolism in cancer, enabling tumor cells to adapt to changing environmental conditions.

### Keywords
Mtorc2, Xct

### Affiliations
Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, University of California San Diego, CA. Moores Cancer Center, UCSD School of Medicine, La Jolla, CA. Department of Pathology, UCSD School of Medicine, La Jolla, CA
UCSD

### Submitter
Claudio Ponte de Albuquerque

### Lab Head
Dr Paul S. Mischel3
Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, University of California San Diego, CA. Moores Cancer Center, UCSD School of Medicine, La Jolla, CA. Department of Pathology, UCSD School of Medicine, La Jolla, CA


