### Accession
PXD041494

### Title
The Cyclimids: Degron-inspired cereblon binders for targeted protein degradation

### Description
Our studies establish the unique properties of the cyclimids as versatile warheads in TPD and a systematic biochemical approach for quantifying ternary complex formation to predict their cellular degradation activity, which together will accelerate the development of novel CRBN-targeting bifunctional degraders.

### Sample Protocol
Global proteomics samples were prepared in biological triplicate for each condition. 2.0×106 Jurkat cells were seeded in 12-well plates and incubated at 37 °C, 5% CO2 for 1 h. Small molecules of interest were then added, and cells were incubated at 37 °C, 5% CO2 for 4 h. Cells were collected according to the described general procedure, lysed by probe sonication (5 sec on, 3 sec off, 15 sec in total, 11% amplitude) in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 50 mM NaCl, 50 mM HEPES, 1x protease/phosphatase inhibitor cocktail, pH 8.2), and cleared by centrifugation (21,000 × g, 4 °C, 10 min). After protein quantification by BCA protein assay, the lysates were diluted to 0.89 mg/mL with the lysis buffer. The diluted lysates (110 μL) were reduced by the addition of dithiothreitol (final concentration: 5 mM) at 24 °C for 30 min, then alkylated by addition of iodoacetamide (final concentration: 15 mM) and incubation in the dark at 24 °C for 30 min. The proteins in the samples were precipitated using methanol-chloroform precipitation. In brief, four volumes of chilled methanol, one volume of chilled chloroform, and three volumes of water were added sequentially to the lysates. The mixture was vortexed and centrifugated at 14,000 × g, 5 min, 4 °C, and the supernatant was aspirated. The protein pellet was washed with three volumes of chilled methanol and centrifugated at 14,000 × g, 5 min, 4 °C, and the resulting precipitated protein was air-dried.
The protein was dissolved in 25 µL 4M urea, 50 mM HEPES, pH 7.4, followed by the addition of 75 µL 200 mM HEPPS, pH 8.0. Lys-C (2.0 µg) was added to the mixture, and the digestion was allowed to proceed at 30 °C for 4 h without rotation. The samples were diluted by the addition of 200 mM HEPPS, pH 8.0 (100 µL), and further digested by trypsin (4.0 µg) at 37 °C for 18 h without rotation. Approximately 50 µg of peptides from each digested sample (107 μL) was taken for labeling with TMTpro 16-plex reagent (17 μL) at 24 °C for 1 h. TMT labeling was quenched by incubation with 5% hydroxylamine (7 µL) at 24 °C for 15 min. The TMT-labeled samples were combined and dried by a vacufuge. The combined, dried sample was then resuspended in 300 µL 0.1% formic acid and was subjected to desalting with Pierce Peptide desalting spin columns (Thermo Scientific, 89852). The desalted sample was combined, dried by a vacufuge, and then resuspended in 200 µL 5% acetonitrile in aqueous NH4HCO3 solution (final concentration: 10 mM). The sample was offline fractionated into 80 fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC (Agilent LC1260) through an Aeris peptide XB-C18 column (Phenomenex) with mobile phase A containing 5% acetonitrile and aqueous NH4HCO3 solution (final concentration: 10 mM), and mobile phase B containing 90% acetonitrile and aqueous NH4HCO3 solution (final concentration: 1 mM). Both mobile phase solutions were adjusted to be at pH 8.0 with ammonium hydroxide and formic acid. Fractions were collected using a fraction collector (Agilent) in a 96-deep well plate (Agilent, 5043-9305). Samples were initially loaded onto the column at 1 mL/min for 4 min, after which the fractionation gradient commenced as follows: 1% B to 27% B in 50 min, 60% B in 4 min, and ramped to 70% B in 2 min. At this point, fraction collection was halted, and the gradient was held at 70% B for 5 min before being ramped back to 1% B, where the column was then washed and equilibrated. The 80 resulting fractions were transferred into low protein binding tubes and dried by a vacufuge. The dried fractions were resuspended in 20 µL 0.1% FA and pooled in a non-contiguous manner into 20 fractions (final volume: 80 µL), followed by subsequent mass spectrometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
Analysis was performed in Thermo Scientific Proteome Discoverer version 2.4.1.15. The raw data were searched against SwissProt human (Homo sapiens) protein database (21 February 2019; 20,355 total entries) and contaminant proteins using the Sequest HT algorithm. Searches were performed with the following guidelines: spectra with a signal-to-noise ratio greater than 1.5; mass tolerance of 20 ppm for the precursor ions and 0.02 Da for the fragment ions; full trypsin digestion; 2 missed cleavages; variable oxidation on methionine residues (+15.995 Da); static carboxyamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da); static TMTpro 16-plex labeling (+304.207 Da) at lysine residues and N-termini. The TMT reporter ions were quantified using the Reporter Ions Quantifier node and normalized to the total peptide amount. Peptide spectral matches (PSMs) were filtered using a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) using Percolator. PSMs were filtered to PSMs in only one protein group with an isolation interference under 70%. For the obtained proteome, the data were further filtered to include only master proteins with high protein FDR confidence, at least 2 unique peptides, and exclude all contaminant proteins. The abundance ratios and their associated p-values were calculated by one-way ANOVA with TukeyHSD post-hoc test. 

### Publication Abstract
Cereblon (CRBN) is an E3 ligase substrate adapter widely exploited for targeted protein degradation (TPD) strategies. However, achieving efficient and selective target degradation is a preeminent challenge with ligands that engage CRBN. Here, we report that the cyclimids, ligands derived from the C-terminal cyclic imide degrons of CRBN, exhibit distinct modes of interaction with CRBN and offer a facile approach for developing potent and selective bifunctional degraders. Quantitative TR-FRET-based characterization of 60 cyclimid degraders in binary and ternary complexes across different substrates revealed that ternary complex binding affinities correlated strongly with cellular degradation efficiency. Our studies establish the unique properties of the cyclimids as versatile warheads in TPD and a systematic biochemical approach for quantifying ternary complex formation to predict their cellular degradation activity, which together will accelerate the development of ligands that engage CRBN.

### Keywords
Targeted protein degradation; crbn; cyclic imide; ternary complex; protac

### Affiliations
Harvard University
Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Harvard University

### Submitter
Christina Woo

### Lab Head
Dr Christina Woo
Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Harvard University


