### Accession
PXD027863

### Title
Label free quantitativeproteomics of MDSCs

### Description
We sorted the MDSCs from the bone marrows of B16-F10 tumor-bearing mice and the naive mice. In addition, we cultured MDSCs in vitro to determine the effect of DOX (5µM).

### Sample Protocol
Label-free quantitative proteomics was used to determine differential expression. Protenin (30 μg) extracted form MDSCs was loaded onto the SDS-PAGE and runed into the gel at approximately 2 cm. The gel stained by Coomassie blue was cut, destained, and subjected to in-gel digestion using trypsin (#90057, Thermo Scientific) and analyzed by LC−MS/MS using fragmentation by higher-energy collisional dissociation (Triple-quad Ion-trap and Orbitrap fusion, Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The raw data were analyzed using free academic software Maxquant to quantify the expression. A fold change of more than 1 is defined as significantly different.

### Publication Abstract
Myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) enhance the proliferation of endothelial cells to stimulate angiogenesis. However, many aggressive malignant tumors do not have endothelial cell-dependent blood vessels in the early stage and instead generate microcirculation by forming vasculogenic mimicry (VM). To date, the relationship between MDSCs and tumor cells remains the focus of ongoing studies. In this work, MDSCs were co-cultured with mouse melanoma cells and can enhance proliferation and VM formation of melanoma cells. For MDSCs targeting, doxycycline (DOX) was found to selectively suppress PMN-MDSCs but has no influence on T&#xa0;cells. In addition, DOX pretreatment substantially reduced the promoting ability of MDSCs for the VM formation of B16-F10 cells. DOX also inhibited tumor growth and enhanced the antitumor activity of PD-1 inhibitors in C57BL6 and BALB/c mice subcutaneously inoculated with B16-F10 and 4T1 cells, respectively. In conclusion, the combination of DOX and PD-1 inhibitor could be an anticancer strategy.

### Keywords
Mdscs

### Affiliations
Nankai University
State Key Laboratory of Medicinal Chemical Biology and College of Pharmacy, Nankai University, Tianjin, China

### Submitter
Kailiang Qiao

### Lab Head
Dr Tao Sun
State Key Laboratory of Medicinal Chemical Biology and College of Pharmacy, Nankai University, Tianjin, China


