### Accession
PXD022169

### Title
Comparative Evaluation of MaxQuant and Proteome Discoverer MS1-based Protein Quantification Tools

### Description
MS1-based label-free quantification can compare precursor ion peaks across runs, allowing reproducible protein measurements. Among bioinformatic platforms enabling MS1-based quantification, MaxQuant (MQ) is one of the most used, while Proteome Discoverer (PD) has recently introduced the Minora tool. Here, we present a comparative evaluation of six MS1-based quantification methods available in MQ and PD. Intensity (MQ and PD) and area (PD only) of the precursor ion peaks were measured and then subjected or not to normalization. The six methods were applied to datasets simulating various differential proteomics scenarios and covering a wide range of protein abundance ratios and concentrations. PD outperformed MQ in terms of quantification yield, dynamic range, and reproducibility, although neither platform reached a fully satisfactory quality of measurements at low-concentration ranges. PD methods including normalization were the most accurate in estimating the abundance ratio between groups and the most sensitive when comparing groups with a narrow abundance ratio; on the contrary, MQ methods generally reached slightly higher specificity, accuracy, and precision values. Moreover, we found that applying an optimized log ratio-based threshold can maximize specificity, accuracy, and precision. Taken together, these results can help researchers choose the most appropriate MS1-based protein quantification strategy for their studies.

### Sample Protocol
The main part of the study is a reanalysis of a proteomic dataset deposited on the ProteomeXchange repository with the identiﬁer PXD001819 and described by Ramus and colleagues. The dataset had been obtained by spiking a proteomic standard composed of an equimolar mixture of 48 human proteins (UPS1) at nine different concentrations into a background (2 μg) of yeast cell lysate. According to the original paper, LC–MS/MS analyses were performed using a nanoRS UHPLC system (Dionex, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Samples were loaded on a C-18 precolumn (300 μm ID × 5 mm) at 20 μL/min using a 5% acetonitrile (ACN), 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid solution. After desalting, peptides were separated in an analytical C-18 column (75 μm ID × 15 cm), equilibrated in 95% solvent A (5% ACN, 0.2% formic acid (FA)) and 5% solvent B (80% ACN, 0.2% FA). Peptide elution was carried out at 300 nL/min flow rate, using a solvent B gradient as follows: 5 to 25% for 75 min; 25 to 50% for 30 min; 50 to 100% for 10 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode using the XCalibur software. Survey scans were acquired in the Orbitrap on the 300–2000 m/z range, with resolution set to 60,000. The 20 most intense ions per survey scan were selected for CID fragmentation and the resulting fragments were analyzed in the LTQ. Dynamic exclusion was set to 60 s. A total of 27 raw files, corresponding to nine different amounts of UPS1 proteins (namely 100, 50, 25, 10, 5, 1, 0.5, 0.25 and 0.1 fmol, named P1-P9) analyzed in triplicate, were retrieved from the ProteomeXchange repository and reanalyzed in this study. A second dataset, deposited on the ProteomeXchange repository with the identiﬁer PXD003472 and described by Jarnuczak and colleagues, was selected to further investigate method specificity. Specifically, we choose two samples, both containing 500 ng of yeast protein digest as background: the first one (YH) with 25 fmol of spiked-in human proteins (the same UPS1 standard used in the main dataset); the second one (Y) with no spiked-in proteins (background proteins only). Four replicate runs were available for each sample. According to the original paper, LC-MS/MS analyses were carried out using a nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters, Manchester, UK) coupled with an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer. Peptide mixtures were loaded on a 75 μm × 25 cm, 1.8 μm particle size, C18 nanoAcquity analytical column in mobile phase A (0.1% FA) and separated with a linear gradient of 3–35% mobile phase B (0.1% FA in ACN) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min over a 240 min gradient. The instrument was operated in a data-dependent mode. A survey scan was acquired over the 350–2000 m/z range at a mass resolution of 30,000 and the top 20 most intense precursor ions were subjected to CID fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification were performed on the whole dataset using two search engine platforms: MaxQuant (MQ; version 1.6.0.13) and Proteome Discoverer (PD; version 2.4.1.15; Thermo Fisher Scientific). A given protein was considered as 'identified' when a valid MS2 spectrum was available for at least one of the peptides belonging to that protein. Quantification was carried out according to six different methods. MQ protein quantification returned a (raw) intensity value (MQ-I) and an "LFQ" (normalized intensity) value (MQ-L). PD provided for each quantified protein the height of the most abundant peak at the apex of the chromatographic profile ("intensity") and the integrated peak area ("area"); furthermore, quantitative values were subjected (or not) to a normalization step, based on the total peptide intensity of the samples. Therefore, the four PD-based quantitative methods were named intensity (PD-I), normalized intensity (PD-nI), area (PD-A) and normalized area (PD-nA). The quantification value reported for a given protein is calculated as the sum of the quantification values of all peptides belonging to that protein. A complete list of the parameters used in the MQ and PD protein identification and quantification processes is provided in Dataset S2. Specifically, the time windows for chromatographic peak alignment and matching/mapping were set for both platforms at 10 and 2 minutes, respectively, based on the default or automatically calculated values reported by PD. Moreover, False-Discovery Rates (FDRs) for peptide and protein identifications were set to 1% with both platforms. The protein database used was a combination of the reference proteome of Saccharomyces cerevisiae (6049 sequences retrieved from UniProtKB release 2020_04, Database_1.fasta) and the sequences of the 48 human proteins included in the UPS1 (https://www.sigmaaldrich.com/content/dam/sigma-aldrich/life-science/proteomics-and-protein/ups1-ups2-sequences.fasta, Database_2.fasta).

### Publication Abstract
MS1-based label-free quantification can compare precursor ion peaks across runs, allowing reproducible protein measurements. Among bioinformatic platforms enabling MS1-based quantification, MaxQuant (MQ) is one of the most used, while Proteome Discoverer (PD) has recently introduced the Minora tool. Here, we present a comparative evaluation of six MS1-based quantification methods available in MQ and PD. Intensity (MQ and PD) and area (PD only) of the precursor ion peaks were measured and then subjected or not to normalization. The six methods were applied to data sets simulating various differential proteomics scenarios and covering a wide range of protein abundance ratios and amounts. PD outperformed MQ in terms of quantification yield, dynamic range, and reproducibility, although neither platform reached a fully satisfactory quality of measurements at low-abundance ranges. PD methods including normalization were the most accurate in estimating the abundance ratio between groups and the most sensitive when comparing groups with a narrow abundance ratio; on the contrary, MQ methods generally reached slightly higher specificity, accuracy, and precision values. Moreover, we found that applying an optimized log ratio-based threshold can maximize specificity, accuracy, and precision. Taken together, these results can help researchers choose the most appropriate MS1-based protein quantification strategy for their studies.

### Keywords
Specificity, Sensitivity, Accuracy, Precision, Proteomics, Dynamic range, Differential analysis, Mass spectrometry, Label-free quantification

### Affiliations
Porto Conte Ricerche, Tramariglio, Alghero, Italy
Porto Conte Ricerche

### Submitter
Antonio Palomba

### Lab Head
Dr Daniela Pagnozzi
Porto Conte Ricerche, Tramariglio, Alghero, Italy


