### Accession
PXD028324

### Title
Arginine methylation and ubiquitylation crosstalk controls DNA end-resection and homologous recombination repair

### Description
Cross-talk between distinct protein post-translational modifications is critical for an effective DNA damage response. Arginine methylation plays an important role in maintaining genome stability, however how this modification integrates with other enzymatic activities is largely unknown. Here, we identify the deubiquitylating enzyme USP11 as a previously uncharacterised PRMT1 substrate, and that methylation of USP11 promotes DNA end-resection and the repair of DNA double strand breaks by homologous recombination (HR). In addition, we show that PRMT1 is a ubiquitylated protein that it is targeted for deubiquitylation by USP11, and that USP11 regulates the ability of PRMT1 to bind to and methylate MRE11. Interestingly, USP11 methylation by PRMT1 is not required for other USP11 activities during HR, such as PALB2 deubiquitylation. Taken together, our findings reveal a specific role for USP11 during the early stages of DSB repair, which is mediated through its ability to regulate the activity of the PRMT1-MRE11 pathway.

### Sample Protocol
Flag-PRMT1 was cloned into pHIV-zsGreen and stable 293T cell lines generated. Control 293T-pHIV-zsG or test 293T-pHIV-zsG-Flag-PRMT1 cells were lysed in 0.1% NP40 lysis buffer (150mM NaCl, 20mM Tris pH 7.5, 0.5mM EDTA, 1mM Na3VO4, 50mM NaF, 1mM beta-glycerophosphate, 100 mM PMSF, 10ug/ml leupeptin, 10ug/ml aprotinin). After sonication, 3mg of protein was precleared with protein G sepharose for 30 mins at 40C and samples incubated with Flag-M2-agarose affinity beads (Sigma; A2220) for 2 hrs at 4oC. Immunoprecipitations were washed three times with 0.1% NP40 lysis buffer and once with 10mM Tris pH7.5/150mM NaCl. Protein complexes were eluted twice with 50ul Flag peptide (500ug/ml; Sigma) using a thermoshaker set to 1200pm, 15oC for 30 mins. Complexes were resolved by SDS-PAGE (NuPAGE Bis-Tris: ThermoFisher), fixed and stained with SYPRO Ruby as to the manufactures protocol (Lonza). Three independent biological experiments were conducted (i.e. Flag M2 immunoprecipitation from zsGren or zsGreen-Flag-PRMT1 expressing 293T cells), and denatured samples stored before resolving by SDS-PAGE at the same time.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data were then queried against a protein database (UniProt KB) using the Mascot search engine programme (Matrix Science, UK) 65.  Database search parameters were set with a precursor tolerance of 10ppm and a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.8Da.  One missed enzyme cleavage was allowed and variable modifications for oxidised methionine, carbamidomethyl cysteine, pyroglutamic acid, phosphorylated serine, threonine and tyrosine, and methyl arginine were included.  MS/MS data were validated using the Scaffold program (Proteome Software Inc., USA).  All data were additionally interrogated manually.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ubiquitination, Prmt1, Lc-ms/ms, Dna repair, Metylation

### Affiliations
Francis Crick Institute
Institute of Cancer and Genomic Sciences, University of Birmingham, UK

### Submitter
Mark Skehel

### Lab Head
Dr Clare C Davies
Institute of Cancer and Genomic Sciences, University of Birmingham, UK


