### Accession
PXD031677

### Title
40S hnRNP particles are a novel class of nuclear biomolecular condensates

### Description
Heterogenous nuclear ribonucleoproteins (hnRNPs) are abundant proteins implicated in various steps of RNA processing that assemble on nuclear RNA into larger complexes termed 40S hnRNP particles. Despite their initial discovery 55 years ago, our understanding of these intriguing macromolecular assemblies remains limited. We biochemically purified native 40S hnRNP particles and determined their complete protein composition by label-free quantitative mass spectrometry, identifying A-group and C-group hnRNPs as the major protein constituents.

### Sample Protocol
For the analysis of hnRNP C-3xFLAG interactome, IP was performed in triplicate for RNase A-treated and untreated conditions. Eluates were run 1 cm into 4-12% Bis-Tris gel, stained with blue silver (Candiano et al., 2004) and excised as vertical, 3 x 8 mm gel bands. Excised bands were further cut into smaller cubes and proteins were trypsinized using an in-gel digestion protocol (Gunasekera et al., 2012). Digests were analyzed on a QExactive instrument with identical conditions as described elsewhere (Winzer et al., 2020). For label free quantitative mass spectrometry, proteins from fraction 9 were precipitated overnight at -80 °C with 1 volume of acetone and 0.1 volume of 100 % (w/v) TCA. Precipitated material was pelleted by centrifugation and washed 3 times with cold acetone. Samples were dried in SpeedVac, reconstituted in 8 M Urea, 100 mM Tris pH8 and double digested with LysC and trypsin as described elsewhere (Braga-Lagache et al., 2016). The digests were analyzed by liquid chromatography (LC)-MS/MS (PROXEON coupled to a QExactive HF mass spectrometer, ThermoFisher Scientific) with three injections of 5 μl digests. Peptides were trapped on a µPrecolumn C18 PepMap100 (5μm, 100 Å, 300 μm×5mm, ThermoFisher Scientific, Reinach, Switzerland) and separated by backflush on a C18 column (5 μm, 100 Å, 75 μm×15 cm, C18) by applying a 90-minute gradient of 5% acetonitrile to 40% in water, 0.1% formic acid, at a flow rate of 350 nl/min. The Full Scan method was set with resolution at 60,000 with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 1E06 and maximum ion injection time of 50 ms. The data-dependent method for precursor ion fragmentation was applied with the following settings: resolution 15,000, AGC of 1E05, maximum ion time of 110 milliseconds, mass window 1.6 m/z, collision energy 28, under fill ratio 1%, charge exclusion of unassigned and 1+ ions, and peptide match preferred, respectively.   Refs: Candiano et al.(2004) Blue silver: a very sensitive colloidal Coomassie G-250 staining for proteome analysis. Electrophoresis 25, 1327-1333. 10.1002/elps.200305844 Gunasekera et al.(2012) Proteome remodelling during development from blood to insect-form Trypanosoma brucei quantified by SILAC and mass spectrometry. BMC Genomics 13, 556. 10.1186/1471-2164-13-556. Winzer et al. (2020) Neospora caninum: Differential Proteome of Multinucleated Complexes Induced by the Bumped Kinase Inhibitor BKI-1294. Microorganisms 8. 10.3390/microorganisms8060801. Braga-Lagache et al. (2016) Robust Label-free, Quantitative Profiling of Circulating Plasma Microparticle (MP) Associated Proteins. Mol Cell Proteomics 15, 3640-3652. 10.1074/mcp.M116.060491.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data was interpreted with MaxQuant against the human SwissProt protein sequence database (version 2017_12) with carbamidomethylation of cysteine set as static modification and protein N-terminal acetylation, oxidation of methionine, and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine set as variable modification. All other settings and statistical evaluation of differential LFQ intensities were as previously described (Winzer et al., 2020). The samples for label-free quantitative mass spectrometry were processed by the four search engines Comet (Eng et al., 2015), Xtandem (Craig and Beavis, 2003), MSGF (Kim and Pevzner, 2014) and Myrimatch (Tabb et al., 2007) against the manually curated Swiss-Prot (UniProt, 2019) database [release 2017_12 for 20180201_MD (Fig. 1E), release 2018_07 for 20180724_MD (Figs. 2D and 3E), and release 2020_03 for 20200901_MD (Fig. 4E)] concatenated to reversed decoy sequences. Search parameters were set to high resolution parameters, namely 10 ppm and 20 ppm for the peptide and fragment mass tolerance, respectively; cleavage rule was set to strict trypsin, allowing for 3 missed cleavages; allowed modifications were fixed carbamidomethylation of cysteines, variable oxidation of methionines and acetylation of protein N-termini, plus deamidation of asparagines and glutamines for the 20180720_MD samples. Each search was followed by the application of the PeptideProphet (Choi et al., 2008) tool from the Transproteomics pipeline (Deutsch et al., 2010), followed by the application of iprophet (Shteynberg et al., 2011) from TPP in order to combine the search results, which were filtered at the false discovery rate of 0.01; furthermore, the identification was only accepted if at least two of the search engines agreed on the identification. Protein inference was performed with ProteinProphet (Nesvizhskii and Aebersold, 2005) from TPP. For those protein groups accepted by a false discovery rate filter of 0.01, a Normalized Spectral Abundance Factor (Zybailov et al., 2007) was calculated based on the peptide to spectrum match count; shared peptides were accounted for by the method of Zhang and colleagues (Zhang et al., 2010).  The per gene aggregation was performed based on the protein prophet report, so that a PSM sum per gene is calculated from the weighted sums of all the PSMs attributed to the ID group, and the NSAF calculated based on the length of the longest protein of the ID group.  Refs: Winzer et al. (2020) Neospora caninum: Differential Proteome of Multinucleated Complexes Induced by the Bumped Kinase Inhibitor BKI-1294. Microorganisms 8. 10.3390/microorganisms8060801. Eng et al.(2015) A deeper look into Comet--implementation and features. J Am Soc Mass Spectrom 26, 1865-1874. 10.1007/s13361-015-1179-x. Craig et al. (2003) A method for reducing the time required to match protein sequences with tandem mass spectra. Rapid Commun Mass Spectrom 17, 2310-2316. 10.1002/rcm.1198. Kim and Pevzner, (2014) MS-GF+ makes progress towards a universal database search tool for proteomics. Nature communications 5, 5277. 10.1038/ncomms6277. Tabb et al.(2007) MyriMatch: highly accurate tandem mass spectral peptide identification by multivariate hypergeometric analysis. J Proteome Res 6, 654-661. 10.1021/pr0604054 Choi et al.(2008) Statistical validation of peptide identifications in large-scale proteomics using the target-decoy database search strategy and flexible mixture modeling. J Proteome Res 7, 286-292. 10.1021/pr7006818 Deutsch et al.(2010) A guided tour of the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline. Proteomics 10, 1150-1159. 10.1002/pmic.200900375 Shteynberg et al.(2011) iProphet: multi-level integrative analysis of shotgun proteomic data improves peptide and protein identification rates and error estimates. Mol Cell Proteomics 10, M111 007690. 10.1074/mcp.M111.007690. Nesvizhskii and Aebersold (2005) Interpretation of shotgun proteomic data: the protein inference problem. Mol Cell Proteomics 4, 1419-1440. 10.1074/mcp.R500012-MCP200 Zybailov et al.(2007) Quantitative shotgun proteomics using a protease with broad specificity and normalized spectral abundance factors. Mol Biosyst 3, 354-360. 10.1039/b701483j Zhang et al.(2010) Refinements to label free proteome quantitation: how to deal with peptides shared by multiple proteins. Analytical chemistry 82, 2272-2281. 10.1021/ac9023999

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hnrnp, Ribonucleosome, 40s particles

### Affiliations
University of Bern
Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry Core Facility, Department for BioMedical Research (DBMR), University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland

### Submitter
Manfred Heller

### Lab Head
Dr Oliver Mühlemann
University of Bern


