### Accession
PXD013058

### Title
CORRELATION OF CANINE BONE MARROW DERIVED MESENCHYMAL STEM CELLS GENOMICS WITH SECRETOME PROTEOMIC COMPOSITION

### Description
The adult stem cells have become prominent candidates for the treatment of various diseases in veterinary practice. Therefore, the main goal of our study was to provide a complex study of canine bone marrow derived mesenchymal stem cells (BMMSCs) and conditioned media, isolated from healthy adult dogs of different breeds. Under well-defined standardized isolation protocols the multilineage differentiation and specific surface markers of MSCs were supplemented with their gene expression and the proteome profile. Present data has confirmed that canine BMMSCs expresses important genes for differentiation toward osteo-, chondro- and tendo-genic directions, but also genes that were associated with neurotrophic and immunomodulatory properties. Furthermore, we have identified for the first time by proteome profiling dynamic release various bioactive molecules, such as transcription and translation factors, osteogenic, growth and neurotrophic factors from canine BMMSC conditioned medium. Importantly, relevant genes were linked to their proteins that were detected in conditioned medium, which have an important correlation to their possible function and clinical application. Thus, here we show that the canine BMMSCs properties are applicable for replacement therapies of skeletal disease, but due to their ability of releasing immunomodulatory and bioactive molecules via conditioned media, they may improve repair of other tissue. However, extensive experimental or pre-clinical trials testing canine sources needs to be performed in order to better understand the individual differences between healthy donors that are considered for transplantation treatment studies in veterinary medicine.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction From each lineage 1 mL was collected, dried under vacuum and then taken up in 100 µL of extraction buffer (4% SDS, Tris 0.1M, pH 7.8). The samples were heated at 95°C for 15 min and then sonicated for 15 min. Centrifugation was performed at 16,000 x g, 20°C, for 10 min, and then the supernatant was collected. After the extraction was complete, a Bradford assay was performed to determine the protein concentration in each sample. The samples were kept at -80°C until further experimentation.  FASP method The samples were processed using a shotgun bottom-up proteomic approach. All samples were normalized with a final protein concentration of 1 mg/ml in 50 µL. An equivalent volume of reduction solution (Dithiothreitol DTT 0.1 M) was added to each sample followed by an incubation step at 56°C for 40 min. Then the samples were processed by filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol (8, 9) using a filter with a nominal molecular weight limit of 30,000 KDa (Amicon Ultra-0.5 30K, Millipore). Briefly, each sample were mixed with 200 µL of denaturant buffer (8 M urea, Tris/HCl 0.1 M, pH 8.5) and transferred in FASP filters. The samples were centrifuged at 14,000 x g, 20°C, for 15 min. For the alkylation step, 100 µL of 0.05 M of iodoacetamide in denaturant buffer was added for each sample, followed by incubation in the dark for 20 min at room temperature. Samples were washed twice with 100 µL of denaturant buffer followed by two washes with 100 µL of buffer AB (Ammonium bicarbonate 0.05 M). For each washing step, the centrifugation was performed at 14,000 x g, 20°C, for 15 min. The proteins were digested by adding 40 µL of trypsin at 40 µg/ml in buffer AB and incubated at 37°C overnight. The peptides were eluted by adding 50 µL of saline solution (NaCl 0.5 M) and centrifuged at 14,000 x g, 20°C, for 15 min. The digestion was stopping by adding 10 µL of TFA 5%. The samples were desalted using a ZipTip C-18 (Millipore), and eluted with a solution of ACN/0.1% TFA (7:3, v/v). The samples were dried with SpeedVac and resuspended in 20 µL of ACN/0.1% formic acid (0.2:9.8, v/v) just before processing using LC-MS/MS.  LC-MS/MS The analyze of digested proteins was performed by a nano Acquity UPLC system (Waters) coupled with a Q-Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) via a nanoelectrospray source. The samples were separated by online reversed-phase, using a pre-concentration column (nanoAcquity Symmetry C18, 5 µm, 180 µm x 20 mm) and an analytical column (nanoAcquity BEH C18, 1.7 µm, 75 µm x 250 mm). The peptides were separated by applying a linear gradient of acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid (5%-35%) for 2 hours, at the flow rate of 300 nl/min. The Q-Exactive was operated in data dependent mode defined to analyze the 10 most intense ions of MS analysis (Top 10). The MS analysis was performed with an m/z mass range between 300 to 1600, a resolution of 70,000 FWHM, an AGC of 3e6 ions and a maximum injection time of 120 ms. The MS/MS analysis was performed with an m/z mass range between 200 to 2000, an AGC of 5e4 ions, a maximum injection time of 60 ms and the resolution was set at 17,500 FWHM.

### Data Protocol
The proteins were identified by comparing all MS/MS data with the proteome database of Canis lupus familiaris (Uniprot, release December 2018, 25493 entries) and Homo sapiens (Uniprot, release December 2018, 73925 entries), using the MaxQuant software version 1.5.8.3 (10–12). The digestion parameters were defined using trypsin with 2 maximum missed cleavages. The oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation were defined as variable modifications. The Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was chosen as fixed modifications. The Label-free quantification (LFQ) was done keeping the default parameters of the software. The identification parameters of the proteins and peptides were performed with a false discovery rate (FDR) at 1%, and a minimum of 2 peptides per protein in which 1 was unique. The statistical analysis was done by Perseus software (version 1.6.2.1). Briefly, the LFQ intensity of each sample were downloaded in Perseus and the data matrix was filtered by removing the potential contaminants, reverse and only identified by site. The data was then transformed using the log2(x). Before statistical analysis, 3 groups were defined with 3 replicates per group. A Multiple-sample tests was performed using ANOVA with a p-value of 0.01, and the results were normalized by Z-score and represented as a hierarchical clustering.

### Publication Abstract
Adult stem cells have become prominent candidates for treating various diseases in veterinary practice. The main goal of our study was therefore to provide a comprehensive study of canine bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells (BMMSC) and conditioned media, isolated from healthy adult dogs of different breeds. Under well-defined standardized isolation protocols, the multipotent differentiation and specific surface markers of BMMSC were supplemented with their gene expression, proteomic profile, and their biological function. The presented data confirm that canine BMMSC express important genes for differentiation toward osteo-, chondro-, and tendo-genic directions, but also genes associated with angiogenic, neurotrophic, and immunomodulatory properties. Furthermore, using proteome profiling, we identify for the first time the dynamic release of various bioactive molecules, such as transcription and translation factors and osteogenic, growth, angiogenic, and neurotrophic factors from canine BMMSC conditioned medium. Importantly, the relevant genes were linked to their proteins as detected in the conditioned medium and further associated with angiogenic activity in chorioallantoic membrane (CAM) assay. In this way, we show that the canine BMMSC release a variety of bioactive molecules, revealing a strong paracrine component that may possess therapeutic potential in various pathologies. However, extensive experimental or preclinical trials testing canine sources need to be performed in order to better understand their paracrine action, which may lead to novel therapeutic strategies in veterinary medicine.

### Keywords
Stem-cell, Lc-msms, Proteomic, Secretome, Canine

### Affiliations
PRISM - Unité INSERM 1192 Université de Lille France
PRISM

### Submitter
Soulaimane Aboulouard

### Lab Head
Dr Michel Salzet
PRISM - Unité INSERM 1192 Université de Lille France


