### Accession
PXD019794

### Title
ChIP-MS of DPPA3/STELLA in mouse embryonic stem cells

### Description
Genome-wide DNA demethylation is a unique feature of mammalian development and naïve pluripotent stem cells. So far, it was unclear how mammals specifically achieve global DNA hypomethylation, given the high conservation of the DNA (de-)methylation machinery among vertebrates. We found that DNA demethylation requires TET activity but mostly occurs at sites where TET proteins are not bound suggesting a rather indirect mechanism. Among the few specific genes bound and activated by TET proteins was the naïve pluripotency and germline marker Dppa3 (Pgc7, Stella), which undergoes TDG dependent demethylation. The requirement of TET proteins for genome-wide DNA demethylation could be bypassed by ectopic expression of Dppa3. We show that DPPA3 binds and displaces UHRF1 from chromatin and thereby prevents the recruitment and activation of the maintenance DNA methyltransferase DNMT1. We demonstrate that DPPA3 alone can drive global DNA demethylation when transferred to amphibians (Xenopus) and fish (medaka), both species that naturally do not have a Dppa3 gene and exhibit no post-fertilization DNA demethylation. Our results show that TET proteins are responsible for active and - indirectly also for - passive DNA demethylation; while TET proteins initiate local and gene-specific demethylation in vertebrates, the recent emergence of DPPA3 introduced a unique means of genome-wide passive demethylation in mammals and contributed to the evolution of epigenetic regulation during early mammalian development.

### Sample Protocol
For Chromatin immunoprecipitation coupled to Mass Spectrometry (ChIP-MS), whole cell lysates of the doxycycline inducible and formaldehyde crosslinked Dppa3 -FLAG mES cells were used by performing three separate immunoprecipitations with an anti-FLAG antibody and three samples with a control IgG. Proteins were digested on the beads after the pulldown and desalted subsequently on StageTips with three layers of C18. Here, peptides were separated by liquid chromatography on an Easy-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) on in-house packed 50 cm columns of ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9-µm resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH). Peptides were then eluted successively in an ACN gradient for 120 min at a flow rate of around 300 nL/min and were injected through a nanoelectrospray source into a Q Exactive HF-X Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). After measuring triplicates of a certain condition, an additional washing step was scheduled. During the measurements, the column temperature was constantly kept at 60 °C while after each measurement, the column was washed with 95% buffer B and subsequently with buffer A. Real time monitoring of the operational parameters was established by SprayQc software. Data acquisition was based on a top10 shotgun proteomics method and data-dependent MS/MS scans. Within a range of 400-1650 m/z and a max. injection time of 20 ms, the target value for the full scan MS spectra was 3 × 10 6 and the resolution at 60,000.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS data was then analyzed with the MaxQuant software package (version 1.6.0.7) 140. The underlying FASTA files for peak list searches were derived from Uniprot (UP000000589_10090.fasta and UP000000589_10090 additional.fasta, version June 2015) and an additional modified FASTA file for the FLAG-tagged Dppa3 in combination with a contaminants database provided by the Andromeda search engine with 245 entries. During the MaxQuant-based analysis the “Match between runs” option was enabled and the false discovery rate was set to 1% for both peptides (minimum length of 7 amino acids) and proteins. Relative protein amounts were determined by the MaxLFQ algorithm 142, with a minimum ratio count of two peptides. For the downstream analysis of the MaxQuant output, the software Perseus (version 1.6.0.9) was used to perform Student’s t -test with a permutation-based FDR of 0.05 and an additional constant S0 = 1 in order to calculate fold enrichments of proteins between triplicate chromatin immunoprecipitations of anti-FLAG antibody and control IgG. The result was visualized in a scatter plot.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dna methylation, Chip-ms, Epigenetics, Escs

### Affiliations
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max Planck Institute for Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany
Faculty of Biology and Center for Molecular Biosystems (BioSysM), Human Biology and BioImaging, LMU Munich & Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max-Planck Institute of Biochemistry

### Submitter
Enes Ugur

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Wierer
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max Planck Institute for Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany


