### Accession
PXD013414

### Title
Role of ATR in mitochondrial functions and metabolism

### Description
The PIKK superfamily member ATR is a key factor in DNA damage response (DDR) and is vital for the maintenance of genomic stability. DNA single strand breaks (SSBs) and replication stress activate ATR to phosphorylate a wide range of downstream substrates, which activates cell cycle checkpoint, senescence induction, cell death, and R-loop disintegration. ATR mutation causes the human ATR-Seckel syndrome, characterized by dwarfism, microcephaly and intellectual disabilities. Recent studies have implied ATR in non-nuclear functions; however, ATR's function in mitochondrial metabolism and a link to human diseases remains largely unknown. Here we show that ATR is located in mitochondria and its deletion alters mitochondrial dynamics prior to the DDR. ATR deletion disturbs the electron transfer chain (ETC) resulting in ROS overproduction and switches energy production from OXPHOS to the TCA cycle. Multi-omics analyses together with biochemical studies showed an imbalance of ETC proteins and membrane lipids accompanied with a dysregulation of key metabolic signaling pathways, including AMPK, mTOR and PGC1α. Pharmacological intervention of AMPK signaling or ETC functions delineates the metabolic pathways affected in ATR deleted cells. Mitochondrial metabolic dysfunction is more pronounced in ATR deleted neural cells and brain tissues, implicating a connection with neuropathological processes. Thus, ATR plays, beyond its well-known DDR function, an important role for cell metabolism and mitochondrial functionality, which contributes to the manifestation of neuronal deficit of ATR-Seckel.

### Sample Protocol
First, homogenates of the hippocampus tissues were prepared using the bead-beating device (24 tissue homogenizer) from Precellys.  Frozen tissue was transferred on ice to bead-beating tubes (Precellys CKMix, 0.5 mL) containing ice-cold PBS with Protease and Phosphatase Inhibitor cocktail (Roche) and beaten for 2 cycles of 20s @6000rpm with a 30 s break at 4 °C. Homogenates were prepared at an estimated protein concentration of 20 µg/µL; based on 5% protein content of fresh brain tissues by weight.  They were transferred to 2 mL Eppendorf tubes and centrifuged at 1000 xg (4 min, 4°C). 10 µL of the supernatant (corresponding approx 200 µg protein) was taken further for lysis.  Lysis was proceeded by resuspension of the homogenate in final volume of 200 µL lysis buffer (as described in the cell pellet preparation for MEFs below).  All following steps having obtained a 1 µg/uL lysate were proceeded in the same way until peptide labelling with TMT and subsequent high pH fractionation and LC-MS, which is described in detail in Buczak et al, 2018.  Briefly, peptide samples, obtained from the digestion were labelled with TMT-10plex isobaric mass tags (Thermo) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.  Equal amounts of the labelled peptides from 5 WT and 5 KO samples were mixed, desalted and pre-fractionated into 16 fractions using high pH reverse phase fractionation on an Agilent Infinity 1260 HPLC, before each fraction was measured individually by nano-LC-MS on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos employing SPS-MS3 data acquisition.

### Data Protocol
The fraction data were subsequently searched together in Mascot 2.5.1 (Matrix Science) using Proteome Discoverer 2.0 (Thermo) against the Swissprot Mus musculus database (2016, 16756 entries) and a list common contaminants.  Reporter ion intensity values for the PSMs were exported and processed using in-house written R scripts to remove common contaminants and decoy hits. Additionally only PSMs having reporter ion intensities above 1 × 103 in all the relevant TMT channels were retained for quantitative analysis described in detail in Buczak et al, 2018.  Briefly, reporter ion (TMT) intensities were log2-transformed and normalized. Peptide-level data were summarized into their respective protein groups by taking the median value. For differential protein expression, four of the five replicates of the WT and KO respectively within the TMT10-plex were taken together. Protein ratios were calculated for all the protein groups quantified with at least 2 peptides.  The datasets were post-analyzed using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) software (Quiagen Bioinformatics) with a cut-off of p <0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Ataxia Telangiectasia and Rad3-related (ATR) protein, as a key DNA damage response (DDR) regulator, plays an essential function in response to replication stress and controls cell viability. Hypomorphic mutations of ATR cause the human ATR-Seckel syndrome, characterized by microcephaly and intellectual disability, which however suggests a yet unknown role for ATR in non-dividing cells. Here we show that ATR deletion in postmitotic neurons does not compromise brain development and&#xa0;formation; rather it enhances intrinsic neuronal activity resulting in aberrant firing and an increased epileptiform activity, which increases the susceptibility of ataxia and epilepsy in mice. ATR deleted neurons exhibit hyper-excitability, associated with changes in action potential conformation and presynaptic vesicle accumulation, independent of DDR signaling. Mechanistically, ATR interacts with synaptotagmin 2 (SYT2) and, without ATR, SYT2 is highly upregulated and aberrantly translocated to excitatory neurons in the hippocampus, thereby conferring a hyper-excitability. This study identifies a physiological function of ATR, beyond its DDR role, in regulating neuronal activity.

### Keywords
Mitochondrial function, Metabolism, Atr

### Affiliations
Leibniz Institute on Aging  – Fritz Lipmann Institute (FLI) Beutenbergstrasse 11 07745 Jena, Germany
The Francis Crick Institute

### Submitter
Joanna Kirkpatrick

### Lab Head
Dr Zhao-Qi Wang
Leibniz Institute on Aging  – Fritz Lipmann Institute (FLI) Beutenbergstrasse 11 07745 Jena, Germany


