### Accession
PXD010003

### Title
CASP XL-MS target H0957 (ID31): Cross-linking for the 13th Community Wide Experiment on the Critical Assessment of Techniques for Protein Structure Prediction (CASP13)

### Description
Chemical cross-linking coupled to mass spectrometry was used to provide distance restraints for different homo- and heterooligomeric complexes as part of the CASP13 experiment (https://www.predictioncenter.org/casp13/index.cgi).

### Sample Protocol
Chemical cross-linking was performed following previously described procedures (Leitner et al., Nat. Protoc., 2014 and Leitner et al., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 2014). Independent experiments were performed using the lysine reactive DSS and a combination of PDH and DMTMM (generating carboxy-carboxy and amine-carboxy cross-links), respectively. Samples were digested using endoproteinase Lys-C and trypsin, digests were analyzed by data-dependent LC-MS/MS on a Thermo Orbitrap Elite system without fractionation or enrichment. Duplicate runs were performed for precursors with a charge state of 3 and above. In addition, a single run was performed for charge states 2+ and higher to detect dead-end/mono-link peptides. See the accompanying file list for further information.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched using xQuest (Walzthoeni et al., Nat. Methods, 2012), version 2.1.4, against the sequences of the target proteins. Additional search settings were as follows: Enzyme = trypsin, maximum number of missed cleavages = 2, MS mass tolerance = 5 ppm, MS/MS mass tolerance = 0.2 Da for “common”-type fragment ions and 0.3 Da for “xlink”-type fragment ions. The sequence database in .fasta format is provided as well.

### Publication Abstract
With the advance of experimental procedures obtaining chemical crosslinking information is becoming a fast and routine practice. Information on crosslinks can greatly enhance the accuracy of protein structure modeling. Here, we review the current state of the art in modeling protein structures with the assistance of experimentally determined chemical crosslinks within the framework of the 13th meeting of Critical Assessment of Structure Prediction approaches. This largest-to-date blind assessment reveals benefits of using data assistance in difficult to model protein structure prediction cases. However, in a broader context, it also suggests that with the unprecedented advance in accuracy to predict contacts in recent years, experimental crosslinks will be useful only if their specificity and accuracy further improved and they are better integrated into computational workflows.

### Keywords
Chemical cross-linking; dss; pdh; dmtmm; structural proteomics; casp

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland
ETH Zurich, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology

### Submitter
Alexander Leitner

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Leitner
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland


