### Accession
PXD023024

### Title
EGF Induces Migration Independent of EMT or Invasion in A549 Lung Adenocarcinoma Cells

### Description
Tumors and tumor surrounding tissues produce multiple growth factors that influence tumor cell behavior via different signal transduction pathways. Growth factors like transforming growth factor beta (TGFβ) and epidermal growth factor (EGF) were shown to induce proliferation, migration and invasion in different cell models. Both factors are frequently overexpressed in cancer and will often act in combination. Although both factors are being used as rational targets in clinical oncology, similarities and differences of their contributions to cancer cell migration and invasion are not fully understood.  Here we compared the impact of TGFβ, EGF and the combination of both factors on A549 cells.  Both factors stimulated A549 migration to a similar extent but with a different kinetic and the combination had an additive effect. While EGF-induced migration depended on activation of the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway, this pathway was dispensable for TGFβ-induced migration despite a strong activation by TGFβ. Proteome analysis revealed an overlap in expression patterns of migration-related proteins and associated gene ontology (GO) terms by TGFβ and EGF but only TGFβ induced the expression of epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT)-related proteins like matrix metalloproteinase 2 (MMP2). EGF in contrast, made no major contribution to EMT marker expression on either the protein or the transcript level. In line with these expression patterns, EGF was unable to increase invasion of A549 cells on its own and failed to enhance TGFβ-induced invasion. Overall, these data suggest that TGFβ and EGF may partly compensate each other for stimulation of cell migration but abrogation of TGFβ signaling may be more suitable for antagonizing invasion.

### Sample Protocol
Twelve biological replicates each of 1x106 A549 lung adenocarcinoma cells were seeded into 10 cm petri dishes containing medium supplemented with 10 % FBS. After 24 h, three replicates of cells were further grown for 48 h in FBS-free medium as controls, three replicates were subjected to a treatment with 5 ng/ml TGFβ, three replicates with 50 ng/ml EGF, and three replicates with 5 ng/ml TGFβ and 50 ng/ml EGF, each for 48 h in FBS-free medium.  Cell supernatants were collected and proteins secreted by the cells were precipitated overnight with ethanol at -20 °C. Cells were lysed with isotonic lysis buffer supplemented with protease inhibitors and by applying mechanical shear stress. Nuclei were pelletized by centrifugation at 2300 g and 4 °C for 5 min, and cytoplasmic proteins were collected in the supernatant and precipitated overnight with ice-cold ethanol at -20 °C. Nuclear proteins were then extracted from pelletized nuclei by incubating the pellet for 10 min in 500 mM NaCl, followed by an 1:10 dilution with NP-40 buffer and another incubation for 15min. After centrifugation at 2300 g and 4 °C for 5 min, nuclear proteins were collected in the supernatant and precipitated overnight with ice-cold ethanol at -20 °C. After centrifugation, all protein samples were dissolved in sample buffer. Protein concentrations were determined by means of a Bradford assay. In-solution digestion of proteins was performed with trypsin, using a variation of the FASP protocol. After trypsin digestion, peptide samples were cleaned up with C-18 spin columns. The digested peptide samples were dried and stored at -20 °C until further MS analyses.  For LC-MS/MS analyses, dried samples were reconstituted in 5 µl 30 % formic acid (FA) and diluted with 40 µl mobile phase A (98 % H2O, 2 % ACN, 0.1 % FA). Ten microliters of this solution were then injected into the Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano LC-system coupled to a QExactive orbitrap mass spectrometer equipped with a nanospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria). All samples were analyzed in technical duplicates. As a pre-concentration step, peptides were loaded on a 2 cm x 75 µm C18 Pepmap100 pre-column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria) at a flow rate of 10 µl/min using mobile phase A. Elution from the pre-column to a 50 cm x 75µm Pepmap100 analytical column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria) and subsequent separation was achieved at a flow rate of 300 nl/min using a gradient of 8 % to 40 % mobile phase B (80 % ACN, 2 % H2O, 0.1 % FA) over 45 min for supernatants and over 95 min for cytoplasmic and nuclear fractions. For mass spectrometric detection, MS scans were performed in the range from m/z 400-1400 at a resolution of 70000 (at m/z = 200). MS/MS scans of the 8 most abundant ions were achieved through HCD fragmentation at 30% normalized collision energy and analyzed in the orbitrap at a resolution of 17500 (at m/z = 200).

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria) running Mascot 2.4 (Matrix Science, UK) was used for protein identification. Protein identification was achieved searching against the SwissProt Database (version April 2019 with 26 447 entries) allowing a mass tolerance of 10ppm for MS spectra and 50mmu for MS/MS spectra as well as a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Furthermore, search criteria included carbamidomethylation on cysteins as fixed modification and methionine oxidation as well as N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Tumors and the tumor microenvironment produce multiple growth factors that influence cancer cell behavior via various signal transduction pathways. Growth factors, like transforming growth factor &#x3b2; (TGF&#x3b2;) and epidermal growth factor (EGF), have been shown to induce proliferation, migration, and invasion in different cell models. Both factors are frequently overexpressed in cancer and will often act in combination. Although both factors are being used as rational targets in clinical oncology, the similarities and differences of their contributions to cancer cell migration and invasion are not fully understood. Here we compared the impact of treating A549 lung adenocarcinoma cells with TGF&#x3b2;, EGF, and both in combination by applying videomicroscopy, functional assays, immunoblotting, real-time PCR, and proteomics. Treatment with both factors stimulated A549 migration to a similar extent, but with different kinetics. The combination had an additive effect. EGF-induced migration depended on activation of the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway. However, this pathway was dispensable for TGF&#x3b2;-induced migration, despite a strong activation of this pathway by TGF&#x3b2;. Proteome analysis (data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD023024) revealed an overlap in expression patterns of migration-related proteins and associated gene ontology (GO) terms by TGF&#x3b2; and EGF. Further, only TGF&#x3b2; induced the expression of epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT)-related proteins like matrix metalloproteinase 2 (MMP2). EGF, in contrast, made no major contribution to EMT marker expression on either the protein or the transcript level. In line with these expression patterns, TGF&#x3b2; treatment significantly increased the invasive capacity of A549 cells, while EGF treatment did not. Moreover, the addition of EGF failed to enhance TGF&#x3b2;-induced invasion. Overall, these data suggest that TGF&#x3b2; and EGF can partly compensate for each other for stimulation of cell migration, but abrogation of TGF&#x3b2; signaling may be more suitable to suppress cell invasion.

### Keywords
Human, Epithelial to mesenchymal transition, Invasiveness, Egf, Tgfβ, Cancer cell migration, Lung adenocarcinoma

### Affiliations
University of Vienna
University of Vienna, Faculty of Chemistry, Department of Analytical Chemistry

### Submitter
Christopher Gerner

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher Gerner
University of Vienna, Faculty of Chemistry, Department of Analytical Chemistry


