### Accession
PXD010126

### Title
Multifaceted stoichiometry control of bacterial operons revealed by data-independent acquisition mass spectrometry

### Description
Genes clustered into polycistronic operons was thought a characteristic of bacteria and many other species. More than half protein-coding genes are organized in polycistronic operons composed of two or more than ten genes in bacterial genomes. Although the structure of operons have been studied precisely, how the member genes within operon maintain their stoichiometry expression is remain unknown. Using a highly accurate label-free absolute quantification method DIA (data-independent acquisition), we present a global analysis of Escherichia coli proteome, quantified 1607 proteins, including 59.1% of the known polycistronic operons. We found shorter operons tend to be more tightly controlled than longer operons, and those operons for metabolic pathways are less controlled for stoichiometry balance than those operons for protein complexes. Our results thus reveal the two-level regulation mode involving transcription and translation of operons would balance the stoichiometry expression of genes in polycistronic operons in different time-scale.

### Sample Protocol
MS sample preparation Escherichia coli K-12 sub-strains BW25113 and MG1655 were cultivated on glucose M9 minimal medium in flasks to exponential phase (OD600 = 0.6) and then harvested in 45 mL volume, immediately cooled in ice water, and then centrifuged at 10,000 × g for 5 min. The pellet was washed once with PBS, centrifuged at 10,000 × g for 5 min again. Pellet was re-suspended on ice with lysis buffer (5 M urea/2 M thiourea in 10 mM HEPES, pH 8.0), and were sonicated and centrifuged at 17,000 × g for 30 min in a table-top centrifuge to remove cell debris. Supernatant was collected, and protein concentrations were determined with a Bradford Protein Assay (Bio-rad Protein Assay Dye Reagent Concentrate, Cat. #500-0006).  For proteome analysis, we employed in-solution protein digestion with a filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method[]. 1 mg of protein was subjected to reduction (8 M urea and 50 mM DTT at 37 °C, 1 h), followed by alkylation with 100 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in dark at room temperature for 30 min. The solution was transferred to the 30 kDa ultracentrifuge filters (Millipore). Proteins were washed with 8 M urea, and four sequential buffer changes were performed using 50 mM TEAB, respectively. Trypsin (Promega) was then added into the filter at a mass ratio of 1:20 for Proteins digested in 130 μL 50mM TEAB at 37°C for 12 hours. The released peptides were collected by centrifugation and dried with a cold-trap speed vacuum.

### Data Protocol
1 μg sample abovementioned peptides was analyzed on a C18 column (50 μm x 15 cm, 2 μm, Thermo Fisher) by using an EASY-nLC 1200 UHPLC connected to a Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The peptides with the iRT-standard (1/10 by volume) were separated by a linear gradient from 6% to 30% ACN with 0.1% formic acid at 270 nL/min for 100-130 min and linearly increased to 90% ACN in 20 min. For the data-dependent acquisition (DDA), the source was operated at 2.0 kV. The DDA scheme included a full MS survey scan from m/z 400 to m/z 1500 at a resolution of 60,000 FWHM with AGC set to 4E5 (maximum injection time of 50 ms), followed by MS/MS scans at a resolution of 15,000 FWHM with AGC set to 5E4 (maximum injection time of 30 ms), data-dependent mode was set to top speed. Isolation window was 1.6. Dynamic exclusion was set to 90 s with a 10 ppm tolerance around the selected precursor. For the DIA hyper reaction monitoring (HRM) MS, individual tryptic peptide samples were mixed with the iRT-standard (1/10 by volume. Biognosys, HRM Calibration Kit: Ki-3003) and analyzed by the same method as DDA used. The method consisted of a full MS1 scan at a resolution of 60,000 FWHM from m/z 350 to m/z 1,200 with AGC set to 4E5 (maximum injection time of 30 ms) followed by 40 DIA windows acquired at a resolution of 30,000 FWHM with AGC set to 5E5 (maximum injection time of 50 ms).  To generate the spectral library, three DDA measurements of the mixed samples were performed. Raw DDA datasets were searched against a combined database of the NCBI database of Escherichia coli str. K-12 (GCF_000005845.2_ASM584v2, 4140 entries) and the iRT standard peptides sequence using the Sequest HT (Proteome Discoverer v2.1) local server. Common contaminants in the database included trypsin and keratins. Precursor and product ion spectra were searched at an initial mass tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance 0.02 Da, respectively. Tryptic cleavage was selected, and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine (+57.021 Da) was set as a fixed modification, and oxidation (+15.995 Da) on methionine was assigned as a variable modification. A target-decoy-based strategy was applied to control peptide and protein false discovery rates (FDRs) at lower than 1%. Conﬁdent protein identiﬁcations should suit the following criteria: (1) protein level FDR ≤ 1%; (2) unique peptides ≥ 1 or 2; (3) peptide length ≥ 6 or 7 aa. The search result was exported in a pdResult file format containing the annotation of precursors and fragment ions and their exact retention times. The pdResult file was then imported into Spectronaut software Pulsar (Biognosys) to generate the spectral library used for HRM-MS data analysis

### Publication Abstract
More than half of the protein-coding genes in bacteria are organized in polycistronic operons composed of two or more genes. It remains under debate whether the operon organization maintains the stoichiometric expression of the genes within an operon. In this study, we performed a label-free data-independent acquisition hyper reaction monitoring mass-spectrometry (HRM-MS) experiment to quantify the <i>Escherichia coli</i> proteome in exponential phase and quantified 93.6% of the cytosolic proteins, covering 67.9% and 56.0% of the translating polycistronic operons in BW25113 and MG1655 strains, respectively. We found that the translational regulation contributes largely to the proteome complexity: the shorter operons tend to be more tightly controlled for stoichiometry than longer operons; the operons which mainly code for complexes is more tightly controlled for stoichiometry than the operons which mainly code for metabolic pathways. The gene interval (distance between adjacent genes in one operon) may serve as a regulatory factor for stoichiometry. The catalytic efficiency might be a driving force for differential expression of enzymes encoded in one operon. These results illustrated the multifaceted nature of the operon regulation: the operon unified transcriptional level and gene-specific translational level. This multi-level regulation benefits the host by optimizing the efficiency of the productivity of metabolic pathways and maintenance of different types of protein complexes.

### Keywords
Faceted stoichiometry control, Operons, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Key Laboratory of Functional Protein Research of Guangdong Higher Education Institutes, Institute of Life and Health Engineering, Jinan Univrsity, Guangzhou510632, China
Key Laboratory of Functional Protein Research of Guangdong Higher Education Institutes, Institute of Life and Health Engineering, Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632, China

### Submitter
Jing Zhao

### Lab Head
Dr Gong Zhang
Key Laboratory of Functional Protein Research of Guangdong Higher Education Institutes, Institute of Life and Health Engineering, Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632, China


