### Accession
PXD029241

### Title
Changes in the proteome and secretome of rat liver sinusoidal endothelial cells during early primary culture and effects of dexamethasone

### Description
Liver sinusoidal endothelial cells (LSECs) are specialized fenestrated scavenger endothelial cells involved in the elimination of modified plasma proteins and tissue turnover waste macromolecules from blood. LSECs also participate in liver immune responses. A challenge when studying LSEC biology is the rapid loss of the in vivo cell phenotype in culture. In this study, we have examined biological processes and pathways affected during early-stage primary culture of rat LSECs and checked for cell responses to the pro-inflammatory cytokine interleukin (IL)-1 and the anti-inflammatory drug dexamethasone. Methods: LSECs from male Sprague Dawley rats were cultured on type I collagen in a 5% oxygen atmosphere in DMEM with serum-free supplements for 2 and 24 h. Quantitative proteomics using tandem mass tag technology were used to examine proteins in cells and supernatants. Validation was done with ELISA and multiplex immunobead assays, cell ultrastructure was examined by scanning electron microscopy, and scavenger function by quantitative endocytosis assays. Results: LSECs cultured for 24 h showed a characteristic pro-inflammatory phenotype both in the presence and absence of IL-1, displaying upregulation of cellular responses to cytokines and interferon-, cell-cell adhesion, and glycolysis, and downregulation of membrane/endocytosis receptors (MCAM, STAB1, STAB2, LYVE1, CLEC4G) and proteins involved in pyruvate metabolism, citric acid cycle, fatty acid elongation, amino acid metabolism, and oxidation-reduction processes. Dexamethasone improved LSEC viability in culture and repressed the culture-induced stimulation of glycolysis, inflammatory and immune regulatory pathways, and secretion of pro-inflammatory cytokines while increasing IL-10 secretion compared to time-matched control. The number of sieve plates in LSECs was reduced at 24 h both in the presence and absence of dexamethasone but the dexamethasone-treated cells showed a more quiescent phenotype. Conclusion: Rat LSECs become activated towards a pro-inflammatory phenotype during early culture. Dexamethasone represses LSEC activation and improves cell viability.

### Sample Protocol
Supernatant of LSECs cultured for 24h was collected and filtered through a 0.2 µm membrane to remove debris, then concentrated on Vivaspin columns (3kD cut-off, Sartorius AG, City, State). The protein solution was washed 3 times with PBS in the column and the volume reduced to 0.2 ml.  Cellular protein extracts of LSEC cultures incubated for either 2h, or 24h were prepared according to the protocol provided in the TMTsixplexTM Isobaric Mass Tagging Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) with the following modification: Denaturing reagent was 5% sodium deoxycholate in 100mM TEAB (triethyl ammonium bicarbonate). Protein concentrations of concentrated supernatant and cellular extracts were measured with Direct DetectTM Infrared Spectrometer (Millipore). The proteins in cell extracts and supernatants were reduced according to the protocol provided in the TMTsixplexTM Isobaric Mass Tagging Kit, except that the reducing reagent was 5 mM dithiothreitol (Sigma) instead of tri (2-carboxyethyl)-phosphine. Proteins were precipitated with acetone and the pellet collected by centrifugation at 16000g for 10 min. The protein pellet (25 µg) was resuspended in 2M urea, 50mM TEAB. Proteins were digested for 6 h by 1:100 (w/w) lysyl endopeptidase (Fujifilm Wako Chemicals Europe GmBH, Neuss, Germany). The samples were diluted to 1M urea and digested overnight with 1:20 (w/w) trypsin (V511A, Promega Corporation, Wisconsin, USA). Peptides from each sample was labelled with the TMTsixplexTM Isobaric Mass Tagging Kit according to the manufacturer’s protocol. OMIX C18 tips (Varian, Inc., Palo Alto, CA, USA) was used for sample cleanup and concentration. Peptide mixtures containing 0.1% formic acid were loaded onto Thermo Fisher Scientific EASY-nLC1000 system and EASY-Spray column (C18, 2µm, 100Å, 50µm, 50cm). Peptides were fractionated using a 2-100% acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% formic acid over 180 min at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. The separated peptides were analyzed using a Thermo Scientific Q-Exactive mass spectrometer. Data was collected in data dependent mode using a Top10 method. Raw data were processed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.0.30), and proteins were identified using the integrated Andromeda search engine. Tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) data was searched against the UniProt Rattus norvegicus (Rat) reference proteome (UniProt 2019). A false discovery rate (FDR) ratio of 0.01 was needed to give a protein identification.

### Data Protocol
The resulting output from MaxQuant was pre-processed with Perseus (version 1.6.10.43). The generated list of proteins was filtered to remove protein hits that were annotated as only identified by site, contaminants, and reverse hits in Perseus. The annotation of the protein IDs to their corresponding gene symbols was manually curated with the UniProt Knowledgebase (UniProtKB; (UniProt 2019)). Redundant gene symbols were summed to get the expression values before doing the differential expression analysis.  The tag-reporter intensity corrected output from the MaxQuant was used for protein quantification. Each single TMT run contained all the experimental groups from one rat (=one biological replicate; see experimental set up in Fig. 1), and the reporter intensity was therefore dependent both on the run and the rat. The runs are separately scaled, followed by internal reference scaling normalization (Plubell, Wilmarth et al. 2017, Khan, Ali et al. 2018). Finally, the data was normalized for compositional bias using EdgeR TMM normalization (Bioconductor; (Robinson and Oshlack 2010)). These normalized intensities were then used in differential protein expression analysis using edgeR-limma workflow described in (Law, Alhamdoosh et al. 2016, Bhandari, Li et al. 2020). In addition, the differential protein expression in the supernatant datasets were checked by adjusting the normalized data for the total amount of histone and ribosomal proteins. The result displayed no significant difference prior to and after scaling for histone and ribosomal proteins in terms of the differential expression analyses (not shown). Therefore, supernatant datasets without additional histone and ribosomal proteins scaling were used for the subsequent analysis and illustration. We want to keep the normalization steps as low as possible not to introduce bias due to inherent variability in expression of histone and ribosomes in our data.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Glucocorticoid(s), Cell survival, Dexamethasone, Rat, Liver, Proteome, Liver sinusoidal endothelial cell(s), Secretome, Tmt isobaric tag labeling, Il-1b, Phenotype, Lc-msms, Endothelial activation, Proteomics, Scavenger receptors, Capillaries

### Affiliations
UiT
Department of Medical Biology, Faculty of Health Sciences, UiT The Arctic University of Norway, Tromsø, Norway

### Submitter
Sabin Bhandari

### Lab Head
Dr Karen Kristine Sørensen
Department of Medical Biology, Faculty of Health Sciences, UiT The Arctic University of Norway, Tromsø, Norway


