### Accession
PXD020185

### Title
Metabolic selection of a homologous recombination mediated gene rearrangement in Trypanosoma brucei

### Description
The Trypanosoma brucei genome contains three fumarate reductase (FRD) genes, including two tandemly arranged in chromosome 5 encoding the glycosomal isoform (FRDg) and a potentially mitochondrial FRD isoform never detected so far in trypanosomes (FRDm2). We report here that the PPDK/PEPCK/GPDH mutant cell line (Δppdk/Δpepck/RNAi-GPDH) expresses a chimeric non-functional FRDg-m2 isoform resulting from stochastic homologous recombination within the FRDg/FRDm2 locus. This conclusion come from comparison of the parental (WT, Δppdk, Δpepck and Δppdk/Δpepck) and Δppdk/Δpepck/RNAi-GPDH proteomes. The selective advantage provided by the consequential loss of the FRDg gene, in the context of the Δppdk/Δpepck/RNAi-GPDH null background, is probably related to the autoflavinylation activity of the FRDg isoform.

### Sample Protocol
Total extracts and glycosome enriched fractions of trypanosomes were loaded on a 10% acrylamide SDS-PAGE gel and proteins were visualized by Colloidal Blue staining. For total extracts, migration was performed classically and each protein lanes were cut into 4 equal segments. For glycosome enriched fractions, migration was stopped when samples had just entered the resolving gel and the unresolved region of the gel cut into only one segment. Each SDS-PAGE band was cut into into 1 mm x 1 mm gel pieces and protein were reduced, alkylated and digested by trypsin. Online nanoLC-MS/MS analyses were performed using an Ultimate 3000 system (Dionex, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) coupled to a nanospray LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Ten microliters of each peptide extract were loaded on a 300 µm ID x 5 mm PepMap C18 precolumn (LC Packings, Dionex, USA) at a flow rate of 10 µl/min. After 5 min desalting, peptides were online separated on a 75 µm ID x 15 cm C18PepMapTM column (LC packings, Dionex, USA) with a 2-40% linear gradient of solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80% ACN) during 108 min. The separation flow rate was set at 200 nl/min. The mass spectrometer operated in positive ion mode at a 1.8 kV needle voltage and a 42 V capillary voltage. Data were acquired in a data-dependent mode alternating an FTMS scan survey over the range m/z 300-1700 with the resolution set to a value of 60 000 at m/z 400 and six ion trap MS/MS scans with Collision Induced Dissociation (CID) as activation mode. MS/MS spectra were acquired using a 3 m/z unit ion isolation window and normalized collision energy of 35. Mono-charged ions and unassigned charge-state ions were rejected from fragmentation. Dynamic exclusion duration was set to 30 sec.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification, Sequest HT and Mascot 2.4 algorithms through Proteome Discoverer 1.4 Software (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) were used for protein identification in batch mode by searching against a Trypanosoma brucei protein database (11 119 entries, release 46). This database was downloaded from http://tritrypdb.org website. Two missed enzyme cleavages were allowed. Mass tolerances in MS and MS/MS were set to 10 ppm and 0.6 Da. Oxidation of methionine, acetylation of lysine and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine were searched as dynamic modifications. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine was searched as static modification. Peptide validation was performed using Percolator algorithm and only “high confidence” peptides were retained corresponding to a 1% False Discovery Rate (FDR) at peptide level. Raw LC-MS/MS data were imported in Progenesis QI (version 2.0; Nonlinear Dynamics, a Waters Company) for feature detection, alignment, and quantification. All sample features were aligned according to retention times by manually inserting up to fifty landmarks followed by automatic alignment to maximally overlay all the two-dimensional (m/z and retention time) feature maps. Singly charged ions and ions with higher charge states than six were excluded from analysis. All remaining features were used to calculate a normalization factor for each sample that corrects for experimental variation. Peptide identifications (with FDR<1%) were imported into Progenesis. Only non-conflicting features and unique peptides were considered for calculation of quantification at protein level. A minimum of two peptides matched to a protein was used as the criteria for identification as a differentially expressed protein.

### Publication Abstract
The genome of trypanosomatids rearranges by using repeated sequences as platforms for amplification or deletion of genomic segments. These stochastic recombination events have a direct impact on gene dosage and foster the selection of adaptive traits in response to environmental pressure. We provide here such an example by showing that the phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (PEPCK) gene knockout (&#x394;pepck) leads to the selection of a deletion event between two tandemly arranged fumarate reductase (FRDg and FRDm2) genes to produce a chimeric FRDg-m2 gene in the &#x394;pepck&#x2217; cell line. FRDg is expressed in peroxisome-related organelles, named glycosomes, expression of FRDm2 has not been detected to date, and FRDg-m2 is nonfunctional and cytosolic. Re-expression of FRDg significantly impaired growth of the &#x394;pepck&#x2217; cells, but FRD enzyme activity was not required for this negative effect. Instead, glycosomal localization as well as the covalent flavinylation motif of FRD is required to confer growth retardation and intracellular accumulation of reactive oxygen species (ROS). The data suggest that FRDg, similar to Escherichia coli FRD, can generate ROS in a flavin-dependent process by transfer of electrons from NADH to molecular oxygen instead of fumarate when the latter is unavailable, as in the &#x394;pepck background. Hence, growth retardation is interpreted as a consequence of increased production of ROS, and rearrangement of the FRD locus liberates &#x394;pepck&#x2217; cells from this obstacle. Interestingly, intracellular production of ROS has been shown to be required to complete the parasitic cycle in the insect vector, suggesting that FRDg may play a role in this process.

### Keywords
Label-free quantitative proteome analysis, Trypanosoma brucei

### Affiliations
Laboratoire de Microbiologie Fondamentale et Pathogénicité (MFP), Université de Bordeaux, CNRS UMR-5234, Bordeaux, France
Plateforme Proteome Bordeaux

### Submitter
Dupuy Jean-William

### Lab Head
Dr Frédéric Bringaud
Laboratoire de Microbiologie Fondamentale et Pathogénicité (MFP), Université de Bordeaux, CNRS UMR-5234, Bordeaux, France


