### Accession
PXD032942

### Title
Thermal Proteome Profiling Datasets for smarTPCA

### Description
Chemical biology and the application of small molecules has proven to be a potent perturbation strategy especially for the functional elucidation of proteins, their networks and regulators. In recent years, the cellular thermal shift assay (CETSA) and its proteome-wide extension, thermal proteome profiling (TPP), have proven to be effective tools for identifying interactions of small molecules with their target proteins as well as off-targets in living cells. Here, we asked the question if isothermal dose-response (ITDR) CETSA can be exploited to characterize secondary effects downstream of the primary binding event, such as changes in post-translational modifications or protein-protein interactions (PPI). Applying ITDR-CETSA to MAPK14 kinase inhibitor treatment of living HL-60 cells, we found similar dose-responses for the direct inhibitor target and its known interaction partners MAPKAPK2 and MAPKAPK3. Extension of the dose-response similarity comparison to the proteome wide level using TPP with compound concentration range (TPP-CCR) revealed not only the known MAPK14 interaction partners MAPKAPK2 and MAPKAPK3, but also the potentially new intracellular interaction partner MYLK. We are confident that dose-dependent small molecule treatment in combination with ITDR-CETSA or TPP-CCR similarity assessment will not only allow discrimination between primary and secondary effects, but also provide a novel method to study PPI in living cells without perturbation by protein modification, which we named "small molecule arranged thermal proximity coaggregation" (smarTPCA).

### Sample Protocol
See Lenz, T. and Stühler, K., Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022 (manuscript ready for submission) for detailed description. In brief, HL-60 cells were treated with the MAPK14 inhibitors AMG-548 or SB203580 as well as the MAPK1/3 kinase inhibitor ERK 11e (20 µM and vehicle control for TPP-TR or nine fourfold dilutions starting from 20 µM and vehicle control for TPP-CCR also including Quercetin), temperature treated (ten different temperatures in the range 37-67°C for TPP-TR or 51°C for TPP-CCR), and the soluble (non-heat-denatured) protein fraction was obtained after mild cell lysis and centrifugation. After preparing tryptic peptides from the non-denatured protein fractions applying in-gel digestion (TPP-TR) or the SP3 method (TPP-CCR), the peptides were labeled using TMT10plex, coding for temperature (TPP-TR) or inhibitor concentration (TPP-CCR), and the samples belonging to a TMT set were combined, offline high pH fractionated (eight fractions) and analyzed by LC-MS/MS (Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer for TPP-TR or Q Exactive plus hybrid quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer for TPP-CCR).

### Data Protocol
MS data was processed with MaxQuant (Max Planck Institute for Biochemistry, Planegg, Germany) version 1.6.6.0 for TPP-TR and version 1.6.17.0 for TPP-CCR. If not stated otherwise, standard parameters were used for protein identification and quantification. Searches were carried out based on 74416 Homo sapiens protein entries downloaded from the UniProtKB on 19th June 2019 for TPP-TR or 75777 Homo sapiens protein entries downloaded from the UniProtKB on 27th January 2021 for TPP-CCR using tryptic cleavage specificity (behind K and R) and a maximum of three missed cleavage sites. Methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation as well as a carbamidomethylation at cysteine residues were considered as variable and fixed modifications, respectively. First, an initial search was carried out using a precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm and after recalibration, a second search was performed with 4.5 ppm precursor mass tolerance. Tolerances for fragment spectra were 20 ppm. Peptides and proteins were identified with an FDR of 1%. The eight MS raw files corresponding to the eight high-pH fractions of each sample set were defined as fractions (Fraction 1-8) of the respective experiment in the table under the "Raw data" folder in the MaxQuant GUI. The settings “Label-free quantification” and “Match between runs” were explicitly disabled.  The following settings were explicitly enabled:  - Group-specific parameters -> Type -> Type -> Reporter ion MS3 (TPP-TR) or MS2 (TPP-CCR) with 10plex TMT and Reporter mass tolerance of 0.003 Da. Correction factors were not used for the single TMT labels, because their effect had been found neglectable in previous tests on published data sets (Pride ID: PXD013774; Franken et al., 2015).  - Global parameters -> Protein quantification -> Discard unmodified counterpart peptides and Advanced ratio estimation  - Global parameters -> Tables -> Write ms3Scans table

### Publication Abstract
Chemical biology and the application of small molecules has proven to be a potent perturbation strategy, especially for the functional elucidation of proteins, their networks, and regulators. In recent years, the cellular thermal shift assay (CETSA) and its proteome-wide extension, thermal proteome profiling (TPP), have proven to be effective tools for identifying interactions of small molecules with their target proteins, as well as off-targets in living cells. Here, we asked the question whether isothermal dose-response (ITDR) CETSA can be exploited to characterize secondary effects downstream of the primary binding event, such as changes in post-translational modifications or protein-protein interactions (PPI). By applying ITDR-CETSA to MAPK14 kinase inhibitor treatment of living HL-60 cells, we found similar dose-responses for the direct inhibitor target and its known interaction partners MAPKAPK2 and MAPKAPK3. Extension of the dose-response similarity comparison to the proteome wide level using TPP with compound concentration range (TPP-CCR) revealed not only the known MAPK14 interaction partners MAPKAPK2 and MAPKAPK3, but also the potentially new intracellular interaction partner MYLK. We are confident that dose-dependent small molecule treatment in combination with ITDR-CETSA or TPP-CCR similarity assessment will not only allow discrimination between primary and secondary effects, but will also provide a novel method to study PPI in living cells without perturbation by protein modification, which we named "small molecule arranged thermal proximity coaggregation" (smarTPCA).

### Keywords
Small molecule arranged thermal proximity coaggregation (smartpca), Hl-60 cell line, Thermal proteome profiling (tpp), Kinase inhibitors, Tpp with temperature range (tpp-tr) or compound concentration range (tpp-ccr)

### Affiliations
1 Molecular Proteomics Laboratory, Biological Medical Research Center, Heinrich-Heine-University Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany 2 Institute for Molecular Medicine, Proteome Research, University Hospital and Medical Faculty, Heinrich-Heine-University Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany
MPL/BMFZ, HHU Düsseldorf

### Submitter
Thomas Lenz

### Lab Head
Dr Kai Stühler
1 Molecular Proteomics Laboratory, Biological Medical Research Center, Heinrich-Heine-University Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany 2 Institute for Molecular Medicine, Proteome Research, University Hospital and Medical Faculty, Heinrich-Heine-University Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany


