### Accession
PXD023659

### Title
Specificity of the protase acrosin in zona pellucida proteins

### Description
This study aims to characterize the sperm protease acrosin.

### Sample Protocol
Zonae pellucidae were washed 3 times in PBS and groups of 150-185 zonae pellucidae were suspended in 5 µl PBS to which 45 µl of low pH PBS (pH 2.7) were added to dissolve the zonae pellucidae. The samples were adjusted to pH 7 using 0.35% ammonia. After reduction / alkylation the samples were split and digested with 0.1 µg GluC or chymotrypsin. After desalting on a SepPak tC18 uElution Plate the samples were lyophilized and resuspended in 0.1% for LC-MS/MS measurement. Peptides were separated using 120 min gradients (5-35% acetonitrile) by nanoscale reversed-phase nanoUPLC using a Waters HSS-T3 column (75 µm *250 mm) on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 liquid chromatography system directly coupled to a Thermo Exploris-480 mass spectrometer. Data were acquired by data-directed acquisition, selecting the 20 most abundant peptides for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Raw data processing and database search was performed using Proteome Discoverer V2.4 using Sequest HT as database search engine. Shared clavage sites, that were unlikely from the used protease were assumed as cleavage sites of acrosin.

### Publication Abstract
The encounter of oocyte and sperm is the key event initiating embryonic development in mammals. Crucial functions of this existential interaction are determined by proteolytic enzymes, such as acrosin, carried in the sperm head acrosome, and ovastacin, stored in the oocyte cortical granules. Ovastacin is released upon fertilisation to cleave the zona pellucida, a glycoprotein matrix surrounding the oocyte. This limited proteolysis hardens the oocyte envelope, and thereby provides a definitive block against polyspermy and protects the developing embryo. On the other hand, acrosin, the renowned and most abundant acrosomal protease, has been thought to enable sperm to penetrate the oocyte envelope. Depending on the species, proteolytic cleavage of the zona pellucida by acrosin is either essential or conducive for fertilisation. However, the specific target cleavage sites and the resulting physiological consequences of this proteolysis remained obscure. Here, we treated native mouse zonae pellucidae with active acrosin and identified two cleavage sites in zona pellucida protein 1 (ZP1), five in ZP2 and one in ZP3 by mass spectrometry. Several of these sites are highly conserved in mammals. Remarkably, limited proteolysis by acrosin leads to zona pellucida remodelling rather than degradation. Thus, acrosin affects both sperm binding and mechanical resilience of the zona pellucida, as assessed by microscopy and nanoindentation measurements, respectively. Furthermore, we ascertained potential regulatory effects of acrosin, via activation of latent pro-ovastacin and inactivation of fetuin-B, a tight binding inhibitor of ovastacin. These results offer novel insights into the complex proteolytic network modifying the extracellular matrix of the mouse oocyte, which might apply also to other species.

### Keywords
Ovastacin, Fetuin-b, Acrosin, Mammalian fertilization, Zona pellucida

### Affiliations
University Medical Center of the Johannes Gutenberg-University Mainz / Institute for Immunology
University medical center of the Johannes Gutenberg-University / Institute for Immunology / Core Facility Mass Spectrometry

### Submitter
Thomas Michna

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan Tenzer
University medical center of the Johannes Gutenberg-University / Institute for Immunology / Core Facility Mass Spectrometry


