### Accession
PXD013855

### Title
Role of GATA-2 -77 enhancer in murine blood progenitor cells

### Description
We discovered enhancers that control GATA-2 expression during mouse development and in adult and generated mutant mouse strains that lack these enhancers, and these mice have very specific and important phenotypes that revealed GATA-2 mechanisms to control stem and progenitor cell transitions. In this study we aim to determine what proteins are under control of the GATA-2 -77 enhancer in a pool of heterogeneous blood progenitor cells with the specific focus on Socs2 expression.

### Sample Protocol
Blood progenitor cells were sorted by FACS, lyzed, and digested in solution with trypsin. Resultant peptides were separated using nanoHPLC and analyzed on Orbitrap Fusion Lumos.

### Data Protocol
Raw data corresponding to the whole proteome analysis were searched in MaxQuant (v. 1.6.1.0) against mouse database. Targeted data were analyzed with Skyline.

### Publication Abstract
Stem and progenitor cell fate transitions constitute key decision points in organismal development that enable access to a developmental path or actively preclude others. Using the hematopoietic system, we analyzed the relative importance of cell fate-promoting mechanisms versus negating fate-suppressing mechanisms to engineer progenitor cells with multilineage differentiation potential. Deletion of the murine Gata2-77 enhancer, with a human equivalent that causes leukemia, downregulates the transcription factor GATA2 and blocks progenitor differentiation into erythrocytes, megakaryocytes, basophils, and granulocytes, but not macrophages. Using multiomics and single-cell analyses, we demonstrated that the enhancer orchestrates a balance between pro- and anti-fate circuitry in single cells. By increasing GATA2 expression, the enhancer instigates a fate-promoting mechanism while abrogating an innate immunity-linked, fate-suppressing mechanism. During embryogenesis, the suppressing mechanism dominated in enhancer mutant progenitors, thus yielding progenitors with a predominant monocytic differentiation potential. Coordinating fate-promoting and -suppressing circuits therefore averts deconstruction of a multifate system into a monopotent system and maintains critical progenitor heterogeneity and functionality.

### Keywords
Primary tissue, Targeted proteomics, Deep analysis, Label-free proteomics

### Affiliations
University of Wisconsin - Madison

### Submitter
Evgenia Shishkova

### Lab Head
Dr Joshua Coon
University of Wisconsin - Madison


