### Accession
PXD007860

### Title
Characterizing T-cell immunopeptidomes

### Description
Imunopeptidomes promise novel surface markers as ideal targets for immunotherapies, but their characterization by mass spectrometry (MS) remains challenging. Until recently, cell numbers exceeding 1.0xE9 were needed for reasonably deep immunopeptidome surveys of at least 1,000 HLA ligands. Such limitation in analytical sensitivity necessarily constrains the types of clinical specimens that can evaluated. To evaluate the feasibility of immunopeptidome profiling from limiting cell amounts, primary purified human regulatory (Treg) and conventional T cells (Tconv) were compared, evaluating the relative immunopeptide recovery from T cells isolated from individual healthy donors (N=5) versus pools (N=2 pools from 13 donors). Two donors’ Tconv were subsequently stimulated with CD3/CD28 and IL-2 and compared to resting Tconv. The combined T-cell immunopeptide dataset reported here contains over 13,000 unique peptides derived from over 5,000 proteins. In comparison to protein expression, T cell immunopeptidomes revealed complementary aspects of T cell biology, while pointing to HLA ligands specific for distinct T cell subsets (e.g., FOXP3, CD5 and WNK1). Taken together, these findings have implications for understanding conditions required to induce therapeutic immune responses and may open up new avenues for tuning Treg suppressive functions to treat cancer.

### Sample Protocol
Human Treg and CD4+ Tconv cells were enriched using immunomagnetic bead separation. MHC-class I immunopeptidomes were extracted from five single-donor T cell preparations, two pooled T cell preparations, and two T cell preparations that were activated and expanded in culture In brief, cells were lysed and the lysate was subjected to centrifugation and then precleared using rProtein A Sepharose fast-flow beads (GE Healthcare). For all MHC-class 1 captures the precleared lysate was incubated with the pan HLA-A-, B-, and C- antibody W6/32 coupled to rProtein A Sepharose fast-flow beads. Following the immune-capture, the beads were washed with TBS and peptides were eluted from the purified MHC-molecules using 10% acetic acid. The peptides were further purified with a MWCO size filter, followed by a concentration step and then desalted on C18 based StageTips. The isolated peptides were analyzed on a LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific) or a Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific).

### Data Protocol
All tandem mass spectra were queried against the human proteome Swiss-Prot database (20,214 entries, manually reviewed) with added common contaminants using Proteome Discoverer (v 2.2.0.388) with SEQUEST (Eng et al., 1994) search engine. Spectrum matching was set to one for b and y ions for HCD and c and z for EThcD. For all searches, the parent mass error tolerance was set to 10 ppm and the fragment mass error tolerance to 0.02 Da. Enzyme specificity was set to none and oxidation of methionines and deamidation (N, Q), cysteinylation, and phosphorylation (S, T, Y) was searched as a variable modification. High-confidence peptide identifications were selected at a 1% false discovery rate with the Percolator algorithm (Käll et al., 2007).

### Publication Abstract
Immunopeptidomes promise novel surface markers as ideal immunotherapy targets, but their characterization by mass spectrometry (MS) remains challenging. Until recently, cell numbers exceeding 10<sup>9</sup> were needed to survey thousands of HLA ligands. Such limited analytical sensitivity has historically constrained the types of clinical specimens that can be evaluated to cell cultures or bulk tissues. Measuring immunopeptidomes from purified cell subpopulations would be preferable for many applications, particularly those evaluating rare, primary hematopoietic cell lineages. Here, we test the feasibility of immunopeptidome profiling from limited numbers of primary purified human regulatory T cells (T<sub>Reg</sub> ), conventional T cells (T<sub>conv</sub> ), and activated T cells. The combined T cell immunopeptide dataset reported here contains 13&#xa0;804 unique HLA ligands derived from 5049 proteins. Of these, more than 700 HLA ligands were derived from 82 proteins that we exclusively identified from T<sub>Reg</sub> -enriched cells. This study 1) demonstrates that primary, lineage-enriched T cell subpopulations recovered from single donors are compatible with immunopeptidome analysis; 2) presents new T<sub>Reg</sub> -biased ligand candidates; and 3) supports immunopeptidome surveys' value for revealing T cell biology that may not be apparent from expression data alone. Taken together, these findings open up new avenues for targeting T<sub>Reg</sub> and abrogating their suppressive functions to treat cancer.

### Keywords
Human, Antigen presentation, T cell, Mhc, Orbitrap

### Affiliations
Department of Chemical & Systems Biology, Stanford University, USA
Stanford University

### Submitter
Niclas Olsson

### Lab Head
Dr Joshua E Elias
Department of Chemical & Systems Biology, Stanford University, USA


