### Accession
PXD022870

### Title
MALDI-IMS combined with shotgun proteomics identify and localize new factors in male infertility

### Description
Spermatogenesis is a complex multi-step process involving intricate interactions between different cell types in the male testis. Disruption of these interactions results in infertility. Combination of shotgun tissue proteomics with MALDI imaging mass spectrometry is markedly potent in revealing topological maps of molecular processes within tissues. Here, we use a combinatorial approach on a characterized mouse model of hormone induced male infertility to uncover misregulated pathways. Comparative testicular proteome of wildtype and mice overexpressing human P450 aromatase (AROM+) with pathologically increased estrogen levels unravels gross dysregulation of spermatogenesis and emergence of pro-inflammatory pathways in AROM+ testis. In situ MS allowed us to localize misregulated proteins/peptides to defined regions within the testis. Results suggest that infertility is associated with substantial loss of proteomic heterogeneity, which define distinct stages of seminiferous tubuli in healthy animals. Importantly, considerable loss of mitochondrial factors, proteins associated with late stages of spermatogenesis and steroidogenic factors characterise AROM+ mice. Thus, the novel proteomic approach pinpoints in unprecedented ways the disruption of normal processes in testis and provides a signature for male infertility.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for LC-MS Approximately 1 mg of WT and AROM+ tissues were homogenized manually. Proteins were extracted from the partially homogenized tissue employing the iST Sample Preparation Kit (PreOmics, Martinsried, Germany) using manufacturer’s protocol. Briefly; the tissues were lysed and subsequently sheared to get rid of DNA and other interfering molecules. The homogenous lysate was incubated with Trypsin at 37°C for 2.5 hours. The ensuing peptides were subsequently desalted, purified and re-dissolved in 10 µl ‘Load’ solution after drying completely in a speed vac.  MS measurements For reversed phase HPLC separation of peptides on a Ultimate 3000 nanoLC system (Thermo-Fisher-Scientific), 5 μl of the solution were loaded onto the analytical column (120 x 0.075mm, in house packed with ReprosilC18-AQ, 2.4 μm, Dr. Maisch GmbH), washed for 5 min at 300 nl/min with 3% ACN containing 0.1% FA and subsequently separated applying a linear gradient from 3% ACN to 40% ACN over 50 min. Eluting peptides were ionized in a nanoESI source and on line detected on a QExactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo-Fisher Scientific). The mass spectrometer was operated in a TOP10 method in positive ionization mode, detecting eluting peptide ions in the m/z range from 375 to 1600 and performing MS/MS analysis of up to 10 precursor ions. Peptide ion masses were acquired at a resolution of 60000 (at 200 m/z). High-energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) MS/MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 15000 (at 200 m/z). All mass spectra were internally calibrated to lock masses from ambient siloxanes. Precursors were selected based on their intensity from all signals with a charge state from 2+ to 5+, isolated in a 2 m/z window and fragmented using a normalized collision energy of 27%. To prevent repeated fragmentation of the same peptide ion, dynamic exclusion was set to 20 s. Sample preparation for IMS Fresh frozen testis from WT and AROM+ animals were cryo-sectioned into 12 m thick sections using CM1950 cryostat (Leica Microsystems, Germany) and thaw-mounted on conductive ITO coated glass slides (Bruker Daltonik GmbH, Germany) pretreated with poly-lysine (1:1 in water with 0.1% NP-40). The slides were then stored at -80°C until further analysis.  Tissue sections were washed prior to trypsin and matrix spraying to remove lipids and salts, which act as interferents in MALDI measurements. Tissue sections were washed as previously described (Deutskens, Yang et al., 2011) with some modifications for measuring in situ generated peptides. Briefly; proteins were precipitated in situ by a sequential wash in 70% and 100% ethanol (for 30 s each) followed by a 90 s wash in Carnoy’s fluid (6:3:1 Ethanol:Chloroform:Acetic acid, v/v/v). Tissues were put back in 100% ethanol for 30 s. Further washing in dH2O containing 0.2% TFA was performed to remove salts and acidify. Excess acid was removed by washing the sections in 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 30 s. The excess water from the previous two steps was removed by washing with 100% ethanol for 30 s. Subsequently, the slides were dried in vacuum overnight at RT before Trypsin-spraying. 25 ng/l Trypsin solution was prepared in 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate and sprayed on the tissue sections using the syringe spray system of TM Sprayer (HTX Imaging, HTX Technologies, LLC). The spraying parameters for trypsin were the following: Temperature - 30°C, No. of passes – 8, Pattern – Criss-Cross (CC), Flow rate – 0.03 ml/min, Nozzle velocity – 750, Track spacing – 2 mm, Gas pressure – 10 psi, Nozzle height – 40 mm. The sprayed sections were then incubated at 50°C for 2.5 hours in a humid chamber.  Subsequently, the slides were sprayed with 10 mg/ml HCCA in 70% ACN and 1% TFA in the TM sprayer using the following spray parameters: Temperature – 75°C, No. of passes – 4, Pattern – Horizontal (HH), Flow rate – 0.12 ml/min, Nozzle velocity – 1200, Track spacing – 3 mm, Gas pressure – 10 psi, Gas flow rate: 2, Nozzle height – 40 mm.   IMS measurements Imaging experiments were performed in a rapifleX MALDI Tissuetyper MALDI-TOF/TOF mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonik GmbH, Germany) equipped with a SmartBeam 3G laser. Tissues were measured in a positive reflector mode with 25 m spatial resolution and using a mass range of 600-3200 Da. Each measurement was pre-calibrated externally using a commercial peptide calibrant mixture (Bruker Daltonik GmbH, Germany) spotted on the same target as the tissues at multiple positions. Tissues from all the animals were measured in the rapifleX using 1.25 GS/s sample rate and a pulsed ion extraction of 160 ns. After the IMS measurements, HCCA matrix was removed by washing the slides in 70% ethanol and H&E counterstaining was performed. High-resolution images of the stained sections were obtained from Mirax Scan system (Carl Zeiss MicroImaging, Germany) and co-registered with MALDI-IMS data for histological correlation.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis for LC-MS Protein identification was performed by MaxQuant 1.6.0.16 software package. Parent ion and fragment mass tolerances were 8 ppm and 0.7 Da respectively and allowance for 2 missed cleavages was made. Mouse canonical protein database from Uniprot (release June, 2018), filtered to retain only the reviewed entries was used for the searches. Regular MaxQuant conditions were the following: Peptide FDR, 0.01; Protein FDR, 0.01; Min. peptide Length, 5; Variable modifications, Oxidation (M); Acetyl (Protein N-term); Acetyl (K); Dimethyl (KR); Fixed modifications, Carbamidomethyl (C); Peptides for protein quantitation, razor and unique; Min. peptides, 2; Min. ratio count, 2. Proteins were validated on the basis of at least 1 unique peptide detected in the proteome of all the 3 replicates or in at least 2 of the 3 replicates. Statistical analysis In order to detect significant changes in protein levels between WT and AROM+, we performed statistical analysis on the acquired LC-MS/MS data. We chose LIMMA moderated t-test proposed earlier (Kammers, Cole et al., 2015) over standard t-test because it utilizes full data to shrink the observed sample variance towards a pooled estimate, resulting in far more stable and powerful inference compared to ordinary t-test.  Missing values in proteomics data is a common problem and are usually imputed before applying statistical methods. Here, we have used an imputation algorithm (Tyanova, Temu et al., 2016), which allows us to randomly draw values from a distribution meant to simulate values below the detection limit of the MS instrument. We have implemented the statistical analyses in R, MATLAB and used Cytoscape (Shannon, Markiel et al., 2003) for network graph generation. Pathway analysis In order to understand biological pathways affected in testis by the overexpression of aromatase, we analysed proteins that were either enriched or exclusively detected in WT or AROM+ for their involvement in those pathways. Enrichment analysis is a common practice to discover biological themes associated with the proteins of interest. Here, we used the R package ReactomePA (Yu & He, 2016) to discover biological pathways in which the enriched or exclusive proteins participate. The package use hypergeometric distribution model to calculate p-values to determine whether any Reactome Pathways annotate a specified list of genes at a frequency greater than that would be expected by chance. Data Analysis for IMS The acquired data was exported to SCiLS Lab version 2016b (SCiLS, Bremen, Germany, www.scils.de) (Trede, Schiffler et al., 2012) software for further analysis. Initially, a segmentation pipeline was executed on the acquired IMS data from both WT and AROM+ tissues (Supplementary Fig 1) for unbiased hierarchical clustering with a minimal interval width of ± 0.1 Da. The resulting clusters were examined for their correlation with histological features of the tissues manually. Subsequently, clusters representing relevant regions were selected for further analysis.  Peptide masses defined as distinguishing the clusters that are discussed in the manuscript were found using ‘Find discriminative m/z values’ tool of SCiLS Lab. The tool uses the Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) measure to discriminate between all m/z values from a particular cluster. The resulting mass list in each case (with a threshold of at least 0.7) was exported as an excel file and further processed through in-house developed program (as described in the manuscript).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Testis, Mouse, Arom+, Male infertility, Maldi imaging mass spectrometry, Estrogen

### Affiliations
Biomedical Center-LMU
Histone Modifications Group  Zentrallabor für Proteinanalytik  BioMedical Center (Faculty of Medicine)  Ludwig-Maximilians-University of Munich  Großhadernerstr. 9  82152 Planegg-Martinsried   GERMANY

### Submitter
Ignasi Forne

### Lab Head
Dr Axel Imhof
Histone Modifications Group  Zentrallabor für Proteinanalytik  BioMedical Center (Faculty of Medicine)  Ludwig-Maximilians-University of Munich  Großhadernerstr. 9  82152 Planegg-Martinsried   GERMANY


