### Accession
PXD018451

### Title
PolyQ-expansion does not alter the huntingtin-HAP40 complex

### Description
The amplification of a CAG repeat in the gene coding for huntingtin (HTT) leads to Huntington’s disease (HD). At the protein level, this translates into the expansion of a poly-glutamine (polyQ) stretch in the HTT N-terminus, which renders HTT aggregation-prone by unknown mechanisms. Here we investigate the effects of polyQ expansion on the HTT-HAP40 complex, where HTT structure is substantially stabilized. Surprisingly, our biophysical, cryo-EM and crosslinking mass spectrometry experiments reveal no major changes between 17QHTT-HAP40 (wild type), 46QHTT-HAP40 (typical polyQ length in HD patients) and 128QHTT-HAP40 (extreme polyQ length). Thus, the proposed destabilizing effect of HTT polyQ expansion may not suffice to alter the HTT-HAP40 complex, suggesting that polyQ expansion does not have a major global effect on HTT structure.

### Sample Protocol
Protein complexes were crosslinked and measured as described (Leitner et al., 2014). In short, 40 μg of equimolar mixtures of HTT and HAP40 (0.7 µg / µL stored in 25 mM HEPES, pH 7.4, 300 mM NaCl, 0.05 % CHAPS, 1 mM DTT and 10 % glycerol) were crosslinked by addition of H12/D12 disuccinimidyl suberate (DSS) (Creative Molecules) at a final ratio of 2.5 nmol DSS per 1 µg protein for 30 min at 37 °C while shaking at 650 rpm in a Thermomixer (Eppendorf). After quenching by addition of ammonium bicarbonate to a final concentration of 50 mM and incubation for 10 min at 37 °C, samples were evaporated to dryness, dissolved in 8 M urea, reduced with TCEP (final concentration of 2.5 mM), alkylated with iodoacetamid (final concentration of 5 mM) and digested overnight with trypsin (Promega V5113) in 1 M urea at an enzyme-to-substrate ratio of 1:40. Digested peptides were separated from the solution and retained by a solid phase extraction system (SepPak, Waters) and subsequently enriched by SEC on an ÄKTAmicro chromatography system (GE Healthcare) using a SuperdexTM Peptide 3.2/300 column (GE Healthcare) at a flow rate of 50 µL/min of the mobile phase (water/acetonitrile/trifluoroacetic acid 70 %/30 %/0.1 %, vol/vol/vol). The three fractions 1.0 – 1.1 mL, 1.1 – 1.2 mL and 1.2 – 1.3 mL were collected, dried and further analyzed by LC-MS/MS.  Sample amounts fractionated by SEC were normalized and re-dissolved in an appropriate volume of MS buffer (acetonitrile/formic acid 5 %/0.1 %, vol/vol) according to their UV signal (at 215 nM) prior to liquid chromatography (LC)-MS/MS analysis on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).  Peptides were separated on an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Scientific) system equipped with a C18 column (Acclaim PepMap 100 RSLC, length 15 cm, inner diameter 50 µm, particle size 2 µm, pore size 100 Å, Thermo Scientific). Peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 300 nL/min using a 60 min gradient starting at 94 % solvent A (water/acetonitrile/formic acid 100 %/0 %/0.1 %, vol/vol/vol) and 6 % solvent B (water/acetonitrile/formic acid 20 %/80 %/0.1 %, vol/vol/vol) for 4 min, then increasing the percentage of solvent B to 44 % within 45 min followed by a 1 min step to 100 % B for additional 10 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent-mode with dynamic exclusion set to 60 s and a total cycle time of 3 s. Full scan MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap (120.000 resolution, 2e5 AGC target, 50 ms maximum injection time). Most intense precursor ions with charge states 3 – 8 and intensities greater than 5e3 were selected for fragmentation using CID with 35 % collision energy. Monoisotopic peak determination was set to peptide and MS/MS spectra were acquired in the linear ion trap (rapid scan rate, 1e4 AGC target).

### Data Protocol
Data were searched using xQuest. Crosslinking was performed in biological triplicates and each sample was additionally measured in technical duplicates. Crosslinks were only considered during structural analysis, if they were identified in at least 2 of 3 biological replicates with deltaS < 0.95, ld score ≥ 25 and at least one with an assigned false discovery rate (FDR) as calculated by xProphet below 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Huntingtin; huntington’s disease; polyglutamine expansion; cryo-electron microscopy; crosslinking mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Universität Konstanz
Department of Biology, Cellular Proteostasis and Mass Sepectrometry, University of Konstanz

### Submitter
Florian Stengel

### Lab Head
Dr Florian Stengel
Department of Biology, Cellular Proteostasis and Mass Sepectrometry, University of Konstanz


