### Accession
PXD045796

### Title
Secreted HLA Fc-Fusion Profiles Immunopeptidome in Hypoxic PDAC and Cellular Senescence

### Description
Here, we describe a secreted HLA (sHLA) Fc-fusion construct for simple single HLA allele profiling in hypoxic pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) and cellular senescence. This method streamlines sample preparation, enables temporal control, and provides allele-restricted target identification. Over 30,000 unique HLA-associated peptides were identified across two different HLA alleles and seven cell lines, with ~9,300 peptides newly discovered. The sHLA Fc-fusion capture technology holds potential to expedite immunopeptidomics and advance therapeutic interest in peptide-HLA complexes.

### Sample Protocol
Cell phenotypes were induced to produce the sHLA-Fc fusions as described. Cells were cultured in media with 2 μg/mL doxycycline for 24 hours, and then subsequently cultured in serum-free media with 2 μg/mL doxycycline for 28 hours prior to media collection. For each 50 mL of media sample, 100 μL of Pierce™ Protein A Magnetic beads (Thermo Scientific) were washed twice with PBS prior to use. Beads were added to media—which has previously been filtered with 0.45-μm filters—and rotated for 1 hour at 4°C. Samples were spun at 500 x g for 5 minutes and media removed. Beads were washed strenuously with 10 mM Tris pH 8.0 made with Optima™ LC/MS water (Thermo Scientific). After washing, protein/peptides were eluted by incubating beads with 10% acetic acid for 10 minutes at room temperature. Beads were washed twice with 10% acetic acid, and washes and elution were pooled together. Samples were dried in a Genevac prior to desalting.   Dried down samples were resuspended in 75 μL of 1% TFA and vortexed vigorously. Samples were centrifuged at 21,000 x g for 5 minutes at RT to remove any remaining precipitate. Sample was placed in a magnetic rack, after which the supernatant was removed gently from the tube and placed in a prepared Pierce C18 column as per manufacturer’s instruction. Shortly, each column was washed with 200 μL of 70% acetonitrile in water and spun down at 1500xg until dry. The columns were further washed with 200 μL of 50% acetonitrile in water and spun till dryness. Following the pre-wash steps, each column was further washed twice with 200 μL of 5% acetonitrile/0.5% TFA in water and spun till dryness. The sample was then loaded onto the column and spun till dryness. Each sample was reloaded onto the column to maximize peptide yield. Samples were then washed with 2x 200 μL of 5% acetonitrile/0.5% TFA in water, 200 μL of 5% acetonitrile/1% FA in water, and eluted in 2x 50 μL of 70% acetonitrile in water. Samples were dried to completion.

### Data Protocol
Briefly, for general database searching, peptides for each individual dataset were searched using PEAKS Online X version 1.5 against the entire Swiss-prot Human Proteome (Swiss-prot). Enzyme specificity was set to Unspecific. Peptide length was specified between 8-12 amino acids. No fixed modifications were set, while acetylation (N-term) and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications. The precursor mass error tolerance was set to 20 PPM and the fragment mass error tolerance was set to 0.03 Da. Data were filtered at 1% for both protein and peptide FDR. All mass spectrometry database searching was based off of four biological replicates. Biological replicates underwent preparation, washing, and downstream LC-MS/MS preparation separately. ICE Logos were generated using the server https://iomics.ugent.be/icelogoserver/. Novel peptide ID’s were determined by cross-referencing the Immune Epitope Database (as of 10/10/21).

### Publication Abstract
Human leukocyte antigens (HLA) present peptides largely from intracellular proteins on cell surfaces. As these complexes can serve as biomarkers in disease, proper identification of peptides derived from disease-associated antigens and the corresponding presenting HLA is important for the design and execution of therapeutic strategies. Yet, current mass spectrometry methods for immunopeptidomic profiling require large and complex sample inputs, hindering the study of certain disease phenotypes and lowering confidence in peptide and allele identification. Here, we describe a secreted HLA (sHLA)-Fc fusion construct for simple single HLA allele profiling in hypoxic pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) and cellular senescence. This method streamlines sample preparation, enables temporal control, and provides allele-restricted target identification. Over 30,000 unique HLA-associated peptides were identified across 2 different HLA alleles and 7 cell lines, with &#x223c;9,300 peptides newly discovered. The sHLA-Fc fusion capture technology holds the potential to expedite immunopeptidomics and advance therapeutic interest in HLA-peptide complexes.

### Keywords
Immunopeptidomics, Senescence, Hypoxia, Secreted hla

### Affiliations
Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry School of Pharmacy UC San Francisco
UC San Francisco

### Submitter
Lisa Kirkemo

### Lab Head
Dr Jim Wells
Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry School of Pharmacy UC San Francisco


