### Accession
PXD015928

### Title
Heterogeneity of proteome dynamics between connective tissue phases of adult tendon

### Description
Turnover of matrix proteins is essential to maintain tissue homeostasis, and dysregulation of protein turnover has been implicated in a variety of diseases. However, proteome dynamics in the musculoskeletal system, particularly tendon, remain relatively unexplored. The aim of this study was therefore to calculate the turnover rate of individual proteins within tendon and its constituent components. We hypothesised that turnover of proteins in the interfascicular matrix would be greater than in the fascicles. Achilles tendons were harvested from rats fed heavy labelled water over a period of 127 days. Proteins were extracted from one Achilles tendon, while laser capture microdissection was used to isolate regions of interfascicular and fascicular matrix from the other Achilles prior to protein extraction. Samples were analysed using tandem mass spectrometry and the rate of label incorporation used to calculate turnover rate of individual proteins. Results demonstrate complex proteome dynamics within tendon, with differences in protein turnover rates approaching 1000-fold. Collagen turnover was relatively slow, with much more rapid turnover of proteoglycans and glycoproteins. Data support the hypothesis, demonstrating overall faster protein turnover within the interfascicular matrix compared to the fascicles. More rapid turnover of the interfascicular matrix may be a mechanism to repair microdamage to this region which is exposed to high levels of shear during locomotion. The techniques used here provide a powerful approach to interrogate alterations in protein turnover in the musculoskeletal system with ageing and/or disease which are likely to influence injury risk.

### Sample Protocol
For analyses of whole tendon samples, tendons were powdered under liquid nitrogen, and deglycosylated in chondroitinase ABC (0.5U/ml in 100mM tris acetate buffer, pH 8, with protease inhibitors) for 6 h at 37 °C. Proteins were then extracted in guanidine hydrocholoride (4M guanidine hydrochloride (GuHCl), 65mM dithiothreitol, 50mM sodium acetate and protease inhibitors). Samples were sonicated then incubated at 4 °C for 48 h with shaking. Samples were centrifuged (13 000g, 15 min, 4 °C) and the supernatant collected. Filter units were wetted with 1% (v/v) formic acid and a balance volume of buffer (4M GuHCl/50mM ammonium bicarbonate (ambic)) was added to each filter. A volume equivalent to 50µg of protein was added to each filter and the samples mixed by gentle vortex. Filters were centrifuged (15 min, 12 500 rpm, 20C), washed with 200 µl of buffer and centrifuged again. Proteins were reduced by incubating with dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT) (8mM in 4M GuHCl, 15 min, 56 C) followed by centrifugation (10 min, 12 500 rpm). DDT was removed by washing. Proteins were alkylated by addition of 100 μl of 50mM iodoacetamide in 4M GuHCl solution, mixed and incubated in the dark for 20 min at room temperature. Iodoacetamide was removed by washing. Buffer was exchanged to ambic by washing filter units with 50mM ambic 3 times, with centrifugation after each wash. 1µg of trypsin was added and proteins digested overnight at 37 C with rotation. Flow through was collected after centrifugation and addition of 40µl 50mM ambic. Samples were acidified with trifluoracetic acid (TFA; 1µl, 50%) and diluted 20-fold in 0.1% (v/v) TFA/3% (v/v) acetonitrile. Fascicular matrix and interfascicular matrix samples were isolated by laser capture microdissection. Samples were digested with 0.1% Rapigest SF. Samples were gently mixed at room temperature for 30 min then incubated at 60 C for 1 h at 450 rpm. Samples were centrifuged at 17,200 x g for 10 min and gently vortexed. Samples were incubated at 80 C for 10 min, followed by a pulse centrifuge and vortex to mix. Proteins were reduced by incubating with DDT (5 L of 60mM in 25mM ambic, 10 min, 60 C) followed by pulse centrifugation. Proteins were alkylated by addition of 5μl of 178mM iodoacetamide in 25mM ambic, mixed by gentle vortexing and incubated in the dark for 30 min at room temperature. Trypsin (Promega Gold sequencing grade) was diluted in 25mM ambic and added at an enzyme to protein ratio of 1:50 (based on the average estimated protein amount from volume of tissue collected). Digests were incubated at 37 C for 3.5 h after which an enzyme top-up as above was added and the digests incubated at 37 C overnight. 0.5 L of TFA was added and the digests incubated at 37 C for 45 min to hydrolyse the Rapigest surfactant. Digests were centrifuged at 17,200 x g for 30 min and the clarified digests aspirated into low-bind tubes. Prior to LC-MSMS analysis digests were de-salted on stage-tips. LC-MSMS analyses - Data-dependent LC-MSMS analyses were conducted on a QExactive quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer coupled to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano-liquid chromatograph (Hemel Hempstead, UK). Sample digest (1µL) was loaded onto a trapping column (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, 75 µm x 2 cm, 3 µm packing material, 100 Å) using a loading buffer of 0.1 % (v/v) TFA, 2 % (v/v) acetonitrile in water for 7 min at a flow rate of 9 µL min-1. The trapping column was then set in-line with an analytical column (EASY-Spray PepMap RSLC C18, 75 µm x 50 cm, 2 µm packing material, 100 Å) and the peptides eluted using a linear gradient of 96.2 % A (0.1 % [v/v] formic acid):3.8 % B (0.1 % [v/v[ formic acid in water:acetonitrile [80:20] [v/v]) to 50 % A:50 % B over 60 min at a flow rate of 300 nL min-1, followed by washing at 1% A:99 % B for 5 min and re-equilibration of the column to starting conditions. The column was maintained at 40 oC, and the effluent introduced directly into the integrated nano-electrospray ionisation source operating in positive ion mode. The mass spectrometer was operated in DDA mode with survey scans between m/z 300-2000 acquired at a mass resolution of 70,000 (FWHM) at m/z 200. The maximum injection time was 250 ms, and the automatic gain control was set to 1e6. The 10 most intense precursor ions with charges states of between 2+ and 4+ were selected for MS/MS with an isolation window of 2 m/z units. The maximum injection time was 100 ms, and the automatic gain control was set to 1e5. Fragmentation of the peptides was by higher-energy collisional dissociation using a normalised collision energy of 30 %. Dynamic exclusion of m/z values to prevent repeated fragmentation of the same peptide was used with an exclusion time of 20 sec.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified from the RAW data files using Peaks® Studio 8.5 software (Bioinformatics Solutions, Waterloo, Canada). Trypsin was specified as the protease with one missed cleavage allowed and with fixed modifications of carbamidomethyl cysteine and variable modifications of oxidation of methionine and proline, and searches were performed against the UniProt Rattus Norvegicus database (www.uniprot.org/proteomes), with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%, ≥2 unique peptides per protein and a confidence score >20

### Publication Abstract
Maintenance of connective tissue integrity is fundamental to sustain function, requiring protein turnover to repair damaged tissue. However, connective tissue proteome dynamics remain largely undefined, as do differences in turnover rates of individual proteins in the collagen and glycoprotein phases of connective tissue extracellular matrix (ECM). Here, we investigate proteome dynamics in the collagen and glycoprotein phases of connective tissues by exploiting the spatially distinct fascicular (collagen-rich) and interfascicular (glycoprotein-rich) ECM phases of tendon. Using isotope labelling, mass spectrometry and bioinformatics, we calculate turnover rates of individual proteins within rat Achilles tendon and its ECM phases. Our results demonstrate complex proteome dynamics in tendon, with ~1000 fold differences in protein turnover rates, and overall faster protein turnover within the glycoprotein-rich interfascicular matrix compared to the collagen-rich fascicular matrix. These data provide insights into the complexity of proteome dynamics in tendon, likely required to maintain tissue homeostasis.

### Keywords
Ifm, Fm, Rat tendon, Protein turnover

### Affiliations
Comparative Biomedical Sciences Royal Veterinary College Royal College Street London NW1 0TU
Royal Veterinary College

### Submitter
Chavaunne Thorpe

### Lab Head
Dr Chavaunne Thorpe
Comparative Biomedical Sciences Royal Veterinary College Royal College Street London NW1 0TU


