### Accession
PXD031238

### Title
Accurate proteome-wide measurement of methionine oxidation in aging mouse brains

### Description
The oxidation of methionine side chains has emerged as an important posttranslational modification of proteins. A diverse array of low-throughput and targeted studies have suggested that the oxidation of methionine residues in select proteins can have diverse impacts on cell physiology, ranging from detrimental effects on protein structure and stability to functional roles in cell signaling. Despite its importance, the large-scale investigation of methionine oxidation in a complex matrix, such as the cellular proteome has been historically hampered by technical limitations. Herein we report a methodology, Methionine Oxidation by Blocking (MobB), that allows for accurate and precise quantification of low levels of methionine oxidation typically observed in vivo. To demonstrate the utility of this methodology, we applied MobB to the brain tissues of young (6 m.o.) and old (20 m.o.) mice and identified over 280 novel sites for in vivo methionine oxidation. We further demonstrated that oxidation stoichiometries for specific methionine residues are highly consistent between individual animals and methionine sulfoxides are enriched in clusters of functionally related gene products including membrane and extracellular proteins. However, we did not detect significant changes in methionine oxidation in brains of old mice, suggesting that oxidation levels are highly regulated during the course of aging.

### Sample Protocol
Animal handling. All mouse experiments were performed in accordance with guidelines established by University of Rochester Committee on Animal Resources. Male C57BL/6 mice were used in this study and both age groups, young (6 m.o.) and old (20 m.o.), were from University of Rochester colonies. Three animals from each group were used. Animals were sacrificed by treatment with isoflurane and perfused with saline prior to organ harvesting.   Sample preparation and labeling (oxidation). Brain cortices were ground in the frozen state using a mortar and pestle. Ground tissues were then resuspended in a denaturing lysis buffer; 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) (Fischer Scientific) and 10% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS). Homogenization and genomic DNA shredding were achieved by high-energy sonication, on ice. Samples were clarified of cell debris by centrifugation at 16,000×g for 10 min. Protein concentration was quantified by bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay and immediately diluted (1:1) to a final protein concentration of 0.5 mg/mL with either 18O heavy (Sigma) or 16O light (Fisher) H2O2 to a final H2O2 concentration of approximately 1.25%. Oxidation reactions were allowed to continue for 2 hours at 25°C. Disulfide bonds were reduced by adding 2 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) (Fisher) and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) (Sigma). Samples were acidified by adding phosphoric acid to a final concentration of 1.2% and subsequently diluted 7-fold with 90% methanol in 100 mM TEAB. The samples were added to an S-trap column (Protofi), and the column was washed twice with 90% methanol in 100 mM TEAB. Trypsin (Pierce) was added to the S-trap column at a ratio of 1:25 (trypsin/protein), and the digest reaction was allowed to continue overnight at 37 °C. Peptides were eluted in 80 μL of 50 mM TEAB followed by 80 μL of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) (Pierce) in water and 80 μL of 50/50 acetonitrile/water in 0.1% TFA. Samples were dried by lyophilization and resuspended in 10 mM ammonium hydroxide to a final concentration of 1ug/uL.  Titration samples were prepared by mixing 16O (light)-labeled peptides with 18O (heavy)-labeled peptides at prespecified ratios to a final amount of 25ug. In order to increase coverage, titration samples were pre-fractionated on homemade C18 spin columns. Sixteen different elution buffers were made in 100 mM ammonium formate (pH 10) with 2.0, 3.5, 5.0, 6.5, 8.0, 9.5, 11.0, 12.5, 14.0, 15.0, 16.5, 18.0, 19.5, 21.0, 27.0 and 50% acetonitrile added. To reduce the number of samples, fractions were combined in the following ways: 1-9, 2-10, 3-11, 4-12, 5-13, 6-14, 7-15, 8-16. All fractions were then lyophilized and resuspended in 12.5 μL of 0.1% TFA.  LC-MS/MS analysis. Fractionated peptides were injected onto a homemade 30 cm C18 column with 1.8 μm beads (Sepax), with an Easy nLC-1200 HPLC (Thermo Fisher), connected to a Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid in water, while solvent B was 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile. Ions were introduced to the mass spectrometer using a Nanospray Flex source operating at 2 kV. The gradient began at 3% B and held for 2 min, increased to 10% B over 5 min, increased to 38% B over 68 min, then ramped up to 90% B in 3 min and was held for 3 min, before returning to starting conditions in 2 min and re-equilibrating for 7 min, for a total run time of 90 min. The Fusion Lumos was operated in data-dependent mode, with MS1 scans acquired in the Orbitrap and MS2 scans acquired in the ion trap. The cycle time was set to 1.0 s to ensure that there were enough scans across the peak. Monoisotopic precursor selection (MIPS) was set to Peptide. The full scan was collected over a range of 375–1400 m/z, with a resolution of 120 000 at an m/z of 200, an AGC target of 4e5, and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Peptides with charge states between 2 and 5 were selected for fragmentation. Precursor ions were fragmented by collision-induced dissociation (CID) using a collision energy of 30% with an isolation width of 1.1 m/z. The ion trap scan rate was set to rapid, with a maximum injection time of 35 ms and an AGC target of 1e4. Dynamic exclusion was set to 20 s.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant analysis and data conversion. Raw files for all samples were searched against the Mus musculus UniProt database (downloaded 5/3/2021) using the integrated Andromeda search engine with the MaxQuant software. Peptide and protein identifications were performed with MaxQuant using the default parameter settings. 18O Methionine sulfoxide, 16O methionine sulfoxide, and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications, and carbamidomethyl cysteine was set as a fixed modification. Raw files were converted to the mzXML format with the ProteoWizard’s MSConvert software using the vendor-supplied peak picking algorithm, no additional filters were used. The MaxQuant-supplied evidence file and the mzXML file were used as the input into a custom algorithm described below.  Custom quantification of 16O/18O labeled methionine ratios. Quantification of 16O/18O labeled methionine ratios (MOS values) was done using an in-house algorithm. Briefly, 16O/18O labeled methionine pairs are subset from the MS1 spectra using predicted retention times and mass to charge ratios. A gaussian, or mixture of gaussians, model is then fit to the RAW data and consecutive isotopologues are connected based on cosine similarities. Estimated 16O/18O labeled methionine ratios are measured as the slope of a linear regression between the summed intensities of light and heavy labeled isotopologues. Finally, estimated 16O/18O labeled methionine ratios are corrected based on the theoretical overlap between the isotopic envelopes of light and heavy labeled peptides.

### Publication Abstract
The oxidation of methionine has emerged as an important post-translational modification of proteins. A number of studies have suggested that the oxidation of methionines in select proteins can have diverse impacts on cell physiology, ranging from detrimental effects on protein stability to functional roles in cell signaling. Despite its importance, the large-scale investigation of methionine oxidation in a complex matrix, such as the cellular proteome, has been hampered by technical limitations. We report a methodology, methionine oxidation by blocking (MobB), that allows for accurate and precise quantification of low levels of methionine oxidation typically observed in vivo. To demonstrate the utility of this methodology, we analyzed the brain tissues of young (6 m.o.) and old (20 m.o.) mice and identified over 280 novel sites for in vivo methionine oxidation. We further demonstrated that oxidation stoichiometries for specific methionine residues are highly consistent between individual animals and methionine sulfoxides are enriched in clusters of functionally related gene products including membrane and extracellular proteins. However, we did not detect significant changes in methionine oxidation in brains of old mice. Our results suggest that under normal conditions, methionine oxidation may be a biologically regulated process rather than a result of stochastic chemical damage.

### Keywords
Brain, Mouse, Aging, Methionine oxidation

### Affiliations
University of Rochester Department of Biology
University of Rochester

### Submitter
John Bettinger

### Lab Head
Dr Sina Ghaemmaghami
University of Rochester Department of Biology


