### Accession
PXD018333

### Title
Validation of the expression of clathrin heavy chain muscle isoform including exon 31 at the protein level

### Description
A single exon alternative splicing in the CLTC gene determines clathrin coat organization. This event controls plasticity from clathrin-coated pits to plaques, structures that are essential for muscle fiber function and maintenance

### Sample Protocol
Human immortalized muscle cells were lysed in a buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 0.15 M NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1% NP-40) supplemented with protein inhibitor cocktail 1:100 (Sigma Aldrich, France) at myoblast or 4 days myotube differentiation stages. Clathrin heavy chain (CHC) immunoprecipitation was then performed on lysates of 300 µg protein content prepared in lysis buffer, precleared with 30 µL Protein-G-Sepharose (PGS 4 fast flow, Thermo Fisher, France) and incubated with 5 µg of CHC antibody (Abcam Cat#ab21679, RRID:AB_2083165) overnight at 4°C. Washed PGS (30 µL) were incubated with sample lysates for 2 hours at 4°C. Pelleted PGS were then washed once with lysis buffer lowered to 0.1% NP-40, then thrice with ammonium bicarbonate (NH4)HCO3 25 mM before on-beads digestion with Glu-C. Five biological replicates of myoblast or myotube were on-beads digested (15 µL beads) with 0.5 μg of Glu-C (Promega) for 1 hour in 100 µL of 25 mM (NH4)HCO3. Samples were then loaded onto a homemade C18 StageTips for desalting. Peptides were eluted using 40/60 MeCN/H2O + 0.1% formic acid, vacuum concentrated to dryness and reconstituted in injection buffer (2% MeCN/0.3% TFA) before nano-LC-MS/MS analysis. Liquid chromatography (LC) was performed with an RSLCnano system (Ultimate 3000, Thermo Scientific) coupled online to a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (MS) with a Nanospay Flex ion source (Thermo Scientific)

### Data Protocol
For identification, the data were searched against the Homo sapiens (UP000005640) UniProt database and the clathrin heavy chain Q00610 +/- Exon 31 sequences using SequestHT Proteome Discoverer (version 2.4). Enzyme specificity was set to Glu-C and a maximum of two-missed cleavage sites was allowed. Oxidized methionine, Met-loss, Met-loss-Acetyl and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Maximum allowed mass deviation was set to 10 ppm for monoisotopic precursor ions and 0.02 Da for MS/MS peaks. The resulting files were further processed using myProMS v3.9 (PMID: 17610305). FDR calculation used Percolator and was set to 1% at the peptide level for the whole study. To quantify the specific peptides of clathrin heavy chain with +/- exon 31, corresponding to peptides YLTKVDAIKE (+ Exon 31 m/z 393.892; charged 3+) and YLTKVDKLDASE (- Exon 31 m/z 691.364; charged 2+), we extracted from the MS survey of the nanoLC-MS/MS raw files, the Extracted Ion Chromatogram (XIC) signal by using the retention time and m/z values of the well characterized Glu-C peptide ions using the Xcalibur softwares (manually). Specific peptides XIC areas were integrated in Xcalibur under the QualBrowser interface using the ICIS algorithm, and the sum of all clathrin peptides XIC areas were computed for each biological replicate with MassChroQ version 2.2 (PMID: 21751374) for normalization

### Publication Abstract
Clathrin function directly derives from its coat structure, and while endocytosis is mediated by clathrin-coated pits, large plaques contribute to cell adhesion. Here, we show that the alternative splicing of a single exon of the clathrin heavy chain gene (CLTC exon 31) helps determine the clathrin coat organization. Direct genetic control was demonstrated by forced CLTC exon 31 skipping in muscle cells that reverses the plasma membrane content from clathrin plaques to pits and by promoting exon inclusion that stimulated flat plaque assembly. Interestingly, mis-splicing of CLTC exon 31 found in the severe congenital form of myotonic dystrophy was associated with reduced plaques in patient myotubes. Moreover, forced exclusion of this exon in WT mice muscle induced structural disorganization and reduced force, highlighting the contribution of this splicing event for the maintenance of tissue homeostasis. This genetic control on clathrin assembly should influence the way we consider how plasticity in clathrin-coated structures is involved in muscle development and maintenance.

### Keywords
Human, Alternative splicing, Cltc exon 31, Clathrin plaques, Clathrin coated-pits, Muscle, Clathrin heavy chain, Differentiation

### Affiliations
Curie Institute
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry Platform

### Submitter
Valentin SABATET

### Lab Head
Dr Damarys Loew
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry Platform


