### Accession
PXD040871

### Title
Kinome-wide synthetic lethal screen identifies PANK4 as modulator of resistance in glioblastoma multiforme

### Description
Elucidating the global proteomic alterations in T98GRes glioblastoma cells, following knockdown of PANK4 in the presence or absence of temozolomide

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for the TMT-based proteomic experiment Briefly, T98GRes cells were reverse-transfected with either siCTRL or siPANK4. After 24 hours, cells were treated with either DMSO or TMZ. Following 96h, cells were washed (×3 in PBS) and pelleted. Cell pellets were lysed separately with freshly prepared lysis buffer containing 50 mM HEPES, pH 8.0, 2% SDS, 1 mM PMSF, supplemented with phosphatase and protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich). Samples were thawed at room temperature (RT) for 20 minutes (min) before heating to 99°C for 5 min. After cooling to RT, DNA was sheared by sonication. Cell debris was removed by centrifugation at 20,000×g for 15 min at 20 °C. Protein concentration was determined using the BCA protein assay kit (Applichem GmbH, Darmstadt, Germany).   Protein digestion and offline fractionation FASP digestion was performed according to the procedure described by Wisniewski et al. (2009). TMT labelling was performed with TMTpro 16-plex reagents (Lot#WA314599) according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA). Offline Fractionation of peptides into 12 fractions was performed via RP-HPLC at high pH as described by Gilar et al. (2005). After solvent removal in a vacuum concentrator, samples were reconstituted in 0.1% TFA for LC-MS/MS analysis.   Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry analysis Mass spectrometry was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) coupled to a Dionex Ultimate 3000RSLC nano system (ThermoFisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) via a nanoflex source. Tryptic peptides were separated on a 50 cm, 75 µm i.d. analytical column (self-packed with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 3 μm, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch Entringen, Germany) and a 90 min acetonitrile gradient (5-90%) at a flow rate of 230 nL/min. Analysis was performed in a data-dependent acquisition mode using a TopN dependent scan method with a cycle time of up to 20 scans for precursor ion selection. MS1 data were acquired in the orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000 (at 200 m/z). Automatic gain control (AGC) was set to a target of 2.5E4 and a maximum injection time of 86 ms. MS2 spectra were acquired in the orbitrap (FT) using a quadrupole isolation window of 0.5 Da and higher-energy collision induced dissociation (HCD) at a normalised collision energy (NCE) of 34%. The resolution was 50,000 (at 200 m/z) with a fixed first mass of 110 m/z, an AGC target of 5E4, and a maximum injection time of 110 ms. Dynamic exclusion for selected ions was 90 s. A single lock mass at m/z 445.120024 was employed.

### Data Protocol
Proteomic data analysis  Protein identification and comparative quantification of TMTpro 16-plex labelled proteins from MS and MS/MS raw data were performed using the MaxQuant software suit (version 1.6.12.0) (Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Planegg, Germany) with the implemented peptide search engine Andromeda against a reference proteome database of Homo sapiens (Human/Uniprot proteome ID: UP000005640, Version 7 March 2021). Statistical analysis was performed using the Perseus software (version 1.6.14.0). Unpaired t-test was employed to determine the significance of the observed differences. Differences were considered statistically significant at p < 0.05 (95% confidence interval, * p < 0.05; ** p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001; ****p < 0.0001).

### Publication Abstract
Temozolomide (TMZ) represents the cornerstone of therapy for glioblastoma (GBM). However, acquisition of resistance limits its therapeutic potential. The human kinome is an undisputable source of druggable targets, still, current knowledge remains confined to a limited fraction of it, with a multitude of under-investigated proteins yet to be characterized. Here, following a kinome-wide RNAi screen, pantothenate kinase 4 (PANK4) isuncovered as a modulator of TMZ resistance in GBM. Validation of PANK4 across various&#xa0;TMZ-resistant GBM cell models, patient-derived&#xa0;GBM cell lines, tissue samples, as well as in vivo studies, corroborates the potential translational significance of these findings. Moreover, PANK4 expression is induced during TMZ treatment, and its expression is associated with a worse clinical outcome. Furthermore, a Tandem Mass Tag (TMT)-based quantitative proteomic approach, reveals that PANK4 abrogation leads to a significant downregulation of a host of proteins with central roles in cellular detoxification and cellular response to oxidative stress. More specifically, as cells undergo genotoxic stress during TMZ exposure, PANK4 depletion represents a crucial event that can lead to accumulation of intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS) and subsequent cell death. Collectively, a previously unreported role for PANK4 in mediating therapeutic resistance to TMZ in GBM is unveiled.

### Keywords
Pank4 knockdown, T98gres glioblastoma cells, Temozolomide

### Affiliations
National Institute for Biological Standards and Control (NIBSC)
Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA)
Department for Biochemistry and Biomedicine, School of Life Sciences, University of Sussex

### Submitter
Murat Eravci

### Lab Head
Dr Georgios Giamas
Department for Biochemistry and Biomedicine, School of Life Sciences, University of Sussex


