### Accession
PXD031223

### Title
Chronic Aicar Treatment Identifies Sex-specific Phenotypes in the Aging Mouse Heart

### Description
Heart failure represents a leading cause of mortality in the elderly population. Although aging features include diastolic dysfunction and interstitial fibrosis in both males and females, it becomes increasingly apparent that aged male and female hearts are phenotypically different. There were fundamental differences in extracellular matrix (ECM) composition and architecture and heart function indices at the baseline, which were further accentuated by Aicar treatment. By combining in vivo, ex vivo, and in vitro strategies, we demonstrated that there are sex-specific features that influence the response to pharmacological intervention in the aging mouse heart.

### Sample Protocol
Heart tissues were decellularized using the decellularization buffer followed by attachment of fibroblasts in media. The matrices were fixed and processed for downstream analysis. For LC-MS/MS analysis, samples were digested using LysC and Trypsin enzyme in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer. Label-free profiling for the extracellular matrix was carried out using a nano-LC 1200 system coupled to Orbitrap Lumos ETD mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Obtained MS/MS spectra were searched against target-decoy Mus musculus NCBI RefSeq protein database (updated on 2020/03/24) in the Proteome Discoverer (PD2.1, Thermo Fisher) with Mascot algorithm (Mascot 2.4, Matrix Science). The peptides identified from the mascot result file were validated with 5% false discovery rate (FDR). The gene product inference and iBAQ-based quantification was carried out using the gpGrouper algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
The incidence of diastolic dysfunction increases with age in both humans and mice. This is characterized by increased passive stiffness and slower relaxation of the left ventricle. The stiffness arises at least partially from progressively increased interstitial collagen deposition because of highly secretory fibroblasts. In the past, we demonstrated that AMPK activation via the drug 5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide riboside (AICAR) in middle-aged mice reduced adverse remodeling after myocardial infarction. Therefore, as an attempt to normalize the fibroblast phenotype, we used 21-mo-old male and female mice and treated them with AICAR (0.166 mg/g body wt) where each mouse was followed in a functional study over a 3-mo period. We found sex-related differences in extracellular matrix (ECM) composition as well as heart function indices at baseline, which were further accentuated by AICAR treatment. AICAR attenuated the age-related increase in left atrial volume (LAV, an indicator of diastolic dysfunction) in female but not in male hearts, which was associated with reduced collagen deposition in the old female heart, and reduced the transcription factor Gli1 expression in cardiac fibroblasts. We further demonstrated that collagen synthesis was dependent on Gli1, which is a target of AMPK-mediated degradation. By contrast, AICAR had a minor impact on cardiac fibroblasts in the old male heart because of blunted AMPK phosphorylation. Hence, it did not significantly improve old male heart function indices. In conclusion, we demonstrated that male and female hearts are phenotypically different, and sex-specific differences need to be considered when analyzing the response to pharmacological intervention.<b>NEW &amp; NOTEWORTHY</b> The aging heart develops diastolic dysfunction because of increased collagen deposition. We attempted to reduce collagen expression in the old heart by activating AMPK using AICAR. An improvement of diastolic function and reduction of cardiac fibrosis was found only in the female heart and correlated with decreased procollagen expression and increased degradation of the transcription factor Gli1. Male hearts display blunted AICAR-dependent AMPK activation and therefore this treatment had no benefits for the male mice.

### Keywords
Heart, Mouse, Label-free profiling, Aging, Extracellular matrix

### Affiliations
Baylor College of Medicine
Associate Professor Department of Medicine-Cardiovascular Sciences Baylor College of Medicine Houston, TX USA

### Submitter
Nelufa Islam

### Lab Head
Dr Katarzyna A Cieslik
Associate Professor Department of Medicine-Cardiovascular Sciences Baylor College of Medicine Houston, TX USA


