### Accession
PXD019441

### Title
: Proteome of Prostate Cell Line-derived Extracellular Vesicles

### Description
Project Description: Extracellular vesicles were isolated from conditioned media of prostate cancer cell lines PC-3M and LNCaP. Proteomic profiling was conducted on EVs to identify differential protein cargoes.

### Sample Protocol
Microvesicles were depleted from conditioned media of prostate cancer cell lines PC-3M and LNCaP by centrifugation at 2000 x g for 20min followed by 16,500 x g for 30min; resulting supernatant was filtered through a pre-wetted 0.22 µm vacuum filter. Microvesicle-depleted biospecimen was densified by mixing with OptiPrep iodixanol solution (Sigma D1556) to a final density of 1.16-1.30 g/mL and loaded into the bottom of a polycarbonate ultracentrifuge tube and overlaid with 0.5-2mL aliquots of iodixanol/PBS solution in the 1.20-1.01 g/mL (35-0% wt/vol) range, proceeding from the highest to lowest density to form a single- or multi-step density fractionation gradient as needed. Ultracentrifugation was performed for at 100,000 ×g for 4 hrs at 8°C. Vesicles were collected from the top of the tube, proceeding downward to recover volume equal to 90% of overlaid gradient volume. Density of harvested fractions was assessed against a standard curve based on sample absorbance at 250 nm using a NanoDrop microvolume spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Wilmington, DE). Vesicle harvests were stored at -80°C.  ECV-derived protein digestion and identification by LC-MS/MS was performed using established protocols. NanoAcquity UPLC system coupled in-line with WATERS SYNAPT G2-Si mass spectrometer was used for the separation of pooled digested protein fractions. The system was equipped with a Waters Symmetry C18 nanoAcquity trap-column (180 μm × 20 mm, 5 μm) and a Waters HSS-T3 C18 nanoAcquity analytical column (75 μm × 150 mm, 1.8 μm). The column oven temperature was set at 50 °C, and the temperature of the tray compartment in the auto-sampler was set at 6 °C. LC-HDMSE data were acquired in resolution mode with SYNAPT G2-Si using Waters Masslynx (version 4.1, SCN 851). The capillary voltage was set to 2.80 kV, sampling cone voltage to 30 V, source offset to 30 V and source temperature to 100 °C. Mobility utilized high-purity N2 as the drift gas in the IMS TriWave cell. Pressures in the helium cell, Trap cell, IMS TriWave cell and Transfer cell were 4.50 mbar, 2.47 × 10−2, 2.90, and 2.53 × 10−3 mbar, respectively. IMS wave velocity was 600 m s−1, helium cell DC 50 V, Trap DC bias 45 V, IMS TriWave DC bias V and IMS wave delay 1000 μs. The mass spectrometer was operated in V-mode with a typical resolving power of at least 20,000. All analyses were performed using positive mode ESI using a NanoLockSpray source. The lock mass channel was sampled every 60 s. The mass spectrometer was calibrated with a [Glu1] fibrinopeptide solution (300 fmol µL−1) delivered through the reference sprayer of the NanoLockSpray source. Accurate mass LC-HDMSE data were collected in an alternating, low energy (MS) and high energy (MSE) mode of acquisition with mass scan range from m/z 50 to 1800. The spectral acquisition time in each mode was 1.0 s with a 0.1-s inter-scan delay. In low energy HDMS mode, data were collected at constant collision energy of 2 eV in both Trap cell and Transfer cell. In high-energy HDMSE mode, the collision energy was ramped from 25 to 55 eV in the Transfer cell only. The RF applied to the quadrupole mass analyzer was adjusted such that ions from m/z 300 to 2000 were efficiently transmitted, ensuring that any ions observed in the LC-HDMSE data <m/z 300 arose from dissociations in the Transfer collision cell.

### Data Protocol
The acquired LC-HDMSE data were processed and searched against protein knowledge database (Uniprot) through ProteinLynx Global Server (PLGS, Waters Company) with 4% FDR.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cancer cell line, Extracellular vesicles, Proteomic profiles

### Affiliations
The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center

### Submitter
Jody Vykoukal

### Lab Head
Dr Samir Hanash
The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center


