### Accession
PXD002905

### Title
Mouse_Hippocampus_LCMSMS_IEF_Pooling

### Description
Protein extract from a single mouse hippocampus was enzymatically digested and fractionated by isoelectric focusing. Aliquots of fractions were pooled to make fewer, more complex samples. The unfractionated lysate, fractions, and pooled fractions were subjected to liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry analysis. Samples consisting of many individual fractions had more protein identifications and quantified proteins with more spectral counts and greater precision than protein extract that was unfractionated or pooled into fewer LC-MS/MS samples.

### Sample Protocol
Mouse hippocampal peptides were extracted using a modified FASP protocol. Peptides were then fractionated via IEF into 12 fractions. Isovolumeric aliquots of each fraction were then pooled to generate sets of pooled samples containing 6, 4, and 1 fraction(s).

### Data Protocol
raw files were uploaded into proteome discoverer (Thermo Scientific, version 1.4.0.288) and searched with both Mascot and Sequest HT (version 2.4.0) trypsin was selected as the enzyme and a maximum of 2 miss cleavages were permitted. Dynamic moficitations were carbamiodomethyl (C residues), Oxidation (M residues), and Phosphorylation (S, T, and Y residues). The MuDPIT setting was used to combine fractions from each set of pooled samples into single samples. The resulting .msf files (one per technical replicate) were then uploaded into the Scaffold software (Proteome Software, version 4.4.1.1). Technical replicates were uploaded as individual biosamples, and data were searched with X!Tandem. All database searches used the swisprot mouse database with appended reverse sequences for target-decoy filtering. In Scaffold, the protein FDR was set to 1%, the peptide FDR was set to 1%, and the minumum number of peptides was set to 2.

### Publication Abstract
An assessment of fractionated mouse hippocampal peptides was conducted. Protein extract from a single mouse hippocampus was enzymatically digested and fractionated by IEF. Aliquots of fractions were pooled into fewer, more complex samples. The unfractionated lysate, fractions, and pooled fractions were subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis. Samples consisting of many individual fractions had more protein identifications, greater protein sequence coverage, and quantified proteins with more spectral counts than protein extract that was unfractionated or pooled into fewer LC-MS/MS samples. Additionally, prefractionation reduced the median CV for spectral counts as much as 33%. However, the relative gain in proteome resolution was found to saturate with increasing fractionation extent. This study demonstrates how prefractionation by offline IEF can improve the resolution of proteomic investigations of the mouse hippocampus, and that a data-driven pooling methodology can reduce excessive and cost-ineffective fractionation.

### Keywords
Brain, Mouse, Lc-msms, Isoelectric focusing, Hippocampus

### Affiliations
Florida State University College of Medicine, Biomedical Sciences
Florida State University College of Medicine

### Submitter
Joseph Bundy

### Lab Head
Dr Richard Nowakowski
Florida State University College of Medicine, Biomedical Sciences


