### Accession
PXD044994

### Title
Hepatitis C virus alters the morphology and function of peroxisomes.

### Description
Despite the introduction of effective treatments for hepatitis C in clinics, issues remain regarding the liver diseases induced by chronic hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection. HCV is known to disturb the metabolism of infected cells, especially lipid metabolism and redox balance, but the mechanisms leading to HCV-induced pathogenesis are still poorly understood. In an APEX2-based proximity biotinylation screen, we identified ACBD5, a peroxisome membrane protein, as located in the vicinity of HCV replication complexes. Confocal microscopy confirmed the relocation of peroxisomes near HCV replication complexes and indicated that their morphology and number are altered in approximately 30% of infected Huh-7 cells. Peroxisomes are small versatile organelles involved among other functions in lipid metabolism and ROS regulation. To determine their importance in the HCV life cycle, we generated Huh-7 cells devoid of peroxisomes by inactivating the PEX5 and PEX3 genes using CRISPR/Cas9 and found that the absence of peroxisomes had no impact on replication kinetics or infectious titers of HCV strains JFH1 and DBN3a. The impact of HCV on peroxisomal functions was assessed using sub-genomic replicons. An increase of ROS was measured in peroxisomes of replicon-containing cells, and this increase was more pronounced than in mitochondria or the cytosol, suggesting that the redox balance of peroxisomes is specifically impaired in cells replicating HCV. Our study provides evidence that peroxisome function and morphology are altered in HCV-infected cells.

### Sample Protocol
APEX2-biotinylated proteins were loaded on SDS-PAGE to perform one gel slice trypsin digestion for each sample. Peptides were extracted with 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile, evaporated to reduce volume at 8 µl and injected on an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano System (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were automatically fractionated onto a commercial C18 reversed-phase column (75 μm × 250 mm, 2-μm particle, PepMap100 RSLC column, Thermo Fisher Scientific (Waltham, USA), temperature 35 °C). Trapping was performed for 4 min at 5 μl/min with solvent A (98% H2O, 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid). Elution was performed using two solvents, A (0.1% formic acid in water) and B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile), at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Gradient separation was 3 min at 3% B, 110 min from 3% to 20% B, 10 min from 20% to 80% B, and maintained for 15 min. The column was equilibrated for 6 min with 3% buffer B prior to the next sample analysis. The eluted peptides from the C18 column were analyzed by Q-Exactive instruments (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA). The electrospray voltage was 1.9 kV, and the capillary temperature was 275 °C. Full mass spectrometry (MS) scans were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer over the m/z 400–1200 range with a resolution of 70 000 (m/z 200). The target value was 3.00E+06. The fifteen most intense peaks with charge states between 2 and 5 were fragmented in the high-energy collisional dissociation cell (HCD) with a normalized collision energy of 27%, and the tandem mass spectrum was acquired using an Orbitrap mass analyzer with a resolution of 17,500 at m/z 200. The target value was 1.00E+05. The ion selection threshold was 5.0E+04 counts, and the maximum allowed ion accumulation times were 250 ms for full MS scans and 100 ms for tandem mass spectra. The dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s.  The full proteome analysis was performed in same conditions with a column of 500 mm length, heated at 55°C and a 3% to 20% B gradient separation of 170 min.

### Data Protocol
Raw data collected during nano LC–MS/MS analyses were processed and converted into an *.mgf peak list format with Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). MS/MS data were analyzed using the search engine Mascot (version 2.4.0, Matrix Science, London, UK) installed on a local server. Searches were performed with a tolerance on mass measurement of 0.02 Da for precursor and 10 ppm for fragment ions against a composite target-decoy database built with a Human Swissprot database (taxonomy 9606) fused with the sequences of recombinant trypsin, NS3, NS4A, NS4B, NS5A, NS5B, and a list of classical contaminants. Cysteine carbamidomethylation, methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation, and cysteine propionamidation were searched as variable modifications. Up to one missed trypsin cleavage was allowed.  For the APEX2-biotinylated protein samples, the identification results were imported into Scaffold software 4.5.3 and peptides were filtered out according to the cutoff set for proteins hits with 1 or more peptides taller than 9 residues, ion score > 20, identity score > -7, corresponding to a 1% false positive rate.  For the full proteome analysis, the identification results were imported into Proline software (http://proline.profiproteomics.fr) (Bouyssié et al., 2020). Peptide spectrum matches taller than 9 residues and ion scores >10 were retained. The false discovery rate was then optimized to be below 1% at the protein level using the Mascot Modified Mudpit score. Extracted Ion Current based quantification was performed with Proline 2.0.

### Publication Abstract
Despite the introduction of effective treatments for hepatitis C in clinics, issues remain regarding the liver disease induced by chronic hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection. HCV is known to disturb the metabolism of infected cells, especially lipid metabolism and redox balance, but the mechanisms leading to HCV-induced pathogenesis are still poorly understood. In an APEX2-based proximity biotinylation screen, we identified ACBD5, a peroxisome membrane protein, as located in the vicinity of HCV replication complexes. Confocal microscopy confirmed the relocation of peroxisomes near HCV replication complexes and indicated that their morphology and number are altered in approximately 30% of infected Huh-7 cells. Peroxisomes are small versatile organelles involved among other functions in lipid metabolism and ROS regulation. To determine their importance in the HCV life cycle, we generated Huh-7 cells devoid of peroxisomes by inactivating the PEX5 and PEX3 genes using CRISPR/Cas9 and found that the absence of peroxisomes had no impact on replication kinetics or infectious titers of HCV strains JFH1 and DBN3a. The impact of HCV on peroxisomal functions was assessed using sub-genomic replicons. An increase of ROS was measured in peroxisomes of replicon-containing cells, correlated with a significant decrease of catalase activity with the DBN3a strain. In contrast, HCV replication had little to no impact on cytoplasmic and mitochondrial ROS, suggesting that the redox balance of peroxisomes is specifically impaired in cells replicating HCV. Our study provides evidence that peroxisome function and morphology are altered in HCV-infected cells.

### Keywords
Proximity biotinylation, Dbn3a, Crispr-cas9, Hepatitis c virus, Jfh1, Ros, Peroxisome, Apex2, Hcv genotype

### Affiliations
Univ. Lille, CNRS, Inserm, CHU Lille, Institut Pasteur de Lille, US41 – UAR 2014 – PLBS, F-59000 Lille, France
Institut Pasteur de Lille

### Submitter
SALIOU Jean-Michel

### Lab Head
Dr Jean-Michel Saliou
Univ. Lille, CNRS, Inserm, CHU Lille, Institut Pasteur de Lille, US41 – UAR 2014 – PLBS, F-59000 Lille, France


