### Accession
PXD012930

### Title
Identification of ChIP-seq and RIME grade antibodies for Estrogen Receptor alpha

### Description
Estrogen Receptor alpha (ERα) is a key driver of most breast cancers, and it is the target of endocrine therapies used in the clinic to treat women with ERα positive (ER+) breast cancer. The two methods ChIP-seq (chromatin immunoprecipitation coupled with deep sequencing) and RIME (Rapid Immunoprecipitation of Endogenous Proteins) have greatly improved our understanding of ERα function during breast cancer progression and in response to anti-estrogens. A critical component of both ChIP-seq and RIME protocols is the antibody that is used to pull down the bait protein. To date, most of the ChIP-seq and RIME experiments for the study of ERα have been performed using the sc-543 antibody from Santa Cruz Biotechnology. However, this antibody has been discontinued, thereby severely impacting the study of ERα in normal physiology as well as diseases such as breast cancer and ovarian cancer. Here, we compare the sc-543 antibody with other commercially available antibodies, and we show that 06-935 (EMD Millipore) and ab3575 (Abcam) antibodies can successfully replace the sc-543 antibody for ChIP-seq and RIME experiments.

### Sample Protocol
A 10µL trypsin solution (15ng/ul) (Pierce) prepared in 100mM AMBIC was added to the beads followed by overnight incubation at 37°C. The next day, trypsin solution was added for a second digestion step followed by incubation for 4h at 37°C. At the end of the second step digestion, the tubes were placed on a magnet and the supernatant solution was collected and acidified by the addition of 2µl 5% formic acid. The peptides were cleaned with the Ultra-Micro C18 Spin Columns (Harvard Apparatus) and were analysed in the Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system coupled with the Q-Exactive HF (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer. Samples were loaded on the Acclaim PepMap 100, 100μm × 2cm C18, 5μm, 100Ȧ trapping column with the ulPickUp injection method at loading flow rate 5μL/min for 10 min. For the peptide separation the EASY-Spray analytical column 75μm × 25cm, C18, 2μm, 100 Ȧ was used for multi-step gradient elution. Mobile phase (A) was composed of 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid, 5% dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) and mobile phase (B) was composed of 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid, 5% DMSO. The full scan was performed in the Orbitrap in the range of 400-1600m/z at 60K resolution. For MS2, the 10 most intense fragments were selected at resolution 30K. A 2.0Th isolation window was used and the HCD collision energy was set up at 28%.

### Data Protocol
The HCD tandem mass spectra were processed with the SequestHT search engine on Proteome Discoverer 2.2 software. The node for SequestHT included the following parameters: Precursor Mass Tolerance 20ppm, Maximum Missed Cleavages sites 2, Fragment Mass Tolerance 0.02Da and Dynamic Modifications were Oxidation of M (+15.995Da) and Deamidation of N, Q (+0.984Da). The Minora Feature Detector node was used for label-free quantification and the consensus workflow included the Feature mapper and the Precursor Ion Quantifier nodes using intensity for the precursor quantification. The protein intensities were normalized by the summed intensity separately for the IgG and ERα pull downs (within group normalization). The plots for ERα coverage were created using the qPLEXanalyzer tool.

### Publication Abstract
Estrogen Receptor alpha (ER&#x3b1;) plays a major role in most breast cancers, and it is the target of endocrine therapies used in the clinic as standard of care for women with breast cancer expressing this receptor. The two methods ChIP-seq (chromatin immunoprecipitation coupled with deep sequencing) and RIME (Rapid Immunoprecipitation of Endogenous Proteins) have greatly improved our understanding of ER&#x3b1; function during breast cancer progression and in response to anti-estrogens. A critical component of both ChIP-seq and RIME protocols is the antibody that is used against the bait protein. To date, most of the ChIP-seq and RIME experiments for the study of ER&#x3b1; have been performed using the sc-543 antibody from Santa Cruz Biotechnology. However, this antibody has been discontinued, thereby severely impacting the study of ER&#x3b1; in normal physiology as well as diseases such as breast cancer and ovarian cancer. Here, we compare the sc-543 antibody with other commercially available antibodies, and we show that 06-935 (EMD Millipore) and ab3575 (Abcam) antibodies can successfully replace the sc-543 antibody for ChIP-seq and RIME experiments.

### Keywords
Rime, Estrogen receptor alpha, Chip-seq

### Affiliations
Senior Group Leader
Senior Scientific Assistant

### Submitter
Evangelia Papachristou

### Lab Head
Dr Jason Carroll
Senior Group Leader


