### Accession
PXD014391

### Title
Comprehensive landscape of active deubiquitinating enzymes profiled by advanced chemoproteomics

### Description
Enzymes that bind and process ubiquitin, a small 76 amino acid protein, have been recognized as pharmacological targets in oncology, immunological disorders and neurodegeneration. Mass spectrometry technology has now reached the capacity to cover the proteome with enough depth to interrogate entire biochemical pathways including those that contain DUBs and E3 ligase substrates. We have recently characterized the breast cancer cell (MCF7) deep proteome by detecting and quantifying ~10,000 proteins, and within this data set, we can detect endogenous expression of 65 deubiquitylating enzymes (DUBs), whereas matching transcriptomics detected 78 DUB mRNAs. Since enzyme activity provides another meaningful layer of information in addition of the expression levels, we have combined advanced mass spectrometry technology, pre-fractionation and more potent/selective ubiquitin active-site probes with propargylic based electrophiles to profile 74 DUBs including distinguishable isoforms for five DUBs in MCF7 crude extract material. Competition experiments with cysteine alkylating agents, pan-DUB inhibitors combined with probe labelling revealed the proportion of active cellular DUBs directly engaged with probes by label-free quantitative (LFQ) mass spectrometry. This demonstrated that USP13, 39 and 40 are non-reactive to probe, indicating restricted enzymatic activity under these cellular conditions. Our extended chemoproteomics workflow increases depth of covering the active DUBome, including isoform-specific resolution, and provides the framework for more comprehensive cell-based small molecule DUB selectivity profiling.

### Sample Protocol
Mass spectrometry experiments (sample preparation and fractionation) DUB-probe immunoprecipitated sample eluates were diluted to 175 µL with ultra-pure water and reduced with 5 µL DTT (200 mM in 0.1 M Tris, pH 7.8) for 30 minutes at 37°C. Samples were alkylated with 20 µL iodoacetamide (100 mM in 0.1 M Tris, pH 7.8) for 15 minutes at room temperature (protected from light), followed by protein precipitation using a double methanol/chloroform extraction method[34]. Protein samples were treated with 600 µL methanol, 150 µL chloroform and 450 µL water, followed by vigorous vortexing. Samples were centrifuged at 17,000 g for 3 minutes and the resultant upper aqueous phase was removed.  Proteins were pelleted following the addition of 450 µL methanol and centrifugation at 17,000 g for 6 minutes. The supernatant was removed, and the extraction process repeated. Following the second extraction process, precipitated proteins were re-suspended in 50 µL 6M urea and diluted to < 1M urea with 250 µL of 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0 buffer. Protein digestion was carried out by adding trypsin (from a 1 mg/mL stock in 1 mM HCl) to a ratio 1:100, rocking at 12 rpm and room temperature overnight. Following digestion, samples were acidified to 1% trifluoroacetic acid and desalted on C18 solid-phase extraction cartridges (SEP-PAK plus, Waters), dried and re-suspended in 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid for analysis by LC-MS/MS as described below. Off-line high-pH reverse-phase prefractionation was performed as in [35]. Briefly, digested material was fractionated using the loading pump of a Dionex Ultimate 3000 HPLC with an automated fraction collector and a Waters Acquity UPLC Peptide BEH C18, 300 Å, 1.7 μm, 1 mm x 100 mm (part no. 186005593) column over a 65 min gradient using basic pH reverse-phase buffers (A: water, pH 10 with ammonium hydroxide; B: 90% acetonitrile, pH 10 with ammonium hydroxide). The gradient consisted of a 15 min wash with 2% B, then increasing to 35% B over 30 min, with a further increase to 95% B in 0.1 min, followed by a 9.9 min wash at 95% B and then returning to 2% in 0.1 min, followed by re-equilibration at 2% B for 9.9 min, all at a flow rate of 100 μL/min with fractions collected every 1 min from 0 to 60 minutes. 100 μL of the fractions was dried and resuspended in 20 μL of 2% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid for analysis by LC–MS/MS. Fractions were loaded on the LC–MS/MS following concatenation of 60 fractions into 10, combining fractions in a 10 fractions interval (F1 + F11 + F21 + F31 + F41 + F51… to F10 + F20 + F30 + F40 + F50 +F60).   Liquid Chromatography- Mass Spectrometry/Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) LC-MS/MS analysis was performed in biological quadruplicate using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano-ultra high-pressure reverse phase chromatography coupled on-line to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) as described previously [36]. In brief, samples were separated on an EASY-Spray PepMap RSLC C18 column (500 mm x 75 µm, 2 µm particle size, Thermo Scientific) over a 60 minute gradient of 2-35% acetonitrile in 5% dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), 0.1% formic acid at 250 nL/min. MS1 scans were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 at 200 m/z and the top 12 most abundant precursor ions were selected for high collision dissociation (HCD) fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
For the DUB activitome, all raw MS data files from the HA-IP and high-pH fractionation experiments were analysed in a combined fashion using MaxQuant (v1.5.5.1) and searched against the UniProt Human database (92,954 entries).

### Publication Abstract
Enzymes that bind and process ubiquitin, a small 76-amino-acid protein, have been recognized as pharmacological targets in oncology, immunological disorders, and neurodegeneration. Mass spectrometry technology has now reached the capacity to cover the proteome with enough depth to interrogate entire biochemical pathways including those that contain DUBs and E3 ligase substrates. We have recently characterized the breast cancer cell (MCF7) deep proteome by detecting and quantifying ~10,000 proteins, and within this data set, we can detect endogenous expression of 65 deubiquitylating enzymes (DUBs), whereas matching transcriptomics detected 78 DUB mRNAs. Since enzyme activity provides another meaningful layer of information in addition to the expression levels, we have combined advanced mass spectrometry technology, pre-fractionation, and more potent/selective ubiquitin active-site probes with propargylic-based electrophiles to profile 74 DUBs including distinguishable isoforms for 5 DUBs in MCF7 crude extract material. Competition experiments with cysteine alkylating agents and pan-DUB inhibitors combined with probe labeling revealed the proportion of active cellular DUBs directly engaged with probes by label-free quantitative (LFQ) mass spectrometry. This demonstrated that USP13, 39, and 40 are non-reactive to probe, indicating restricted enzymatic activity under these cellular conditions. Our extended chemoproteomics workflow increases depth of covering the active DUBome, including isoform-specific resolution, and provides the framework for more comprehensive cell-based small-molecule DUB selectivity profiling.

### Keywords
Chemical biology, Ubiquitin specific proteases, Proteomics, Isoforms, Deubiquitylating enzymes, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
TDI Mass Spectrometry Laboratory, Target Discovery Institute, Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, Roosevelt Drive, Oxford OX3 7FZ, UK
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Adan Pinto-Fernandez

### Lab Head
Dr Benedikt Kessler
TDI Mass Spectrometry Laboratory, Target Discovery Institute, Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, Roosevelt Drive, Oxford OX3 7FZ, UK


