### Accession
PXD000772

### Title
Temporal and ligand effects on phagosome maturation

### Description
Systems biology analysis of temporally-resolved phagosome proteomes following uptake via key phagocytic receptors Macrophages operate at the forefront of innate immunity, and their discrimination of pathogenic versus “self” particles is critical for a number of responses including efficient pathogen killing, antigen presentation and cytokine induction. In order to efficiently phagocytose and destroy the particles, macrophages express an array of receptors to sense and internalise prey particles. In this manuscript, particles conjugated to seven ligands representing pathogen-associated molecular patterns, immune opsonins or apoptotic cell markers were inoculated to murine bone marrow-derived macrophages (BMDMs) and proteomes of isolated phagosomes were accurately quantified among conditions and across a timecourse.  While we identified a clear functional differentiation over the three timepoints, only subtle differences were detected between certain ligand-phagosomes, suggesting that triggering of receptors through a single ligand has only mild effects on phagosome proteome and function. This data shows for the first time a systematic time-course analysis of BMDM phagosomes and how phagosome fate is regulated by the receptors triggered for phagocytosis.

### Sample Protocol
Bone marrow derived macrophage (BMDM) culture and phagosome isolation BMDMs were derived from murine femurs by differentiation using growth media containing macrophage colony-stimulating factor (M-CSF), obtained from L929-conditioned media as detailed previously (Weischenfeldt & Porse, 2008). Femurs were obtained from female wild-type mice between 8 and 12 weeks of age. The use of animals in the University of Dundee is overseen by its Welfare and Ethical Use of Animals Committee. The University is a Licensed Establishment under the Animals (Scientific Procedures) Act 1986 and all animals use in this study were kept to the standards required by the UK Home Office and were killed by approved humane methods. Following extraction of bone marrow and red blood cell lysis, cells were resuspended in D-MEM (Gibco) supplemented with 10% FBS, 2 mM glutamine, 100 units/mL Penicillin-Streptomycin (Gibco), and 20% L929 conditioned supplement, prepared as described elsewhere (Leverrier & Ridley, 2001). Cells were grown in tissue culture plastic ware for three days, and then transferred to untreated 10 cm Petri dishes (BD Biosciences) for replication and differentiation for seven days, yielding 15 dishes per mouse. Differentiation of macrophages was determined by high conversion to F4/80 positive cells.   Phagosomes were isolated as described previously (Desjardins et al, 1994; Trost et al, 2009).  In brief, polystyrene particles were inoculated onto macrophage monolayers for a 30 minute pulse, at which point excess particles were removed and chased for a 0, 30, or 150 minute incubation. Subsequently, cells were washed and broken, nuclei and cell debris removed, and phagosomes were isolated using a sucrose gradient.  For each ligand and timepoint, phagosomes were isolated in triplicate, each from 14 dishes of macrophages.  Proteomic sample preparation and mTRAQ labelling Proteins from isolated phagosomes were solubilized in 1% sodium 3-[(2-methyl-2-undecyl-1,3-dioxolan-4-yl)methoxy]-1-propanesulfonate (commercially available as RapiGest, Waters) in 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0 with 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP, Pierce), heated at 60°C for 5 minutes.  Proteins were then alkylated in 10 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma) and excess reagent was quenched with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT, Sigma). After 10-fold dilution in 50 mM Tris pH 8.0, 5 mM calcium chloride, Trypsin Gold (Promega) was added at 1:100 for 4 hours at 37°C with shaking, and an additional dose for overnight incubation. Sodium 3-[(2-methyl-2-undecyl-1,3-dioxolan-4-yl)methoxy]-1-propanesulfonate was removed by adding 1% trifluoroacetic acid heated at 37°C for 1 h and spinning at 1400 g for 30 min. Peptides were desalted by solid phase extraction using Microspin C-18 (Nest Group), dried by SpeedVac, and labelled using mTRAQ (AB-Sciex). Each sample was labelled with the Δ8 mTRAQ reagent, and a pooled sample for a spike in reference sample (consisting of equal amounts of phagosomes from avidin, IgG, LPS, iC3b, and mannan at 30’/0, 30’/30’ and 30’/150’) was labelled with Δ0. NHS tyrosine and serine side reactions were removed using 100 mM hydroxylamine treatment for 4h (Madler et al, 2009), and peptides were desalted as above. Labeled pPeptides were checked for labelling efficiency (>97%) and side-labelling (<1%).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometric analyses were conducted on an Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer coupled to an Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system with a 50 cm Acclaim PepMap 100 analytical column (75 μm ID, 3 μm C18) in conjunction with a Pepmap trapping column (100 μm x 2 cm, 5 μm C18) (Thermo-Fisher Scientific). Acquisition settings were: lockmass of 445.120024, MS1 with 60,000 resolution, top 20 CID MS/MS using Rapid Scan, monoisotopic precursor selection, unassigned charge states and z=1 rejected, dynamic exclusion of 60s with repeat count 1.  Six hour linear gradients were performed from 3% solvent B to 35% solvent B (solvent A: 0.1% formic acid , solvent B: 80% acetonitrile 0.08% formic acid) with a 30 minute washing and re-equilibration step. For each run, 1 µg Δ0 pool and 1 µg Δ8 sample mixture was injected.  Protein identification and quantification were made using MaxQuant Version 1.3.0.5 with the following parameters: stable modification carbamidomethyl (C); variable modifications Oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein N-term), Deamidation (NQ), and mTRAQ Δ0 or Δ4 on N-terminal or lysines; maximum 5 modifications per peptide, and 2 missed cleavages. Searches were conducted using a Uniprot-Trembl Mus musculus database downloaded October 18, 2012 plus common contaminants, including immunoglobulin (Ighg, Ighg1, Ighg2c, Ighg-3). Identifications were filtered at a 1% FDR at the protein level, accepting a minimum peptide length of 7. Quantification used only razor and unique peptides, and required a minimum ratio count of 2. Re-quantify was enabled, and match between runs was allowed within a 15 min window. Normalized ratios were extracted for each protein/condition were extracted and used for downstream analyses.

### Publication Abstract
Macrophages operate at the forefront of innate immunity and their discrimination of foreign versus "self" particles is critical for a number of responses including efficient pathogen killing, antigen presentation, and cytokine induction. In order to efficiently destroy the particles and detect potential threats, macrophages express an array of receptors to sense and phagocytose prey particles. In this study, we accurately quantified a proteomic time-course of isolated phagosomes from murine bone marrow-derived macrophages induced by particles conjugated to seven different ligands representing pathogen-associated molecular patterns, immune opsonins or apoptotic cell markers. We identified a clear functional differentiation over the three timepoints and detected subtle differences between certain ligand-phagosomes, indicating that triggering of receptors through a single ligand type has mild, but distinct, effects on phagosome proteome and function. Moreover, our data shows that uptake of phosphatidylserine-coated beads induces an active repression of NF-&#x3ba;B immune responses upon Toll-like receptor (TLR)-activation by recruitment of anti-inflammatory regulators to the phagosome. This data shows for the first time a systematic time-course analysis of bone marrow-derived macrophages phagosomes and how phagosome fate is regulated by the receptors triggered for phagocytosis.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Mtraq, Phagosome, Phagocytosis, Macrophage

### Affiliations
MRC Protein Phosphorylation and Ubiquitylation Unit, University of Dundee, Dow St, Dundee, DD1 5EH, Scotland, UK
Newcastle University

### Submitter
Matthias Trost

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Trost
MRC Protein Phosphorylation and Ubiquitylation Unit, University of Dundee, Dow St, Dundee, DD1 5EH, Scotland, UK


