### Accession
PXD002559

### Title
Phosphoproteome Dynamics Mediate Revival of Bacterial Spores

### Description
Background: Bacterial spores can remain dormant for decades, yet harbor the exceptional capacity to rapidly resume metabolic activity and recommence life. Although germinants and their corresponding receptors have been known for more than 30 years, the molecular events underlying this remarkable cellular transition from dormancy to full metabolic activity are only partially defined. Results: Here, we examined whether protein phospho-modifications occur during germination, the first step of exiting dormancy, thereby facilitating spore revival. Utilizing Bacillus subtilis as a model organism, we performed phosphoproteomic analysis to define the Ser/Thr/Tyr phosphoproteome of a reviving spore. The phosphoproteome was found to chiefly comprise newly identified phosphorylation sites located within proteins involved in basic biological functions, such as transcription, translation, carbon metabolism and spore-specific determinants. Quantitative comparison of dormant and germinating spore phosphoproteomes revealed phosphorylation dynamics, indicating that phospho-modifications could modulate protein activity during this cellular transition. Furthermore, by mutating select phosphorylation sites located within proteins representative of key biological processes, we established a functional connection between phosphorylation and the progression of spore revival. Conclusions: In this study we provide for the first time a phosphoproteomic view of a germinating bacterial spore. We show that the spore phosphoproteome is dynamic and present evidence that phosphorylation events play an integral role in facilitating spore revival.

### Sample Protocol
For phosphoproteomic analysis purified spores were diluted to OD600 of 0.5 in reviving medium containing MOPS (40 mM, pH 7), AGFK (2.5 mM L-aspargine, 5 mg/ml D-glucose, 5 mg/ml D-fructose, 50 mM KCl) and L-ala (10 mM). (Pelczar et al., 2007) and germinated for 30 min. Samples from t=0, t=10 and t=30 min were collected by centrifugation, resuspended in 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4) supplemented with 0.05% SDS, Halt Protease and Phosphatase inhibitors (Pierce), and lysed using Fastprep [FastPrep (MP) 6.5, 60 sec, x3]. Following cell lysis the supernatant was additionally centrifuged at 100,000 g for 30 min to remove cell wall remnants and other insoluble matter. The protein suspension was precipitated using acetone. The resulting protein extracts were resuspended in denaturation buffer (6 M urea/2 M thiourea in 10 mMTris). The amounts of protein present from all 3 time points were determined through utilizing the Bradford assay (Bio-Rad, Munich, Germany). Approximately 6 mg of protein extract from each time point were digested into peptides as previously described (Macek et al., 2007) with slight modifications: proteins were reduced with 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), followed by an alkylation step with 5.5 mM iodacetamide (IAA). The peptide mixture was pre-digested with endoproteinase Lys-C (Waco, Neuss, Germany) for 3 hrs at room temperature (RT) followed by an overnight digestion step with trypsin (RT). For proteome analysis, approximately 10 µg of peptides from each sample were acidified to pH 2.5, desalted using C18 stage tips (Ishihama et al., 2006) followed by nano-LC-MS/MS analysis. The remaining peptides from each sample were subsequently enriched for phosphopeptides using TiO2 chromatography as previously described (Macek et al., 2008) with additional modifications. TiO2 beads with a diameter of 10 µm (MZ Analysetechnik, Mainz, Germany) were incubated with 2,5-dihydrobenzoic acid in 80% acetonitrile in a concentration of 30 mg/ml. Approximately 5 mg of TiO2 beads were added to each sample and incubated for 20 min, while being slightly agitated (RT). This procedure was repeated consecutively for a total of 5 times. For each round of TiO2 enrichment, beads underwent a washing step with 1 ml of 30% acetonitrile/ 3% Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and 80% acetonitrile/0.1% TFA for a period of 10 min. Enriched phosphopeptides were eluted from the TiO2 beads using 100 µl of 40% ammonium hydroxide solution in 60% acetonitrile, pH 10.5. The 5 elutions from each phosphopeptide enrichment were then pooled together in order to yield one sample per experimental condition (t=0, t=10 and t=30 min). The sample volume was reduced in a vacuum centrifuge (RT) to 6 µl followed by nano-LC-MS/MS analysis. Three phosphoproteome measurements were performed; one was purely qualitative, one involved 15N labeling of bacterial culture (Hahne et al., 2010) and one utilized label-free quantification. For technical reasons 15N-labeling was not used for quantification, but only for identification of phosphorylation events. Of note, SILAC experiments were not applicable as, strains, auxotrophs for Lys or Arg sporulate poorly, yielding very low amounts of mature spores.  Nano-LC-MS/MS was performed on an EasyLCnano-HPLC (ProxeonBiosystems) coupled to the LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer. Peptides were loaded onto a 15 cm nano-HPLC column (inner diameter: 75 µm, tip diameter: 8 µm) in-house packed with reverse-phase 3 µm C18 spheres (Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany). Peptides were loaded onto the column with 0.5% acetic acid at a flow rate of 500 nl/min. A linear, segmented 130 min gradient consisting of 5–33% of Solvent B (80% acetonitrile in 0.5% acetic acid) was applied at a constant flow rate of 200 nL/min. Separated peptides were ionized through electrospray ionization using the electrospray ion source (ESI) (ProxeonBiosystems, Odense, Denmark). The OrbitrapXL was operated in the data-dependent positive ion mode utilizing the following acquisition cycle: one survey scan in the Orbitrap mass analyzer was acquired at the range of m/z 300–2,000 Thompson at a resolution of 60,000 (defined at m/z=400) with a target value of 1E6 charges, followed by fragmentation via collision induced dissociation (CID) of the 10 most intense precursor ions in the linear ion trap analyzer (LTQ) at a target value of 5E3 charges. Dynamic exclusion of precursor ions was applied for 90 sec. Additionally, the lock-mass option was enabled for internal calibration (Olsen et al., 2005). For MS analysis of enriched phosphopeptides, the LTQ Orbitrap XL was utilized with additional parameters: CID was performed on the 5 most intense precursor ions. Moreover, the Multi stage activation (MSA) feature was enabled in all MS/MS events where a neutral loss was detected at masses of singly (-97.97 Th), doubly (-48.99 Th) and triply (-32.66 Th) charged precursor ions.

### Data Protocol
In terms of both processing and analyzing the MS data, all acquired MS RAW files were processed together using the MaxQuant software suite version 1.2.2.9 (Cox & Mann, 2008). Database search was performed using the Andromeda platform, which is built into Maxquant (Cox et al., 2011) against a target-decoy database of Bacillus subtilis 168 obtained from Uniprot (taxonomy ID 1423), containing a total of 4195 B. subtilis protein entries and 262 contaminant proteins. Briefly, Trypsin was fixed as the protease with a maximum allowance of two missed cleavages. Variable modifications were set for methionine oxidation, N-terminal acetylation and phosphorylation on serine, threonine and tyrosine residues. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification. A Mass tolerance was set to 6 ppm and 0.5 Daltons for MS and MS/MS scans, respectively. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was applied at the peptide, protein and phosphorylated site level. Finally, the LFQ algorithm was set to infer quantitative information. Phosphorylation sites with a localization probability of ≥ 0.75 were considered to be localized. MS/MS spectra of phosphorylated peptides were filtered through manual validation in order to ensure high data quality. Phosphorylation site intensities were normalized with their respective protein intensities in order to determine if a bias was present based on the changing protein abundance. After this normalization step, phosphorylation sites were considered as significantly changing, based on the intensity-weighed statistical test known as “Significance B” (p = 0.05) . Finally, protein GO annotation and clustering analysis was done using DAVID and Subtiwiki (Huang da et al., 2009, Michna et al., 2014).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bacillus subtilis; spore; phosphoproteome; germination

### Affiliations
Proteome Center
Proteome Center Tuebingen

### Submitter
Karsten Krug

### Lab Head
Dr Boris Macek
Proteome Center Tuebingen


