### Accession
PXD029911

### Title
Insights on the Differential Preservation of Bone Proteomes in Inhumated and Entombed Cadavers from Italian Forensic Caseworks

### Description
Bone is a long-lasting biological tissue often used in forensic investigations as it retains vital biomolecular information commonly used for identification purposes. Bone proteins have attracted interest for their potential in estimating post-mortem interval (PMI) and age-at-death (AAD). However, the preservation of such proteins is highly dependent on intrinsic and extrinsic factors, and these have an impact in the potential application of molecular techniques to forensic sciences. The present study aims at investigating the effect that two commonly used types of burial practices (entombment and inhumation) have on bone protein survival. The sample consists in 14 exhumed individuals from cemeteries in south of Italy at with different AADs (29-85 yeas) and PMIs (1-37 years). LC-MS/MS analyses show that 16 proteins are better preserved in the entombed condition and four in the inhumated one, while no clear cluster separation is detected with principal component analysis. Besides the different burial environments, several potential protein markers are identified for PMI and AAD estimation. Overall, preliminary results show that the two burial environments seem to play a marginal role in the differential preservation of non-collagenous proteins and in the accumulation of post-translational modifications, confirming the potential of LC-MS/MS based proteomics in forensic sciences.

### Sample Protocol
The bone samples belonging to the deceased individuals subjected to this analysis were originally acquired from cemeteries in Campania (IT) by one of the authors at the request of the Judicial Authority and preserved at the forensic laboratory of the Legal Medicine Department, University of Catanzaro Magna Graecia. The specimens were obtained with an oscillating SG 700 saw. The diaphysis of 4.0 cm from 14 right femurs were cut out with a milling cutter, the outermost and innermost organic layers were removed, and the bone was cut into more fragments. These were washed in 50 ml distilled water on an orbital agitator for 20 minutes, then air dried; they were washed in 50 ml 96% EtOH on an orbital agitator for 20 minutes, then air dried. Finally, they were washed in 50 ml diethyl ether on an orbital agitator for 60 minutes, then air dried. Then, they were cooled at -30°C and subsequently pulverised at room temperature twice for 3 minutes, at 30 Hz with a tungsten carbide ball, in a steel mill. During the pulverization of different mortal remains, the mill was rinsed with 10% V/V bleach followed by H2O and 96% V/V EtOH. 25 mg of bone powder from each of the 14 individuals were processed in duplicate (“A” and “B” samples) for protein extraction according to the method developed by Procopio and Buckley. Each sample was decalcified with 1 mL of 10 v/v% formic acid for 6 hours at 4 °C. After removing all the acid soluble fraction, the acid insoluble fraction was left to incubate at 4°C for 18 hours in 500 µL of 6 M guanidine hydrochloride/100mM TRIS buffer. The buffer was exchanged into 100 µL of 50 mM ammonium acetate with 10K molecular-weight cut off filters, and the sample was reduced with 4.2 µL of 5 mM dithiothreitolfor 40 min at room temperature before alkylation in 16.8 µL of 15 mM iodoacetamide for 45 min in the dark at room temperature. Samples were then quenched with another 4.2 µL of 5 mM DTT, and digested with 0.4 µg of trypsin for 5 hours at 37°C and finally frozen. By adding 15 µL of 1 v/v% trifluoroacetic acid, digestion was stopped, and the samples were desalted, concentrated, and purified using OMIX C18 pipette tips with 0.1 v/v% TFA as washing solution and 50 v/v% acetonitrile/0.1 v/v% TFA as a conditioning solution. Pipette tips were conditioned using two volumes of 100 µL of 0.1 v/v% TFA and washed twice with 100 µL of 50 v/v% ACN/0.1 v/v% TFA. The sample was then syphoned into the tip at least ten times to efficiently bind peptides to the absorbent membrane. Two consecutive washing steps with 100µL of 0.1 v/v% TFA were performed prior to the peptide’s elution in 100 µL of 50 v/v% ACN/0.1 v/v% TFA. Purified peptides were left drying in the fume cupboard at room temperature prior to their LC-MS/MS analysis. Samples were resuspended in 5 v/v% ACN/0.1 v/v% TFA and were analysed by LC-MS/MS using an Ultimate™ 3000 Rapid Separation LC nano LC system coupled to a Exploris 480 Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer. Peptides were separated on an EASY-Spray™ reverse phase LC Column using a gradient from 96 v/v% A (0.1 v/v% FA in 3 v/v% DMSO) and 2 v/v% B (0.1 v/v% FA in 80 v/v% ACN 3 v/v% DMSO) to 8 v/v%, 30 v/v% and 50% B at 14, 50, and 60 min, respectively, at a flow rate of 250 nL min-1. Acclaim™ PepMap™ 100 C18 LC Column was used as trap column at a flow rate of 10 µL min-1 maintained at 45 °C. The LC separation was followed by a cleaning cycle with an additional 15 min of column equilibration time. Then, peptide ions were analysed in full scan MS scanning mode at 60,000 MS resolution with an automatic gain control (AGC) of 3e6, injection time of 200 ms and scan range of 375-1,400 m/z. The top 20 most abundant ions were selected for data-dependent MS/MS analysis with a normalized collision energy (NCE) level of 30 performed at 17,500 MS resolution with an AGC of 1e5 and maximum injection time of 100 ms. The isolation window was set to 2.0 m/z, with an underfilled ratio of 0.4%, dynamic exclusion was employed; thus, one repeat scan (i.e., two MS/MS scans in total) was acquired in a 25 s repeat duration with the precursor being excluded for the subsequent 25 s.

### Data Protocol
Peptide mass spectra were searched against the SwissProt_2021_03 database (selected for Homo sapiens, 20,386 entries) using the Mascot search engine (version 2.8.0; www.matrixscience.com) for matches to primary protein sequences. This search included the fixed carbamidomethyl modification of cysteine (+57.02 Da) as it is induced from an addition of DTT to the proteins. Deamidation of asparagine and glutamine (+0.98 Da) were considered as variable modifications together with oxidation (methionine, proline, and lysine, +15.99 Da) due to the interest of their relationship with the post-mortem processes. The enzyme was set to trypsin with a maximum of two missed cleavages allowed. Mass tolerances for precursor and fragmented ions were set at 5 ppm and 10 ppm, respectively. It was assumed that all spectra hold either 2+ or 3+ charged precursors. Progenesis Qi for Proteomics (version 4.1; Nonlinear Dynamics, Newcastle, U.K.) was used to perform relative quantitation calculations using the recorded ion intensities (area under the curve, AUC) and averaging the N most abundant peptides for each protein (Hi-N method, where N=3) and protein and post-translational modifications identifications. To increase the reliability of the matches, peptide ions with a score of <29 which indicates identity or extensive homology (FDR at p < 0.05), were excluded from the analysis based on the Mascot evaluation of the peptide score distribution for the searched .mgf file originating from Progenesis (combining all the samples in a single experiment). Proteins with a unique peptide count <2 were excluded from subsequent analyses. Group difference between FTIR parameters was evaluated by mean of t-test. Further, protein abundances were normalised using log2 transformation and robust empirical Bayes regression (ComBat) was applied to normalise batch effects between A and B biological replicates. Data analysis on normalised parameters accounted for principal component analysis (PCA) to evaluate differences between the different burial sites for all proteins quantified by LC-MS/MS and for selected deamidated peptides that provided abundances different from zero in all samples. The differences between burial conditions for each protein were further evaluated by means of t-test. STRING software version 11.0 was used to visualize functional links between the extracted proteins. The relationship between proteins, age at death and PMI was evaluated by Spearman's rank correlation coefficient with significance set at p<0.05 due to the monotonic but not linear association between variables. Posttranslational modification analysis focused on peptides deamidation as this was found in previous study to have correlation with both age and PMI. Only peptides presenting both a non-deamidated and a deamidated form and with an abundance different from zero for each sample were used in the quantification of modification percentage. The same statistical exploration employed for proteins was also applied to evaluate posttranslational modifications among the different burial conditions, age, and PMI.

### Publication Abstract
Bone is a hard biological tissue and a precious reservoir of information in forensic investigations as it retains key biomolecules commonly used for identification purposes. Bone proteins have recently attracted significant interest for their potential in estimating post-mortem interval (PMI) and age at death (AAD). However, the preservation of such proteins is highly dependent on intrinsic and extrinsic factors that can hinder the potential application of molecular techniques to forensic sciences. The present study aims at investigating the effects that two commonly used types of burial practices (entombment and inhumation) have on bone protein survival. The sample consists of 14 exhumed individuals from cemeteries in Southern Italy with different AADs (29-85 years) and PMIs (1-37 years). LC-MS/MS analyses show that 16 proteins are better preserved under the entombed conditions and 4 proteins are better preserved under the inhumed conditions, whereas no clear differences are detected for post-translational protein modifications. Furthermore, several potential "stable" protein markers (<i>i.e</i>., proteins not affected by the burial environment) are identified for PMI and AAD estimation. Overall, these results show that the two burial environments play a role in the differential preservation of noncollagenous proteins, confirming the potential of LC-MS/MS-based proteomics in forensic sciences.

### Keywords
Burial environment, Post-translational protein modifications, Forensics, Age-at-death, Post-mortem interval, Bone

### Affiliations
Forensic Science Research Group, Faculty of Health and Life Sciences, Applied Sciences, Northumbria University, NE1 8ST, Newcastle Upon Tyne, UK
University of Central Lancashire 

### Submitter
Noemi Procopio

### Lab Head
Dr Noemi Procopio
Forensic Science Research Group, Faculty of Health and Life Sciences, Applied Sciences, Northumbria University, NE1 8ST, Newcastle Upon Tyne, UK


