### Accession
PXD004496

### Title
Sex differences in the molecular signature of the developing mouse hippocampus

### Description
We used LC-MS/MS based proteomics to identify changes in protein expression in the the female and male mouse hippocampus at 1, 2, and 4 months of age. This proteomics dataset was correlated with an accompanying mRNA dataset to identify genes that show mRNA changes in a different direction that their respective proteins.  A modest correlation was found between mRNA and protein abundance in the mouse hippocampus (spearman rank coefficient = 0.53).

### Sample Protocol
Protein was extracted and processed via a modified FASP (Filter assisted sample preparation) protocol.  200ug of purified extract per sample was then digested with 4ug trypsin overnight. Finally digested peptides were fractionated via isoelectric focusing using an Agilent 3100 offgel fractionator, producing 12 fractions, which were re-pooled into 4 fractions per sample. Sample fractions were then analyzed on a LTQ Orbitrap Velos high-resolution electrospray tandem mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were uploaded into Proteome Discoverer (Thermo Scientific, version 1.4.0.288) using the MudPIT setting to combine data from multiple fractions corresponding to the same biological sample. Database searches were performed on each technical replicate with both Sequest HT and Mascot (version 2.4.0) using the target-reverse Mus musculus Swissprot reference proteome. Search result files in .msf format were then uploaded to the Scaffold software (Proteome Software, version 4.4.1.1). In Scaffold, an additional X!Tandem search war performed. Settings in the scaffold software were as follows: protein FDR = 1%, minimum # peptides = 2, peptide FDR = 1%. Spectral counts were normalized for protein length and sample loading with the NSAF option.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse, Development, Lc-ms/ms, Hippocampus

### Affiliations
Florida State University College of Medicine
Florida State University College of Medicine Department of Biomedical Sciences

### Submitter
Joseph Bundy

### Lab Head
Dr Richard S. Nowakowski
Florida State University College of Medicine Department of Biomedical Sciences


