### Accession
PXD019426

### Title
High-density monitoring of tyrosine phosphorylation signaling targets in human tumors using internal standard triggered targeted quantitation

### Description
SureQuant pTyr, a targeted, tyrosine phosphorylation (pTyr) mass spectrometry method, was applied to profile the pTyr signatures of human colorectal tumor samples. Using internal standard guided aquisition with the SureQuant acquisition mode on the Oribtrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific), the real-time detection of trigger peptides during analysis initiates the sensitive and selective quantitation of endogenous pTyr targets. This framework allows for reliable quantification of several hundred commonly dysregulated pTyr targets with high quantitative accuracy and improves the robustness and usability of targeted aquisition.

### Sample Protocol
Briefly, samples were lysed in 8M urea, reduced in 10 mM DTT, and alkylated with 55 mM IAA. Samples were diluted 4-fold with 100 mM ammonium acetate, pH 8.9, and proteins were digested with sequencing grade trypsin at an enzyme to substrate ratio of 1:50 overnight. Enzymatic activity was quenched by acidification with glacial acetic acid to 10% of the final solution volume, and peptides were desalted using C18 solid phase extraction cartridges. Eluted peptides were dried using vacuum centrifugation, lyophilzed in 800 ug aliquots, and stored at -80 until analysis. Tyrosine phosphorylation enrichment protocols can be found at github.com/white-lab/protocols

### Data Protocol
Peak area ratios of endogenous, light peptides and their heavy, stable isotope labeled- (SIL) peptide standards for 6 pre-selected transitions were exported from Skyline, and peptides were filtered according to the following criteria. Only SIL-peptides with an area > 0 and at least 5/6 product ions were considered. Of the remaining targets, endogenous targets with an AUC > 0 and at least 3 product ions were considered. For quantification, peak area values of the 3 highest intensity product ions present for both the light/heavy peptides were summed, and the ratio of light to heavy signal was taken across samples.

### Publication Abstract
Tyrosine phosphorylation (pTyr) plays a pivotal role in signal transduction and is commonly dysregulated in cancer. As a result, profiling tumor pTyr levels may reveal therapeutic insights critical to combating disease. Existing discovery and targeted mass spectrometry-based methods used to monitor pTyr networks involve a tradeoff between broad coverage of the pTyr network, reproducibility in target identification across analyses, and accurate quantification. To address these limitations, we developed a targeted approach, termed "SureQuant pTyr," coupling low input pTyr enrichment with a panel of isotopically labeled internal standard peptides to guide data acquisition of low-abundance tyrosine phosphopeptides. SureQuant pTyr allowed for reliable quantification of several hundred commonly dysregulated pTyr targets with high quantitative accuracy, improving the robustness and usability of targeted mass spectrometry assays. We established the clinical applicability of SureQuant pTyr by profiling pTyr signaling levels in human colorectal tumors using minimal sample input, characterizing patient-specific oncogenic-driving mechanisms. While in some cases pTyr profiles aligned with previously reported proteomic, genomic, and transcriptomic molecular characterizations, we highlighted instances of new insights gained using pTyr characterization and emphasized the complementary nature of pTyr measurements with traditional biomarkers for improving patient stratification and identifying therapeutic targets. The turn-key nature of this approach opens the door to rapid and reproducible pTyr profiling in research and clinical settings alike and enables pTyr-based measurements for applications in precision medicine. SIGNIFICANCE: SureQuant pTyr is a mass spectrometry-based targeted method that enables sensitive and selective targeted quantitation of several hundred low-abundance tyrosine phosphorylated peptides commonly dysregulated in cancer, including oncogenic signaling networks.

### Keywords
Post-translational modification, Targeted, Tyrosine phosphorylation, Surequant, Orbitrap, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
MIT
Koch Institute of Integrative Cancer Research, Department of Biological Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology

### Submitter
Lauren Stopfer

### Lab Head
Dr Forest White
Koch Institute of Integrative Cancer Research, Department of Biological Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology


