### Accession
PXD011356

### Title
Identification of novel pyrazolopyrimidine compounds that modulate the shelterin complex and telomere length regulation via phosphoglycerate kinase 1 and stress sensor DJ1

### Description
Telomere signalling and metabolic dysfunction are hallmarks of cell aging, and are associated with a variety of pathologies. Identification of new agents targeting these processes might provide therapeutic opportunities, including chemoprevention strategies against cancer predisposition. Here we report identification and characterization of a pyrazolopyrimidine compound series that emerged from screens focused on cell immortality pathways and whose targets are glycolytic kinase PGK1 and oxidative stress sensor DJ1. We initially performed structure-activity studies on the series to develop an analogue suitable for use as a photoaffinity probe to deconvolute the cellular targets. Biophysical and structural analyses confirmed these targets, pointing to the possibility that PGK1/DJ1 interact, which we confirmed by immunoprecipitation. Glucose homeostasis and oxidative stress have previously been linked to telomere signalling and exemplar compound CRT0063465 was found to block hypoglycaemic telomere shortening. Intriguingly, we find that both PGK1 and DJ1 bind to TRF2 and telomeric DNA. Compound treatment not only modulates these interactions but also affects composition of the Shelterin complex, in addition to conferring cellular protection from cytotoxicity due to bleomycin and desferroxamine. These results highlight the power of chemical approaches in discovery of novel biological mechanisms and demonstrate therapeutic potential of the compound series.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitation  Immunoprecipitations were performed using Dynabeads (Thermo Fisher Scientific, York, UK). 10 μg antibodies were coupled to M270 beads according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Beads were washed in C1 buffer then C1-diluted antibodies added. Buffer C2 was added and reactions incubated for 18 h at 37 oC. HB and SB washes contained 0.1% Tween-20 (Sigma-Aldrich, Dorset, UK). Before use, beads were washed in PBS containing 0.1% BSA. Lysates were prepared in kit extraction buffer supplemented with EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail tablets (Roche Diagnostics Ltd., West Sussex, UK) and 100 mM NaCl. Immunoprecipitations were performed for 30 minutes at 4 oC, then beads were washed and eluted. Antibodies were ab13579, TRF2 (Abcam, Cambridge, UK).   TRF2 pull-down LC-MS analysis  Gel lanes were excised to six approximately equal sized bands and destained by successive washing (10 min, 30 °C) in water, 50% acetonitrile, 0.1 M triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB, pH 8.5) and 50 mM TEAB in 50% acetonitrile. Gel was dehydrated in 100% acetonitrile and dried by Speedvac (Thermo Fisher Scientific, York, UK) before rehydration in 25 mM TEAB containing 5 μg/ml trypsin overnight (30 °C). Digests were extracted sequentially with one volume of 100% acetonitrile (15 min, 30 °C) and one volume of 25% acetonitrile and 1.25% formic acid (15 min, 30 °C). Supernatants were pooled and evaporated. Dried peptides were re-dissolved in 5% acetonitrile/0.25% formic acid. Reversed-phase LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on LTQ-Orbitrap Velos coupled to a Proxeon Easy-LC (Thermo Fisher Scientific, York, UK). Peptide mixtures were loaded onto C18 guard columns (1.9 μm; 0.1 × 20 mm) and separated on a C18 in-house packed emitter (1.9 μm; 0.075 × 150 mm) over a 55 min linear gradient (5% to 45% B. A: 2% acetonitrile 0.1% formic acid B: 80% acetonitrile 0.1% formic acid). The Orbitrap survey scan analysis (m/z 350 to 1600) was at 60,000 resolution and the top 10 ions in each duty cycle were selected for MS/MS in the LTQ linear ion trap with collision-induced dissociation (CID) (normalised collision energy (NCE) 36%).

### Data Protocol
Data was searched against Homo sapiens Swiss-Prot (148212 entries) using Mascot (2.4.1). Mascot files were loaded into Scaffold (4.3.4).

### Publication Abstract
Telomere signaling and metabolic dysfunction are hallmarks of cell aging. New agents targeting these processes might provide therapeutic opportunities, including chemoprevention strategies against cancer predisposition. We report identification and characterization of a pyrazolopyrimidine compound series identified from screens focused on cell immortality and whose targets are glycolytic kinase PGK1 and oxidative stress sensor DJ1. We performed structure-activity studies on the series to develop a photoaffinity probe to deconvolute the cellular targets. In vitro binding and structural analyses confirmed these targets, suggesting that PGK1/DJ1 interact, which we confirmed by immunoprecipitation. Glucose homeostasis and oxidative stress are linked to telomere signaling and exemplar compound CRT0063465 blocked hypoglycemic telomere shortening. Intriguingly, PGK1 and DJ1 bind to TRF2 and telomeric DNA. Compound treatment modulates these interactions and also affects Shelterin complex composition, while conferring cellular protection from cytotoxicity due to bleomycin and desferroxamine. These results demonstrate therapeutic potential of the compound series.

### Keywords
Shelterin, Pgk1, Dj1, Trf2, Telomere, Stress

### Affiliations
Institute of Cancer Sciences, University of Glasgow, Wolfson Wohl Cancer Research Centre, Garscube Estate, Switchback Road, Bearsden, Glasgow G61 1QH, UK
BICR

### Submitter
David Sumpton

### Lab Head
Dr Nicol Keith
Institute of Cancer Sciences, University of Glasgow, Wolfson Wohl Cancer Research Centre, Garscube Estate, Switchback Road, Bearsden, Glasgow G61 1QH, UK


