### Accession
PXD024043

### Title
Ultra-high sensitivity mass spectrometry quantifies single-cell proteome changes upon perturbation

### Description
Single-cell technologies are revolutionizing biology but are today mainly limited to imaging and deep sequencing. However, proteins are the main drivers of cellular function and in-depth characterization of individual cells by mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics would thus be highly valuable and complementary. Here, we develop a robust workflow combining miniaturized sample preparation, very low flow-rate chromatography and a novel trapped ion mobility mass spectrometer, resulting in a more than ten-fold improved sensitivity. We precisely and robustly quantify proteomes and their changes in single, FACS-isolated cells. Arresting cells at defined stages of the cell cycle by drug treatment retrieves expected key regulators. Furthermore, it highlights potential novel ones and allows cell phase prediction. Comparing the variability in more than 430 single-cell proteomes to transcriptome data revealed a stable core proteome despite perturbation, while the transcriptome appears stochastic. Our technology can readily be applied to ultra-high sensitivity analyses of tissue material, posttranslational modifications and small molecule studies from small cell counts to gain unprecedented insights into cellular heterogeneity in health and disease.  

### Sample Protocol
For all benchmark experiments purified peptides from bulk HeLa cells were used. HeLa was cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium at 10 % fetal bovine serum, 20 mM glutamine and 1% penicillin–streptomycin. Cells were collected by centrifugation, washed with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at −80 °C. Cells were resuspended in PreOmics lysis buffer (PreOmics GmbH) and boiled for 20 min at 95 °C, 1500 rpm to denature, reduce and alkylate cysteins, followed by sonication in a Branson, cooled down to room temperature and diluted 1:1 with 100 mM TrisHCl pH 8.5. Protein concentration was estimated by Nanodrop measurement and 500 µg were further processed for overnight digestion by adding LysC and trypsin in a 1:50 ratio (µg of enzyme to µg of protein) at 37 °C and 1500 rpm. Peptides were acidified by adding 1 % trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) 99 % isopropanol (IprOH)in a 1:1 ratio, vortexed, and subjected to StageTip (Rappsilber et al, 2007) clean-up via styrenedivinylbenzene reverse phase sulfonate (SDB-RPS). 20 µg of peptides were loaded on two 14-gauge StageTip plugs. Peptides were washed two times with 200 µL 1 % TFA 99 % IprOH followed by 200 µL 1 % TFA 99 % IprOH in an in-house-made StageTip centrifuge at 2000 xg and elution with 100 µL of 1 % Ammonia, 80 % acetonitrile (ACN), 19% ddH2O into PCR tubes and finally dried at 60 °C in a SpeedVac centrifuge (Eppendorf, Concentrator plus). Peptides were resuspended in 0.1 % TFA, 2 % ACN, 97.9 % ddH2O.

### Data Protocol
Raw data analysis. ddaPASEF data for tryptic HeLa digest dilution series and the cell count experiment were analyzed in the MaxQuant environment (version 1.6.7) and searched against the human Uniprot databases (UP000005640_9606.fa, UP000005640_9606_additional.fa), which extracts features from four-dimensional isotope patterns and associated MS/MS spectra(Cox & Mann, 2008; Prianichnikov et al, 2020). False-discovery rates were controlled at 1% both on peptide spectral match (PSM) and protein levels. Peptides with a minimum length of seven amino acids were considered for the search including N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications and cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification, while limiting the maximum peptide mass to 4,600 Da. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin cleaving c-terminal to arginine and lysine. A maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Maximum precursor and fragment ion mass tolerance were searched as default for TIMS-DDA data. Peptide identifications by MS/MS were transferred by matching four-dimensional isotope patterns between the runs (MBR) with a 0.7-min retention-time match window and a 0.05 1/K0 ion mobility window in case of the single cell-count dilution experiment into a deep ddaPASEF library consisting of 24 fractionations of tryptic HeLa digest. These data were also searched without matching between runs to access the MBR-mediated identification increase. Either intensity-based absolute quantification (IBAQ) or label-free quantification was performed with the MaxLFQ algorithm and a minimum ratio count of one(Cox et al, 2014). For all other single-cell experiments, we used a small library consisting of 25,376 peptides and 4,144 protein groups, which was acquired with the 100ms ddaPASEF method described above and generated with the MSFRAGGER version 16 using default settings with the exception that cysteine carbamidomethylation was removed from fixed modification(Demichev et al; Kong et al, 2017). All single-cell measurements were searched against the human UniProt reference proteome (UP000005640_9606.fa, UP000005640_9606_additional.fa) of canonical and isoform sequences.  Due to recent software improvement driven by the implementation the next generation of Spectronaut 15, followed by DIA-NN 1.8 (Demichev et al; Bruderer et al, 2015) for the analysis of diaPASEF raw files, which utilize the complex diaPASEF TIMS-TOF data much better by improved machine learning algorithms, we initially evaluated both software solutions for the analysis of our single-cell data set. It turned out that DIA-NN 1.8 using spectral libraries generated with MSFRAGGER, at that time, outperformed the library-based and directDIA analysis pipeline in Spectronaut 15 in our hands.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics at single-cell resolution; low flow lc-ms; drug perturbation; systems biology; single-cell heterogeneity

### Affiliations
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry
Proteomics

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry


