### Accession
PXD002002

### Title
Giardia duodenalis Encystation Strain Variation

### Description
Giardia duodenalis is a protozoan parasite responsible for gastroenteritis in vertebrates, including humans. The prevalence of G. duodenalis is partly owed to its direct and simple life cycle, as well as the formation of the environmentally resistant and infective cysts. Several proteomic and transcriptomic studies have previously analysed global changes during the encystation process using the well-characterised laboratory isolate and genome strain, WBC6. To expand current comparative analyses, this study presents the first quantitative global study of encystation using pathogenically relevant and alternative assemblage A strains: the human-derived BRIS/82/HEPU/106 and avian-derived BRIS/95/HEPU/2041. We have utilised tandem MS/MS with a label-free quantitative approach to compare cysts and trophozoite life stages between strains for variation, as well as confirm universal encystation markers of Assemblage A.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted, subjected to FASP with Lys-C and trypsin digestion and analysed using LC-MS/MS on a LTQ Velos Pro linear ion trap mass spectrometer (Thermo, San Jose CA). Samples were analysed as 4 repeat injections using GPF for online fractionation as 4 repeat injections across  four mass range.

### Data Protocol
The Giardiadb.org 4.0 release of the G. duodenalis strain Assemblage A1 (strain WB) genome was used as a database for searching with the global proteome machine (GPM) software (version 2.1.1) and the X!Tandem algorithm. For each replicate in each sample the 4 fractions were searched sequentially and processed with output files for each individual fraction, and a merged, non-redundant output file for protein identifications with log(e) values < – 1.  Reversed database searching was used for calculating peptide and protein false discovery rates (FDRs) while protein abundance was calculated using normalised spectral abundance factors (NSAF).

### Publication Abstract
The prevalence of Giardia duodenalis in humans is partly owed to its direct and simple life cycle, as well as the formation of the environmentally resistant and infective cysts. Proteomic and transcriptomic studies have previously analysed the encystation process using the well-characterised laboratory genomic strain, WB C6. This study presents the first quantitative study of encystation using pathogenically relevant and alternative assemblage A strains: the human-derived BRIS/82/HEPU/106 (H-106)and avian-derived BRIS/95/HEPU/2041 (B-2041). We utilised tandem MS/MS with a label-free quantitative approach to compare cysts and trophozoite life stages for strain variation, as well as confirm universal encystation markers of assemblage A. A total of 1061 non-redundant proteins were identified from both strains, including trophozoite- and cyst-specific proteomes and life-stage differentially expressed proteins. Additionally, 24 proteins previously classified in the literature as encystation-specific were confirmed as strain-independent markers of encystation. Functional cluster analysis of differentially expressed proteins saw significant overlap between strains, including protein trafficking and localisation in cysts, NEK kinase function, and carbohydrate metabolism in trophozoites. Two significant points of strain specific adaptations in cysts were also identified. B-2041 possessed major up-regulation of the ankyrin repeat protein 21.1 family compared to H-106. Furthermore, cysts of B-2041 retained near-complete VSP variant diversity between cysts and trophozoites, while H-106 lost 45% of its VSP variant diversity between life cycle stages, a constriction previously observed in studies of WB C6. This is the first report of strain variation in the cyst stage in G. duodenalis, and highlights cyst variation and its impacts on reinfection and life cycle success.

### Keywords
Parasitology, Spectral counting, Spc, Lc-ms/ms, Giardia, Label-free, Protozoans, Nsaf

### Affiliations
Chemistry and Biomolecular Sciences, Macquarie University, North Ryde
Population Health and Immunity, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research

### Submitter
Samantha Emery

### Lab Head
Dr Paul A Haynes
Chemistry and Biomolecular Sciences, Macquarie University, North Ryde


