### Accession
PXD020766

### Title
Uncovering the pathways related with extracellular vesicles derived from Devil Facial Tumour cells (DFTD).

### Description
Tasmanian devils are threatened with extinction because of two genetically independent transmissible cancers which are termed as Devil Facial Tumour Disease one and two (DFTD-1 and DFTD-2). The cancers are indistinguishable by gross examination and require laboratory procedures such as immunohistochemistry and/or PCR for diagnosis. Here we used proteomics to analyse extracellular vesicles from DFTD cells to better understand the potentail role of EV's in DFTD cancer metastasis.

### Sample Protocol
Cell cultures of DFT1, DFT2 and fibroblasts were maintained in RPMI medium supplemented with 10% FBS.  Extracellular vesicles were prepared by size exclusion chromatography (qEV2 – 35 columns) and lysis in 50% acetonitrile and cell lysates prepared by extraction in 7M urea/2M thiourea. Aliquots of 30ug protein were sequentially reduced and alkylated then digested with trypsin/rLysC according to the SP3 protocol.  Digests were desalted using ZipTips. Digests were desalted using ZipTips. Approx 1ug was analysed by nanoLC/MS using 90 minute gradients.

### Data Protocol
Spectral libraries were generated using high pH offline fractionation of cell lysate peptides and EV peptides. These were then used to match against DIA_MS data acquired for the individual DFTD lysate and fibroblast (control) samples. Standard (Biognosys Factory Settings) Spectronaut parameters were used for protein identification and quantitation, and data was imported into Perseus for further statistics and visualization.

### Publication Abstract
The iconic Tasmanian devil (Sarcophilus harrisii) is endangered due to the transmissible cancer Devil Facial Tumour Disease (DFTD), of which there are two genetically independent subtypes (DFT1 and DFT2). While DFT1 and DFT2 can be differentially diagnosed using tumour biopsies, there is an urgent need to develop less-invasive biomarkers that can detect DFTD and distinguish between subtypes. Extracellular vesicles (EVs), the nano-sized membrane-enclosed vesicles present in most biofluids, represent a valuable resource for biomarker discovery. Here, we characterized the proteome of EVs from cultured DFTD cells using data-independent acquisition-mass spectrometry and an in-house spectral library of&#x2009;&gt;&#x2009;1500 proteins. EVs from both DFT1 and DFT2 cell lines expressed higher levels of proteins associated with focal adhesion functions. Furthermore, hallmark proteins of epithelial-mesenchymal transition were enriched in DFT2 EVs relative to DFT1 EVs. These findings were validated in EVs derived from serum samples, revealing that the mesenchymal marker tenascin-C was also enriched in EVs derived from the serum of devils infected with DFT2 relative to those infected with DFT1 and healthy controls. This first EV-based investigation of DFTD increases our understanding of the cancers' EVs and their possible involvement in DFTD progression, such as metastasis. Finally, we demonstrated the potential of EVs to differentiate between DFT1 and DFT2, highlighting&#xa0;their potential use as less-invasive liquid biopsies for the Tasmanian devil.

### Keywords
Dftd, Proteomics, Extracellular vesicles, Biomarkers

### Affiliations
University of Tasmania
Proteomics facility, Central Science Laboratory, University of Tasmania

### Submitter
Richard Wilson

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Richard Wilson
Proteomics facility, Central Science Laboratory, University of Tasmania


