### Accession
PXD016279

### Title
p97/VCP inhibition radiosensitises cancer cells through excessive MRE11-dependent DNA end resection

### Description
Cancer cells are under constant proteotoxic stress and have an increased genomic instability. They therefore rely on upregulation of protein homeostasis and the DNA damage response (DDR) for survival. The ubiquitin-dependent ATPase p97 is a central component of the ubiquitin-proteasome degradation system (UPS), involved in both protein homeostasis and DDR. p97 is overexpressed in many tumours and its overexpression correlates with poor prognosis in patients. To explore the concept of cancer cell killing by combined targeting of DDR and proteostasis, we induced DNA damage by ionising radiation (IR) and inhibited proteostasis by CB-5083, a specific small molecule inhibitor of p97, in bladder cancer cell lines and a mouse xenograft model. Combined therapy induced radiosensitivity and supressed xenograft tumour growth. Mechanistically, inactivation of the p97 ATPase activity results in proteotoxic accumulation of the nuclease MRE11 at the sites of IR-induced DNA lesions. This leads to excessive formation of single-stranded DNA (ssDNA), inhibition of HR, reliance on SSA for DSB repair and synthetic lethality after IR exposure in non-homologous end-joining-defective tumour cells such as those in muscle-invasive bladder carcinoma patients

### Sample Protocol
MRE11 pull-down For mass spectrometry of MRE11 interactome, T24 cells were plated on 15 cm plates and transfected with 20 µg pCDNA3.3 vector containing HA-MRE11 per plate, with FuGene transfection reagent in a 1:3 ratio. Cells were treated with 5 Gy IR in a cesium-137 Gamma-Service Medical GmbH GSR D1 irradiator and recovered for 4 hours. Cells were harvested and lysed in 50 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 100 mM NaCl, 10 mM EDTA, 1% w/v Triton X-100, 4 mM sodium pyrophoshate, 2mM sodium orthovanadate, 10 mM sodium fluoride, 50 mM β-glycerophosphate and Roche Complete Mini Protease inhibitor cocktail. Cell lysate was incubated with a mixture of 25 µL protein A and 25 uL protein G dynabeads which were pre-washed with lysis buffer for 1 hour to pre-clear sample. HA-conjugated magnetic beads (Pierce) were also washed in lysis buffer, and sample incubated with these beads at 4°C for 1 hour with rotation. Beads were then washed six times with lysis buffer as above, but containing 0.5 M NaCl instead of 100 mM NaCl. Elution was carried out with HA peptide (2 mg/mL), 20 - 100 µL for 2 hours at room temperate. After elution, protein was precipitated using chloroform/methanol, then trypsin digestion was carried out. Protein digestion, LC-MS/MS analysis and data analysis  Pulled down proteins were reduced, alkylated and then precipitated using chloroform/methanol protein precipitation (Fischer et al., 2012). Protein precipitates were solubilised in 6 M urea in 100 mM Tris pH 7.4, digested with trypsin (overnight at 37 °C; Promega), de-salted using C18 Sep Pak column cartridges (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) and dried using a speed vacuum. Peptides were resuspended in water with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and 2% acetonitrile.  MRE11 pulled down tryptic peptides were analysed by nano-UPLC-MS/MS using a Water nanoAcquitiy system connected to a LTQ Orbitrap Velos Elite(Thermo), as described previously (Fischer et al., 2012). In brief, tryptic peptides were separated on a C18 reverse-phase column (Waters, nAcquity, 75µm x 25cm, 1.7µm particle size) using a multistep gradient from 1 to 40% acetonitrile in 60 min at a flow rate of 250 nl/min.  Full MS scans were acquired over the m/z range of 300 – 1500 at 60000 resolution. MS/MS data was acquired in a data dependent manner by selecting the top 20 most abundant precursor ions for CID fragmentation (Collision energy of 35). Proteins were identified in MASCOT (v2.3), using the Human UniProt_SwissProt database (retrieved 20150204; containing 20,274 sequences). Data was searched against the Human UniProt_SwissProt database (retrieved 20150204; containing 20,274 sequences) using the Decoy function, whilst selecting trypsin as enzyme (allowing 1 missed cleavages), peptide charge of +2, +3, +4 ions, peptide tolerance of 10 ppm and MS/MS of 0.5 Da; #13C at 1; Carboamidomethylation as fixed modification, and Oxidation (M) and Deamidation (N) as a variable modification. The mass spectrometry raw data had been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PRIDE: PXD________ (Vizcaino et al., 2016)

### Data Protocol
Data was searched using MASCOT and results were filtered by applying a significance threshold at p< 0.001.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteasomal degradation, Ubiquitin, Mre11, Homologous recombination, Dna double-strand break repair, Dna damage, Single-strand annealing, Cb-5083, Bladder cancer, P97

### Affiliations
CRUK-MRC Oxford Institute for Radiation Oncology, Oxford University
CRUK/MRC Oxford Institute for Radiation Oncology, Department of Oncology, University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 7DQ, UK

### Submitter
iolanda Vendrell

### Lab Head
Dr Anne E Kiltie
CRUK/MRC Oxford Institute for Radiation Oncology, Department of Oncology, University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 7DQ, UK


