### Accession
PXD029190

### Title
GPI-glycan structures of Prion from WT mouse brains

### Description
To determine glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) structures of prion proteins isolated from mouse brains.

### Sample Protocol
We affinity purified prion protein from mouse brains by anti-prion antibody after phosphatidylinositol-specific phospholipase C treatment to remove GPI lipid portion. Then, we treated the purified sample with peptide-N-glycosidase F to remove the N-glycans. Sample was separated by SDS-PAGE and the gel corresponding to prion protein was excised. Excised gel was reduced with 10 mM DTT and alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide followed by the digestion with trypsin. The resulted peptide sample was purified with Nu-Tip polyHydroxyethylA (HILIC) (purchased from glygen) according to the manufacture’s protocol. Purified peptides were dried and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid, generating a measurement sample. Sample was separated by forward-phase HPLC with nanoLC using HILIC column (Capillary EX-Nano Inert Sustain Amide 3 µm 0.1 x 150 mm from GL Science). Data was obtained by LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Xcalibur Software was used for analysis of mass data. In the MS/MS profiles, those that contain characteristic fragments derived from GPI anchors, such as fragment ions of m/z 422+ and 477+, were selected, and fragments in the selected profiles were assigned to determine the GPI structures.

### Publication Abstract
Glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) is a posttranslational glycolipid modification of proteins that anchors proteins in lipid rafts on the cell surface. Although some GPI-anchored proteins (GPI-APs), including the prion protein PrP<sup>C</sup>, have a glycan side chain composed of N-acetylgalactosamine (GalNAc)-galactose-sialic acid on the core structure of GPI glycolipid, in&#xa0;vivo functions of this GPI-GalNAc side chain are largely unresolved. Here, we investigated the physiological and pathological roles of the GPI-GalNAc side chain in&#xa0;vivo by knocking out its initiation enzyme, PGAP4, in mice. We show that Pgap4 mRNA is highly expressed in the brain, particularly in neurons, and mass spectrometry analysis confirmed the loss of the GalNAc side chain in PrP<sup>C</sup> GPI in PGAP4-KO mouse brains. Furthermore, PGAP4-KO mice exhibited various phenotypes, including an elevated blood alkaline phosphatase level, impaired bone formation, decreased locomotor activity, and impaired memory, despite normal expression levels and lipid raft association of various GPI-APs. Thus, we conclude that the GPI-GalNAc side chain is required for in&#xa0;vivo functions of GPI-APs in mammals, especially in bone and the brain. Moreover, PGAP4-KO mice were more vulnerable to prion diseases and died earlier after intracerebral inoculation of the pathogenic prion strains than wildtype mice, highlighting the protective roles of the GalNAc side chain against prion diseases.

### Keywords
Gpi, Brain, Mouse, Gpi side chain, Prion

### Affiliations
Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, Osaka University
Center for Highly Advanced Integration of Nano and Life Sciences (G-CHAIN)

### Submitter
Tetsuya Hirata

### Lab Head
Dr Taroh Kinoshita
Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, Osaka University


