### Accession
PXD036110

### Title
Characterization of the redox proteome in Drosophila melanogaster aging eyes.

### Description
During oxidative stress, reactive oxygen species (ROS) can modify and damage cellular proteins. In particular, the thiol groups of cysteine residues can undergo reversible or irreversible oxidative post-translation modifications (PTMs). Identifying the redox-sensitive cysteines on a proteome-wide scale can provide insight into those proteins that act as redox sensors or become irreversibly damaged upon exposure to high levels of ROS. Aging is accompanied by oxidative stress, and oxygen-rich tissues such as the eye are particularly vulnerable because of its high energy demand and generation of ROS byproducts, which increases the risk for ocular disease. In this study, we profiled the redox proteome of the aging Drosophila eye to identify cysteine residues that are modified by age-associated ROS.

### Sample Protocol
Drosophila melanogaster were aged to days 10 and 50 post-eclosion under 12:12 light: dark conditions at 25C. Eyes were manually removed at indicated ages, and were lysed and ultrasonicated in a Covaris E220 in HES buffer [50mM HEPES, 1mM EDTA, 0.1% SDS]. Protein was quantified using a Qubit Fluorometer, and 250ug of protein in HES buffer [50mM HEPES, 1mM EDTA, 0.1% SDS] was used for analysis. 50ug of each sample was reserved for global proteomic analysis, and the remaining 200ug was labeled with iodo-TMT-sixplex reagents. Each sample received an independent iodo-TMT-sixplex tag, and was then reduced with 0.5M DTT. After reduction, all samples were labeled with iodoacetamide (IAA). Samples were combined, and an acetone precipitation was performed. After the precipitation, the combined sample was dissolved in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate and digested with trypsin overnight. The sample was then acidified with TFA and lyophilized. Lastly, the lyophilized peptides were resuspended in 1x TBS prior to enrichment. 100ug was set aside for fractionation, and the remaining peptides were enriched using an anti-TMT resin and eluted with TMT elution buffer.

### Data Protocol
Scientific™, RRID: SCR_014477) with a Drosophila melanogaster UniProt FASTA plus common contaminants (downloaded Feb 2021, 3629 total sequences). SEQUEST HT searches were conducted with a maximum number of 3 missed cleavages; precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm; and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.02 Da. For iodoTMT samples, a max of 3 dynamic mods were allowed per peptide and dynamic modifications of oxidation (M), iodoTMT6plex (Cys), carbamidomethyl (Cys); dynamic protein terminus modifications of acetylation (N-terminus), Met-loss or Met-loss plus acetylation (N-terminus).  For global proteome samples, the same precursor/fragment/missed cleavage/max dynamic mod settings were used in addition to static modifications of TMT6plex on lysines (K) and carbamidomethylation on cysteine (C) residues; Dynamic modifications of oxidation on (M), TMT label on the N-termini of peptides, phosphorylation on (S,T,Y); dynamic Protein terminus modifications of acetylation (N-terminus), Met-loss or Met-loss plus acetylation (N-terminus). Percolator False Discovery Rate was set to a strict setting of 0.01 and a relaxed setting of 0.05. IMP-ptm-RS node was used for all modification site localization scores. In the consensus workflows, data were normalized to total peptide. Co-isolation thresholds of 50% and average reporter ion S/N cutoffs of 5 were used for quantification. Lot specific isotopic impurity levels were applied. Protein Abundance based protein ratio calculation with no imputation and ANOVA (individual proteins) was performed. Resulting normalized abundance values for each sample type (iodo-TMT labeled peptides or global proteins), abundance ratio and log2(abundance ratio) values; and respective p-values (t-test) from Proteome Discover™ were exported to Microsoft Excel.

### Publication Abstract
The retina is one of the highest oxygen-consuming tissues because visual transduction and light signaling processes require large amounts of ATP. Thus, because of the high energy demand, oxygen-rich environment, and tissue transparency, the eye is susceptible to excess production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) resulting in oxidative stress. Oxidative stress in the eye is associated with the development and progression of ocular diseases including cataracts, glaucoma, age-related macular degeneration, and diabetic retinopathy. ROS can modify and damage cellular proteins, but can also be involved in redox signaling. In particular, the thiol groups of cysteines can undergo reversible or irreversible oxidative post-translational modifications (PTMs). Identifying the redox-sensitive cysteines on a proteome-wide scale provides insight into those proteins that act as redox sensors or become irreversibly damaged upon exposure to oxidative stress. In this study, we profiled the redox proteome of the Drosophila eye under prolonged, high intensity blue light exposure and age using iodoacetamide isobaric label sixplex reagents (iodo-TMT) to identify changes in cysteine availability. Although redox metabolite analysis of the major antioxidant, glutathione, revealed similar ratios of its oxidized and reduced form in aged or light-stressed eyes, we observed different changes in the redox proteome under these conditions. Both conditions resulted in significant oxidation of proteins involved in phototransduction and photoreceptor maintenance but affected distinct targets and cysteine residues. Moreover, redox changes induced by blue light exposure were accompanied by a large reduction in light sensitivity that did not arise from a reduction in the photopigment level, suggesting that the redox-sensitive cysteines we identified in the phototransduction machinery might contribute to light adaptation. Our data provide a comprehensive description of the redox proteome of Drosophila eye tissue under light stress and aging and suggest how redox signaling might contribute to light adaptation in response to acute light stress.

### Keywords
Drosophila eye, Redox proteome, Oxidative post-translation modifications, Aging

### Affiliations
Indiana University School of Medicine
IUSM Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Center for Proteome Analysis, Indianapolis, IN

### Submitter
Emma Doud

### Lab Head
Dr Amber Mosley
IUSM Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Center for Proteome Analysis, Indianapolis, IN


