### Accession
PXD047806

### Title
Mass spectrometry analysis of kinetochore proteins (KKT4, KKT14, and KKT22) in Trypanosoma brucei

### Description
We performed immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry of kinetoplastid kinetochore proteins (full-length proteins for KKT4, KKT14, and KKT22 as well as KKT14 fragments) to identify co-purifying proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Ectopic expression of GFP-tagged KKT14N (2–357) and KKT14C (358–685) fragments in trypanosomes was induced with 10 ng/ml doxycycline for 24 hours. KKT4-YFP, YFP-KKT14, and YFP-KKT22 were expressed from the endogenous locus. Where indicated, 10 µM MG132 or 2 µM 1NM-PP1 were added for 4 hours prior to harvesting the cells. Immunoprecipitation was performed with anti-GFP antibodies (11814460001, Roche) using a method we previously described (Ishii and Akiyoshi, 2020). Proteins were eluted using either 0.1% RapiGest in 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.3 or 0.3% SDS in 1 mM EDTA and 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.3. Reduction of disulphide bridges in cysteine-containing proteins was performed with dithiothreitol (56°C, 30 min, 10 mM in 50 mM HEPES, pH 8.5). Reduced cysteines were alkylated with 2-chloroacetamide (room temperature, in the dark, 30 min, 20 mM in 50 mM HEPES, pH 8.5). Samples were prepared using the SP3 protocol (Hughes et al., 2019) and trypsin (Promega) was added in an enzyme to protein ratio 1:50 for overnight digestion at 37°C. Next day, peptide recovery was done in HEPES buffer by collecting supernatant on magnet and combining with second elution with HEPES buffer. For further sample clean up, an OASIS HLB µElution Plate (Waters) was used. The samples were dissolved in 10 µL of reconstitution buffer (96:4 water: acetonitrile, 1% formic acid and analyzed by LC-MS/MS using QExactive (Thermo) in the proteomics core facility at EMBL Heidelberg (https://www.embl.org/groups/proteomics/).

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified by searching tandem mass spectrometry spectra against the T. brucei protein database with MaxQuant (version 2.0.1) with carbamidomethyl cysteine set as a fixed modification and oxidization (Met), phosphorylation (Ser, Thr, and/or Tyr), and acetylation (Lys) set as variable modifications. Up to two missed cleavages were allowed. The first peptide tolerance was set to 10 ppm (protein FDR 1%).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Kinetochore, Trypanosomes

### Affiliations
University of Edinburgh
Institute of Cell Biology, School of Biological Sciences, University of Edinburgh

### Submitter
Bungo Akiyoshi

### Lab Head
Dr Bungo Akiyoshi
Institute of Cell Biology, School of Biological Sciences, University of Edinburgh


