### Accession
PXD007236

### Title
TbSTT3A and TbSTT3B  hetero-oligomeric complex

### Description
Directly address the oligomeric states of T. brucei STT3 subunits

### Sample Protocol
Heavy and light labelled cells were harvested separately (15 min, 800 g, 4 °C) and washed and resuspended in trypanosome dilution buffer (20 mM Na2HPO4, 2 mM NaH2PO4, 80 mM NaCl, 5 mM KCl, 20 mM glucose) for cell counting. The cells were mixed 1 : 1 before undergoing immunoprecipitation, as described above. The eluted proteins in 25 µl reducing SDS sample buffer were S-alkylated with 5 µl 300 mM iodoacetamide (30 min, dark) and loaded on Novex NUPAGE 4-12% Bis Tris gel and run at 200 V using MOPS buffer until the proteins had migrated about 2 cm into the gel (visualised by Simply Blue Safe Stain, Thermo Fisher). The protein-containing region of the gel was excised and subjected to in-gel trypsin digestion and aliquots of the extracted peptides were analysed on an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer coupled with a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RS HPLC system (Thermo Fisher). The sample peptides were loaded at 5 μL/min onto a trap column (100 μm × 2 cm, PepMap nanoViper C18 column, 5 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific) equilibrated in 98% buffer A (2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid (v/v)) and 2% buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 0.08% formic acid (v/v)). The trap column was washed for 3 min at the same flow rate and then switched in-line with a Thermo Scientific resolving C18 column (75 μm × 50 cm, PepMap RSLC C18 column, 2 μm, 100 Å). The peptides were eluted from the column at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min with a linear gradient from 98% buffer A to 40% buffer B in 128 min, and then to 98% buffer B by 130 min. LTQ-Orbitap Velos Pro was used in data dependent mode. A scan cycle comprised an MS1 scan (m/z range from 335-1800) in the Orbitrap (resolution 60,000) followed by 15 sequential data-dependant collision induced dissociation MS2 scans (the threshold value was set at 5000 and the minimum injection time was set at 200 ms).

### Data Protocol
The data set from the experiment was used to search a T. brucei predicted protein database using MaxQuant software. Each protein was displayed on a plot of the Log10 value of the intensities of the unique peptides of that protein and the Log2 value of the heavy to light isotope ratios of the same peptides.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Trypanosoma brucei</i> causes African trypanosomiasis and contains three full-length oligosaccharyltransferase (OST) genes; two of which, <i>Tb</i>STT3A and <i>Tb</i>STT3B, are expressed in the bloodstream form of the parasite. These OSTs have different peptide acceptor and lipid-linked oligosaccharide donor specificities, and trypanosomes do not follow many of the canonical rules developed for other eukaryotic <i>N</i>-glycosylation pathways, raising questions as to the basic architecture and detailed function of trypanosome OSTs. Here, we show by blue-native gel electrophoresis and stable isotope labeling in cell culture proteomics that the <i>Tb</i>STT3A and <i>Tb</i>STT3B proteins associate with each other in large complexes that contain no other detectable protein subunits. We probed the peptide acceptor specificities of the OSTs <i>in vivo</i> using a transgenic glycoprotein reporter system and performed glycoproteomics on endogenous parasite glycoproteins using sequential endoglycosidase H and peptide:<i>N</i>-glycosidase-F digestions. This allowed us to assess the relative occupancies of numerous <i>N</i>-glycosylation sites by endoglycosidase H-resistant <i>N</i>-glycans originating from Man<sub>5</sub>GlcNAc<sub>2</sub>-PP-dolichol transferred by <i>Tb</i>STT3A, and endoglycosidase H-sensitive <i>N</i>-glycans originating from Man<sub>9</sub>GlcNAc<sub>2</sub>-PP-dolichol transferred by <i>Tb</i>STT3B. Using machine learning, we assessed the features that best define <i>Tb</i>STT3A and <i>Tb</i>STT3B substrates <i>in vivo</i> and built an algorithm to predict the types of <i>N</i>-glycan most likely to predominate at all the putative <i>N</i>-glycosylation sites in the parasite proteome. Finally, molecular modeling was used to suggest why <i>Tb</i>STT3A has a distinct preference for sequons containing and/or flanked by acidic amino acid residues. Together, these studies provide insights into how a highly divergent eukaryote has re-wired protein <i>N</i>-glycosylation to provide protein sequence-specific <i>N</i>-glycan modifications. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifiers PXD007236, PXD007267, and PXD007268.

### Keywords
Glycoproteomics, Parasitology, Trypanosoma, Stt3, Glycoprotein biosynthesis, N-linked glycosylation, Oligosaccharyltransferase

### Affiliations
The Wellcome Centre for Anti-Infectives Research  School of Life Sciences University of Dundee Dow Street, Dundee DD1 5EH, Scotland, UK
Dundee University

### Submitter
Michele Tinti

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Ferguson
The Wellcome Centre for Anti-Infectives Research  School of Life Sciences University of Dundee Dow Street, Dundee DD1 5EH, Scotland, UK


