### Accession
PXD025146

### Title
The global Proteome and Ubiquitinome of bacterial and viral co-infected Bronchial Epithelial Cells

### Description
Viral infections facilitate bacterial trafficking to the lower respiratory tract resulting in bacterial viral co infections. Bacterial dissemination to the lower respiratory tract is enhanced by influenza A virus induced epithelial cell damage and dysregulation of immune responses. Epithelial cells act as the first line of defense and detect pathogens by a high variety of pattern recognition receptors. The post translational modification ubiquitin is involved in almost every cellular process. Moreover, ubiquitination contributes to the regulation of host immune responses, influenza A virus uncoating and transport within host cells. We applied proteomics with a special focus on ubiquitination to assess the impact of single bacterial and viral as well as bacterial viral co-infections on bronchial epithelial cells. We used Tandem Ubiquitin Binding Entities to enrich polyubiquitinated proteins and assess changes in the ubiquitinome. Infecting 16HBE cells with Streptococcus pyogenes led to an increased abundance of proteins related to mitochondrial translation and energy metabolism in proteome and ubiquitinome. In contrast, influenza A virus infection mainly altered the ubiquitinome. Co-infections had no additional impact on protein abundances or affected pathways. Changes in protein abundance and enriched pathways were assigned to imprints of both infecting pathogens.

### Sample Protocol
Whole cell extracts were prepared by adding 1.5 ml of lysis buffer (50 mM Tris HCl [pH 7.5], 0.15 M NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1% NP 40, 10% glycerol, 1x cOmplete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche), 1 mM PMSF, 10 mM N-ethylmaleimide, 20 µM MG134) to the cells. Samples were incubated on ice (30 min) with vortexing every 5 min. Lysates were sonicated two times for 1 min (probe MS72; 0.1 s pulse; 0.5 s cycle, 20% amplitude) to shear DNA. Lysates were cleared by high speed centrifugation (20,000×g; 10 min). Protein concentration was determined using the BCA assay. For the enrichment of polyubiquitinated proteins magnetic beads from 65 µl magnetic TUBE 2 slurry (LifeSensors) were washed two times with TBS T (20 mM Tris HCl [pH 8.0], 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% Tween 20) and collected with a magnetic stand. Lysate containing 1 mg of protein was added to the beads. The final volume was adjusted to 900 µl using freshly prepared lysis buffer. Samples were incubated overnight in a rotator (10 rpm; 4 °C). Beads were collected using a magnetic stand, the unbound fraction was removed and the beads were washed four times with 1 ml TBS-T. After the final washing step, the magnetic beads were suspended in 50 µl SDS buffer (5% SDS; 50 mM TEAB; 5 mM TCEP) and incubated at 65 °C for 45 min with agitation (300 rpm). The magnetic beads were pelleted by centrifugation and the supernatant was transferred to a new tube. Proteins were digested on micro S Traps (Protifi) following the vendor’s protocol with slight modifications. Briefly, lysates containing 50 µg protein were transferred into new tubes and the volume was adjusted to 50 µl using freshly prepared lysis buffer. SDS and TEAB have been added to final concentrations of 5% and 50 mM, respectively. Disulfide bonds were reduced by adding TCEP (5 mM final concentration; 45 min; 65 °C). Thiol groups were alkylated by adding iodoacetamide (IAA; 10 mM final concentration; 15 min; RT; in the dark). Phosphoric acid was added to the samples to a final concertation of 1.2%. Afterwards, 500 µl S Trap binding buffer (90% methanol, 100 mM TEAB) was added to the acidified samples. The protein colloid solution was subsequently loaded onto the S-Trap micro columns by centrifugation (4,000×g). Trapped proteins were washed three times with 165 µl S Trap binding buffer. Proteins were digested by adding 25 µl digestion buffer (50 mM TEAB) containing 2 µg trypsin (Promega) followed by an incubation for 3 hours at 47 °C. Peptides were subsequently eluted with 40 µl 50 mM TEAB; 0.1% acetic acid; 60% ACN in 0.1% acetic acid. All eluted fractions of a sample were pooled and dried in a vacuum concentrator. Enriched polyubiquitinated proteins were digested on micro S Traps (Protifi) following the vendor´s protocol with slight modifications. In brief, thiol groups of eluted proteins were alkylated by adding IAA (10 mM final concentration) and incubation for 15 min at room temperature in the dark. Phosphoric acid was added to the samples to a final concentration of 1.2%. Hereafter, 316 µl of S Trap binding buffer (90% methanol, 100 mM TEAB) were added to the acidified samples. All following steps are identical to the aforementioned digest. Peptides were fractionated using Pierce Micro-Spin Columns packed with 15 mg of Dr. Maisch Reprosil-Gold 300 C18, 5 µm (Dr. Maisch) particles. Columns were washed three times with 300 µl ACN and equilibrated two times with 300 µl 0.1% TFA by centrifugation (5,000×g; 2 min). Dried peptides were reconstituted in 300 µl 0.1% TFA and loaded onto the spin column by centrifugation (4 min; 3,000×g). Peptides were subsequently eluted with 5%; 7.5%; 10%; 12.5%; 15%; 17.5%; 20% and 60% ACN in 0.1% triethylamine, 300 µl each (4 min; 3,000×g). Fractions were concatenated using the scheme: 5% and 15%; 7.5% and 17.5%; 10% and 20%; 12.5% and 60%. Concatenated fractions were dried by vacuum centrifugation and resolved with 20 µl 0.1% acetic acid containing iRT peptides (Biognosys). LC-MS/MS was applied to uncover peptide compositions and quantities. Therefore, an EASY nLC 1200 was coupled to a QExactive mass spectrometer. Peptides were loaded onto in-house packed fused silica columns of 20 cm length and an inner diameter of 75 µm, filled with Dr. Maisch ReproSil Pur 120 C18-AQ 1.9 µm (Dr. Maisch). Peptides were eluted using a non linear binary gradient of 166 min from 2% to 99% solvent B (0.1% acetic acid in ACN) in solvent A (0.1% acetic acid). The full scan was recorded with a mass range from 300 1650 m/z and a resolution of 140,000 at 200 m/z. The 15 most abundant ions were isolated with an isolation width of 2 Th and fragmented by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) at a normalized collision energy of 27. Fragment ion spectra were recorded with a resolution of 17,500 at 200 m/z. Ions with unassigned charge states as well as charge 1 and higher than 6 were excluded from fragmentation. Fragmented ions were excluded from fragmentation for 30 s. Lock mass correction was enabled.

### Data Protocol
Datasets for enriched ubiquitinated proteins and for the total proteome were processed separately. Raw data were searched with MaxQuant (version 1.6.14.0) against the UniProt databases for human, Staphylococcus aureus USA300 and Influenza A virus (A/Germany-BY/74/2009(H1N1)) as well as the NCBI database for Streptococcus pyogenes M1 GAS. The maximum number of allowed missed cleavages was 2 and precursor mass tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm. Carbamidomethylation (C) was set as a fixed modification, oxidation (M) and acetylation (protein N‐termini) were set as variable modifications for both datasets. GlyGly (K) was set as an additional variable modification for TUBE enriched samples. Match between runs was applied and protein abundances were calculated by the MaxLFQ algorithm. Identified protein groups were analyzed with Perseus (version 1.6.14.0). Only identified by site and reverse hits, as well as potential contaminations were removed. To assess differentially expressed proteins, a two tailed t test was applied for proteins with “LFQintensity” values in all replicates of the compared groups. Proteins were considered as differentially expressed with a p value < 0.05 and a fold change > 1.5. Enrichment analysis of GO direct terms was performed with the Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery v6.8 (DAVID). Data were visualized using Inkscape (version 0.92.2) and RStudio (version 1.3.1073) with the ggplot2 (version 3.3.2) and dplyr (version 1.0.1) package. Networks were created with STRING v11.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Proteomics, Co infection, Streptococcus pyogenes, 16hbe, Influenza a virus, Staphylococcus aureus

### Affiliations
University of Greifswald, Center for Functional Genomics of Microbes, Institute of Microbiology, Department of Microbial Proteomics, Felix Hausdorff Str. 8, 17489 Greifswald, Germany
University of Greifswald, Center for Functional Genomics of Microbes, Institute of Microbiology, Department of Microbial Proteomics

### Submitter
Thomas Sura

### Lab Head
Dr Doerte Becher
University of Greifswald, Center for Functional Genomics of Microbes, Institute of Microbiology, Department of Microbial Proteomics, Felix Hausdorff Str. 8, 17489 Greifswald, Germany


