### Accession
PXD041045

### Title
Suspension TRAPping filter (sTRAP) sample preparation for quantitative proteomics in the low µg input range using a plasmid DNA micro-spin column: analysis of the hippocampus from the 5xFAD Alzheimer’s Disease mouse model

### Description
Suspension TRAPping filter (sTRAP) is an attractive sample preparation method for proteomics study. Here, we demonstrated the use of a low-cost Plasmid DNA spin column for sTRAP. We first evaluated, the reproducibility of this protocol and the low CoV using 4 replicates of 5-10 µg of a synapse enriched fraction,  with 120 ng of the resulting tryptic peptides for mass spectrometry resulted in 5500 protein groups identification with CoV of 3.5%. We have also tested lower input amounts of 0.6 µg and 0.3 µg with CoV increase slightly to 5-8%.  Comparing other sample preparation protocols, as the in-gel digestion and the commercial protifi sTRAP  with the plasmid DNA micro-spin, the last is superior in both protein and peptide identification numbers (48523, 56714 to 60245 peptides and 5669, 6106, 6494 proteins respectively) and smaller Coefficient of Variation ( 6.7%, 3.2%, 3.1% respectively).We applied this protocol to the analysis of hippocampal proteome from a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease, and identified about 6300 protein groups with CV of 11.6-14.6%. Protein changes in the mutant mice points to the alteration of processes related to known major AD-related pathology.

### Sample Protocol
Each sample of digest was redissolved in 100µl 0.1% Formic acid; peptide solution was loaded onto an Evotip, and run on a 15 cm x 150 µm, 1.9 µm Endurance Column (EV1106 from EvoSep) using the Evosep One LC system with the 30 samples per day program. Peptides were electro-sprayed into the TimsTOF Pro 2 mass spectrometer and analyzed with parallel accumulation–serial fragmentation combined with diaPASEF. The MS scan was between 400-12010 m/z. The Tims settings were 1/Ko from start to end between 0.6-1.43, 26 Da precursor selection windows with 1 Da overlap, and 16 diaPASEF scans with two precursor selection windows result ing in a 1.8sec cycle time.

### Data Protocol
: DIA-NN 1.8.1 was used for database search. Raw diaPASEF data from the Bruker TimsTOF Pro 2 were searched with a virtual spectral library generated from the mouse fasta file (UP000000589_10090.fasta) by DIA-NN. Deep learning-based spectra were activated. Protein inference was set to isoform and cross run normalization was activated. The precursor charge range was 2-4. A fixed modification of UniMod: 39,45.987721,C was used which represents the MMTS modification on the cysteine residue. All other settings used were default settings. For the downstream analysis, we used MS-DAP (version beta 0.2.5.1), (https://github.com/ftwkoopmans/msdap) for quality control and candidate discovery.

### Publication Abstract
Suspension TRAPping filter (sTRAP) is an attractive sample preparation method for proteomics studies. The sTRAP protocol uses 5% SDS that maximizes protein solubilization. Proteins are trapped on a borosilicate glass membrane filter, where SDS is subsequently removed from the filter. After trypsin digestion, peptides are analyzed directly by LC-MS. Here, we demonstrated the use of a low-cost plasmid DNA micro-spin column for the sTRAP sample preparation of a dilution series of a synapse-enriched sample with a range of 10-0.3 &#xb5;g. With 120 ng tryptic peptides loaded onto the Evosep LC system coupled to timsTOF Pro 2 mass spectrometer, we identified 5700 protein groups with 4% coefficient of variation (CoV). Comparing other sample preparation protocols, such as the in-gel digestion and the commercial Protifi S-TRAP with the plasmid DNA micro-spin column, the last is superior in both protein and peptide identification numbers and CoV. We applied sTRAP for the analysis of the hippocampal proteome from the 5xFAD mouse model of Alzheimer's disease and their wildtype littermates, and revealed 121 up- and 54 down-regulated proteins. Protein changes in the mutant mice point to the alteration of processes related to the immune system and Amyloid aggregation, which correlates well with the known major Alzheimer's-disease-related pathology. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with the identifier PXD041045.

### Keywords
Micro-spin column, Alzheimer’s disease, Proteomics, Strap, 5xfad mouse model

### Affiliations
Center for Neurogenomics and Cognitive Research, Department of Molecular and Cellular Neurobiology, Amsterdam Neuroscience, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, 1081 HV Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Center for Neurogenomics and Cognitive Research, Department of Molecular and Cellular Neurobiology, Amsterdam Neuroscience, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, 1081 HV Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

### Submitter
Evangelia Thanou

### Lab Head
Dr Ka Wan Li
Center for Neurogenomics and Cognitive Research, Department of Molecular and Cellular Neurobiology, Amsterdam Neuroscience, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, 1081 HV Amsterdam, The Netherlands.


