### Accession
PXD033835

### Title
coimmunoprecipitation of BdRFS identifies putative itneracting proteins

### Description
In this work we sought to identify putative interacting proteins of the Brachypodium distachyon Regulator of Stress and Flowering protein (BdRFS) from healthy leaf tissue. A truncated form of BdRFS lacking the N-terminal 45 residues was necessary for solubilization. THe protein is tagged N-terminally with His-SUMO tag.

### Sample Protocol
Eluted proteins were loaded onto a 12.5% pre-cast BioRad Criterion 1D gel and electrophoresed at 50V constant for ~20min or until the dye front migrated 2-3mm below the well.  Electrophoresis was stopped and the gel stained using Coomassie Blue.  Concentrated sample bands were then excised from the gel and placed into individual microfuge tubes. Gel bands were digested in-gel according to Shevchenko, et. al.1 with modifications.  Briefly, gel bands were dehydrated using 100% acetonitrile and incubated with 10mM dithiothreitol in 100mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH~8, at 56C for 45min, dehydrated again and incubated in the dark with 50mM iodoacetamide in 100mM ammonium bicarbonate for 20min.  Gel bands were then washed with ammonium bicarbonate and dehydrated again.  Sequencing grade modified typsin was prepared to 0.005ug/uL in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate and ~100uL of this was added to each gel band so that the gel was completely submerged.  Bands were then incubated at 37C overnight.  Peptides were extracted from the gel by water bath sonication in a solution of 60% Acetonitrile (ACN) /1% Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and vacuum dried to ~2uL.  Digests were re-suspended to 20uL in 2% ACN/0.1% TFA. An injection of 10uL was automatically made using a Thermo (www.thermo.com) EASYnLC 1200 onto a Thermo Acclaim PepMap RSLC 0.075mm x 250mm c18 column with a gradient of 5%B to 40%B in 24min, ramping to 90%B at 25min and held at 90%B for the duration of the run (Buffer A = 99.9% Water/0.1% Formic Acid, Buffer B = 80% Acetonitrile/0.1% Formic Acid/19.9% Water) at a constant flow rate of 300nl/min.  Column temperature was maintained at a constant temperature of 50oC using and integrated column oven (PRSO-V2, Sonation GmbH, Biberach, Germany). Eluted peptides were sprayed into a ThermoScientific Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (www.thermo.com) using a FlexSpray spray ion source.  Survey scans were taken in the Orbi trap (60000 resolution, determined at m/z 200) and the top 15 ions in each survey scan are then subjected to automatic higher energy collision induced dissociation (HCD) with fragment spectra acquired at 15000 resolution.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS spectra were converted to peak lists using MaxQuant, v1.6.11.0, and searched against a database containing all B. distachyon protein sequences available from Phytozome v13 and concatenated with common laboratory contaminants, using the Andromeda search algorithm, a part of the MaxQuant environment. Oxidation of methionine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications, carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification. Digestion mode was Trypsin/P with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Label free quantification employed the LFQ quantification setting in the MaxQuant software. MS/MS tolerance of the first search was 20 ppm, and main search was 4.5 ppm, with individualized peptide mass tolerance selected. False discovery rate (FDR) at peptide spectrum match and protein levels was set as 0.01, using the target-decoy strategy as described by Elias & Gygi, 2007. Filtering of resulting protein groups was performed manually at a fixed FDR of 0% by accepting protein IDs with the highest MaxQuant Scores until the first decoy protein ID was reached.

### Publication Abstract
To cope with environmental stresses and ensure maximal reproductive success, plants have developed strategies to adjust the timing of their transition to reproductive growth. This has a substantial impact on the stress resilience of crops and ultimately on agricultural productivity. Here, we report a previously uncharacterized, plant-specific gene family designated as Regulator of Flowering and Stress (RFS). Overexpression of the BdRFS gene in Brachypodium distachyon delayed flowering, increased biomass accumulation, and promoted drought tolerance, whereas clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats/CRISPR-associated protein 9 (CRISPR/Cas9)-mediated knockout mutants exhibited opposite phenotypes. A double T-DNA insertional mutant in the two Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) homologs replicated the effects on flowering and water deprivation seen in the B. distachyon CRISPR knockout lines, highlighting the functional conservation of the family between monocots and dicots. Lipid analysis of B. distachyon and Arabidopsis revealed that digalactosyldiacylglycerol (DGDG) and phosphatidylcholine (PC) contents were significantly, and reciprocally, altered in overexpressor and knockout mutants. Importantly, alteration of C16:0-containing PC, a Flowering Locus T-interacting lipid, associated with flowering phenotype, with elevated levels corresponding to earlier flowering. Co-immunoprecipitation analysis suggested that BdRFS interacts with phospholipase D&#x3b1;1 as well as several other abscisic acid-related proteins. Furthermore, reduction of C18:3 fatty acids in DGDG corresponded with reduced jasmonic acid metabolites in CRISPR mutants. Collectively, we suggest that stress-inducible RFS proteins represent a regulatory component of lipid metabolism that impacts several agronomic traits of biotechnological importance.

### Keywords
Brachypodium, Rfs

### Affiliations
Michigan State University
Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Michigan State University

### Submitter
Peter Lundquist

### Lab Head
Dr Peter K. Lundquist
Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Michigan State University


