### Accession
PXD030446

### Title
The effect of dietary Spirulina microalga on the intestinal function of the post-weaned piglet

### Description
The aim of this study was to characterize the metabolomic and proteomic changes in the intestinal tissue of weaned piglets fed with diets containing Spirulina as an ingredient (10% incorporation in the diet), combining such information with histomorphology data.

### Sample Protocol
Thirty post-weaned male piglets (50% Pietrain, 25% Large White and 25% Landrace) with an initial live weight of 11.91± 0.91 kg were used. Piglets had ad libitum access to feed and water. Each group of 10 piglets received one of the following isoenergetic and isoproteic diets: cereal and soybean meal base diet (Control), base diet with 10% Spirulina (SP) and SP diet supplemented with 0.01% lysozyme (SP+L). For omics assays, ileum samples were collected and stored at -80 ºC until further analysis.  One aliquot of cold cut intestine samples was homogenized in 500 mL lysis buffer (100 mM TEAB, 2% SDS) using an Omni TH220 homogenizer (Omni International, Kennesaw, GA, USA), followed by 2 cycles of sonication at maximum amplitude (Qsonica, Newtown, CT, USA) on ice. After centrifugation at 16 000 g at 4 ºC for 30 min, clarified supernatant was transferred to a new tube. After protein extraction from tissues, samples were processed using a filter aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol and Tandem Mass Tag (TMT)-based quantitative approach.  High resolution LC-MS/MS analysis of TMT-labelled peptides was carried out using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Dionex, Germering, Germany) coupled to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Succinctly, peptides were dissolved in loading solvent (1% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) and loaded onto the trap column (C18 PepMap100, 5 μm, 100A, 300 μm×5 mm), desalted for 12 min at the flow rate of 15 μL/min and separated on the analytical column (PepMap™ RSLC C18, 50 cm×75 μm) using a linear gradient of 5–45% mobile phase B (0.1% formic acid in 80% ACN) over 120 min, 45% to 90% for 2 min, held at 80% for 2 min and re-equilibrated at 5% B for 20 min at the flow rate of 300 nL/min. Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water. Ionisation was achieved using nanospray Flex ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) containing a 10 μm-inner diameter SilicaTip emitter (New Objective, Woburn, MA, USA). The MS operated in positive ion mode using DDA Top8 method. Full scan MS spectra were acquired in range from m/z 350.0 to m/z 1800.0 with a resolution of 70,000, 110 ms injection time, AGC target 1E6, a ± 2.0 Da isolation window and the dynamic exclusion 30 s. HCD fragmentation was performed at step collision energy (29% and 35% NCE) with a resolution of 17,500 and AGC target of 2E5. Precursor ions with unassigned charge state, as well as charge states of +1 and more than +7 were excluded from fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Acquired MS/MS spectra were analysed for protein identification and quantification using the SEQUEST algorithm implemented into Proteome Discoverer (version 2.0., ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Database search against Sus scrofa FASTA files (downloaded from Uniprot database 04/18/2018, 77933 entries)) was performed. The false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide identification was calculated using the Percolator algorithm in the Proteome Discoverer workflow based on the search results against a decoy database and was set at 1% FDR. Only proteins with at least two unique peptides and 5% FDR were reported as confidently identified. Moreover, the protein quantification was accomplished by correlating the relative intensities of reporter ions extracted from tandem mass spectra to that of the peptides selected for MS/MS fragmentation. The internal standard was used to compare relative quantification results for each protein between the experiments.

### Publication Abstract
The effect of dietary Spirulina (Arthrospira platensis) and CAZyme supplementation was assessed on the gut of weaned piglets, using an integrated NMR-metabolomics approach combined with Tandem Mass Tag labelled proteomics. Thirty weaned male piglets were assigned to one of the three following diets (n&#xa0;=&#xa0;10): cereal and soybean meal basal diet (Control), basal diet with 10% Spirulina inclusion (SP) and SP diet supplemented with 0.01% lysozyme (SP&#xa0;+&#xa0;L). The experiment lasted 4&#xa0;weeks and, upon slaughter, small intestine samples were collected for histological, metabolomic and proteomic analysis. No significant differences were found for the histology and metabolomics analysis between the three experimental groups. Lactate, glutamate, glycine and myo-inositol were the most abundant metabolites. Proteomics results showed 1502 proteins identified in the intestine tissue. A total of 23, 78, 27 differentially abundant proteins were detected respectively for the SP vs. Control, SP&#xa0;+&#xa0;L vs. Control and SP&#xa0;+&#xa0;L vs. SP comparisons. The incorporation of Spirulina and supplementation of lysozyme in the piglet's diets is associated to intestinal proteomic changes. These include increased protein synthesis and abundance of contractile apparatus proteins, related with increased nutrient availability, which has beneficial (increased glucose uptake) and detrimental (increased digesta viscosity) metabolic effects. SIGNIFICANCE: The use of conventional feedstuffs becomes increasingly prohibitive due to its environmental toll. To increase the sustainability of the livestock sector, novel feedstuffs such as microalgae need to be considered. However, its recalcitrant cell wall has antinutritional effects that can inhibit high dietary inclusion levels. The supplementation with CAZymes is a possible solution to this issue. The small intestine is a central piece in monogastric digestion and of particular importance for the weaned piglet. Studying the effect of dietary Spirulina and CAZyme supplementation on its histomorphology, metabolome and proteome allows studying relevant physiological adaptations to these diets.

### Keywords
Spirulina, Intestine, Proteomics, Piglets, Label-based proteomics

### Affiliations
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Zagreb
Internal Diseases Clinic, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia

### Submitter
Josipa Kuleš

### Lab Head
Dr Vladimir Mrljak
Internal Diseases Clinic, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia


