### Accession
PXD023343

### Title
Quantitative proteomics analysis of soybean leaves under low and high phosphate conditions

### Description
Low phosphate (LP) availability is a critical limiting factor affecting soybean production. Soybean plants develop a series of strategies to adapt phosphate limitation condition. To know the underlying molecular mechanisms responsible for LP stress response. A label-free quantification (LFQ) analysis of soybean leaves grown under low and high phosphate condition was performed.

### Sample Protocol
Soybean seeds (Glycine max var. Williams 82) were germinated in the wet vermiculite for three days, then transferred into modified half strength Hoagland’s nutrient solution (HP, 500 mM KH2PO4; LP, 0 mM, pH =5.8) for another two weeks. Three biological replicates from HP and LP treated leaves were used for soluble protein extraction. Total soluble protein was isolated from the first trifoliate leaves of soybean leaves. Fresh leaves were homogenized to slurry by a cold pestle, then filtered by a 2-layers Miracloth (Millipore). Supernatant were mixed with Extraction Buffer (0.5M Tris-HCl, 10% SDS, 20% (w/v) Glycerin, 2% (w/v) β-mercaptoethanol) with ratio 1:1, and heat at 95°C for 10 minutes. The debris was removed by centrifugation at 12,000g for 15 min. Protein concentration was determined with bovine serum albumin (BSA) as a standard. Protein samples were loaded into a precast gradient SDS PAGE gel (NuPAGE Novex 4–12% [(wt/vol) acylamide in buffer] Bis-Tris Protein Gels; Invitrogen) and digested with trypsin, and the resulting peptides were analyzed by HCD LC-MS/MS using an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). Survey scans were acquired in the Orbitrap MS using a mass resolution of 140,000. Six MS/MS scans were acquired in the Orbitrap for each survey scan.

### Data Protocol
Raw intensities were extracted and normalized using standard settings with the LFQ selected by MaxQuant, followed by statistical analysis using Perseus software. Missing values were replaced by imputation according to normal distribution to simulate low abundance values in a typical MS experiment.

### Publication Abstract
Soybean (<i>Glycine max</i> L.) is a major crop providing important source for protein and oil for human life. Low phosphate (LP) availability is a critical limiting factor affecting soybean production. Soybean plants develop a series of strategies to adapt to phosphate (Pi) limitation condition. However, the underlying molecular mechanisms responsible for LP stress response remain largely unknown. Here, we performed a label-free quantification (LFQ) analysis of soybean leaves grown under low and high phosphate conditions. We identified 267 induced and 440 reduced differential proteins from phosphate-starved leaves. Almost a quarter of the LP decreased proteins are involved in translation processes, while the LP increased proteins are accumulated in chlorophyll biosynthetic and carbon metabolic processes. Among these induced proteins, an enolase protein, GmENO2a was found to be mostly induced protein. On the transcriptional level, <i>GmENO2a</i> and <i>GmENO2b,</i> but not <i>GmENO2c</i> or <i>GmENO2d,</i> were dramatically induced by phosphate starvation. Among 14 enolase genes, only <i>GmENO2a</i> and <i>GmENO2b</i> genes contain the P1BS motif in their promoter regions. Furthermore, <i>GmENO2b</i> was specifically induced in the <i>GmPHR31</i> overexpressing soybean plants. Our findings provide molecular insights into how soybean plants tune basic carbon metabolic pathway to adapt to Pi deprivation through the ENO2 enzymes.

### Keywords
Low phosphate, Lc-ms/ms, Soybean

### Affiliations
Fujian Agriculture and Forestry University

### Submitter
Man Li

### Lab Head
Dr Wenfei Wang
Fujian Agriculture and Forestry University


