### Accession
PXD005992

### Title
Immunoprecipitation of YAP -  The essential role of YAP O-GlcNAcylation in high-glucose-stimulated liver tumorigenesis

### Description
YAP was immunoprecipitated to detect O-GlcNAcylation status.

### Sample Protocol
To determine the identities of the proteins co-purified with YAP, the corresponding protein bands in the Coomassie Brilliant blue gel were excised and in-gel digested with trypsin. The tryptic peptide digests of the proteins were analyzed using a Capillary Electrophoresis/Nano-liquid chromatography (Nano-LC) system coupled with a Quadrupole-Time-of-Flight Mass Spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics, Leipzig, Germany).

### Data Protocol
An internal MASCOT 2.4.1 server (Matrix Science, Boston, MA, USA; http://www.matrixscience.com/) using the Swiss-Prot database was applied to identify peptides and their posttranslational modifications. The posttranslational modifications search parameter used was an increase of +203.079373 Da on serine/threonine residues (dynamic O-GlcNAcylation).

### Publication Abstract
O-GlcNAcylation has been implicated in the tumorigenesis of various tissue origins, but its function in liver tumorigenesis is not clear. Here, we demonstrate that O-GlcNAcylation can enhance the expression, stability and function of Yes-associated protein (YAP), the downstream transcriptional regulator of the Hippo pathway and a potent oncogenic factor in liver cancer. O-GlcNAcylation induces transformative phenotypes of liver cancer cells in a YAP-dependent manner. An O-GlcNAc site of YAP was identified at Thr241, and mutating this site decreased the O-GlcNAcylation, stability, and pro-tumorigenic capacities of YAP, while increasing YAP phosphorylation. Importantly, we found via in vitro cell-based and in vivo mouse model experiments that O-GlcNAcylation of YAP was required for high-glucose-induced liver tumorigenesis. Interestingly, a positive feedback between YAP and global cellular O-GlcNAcylation is also uncovered. We conclude that YAP O-GlcNAcylation is a potential therapeutic intervention point for treating liver cancer associated with high blood glucose levels and possibly diabetes.

### Keywords
Liver yap o-glcnacylation

### Affiliations
Tongji University 
Department of Clinical Laboratory Medicine, Shanghai Tenth People’s Hospital of Tongji University, Shanghai, 200072, China

### Submitter
Xiao Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Fenyong Sun
Department of Clinical Laboratory Medicine, Shanghai Tenth People’s Hospital of Tongji University, Shanghai, 200072, China


