### Accession
PXD003445

### Title
In vitro chromatin assembly -  A quantitative proteomic analysis of in vitro assembled chromatin

### Description
Here, we use LC-MSMS and SWATH-MS to describe the kinetics of in vitro assembled chromatin supported by an embryo extract prepared from preblastoderm Drosophila melanogaster embryos. This system allows easy manipulation of distinct aspects of chromatin assembly such as post-translational histone modifications, the levels of histone chaperones and the concentration of distinct DNA binding factors. Our findings support the idea that chromatin assembly factors and factors important for chromatin structure bind chromatin an ordered manner, which is -at least in part- regulated by histone deacetylation.

### Sample Protocol
Assembled chromatin was subjected to mass spectrometry analysis. The peptide mixture resulting from tryptic cleavage was injected onto an Ultimate 3000 HPLC system equipped with a C18 trapping column (C18 PepMap, 5 mm x 0.3 mm x 5 μm, 100Å) and an analytical column  (C18RP Reposil-Pur AQ, 120 mm x 0.075 mm x 2.4 μm, 120 Å, Dr. Maisch, Germany) packed into an ESI-emitter tip (New Objective, USA). First, the peptide mixture was desalted on the trapping column for 7 min at a flow rate of 25 ul/min (0.1% FA). For peptide separation a linear gradient from 5-40 % B (HPLC solvents A: 0.1 % FA, B: 80 % ACN, 0.1 % FA) was applied over a time of 120 min. The HPLC was online coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, USA). The mass spectrometer was operated in DDA-mode employing a duty cycle of one survey scan in the orbitrap at 60,000 resolution followed by up to 6 tandem MS scans in the ion trap. Precursors were selected when they had a minimal intensity of 10,000 counts and a charge state of 2+ or higher. Previously analyzed precursors were excluded for 20 seconds within a mass window of -1.5 to + 3.5 Da.

### Data Protocol
DDA-MS data recorded on the LTQ Orbitrap mass spectrometer were processed with MaxQuant (version 1.2.2.5) using standard settings with the additional options LFQ and iBAQ (log fit) selected. Data were searched against a combined forward/reversed database (special amino acids: KR) including common contaminants for false-discovery rate filtering of peptide and protein identifications. The mass deviation for the precursor mass was set 20 ppm; fragment ions were matched within 0.5 Da mass accuracy. Fixed modifications of cysteine (Carbamidomethyl (C)) were included as well as variable modifications by oxidation of methionine and acetylation (Acetyl (Protein N-term); Oxidation (M)). Matches were filtered setting false peptide and protein (PSM FDR and protein FDR) hits to 1 %. The minimum peptide length was allowed to be 6 amino acids, the minimum score for modified peptides was set to 40. For protein identification, one non-unique razor peptide was required, whereas protein quantitation was only performed if at least 2 razor peptides were associated with the protein hit. Prior to statistical analysis in Perseus, protein hits associated with the reversed database or common contaminants were filtered in the protein.groups.txt file.  Chromatin assembly experiments have been performed in three biological replicates with three independently-collected DREX. As negative controls, beads-only were incubated in three biological replicates with DREX. Silver gels and agarose gels show a representative example out of three replicates. A pilot study in our lab revealed that three biological replicates enable us for a precise and statistical valid conclusion between chromatin assembly experiments and the composition of proteins during different time points of assembly. Based on biological function of the identified proteins, we altered the initial settings for statistical analysis to be (s(0)=3 and FDR = 5 %). Using these parameters we were able to recover almost all chromatin-assembly factors and reduce the unspecific background.

### Publication Abstract
The structure of chromatin is critical for many aspects of cellular physiology and is considered to be the primary medium to store epigenetic information. It is defined by the histone molecules that constitute the nucleosome, the positioning of the nucleosomes along the DNA and the non-histone proteins that associate with it. These factors help to establish and maintain a largely DNA sequence-independent but surprisingly stable structure. Chromatin is extensively disassembled and reassembled during DNA replication, repair, recombination or transcription in order to allow the necessary factors to gain access to their substrate. Despite such constant interference with chromatin structure, the epigenetic information is generally well maintained. Surprisingly, the mechanisms that coordinate chromatin assembly and ensure proper assembly are not particularly well understood. Here, we use label free quantitative mass spectrometry to describe the kinetics of in vitro assembled chromatin supported by an embryo extract prepared from preblastoderm Drosophila melanogaster embryos. The use of a data independent acquisition method for proteome wide quantitation allows a time resolved comparison of in vitro chromatin assembly. A comparison of our in vitro data with proteomic studies of replicative chromatin assembly in vivo reveals an extensive overlap showing that the in vitro system can be used for investigating the kinetics of chromatin assembly in a proteome-wide manner.

### Keywords
Chromatin assembly, Lc-msms, Drosophila melanogaster

### Affiliations
Histone Modifications Group Zentrallabor für Proteinanalytik BioMedical Center Ludwig-Maximilians-University of Munich Großhadernerstr. 9 82152 Planegg-Martinsried  GERMANY
LMU Munich

### Submitter
Moritz Voelker-Albert

### Lab Head
Dr Axel Imhof
Histone Modifications Group Zentrallabor für Proteinanalytik BioMedical Center Ludwig-Maximilians-University of Munich Großhadernerstr. 9 82152 Planegg-Martinsried  GERMANY


