### Accession
PXD041093

### Title
Cerebrospinal fluid proteomics in recent-onset Narcolepsy type 1 reveals activation of the complement system

### Description
Narcolepsy type 1 (NT1) is a rare, chronic and disabling neurological disease causing excessive daytime sleepiness and cataplexy. NT1 is characterized pathologically by an almost complete loss of neurons producing the orexin neuropeptides in the lateral hypothalamus. Genetic and environmental factors strongly suggest the involvement of the immune system in the loss of orexin neurons. The cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), secreted locally and surrounding the central nervous system (CNS), represents an accessible window into CNS pathological processes.  To gain insight into the biological and molecular changes in NT1 patients, we performed a comparative proteomics analysis of the CSF from 21 recent-onset NT1 patients and from two control groups: group 1 with somatoform disorders, and group 2 patients with hypersomnia other than NT1, to control for any potential effect of sleep disturbances on CSF composition. To achieve an optimal proteomic coverage analysis, the twelve most abundant CSF proteins were depleted, and samples were analyzed by nano-flow liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (nano-LC-MS/MS) using the latest generation of hybrid Orbitrap mass spectrometer. Our study allowed the identification and quantification of up to 1943 proteins, providing a remarkably deep analysis of the CSF proteome. Interestingly, gene set enrichment analysis indicated that the complement and coagulation systems were enriched and significantly activated in NT1 patients in both cohorts analyzed. Notably, the lectin and alternative complement pathway as well as the downstream lytic membrane attack complex were congruently increased in NT1. Our data suggest that the complement dysregulation in NT1 patients can contribute to immunopathology either by directly promoting tissue damage or as part of local inflammatory responses. We therefore reveal an altered composition of the CSF proteome in NT1 patients, which points to an ongoing inflammatory process contributed, at least in part, by the complement system.

### Sample Protocol
The CSF samples were thawed on ice and proteins were concentrated by ultrafiltration (Amicon Ultra 0.5mL- 10kDa cutoff, Millipore) at 4°C. For each sample, a depletion of 12 high abundant proteins (α1-Acid Glycoprotein, α1-Antitrypsin, α2-Macroglobulin, Albumin, Apolipoprotein A-I, Apolipoprotein A-II, Fibrinogen, Haptoglobin, IgA, IgG, IgM, Transferrin) was performed using single-use spin columns containing immobilized antibodies (Pierce™ Top 12 Abundant Protein Depletion Spin Columns, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The aim of this depletion step was to reduce the dynamic range of protein concentration and improve the identification and quantification of low-abundant proteins by mass spectrometry (PMID: 19341827, PMID: 30124047). Protein samples were lyophilized, resuspended in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate containing 5% of SDS, and then processed for trypsin digestion on S-trap Micro devices (Protifi) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Nano-LC-MS/MS analysis of proteins Peptides were analyzed by nanoscale liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (nanoLC-MS/MS) using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system coupled to a Q-Exactive-HFX mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Five µL (i.e., approximately 5µg of peptides) of each sample were loaded onto C-18 precolumn (300 µm ID x 5 mm, ThermoFisher) in a solvent containing 5% acetonitrile and 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and at a flow rate of 20 µL/min. After 3 min of desalting, the precolumn was switched online with the analytical C-18 column (Thermo Scientific Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 2µm, 0.075 x 50mm) equilibrated in 90% solvent A (5% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid) and 10% solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid). Peptides were eluted using a 10 to 45% gradient of solvent B over 120 min at a flow rate of 350 nL/min. The Q-Exactive-HFX was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode with the XCalibur software, i.e. peptide ions eluting from the nanoLC column and ionized in the mass spectrometer were regularly surveyed and subsequently isolated in the instrument to be fragmented and obtain sequencing data. Survey MS scans were acquired in a cyclic manner (approximately every second) in the Orbitrap on the 350-1400 m/z range at a resolution of 60000. At each cycle (, 12 different peptide ions per survey scan were selected for sequencing by high-energy C-trap dissociation at a resolution of 15000, using a target value of 1e5 ions for filling the C-trap, and a maximum injection time of 22 ms. Dynamic exclusion was employed within 30 seconds to prevent repetitive selection of the same peptide. Two injections were performed for each sample.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were processed with the Mascot 2.7 software for database search and Proline 2.1 for label-free quantitative analysis (16). Data were searched against human sequences of the SwissProt database (release UniProt KB 2020_10; 20,386 entries). Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification, whereas oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Specificity of trypsin digestion was set for cleavage after K or R, and two missed trypsin cleavage sites were allowed. The mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm for the precursor and to 20 millimass unit (mmu) in tandem MS mode. Minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino-acids, and identification results were further validated in Proline by the target decoy approach using a reverse database at both a peptide spectrum-match and protein false-discovery rate (FDR) of 1%. Label-free relative quantification was performed with Proline by extraction of peptide MS signals intensity to compute a metric for protein abundance. Cross-assignment of peptide ions peaks was enabled across all samples with a match time window of 1 min, after a first alignment of the analytical runs with a time window of +/- 600s.  Statistical analysis Statistical analysis was performed using an in-house R script integrated in the Proline software. Raw protein abundance values were normalized across all samples, using as a normalization factor the median of protein abundance ratios calculated between each run and a reference run. Quality control of the datasets obtained for both cohorts was performed before and after this normalization step. Protein abundances measured from replicate MS injections were averaged, and a filtering step was performed by keeping, for further statistical analysis, only proteins quantified in at least 50% of the individuals in at least one condition (i.e., NT1 and/or control group) and identified with at least 2 tandem mass spectra sequencing scans across all samples. Missing protein abundances were then imputed with a random value chosen in a simulated Gaussian distribution centered, for each sample, on a low intensity value representing background noise. To compare CSF protein abundance in NT1 patients vs. controls, the fold change between the mean abundance of proteins in patients and controls was calculated, and the statistical significance of the difference was estimated using a Limma test followed by a Benjamini–Hochberg (BH) correction to adjust the FDR at 1%. The Mann-Whitney test was used to compare selected proteins between groups. Bio-informatic analysis  Heatmaps of differentially regulated proteins were generated using the Web tool Heatmapper (http://www.heatmapper.ca) (17). Volcano plots were generated using the Web tool VolcaNoseR (https://huygens.science.uva.nl/VolcaNoseR/) (18), a statistical cut-off was set at P≤0.05 to show differentially regulated proteins. Pathway Analysis was performed using the Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) feature of the R package clusterProfiler (19). The enriched pathways were selected based on the significance of Enrichment score (P≤0.05).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Immune response, Coagulation system, Proteomics, Narcolepsy type 1, Complement system, Cerebrospinal fluid, Neuroimmunology

### Affiliations
IPBS CNRS
Toulouse Institute for infectious and inflammatory diseases (Infinity), University of Toulouse, CNRS, INSERM, UPS, Toulouse, France. Department of Immunology, Toulouse University Hospitals, Toulouse, France.

### Submitter
Emmanuelle Mouton Barbosa

### Lab Head
Dr Rolland Liblau
Toulouse Institute for infectious and inflammatory diseases (Infinity), University of Toulouse, CNRS, INSERM, UPS, Toulouse, France. Department of Immunology, Toulouse University Hospitals, Toulouse, France.


