### Accession
PXD007546

### Title
LC-MS/MS analysis of Mannose 6-phosphate containing proteins

### Description
Mucolipidosis III gamma (MLIII) is clinically characterized by onset of first symptoms at an average of 5 years such as stiffness of hands and shoulders, claw hand deformities, scoliosis and progressive destruction of hip joints. The disease is caused by mutations in GNPTG encoding the gamma-subunit of the GlcNAc-1-phosphotransferase complex. This enzyme is responsible for the generation of mannose 6-phosphate (M6P) targeting signals on 70 soluble lysosomal enzymes that are required for their efficient receptor-mediated transport to lysosomes. In fibroblasts from Gnptg-KO mice the GlcNAc-1-phosphotransferase activity is reduced leading to low amounts of M6P-containing proteins. M6P affinity chromatography-assisted and mass spectrometry-based secretome analysis of Gnptg-KO fibroblasts revealed a distinct set of lysosomal enzymes modified with M6P residues.

### Sample Protocol
The experiments were performed using MEF cells from three Gnptgko and three wild-type mice. Gnptgko and wild-type MEF were labelled with light and heavy SILAC amino acids, respectively. The media were concentrated using 3 kDa molecular weight cut-off filters and mixed. M6P containing proteins were captured on scFv M6P-1 antibody immobilized to AminoLink Plus Gel beads (Pierce). M6P beads with bound proteins were reduced and alkylated using DTT and acrylamide, respectively and incubated overnight with trypsin for digestion. The next day, peptides were extracted, desalted using STAGE tips (Rappsilber et al, 2007), and loaded onto the analytical column using an Thermo EASY-nLC  1000 liquid chromatography system. Ppeptides were eluted with a linear gradient from 100 % A to 65 % A/35 % B (ACN with 0.1 % FA) in 60 min and analyzed using an Thermo Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). One survey scan at a mass range of m/z 400 to m/z 1200 and a resultion of 630000 was acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer followed by fragmentation of the 10 most abundand ions in the ion trap part of the instrument.  Rappsilber, J, et al. “Protocol for Micro-Purification, Enrichment, Pre-Fractionation and Storage of Peptides for Proteomics Using StageTips.” Nature Protocols., U.S. National Library of Medicine, 2007

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed using Maxquant 1.5.2.8 using standard settings. Propionamide at cysteine was set as fixed modification, while acetylation at protein N-termini and methionine oxidation were used as variable modifications. Quantification was performed with SILAC 2plex using arginine 13C615N4 and lysine 13C615N2 as heavy amino acids. Samples were searched against SwissProt/TREMBL (79899 entries, release date: 09/2016) and peptides were filtered for FDR < 1%, exported and analysed in MS Excel. Manual quantification was performed using Xcalibur (Thermo Scientific).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mannose 6-phosphate affinity purification, : mouse embryonic fibroblasts, Secreted proteins

### Affiliations
Researcher 
Principal Investigator (PI)

### Submitter
Shiva Ahmadi

### Lab Head
Dr Dominic Winter
Principal Investigator (PI)


