### Accession
PXD031966

### Title
Proteomic identification of MHC class I-associated peptidome derived from non-obese diabetic mouse thymus and pancreas

### Description
The peptides repertoire presented to CD8+ T cells by major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I molecules, referred to as the MHC I-associated peptidome (MIP), regulates all critical events that occur during the lifetime of CD8+ T cells. The MIP presented by thymic antigen presenting cells (APCs) is crucial for shaping CD8+ T cell repertoire and self-tolerance, while the MIP presented by peripheral tissues and organs is not only involved in maintaining periphery CD8+ T cell survival and homeostasis, but also mediates immune surveillance and autoimmune responses of CD8+ T cells under pathological conditions. Type 1 diabetes (T1D) is an organ-specific autoimmune disease caused by the destruction pancreatic β cells, mediated primarily by autoreactive CD8+ T cells. Non-obese diabetic (NOD) mouse is one of important animal models of spontaneous autoimmune diabetes that shares several key features with human T1D. Here, we deeply analyzed the MIP derived from the primary tissues of thymus and pancreas in NOD mice using targeted database searches of mass spectrometry data. We demonstrated that the thymus MIP source proteins accommodated only a small portion of the transcriptome of thymus epithelial cells, and partially shared with the MIP source proteins derived from NOD mice pancreas and β cell line. The global view of the MHC I-associated self-peptides repertoire in the thymus and pancreas of NOD mice may serve as a biological reference to identify potential autoantigens targeted by autoreactive CD8+ T cells in T1D.

### Sample Protocol
The thymus (total 2g) and pancreas tissue (total 8 g) were collected from 40 non-diabetic and diabetic female NOD mice at 8-20 weeks age, and immediately lysed in 20 ml of ice-cold lysis buffer (50 mM Tris pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, and 1% of CHAPS) containing “complete” protease inhibitor (Roche). Tissue lysates were clarified by several rounds of centrifugation, and the clean supernatant was filtered by 0.2μm Needle filter (thermofisher) and collected. The procedure used for the isolation of MIPs was modified from the one described previously 17-19. Immunoaffinity columns were constructed using HiTrap NHS-activated HP (GE Healthcare) coupled with 10mg anti-H2 mAb (clone: M1/42.3.9.8, Bioxcell company) as described by manual. The thymus and pancreas proteolytic solution was repeatedly circulated in HiTrap NHS activated HP column overnight at 4°C. Then the column was washed with several buffers in the following order: 50 mM Tris (pH 8.0), 150 mM NaCl, and 1% of CHAPS; 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 150 mM NaCl; 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 450 mM NaCl; and 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0). Subsequently, MHC I-peptide complexes were eluted with 4 ml 10% acetic acid. The mixture of peptides and class I heavy-chain and β2-microglobulin were filtered by ultrafiltration with a 3-KDa cutoff Millipore.

### Data Protocol
All tandem mass spectra were queried against MHC class I targeted database described above using MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.8), Sequest and Mascot (implemented with Proteome Discoverer 2.1) search engines. For all searches, the parent mass error tolerance was set to 10 ppm. and the fragment mass error tolerance to 0.02 Da. Enzyme specificity was set to none and oxidation of methionine were considered as variable modifications. Peptide identifications were selected at a 5% false discovery rate (FDR) in peptide-spectrum match level.

### Publication Abstract
The peptides repertoire presented to CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells by major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I molecules is referred to as the MHC I-associated peptidome (MIP), which regulates thymus development, peripheral survival and function during lifetime of CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells. Type 1 diabetes (T1D) is an organ-specific autoimmune disease caused by pancreatic &#x3b2; cells destruction mediated primarily by autoreactive CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells. Non-obese diabetic (NOD) mouse is an important animal model of T1D. Here, we deeply analyzed the MIP derived from NOD mice thymus and pancreas, and demonstrated that the thymus MIP source proteins partially shared with the MIP source proteins derived from NOD mice pancreas and &#x3b2; cell line. One H-2Kd restricted peptide SLC35B1<sub>26-34</sub> which was shared by MIP derived from both NOD mice pancreatic tissues and islet &#x3b2;-cell line, but absent in MIP from NOD thymus tissues, showed ability to stimulate IFN-&#x3b3; secretion and proliferation of NOD mice splenic CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells. The global view of the MHC I-associated self-peptides repertoire in the thymus and pancreas of NOD mice may serve as a biological reference to identify potential autoantigens targeted by autoreactive CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells in T1D. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD031966. SIGNIFICANCE: The peptides repertoire presented to CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells by major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I molecules is referred to as the MHC I-associated peptidome (MIP). The MIP presented by thymic antigen presenting cells (APCs) is crucial for shaping CD8<sup>+</sup> T cell repertoire and self-tolerance, while the MIP presented by peripheral tissues and organs is not only involved in maintaining periphery CD8<sup>+</sup> T cell survival and homeostasis, but also mediates immune surveillance and autoimmune responses of CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells under pathological conditions. Type 1 diabetes (T1D) is an organ-specific autoimmune disease caused by the destruction of pancreatic &#x3b2; cells, mediated primarily by autoreactive CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells. Non-obese diabetic (NOD) mouse is one of important animal models of spontaneous autoimmune diabetes that shares several key features with human T1D. The global view of the MHC I-associated self-peptides repertoire in the thymus and pancreas of NOD mice may serve as a good biological reference to identify potential autoantigens targeted by autoreactive CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells in T1D. It has great significance for further clarifying the immune recognition and effect mechanism of autoreactive CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells in the pathogenesis of T1D, and then developing antigen-specific immune intervention strategies.

### Keywords
Nod mouse, Mhc class i-associated peptidome, T1d, Lc-ms/ ms, Pancreas, Cd8+ t-cell., Thymus

### Affiliations
Army Medical University (Third Military Medical University)
no

### Submitter
lina  wang

### Lab Head
Dr Yuzhang Wu
Army Medical University (Third Military Medical University)


