### Accession
PXD001406

### Title
Impact of Regulatory Variation from RNA to Protein

### Description
Genetic variants that impact gene regulation are important contributors to human phenotypic variation. For this reason, considerable efforts have been made to identify genetic associations with differences in mRNA levels of nearby genes, namely, cis expression quantitative trait loci (eQTLs). The phenotypic consequences of eQTLs are presumably due, in most cases, to their ultimate effects on protein expression levels. Yet, only few studies have quantified the impact of genetic variation on proteins levels directly. It remains unclear how faithfully eQTLs are reflected at the protein level, and whether there is a significant layer of cis regulatory variation acting primarily on translation or steady state protein levels. To address these questions, we measured ribosome occupancy by high-throughput sequencing, and relative protein levels by high-resolution quantitative mass spectrometry, in a panel of lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCLs) in which we had previously measured transcript expression using RNA sequencing. We then mapped genetic variants that are associated with changes in transcript expression (eQTLs), ribosome occupancy (rQTLs), or protein abundance (pQTLs). Most of the QTLs we detected are associated with transcript expression levels, with consequent effects on ribosome and protein levels. However, we found that eQTLs tend to have significantly reduced effect sizes on protein levels, suggesting that their potential impact on downstream phenotypes is often attenuated or buffered. Additionally, we confirmed the presence of a class of cis QTLs that specifically affect protein abundance with little or no effect on mRNA levels; most of these QTLs have little effect on ribosome occupancy, and hence may arise from differences in post-translational regulation.

### Sample Protocol
We collected protein abundance and ribosome occupancy data from Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) transformed lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCLs) derived from humans (YRI from Coriell, NIGMS Human Genetic Cell Repository). RNA-seq data and genotype data for the same cell lines was collected previously  and is available for download at http://eqtl.uchicago.edu. Corresponding ribosome profiling data has been deposited at GEO with accession GSE61742. Cells were maintained at identical conditions of 37 degrees with 5% CO2 in RPMI media with 15% FBS, supplemented with 2 mM L-glutamate, 100 IU/ml penicillin, and 100 μg/ml streptomycin. An internal standard LCL (Coriell YRI, NIGMS Human Genetic Cell Repository, GM19238) was grown in RPMI minus L-Lysine and L-Arginine, 15% dialyzed FBS, and L-13C615N4-arginine (Arg-10) and L13C615N2-lysine (Lys-8) (Cambridge Isotopes, Andover, MA, USA) supplemented with 2 mM L-glutamate, 100 IU/ml penicillin, and 100 μg/ml streptomycin under identical conditions as the unlabeled LCLs. The internal standard LCL (GM19238) was grown for 6 doublings to assure complete SILAC label incorporation. Complete label incorporation was verified by analyzing the protein lysate from the labeled LCL alone by high-resolution LC-MS/MS.   LCLs were washed in PBS three times and then lysed using the UPX Universal Protein Extraction Kit (Expedeon Inc., San Diego, CA, USA). Protein quantitation was performed using the Qubit fluorometry assay (Invitrogen) and the reducing agent-compatible (RAC) version of the BCA Protein Assay (Thermo Scientific Pierce). 12ug of each sample was combined with 12ug of the SILAC labeled lysate from human LCL GM19238. Note that the SILAC lysate was prepared once and used as an internal standard through the quantification of the cell lines. 24ug of each combined sample was then processed by SDS-PAGE using a 4-12% Bis Tris NuPage mini-gel (Invitrogen). Calibration was with Thermo PageRuler broad range markers. Each of 40 gel segments were processed by in-gel digestion using a ProGest robot (DigiLab) with the following protocol: wash with 25mM ammonium bicarbonate followed by acetonitrile, reduce with 10mM dithiothreitol at 60 degrees C followed by alkylation with 50mM iodoacetamide at room temperature, digest with trypsin (Promega) at 37 degrees C for 4h, and quench with formic acid. The supernatant was analyzed directly without further processing. Each gel digest was analyzed by nano-LC/MS/MS with a Waters NanoAcquity HPLC system interfaced to a ThermoFisher LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro. Peptides were loaded on a trapping column and eluted over a 75um analytical column at 350nL/min using a 1-hour LC gradient. Both columns were packed with Jupiter Proteo resin (Phenomenex). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, with MS performed in the Orbitrap at 60,000 FWHM resolution and MS/MS performed in the LTQ. The fifteen most abundant ions were selected for MS/MS. Data was collected in centroid mode.

### Data Protocol
Low-level analysis was performed using the open-source proteomics software tool PVIEW (Release December 23, 2012; http://compbio.cs.princeton.edu/pview). As input to PVIEW, we generated in silico translations of coding genes from the UCSC Genome Browser database based on gene models from the human genome. Each protein sequence entry retained the corresponding Ensembl gene identifier and gene symbol. Database searches were performed using +/-4 p.p.m. MS1 tolerance and an MS2 window tolerance of +/-0.5 Da. Up to 2 missed tryptic cleavages were allowed during search. Peptide spectrum matches were obtained at a stringent false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%. As is standard practice, log2(sample/standard) peptide measurements were centered so their median was zero to adjust for any differences in sample loading. For the protein-level quantification, we used the median log2(sample/standard) ratio across all independent quantifications of a protein (distinct peptides including duplicate peptide measurements across fractions and for differing charge states). We removed peptides mapping to multiple gene models. We removed genes that were quantified at the protein level in fewer than half of the individuals. A total of 4,381 genes were quantified in at least half of the cell lines and thus used for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lymphoblastoid cell line, Eqtl, Genetic variation, Gene regulation, Rna-seq, Post-translational, Silac, Hapmap, Ribosome profiling, Pqtl

### Affiliations
University of Maryland College Park
Center for Bioinformatics and Computational Biology
Department of Computer Science
Department of Human Genetics University of Chicago

### Submitter
Zia Khan

### Lab Head
Dr Yoav Gilad
Department of Human Genetics University of Chicago


