### Accession
PXD006539

### Title
Hypoxia-induced proteomic remodeling of human mammary cancer associated fibroblast - siRNA NCBP2-AS2

### Description
Intratumoral hypoxia causes the formation of dysfunctional blood vessels which contribute to tumor metastasis. Blood vessels are embedded in the tumor stroma where cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) constitute the most prominent cellular component. We found that hypoxic human mammary CAFs promote blood vessel growth in CAF-endothelial cell co-cultures in vitro. Mass spectrometry-based proteomic analysis of CAF secretome unravels how hypoxic CAFs contribute to blood vessel abnormalities by altering the secretion of a multitude of pro- and anti-angiogenic factors. Hypoxia induces pronounced remodeling of the CAF proteome, including proteins that have not been previously related to this process. Amongst those, the uncharacterized antisense gene protein NCBP2-AS2 is one of the most transcriptionally upregulated proteins in the proteome and secretome of hypoxic CAFs. Silencing of NCBP2-AS2 abrogates the pro-angiogenic function acquired by hypoxic CAFs through decreasing VEGF expression levels to the levels found in normoxic CAFs.

### Sample Protocol
Secretome For the cCAF- and pCAF-derived secretome, 6x106 ‘medium’ and ‘heavy’ SILAC labelled cells were seeded in 15 cm dishes. The following day, cells were washed six times with pre-warmed PBS to remove FBS residuals, serum-free SILAC medium was added and cells were allowed to secrete for 72 h in either normoxic or hypoxic conditions. Subsequently, the same volume of conditioned media from 3 dishes from each condition was mixed and subjected to sequential centrifugations at 4°C: 300 x g for 10 min, 2,000 x g for 10 min and 10,000 x g for 30 min. An ultracentrifugation step of 100,000 x g for 70 min was carried out to separate the soluble secretome from the extracellular vesicle (EV) fraction. The pellet containing the EVs was lysed with 8 M Urea buffer and in-solution digested with trypsin (Promega). The soluble fraction was acidified using 10% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to pH 5.0 and proteins enriched using Strataclean-resin (Agilent Technologies) as previously described. The eluted proteins from the resin were loaded in a 4-12% gradient NuPAGE Novex Bis-Tris gel, stained with instant blue and in-gel digested with trypsin (Promega). For the secretome of hypoxic cCAFs silenced for NCBP2-AS2, ‘medium’ and ‘heavy’ SILAC labelled cells were transfected with siRNA CTL and siRNA NCBP2-AS2. 2x106 cells from each condition were seeded in a 10 cm dish and the CM prepared as described above. In this experiment, all secreted proteins and EVs were enriched with Strataclean-resin and in-gel digested with trypsin. Total proteome  For the analysis of the total proteome, total lysates from the same cells used for the isolation of the secretome were collected using 2% SDS, 100 mM TrisHCl pH 7.4 lysis buffer. Proteins were digested into peptides using filter-aided sample preparation (FASP). For the proteomes of cCAFs and pCAFs exposed to hypoxia, 50 µg of FASP-derived peptides were fractionated using strong anion exchange chromatography (SAX). For the proteome of hypoxic iCAFs silenced for NCBP2-AS2, 50 µg of FASP-derived peptides were fractionated using high-pH reverse phase StageTip fractionation as previously described, with minor modifications. nLC-MS/MS analysis After trypsin digestion, peptides were desalted using StageTip. Peptides were peptides were resuspended in 1% TFA, 0.2% acetic acid or formic acid buffer and injected on an EASY-nLC or 1200 system coupled online to an LTQ-Orbitrap Pro Elite or Q-Exactive HF, respectively, via nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher scientific). Peptides were separated on a 20 cm fused silica emitter (New Objective) packed in house with reverse phase Reprosil Pur Basic 1.9 µm (Dr. Maisch GmbH). For peptide elution, buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and Buffer B (80% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) were used. In the Orbitrap Elite, peptides were eluted with a flow of 200 nl/min from 5% to 30% of buffer B, in a 90 min linear gradient (for in-gel digested peptides) and 190 min gradient (for SAX fractions and extracellular vesicles). In the Q-Exactive HF, peptides were eluted with a flow of 300 nl/min from 5% to 30% of buffer B in a 60 min linear gradient. In the Orbitrap Elite, the mass range acquired for the full MS scan was 300-1,650 m/z with a resolution of 120,000 at 400 Th. The top ten most intense ions in the full MS were isolated for higher-energy collision dissociation fragmentation with a target of 40,000 ions at a resolution of 15,000 at 400 Th). For the Q-Exactive HF, the mass range acquired for the full MS scan was 375-1,500 m/z with a resolution of 60,000 at 250 Th. The top ten most intense ions in the full MS were isolated for fragmentation with a target of 50,000 ions at a resolution of 15,000 at 250 Th. MS data were acquired using the XCalibur software (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The MS .raw files were processed with the MaxQuant software version 1.5.0.36 and search with the Andromeda search engine, with the following settings: minimal peptide length 7 amino acids, multiplicity 2, where the light labels were Arg6 and Lys4 and the heavy labels were Arg10 and Lys8; variable modifications Acetyl (Protein N-term) and Oxidation (M); fixed modification Carbamidomethyl (C); specificity for trypsin cleavage was required and maximum 2 missed cleavages were allowed. For the search of the parent mass and fragment ions, an initial mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and 20 ppm, respectively, was required. The re-quantify parameter was enabled and match between runs was used between similar fractions. For identification, the false discovery rates (FDRs) at the protein and peptide level were set to 1%. For accurate protein quantification, only unique peptides with at least 2 ratio counts were used. For CAFs silenced for NCBP2-AS2 a ratio count of 1 was used to allow the quantification of NCBP2-AS2. The MaxQuant output table ‘ProteinGroups.txt’ was uploaded in Perseus (version 1.5.2.11) for downstream analysis. The data were filtered to remove potential contaminants, reverse peptides which match a decoy database, and peptides only identified by site, which corresponds to peptides identified only in their modified version. To assure an unambiguous identification, only proteins identified with at least one unique peptide were considered. The normalized SILAC Ratio was used for the analysis. Ratios from the ‘Reverse’ experiment were inverted. Then, ratios and intensities were logarithmized, log2 and log10, respectively. When the distribution of the SILAC ratios was not centered on the zero, data were normalized by subtracting the median of the all SILAC ratios calculated for that experiment.

### Publication Abstract
Intratumoral hypoxia causes the formation of dysfunctional blood vessels, which contribute to tumor metastasis and reduce the efficacy of therapeutic treatments. Blood vessels are embedded in the tumor stroma of which cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) constitute a prominent cellular component. We found that hypoxic human mammary CAFs promoted angiogenesis in CAF-endothelial cell cocultures in vitro. Mass spectrometry-based proteomic analysis of the CAF secretome unraveled that hypoxic CAFs contributed to blood vessel abnormalities by altering their secretion of various pro- and anti-angiogenic factors. Hypoxia induced pronounced remodeling of the CAF proteome, including proteins that have not been previously related to this process. Among those, the uncharacterized protein NCBP2-AS2 that we renamed HIAR (hypoxia-induced angiogenesis regulator) was the protein most increased in abundance in hypoxic CAFs. Silencing of HIAR abrogated the pro-angiogenic and pro-migratory function of hypoxic CAFs by decreasing secretion of the pro-angiogenic factor VEGFA and consequently reducing VEGF/VEGFR downstream signaling in the endothelial cells. Our study has identified a regulator of angiogenesis and provides a map of hypoxia-induced molecular alterations in mammary CAFs.

### Keywords
Angiogenesis, Hypoxia, Caf, Proteome, Silac, Secretome, Cancer

### Affiliations
CRUK Beatson Institute
Tumour Microenvironment & Proteomics

### Submitter
Sara Zanivan

### Lab Head
Dr Sara Zanivan
CRUK Beatson Institute


