### Accession
PXD020807

### Title
Temporal proteomic profiling of SH-SY5Y differentiation with retinoic acid using a FAIMS and Real-Time Searching strategy

### Description
The SH-SY5Y cell line is often used as a surrogate for neurons in cell-based studies. This cell line is frequently differentiated with all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) over a 7-day period which confers neuron-like properties to the cells. However, no analysis of proteome remodeling has followed the progress of this transition. Here, we quantitatively profiled over 9,400 proteins across a 7-day treatment with retinoic acid using state-of-the-art mass spectrometry-based proteomics technologies, including FAIMS, real-time database searching, and TMTpro16 sample multiplexing. Gene ontology analysis revealed that categories with the highest increases in abundance were related to the plasma membrane/extracellular space. To showcase our dataset, we surveyed the protein abundance profiles linked to neurofilament bundle assembly, neuron projections, and neuronal cell body formation. These proteins exhibited increases in abundance level, yet we observed multiple patterns among the queried proteins. The data presented represent a rich resource for investigating temporal protein abundance changes in SH-SY5Y cells differentiated with retinoic acid. Moreover, the sample preparation and data acquisition strategies used here can be readily applied to any analogous cell line differentiation analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were homogenized by 12 passes through a 21-gauge (1.25 inches long) needle and incubated at 4°C with gentle agitation for 30 min. The homogenate was sedimented by centrifugation at 21,000 x g for 5 min and the supernatant was transferred to a new tube. Protein concentrations were determined using the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay (ThermoFisher Scientific). Proteins were subjected to disulfide bond reduction with 5 mM tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (room temperature, 15 min) and alkylation with 10 mM iodoacetamide (room temperature, 20 min in the dark). Excess iodoacetamide was quenched with 10 mM dithiotreitol (room temperature, 15 min in the dark). Methanol-chloroform precipitation was performed prior to protease digestion. In brief, 4 parts of neat methanol were added to each sample and vortexed, 1-part chloroform was added to the sample and vortexed, and 3 parts water was added to the sample and vortexed. The sample was centrifuged at 14,000 RPM for 2 min at room temperature and subsequently washed twice with 100% methanol. Samples were resuspended in 200 mM EPPS, pH 8.5 and digested at room temperature for 14 h with LysC protease at a 100:1 protein-to-protease ratio. Trypsin was then added at a 100:1 protein-to-protease ratio and the reaction was incubated for 6 h at 37°C.

### Data Protocol
Spectra were converted to mzXML via MSconvert. Database searching included all entries from the Human UniProt Database (downloaded: August 2019). The database was concatenated with one composed of all protein sequences for that database in the reversed order. Searches were performed using a 50-ppm precursor ion tolerance for total protein level profiling. The product ion tolerance was set to 0.9 Da. These wide mass tolerance windows were chosen to maximize sensitivity in conjunction with Comet searches and linear discriminant analysis. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N-termini (+229.163 Da for TMT and +304.207 Da for TMTpro) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) was set as a variable modification. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were adjusted to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR). PSM filtering was performed using a linear discriminant analysis, as described previously and then assembled further to a final protein-level FDR of 1%. Proteins were quantified by summing reporter ion counts across all matching PSMs, also as described previously. Reporter ion intensities were adjusted to correct for the isotopic impurities of the different TMT reagents according to manufacturer specifications. The signal-to-noise (S/N) measurements of peptides assigned to each protein were summed and these values were normalized so that the sum of the signal for all proteins in each channel was equivalent to account for equal protein loading. Finally, each protein abundance measurement was scaled, such that the summed signal-to-noise for that protein across all channels equaled 100, thereby generating a relative abundance (RA) measurement. Data analysis and visualization were performed in Microsoft Excel or R. We used Bioconductor and the timecourse package which applies a multivariate empirical Bayes model to rank temporally changing proteins and calculate the Hotelling T2 statistic.

### Publication Abstract
The SH-SY5Y cell line is often used as a surrogate for neurons in cell-based studies. This cell line is frequently differentiated with <i>all-trans</i> retinoic acid (ATRA) over a 7-day period, which confers neuron-like properties to the cells. However, no analysis of proteome remodeling has followed the progress of this transition. Here, we quantitatively profiled over 9400 proteins across a 7-day treatment with retinoic acid using state-of-the-art mass spectrometry-based proteomics technologies, including FAIMS, real-time database searching, and TMTpro16 sample multiplexing. Gene ontology analysis revealed that categories with the highest increases in protein abundance were related to the plasma membrane/extracellular space. To showcase our data set, we surveyed the protein abundance profiles linked to neurofilament bundle assembly, neuron projections, and neuronal cell body formation. These proteins exhibited increases in abundance level, yet we observed multiple patterns among the queried proteins. The data presented represent a rich resource for investigating temporal protein abundance changes in SH-SY5Y cells differentiated with retinoic acid. Moreover, the sample preparation and data acquisition strategies used here can be readily applied to any analogous cell line differentiation analysis.

### Keywords
Eclipse, Sps-ms3, Multi-notch, Atra, Retinoic acid, Tmtpro

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School
Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, USA

### Submitter
Joao Paulo

### Lab Head
Dr Joao A. Paulo
Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, USA


