### Accession
PXD011789

### Title
Mitoprotein-induced stress launches a global transcriptional fail-safe program

### Description
Most mitochondrial proteins are synthesized as cytosolic precursor proteins before being imported into mitochondria. Cytosolic accumulation of mitochondrial precursors hazards cellular fitness and is associated with a growing number of diseases, but is not observed under physiological conditions. Individual mechanisms that allow cells to avoid cytosolic accumulation of mitochondrial precursors have recently been discovered, but their interplay and regulation remain elusive. Here we show that cells rapidly launch a global transcriptional program to restore cellular proteostasis after induction of a “clogger” protein that reduces the number of available mitochondrial import sites. Cells upregulate the protein folding and proteolytic systems in the cytosol and downregulate both the cytosolic translation machinery and many mitochondrial metabolic enzymes, presumably to relieve the workload of the overstrained mitochondrial import system. We show that this transcriptional remodeling is a combination of a “wideband” core response regulated by the transcription factors Hsf1 and Rpn4 and a unique mitoprotein-induced downregulation of the oxidative phosphorylation components, the most abundant group of precursorsmediated by an inactivation of the Hap2/3/4/5 complex. These findings depict the first comprehensive, time-resolved model of adaptations to mitochondrial import impairment. This reveals the regulation of previously described reactions and combines them with a so far unidentified mitochondrion-specific arm into an overarching coordinated network of the cellular mitoprotein-induced stress response.

### Sample Protocol
For the quantitative comparison of proteomes of ‘clogger’ induced and mock treated Saccharomyces cerevisiae, expression of b2-DHFR was induced for 0, 90, 270 and 540 min as well as for 18 h and compared to control cells expressing cytosolic DHFR. 50 OD600 of cells were harvested at each time point by centrifugation (17,000 g, 3 min, 2°C), washed with prechilled water, snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C. Cells lysates were prepared in lysis buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.6, 5% (w/v) SDS) using a FastPrep-24 5G homogenizer (MP Biomedicals, Heidelberg, Germany) with 3 cycles of 30 s, speed 8.0 m/s, 120 s breaks, glass beads). Lysates were diluted to 2% (w/v) SDS and protein concentrations were determined using the Pierce BCA Protein Assay (Thermo Scientific, #23225). 20 µg of each lysate were subjected to an in-solution tryptic digest using a modified version of the Single-Pot Solid-Phase-enhanced Sample Preparation (SP3) protocol (PMID: 25358341, PMID: 29565595). Here, lysates were added to Sera-Mag Beads (Thermo Scientific, #4515-2105-050250, 6515-2105-050250) in 10 µl 15% formic acid and 30 µl of ethanol. Binding of proteins was achieved by shaking for 15 min at room temperature. SDS was removed by 4 subsequent washes with 200 µl of 70% ethanol. Proteins were digested with 0.4 µg of sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega, #V5111) in 40 µl Hepes/NaOH, pH 8.4 in the presence of 1.25 mM TCEP and 5 mM chloroacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich, #C0267) overnight at room temperature. Beads were separated, washed with 10 µl of an aqueous solution of 2% DMSO and the combined eluates were dried down. In total three biological replicates were prepared (n=3). Each replicate included samples of the time course of control and clogger expressing cells (in total 10 samples per replicate). Peptides were reconstituted in 10 µl of H2O and reacted with 80 µg of TMT10plex (Thermo Scientific, #90111) (PMID: 24579773) label reagent dissolved in 4 µl of acetonitrile for 1 h at room temperature. Excess TMT reagent was quenched by the addition of 4 µl of an aqueous solution of 5% hydroxylamine (Sigma, 438227). Peptides were mixed to achieve a 1:1 ratio across all TMT-channels. Mixed peptides were subjected to a reverse phase clean-up step (OASIS HLB 96-well µElution Plate, Waters #186001828BA) and subjected to an off-line fractionation under high pH condition (PMID: 25358341). The resulting 12 fractions were then analyzed by LC-MS/MS on a Q Exactive Plus (Thermo Scentific) as previously described (PMID: 29706546). Briefly, peptides were separated using an UltiMate 3000 RSLC (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a trapping cartridge (Precolumn; C18 PepMap 100, 5 lm, 300 lm i.d. × 5 mm, 100 A°) and an analytical column (Waters nanoEase HSS C18 T3, 75 lm × 25 cm, 1.8 lm, 100 A°). Solvent A: aqueous 0.1% formic acid; Solvent B: 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (all solvents were of LC-MS grade). Peptides were loaded on the trapping cartridge using solvent A for 3 min with a flow of 30 µl/min. Peptides were separated on the analytical column with a constant flow of 0.3 µl/min applying a 1 h gradient of 2 – 28% of solvent B in A, followed by an increase to 40% B. Peptides were directly analyzed in positive ion mode applying with a spray voltage of 2.3 kV and a capillary temperature of 320°C using a Nanospray-Flex ion source and a Pico-Tip Emitter 360 lm OD × 20 lm ID; 10 lm tip (New Objective). MS spectra with a mass range of 375–1.200 m/z were acquired in profile mode using a resolution of 70.000 [maximum fill time of 250 ms or a maximum of 3e6 ions (automatic gain control, AGC)]. Fragmentation was triggered for the top 10 peaks with charge 2–4 on the MS scan (data-dependent acquisition) with a 30 second dynamic exclusion window (normalized collision energy was 32). Precursors were isolated with a 0.7 m/z window and MS/MS spectra were acquired in profile mode with a resolution of 35,000 (maximum fill time of 120 ms or an AGC target of 2e5 ions).

### Data Protocol
Acquired data were analyzed using IsobarQuant (PMID: 26379230) and Mascot V2.4 (Matrix Science) using a reverse UniProt FASTA Saccharomyces cerevisiae database (UP000002311) including common contaminants. The following modifications were taken into account: Carbamidomethyl (C, fixed), TMT10plex (K, fixed), Acetyl (N-term, variable), Oxidation (M, variable) and TMT10plex (N-term, variable). The mass error tolerance for full scan MS spectra was set to 10 ppm and for MS/MS spectra to 0.02 Da. A maximum of 2 missed cleavages were allowed. A minimum of 2 unique peptides with a peptide length of at least seven amino acids and a false discovery rate below 0.01 were required on the peptide and protein level (PMID: 25987413).

### Publication Abstract
The cytosolic accumulation of mitochondrial precursors is hazardous to cellular fitness and is associated with a number of diseases. However, it is not observed under physiological conditions. Individual mechanisms that allow cells to avoid cytosolic accumulation of mitochondrial precursors have recently been discovered, but their interplay and regulation remain elusive. Here, we show that cells rapidly launch a global transcriptional programme to restore cellular proteostasis after induction of a 'clogger' protein that reduces the number of available mitochondrial import sites. Cells upregulate the protein folding and proteolytic systems in the cytosol and downregulate both the cytosolic translation machinery and many mitochondrial metabolic enzymes, presumably to relieve the workload of the overstrained mitochondrial import system. We show that this transcriptional remodelling is a combination of a 'wideband' core response regulated by the transcription factors Hsf1 and Rpn4 and a unique mitoprotein-induced downregulation of the oxidative phosphorylation components, mediated by an inactivation of the HAP complex.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Yeast, Oxidative phosphorylation, Protein import, Chaperones, Stress response, Proteasome

### Affiliations
University of Kaiserlautern Cell Biology
University of Kaiserslautern

### Submitter
Felix Boos

### Lab Head
Dr Johannes M. Herrmann
University of Kaiserlautern Cell Biology


