### Accession
PXD035419

### Title
Interaction proteomics of Loqs-GFP in Aedes after Dengue infection

### Description
Efficient virus replication in its vector, Aedes mosquitoes, is essential for the transmission of arboviral diseases like dengue virus (DENV) in populations. In order to identify RNA-independent host factors involved in DENV replication in mosquitoes, we established a system expressing all non-structural proteins within the context of the macro protein complex as observed during viral infections. We GFP-tagged Loqs to purify it's interactors by label-free mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
A stable Loqs-GFP Aag2 cell line was infected with dengue virus at a MOI of 0.01 for 96h. Proteins were extracted in ice-cold lysis buffer (10 mM Tris/Cl pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA, 0.5% NP-40, 1x protease inhibitor cOmplete (Roche)). Around 6 mg of proteins were incubated overnight with 20µL of Anti-GFP agarose beads or blocked beads (as a negative control) in ice-cold dilution buffer (lysis buffer without NP-40), with a lysis to dilution buffer ratio of 1:2.5. After 3 washes in ice-cold dilution buffer and 2 washes with ice-cold PBS, samples were processed for mass spectrometry. In short, proteins are denatured and cysteines reduced in elution buffer (2M urea; 100 mM Tris pH 8.0; 10 mM Tris), after which cysteines are blocked using 50 mM Iodoacetamide. Proteins are digested by Trypsin for 2 hours on the beads, after which the supernatants are collected and further digested overnight. Peptides are concentrated and desalted using StageTips.

### Data Protocol
RAW data has been analyzed using MaxQuant version 1.6.6.0 with the fasta file for A.Aegypti (included). Most of the default settings are used, except for enabling Label free quantification, iBAQ, match between runs and deamidation (NQ) as variable modification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Denv2, Aag2, Mosquito, Ngc, Aedes, Cells

### Affiliations
RIMLS, RU, Nijmegen, The Netherlands
Department of Medical Microbiology, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University Medical Center, P.O. Box, 9101, 6500 HB Nijmegen, the Netherlands

### Submitter
Cornelia Spruijt

### Lab Head
Dr Ronald Pieter van Rij
Department of Medical Microbiology, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University Medical Center, P.O. Box, 9101, 6500 HB Nijmegen, the Netherlands


