### Accession
PXD041979

### Title
Blautia producta displays great plasticity of short open reading frame-encoded peptides under different environmental conditions

### Description
Short open reading frames (sORF) have the potential to encode small proteins in the human gut microbiome, but their role in this environment is rarely understood. These small proteins, known as sORF-encoded peptides (SEP), are less than or equal to 100 amino acids in length. Using bottom-up proteomics (BUP) and top-down proteomics (TDP) approaches, we aimed to identify SEP under various growth conditions and stress exposure in Blautia producta, a key species in mediating colonization resistance and dampening gut inflammation. After applying a rigorous filtering and validation procedure, we identified 45 SEP. Our findings indicate that in contrast to previous results the production of specific SEP is not restricted to direct bacterial interactions within the microbiome but rather depends on growth and stress conditions of the environment. Top-down analysis improved identification confidence and detected a number of full-length with and without N-terminal methionine excision (NME), N- or C-terminal truncated or post-translational modified proteoforms of SEP, indicating that these are common occurrences in B. producta. These findings highlight SEP as a ubiquitous class of non-annotated polypeptides that have been overlooked as a subset of proteins in B. producta.

### Sample Protocol
Protein Extraction and Preparation Blautia producta DSM 2950 was grown in two biological replicates, in YCFA or BHI medium with different additives and pH-values at 37°C under anoxic conditions. After the bacteria reached the exponential phase proteins were extracted by fifteen cycles of freeze-thawing in lysis buffer (6 M GndHCl, 100 mM HEPES, 20 mM NaCl and 1x protease inhibitor, pH 7.5). Cell debris were pelleted by centrifugation, washed twice with lysis buffer and supernatants were collected. After protein concentrations were determined by BCA assay, proteins were aliquoted for full-proteome analysis or for the depletion protocol. Bottom-up full-proteome analysis – Extracted proteins (50 µg) were reduced using DTT and IAA. Afterwards, samples were precipitated by ethanol, suspended in 200 µl digestion buffer (0.1 M TEAB, pH 8.5), and digested using trypsin with a protease-to-protein ratio of 1:40 (w/w). After incubation for 20 hours at 37 °C, samples were acidified to a pH of 2 to 3 with 10% TFA, desalted using solid-phase extraction, and freeze-dried. Peptide samples were suspended in loading solution (3 % ACN and 0.1% aqueous TFA) for subsequent measurements.  Depletion of high molecular weight proteins – The identification of the acidic and alkaline low molecular weight proteome (LMWP) was carried out using a high mass protein depletion procedure. A total of 400 μg of extracted proteins were precipitated by ethanol and suspended in 80 μl of either 210 mM NaCl or 420 mM TEAB. The samples were vortexed to ensure solubilization, and 3.2x volume of ACN, with the addition of 0.1% TFA for the acidic depletion. After incubation for 1 h at 20 °C at 1300 rpm, samples were centrifuged. The supernatant was then transferred to a new tube and dried using vacuum centrifugation. LMWP Bottom-up preparation – Proteins were suspended in 200 µl of digestion buffer (0.1 M TEAB, pH 8.5), reduced, alkylated, trypsinized, desalted and suspended in loading solution prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. LMWP top-down preparation – Proteins were suspended in loading solution, mixed thoroughly, sonicated, and centrifuged. The supernatant was then transferred to an LC vial for further analysis. LC-MS/MS analysis Bottom-up – Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis was performed on a Q Exactive mass plus spectrometer coupled to an Dionex U3000 UHPLC. Peptides were concentrated onto a reverse-phase trap column (Acclaim PepMap100, 2 μm, 100 Å, 75 μm × 20 mm) with 30 µl/min for 5 min using 2% ACN and 0.05% TFA before being separated with a linear 120 min gradient from 95 % eluent A (0.1% formic acid (FA)) to 50 % eluent B (80% ACN, 0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min, on an C18 reversed-phase analytical column (Acclaim PepMap100, 2 μm, 100 Å, 75 μm × 500 mm). The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode. MS data were acquired using a data-dependent top10 method dynamically choosing the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan (300 to 1800 m/z, resolution: 70,000, ACG target: 3e6, maximal injection time (IT): 100 ms) with a 2.0 m/z isolation window for HCD fragmentation. HCD spectra (resolution: 17,500, AGC target: 1e5, maximal IT: 100 ms, dynamic exclusion: 40 s) utilized a NCE of 27.  Top-down – LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer coupled to an Dionex U3000 UHPLC. Proteins were concentrated onto a reverse-phase trap column (PepMap300, C4, 5 μm, 300 Å) with 30 µl/min for 5 min using 2% ACN and 0.05% TFA before being separated with a linear 60 min gradient from 85 % eluent A (0.1% aqueous FA) to 60 % eluent B (80% ACN, 0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min, on an C4 reversed-phase analytical column (Accucore, 50 cm × 75 μm, 2.6 μm, 150 Å). The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode equipped with the field asymmetric ion mobility spectrometry (FAIMS) pro interface utilizing a multi-compensation voltage (CV) method. Full-scan MS were acquired (400 to 1800 m/z, resolution: 120,000, 30% RF lens, 200% ACG target, maximal injection time: 246 ms) uisng 15 V source- induced dissociation. Within a cycle time of 3 s MS2 spectra were acquired with an isolation window of 5 m/z, 50 000 resolution, 400% AGC target, 250 ms injection time, and for fragmentation CID with a NCE of 30 % was utilized. Four different CVs (-60, -50, -40, -20 V) with different MS1 and MS2 settings were applied. Settings for CVs -60 and -50 V: resolution 60k/50k (MS1/MS2), maximum injection time 118/125 ms, microscans 2/2, AGC target 200%/400%. Settings for CVs -40, -20 V: resolution 120k/60k, maximum injection time: 246/250 ms, 4/4 microscans. Acquisition was performed in “peptide mode”, according to the recommendations of vendors for the mass range below ca. 20−30 kDa.

### Data Protocol
Bottom-up – Processing of MS/MS raw spectrum data files was performed in Proteome Discoverer (PD) (Version 2.5, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using the integrated proteogenomics search database (iPtgxDB) for Blautia producta ATCC 27340 (accessed 2021.11.28) and 47 sequences of commonly observed laboratory contaminants. Database searches were performed using semi-specific cleavage and full tryptic specificity allowing up to four missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine as a variable modification. The "match between runs" function was disabled, meaning that each peptide being analyzed must be identified with a unique PSM. The percolator algorithm was used for posterior error calculation combining the results of the database searches restricted by q-value to FDR ≤ 0.01, and protein groups were assigned using strict parsimony rules. An additional filtering was implemented including: (i) the manual inspection of putative non-annotated peptide matches; (ii) the requirement that an SEP identification must have a sequence tag of at least five consecutive b- or y-ions in its MS2 spectrum; and (iii) the requirement that Prodigal and ChemGenome predictions must have at least three PSMs and in silico ORF predictions must have at least four PSMs.  Top-down – Database search was conducted using ProSightPD 4.0 nodes (Proteinaceous Inc., Evanston, USA) within Proteome Discoverer (Version 2.5.0.400, Thermo Fisher Scientific), utilizing the iPtgxDB. The high/high cRAWler node was employed for the automated generation of experiments in combination with Xtract for deconvolution. Acetylation and formylation at the N-terminus were treated as variable modifications. The Annotated Proteoforms Search, with a maximum of three proteoform spectrum matches (PrSMs) per precursor, a minimum of three matched fragments, and no delta M mode, was utilized to identify full-length proteoforms. Two Subsequence Search Nodes, each with a maximum of one PrSM per precursor, a minimum of six matched fragments, and a precursor and fragment mass tolerance of 10 ppm, were used to detect truncated proteoforms. One of these search nodes was specifically designed to search for fixed dehydro-modifications on cysteine in order to identify potential disulfide bridges. The TD results were processed in a single multiconsensus step, filtering PrSMs and proteoforms with a false discovery rate (FDR) cut-off of 1%. To ensure accurate identification and validation of SEP, the related proteoforms must have a minimum C-Score of 40, an E-Value smaller than 1 × 10−5 and at least ten matching fragment ions with a mass error less than 10 ppm. Furthermore, SEP identifications had to meet the requirement of at least three PrSMs for Prodigal and ChemGenome predictions and at least four PrSMs for Silico ORF predictions.

### Publication Abstract
The identification of short open reading frame-encoded peptides (SEP) and different proteoforms in single cultures of gut microbes offers new insights into a largely neglected part of the microbial proteome landscape. This is of particular importance as SEP provide various predicted functions, such as acting as antimicrobial peptides, maintaining cell homeostasis under stress conditions, or even contributing to the virulence pattern. They are, thus, taking a poorly understood role in structure and function of microbial networks in the human body. A better understanding of SEP in the context of human health requires a precise understanding of the abundance of SEP both in commensal microbes as well as pathogens. For the gut beneficial <i>B. producta</i>, we demonstrate the importance of specific environmental conditions for biosynthesis of SEP expanding previous findings about their role in microbial interactions.

### Keywords
Sorf-encoded peptides, Proteoform, Short open reading frames, Top-down proteomics, Ibd, Inflammation, Bacterial proteomics, Bottom-up proteomics, Sep

### Affiliations
Systematic Proteome Research & Bioanalytics, University of Kiel
Systematic Proteome Research & Bioanalytics, Institute for Experimental Medicine, Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel, Kiel, Germany

### Submitter
Andreas Tholey

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Tholey
Systematic Proteome Research & Bioanalytics, Institute for Experimental Medicine, Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel, Kiel, Germany


