### Accession
PXD003968

### Title
Immunoseroproteomic profiling in prostate cancer

### Description
Mass spectrometry analysis of immunoreactive protein spots revealed that seveal prostate cancer patient sera had autoantibodies to a number of proteins associated with both the glycolysis and plasminogen pathways.

### Sample Protocol
Whole cell lysates from a prostate cancer cell line (PC3) was separated on two-dimensional gels.  A reference gel was stained with coomassie and an analytical gel was transferred to a membrane for westernblotting using patient serum samples as the antibody source.  Electronic overlays identified which protein spots from the coomassie stain corresponded to immunoreactive bands on the analytical gel-blot.  The coomassie-stained protein spots were excised and destained in 50% methanol, 5% acetic acid overnight.  The protein samples were incubated in ammonium bicarbonate with DTT and then with iodoacetamide for 30 minutes each.  The samples were next treated with trypsin and the peptide fragments were extracted the next day using ammonium bicarbonate and acetonitrile.  The samples were dried on a SpeedVac and reconstituted with 0.1% formic acid and desalted using C18 ZipTips.  The samples were then loaded on an autosampler leading to an Easy-nLC liquid chromatography system attached to an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer.  Collision-induced disassociation was used to fragment the top 10 most abundant ions for MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS spectra were uploaded and analyzed on Proteome Discoverer 1.4 Sequest HT search software using human fasta database with the following search parameters: two missed trypsin cleavages allowed, dynamic oxidation on Met, dynamic deamidation on Asn/Gln, and static carbamidomethylation on Cys.  The results were identified using high confidence peptide filters with a false discovery rate target of 0.01.  The hits were selected based on correct range of pI and molecular weight that corresponded to immunoreactive bands on 2D analysis gel-blot.  The msf data was converted to msg for compatible Spectra analysis and also converted to mzid using the ProCon program.

### Publication Abstract
African American (AA) men suffer from a disproportionately high incidence and mortality of prostate cancer (PCa) compared with other racial/ethnic groups. Despite these disparities, African American men are underrepresented in clinical trials and in studies on PCa biology and biomarker discovery. We used immunoseroproteomics to profile antitumor autoantibody responses in AA and European American (EA) men with PCa, and explored differences in these responses. This minimally invasive approach detects autoantibodies to tumor-associated antigens that could serve as clinical biomarkers and immunotherapeutic agents. Sera from AA and EA men with PCa were probed by immunoblotting against PC3 cell proteins, with AA sera showing stronger immunoreactivity. Mass spectrometry analysis of immunoreactive protein spots revealed that several AA sera contained autoantibodies to a number of proteins associated with both the glycolysis and plasminogen pathways, particularly to alpha-enolase (ENO1). The proteomic data is deposited in ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD003968. Analysis of sera from 340 racially diverse men by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISA) showed higher frequency of anti-ENO1 autoantibodies in PCa sera compared with control sera. We observed differences between AA-PCa and EA-PCa patients in their immunoreactivity against ENO1. Although EA-PCa sera reacted with higher frequency against purified ENO1 in ELISA and recognized by immunoblotting the endogenous cellular ENO1 across a panel of prostate cell lines, AA-PCa sera reacted weakly against this protein by ELISA but recognized it by immunoblotting preferentially in metastatic cell lines. These race-related differences in immunoreactivity to ENO1 could not be accounted by differential autoantibody recognition of phosphoepitopes within this antigen. Proteomic analysis revealed differences in the posttranslational modification profiles of ENO1 variants differentially recognized by AA-PCa and EA-PCa sera. These intriguing results suggest the possibility of race-related differences in the antitumor autoantibody response in PCa, and have implications for defining novel biological determinants of PCa health disparities.

### Keywords
Autoantibodies, Tumor-associated antigens, Plasminogen, Glycoslysis, Prostate cancer

### Affiliations
Loma Linda University
Professor Loma Linda University School of Medicine, Center for Health Disparities and Molecular Medicine, 11085 Campus St, Mortensen Hall 142, Loma Linda CA 92350, USA

### Submitter
Tino Sanchez

### Lab Head
Dr Carlos Casiano
Professor Loma Linda University School of Medicine, Center for Health Disparities and Molecular Medicine, 11085 Campus St, Mortensen Hall 142, Loma Linda CA 92350, USA


