### Accession
PXD023951

### Title
Evaluation and Optimization of High-Field Asymmetric Waveform Ion Mobility Spectrometry for Multiplexed Quantitative Site-specific N-glycoproteomics

### Description
The heterogeneity and complexity of glycosylation hinder the depth of site-specific glycoproteomics analysis. High-field asymmetric-waveform ion-mobility spectrometry (FAIMS) has shown to improve the scope of bottom-up proteomics. The benefits of FAIMS for quantitative N-glycoproteomics have not been investigated yet. In this work, we optimized FAIMS settings for N-glycopeptide identification, with or without the tandem mass tag (TMT) label. The optimized FAIMS approach significantly increased the identification of site-specific N-glycopeptides derived from the purified IgM protein or human lymphoma cells. We explored in detail the changes in FAIMS mobility caused by N-glycopeptides with different characteristics, including TMT labeling, charge state, glycan type, peptide sequence, glycan size and precursor m/z. Importantly, FAIMS also improved multiplexed N-glycopeptide quantification, both with the standard MS2 acquisition method and with our recently developed Glyco-SPS-MS3 method. The combination of FAIMS and Glyco-SPS-MS3 provided the highest quantitative accuracy and precision. Our results demonstrate the advantages of FAIMS for improved mass-spectrometry-based qualitative and quantitative N-glycoproteomics.

### Sample Protocol
Sample Preparation. Human IgM purified from human serum (Sigma) was digested with trypsin, and the resulting peptides were labeled without or with TMT reagents (TMT0 or TMT6). The IgM digests (without enrichment of glycopeptides) were injected onto LC-FAIMS-MS/MS analysis directly. DG 75 cells (DSMZ no.: ACC 83) were digested with trypsin and the resulting peptides were then labeled with TMT tag (TMT0 or TMT6) followed by enrichment of glycopeptides using zwitterionic hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography (ZIC-HILIC). IgM and yeast peptide mixture were prepared as showed in Fig. 5A. The detailed experiments for all samples were supplemented in Supporting Information.  LC-FAIMS-MS/MS Analysis. For LC-MS/MS measurements with FAIMS, the FAIMS Pro device (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was operated in standard resolution with the temperature of FAIMS inner and outer electrodes set to 100 oC. We used the defaults settings for the dispersion voltage (DV) for the FAIMS pro. DV circuitry was tuned using the auto-tune option. The option “Tune DV RF” was enabled throughout the LC-FAIMS-MS/MS analysis for the high and low electric field's automated settings that create the DV waveform applied to the electrodes. In order to maintain a stable electrospray, we used a coated silica emitter (New Objective) for LC-MS/MS runs with FAIMS, while a metal emitter (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used for no FAIMS analyses. For single-CV experiments, a CV ranging from -25 to -90 V with 5 V steps was applied throughout the analysis. For runs with double CVs or triple CVs, selected CV was applied to sequential survey scans and MS/MS cycles. The cycle time was 1.5 s for each CV in double CV experiments and 1 s for each CV in triple CV experiments. The MS/MS CV was always paired with the appropriate CV from the corresponding survey scan. LC-FAIMS-MS2/MS3 methods were performed on the Orbitrap Exploris and Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometers (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For the FAIMS CV scanning of synthetic peptides and glycopeptides, each sample (Table S1, Supporting Information) was directly injected to the Orbitrap Lumos (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). The CV was scanned from 0-100 V in 1 V steps. For each run, selected ion monitoring scan type was used to monitor the ions with specific mass to charge (m/z). The parameters for LC and MS analyses were provided in detail in Supporting Information.

### Data Protocol
Data Analysis. For intact N-glycopeptide identification and quantification, .raw files were processed via GlycoBinder.5 Intensities of all isotopic clusters associated with the identified N-glycopeptide were determined by the pQuant algorithm incorporated in pGlyco2.0.25 MaxQuant was used to determine the charge state and m/z of MS1 features in LC-MS/MS data.26 Parameters used for database search for IgM, DG 75 and IgM-yeast mixture samples were detailed in Supporting Information.   To assess the quantitative accuracy of different LC-FAIMS-MS methods, we first calculated the error of each TMT-ratio determination compared to the predefined values. We then deduced the "positive bias" of each acquisition method by taking the mean of all positive values of the errors associated with the method. For assessing quantitative precision, we calculated the population variance of each measurement based on the formula: population variance=, where X is the determined TMT ratio,  is the mean of all TMT ratios, and n is the count of all TMT ratios.  We classified all identified N-glycopeptides and their glycan compositions, i.e., numbers of different monosaccharide moieties including hexose (Hex), N-acetylhexosamine (HexNAc), N-acetylneuraminic acid (Neu5Ac) and Fucose (Fuc), into five putative glycan types based on previous glycomics analysis.27, 28 The potential number of branches of each glycan composition were proposed based on the glycan types. The detailed criteria for glycan classification were supplemented in Supporting Information and Table S2.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Faims n-glycoproteomics

### Affiliations
Fudan University
max planck institute for biophysical chemistry

### Submitter
Pan Fang

### Lab Head
Dr Kuan-Ting Pan
max planck institute for biophysical chemistry


