### Accession
PXD005746

### Title
Human mesenchimal stem cells secretome

### Description
The study reports for the first time a quantitative proteomic characterization of the secretome of human bone marrow derived MSC before and after stimulation with a panel of pro-inflammatory cytokines.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were precipitated with 10 % tricholoracetic acid for 2 h on ice, reduced, carbamydomethylated and digested with trypsin sequence grade trypsin (Roche) for 16 h at 37 °C using a protein:tripsin ratio of 50:1. Nano LC-ESI-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Dionex UltiMate 3000 HPLC System with a PicoFrit ProteoPrep C18 column (200 mm, internal diameter of 75 μm) and the eluate was electrosprayed into an LTQ Orbitrap Velos operated in positive mode in data-dependent acquisition mode to automatically alternate between a full scan (m/z 350-2000) in the Orbitrap (at resolution 60000, AGC target 1000000) and subsequent CID MS/MS in the linear ion trap of the 20 most intense peaks from full scan (normalized collision energy of 35%, 10 ms activation). Isolation window: 3 Da, unassigned charge states: rejected, charge state 1: rejected, charge states 2+, 3+, 4+: not rejected; dynamic exclusion enabled (60 s, exclusion list size: 200). Five technical replicate analyses of each biological replicate (CTR- and MIX-hMSC-CM from patient H30 and from patient H34) were performed. Data acquisition was controlled by Xcalibur 2.0 and Tune 2.4 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were analyzed using MaxQuant software (version 1.3.0.5). The initial maximum allowed mass deviation was set to 6 ppm for monoisotopic precursor ions and 0.5 Da for MS/MS peaks. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin, defined as C-terminal to arginine and lysine excluding proline, and a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylcysteine was set as a fixed modification, N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. The spectra were searched by the Andromeda search engine against the human UniProt sequence database (release 2014_01). Protein identification required at least one unique or razor peptide per protein group. Quantification in MaxQuant was performed using the built in XIC-based label free quantification (LFQ) algorithm using fast LFQ. The required false positive rate was set to 1% at the peptide and 1% at the protein level, and the minimum required peptide length was set to 6 amino acids.

### Publication Abstract
Mesenchymal stem cells (MSC) represent an impressive opportunity in term of regenerative medicine and immunosuppressive therapy. Although it is clear that upon transplantation MSC exert most of their therapeutic effects through the secretion of bioactive molecules, the effects of a pro-inflammatory recipient environment on MSC secretome have not been characterized. In this study, we used a label free mass spectrometry based quantitative proteomic approach to analyze how pro-inflammatory cytokines modulate the composition of the human MSC secretome. We found that pro-inflammatory cytokines have a strong impact on the secretome of human bone marrow-derived MSC and that the large majority of cytokine-induced proteins are involved in inflammation and/or angiogenesis. Comparative analyses with results recently obtained on mouse MSC secretome stimulated under the same conditions reveals both analogies and differences in the effect of pro-inflammatory cytokines on MSC secretome in the two organisms. In particular, functional analyses confirmed that tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase-1 (TIMP1) is a key effector molecule responsible for the anti-angiogenic properties of both human and mouse MSC within an inflammatory microenvironment. Mass spectrometry data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD005746 SIGNIFICANCE: The secretion of a broad range of bioactive molecules is believed to be the main mechanism by which MSC exert specific therapeutic effects. MSC are very versatile and respond to specific environments by producing and releasing a variety of effector molecules. To the best of our knowledge this is the first study aimed at describing the secretome of human MSC primed using a mixture of cytokines, to mimic pro-inflammatory conditions encountered in vivo, by a quantitative high-resolution mass spectrometry based approach. The main output of the study concerns the identification of a list of specific proteins involved in inflammation and angiogenesis which are overrepresented in stimulated MSC secretome. The data complement a previous study on the secretome of mouse MSC stimulated under the same conditions. Comparative analyses reveal analogies and differences in the biological processes affected by overrepresented proteins in the two organisms. In particular, the key role of TIMP-1 for the anti-angiogenic properties of stimulated MSC secretome already observed in mouse is confirmed in human. Overall, these studies represent key steps necessary to characterize the different biology of MSC in the two organisms and design successful pre-clinical experiments as well as clinical trials.

### Keywords
Human msc secretome

### Affiliations
University of Milano
Department of Veterinary Medicine, University of Milano, Milano, Italy

### Submitter
gabriella tedeschi

### Lab Head
Dr Gabriella Tedeschi
Department of Veterinary Medicine, University of Milano, Milano, Italy


