### Accession
PXD026036

### Title
Potential binding partners of profilin protein from Leishmania donovani

### Description
For identifying potential ligands of Leishmania profilin (LdPfn) protein, full length profilin was cloned and expressed with GST tag. Only GST tag protein was used as a negative control. Employing pull down assay and with the help of LC-MS, the potential binding partners of profilin protein in Leishmania promastigotes were detected.

### Sample Protocol
For the pulldown assay, purified recombinant protein of GST-profilin (GSTPfn) or GST alone were incubated with 100μL of Glutathione Sepharose affinity beads for 2 hr. The unbound protein was removed and then, the recombinant proteins associated with the beads were incubated with 2mg of Leishmania parasite's protein extract (clear supernatant obtained after sonication and centrifugation) overnight at 4°C. The next day, the unbound proteins were removed, and the beads were washed five times with 1x PBS. Finally, the bound proteins were eluted by boiling the beads at 96°C for 5 min in 50ul of SDS PAGE gel loading buffer. Such eluates were run on 12% polyacrylamide gel. Three biological replicates of each of GST and GSTPfn pull-down samples were stained with silver nitrate, the gel was rinsed thrice with double distilled water; the respective lanes were excised, kept in labelled eppendorfs submerged with double distilled water, and submitted at the Mass Spectrometry facility, (Institute for Stem Cell Regeneration and Medicine, NCBS-TIFR Campus, Bellary Road, Bangalore Karnataka, India ) for analysis using LC-MS (Orbitrap Fusion™ Tribrid™ Mass Spectrometer). Only the protein hits with a score cut off 25, significance threshold p<0.05 were considered. The obtained data were used for searching the www.tritrypdb.org database (version 51) from the Leishmania donovani (BPK282A1) genome.

### Data Protocol
The parameters used for mass spectrometry analysis are being uploaded as an excel file “Parameters used.xls”. For data analysis, the proteins present in all three replicates or at least two replicates of GST-profilin (GSTPfn), but not present in any of the replicates of GST control, were being reported. Only the protein hits with a score cut off 25, significance threshold p<0.05 were considered.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Leishmania, Proteomics, Profilin, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Institute of Bioinformatics and Applied Biotechnology, Bangalore, India

### Submitter
Purna Sudha Bindu Ambaru

### Lab Head
Dr Chhitar. M. Gupta
Institute of Bioinformatics and Applied Biotechnology, Bangalore, India


