### Accession
PXD006152

### Title
TMT analysis of early proteome events in direct cardiomyocyte reprogramming

### Description
Direct reprogramming of fibroblasts into cardiomyocyte-like cells (iCM) holds great potential for heart regeneration and disease modeling and may lead to future therapeutic applications in human patients with heart disease. Currently, the application of this technology is limited by our lack of understanding of the molecular mechanisms which drive direct iCM reprogramming. Using a quantitative mass spectrometry-based proteomic approach we have identified the temporal global changes in protein abundance that occur during the initial phases of iCM reprogramming. Collectively, our results show systematic and temporally distinct alterations in the levels of specific functional classes of proteins during the initiating steps of reprogramming including extracellular matrix proteins, translation factors, and chromatin-binding proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Direct reprogramming of fibroblasts into cardiomyocyte-like cells (iCM) holds great potential for heart regeneration and disease modeling and may lead to future therapeutic applications in human patients with heart disease. Currently, the application of this technology is limited by our lack of understanding of the molecular mechanisms which drive direct iCM reprogramming. Using multiplexed TMT-based proteomics, we have identified the global changes in protein abundance that occur during the initial phases (48 and 72 hours) of iCM reprogramming. Collectively, our results show systematic and temporally distinct alterations in the levels of specific functional classes of proteins during the initiating steps of reprogramming including extracellular matrix proteins, translation factors, and chromatin-binding proteins.

### Data Protocol
Tandem MS spectra (raw file date stamp: 2015_05_01) collected across the 13 LC-MS/MS runs for 48 and 72 hr TMT 6plex experiments were analyzed by Proteome Discoverer (v2.1.0.81). In summary, the two sets of 13 fractions were analyzed by a Processing workflow containing (1) the MSAmanda algorithm to generate peptide spectrum matches by database search of tandem MS spectra with static TMT modifications against the UniProt-SwissProt mouse reference proteome database and common contaminants (2015-09, 46,631 sequences), (2) Percolator to calculate spectrum q-values based on reverse sequence database searches, and (3) a reporter ion quantifier module to extract TMT signal-to-noise values from MS/MS spectra. The processed data were combined in the Consensus workflow, which defined peptide and protein filters to limit the false discovery rate to  1%, then assembled peptides into protein groups with strict parsimony, and retained quantitative values from spectra that (1) were unique to the protein group, (2) had a co-isolation threshold of < 50%, and (3) had an average S/N of > 10. TMT S/N values were normalized between TMT reporter channels based on the total sum of the S/N values within each channel over all identified peptides. Protein abundances were calculated as the sum of normalized spectrum S/N values for each channel within each protein group. Protein groups and associated TMT abundances for each sample were exported to Excel. Only protein groups containing a minimum of 2 quantified unique spectra were considered for further analysis. The TMT abundance ratio for 48 or 72 hr MGT versus DsRed was calculated as the average abundance of MGT versus DsRed control.

### Publication Abstract
Direct reprogramming of fibroblasts into cardiomyocyte-like cells (iCM) holds great potential for heart regeneration and disease modeling and may lead to future therapeutic applications. Currently, application of this technology is limited by our lack of understanding of the molecular mechanisms that drive direct iCM reprogramming. Using a quantitative mass spectrometry-based proteomic approach, we identified the temporal global changes in protein abundance that occur during initial phases of iCM reprogramming. Collectively, our results show systematic and temporally distinct alterations in levels of specific functional classes of proteins during the initiating steps of reprogramming including extracellular matrix proteins, translation factors, and chromatin-binding proteins. We have constructed protein relational networks associated with the initial transition of a fibroblast into an iCM. These findings demonstrate the presence of an orchestrated series of temporal steps associated with dynamic changes in&#xa0;protein abundance in a defined group of protein pathways during the initiating events of direct reprogramming.

### Keywords
Orbitrap velos, Hcd, Fibroblast, Mef, Gmt

### Affiliations
Molecular Biology, Princeton University
Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, USA

### Submitter
Todd Greco

### Lab Head
Dr Ileana Cristea
Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, USA


