### Accession
PXD016438

### Title
SILAC-based quantitative proteomic analysis of Drosophila gastrula stage embryos mutant for fibroblast growth factor signalin

### Description
Quantitative mass spectrometry-based proteomic analyses in combination with genetics provide powerful tools in developmental cell signaling research. Drosophila melanogaster is one of the most widely used genetic models for studying development and disease. Here we combined quantitative proteomics with genetic selection to determine global changes in the proteome upon depletion of the Heartless (Htl) Fibroblast-Growth Factor (FGF) receptor signaling in Drosophila embryos at the gastrula stage. We present a robust, single generation SILAC (stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture) protocol for labeling proteins in early embryos and for the selection of homozygously mutant embryos at pre-gastrula stages using an independent genetic marker. Our analyses detected quantitative changes in the global proteome of htl mutant embryos during gastrulation. We identified distinct classes of down-regulated and up-regulated proteins and network analyses indicates functionally related groups of proteins in each class. In addition, we identified changes in the abundance of phosphopeptides. These data suggest that FGF signaling in the early embryo affects global changes in the abundance of metabolic, nucleoplasmic, cytoskeletal and transport proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Drosophila strains  Fly stocks were kept under standard conditions. The stock containing the loss of function haloAJ allele and a stock harboring a transgene with the halo genomic locus (p[halo]) were gifts of M.A. Welte (Univ. of Rochester, U.S.A.)31, 32. We used a chromosome harboring transposase Δ2,3 under the control of a hsp70 promoter to mobilize the p[halo] transposon insertion in the genome and isolated insertions on the autosomal balancer chromosomes TM3, TM6 and CyO. The loss-of-function htlAB42 allele was maintained with a TM6B, Hu, Tb, e, p[halo] balancer chromosome and crossed into a homozygous haloAJ background.  SILAC labeling of Saccharomyces cerevisiae  Saccharomyces cerevisiae BY4742 colonies were allowed to grow for 2 days at 30°C. A single colony was inoculated into 5 ml DOA (Dropout) – no Lysine media (synthetic complete) supplemented with 5 μl of heavy Lysine (Lys-8; stock: 30 mg/ml) (L-Lysine: 2HCl, U-13C6, 99%; U-15N2, 99%, Cambridge Isotope Laboratories, Inc.). The culture was incubated at 30°C for 24 hours. 5 μl of cell suspension was used to inoculate 5 ml of fresh media containing Lys-8 and was incubated for another 24 hours at 30°C in a shaking incubator. 1 ml of culture was used to inoculate 1 l of DOA media containing Lys-8. Incubation took place for another 24 hours at 30°C in a shaking incubator. 1 ml of the culture was saved for a label check and the remaining culture was pelleted by centrifugation. The yeast pellet was resuspended once in dH2O and centrifuged; the supernatant was discarded and the Lys-8 – labeled yeast was stored at -80°C. Previous protocols used the Lysine auxotrophic S. cerevisiae stock SUB62 9. We found that the SUB62 was insufficiently labeled in a Lys-8 containing medium with an  average global SILAC ratio of 1.4 and below suggesting a maximum of 58.4 % Lys-8 label (Suppl. Fig. S1A,B). SUB62 strain harbors the point mutation lys2-801, which was described as an amber mutation in the lys2 gene and therefore is, in principle, revertible in particular when grown in large cultures. We found that in 1 l cultures the SUB62 strain undergoes reversion to a lys prototrophic strain and that this effect appears to be enhanced in the presence of Lys-8 as a source (Suppl. Fig. S1). We therefore utilized the strain BY4742 that carries the lys2D0 mutation, which is a complete deletion of the lys2 gene and does not undergo reversions33. The labeling effiency with BY4742 was nearly complete exhibiting a global SILAC ratio of around 15 (Suppl. Fig. S1C,D).  SILAC labeling of Drosophila melanogaster  150 embryos were transferred onto a fresh apple juice agar plate supplemented with 300 µl of BY4742 Lys-8 yeast and enclosed with a fly cage. Larvae were allowed to hatch and to feed on Lys-8 labeled yeast at 25°C. Once the larvae started to penetrate the apple juice agarose dH2O was supplemented according to humidity and evaporation to keep the apple juice agarose/yeast mixture soft and moist. Pupae were gently transferred onto a fresh apple juice agar plate supplemented with a drop of BY4742 Lys-8 yeast as food for the hatching SILAC flies. Control flies of the respective genotype were raised according to the same protocol except for using yeast grown on standard Lys-0 containing media.  Protein extraction from yeast  1 ml of Lys-8 BY4742 culture was centrifuged, the supernatant was discarded and the yeast pellet was resuspended in 150 µl of 2M NaOH, 1 M β-Mercaptoethanol. 5 volumes of protein extract were supplemented with 1 volume of 20 % Trichloracetic acid (TCA) and mixed by inversion. The mixture was incubated on ice for 10 minutes and subsequently centrifuged at 14.000 rpm for 4 minutes at 4°C. The supernatant was removed, the pellet was washed with cold acetone and air dried. The pellet was resuspended in 8 M urea, 0.4 M ammonium bicarbonate and used for label check via mass spectrometry.  Embryo collection and protein lysis  The embryos were incubated on an agarose coated petri dish, covered with Halocarbon oil (27S; Sigma/Aldrich) and were staged under a dissection microscope in transmitted light. Embryos at the desired stages were dechorionated in 0.5% sodium hypochlorite solution and collected in microtubes (Protein LoBind tubes, Eppendorf), which were kept on dry ice. For lysis, RIPA buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 1 % NP40, 0.5 % Sodiumdesoxycholate, 0.1 % SDS) was supplemented with proteinase inhibitors (EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (complete), Roche) and phosphatase inhibitors (PhosSTOP, Roche); 100 μl of buffer was used for embryo lysis for each individual biological replicate. An equal number of embryos were homogenized with a bio-vortexer and incubated on ice for 20 minutes, followed by centrifugation for 10 minutes at 14.000 rpm at 4°C. The supernatant was transferred into a fresh microtube and protein concentration was determined (Peptide and Protein Quantification Kit, LavaPep)

### Data Protocol
Data analysis  Raw MS data were analyzed with MaxQuant 34 version 1.5.2.8 and searched against the Uniprot Drosophila January 2016 database. The modifications used for L-Lysine quantitations were: Lys-0: 12C6, 99%; 14N2, 99% (MW: 182.65); Lys-8: 13C6, 99%; 15N2, 99% (MW: 190.59). Default MaxQuant settings were used throughout with variable modifications set as Acetyl (Protein N-term); Oxidation (M); Deamidation (NQ); Gln->pyro-Glu; Phospho (STY) and fixed modifications set to Carbamidomethyl (C). Protein and peptide False Discovery Rate (FDR) cut offs were both set to 0.01, and a minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids. Only proteins with >1 peptide coverage were included in further analysis, with reversed and contaminant protein identifications removed. All quantified peptides were specified as the modified and unmodified versions. Statistical analysis was carried out with Perseus35 and Microsoft Excel. Protein network analyses of down- and up-regulated proteins were conducted with STRING version 10.5 (https://string-db.org/) 36. The settings used for the STRING  analyses were default settings including basic settings in which the network edges indicate the type of interaction evidence, and included text mining, experimental evidence, databases, co-expression, neighborhood, gene fusions or co-occurrence. The color code annotation for the edges is indicated in the figure legends. The minimum required interaction score was set on medium confidence (0.4) and the interactions were tested for the query proteins only. No clustering was applied and no enrichment analysis was performed.

### Publication Abstract
Quantitative proteomic analyses in combination with genetics provide powerful tools in developmental cell signalling research. <i>Drosophila melanogaster</i> is one of the most widely used genetic models for studying development and disease. Here we combined quantitative proteomics with genetic selection to determine changes in the proteome upon depletion of Heartless (Htl) Fibroblast-Growth Factor (FGF) receptor signalling in <i>Drosophila</i> embryos at the gastrula stage. We present a robust, single generation SILAC (stable isotope labelling with amino acids in cell culture) protocol for labelling proteins in early embryos. For the selection of homozygously mutant embryos at the pre-gastrula stage, we developed an independent genetic marker. Our analyses detected quantitative changes in the global proteome of <i>htl</i> mutant embryos during gastrulation. We identified distinct classes of downregulated and upregulated proteins, and network analyses indicate functionally related groups of proteins in each class. In addition, we identified changes in the abundance of phosphopeptides. In summary, our quantitative proteomic analysis reveals global changes in metabolic, nucleoplasmic, cytoskeletal and transport proteins in <i>htl</i> mutant embryos.

### Keywords
Drosophila, Silac

### Affiliations
The Centre for Gene Regulation and Expression
Developmental Genetics Unit, Institute of Biology, University of Kassel, Germany

### Submitter
Sara ten Have

### Lab Head
Dr Arno Mueller
Developmental Genetics Unit, Institute of Biology, University of Kassel, Germany


