### Accession
PXD018679

### Title
Solute carrier family 12 member 2 as a proteomic and histological biomarker of dysplasia and neoplasia in ulcerative colitis

### Description
Ulcerative colitis (UC) patients have a greater risk of developing colorectal cancer through inflammation-dysplasia-carcinoma sequence of transformation. The histopathological diagnosis of dysplasia is therefore of critical clinical relevance, but dysplasia may be difficult to distinguish from inflammatory changes.  A proteomic pilot study on 5 UC colorectal dysplastic patients highlighted proteins differentially distributed between paired dysplastic, inflammatory and normal tissues. The best candidate marker was selected and immunohistochemistry confirmation was performed on AOM/DSS mouse model lesions, 37 UC dysplasia, 14 UC cancers, 23 longstanding UC, 35 sporadic conventional adenomas, 57 sporadic serrated lesions and 82 sporadic colorectal cancers.  Differential proteomics found 11 proteins significantly more abundant in dysplasia compared to inflammation, including Solute carrier family 12 member 2 (SLC12A2) which was confidently identified with 8 specific peptides and was below the limit of quantitation in both inflammatory and normal colon. SLC12A2 immunohistochemical analysis confirmed the discrimination of preneoplastic and neoplastic lesions from inflammatory lesions in mice, UC and in sporadic contexts. A specific SLC12A2 staining pattern termed “loss of gradient” reached 89% sensitivity, 95% specificity and 92% accuracy for UC-dysplasia diagnosis together with an inter-observer agreement of 95.24% (multirater κfree of 0.90; IC95%: 0.78 – 1.00). Such discrimination could not be obtained by Ki67 staining. This specific pattern was also associated with sporadic colorectal adenomas and cancers.  We found a specific SLC12A2 immunohistochemical staining pattern in precancerous and cancerous colonic UC-lesions which could be helpful for diagnosing dysplasia and cancer in UC and non-UC patients.

### Sample Protocol
Laser capture microdissection for epithelial cell enrichment was performed. We collected 5000 epithelial cells per sample (tissue section of 5 µm each). Microdissection was performed with Leica LMD 7000 (Leica Microsystems, Wetzlar, Germany). The sample processing for the proteomic study was performed using a citric acid antigen retrieval and double trypsin digestion protocol, as previously described by Longuespée et al. Methods 2016. The 15 peptide mixtures obtained were desalted and concentrated using C18 Tips (Thermo Scientific Pierce, Waltham, USA). Samples were dried using speed vacuum and stored at -80°C until further analysis. The 15 samples were each re-suspended in 10.5 µL of 100mM formate solution containing MassPREP Digestion Standard Mix 1 or 2 (Waters, Milford, USA) for a quantity corresponding to 50 fmoles of alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH) 1 protein from saccharomyces cerevisiae. Peptides separation was achieved by reverse-phase liquid chromatography using a 2 dimensions (2D) ultra-performance liquid chromatography (UPLC) on a nanoAcquity instrument (Waters, Milford, USA) as detailed previously.21 The first dimension separation was made at pH 10, on an X-Bridge BEH C18 column 5 µm (300 µm x 50 mm) and the second dimension was done after dilution using a trap column Symmetry C18, 5 µm (180 µm x 20 mm) at pH 3. The analytical column was an HSS T3 1.8 µm (75 µm x 250 mm) (Waters). On the first column, samples were loaded at 2 µL/min (20 mM ammonium formate solution adjusted to pH 10) and subjected to three isocratic elution steps (13.3%, 19% and 65% ACN respectively). After a 10/1 online dilution to pH 3, each eluted fraction was desalted on the trap column. Samples were then separated on the analytical column with a flow rate of 250 nL/min, solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) and solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) with a linear gradient as follows: 0 min, 99% A; 5 min, 93% A; 140 min, 65% A. The total run time for the separation of each fraction was 180 min. The 2D nano-UPLC was coupled to a Thermo Scientific Q Exactive Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA) equipped with a nanospray ESI source operated in positive mode. A Top10-MS/MS method was used for acquiring data. The parameters for MS spectrum acquisition were set as follows: m/z range from 400 to 1750, resolution of 70 000, Automatic Gain Control (AGC) of 1x106 or maximum injection time of 200 ms. The parameters for MS/MS spectrum acquisition were set as follows: isolation window of 2.0 m/z, a stepped Normalized Collision Energy (NCE) of 21.5, 25 and 28.8, resolution of 17 500, AGC target of 1x105 or maximum injection time of 200 ms. A dynamic exclusion of 10s was used.

### Data Protocol
The analysis of the raw spectra was performed using MaxQuant 1.5.2.8. for the protein identifications and Label free quantification (LFQ). The parameters of this analysis were as follows: instrument type Orbitrap, Uniprot human database release 2015-01, N-acetylations (N-term), phosphorylations (STY) and oxidations (M) were selected as variable modifications and carbamidomethylations (C) as fixed modifications, with a maximum of 5 modifications per peptide. We set the maximum number of missed cleavages at two, the minimal peptide length for identification at 7 amino acids and a need of at least two peptides per protein for identification with a minimum of one unique peptide. Data normalization was performed using the LFQ algorithm and the minimum ratio count for LFQ was set at 2. The main search tolerance was set at 4.5 ppm, the peptide and protein false discovery rates (FDR) were both set at 0.01 with the decoy mode set to reverse.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dysplasia associated to inflammation, Colorectal neoplasia, Label-free proteomics

### Affiliations
University of Liège
Laboratory of Translational Gastroenterology and Hepato-Gastroenterology and Digestive Oncology University of Liège,University Hospital CHU of Liège, Liège, Belgium

### Submitter
Angela-Maria Merli

### Lab Head
Dr Edouard Louis
Laboratory of Translational Gastroenterology and Hepato-Gastroenterology and Digestive Oncology University of Liège,University Hospital CHU of Liège, Liège, Belgium


