### Accession
PXD025457

### Title
Quantitative tyrosine phosphoproteome profiling of GAS6-AXL signaling network

### Description
Overexpression and amplification of AXL receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) has been found in several hematologic and solid malignancies. Activation of AXL by its ligand GAS6 can enhance tumor-promoting processes such as proliferation, migration, invasion, and survival. Despite the important role of AXL in cancer development, a deep and quantitative mapping of its signaling transduction has not been performed. Here, we used a mass spectrometry-based quantitative proteomic approach to characterize the temporal dynamics of the phosphotyrosine proteome of MDA-MB-231 cells stimulated with GAS6

### Sample Protocol
MDA-MB-231 cells (ATCC) were cultured in DMEM media with 10% (vol/vol) FBS, and 1% penicillin/streptomycin in a 5% CO2 incubator at 37 °C. Cells in tissue culture plates at 80% confluency were washed with PBS twice and incubated for 18 hours in serum free media before stimulation. Recombinant human GAS6 (400 ng/ml) was directly added to serum free media for 5 minutes, 10 minutes, 1 hour and 5 hours. After stimulation, cells were harvested in 8 M urea buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 8 M urea, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM β-glycerophosphate, and 5 mM sodium fluoride) sonicated, and then cleared by centrifugation at 15,000 x g at 4 °C for 20 min. Protein concentration of lysates was measured by BCA Protein Assay. 5 mg of protein lysates from each treatment condition was used for trypsin in-solution digestion. Briefly, the protein lysates were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide. After reduction and alkylation, the protein lysates were diluted in 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0 to a final concentration lower than 2 M urea and were subjected to TPCK-treated trypsin digestion on an orbital shaker at room temperature overnight. Digested tryptic peptides were acidified with 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to quench the digestion reaction and subjected to centrifugation at 10,000 x g at room temperature for 10 min. The resulting supernatants were desalted using SepPak C18 cartridge. Eluted peptides were lyophilized to dryness prior to phosphotyrosine peptide enrichment. Phosphotyrosine peptides were enriched using a phosphotyrosine peptides enrichment kit (PTM Scan, P-Tyr-1000; Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA). The enriched pTyr peptides eluted from P-Tyr-1000 beads were dried with Speed-Vac and reconstituted in 50 µl 100mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEABC) and mixed with 50 µg TMT Pro reagent that was dissolved in 10 µl anhydrous acetonitrile. After 1-hour incubation at RT, 10 μL of 5% hydroxylamine was added and incubated for 15 min at RT to quench the reaction. Peptides labeled by different TMT reagents were then mixed and dried with Speed-Vac. Dried peptides were reconstituted with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), desalted with C18 stage tips, dried with Speed-Vac and used for mass spectrometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer software suite (v 2.5; Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) was used for quantitation and database searches. The MS/MS data were searched using the SEQUEST search algorithm against a Uniport database supplemented with frequently observed contaminants. Search parameters used for SEQUEST search algorithm included trypsin as protease with full specific and a maximum of two allowed missed cleavage; carbamidomethylation of cysteine and TMT-Pro tags (+304.207 Da) on lysine residues or peptide N-terminus as a fixed modification; oxidation at methionine, deamidation at asparagine and glutamine, phosphorylation at serine/threonine and tyrosine as variable modifications. The precursor tolerance was set at 10 ppm while the fragment match tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. The PSMs, peptides and proteins were filtered at 1% false discovery rate cut-off calculated using decoy database searches. The probability of an identified phosphorylation of specific Ser/Thr/Tyr residue on each identified phosphopeptide was determined from the PhosphoRS algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Axl, Mas spectrometry, Breast cancer, Tmt

### Affiliations
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905
Mayo Clinic

### Submitter
Akhilesh Pandey

### Lab Head
Dr Akhilesh Pandey
Mayo Clinic


