### Accession
PXD026184

### Title
T1D B lymphocyte cell line Immunopeptidome

### Description
HLA-I and HLA-II immunopeptidome of B cells from healthy control and Type 1 diabetics sharing similar HLA alleles.

### Sample Protocol
HLA-I and HLA-II peptides were enriched from B cell lysates sequentially using W6/32 and HB145 antibody-crosslinked protein-A beads. Immunopeptide samples were analyzed using nanoLC-MS/MS under data dependent acquisition mode.

### Data Protocol
We employed MaxQuant (version 1.6.10.43) to search and sequence the peak lists against the UniProt database (Human 20412 entries, 2018). The enzyme specificity was set as unspecific. N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were used as variable modifications. Immunopeptidomics analysis was performed applying a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 for peptide identifications and no protein FDR. Possible sequence matches were restricted to 8 to 25 amino acids.

### Publication Abstract
Peptide ligands presented by human leukocyte antigen (HLA) molecules on the cell surface represent the immunopeptidome that could be utilized for identification of antigenic peptides for immunotherapy and prevention of autoimmune diseases. Although T-cells are well-known key players in the destruction of pancreatic beta-cells in type 1 diabetes (T1D), increasing evidence points toward a role for B-cells in disease pathogenesis. However, as antigen presenting cells, little is known about the comprehensive immunopeptidome of B cells and their changes in the context of T1D. We performed HLA allele-specific quantitative immunopeptidomics using B lymphocytes derived from T1D patients and healthy controls. Hundreds of HLA-I and HLA-II immunopeptides were identified as differentially regulated in T1D per HLA allele for B cells sharing identical HLA alleles. The results were further validated using additional T1D and healthy B cells with partially overlapped HLA alleles. Differentially expressed immunopeptides were confirmed with targeted proteomics and for reactivity using known T-cell assays in the immune epitope database. Considering samples with identical HLA alleles are difficult to obtain for T1D and other similar HLA-restricted diseases, our work represents a viable approach to better understand HLA allele-specific antigen presentation and may facilitate identification of immunopeptides for therapeutic applications in autoimmune diseases. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD026184.

### Keywords
Hla-i, Human, B cell, Allele, T1d, Immunopeptidome, Hla-ii

### Affiliations
UNCG
University of North Carolina at Greensboro

### Submitter
Qibin  Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Qibin Zhang
University of North Carolina at Greensboro


