### Accession
PXD030677

### Title
A deep comparative metaproteomic study on the complex wastewater treatment microbiome

### Description
We performed a deep, comparative metaproteomics study on three aerobic granular sludge wastewater treatment communities to determine the core microbiome and the occurrence and relative abundance of the central nutrient-removing organisms. Our systematic study underscores the importance of metaproteomics when characterizing complex microbiomes, and the necessity of accurate reference sequence databases to improve the comparison between studies and omics approaches.

### Sample Protocol
Granules from wastewater treatment plants were freeze-dried and ground with a mortar and pestle. Two hundred milligrams glass beads (150–212 μm) and 350 μL of both TEAB and B-PER buffer were added to approximately 5 mg starting material. Bead beating was performed for 20 s (3) with a 30 s pause between cycles. Samples were centrifuged and freeze/thaw cycles (3) were performed by freezing the sample at -80°C and subsequently thawing at 95°C in a water bath. The samples were centrifuged, and the supernatant was collected. Protein precipitation was performed by adding TCA at a ratio of TCA to supernatant of 1:4. The samples were incubated at 4°C for 10 min. and then centrifuged at 14,000 r.p.m. for 5 min. The pellets were washed with 200 μL ice-cold acetone. The protein pellets were reconstituted in 250 µL 6 M urea and the protein extracts were then reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 60 min. at 37°C. Next, the samples were alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) and incubated in the dark at room temperature for 30 min. Thereafter, the samples were diluted with 200 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AmBiC) to <1 M urea. Finally, sequencing-grade trypsin was added (Promega) at an approximate enzyme to protein ratio of 1:50 and incubated at 37°C overnight. The obtained peptides were purified by solid-phase extraction using Oasis HLB solid-phase extraction well plates (Waters) according to the protocol provided by the manufacturer. Purified peptide fractions were then dried in a SpeedVac concentrator, reconstituted in aqueous 0.1% TFA and separated (according to the instructions supplied by the manufacturer) into 8 fractions using the Pierce high pH reversed-phase fractionation kit (Thermo Scientific). For plants 2 (DX) and 3 (GW) the fractions 2+6, 3+7, 4+8 were combined. The obtained samples were dried in a SpeedVac concentrator and dissolved in water containing 3% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid, resulting in 8 fractions for plant 1 (DX), 4 fractions for plant 2 (GW) and 3 (SP).

### Data Protocol
Briefly, the prepared fractions were analyzed using a one-dimensional shotgun proteomic approach on a nano-liquid-chromatography system consisting of an EASY nano-LC 1200 equipped with an Acclaim PepMap RSLC RP C18 separation column (50 μm  150 mm, 2 μm and 100 Å) coupled to a QE Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Germany). The flow rate was maintained at 350 nL/min using as solvent A water containing 0.1% formic acid, and as solvent B 80% acetonitrile in water and 0.1% formic acid. The Orbitrap was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode acquiring peptide signals at 70 K resolution and a max IT of 100 ms, where the top 10 precursor ions were isolated by a 2.0 m/z window with an 0.1 m/z isolation offset, and fragmented at an NCE of 28. The AGC target was set to 2e5 at a max. IT of 75 ms and 17.5 K resolution. Mass peaks with unassigned charge state, singly, 7 and >7, were excluded from fragmentation. For the prepared four fractions from the plants 2 (GW) and 3 (SP) analysis in duplicates was performed using a linear gradient from 5% to 28% solvent B for 115 min and finally to 55% B for additional 60 min. The individual fractions (1–8) obtained from plant 1 were analysed by single injections using a short linear gradient from 6% to 26% solvent B for 45 min and finally to 50% B over additional 10 min. Mass spectrometric raw data (obtained from the fractions of each plant) were combined and analysed using PEAKS StudioX by database searching against the metagenomic-constructed databases from predicted ORFs. Additional de novo sequencing was used as quality control. Redundant sequences in the constructed databases were removed by using cd-hit. The cRAP protein sequences were included into the search and obtained from https://www.thegpm.org/crap/. Database search was performed setting carbamidomethylation (C) as fixed and oxidation (M) and deamidation (N/Q) as variable modifications, allowing up to 2 missed cleavages and 2 variable modifications per peptide. Peptide-spectrum matches were filtered against 1% false discovery rate and protein identifications with ≥2 unique peptides were considered as significant.

### Publication Abstract
The tremendous progress in sequencing technologies has made DNA sequencing routine for microbiome studies. Additionally, advances in mass spectrometric techniques have extended conventional proteomics into the field of microbial ecology. However, systematic studies that provide a better understanding of the complementary nature of these 'omics' approaches, particularly for complex environments such as wastewater treatment sludge, are urgently needed. Here, we describe a comparative metaomics study on aerobic granular sludge from three different wastewater treatment plants. For this, we employed metaproteomics, whole metagenome, and 16S rRNA amplicon sequencing to study the same granule material with uniform size. We furthermore compare the taxonomic profiles using the Genome Taxonomy Database (GTDB) to enhance the comparability between the different approaches. Though the major taxonomies were consistently identified in the different aerobic granular sludge samples, the taxonomic composition obtained by the different omics techniques varied significantly at the lower taxonomic levels, which impacts the interpretation of the nutrient removal processes. Nevertheless, as demonstrated by metaproteomics, the genera that were consistently identified in all techniques cover the majority of the protein biomass. The established metaomics data and the contig classification pipeline are publicly available, which provides a valuable resource for further studies on metabolic processes in aerobic granular sludge.

### Keywords
Metaproteomics, Prokaryotes, Wastewater treatment microbiome

### Affiliations
TUD
Department of Biotechnology, TU Delft, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Martin Pabst

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Pabst
Department of Biotechnology, TU Delft, The Netherlands


