### Accession
PXD029584

### Title
Adaptiven mechanism of antibiotic resistant Staphylococus aureus to host environment

### Description
Antibiotic-resistant bacteria can escape from the killing of host immune and settle in the host to form persistent infections. In this study, we investigated the environmental adaptation mechanism of resistant Staphyloccus aureus (S. aureus) to host environment by Data-independent acquisition based quantitative proteomics and functional validation. The detection of growth curve and MIC indicated that ciprofloxacin-resistant S. aureus (Cip-R) showed survival advantage over sensitive strain. Cip-R also exhibited stronger adhesion and invasion ability than sensitive bacteria. Cip-R stimulation resulted in the production of stronger inflammatory factors of the host cells. Proteomics study combined with biochemical validations showed that Cip-R obtains adaptability to host via up-regulation of TCA cycle and down-regulation of ribosome metabolism and protein folding to maintain energy to support their survival. Thus, this study will help us to further explain the growth strategy of resistant bacteria to adapt to the host environment, and provide important information for the development of new antibacterial drugs.

### Sample Protocol
In accordance with the above mentioned method, Infection and uninfection group bacteria was obtained. 800 μL SDS Buffer (Beyotime, Jiangsu, China) and 18 μL Inhibitor cocktail for general use, MS-SAFE, Protease Inhibitor (1:50) (Beyotime, Jiangsu, China) and 9 μL Phenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride (1:100) (Beyotime, Jiangsu, China) were added. Fully mixed, ultrasonic crushing (30% power, 4s on, 3s off, 15min, 0 ℃). Finallycentrifugation at 4 ℃ at 17000 g for 30 minutes. Appropriate amount of 8 M urea was added to 1 mg protein. The operation of protein alkylation and reduction was the same as the methods described by a previous study{Dong, 2021 #25}. The typtic digestion was performed at 37 ℃ for 18 h. The digested peptides was collected by centrifugation at 12000 g for 15 min, and washed once with 75 ul TEAB. The peptides are lyophilized by a high-speed refrigerated centrifuge (Xiang Yi Company, China). All samples were re-dissolved in solution A (5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). Removing the salt with Mono Tip C18 (GL, Japan). The desalted peptides are lyophilized by a high-speed refrigerated centrifugeagain.

### Data Protocol
Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo, United States) mass spectrometer was used for protein detection. The peptide was re-dissolved with solution A and adjusted to a concentration to 0.6 ug/ul, and centrifuged at 17000 g for 30 min to remove the insoluble precipitate. 1 ul samples of each group were thoroughly mixed with 2* iRT (Biognosys, Switzerland) according to the manufacture’s instructions. The mixture was transferred to the sample tube for establishing data-dependent acquisition (DDA) database. The remaining 9 ul samples of each group were thoroughly mixed with 2* iRT. The mixture was transferred to the sample tube for DIA.  Then DDA database parameters were set as follows : ion source type: NSI, positive ion reflection mode, ion transfer tube temperature: 320°C, pressure mode: standard, default charge state: 2. Do data dependent experiment if no target species are found: False, MSn Level: 1, detection type: ion trap, ion trap resolution: 60 K, mass range: normal, scanning range (m/z): 400- 1500, the longest injection time: 50 ms, Mass tolerance low: 10, Mass tolerance high: 10. Filter type: intensity threshold, signal intensity: 50000, separation mode: quadrupole, activation type: HCD, neutral loss mass: 50.0001, collision energy (%): 30. The DIA database parameters were set as follows primary scan range: 350-1200 m/z, secondary scan range: 200-2000 m/z, others are the same  The acquired raw data of DDA and the S. aureus_.fasta.fasta database from Uniprot: http://www.uniprot.org./ were used to establish the DDA database via Spectronant  software (, Biognosys AG, Switzerland). Proteome Discoverer () was used, the search engine used was Sequest HT (version 2.5), download Staphylococcus aureus 8325 from Uniprot (download at uniprot on March 29, 2017) protein database. The protein sequence of iRT standard peptides was integrated into the protein database of S. aureus NCTC 8325 to form a total protein database file in .Fasta format. The parameters of the database search are set as follows: Precursor Mass tolerance, 10 ppm; Fragment Mass tolerance, 0.02 Da; Enzyme, Trypsin; fixed modification to Carbamidomethylation (C); minimum peptide length is 7 amino acids; unique peptide ≥ 1; FDR <1%. Then the acquired raw data of DIA were identified and quantified according to the DDA database. The result was analyzed with statistical t-test and the criteria of fold change > 1.5 with p <0.05 was used to define the differentially expressed proteins (DEPs). Three independent biological experiments were repeated.   , and . ClueGO (version 2.3.3) plug-in of Cytoscape (version 3.5.0) was used for gene ontology (GO) annotation and Kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes (KEGG) pathway enrichment analysis of DEPs. The previous analysis results are visualized with Cytoscape for subsequent analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Antibiotic-resistant bacteria can escape host immune killing and settle in the host to form persistent infections. In this study we investigated the adaptive mechanism of resistant <i>Staphylococcus aureus</i> to the host environment by data-independent acquisition-based quantitative proteomics and functional validation. The growth curve and minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) indicated that ciprofloxacin-resistant (Cip-R) <i>S. aureus</i> showed a survival advantage over sensitive strains. Cip-R also exhibited a stronger invasion and biofilm formation ability than sensitive bacteria. Cip-R stimulation resulted in the improved production of inflammatory factors of the host cells. Proteomics study combined with biochemical validations showed that Cip-R obtained adaptability to the host via upregulation of the tricarboxylic acid cycle (TCA cycle) and downregulation of ribosome metabolism and protein folding to maintain energy to support Cip-R's survival. Thus, this study will help us to further explain the growth strategy of resistant bacteria to adapt to the host environment, and provide important information for the development of new antibacterial drugs.

### Keywords
Host environment, Ciprofloxacin-resistant, Proteomics, Staphylococcus aureus

### Affiliations
Jinan univercity
MOE Key Laboratory of Tumor Molecular Biology and Key Laboratory of Functional Protein Research of Guangdong Higher Education Institutes, Institute of Life and Health Engineering, College of Life Science and Technology, Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632, China.

### Submitter
Liu jiajia

### Lab Head
Dr Qing-Yu He
MOE Key Laboratory of Tumor Molecular Biology and Key Laboratory of Functional Protein Research of Guangdong Higher Education Institutes, Institute of Life and Health Engineering, College of Life Science and Technology, Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632, China.


