### Accession
PXD003050

### Title
Comprehensive proteome profiling of nuclear and cytoplasmic fractions of rat Sertoli cells.

### Description
The Sertoli cells (Sc) of 5 days (infant) and 12 days (pubertal) old rat were isolated and cultured in triplicates. Nuclear and cytoplasmic fractionation was done for both the cases. All the four protein fractions (nuclear and cytoplasm of infant and pubertal Sc) were anaysed using Lc-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
Sertoli cell (Sc) from the testes of 5 days and 12 days old rat were isolated and cultured in triplicates as described in the concerned publication. Nuclear and cytoplasmic fractionation of the cultured cells were performed using NE-PER (Nuclear and Cytoplasmic extraction kit, from Thermo Scientific). All the three replicates of each of the four cellular fractions (nuclear and cytoplasm of 5 days and 12 days old rat Sc) were diluted in 10mM ammonium bicarbonate followed by reduction with 25mM Dithiothreitol and alkylation with 55mM Iodoacetamide. The samples were then incubated with trypsin for overnight @ 37 degree C (trypsin:protein :: 1:10).

### Data Protocol
Data processing was done using TPP (Trans-Proteomics Pipeline) as described in the concerned publication. Briefly, raw files (.wiff) were first converted to mzML format using msconvert from Proteowizard using vendor specific peak picking algorithm. All the files were independently searched against rat protein sequence from UniProt database using  X!Tandem and Comet search followed by peptide validation using PeptideProphet. The resultant pep.xml files obtained from both the search algorithms and the replicates were merged using iProphet.

### Publication Abstract
Differential next-generation-omics approaches aid in the visualization of biological processes and pave the way for divulging important events and/or interactions leading to a functional output at cellular or systems level. To this end, we undertook an integrated Nextgen transcriptomics and proteomics approach to divulge differential gene expression of infant and pubertal rat Sertoli cells (Sc).Unlike, pubertal Sc, infant Sc are immature and fail to support spermatogenesis. We found exclusive association of 14 and 19 transcription factor binding sites to infantile and pubertal states of Sc, respectively, using differential transcriptomics-guided genome-wide computational analysis of relevant promoters employing 220 Positional Weight Matrices from the TRANSFAC database. Proteomic SWATH-MS analysis provided extensive quantification of nuclear and cytoplasmic protein fractions revealing 1,670 proteins differentially located between the nucleus and cytoplasm of infant Sc and 890 proteins differentially located within those of pubertal Sc. Based on our multi-omics approach, the transcription factor YY1 was identified as one of the lead candidates regulating differentiation of Sc.YY1 was found to have abundant binding sites on promoters of genes upregulated during puberty. To determine its significance, we generated transgenic rats with Sc specific knockdown of YY1 that led to compromised spermatogenesis.

### Keywords
Sertoli cell, Nucleus, Cytoplasm

### Affiliations
National Institute of Immunology, New Delhi, India

### Submitter
Kamal Mandal

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Subeer S. Majumdar
National Institute of Immunology, New Delhi, India


