### Accession
PXD031993

### Title
An anti-influenza A virus microbial metabolite acts by degrading viral endonuclease PA

### Description
The emergence of new highly pathogenic and drug-resistant influenza strains urges the development of novel therapeutics for influenza A virus (IAV). Here, we report the discovery of an anti-IAV microbial metabolite called APL-16-5 that was originally isolated from the plant endophytic fungus Aspergillus sp. CPCC 400735. APL-16-5 binds to both the E3 ligase TRIM25 and IAV polymerase subunit PA, leading to TRIM25 ubiquitination of PA and subsequent degradation of PA in the proteasome. This mode of action conforms to that of a proteolysis targeting chimera which employs the cellular ubiquitin-proteasome machinery to chemically induce the degradation of target proteins. Importantly, APL-16-5 potently inhibits IAV and protects mice from lethal IAV infection. Therefore, we have identified a natural microbial metabolite with potent in vivo anti-IAV activity and the potential of becoming a new IAV therapeutic. The antiviral mechanism of APL-16-5 opens the possibility of improving its anti-IAV potency and specificity by adjusting its affinity for TRIM25 and viral PA protein through medicinal chemistry.

### Sample Protocol
The tryptic peptides were dissolved in solvent A (0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile/ in water), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (25-cm length, 75/100 μm i.d.). Peptides were separated with a gradient from 6% to 24% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) over 70 min, 24% to 35% in 14 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 450 nL/min on a nanoElute UHPLC system (Bruker Daltonics).

### Data Protocol
The peptides were subjected to Capillary source followed by the timsTOF Pro (Bruker Daltonics) mass spectrometry. The electrospray voltage applied was 1.60 kV. Precursors and fragments were analyzed at the TOF detector, with a MS/MS scan range from 100 to 1700 m/z. The timsTOF Pro was operated in parallel accumulation serial fragmentation (PASEF) mode. Precursors with charge states 0 to 5 were selected for fragmentation, and 10 PASEF-MS/MS scans were acquired per cycle. The dynamic exclusion was set to 30.  The resulting MS/MS data were processed using MaxQuant search engine (version1.6.15.0). Tandem mass spectra were searched against human SwissProt database (Home-sapiens-9606-SP-20201214.fasta, 20395 entries) concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 40 ppm in First search and 40 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.04 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification, and acetylation on protein N-terminal and oxidation on Met, acetylation/succinylation/ubiquitylation/crotonylation/2-ohi-butyrylation/malonylation/… on Lys/phosphorylation on Ser, Thr, Tyr were specified as variable modifications. TMT-6plex quantification was performed. FDR was adjusted to < 1%. The cut-off values for identification of potential hits was set at log2FoldChange<0.5 & P value <0.05.

### Publication Abstract
The emergence of new highly pathogenic and drug-resistant influenza strains urges the development of novel therapeutics for influenza A virus (IAV). Here, we report the discovery of an anti-IAV microbial metabolite called APL-16-5 that was originally isolated from the plant endophytic fungus Aspergillus sp. CPCC 400735. APL-16-5 binds to both the E3 ligase TRIM25 and IAV polymerase subunit PA, leading to TRIM25 ubiquitination of PA and subsequent degradation of PA in the proteasome. This mode of action conforms to that of a proteolysis targeting chimera which employs the cellular ubiquitin-proteasome machinery to chemically induce the degradation of target proteins. Importantly, APL-16-5 potently inhibits IAV and protects mice from lethal IAV infection. Therefore, we have identified a natural microbial metabolite with potent in vivo anti-IAV activity and the potential of becoming a new IAV therapeutic. The antiviral mechanism of APL-16-5 opens the possibility of improving its anti-IAV potency and specificity by adjusting its affinity for TRIM25 and viral PA protein through medicinal chemistry.

### Keywords
Influenza a virus; proteolysis-targeting chimeras; trim25; phenalenone derivatives; microbial metabolites; antiviral drug

### Affiliations
Institute of Medicinal Biotechnology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical School

### Submitter
Jianyuan Zhao

### Lab Head
Dr Shan Cen
Institute of Medicinal Biotechnology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical School


