### Accession
PXD000214

### Title
Identification of Autocrine Growth Factors Secreted by CHO cells for Applications in Single Cell Cloning Media

### Description
To identify low abundance autocrine growth factors in CHO cell conditioned media, we utilized a label-free shotgun proteomics approach.  CHO cell conditioned media were harvested from fed batch bioreactors and concentrated using methanol/chlorofrom precipitation. Proteins in the samples were then subjected to proteolysis with trypsin, and then subjected to primary fractionation using a SCX column, followed by RP liquid chromatography MS (LC-MS) with a LTQ Orbitrap Velos instrument using the data dependent acquisition (DDA) method. The MS system was set up and run with a method which enabled fast acquisitions of high quality peptide precursor and fragment ion data, with the desired precursor mass accuracy of ±5 ppm.  For the LTQ Orbitrap Velos MS, the data-dependent MS/MS analytical workflow in positive ion mode was used.  Each precursor survey scan (m/z: 300 to 1800) by the Orbitrap mass analyzer (resolution = 60,000 FWHM) was linked to 10 MS/MS events using the 2D ion trap CID approach, with dynamic ion exclusion set at 60 s.  This value was determined based on the observed mean peptide chromatographic peak width.  All other instrument parameters were set up according to the manufacturer’s suggested values for complex peptide samples.  The nano-ESI source was fitted with a 30-µm stainless steel nano-bore emitter (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with 1.7 kV applied near the tip. Raw data files from the LTQ Orbitrap Velos MS were processed using the Proteome Discoverer 1.3 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  The LC-MS data were searched against the human (Homo sapiens; UniProtKb, updated in August 2012, 45 848 entries), mouse (Mus musculus; UniProtKb, updated in August 2012, 31 528 entries) and chinese hamster (Cricetulus griceus; UniprotKb, updated in August 2012, 24 609 entries)  protein databases using the Sequest search engine for the LTQ Orbitrap Velos LC-MS data, assuming tryptic digestion with precursor ions to fall within 10 ppm of projected m/z values and a fragment  ion mass tolerance of 0.5 m/z.  The specified search parameters were carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification, oxidation of methionine as dynamic modification and a maximum of two missed cleavage events.  Reverse database searching resulted in a specific false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% at the peptide and protein level.

### Sample Protocol
The CHO-K1 cell line (CCL-61, ATCC) was previously adapted to suspension culture in a proprietary in-house fully defined protein-free medium without components of animal origin. Suspension CHO-DG44 cells (Gibco catalog no. 12609- 012, Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) were previously adapted to HyQ PF-CHO (Hyclone, Logan, UT), and supplemented with 4 mM L-glutamine (Invitrogen), 0.1% Pluronic F-68 (Invitrogen), 0.1 mM sodium hypoxanthine, and 16 μM thymidine (1 × HT supplement, Invitrogen). The cells were subcultured every 3 days in 125 mL disposable Erlenmeyer shake flasks (Corning, Acton, MA) and incubated on a shaker platform at 110 rpm in a humidified 37 °C/8% CO2 incubator. Viable cell densities and viabilities were determined using an automated cell counter, Cedex (Innovatis, Malvern, PA), according to manufacturer’s instructions. Static cell cultures were incubated in a humidified 37 °C/5% CO2 incubator.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files from the LTQ Orbitrap Velos MS were processed using Proteome Discoverer 1.3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and those from Synapt G2 HDMS were processed using ProteinLynxGlobalSERVER (PLGS) v2.4 (Waters). On both software platforms, the LC−MS data were searched against the human (Homo sapiens; UniProtKb, updated in August 2012, 45 848 entries), mouse (Mus musculus; UniProtKb, updated in August 2012, 31528 entries) and Chinese hamster (Cricetulus griceus; UniprotKb, updated in August 2012, 24609 entries) protein databases separately, using the Sequest search engine for the LTQ Orbitrap Velos LC−MS data and the PLGS search engine for the Synapt G2 HDMS LC−MS data, assuming tryptic digestion with precursor ions to fall within 10 ppm of projected m/z values and a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.5 m/z. The specified search parameters were carbamidomethylation of cysteine as the fixed modification, oxidation of methionine as the dynamic modification, and a maximum of two missed cleavage events. Reverse database searching resulted in a specific false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% at the peptide level, and proteins were identified by at least 2 unique peptides. Protein IDs (e.g., protein name, gene name, accession no., entry name) from the three separate database searches for all 8 samples of the two bioreactor cultures were combined into a single data set. For proteins identified using Proteome Discoverer 1.3, their gene names could be obtained directly from its search results. On the other hand, proteins identified using PLGS v2.4 were assigned with protein accession nos., entry names, and protein names, instead of gene names. Gene names of these proteins were then manually assigned using their protein accession no.s to retrieve their gene names from the UniprotKb database. Some proteins retrieved from the UniprotKb database were assigned with open reading frame (ORF) identifiers instead of gene names. For these proteins, their protein names were used to find their respective gene names from human or mouse homologues based on reviewed Swiss-Prot information. Proteins without any assignable gene names were considered to be unique, and their own ORF identifier nos. were used in our data set as their gene names. For example, protein accession no. G3HXU8 retrieved an ORF identifier I79_015863 from the Chinese hamster database. Its protein name “Fibroblast growth factor 8” was used to retrieve the gene name of its human or mouse homologue (Fgf8) from the reviewed Swiss-Prot database. From the combined data set, protein IDs having the same gene name identified from the different sequence databases were eliminated by gene name filtering to avoid any repetition of gene names, which we used for subsequent analyses to identify secreted proteins and growth factors.

### Publication Abstract
Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cell lines are widely used for the expression of therapeutic recombinant proteins, including monoclonal antibodies and other biologics. For manufacturing, cells derived from a single-cell clone are typically used to ensure product consistency. Presently, fetal bovine serum (FBS) is commonly used to support low cell density cultures to obtain clonal cell populations because cells grow slowly, or even do not survive at low cell densities in protein-free media. However, regulatory authorities have discouraged the use of FBS to reduce the risk of contamination by adventitious agents from animal-derived components. In this study, we demonstrated how a complementary mass spectrometry-based shotgun proteomics strategy enabled the identification of autocrine growth factors in CHO cell-conditioned media, which has led to the development of a fully defined single-cell cloning media that is serum and animal component-free. Out of 290 secreted proteins that were identified, eight secreted growth factors were reported for the first time from CHO cell cultures. By supplementing a combination of these growth factors to protein-free basal media, single cell growth of CHO cells was improved with cloning efficiencies of up to 30%, a 2-fold improvement compared to unsupplemented basal media. Complementary effects of these autocrine growth factors with other paracrine growth factors were also demonstrated when the mixture improved cloning efficiency to 42%, similar to that for the conditioned medium.

### Keywords
Autocrine growth factors, Shotgun proteomics, Secreted proteins, Chinese hamster ovary cells

### Affiliations
Mass Spectrometry
Bioprocessing Technology Institute , Agency for Science, Technology and Research-A*STAR, 20 Biopolis Way 06-01, Singapore 138668, Republic of Singapore

### Submitter
U MING LIM

### Lab Head
Dr Say Kong Ng
Bioprocessing Technology Institute , Agency for Science, Technology and Research-A*STAR, 20 Biopolis Way 06-01, Singapore 138668, Republic of Singapore


