### Accession
PXD002768

### Title
Chicken spermatozoa protein extract analyzed by Top-down HRMS

### Description
Currently, evaluation of quality semen is based on traditional in vitro sperm tests as measures of motility, viability and acrosomic reaction. However, the results are not always well correlated with real male fertility. In the present study, we evaluated Intact Cell MALDI-TOF Mass Spectrometry (ICM-MS) method as diagnostic molecular tool to substitute in vitro tests in order to phenotype semen with more robustness. For that, we investigated a large male population of known fertility that included two highly different genetic lines (meat and egg laying lines). Our optimized ICM-MS-based method through automation and the construction of fertility-predictive mathematical models was able to discriminate individuals on their reproductive capacity in the two lines studied. Furthermore, we showed a better diagnostic accuracy than traditional in vitro sperm quality tests and demonstrated that differential markers presenting a high discriminating power between fertile and subfertile sperm cells in sperm were implicated in fertility processes. To characterize m/z peaks observed in ICM-MS spectra, we performed high-throughput top-down protein identification of sperm cell extracts. Therefore, we identified more than 75% of the m/z peaks, revealing that these comprises mostly degradation products of testis-specific proteins implicated in the most important functional pathways in sperm cells such as energy metabolism and structure/movement.

### Sample Protocol
Sperm protein extraction was performed by sonication in a 6M Urea 50mM Tris-HCl pH 8.8 buffer and ulterior centrifugation during 45 minutes at 13.000 rpm and 4ºC. Peptides/proteins contained in supernatants were subjected to fractionation through chromatographic separation on an UltiMate 3000 RSLC system controlled by Chromeleon version 6.80 SR13 software (Thermo Scientific Dionex, USA) using two different chromatographic approaches. First, proteins were separated by reversed phase HPLC using a Waters XBridge BEH C18 column (Waters, USA). A second approach was based in the separation by molecular weight using a Superdex 75 10/300 GL gel filtration column (GE Healthcare Life Sciences, USA) in 100mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer. Fractions obtained from each chromatographic procedure were dried, resuspended in formic acid 1% and analyzed by MALDI-TOF (Bruker UltrafleXtreme) to define its composition (1 µL of sample plus 1 µL of matrix composed of 20 mg/mL Sinapinic acid, 0,1% Trifluoroacetic acid, 50% acetonitrile in water).  All fractions were then analyzed by on-line nanoflow liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (nanoLC-MS/MS) on a dual linear ion trap Fourier Transform Mass Spectrometer (FT-MS) LTQ Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany) coupled to an Ultimate® 3000 RSLC Ultra High Pressure Liquid Chromatographer (Dionex, The Netherlands) controlled by Chromeleon Software (version 6.8 SR11; Dionex, The Netherlands). Ten microliters of each sample were injected using µL-pickup mode and loaded on a Dionex trap column (Monolithic PS-DVB PepSwift, 200 µm inner diameter x 5 mm long). Mobile phases consisted of (A) 0.1% formic acid, 97.9 % water, 2% acetonitrile (v/v/v) and (B) 0.1% formic acid, 15.9 % water, 84% acetonitrile (v/v/v). Biomolecules were automatically preconcentrated for 10 min at 10µL/min with 4% solvent B. The separation was conducted using a Dionex column (Monolithic PS-DVB PepSwift, 200 µm inner diameter x 5 cm long). The gradient consisted of 4-10% B for 1 min, 10-75% B for 60 min, 75 to 99% B for 1 min, constant 99% B 20 min and return to 4 % B in 1 min. The column was re-equilibrated for 15 min at 4% B between runs. The flow rate was set to 1 µL/min. The eluate was sprayed using a SilicaTip emitter with 30 μm inner diameter and 360 µm outer diameter (New Objective, Woburn, MA, USA) into a Thermo Finnigan Nanospray Ion Source 1. Standard mass spectrometric conditions for all experiments were spray voltage 1.3 kV, no sheath and auxiliary gas flow; heated capillary temperature, 250 °C; predictive automatic gain control (AGC) enabled, and an S-lens RF level of 70%. Data were acquired using Xcalibur software (version 2.1; Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). The LTQ Orbitrap Velos instrument was operated in positive mode in data-dependent mode using a high-high strategy, meaning that a FT-MS spectrum using the profile mode was followed by an FT-MS2 spectrum. Target resolution in the Orbitrap was set to R = 100,000. In the scan range of m/z 400-2000, the 10 most intense ions with charge states ≥2 were sequentially isolated and fragmented by HCD (Higher-Energy Collisional Dissociation) with normalized collision energy of 38% and wideband-activation enabled. Ion selection threshold was 500 counts for MS/MS with an isolation width = m/z 3. The maximum allowed ion accumulation times were 200 ms for full scans (2 microscans) and 500 ms for HCD-MS/MS measurements (3 microscans) in the Orbitrap analyzer. Target ion quantity for FT full MS was 1×106 and for MS2 was 5×105. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a repeat count of 3 and exclusion duration of 5000 secondes.

### Data Protocol
Proteo/peptidoform identification and structural characterization were performed using ProSight PC software v 3.0 SP1 (Thermo Fisher, San Jose). NanoLC-MS/MS raw files were automatically processed inside ProSightHT using cRAWler and THRASH algorithms to convert each precursor/fragmentation scan pair into monoisotopic neutral mass values. The process settings were: signal/noise: 3/1, minimum fragment intensity at 100, retaining only the top 5 most intense neutral fragment masses within a 100 Da window below 2000 Da). Automated searches were performed using the “Biomarker” search option against a database made via shotgun annotation from the Swiss-Prot Gallus gallus release from the UniProtKnowledgebase release 2012_06. Iterative search tree was designed to begin with high mass accuracy (both 10 ppm at the intact and fragment ion level) for monoisotopic precursors. If the top result matched with a p-score of ≤1 × 10−5 the search engine accepted this result as valid and the next search was executed. Two subsequent searches used larger intact mass tolerances (average precursors with 3 and 85 Da mass tolerance) if a result of sufficient quality could not be determined initially. For all searches, both delta mass feature and disulfide modifications were deactivated and the N-terminal post-translation modifications (acetylation and initial methionine cleavage) were considered. First hits with E-value ≤1 × 10−5 were considered positively identified with a minimum of 5 matching fragment ions. Low confidence proteoform identifications were manually controlled and independently analyzed using Sequence Gazer.

### Publication Abstract
Currently, evaluation of sperm quality is primarily based on in vitro measures of sperm function such as motility, viability and/or acrosome reaction. However, results are often poorly correlated with fertility, and alternative diagnostic tools are therefore needed both in veterinary and human medicine. In a recent pilot study, we demonstrated that MS profiles from intact chicken sperm using MALDI-TOF profiles could detect significant differences between fertile/subfertile spermatozoa showing that such profiles could be useful for in vitro male fertility testing. In the present study, we performed larger standardized experimental procedures designed for the development of fertility- predictive mathematical models based on sperm cell MALDI-TOF MS profiles acquired through a fast, automated method. This intact cell MALDI-TOF MS-based method showed high diagnostic accuracy in identifying fertile/subfertile males in a large male population of known fertility from two distinct genetic lineages (meat and egg laying lines). We additionally identified 40% of the m/z peaks observed in sperm MS profiles through a top-down high-resolution protein identification analysis. This revealed that the MALDI-TOF MS spectra obtained from intact sperm cells contained a large proportion of protein degradation products, many implicated in important functional pathways in sperm such as energy metabolism, structure and movement. Proteins identified by our predictive model included diverse and important functional classes providing new insights into sperm function as it relates to fertility differences in this experimental system. Thus, in addition to the chicken model system developed here, with the use of appropriate models these methods should effectively translate to other animal taxa where similar tests for fertility are warranted.

### Keywords
Spermatozoa, Top-down, Chicken

### Affiliations
INRAE-Nouzilly-PRC
INRA Centre val de Loire 5tours, France) UMR INRA 85 CNRS 7247 UFR IFCE Physiologie de la reproduction et des comportements PAIB2 platform

### Submitter
Labas Valerie

### Lab Head
Dr PAIB INRA platform, Mass spectrometry Laboratory, Valérie Labas
INRA Centre val de Loire 5tours, France) UMR INRA 85 CNRS 7247 UFR IFCE Physiologie de la reproduction et des comportements PAIB2 platform


