### Accession
PXD013771

### Title
Phosphoproteome and Proteome Time Series Analysis of R6/2 and WT Mice Striatum

### Description
Animal models play a critical role in the study of Huntington’s disease (HD), for example to elucidate underlying molecular mechanisms or to develop novel therapeutic venues. One of the first transgenic mouse models of HD, the R6/2 line, has been described in 1996 and has since become one of the most studied models of the disease (Mangiarini et al. 1996; Li, Popovic & Brundin 2005). R6/2 mice express the human exon 1 under control of the human huntingtin promoter at around 75% of the endogenous levels. The expression of the exon 1 with a CAG repeat length of around 115 evokes rapid disease progression and animals display multiple HD-associated neuropathological changes. First signs of disease can occur as early as three weeks and mice are severely impaired by the age of 8-12 weeks. The expected life span is 13-16 weeks (Li, Popovic & Brundin 2005).  Here we were interested in the changes occurring in the proteomic landscape as well as in phosphoproteomic signaling networks in the R6/2 mouse model as compared to wild type mice. To this end, we performed comprehensive quantitative phosphoproteome and proteome analyses of striatum of one, two, and three months old mice of both genotypes. A total of nine or more samples per group was analyzed according to the experimental layout shown above. To allow for accurate quantification, peptides of each sample were labelled using tandem mass tags (TMT) and replicates of different conditions were combined. Each combined sample contained an aliquot of a pooled sample consisting of 12 sample lysates. This pooled sample was intended to serve as a reference to allow for quantitative comparison between all combined samples.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue samples were homogenized using a micropestle in 8 M Urea lysis buff-er (8 M Urea, 75 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris, 10 mM Na4P2O7, 5 mM EGTA, 5 mM EDTA pH 8.2 supplemented with 10 mM NaF, 10 mM ?-Glycerophosphate, 2 mM NaV3O4 and Roche complete Mini Protease Inhibitor, SIGMA Phoshatase inhibitor cocktail 2 and 3 according to the manufacturer’s instructions). Extracts were further sonicated using the beaker resonator BR30 (Bandelin Electronic, Germany) with the reaction cup mount EH3 (Bandelin Electronic, Germany) in combination with the power supply unit SONOPLUS HD2070 (Bandelin Elec-tronics, Germany. Samples were then centrifuged at >14.000 g, 4°C for 20 min to remove tissue/cell debris and protein concentrations of the supernatants were determined using a Bradford assay. Aliquots containing 200 µg of protein of each striatum sample were further processed. Additionally, for the pooled sample, aliquots containing 175 µg protein of twelve striatum samples (originat-ing from both male and female, WT and R6/2 samples as well as different age points) were pooled before further processing. Next, disulfide bridges in all samples were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol and cysteine residues were alkylated by 55 mM iodoacetamide. LysC-trypsin mix (Promega) was added at an enzyme-to-protein ratio of 1:100. Samples were incubated for 4 h at room temperature, prior to 1:4 dilution with 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.2 and digestion was continued overnight.  The resulting peptide mixtures were acidified by the addition of TFA to a final concentration of 0.5% and subsequently desalted using C18 Sep-Pak columns (100 mg sorbent weight, Waters). Peptides were eluted with 50% ACN, 0.5% acetic acid, snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and lyophilized.  Peptides of each sample were labelled with the respective TMT-label following the vendor’s instructions and according to the labelling scheme shown in Ta-ble 6. After ensuring a labeling efficiency of >95%, samples of one replicate number were combined as shown in Table 1. Combined samples were desalt-ed by solid phase extraction on C18 Sep-Pak columns (100 mg sorbent weight, Waters). Samples were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen, lyophilized and subse-quently fractionated by high pH reversed phase chromatography. Briefly, ly-ophilisates were reconstituted in 20 mM ammonium formate (pH 10, buffer ”A”), loaded on-to an XBridge C18 200 4.6 mm column (Waters) operated with the Äkta Explorer system (GE Healthcare) and separated by applying a gradient of increasing buffer ”B” concentration (20 mM ammonium formate, 80% ACN, pH 10). The collected 40 fractions of eluting peptides were combined in a non-linear way to generate 10 fractions for each individual sample. Samples were frozen in liquid nitrogen and lyophilized. After desalting via C18 Sep-Pak col-umns (100 mg sorbent weight, Waters), aliquots of each fractionated sample were removed for proteome analysis. These aliquots were snap-frozen lyophi-lized, and reconstituted in 0.1% FA for LC MS/MS analysis. The remaining frac-tionated samples, were enriched for phosphopeptides using Fe3+-loaded NTA Superflow Agarose Beads (Qiagen) as described in (Mertins et al. 2013).  Peptide samples were loaded onto a reverse phase analytical column (packed in-house with C18 beads), resolved over 90 min by an acetonitrile gradient us-ing an UPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and directly electrosprayed via a nano electrospray ion source into a Q Exactive HF Plus instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The Q Exactive mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode to automatically switch between full scans in the orbitrap mass analyzer (R=60,000 at m/z 200) and the acquisition of HCD fragmentation spectra (MS/MS mode) of the 15 most abundant peptide ions in the Orbitrap.

### Data Protocol
All raw files acquired in this study were collectively processed with the MaxQuant software suite (version 1.5.7.13 (Cox & Mann 2008)) for peptide and protein identification and quantification using a mouse Swissprot database (version September 2017). Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were allowed as variable modifications. The minimum required peptide length was seven amino acids and up to two missed cleavages and three labeled amino acids were allowed. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 was selected for both protein and peptide identifications and a posterior error probability (PEP) below or equal to 0.1 for each peptide-to-spectral match was required. Match-between-runs was allowed across samples of the proteome and phosphopro-teome analysis, respectively. TMT-labels were corrected for batch-specific im-purities as indicated by the vendor.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Huntington's disease; phosphoproteome; proteome; r6/2; striatum

### Affiliations
Evotec, Martinsried, Germany
Evotec

### Submitter
Christoph Schaab

### Lab Head
Dr Christoph Schaab
Evotec, Martinsried, Germany


