### Accession
PXD025591

### Title
A proteomics database for CNS proteins of the great pond snail Lymnaea stagnalis

### Description
Benchmarking of a new proteomics database (LymSt-PDB) for the identification of proteins from the Central Nervous System (CNS) of Lymnaea stagnalis with LC-MS based proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
Experimental animals Specimens of Lymnaea stagnalis were raised in the breeding facility of the University of Sussex, where they were kept in 20–22 °C copper free water under 12 h light and dark cycle. They were fed on lettuce 3 times and a vegetable-based fish food twice a week. Preparation of snail CNS Whole CNS of 90 snails at the age of three months weighing approx. 1.5 g were prepared as follows: The shell of the snail was cut off, and the animal’s body removed carefully. The preparation was then pinned down in a Sylgard-coated dish containing HEPES buffered saline and dissected under a stereomicroscope (E-Zoom6, Edmund Optics, Barrington NJ, USA). The CNS was accessed by a dorsal body incision and isolated from the buccal mass by severing all the peripheral nerves and immediately placed in Eppendorf tubes on dry ice. Three tubes, with each containing 30 CNS, were stored at -80°C until the further stages of the experiment.   Protein extraction, digestion and prefractionation Frozen CNS samples were thawed for 30 min at RT before adding lysis buffer (6M urea / 2M thiourea in 10mM HEPES pH 8.0) and 30 ceramic beads (1.4 mm zirconium oxide beads) for homogenisation in a Precellys 24 Homogeniser (Bertin Instruments) using two cycles for 30 seconds at 6800 RPM with a 60 second break in between, followed by a centrifugation for 1h at 14000 x g to remove the debris. The supernatant was transferred to a fresh tube and the extracted proteins were reduced for 30 min in 10 mM dithiothreitol and alkylated for 30 min in 55 mM iodoacetamide (in the dark). Proteins were first pre-digested with LysC for at least 3h at RT and after dilution with 3 volumes of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer, the main digestion was performed with trypsin overnight at RT. Peptide samples (triplicates) were desalted with C18 Hypersep cartridges (Thermo Fisher) and eluates were concentrated in a SpeedVac concentrator (Savant) and prefractionated into 6 fractions using the IPG strip-based peptide fractionation method described by (Eravci et al., 2014).  LC-MS analysis 18 fractionated and desalted peptide samples (3 x 6 fractions) were analysed by a reversed-phase capillary nano liquid chromatography system (Ultimate 3000, Thermo Scientific) connected to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Samples were injected and concentrated on a trap column (PepMap100 C18, 3 µm, 100 Å, 75 µm i.d. x 2 cm, Thermo Scientific) equilibrated with 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid in water. After switching the trap column inline, LC separations were performed on a capillary column (Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 2 µm, 100 Å, 75 µm i.d. x 25 cm, Thermo Scientific) at an eluent flow rate of 300 nl/min. Mobile phase A contained 0.1 % formic acid in water, and mobile phase B contained 0.1% formic acid in 80 % acetonitrile, 20% water. The column was pre-equilibrated with 5% mobile phase B and peptides were separated using a gradient of 5–44% mobile phase B within 100 min. Mass spectra were acquired in a data-dependent mode utilising a single MS survey scan (m/z 350–1650) with a resolution of 60,000 in the Orbitrap, and MS/MS scans of the 15 most intense precursor ions with a resolution of 15,000. HCD-fragmentation was performed for all ions with charge states of 2+ to 5+ at 27% normalized collision energy using an isolation window of 1.4 m/z. The dynamic exclusion time was set to 20 s. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set to 3x106 for MS scans using a maximum injection time of 20 ms. For MS2 scans the AGC target was set to 1x105 with a maximum injection time of 25 ms.

### Data Protocol
MS and MS/MS raw data were analysed using the MaxQuant software package (version 1.6.12.0) with an implemented Andromeda peptide search engine (Tyanova et al., 2016). Data were searched against the FASTA formatted protein database of Lymnaea stagnalis (LymSt-PDB)

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Lymnaea stagnalis, Proteomics, Database

### Affiliations
University of Sussex
School of Life Sciences
Sussex Neuroscience School of Life Sciences University of Sussex Falmer, Brighton BN1 9QG United Kingdom

### Submitter
Murat Eravci

### Lab Head
Dr György Kemenes
Sussex Neuroscience School of Life Sciences University of Sussex Falmer, Brighton BN1 9QG United Kingdom


