### Accession
PXD043925

### Title
Urine-HILIC – An automated sample preparation for bottom-up urinary proteome profiling in clinical proteomics

### Description
Urine provides a diverse source of information related to health status and is ideal for clinical proteomics because of its ease of collection. To date, there is no standard operating procedure for reproducible and robust urine sample processing for mass spectrometry-based clinical proteomics. To address this need, a novel workflow was developed based on an on-bead protein capture, clean up, and digestion without the requirement from pre-processing steps such as precipitation. The workflow was applied to an acute kidney injury (AKI) pilot study. Urine from clinical samples and a pooled sample were subjected to automated sample preparation in a KingFisher™ Flex magnetic handling station using a novel urine-HILIC (uHLC) approach based on MagReSyn® HILIC microspheres. For benchmarking, the pooled sample was also prepared using a published protocol based on an on-membrane (OM) protein capture and digestion workflow. Peptides were analysed by LCMS in DIA mode using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UPLC coupled to a Sciex 5600 mass spectrometer. Data was searched in Spectronaut™ 17. Following statistical analysis, candidate protein markers were filtered at ≥ 2-fold change in abundance, ≥ 2 uniques peptides and ≤ 1% false discovery rate. Both workflows showed similar peptide and protein identifications in the pooled sample. The uHLC workflow was easier to set up and complete, having less hands-on time than the OM method. With fewer manuel processiing steps, a lower peptide and protein CV was observed in the uHLC technical replicates. Analysis of clinical samples revealed many significant, differentially abundant kidney injury-associated urinary proteins. The pilot data derived using this novel workflow provides information on the urinary proteome of patients with AKI. Further exploration in a larger cohort using this novel high-throughput method is warranted.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were allowed to thaw to RT. Urine (100 μL) was mixed with 300 uL of urine sample buffer (USB: 8M Urea, 2% SDS), and sequentially reduced and alkylated using DTT (10mM v/v; 30 min, RT) and IAA (30mM v/v; 30 min, RT-dark). Thereafter, an equal volume HILIC binding buffer (30% ACN/200mM Ammonium acetate pH 4.5) was added to the sample-USB mix (~ 410 μL final volume). The automated KingFisher HILIC workflow was then followed, as previously described.  Individual peptide samples were analysed using a Dionex UltiMate™ 3000 UHPLC in nanoflow configuration. Samples were inline desalted on an Acclaim PepMap C18 trap column (75 μm × 2 cm; 2 min at 5 μl/min using 2% MeCN/0.2% FA). Trapped peptides were gradient eluted and separated on a nanoEase M/Z Peptide CSH C18 Column (130 Å, 1.7 µm, 75 µm X 250 mm) (Waters Corp., Milford, Massachusetts, United States) at a flowrate of 300 nl/min with a gradient of 5 – 40 %B over 30 min for benchmarking and 60 min for the pilot study (A: 0.1% FA; B: 80% MeCN/0.1% FA).   Data was acquired using data-independent acquisition (DIA) - or Sequential Window Acquisition of all Theoretical Mass Spectra (SWATH) ​[12]​, using a TripleTOF® 5600 mass spectrometer (SCIEX, Massachusetts, USA). Eluted peptides were delivered into the mass spectrometer via a Nanospray® III ion source equipped with a 20 µm Sharp Singularity emitter (Fossil Ion Technology, Madrid, Spain). Source settings were set as: Curtain gas - 25, Gas 1 - 40, Gas 2 - 0, temperature – 0 (off) and ion spray voltage – 3 200 V.    Data was acquired using 48 MS/MS scans of overlapping sequential precursor isolation windows (variable m/z isolation width, 1 m/z overlap, high sensitivity mode), with a precursor MS scan for each cycle. The accumulation time was 50 ms for the MS1 scan (from 400 to 1100 m/z) and 20 ms for each product ion scan (200 to 1 800 m/z) for a 1.06 sec cycle time.

### Data Protocol
A spectral library was built in Spectronaut™ 17 software using default settings with minor adjustments as follows: segmented regression was used to determine iRT in each run; iRTs were calculated as median for all runs; the digestion rule was set as “Trypsin” and modified peptides were allowed; fragment ions between 300 and 1 800 m/z and ions with greater than 3 amino acids were considered; peptides with a minimum 3 and maximum 6 (most intense) fragment ions were accepted. This study specific spectral library was concatenated with an in-house generated urinary proteome spectral library (using Spectronaut™ “Search Archives” feature).    Raw SWATH (.wiff) data files were analyzed using Spectronaut™ 17. The default settings that were used for targeted analysis are described in brief as follows: dynamic iRT retention time prediction was selected with correction factor for window 1; mass calibration was set to local; decoy method was set as scrambled; the FDR, based on mProphet approach, was set at 1% on the precursor, peptide and protein group levels; protein inference was set to “default” which is based on the ID picker algorithm, and global cross-run normalisation on median was selected. The final urinary proteome spectral library (peptides – 20 616, protein groups – 2 604) was used as a reference for targeted data extraction.    Default settings were used for state comparison analysis using a t-test (null hypothesis that no change in protein abundance was observed between the two groups). The t-test was performed on the log2 ratio of peptide intensities that corresponded to individual proteins. The p-values were corrected for multiple testing using the q-value approach to control false discovery rate.

### Publication Abstract
Urine provides a diverse source of information related to a patient's health status and is ideal for clinical proteomics due to its ease of collection. To date, most methods for the preparation of urine samples lack the throughput required to analyze large clinical cohorts. To this end, we developed a novel workflow, urine-HILIC (uHLC), based on an on-bead protein capture, clean-up, and digestion without the need for bottleneck processing steps such as protein precipitation or centrifugation. The workflow was applied to an acute kidney injury (AKI) pilot study. Urine from clinical samples and a pooled sample was subjected to automated sample preparation in a KingFisher&#x2122; Flex magnetic handling station using the novel approach based on MagReSyn<sup>&#xae;</sup> HILIC microspheres. For benchmarking, the pooled sample was also prepared using a published protocol based on an on-membrane (OM) protein capture and digestion workflow. Peptides were analyzed by LCMS in data-independent acquisition (DIA) mode using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UPLC coupled to a Sciex 5600 mass spectrometer. The data were searched in Spectronaut&#x2122; 17. Both workflows showed similar peptide and protein identifications in the pooled sample. The uHLC workflow was easier to set up and complete, having less hands-on time than the OM method, with fewer manual processing steps. Lower peptide and protein coefficient of variation was observed in the uHLC technical replicates. Following statistical analysis, candidate protein markers were filtered, at &#x2265;8.35-fold change in abundance, &#x2265;2 unique peptides and &#x2264;1% false discovery rate, and revealed 121 significant, differentially abundant proteins, some of which have known associations with kidney injury. The pilot data derived using this novel workflow provide information on the urinary proteome of patients with AKI. Further exploration in a larger cohort using this novel high-throughput method is warranted.

### Keywords
Automated sample preparation; clinical proteomics; swath-ms (dia); urinary proteomics; hilic

### Affiliations
NextGen Health, CSIR, South Africa
Council for Scientific and Industrial Research

### Submitter
Previn Naicker

### Lab Head
Dr Previn Naicker
NextGen Health, CSIR, South Africa


