### Accession
PXD011022

### Title
A quantitative proteomics-approach to detect impaired estrogen synthesis in zebrafish (Danio rerio)

### Description
Identification and relative quantification of proteins associated with substance specific alterations and sex-specific physiological responses following aromatase inhibition.

### Sample Protocol
Liver and gonad issues were homogenized using a motor-driven plastic pestle in 6M urea, 2M thiourea, CHAPS (3-[(3-cholamidopropyl)dimethylammonio]-1-propanesulfonate hydrate) in 50mM TEAB (Triethylammonium bicarbonate), at pH 8.2. The tissue lysates were centrifuged at 18,000g for 10mins, the supernatants carefully transferred and the protein concentration measured using Bradford assay. For each of the four replicate per tissue (Fadrozole at 0, 0.1, 1 and 10 µg/L in the liver and gonad), 100 µg of protein was subjected to in-solution digestion through the addition of reducing agent Tris-(2-Carboxyethyl)phosphine, Hydrochloride (TCEP) and alkylation with iodoacetic acid (IAA) followed by overnight tryptic digestion at 37°C. TMT-6-plex labelling of 100 μg of tryptic peptides was carried out according to manufacturer’s instructions. Thereafter, samples were pooled, dried and re-solubilized in 0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile were analysed using data-dependent acquisition on a high-resolution LC–MS/MS system.

### Data Protocol
The obtained LC-MS raw data were processed using proteome discoverer 2.2 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany). For peptide identification, MS data were matched to zebrafish database obtained from Ensembl (Download version: April. 02. 2017) using the SEQUEST algorithm. A maximum number of two (2) missed cleavages per peptide were allowed. Reporter ion tolerance of 20ppm and most confident centroid was used in peptides peaks integration for matching protein. Pairwise ratio was considered in ratio calculation and no imputation of missing values was allowed. Furthermore, protein false discovery rate (FDR) was controlled to be less than 1 % using a decoy database approach. Principles of parsimony was enabled in assembling peptides into proteins and protein groups, proteins were considered as identified if at least two unique peptides were matched. To control error in proteomic data, downstream statistical comparison of fadrozole treated samples relative to control was performed with multiple t-tests (two-stage Benjamini, Krieger, & Yekutieli test with FDR of 5%) in GraphPad Prism. q < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.

### Publication Abstract
The fish short-term reproduction assay (FSTRA) is a common in vivo screening assay for assessing endocrine effects of chemicals on reproduction in fish. However, the current reliance on measures such as egg number, plasma vitellogenin concentration and morphological changes to determine endocrine effects can lead to false labelling of chemicals with non-endocrine modes-&#xa0;of-action. Here, we integrated quantitative liver and gonad shotgun proteomics into the FSTRA in order to investigate the causal link between an endocrine mode-of-action and adverse effects assigned to the endocrine axis. Therefore, we analyzed the molecular effects of fadrozole-induced aromatase inhibition in zebrafish (Danio rerio). We observed a concentration-dependent decrease in fecundity, a reduction in plasma vitellogenin concentrations and a mild oocyte atresia with oocyte membrane folding in females. Consistent with these apical measures, proteomics revealed a significant dysregulation of proteins involved in steroid hormone secretion and estrogen stimulus in the female liver. In the ovary, the deregulation of estrogen synthesis and binding of sperm to zona pellucida were among the most significantly perturbed pathways. A significant deregulation of proteins targeting the transcriptional activity of estrogen receptor (esr1) was observed in male liver and testis. Our results support that organ- and sex-specific quantitative proteomics represent a promising tool for identifying early gene expression changes preceding chemical-induced adverse outcomes. These data can help to establish consistency in chemical classification and labelling.

### Keywords
Endocrine disruptors, Adverse outcome pathways (aop), Omics, Zebrafish, Toxicity pathways

### Affiliations
Fraunhofer IME
Ecotoxicology, Fraunhofer Institute for Molecular Biology and Applied Ecology IME, Schmallenberg, Germany.

### Submitter
Steve Ayobahan

### Lab Head
Dr Elke Eilebrecht
Ecotoxicology, Fraunhofer Institute for Molecular Biology and Applied Ecology IME, Schmallenberg, Germany.


