### Accession
PXD013255

### Title
Evaluation of sodium deoxycholate as solubilization buffer

### Description
Sodium deoxycholate was evaluated as alternative protein solubilization buffer to a more commonly used urea/thiourea buffer. Sodium deoxycholate was found to have similar efficiency as of urea/thiourea buffer in solubilizing proteins from oil palm fruit mesocarps.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from oil palm fruit mesocarps, concentrated and reconstituted in different buffers for comparison. Comparison were carried out using gel-based and non-gel based. Further validations using PLS-DA were done.

### Data Protocol
Data acquisition was executed with Thermo Xcalibur and processed by Thermo Proteome Discoverer. Tandem MS spectra were searched against Elaeis guineensis and Phoenix datylifera taxonomies in the NCBI protein database. All PSMs were further validated with Percolator algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
Protein solubility is a critical prerequisite to any proteomics analysis. Combination of urea/thiourea and 3-[(3-cholamidopropyl)dimethylammonio]-1-propanesulfonate (CHAPS) have been routinely used to enhance protein solubilization for oil palm proteomics studies in recent years. The goals of these proteomics analysis are essentially to complement the knowledge regarding the regulation networks and mechanisms of the oil palm fatty acid biosynthesis. Through omics integration, the information is able to build a regulatory model to support efforts in improving the economic value and sustainability of palm oil in the global oil and vegetable market. Our study evaluated the utilization of sodium deoxycholate as an alternative solubilization buffer/additive to urea/thiourea and CHAPS. Efficiency of urea/thiourea/CHAPS, urea/CHAPS, urea/sodium deoxycholate and sodium deoxycholate buffers in solubilizing the oil palm (Elaeis guineensis var. Tenera) mesocarp proteins were compared. Based on the protein yields and electrophoretic profile, combination of urea/thiourea/CHAPS were shown to remain a better solubilization buffer and additive, but the differences with sodium deoxycholate buffer was insignificant. A deeper mass spectrometric and statistical analyses on the identified proteins and peptides from all the evaluated solubilization buffers revealed that sodium deoxycholate had increased the number of identified proteins from oil palm mesocarps, enriched their gene ontologies and reduced the number of carbamylated lysine residues by more than 67.0%, compared to urea/thiourea/CHAPS buffer. Although only 62.0% of the total identified proteins were shared between the urea/thiourea/CHAPS and sodium deoxycholate buffers, the importance of the remaining 38.0% proteins depends on the applications. The only observed limitations to the application of sodium deoxycholate in protein solubilization were the interference with protein quantitation and but it could be easily rectified through a 4-fold dilution. All the proteomics data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD013255. In conclusion, sodium deoxycholate is applicable in the solubilization of proteins extracted from oil palm mesocarps with higher efficiency compared to urea/thiourea/CHAPS buffer. The sodium deoxycholate buffer is more favorable for proteomics analysis due to its proven advantages over urea/thiourea/CHAPS buffer.

### Keywords
Sodium deoxycholate, Proteomics, Oil palm

### Affiliations
Malaysian Palm Oil Board

### Submitter
Benjamin Lau

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin Lau Yii Chung
Malaysian Palm Oil Board


