### Accession
PXD014536

### Title
Structural complementarity offsets low receptor affinity in E7820-mediated RBM39 degradation by CRL4DCAF15

### Description
The investigational drugs E7820, indisulam and tasisulam (aryl-sulfonamides) promote the degradation of the splicing factor RBM39 in a proteasome and CRL4DCAF15 ubiquitin ligase-dependent mechanism, however the molecular details of this activity remain elusive. Here we present the cryo-EM structure of DDB1-DCAF15-DDA1 bound to RBM39 and E7820 at 4.4 Å resolution, together with crystal structures of engineered subcomplexes. We show that DCAF15 adopts a novel fold stabilized by DDA1, and that extensive protein-protein contacts between the ligase and substrate mitigate the low affinity interaction between aryl-sulfonamides and DCAF15. Our data demonstrates how aryl-sulfonamides neo-functionalize a shallow, non-conserved pocket on DCAF15 to selectively bind and degrade RBM39 and RBM23 without the requirement for a high affinity ligand, which has broad implications for the de novo discovery of molecular glue degraders.

### Sample Protocol
Kelly cells were treated with DMSO vehicle or 10 µM of E7820 in singlicate for 5h. Treated Kelly cells were washed in PBS (Corning VWR, Radnor PA, USA) and collected at 3000 g centrifugation. Lysis buffer (8 M Urea, 50 mM NaCl, 50 mM 4-(2hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid (EPPS) pH 8.5, protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Roche) were added to the cell pellets and homogenized by 20 passes through a 21 gauge (1.25 in. long) needle to achieve a cell lysate with a protein concentration between 2 – 4 mg/mL. A micro-BCA assay (Pierce) was used to determine final protein concentration in the cell lysates. 200 µg of protein for each sample were reduced and alkylated as previously described9. Proteins were precipitated using methanol/chloroform. In brief, four volumes of methanol were added to the cell lysate, followed by one volume of chloroform, and finally three volumes of water. The mixture was vortexed and centrifuged to separate the chloroform phase from the aqueous phase. The precipitated protein was washed with three volumes of methanol, centrifuged and the resulting washed precipitated protein was allowed to air dry. Precipitated protein was resuspended in 4 M Urea, 50 mM HEPES pH 7.4, followed by dilution to 1 M urea with the addition of 200 mM EPPS, pH 8. Proteins were first digested with LysC (1:50; enzyme:protein; Fisher Scientific) for 12 h at room temperature. The LysC digestion was diluted to 0.5 M Urea with 200 mM EPPS pH 8 followed by digestion with trypsin (1:50; enzyme:protein; Promega) for 6 h at 37 °C. Tandem mass tag (TMT) reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific) were dissolved in anhydrous acetonitrile (ACN) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Anhydrous ACN was added to each peptide sample to a final concentration of 30% v/v, and labeling was induced with the addition of TMT reagent to each sample at a ratio of 1:4 peptide:TMT label. The 11-plex labeling reactions were performed for 1.5 h at room temperature and the reaction quenched by the addition of hydroxylamine to a final concentration of 0.3% for 15 min at room temperature. The sample channels were combined at a 1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1 ratio, desalted using C18 solid phase extraction cartridges (Waters, Milford MA, USA) and analyzed by LC-MS for channel ratio comparison. Samples were then combined using the adjusted volumes determined in the channel ratio analysis and dried down in a speed vacuum. The combined sample was then resuspended in 1% formic acid and acidified (pH 2−3) before being subjected to desalting with C18 SPE (Sep-Pak, Waters). Samples were then offline fractionated into 96 fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC (Agilent LC1260, Santa Clara CA, USA) through an aeris peptide xb-c18 column (phenomenex) with mobile phase A containing 5% acetonitrile and 10 mM NH4HCO3 in LC-MS grade H2O, and mobile phase B containing 90% acetonitrile and 10 mM NH4HCO3 in LC-MS grade H2O (both pH 8.0). The 96 resulting fractions were then pooled in a non-continuous manner into 24 fractions and these fractions were used for subsequent mass spectrometry analysis.  Data were collected using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, San Jose CA, USA) coupled with a Proxeon EASY-nLC 1200 LC pump (ThermoFisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on an EasySpray ES803 75 μm inner diameter microcapillary column (ThermoFisher Scientific). Peptides were separated using a 190 min gradient of 6–27% acetonitrile in 1.0% formic acid with a flow rate of 350 nL/min. Each analysis used an MS3-based TMT method as described previously41. The data were acquired using a mass range of m/z 340 – 1350, resolution 120,000, AGC target 5 x 105, maximum injection time 100 ms, dynamic exclusion of 120 seconds for the peptide measurements in the Orbitrap. Data dependent MS2 spectra were acquired in the ion trap with a normalized collision energy (NCE) set at 35%, AGC target set to 1.8 x 104 and a maximum injection time of 120 ms. MS3 scans were acquired in the Orbitrap with HCD collision energy set to 55%, AGC target set to 2 x 105, maximum injection time of 150 ms, resolution at 50,000 and with a maximum synchronous precursor selection (SPS) precursors set to 10. The Advanced Peak Detection (APD) algorithm was disabled.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (ThermoFisher Scientific) was used for .RAW file processing and controlling peptide and protein level false discovery rates, assembling proteins from peptides, and protein quantification from peptides. MS/MS spectra were searched against a Uniprot human database (September 2016) with both the forward and reverse sequences. Database search criteria are as follows: tryptic with two missed cleavages, a precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm, fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.6 Da, static alkylation of cysteine (57.0211 Da), static TMT labelling of lysine residues and N-termini of peptides (229.163 Da), variable oxidation of methionine (15.9951 Da), variable phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine (79.966 Da) and variable acetylation (42.011 Da), Methionine-loss (131.040 Da) or methionine-loss + acetylation (83.030 Da) of the protein N-terminus. TMT reporter ion intensities were measured using a 0.003 Da window around the theoretical m/z for each reporter ion in the MS3 scan. Peptide spectral matches with poor quality MS3 spectra were excluded from quantitation (summed signal-to-noise across 11 channels < 200 and precursor isolation specificity < 0.5), and resulting data was filtered to only include proteins that had a minimum of two unique peptides identified. Reporter ion intensities were normalized and scaled using in-house scripts in the R framework (Team RCR: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing http://www.R-project.org/; accessed Nov. 1, 2017). Statistical analysis was carried out using the limma package within the R framework42.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Dcaf15, E7820, Rbm39, Sulfonamide, Crl4, Cullin

### Affiliations
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute
Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215, USA., Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA

### Submitter
Eric Fischer

### Lab Head
Dr Eric Fischer
Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215, USA., Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA


