### Accession
PXD046243

### Title
A synthetically methylotrophic Escherichia coli as a chassis for bioproduction

### Description
Proteome characterization of three E. coli strains: a methanol-dependent strain (MEvo1-0) and two synthetically methylotrophic strains (MEcoli_ref_1, MEcoli_ref_2)

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation To each sample 100 µl of lysis buffer (4 % Sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) in 100 mM Tris/HCl pH 8.2) were added. Protein extraction was carried out using a tissue homogenizer (TissueLyser II, QUIAGEN) by applying 2x2min cycles at 30 Hz. The samples were treated with High Intensity Focused Ultrasound (HIFU) for 1 minute before centrifugation at 20000 x g for 10 min. Protein concentration was determined using the Lunatic UV/Vis polychromatic spectrophotometer (Unchained Labs) with a 1:25 dilution of each sample. For each sample 50 µg of protein were taken and reduced with 5 mM TCEP (tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine) and alkylated with 15 mM chloroacetamide at 30°C for 30 min. Samples were processed using the single‐pot solid‐phase enhanced sample preparation (SP3). The SP3 protein purification, digest and peptide clean-up was performed using a KingFisher Flex System (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and Carboxylate-Modified Magnetic Particles (GE Life Sciences; GE65152105050250, GE45152105050250) [AA – Hughes CS, Foehr S, Garfield DA, Furlong EE, Steinmetz LM, Krijgsveld J. Ultrasensitive proteome analysis using paramagnetic bead technology. Mol Syst Biol. 2014 Oct 30;10(10):757. doi: 10.15252/msb.20145625; BB – Leutert M, Rodriguez‐Mias RA, Fukuda NK, Villén J (2019) R2‐P2 rapid‐robotic phosphoproteomics enables multidimensional cell signaling studies. Mol Syst Biol 15: e9021]. Beads were conditioned following the manufacturer’s instructions, consisting of 3 washes with water at a concentration of 1 µg/µl. Samples were diluted with 100% ethanol to a final concentration of 60% ethanol. The beads, wash solutions and samples were loaded into 96 deep well- or micro-plates and transferred to the KingFisher.  Following steps were carried out on the robot: collection of beads from the last wash, protein binding to beads, washing of beads in wash solutions 1-3 (80% ethanol), protein digestion (overnight at 37°C with a trypsin:protein ratio of 1:50 in 50 mM Triethylammoniumbicarbonat (TEAB)) and peptide elution from the magnetic beads using MilliQ water. The digest solution and water elution were combined and dried to completeness and re-solubilized in 20 µL of MS sample buffer (3% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid).  Peptide concentration was determined using the Lunatic UV/Vis polychromatic spectrophotometer (Unchained Labs).  LC-MSMS – Lumos OT/OT DIA LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a Digital PicoView source (New Objective) and coupled to an M-Class UPLC (Waters). Solvent composition of the two channels was 0.1% formic acid for channel A and 99.9% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid for channel B. Column temperature was 50°C. For each sample the equivalent of 0.3 absorbance were loaded on a commercial ACQUITY UPLC M-Class Symmetry C18 Trap Column (100Å, 5 µm, 180 µm x 20 mm, Waters) connected to a ACQUITY UPLC M-Class HSS T3 Column (100Å, 1.8 µm, 75 µm X 250 mm, Waters). The peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. After a 3 min initial hold at 5% B, a gradient from 5 to 22 % B in 80 min and 22 to 32% B in additional 10 min was applied. The column was cleaned after the run by increasing to 95 % B and holding 95 % B for 10 min prior to re-establishing loading condition.  Samples were measured in randomized order. For the analysis of the individual samples, the mass spectrometer was operated in data-independent mode (DIA). DIA scans covered a range from 392 to 1008 m/z in windows of 16 m/z. The resolution of the DIA windows was set to 30’000, with an AGC target value of 500’000, the maximum injection time set to 50 ms and a fixed normalized collision energy (NCE) of 33 %. Each instrument cycle was completed by a full MS scan monitoring 350 to 1500 m/z at a resolution of 120’000.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometry proteomics data were handled using the local laboratory information management system b-fabric (LIMS) [Christian Panse, Christian Trachsel and Can Türker, Bridging data management platforms and visualization tools to enable ad-hoc and smart analytics in life sciences,  https://doi.org/10.1515/jib-2022-0031].  The acquired shotgun MS data were processed for identification and quantification using DIANN [Demichev, V., Messner, C.B., Vernardis, S.I. et al. DIA-NN: neural networks and interference correction enable deep proteome coverage in high throughput. Nat Methods 17, 41–44 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-019-0638-x]. Spectra were searched using the database in FASTA file format consisting of the proteome of E. coli BW25113 supplemented with the amino acid sequences of Mdh, Hps and Phi and common protein contaminants. TMT modification on peptide N-termini and Lysine side chains and carbamidomethylation of cysteine were fixed modifications, while methionine oxidation was variable. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin/P, allowing a minimal peptide length of 7 amino acids and a maximum of two missed cleavages.  The R package prolfqua [Wolski WE, Nanni P, Grossmann J, d'Errico M, Schlapbach R, Panse C. prolfqua: A Comprehensive R-Package for Proteomics Differential Expression Analysis. J Proteome Res. 2023 Apr 7;22(4):1092-1104. doi: 10.1021/acs.jproteome.2c00441] was used to analyze the differential expression and to determine group differences, confidence intervals, and false discovery rates for all quantifiable proteins. Starting with the report.tsv file generated by DIANN, which does report the precursor ion abundances for each raw file, we determined protein abundances by first aggregating the precursor abundances to peptidoform abundances. Then, we employed the Tukeys-Median Polish to estimate protein abundances. Furthermore, before fitting the linear models, we transformed the protein abundances using the variance stabilizing normalization [Wolfgang Huber and Anja {von Heydebreck} and Holger Sueltmann and Annemarie Poustka and Martin Vingron, Variance Stabilization Applied to Microarray Data Calibration and to the Quantification of Differential Expression, 10.1093/bioinformatics/18.suppl_1.s96].

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Biotechnology, Synthetic methylotrophy, Metabolic engineering, Synthetic biology, E. coli

### Affiliations
Institute of Microbiology, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
ETH Zurich

### Submitter
Michael Reiter

### Lab Head
Dr Julia A. Vorholt
Institute of Microbiology, ETH Zurich, Switzerland


