### Accession
PXD006800

### Title
Establishment of plasmodesmata core proteome using label free semi-quantitative proteomic analysis.

### Description
To establish the plasmodesmata core proteome, the identification and the relative amount of proteins in different cellular fractions, namely, the plasmodesmata, plasma membrane, total cell extract, microsomal and cell wall fractions, were determined using label-free quantification method. Four to six biological replicates for each fraction were used for quantification.

### Sample Protocol
Arabidopsis thaliana (ecotype Landsberg erecta) cultured cells were grown in liquid supplemented Murashige and Skoog medium as described in Bayer et al. (2004). The different cellular fractions  were purified according to Grison et al. (2015a, b) and Bayer et al. (2006 from six-day-old cultures. Quantification of protein was performed using the QuantiProTM BCA Assay Kit (Sigma-Aldrich).  Bayer E, Thomas CL, and Maule AJ (2004). Plasmodesmata in Arabidopsis thaliana suspension cells. Protoplasma 223: 93–102 Bayer EM, Bottrill AR, Walshaw J, Vigouroux M, Naldrett MJ, Thomas, C.L. and Maule AJ*  (2006) Arabidopsis cell wall proteome defined using multidimensional protein identification technology. Proteomics 6: 301-311.  Grison MS, Fernandez-Calvino L, Mongrand S, Bayer EM (2015a). Isolation of Plasmodesmata from Arabidopsis suspension culture cells. Methods Mol. Biol. 2015, 1217:83–93 Grison MS, Brocard L, Fouillen L, Nicolas W, Wewer V, Dörmann P, Nacir H, Benitez-Alfonso Y, Claverol S, Germain V, Boutté Y, Mongrand S and Bayer EM (2015b) Specific membrane lipid composition is important for plasmodesmata function in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 27:1228–1250

### Data Protocol
Data were searched by SEQUEST through Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) against a subset of the version 11 of the Araport (https://www.araport.org/) protein database (40782 entries). Spectra from peptides higher than 5000 Da or lower than 350 Da were rejected. The search parameters were as follows: mass accuracy of the monoisotopic peptide precursor and peptide fragments was set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da respectively. Only b- and y-ions were considered for mass calculation. Oxidation of methionines (+16 Da) was considered as variable modification and carbamidomethylation of cysteines (+57 Da) as fixed modification. Two missed trypsin cleavages were allowed. Peptide validation was performed using Percolator algorithm and only “high confidence” peptides were retained corresponding to a 1% False Positive Rate at peptide level. Raw LC-MS/MS data were imported in Progenesis QI for Proteomics 2.0 (Nonlinear Dynamics Ltd, Newcastle, U.K). Noticeably, only non-conflicting features and unique peptides were considered for calculation at protein level. Quantitative data were considered for proteins quantified by a minimum of 2 peptides.

### Publication Abstract
In eukaryotes, membrane contact sites (MCS) allow direct communication between organelles. Plants have evolved a unique type of MCS, inside intercellular pores, the plasmodesmata, where endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-plasma membrane (PM) contacts coincide with regulation of cell-to-cell signalling. The molecular mechanism and function of membrane tethering within plasmodesmata remain unknown. Here, we show that the multiple C2 domains and transmembrane region protein (MCTP) family, key regulators of cell-to-cell signalling in plants, act as ER-PM tethers specifically at plasmodesmata. We report that MCTPs are plasmodesmata proteins that insert into the ER via their transmembrane region while their C2 domains dock to the PM through interaction with anionic phospholipids. A Atmctp3/Atmctp4 loss of function mutant induces plant developmental defects, impaired plasmodesmata function and composition, while MCTP4 expression in a yeast &#x394;tether mutant partially restores ER-PM tethering. Our data suggest that MCTPs are unique membrane tethers controlling both ER-PM contacts and cell-to-cell signalling.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Proteomics, Label-free, Plasmodesmata

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Membrane Biogenesis, University of Bordeaux, France
Plateforme Proteome

### Submitter
Stephane Claverol

### Lab Head
Dr Emmanuelle Bayer
Laboratory of Membrane Biogenesis, University of Bordeaux, France


