### Accession
PXD022992

### Title
Data-independent Acquisition-based Proteome and Phosphoproteome Profiling across Six Melanoma Cell Lines

### Description
The rapid documentation of the steady-state gene expression landscape of the cells used in particular experiments may help to improve the reproducibility of scientific research. Here we applied a data-independent acquisition mass spectrometry (DIA-MS) method, coupled with a peptide spectral-library free data analysis workflow, to measure both proteome and phosphoproteome of a melanoma cell line panel with different metastatic properties. For each cell line, the single-shot DIA-MS detected 8,100 proteins and almost 40,000 phosphopeptides in the respective measurement of two hours. Benchmarking the DIA-MS data towards the RNA-seq data and tandem mass tag (TMT)-MS results from the same set of cell lines demonstrated comparable qualitative coverage and quantitative reproducibility. Our data confirmed the high but complex mRNA~protein and protein~phospsite correlations. The results successfully established DIA-MS as a strong and competitive proteotyping approach for cell lines.

### Sample Protocol
The metastatic melanoma cancer cells (ATCC TCP-1014) and the primary melanoma cancer cells (ATCC TCP-1013) were purchased from ATCC. The three metastatic cell lines include RPMI-7951 (ATCC HTB-66, named “7951” hereafter), SH-4 (ATCC CRL-7724, named “SH4”), and SK-MEL-3 (ATCC HTB-69, named “HTB69”). The three primary cell lines include SK-MEL-1 (ATCC HTB-67, named “SK”), A375 (ATCC CRL-1619, named “A375”), and G-361 (ATCC CRL-1424, named “G361”). The routine cell culture protocol was detailed previously10. In brief, cells were cultured in 5% CO2 and 37° in either DMEM (#10564011, for 7951, HTB69, A375 and G361 cells) or RPMI Medium (#72400047, for SH4 and SK cells) supplemented with 10% FBS (Sigma Aldrich), together with a penicillin/streptomycin solution (Gibco). Cells were harvested at 80% confluence for mRNA and protein extractions.  Cells were washed three times by PBS, harvested, and snap-frozen. The cell pellets were then lysed by adding 10 M urea containing complete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche) and Halt™ Phosphatase Inhibitor (Thermo).Duplicate dishes per cell line were used for proteomics analysis.The phosphopeptide enrichment was performed using the High-Select™ Fe-NTA kit (Thermo Scientific, A32992) according to the manufacturer's instructions. The peptide samples were resolved in 2% ACN, 0.1% FA, and 1 µg of peptides or enriched phosphopeptides was injected per each single MS injection. The DIA-MS measurement was performed. Briefly, LC separation was performed on EASY-nLC 1200 systems (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA) using a 75 µm × 50 cm C18 column packed with 100A C18 material. A 120-min measurement with buffer A (0.1% formic acid in H2O) and buffer B (80% acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid) mixed and configured as below to elute peptides from the LC: Buffer B was increasing from 6% to 37% in 109 mins, increased to 100% in 3 mins, and then kept at 100% for 8mins.The Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) instrument coupled to a nanoelectrospray ion source (NanoFlex, Thermo Scientific) was used as the DIA-MS platform for both proteomic and phosphoproteomic analyses.

### Data Protocol
DIA-MS data analyses for proteomics and phosphoproteomics were performed using Spectronaut v14, both with the “DirectDIA” pipeline (i.e., an optimal spectral library-free pipeline). This means the DIA runs were all directly searched against Swiss-Prot protein database (September 2020, 20,375 entries). For the identification of the total proteomics dataset, the possibilities of Oxidation at methionine and Acetylation at the protein N-terminals were set as variable modifications, whereas carbamidomethylation at cysteine was set as a fixed modification. For the “DirectDIA” database searching on the phosphoproteomic dataset, in addition to the above peptide modification settings, the possibility of Phosphorylation at serine/threonine/tyrosine (S/T/Y) was enabled as a variable modification. Overall, both peptide- and protein- FDR (based on Qvalue) were controlled at 1%, and the data matrix was filtered by Qvalue. In particular, the PTM localization option in Spectronaut v14 was enabled to locate phosphorylation sites. For each localized phosphosite, the corresponding phosphopeptide precursors with the least missing values were taken for quantification between samples. The quantitative peak areas for protein and phosphopeptides were then log2-transformed for downstream statistical analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Melanoma, Cell lines, Proteome, Phosphoproteome, Metastasis, Dia

### Affiliations
Yale University School of Medicine

### Submitter
Yansheng Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Yansheng Liu
Yale University School of Medicine


