### Accession
PXD005938

### Title
PKA signaling network-quantitative proteomics and phosphoproteomics

### Description
Classically, connections within a complex network can be identified through systematically removing its components one at a time and observing the resulting functional changes throughout the network.  We applied this concept to identify the signaling network downstream from protein kinase A (PKA) in epithelial cells expressing the Gs-coupled V2 vasopressin receptor.   Both genes coding for PKA catalytic subunits (Prkaca and Prkacb) were modified using CRISPR-Cas9 to introduce indels resulting in the absence of detectable PKA catalytic subunit protein (immunoblotting and SILAC-based quantitative protein mass spectrometry).   Analysis of multiple PKA double knockout (dKO) lines using SILAC-based quantitative phosphoproteomics showed that phosphorylation  sites with decreased phospho-occupancy were dominated by the basophilic motif (R/K)-(R/K)-x-S, consistent with that seen for previously identified PKA targets.  Overall, 233 PKA target sites were identified, the majority of which are not annotated as PKA sites in public databases. In addition, we identified a large number of sites with increased phospho-occupancy and the motif x-(S/T)-P, consistent with activation of one or more CMGC family kinases in response to PKA deletion. An unexpected finding was a complete, selective loss of expression of the Aqp2 gene (coding for a kidney-specific water channel) with PKA deletion observed both with quantitative proteomics and RNA-Seq based transcriptomics.  Using large-scale data integration techniques, the quantitative proteomic, phosphoproteomic, and RNA-Seq datasets were integrated with prior data from the literature to identify a PKA signaling network that explains most of the cellular physiological responses to vasopressin in the target cells, including the regulation of Aqp2 gene transcription.

### Sample Protocol
Cells from heavy and light cultures were lysed with 8 M urea buffer [8M urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 75 mM NaCl, 1X Halt protease and phosphatase inhibitors] and sonicated to solubilize proteins, then equal amounts of protein (2mg) extracts were mixed. The mixed samples were reduced with 20 mM dithiothreitol for 1 hour at 25o C, and then alkylated with 40 mM iodoacetamide for 1 hour at 25o C in dark. The samples were diluted with 20 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) buffer (pH 8.5) to 1M urea, and then digested with Trypsin/LysC (Promega) (1:20 wt/wt.) overnight at 37oC. The peptides were desalted using hydrophilic-lipophilic-balanced (HLB) extraction cartridges (Oasis), and fractionated into 12 fractions with high pH reverse phase chromatography (Agilent 1200 HPLC System).  Each fraction was divided into three parts: total peptide analysis (2%) and phospho-peptide enrichments (49%X2). Both Fe-NTA and TiO2 columns (ThermoFisher) were used for phospho-peptide enrichments as per manufacture’s protocols.  The enriched peptides were desalted using graphite columns, then vacuum-dried and stored at -80 oC. The dried peptides were re-suspended with 0.1% formic acid in LC-MS grade water (J.T Baker) before mass spectrometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
MS spectra were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 1.4. To obtain comprehensive spectra-peptide matches, we integrated the results of peptide-spectra match by Mascot (Perkins et al., 1999 (10612281)) and SEQUEST (Eng et al., 1994 (24226387)). The search criteria were set as follows: 1) 10-ppm precursor mass tolerance, 2) 0.2 Da fragment mass tolerance 3) two missed cleavages allowed per peptide. Specific amino acid modifications are: a) isotope labeling of lysine (K+6.020 Da) and arginine (R+10.008 Da), b) carbamidomethylation of cysteine (C+57.021 Da), c) oxidation of methionine (M+15.995 Da), d) deamination on glutamine and asparagine (N, Q+0.984 Da), and e) phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine (S, T, Y+79.966 Da). The protein database used was the mouse Swiss-Prot (April 17, 2014). The false discovery rate was calculated by the target-decoy algorithm (Elias and Gygi, 2007 (17327847)). The results from SEQUEST and Mascot searches were integrated in Proteome Discoverer 1.4 with the following filters: false discovery rate <0.01, and peptide rank = 1. Relative quantification of peptides and phospho-peptides was performed using “Quantification Module” within Proteome Discoverer 1.4 for SILAC data, which calculates relative peptide abundance ratios from light and heavy channels using the peak intensities from the reconstructed MS1 ion chromatograms corresponding to each peptide. The settings for the “Quantification Module” are: maximum ratio is assigned to 1000, and minimum ratio is assigned to 0.001, missing quantification values (e.g. peptides of the knockout target, PKA) were replaced by the minimum intensity of that channel. The peak intensities were median normalized in each channel, then ratios of dKO/ctrl were calculated. To avoid the outliers, for protein quantification, median of the dKO/ctrl ratios from all the peptides matched to a protein was chosen to represent the relative abundance ratio of a protein. Paired t-test was used to calculate p values of dKO/ctrl ratios to the unchanged baseline (=1), then FDR was calculated using p.adjust in R (http://stat.ethz.ch/R-manual/R-devel/library/stats/html/p.adjust.html). Amino acid sequences of the phosphorylation sites were centralized using PTM Centralizer (https://hpcwebapps.cit.nih.gov/ESBL/PtmCentralizer/). Phosphorylation motifs was analyzed using PhosphoLogo (https://hpcwebapps.cit.nih.gov/PhosphoLogo/).

### Publication Abstract
G protein stimulatory &#x3b1;-subunit (G<sub>&#x3b1;s</sub>)-coupled heptahelical receptors regulate cell processes largely through activation of protein kinase A (PKA). To identify signaling processes downstream of PKA, we deleted both PKA catalytic subunits using CRISPR-Cas9, followed by a "multiomic" analysis in mouse kidney epithelial cells expressing the G<sub>&#x3b1;s</sub>-coupled V2 vasopressin receptor. RNA-seq (sequencing)-based transcriptomics and SILAC (stable isotope labeling of amino acids in cell culture)-based quantitative proteomics revealed a complete loss of expression of the water-channel gene <i>Aqp2</i> in PKA knockout cells. SILAC-based quantitative phosphoproteomics identified 229 PKA phosphorylation sites. Most of these PKA targets are thus far unannotated in public databases. Surprisingly, 1,915 phosphorylation sites with the motif x-(S/T)-P showed increased phosphooccupancy, pointing to increased activity of one or more MAP kinases in PKA knockout cells. Indeed, phosphorylation changes associated with activation of ERK2 were seen in PKA knockout cells. The ERK2 site is downstream of a direct PKA site in the Rap1GAP, Sipa1l1, that indirectly inhibits Raf1. In addition, a direct PKA site that inhibits the MAP kinase kinase kinase Map3k5 (ASK1) is upstream of JNK1 activation. The datasets were integrated to identify a causal network describing PKA signaling that explains vasopressin-mediated regulation of membrane trafficking and gene transcription. The model predicts that, through PKA activation, vasopressin stimulates AQP2 exocytosis by inhibiting MAP kinase signaling. The model also predicts that, through PKA activation, vasopressin stimulates <i>Aqp2</i> transcription through induction of nuclear translocation of the acetyltransferase EP300, which increases histone H3K27 acetylation of vasopressin-responsive genes (confirmed by ChIP-seq).

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Mouse, Pka, Proteomics, Kindey

### Affiliations
National Institutes of Health, USA
Epithelial Systems Biology Laboratory National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute National Institutes of Health U.S.A.

### Submitter
CHIN-RANG YANG

### Lab Head
Dr Mark A Knepper
Epithelial Systems Biology Laboratory National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute National Institutes of Health U.S.A.


