### Accession
PXD039018

### Title
FKBP35 secures ribosome homeostasis in Plasmodium falciparum

### Description
Plasmodium falciparum accounts for the majority of over 600’000 malaria-associated deaths annually. Parasites resistant to nearly all antimalarials have emerged and the need for drugs with alternative modes of action is thus undoubted. The FK506-binding protein PfFKBP35 has gained attention as a promising drug target due to its high affinity to the macrolide compound FK506. Whilst there is considerable interest in targeting PfFKBP35 with small molecules, a genetic validation of this factor as a drug target is missing and its function in parasite biology remains elusive. Here, we show that limiting PfFKBP35 levels are lethal to P. falciparum and result in a delayed-death phenotype that is characterized by defective ribosome homeostasis and protein translation. We furthermore show that the drug exerts it parasiticidal activity in a PfFKBP35-independent manner and, using cellular thermal shift assays, identify FK506-targets beyond PfFKBP35. In addition to revealing first insights on PfFKBP35 function, our results show that current efforts to develop PfFKBP35-targeting drugs need to be reconsidered.

### Sample Protocol
Then parasites were resuspended in 25 µL of lysis buffer (5% SDS, 100 mM tetraethylammonium bromide (TEAB), 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphin (TCEP), pH 8.5) and sonicated (10 cycles, 30 sec on/off at 4°C, Bioruptor, Diagnode). Lysates were subsequently reduced for 10 minutes at 95°C. Samples were then cooled down to RT and 0.5 µL of 1M iodoacetamide was added to the samples. Cysteine residues were alkylated for 30 min at 25°C in the dark. Digestion and peptide purification was performed using S-trapTM technology (Protifi) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. In brief, samples were acidified by addition of 2.5 µL of 12% phosphoric acid (1:10) and then 165 µL of S-trap buffer (90% methanol, 100 mM TEAB pH 7.1) was added to the samples (6:1). Samples were briefly vortexed and loaded onto S-trapTM micro spin-columns (Protifi) and centrifuged for 1 min at 4000 g. Flow-through was discarded and spin-columns were then washed 3 times with 150 µL of S-trap buffer (each time samples were centrifuged for 1 min at 4000 g and flow-through was removed). S-trap columns were then moved to the clean tubes and 20 µL of digestion buffer (50 mM TEAB pH 8.0) and trypsin (at 1:25 enzyme to protein ratio) were added to the samples. Digestion was allowed to proceed for 1h at 47 °C. Then 40 µL of digestion buffer were added to the samples and the peptides were collected by centrifugation at 4000 g for 1 minute. To increase the recovery, S-trap columns were washed with 40 µL of 0.2% formic acid in water (400g, 1 min) and 35 µL of 0.2% formic acid in 50% acetonitrile. Eluted peptides were dried under vacuum and stored at -20 °C until further analysis.  Peptides were resuspended in 0.1% aqueous formic and peptide concentration was adjusted to 0.25 µg/µL. 1 µL of each sample was subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis using an Orbitrap Elicpse Tribrid Mass Spectrometer fitted with an Ultimate 3000 nano system (both Thermo Fisher Scientific) and a custom-made column heater set to 60°C. Peptides were resolved using a RP-HPLC column (75μm × 30cm) packed in-house with C18 resin (ReproSil-Pur C18–AQ, 1.9 μm resin; Dr. Maisch GmbH) at a flow rate of 0.3 μL/min. The following gradient was used for peptide separation: from 2% B to 12% B over 5 min, to 30% B over 40 min, to 50% B over 15 min, to 95% B over 2 min followed by 11 min at 95% B then back to 2% B. Buffer A was 0.1% formic acid in water and buffer B was 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in water. The mass spectrometer was operated in DDA mode with a cycle time of 3 seconds between master scans. Each master scan was acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 240,000 FWHM (at 200 m/z) and a scan range from 375 to 1600 m/z followed by MS2 scans of the most intense precursors in the linear ion trap at “Rapid” scan rate with isolation width of the quadrupole set to 1.4 m/z. Maximum ion injection time was set to 50 ms (MS1) and 35 ms (MS2) with an AGC target set to 1e6 and 1e4, respectively. Only peptides with charge state 2-5 were included in the analysis. Monoisotopic precursor selection (MIPS) was set to Peptide, and the Intensity Threshold was set to 5e3. Peptides were fragmented by HCD (Higher-energy collisional dissociation) with collision energy set to 35%, and one microscan was acquired for each spectrum. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 30s.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw-files were imported into the Progenesis QI software (v2.0, Nonlinear Dynamics Limited), which was used to extract peptide precursor ion intensities across all samples applying the default parameters. The generated mgf-file was searched using MASCOT against a Plasmodium falciparum (isolate 3D7) database (Uniprot, 11.2019) and 392 commonly observed contaminants using the following search criteria: full tryptic specificity was required (cleavage after lysine or arginine residues, unless followed by proline); 3 missed cleavages were allowed; carbamidomethylation (C) was set as fixed modification; oxidation (M) and acetyl (Protein N-term) were applied as variable modifications; mass tolerance of 10 ppm (precursor) and 0.6 Da (fragments). The database search results were filtered using the ion score to set the false discovery rate (FDR) to 1% on the peptide and protein level, respectively, based on the number of reverse protein sequence hits in the dataset. Quantitative analysis results from label-free quantification were processed using the SafeQuant R package v.2.3.2 (16) to obtain peptide relative abundances. This analysis included global data normalization by equalizing the total peak/reporter areas across all LC-MS runs, data imputation using the knn algorithm, summation of peak areas per protein and LC-MS/MS run, followed by calculation of peptide abundance ratios. Only isoform specific peptide ion signals were considered for quantification. To meet additional assumptions (normality and homoscedasticity) underlying the use of linear regression models and t-Tests, MS-intensity signals a were transformed from the linear to the log-scale. The summarized peptide expression values were used for statistical testing of between condition differentially abundant peptides. Here, empirical Bayes moderated t-Tests were applied, as implemented in the R/Bioconductor limma package. The resulting per protein and condition comparison p-values were adjusted for multiple testing using the Benjamini-Hochberg method.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dda, Fkbp35, Plasmodium falciparum, Malaria, Lfq, Ribosome homeostasis, Antimalarial drugs, Fk506

### Affiliations
Biozentrum, University of Basel
Proteomics Core Facility, Biozentrum, University of Basel, Switzerland

### Submitter
Katarzyna Buczak

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Schmidt
Proteomics Core Facility, Biozentrum, University of Basel, Switzerland


