### Accession
PXD002582

### Title
Proteomic analysis reveals distinct metabolic differences between GM-CSF and M-CSF grown macrophages derived from murine bone marrow cells

### Description
Macrophages are crucial in controlling infectious agents and tissue homeostasis. Macrophages require a wide range of functional capabilities in order to fulfill distinct roles in our body, one being rapid and robust immune responses. To gain insight into macrophage plasticity and the key regulatory protein networks governing their specific functions, we performed quantitative analyses of the proteome and phosphoproteome of murine primary GM-CSF and M-CSF grown bone marrow derived macrophages (GM-BMMs and M-BMMs, respectively) using the latest isobaric tag based tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling and liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Strikingly, metabolic processes emerged as a major difference between these macrophages. Specifically, GM-BMMs show significant enrichment of proteins involving glycolysis, the mevalonate pathway, and nitrogen compound biosynthesis. This evidence of enhanced glycolytic capability in GM-BMMs is particularly significant regarding their pro-inflammatory responses, because increased production of cytokines upon LPS stimulation in GM-BMMs depends on their acute glycolytic capacity. In contrast, M-BMMs upregulate proteins involved in endocytosis, which correlates with a tendency toward homeostatic functions such as scavenging cellular debris. Together, our data describes a proteomic network that underlies the pro-inflammatory actions of GM-BMMs as well as the homeostatic functions of M-BMMs.

### Sample Protocol
Trypsin Digestion, TMT Labeling, and OFF-Gel Fractionation Equal protein amounts were digested using Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) method(17). Briefly, lysates were washed with 8M urea, followed by alkylation with 50 mM iodoacetamide (20 min at RT). After alkylation, filters were washed with 8M Urea two times and with 0.1M TEAB two times for labeling with TMT reagents. Trypsin was added at a ratio of 1μg trypsin : 50μg protein and samples were incubated overnight at 37°C. Tryptic digests of the 4 cell lysates were labeled with 4 different mass-tags among the TMT 6-plex reagents respectively, per the protocol described by Thermo Fisher Scientific (Rockford, IL). Resulting TMT-labeled peptides were subject to peptide isoelectrofocusing (IEF) fractionation, the 3100 OFFGEL fractionator with a “Low Resolution Kit” pH 3-10 (Agilent Technologies, CA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Phosphopeptide enrichment using TiO2 Phosphopeptide enrichment was carried out as described in the TitansphereTm Phos-TiO2 Kit manual. Briefly, phosphopeptides were eluted with 5% aqueous ammonium hydroxide and 5% aqueous pyrrolidine solutions from Phos-TiO2 (3 mg/200 μL, Titansphere, GL Sciences Inc, Japan) spin column.

### Data Protocol
The acquired MS/MS spectra were searched against the Universal Protein Resource mouse protein database (Uniprot release 2013_09, 50287 entries, http://www.uniprot.org/) with the Sequest algorithm in Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Search parameters were as follows: tryptic specificity with up to two missed cleavage sites, mass tolerances for precursor ions and fragment ions were set to 10 ppm and 0.8 Da, respectively, fixed modification for carbamidomethyl-cysteine, TMT 4-plex of lysine and N-terminus and variable modification for methionine oxidation. Following database searching, the output files were imported into Scaffold Q+ (version Scaffold_4.3.2, Proteome Software Inc. Portland, OR). Scaffold was used to organize all data, to quantitate protein and to validate peptide identifications using the Peptide Prophet algorithm(18). We selected peptides with cutoff of FDR = 0.01 and Peptide threshold 95%. We then identified the proteins that have Protein threshold 99.9%. Validated data were normalized between intra-sample channels and TMT signals showed at least 1.5-fold change in abundance were used for quantitative analysis of protein.

### Publication Abstract
Macrophages are crucial in controlling infectious agents and tissue homeostasis. Macrophages require a wide range of functional capabilities in order to fulfill distinct roles in our body, one being rapid and robust immune responses. To gain insight into macrophage plasticity and the key regulatory protein networks governing their specific functions, we performed quantitative analyses of the proteome and phosphoproteome of murine primary GM-CSF and M-CSF grown bone marrow derived macrophages (GM-BMMs and M-BMMs, respectively) using the latest isobaric tag based tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling and liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Strikingly, metabolic processes emerged as a major difference between these macrophages. Specifically, GM-BMMs show significant enrichment of proteins involving glycolysis, the mevalonate pathway, and nitrogen compound biosynthesis. This evidence of enhanced glycolytic capability in GM-BMMs is particularly significant regarding their pro-inflammatory responses, because increased production of cytokines upon LPS stimulation in GM-BMMs depends on their acute glycolytic capacity. In contrast, M-BMMs up-regulate proteins involved in endocytosis, which correlates with a tendency toward homeostatic functions such as scavenging cellular debris. Together, our data describes a proteomic network that underlies the pro-inflammatory actions of GM-BMMs as well as the homeostatic functions of M-BMMs.

### Keywords
Protein identification, Immunology, Phosphoproteins, Tmt, Mass spectrometry, Macrophage

### Affiliations
South Korea
Department of Applied Chemistry College of Applied Sciences, Kyung Hee University Yong-in City, 446-701 Republic of Korea

### Submitter
Ji Hye Hong

### Lab Head
Dr Kwang Pyo Kim
Department of Applied Chemistry College of Applied Sciences, Kyung Hee University Yong-in City, 446-701 Republic of Korea


