### Accession
PXD016080

### Title
Genomic rewiring of Sox2 chromatin interaction network during differentiation of ESCs to postmitotic neurons

### Description
Cellular differentiation requires cells to undergo dramatic but strictly controlled changes in chromatin organization, transcriptional regulation, and protein production and interaction. To understand the regulatory connections between these processes, we applied a multi-omics approach integrating proteomic, transcriptomic, chromatin accessibility, protein occupancy, and protein-chromatin interaction data acquired during differentiation of mouse embryonic stem cells (ESCs) into post-mitotic neurons. We found extensive remodeling of the chromatin that was preceding changes on RNA and protein levels. We found the pluripotency factor Sox2 as regulator of neuron-specific genes and, as a potential mechanism, revealed its genomic redistribution from pluripotency enhancers to neuronal promoters and concomitant change of its protein interaction network upon differentiation. We identified Atrx as a major Sox2 partner in neurons, whose co-localisation correlated with an increase in active enhancer marks and increased expression of nearby genes, and where deletion of a Sox2-Atrx co-bound site resulted in reduced expression of the proximal gene. Collectively, these findings provide key insights into the regulatory transformation of Sox2 during neuronal differentiation and highlight the significance of multi-omic approaches in understanding gene regulation in complex systems.

### Sample Protocol
129X1/SvJ ESCs were cultured in biological duplicates on feeder-free gelatin-coated plates for 2 passages in ES medium with 15% FBS and 20 ng/ml LIF. The cells were then subjected to neuronal differentiation for 10 days in accordance with the protocol of Bibel et al. 2007.  For the whole proteome analysis, cells were collected at two-day intervals from day 0 to day 10 and subjected to SP3 sample preparation as described by Hughes et al, 2014. After proteolytic digestion, the peptide-containing SN was transferred to new tubes and the samples were subjected to multiplexed labeling using TMT. The labeled peptide samples were fractionated with 1200 Infinity HPLC system (Agilent), using a Gemini C18 column (Phenomenex). A 60 minute gradient was used, which progresses linearly from 0 to 35% ACN in 20 mM ammonium formate, pH10, flow 100μl/min. Peptide elution was detected via UV detector at 254 nm. 33 fractions were collected and pooled into 11 fractions.  ChIP-SICAP was performed as described by Rafiee et al., 2016. Briefly, nuclei were extracted and lysed from formaldehyde-crosslinked cells (1.5%, 15 min), followed by chromatin shearing and ChIP of Sox2. Next, Sox2-crosslinked DNA was biotinylated using terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase (TdT) and pulled down using streptavidin-coated beads, thus ensuring the specific isolation of the chromatin-associated Sox2 interactome. As a negative control, the same procedure was performed using an unspecific IgG antibody. Finally, the isolated proteins were subjected to proteolytic digestion and protein identification by LC-MS/MS. For the ChIP-MS experiment, the protein fraction which was NOT bound by the streptavidin beads (soluble proteins) was collected as well.   Mass spectrometry was performed on an Orbitrap-Fusion Quadrupole-Linear-Ion Trap-Orbitrap hybrid mass spectrometer coupled to EASY-nLC system. The samples were loaded onto a 100 μm x 2 cm Acclaim Pepmap RSLC trap column (5μm particles, 100Å pores, C18) in 100% solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water, ULCMS Grade, Biosolve) and eluted onto a 75 μm x 50 cm (2μm particles, 100Å pores, C18) Acclaim Pepmap RSLC analytical column by a gradient from 3% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile and 19.9% water, ULCMS Grade) to 50% solvent B in 86 minutes at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Eluting peptides were analyzed by electrospray using a 10 μm Picotip coated fused silica emitter (New Objective) and a Nanospray-Flex ion source connected to an Orbitrap-Fusion mass spectrometer. The Orbitrap was operated in positive mode generating profile spectra at a resolution of 60.000 FWHM, AGC target was 1x106, maximum injection time 50 ms. The mass spectrometer was set to data-dependent mode of acquisition (top speed) and the most intense ions (threshold 5x103) were selected for HCD-fragmentation using nitrogen as a collision gas (33% HCD collision energy) by the Quadrupole (1.6 m/z window) and resulting fragments were analyzed by the Linear-Ion-Trap set to rapid scan rate, first mass 120 m/z, an AGC Target of 1x104, a maximum injection time of 50 ms and data type to centroid. Selected ions were excluded for reselection 60 (146 min gradient) seconds with a window of 20 ppm.

### Data Protocol
For the full proteome, MS spectra were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher). Proteins were identified using MASCOT search engine (Matrix Science) and the Uniprot Mus Musculus database (release 2015). Exact search settings can be read out from the .msf files attached.  For the ChIP-SICAP and ChIP-MS experiments, Proteome *.raw data was searched against Uniprot Mus Musculus database (release 2017_08) with MaxQuant 1.5.1.2. The proteomics data was further processed using Perseus software. To exclude false-positive interactors of Sox2, the only proteins included in the final analysis were either 1) exclusively present in the Sox2 pull-downs and not in the IgG pull downs in both biological replicates or 2) displayed at least 4-fold enrichment over the negative IgG control in both biological replicates. For exact settings, see MQ parameters file attached. For the ChIP-MS analysis in MaxQuant, the soluble and SICAP .raw files corresponding to each sample were analyzed like 2 fractions (details in the provided summary file).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Mouse, Neurons, Differentiation, Escs

### Affiliations
DKFZ, EMBL
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ)

### Submitter
Nade Abazova

### Lab Head
Dr Jeroen Krijgsveld
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ)


