### Accession
PXD016596

### Title
Analysis of EYA3 phosphorylation by Src kinase

### Description
Native MS analysis of prokaryotically expressed and purified EYA3. Native MS analysis of EYA3 phosphorylation by Src and EYA3 autodephosphorylation reaction.

### Sample Protocol
After the reactions were finished, samples were buffer exchanged to ammonium acetate at pH 6.8. Then, native mass spectrometry experiments were made, using EMR mass spectrometer(Thermo Fisher Sientific, Germany)

### Data Protocol
Results were analysed using programs Xcalibur™ Software (Thermo Scientific) and MassLynx™ v4.1 Software (Waters).

### Publication Abstract
Eyes absent (EYA) are non-thiol-based protein tyrosine phosphatases (PTPs) that also have transcriptional co-activator functions. Their PTP activity is involved in various pathologies. Recently, we demonstrated that Src tyrosine kinase phosphorylates human EYA3 by controlling its subcellular localization. We also found EYA3's ability to autodephosphorylate, while raising the question if the two opposing processes could be involved in maintaining a physiologically adequate level of phosphorylation. Using native and bottom-up mass spectrometry, we performed detailed mapping and characterization of human EYA3 Src-phosphorylation sites. Thirteen tyrosine residues with different phosphorylation and autodephosphorylation kinetics were detected. Among these, Y77, 96, 237, and 508 displayed an increased resistance to autodephosphorylation. Y77 and Y96 were found to have the highest impact on the overall EYA3 phosphorylation. Using cell cycle analysis, we showed that Y77, Y96, and Y237 are involved in HEK293T proliferation. Mutation of the three tyrosine residues abolished the pro-proliferative effect of EYA3 overexpression. We have also identified a Src-induced phosphorylation pattern of EYA3 in these cells. These findings suggest that EYA3's tyrosine phosphorylation sites are non-equivalent with their phosphorylation levels being under the control of Src-kinase activity and of EYA3's autodephosphorylation.

### Keywords
Tyrosine phosphorylation, Src, Eya3, Nlc-ms/ms, Native ms

### Affiliations
Instutue of Biochemistry of the Romanian Academy
Institute of Biochemistry of the Romanian Academy 

### Submitter
Aura Elena Ionescu

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan Eugen Szedlacsek
Instutue of Biochemistry of the Romanian Academy


