### Accession
PXD034410

### Title
UBR4 KO analysis with TMT labeling

### Description
The impact of NatC and UBR4 on the human proteome (protein abundance). Analysis of HAP1 WT siCtr, HAP1 WT siUBR4, HAP1 NAA30 KO siCtr, and HAP1 NAA30 KO siUBR4 cells.

### Sample Protocol
HAP1 WT and NAA30 KO2 cells were seeded at a density of 2x105 cell per 6-cm dish. After 24 h the cells were transfected with 20 nM of siRNA targeting UBE2M for 72 h using DharmaFECT1 (both from Horizon Discovery). Control treatment is referred to as transfection with non-targeting control siRNA. The cells were washed 2x in cold DPBS buffer (Gibco), detached by scraping in cold DBPS containing cOmplete protease inhibitor (Roche) and collected by centrifugation 2x16,000g for 20 sec. The cell pellets were flash frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at 80°C until further processing. There are four samples with four replicate each (16 tubes in total). Samples were prepared by following the S-Trap™ protocol (S-TrapTM mini, ProtiFi , cat. No. C02-mini-40). Cells were lysed in 100 μL S-trap lysis buffer (5% SDS in 50mM TEAB, pH 8.5) on ice. The cells were then sonicated 3 times for 15 s (with 1 min breaks on ice) each and centrifuged at 16 000 xg for 10 min at 4°C. The supernatant was collected and protein concentration was determined by BCA (PierceTM BCA Protein Assay Kit, Thermo scientific, cat.no. 23225) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. From each sample, 100 μg of protein material was taken and the volume was adjusted with S-trap lysis buffer to 46 µl. Subsequently, proteins were reduced  by addition of DTT (15 mM f.c.) for 15 min at 55°C followed by alkylation with iodoacetamide (30 mM f.c.) for 15 min in the dark. Next, 5 μL of 12% phosphoric acid (to a f.c. of 1.1%) was added. The pH of the samples was checked if this was <1. 350 µL of protein binding/wash buffer (90% MeOH, 100 mM TEAB, pH 7.55) was added to the samples before loading them onto the S-Trap column. Columns were centrifuged for 30 s at 4,000 xg and the flow-through was discarded. The column was washed three times by addition of 400 µl of binding/wash buffer and centrifuged 30 s at 4,000 xg. The samples were centrifuged a final time for 1 min at 4,000 g to completely remove the remaining binding/wash buffer. To each column, 125 μL digestion buffer (trypsin in 50 mM TEAB in a 1/100 (w/w)) was added and incubated ON at 37°C. Peptides were eluted in three steps: first, 80 μL elution buffer 1 (50 mM TEAB in ddH2O) was added and samples were centrifuged for 1 min at 4,000 x g. Followed by an addition of 80 μL of elution buffer 2 (0.1% FA in ddH2O) and second centrifugation. Finally, 80 μL of elution buffer 3 (50% ACN, 0.1% FA in ddH2O) was added and samples were centrifuged a third time. Elution fractions were pooled and samples are vacuum-dried.  Samples are re-dissolved in 100 µl 100 mM TEAB with 10% ACN pH8.5 and the peptide concentration was measured on Lunatic microfluidic device (Unchained Labs). For each samples 50 µg of peptide material was taken and volume was adjusted to 100 µl. TMTpro 16-plex labels (TMTpro™ 16plex Label Reagent Set, 1 x 0,5 mg , Thermo Fisher Scientific, A44521)were thawed at RT and suspended in 20 µL 100% ACN and vortexed vigorously. Each fraction was labelled corresponding to its temperature treatment by adding 10 µL label and incubating 1 h at RT (600 rpm). The reaction was quenched with 1:20 v:v 5% NH4OH (f.c. 0.25%) for 15 min at RT (600 rpm) and the 16 fractions were ultimately combined in one fresh Eppendorf. 100 µg of peptide material was taken and vacuum-dried. The labeled peptides were re-dissolved in 100 µl 0.1% TFA and 1 µl 100% TFA was added to lower the pH before clean-up.  Samples are desalted using OMIX C18 tips ( OMIX C18 pipette tips, 10 - 100 μL, 1 x 96 tips, Agilent technologies, cat. No. A57003100) per manufacturer’s instructions. Vacuum dried peptides were re-dissolved in 100 µl solvent A (0.1% TFA in water/ACN (98:2, v/v)) and injected for fractionation by RP-HPLC (Agilent series 1200) connected to a Probot fractionator (LC Packings). Peptides were first loaded in solvent A on a 4 cm pre-column (made in-house, 250 µm internal diameter (ID), 5 µm C18 beads, Dr. Maisch) for 10 min at 25 µl/min and then separated on a 15 cm analytical column (made in-house, 250 µm ID, 3 µm C18 beads, Dr Maisch). Elution was done using a linear gradient from 100% RP-HPLC solvent A (10 mM ammonium acetate (pH 5.5) in water/ACN (98:2, v/v)) to 100% RP-HPLC solvent B (70% ACN, 10 mM ammonium acetate (pH 5.5)) in 100 min at a constant flow rate of 3 µL/min. Fractions were collected every minute between 20 and 96 minutes and pooled every 12 minutes to generate a total of 12 samples for LC-MS/MS analysis. All 12 fractions were dried under vacuum in HPLC inserts and stored at −20°C until further use.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data acquisition. Purified peptides were re-dissolved in 20 μL loading solvent A (0.1% TFA in water/ACN (98:2, v/v)) and peptide concentration was measured on Lunatic microfluidic device (Unchained Labs). 2 μg of peptides were injected for LC-MS/MS analysis on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system in-line connected to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo). Trapping was performed at 10 μl/min for 4 min in loading solvent A on a 20 mm trapping column (made in-house, 100 μm internal diameter (I.D.), 5 μm beads, C18 Reprosil-HD (Dr. Maisch, Germany). The peptides were separated on a 200 cm µPAC column (C18-endcapped functionality, 300 μm wide channels, 5 μm porous-shell pillars, inter pillar distance of 2.5 μm and a depth of 20 μm; PharmaFluidics, Belgium). The column temperature was kept constant at 50°C. Peptides were eluted by a linear gradient reaching 55% MS solvent B (0.1% FA in water/acetonitrile (2:8, v/v)) after 85 min, 99% MS solvent B at 90 min, followed by a 10-min wash at 99% MS solvent B and re-equilibration with MS solvent A (0.1% FA in water). The first 15 min the flow rate was set to 750 nL/min after which it was kept constant at 300 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent top speed mode with a cycle time of 3 s, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition. Full-scan MS spectra (300-1500 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 120,000 in the Orbitrap analyzer after accumulation to an AGC value of 400,000 with a maximum injection time of 50 ms. The most intense ions above a threshold value of 50,000 and a charge state ranging from 2 to 7, subjected to a dynamic exclusion of 60 s, were isolated in the quadrupole for fragmentation in the ion routing multipole at a normalized collision energy of 37% after accumulation of precursor ions at a target value of 100,000 with a maximum of 86 ms with an isolation width of 0.9 Th. The fragments were analyzed in the orbitrap with a resolution of 50000. The generated MS/MS spectra were processed with MaxQuant (version 1.6.17.0) using the Andromeda search engine with default search settings, including a false discovery rate set at 1% on both the peptide and protein level. Spectra were searched against the sequences of the human proteins in the Swiss-Prot database (release January 2021). The enzyme specificity was set at trypsin/P, allowing for two missed cleavages. Variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionine residues and N-terminal protein acetylation. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was put as fixed modification.  In order to cope with the spectra that suffer from co-fragmentation, the precursor ion fraction (PIF) option was set to 75%. MS2-based quantification using TMTpro16plex labels was chosen as quantification method and a minimum ratio count of 2 peptides (both unique and razor) was required for quantification. Further data analysis was performed with the Perseus software (version 1.6.15.0) after loading the protein groups file from MaxQuant (load reporter ion intensities corrected per label). With Perseus, reverse proteins, proteins that are only identified by site and contaminants were removed. Samples were normalized by subtraction of the median per sample. Proteins with less than three valid values in at least one group were removed and missing values were imputed from a normal distribution around the detection limit. Then, a multiple sample t-test (false discovery rate (FDR)= 0.01) was performed to detect enrichments in the different samples. Also, t-tests (FDR= 0.01, S0=0.1) were performed between the different cell types.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ubr4, Hap1 ko cells, Lc-ms/ms, Tmt

### Affiliations
VIB - Center for medical Biotechnology
Ghent University - Department of Biomolecular Medicine
1VIB Center for Medical Biotechnology, VIB, Ghent, 9052, Belgium 2Department of Biomolecular Medicine, Ghent University, Ghent, 9052, Belgium

### Submitter
Annelies Bogaert

### Lab Head
Dr Kris Gevaert
1VIB Center for Medical Biotechnology, VIB, Ghent, 9052, Belgium 2Department of Biomolecular Medicine, Ghent University, Ghent, 9052, Belgium


