### Accession
PXD022584

### Title
The Arabidopsis NOT4A E3 ligase promotes PGR3 expression and regulates chloroplast function

### Description
Chloroplast function requires the coordinated action of nuclear- and chloroplast-derived proteins, including several hundred nuclear-encoded pentatricopeptide repeat (PPR) proteins that regulate plastid mRNA metabolism. Despite their large number and importance, regulatory mechanisms controlling PPR expression are poorly understood. Here we show that the Arabidopsis NOT4A ubiquitin-ligase positively regulates PROTON GRADIENT 3 (PGR3), a PPR protein required for translating 30S ribosome subunits and several thylakoid-localised photosynthetic components within chloroplasts.

### Sample Protocol
Col-0 and not4a plants were grown on 1/2 MS medium, supplemented with 0.8% sugar, for 30d under short day conditions. Plant material from three independent biological replicates was homogenized in Rensink extraction buffer (50 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.5, 100 mM NaCl, 0.5% (v/v) TritonX-100, 2 mM DTT and protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich)). LC separation and HD-MSE data acquisition was performed as previously described (Helm et al., 2014). In short, 100µg protein was digested in solution with RapiGestTM with 1 µg Trypsin (Promega) over night. Peptide pellets were dissolved in 2% (v/v) ACN, 0.1% (v/v) FA, and subjected to LC on an ACQUITY UPLC System coupled to a Synapt G2-S mass spectrometer (Waters, Eschborn, Germany). For quantification, the sample was spiked with 10 fmol rabbit glycogen phosphorylase and the abundance of the three most intense peptide ions were used as s reference value for 10 fmol (Hi-3 method, Silva et al., 2006).

### Data Protocol
Data analysis and quantification was carried out by ProteinLynx Global Server (PLGS 3.0.1, Apex3D algorithm v. 2.128.5.0, 64 bit, Waters, Eschborn, Germany) with automated determination of chromatographic peak width as well as MS TOF resolution. Database query was as follows: Peptide and fragment tolerances were set to automatic, two fragment ion matches per peptide, five fragment ions for protein identification, and two peptides per protein were required for identification. Primary digest reagent was trypsin with one missed cleavage allowed. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 4% at the protein level. MSE data were searched against the modified A. thaliana database (TAIR10, ftp://ftp.arabidopsis.org) containing common contaminants such as keratin (ftp://ftp.thegpm.org/fasta/cRAP/crap.fasta). All quantitative proteomics data were obtained with three independent biological replicates that were measured in three technical replicates each, giving rise to nine measurements per sample. Mapman was used to assign proteins to functional groups (Thimm et al., 2004). Statistical testing was based on a two-sided T-test (Helm et al., 2014).

### Publication Abstract
Chloroplast function requires the coordinated action of nuclear- and chloroplast-derived proteins, including several hundred nuclear-encoded pentatricopeptide repeat (PPR) proteins that regulate plastid mRNA metabolism. Despite their large number and importance, regulatory mechanisms controlling PPR expression are poorly understood. Here we show that the Arabidopsis NOT4A ubiquitin-ligase positively regulates the expression of PROTON GRADIENT REGULATION 3 (PGR3), a PPR protein required for translating several thylakoid-localised photosynthetic components and ribosome subunits within chloroplasts. Loss of NOT4A function leads to a strong depletion of cytochrome b<sub>6</sub>f and NAD(P)H dehydrogenase (NDH) complexes, as well as plastid 30&#x2009;S ribosomes, which reduces mRNA translation and photosynthetic capacity, causing pale-yellow and slow-growth phenotypes. Quantitative transcriptome and proteome analysis of the not4a mutant reveal it lacks PGR3 expression, and that its molecular defects resemble those of a pgr3 mutant. Furthermore, we show that normal plastid function is restored to not4a through transgenic PGR3 expression. Our work identifies NOT4A as crucial for ensuring robust photosynthetic function during development and stress-response, through&#xa0;promoting PGR3 production and chloroplast translation.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis, Pgr3 expression, Not4a e3 ligase

### Affiliations
Institut fuer Biochemie und Biotechnologie
PROF. DR. SACHA BAGINSKY Lehrstuhl für Biochemie der Pflanzen Gebäude ND 3/126 Universitätsstraße 150, 44801 Bochum

### Submitter
Sacha Baginsky

### Lab Head
Dr Sacha Baginsky
PROF. DR. SACHA BAGINSKY Lehrstuhl für Biochemie der Pflanzen Gebäude ND 3/126 Universitätsstraße 150, 44801 Bochum


