### Accession
PXD018268

### Title
Alt-RPL36 downregulates the PI3K-AKT-mTOR signaling pathway by interacting with TMEM24

### Description
While thousands of previously unannotated small and alternative open reading frames (alt-ORFs) have recently been revealed in the human genome, the functions of only a handful are currently known, leaving open the question of their biological significance as a class. Using a proteomic strategy for discovery of unannotated short open reading frames in human cells, we report the detection of alt-RPL36, a 148-amino acid protein co-encoded with and overlapping human RPL36. Alt-RPL36 interacts with TMEM24, which transports the phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate [PI(4,5)P2] precursor phosphatidylinositol from the endoplasmic reticulum to the plasma membrane. Knock-out of alt-RPL36 in HEK 293T cells increased PI(4,5)P2 levels in the plasma membrane and upregulated the PI3K-AKT-mTOR signaling pathway. Remarkably, we find that four serine residues of alt-RPL36 are phosphorylated, and mutation of these four serines to alanine abolished the interaction with TMEM24 and regulation of PI3K signaling. These results implicate alt-RPL36 as a novel regulator of PI(4,5)P2 synthesis upstream of the PI3K-AKT-mTOR signaling pathway, and the first example of a phosphorylated alt-ORF product. More broadly, both alt-RPL36 and RPL36 regulate protein synthesis and cell growth via different molecular mechanisms – AKT signaling and ribosome composition, respectively. One human transcript can therefore express two sequence-independent polypeptides from overlapping ORFs that regulate the same processes via distinct mechanisms.

### Sample Protocol
Protein-containing gel slices were digested with trypsin at 37℃ for 14-16 h. The resulting peptide mixtures were extracted from the gel, dried, followed with ethyl acetate extraction to remove residual detergent, then re-suspended in 15 µl of 3:8 70% formic acid:0.1% TFA. A 5 μL aliquot of each sample was injected onto a pre-packed column attached to a nanoAcquity UPLC (Waters) in-line with an LTQ Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Scientific) and a 90-min gradient was used to further separate the peptide mixtures as follows (solvent A: 0.1% formic acid; solvent B: acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid): Single pump trapping was turned on for 6 min at a flow rate of 2.5 μL/min at 98% A. Isocratic flow was maintained at 0.3 μL/min at 2% B for 10 min, followed by linear gradients from 2 to 10 % B over 2 min, 10 % B to 25 % B over 58 min, 25 % B to 40 % B over 10 min, 40 % B to 95 % B over 2 min. Isocratic flow at 95 % B was maintained for 5 min, followed by a gradient from 95 % B to 2 % B over 10 min. The column flow rate was 0.3 μL/min. The full MS was collected over the mass range of 298-1,750 m/z with a resolution of 30,000. MS/MS data was collected using a top10 high-collisional energy dissociation method in data-dependent mode with a normalized collision energy of 33.0 eV and a 2.0 m/z isolation window. The first mass was 100 m/z in fixed mode. MS/MS resolution was 7,500 and dynamic exclusion was 60 seconds.

### Data Protocol
ProteoWizard MS Convert was used for peak picking and files were analyzed using Mascot. For co-IP proteomics searches and semiquantitative analysis, oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. For phosphoproteomics searches, phosphorylation of Ser, Thr and Tyr, oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. A mass deviation of 20 p.p.m. was set for MS1 peaks, and 0.6 Da was set as maximum allowed MS/MS peaks with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Maximum false discovery rates (FDR) were set to 1% both on peptide and protein levels. Minimum required peptide length was five amino acids. Protein quantitation was accomplished via spectral counting, where the number of total peptides observed for each identified protein was taken as the total spectral counts and compared for the IP vs. negative control samples.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human microprotein alt-protein phosphoproteomics

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School
Department of Chemistry, Yale University  West Campus Chemical Biology Institute

### Submitter
Alexandra Khitun

### Lab Head
Dr Sarah Ann Slavoff
Department of Chemistry, Yale University  West Campus Chemical Biology Institute


