### Accession
PXD033147

### Title
The Periodontal Pathogen Fusobacterium nucleatum Exacerbates Alzheimer’s Pathogenesis via Specific Pathways

### Description
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is the most common form of dementia in older adults and has a devastating impact on the patient’s quality of life, which creates a significant socio-economic burden for the affected individuals and their families. In recent years, studies have identified a relationship between periodontitis and AD. Periodontitis is an infectious/inflammatory disease that destroys the supporting periodontal structure leading to tooth loss. Dysbiosis of the oral microbiome plays a significant role in the onset and development of periodontitis exhibiting a shift to overgrowth of pathobionts in the normal microflora with increasing local inflammation. Fusobacterium nucleatum is a common pathogen that significantly overgrows in periodontitis and has also been linked to various systemic diseases. Earlier studies have reported that antibodies to F. nucleatum can be detected in the serum of patients with AD or cognitive impairment, but a causal relationship and a plausible mechanism linking the two diseases have not been identified. In this study, we conducted both in vivo and in vitro experiments and found that F. nucleatum activates microglial cells causing morphological changes, accelerated proliferation and enhanced expression of TNF-α and IL-1β. In our in vivo experiments, we found that F. nucleatum-induced periodontitis resulted in the exacerbation of Alzheimer’s symptoms in 5XFAD mice including increased cognitive impairment, beta-amyloid accumulation and Tau protein phosphorylation in the mouse cerebrum. This study may suggest a possible link between a periodontal pathogen and AD and F. nucleatum could be a risk factor in the pathogenesis of AD. We are currently further identifying the pathways through which F. nucleatum modulates molecular elements in enhancing AD symptoms and signs.

### Sample Protocol
Six mouse brain samples were received and prepared for lysates; protein concentrations were measured using BCA method. Equal amount of total protein (50 μg) from of each of six samples was processed for MS analysis. In brief, the same amount of protein (100 μg) from each of six samples was processed for trypsin digestion followed by TMT-multiplex labeling using a TMT 7plex. Six unique TMT tags were used to label trypsin-digested peptides from six samples and one TMT tag was used to label a master mix of equal amount tryptic peptides from the six samples.Resuspend the dried labeled peptides in 10 mM TEABC. Determine the labeling efficiency before fractionation by analysis of a small aliquot of the sample (1%). A minimum 95% of labeling efficiency is required. The fractionation of TMT-11plex labeled peptide mixture is carried out using an Agilent AdvanceBio Column (2.7 μm, 2.1 x 250 mm) at Solvent A (10 mM TEABC, pH 8.0) and an Agilent UHPLC 1290 system. The separation is performed by running a gradient of Solvent B (10 mM TEABC, pH 8.0, 90% ACN) and Solvent A (10 mM TEABC, pH 8.0) at the flow rate 250 μL/min. The elute fractions are collected into a 96-well plate using a 1260 series auto-sample fraction collector. The 96 elute fractions are further combined into 24 fractions according to collection time (e.g. Ax/Cx/Ex/Gx, and Bx/Dx/Fx/Hx, A/B/C/D/E/F/G/H represents column, x represents row 1 through row 12) for LC/MS/MS analysis.The LC/MS/MS analysis is carried out using a Thermo Scientific Q-Exactive hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer and a Thermo Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano System. Each peptide fraction from a set of 24 fractions is loaded onto a peptide trap cartridge at a flow rate of 5 μL/min. The trapped peptides was eluted onto a reversed-phase 20 cm C18 PicoFrit column (New Objective, Woburn, MA) using a linear gradient of acetonitrile (3-36%) in 0.1% formic acid. The elution duration is 110 min at a flow rate of 0.3 μL/min. Eluted peptides from the PicoFrit column is ionized and sprayed into the mass spectrometer, using a Nanospray Flex Ion Source ES071 (Thermo) under the following settings: spray voltage, 1.8 kV, Capillary temperature, 250°C. 24 fractions were analyzed sequentially.

### Data Protocol
The Q Exactive instrument is operated in the data dependent mode to automatically switch between full scan MS and MS/MS acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (m/z 350−1800) was acquired in the Orbitrap with 35,000 resolutions (m/z 200) after an accumulation of ions to a 3 × 10e6 target value based on predictive automatic gain control (AGC). The maxima injection time was set to 100 ms. The 15 most intense multiply charged ions (z ≥ 2) were sequentially isolated and fragmented in the octopole collision cell by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) using normalized HCD collision energy 30 with an AGC target 1×105 and a maxima injection time of 400 ms at 17,500 resolutions. The isolation window was set to 2 and fixed first mass was 120 m/z. The dynamic exclusion was set to 20 s. Charge state screening was enabled to reject unassigned and 1+, 7+, 8+, and >8+ ions. One sets of 24 MS Raw data files acquired from analysis of 24 fractions are searched against mouse protein sequences database obtained from UniprotKB website using the Proteome Discoverer 2.4 software (Thermo, San Jose, CA) based on the SEQUEST and percolator algorithms. The false positive discovery rates (FDR) was set on 1%. The resulting Proteome Discoverer Report contains all assembled proteins with peptides sequences and peptide spectrum match counts (PSM#) and TMT-tag based quantification ratio.

### Publication Abstract
Alzheimer's Disease (AD) is the most common form of dementia in older adults and has a devastating impact on the patient's quality of life, which creates a significant socio-economic burden for the affected individuals and their families. In recent years, studies have identified a relationship between periodontitis and AD. Periodontitis is an infectious/inflammatory disease that destroys the supporting periodontal structure leading to tooth loss. Dysbiosis of the oral microbiome plays a significant role in the onset and development of periodontitis exhibiting a shift to overgrowth of pathobionts in the normal microflora with increasing local inflammation. <i>Fusobacterium nucleatum</i> is a common pathogen that significantly overgrows in periodontitis and has also been linked to various systemic diseases. Earlier studies have reported that antibodies to <i>F. nucleatum</i> can be detected in the serum of patients with AD or cognitive impairment, but a causal relationship and a plausible mechanism linking the two diseases have not been identified. In this study, we conducted both <i>in vivo</i> and <i>in vitro</i> experiments and found that <i>F. nucleatum</i> activates microglial cells causing morphological changes, accelerated proliferation and enhanced expression of TNF-&#x3b1; and IL-1&#x3b2; in microglial cells. In our <i>in vivo</i> experiments, we found that <i>F. nucleatum</i>-induced periodontitis resulted in the exacerbation of Alzheimer's symptoms in 5XFAD mice including increased cognitive impairment, beta-amyloid accumulation and Tau protein phosphorylation in the mouse cerebrum. This study may suggest a possible link between a periodontal pathogen and AD and <i>F. nucleatum</i> could be a risk factor in the pathogenesis of AD. We are currently further identifying the pathways through which <i>F. nucleatum</i> modulates molecular elements in enhancing AD symptoms and signs. Data are available <i>via</i> ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD033147.

### Keywords
F. nucleatum, Alzheimer’s disease, Periodontitis, Mouse model, Inflammation

### Affiliations
Tufts University
Southern Medical University

### Submitter
Hongle WU

### Lab Head
Dr Jake Chen
Tufts University


