### Accession
PXD024040

### Title
Investigating the target and off-target landscape of PLK1 small molecule inhibitor volasertib

### Description
In this study we aimed to identify off-targets of polo-like kinase 1 (Plk1) small molecule inhibitor volasertib. Plk1 is an important cell cycle kinase and an attractive target for anticancer treatment. Volasertib is ATP-competitive small molecules that may also block the ATP-pocket of other proteins. Despite the fatal infections and negative survival in a phase III trial on volasertib in acute myeloid leukemia volasertib has been a promising treatment option in children with rhabdomyosarcoma. Therefore, there is a need to understand the nature of adverse effects that possibly originate from the off-target proteins. We used thermal proteome profiling (TPP) to identify proteins that have a change in the thermal stability after treatment with volasertib. The temperature of aggregation of several proteins involved in prostaglandin and phosphatidyl-inositol phosphate metabolism increased after treatment with volasertib. PIP4K2A and ZADH2 were stabilized both by treatment in living cells and cell lysate. Functional disruption of these proteins affects the immune response and fatty acid metabolism. In addition, volasertib was found to affect transcriptional coactivators, normal and alternative RNA splicing regulators and proteins involved in the intracellular transport regulation. Our data suggests that the identified proteins may contribute more to the understanding of anti-tumor effect of volasertib.

### Sample Protocol
The cell pellets from triplicate experiments were dissolved in 500 µl Lysis buffer (4% SDS, 50 mM HEPES pH 7.6, 1 mM DTT), heated to 95°C and sonicated. The total protein amount was estimated (Bio-Rad DC). Protein (200 µg) digestion (LysC and trypsin, sequencing grade modified, Pierce) was performed using SP3-protocol (Hughes CS et al. Mol Syst Biol 2014). Seventy µg of peptides from each sample were labeled with isobaric TMTpro™ -tags (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Before labelling, samples were pH adjusted using TEAB pH 8.5 (100 mM final conc.). Labeled peptide samples were pooled and cleaned by solid phase extraction (SPE strata-X-C, Phenomenex) and dried in a SpeedVac. Approximately 500 µg of pooled peptides were prefractionated using High resolution isoelectric focusing (HiRIEF) as previously described (Branca RMM et al Nat Methods 2014) using the peptide IEF-IPG (isoelectric focusing by immobilized pH gradient) in the pI range 3-10. The resulting fractions were dried and kept at -20°C.

### Data Protocol
Orbitrap raw MS/MS files were converted to mzML format using msConvert from the ProteoWizard tool suite (Holman et al., 2014). Spectra were then searched using MSGF+ (v10072) (Kim and Pevzner, 2014) and Percolator (v2.08) (Granholm et al., 2014), where search results from 8 subsequent fraction were grouped for Percolator target/decoy analysis. All searches were done against the human protein subset of Ensembl 99 in the Galaxy platform (Boekel et al., 2015). MSGF+ settings included precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, fully-tryptic peptides, maximum peptide length of 50 amino acids and a maximum charge of 6. Fixed modifications were TMT-10plex on lysines and peptide N-termini, and carbamidomethylation on cysteine residues, a variable modification was used for oxidation on methionine residues. Quantification of TMT-10plex reporter ions was done using OpenMS project's IsobaricAnalyzer (v2.0) (Sturm et al., 2008). PSMs found at 1% FDR (false discovery rate) were used to infer gene identities. Protein quantification by TMT10plex reporter ions was calculated using TMT PSM ratios to the entire sample set (all 10 TMT-channels) and normalized to the sample median. The median PSM TMT reporter ratio from peptides unique to a gene symbol was used for quantification. Protein false discovery rates were calculated using the picked-FDR method using gene symbols as protein groups and limited to 1% FDR (Savitski et al., 2015).

### Publication Abstract
Polo-like kinase 1 (PLK1) is an important cell cycle kinase and an attractive target for anticancer treatments. An ATP-competitive small molecular PLK1 inhibitor, volasertib, has reached phase III in clinical trials in patients with refractory acute myeloid leukemia as a combination treatment with cytarabine. However, severe side effects limited its use. The origin of the side effects is unclear and might be due to insufficient specificity of the drug. Thus, identifying potential off-targets to volasertib is important for future clinical trials and for the development of more specific drugs. In this study, we used thermal proteome profiling (TPP) to identify proteome-wide targets of volasertib. Apart from PLK1 and proteins regulated by PLK1, we identified about 200 potential volasertib off-targets. Comparison of this result with the mass-spectrometry analysis of volasertib-treated cells showed that phosphatidylinositol phosphate and prostaglandin metabolism pathways are affected by volasertib. We confirmed that PIP4K2A and ZADH2-marker proteins for these pathways-are, indeed, stabilized by volasertib. PIP4K2A, however, was not affected by another PLK1 inhibitor onvansertib, suggesting that PIP4K2A is a true off-target of volasertib. Inhibition of these proteins is known to impact both the immune response and fatty acid metabolism and could explain some of the side effects seen in volasertib-treated patients.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Plk1, Leukemia, Volasertib

### Affiliations
Karolinska Institutet
Rozbeh Jafari, Karoliniska Institutet, Department of Oncology-Pathology (lab head)

### Submitter
Rozbeh Jafari

### Lab Head
Dr Rozbeh Jafari
Rozbeh Jafari, Karoliniska Institutet, Department of Oncology-Pathology (lab head)


