### Accession
PXD012860

### Title
Cdc14 and PP2A Phosphatases Cooperate to Shape Phosphoproteome Dynamics during Mitotic Exit

### Description
Temporal control over protein phosphorylation and dephosphorylation is crucial for accurate chromosome segregation and for completion of the cell division cycle during exit from mitosis. In budding yeast, the Cdc14 phosphatase is thought to be a major regulator at this time, while in higher eukaryotes PP2A phosphatases take a dominant role. Here, we use time-resolved phosphoproteome analysis in budding yeast to evaluate the respective contributions of Cdc14 and the two main PP2A isoforms, PP2A(Cdc55) and PP2A(Rts1). This reveals an overlapping requirement for all three phosphatases during mitotic progression. Cdc14 instructs the sequential pattern of phosphorylation changes, in part through its preferential recognition of serine-based cyclin-dependent kinase (Cdk) substrates. PP2A(Cdc55) and PP2A(Rts1) in turn exhibit a broad substrate spectrum with some selectivity for phospho-threonines and a role for PP2A(Rts1) in sustaining Aurora kinase activity. Our results illustrate synergy and coordination between phosphatases as they orchestrate phosphoproteome dynamics during mitotic progression.

### Sample Protocol
300 µg of each protein sample was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 25 min at 56 C, alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in the dark, then quenched with 7.5 mM DTT. Samples were diluted with 50 mM HEPES (pH 8.5), prior to trypsin digestion overnight at 37 C. Peptides were acidified and desalted using a C18 SepPak column under vacuum and dried. The samples were arranged in sets of 10 and labeled using a TMT10plex Isobaric Label Reagent Set, as per the manufacturer's instructions. Following labeling and mixing, multiplexed samples were again desalted using a C18 SepPak column. Phosphopeptide enrichment was performed by the use of a High-Select TiO2 Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit followed by a High-Select Fe-NTA Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit for the non-bound flowthrough fractions. Phosphopeptides were eluted, desalted using a C18 StageTip and analysed in triplicate on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer coupled to an UltiMate 3000 HPLC system for on-line liquid chromatographic separation. Each run consisted of a three hour gradient elution from a 75 µm x 50 cm C18 column.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (version 1.5.0.13) was used for all data processing. The data was searched against a UniProt extracted Saccharomyces cerevisiae proteome FASTA file, amended to include common contaminants. Default MaxQuant parameters were used with Phospho(STY) being added as a variable modification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pp2a, Tmt, Cdc14, Orbitrap, Phosphatase, Mitotosis

### Affiliations
The Francis Crick Institute
Mass Spectrometry Proteomics Science Technology Platform, The Francis Crick Institute

### Submitter
Andrew Jones

### Lab Head
Dr Bram Snijders
Mass Spectrometry Proteomics Science Technology Platform, The Francis Crick Institute


