### Accession
PXD026638

### Title
Chromatin remodeler Brahma safeguards labile canalization of cardiac mesoderm differentiation

### Description
Differentiation proceeds along a continuum of increasingly fate-restricted intermediates, referred to as canalization. Canalization is essential for stabilizing cell fate, but mechanisms underlying robust canalization are unclear. Here we show that the BRG1/BRM-associated factor (BAF) chromatin remodeling complex ATPase gene Brm safeguards cell identity during directed cardiogenesis of mouse embryonic stem cells. Despite establishment of well-differentiated precardiac mesoderm, Brm-null cells predominantly became neural precursors, violating germ layer assignment. Trajectory inference showed sudden acquisition of non-mesodermal identity in Brm-null cells, consistent with a new transition state referred to as a saddle-node bifurcation. Mechanistically, loss of Brm prevented de novo accessibility of cardiac enhancers while increasing expression of neurogenic factor POU3F1, preventing expression of neural suppressor REST, and disrupting composition of BRG1 complexes. Brm mutant identity switch was overcome by increasing BMP4 levels during mesoderm induction. Mathematical modeling supports all our observations. In the mouse embryo, Brm deletion exacerbated mesoderm-deleted Brg1 mutant phenotypes, severely compromising cardiogenesis, unmasking an in vivo role for Brm. Our results reveal Brm as a compensable safeguard of the fidelity of mesoderm chromatin states, and support a model in which developmental canalization is not a rigid irreversible path, but a highly plastic trajectory.

### Sample Protocol
BRG1 complexes were affinity purified using anti-FLAG antibody conjugated agarose gel and mass spectrometry performed as described previously5. Briefly, nuclear extract was prepared form 100 x 106 cells of each genotype, BMP4 condition and stage of differentiation, followed by affinity purification and FLAG elution.  Samples derived from the affinity purification were denatured and reduced in 1.7M urea, 50mM tris, and 1mM DTT for 30 min at 37°C, then alkylated with 3 mM iodoacetamide for 45 min at room temperature in dark. Trypsin was added for overnight proteolytic digestion at 37°C. Following digestion, samples were desalted using C18 Ultra Micro Spin Columns according to the manufacturer’s specifications. Desalted samples were evaporated to dryness and resuspended in 1% formic acid for mass spectrometry analysis. Digested samples were analyzed on an Orbitrap Lumos mass spectrometry system equipped  with  an  Easy  nLC  1200  ultra-high  pressure  liquid  chromatography system interfaced via a Nanospray Flex nanoelectrospray source. For all analyses, samples were injected on a C18 reverse phase column (15 cm x 75 μm packed with BEH  1.7  μm  particles).  Mobile  phase  A  consisted  of  0.1%  FA,  and  mobile  phase  B consisted of 0.1% FA/80% ACN. Peptides were separated by an organic gradient from 5% to 30% mobile phase B over 112 minutes followed by an increase to 58% B over 12 minutes, then held at 90% B for 16 minutes at a flow rate of 350 nL/minute. Analytical columns were equilibrated with 6  μL  of  mobile  phase  A. The peptides were separated over a gradient from 3% to 24% B in 38 min followed by an increase of B up to 32% over 9 min at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The mass spectrometer collected data in a data-dependent fashion, collecting one full scan in the Orbitrap at 120,000 resolution over a m/z range from 350-1250. Peptides   with   charge   states   2-6   were   selected for MS/MS interrogation using higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD), MS/MS scans were collected with a fixed cycle time of 2 seconds. Dynamic exclusion was enabled for 30 s with a repeat count of 1.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry data were analyzed using the MaxQuant software package (version 1.6.12.0). Data were matched to the SwissProt mouse protein sequences (downloaded from UniProt in November 2020). MaxQuant was configured to generate and search against a reverse sequence database for false discovery rate (FDR) calculations. Variable modifications were allowed for methionine oxidation and protein N-terminus acetylation. A fixed modification was indicated for cysteine carbamidomethylation. Full trypsin specificity was required. The first search was performed with a mass accuracy of ±20 ppm and the main search was performed with a mass accuracy of ±6ppm. A maximum of five modifications were allowed per peptide. A maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. The maximum charge allowed was 7+. Individual peptide mass tolerances were allowed. For MS/MS matching, a mass tolerance of 0.5 Da was allowed and the top six peaks per 100 Da were analyzed. MS/MS matching was allowed for higher charge states, water and ammonia loss events. The data were filtered to obtain a peptide, protein and site-level FDR of 0.01. The minimum peptide length was seven amino acids. Results were matched between runs with a time window of 0.7 min. All precursor (MS1) intensities of valid peptide matches were quantified by the Maxquant LFQ algorithm using the match between runs option to minimize missing values.

### Publication Abstract
Differentiation proceeds along a continuum of increasingly fate-restricted intermediates, referred to as canalization<sup>1,2</sup>. Canalization is essential for stabilizing cell fate, but the mechanisms that underlie robust canalization are unclear. Here we show that the BRG1/BRM-associated factor (BAF) chromatin-remodelling complex ATPase gene Brm safeguards cell identity during directed cardiogenesis of mouse embryonic stem cells. Despite the establishment of a well-differentiated precardiac mesoderm, Brm<sup>-/-</sup> cells predominantly became neural precursors, violating germ layer assignment. Trajectory inference showed a sudden acquisition of a non-mesodermal identity in Brm<sup>-/-</sup> cells. Mechanistically, the loss of Brm prevented de novo accessibility of primed cardiac enhancers while increasing the expression of neurogenic factor POU3F1, preventing the binding of the neural suppressor REST and shifting the composition of BRG1 complexes. The identity switch caused by the Brm mutation was overcome by increasing BMP4 levels during mesoderm induction. Mathematical modelling supports these observations and demonstrates that Brm deletion affects cell fate trajectory by modifying saddle-node bifurcations<sup>2</sup>. In the mouse embryo, Brm deletion exacerbated mesoderm-deleted Brg1-mutant phenotypes, severely compromising cardiogenesis, and reveals an in vivo role for Brm. Our results show that Brm is a compensable safeguard of the fidelity of mesoderm chromatin states, and support a model in which developmental canalization is not a rigid irreversible path, but a highly plastic trajectory.

### Keywords
Ap-ms, Cardiac differentiation

### Affiliations
UCSF
Celleluar and Molecular Pharmacology, UCSF

### Submitter
Ruth Huttenhain

### Lab Head
Dr Ruth Huttenhain
Celleluar and Molecular Pharmacology, UCSF


