### Accession
PXD010699

### Title
Chlamydomonas reinhardtii flagella cc125 ift139-2 dhc1b-3

### Description
As part of a cryo EM study of IFT trains in Chlamydomonas flagella we used two mutants with defects in IFT139 or DHC1b. To determine what proteins were missing in the flagella of the mutants we did a proteomic analysis of the membrane matrix fraction from flagella isolated from the mutants.

### Sample Protocol
To analyze the protein composition of flagella of mutant cells, flagella were isolated by the dibucaine method (Witman https://doi.org/10.1016/0076-6879(86)34096-5) and were extracted with 0.1% Iepal. Following sedimentation of the insoluble axonemes, the soluble ‘membrane and matrix’ fraction was analyzed by mass spectrometry. To this end, proteins were precipitated with isopropanol, digested with trypsin and analyzed by LC MS/MS on an Ultimate3000 nanoLC system interfaced on-line to a LTQ Orbitrap Velos hybrid tandem mass spectrometer (both Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) <<Knittelfelder etat, 10.1021/acs.analchem.8b02004>>.

### Data Protocol
Database search against C. reinhardtii sequences (UniProt, October 2017, 15248 entries) was performed using Mascot software (v.2.2.04, Matrix Science, London, UK). Protein hits were evaluated by Scaffold (v.4.7.5, Proteome Software, Portland, US) and accepted if matched with one peptide under 90% peptide and protein probabilities. Peptide and protein false discovery rates (FDR) were below 1% as calculated by Scaffold. ProteinRelative intensities for identified proteins were calculated by MaxQuant (v.1.5.7.0) <<Cox etat.  10.1038/nbt.1511>> using default settings; “match-between-runs” function was disabled.

### Publication Abstract
Movement of cargos along microtubules plays key roles in diverse cellular processes, from signalling to mitosis. In cilia, rapid movement of ciliary components along the microtubules to and from the assembly site is essential for the assembly and disassembly of the structure itself<sup>1</sup>. This bidirectional transport, known as intraflagellar transport (IFT)<sup>2</sup>, is driven by the anterograde motor kinesin-2<sup>3</sup> and the retrograde motor dynein-1b (dynein-2 in mammals)<sup>4,5</sup>. However, to drive retrograde transport, dynein-1b must first be delivered to the ciliary tip by anterograde IFT<sup>6</sup>. Although, the presence of opposing motors in bidirectional transport processes often leads to periodic stalling and slowing of cargos<sup>7</sup>, IFT is highly processive<sup>1,2,8</sup>. Using cryo-electron tomography, we show that a tug-of-war between kinesin-2 and dynein-1b is prevented by loading dynein-1b onto anterograde IFT trains in an autoinhibited form and by positioning it away from the microtubule track to prevent binding. Once at the ciliary tip, dynein-1b must transition into an active form and engage microtubules to power retrograde trains. These findings provide a striking example of how coordinated structural changes mediate the behaviour of complex cellular machinery.

### Keywords
Flagella cilia intraflagellar transport ift membrane matrix

### Affiliations
MPI-CBG Dresden, Germany
MPI-CBG

### Submitter
Dennis Diener

### Lab Head
Dr Gaia Pigino
MPI-CBG Dresden, Germany


