### Accession
PXD023992

### Title
Spotlight on alternative frame coding: two long overlapping genes in Pseudomonas aeruginosa are translated and under purifying selection

### Description
The existence of overlapping genes (OLGs) with significant coding overlaps revolutionises our understanding of genomic complexity. We report two exceptionally long (957 nt and 1536 nt), evolutionarily novel, translated antisense open reading frames (ORFs) embedded within annotated genes in the medically important Gram-negative bacterium Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Both OLG pairs show sequence features consistent with being genes and transcriptional signals in RNA sequencing data. Translation of both OLGs was confirmed by ribosome profiling and mass spectrometry. Quantitative proteomics of samples taken during different phases of growth revealed regulation of protein abundances, implying biological functionality. Both OLGs are taxonomically highly restricted, and likely arose by overprinting within the genus. Evidence for purifying selection further supports functionality. The OLGs reported here, designated olg1 and olg2, are the longest yet proposed in prokaryotes and are among the best attested in terms of translation and evolutionary constraint. These results highlight a potentially large unexplored dimension of prokaryotic genomes.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysis and protein digest for mass spectrometry. Cells were lysed in 100 µL absolute TFA (Sigma-Aldrich; 5 min, 55°C, shaking at 1,000 rpm) and neutralized with 900 µL 2 M Tris95. Protein concentration was determined using Bradford reagent (B6916, Sigma-Aldrich). For offline high pH reversed-phase (hpH RP) fractionation and for targeted proteomics, 75 µg and 20 µg of total protein amount were reduced and alkylated (10 mM TCEP, 55 mM CAA; 5 min, 95°C), respectively. Water-diluted samples (1:1) were subjected to proteolysis with trypsin (enzyme to protein ratio 1:50, 30°C, overnight, shaking at 400 rpm) and then stopped (3% formic acid, FA).   Offline high pH reversed-phase fractionation for full proteome analysis. Three discs of Empore C18 (3M) material were packed in 200-µL pipette tips. The resulting desalting columns were conditioned (100% acetonitrile, ACN) and equilibrated (40% ACN/0.1% FA) followed by 2% ACN/0.1% FA. Peptides of the 75-µg protein digest were loaded, washed (2% ACN/0.1% FA) and eluted (40% ACN/0.1% FA). Next, peptides were fractionated using an Agilent 1100 series HPLC system operating a XBridge BEH130 C18 3.5 µm 2.1 × 250 mm column (Waters) at a flow rate of 200 µL/min. Buffer A was 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.0), buffer B was 80% ACN. Fractions were collected every minute into a 96 well plate. Peptides were separated by a linear gradient from 4% to 32% buffer B over 45 min, followed by a gradient from 32% to 85% buffer B over 6 min. Samples were collected in 30 s steps between minute 3 and 51. The solvent was evaporated and samples were redissolved in 2% ACN/0.1% FA.  LC-MS/MS measurements - Full proteomes. Peptides were analysed on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system coupled to a Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For full proteome analyses, 0.5 µg of peptides were delivered to a trap column (ReproSil-pur C18-AQ, 5 μm, 20 mm × 75 µm, Dr. Maisch, self-packed) at a flow rate of 5 µL/min of solvent A (HPLC-grade water with 0.1% FA). After loading (10 min), peptides were transferred to an analytical column (ReproSil Gold C18-AQ, 3 µm, 450 mm × 75 μm, Dr. Maisch, self-packed) and separated using a 50-min linear gradient from 4% to 32% of solvent B (ACN/0.1% FA/5% dimethyl sulfoxide, DMSO) in solvent A (HPLC-grade water with 0.1% FA/5% DMSO) at 300 nL/min flow rate. Both solvents contain DMSO boosting MS intensity. The Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) and positive ionization mode. MS1 spectra (360–1300 m/z) were recorded at a resolution of 60,000 using an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 4×105 and maximum injection time (MaxIT) of 50 ms. Up to 20 peptide precursors were selected for fragmentation in case of the full proteome analyses. Only precursors with charge state 2 to 6 were selected and dynamic exclusion of 20 s was enabled. Peptide fragmentation was performed using higher energy collision induced dissociation (HCD) and a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 30%. The precursor isolation window width was set to 1.3 m/z. MS2 spectra were acquired in the orbitrap with a resolution of 15.000 and an AGC target value of 5x104. MaxIT was set to 22 ms.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometric data analysis - Full proteomes. Peptide identification and quantification was performed using MaxQuant (v1.6.3.4) with Andromeda. MS2 spectra were searched against the RefSeq file downloaded for P. aeruginosa PAO1 (GCF_000006765.1_ASM676v1_protein.faa, 5,572 reviewed entries, 7 Feburary 2020), supplemented with common contaminants (by MaxQuant) and Olg1 and Olg2 AA sequences. Trypsin/P was specified as proteolytic enzyme. Precursor tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm and fragment ion tolerance to 20 ppm. Results were adjusted to 1% FDR on peptide spectrum match level and protein level employing a target-decoy approach using reversed protein sequences. Minimal peptide length was defined as 7 AA; the “match-between-run” function disabled. For full proteome analyses, carbamidomethylated cysteine was set as fixed and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications. Correlation scores (dot product) between experimental and predicted spectra were calculated via Skyline daily (64-bit, v20.1.9.234) that supports Prosit spectra predictions. For data analysis, protein intensities and iBAQ values were used.

### Publication Abstract
The existence of overlapping genes (OLGs) with significant coding overlaps revolutionizes our understanding of genomic complexity. We report two exceptionally long (957 nt and 1536 nt), evolutionarily novel, translated antisense open reading frames (ORFs) embedded within annotated genes in the pathogenic Gram-negative bacterium <i>Pseudomonas aeruginosa</i>. Both OLG pairs show sequence features consistent with being genes and transcriptional signals in RNA sequencing. Translation of both OLGs was confirmed by ribosome profiling and mass spectrometry. Quantitative proteomics of samples taken during different phases of growth revealed regulation of protein abundances, implying biological functionality. Both OLGs are taxonomically restricted, and likely arose by overprinting within the genus. Evidence for purifying selection further supports functionality. The OLGs reported here, designated <i>olg1</i> and <i>olg2</i>, are the longest yet proposed in prokaryotes and are among the best attested in terms of translation and evolutionary constraint. These results highlight a potentially large unexplored dimension of prokaryotic genomes.

### Keywords
Overprinting, Overlapping genes, De novo gene origin, Orphan genes, Mass spectrometry, Ribosome profiling

### Affiliations
Bavarian Center for Biomolecuar Mass Spectrometry (BayBioMS, Technical University of Munich (TUM), Freising, Germany
TU Munich

### Submitter
Christina Ludwig

### Lab Head
Dr Christina Ludwig
Bavarian Center for Biomolecuar Mass Spectrometry (BayBioMS, Technical University of Munich (TUM), Freising, Germany


