### Accession
PXD032292

### Title
Identification and analysis of phosphorylation within Xenopus laevis linker histone H1.0

### Description
As a key structural component of the chromatin of higher eukaryotes, linker histones (H1s) are involved in stabilizing the folding of extended nucleosome arrays into higher-order chromatin structures and function as a gene-specific regulators of transcription in vivo. The H1 C-terminal domain (CTD) is essential for high affinity binding of linker histones to chromatin and stabilization of higher-order chromatin structure. Importantly, the H1 CTD is an intrinsically disordered domain that undergoes a drastic condensation upon binding to nucleosomes. Moroever, although phosphorylation is a prevalent posttranslational modification (PTM) within the H1 CTD, exactly where this modification is installed and how phosphorylation influences the structure of the H1 CTD remains unclear for many H1s.  Using novel mass spectrometry techniques, we identified six phosphorylation sites within the CTD of the archetypal linker histone Xenopus H1.0. We then analyzed nucleosome-dependent CTD condensation and H1-dependent linker DNA conformation for six full-length H1s in which the phosphorylated serine residues were replaced by glutamic acid residues.

### Sample Protocol
Blood from Xenopus laevis was obtained from animals anesthetized with 0.25% MS-222 by heart puncture and collected into heparinized tubes, and washed in modified PBS (1.79 mM KCl, 0.98 mM KH2PO4, 5.4 mM Na2HPO4, and 91.3 mM NaCl) three times (500 ×g, 4ºC, 10 min) with the addition of 10 mM ß-mercaptoethanol. The cell pellet was permeabilized in STKM buffer (250 mM sucrose, 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 25 mM KCl, 5 mM MgCl2, and 10 mM ß-mercaptoethanol) with 0.2% Triton X-100 followed by homogenization (five strokes) in a Dounce homogenizer. Homogenate was centrifuged at 1500 ×g for 10 min at 4ºC. The cytoplasmic fraction was discarded and the pellet containing nuclei was washed two times with STKM buffer without any detergent. Nuclei were resuspended in five volumes of 10% perchloric acid (PCA) and the mixture was incubated for 30 min on ice with occasional vortexing. After centrifugation at 14,000 ×g for 10 min at 4 °C, acid soluble supernatant fraction containing linker histones was collected in a fresh tube. Trichloroacetic acid was added to a final concentration of 20%, mixed thoroughly, and incubated on ice for 1h. The sample was centrifuged at 14,000 ×g for 15 min at 4 °C, the pellet was washed once with ice cold acidified acetone (acetone + 0.1% HCl), once with ice cold acetone (14,000 ×g, 10 min, 4 °C), then air dried. The purified proteins were run on a 15% SDS-PAGE and stained with Coomassie blue. Two distinct bands were observed. Mass spectrometric analysis confirmed that the lower bands contained histone H1.0A and H1.0B. These were washed in 100 mM NH4HCO3. DTT was added to a final concentration of 10 mM followed by incubation at 37 °C for 60 min. After that, iodoacetamide (IAA) was added to alkylate proteins with final concentration of 20 mM followed by incubation at room temperature in dark for 30 min. We used either Trypsin or Elastase (Sigma) to digest the protein. Trypsin digestion resulted in poor coverage especially in the CTD as there are a number of lysines present, while elastase digestion yielded better coverage of CTD region. Elastase was added to the H1 protein at 1:50 (w/w) for digestion at 37ºC overnight.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched using a local copy of Mascot with the following parameters:  Enzyme: None Database: Uniprot Xenopus (concatenated forward and reverse plus common contaminants) Fixed modification: Carbamidomethyl (C) Variable modifications: Methyl (K), Dimethyl (K), Acetyl (K, N-term), Phospho (STY) Mass values: Monoisotopic Peptide Mass Tolerance:  10 ppm Fragment Mass Tolerance: 0.02 Da Max Missed Cleavages: N/A  Mascot DAT files were parsed into the Scaffold software for validation, filtering and to create a non-redundant list per sample. Data were filtered using a minimum protein value of 80%, a minimum peptide value of 20% (Prophet scores) and requiring at least one unique peptide per protein.

### Publication Abstract
As a key structural component of the chromatin of higher eukaryotes, linker histones (H1s) are involved in stabilizing the folding of extended nucleosome arrays into higher-order chromatin structures and function as a gene-specific regulator of transcription in&#xa0;vivo. The H1 C-terminal domain (CTD) is essential for high-affinity binding of linker histones to chromatin and stabilization of higher-order chromatin structure. Importantly, the H1 CTD is an intrinsically disordered domain that undergoes a drastic condensation upon binding to nucleosomes. Moreover, although phosphorylation is a prevalent post-translational modification within the H1 CTD, exactly where this modification is installed and how phosphorylation influences the structure of the H1 CTD remains unclear for many H1s. Using novel mass spectrometry techniques, we identified six phosphorylation sites within the CTD of the archetypal linker histone Xenopus H1.0. We then analyzed nucleosome-dependent CTD condensation and H1-dependent linker DNA organization for H1.0 in which the phosphorylated serine residues were replaced by glutamic acid residues (phosphomimics) in six independent mutants. We find that phosphomimetics at residues S117E, S155E, S181E, S188E, and S192E resulted in a significant reduction in nucleosome-bound H1.0 CTD condensation compared with unphosphorylated H1.0, whereas S130E did not alter CTD structure. Furthermore, we found distinct effects among the phosphomimetics on H1-dependent linker DNA trajectory, indicating unique mechanisms by which this modification can influence H1 CTD condensation. These results bring to light a novel role for linker histone phosphorylation in directly altering the structure of nucleosome-bound H1 and a potential novel mechanism for its effects on chromatin structure and function.

### Keywords
Identification and analysis of phosphorylation within xenopus laevis linker histone h1.0

### Affiliations
Shohei Koide Professor and Chair, Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics Box 712, Rm 3-6710 University of Rochester Medical Center 601 Elmwood Ave Rochester, NY 14642
University of Rochester

### Submitter
Jeffrey Hayes

### Lab Head
Dr Jeffrey J. Hayes, Ph.D.
Shohei Koide Professor and Chair, Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics Box 712, Rm 3-6710 University of Rochester Medical Center 601 Elmwood Ave Rochester, NY 14642


