### Accession
PXD005896

### Title
SIRT4 Is a Lysine Deacylase that Controls Leucine Metabolism and Insulin Secretion

### Description
Sirtuins are NAD+-dependent protein deacylases that regulate several aspects of metabolism and aging. In contrast to the other mammalian sirtuins, the primary enzymatic activity of mitochondrial sirtuin 4 (SIRT4) and its overall role in metabolic control has remained enigmatic. Using a combination of phylogenetics, structural biology, and enzymology, we show that SIRT4 removes three acyl moieties from lysine residues – methylglutaryl(MG)-, hydroxymethylglutaryl(HMG)-, and 3-methylglutaconyl(MGc)-lysine. The metabolites leading to these post-translational modifications are intermediates in leucine oxidation, and we show a primary role for SIRT4 in controlling this pathway in mice. Furthermore, we find that dysregulated leucine metabolism in SIRT4KO mice leads to elevated basal and stimulated insulin secretion, which progressively develops into glucose intolerance and insulin resistance. These findings identify a robust enzymatic activity for SIRT4, uncover a mechanism controlling branched-chain amino acid flux, and position SIRT4 as a crucial player maintaining insulin secretion and glucose homeostasis during aging.  From Anderson et. al. Cell Metabolism, 2017.

### Sample Protocol
MCCC protein isolation:  Freshly harvested mouse liver was rinsed in ice-cold PBS, minced with scissors in STE buffer (0.25 M sucrose, 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 1 mM EDTA, and protease inhibitor cocktail) 10-20 times, and homogenized in 10 volumes STE with 10-20 strokes in a chilled Dounce B homogenizer. The homogenate was centrifuged at 700 x g for 10 min at 4oC and the resulting supernatant centrifuged at 7,000 x g for 10 min at 4oC. The pellet of the 7,000 x g centrifugation (i.e., the mitochondrial pellet) was washed one time with STE buffer. Fresh crude mitochondrial pellets were resuspended in Triton X-100 lysis buffer (50 mM Tris HCl, pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5% Triton X-100, 2 mM EDTA, 40 mM NaF, and protease inhibitor cocktail) and homogenized in chilled racks with a TissueLyser bead mill for 2 min at 30 Hz. After lysate centrifugation at 14,000 x g for 30 min to pellet insoluble material, the supernatant protein concentration was determined by BCA. About 1 mg protein in 1 mL Triton X-100 lysis buffer was incubated end-over-end overnight at 4°C with 20 µL Protein A/G agarose and anti-MCCA (Santa Cruz sc-271427) at 1/50 dilution. The Pro A/G agarose was washed 3X with lysis buffer, 1X with lysis buffer containing no detergent, and frozen at -80oC. Proteins were eluted by incubating the beads with 150 µL 0.1% TFA for 15 minutes at room temperature while rotating. Samples were centrifuged at 1000 x g for 30 sec, the supernatant collected, spiked with 30 µL 1M Tris pH 8.0, added to a filter spin column, centrifuged for 30 seconds at 1000 x g, and the flow-through saved. The agarose beads were subsequently eluted again by incubation with 150 µL of 8M-containing buffer (8 M urea in 50 mM Tris, pH 8.0, 40 mM NaCl, 2 mM MgCl2, + 1x Complete Roche protease inhibitor tablet, 10 mM Nicotinamide, 10 µM TSA) for 15 minutes at room temperature while rotating. The beads and solution from the second elution were added to the spin column, which was centrifuged for 30 sec at 1000 x g, and the flow-through combined with that from the first elution. After the pH was verified to be ~7-8 with a pH strip, the sample was reduced with 5 mM DTT at 37°C for 30 min, cooled to RT, alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark, and unreacted iodoacetamide quenched by the addition of DTT up to 15 mM for 10 min at room temperature. Following dilution to 1.5 M urea with 50 mM Tris (pH 8.0), 5 mM CaCl2, 5µg of sequencing-grade trypsin was added and digestion proceeded overnight at 37°C. The samples were acidified to 0.5% TFA and desalted with an SPE column. The eluate was lyophilized and the dried peptides were re-suspended in 12 µL 0.1% formic acid.  MCCC Analysis by Mass Spectrometry Proteomic analysis was performed using a nano-Acquity UPLC system coupled to a Q Exactive Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer via a nanoelectrospray ionization source. For each injection, the sample was first trapped on a Symmetry C18 20 mm × 180 µm trapping column (5 µl/min at 99.9/0.1 v/v water/acetonitrile), after which the analytical separation was performed using a 1.7 µm Acquity BEH130 C18 75 µm × 250 mm column over a gradient of 3 to 30% acetonitrile (total run time 235 min) in 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 400 nanoliters/minute (nL/min) with a column temperature of 55ºC. The mass spectrometer was operated in DDA mode collecting MS/MS spectra for the top 10 ions with a charge greater than 1. MS1 (precursor) analysis was performed at 70,000 resolution, with an AGC target of 1x106 ions and a maximum injection time of 60 ms. Precursor ions were filtered with a 2.0 m/z isolation window and fragmented with a normalized collision energy of 27. MS2 scans were performed at 17,500 resolution, with an AGC target of 5 x 104 ions, a maximum injection time of 60 ms, and a dynamic exclusion window of 20 seconds.  See Anderson et. al. Cell Metabolism, 2017 for further details.

### Data Protocol
Raw LC-MS/MS data were processed in Proteome discoverer v2.1 (PD2.1, Thermo Fisher Scientific), using the Byonic search engine (Protein Metrics, Inc.).  Data were searched against the UniProt mouse complete proteome database of reviewed (Swiss-Prot) and unreviewed (TrEMBL) proteins, which consisted of 51,418 sequences on the date of download (8/18/2016).  Variable modifications included oxidation (M), and acylation of lysine with the following (monoisotopic additions to K in parentheses):  hydroxymethylglutarylation (144.0422587348 Da), 3-methylglutaconyl (126.0316941 Da), methylglutaryl (128.047344 Da),glutaryl (114.0316941 Da), methylglutaryl (128.047344 Da),acetyl (42.010565 Da), and succinyl (100.016044 Da).  Fixed modification of carbamidomethyl (C) was selected.  Data were searched with a 10 ppm precursor mass and 0.02 Da product ion tolerance.  The maximum number of missed cleavages was set at 4 and enzyme specificity was trypsin.  PSMs were filtered to a 1% FDR and site localization probabilities were determined by Byonic.  PSMs were grouped to unique peptides while maintaining a 1% FDR at the peptide level and using a 95% localization threshold for PTMs.  Peptides were grouped to proteins using the rules of strict parsimony, and proteins were filtered to 1% FDR based on the target-decoy strategy using the Protein FDR Validator node of PD2.1.  See Anderson et. al. Cell Metabolism, 2017 for further details.

### Publication Abstract
Sirtuins are NAD<sup>+</sup>-dependent protein deacylases that regulate several aspects of metabolism and aging. In contrast to the other mammalian sirtuins, the primary enzymatic activity of mitochondrial sirtuin 4 (SIRT4) and its overall role in metabolic control have remained enigmatic. Using a combination of phylogenetics, structural biology, and enzymology, we show that SIRT4 removes three acyl moieties from lysine residues: methylglutaryl (MG)-, hydroxymethylglutaryl (HMG)-, and 3-methylglutaconyl (MGc)-lysine. The metabolites leading to these post-translational modifications are intermediates in&#xa0;leucine oxidation, and we show a primary role for&#xa0;SIRT4 in controlling this pathway in mice. Furthermore, we find that dysregulated leucine metabolism in SIRT4KO mice leads to elevated basal and stimulated insulin secretion, which progressively develops into glucose intolerance and insulin resistance. These findings identify a robust enzymatic activity for SIRT4, uncover a mechanism controlling branched-chain amino acid flux, and position SIRT4 as a crucial player maintaining insulin secretion and glucose homeostasis during aging.

### Keywords
Protein acylation, Leucine metabolism, Insulin secretion, Sirt4

### Affiliations
Assistant Professor Department of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism, and Nutrition Department of Pharmacology and Cancer Biology Duke University Medical Center
Duke Molecular Physiology Institute

### Submitter
Paul Grimsrud

### Lab Head
Dr Matthew D. Hirschey
Assistant Professor Department of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism, and Nutrition Department of Pharmacology and Cancer Biology Duke University Medical Center


