### Accession
PXD008777

### Title
Investigation of the effects on the proteome composition of Escherichia coli producing a recombinant protein in the periplasm under non-optimized and optimized conditions

### Description
Recombinant proteins containing disulfide bonds, like antibody fragments, are usually produced in the periplasm of E. coli, because in this compartment of the E. coli cell the formation of disulfide bonds is catalyzed.  A recombinant protein is targeted to the periplasm with the help of an N-terminally fused signal sequence, which is clipped off from the recombinant protein upon translocation across the cytoplasmic membrane. The single-chain variable antibody fragment BL1 N-terminally fused to the DsbA signal sequence was produced in the E. coli Lemo21(DE3) recombinant protein production strain at conditions non-optimal (0 µM L-rhamnose) and optimal (500 µM L-rhamnose) for the production of the scFv BL1 in the periplasm. Lemo21(DE3) cells not producing a recombinant protein were used as a reference.

### Sample Protocol
E. coli cells were collected using centrifugation and subsequently lysed by probe sonication. After isolating the protein using acetone precipitation, the proteins were digested in-solution using trypsin and analyzed by on-line LC-MS/MS (LTQ Velos Orbitrap).

### Data Protocol
The raw data were processed by Raw2MGF to generate mg files. The files were merged to a single file and used to search an E. coli database with the Mascot search engine. The resulting search results (i.e. the “.dat” file) were then used together with Quanti, a program for label free quantification, to quantify the identified proteins. After normalization, the proteins were finally compared using Student’s t-test.

### Publication Abstract
In <i>Escherichia coli</i>, many recombinant proteins are produced in the periplasm. To direct these proteins to this compartment, they are equipped with an N-terminal signal sequence so that they can traverse the cytoplasmic membrane via the protein-conducting Sec translocon. Recently, using the single-chain variable antibody fragment BL1, we have shown that harmonizing the target gene expression intensity with the Sec translocon capacity can be used to improve the production yields of a recombinant protein in the periplasm. Here, we have studied the consequences of improving the production of BL1 in the periplasm by using a proteomics approach. When the target gene expression intensity is not harmonized with the Sec translocon capacity, the impaired translocation of secretory proteins, protein misfolding/aggregation in the cytoplasm, and an inefficient energy metabolism result in poor growth and low protein production yields. The harmonization of the target gene expression intensity with the Sec translocon capacity results in normal growth, enhanced protein production yields, and, surprisingly, a composition of the proteome that is-besides the produced target-the same as that of cells with an empty expression vector. Thus, the single-chain variable antibody fragment BL1 can be efficiently produced in the periplasm without causing any notable detrimental effects to the production host. Finally, we show that under the optimized conditions, a small fraction of the target protein is released into the extracellular milieu via outer membrane vesicles. We envisage that our observations can be used to design strategies to further improve the production of secretory recombinant proteins in <i>E. coli</i><b>IMPORTANCE</b> The bacterium <i>Escherichia coli</i> is widely used to produce recombinant proteins. Usually, trial-and-error-based screening approaches are used to identify conditions that lead to high recombinant protein production yields. Here, for the production of an antibody fragment in the periplasm of <i>E. coli</i>, we show that an optimization of its production is accompanied by the alleviation of stress. This indicates that the monitoring of stress responses could be used to facilitate enhanced recombinant protein production yields.

### Keywords
Escherichia coli, Proteomics, Lemo21(de3), Periplasm, Recombinant protein, Protein production

### Affiliations
Department of Medicine, Solna, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden
Dept. Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Div. Chemistry I, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden

### Submitter
Jimmy Ytterberg

### Lab Head
Dr Roman A. Zubarev
Dept. Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Div. Chemistry I, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden


