### Accession
PXD034830

### Title
Plasmodium sporozoites require the protein B9 to invade hepatocytes

### Description
Here we report that the B9 protein, a member of the 6-cysteine domain protein family, is secreted from sporozoite micronemes and is required for productive invasion of hepatocytes.

### Sample Protocol
Freshly dissected B9-Flag sporozoites were lysed. After centrifugation supernatants were preclearing overnight. Precleared lysates were subjected to B9-Flag immunoprecipitation using Anti-FLAG M2 Affinity Gel. PbGFP parasites with untagged B9 were used as a control and treated in the same way. After washes, proteins on beads were directly eluted in Laemmli buffer. After centrifugation, supernatants were collected for further analysis. Samples (eluate and supernmatants) were loaded on a polyacrylamide gel (SDS-PAGE) for short migration (5 mm). Lanes containing the samples were then cut into small pieces and submitted to trypsin digestion. Peptides were extracted from gel pieces, desalted by StageTips and analysed by LC-MS/MS system (nanoElute coupled to a timsTOF PRO mass spectrometer, Bruker).

### Data Protocol
Mascot generic files (mgf) were generated using Data Analysis 5.1 (Bruker) and processed with X!Tandem pipeline version 0.2.36 (http://pappso.inra.fr/bioinfo/xtandempipeline) using databases from UniProt or PlasmoDB. The databases used were: Contaminants_20160129 containing a list of common contaminants, Anopheles_stephensi_UP.fasta (Date 09/2018, number of entries: 11,767), PlasmoDB_PB_39_PbergheiANKA (Date 09/2018, number entered: 5,076) and UP000005640_9606_HUMAIN (Date 09/2021, number entered: 20,600) . The search parameters were : maximum 1 missed cleavage allowed, Cys-CAM as fixed modification, Met-Ox and acetyl N-term as variable modifications. MS mass error tolerances were adapted to instrument. MS1 mass error tolerance were set to 25 ppm. MS2 mass error tolerance were set to 25 ppm. Protein lists were filtered (FDR < 1% at peptide and protein level, minimum 1 peptide per protein).

### Publication Abstract
<i>Plasmodium</i> sporozoites are transmitted to a mammalian host during blood feeding by an infected mosquito and invade hepatocytes for initial replication of the parasite into thousands of erythrocyte-invasive merozoites. Here we report that the B9 protein, a member of the 6-cysteine domain protein family, is secreted from sporozoite micronemes and is required for productive invasion of hepatocytes. The N-terminus of B9 forms a beta-propeller domain structurally related to CyRPA, a cysteine-rich protein forming an essential invasion complex in <i>Plasmodium falciparum</i> merozoites. The beta-propeller domain of B9 is essential for sporozoite infectivity and interacts with the 6-cysteine proteins P36 and P52 in a heterologous expression system. Our results suggest that, despite using distinct sets of parasite and host entry factors, <i>Plasmodium</i> sporozoites and merozoites may share common structural modules to assemble protein complexes for invasion of host cells.

### Keywords
Malaria, Hepatocyte, Beta-propeller domain., B9 protein, Plasmodium sporozoites, Invasion

### Affiliations
Plateforme P3S UMS-37 PASS – Sorbonne Universite
Plateforme P3S - UMS PASS 37 - Sorbonne Universite - INSERM

### Submitter
Soumia HAMADA

### Lab Head
Dr Solenne Chardonnet
Plateforme P3S - UMS PASS 37 - Sorbonne Universite - INSERM


