### Accession
PXD004924

### Title
Identification of autophosphorylationsites in recombinant Saccharomyces cerevisiae Ire1

### Description
This study reports autophosphorylation sites in the serine/threonine protein kinase Ire1. The cytosolic portion of Ire1 was expressed as an glutathione S transferase fusion protein in Escherichia coli. Phosphroyaltion sites in the recombinant wild type protein and a L745A mutant were mapped by mass spectrometry. Phosphorylation sites map of the activation loop in the protein kinase domain and the alphaEF-alphaF insertion loop. In the activation loop phosphorylation was observed at serine 837, serine 840, serine 844, and threonine 844. Phosphorylaton was also observed at serine 850 in the P+1 loop. In the alphaEF-alphaF insertion loop phosphorylation was observed at threonine 873, serine 877, serine 878, threonine 881, serine 884, serine 885, and serine 887.

### Sample Protocol
MS/MS analysis of the cytosolic domains of WT and mutant Ire1 expressed in E. coli was carried out on an LTQ XL orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Ultimate 3000 nano HPLC system. The RP-LC system consisted of a desalting column (300 microm x 5 mm, PepMap C18 3 microm, 100 Å) and an analytical column (75 microm x 250 mm, PepMap C18 3 microm, 100 Å) with split solvent delivery (split ratio 1:300). A Thermo nanospray II source was fitted with a 30 microm silica emitter tip (PicoTip, New Objective, US) and maintained at 1100 V ion spray voltage. Peptide samples (3 microl) were loaded onto the trap column in 0.1% (w/v) trifluoroacetic acid at 20 microl/min for 3 min and eluted at 300 nl/min using a gradient from 0.05% (v/v) formic acid in water (A) to 0.05% formic acid in 80% (v/v) acetonitrile (B). The gradient profile was as follows: 4% buffer B for 3 min, 4% B to 40% B in 40 min, 40% B to 65% B in 6 min, 65% B to 95% B in 1 min, and 95% B for 6 min. Using Excalibur 2.0.1, intact peptides were detected between m/z 400 and m/z 1,600 in the orbitrap at a resolution of 60,000. Internal calibration was performed using the ion signal of (Si(CH3)3O)6H+ at m/z 445.120025 as a lock mass. Maximum ion accumulation time allowed on the LTQ orbitrap was 1 s for all scan modes. Automatic gain control was used to prevent over-filling of the ion trap. Collision induced dissociation (CID) spectra of the top 5 peptide ions (minimum intensity 10,000 counts, rejection of singly charged precursors) were acquired at a normalised collision energy of 35. Dynamic exclusion was set with a repeat count of 1, a repeat time of 30 s and, an exclusion time of 3 min and an exclusion list size of 50. The chromatography feature was enabled with a correlation area ratio of 1.0. Activation Q was set to 0.25 with 30 ms activation time.

### Data Protocol
XITandem tornado version 2009.04.01.1 was used to search the ENSEMBL yeast proteome database (version SGD1.01.55) and the common repository of adventitious proteins (cRAP, http://www.theqpm.org/crap/index.html) for the identification of proteins and the reversed version of both databases. Precursor mass accuracy was set to 20 ppm and fragment mass error to 0.6 Da. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine as a variable modification. At the refinement step, oxidation of methionine and tryptophan, double oxidation of methionine and tryptophan, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, methylation of aspartate, glutamate, histidine, lysine, arginine and asparagine, carbamidomethylation of lysine, histidine, aspartate and glutamate and dehydration of serine and threonine were included in the search parameters.

### Publication Abstract
The bifunctional protein kinase-endoribonuclease Ire1 initiates splicing of the mRNA for the transcription factor Hac1 when unfolded proteins accumulate in the endoplasmic reticulum. Activation of <i>Saccharomyces cerevisiae</i> Ire1 coincides with autophosphorylation of its activation loop at S840, S841, T844, and S850. Mass spectrometric analysis of Ire1 expressed in <i>Escherichia coli</i> identified S837 as another potential phosphorylation site <i>in vivo</i> Mutation of all five potential phosphorylation sites in the activation loop decreased, but did not completely abolish, splicing of <i>HAC1</i> mRNA, induction of <i>KAR2</i> and <i>PDI1</i> mRNAs, and expression of a &#x3b2;-galactosidase reporter activated by Hac1<sup>i</sup> Phosphorylation site mutants survive low levels of endoplasmic reticulum stress better than <i>IRE1</i> deletions strains. <i>In vivo</i> clustering and inactivation of Ire1 are not affected by phosphorylation site mutants. Mutation of D836 to alanine in the activation loop of phosphorylation site mutants nearly completely abolished <i>HAC1</i> splicing, induction of <i>KAR2</i>, <i>PDI1</i>, and &#x3b2;-galactosidase reporters, and survival of ER stress, but it had no effect on clustering of Ire1. By itself, the D836A mutation does not confer a phenotype. These data argue that D836 can partially substitute for activation loop phosphorylation in activation of the endoribonuclease domain of Ire1.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Yeast, Protein kinase, Ire1, Unfolded protein response

### Affiliations
Durham University
Durham University, Department of Biosciences, South Road, Durham DH1 3LE, United Kingdom

### Submitter
Martin Schroeder

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Schröder
Durham University, Department of Biosciences, South Road, Durham DH1 3LE, United Kingdom


