### Accession
PXD015993

### Title
Thermal proteome profiling of phosphorylated proteoforms

### Description
We combined thermal proteome profiling (TPP) with phosphopeptide enrichment to study the thermostability of phosphorylated proteoforms.

### Sample Protocol
After heating, lysing and extraction of remaining soluble protein fraction (with a modified thermal proteome profiling protocol - Savitski et al., Science (2014), samples were processed with a modified SP3 protocol, digested using trypsin and labeled with TMT. Some samples were phosphopeptide-enriched with a Fe3+-IMAC column (similarly to Potel et al., Nature Methods (2018)). Shotgun proteomics using a Lumos Orbitrap was then performed.

### Data Protocol
TMT quantification was used, by using the isobarquant python package (Franken et al., Nat Protoc (2015)), and Mascot 2.4 was used for protein identification. Search parameters: trypsin, missed cleavages 3, peptide tolerance 10ppm, 0.02Da for MS/MS tolerance. Fixed modifications were carbamidomethyl on cysteines and TMT10plex on lysine. Variable modifications included acetylation on protein N-terminus, oxidation of methionine and TMT10plex on peptide N-termini (phosphorylation on STY for phosphoenriched samples). The R programming language was used to analyze the output data.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Thermal proteome profiling, Meltome, Phosphopeptides

### Affiliations
European Molecular Biology Laboratory

### Submitter
Andre Mateus

### Lab Head
Dr Mikhail M. Savitski
European Molecular Biology Laboratory


