### Accession
PXD031343

### Title
Impact of modified atmospheres on growth and metabolism of meat-spoilage relevant Photobacterium spp. as predicted by comparative proteomics

### Description
Modified atmosphere packaging (MAP) is a common strategy to selectively prevent the growth of certain species of meat spoiling bacteria. While studies on the effectiveness of MAP are still scarce on a putative control over the population of photobacteria detected as meat spoilers, they could develop means to enhance safety and quality of raw meat. This study aims to determine the impact on photobacteria of two modified atmospheres: with high oxygen concentration (red and white meats), and free oxygen MAP (white meats and seafood). We have conducted growth experiments of the two main species found on meat, Photobacterium carnosum (P.) and P. phosphoreum, on a meat simulation media under different gas mixtures of nitrogen, oxygen and carbon dioxide representing air-, high oxygen- and vacuum-like conditions with and without carbon dioxide present. Growth was monitored based on optical density, and samples were taken during exponential growth for a comparative proteomic analysis that allowed the determination of the effects of the different gases and their synergy. Growth under air atmosphere appears optimal particularly for P. carnosum, with enhancement of energy metabolism, respiration, oxygen consuming reactions, and a predicted preference for lipids as carbon source. However, all the other atmospheres show some degree of growth reduction. An increase in oxygen concentration leads to an increase in enzymes counteracting oxidative stress for both species, and enhancement of heme utilization and iron-sulfur cluster assembly proteins for P. phosphoreum. Absence of oxygen appears to switch the metabolism towards fermentative pathways, where either ribose (P. phosphoreum), or glycogen (P. carnosum) appear to be the preferred substrates. Additionally, it promotes the use of alternative electron donors/acceptors, mainly formate and nitrate/nitrite. Stress response is manifested as enhanced expression of enzymes able to produce ammonia (e.g. carbonic anhydrase, hydroxylamine reductase) and regulate osmotic stress. Our results suggest that photobacteria do not sense the environmental levels of carbon dioxide but rather adapt to their own anaerobic metabolism. The regulation in presence of carbon dioxide is limited and strain-specific under anaerobic conditions. However, when oxygen at air-like concentration is present together with carbon dioxide the oxidative stress appears enhanced compared to air conditions (very low carbon dioxide), explained if both gases have a synergistic effect. This is further supported by the increase in oxygen concentration in presence of carbon dioxide. The atmosphere is able to fully inhibit P. carnosum, heavily reduce P. phosphoreum growth in vitro and trigger diversification of energy production with higher energetic cost, highlighting the importance of concomitant bacteria for their growth on raw meat under said atmosphere.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial strains and pre-culture P. carnosum TMW 2.2021T (DSM 105454T) is the described type strain of the species (Hilgarth et al., 2018b), and was isolated from MAP packed raw chicken meat. Strain TMW 2.2149 was previously isolated from MAP packed pork (Fuertes-Perez et al., 2019). P. phosphoreum strains TMW 2.2103 and TMW 2.2134 were isolated from MAP packed beef and MAP packed poultry meat, respectively (Fuertes-Perez et al., 2019). Strains were inoculated in a pre-culture of meat-extract media according to Fuertes-Perez et al. (2019), prepared with 20 g/L meat extract, 20 g/L NaCl, pH 5.8 from the same glycerol stock every time. Pre-cultures were incubated at 15 ºC overnight in Erlenmeyer flasks for aerob growth conditions, or in gas tight Schott bottles for anaerob conditions. Cells from pre-cultures were harvested, washed once with 0.85 % NaCl (w/v) solution and re-suspended in the same solution for further inoculation of the cultures.  Growth under different gas atmospheres Growth of the selected strains was tested on gas tight locked glass bottles filled with 0.4 L of Meat-Simulation-Media (MSM) media prepared according to Kolbeck et al. (2019b). Shortly, MSM contains6 % meat extract (w/v) (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) as the minimum amount at which growth was observed, 0.5 % glycerol (w/v) (Gerbu Biotechnik GmbH, Heidelberg, Germany), 0.05 mM Tween80 (Gerbu Biotechnik GmbH, Heidelberg, Germany) and 2 μg/ml heminchloride (Roth, Karlsruhe, Germany) dissolved in dimethylsulfoxide (99.8 %) (Roth, Karlsruhe, Germany). All reagents were added to the media after sterilization. The pH of the media was adjusted to 5.8 with 100 % lactic acid.  Bacteria were inoculated at a start optical density of 0.1 at 600 nm with the cells in sodium chloride solution harvested from the pre-culture. The growth was monitored by optical density measurement for 48 h or until the stationary phase was reached, with constant gas flow, stirring at 120 rpm and at 15 ºC. Gas mixtures utilized and pumped into the bottles during growth were: (a) air, (b) N2, (c) O2/N2, (70/30 %) (d) N2/CO2 (70/30 %), (e) O2/CO2/N2 (21/30/49 %), (f) O2/CO2 (70/30 %). Samples for proteomics analysis were collected by centrifugation (4000 x g, 5 min, 4 °C) of 100 ml of culture during exponential growth. The amount of cells during that phase was above log 7 CFU ml-1. Cells were washed twice with 0.85 % NaCl solution, snap-frozen with liquid nitrogen, and stored at -80 °C. During the whole process, samples were kept on ice. All experiments were performed in triplicate for each gas atmosphere and each strain.  Growth parameters and statistical analysis Optical density measurements obtained for the triplicates of each experiment were used as input for the open source software RStudio (v. 3.3.0) together with the CRAN package grofit (v. 1.1.1-1) to obtain lag-phase (ʎ), maximum optical density (ODmax) and maximum growth rate (µmax) of the bacteria. Parameters for the analysis were kept as default. Differences between the mean values of each parameter were analyzed with IBM SPSS Statistics v. 28.0 software (IBM Corp., Armonk, NY) by performing one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) between the gas atmospheres used for each strain, followed by a post-hoc Tukey test with a confidence interval set at 95 % (p < 0.05).  Preparation of samples for proteomics analysis Preparation of samples for proteomics analysis were performed with an in-solution sample processing protocol. Shortly, cells were resuspended in 8M urea lysis buffer and mechanically disrupted with a beads beater. The protein concentration was determined by the BCA method according to manufacturer’s instructions. A total of 20 μg of protein per sample were reduced (10 mM DTT for 30 min at 30 °C) and carbamidomethylated (55 mM CAA for 30 min at room temperature in darkness). Digestion of the proteins was carried out by adding trypsin at a 1/100 enzyme/protein ratio (w/w) for 1 h and afterwards by adding another 1/100 enzyme/protein ratio overnight at 37 °C. After digest, stage tip purification was performed. Therefore, the pH of the samples was measured (pH<3) with pH strips (MColorpHast, Merck, GER). The in-house build C18 tips using 3 disks (3M) were equilibrated consecutively with 250 µl 100% ACN, 250 ul elution solution (40% ACN, 0.1% FA) and 250 µl washing solution (2% ACN, 0.1% FA) at 1500 g. Every sample was loaded on the column (5 min at 500 g) and the sample was three times desalted with washing buffer (2% ACN, 0.1% FA) for 2 min at 1500 g. Finally, peptides were eluted with two times 50 µl elution solution (40% ACN, 0.1% FA) for 2 min at 500g. The solvent of all samples was completely subtracted in a centrifugal evaporator (Centrivap Cold Trap -50, Labconco, US), freshly suspended before MS measurement in washing solution (2% ACN, 0.1% FA) and ~0,1 µg of digest were injected into the mass spectrometer per measurement.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis and data generation LC-MS/MS measurements were performed on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system coupled to a Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For full proteome analyses 0.1 µg of peptides were delivered to a trap column (ReproSil-pur C18-AQ, 5 mm, Dr. Maisch, 20 mm 75 mm, self-packed) at a flow rate of 5 µL/min in HPLC grade water with 0.1% formic acid. After 10 min of loading, peptides were transferred to an analytical column (ReproSil Gold C18- AQ, 3 mm, Dr. Maisch, 450 mm  75 mm, self-packed) and separated using a 50 min linear gradient ranging from 4 to 32% of solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile and 5% (v/v) DMSO) at 300 nL/min flow rate. Both nanoLC solvents (solvent A = 0.1% formic acid in HPLC grade water and 5% (v/v) DMSO) contained 5% DMSO to boost MS intensity. The Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent acquisition (DDA) and positive ionization mode. MS1 spectra (360–1300 m/z) were recorded at a resolution of 60,000 using an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 3e6 and maximum injection time (maxIT) of 45 ms. Up to 18 peptide precursors were selected for fragmentation in case of the full proteome analyses. Only precursors with charge state 2 to 6 were selected and dynamic exclusion of 25 sec was enabled. Peptide fragmentation was performed using higher energy collision induced dissociation (HCD) and a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 26%. The precursor isolation window width was set to 1.3 m/z. MS2 Resolution was 15.000 with an AGC target value of 1e5 and maximum injection time (maxIT) of 25 ms (full proteome).   Identification and quantification of proteins using MaxQuant Peptide identification and quantification was performed using the software MaxQuant (version 1.6.3.4) with its built-in search engine Andromeda (Cox et al., 2011; Tyanova et al., 2016a). MS2 spectra were searched against the NCBI proteome database of P. carnosum TMW 2.2021T (NPIB01), TMW 2.2149 (WMDL01), and P. phosphoreum TMW 2.2103 (WMCZ01), TMW 2.2134 (WMCU01), supplemented with common contaminants (built-in option in MaxQuant). Trypsin/P was specified as proteolytic enzyme. Precursor tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm, and fragment ion tolerance to 20 ppm. Results were adjusted to 1% false discovery rate (FDR) on peptide spectrum match (PSM) level and protein level employing a target-decoy approach using reversed protein sequences. The minimal peptide length was defined as seven amino acids, the “match-between-run” function was disabled. Carbamidomethylated cysteine was set as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications. The proteins differentially regulated between two growth conditions were evaluated using the label-free quantification algorithm provided by MaxQuant (LFQ). Intensity based absolute quantification (iBAQ) was carried out to evaluate the expression of proteins within the same sample.  Statistical analysis of proteomics data and interpretation of results Data processing was performed using the Perseus software (Tyanova et al., 2016). The workflow included filtering out proteins only identified by site, reverse or from potential contaminants and performing a log2 transformation of the values. We considered only proteins that were detected in at least two out of three replicates in each gas condition. For differential protein analysis we performed Welch t-tests between each pair of gas conditions. Proteins that met the requirements of q-value < 0.05 and log2 fold change > 2 were considered differentially expressed. Functional annotation of proteins was obtained from the databases NCBI, Rapid Annotation Subsystem Technology (RAST) server (Aziz et al., 2008), TIGR annotation (Ouyang et al., 2007) and the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG).  We performed six different comparisons between conditions to identify the effects of: oxygen (21 %) (I. air_vs_N2); high oxygen (70 %) (II. O2/N2_vs_N2, III. Air_vs_O2/N2); carbon dioxide (30 %) under anoxic conditions (IV. N2_vs_N2/CO2); carbon dioxide under oxic conditions (V. N2/CO2_vs_O2/CO2/N2, VI. O2/CO2/N2_vs_O2/CO2).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Spoilage, Proteomics, Modified atmosphere packaging (map), Meat, Photobacterium

### Affiliations
Bavarian Center for Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry (BayBioMS) Technical University Munich (TUM) Gregor-Mendel-Straße 4 85354 Freising
TU Munich

### Submitter
Christina Ludwig

### Lab Head
Dr Christina Ludwig
Bavarian Center for Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry (BayBioMS) Technical University Munich (TUM) Gregor-Mendel-Straße 4 85354 Freising


