### Accession
PXD037400

### Title
Quantitative Proteomics Analysis of COVID-19 Patients

### Description
Treatment of severe cases of Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is extremely important to decrease death and end organ damages. Herein, we performed a proteomic analysis of plasma samples from mild, moderate and sever Covid-19 patients. Analysis revealed differentially expressed proteins and different therapeutic potential targets related to innate immune responses

### Sample Protocol
iTRAQ Proteomics plasma sample preparation  Five biological samples from each group were pooled in one sample. All plasma sample were then subjected to the Agilent Human-14 Multiple Affinity Removal spin cartridge to remove the most 14 abundant proteins from plasma following the manufacture protocol (Agilent, USA). Afterwards, protein digests were labeled using 4-plex iTRAQ reagents (Sciex, Canada) following manufacture protocol with minor modifications. In short, 100µg proteins were denatured, reduced, and alkylated using 8M urea/100Mm Triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), 50Mm Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP), and methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS), respectively. Proteins samples were then digested to peptides using trypsin with a ratio of 1:40 (protein to trypsin). Subsequently, peptides samples were labelled with 114, 115, 116, and 117 for healthy control, severe, moderate, and mild, respectively. All the 4 labelled samples were then mixed and pooled in one sample.  Peptides fractionation and desalting  The iTRAQ pooled sample was fractionated offline on the basis of cation exchange using Pierce Strong Cation Exchange (SCX) spin column (Thermo Scientific, USA) following manufacture instruction. In brief, the spin column was first conditioned using 0.1% formic acid following by loading the labelled peptides into the column. Two steps of wash were performed using 0.1%fromic acid. Peptides were then eluted into 22 fractions by changing the ratio of 10% Acetonitrile and Ammonium formate concertation from 15mM to 900mM. Subsequently, desalting and cleanup step was performed by polymeric reversed-phase sorbent using Oasis HLB Cartridge (Waters, USA). In short, the cartridge was conditioned and equilibrated with Acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid, respectively. Labelled peptides were then loaded and two step of wash with 0.1% formic acid was applied. The elution of peptides was performed by using 70% acetonitrile. NanoLC-MS/MS  Each fraction (total of 22) was loaded on an Ekspert nanoLC 425 (Eksigent, Dublin, CA, USA) coupled to a TripleTOF 5600 (Sciex, Concord, Canada) in triplicate.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS iTRAQ data was processed using ProteinPilot Software (v 4.5, Sciex) for identification and quantification. The parameters were set as follow: sample type; iTRAQ 4plex, Cys. Alkylation; MMTS, Digestion; Trypsin, Special factors; Urea denaturation, Species; Homo sapiens, Database;  uniprot Proteome Humans database (downloaded on October 29, 2019), global FDR was checked. Fold change and p value was calculated based on the average of peptide intensity and Student’s t-test, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
Treatment of severe cases of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is extremely important to minimize death and end-organ damage. Here we performed a proteomic analysis of plasma samples from mild, moderate and severe COVID-19 patients. Analysis revealed differentially expressed proteins and different therapeutic potential targets related to innate immune responses such as fetuin-A, tetranectin (TN) and paraoxonase-1 (PON1). Furthermore, protein changes in plasma showed dysregulation of complement and coagulation cascades in COVID-19 patients compared to healthy controls. In conclusion, our proteomics data suggested fetuin-A and TN as potential targets that might be used for diagnosis as well as signatures for a better understanding of the pathogenesis of COVID-19 disease.

### Keywords
Human, Plasma, Covid-19, Proteomics

### Affiliations
king abdullah international medical research center
King abdullah international medical research center

### Submitter
Bandar Alghanem

### Lab Head
Dr Bandar Abdullah Alghanem
King abdullah international medical research center


