### Accession
PXD020020

### Title
Alzheimer disease neocortex LC-MSMS

### Description
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder that is pathologically characterized by amyloid β-peptide (Aβ)-containing plaques and the generation of neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs). Although proteome profile changes have been reported in AD brains, it is unclear whether they represent a continuous process from mild to severe changes or whether there is a sequence, with step-by-step involvement of proteins. To address this we analyzed neocortex samples of 19 control cases without signs of neurodegeneration (nonAD), 17 pathologically-diagnosed preclinical AD (p-preAD), and 17 symptomatic AD cases by mass spectrometry after homogenization and separation into soluble, dispersible, membrane-associated, and plaque-associated fractions. Here, we show three classes of proteins exhibiting changed levels during the pathogenesis and progression of AD from the AD pathology-free to the symptomatic stage: five early- and 24 late-responding proteins and 17 gradually changing proteins. The identified proteins and hierarchy point to endocytosis/synaptic vesicle cycle-related processes as key elements in the initiation of AD pathology in the neocortex, while later changes document the resulting neurodegenerative process.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of human brain fractions for mass spectrometry analysis Brain tissue was homogenized at 10% (weight/volume) in cold Tris-buffered saline (TBS) with 1* protease/phosphatase inhibitor cocktail. Following a brief homogenization with micro-pestle, samples were sonicated 6 times for 20 s with 10 s intervals of rest at 30% amplitude. Then, all the homogenates were centrifuged at 14 000g for 30 min at 4 °C, before we subjected them into a further ultracentrifuge at 175 000g at 4 °C. We named the corresponding supernatant after ultracentrifuge as “soluble fraction”, and we resuspended the pellet after ultracentrifuge with TBS and we named it as “dispersible fraction”. In the meantime, we resuspended the pellet after 14 000g centrifuge in 2% SDS, and sonicated 6 times for 20 s with 10 s intervals of rest at 30% amplitude, before we subjected all the samples to another 14 000g centrifugation. The resulting supernatant was called “membrane-associated SDS-soluble fraction”. Meanwhile, the resulting pellet was resuspended in 70% (vol/vol) formic acid (FA) overnight at room temperature. Following another centrifugation at 14 000g, the supernatant was collected and dried under vacuum, and they were named “FA-soluble plaque-associated fraction”.   Mass spectrometry sample preparation Chloroform/methanol precipitation was performed for membrane-associated SDS-soluble and FA-soluble plaque-associated fractions, and 2% (vol/vol) Rapigest (Waters) was used to dissolve the precipitated proteins. Protein concentration was determined by the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay (ThermoFisher). For trypsin digestion, 2 μg of total protein per fraction from each case was used. Proteins were treated with 1 mM dithiothreitol and 10 mM iodoacetamide in succession before trypsin (Pierce MS grade, Thermo Scientific) was added at a ratio of 1:100 to each sample. After an overnight incubation at 37°C in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma), the reaction was stopped by 2 μl trifluoroacetic acid (Sigma). Resulting peptides were desalted with C18 tips (3M EmporeTM C18 disks; Sigma-Aldrich) and dried under vacuum.  Liquid Chromatography Coupled to Tandem Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS/MS)     The digested samples (1 µg in 0.1% (vol/vol) FA, 5% (vol/vol) acetonitrile) were injected (5 µL) and separated on an Ultimate 3000 UPLC system (Dionex, Thermo Scientific) equipped with an Acclaim PepMap100 pre-column (C18 3 µm–100 Å, Thermo Scientific) and a C18 PepMap RSLC (2 µm, 50 µm-15cm, Thermo Scientific) using a linear gradient (300 µL/min) of 0–4% buffer B (80% ACN, 0.08% FA) in 3 min, 4–10% B in 12 min, 10–35% in 20 min, 35–65% in 5 min, 65–95% in 1 min 95% for 10 min, 95–5% in 1 min, 5% 10 min. The Q Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) was operated in positive ion mode with a nanospray voltage of 1.5 kV and a source temperature of 250 ºC. Proteo Mass LTQ/FT-Hybrid ESI Pos Mode Cal Mix (MS CAL5-1EASUPELCO, Sigma-Aldrich) was used as an external calibrant and the lock mass 445.12003 as an internal calibrant. The instrument was operated in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode with a survey MS scan at a resolution of 70 000 (fw hm at m/z 200) for the mass range of m/z 400–1600 for precursor ions, followed by MS/MS scans of the top ten most intense peaks with +2, +3, +4, and +5 charged ions above a threshold ion count of 16000 at 17500 resolution using normalized collision energy (NCE) of 25 eV with an isolation window of 3.0 m/z and dynamic exclusion of 10 s. All data were acquired with Xcalibur 3.0.63 software (Thermo Scientific). Unless the intensity of the signal from the MS was too low, we ran each sample once.

### Data Protocol
Bioinformatics  For identification, all data file were converted into .mgf format and processed using MASCOT version 2.2.06 (Matrix Science) against a Uniprot homo sapiens database (SwissProt, Homo sapiens, 20231 entries). The parameters used to search at MASCOT were: parent tolerance of 10 PPM, fragment tolerance of 20 mmu, variable modification oxidation of M and deamidation of NQ, fixed modification with carbamidomethyl C, and up to two missed cleavage for trypsin. To calculate the FDR87 and perform the spectral counting, the sample-specific dat files were loaded into Scaffold 4 (Proteome Software). The Scaffold4 setting: X! Tandem Alanine (2017.2.1.4) as search engine; peptide Thresholds: 95.0% minimum; Protein Thresholds: 1 peptide minimum 1.0% (decoy) for protein false discovery rate (FDR). Quantitative value (normalized total spectra) for all the proteins in each case and fraction with 100% protein identification probability (Suppl Table 1) from at least one sample was used for analyzing.  The lists of significantly changed proteins were sent to DAVID (https://david.ncifcrf.gov/) for statistical overrepresentation test. The threshold of an overrepresented functional annotation is with minimum two proteins involved and EASE < 0.05. The whole list of proteins detected in all samples was used as reference list. The fold of enrichment and Benjamini multiple testing correction were also calculated by DAVID. The representative enriched GO terms had a Benjamini less than 0.1. The association of early-, late- responding or gradually changing proteins and GWAS-established genetic risk factors of AD was analyzed under the framework of STRING database (https://string-db.org/) with the active interaction sources of experiments, databases, co-expression, neighborhood, gene fusion, and co-occurrence. The cut-off for minimal required interaction score is 0.7 (high confidence). The network clustering used Markov Cluster (MCL) Algorithm with three inflations.

### Publication Abstract
Proteome profile changes in Alzheimer's disease (AD) brains have been reported. However, it is unclear whether they represent a continuous process, or whether there is a sequential involvement of distinct proteins. To address this question, we used mass spectrometry. We analyzed soluble, dispersible, sodium dodecyl sulfate, and formic acid fractions of neocortex homogenates (mainly Brodmann area 17-19) from 18 pathologically diagnosed preclinical AD, 17 symptomatic AD, and 18 cases without signs of neurodegeneration. By doing so, we identified four groups of AD-related proteins being changed in levels in preclinical and symptomatic AD cases: early-responding, late-responding, gradually-changing, and fraction-shifting proteins. Gene ontology analysis of these proteins and all known AD-risk/causative genes identified vesicle endocytosis and the secretory pathway-related processes as an early-involved AD component. In conclusion, our findings suggest that subtle changes involving the secretory pathway and endocytosis precede severe proteome changes in symptomatic AD as part of the preclinical phase of AD. The respective early-responding proteins may also contribute to synaptic vesicle cycle alterations in symptomatic AD.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-msms, Neocortex, Alzheimer

### Affiliations
Laboratory for Neuropathology, Department of Imaging and Pathology, KU Leuven (University of Leuven), Leuven, Belgium;Leuven Brain Institute (LBI), KU Leuven (University of Leuven), Leuven, Belgium;Department of Imaging & Pathology, UZ Leuven (University Hospital Leuven), Leuven, Belgium.
Laboratory for Neuropathology, Department of Imaging and Pathology, KU Leuven (University of Leuven), Leuven, Belgium

### Submitter
Xiaohang Li

### Lab Head
Dr Dietmar Rudolf Thal
Laboratory for Neuropathology, Department of Imaging and Pathology, KU Leuven (University of Leuven), Leuven, Belgium;Leuven Brain Institute (LBI), KU Leuven (University of Leuven), Leuven, Belgium;Department of Imaging & Pathology, UZ Leuven (University Hospital Leuven), Leuven, Belgium.


