### Accession
PXD005889

### Title
Function of plant oncogenes(1)

### Description
The rolB plant oncogene exerts its oncogenic properties by modulating the abundance of chaperones

### Sample Protocol
A. thaliana Columbia (Col-0) vector control and rolB-transgenic callus cultures were obtained from seedlings using the pPCV002-CaMVBT construct as described previously.9 The calli were cultivated in W2,4-D medium supplemented with 0.4 mg l-1 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid in the dark at 24oC with 30-day subculture intervals. Samples were taken from 21-day cultures At (vector control) and AtB-2 (rolB-calli). The rolB-expressing callus line AtB-2 represents a line with moderate rolB expression.9 These cultures were two years of age. Expression of rolB was tested before analysis. Three biological experiments were carried out; where we present the best results of the most representative experiment with the largest number of proteins visualized.

### Data Protocol
All mass spectra were acquired with an Autoflex (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) MALDI-TOF mass spectrometer with a nitrogen laser operated in the positive reflector mode (standard method RP 700-3500 Da.par) under the control of FlexControl software (version 3.4; Bruker Daltonics). The analysis was performed in the automatic mode (AutoXecute – automatic Run). The spectra were externally calibrated using the CalibratePeptideStandards.FAMSMethod and a standard calibration mixture (Protein Calibration Standard I, Bruker Daltonics). The data files were transferred to Flexanalysis software version 3.4 (Bruker Daltonics) for automated peak extraction. Assignment of the first monoisotopic signals in the spectra was performed automatically using the signal detection algorithm SNAP (Bruker Daltonics). For MS and MS/MS analyses, we used the PMF.FAMSMethod and SNAP_full_process.FALIFTMethod, respectively. Each spectrum was obtained by averaging 1500-5000 laser shots (300 shots on a step) acquired at the minimum laser power. The data were analyzed using BioTools (version 3.2; Bruker Daltonics). A peptide mass tolerance of 0.5 Da and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.5 Da were adopted for database searches. The m/z spectra were searched against the Arabidopsis thaliana NCBInr and SwissProt databases using the Mascot search engine. Further data were analyzed using UniProt (http://www.uniprot.org/uniprot/) and other specialized databases and programs as indicated below.

### Publication Abstract
The rolB plant oncogene of Agrobacterium rhizogenes perturbs many biochemical processes in transformed plant cells, thereby causing their neoplastic reprogramming. The oncogene renders the cells more tolerant to environmental stresses and herbicides and inhibits ROS elevation and programmed cell death. In the present work, we performed a proteomic analysis of Arabidopsis thaliana rolB-expressing callus line AtB-2, which represents a line with moderate expression of the oncogene. Our results show that under these conditions rolB greatly perturbs the expression of some chaperone-type proteins such as heat-shock proteins and cyclophilins. Heat-shock proteins of the DnaK subfamily were overexpressed in rolB-transformed calli, whereas the abundance of cyclophilins, members of the closely related single-domain cyclophilin family was decreased. Real-time PCR analysis of corresponding genes confirmed the reliability of proteomics data because gene expression correlated well with the expression of proteins. Bioinformatics analysis indicates that rolB can potentially affect several levels of signaling protein modules, including effector-triggered immunity (via the RPM1-RPS2 signaling module), the miRNA processing machinery, auxin and cytokinin signaling, the calcium signaling system and secondary metabolism.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Rolb, Maldi

### Affiliations
Institute of Biology and Soil Science, Far East Branch of Russian Academy of Sciences, Vladivostok-22, 690022, Russia
lab. of bioengineering, Institute of Biology and Soil Science, Far East Branch of Russian Academy of Sciences, Vladivostok-22, 690022, Russia

### Submitter
Dmitriy Bulgakov

### Lab Head
Dr Victor P. Bulgakov
lab. of bioengineering, Institute of Biology and Soil Science, Far East Branch of Russian Academy of Sciences, Vladivostok-22, 690022, Russia


