### Accession
PXD029587

### Title
Multi-omics of a pre-clinical model of diabetic cardiomyopathy reveals increased fatty acid supply impacts mitochondrial metabolic selectivity

### Description
The incidence of type 2 diabetes (T2D) is increasing globally, with long-term implications for human health and longevity. Heart disease is the leading cause of death in T2D patients, who display an elevated risk of an acute cardiovascular event and worse outcomes following such an insult. The underlying mechanisms that predispose the diabetic heart to this poor prognosis remain to be defined. This study developed a pre-clinical model (Rattus norvegicus) that complemented caloric excess from a high-fat diet (HFD) and pancreatic β-cell dysfunction from streptozotocin (STZ) to produce hyperglycaemia, peripheral insulin resistance, hyperlipidaemia and elevated fat mass to mimic the clinical features of T2D. Ex vivo cardiac function was assessed using Langendorff perfusion with systolic and diastolic contractile depression observed in T2D hearts. Cohorts representing untreated, individual HFD- or STZ-treatments and the combined HFD+STZ approach were used to generate ventricular samples (n=9 per cohort) for sequential and integrated analysis of the proteome, lipidome and metabolome by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry. This study found that in T2D hearts, HFD treatment primed the metabolome, while STZ treatment was the major driver for changes in the proteome. Both treatments equally impacted the lipidome. Our data suggest that increases in β-oxidation and early TCA cycle intermediates promoted rerouting via 2-oxaloacetate to glutamate, γ aminobutyric acid and glutathione. Furthermore, we suggest that the T2D heart activates networks to redistribute excess acetyl-CoA towards ketogenesis and incomplete β-oxidation through the formation of short-chain acylcarnitine species. Multi-omics provided a global and comprehensive molecular view of the diabetic heart, which distributes substrates and products from excess β-oxidation, reduces metabolic flexibility and impairs capacity to restore high energy reservoirs needed to respond to and prevent subsequent acute cardiovascular events.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen ventricular tissue (50 mg) collected from nine discrete hearts per cohort following 5BL ex vivo perfusion was pooled on dry ice to contain three biological replicates before protein extraction, as previously described [30]. On six separate occasions per cohort (n=6 per cohort; Table S1), ventricular samples were homogenised in 3 volumes of homogenisation buffer (6 mol/L urea, 2 mol/L thiourea) containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors (1 µmol/L aprotinin, 1 µmol/L pepstatin A, 1 µmol/L leupeptin, 1 µmol/L phenylmethylsulphonyl fluoride [PMSF], HALT phosphatase inhibitor [Calbiochem]) by hand-held homogeniser (Omni, Kennesaw GA) and glass bead-beating (MPbio, Irvine, CA). The homogenate was cleared of cellular debris by centrifugation at 14000 x g for 15 min at 6°C. Proteins were acetone precipitated overnight, resolubilised in homogenisation buffer then reduced and alkylated with 10 mmol/L dithiothreitol and 20 mmol/L iodoacetamide, respectively; before digestion in 50 mmol/L triethylammonium bicarbonate (pH 7.6) for 24 hrs at 26°C with sequencing grade trypsin (1:33 trypsin:protein; Promega, Madison WI). Digests were acidified to 1% trifluoroacetic acid before desalting and concentration by hydrophilic-lipophilic balance chromatography (Waters, Bedford MA). Peptides were reconstituted in 50 mmol/L triethylammonium bicarbonate and adjusted to pH 8.2 before fluorometric quantitation (Qubit; Thermo Fisher Scientific). For relative quantitation, a volume containing 50 µg peptide was aliquoted for labelling with 0.16 mg tandem mass tags (TMT; Table S1; TMT10plex; Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. A second aliquot containing 50 µg peptide from extractions 3-6 was labelled identically to produce technical replicates for these four extractions per cohort (Table S1). The TMT labelled samples were fractionated by offline liquid chromatography using hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography (HILIC), with technical replicates separated by reverse phase C18 at pH 7.9 (mid-pH) using an Agilent 1200 LC system (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara CA). HILIC separation was performed on a 20 cm x 320 µm column packed in house with 3 µm TSK amide 80 particles (TOSOH Bioscience, King of Prussia PA) in 100% buffer B (90% acetonitrile [MeCN], 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid) for 10 min at 10 µL/min. Peptides were eluted over a 40 min linear gradient spanning 10-60% buffer A (0.1% trifluoroacetic acid) at 6 µL/min with fractions collected at 1 min intervals. Mid-pH separation was performed on a 15 cm / 300 µm column packed in house with 3.5 µm XBridge BEH C18 particles (Waters) in 95% buffer A (10 mM ammonium formate, pH7.9) for 13 min at 6 µL/min. Peptides were eluted over a 40 min linear gradient spanning 10-90% buffer B (90% MeCN) at 6 µL/min with fractions collected at 1 min intervals. Off-line LC fractions were concatenated, such that every 8th fraction was pooled for LC-MS/MS. Peptides were separated by reverse phase chromatography (C18, 1.9 µm particle size; Dr Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany) on an in house 40 cm x 75 µm column with integrated emitter across a gradient of 5%-35% MeCN with 0.1% formic acid (FA) over 90 min at 300 nL/min using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 UHPLC coupled to a Q Exactive HFX mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), as previously described [31]. Data were acquired in positive polarity, data dependant acquisition mode, with MS1 scans acquired from 300-1650 m/z (60000 resolution, 3e6 automatic gain control [AGC], 50 msec injection time), followed by 20 MS/MS scans performed using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation (0.7 m/z isolation window, 15000 resolution, 1e5 AGC, 30 normalised collision energy). Paired experiments (Table S1) were run simultaneously with two blanks run between to ensure no sample carryover. Tryptic peptides created from a whole cell HeLa preparation were used for quality control (QC) to ensure minimal signal drift.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed with Proteome Discoverer v.2.4 against the Rodent UniProtKB/Swiss Prot database (October 2019; 25,096 entries), using an in-house Mascot (Matrix Science, UK) server. Searches were performed permitting up to 2 missed cleavages; mass tolerance 20 ppm (MS1) and 0.2 Da (MS2); variable modifications (oxidation (Met), acetylation (protein N-termini), deamidation (Asn and Gln)) and; fixed modifications (TMT10plex (peptide N-termini and Lys) and carbamidomethyl (Cys)). Protein level false discovery rate was set to 0.01 for identifications prior to statistical processing. Proteins with >50% missing features were removed from statistical analyses, with missing values not imputed. Proteomics data were median normalised to CC reporter ion intensities, and Log2 transformed. Replicates were combined using a weighted median calculation based on the number of peptide spectral matches from each experiment in the R statistical environment. A minimum of 2 peptides per protein was required for protein quantitation. Proteins with <50% missing features were subject to students t-test (pair-wise analysis of cohort features) and one-way ANOVA and post-hoc analysis was performed by Benjamini-Hochberg procedure in Perseus [35]. Proteins were deemed to be significantly altered with p<0.05 (ANOVA; biological variance; students t-test, biological end points) and z-Score +/- 1.00 (log2 fold change variance).

### Publication Abstract
The incidence of type 2 diabetes (T2D) is increasing globally, with long-term implications for human health and longevity. Heart disease is the leading cause of death in T2D patients, who display an elevated risk of an acute cardiovascular event and worse outcomes following such an insult. The underlying mechanisms that predispose the diabetic heart to this poor prognosis remain to be defined. This study developed a pre-clinical model (Rattus norvegicus) that complemented caloric excess from a high-fat diet (HFD) and pancreatic &#x3b2;-cell dysfunction from streptozotocin (STZ) to produce hyperglycaemia, peripheral insulin resistance, hyperlipidaemia and elevated fat mass to mimic the clinical features of T2D. Ex vivo cardiac function was assessed using Langendorff perfusion with systolic and diastolic contractile depression observed in T2D hearts. Cohorts representing untreated, individual HFD- or STZ-treatments and the combined HFD&#xa0;+&#xa0;STZ approach were used to generate ventricular samples (n&#xa0;=&#xa0;9 per cohort) for sequential and integrated analysis of the proteome, lipidome and metabolome by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry. This study found that in T2D hearts, HFD treatment primed the metabolome, while STZ treatment was the major driver for changes in the proteome. Both treatments equally impacted the lipidome. Our data suggest that increases in &#x3b2;-oxidation and early TCA cycle intermediates promoted rerouting via 2-oxaloacetate to glutamate, &#x3b3;-aminobutyric acid and glutathione. Furthermore, we suggest that the T2D heart activates networks to redistribute excess acetyl-CoA towards ketogenesis and incomplete &#x3b2;-oxidation through the formation of short-chain acylcarnitine species. Multi-omics provided a global and comprehensive molecular view of the diabetic heart, which distributes substrates and products from excess &#x3b2;-oxidation, reduces metabolic flexibility and impairs capacity to restore high energy reservoirs needed to respond to and prevent subsequent acute cardiovascular events.

### Keywords
Heart, Proteomics, Diabetic cardiomyopathy, Multiomics

### Affiliations
The University of Sydney, Australia
University of Sydney

### Submitter
Melanie White

### Lab Head
Dr Melanie White
The University of Sydney, Australia


