### Accession
PXD005944

### Title
On-bead vs FASP vs InGel sample preparation for LC-MS/MS

### Description
The aim of this project was to compare and optimize sample processing protocols up-stream of LC-MS/MS. We set out to create a protocol that is easier and less laborious to use with liquid handlers than FASP, but that generates comparable results as FASP or traditional in-gel digestion.

### Sample Protocol
Total lysate obtained from Jurkat cells was biotinylated using NHS and MAL biotin. Free biotin was removed by four washes with DH2O on 10 kDa Amicon Ultra spin filters. The samples were then fractionated by either GelFree 8100 instrument in an 8% gel cassette or by standard SDS-PAGE on a 4-20% gradient polyacrylamide gel (Biorad). The GelFree fractions were subsequently split in two parts. One part was bound to streptavidin-sepharose beads and processed in a 96-well PCR plate, the other part was processed using the standard FASP protocol as published by Wisniewski et al (Wisniewski et al., Nature Methods 6, 359-362, 2009). After incubation with the sample, the sepharose-streptavidin beads were subsequently washed with 200 µl of: PBS with 1% lauryl maltoside (twice), PBS (once) and water (three times). After the last wash 50 µl of ammonium bicarbonate buffer with 1 µg trypsin (Promega) was added to both FASP-processed and sepharose-processed samples, and incubated overnight at 37°C. After the digestion both sample types (FASP and on-bead) were desalted and purified using Sep-Pak tC18 µElution Plates (Waters). For the in-gel digestion, a lane of the polyacrylamide gel containing the sample was cut into 12 strips and processed according to the protocol published by Shevchenko et al (Shevchenko et al., Analytical Chemistry 68, 850-8, 1996). After peptide desalting and purification all samples (FASP, on-bead and in-gel) were dried in a vacuum concentrator and re-suspended in 12 µl of 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were analyzed on Qexactive plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer coupled to Easy-nLC1000 liquid chromatographer (both ThermoFisher Scientific). The LC was equipped with a 50cm PepMap RSLCC18 column with a diameter of 75µm (ThermoFisher Scientific, cat. no. ES803). Water with 0.1% formic acid was used as solvent A and acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid was used as solvent B. The gradient was as follows: 2%B to 7%B in 5 min; 7%B to 30%B in 55 min; 30%B to 90%B in 2 min; 90%B for 20 min. Solvent flow was set to 300 nl/min and column temperature was kept at 60°C. The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent mode to automatically switch between MS and MS/MS acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (from m/z 400 to 1,200) were acquired in the Orbitrap with resolution R = 70,000 at m/z 200 (after accumulation to a target of 3,000,000 ions in the quadruple). The method used allowed sequential isolation of the most intense multiply-charged ions, up to ten, depending on signal intensity, for fragmentation on the HCD cell using high-energy collision dissociation at a target value of 100,000 charges or maximum acquisition time of 100 ms. MS/MS scans were collected at 17,500 resolution at the Orbitrap cell. Target ions already selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 30 seconds. General mass spectrometry conditions were: electrospray voltage 2.1 kV; no sheath and auxiliary gas flow, heated capillary temperature of 250oC, normalized HCD collision energy 25%. Ion selection threshold was set to 5e4 counts. Isolation width of 3.0 Da was used.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were submitted to MaxQuant software version 1.5.2.8 3 for protein identification. Parameters were set as follows: no fixed modification; protein N-acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. First search error window of 20 ppm and mains search error of 6 ppm. Trypsin without proline restriction enzyme option was used, with two allowed miscleavages. Minimal unique peptides were set to 1, and FDR allowed was 0.01 (1%) for peptide and protein identification. Match between runs options was turned on. The reviewed Uniprot human database was used (downloaded June 2015). Generation of reversed sequences was selected to assign FDR rates.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Fasp, On-bead digestion, Gelfree

### Affiliations
Dept. of Immunology, Oslo University Hospital Rikshospitalet, Oslo, Norway
K.G. Jebsen Center for Cancer Immunotherapy, Oslo, Norway

### Submitter
Krzysztof Sikorski

### Lab Head
Dr Fridtjof Lund-Johansen
Dept. of Immunology, Oslo University Hospital Rikshospitalet, Oslo, Norway


