### Accession
PXD005585

### Title
GFPtrap enrichment of CYP83A1 and CYP83B1

### Description
CYP83A1 and CYP83B1 are important enzymes in the biosynthesis of glucosinolates. However, only few of their interaction partners are known so far. We therefore performed a GFPtrap affinity enrichment using protein extracts from lines expressing tagged CYP83A1 or CYP83B1, or from wild type plants as background control.

### Sample Protocol
The experiment was performed in three biological replicates.  Protein extracts of wild type plants or proCYP83A1::CYP83A1-mVenus and proCYP83B1::CYP83B1-mVenus transgenic lines were mixed with GFPtrap magnetic beads and incubated. After magnetic separation and washing, the samples were eluted in SDS buffer.  The eluates were mixed with urea buffer and loaded onto centrifugal filter units, on which iodoacetamide treatment and trypsin digest was perfomed. The eluted peptides were purified using Sep-Pak cartridges.  Mass spectrometry measurements were performed on a LTQ OrbiTrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) coupled to a NanoLC-ultra (Eksigent) using electrospray ionisation. Peptides were eluted with a flow rate of 300 nl/min for 65 min by an increasing gradient from 3% acetonitrile to 50% acetonitrile. The FT OrbiTrap was used for obtaining full scans at a range of 300-1700 mass/charge, followed by MS/MS scans of the twenty highest parent ions. Dynamic exclusion was enabled at a duration of 45 s.

### Data Protocol
The obtained raw spectra were transformed to mgf data format and searched against the TAIR10 database (download on January 17th, 2011) (Lamesch et al., 2012) with concatenated decoy database and supplemented with common contaminants (71,032 entries) using the Mascot algorithm (version 2.3.02) (Mascot Science). The search parameters used were: mass = monoisotopic, requirement for tryptic ends, 2 missed cleavages allowed, precursor ion tolerance = +/- 10 ppm, fragment ion tolerance = +/- 0.5 Da, variable oxidation of methionine (M, PSI-MOD name: oxidation, mono ? = 15.995), protein N-terminal acetylation (protein N-term, PSI-MS name: acetyl, mono ? = 42.010565 Da) and conversion of N-terminal glutamine into pyroglutamic acid (N-term Q, PSI-MS name: Gln ? pyro-Glu, mono ? = -17.026549 Da), and static carbamidomethylation of cysteine (C, PSI-MS name: carbamidomethyl, mono ? = 57.0215). Peptide spectrum assignments with a Mascot score higher than the ion score that indicates identity or extensive homology (p<0.05) in the respective sample were loaded into the pep2pro database. Peptides matching to known contaminants or to several proteins were excluded from further analyses, unless they belong to a different splice variant of the same protein or to a different locus, which shares exactly the same amino acid sequence.

### Publication Abstract
Within the cell, biosynthetic pathways are embedded in protein-protein interaction networks. In Arabidopsis, the biosynthetic pathways of aliphatic and indole glucosinolate defense compounds are well-characterized. However, little is known about the spatial orchestration of these enzymes and their interplay with the cellular environment. To address these aspects, we applied two complementary, untargeted approaches-split-ubiquitin yeast 2-hybrid and co-immunoprecipitation screens-to identify proteins interacting with CYP83A1 and CYP83B1, two homologous enzymes specific for aliphatic and indole glucosinolate biosynthesis, respectively. Our analyses reveal distinct functional networks with substantial interconnection among the identified interactors for both pathway-specific markers, and add to our knowledge about how biochemical pathways are connected to cellular processes. Specifically, a group of protein interactors involved in cell death and the hypersensitive response provides a potential link between the glucosinolate defense compounds and defense against biotrophic pathogens, mediated by protein-protein interactions.

### Keywords
Seedling, Cyp83b1, Arabidopsis, Cyp83a1, Gfptrap, Affinity enrichment, Glucosinolate biosynthesis

### Affiliations
ETH Zurich
Institute of  Plant Science

### Submitter
Katja Baerenfaller

### Lab Head
Dr Katja Baerenfaller
ETH Zurich


