### Accession
PXD012307

### Title
An atlas of the aging lung mapped by single cell transcriptomics and deep tissue proteomics

### Description
Aging promotes lung function decline and susceptibility to chronic lung diseases, which are the third leading cause of death worldwide. We used single cell transcriptomics and mass spectrometry to quantify changes in cellular activity states of 30 cell types and the tissue proteome from lungs of young and old mice. Aging led to increased transcriptional noise, indicating deregulated epigenetic control. We observed highly distinct effects of aging on cell type level, uncovering increased cholesterol biosynthesis in type-2 pneumocytes and lipofibroblasts as a novel hallmark of lung aging. Proteomic profiling revealed extracellular matrix remodeling in old mice, including increased collagen IV and XVI and decreased Fraser syndrome complex proteins and Collagen XIV. Computational integration of the aging proteome and single cell transcriptomes predicted the cellular source of regulated proteins and created a first unbiased reference of the aging lung. The lung aging atlas can be accessed via an interactive user-friendly webtool at: https://theislab.github.io/LungAgingAtlas

### Sample Protocol
Detergent solubility profiling: For proteome analysis ~100mg of fresh frozen total tissue (wet weight) of mouse lungs was homogenized in 500 µl PBS (with protease inhibitor cocktail) using an Ultra-turrax homogenizer. After centrifugation the soluble proteins were collected and proteins were extracted from the insoluble pellet in 3 steps using buffers with increasing stringency as described in the QDSP protocol(Schiller, HB et al 2015). Peptides from LysC and trypsin proteolysis of the four protein fractions in guadinium hydrochloride (enzyme/protein ratio 1:50), were purified as previously described on SDB-RPS material stage-tips (Schiller, HB et al 2015).  Mass spectrometry: Data was acquired on a Quadrupole/Orbitrap type Mass Spectrometer (Q-Exactive, Thermo Scientific) as previously described (Schiller, HB et al 2015). Approximately 2 μg of peptides were separated in a four hour gradient on a 50-cm long (75-μm inner diameter) column packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 μm resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH). Reverse-phase chromatography was performed with an EASY-nLC 1000 ultra-high pressure system (Thermo Fisher Scientific), which was coupled to a Q-Exactive Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded with buffer A (0.1% (v/v) formic acid) and eluted with a nonlinear 240-min gradient of 5–60% buffer B (0.1% (v/v) formic acid, 80% (v/v) acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. After each gradient, the column was washed with 95% buffer B and re-equilibrated with buffer A. Column temperature was kept at 50 °C by an in-house designed oven with a Peltier element (Thakur, S.S. et al 2011) and operational parameters were monitored in real time by the SprayQc software (Scheltema, R.A. & Mann, M 2011). MS data were acquired with a shotgun proteomics method, where in each cycle a full scan, providing an overview of the full complement of isotope patterns visible at that particular time point, is follow by up-to ten data-dependent MS/MS scans on the most abundant not yet sequenced isotopes (top10 method) (Michalski, A 2011). Target value for the full scan MS spectra was 3 × 106 charges in the 300−1,650 m/z range with a maximum injection time of 20 ms and a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 400. Isolation of precursors was performed with the quadrupole at window of 3 Th. Precursors were fragmented by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with normalized collision energy of 25 % (the appropriate energy is calculated using this percentage, and m/z and charge state of the precursor). MS/MS scans were acquired at a resolution of 17,500 at m/z 400 with an ion target value of 1 × 105, a maximum injection time of 120 ms, and fixed first mass of 100 Th. Repeat sequencing of peptides was minimized by excluding the selected peptide candidates for 40 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry raw data processing: MS raw files were analyzed by the MaxQuant (Cox, J. & Mann, M. 2008) (version 1.4.3.20) and peak lists were searched against the human Uniprot FASTA database (version Nov 2016), and a common contaminants database (247 entries) by the Andromeda search engine (Cox, J. et al. 2011) as previously described (Schiller, HB et al. 2015).  QDSP data analysis: The quantitative detergent solubility profiling (QDSP) analysis was done as previously described (Schiller, HB et al. 2011). Briefly, intensities were first normalized such that the mean log2 intensities of the young and the old samples are zero, respectively. Using the normalized intensities, a two-way ANOVA with the two-factor treatment (old/young) and solubility fraction (FR1, FR2, FR3, INSOL) and the corresponding interaction term was performed using the R function aov(). Proteins significant in the interaction term correspond to proteins for which the solubility profile changes between young and old mice. Therefore, the corresponding P-value was used for filtering the significantly changed profiles after FDR correction.  In silico bulk differential expression analysis: In silico bulk samples were generated by summing UMI counts across all cells within one mouse sample. Differential gene expression analysis of in silico bulk samples was performed using the R package DESeq2 (v1.20.0) ( Cox, J. et al. 2011).  2D annotation enrichment analysis: Statistical and bioinformatics operations, such as normalization, pattern recognition, cross-omics comparisons and multiple-hypothesis testing corrections, were performed with the Perseus software package (Tyanova, S. et al. 2015). The 2D annotation enrichment test used to compare proteome and transcriptome, is based on a two-dimensional generalization of the nonparametric two-sample test. The false discovery rate is stringently controlled by correcting for multiple hypothesis testing (Cox, J. & Mann, M. 2012).  scRNA-seq, bulk RNA-seq and proteome integration: To integrate scRNA-seq, bulk RNA-seq and protein data the following approach was used. Raw count data from the in silico bulk and whole lung tissue bulk was normalized using the voom() function of the limma R package(Law et al. 2014). Next, in silico bulk, whole lung tissue bulk and protein data was merged on a set of genes present in all three data sets and quantile normalized. This merged and quantile normalized expression matrix was then subjected to PCA.  RAW file nomenclature: E.g. 20131023_EXQ8_HeSc_SA_FR1_young_11_1 correlates to date_MS-machine_user_sampletype_QDSP-fraction_sample-name_replicate

### Publication Abstract
Aging promotes lung function decline and susceptibility to chronic lung diseases, which are the third leading cause of death worldwide. Here, we use single cell transcriptomics and mass spectrometry-based proteomics to quantify changes in cellular activity states&#xa0;across&#xa0;30 cell types and chart the lung proteome of young and old mice. We show that aging leads to increased transcriptional noise, indicating deregulated epigenetic control. We observe cell type-specific effects of aging, uncovering increased cholesterol biosynthesis in type-2 pneumocytes and lipofibroblasts and altered relative frequency of airway epithelial cells as hallmarks of lung aging. Proteomic profiling reveals extracellular matrix remodeling in old mice, including increased collagen IV and XVI and decreased Fraser syndrome complex proteins and collagen XIV. Computational integration of the aging proteome with the single cell transcriptomes predicts the cellular source of regulated proteins and creates an unbiased reference map of the aging lung.

### Keywords
Lung, Qdsp, Single cell transcriptomics, Lung cell atlas, Aging, Total proteome, Extracellular matrix, Lipid metabolism, Chronic lung disease

### Affiliations
Helmholtz Zentrum München, Institute of Lung Biology and Disease, Member of the German Center for Lung Research (DZL), Munich, Germany
CPC/ILBD HemholtzZentrum München

### Submitter
Christoph Mayr

### Lab Head
Dr Herbert B Schiller
Helmholtz Zentrum München, Institute of Lung Biology and Disease, Member of the German Center for Lung Research (DZL), Munich, Germany


