### Accession
PXD047989

### Title
Project title: Endogenous AIRE-immunoprecipitation from primary human neutrophils

### Description
Autoimmune regulator (AIRE) is a transcriptional regulator. We here assess the role for AIRE in primary human neutrophils. We found that the functional role for AIRE in neutrophils is to regulate the extrinsic apoptotic pathway involving the Fas/TNFR death receptors and Cathepsin G and the expression of unique immune mediators.

### Sample Protocol
The co-immunoprecipitation AIRE samples were reduced with dithiothreitol followed by alkylation with iodoacetamide and proteins precipitated in 90% ethanol and proteins were digested with trypsin. Peptides were analyzed by LC-MS on an Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA), operated in positive data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode.

### Data Protocol
The raw DDA data were analyzed with Proteome Discoverer™ 2.5 Software (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, Massachusetts, USA), and the peptides were identified using SEQUEST HT against UniProtKB Human database (UP000005640_9606). The search was performed with the following parameters applied: static modification: cysteine carbamidomethylation and dynamic modifications N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation and phosphorylation on S, T and Y. The precursor tolerance was set to 10 ppm, and fragment tolerance was set to 0.02. Up to 2 missed cleavages were allowed, and Percolator was used for peptide validation at a q-value of a maximum of 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Autoimmune regulator (AIRE) is a transcriptional regulator expressed in the thymus and necessary for maintaining immunological self-tolerance. Extra-thymic AIRE expression is rare and a role for AIRE in tumor-associated innate immune cells has not yet been established. In this study we show that AIRE is expressed in human pro-tumor neutrophils. In breast cancer, AIRE was primarily located to tumor associated neutrophils (TANs), and to a lesser extent to tumor associated macrophages (TAMs) and tumor cells. Expression of AIRE in TAN/TAMs, but not in cancer cells, was associated with an adverse prognosis. We show that the functional role for AIRE in neutrophils and macrophages is to regulate expression of immune mediators and the extrinsic apoptotic pathway involving the Fas/TNFR death receptors and Cathepsin G. We here propose that the role for AIRE in TAN/TAMs in breast tumors is to regulate cell death and inflammation, thus promoting tumor progression.

### Keywords
Human, Aire, Neutrophil

### Affiliations
Dept. of Oncology, Clinical Sciences, Lund University, 221 85 Lund, Sweden
Karin Leandersson Professor, PhD Cancer Immunology, Department for Translational Medicine, Clinical Research Centre, house 91, floor 11 Jan Waldenströmsg 35, Lund University Skåne University Hospital, Malmö SE-214 28 Malmö, Sweden

### Submitter
Charlotte Welinder

### Lab Head
Dr Karin Leandersson
Karin Leandersson Professor, PhD Cancer Immunology, Department for Translational Medicine, Clinical Research Centre, house 91, floor 11 Jan Waldenströmsg 35, Lund University Skåne University Hospital, Malmö SE-214 28 Malmö, Sweden


