### Accession
PXD035937

### Title
Proteome analysis of AML cells upon CaSR-KO

### Description
Haematopoietic stem cells (HSC) reside in locations within the bone marrow microenvironment (BMM) featuring a slightly higher extracellular calcium ion concentration [eCa2+]. HSC respond to [eCa2+] via the G-protein coupled calcium-sensing receptor (CaSR), but the role of CaSR for leukaemia and leukaemia stem cells (LSC), the malignant counterpart to HSC, is poorly defined. Here we performed a proteomic analysis on Lin- MLL AF9+ cells, comparing WT cells to cells lacking CaSR using TMT-based proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were dissolved in lysis buffer (2%SDS, 10mM TCEP, 40mM CAA, 50mM Tris pH 8.5), boiled for 10 minutes at 95°C followed by 2 minutes of sonication and another 5 minutes of boiling at 95°C. Proteins were precipitated by methanol-chloroform-precipitation and protein pellets were resuspended in 8M Urea, 50mM Tris pH 8.2 and protein concentration determined using BCA assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 23225). 40µg of protein from each sample were diluted to 0.8M urea using digestion buffer (50mM Tris pH 8.2) and incubated with LysC (Wako Chemicals) at 1:50 (w/w) ratio and Trypsin (Promega, V5113) at 1:100 (w/w) ratio overnight at 37°C. Digests were acidified using trifluoroaceticacid (TFA) to 0.5% and peptides purified using SepPak tC18 columns (Waters, WAT054955). Eluted peptides were dried, resuspended in TMT labelling buffer (0.1M EPPS pH 8.2, 20% Acetonitrile) and peptide concentration determined by micro BCA (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 23235). 10µg of peptides per sample were mixed with TMT10 reagents (ThermoFisher Scientific, 90111, A37724, 90061) in a 1:2 (w/w) ratio (2µg TMT reagent per 1µg peptide). Reactions were incubated for one hour at RT and subsequently quenched by addition of hydroxylamine to a final concentration of 0.5% and incubation at RT for 15min. After verification of labelling efficiency (>99%) and mixing ratios by LC-MS analysis of a testpool comprising 1/20th of each sample, all samples were pooled accordingly, desalted by SepPak as stated above and dried again. Peptides were fractionated using high-pH liquid-chromatography on a micro-flow HPLC (Dionex U3000 RSLC, Thermo Scientific). 30µg of pooled and purified TMT labelled peptides resuspended in Solvent A (5mM ammonium-bicarbonate, 5%ACN) were separated on a C18 column (XSelect CSH, 1mm x 150mm, 3.5 µm particle size; Waters) using a multistep gradient from 3-60% Solvent B (100% ACN) over 65 minutes at a flow rate of 30 µl/min. Eluting peptides were collected every 43 seconds from minute 2 for 69 minutes into a total of 96 fractions, which were cross-concatenated into 16 fractions. Pooled fractions were evaporated to dryness and stored at -20°C until mass spectrometry analysis, for which they were resuspended in LC-MS grade water containing 2% ACN and 0.1% TFA. Tryptic peptides were analyzed on an Orbitrap Lumos coupled to an easy nLC 1200 (ThermoFisher Scientific) using a 35 cm long, 75µm ID fused-silica column packed in house with 1.9 µm C18 particles (Reprosil pur, Dr. Maisch), and kept at 50°C using an integrated column oven (Sonation). A synchronous precursor selection (SPS) multi-notch MS3 method was used in order to minimize ratio compression as previously described (McAlister et al., 2014). Assuming equal amounts in each fraction, 750 ng of peptides were eluted by a non-linear gradient from 4 to 32% ACN over 90 minutes followed by a step-wise increase to 75% ACN in 6 minutes which was held for another 9 minutes. Full scan MS spectra (350-1400 m/z) were acquired with a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200, maximum injection time of 100 ms and AGC target value of 4 x 105. The most intense precursors with a charge state between 2 and 6 per full scan were selected for fragmentation (“Top Speed” with a cycle time of 1.5 seconds) and isolated with a quadrupole isolation window of 0.7 Th. MS2 scans were performed in the Ion trap (Turbo) using a maximum injection time of 50ms, AGC target value of 1.5 x 104 and fragmented using CID with a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 35%. SPS-MS3 scans for quantification were performed on the 10 most intense MS2 fragment ions with an isolation window of 0.7 Th (MS) and 2 m/z (MS2). Ions were fragmented using HCD with an NCE of 65% and analysed in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 50,000 at m/z 200, scan range of 110-500 m/z, AGC target value of 1.5 x105 and a maximum injection time of 86ms. Repeated sequencing of already acquired precursors was limited by setting a dynamic exclusion of 45 seconds and 7 ppm and advanced peak determination was deactivated.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was analyzed with Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (ThermoFisher Scientific). Acquired MS2-spectra were searched against the mouse reference proteome (Taxonomy ID 10090) downloaded from UniProt (12-March-2020; “One Sequence Per Gene”, 21959 sequences) and a collection of common contaminants (244 entries from MaxQuant`s “contaminants.fasta”) using SequestHT, allowing a precursor mass tolerance of 7 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.5 Da after recalibration of mass errors using the Spectra RC-node applying default settings. In addition to standard dynamic (Oxidation on methionines and acetylation/Met-loss or Met-loss+acetylation of protein N-termini) and static (Carbamidomethylation on cysteins) modifications, TMT-labelling of N-termini and lysines were set as static modifications. False discovery rates were controlled on the PSM and protein level using Percolator (< 1% FDR). Only PSMs with a signal-to-noise above 10 and a co-isolation below 50% derived from unique peptides we`re used for protein quantification after total intensity normalization. Filtering and statistical analysis of the Proteome Discoverer output (“Proteins” table) was performed in Perseus (v 1.6.15.0). Only proteins quantified in all replicates in both experimental groups (WT and KO) were used for statistical analysis. Significant proteins were defined after a Student`s t-test applying a p-value cut-off (<0.01) and fold-change threshold (log2ratio larger than +-0.58).

### Publication Abstract
Haematopoietic stem cells (HSC) reside in the bone marrow microenvironment (BMM), where they respond to extracellular calcium [eCa<sup>2+</sup>] via the G-protein coupled calcium-sensing receptor (CaSR). Here we show that a calcium gradient exists in this BMM, and that [eCa<sup>2+</sup>] and response to [eCa<sup>2+</sup>] differ between leukaemias. CaSR influences the location of MLL-AF9<sup>+</sup> acute myeloid leukaemia (AML) cells within this niche and differentially impacts MLL-AF9<sup>+</sup> AML versus BCR-ABL1<sup>+</sup> leukaemias. Deficiency of CaSR reduces AML&#xa0;leukaemic stem cells (LSC) 6.5-fold. CaSR interacts with filamin A, a crosslinker of actin filaments, affects stemness-associated factors and modulates pERK, &#x3b2;-catenin and c-MYC signaling and intracellular levels of [Ca<sup>2+</sup>] in MLL-AF9<sup>+</sup> AML cells. Combination treatment of cytarabine plus CaSR-inhibition in various models may be superior to cytarabine alone. Our studies suggest CaSR to be a differential and targetable factor in leukaemia progression influencing self-renewal of AML LSC via [eCa<sup>2+</sup>] cues from the BMM.

### Keywords
Aml, Mouse, Proteome, Tmt

### Affiliations
Goethe-Universität Frankfurt, Georg-Speyer-Haus, Paul-Ehrlich-Str. 42-44, Frankfurt am Main, GERMANY
Goethe University Frankfurt

### Submitter
Christian Münch

### Lab Head
Dr Daniela Krause
Goethe-Universität Frankfurt, Georg-Speyer-Haus, Paul-Ehrlich-Str. 42-44, Frankfurt am Main, GERMANY


