### Accession
PXD002112

### Title
Feedback circuitry between miR-218 repression and RTK activation in glioblastoma

### Description
Receptor tyrosine kinase pathway signalings plays a central role in the growth and progression of glioblastoma, a highly aggressive group of brain tumors. We recently reported that miR-218 repression, an essentially uniform feature of human GBM, directly promotes RTK hyperactivation by increasing the expression of key positive signaling effectors, including EGFR, PLCr1, PIK3CA and ARAF. However, enhanced RTK signaling is known to activate compensatory inhibitory feedback mechanisms in both normal and cancer cells. We demonstrate here that miR-218 repression in GBM cells also increases the abundance of additional up stream and downstream signaling mediators, including PDGFRa, RSK2, and S6K1, which collectively funciton to alleviate inhibitory RTK feedback regulation. In turn, RTK signaling suppresses miR-218 expression via STAT3, which binds to the miR-218 locus, along with BCLAF1, to repress its expression. These data identify novel interacting feedback loops by which miR-218 repression promotes increased RTK signaling in high-grade gliomas.

### Sample Protocol
The protein sample extracted using the biotinylated DNA pull down assay was ran on a resolving gel. The LC-MS/MS analysis was performed at the Proteomics core facility at the Wistar Institute. Briefly, the gel band was excised and digested with trypsin, and the digests were analyzed by LC-MS/MS on an LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra generated were searched against a human database (UniProt.org) using SEQUEST. Only proteins identified by 2 or more peptides (high-confidence) were included, and common contaminants (eg. keratins) were removed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Glioblastoma, Rtk, Stat3, Mir-218

### Affiliations
University of Pennsylvania
Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute, Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, the United States

### Submitter
Yangpeiwei Huang

### Lab Head
Dr Marie Celeste Simon
Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute, Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, the United States


