### Accession
PXD005609

### Title
Identification of down-regulated proteins in TPD affected rubber tree (Hevea brasiliensis Muell. Arg.) by MALDI-TOF MS/MS analysis

### Description
Identification of proteins associated with Tapping Panel Dryness (TPD) syndrome in rubber tree.

### Sample Protocol
Laticifer cells were collected from both healthy and TPD affected clones and a total protein was extracted from the C-serum of centrifuged laticifer cells using protein extraction buffer containing 0.1 M Tris, EDTA, Nacl, Sucrose, β –mercaptoehanol and Triton X-100. The concentration of extracted protein was quantified spectrophotometrically.

### Data Protocol
The image analysis of the gels was carried out using Image Master 2D Platinum 7 software, giving the expression analysis of the protein spots. The masses obtained in the peptide mass fingerprint were submitted for Mascot search in concerned database for identification of the protein.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Maldi-tof ms/ms, Hevea brasiliensis, Tpd

### Affiliations
Plant Genetic Engineering and Molecular Biology Lab,
Department of Biotechnology,
Periyar University,
Salem,
Tamilnadu, India.
PIN: 636011
Plant Genetic Engineering and Molecular Biology Lab, Department of Biotechnology, Periyar University, Salem - 636011, Tamil Nadu, India.

### Submitter
Venkatachalam P

### Lab Head
Dr Dr.P.Venkatachalam, Professor
Plant Genetic Engineering and Molecular Biology Lab, Department of Biotechnology, Periyar University, Salem - 636011, Tamil Nadu, India.


