### Accession
PXD025063

### Title
human neuronal cell lines characterization

### Description
Proteomic characterization of stemm cell derived human neuronal cell lines

### Sample Protocol
Digestion and fractionation: Sample preparation for mass spectrometry was performed via in-solution digestion and strong cation exchange (SCX) fractionation. In brief, samples were four-fold diluted in 25 mM NH4HCO3, pH 8.0, and subsequently incubated with 5 mM dithiothreitol at room temperature for 1 h. Afterwards, reduced cysteine residues were carbamidomethylated via addition of 20 mM iodine acetamide at room temperature for 1 h. Proteins were digested by adding 2.5 μg trypsin (TrypsinGold, Promega, Madison, WI, USA) and incubated at room temperature overnight. Digestion was stopped by adding formic acid (FAc) to a final concentration of 0.5% and subsequently centrifuged at 15.000 x g at 4°C for 15 min. Resulting supernatant was subjected to a SCX column (SCX SpinTips, Protea Biosciences, Morgantown, USA) previously equilibrated with 60 µl acetonitrile (ACN) and washed with 0.1% trifluoric acid (TFA). After sample application SCX column was washed with 60 µl 0.1% TFA. Fractionation was achieved by stepwise elution with 60 µl of: 50 mM ammonium formiate, 20% ACN, 0.5% FAc; 75 mM ammonium formiate, 20% ACN, 0.5% FAc; 125 mM ammonium formiate, 20% ACN, 0.5% FAc; 200 mM ammonium formiate, 20% ACN, 0.5% FAc; 300 mM ammonium formiate, 20% ACN, 0.5% FAc and 5% ammonium hydroxide, 80% ACN. Eluted fractions were dried in a vacuum centrifuge.  Mass spectrometry: LC-MS/MS was performed on a hybrid dual pressure linear ion trap/orbitrap mass spectrometer (LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro, Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) equipped with an Ultimate 3000-nLC Ultra HPLC (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA). Dried peptide fractions were dissolved in 10 μL 0.1% TFA and subjected to a 75 μm I.D., 25 cm PepMap C18-column, packed with 2 μm resin (Dionex, Germany). Separation was achieved by applying a gradient from 2% ACN to 35% ACN in 0.1% formic acid (FA) over a 130 min gradient at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro MS exclusively used CID-fragmentation when acquiring MS/MS spectra, consisting of an orbitrap full MS scan followed by up to 20 LTQ MS/MS experiments (TOP20) on the most abundant ions detected in the full MS scan. The essential MS settings were as follows: full MS (FTMS; resolution 60,000; m/z range 400–2000); MS/MS (Linear Trap; minimum signal threshold 500; isolation width 2 Da; dynamic exclusion time setting 30 s; singly charged ions were excluded from selection). Normalized collision energy was set to 35%, and the activation time was set to 10 ms.

### Data Protocol
Data processing: Raw data processing and protein identification of the high resolution orbitrap datasets were performed with de novo sequencing algorithms of PEAKS Studio 8.0 (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, Canada) using the SwissProt database. The false discovery rate was set to <1%.

### Publication Abstract
Tauopathies are a major type of proteinopathies underlying neurodegenerative diseases. Mutations in the tau-encoding MAPT-gene lead to hereditary cases of frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD)-tau, which span a wide phenotypic and pathological spectrum. Some of these mutations, such as the N279K mutation, result in a shift of the physiological 3R/4R ratio towards the more aggregation prone 4R isoform. Other mutations such as V337M cause a decrease in the in vitro affinity of tau to microtubules and a reduced ability to promote microtubule assembly. Whether both mutations address similar downstream signalling cascades remains unclear but is important for potential rescue strategies. Here, we developed a novel and optimised forward programming protocol for the rapid and highly efficient production of pure cultures of glutamatergic cortical neurons from hiPSCs. We apply this protocol to delineate mechanisms of neurodegeneration in an FTLD-tau hiPSC-model consisting of MAPT<sup>N279K</sup>- or MAPT<sup>V337M</sup>-mutants and wild-type or isogenic controls. The resulting cortical neurons express MAPT-genotype-dependent dominant proteome clusters regulating apoptosis, ROS homeostasis and mitochondrial function. Related pathways are significantly upregulated in MAPT<sup>N279K</sup> neurons but not in MAPT<sup>V337M</sup> neurons or controls. Live cell imaging demonstrates that both MAPT mutations affect excitability of membranes as reflected in spontaneous and stimulus evoked calcium signals when compared to controls, albeit more pronounced in MAPT<sup>N279K</sup> neurons. These spontaneous calcium oscillations in MAPT<sup>N279K</sup> neurons triggered mitochondrial hyperpolarisation and fission leading to mitochondrial ROS production, but also ROS production through NOX2 acting together to induce cell death. Importantly, we found that these mechanisms are MAPT mutation-specific and were observed in MAPT<sup>N279K</sup> neurons, but not in MAPT<sup>V337M</sup> neurons, supporting a pathological role of the 4R tau isoform in redox disbalance and highlighting MAPT-mutation specific clinicopathological-genetic correlations, which may inform rescue strategies in different MAPT mutations.

### Keywords
Human, Neuronal cell line, Proteomic characterization

### Affiliations
Institute of Exptl. Internal Medicine, University Magdeburg, Leipzigerstr. 44, 39120 Magdeburg, Germnay
University Magdeburg

### Submitter
Thilo Kaehne

### Lab Head
Dr Kaehne, Thilo
Institute of Exptl. Internal Medicine, University Magdeburg, Leipzigerstr. 44, 39120 Magdeburg, Germnay


