### Accession
PXD037652

### Title
Real-time library search assisted identification of cross-links increases resolution for structural modeling and interactome mapping

### Description
Cross-linking mass spectrometry (XL-MS) is a universal tool of molecular and structural biology for probing structural dynamics and protein-protein interactions in vitro and in vivo. Although cross-linked peptides are naturally less abundant than their unlinked counterparts, recent experimental advances improved cross-link identification by enriching the cross-linker modified peptides chemically with the use of enrichable cross-linkers. However, mono-links (i.e., peptides modified with a hydrolyzed cross-linker) still hinder efficient cross-link identification because a large proportion of measurement time is spent on MS2 acquisitions of mono-links. Currently, cross-links and mono-links cannot be separated by sample preparation techniques or chromatography because they are chemically almost identical. Here, we found that based on the intensity ratios of four diagnostic peaks when using PhoX/tert-butyl-PhoX cross-linkers, cross-links and mono-links can be partially distinguished. Harnessing their characteristic intensity ratios for real-time library search (RTLS)-based triggering of full scans increased the number of cross-link identifications from both single protein samples and intact E. coli cells. Furthermore, RTLS improves cross-link identification from unenriched samples and short gradients, which is beneficial in high-throughput approaches and when instrument time or sample amount is limited.

### Sample Protocol
Cross-linking, protein digestion and IMAC enrichment. E. coli DH3α cells were grown in LB media for 16 h at 37 °C. Cells were pelleted at 800xg for 10 min at 4 °C. The cell pellet and chicken ovotransferrin, bovine cytochrome C, bovine serum albumin or yeast alcohol dehydrogenase (Sigma Aldrich) were resuspended in 20 mM HEPES pH 7.4 to a concentration of 10 mg/mL. 5 mM tbPhoX were added to each solution and incubated for 30 – 60 min at room-temperature. The cross-linking reaction was quenched by adding 20 mM Tris pH 8 and incubated for 15 min at room temperature. Cross-linked E. coli were incubated for 10 min at 95 °C after addition of 4% wt/v SDS and lyzed by sonication for 10 min using a Bioruptor (30 s cycles). E. coli proteins were precipitated by chloroform methanol or acetone precipitation. Cross-linked proteins were supplemented with 8 M urea, reduced, alkylated and proteolyzed with Lys-C endopeptidase (1:200 wt/wt) and trypsin (1:100 wt/wt). The digestion was stopped after 16 h with 1% formic acid (FA). Cross-linked peptides were desalted using Sep-Pak C8 cartridges (Waters) and dried. Cross-linked and mono-linked peptides were enriched as described before17.  LC-MS data acquisition. Samples were separated by RP-HPLC using a Thermo Scientific™ EASY-nLC™ 1200 system connected to an EASY-Spray™ PepMap™ RSLC C18 column (0.075 mm x 250 mm, 2 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size (Thermo Fischer Scientific)) at 300 nL/min flow rate. The crosslinked samples were analyzed on the Orbitrap Eclipse™ Tribrid™ mass spectrometer with Instrument Control Software version 4.0. Reverse phase separation was accomplished using a 60- or 125-min separation gradient (plus 20 min equilibration phase). Separation gradient: 3 – 40% solvent B (A: 0.1% FA; B: 80% ACN, 0.1% FA). Cross-linked samples were analyzed using an HCD-MS2 acquisition strategy with 30% normalized collision energy or stepped collision energy (26 ± 5%). MS1 and MS2 scans were acquired in the Orbitrap with a respective mass resolution of 60,000 and 30,000. Dynamic exclusion was set to 60 sec. Survey scans were acquired in the ion trap or the orbitrap with scan range of m/z 120 – 500. For survey scans, precursor isolation windows were set to 1.2 m/z at MS1 level and the normalized collision energy was determined experimentally. RTLS searches were performed by comparing survey scans with the spectral library entries representing the mono-link and cross-link classes in the “Reverse Library Search” mode with “Similarity Search” enabled. Each library entry synthetic spectrum consisted of four diagnostic peaks (m/z = 201.1231, 215.1387, 312.0632, 377.1269) with their expected relative intensities. The annotation of the class within the spectral library was used to create instrument methods either rejecting, or requiring (“promoting”), acquisition of additional scans for the mono-link class, cross-link class, or a combination of both. MS2 sequencing events were triggered for precursors at charge states +3 to +8.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis. Spectral raw data files were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 3.0 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with XlinkX node 3.0 using the noncleavable or noncleavable open search algorithms for cross-linked peptides and SEQUEST HT search engine for unmodified peptides and mono-links. MS1 ion mass tolerance: 10 ppm; MS2 ion mass tolerance: 20 ppm. Maximal number of missed cleavages: 2; minimum peptide length: 6; max. modifications: 4; peptide mass: 350 – 8,000 Da. Carbamidomethylation (+57.021 Da) of cysteines was used as a static modification. PhoX cross-linked mass modifications were used as variable modifications for lysine or protein N-terminus in addition to methionine oxidation (+15.995 Da). Data were searched for cross-links against reduced protein databases containing chicken ovotransferrin (P02789), yeast alcohol dehydrogenase (P00330), bovine cytochrome C (P62894), bovine serum albumin (P02769), and proteases or a database generated from 250 protein identifications using the E. coli proteome retrieved from Uniprot as search space. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% at CSM and cross-link levels. Crosslinking analysis was also performed using pLink2 (version 2.3.9). Search parameters were similar to those used in XlinkX. Post-processing and visualization were carried out using R or XMAS plug-in for ChimeraX.

### Publication Abstract
Cross-linking mass spectrometry (XL-MS) is a universal tool for probing structural dynamics and protein-protein interactions <i>in vitro</i> and <i>in vivo</i>. Although cross-linked peptides are naturally less abundant than their unlinked counterparts, recent experimental advances improved cross-link identification by enriching the cross-linker-modified peptides chemically with the use of enrichable cross-linkers. However, mono-links (<i>i.e.</i>, peptides modified with a hydrolyzed cross-linker) still hinder efficient cross-link identification since a large proportion of measurement time is spent on their MS2 acquisition. Currently, cross-links and mono-links cannot be separated by sample preparation techniques or chromatography because they are chemically almost identical. Here, we found that based on the intensity ratios of four diagnostic peaks when using PhoX/tBu-PhoX cross-linkers, cross-links and mono-links can be partially distinguished. Harnessing their characteristic intensity ratios for real-time library search (RTLS)-based triggering of high-resolution MS2 scans increased the number of cross-link identifications from both single protein samples and intact <i>E. coli</i> cells. Specifically, RTLS improves cross-link identification from unenriched samples and short gradients, emphasizing its advantages in high-throughput approaches and when instrument time or sample amount is limited.

### Keywords
E coli, Phox, Cross-linking, Xl-ms, Diagnostic peaks, Rtls

### Affiliations
Leibniz-Forschungsinstitut für Molekulare Pharmakologie, Berlin
Leibniz-Forschungsinstitut for Molecular Pharmacology

### Submitter
Max Ruwolt

### Lab Head
Dr Fan Liu
Leibniz-Forschungsinstitut für Molekulare Pharmakologie, Berlin


