### Accession
PXD013967

### Title
Histone octamer structure is altered early in ISW2 ATP-dependent remodeling of nucleosomes

### Description
Histone octamers are thought to be a rigid part of nucleosomes that shape chromatin and block cellular machinery from accessing DNA. ATP-dependent chromatin remodelers like ISW2 mobilize nucleosomes to provide DNA access. We find evidence for histone octamer distortion preceding DNA being moved into nucleosomes and processive movement of the ATPase motor of ISW2 on nucleosomal DNA. DNA entering nucleosome is uncoupled from the ATPase activity of ISW2 and alterations of the histone octamer structure mediated by ISW2 by deletion of the SANT domain from the C-terminus of the Isw2 catalytic subunit. We also find that restricting histone movement by chemical crosslinking traps remodeling intermediates resembling those seen by loss of the SANT domain, further supporting the importance of changes in histone octamer structure early in ISW2 remodeling. Transient octamer distortions are stabilized by H3-H4 tetramer disulfide crosslinking, thereby linking intrinsic histone octamer flexibility to chromatin remodeling.

### Sample Protocol
To find the optimal BS3 concentration for nucleosome crosslinking , we titrated the BS3 concentration from 65 uM to 5.2 mM and found 1.3 mM BS3 (around 1000X excess the molar amount of the Lysine residues) was the minimal amount of crosslinker needed to shift all histones to slower migrating species during SDS-PAGE. (data not shown). We therefore used 1.3mM BS3 for all of the crosslinking experiments. Two independent experiments were performed for both unmodified (H3 and NCP-WT) and disulfide bonded nucleosomes (H4 and NCP-DISH). The reactions were quenched by addition of 5 uL of 1M ammonium bicarbonate.  After incubating for 30 minutes at 25º C, an equal volume of trifluoroethanol (TFE) was added and the samples were incubated at 60º C for 30 minutes to denature the samples.  TCEP was added to a final concentration of 5 mM. After incubating at 37ºC for 30 minutes, the samples were alkylated by addition of iodoacetamide to 10 mM.  After incubating at 25º C for 30 minutes in the dark, the samples were diluted 10-fold with 20 mM triethanolamine pH 8 and digested with 2 ug of trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) overnight at 37º C correct.  After reducing the volume of the samples to 100 uL, an equal volume of 0.01% trifluoroacetic  acid (TFA) was added and the samples were purified on C18 cartridges (The Nest group, Southborough, MA).  Eluted samples were then dried via Speedvac, resuspended in 100 uL Buffer A (25 mM ammonium formate, 20% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid, pH 2.8)  and then fractionated using an in-house prepared  microcapillary strong cation exchange column (250 mm X 10 cm; 5 um, 200 Å partisphere SCX, Whatman).  Peptides were loaded onto the microcapillary column equilibrated in Buffer A and washed with Buffer A. Bound peptides were eluted with 50 μl of Buffer A containing 10% to 100% Buffer B (800 mM ammonium formate, 20% acetonitrile, pH 2.8), followed by 50 μl of Buffer D (0.5M ammonium formate, 30% acetonitril). All fractions were dried in a speedvac, and resuspended in 0.1% TFA, 2% acetonitrile.   Peptides were analyzed on a Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Elite with HCD fragmentation and serial MS events that included one FTMS1 event at 30,000 resolution followed by 10 FTMS2 events at 15,000 resolution. . Other instrument settings included: MS1 scan range (m/z): 400-1500; cycle time 3 sec; Charge states 4-10; Filters MIPS on, relax restriction = true; Dynamic exclusion enabled: repeat count 1, exclusion duration 30s; Filter IntensityThreshold, signal intensity 50000; A 90 min gradient from 5% ACN to 40% ACN was used.

### Data Protocol
The RAW files were converted to mzXML files by Rawconverter (He et al., 2015, PMID: 26499134). For crosslinked peptide searches, we used two different crosslink database searching algorithms: pLink (Yang et al, 2012, PMID: 22772728) and an in-house designed Nexus.  Crosslinking data were analyzed using pLink (Yang et al, 2012) with default settings (precursor monoisotopic mass tolerance: ±10 ppm; fragment mass tolerance: ±20 ppm; up to 4 isotopic peaks; max evalue 1; static modification on Cysteines; 57. 0215 Da; differential oxidation modification on Methionines; 15. 9949 Da)  against a database containing only BAF or pBAF protein sequences. For Nexus searches, the same databases were used with the following parameter settings: (a) up to three miscleavages; (b) static modification on Cysteines (+57.0215 Da); (c) differential oxidation modification on Methionines (+15.9949 Da); (d) differential modification on the peptide N-terminal Glutamic acid residues (-18.0106 Da) or N-terminal Glutamine residues (-17.0265 Da); (e) differential mono-BS3 modification on Lysine residue (+156.0806 Da). A 5% of FDR cutoff was used for both pLink and Nexus. After performing the pLink and Nexus analyses, the search results were combined and each spectrum was manually evaluated for the quality of the match to each peptide using the COMET/Lorikeet Spectrum Viewer (TPP). Crosslinked peptides are considered confidently identified if at least 4 consecutive b or y ions for each peptide are observed and the majority of the observed ions are accounted for. Search results that did not meet these criteria were removed. Intralinks involving a crosslink between identical residues were only kept if the spectral evidence strongly supported the identification; that is, the major fragment ions correspond to the intralinked peptide sequence and no/few other fragment ions were observed.

### Publication Abstract
Nucleosomes are the fundamental building blocks of&#xa0;chromatin that regulate DNA access and are composed of histone octamers. ATP-dependent chromatin remodelers like ISW2 regulate chromatin access by translationally moving nucleosomes to different DNA regions. We find that histone octamers are more pliable than previously assumed and distorted by ISW2 early in remodeling before DNA enters nucleosomes and the ATPase motor moves processively on nucleosomal DNA. Uncoupling the ATPase activity of ISW2 from nucleosome movement with deletion of the SANT domain from the C terminus of the Isw2 catalytic subunit traps remodeling intermediates in which the histone octamer structure is changed. We find restricting histone movement by chemical crosslinking also traps remodeling intermediates resembling those seen early in ISW2 remodeling with loss of the SANT domain. Other evidence shows histone octamers are intrinsically prone to changing their conformation and can be distorted merely by H3-H4 tetramer disulfide crosslinking.

### Keywords
Transcription, Sant domain, Gene regulation, Histones, Nucleosome movement, Nucleosome dynamics, Nucleosome structure, Iswi, Chromatin remodeling

### Affiliations
Institute For Systems Biology
Institute for Systems Biology

### Submitter
Jie Luo

### Lab Head
Dr Jeff Ranish
Institute For Systems Biology


