### Accession
PXD030175

### Title
Mitogen-activated protein kinase 4 regulated metabolic networks

### Description
Mitogen-activated protein kinase 4 (MPK4) was first identified as a negative regulator of systemic acquired resistance (SAR). It is also an important kinase that gets involved in other plant biological processes in plants, including cytokinesis, reproduction and photosynthesis. Arabidopsis thaliana mpk4 mutant is a dwarf and sterile. Previous ‘omics’ studies including genomics, transcriptomics and proteomics have revealed new functions of MPK4 in different biological processes. However, due to challenges in metabolomics, no study has focused on metabolomic profiles of the mpk4 mutant and what metabolites and metabolic pathways are potentially regulated by MPK4 are not known. Metabolites are crucial components of plants, which plays an and they play important roles in plant signaling, defense, and growth and development. Here we used targeted and untargeted metabolomics to profile metabolites in wild type (WT) and the mpk4 mutant where we found that in addition to jasmonic acid (JA) and salicylic acid (SA) pathways, MPK4 got involved in polyamine synthesis and photosynthesis. In addition, we also conducted label-free proteomics of the two genotypes. Integration of metabolomics and proteomics data allowed insight into the metabolomic networks that are potentially regulated by MPK4.

### Sample Protocol
The leaf pellets left from the metabolite extraction were used for protein extraction with a phenol method (Hurkman and Tanaka, 1986). Briefly, proteins were extracted with same volumes of an extraction buffer (0.9 M sucrose, 0.1 M Tris-HCl pH = 8.8, 10 mM EDTA, 0.4% β-Mercaptoethanol and 2 mM PMSF) and Tris saturated phenol (pH = 8.8). After centrifugation at 10,000 g for 30 min, the phenol layers were mixed with 5 volume 0.1 M ammonium acetate in 100% methanol to precipitate the proteins. Protein pellets were washed once with 80% acetone and once with 100% acetone. The protein pellets were dissolved in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate for in-solution trypsin digestion. The samples were treated with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 1 h at room temperature and 55 mM chloroacetamide (CAA) in the dark for 1 h at room temperature. Then, proteins were digested with 200 ng/ul trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) in 50 mM ABC overnight at 37 °C. Tryptic peptides were desalted with ZipTip using the manufacture protocol (MilliporeSigma, Temecula, CA, USA). The peptides were lyophilized to dryness at 160 mBar using a labconco speedvac (Centrivap, Labconco Inc., USA). Peptides derived from protein digests were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid (FA) for LC-MS analysis. Four biological replicates for each genotype were prepared for proteomics. Proteomics data was acquired on a nanoEasy1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., San Jose, CA, USA) coupled with a Q ExactiveTM Plus Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., San Jose, CA, USA). Samples were loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap® 100 C18 trapping column (75 μm i.d. × 2 cm, 3 μm, 100 Å) and then separated on a PepMap® C18 analytical column (75 μm i.d. × 25 cm, 2 μm, 100 Å). The flow rate was set at 300 nL/min with solvent A (0.1% FA in water) and solvent B (0.1% FA in ACN) as the mobile phase. Separation was conducted using the following gradient: 0 - 2% of B over 0 – 8 min; 2 – 35% of B over 8 – 140 min; 35 – 95% of B over 140 – 160 min, and isocratic at 95% of B over 160 – 165 min, and then from 95 – 2% of B from 165 – 170 min. The equilibration at 2% is from 170 to 180 min. For MS data acquisition, the full MS1 scan (m/z 400 - 2000) was performed in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 75,000. The automatic gain control (AGC) target is 1e6 with 100 ms as the MIT. Peptides bearing 2 to 5 charges were selected with an intensity threshold of 9.1e5. Dynamic exclusion of 60 s was used to prevent resampling the high abundance peptides. The MS/MS was carried out in the Orbitrap with a quadrupole isolation window of 1.3. Fragmentation of the top 10 selected peptides by high energy collision dissociation (HCD) was done at 30% of normalized collision energy. The MS2 spectra were acquired at a resolution of 30,000 with an AGC target of 5e5 and an MIT of 55 ms.

### Data Protocol
Proteome DiscovererTM (version 2.5, Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) was used to search the MS/MS spectra from the protein samples. The SEQUEST algorithm in the Proteome Discoverer was used to process raw data files. Spectra were searched using the TAIR10 protein database with the following parameters: 10 ppm mass tolerance for MS1 and 0.02 as mass tolerance for MS2, two maximum missed tryptic cleavage sites, a fixed modification of carbamidomethylation (+57.021) on cysteine residues, dynamic modifications of oxidation of methionine (+15.996). Search results were filtered at 1% false discovery rate (FDR) and at least two unique peptides per protein for protein identification. Relative protein abundance in the samples was measured using label-free quantification. Proteins identified and quantified in all the four biological samples were used, and no imputation was performed. Peptides in samples were quantified as area under the chromatogram peak. FDR cutoffs for both peptide and protein identification were set as 1%. Data were subjected to log10 transformation for normal distribution. Coefficient of variance (cv) was calculated and those with cv% smaller than 20% were used for quantitative analysis. Normalized datasets were further subjected to T-test, principal component analysis and volcano plot using MetaboAnalyst R package (https://www.metaboanalyst.ca) (Chong et al., 2019).

### Publication Abstract
Mitogen-activated protein kinase 4 (MPK4) was first identified as a negative regulator of systemic acquired resistance. It is also an important kinase involved in many other biological processes in plants, including cytokinesis, reproduction, and photosynthesis. <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i>&amp;nbsp;<i>mpk4</i> mutant is dwarf and sterile. Previous omics studies including genomics, transcriptomics, and proteomics have revealed new functions of MPK4 in different biological processes. However, due to challenges in metabolomics, no study has touched upon the metabolomic profiles of the <i>mpk4</i> mutant. What metabolites and metabolic pathways are potentially regulated by MPK4 are not known. Metabolites are crucial components of plants, and they play important roles in plant growth and development, signaling, and defense. Here we used targeted and untargeted metabolomics to profile metabolites in the wild type and the <i>mpk4</i> mutant. We found that in addition to the jasmonic acid and salicylic acid pathways, MPK4 is involved in polyamine synthesis and photosynthesis. In addition, we also conducted label-free proteomics of the two genotypes. The integration of metabolomics and proteomics data allows for an insight into the metabolomic networks that are potentially regulated by MPK4.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Mpk4

### Affiliations
University of Florida

### Submitter
Chuwei Lin

### Lab Head
Dr Sixue Chen
University of Florida


