### Accession
PXD036589

### Title
PPARγ lipodystrophy mutants reveal intermolecular interactions required for enhancer activation

### Description
The peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor γ (PPARγ) is the master regulator of adipocyte differentiation, and mutations that interfere with PPARγ function cause lipodystrophy. Structural studies indicate that PPARγ domains engage in several intra- and inter-moleuclar interactions; however, how these interactions modulate the ability of PPARγ to activate target genes in a cellular context is currently poorly understood. Here we analysed the transcriptional potential of R212Q and E379K two previously uncharacterised lipodystrophy-associated PPARγ mutants that are located in distinct PPARγ domains but are  both predicted to affect intermolecular interactions. Using a combination of biochemical and genome-wide approaches we show that these mutations impair binding to an overlapping subset of enhancers that are less accessible and specifically require PPARγ for chromatin remodeling. Based on these findings we propose a model in which recruitment of PPARγ to chromatin is determined by several intermolecular interfaces. Furthermore, our data exemplify that relatively subtle molecular defects in transcription factors are sufficient to significantly affect enhancer binding and thereby transcriptional output.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were digested on beads with 0.25 g of trypsin. Peptides were labelled on Stage tips using dimethyl labelling as described previously. Matching light and heavy peptides were combined. Peptides were separated on an reverse-phase EASY-nLC and  analysed on an Orbitrap Exploris (Thermo) mass spectrometer with acquisition settings described in Santos-Barriopedro et al., Nature Communications, 2021.

### Data Protocol
RAW mass spectrometry data were analysed with MaxQuant 1.6.0.1 by searching against the UniProt curated human proteome (released June 2017) with standard settings. Protein ratios obtained from MaxQuant were used for outlier calling. An outlier cut-off of 1.5 inter-quartile ranges in two out of two replicates was used.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Adipocyte differentiation, Pparg

### Affiliations
Center for Molecular Medicine, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
Radboud University

### Submitter
Pascal Jansen

### Lab Head
Dr Eric Kalkhoven
Center for Molecular Medicine, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands.


