### Accession
PXD037526

### Title
Proteomic analysis of mitochondria from Huntington's Disease patient iPSC-derived neurons

### Description
Huntington's disease is caused by an expanded CAG repeat in the huntingtin gene, yeilding a Huntingtin protein with an expanded polyglutamine tract. Patient-derived induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) can help understand disease; however, defining pathological biomarkers in challanging. Here we used LC-MS/MS to determine differences in mitochondrial proteome between iPSC-derived neurons from healthy donors and Huntington's disease patients.

### Sample Protocol
Isolated mitochondria were solubilized in a final concentration of 1% SDS and mitochondrial proteome was extracted using methanol-chloroform precipitation. 400 µl methanol, 100 µl chloroform and 350 µl water were added sequentially to each 100 µl sample, followed by centrifugation at 14,000 x g for 5 min at room temperature. The top phase was removed and the protein interphase was precipitated by addition of 400 µl methanol, followed by centrifugation at 14,000 g for 5 min at room temperature. Pellet was air dried and resuspended in 8M urea, 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 7.5). Protein concentration was determined by BCA (Thermo Fisher) and 2-4 µg total protein were subjected to reduction and alkylation by incubation with 5 mM DTT for 1 h at room temperature followed by 5 mM iodoacetamide for 45 min at room temperature, in the dark. The samples were then incubated with 1:50 enzyme to protein ratio of sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37 °C. Peptides were acidified with trifluoroacetic acid to a final concentration of 1%, desalted with μC18 Ziptips (Millipore Sigma), dried and resuspended in 10 μL 0.1% formic acid in water.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS analyses were conducted using a QExactive Plus Orbitrap (QE) mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) coupled online to a nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters Corporation) through an EASY-Spray nanoESI ion source (Thermo Fisher). Peptides were loaded onto an EASY-Spray column (75 μm x 15 cm column packed with 3 μm, 100 Å PepMap C18 resin) at 2% B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) for 20 min at a flow rate of 600nl/min. Peptides were separated at 400 nL/min using a gradient from 2% to 25% B over 48 min (QE) followed by a second gradient from 25% to 37% B over 8 minutes and then a column wash at 75% B and reequilibration at 2% B. Precursor scans were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer (350-1500 m/z, resolution: 70,000@200 m/z, AGC target: 3x106). The top 10 most intense, doubly charged or higher ions were isolated (4 m/z isolation window), subjected to high-energy collisional dissociation (25 NCE), and the product ions measured in the Orbitrap analyzer (17,500@200 m/z, AGC target: 5e4).  Mass spectrometry data processing Raw MS data were processed using MaxQuant version 1.6.7.0 (Cox and Mann, 2008). MS/MS spectra searches were performed using the Andromeda search engine113 against the forward and reverse human and mouse Uniprot databases (downloaded August 28, 2017 and November 25, 2020, respectively). Cysteine carbamidomethylation was chosen as fixed modification and methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. Parent peptides and fragment ions were searched with maximal mass deviation of 6 and 20 ppm, respectively. Mass recalibration was performed with a window of 20 ppm. Maximum allowed false discovery rate (FDR) was <0.01 at both the peptide and protein levels, based on a standard target-decoy database approach. The “calculate peak properties” and “match between runs” options were enabled.  All statistical l tests were performed with Perseus version 1.6.7.0 using either ProteinGroups or Peptides output tables from MaxQuant. Potential contaminants, proteins identified in the reverse dataset and proteins only identified by site were filtered out. Intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) was used to estimate absolute protein abundance. Two-sided Student’s t-test with a permutation-based FDR of 0.01 and S0 of 0.1 with 250 randomizations was used to determine statistically significant differences between grouped replicates. Categorical annotation was based on Gene Ontology Biological Process (GOBP), Molecular Function (GOMF) and Cellular Component (GOCC), as well as protein complex assembly by CORUM.  Additional analysis was performed on all potential identities of the differentially enriched/depleted proteins that were significant by t-test, using Panther pathways and Panther Overrepresentation algorithms for GO Molecular Function, GO Biological Processes and GO Cellular Component at http://www.pantherdb.org/. Ingenuity Pathway Analysis was performed using the significantly differential proteins to assess pathways, networks and upstream regulators. For comparison of DEPs to PIAS1 knockdown DEGs, overlap statistics for overrepresentation was performed at http://nemates.org/MA/progs/overlap_stats.html using total genome number of genes at 20,500.

### Publication Abstract
Huntington's disease (HD) is caused by an expanded CAG repeat in the huntingtin gene, yielding a Huntingtin protein with an expanded polyglutamine tract. While experiments with patient-derived induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) can help understand disease, defining pathological biomarkers remains challenging. Here, we used cryogenic electron tomography to visualize neurites in HD patient iPSC-derived neurons with varying CAG repeats, and primary cortical neurons from BACHD, deltaN17-BACHD, and wild-type mice. In HD models, we discovered sheet aggregates in double membrane-bound organelles, and mitochondria with distorted cristae and enlarged granules, likely mitochondrial RNA granules. We used artificial intelligence to quantify mitochondrial granules, and proteomics experiments reveal differential protein content in isolated HD mitochondria. Knockdown of Protein Inhibitor of Activated STAT1 ameliorated aberrant phenotypes in iPSC- and BACHD neurons. We show that integrated ultrastructural and proteomic approaches may uncover early HD phenotypes to accelerate diagnostics and the development of targeted therapeutics for HD.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Neurodegeneration, Lc-ms/ms, Huntington's disease

### Affiliations
Chan Zuckerberg Biohub

### Submitter
Ranen Aviner

### Lab Head
Dr Ranen Aviner
Chan Zuckerberg Biohub


