### Accession
PXD003495

### Title
Compensating the fitness costs of synonymous mutations

### Description
Synonymous mutations do not change the sequence of the polypeptide but they  may still influence fitness. We investigated in Salmonella enterica how four synonymous mutations in the rpsT gene (encoding ribosomal protein S20) reduce fitness (i.e. growth rate) and the mechanisms by which this cost can be genetically compensated. The reduced growth rates of the synonymous mutants  were correlated with reduced levels of the rpsT transcript and S20 protein. In an  adaptive evolution experiment these fitness impairments could be compensated  by mutations that either caused up-regulation of S20 through increased gene  dosage (due to duplications), increased transcription of the rpsT gene (due to an  rpoD mutation or mutations in rpsT), or increased translation from the rpsT  transcript (due to rpsT mutations). We suggest that the reduced levels of S20 in  the synonymous mutants result in production of a defective subpopulation of  30S subunits lacking S20 that reduce protein synthesis and bacterial growth and that the compensatory mutations restore S20 levels and the number of  functional ribosomes. Our results demonstrate how specific synonymous mutations can cause substantial fitness reductions and that many different types  intra- and extragenic compensatory mutations can efficiently restore fitness. Furthermore, our study highlights that also synonymous sites can be under strong selection, which may have implications for the use of dN/dS ratios as  signature for selection.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysis in FastPrep instrument, protein assay, protein trypsin FASP digestion, peptide TMT labeling, combining sets, SCX fractionation, desalting, LC-MS/MS analysis on an QExactive, total 4 sets of samples with about 20 fractions per set

### Data Protocol
A database search (Proteome Discoverer 1.4 and Mascot) was performed against Uniprot S. enterica subsp. enterica serovar  Typhimurium str. LT2 reference proteome with some modifications, MS peptide tolerance of 5 ppm and MS/MS tolerance for identification of 50 millimass units 20 (mmu). Tryptic peptides were accepted with zero missed cleavages and the threshold in the software was set to 1% False Discovery Rate by searching against a reversed database. The relative quantification was calculated for fragment ions within 3 mmu and co-isolation of less than 10% was allowed. Each  10-plex set included biological duplicates of one wild-type and four mutants. The protein ratio in each sample was calculated towards one of the wild-type controls within the same 10-plex, only peptides unique for a given protein were considered for relatiive quantification, ratios normalized using protein median.

### Publication Abstract
Synonymous mutations do not change the sequence of the polypeptide but they may still influence fitness. We investigated in Salmonella enterica how four synonymous mutations in the rpsT gene (encoding ribosomal protein S20) reduce fitness (i.e., growth rate) and the mechanisms by which this cost can be genetically compensated. The reduced growth rates of the synonymous mutants were correlated with reduced levels of the rpsT transcript and S20 protein. In an adaptive evolution experiment, these fitness impairments could be compensated by mutations that either caused up-regulation of S20 through increased gene dosage (due to duplications), increased transcription of the rpsT gene (due to an rpoD mutation or mutations in rpsT), or increased translation from the rpsT transcript (due to rpsT mutations). We suggest that the reduced levels of S20 in the synonymous mutants result in production of a defective subpopulation of 30S subunits lacking S20 that reduce protein synthesis and bacterial growth and that the compensatory mutations restore S20 levels and the number of functional ribosomes. Our results demonstrate how specific synonymous mutations can cause substantial fitness reductions and that many different types of intra- and extragenic compensatory mutations can efficiently restore fitness. Furthermore, this study highlights that also synonymous sites can be under strong selection, which may have implications for the use of dN/dS ratios as signature for selection.

### Keywords
Salmonella mutations, Rpst gene, Ribosomal protein s20

### Affiliations
Proteomics Core Facility / University of Gothenburg
Proteomics Core Facility, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg

### Submitter
Carina Sihlbom

### Lab Head
Dr Carina Sihlbom
Proteomics Core Facility, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg


