### Accession
PXD016798

### Title
Proteomic analysis of Acinetobacter baylyi ADP1 under exposure of non-antibiotic pharmaceuticals

### Description
The goals of this study are to use SWATH-MS to detect bacterial proteomic profiles of wild-type Acinetobacter baylyi ADP1, and its protein response under the exposure of non-antibiotic pharmaceuticals, including ibuprofen, naproxen, gemfibrozil, diclofenac, propanolol, and iopromide. The concentrations were 0.5 mg/L for ibuprofen, naproxen, gemfibrozil, diclofenac, propanolol, and 1.0 mg/L for iopromide. The group without dosing pharmaceutical was the control group. Each concentration was conducted in triplicate. By comparing the proteomic profiles of experimental groups and control group, the effects of non-antibiotic pharmaceuticals on translational levels can be revealed.

### Sample Protocol
5 mL of bacteria Acinetobacter baylyi ADP1 (10^8 cfu/mL) were exposed to 0.5 mg/L ibuprofen, 0.5 mg/L naproxen, 0.5 mg/L gemfibrozil, 0.5 mg/L diclofenac, 0.5 mg/L propanolol, or 1.0 mg/L iopromide. The bacteria without any pharmaceutical dosage were the control group. After 8 hours, bacteria were harvested by centrifugation at 12,000 g for 10 min. Total bacterial protein was extracted from these cell pellets using the B-PER method, followed by reduction, alkylation, digestion and ziptip clean-up procedures. Afterwards, 5 μg aliquot of the purified protein from each triplicate sample were applied for mass spectrometry analysis and for construction of protein libraries by information dependent analysis (IDA). Another 5μg aliquot of the purified protein from each triplicate sample were used for SWATH-MS analysis. Samples were pooled into a Triple-T of 5600 instrument (ABSciex, USA) equipped with a Nanospray III interface.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data from IDA were combined and searched using ProteinPilot software (ABSciex, Forster City CA). The searched database was Acinetobacter baylyi (strain ATCC 33305 / BD413 / ADP1) (received from Uniprot on 12th of March 2019). The search setting for enzyme digestion was set to Trypsin and alkylation was set to iodoacetamide. Afterwards, the constructed IDA library and SWATH-MS data were loaded into PeakView v2.1 for further processing, with the peptide confidence threshold of 99%, number of peptides per protein of 5, and number of transitions per peptide of 3. A minimum of 2 peptides and 3 transitions was used for quantitative analysis. A stringency cut-off of q value less than 0.01 was used to identify the proteins with significant different expression levels. Afterwards, R-based package MSstats was applied to compare the difference of translational levels in each group.

### Publication Abstract
Antibiotic resistance is a serious global threat for public health. Considering the high abundance of cell-free DNA encoding antibiotic resistance genes (ARGs) in both clinical and environmental settings, natural transformation is an important horizontal gene transfer pathway to transmit antibiotic resistance. It is acknowledged that antibiotics are key drivers for disseminating antibiotic resistance, yet the contributions of non-antibiotic pharmaceuticals on transformation of ARGs are overlooked. In this study, we report that some commonly consumed non-antibiotic pharmaceuticals, at clinically and environmentally relevant concentrations, significantly facilitated the spread of antibiotic resistance through the uptake of exogenous ARGs. This included nonsteroidal anti-inflammatories, ibuprofen, naproxen, diclofenac, the lipid-lowering drug, gemfibrozil, and the &#x3b2;-blocker propranolol. Based on the results of flow cytometry, whole-genome RNA sequencing and proteomic analysis, the enhanced transformation of ARGs was affiliated with promoted bacterial competence, enhanced stress levels, over-produced reactive oxygen species and increased cell membrane permeability. In addition, a mathematical model was proposed and calibrated to predict the dynamics of transformation during exposure to non-antibiotic pharmaceuticals. Given the high consumption of non-antibiotic pharmaceuticals, these findings reveal new concerns regarding antibiotic resistance dissemination exacerbated by non-antibiotic pharmaceuticals.

### Keywords
Acinetobacter baylyi adp1, Bacteria, Non-antibiotic pharmaceuticals, Swath-ms

### Affiliations
Advanced Water Management Centre, The University of Queensland, Australia
University of Queensland

### Submitter
Jianhua Guo

### Lab Head
Dr Jianhua Guo
Advanced Water Management Centre, The University of Queensland, Australia


