### Accession
PXD015245

### Title
Time-resolved Phosphoproteomic Analysis Elucidates Hepatic 11,12-Epoxyeicosatrienoic Acid Signaling Pathways

### Description
Epoxyeicosatrienoic acids (EETs) are potent lipid mediators with well-established effects in vascular tissues. Recent studies indicated an emerging role of these eicosanoids in metabolic diseases and the EET signaling pathway was shown to be involved in hepatic insulin sensitivity. However, compared to vascular tissues, there is only limited knowledge about the underlying signaling pathways in the liver. Therefore, we employed an LC-MS/MS-based time-resolved phosphoproteomics approach to characterize 11,12-EET-mediated signaling events in the liver cell line Hepa 1-6. 11,12-EET treatment resulted in the time-dependent regulation of phosphopeptides involved in processes as yet unknown to be affected by EETs, including RNA processing, splicing and translation regulation. Pathway analysis combined with western blot-based validation revealed enhanced AKT/mTOR/p70S6K signaling as demonstrated by increased acute phosphorylation of AKT (Ser473) and p70S6K (Thr389). In addition, 11,12-EET treatment led to differential regulation of phosphopeptides including important mediators of the DNA damage response and we observed a prolonged induction of the etoposide-induced DNA damage marker γH2AX in response to 11,12-EET. In summary, our findings extend current knowledge of 11,12-EET signaling events and emphasize the importance of the AKT/mTOR/p70S6K pathway in hepatic 11,12-EET signaling. Based on the results presented in this study, we furthermore propose a novel role of EET signaling in the regulation of the DNA damage response.

### Sample Protocol
400 µg of protein lysates were reduced with dithiothreitol and cysteine residues were alkylated with iodoacetamide. Unreacted IAA was quenched with DTT to a final concentration of 5 mM. Protein digestion was performed with 4 µg Lys-C for 4 h at 37 °C. Afterwards, sample solutions were diluted with 50 mM NH4HCO3 to reduce urea concentration to < 2 M and tryptic digestion (4 µg, 1:100, Promega) was performed overnight at 37 °C.  For the identification of phosphopeptides before enrichment, a 10 µg aliquot of the digest was desalted with Pierce C18 spin columns (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 89870) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Eluates were evaporated almost to dryness in a vacuum concentrator (Concentrator plus, Eppendorf) and resuspended in 50 µl TFA (0.5 % (v/v))/ACN (2 % (v/v)) of which 5 µl were subjected to analysis by LC-MS/MS. The remaining part of each digest was quenched with TFA to a final concentration of 1 % (v/v) and centrifuged at 2,500 g for 5 min at RT. The supernatant was desalted by solid-phase extraction using Sep-Pak C18 cartridges (Sep-Pak tC18, 1 cc Vac (100 mg), Waters), which were previously conditioned (2 ml ACN (100 % (v/v))) and equilibrated (2x 1 ml 0.6 % (v/v) acetic acid). After sample loading, columns were washed twice with 2x 1 ml 0.6 % (v/v) acetic acid and peptides were eluted twice with 350 µl ACN (80 % (v/v))/acetic acid (0.6 % (v/v)) and evaporated almost to dryness (Concentrator plus, Eppendorf). Desalted and concentrated eluates were dissolved in 100 µl loading buffer (80 % (v/v) ACN/6 % (v/v) TFA) and enriched by titanium dioxide (TiO2) chromatography as follows: TiO2 microcolumns were prepared in 20 µl GELoader tips (Eppendorf) plugged with a C8 disk, washed with 20 µl methanol and packed with 500 µg TiO2 (Sachtopore NP, 5µm, 300Å (SNX030S005), Sachtleben Chemie) bead slurry (10 mg/ml in 30 % (v/v) ACN/0.1 % (v/v) TFA). After equilibration with 50 µl loading buffer, the samples were loaded in two steps (50 µl each) and the microcolumns were successively washed with 50 µl loading buffer and 50 µl washing buffer (50 % ACN (v/v)/0.1 % (v/v) TFA). Enriched phosphopeptides were eluted with 30 µl NH4OH (10 % (v/v)) into 30 µl 20 % formic acid (FA), followed by a second elution with 3 µl 80 % (v/v) ACN/2 % (v/v) FA. All processing steps were performed by centrifugation. Samples were further acidified with FA to pH 2 and subjected to analysis by LC-MS/MS. Analysis of enriched phosphopeptides was performed on an Ultimate 3000 nano Rapid Separation LC (RSLC) system (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA) coupled to a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), equipped with a nano-ESI source. An injection volume of 16 µl was automatically delivered to a nano trap column (5 mm x 300 μm i.d., packed with 5 μm Acclaim PepMap100 C18 resin, 100 Å pore size (LC Packings, Sunnyvale)). Afterwards, peptides were separated on a reversed phase analytical column (Acquity UPLC M-Class HSS T3 Column, 250 mm × 75 μm i.d., 1.8 μm, 100 Å pore size, Waters) and eluted with a nonlinear gradient at 250 nl/min flow rate. The gradient was linearly ramped from 7-27 % ACN for 90 min, from 27-41 % ACN for 5 min and from 41-85 % ACN for 5 min and kept isocratic at 85 % ACN for 5 min. The eluent concentration was set back to 5 % ACN within 2 min and equilibrated under this condition for 18 min (all buffers included 0.1 % (v/v) FA). Mass spectrometric (MS) data was acquired in data-dependent mode on a Q-Exactive HF equipped with a nano-ESI source with spray voltage set to 1.90 kV and capillary temperature of 275 °C. Full Scan spectra were acquired in positive mode with a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 200 within a mass range of 300-1500 m/z and an AGC target of 3x106 with a maximum ion injection time of 50 ms. Internal calibration was performed with a lock mass of 371.10124 m/z. Based on their intensity in the MS full scan, up to ten precursor ions with charge states 2-8 were isolated within a window of 1.6 m/z and fragmented in the HCD cell with a normalized collision energy of 28 % if they exceeded a minimal ion count of 1x104.  Resulting fragment ions were analyzed with a resolution of 15,000 at m/z 200 and an AGC target of 1x105 with a maximum ion injection time of 150 ms. Analyzed precursor ions were dynamically excluded for 30s. For the non-enriched samples, the gradient and mass spectrometric method was slightly modified: The LC gradient was linearly ramped from 7-27 %ACN for 80 min, from 27-41 % ACN for 15 min and from 41-85 % ACN for 5 min, followed by an isocratic step at 85 % ACN for 5 min. Within 2 min, the ACN content was reduced to 5 % and kept isocratic for further 18 min (all buffers included 0.1 % (v/v) FA). Conditions for MS full scans were the same as for the analysis of enriched phosphopeptides, whereas the intensity threshold for fragmentation was set to 2x104 and the maximum ion injection time for fragment ion scans was reduced to 50 ms.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometric raw data was processed with Progenesis QI for proteomics (Version 3.0, Nonlinear Dynamics, Waters) to perform label-free quantification with pairwise normalization as described in [36]. Reference samples were automatically selected by the software, followed by automatic alignment of data from chromatographic runs with manual adjustment. Features with single or more than seven charges were excluded from further analysis and normalization to all proteins was performed to correct for systematic experimental variation between samples. All processing steps were performed separately for the phospho-enriched and non-enriched fraction of samples. After alignment and peak picking, MS/MS data were exported in Mascot generic format (mgf) and analyzed with Proteome Discoverer (Version 2.1.1.21, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using the Sequest HT search engine. Spectra were searched against Swiss-Prot mouse database (Release 2017_02) with a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.02 Da. Deamidation (N,Q), oxidation (M) and phosphorylation (S,T,Y) were selected as dynamic modifications and carbamidomethylation (C) as static modification. Two missed cleavages were allowed and proteolytic specificity was set to trypsin. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSM) were filtered to < 1 % False Discovery Rate (FDR) based on Percolator q-value, search engine rank 1 and posterior error probability < 0.01. For the confident localization of phosphosites, ptmRS node (Version 2.0, 1.4.5504.43149, run in phosphoRS mode) was implemented in Proteome Discoverer and an Isoform Confidence Probability Filter > 95 % was applied to phospho-PSMs. Filtered identifications were assigned to features in Progenesis QI for proteomics and peptide quantification was performed based on the sum of abundances of phosphopeptide ions with identical sequence and phosphorylation site. Normalization of phosphopeptide abundances was performed by calculating pairwise normalization factors as described in [36]. Briefly, both the TiO2-enriched and non-enriched datasets were separately normalized in Progenesis QI based on the “Normalize to all proteins” method and abundances of phosphopeptide ions with identical sequence and phosphorylation sites were summed up separately for both datasets. Phosphopeptides identified in both datasets were used for the calculation of abundance ratios between non-enriched vs. TiO2-enriched sample pairs and the ratios were subsequently normalized to one biological sample. Phosphopeptides were removed from the set of shared peptides if they contained methionine and/or if variance between biological samples exceeded 1.5 times the interquartile range of normalized abundance ratios. Finally, the median of all remaining normalized phosphopeptide abundance ratios was calculated for every biological sample pair and used for normalization of all phosphopeptide abundances in the TiO2-enriched dataset.

### Publication Abstract
Epoxyeicosatrienoic acids (EETs) are potent lipid mediators with well-established effects in vascular tissues. Recent studies indicated an emerging role of these eicosanoids in metabolic diseases and the EET signaling pathway was shown to be involved in hepatic insulin sensitivity. However, compared to vascular tissues, there is only limited knowledge about the underlying signaling pathways in the liver. Therefore, we employed an LC-MS/MS-based time-resolved phosphoproteomics approach to characterize 11,12-EET-mediated signaling events in the liver cell line Hepa 1-6. 11,12-EET treatment resulted in the time-dependent regulation of phosphopeptides involved in processes as yet unknown to be affected by EETs, including RNA processing, splicing and translation regulation. Pathway analysis combined with western blot-based validation revealed enhanced AKT/mTOR/p70S6K signaling as demonstrated by increased acute phosphorylation of AKT (Ser473) and p70S6K (Thr389). In addition, 11,12-EET treatment led to differential regulation of phosphopeptides including important mediators of the DNA damage response and we observed a prolonged induction of the etoposide-induced DNA damage marker &#x3b3;H2AX in response to 11,12-EET. In summary, our findings extend current knowledge of 11,12-EET signaling events and emphasize the importance of the AKT/mTOR/p70S6K pathway in hepatic 11,12-EET signaling. Based on the results presented in this study, we furthermore propose a novel role of EET signaling in the regulation of the DNA damage response.

### Keywords
Lipid signaling, Akt/mtor/p70s6k pathway, Eicosanoids, Lc-ms/ms, Tio2

### Affiliations
Research Unit Protein Science, Helmholtz Zentrum München, German Research Center for Environmental Health GmbH, Ingolstädter Landstraße 1, D-85764 Neuherberg, Germany
Helmholtz Zentrum München

### Submitter
Marco Rahm

### Lab Head
Dr Stefanie M. Hauck
Research Unit Protein Science, Helmholtz Zentrum München, German Research Center for Environmental Health GmbH, Ingolstädter Landstraße 1, D-85764 Neuherberg, Germany


