### Accession
PXD010218

### Title
19Jan2018_Suping_LCM_TomatoHeatPollen_protein only

### Description
Heat stress is a major challenge for crop production. During the reproduction stage, pollen development is the most sensitive process to abnormal environmental conditions.  In this project, we have developed a heat treatment system for tomato where plants produce a significantly lower number of pollens and the germination rate of those pollens was also very low.  The size of the flower buds and pollen developmental stages were examined under confocal microscope. Pollen cells at different developmental stages were collected from flower buds at corresponding sizes using LCM.  The single cell population proteomics analysis was used to identify proteome changes in a distinct group of cells. This information was used to determine the function of proteins that are associated with heat stress on cellular processes/functions during pollen development.

### Sample Protocol
Tomato ‘Micro-Tom’ plants were grown under 26 oC /22oC as control and 32 oC /22 oC (day/night, 12/12 hr) as heat-treated conditions for two weeks.  Pollen cells at Microspore to Mitosis  stages  were collected from frozen sections of fresh flower buds under a PALM MicroBeam ZEISS Microscope. For each replicate sample, approximately 60,000 cells were collected. Proteins were extracted in a   PCT buffer  comprising of 20mM HEPES, pH 8.0, 4M urea, 2% SDS, 2mM EDTA  on  a Barocycler (2320 EXT, Pressure Biosciences Inc). Proteins (18 ug each sample) was  reduced with tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP ) and cysteines were blocked with methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS). After removal of sodium dodecyl sulfate  (SDS) and urea  using S-TRAP Micro kit (PROTIFI), On-column trypsin digestion was carried out using trypsin (Promega, sequencing grade modified trypsin,  #VS11A0) at  35C for 16 hr. Tryptic peptides were eluted by centrifugation  (4000xg for 0.5min) in 40 uL  50mM TEAB buffer, 40 uL  0.2% formic acid,  and finally  40 uL  50% acetonitrile in water, 0.2% Formic acid, with centrifugation between each wash.  The elutes were dried down under vacuum. The trypic peptides were labeled with TMT (126, 127, 128 for the three heat-treated replicates, and 129,130, 131 for the three non-treated control replicates), using the TMT six-plex label reagent set (ThermoFisher Scientfic, #90061, Lot#SJ255604).  Labeled peptides were pooled and cleaned  using the Oasis MCX 1cc 30mg Extraction Cartridges 9 (Waters, P/N 186000252). Peptides were eluted twice in 75% ACN/ 10% NH4OH and dried-down under vacuum.  NanoLC-MS/MS analysis was carried out at the Functional & Comparative Proteomics Center, USDA-ARS, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, using an Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) mass spectrometer equipped with nano ion source using high energy collision dissociation (HCD) similar to previous reports. The Orbitrap is coupled with the UltiMate3000 RSLCnano (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA).  Each reconstituted fraction (8 L) was injected onto a PepMap C-18 RP nano trap column (3 µm, 75 µm  20 mm, Dionex) with nanoViper Fittings at 20 L/min flow rate for on-line desalting and then separated on a PepMap C-18 RP nano column (3 µm, 75µm x 15cm), and eluted in a 120 min gradient of 5% to 38% ACN in 0.1% formic acid at 300 nL/min., followed by a 7-min ramping to 95% ACN-0.1% FA and a 7-min hold at 95% ACN-0.1% FA. The column was re-equilibrated with 2% ACN-0.1% FA for 20 min prior to the next run. The Orbitrap Fusion is operated in positive ion mode with nano spray voltage set at 1.6 kV and source temperature at 275 °C. External calibration for FT, IT and quadrupole mass analyzers was performed. An internal calibration was performed using the background polysiloxane ion signal at m/z 445.120025 as the celebrant. The instrument was operated in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode using FT mass analyzer for one survey MS scan for selecting precursor ions followed by Top 3 second data-dependent HCD-MS/MS scans for precursor peptides with 2-7 charged ions above a threshold ion count of 10,000 with normalized collision energy of 37.5%.  MS survey scans at a resolving power of 120,000 (fwhm at m/z 200), for the mass range of m/z 400-1600 with AGC =3e5 and Max IT = 50 ms, and MS/MS scans at 50,000 resolution with AGC=1e5, Max IT = 120ms and with Q isolation window (m/z) at 1.6 for the mass range m/z 105-2000. Dynamic exclusion parameters were set at 1 within 50s exclusion duration with ±10 ppm exclusion mass width. All data was acquired under Xcalibur 3.0 operation software and Orbitrap Fusion Tune 2.0 (Thermo-Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
All MS and MS/MS raw spectra from each set of TMT 6-plex experiments were processed and database searched using Sequest HT software within Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (PD 2.2, Thermo) against tomato protein database version ITAG3.20. The default search settings used for 6-plex TMT quantitative processing and protein identification in PD 2.2 searching software were: two mis-cleavages for full trypsin with fixed Carbamidomethyl of cysteine, fixed 6-plex TMT modifications on lysine and N-terminal amines and variable modifications of methionine oxidation and deamidation on asparagine and glutamine residues. Identified peptides were filtered for a maximum 1% FDR using the Percolator algorithm in PD 2.2. Peptide confidence was set to high. The TMT 6-plex quantification method within PD 2.2 was used to calculate the reporter ratios with a mass tolerance ±10 ppm without applying isotopic correction factors. Only peptide spectra containing all reporter ions were designated as “quantifiable spectra” and used for peptide/protein quantitation.   The normalized protein abundance values (TMT tag reporter ion intensity) were subjected to t-test, two tailed, two sample uneven variance in Excel. The ratio values (treated/control) of  all identified proteins were analyzed for normal distribution and the standard deviation value (sigma). The threshold for Significantly Changed Proteins were P value (<0.5), ratio higher than 1.5 sigma, and reported with two unique peptides.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tmt-proteomics, Pollen fertility, Heat sensitive, Mitotic pollen cells

### Affiliations
USDA-ARS

### Submitter
Ted Thannhauser

### Lab Head
Dr Theodore W. Thannhauser
USDA-ARS


