### Accession
PXD033499

### Title
Proteome of Staphylococcus aureus biofilm changes signifi-cantly with aging

### Description
Staphylococcus aureus is a notorious biofilm-producing pathogen that is frequently isolated from implantable medical device infections. As biofilm ages, it becomes more tolerant to antimicrobial treatment leading to treatment failure and necessitating the costly removal of infected devices. In this study, we investigated what changes occur in the proteome of S. aureus biofilm grown for 3-days and 12-days in comparison with 24 h planktonic showed that proteins associated with bi-osynthetic processes, ABC transporter pathway, virulence proteins, and shikimate kinase pathway were significantly upregulated in 3-day biofilm, while proteins associated with sugar transporter, degradation, and stress response were downregulated. In 12-day biofilms, proteins associated with peptidoglycan biosynthesis, sugar transporters, and stress responses were upregulated, whereas proteins associated with ABC transporters, DNA replication, and adhesion proteins were down-regulated. Furthermore, we observed significant variations in the formation of biofilms result from changes in the level of metabolic activity in the different growth mode of biofilms that could be a significant factor of S. aureus biofilm maturation and persistence. Collectively, potential marker proteins were identified and further characterized to understand their exact role in S. aureus biofilm development which may shed light on possible new therapeutic regimes in the treatment of biofilm-related implant-associated infections.

### Sample Protocol
The objective of this research was to create quantitative proteomic profiling to define the distinctions between S. aureus cells that progress through the lifestyles of planktonic and biofilm. To accomplish this, we conducted protein extraction and fractionation, re-duction, alkylation and in-solution digestion that enabled us to produce extremely com-plicated samples that were analyzed with TMT-based mass spectrometry. Three biological replicates were analyzed for each growth condition: planktonic, mature and prolonged biofilms.

### Data Protocol
The raw data files were submitted to Proteome Discoverer (version 1.3, Thermo Scien-tific). The data were processed using Sequest and Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK) against S. aureus reference strain (ATCC 25923) from Genbank CP009361 and CP009362. For protein identification.Quantification was performed based on the peak intensities of reporter ions in the MS/MS spectra.After the extraction of protein ratios with Proteome Discoverer, additional processing and statistical analysis was done using the TMTPrePro R package.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Staphylococcus aureus</i> is a notorious biofilm-producing pathogen that is frequently isolated from implantable medical device infections. As biofilm ages, it becomes more tolerant to antimicrobial treatment leading to treatment failure and necessitating the costly removal of infected devices. In this study, we performed in-solution digestion followed by TMT-based high-throughput mass spectrometry and investigated what changes occur in the proteome of <i>S. aureus</i> biofilm grown for 3-days and 12-days in comparison with 24 h planktonic. It showed that proteins associated with biosynthetic processes, ABC transporter pathway, virulence proteins, and shikimate kinase pathway were significantly upregulated in a 3-day biofilm, while proteins associated with sugar transporter, degradation, and stress response were downregulated. Interestingly, in a 3-day biofilm, we observed numerous proteins involved in the central metabolism pathways which could lead to biofilm growth under diverse environments by providing an alternative metabolic route to utilize energy. In 12-day biofilms, proteins associated with peptidoglycan biosynthesis, sugar transporters, and stress responses were upregulated, whereas proteins associated with ABC transporters, DNA replication, and adhesion proteins were downregulated. Gene Ontology analysis revealed that more proteins are involved in metabolic processes in 3dwb compared with 12dwb. Furthermore, we observed significant variations in the formation of biofilms resulting from changes in the level of metabolic activity in the different growth modes of biofilms that could be a significant factor in <i>S. aureus</i> biofilm maturation and persistence. Collectively, potential marker proteins were identified and further characterized to understand their exact role in <i>S. aureus</i> biofilm development, which may shed light on possible new therapeutic regimes in the treatment of biofilm-related implant-associated infections.

### Keywords
Transport systems, Biofilms, Metabolic processes, Aging, Proteome, Tmt, Stress responses., Mass spectrometry, Biosynthetic processes, Staphylococcus aureus

### Affiliations
Australian Proteome Analysis Facility, Macquarie University, Sydney NSW 2109, Australia
Macquarie University

### Submitter
Arifur Rahman

### Lab Head
Dr Belinda Schiller
Australian Proteome Analysis Facility, Macquarie University, Sydney NSW 2109, Australia


