### Accession
PXD008858

### Title
Argentilactone molecular targets in Paracoccidioides brasiliensis identified by chemoproteomics

### Description
Paracoccidioidomycosis (PCM) is the cause of several deaths from systemic mycoses. The etiological agents of PCM belong to the Paracoccidioides genus, which is restricted to Latin America. The infection is acquired through inhalation of conidia that primarily lodges in the lungs and may disseminate to other organs/tissues. Treatment of PCM is commonly achieved via the administration of antifungals such as amphotericin B, co-trimoxazole, and itraconazole. The antifungal toxicity and side effects, in addition to the long treatment time, have driven research for new bioactive compounds. Argentilactone, a compound isolated from the Brazilian savanna plant Hyptis ovaliofolia, has been suggested to be a potent antifungal, inhibiting the dimorphism of P. brasiliensis and enzymatic activity of isocitrate lyase, a key enzyme of the glyoxylate cycle. Furthermore, argentilactone has no cytotoxicity and genotoxicity in fibroblast cells at concentrations that inhibit fungal growth. This work was developed due to the importance of elucidating the putative mode of action of argentilactone. The chemoproteomics approach, by affinity chromatography, is the methodology used to explore the interactions between P. brasiliensis proteins and argentilactone. A total of 109 proteins was identified and classified functionally, with those related to amino acid metabolism, energy, and detoxification being the most representative. The interactome of argentilactone binding proteins was predicted. Argentilactone inhibited the enzymatic activity of malate dehydrogenase, citrate synthase, and pyruvate dehydrogenase. Furthermore, argentilactone induced the production of reactive oxygen species. In addition, our data were compared to previously obtained proteomics and transcriptional data. Altogether, our results reveal argentilactone as a promising antifungal.

### Sample Protocol
Two milliliters of resin was added to a chromatographic column and then was washed with 10 mL of ultrapure water.The octyl sepharose column containing the immobilized argentilactone, and the column without argentilactone immobilization (control chromatographic column), were incubated with 6 mg of protein from Pb18 for 1 hour on ice. After incubation, the column was washed with 10 mL of the 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer solution (pH 8.5). The presence of proteins was monitored during the washing process using the Bradford quantification method and polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis to ensure that all non-ligand proteins were removed. The control column-binding proteins were eluted with the addition of 4 mL of 75% acetonitrile. The samples were lyophilized and conditioned at -20 °C until identification.

### Data Protocol
The enzymatically digested proteins were processed as described previously (Murad et al., 2011). To 50 µg of protein extract, 25 μL of RapiGESTTM 0.2% (v/v) (Waters Corporation) was added, and the sample was vortexed and incubated at 80 °C for 15 minutes. Subsequently, reduction of disulfide bonds was carried out by the addition of 2.5 μL of 100 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) (GE Healthcare), and the sample was incubated at 60 °C for 30 minutes. Thereafter, 2.5 μL of a 300-mM iodoacetamide (GE Healthcare) solution was added for cysteine alkylation, and the sample was incubated in the dark at room temperature for 30 minutes. Next, 10 µL of trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA), prepared with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate to 50 ng/µL, was added. The sample was then digested at 37 °C for 16 hours. RapiGESTTM precipitation was performed by adding 10 μL of 5% (v/v) trifluoracetic acid (TFA) (Sigma-Aldrich), followed by incubation at 37 °C for 90 minutes. The sample was centrifuged at 13,000 × g at 6 °C for 30 minutes. The supernatant was dried in a vacuum concentrator. All obtained peptides were suspended in 45 µL of a solution containing 20 mM ammonium formate and 150 fmol/µL PHB (Rabbit Phosphorylase B) (Waters Corporation). The MassPREPTM protein was used as an internal standard.  Nanoscale LC separation of tryptic peptides was performed using a nanoACQUITYTM system (Waters Corporation) equipped with a nanoEaseTM 5 µm × BridgeTM BEH130 C18 300 µm × 50 mm precolumn; trap column 5 µm, 180 µm × 20 mm and BEH130 C18 1.7 µm, 100 µm × 100 mm analytical reversed-phase column (Waters Corporation). The peptides were separated into five fractions, 10.8%, 14%, 16.7%, 20.4% and 65% of acetonitrile/0.1% (v/v) formic acid, with a flow rate of 2000 µL/min. The source was operated in the positive ionization mode nano-ESI (+). To perform external calibration, the masses were corrected based on Glu-fibrinopeptide B (GFP; Sigma) of molecular mass 785.8486. A GFP solution in 50% (v/v) methanol and 0.1% (v/v) formic acid was used at a final concentration of 200 fmol/µL delivered by the reference sprayer of the NanoLockSpray source of the mass spectrometer. Mass spectrometry analysis was performed using a Synapt G1 MSTM (Waters) equipped with a NanoElectronSpray source and two mass analyzers: a quadrupole and a time-of-flight (TOF) operating in the V-mode. Data were obtained using the instrument in the MSE mode. The sample was analyzed from three replicates. MS raw data were processed using the ProteinLynx Global Server version 2.4 (Waters Corporation). The data were subjected to automatic background subtraction, deisotoping and charge state deconvolution. After processing, each ion comprised an exact mass-retention time that contained the retention time, intensity-weighted average charge, inferred molecular weight based on charge and m/z.  Next, the processed spectra were searched against Pb18 protein sequences (Broad Institute; http://www.broadinstitute.org/annotation/genome/paracoccidioides_brasiliensis/Multiome.html) together with reverse sequences. The mass error tolerance for peptide identification was under 50 ppm. The parameters for protein identification included: (i) the detection of at least 2 fragment ions per peptide, (ii) 5 fragments per protein, (iii) the determination of at least 1 peptide per protein, (iv) carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification, (v) phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine, and oxidation of methionine were considered as variable modifications, (vi) maximum protein mass of 600 kDa, (vii) one missed cleavage site allowed for trypsin, and (viii) maximum false positive ratio (FDR) of 4%. The minimum repeat rate for each protein in all replicates was 2. Protein and peptides tables generated by PLGS were merged, and the dynamic range of the experiments, peptide detection type, and mass accuracy were determined for each condition, as previously described (Murad & Rech, 2012).

### Publication Abstract
Paracoccidioidomycosis (PCM) is the cause of many deaths from systemic mycoses. The etiological agents of PCM belong to the <i>Paracoccidioides</i> genus, which is restricted to Latin America. The infection is acquired through the inhalation of conidia that primarily lodge in the lungs and may disseminate to other organs and tissues. The treatment for PCM is commonly performed via the administration of antifungals such as amphotericin B, co-trimoxazole, and itraconazole. The antifungal toxicity and side effects, in addition to their long treatment times, have stimulated research for new bioactive compounds. Argentilactone is a compound that was isolated from the Brazilian savanna plant <i>Hyptis ovalifolia</i>, and it has been suggested to be a potent antifungal, inhibiting the dimorphism of <i>P. brasiliensis</i> and the enzymatic activity of isocitrate lyase, a key enzyme of the glyoxylate cycle. This work was developed due to the importance of elucidating the putative mode of action of argentilactone. The chemoproteomics approach via affinity chromatography was the methodology used to explore the interactions between <i>P. brasiliensis</i> proteins and argentilactone. A total of 109 proteins were identified and classified functionally. The most representative functional categories were related to amino acid metabolism, energy, and detoxification. Argentilactone inhibited the enzymatic activity of malate dehydrogenase, citrate synthase, and pyruvate dehydrogenase. Furthermore, argentilactone induces the production of reactive oxygen species and inhibits the biosynthesis of cell wall polymers.

### Keywords
Chemoproteomic, Antifungal, Paracoccidioides, Argentilactone, Targets

### Affiliations
Universidade Federal de Goiás

### Submitter
Lívia Do Carmo Silva

### Lab Head
Dr Lívia do Carmo Silva
Universidade Federal de Goiás


