### Accession
PXD045879

### Title
Accelerating Sample Preparation for Proteomics of Formalin Fixed Paraffin Embedded Tumor Tissues to Enable Biomarker Analysis

### Description
Archived tumor specimens are routinely preserved by formalin fixation and paraffin embedding.  Despite the conventional wisdom that proteomics might be ineffective due to the crosslinking and pre-analytical variables, these samples have been demonstrated to be useful for both discovery and targeted proteomics.  Building on this capability, proteomics approaches can be used to maximize our understanding of cancer biology and clinical relevance by studying preserved tumor tissues annotated with the patients’ medical histories.  Proteomics of formalin fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) tissues also integrates with histological and molecular pathology strategies, so that additional biopsies or resected tumor aliquots do not need to be used.  The acquisition of data from the same tumor sample also overcomes concerns about biological variation between samples due to intratumoral heterogeneity.  However, the sample preparation for FFPE can be onerous, particularly for very precious (i.e., limited) samples.  Therefore, we compared a modified version of the well-established filter-aided sample preparation strategy to a recently introduced kit-based EasyPep method using laser capture microdissected lung adenocarcinoma tissues from a genetically engineered mouse model.  This model system allows control over the tumor preparation and pre-analytical variables, while also enabling the development of methods for spatial proteomics to examine intratumoral heterogeneity.

### Sample Protocol
Laser capture microdissected samples and remaining tumor (100X boost) were deparaffinized and prepared for expression proteomics using a modified filter-aided sample preparation with SOLA plate peptide extraction and by using the EasyPep kit (Thermo).  Samples were combined in a TMTpro-18plex experiment with the following design: 126 FASP01, 127N EasyPep01, 127C FASP02, 128N EasyPep02, 128C FASP03, 129N EasyPep03, 129C FASP04, 130N EasyPep04, 130C FASP05, 131N EasyPep05, 131C FASP06, 132N EasyPep06, 132C Empty, 133N Empty, 133C Empty, 134N Empty, 134C FASP Boost, 135 EasyPep Boost.  Peptides were fractionated by high pH reversed phase cartridges prior to LC-MS/MS of 0.5-1 µg of total protein digest from each fraction.  Peptides are loaded on the trapping column and washed for 8 minutes.  Elution uses a 120 minute gradient program:  start at 2% solvent B, ramp to 3% solvent B over 5 minutes, to 30% over 90 minutes, to 38.5% B in 10 minutes, to 90% B in 5 minutes, and hold at 90% for 3 minutes to wash the column, followed by ramping solvent B down to 2% in 2 minutes and re-equilibration for 15 minutes prior to analysis of the next sample.  Nanospray source conditions and ion transmission optics parameters were: Spray voltage 2100 V, ion transfer tube temperature 300 oC, with 120,000 resolution across the scan range from m/z 400 to m/z 1500.  FAIMS was performed with 2 compensation voltages, -45 and -65, with 4.2 L/min gas flow.  MS/MS is acquired using data-dependent scans with a 1.5 second cycle time with a threshold ion signal intensity at 1.0e4. Tandem mass spectrometry peptide sequencing scans are performed following each survey scan using a 15 second exclusion window for previously sampled peptide peaks. MS/MS parameters were Normalized AGC target – 300%, 86 ms maximum injection time, 1 microscan, HCD normalized collision energy at 35%, 0.7 m/z isolation window, no isolation offset, and 45,000 resolution, to maximize data quality and provide baseline resolution of the TMT reporter ion signals.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were divided into the two compensation voltages using FreeStyle (Thermo) for separate database searching.  Proteins were identified and quantified using MaxQuant (v. 1.6.14).  Search parameters were trypsin digestion with up to 2 missed cleavages and up to 3 modifications, including methionine oxidation, carbamidomethylation of cysteine, TMT labeling of lysine and peptide N-termini, with mass tolerance 20 ppm for both intact peptides and fragment ions.   Data were searched against the murine proteome (_MOUSE) in UniProt (downloaded in January 2023 and concatenated with reverse sequences) using 1% peptide and protein false discovery rates (FDR) using the match between runs feature to maximize identifications across fractions and compensation voltages. To upload the data to PRIDE/ProteomeXchange, the search was repeated with Mascot through Proteome Discoverer.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ffpe, Expression proteomics, Easypep, Fasp, Tmt, Lung adenocarcinoma

### Affiliations
Molecular Oncology Moffitt Cancer Center Tampa, FL, USA
Moffitt Cancer Center

### Submitter
John Koomen

### Lab Head
Dr Elsa Flores
Molecular Oncology Moffitt Cancer Center Tampa, FL, USA


