### Accession
PXD023656

### Title
3 days injured in vivo ASCs proteome

### Description
Muscle Stem Cells or satellite cells (SCs) are required for muscle regeneration. In resting muscles, SCs are kept in quiescence. After injury, SCs undergo rapid activation, proliferation and differentiation to repair damaged muscles. The transcriptome alteration during SC activation is well characterized. While transcriptome is not exactly represent proteome because of post-transcriptional regulations such as miRNA induced gene silencing. However, little is known about SC proteome. We obtained in vivo activated SCs (ASCs) from 3 days post injured muscles for high resolution mass spectrometry Bruker timsTOF Pro. Compared with QSC proteome,, we identified the pathways that are differentially expressed between them.

### Sample Protocol
For injured SC proteome, we FACS-purified the in vivo ASCs from 3 days 1.2% Bacl2 injured himb limb muscles for Mass Spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
The raw data from Bruker timsTOF Pro instrument are transferred to the PEAKS software. Then search the raw data by PEAKS with Unitprot database. Afterwards, the PEAKS provide all the information including peptides, peaks, proteins, and spectral counting of proteins. Then, we identify the 3 days injured activated SCs proteome.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Timstof, Mouse activated muscle stem cells

### Affiliations
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

### Submitter
Tom Cheung

### Lab Head
Dr Tom H.Cheung
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology


