### Accession
PXD036608

### Title
A systems immunology study comparing innate and adaptive immune responses in adults to COVID-19 mRNA (BNT162b2/mRNA-1273) and adenovirus vectored vaccines (ChAdOx1-S)

### Description
We longitudinally profiled plasma proteomes in 54 adults vaccinated with the BNT162b2 (Pfizer-BioNTech) or ChAdOx1-S (Oxford-AstraZeneca) vaccines. Blood was collected pre-vaccination (V0) and 1-7 days after the 1st doses (BNT162b2 or mRNA-1273, V1) to assess innate and early adaptive responses. We identified key differences in the immune responses induced by the ChAdOx1-S and BNT162b2 vaccines that were correlated with subsequent antigen-specific antibody and T cell responses or vaccine reactogenicity. We observed that vaccination with ChAdOx1-S but not BNT162b2 induced a memory-like response after the first dose, which was correlated with the expression of several proteins involved in complement and coagulation. The COVID-19 Vaccine Immune Responses Study (COVIRS) thus represents a major resource to understand the immunogenicity and reactogenicity of these COVID-19 vaccines.

### Sample Protocol
Plasma samples were processed using the USP3 protocol as outlined previously (Dagley et al., 2019). Briefly, 2 μl plasma samples were reduced and alkylated in 1% SDS lysis buffer using 10 mM Tris (2-Carboxyethyl) phosphine and 40 mM 2-chloracetamide for 10 min at 95°C. Sample volumes containing 25 μg protein were incubated with 20 μl of magnetic PureCube Carboxy agarose beads (Cube Biotech, Monheim, Germany) and 70% acetonitrile for 20 min at RT shaking at 400 rpm. Samples were placed on a magnetic rack, supernatant was removed, and three 200 μl washes were performed: twice with 70% ethanol, and one with neat acetonitrile (ACN). After washing, all traces of solvent were evaporated using a CentriVap (Labconco, Kansas City, USA), and digestion buffer (100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8) was added to the beads containing Lys-C (Wako, Chuo-Ku, Japan) and SOLu-Trypsin (Merck) each at a 1:50 enzyme-to-protein ratio, and digestion was performed for 1 h at 37 °C shaking at 400 rpm. Digests were desalted using in-house C18 stage tips containing 2 plugs as previously described (Rappsilber et al., 2007) and vacuum centrifuged to dryness. Peptides were reconstituted in 75 μl of 0.1% formic acid and 2% ACN for LC-MS/MS analysis. Mass spectrometry analyses were performed on a M-class (Waters, Milford, USA) coupled to a timsTOF Pro (Bruker, Billerica, USA) equipped with a CaptiveSpray source. Peptides (1 uL) were separated by reversed-phase chromatography on a C18 fused silica column (inner diameter 75 µm, OD 360 µm × 15 cm length, 1.6 µm C18 beads) packed into an emitter tip (IonOpticks, Middle Camberwell, Australia). Peptides were loaded directly onto the column at a constant flow rate of 400 nl/min with buffer A (99.9% Milli-Q water, 0.1% FA) and eluted with a 90-min linear gradient from 2 to 34% buffer B (99.9% ACN, 0.1% FA). The timsTOF Pro (Bruker) was operated in diaPASEF mode using Compass Hystar 5.1. The settings on the TIMS analyzer were as follows: Lock Duty Cycle to 100% with equal accumulation and ramp times of 100 ms, and 1/K0 Start 0.6 V.·/cm2 End 1.6 V·s/cm2, Capillary Voltage 1400V, Dry Gas 3 l/min, Dry Temp 180°C. Methods were set up using the instrument firmware (timsTOF control 2.0.18.0) for data-independent isolation of multiple precursor windows within a single TIMS scan. The method included two windows in each diaPASEF scan, with window placement overlapping the diagonal scan line for doubly and triply charged peptides in the m/z – ion mobility plane across 16 × 25 m/z precursor isolation windows (resulting in 32 windows) defined from m/z 400 to 1,200, with 1 Da overlap, with CID collision energy ramped stepwise from 20 eV at 0.8 V·s/cm2 to 59eV at 1.3 V·s/cm2.

### Data Protocol
DIA-NN 1.8 (Demichev et al., 2021) was used for searching of timsTOF diaPASEF .d files. The option for library-free search was enabled, and data were searched against reviewed sequences from the human Uniprot Reference Proteome (downloaded May 2021). The search was set to trypsin specificity, peptide length of 7-30 residues, cysteine carbidomethylation as a fixed modification, and the maximum number of missed cleavages at 2. Additionally, N-terminal acetylation and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications with the maximum number of variable modifications set to 1. In addition, the maximum mass accuracy was set to 10 ppm for both MS1 and MS2 spectra and the quantification strategy to robust LC (high precision). Match between runs (MBR) was enabled, and all other settings left as default. For reporting precursor and protein numbers, outputs were filtered at precursor q-value < 1% and PG protein q-value < 1%, and the PG.MaxLFQ was used to obtain the normalized quantity for protein groups based on proteotypic peptides. Data processing and analysis were performed using R v4.2. Only proteins that were quantified in at least 50% of replicates in at least one condition were kept. The data were normalized using variance stabilizing method implemented in limma v3.51.0. Differential analysis was performed using limma v3.51.0. The Benjamini and Hochberg method was employed to correct for multiple comparisons. Statistical significance was determined as FDR < 0.1.

### Publication Abstract
Identifying the molecular mechanisms that promote optimal immune responses to coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) vaccination is critical for future rational vaccine design. Here, we longitudinally profile innate and adaptive immune responses in 102 adults after the first, second, and third doses of mRNA or adenovirus-vectored COVID-19 vaccines. Using a multi-omics approach, we identify key differences in the immune responses induced by ChAdOx1-S and BNT162b2 that correlate with antigen-specific antibody and T&#xa0;cell responses or vaccine reactogenicity. Unexpectedly, we observe that vaccination with ChAdOx1-S, but not BNT162b2, induces an adenoviral vector-specific memory response after the first dose, which correlates with the expression of proteins with roles in thrombosis with potential implications for thrombosis with thrombocytopenia syndrome (TTS), a rare but serious adverse event linked to adenovirus-vectored vaccines. The COVID-19 Vaccine Immune Responses Study thus represents a major resource that can be used to understand the immunogenicity and reactogenicity of these COVID-19 vaccines.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Plasma, Vaccination, Proteomics, Covid-19 vaccine

### Affiliations
Dynamic Omics, Centre for Genomics Research, Discovery Sciences, BioPharmaceuticals R&D, AstraZeneca, Gaithersburg, MD 20878, USA
Precision Medicine Theme, South Australian Health and Medical Research Institute, Adelaide, SA, 5001, Australia

### Submitter
Jana Zecha

### Lab Head
Dr David J. Lynn
Precision Medicine Theme, South Australian Health and Medical Research Institute, Adelaide, SA, 5001, Australia


