### Accession
PXD019901

### Title
Generation of SARS-CoV-2 S1 spike glycoprotein putative antigenic epitopes in vitro by intracellular aminopeptidases

### Description
Presentation of antigenic peptides by MHCI is central to cellular immune responses against viral pathogens. While adaptive immune responses versus SARS-CoV-2 can be of critical importance to both recovery and vaccine efficacy, how protein antigens from this pathogen are processed inside the cell to generate antigenic peptides is largely unknown. Here, we analyzed the proteolytic processing of 315 overlapping precursor peptides spanning the entire sequence of the S1 spike glycoprotein of SARS-CoV-2, by three key enzymes for the generation ofthat generate antigenic peptides, namely intracellular aminopeptidases ERAP1, ERAP2 and IRAP. Each All enzymes generated shorter peptides with sequences suitable for binding onto HLA alleles, but with marked differences corresponding to distinct specificity fingerprints. ERAP1 was the most efficient in generating peptides 8-11 residues long, the optimal length for HLA binding, while IRAP was the least efficient. The combination of ERAP1 with ERAP2 was largely highly destructive and greatly reduced limited peptides the variability of peptide sequences availableproduced for HLA-binding. Less than 710% of computationally predicted epitopes were found to be produced by enzymatic trimming experimentally, suggesting that proteolytic aminopeptidase processing may constitute a significant filter to successful epitope presentation. These experimentally generated putative epitopes could be prioritized for SARS-CoV-2 immunogenicity studies and vaccine design. We furthermore propose that this in vitro trimming approach could constitute a general filtering method to enhance the prediction robustness of predicting for viral antigenic epitopes.

### Sample Protocol
Peptides  The PepMix SARS-CoV-2 peptide mixture was purchased by JBT Peptide Technologies GmbH. Peptide pools were dissolved in DMSO. Prior to reactions the two peptide collections (158 and 157 peptides respectively) were mixed at equimolar concentrations and diluted in buffer containing 10mM Hepes pH 7, 100mM NaCl to a final concentration of 48μM.   Enzymatic reactions  Enzymatic reactions were performed in triplicate in a total volume of 50μL in 10mM Hepes pH 7, 100mM NaCl. Freshly thawed enzyme stocks were added to each reaction to a final concentration of 50nM. Reactions were incubated at 37C for 2 hours, stopped by the addition of 7.5μL of a 10% TFA solution, flash frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at  -80C until analysis.  LC-MS/MS analysis  The sample was preconcentrated on a pepmap LC trapping column (0.3X5mm) at a rate of 30uL of Buffer A (0.1% Formic acid in water) forin 5min., Tthe LC gradient used was 5% Buffer B (0.1% Formic acid in Acetonitrile) to 25% in 36 min followed by an increase to 36% in 5 min and a second increase to 80% in 0.5min and then was kept constant for 2min. The column was equilibrated for 15 min prior to the next injection. A full MS was acquired with a Q Exactive HF-X Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer, in the scan range of 350-1400m/z, using 60K resolving power with an AGC of 3x 106 and max IT of 45ms, followed by MS/MS scans of the 12 most abundant ions, using 15K resolving power with an AGC of 1x 105 and max IT of 22ms, and an NCE of 28.

### Data Protocol
We employed the MaxQuant computational proteomics platform version 1.6.14.0  to search the peak lists against the Spike glycoprotein SARS2 FASTA file (Swissprot accession number P0DTC2) and a file containing 247 frequently observed contaminants. N-terminal acetylation (42.010565 Da) and methionine oxidation (15.994915 Da) were set as variable modifications. The second peptide identification option in Andromeda was enabled. The false discovery rate (FDR) were set to of 0.01 for peptide. The enzyme specificity was set as unspecific. The minimum peptide length was set to 6 amino acids. The initial allowed mass deviation of the precursor ion was set to 4.5 ppm and the maximum fragment mass deviation was set to 20 ppm.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Antigen, Antigen processing and presentation, Major histocompatibility molecules, Epitope, Enzyme, Sars, Lc-ms/ms, Adaptive immunity, Aminopeptidase, Peptide, Immune system

### Affiliations
Protein Analysis Laboratory
B.S.R.C. "Alexander Fleming",
Alexander Fleming Street 34
16672, Vari,
Greece
National Centre for Scientific Research Demokritos, Agia Paraskevi, Attica, Greece

### Submitter
Martina Samiotaki

### Lab Head
Dr Efstratios Stratikos
National Centre for Scientific Research Demokritos, Agia Paraskevi, Attica, Greece


