### Accession
PXD033850

### Title
Quantitative proteomics of nutrient starved wildtype (WT) and MTM1 knock out (KO) HeLa cells.

### Description
Quantitative whole cell proteomics that compare fed or starved wildtype (WT) and MTM1 KO HeLa cells.

### Sample Protocol
Fed or starved (EBSS, 2 h) wildtype (WT) or siRNA transfected MTM1 knock down cells or MTM1 KO HeLa cells (one 10cm dish at 90% confluency) collected from three independent experiments were lysed in 300 μl 8M urea lysis-buffer in 50 mM TEAB-containing protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche) and 0.5 μl Benzonase Nuclease HC (Millipore). (*Please note that siRNA-mediated MTM1 knock down was not so great at that time revealed by westerblot of parallel samples). Samples were applied to a Bioruptor Pico (Diagenode) for 10 cycles (30 s on/30 s off) at 4 °C. Samples were then incubated for 30 min at 25 °C. Proteins were reduced with 5 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphin-hydrochloride (TCEP) and alkylated with 40 mM chloroacetamide (CAA) for 60 min at 37 °C in the dark. Protein digestion was carried out using Lys C at an enzyme-to-protein ratio of 1:100 (w/w) at 37 °C for 3h. After diluting to 2M urea with 50 mM TEAB buffer, the digestion was continued with trypsin at an enzyme-to-protein ratio of 1:100 (w/w) at 37 °C and overnight. Digestion was stopped by adding formic acid to a final concentration of 1%. Samples were desalted with C18 Sep-Pak cartridge (Waters) and quantified with Pierce colorimetric peptide assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were dried under speed vacuum and stored at -20 °C.  TMT-labeling: Peptides were reconstituted in 50 mM TEAB buffer to a concentration of 2.1 μg/ μl. TMT 10-plex reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was dissolved in 20 μl 100% acetonitrile to reach 0.2 mg. For each TMT channel, 100 μg peptides were labeled with 0.2 mg TMT 10-plex reagent (two multiplex – 10plex for fed and 10plex for starved). For the internal standard (IS), peptides from all samples were mixed to reach 100 μg total peptides and labeled with the TMT 131 channel to be able to compare between the two plexes. The labeling reaction was carried out for 60 min at room temperature and quenched with 55 mM Tris pH 8.0 for 15 min  at room temperature. All TMT 10-plex labeled samples were mixed and desalted with C18 Sep-Pak cartridge (Waters). The eluted peptides from the Sep-Pak were dried under speed vacuum and stored at -20 °C.  Hi-pH pre-fractionation: The mixed TMT labeled peptides were reconstituted in 10 mM NH4OH buffer with 1% acetonitrile to reach 200 μg. The Peptides were fractionated by Hi-pH chromatography using a Gemini column (3 μm, C18, 110 Å, phenomenex) on an Agilent 1260 Infinity II system. An 85 min gradient was applied and 72 fractions were collected and pooled into 12 fractions. Fractions were dried under speed vacuum until analysis by LC-MS.

### Data Protocol
Separation of the labeled TMT samples was achieved by reverse phase (RP)-HPLC on a Thermo Scientific™ Dionex™ UltiMate™ 3000 system as described above. Samples were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer with FAIMS Pro™ device (Thermo Scientific). MS1 and MS2 scans were acquired in the Orbitrap with a mass resolution of 120,000 and 50,000 respectively MS1 scan range was set to 400 – 1600 m/z, standard AGC target, and maximum injection time was set to auto. Precursor ions with charge states 2-6 were isolated with an isolation window of 0.7 m/z and dynamic exclusion of 60 sec. MS2 scans were set to custom AGC target with normalized AGC target of 250 % and maximum injection time was set to auto. Precursor ions were fragmented using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with 38% normalized collision energy. Cycle time was set to 2 sec. An internal stepping of CVs -50, -65 and -85 was used in all runs. Data acquisition was done with Xcalibur software 4.4 and Instrument Control Software version 3.4. Data analysis for the TMT labeled samples was done in Proteome Discoverer version 2.5. The TMT 10-plex was set as the quantification method and the 131 mass was set as the control channel. For the Sequest HT search, the following parameters were applied: MS1 ion mass tolerance of 10ppm and a MS2 mass tolerance of 0.02 Da were used. Tryptic digestion allowing two missed cleavages, minimum peptide length 6 amino acids and maximum 144 amino acids. The following modifications were included: cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57.021 Da) as static modification, methionine oxidation (+15.995 Da) and N-terminal acetylation (+42.011 Da) were set as dynamic modifications. In addition, TMT 6-plex (229.163 Da) was set as static modification for peptide N-terminal and for lysine residue. Strict FDR was set to 0.01 and relaxed FDR was set to 0.05. The search was performed against the Human UniProt/Swiss- Prot database. Unique and razor peptides were used for quantification, co- isolation threshold was set to 50 and average reporter S/N to 10. Data was normalized against total peptide amount and scaling was done against the control channel average. The result ‘Proteins’ output table was exported and the statistical analysis was done in Perseus version 1.6.15.0.

### Publication Abstract
Cells respond to fluctuating nutrient supply by adaptive changes in organelle dynamics and in metabolism. How such changes are orchestrated on a cell-wide scale is unknown. We show that endosomal signaling lipid turnover by MTM1, a phosphatidylinositol 3-phosphate [PI(3)P] 3-phosphatase mutated in X-linked centronuclear myopathy in humans, controls mitochondrial morphology and function by reshaping the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). Starvation-induced endosomal recruitment of MTM1 impairs PI(3)P-dependent contact formation between tubular ER membranes and early endosomes, resulting in the conversion of ER tubules into sheets, the inhibition of mitochondrial fission, and sustained oxidative metabolism. Our results unravel an important role for early endosomal lipid signaling in controlling ER shape and, thereby, mitochondrial form and function to enable cells to adapt to fluctuating nutrient environments.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Hela, Tmt-labeling, Starvation, Mtm1

### Affiliations
Leibniz-Forschungsinstitut für Molekulare Pharmakologie (FMP)

### Submitter
Wonyul Jang

### Lab Head
Dr Volker Haucke
Leibniz-Forschungsinstitut für Molekulare Pharmakologie (FMP)


