### Accession
PXD017973

### Title
The expression of the acarbose biosynthetic gene cluster of Actinoplanes sp. SE50/110 is dependent on the growth phase

### Description
Actinoplanes sp. SE50/110 produces the diabetes type II drug acarbose only during the growth phase and not in the stationary phase. This correlation between the course of the cell growth and the biosynthesis could be due to a decreasing expression of the acarbose biosynthesis genes until the stationary phase.  Therefore, a genome wide transcriptome and proteome analysis in a high temporal resolution is well suited to study the acarbose biosynthesis and the transcriptional regulation thereof. In this study, RNA-seq data and state-of-the-art proteomic data from seven time points of controlled bioreactor cultivations were used to analyze expression dynamics during growth of Actinoplanes sp. SE50/110. A hierarchical cluster analysis revealed co-regulated genes, which display the same transcription dynamics over the cultivation time. Typical indications for a metabolic switch from primary metabolism to secondary metabolism could be detected when the cells entered the stationary phase of growth. In this transition phase, a decreasing transcript abundance for all acarbose biosynthetic genes was observed, with the strongest decrease for the monocistronically transcribed genes acbA, acbB, acbD and acbE. The transcription of these genes shows the same pattern as the specific product formation rate of acarbose, indicating a correlation. However, the proteome dynamics does not follow the respective transcription for all genes. This suggests different protein stabilities of the Acb proteins, which in turn could be an indication for bottlenecks in the acarbose biosynthesis.

### Sample Protocol
For isolation of proteins the organic solvent trifluoroethanol (TFE) was used (Wang et al., 2005). Extracellular proteins were isolated from the supernatant based on a protocol described elsewhere (Wendler et al., 2013).  Protein were digested overnight at 37°C using Trypsin Gold (1µg/ µL) (Mass Spectrometry Grade, Promega, WI, USA). The digest was purified with Sep Pak C18 cartridges (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA, USA).  LC-MS/MS measurement were carried out using a QExactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) online coupled to the LC system.

### Data Protocol
Identification and label-free quantification (LFQ) analysis was performed using the software MaxQuant with default settings and a false discovery rate of padj < 0.05 (Cox and Mann, 2008). For identification, ms spectra were searched with Andromeda against the target-decoy protein sequence database of Actinoplanes sp. SE50/110 based on the annotation data from Wolf et al., 2017b. The statistical analysis of LFQ data obtained from MaxQuant was performed with Perseus 1.6.10.43 (Tyanova et al., 2016). In total, 565,792 MS/MS spectra were recorded for the cytosolic fraction and 243,903 MS/MS spectra were recorded for the extracellular fraction.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Expression dynamics, Acarbose, Actinoplanes sp. se50/110, Transcriptomics, Proteomics, Co-regulation

### Affiliations
Microbial Genomics and Biotechnology, Center for Biotechnology, Bielefeld University, Universitätsstraße 27, 33615 Bielefeld, Germany
Bielefeld University / CeBiTec

### Submitter
Vera Ortseifen

### Lab Head
Dr Jörn Kalinowski
Microbial Genomics and Biotechnology, Center for Biotechnology, Bielefeld University, Universitätsstraße 27, 33615 Bielefeld, Germany


