### Accession
PXD026777

### Title
mouse retinal pigmented epithelium (RPE)-LC/MS/MS

### Description
In this experiment, we compared the phosphorylated protein profile of Cryba1 cKO (RPE-specific) RPE tissue and that of the age-matched control samples.

### Sample Protocol
Protein from RPE-choroid complex tissue were isolated in lysis buffer and digested in trypsin. The peptides were then subjected to Isobaric labeling using TMT-10plex kit. Fractionation of labeled peptides was performed by basic reverse phase HPLC. The LC/MS/MS analysis of samples were carried out using a Thermo Scientific Q-Exactive hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer and a Thermo Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano System.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files analysis using Thermofisher Scientific Proteome Discoverer 1.4 for database search.

### Publication Abstract
The retinal pigmented epithelium (RPE) is a monolayer of multifunctional cells located at the back of the eye. High membrane turnover and polarization, including formation of actin-based apical microvilli, are essential for RPE function and retinal health. Herein, we demonstrate an important role for &#x3b2;A3/A1-crystallin in RPE. &#x3b2;A3/A1-crystallin deficiency leads to clathrin-mediated epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) endocytosis abnormalities and actin network disruption at the apical side that result in RPE polarity disruption and degeneration. We found that &#x3b2;A3/A1-crystallin binds to phosphatidylinositol transfer protein (PITP&#x3b2;) and that &#x3b2;A3/A1-crystallin deficiency diminishes phosphatidylinositol 4,5-biphosphate (PI(4,5)P<sub>2</sub>), thus probably decreasing ezrin phosphorylation, EGFR activation, internalization, and degradation. We propose that &#x3b2;A3/A1-crystallin acquired its RPE function before evolving as a structural element in the lens, and that in the RPE, it modulates the PI(4,5)P<sub>2</sub> pool through PITP&#x3b2;/PLC signaling axis, coordinates EGFR activation, regulates ezrin phosphorylation and ultimately the cell polarity.

### Keywords
Mouse, Rpe, Lc/ms/ms

### Affiliations
University of Pittsburgh
University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Ophthalmology department

### Submitter
Peng Shang

### Lab Head
Dr Debasish Sinha
University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Ophthalmology department


