### Accession
PXD022564

### Title
PKR activity modulation by phosphomimetic mutations of serine residues located three aminoacids upstream of double-stranded RNA binding motifs

### Description
Eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2 alpha kinase 2 (EIF2AK2), better known as PKR plays a key role in the response to viral infections and cellular homeostasis by regulating mRNA translation. Upon binding dsRNA, PKR is activated through homodimerization and subsequent autophosphorylation on Thr446 and Thr451 residues. In this study, we identified a novel PKR phosphorylation site, Ser6, located 3 aminoacids upstream the first double-stranded RNA binding domain (DRBM1). Another Ser residue occurs in PKR at position 97, the very same position relative to the DRBM2. Ser or Thr residues also occur 3 amino acids upstream DRBMs of other proteins such as ADAR1 or DICER. Phosphoinhibiting mutations (Ser-to-Ala) introduced at Ser6 and Ser97 spontaneously activated PKR. In contrast, phosphomimetic mutations (Ser-to-Asp) inhibited PKR activation following either poly (I:C) transfection or virus infection. These mutations moderately affected dsRNA binding, suggesting a model where negative charges occuring at position 6 and 97 tighten the interaction of DRBMs with the kinase domain, thus keeping PKR in an inactive, closed conformation even in the presence of dsRNA. This study provides new insights on PKR regulation mechanisms and identifies Ser6 and Ser97 as potential targets to modulate PKR activity for therapeutic purposes

### Sample Protocol
In order to map PKR phosphorylation sites that may contribute to PKR regulation, PKR was immunoprecipitated from HeLa cells that were either mock-infected or infected with a TMEV strains expressing a mutant L protein (LM60V) that fails to block PKR activation. Immunoprecipitated samples, collected after 10 h of infection, were resolved by SDS-PAGE and Coomassie blue-stained bands around 70Kda (expected molecular weight for PKR) were analyzed by mass spectrometry. Bands of interest were cut out from the gel and digested with trypsin (50ng/μl in 50 mM NH4HCO3 buffer, pH 8.0). The peptides were analysed, as previously described, by capillary LC-tandem mass spectrometry in an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos ion trap mass spectrometer (ThermoScientific, San Jose, CA) fitted with a nanoelectrospray probe

### Data Protocol
The data were analysed with the ProteomeDiscoverer software (ThermoScientific, version 2.4), and the proteins were identified with SequestHT against target-decoy non-redundant human protein database including L virus proteins obtained from Uniprot. The following parameters were used: trypsin was selected with proteolytic cleavage only after arginine and lysine, number of internal cleavage sites was set to 1, mass tolerance for precursors was 10 ppm and 0.5 Da for fragment ions, considered dynamic modifications were + 15.994 Da for oxidized methionine and +79.966 for phosphorylated Ser, Thr and Tyr. Peptide matches were filtered using the q-value and Posterior Error Probability calculated by the Percolator algorithm ensuring an estimated false positive rate below 5%. The filtered Sequest HT output files for each peptide were grouped according to the protein from which they were derived

### Publication Abstract
Eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2 alpha kinase 2 (EIF2AK2), better known as PKR, plays a key role in the response to viral infections and cellular homeostasis by regulating mRNA translation. Upon binding dsRNA, PKR is activated through homodimerization and subsequent autophosphorylation on residues&#xa0;Thr446 and Thr451. In this study, we identified a novel PKR phosphorylation site, Ser6, located 3 amino&#xa0;acids upstream of&#xa0;the first double-stranded RNA binding&#xa0;motif (DRBM1). Another Ser residue occurs in PKR at position 97, the very same position relative to the DRBM2. Ser or Thr residues also occur 3 amino acids upstream DRBMs of other proteins such as ADAR1 or DICER. Phosphoinhibiting mutations (Ser-to-Ala) introduced at Ser6 and Ser97 spontaneously activated PKR. In contrast, phosphomimetic mutations (Ser-to-Asp) inhibited PKR activation following either poly (I:C) transfection or virus infection. These mutations moderately affected dsRNA binding or dimerization, suggesting a model where negative charges occurring at position 6 and 97 tighten the interaction of DRBMs with the kinase domain, thus keeping PKR in an inactive closed conformation even in the presence of dsRNA. This study provides new insights on PKR regulation mechanisms and identifies Ser6 and Ser97 as potential targets to modulate PKR activity for therapeutic purposes.

### Keywords
Autophosphorylation, Pkr, Dsrna binding, Regulation, Viral infection

### Affiliations
Université Catholique de Louvain, de Duve Institute, VIRO B1.74.07, 74, avenue Hippocrate, B-1200, Brussels, Belgium
UCL - de Duve Institute, Brussels Belgium

### Submitter
Didier Vertommen

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Michiels
Université Catholique de Louvain, de Duve Institute, VIRO B1.74.07, 74, avenue Hippocrate, B-1200, Brussels, Belgium


