### Accession
PXD003806

### Title
Mps1(Mph1) Kinase phosphorylates Mad3 to Inhibit Cdc20Slp1 –APC/C and maintain spindle checkpoint arrests

### Description
The spindle checkpoint is a mitotic surveillance system which ensures equal segregation of sister chromatids.  It delays anaphase onset by inhibiting the action of the E3 ubiquitin ligase known as the anaphase promoting complex or cyclosome (APC/C).  Mads/BubR1 is a key component of the mitotic checkpoint complex (MCC) which binds and inhibits the APC/C early in mitosis.  Mps1Mph1 kinase is critical for checkpoint signalling and MCC-APC/C inhibition, yet few substrates have been identified.  Here we identify Mad3 as a substrate of fission yeast Mps1Mph1 kinase.  We map and mutate phosphorylation sites in Mad3, producing mutants that are targeted to kinetochores and assembled into MCC, yet display reduced APC/C binding and are unable to maintain checkpoint arrests.  We chow biochemically that Mad3 phospho-mimics are potent APC/C inhibitors in vitro, demonstrating that Mad3p modification can directly influence Cdc20Slp1-APC/C activity.  This genetic dissection of APC/C inhibition demonstrates that Mps1Mph1 kinase-dependant modification of Mad3 and Mad2 act in a concerted manner to maintain spindle checkpoint arrests.

### Sample Protocol
Protein digestion and Phosphopeptide enrichment. Proteins were electrophoresed into Novex NuPAGE 4–12% Bis-Tris gels (Invitrogen) and visualised with colloidal blue staining kit (Invitrogen). Proteins were excised, reduced/alkylated and in-gel digested using trypsin as described previously. Peptides for direct MS analysis were desalted using C18 StageTips . Peptides for phosphopeptide enrichment were extracted from the gel using 3% TFA/30% ACN followed by 100% ACN. Before enrichment approximately 3 mg TiO2 beads were preincubated in 20 μl of 85 mg/ml lactic acid in 80% ACN/0.1%TFA. This pre-incubated bead mixture was added to the peptide mixture and incubated for 1 h at room temperature. After washing once with 10% ACN/0.1% TFA, and twice with 80% ACN/0.1% TFA, peptides were eluted with 2% ammonium hydroxide in 40% ACN (pH 10.5). Eluate was concentrated to 100 μl and 100 μl of 2% TFA was added and peptides desalted using C18 StageTips. Nano-LC-MS/MS and data analysis Peptides were loaded onto a column needle self-packed with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ material (3 μm, Dr. Maisch, Germany) at a flow rate of 0.7 μl/min. Peptides were separated using an Aligent 1100 binary nanopump LC, with HTC Pal Auto sampler (CTC), using either a twostep linear gradient of 0%-20% B in 35 min, 20%-80% B in 4 min and 80% B for 2 min or a two-step linear gradient of 0%-20% B in 75 min, 20%-80% B in 13 min and 80% for 10 min (Mobile phases were (A) 5% acetonitrile, 0.5% acetic acid and (B) 99.5% acetonitrile, 0.5% acetic acid). Peptides were eluted into an LTQ-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a flow rate of 300 nl/min and a spray voltage of 1.8kV.

### Data Protocol
DTAsupercharge (V1.18) was used to create peak lists from raw data. Peak lists were then used within Mascot daemon (V2.2.0) to search against the UniProt/SwissProt Schizosaccharomyces pombe database. Search parameters were set to: precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, fragment ion mass tolerance to 0.8 Da, enzyme as trypsin, allowing 3 missed cleavages. Carboamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification, with oxidation of methionines, phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
The spindle checkpoint is a mitotic surveillance system which ensures equal segregation of sister chromatids. It delays anaphase onset by inhibiting the action of the E3 ubiquitin ligase known as the anaphase promoting complex or cyclosome (APC/C). Mad3/BubR1 is a key component of the mitotic checkpoint complex (MCC) which binds and inhibits the APC/C early in mitosis. Mps1(Mph1) kinase is critical for checkpoint signalling and MCC-APC/C inhibition, yet few substrates have been identified. Here we identify Mad3 as a substrate of fission yeast Mps1(Mph1) kinase. We map and mutate phosphorylation sites in Mad3, producing mutants that are targeted to kinetochores and assembled into MCC, yet display reduced APC/C binding and are unable to maintain checkpoint arrests. We show biochemically that Mad3 phospho-mimics are potent APC/C inhibitors in vitro, demonstrating that Mad3p modification can directly influence Cdc20(Slp1)-APC/C activity. This genetic dissection of APC/C inhibition demonstrates that Mps1(Mph1) kinase-dependent modifications of Mad3 and Mad2 act in a concerted manner to maintain spindle checkpoint arrests.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Spindle, S.pombe, Kinase, Mitosis, Mad3

### Affiliations
The University of Edinburgh
University of Edinburgh

### Submitter
Heather Barker

### Lab Head
Dr Kevin Hardwick
University of Edinburgh


