### Accession
PXD042302

### Title
Mapping of the podocin proximity-dependent proteome reveals novel components of the kidney podocyte foot process.

### Description
The unique architecture of glomerular podocytes is integral to kidney filtration. Interdigitating foot processes extend from the podocyte cell body, wrap around fenestrated capillaries, and form specialized junctional complexes termed slit diaphragms to create a molecular sieve. However, the full complement of proteins which maintain foot process integrity, and how this localized proteome changes with disease, remains to be elucidated. Proximity-dependent biotin identification (BioID) enables the identification of spatially localized proteomes. To this end, we developed a novel in vivo BioID knock-in mouse model. We utilized the slit diaphragm protein podocin (Nphs2) to create a podocin-BioID fusion. Podocin-BioID localizes to the slit diaphragm and biotin injection leads to podocyte-specific protein biotinylation. We isolated the biotinylated proteins and performed mass spectrometry to identify proximal interactors. Gene ontology analysis of 54 proteins specifically enriched in our podocin-BioID sample revealed ‘cell junctions’, ‘actin binding’, and ‘cytoskeleton organization’ as top terms. Known foot process components were identified and we further uncovered two novel proteins: the tricellular junctional protein Ildr2 and the CDC42 and N-WASP interactor Fnbp1l. We confirmed Ildr2 and Fnbp1l are expressed by podocytes and partially colocalize with podocin. Finally, we investigated how this proteome changes with age and uncovered a significant increase in Ildr2. This was confirmed by immunofluorescence on human kidney samples and suggests altered junctional composition may preserve podocyte integrity. Together, these assays have led to new insights into podocyte biology and supports the efficacy of utilizing BioID in vivo to interrogate spatially localized proteomes in health, aging, and disease.

### Sample Protocol
8–10-week-old mice were injected subcutaneously with 5 mg/kg biotin every day for one week. We surgically isolated the cortex of the kidney to enrich for the glomerular fraction, using a scalpel in cold sterile phosphate buffered saline (PBS). A single biological sample was composed of the isolated kidney cortex of three same sex mice for a total of six kidney cortexes per sample (2 kidneys per animal x 3 mice). The sample was then homogenized via a glass Dounce homogenizer. Samples were centrifuged at 4 °C, 5000 × g for 10 minutes. Supernatant was decanted and the tissue pellets snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80 °C. Lysis buffer (8M urea, 50mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 500mM NaCl, 2.5mM EDTA, 2.5mM EGTA, 1.5mM MgCl2, 1.5mM DTT, 0.25% NP-40, 1% SDS, 1x protease inhibitors. The protein homogenate was sonicated (3 pulses for 10 sec at 30% duty) and centrifuged (4°C, 12000 rpm for 10 min). The supernatant was then removed for subsequent quantification and analysis. Protein concentrations of each lysate were calculated, and 10mg of crude protein lysate was loaded with 100l of streptavidin-coated magnetic beads (Dynabeads MyOne Streptavidin C1, Invitrogen). Samples containing beads and protein lysate were rotated end over end at 4°C overnight. Supernatant was removed using a magnetic strip, and the bead-captured fraction was washed once with lysis buffer. After the first wash with lysis buffer containing 1% SDS and 0.25 % NP-40 diminishing amounts of detergents were utilized in subsequent washes until there was no detergents remaining in the wash buffer (after 4 washes). Beads were then washed 3 times in ABC solution (50mM ammonium bicarbonate, 8.0 pH) and sent to UNC Chapel Hill Hooker Proteomics Core. Each sample was analyzed by LC-MS/MS using an Easy nLC 1200 coupled to a QExactive HF (Thermo Scientific). Samples were injected onto an Easy Spray PepMap C18 column (75μm id × 25cm, 2μm particle size) (Thermo Scientific) and separated over a 120 min method. The gradient for separation consisted of a step gradient from 5 to 36 to 48% mobile phase B at a 250 nl/min flow rate, where mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid in water and mobile phase B consisted of 0.1% formic acid in ACN. The QExactive HF was operated in data-dependent mode where the 15 most intense precursors were selected for subsequent HCD fragmentation. Resolution for the precursor scan (m/z 350–1700) was set to 60,000 with a target value of 3 × 106 ions, 100ms inject time. MS/MS scans resolution was set to 15,000 with a target value of 1 × 105 ions, 75ms inject time. The normalized collision energy was set to 27% for HCD, with an isolation window of 1.6m/z. Peptide match was set to preferred, and precursors with unknown charge or a charge state of 1 and ≥ 8 were excluded.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using the MaxQuant software suite (version 1.6.12.0) for identification and label-free quantitation. Data were searched against an Uniprot Reviewed Mouse database (downloaded January 2021, containing 17,051 sequences) using the integrated Andromeda search engine. A maximum of two missed tryptic cleavages were allowed. The variable modification specified was oxidation of methionine, N-terminal acetylation, and phosphorylation of Ser/Thr/Tyr. Label-free quantitation (LFQ) was enabled. Results were filtered to 1% FDR at the unique peptide level and grouped into proteins within MaxQuant. Match between runs was enabled. Data were filtered in Perseus, then imported into Argonaut for normalization, imputation, and statistical analysis. We then combined three separate MS analyses and averaged the Log2 fold changes and respective p-values of the top 17 proteins identified across all three MS profiles. QIAGEN Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) was utilized to identify putative interactomes. We further utilized the Database for Annotation, Visualization, and Integrated Discovery (DAVID) to compare our IPA analysis and to generate comprehensive and functional annotation tools of our proteins and their respective domains.

### Publication Abstract
<b>Introduction:</b> The unique architecture of glomerular podocytes is integral to kidney filtration. Interdigitating foot processes extend from the podocyte cell body, wrap around fenestrated capillaries, and form specialized junctional complexes termed slit diaphragms to create a molecular sieve. However, the full complement of proteins which maintain foot process integrity, and how this localized proteome changes with disease, remain to be elucidated. <b>Methods:</b> Proximity-dependent biotin identification (BioID) enables the identification of spatially localized proteomes. To this end, we developed a novel <i>in vivo</i> BioID knock-in mouse model. We utilized the slit diaphragm protein podocin (<i>Nphs2</i>) to create a podocin-BioID fusion. Podocin-BioID localizes to the slit diaphragm, and biotin injection leads to podocyte-specific protein biotinylation. We isolated the biotinylated proteins and performed mass spectrometry to identify proximal interactors. <b>Results and Discussion:</b> Gene ontology analysis of 54 proteins specifically enriched in our podocin-BioID sample revealed 'cell junctions,' 'actin binding,' and 'cytoskeleton organization' as top terms. Known foot process components were identified, and we further uncovered two novel proteins: the tricellular junctional protein Ildr2 and the CDC42 and N-WASP interactor Fnbp1l. We confirmed that Ildr2 and Fnbp1l are expressed by podocytes and partially colocalize with podocin. Finally, we investigated how this proteome changes with age and uncovered a significant increase in Ildr2. This was confirmed by immunofluorescence on human kidney samples and suggests altered junctional composition may preserve podocyte integrity. Together, these assays have led to new insights into podocyte biology and support the efficacy of utilizing BioID <i>in vivo</i> to interrogate spatially localized proteomes in health, aging, and disease.

### Keywords
Foot process, Ildr2, Aging, Podocytes, Bioid proximity labeling, Fnbp1l

### Affiliations
Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599
The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill

### Submitter
Gary Gerlach

### Lab Head
Dr Lori O'Brien
Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599


