### Accession
PXD031603

### Title
Interactomes of GluA1 and GluA3 subunit containing AMPARs reveal distinct protein composition

### Description
The AMPA glutamate receptor (AMPAR) is the major type of synaptic excitatory ionotropic receptor in the brain. The most abundant AMPAR subtypes in the hippocampus are GluA1/2 and GluA2/3 heterotetramers. Each subtype contributes differentially to mechanisms of synaptic plasticity, which may be in part caused by how these receptors are regulated by specific associated proteins. A broad range of AMPAR interacting proteins have been identified and several were shown to affect biogenesis, AMPAR trafficking, and channel properties, alone or in distinct assemblies, and several revealed preferred binding to specific AMPAR subunits. To date, a systematic separate interactome analysis of the major GluA1/2 and GluA2/3 AMPAR subtypes is lacking. To reveal interactors belonging to specific AMPAR sub-complexes, we performed both quantitative and interaction proteomics on hippocampi of wildtype and GluA1- or GluA3 knock-out mice. Whereas GluA1/2 receptors co-purified TARP-γ8, PRRT1 and CNIH2 with highest abundances, GluA2/3 receptors revealed strongest co-purification of CNIH2, TARP-γ2, and OLFM1. Further analysis revealed that TARP-γ8-PRRT1 can interact directly, and co-assemble into an AMPAR subcomplex especially near the synapse.

### Sample Protocol
This work contains immunopurification (IP) data of AMPA-receptors and SWATH data obtained with wildtype, GluA1- and GluA3 knock-out mouse hippocampus. In addition it contains IP data and mass spectrometry data obtained from interactor purified complexes separated on BN-PAGE obtained with wildtype hippocampus. For all analysis mouse hippocampal crude synaptosomes (P2+M) were used.    P2+M preparation- To obtain P2+M mouse frozen mouse hippocampi were homogenized in ice-cold homogenization buffer (0.32 M Sucrose (VWR, Radnor, PA, USA), 5 mM HEPES (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA), pH 7.4 with protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche, Basel, Switzerland)) in a homogenizer (Sartorius, Göttingen, Germany) at 900 rpm for 12 strokes. Homogenate was centrifuged at 1000 x g for 10 min, followed by centrifugation of the supernatant at 100,000 x g for 2 h at 4 °C. The resulting P2+M was resuspended in  suspension buffer (25 mM HEPES, 150 mM NaCl and protease inhibitor cocktail, pH 7.4) and stored at –80 °C until further use. Immunopurification- Proteins were extracted from P2+M using a 1% n-Dodecyl β-D-maltoside (DDM) (Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA, USA) sample suspension buffer (25 mM, 150 mM NaCl and protease inhibitor cocktail, pH 7.4), two times for 1 h at 4 °C. Following each extraction, samples were centrifuged at 20,000 x g for 20 min. Next, supernatant was incubated with 10 µg of antibody overnight at 4 °C, and incubated with 80 µL of protein A/G PLUS-Agarose beads (Santacruz, Dallas, TX, USA) for 1 h at 4 °C. Samples were centrifuged at 1000 x g for 1 minute and washed with 1 mL washing buffer (0.1% DDM, 150 mM NaCl (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA), 250 mM HEPES, pH 7.4). This was repeated four times. SDS sample buffer was added to the final pellet, samples were heated at 98 °C and run on a home-made 10% SDS polyacrylamide gel.    In-gel digestion- Gels were fixed overnight in 50% ethanol and 3% phosphoric acid (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA), washed in MilliQ and stained with Colloidal Coomassie Blue. Each sample was cut in 3-5 slices that were further cut into smaller pieces, transferred to a Multiscreen HV filter Plate (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA), washed and destained with a mixture of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) in acetonitrile (VWR, Radnor, PA, USA). Then 100% acetonitrile was added, and samples were incubated overnight at 37 °C with trypsin (Mass Spec Grade, Promega, Madison, WI, USA) dissolved in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Peptides were extracted twice in 0.1 % Trifluoroacetic acid (Protein sequence grade; Applied Biosystems, Warrington, UK) and 50% acetonitrile, followed by extraction in 0.1% Trifluoroacetic acid and 80% acetonitrile. Subsequently the samples were dried in a speed vac (Savant, Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA, USA) and stored at -20 °C until analysis on the LTQ-Orbitrap discovery.  Sample in-gel digestion for SWATH- Wildtype, GluA1- and GluA3 KO P2+M samples were run on a home-made 10% SDS polyacrylamide gel, cut in small pieces and incubated with 100 μL of 50 mM ammoniumbicarbonate and 5 mM TCEP (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) for 30 min, 37°C. Next, 100 μL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 2.5 mM methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS) (Fluka, Honeywell, Charlotte, NC, USA) was incubated for 15 min, room temperature. The proteins were digested using the in-gel digestion protocol described above, and analyzed on the TripleTOF 5600 mass spectrometer (Sciex, Framingham, MA, USA).  Immuno-purifications/BN-PAGE- Immunopurifications were done using the protocol described above, using 30mg P2+M, 100 μL antibody and 1000 μL of beads. After purification and washing of the samples, protein complexes were eluted twice using 500 µg peptide dissolved in 1 mL washing buffer for 1 h. Samples were then concentrated on a 30 kDa filter (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA) for 30 min, and mixed with BN-PAGE loading buffer (Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA, USA), 0.5 µL Molecular weight marker (Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA, USA), and 1 µL Coomassie G-250 mix (Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA, USA). Samples were run on a 3-12% polyacrylamide precast BN-PAGE gel (Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA, USA), at 1 mA constant current for 1 h and 2 mA constant current for 16 h at 4⁰C. BN-PAGE in-gel digestion- Gels were fixed overnight in 50% ethanol, 3% phosphoric acid, washed in MilliQ and stained with Colloidal Coomassie Blue. Each sample was cut into 70 slices using a grid cutter (Gel Company, San Francisco, CA, USA), transferred to a Multiscreen HV filter Plate, and incubated with 1 mM TCEP in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 30 minutes at 37⁰C. Samples were then incubated with 4 mM MMTS in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 15 minutes at room temperature. Samples were washed, destained, dried and digested following the in-gel digestion protocol described above. The samples were dried in a speed vac and stored at -20 °C before analysis on the Triple TOF 5600.

### Data Protocol
LTQ-Orbitrap discovery- Peptides were re-dissolved in 20 µL 0.1% acetic acid (VWR, Radnor, PA, USA), loaded on a 5 mm Pepmap 100 C18 (Dionex, Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA, USA) column (300 µm ID, 5 µm particle size), and separated on a 200 mm Alltima C18 homemade column (100 µm ID, 3 µm particle size). A High-Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC) (Eksigent, Sciex, Framingham, MA, USA) was used with a linear gradient of increasing acetonitrile (VWR, Radnor, PA, USA) concentration from 5% to 35% in 45 min, and to 90% in 5 min. The flow rate was 400 nL/min. Peptides were electro-sprayed into an LTQ-Orbitrap discovery (Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA, USA), which was operated in a data dependent manner with one MS (m/z range from 330 to 2000) followed by MS/MS on five most abundant ions, and an exclusion window of 25 sec. MS/MS spectra were searched against the Mouse database (UP000000589_10090, 2021_02) with the MaxQuant software (version 1.6.17.0), and  parameters set to unique peptides for protein quantifications, digestion with trypsin and Propiomide (C) as fixed modification. Triple TOF 5600 DDA- Peptides were redissolved in 2% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid (VWR, Radnor, PA, USA) and trapped on a 5 mm Pepmap 100 C18 column (300 μm i.d., 5 μm particle size). Samples were fractionated on a 200 mm Alltima home-made C18 column (100 μm i.d., 3 μm particle size). In the mobile phase, the acetonitrile concentration was increased from 5 to 30% in 35 min, to 40% at 37 min, and to 90% for 10 min at a flow rate of 500 nL/min. Peptides were electro-sprayed into Triple TOF 5600 (Sciex, Framingham, MA, USA) mass spectrometer using a voltage of 5500 V, ion source gas at 2 p.s.i., curtain gas at 35 p.s.i and an interface heater temperature of 150°C. The MS/MS spectra were searched against the Mouse database (UP000000589_10090, 2013_01_06) using MaxQuant software (version 1.3.0.5), with methyl methanethiosulfonate c, MMTS (C), set as fixed modification. Per protein of interest, three unique high-quality peptides were peak-picked with consistency in m/z and retention time across all slices in Skyline. Peptide abundances were normalized to their total intensity over all slices, and protein profiles were computed as the mean value at each slice.  TripleTOF 5600 SWATH- Peptides were trapped on a 5 mm Pepmap 100 C18 column (300 μm i.d., 5 μm particle size), and fractionated on a 200 mm Alltima home-made C18 column (100 μm i.d., 3 μm particle size). In the mobile phase, the acetonitrile concentration was increased from 5 to 18% in 88 min, to 25% at 98 min, 40% at 108 min and to 90% in 2 min, at a flow rate of 5 μL/min. Peptides were electro-sprayed into the Triple TOF 5600 (Sciex, Framingham, MA, USA) mass spectrometer with a voltage of 5500 V. A parent ion scan of 150 ms was followed by a SWATH window of 8 Da with a scan time of 80 ms, that stepped through the mass range between 450 and 770 m/z. For each window, the collision energy was determined based on the energy required for a 2+ ion, centered upon the window with a 15eV spread.  Raw files were analyzed in Spectronaut 13.7 (Biognosys, Schlieren, Switzerland) against a spectral library of crude hippocampal synaptosomes published previously (PMID: 34202490). This library was analyzed with the Triple TOF 5600 in DDA mode, and the library files were searched against the mouse proteome (the 2021_02 Uniprot release of UP000000589_10090.fasta) in Maxquant, with MMTS (C) as fixed modification. The Mass Spectrometry Downstream Analysis Pipeline (MS-DAP) (version beta 0.2.7.1) (available at https://github.com/ftwkoopmans/msdap) was used for quality control and differential testing. Peptide intensities without normalization in Spectronaut were taken for downstream analysis. Peptides present in ≥ 75% of the sample replicates of both KO and wildtype condition were used for differential testing, and peptides shared by proteins were removed. The Variation Within Mode Between (VWMB) and modebetween_protein algorithms were used for normalization. Statistical testing was done with the limma eBayes algorithm after rollup to proteins.

### Publication Abstract
The AMPA glutamate receptor (AMPAR) is the major type of synaptic excitatory ionotropic receptor in the brain. AMPARs have four different subunits, GluA1-4 (each encoded by different genes, <i>Gria1</i>, <i>Gria2</i>, <i>Gria3</i> and <i>Gria4</i>), that can form distinct tetrameric assemblies. The most abundant AMPAR subtypes in the hippocampus are GluA1/2 and GluA2/3 heterotetramers. Each subtype contributes differentially to mechanisms of synaptic plasticity, which may be in part caused by how these receptors are regulated by specific associated proteins. A broad range of AMPAR interacting proteins have been identified, including the well-studied transmembrane AMPA receptor regulatory proteins TARP-&#x3b3;2 (also known as Stargazin) and TARP-&#x3b3;8, Cornichon homolog 2 (CNIH-2) and many others. Several interactors were shown to affect biogenesis, AMPAR trafficking, and channel properties, alone or in distinct assemblies, and several revealed preferred binding to specific AMPAR subunits. To date, a systematic specific interactome analysis of the major GluA1/2 and GluA2/3 AMPAR subtypes separately is lacking. To reveal interactors belonging to specific AMPAR subcomplexes, we performed both expression and interaction proteomics on hippocampi of wildtype and <i>Gria1</i>- or <i>Gria3</i> knock-out mice. Whereas GluA1/2 receptors co-purified TARP-&#x3b3;8, synapse differentiation-induced protein 4 (SynDIG4, also known as Prrt1) and CNIH-2 with highest abundances, GluA2/3 receptors revealed strongest co-purification of CNIH-2, TARP-&#x3b3;2, and Noelin1 (or Olfactomedin-1). Further analysis revealed that TARP-&#x3b3;8-SynDIG4 interact directly and co-assemble into an AMPAR subcomplex especially at synaptic sites. Together, these data provide a framework for further functional analysis into AMPAR subtype specific pathways in health and disease.

### Keywords
Glua1/2, Prrt1, Subcomplexes, Ampar, Ms-dap, Tarp- γ8, Glua2/3, Proteomics

### Affiliations
CNCR, VU Amsterdam
Department of Molecular and Cellular Neurobiology, Center for Neurogenomics and Cognitive Research, Amsterdam Neuroscience, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Sophie van der Spek

### Lab Head
Dr Ka Wan Li
Department of Molecular and Cellular Neurobiology, Center for Neurogenomics and Cognitive Research, Amsterdam Neuroscience, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands


