### Accession
PXD038231

### Title
N-terminal acetylation determination of PEXEL proteins

### Description
We have knocked out a putative N-acetyl transferase, Pf3D7_1437000, from the malaria parasite plasmodium falciparum. Pf3D7_1437000 resides in the ER. Proteins in the Plasmodium falciparum secretory pathway are known to be extensively N-terminally acetylated. We have isolated two such proteins, HRP2 and HRP3, from the WT and KO parasites compared there N terminal acetylation status.

### Sample Protocol
HRP2 and HRP3 were purified from saponin lysed parasite lysate using nickel beads affinity purification. Purified samples were run in SDS-PAGE gel and the specific bands were cut out following Coomassie staining. Gel bands were washed in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AmBic)/acetonitrile and reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol at 50°C for 30 minutes. Cysteines were alkylated with 100 mM iodoacetamide in the dark for 30 minutes in room temperature. Gel bands were washed in 100mM AmBic/acetonitrile prior to adding 600 ng Glu-C for overnight incubation at 37 °C. Supernatant containing peptides was saved into a new tube. Gel was washed at room temperature for ten minutes with gentle shaking in 50% acetonitrile/5%  formic acid, and supernatant was saved to peptide solution. Wash step was repeated each with 80% acetonitrile/5% formic acid, and 100% acetonitrile, and all supernatant was saved then subjected to the speedvac to dry. After lyophilization, peptides were reconstituted with 0.1% FA in water and injected onto a Neo trap cartridge coupled with an analytical column (75 µm ID x 15 cm PepMapTM RSLC C18, 3 µm). Samples were separated using a linear gradient of solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) and solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) over 120 minutes using a Vanquish Neo UHPLC System coupled to an Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Data were searched using Mascot (v.2.8.0 Matrix Science, Boston, MA) against a custom Plasmodium falciparum 3D7 database, and results were reported at 1% false discovery rate in Scaffold (v.5.1.1 Proteome Software, Portland, OR). In the custom database, proessed sequence of HRP2 and HRP3 were added with the id P0001 and P0002.

### Publication Abstract
N-terminal acetylation is a common eukaryotic protein modification that involves the addition of an acetyl group to the N-terminus of a polypeptide. This modification is largely performed by cytosolic N-terminal acetyltransferases (NATs). Most associate with the ribosome, acetylating nascent polypeptides co-translationally. In the malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum, exported effectors are thought to be translated into the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), processed by the aspartic protease plasmepsin V and then N-acetylated, despite having no clear access to cytosolic NATs. Here, we used inducible gene deletion and post-transcriptional knockdown to investigate the primary ER-resident NAT candidate, Pf3D7_1437000. We found that it localizes to the ER and is required for parasite growth. However, depletion of Pf3D7_1437000 had no effect on protein export or acetylation of the exported proteins HRP2 and HRP3. Despite this, Pf3D7_1437000 depletion impedes parasite development within the host red blood cell and prevents parasites from completing genome replication. Thus, this work provides further proof of N-terminal acetylation of secretory system proteins, a process unique to apicomplexan parasites, but strongly discounts a promising candidate for this post-translational modification.

### Keywords
Plasmodium falciparum, Er, N-acetyl transferase

### Affiliations
David M. and Paula L. Kipnis Distinguished Professor, Departments of Medicine and Molecular Microbiology, Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, 660 South Euclid Avenue, Campus Box 8051, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, United States.
Washington University in St. Louis

### Submitter
Md Mahmudul Hasan

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel E Goldberg
David M. and Paula L. Kipnis Distinguished Professor, Departments of Medicine and Molecular Microbiology, Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, 660 South Euclid Avenue, Campus Box 8051, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, United States.


