### Accession
PXD019777

### Title
Evaluating the influence of MS-acquisition parameters on DDA label-free proteomics analyses

### Description
Label-free proteomics enables the unbiased quantification of thousands of proteins across large sample cohorts. Commonly used mass spectrometry-based proteomic workflows rely on data dependent acquisition (DDA). However, its stochastic selection of peptide features for fragmentation-based identification inevitably results in high rates of missing values, which prohibits the integration of larger cohorts as the number of recurrently detected peptides is a limiting factor. Peptide identity propagation (PIP) can mitigate this challenge, allowing to transfer sequencing information between samples. However, despite the promise of these approaches, current methods remain limited either in sensitivity or reliability and there is a lack of robust and widely applicable software. Here we prepared a tool spike-in data set which can be used to evaluate the influence of changing Top-N, gradient length and sample injection amounts on DDA label-free proteomics results. It also includes analysis by data-independent acquisition (DIA) which allows direct comparison of DDA and DIA for label-free proteomics analyses.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa cells were pelleted from cell culture, snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C. Cell pellet was reconstituted in 100 μL of 0.1% RapiGest SF Surfactant in 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate and 1x protease inhibitor cocktail. Each sample was probe-sonicated for 4x 15 seconds at 10% frequency with storage on-ice between cycles of homogenization. Samples were centrifuged at 15.000x g, 4°C for 30 minutes to pellet any remaining cell- and tissue-debris, followed by transfer of the supernatant into new reaction tubes and protein quantification using a bicinchoninic acid assay. Proteins were denatured for 5 minutes at 95°C. Disulfide-bonds were reduced with Dithiothreitol (5 mM) at 60°C for 30 minutes. Cysteine residues were alkylated using chloroacetamide (15 mM) at 23°C for 30 minutes. Reduced and alkylated proteins were digested overnight at 37°C in a table-top thermomixer at 500 rpm using sequencing-grade modified trypsin in ddH2O. Upon overnight protein digestion, each sample was acidified to a final concentration of 1% trifluoroacetic acid and incubated at 37°C and 500 rpm for 30 minutes, in order to cleave and precipitate RapiGest. Subsequently, samples were centrifuged at 15.000x g, at 23°C for 30 minutes to pellet the RapiGest precipitate and recover the peptide-containing supernatant to a new reaction tube. MS injection-ready samples were stored at -20°C. E. coli lyophilized sample (Bio-Rad) was re-suspended in ddH2O to achieve a stock concentrations of 2 μg/μL. 100 μL (200 μg) were incubated at 95°C for 5 minutes, followed by reduction and alkylation using Dithiothreitol (10 mM) at 37°C for 1-hour and chloroacetamide (40 mM) at 23°C for 45 minutes at 500 rpm. Reduced and alkylated proteins were digested overnight at 37°C in a table-top thermomixer at 700 rpm using sequencing-grade modified trypsin (Promega) in ddH2O. Upon overnight protein digestion, each sample was acidified to a final concentration of 1% trifluoroacetic acid. MS injection-ready samples were stored at -20°C. Spike-in samples were prepared by mixing HeLa sample with 0%, 3%, 4.5%, 6%, 7.5% or 9% (wt/wt) of E. coli sample (n=3). Peptides were separated using the Easy NanoLC 1200 fitted with a trapping (Acclaim PepMap C18, 5μm, 100Å, 100 μm x 2cm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and an analytical column (nanoEase MZ BEH C18, 1.7 μm, 130 Å, 75 μm x 25 cm, Waters). The outlet of the analytical column was coupled directly to a Q-Exactive HF Orbitrap (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer. Solvent A was ddH2O, 0.1% (v/v) FA and solvent B was 80% acetonitrile (CAN) in ddH2O, 0.1% (v/v) FA. The samples were loaded with a constant flow of solvent A at a maximum pressure of 800 bar, onto the trapping column. Peptides were eluted via the analytical column at a constant flow of 0.3 μL/minute at 55°C using three different methods as described below. 2-hours method: During the elution, the percentage of solvent B was increased in a linear fashion from 3 to 8% in 4 minutes, then from 8% to 10% in 2 minutes, then from 10% to 32% in a further 68 minutes, and then to 50% B in 12 minutes. Finally, the gradient was finished with 8 minutes at 100% solvent B, followed by 11 minutes 97% solvent A. 1-hour 25 minutes method: During elution, the percentage of solvent B was increased linearly from 4 to 5% in 1 minute, then from 5% to 27% in 30 minutes, and then from 27% to 44% in a further 5 minutes. Finally, the gradient was finished with 10.1 minutes at 95% solvent B, followed by 13.5 minutes at 96% solvent A. 1-hour 10 minutes method: During elution, the percentage of solvent B was increased linearly from 3 to 8% in 4 minute, then from 8% to 10% in 2 minutes, and then from 10% to 32% in a further 17 minutes, and then to 50% B in 3 minutes. Finally, the gradient was finished with 8 minutes at 100% solvent B, followed by 11 minutes at 97% solvent A. Peptides were introduced into the mass spectrometer via a Pico-Tip Emitter 360 μm OD x 20 μm ID; 10 μm tip (New Objective) and at a spray voltage of 2 kV. The capillary temperature was set at 275°C. Full scan MS spectra with mass range m/z 350 to 1500 were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 60,000 FWHM. The filling time was set to a maximum of 50 ms with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3 x 106 ions. The top 5, top 10, or top 20 most abundant ions per full scan were selected for an MS2 acquisition. Isotopes, unassigned charges, and charges of +1 or >+8 were excluded. The dynamic exclusion list was with a maximum retention period of 15 seconds (1-hour 10 minutes) or 25 seconds and a mass tolerance of plus and minus 10 ppm. For MS2 scans, the resolution was set to 15,000 FWHM with automatic gain control of 1 x 105 ions and maximum fill time of 50 ms. The isolation window was set to 2 Th, with a fixed first mass of m/z 110, and stepped collision energy of 26.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.1.2). The search was performed against the UniProt database consisting of reviewed human and E. coli proteins (September 2019, 24644 entries). The Andromeda search engine was used with the following search criteria: enzyme was set to trypsin/P with up to 2 missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation (C) was selected as a fixed modification; oxidation (M), acetylation (protein N-term) were set as variable modification. Match between runs was enabled with match time window set to 1 min and alignment time window set to 20 min. The search type for protein quantification was set to standard. Quantification intensities were calculated by the default fast MaxLFQ algorithm with minimal ratio count set to 1. Require MS/MS for LFQ comparisons was disabled. Peptide and protein hits were filtered at a false discovery rate of 1%, with a minimal peptide length of 7 amino acids. Second peptide search for the identification of chimeric MS2 spectra was enabled. Not mentioned MaxQuant settings were left as default.

### Publication Abstract
Label-free proteomics by data-dependent acquisition enables the unbiased quantification of thousands of proteins, however it notoriously suffers from high rates of missing values, thus prohibiting consistent protein quantification across large sample cohorts. To solve this, we here present IceR (Ion current extraction Re-quantification), an efficient and user-friendly quantification workflow that combines high identification rates of data-dependent acquisition with low missing value rates similar to data-independent acquisition. Specifically, IceR uses ion current information for a hybrid peptide identification propagation approach with superior quantification precision, accuracy, reliability and data completeness compared to other quantitative workflows. Applied to plasma and single-cell proteomics data, IceR enhanced the number of reliably quantified proteins, improved discriminability between single-cell populations, and allowed reconstruction of a developmental trajectory. IceR will be useful to improve performance of large scale global as well as low-input proteomics applications, facilitated by its availability as an easy-to-use R-package.

### Keywords
Dda, Quantitative proteomics, Missing values, Ms1-based, Label-free, Dia

### Affiliations
DKFZ Heidelberg
EMBL Heidelberg

### Submitter
Mathias Kalxdorf

### Lab Head
Dr Jeroen Krijgsveld
DKFZ Heidelberg


