### Accession
PXD004091

### Title
Proteomic profile of two different cerebral hypoxic models treated with antioxidant melatonin and nitric oxide donors

### Description
In the present work we analyse the proteomic profile of two models of cerebral hypoxia with different severity as well as their response after treatment with the antioxidant melatonin and the nitric oxide-donor isosorbide mononitrate (ISMN).

### Sample Protocol
Our study has been performed on 40 adult male Wistar rats provided by Harlan Laboratories (Envigo) and weighing 350 g each, kept under standard conditions of light and temperature and allowed ad libitum access to food and water. All procedures were performed in accordance with the EU Directive 2010/63/EU (2010), reviewed by the Ethics Committee of the Spanish Council for Scientific Research, approved by the Committee of Bioethics of the University of Jaén (Spain), and are in accordance with the Uniform Requirements for manuscripts submitted to Biomedical Journals. Animals were distributed into eight different groups: 1) S-HH: sham animals submitted to HH; 2) A+HH: animals submitted to HH and treated with antioxidant melatonin; 3) D+HH: rats submitted to HH and treated with NO donor isosorbide mononitrate (ISMN); 4) A+D+HH: animals treated with melatonin and ISMN and submitted to HH. 5) S-IHH: sham animals submitted to IHH; 6) Mel+IHH: animals submitted to HH and treated with antioxidant melatonin; 7) D+IHH: rats submitted to IHH and treated with ISMN; 8) A+D+IHH: animals treated with melatonin and ISMN and submitted to IHH. Antioxidant Melatonin (100 mg/Kg body weight, diluted in saline and 2% methanol, Sigma, St. Louis, USA) was injected i.p. always at 8.30 a.m., 1 h prior to the onset of HH/IHH. NO donor ISMN (Lacer Laboratories, Barcelona, Spain) was diluted 0.38mg/ml in drinking water. Rats were allowed ad libitum access to water for 7 days, and water consumption was controlled daily. In order to elucidate the role of antioxidant melatonin and nitric oxide donor ISMN in H/I, we have developed two experimental models of oxygen deprivation with different degree of severity:  (i) A gentle model of hypobaric hypoxia (HH) using a slight modification of a previously published procedure (Hernández et al., 2013) by down-regulating the environmental O2 pressure to a final barometric pressure of approximately 300 hPa inside a hypobaric chamber. Briefly, after pharmacological treatments, the rats were placed in the hypobaric chamber in which the air pressure was controlled by means of a continuous vacuum pump and an adjustable inflow valve. The chamber was also provided with a manometer to check the experimental altitude during the process. The conditions, simulating an altitude of 9,144 m (30,000 feet), were maintained for 1 h. Ascent and descent rates were kept below 300 m/min (approximately 1,000 feet/min). After the hypoxic period, the return to normobaric normoxic conditions spanned 30 min. Animals were killed after the hypobaric chamber was opened. Sham animals kept in the chamber under normobaric normoxic conditions served as controls. (ii) A more severe model of cerebral ischemia followed by hypobaric hypoxia (IHH), which consists of unilateral left common carotid artery occlusion followed by a hypoxic stress for a predetermined time (Adhami et al., 2006). This model has been successfully applied both to neonatal (Levine 1960; Rice et al., 1981) and adult animals (Basu et al., 2005; Vannucci et al., 2001) and consists on a slight modification of the Levin/Vannucci model. More specifically, after pharmacological treatments, rats were anesthetized with ketamine (100 mg/Kg body weight, i.p.) and xylazine (5 mg/Kg body weight, i.p.). Then, we proceed to the isolation, ligation, and sectioning of left common carotid artery. Animals recovered for 2 h after surgery, and were submitted to hypobaric hypoxia as previously described. Body temperature was monitored and maintained throughout all the procedures. Sham animals submitted to surgery without vessel sectioning and then kept in the chamber under normobaric normoxic conditions were used as control group. Left brain cortices from animals of all experimental groups were extracted and processed according to the procedure described below.

### Data Protocol
Thermo RAW files were converted to mzML using ProteoWizard v. 3.0.9576. The same RAW files were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer v. 1.4.0.288, both for protein identification and quantitation using the TMT reagent.  For the identification, a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.6 Da were selected with CID generated spectra. Ions b and y and neutral losses from b,y,a were used for spectrum matching. Four different amino acid modifications were used: three variable (N-terminal TMT6plex,TMT6plex at K, oxidation at M) and one fixed (carbamidomethyl at C).  The protein database used for the study was Uniprot reference proteome, 2015_01 version. The quantitation was performed analyzing the HCD generated spectra. Four quantitation work-flows were created following the sample analysis design and the corresponding msf files were created.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Brain, Melatonin, Ischemia, Rat, No donor, Hypoxia, Tmt

### Affiliations
University of Jaen
University of Jaen, Spain

### Submitter
Santos Blanco

### Lab Head
Dr Maria Angeles Peinado
University of Jaen, Spain


