### Accession
PXD041324

### Title
New ruthenium-cyclopentadienyl complexes affect colorectal cancer hallmarks showing high therapeutic potential

### Description
Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the most lethal cancers worldwide. Current therapeutic strategies are accompanied by low success rates and several side effects, representing a relevant clinical problem and requiring the discovery of new and more effective therapeutic alternatives. Ruthenium drugs emerged as one of the most promising metallodrugs due to their high selectivity to cancer cells. In this work, we studied for the first time the anticancer properties and mechanisms of action of four lead Ru-cyclopentadienyl compounds, namely PMC79, PMC78, LCR134 and LCR220, in CRC-derived cell lines. Biological assays were performed in CRC cell lines to evaluate cellular distribution, colony formation, cell cycle, proliferation, apoptosis, motility as well as cytoskeleton and mitochondrial alterations. Our results showed that all compounds displayed high bioactivity and selectivity, as shown by low IC50 concentrations against CRC cells. We observed that all Ru compounds had different intracellular distributions and inhibited to a high extent the clonogenic ability and proliferation of CRC cells. In addition, PMC79, LCR134 and LCR220 induced apoptosis, increased the levels of reactive oxygen species, induced mitochondrial alterations and affected F-actin cytoskeleton organization and cellular motility. A proteomic analysis showed that these compounds induce alterations in several cellular proteins related to the phenotypic alterations induced. Overall, we demonstrated that Ru compounds, in special PMC79 and LCR220, present promising anticancer activity in CRC cells and potential to be used as new metallodrugs for CRC therapy.

### Sample Protocol
Samples (10 µg) were reduced with dithiothreitol (30 nmol, 37 ºC, 60 min) and alkylated in the dark with iodoacetamide (60 nmol, 25 ºC, 30 min). The resulting protein extract was first diluted to 2 M urea with 200 mM ammonium bicarbonate for digestion with endoproteinase LysC (1:10 w:w, 37ºC, 6h, Wako, cat # 129-02541), and then diluted 2-fold with 200 mM ammonium bicarbonate for trypsin digestion (1:10 w:w, 37ºC, o/n, Promega cat # V5113). After digestion, peptide mix was acidified with formic acid and desalted with a MicroSpin C18 column (The Nest Group, Inc) prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. Samples were then analyzed using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1200 (January 2019) (Thermo Fisher Scientific (Proxeon), Odense, Denmark). Peptides were loaded directly onto the analytical column and were separated by reversed-phase chromatography using a 50-cm column with an inner diameter of 75 μm, packed with 2 μm C18 particles spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA). Chromatographic gradients started at 95% buffer A and 5% buffer B with a flow rate of 300 nl/min and gradually increased to 25% buffer B and 75% A in 79 min and then to 40% buffer B and 60% A in 11 min. After each analysis, the column was washed for 10 min with 100% buffer B. Buffer A: 0.1% formic acid in water. Buffer B: 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile (January 2019). The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ionization mode with nanospray voltage set at 2.4 kV and source temperature at 305 °C. The acquisition was performed in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode and full MS scans with 1 micro scans at resolution of 120,000 were used over a mass range of m/z 350-1400 with detection in the Orbitrap mass analyzer. Auto gain control (AGC) was set to ‘standard’ and injection time to ‘auto’. In each cycle of data-dependent acquisition analysis, following each survey scan, the most intense ions above a threshold ion count of 10000 were selected for fragmentation. The number of selected precursor ions for fragmentation was determined by the “Top Speed” acquisition algorithm and a dynamic exclusion of 60 seconds. Fragment ion spectra were produced via high-energy collision dissociation (HCD) at normalized collision energy of 28% and they were acquired in the ion trap mass analyzer. AGC MS2 was set to 2E4, and an isolation window of 0.7 m/z and a maximum injection time of 12 ms were used. Digested bovine serum albumin (New england biolabs cat # P8108S) was analyzed between each sample to avoid sample carryover and to assure stability of the instrument and Qcloud has been used to control instrument longitudinal performance during the project.

### Data Protocol
Acquired spectra were analyzed using the Proteome Discoverer software suite (v2.3, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the Mascot search engine (v2.6, Matrix Science). The data were searched against a Swiss-Prot human database (as in June 2020, 20406 entries) plus a list of common contaminants and all the corresponding decoy entries. For peptide identification a precursor ion mass tolerance of 7 ppm was used for MS1 level, trypsin was chosen as enzyme, and up to three missed cleavages were allowed. The fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da for MS2 spectra. Oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation were used as variable modifications whereas carbamidomethylation on cysteines was set as a fixed modification. False discovery rate (FDR) in peptide identification was set to a maximum of 5%. Only proteins with at least two unique peptides identified were considered for quantification. Peptide quantification data were retrieved from the “Precursor ion area detector” node from Proteome Discoverer (v2.3) using 2 ppm mass tolerance for the peptide extracted ion current (XIC). The obtained values were used to calculate protein fold-changes and their corresponding adjusted p-values (q-values).

### Publication Abstract
Colorectal cancer (CRC) is among the most deadly cancers worldwide. Current therapeutic strategies have low success rates and several side effects. This relevant clinical problem requires the discovery of new and more effective therapeutic alternatives. Ruthenium drugs have arisen as one of the most promising metallodrugs, due to their high selectivity to cancer cells. In this work we studied, for the first time, the anticancer properties and mechanisms of action of four lead Ru-cyclopentadienyl compounds, namely <b>PMC79</b>, <b>PMC78</b>, <b>LCR134</b> and <b>LCR220</b>, in two CRC-derived cell lines (SW480 and RKO). Biological assays were performed on these CRC cell lines to evaluate cellular distribution, colony formation, cell cycle, proliferation, apoptosis, and motility, as well as cytoskeleton and mitochondrial alterations. Our results show that all the compounds displayed high bioactivity and selectivity, as shown by low half-maximal inhibitory concentrations (IC<sub>50</sub>) against CRC cells. We observed that all the Ru compounds have different intracellular distributions. In addition, they inhibit to a high extent the proliferation of CRC cells by decreasing clonogenic ability and inducing cell cycle arrest. <b>PMC79</b>, <b>LCR134</b>, and <b>LCR220</b> also induce apoptosis, increase the levels of reactive oxygen species, lead to mitochondrial dysfunction, induce actin cytoskeleton alterations, and inhibit cellular motility. A proteomic study revealed that these compounds cause modifications in several cellular proteins associated with the phenotypic alterations observed. Overall, we demonstrate that Ru compounds, especially <b>PMC79</b> and <b>LCR220</b>, display promising anticancer activity in CRC cells with a high potential to be used as new metallodrugs for CRC therapy.

### Keywords
Ruthenium-cyclopentadienyl compounds; colorectal cancer; active targeting; passive targeting

### Affiliations
Center for Genomic Regulation, Universitat Pompeu Fabra
Centre de Regulació Genòmica

### Submitter
Eduard Sabidó

### Lab Head
Dr Eduard Sabidó
Center for Genomic Regulation, Universitat Pompeu Fabra


