### Accession
PXD040737

### Title
A solid-phase compatible silane-based cleavable linker enables custom isobaric quantitative chemoproteomics

### Description
Only ~4% of the human proteome has been drugged by FDA approved molecules. Consequently, closing this druggability gap is a central focus of mass spectrometry chemoproteomics screening platforms. Despite increasingly widespread adoption, established chemoproteomic platforms fall short of achieving comprehensive proteome-wide structure activity relationship (SAR) maps for two key reasons: (1) time consuming and cumbersome sample preparation workflows and (2) and low throughput sample acquisition. Here we report the silane-based Cleavable Linkers for Isotopically-labeled Proteomics (sCLIP) method. sCLIP streamlines sample preparation with unparalleled early-stage isobaric labeling and sample pooling, allowing for increased sample throughput via customized low cost 6-plex sample multiplexing. The sCLIP method is distinguished by its unprecedented click-assembled isobaric tags, in which the reporter group is encoded in the sCLIP capture reagent and balancer in the pan cysteine-reactive probe. When paired with a custom FragPipe data analysis workflow and applied to cysteine-reactive fragment screens, sCLIP proteomics revealed established and unprecedented cysteine-ligand pairs, including those labeled by covalent-reversible electrophilic modalities.

### Sample Protocol
In general HEK293T cells were lysed and diluted to concentrations between 1-2mg/mL. These samples were then subjected to traditional cysteine proteomics (IAA and Click with capture reagent) followed by SP3 sample preparation and streptavidin or neutravidin enrichment. Samples were then analyzed using an Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid mass spectrometer either with or without a high field asymmetric waveform ion mobility spectrometry (FAIMS) device.

### Data Protocol
Raw data collected by LC-MS/MS were searched with MSFragger (v3.4 and v3.5) and FragPipe (v17.1 and 18.0). For closed search, the “default” proteomic workflow was loaded in FragPipe and these default values were used for all settings, except as noted below. Precursor and fragment mass tolerance was set as 20 ppm. Missed cleavages were allowed up to 1. A human protein database was downloaded from UniProt on [January 1st, 2020] using FragPipe, containing reviewed sequences and common contaminants, with 37110 total entries. Digestion was performed in MSFragger using the ‘stricttrypsin’ (i.e. allowing cleavage before P) setting, peptide length was set 7 - 50, and peptide mass range was set 500 - 5000. Cysteine residues were searched with differential modifications as described in the study, allowing a max of 2 per peptide. Cys carbamidomethylation was additionally set as a variable modification (max 2 per peptide). For labile search, a single modification mass was set as a mass offset and was restricted to cysteines. Labile search mode was enabled with Y ion masses and diagnostic fragment masses set as in Figure S8 for different proteomic samples, and diagnostic ion minimum intensity of 0.02. PTM-Shepherd was enabled for fragment analysis. PSM validation, protein inference, and FDR filtering were performed in PeptideProphet, ProteinProphet, and Philosopher, respectively, in FragPipe using default settings. A sample workflow can be found attached. Calibrated and deisotoped spectrum files produced by FragPipe were retained and reused for this analysis. For isobaric quantitation analyses, a custom version of Philosopher with the DADPS reporter ion masses added to the LabelQuant module was used. Results were generated using the TMT integrator output where the best PSM was disabled, allow unlabeled was set to True, and the mod tag was set to the mass of the intact cysteine modification.

### Publication Abstract
Mass spectrometry-based chemoproteomics has emerged as an enabling technology for functional biology and drug discovery. To address limitations of established chemoproteomics workflows, including cumbersome reagent synthesis and low throughput sample preparation, here, we established the silane-based cleavable isotopically labeled proteomics (sCIP) method. The sCIP method is enabled by a high yielding and scalable route to dialkoxydiphenylsilane fluorenylmethyloxycarbonyl (DADPS-Fmoc)-protected amino acid building blocks, which enable the facile synthesis of customizable, isotopically labeled, and chemically cleavable biotin capture reagents. sCIP is compatible with both MS1- and MS2-based quantitation, and the sCIP-MS2 method is distinguished by its click-assembled isobaric tags in which the reporter group is encoded in the sCIP capture reagent and balancer in the pan cysteine-reactive probe. The sCIP-MS2 workflow streamlines sample preparation with early stage isobaric labeling and sample pooling, allowing for high coverage and increased sample throughput via customized low cost six-plex sample multiplexing. When paired with a custom FragPipe data analysis workflow and applied to cysteine-reactive fragment screens, sCIP proteomics revealed established and unprecedented cysteine-ligand pairs, including the discovery that mitochondrial uncoupling agent FCCP acts as a covalent-reversible cysteine-reactive electrophile.

### Keywords
Dadps, Sclip, Cleavable, Lc-msms, Solid-phase, Isobaric, Tmt, Ms2

### Affiliations
UCLA
Department of Biological Chemistry, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California

### Submitter
Nik Burton

### Lab Head
Dr Keriann Marie Backus
Department of Biological Chemistry, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California


