### Accession
PXD008053

### Title
Mice Hippocampus neuron HT22 LC-MS

### Description
Ketone 3-hydroxybutyrate (3OHB) has been proved to be a neuroprotective endogenous molecule in multiple neurodegenerative diseases, but the detailed mechanisms of action has not been fully uncovered. Here, we employed a quantitative proteomics approach to assess the global protein expression pattern of neuron cells which were incorporated with 3OHB. While 3OHB did not derive dramatic proteome pattern fluctuation in HT22 cells, a big portion of the proteome alteration are found to be 3OHB specific responses (including: cell metabolism, protein acetylation, cognition, neurodegeneration diseases). Combining with disease related protein-protein interaction network analysis, we successfully pinpointed a hub marker, Histone lysine 27 trimethylation (H3K27me3), which has been widely studied in multiple neurodegenerative diseases, but still hasn’t been connected to 3OHB derived neuroprotective effects yet. In addition, our data suggested that the co-occurrence of H3K4me3 and H3K27me3 which was defined as chromatin bivalency referring “poised” transcriptional state could be perturbed by 3OHB, since both H3K4me3 and H3K27me3 were showing sensitive response to 3OHB. Integrative transcriptomics and epigenomics analysis highlighted bivalent transcription factors may play critical roles in 3OHB derived disease protection and alteration of neuronal development processes. To further validate and explore the possible scenario, we performed transcriptomics profiling of 3OHB perturbation upon neural differentiation process. The gene set enrichment analysis has shown that 3OHB could impair the fate decision of neural precursor cells by repressing and promoting their differentiation and proliferation related biological processes, respectively. Another interesting phenomenon is that two of relative high abundant Histone lysine hydroxybutyrylation sites (H2AK118bhb, H2BK34bhb) also responded to 3OHB fulguration. Those two sites are happen to be the most important monoubiquitylation sites that play critical role in regulating of H3K27 methylation and H3K4 (and K79) methylation, respectively. One may speculate that H2AK118bhb and H2BK34bhb involve in or even derive chromatin bivalency alteration upon 3OHB perturbation in neural systems.Taking together, our study provides a novel scenario for deciphering the 3OHB and its mechanisms of action in neural systems both in neurodegeneration disease pathogenesis and neural development  process.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for LC-MS/MS  Protein extraction was performed using approximately 1x 107 cells per group. HT22 cells were washed twice with ice-cold PBS, and then lysed in 1.0 ml of urea lysis buffer (8 M urea, 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4), 10 mM EDTA, 0.15M NaCl, 1% β-octyl glucopyranoside, 1x EDTA free cocktail, Roche, UK).  Cell lysates were vigorously mixed for 10 min at room temperature and further sonicated 20s (20 kHz, 30% amplitude). Proteins were reduced with freshly added 10 mM DTT to break disulfide bond and incubated in dark for 1 hour at 37 o°C, followed by alkylation with 40 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min. The lysates were diluted using 50 mM NH4HCO3 to reach 1M urea. Protein digestion was achieved by adding sequence grade trypsin (V5111, Promega, USA) into diluted protein solutions using a ratio of 1:50 (trypsin: protein) at 37 oC℃ overnight. The digested solutions were acidified by adding 5% formic acid and further desalted by HLB column (Waters Corporation, United Kingdom). The elute (elution buffer: water/acetonitrile/ formic acid = 20:80:0.1) was evaporated to dryness in a vacuum centrifuge.  Isobaric Dimethylation peptide labeling Isobaric dimethylation of N–terminal and lysine amino groups with HCHO (D13CDO) and NaBH3CN was carried out using the same protocol as reported before (Boersema et al, 2009). After labeling, isobaric peptides solution with light (+28) or heavy (+34) labels for both of control and BHB treatment, respectively. They were mixed at the ration of light/heavy=1:1 (control (light): treatment (heavy)) as Forward labeling and 1:1 (treatment (light): control (heavy)) as Reciprocal labeling and freezer dried for subsequent HPLC-SCX fractionation. HPLC-SCX fractionation of dimethyl labeled mixed peptides. SCX chromatography was performed on an ?kta Purifier modular liquid chromatography system (GE Healthcare, USA) at a flow rate of 1 ml/min using the SCX mobile phase. Both 254 and 280 nm UV spectra were used to monitor the ef?uent. Polysulfoethyl A column (4.6 × 200 mm, 5 μm, 200 ?, PolyLC) was equilibrated with 0.01% H3PO4, pH 3.0 containing 25% of acetonitrile. Dimethyl labelled peptides mixture were dissolved in 500 μL of buffer A, and loaded onto the column.  After 5 min, 5 mL of 10 mM KH2PO4, pH 3.0 in 25% acetonitrile (buffer solution A) was injected. A 25-min gradient was run from 0% to 25% of buffer solution B (10 mM KH2PO4, 300 mM KCl, pH 3.0 in 25% acetonitrile) subsequently, followed by an increase to 100% of buffer B in 25 min and finally a 5 min isocratic gradient of 100% buffer B. Fractions were collected every minute and 6 of adjacent fractions from No. 1 to No. 60 were combined, desalted and freezer dried. The amount of peptide in each fraction was measured by protein Micro BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, China)   LC-MS/MS analysis For liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry (LC–MS/MS) analysis, the peptides were separated by a 120 min gradient using the fused silica capillary analytical column (75 μm ID, 150 mm length; Upchurch, Oak Harbor, WA) packed with C18 resin (300 ?, 5 μm, Varian, Lexington, MA) on a NanoLC system (Proxeon, Denmark). The elution was achieved at a flow rate of 0.25 μL/min using the following gradient: 0–8 min 2% B, 8–12 min 2–10% B, 12–90 min 10–50% B, 90–100 min 50-98% B and 100- 120 min 98-2% where B (acetonitrile /formic acid, 100:0.1). The analytical column was directly interfaced with a Thermo Scientific Q Exactive mass spectrometer which was operated in the data-dependent acquisition mode and there was a full-scan mass spectrum in the Orbitrap (300–1800 m/z, 75?000 resolution). 10 of most abundant m/z signals were chosen from the primary scan for collision-induced dissociation at 32% normalized collision energy (HCD). The mass window for precursor ion selection was 2.0 m/z, the threshold for triggering MS/MS experiments was 8.0 × 103, and the dynamic exclusion time was 20 s.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics Data Processing The collected RAW data files were analysed using the MaxQuant software, version 1.5.3.23 (Cox and Mann, 2008).  The protein identification was achieved employing Andromeda (Cox et al., 2011) search engine which included in the MaxQuant software in this version. The parameters from MaxQuant were set to search against the UniProt Rattus database (UniProt release 2015_10).  Isobaric labelling with dimethyl labels light (+28 Da) and heavy (+34 Da) on both N-terminal and lysine residue were chosen for isobaric labeling method, oxidation of methionine and carbamidomethylation of cysteine were set as variable modification and fixed modification, respectively. Trypsin missed cleavages was selected with up to two. Peptides were searched using as MS1 tolerance of 6 ppm and MS2 tolerance of 1.5 Da. The false discovery rate (FDR) was 0.1% for identification of peptides and proteins. Protein quantitation was performed on unmodified peptides. Quantitative protein and peptide output from MaxQuant was analyzed using Perseus (version 1.5.3.2). Besides default FDR thresholds in MaxQuant, additional cleaning procedures were used to eliminate the proteins with less than 2 peptides identifications, contaminants and reverse hits.

### Publication Abstract
3-hydroxybutyrate (3OHB) has been proved to act as a neuroprotective molecule in multiple neurodegenerative diseases. Here, we employed a quantitative proteomics approach to assess the changes of the global protein expression pattern of neural cells upon 3OHB administration. In combination with a disease-related, protein-protein interaction network we pinpointed a hub marker, histone lysine 27 trimethylation, which is one of the key epigenetic markers in multiple neurodegenerative diseases. Integrative analysis of transcriptomic and epigenomic datasets highlighted the involvement of bivalent transcription factors in 3OHB-mediated disease protection and its alteration of neuronal development processes. Transcriptomic profiling revealed that 3OHB impaired the fate decision process of neural precursor cells by repressing differentiation and promoting proliferation. Our study provides a new mechanism of 3OHB's neuroprotective effect, in which chromatin bivalency is sensitive to 3OHB alteration and drives its neuroprotective function both in neurodegenerative diseases and in neural development processes.

### Keywords
Neuron, Transcriptomics, Beta-hydroxybutyrate, Central nervous system, Proteomics, Bivalent chromatin, Mice, Histone lysine hydroxybutyrylation, Ht22

### Affiliations
Hong Kong University of science and technology
Key Laboratory of Biomedical Information Engineering of Ministry of Education, School of Life Science and Technology, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an 710049, Shaanxi Province, China.

### Submitter
Xinliang ZHU

### Lab Head
Dr Xiao yun LU
Key Laboratory of Biomedical Information Engineering of Ministry of Education, School of Life Science and Technology, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an 710049, Shaanxi Province, China.


