### Accession
PXD025053

### Title
ChIP-MS of HP1-beta (CBX1) and ubiquitylome of KAP1 (TRIM28) in mESCs

### Description
Heterochromatin binding protein HP1β plays an important role in chromatin organization and cell differentiation, however the underlying mechanisms remain unclear. Here, we generated HP1β-/- embryonic stem cells and observed reduced heterochromatin clustering and impaired differentiation. We found that during stem cell differentiation, HP1β is phosphorylated at serine 89 by CK2, which creates a binding site for the pluripotency regulator KAP1. This phosphorylation dependent sequestration of KAP1 in heterochromatin compartments causes a downregulation of pluripotency factors and triggers pluripotency exit. Accordingly, HP1β-/- and phospho-mutant cells exhibited impaired differentiation, while ubiquitination-deficient KAP1ΔRing cells had the opposite phenotype with enhanced differentiation. These results suggest that KAP1 regulates pluripotency via its ubiquitination activity. We propose that the formation of subnuclear membraneless heterochromatin compartments may serve as a dynamic reservoir to trap or release cellular factors. The sequestration of essential regulators defines a novel and active role of heterochromatin in gene regulation and represents a dynamic mode of remote control to regulate cellular processes like cell fate decisions.

### Sample Protocol
Chromatin immunoprecipitation and sample preparation for mass spectrometry  Chromatin immunoprecipitation coupled to mass spectrometry (ChIP-MS) of HP1β was performed in two technical replicates for WT and HP1β-KO mESCs and EpiLCs by using a direct HP1β antibody (Abcam). For each replicate, independently grown 15*106 cells were harvested and crosslinked as described previously (Mulholland et al., 2020). Next, nuclei were isolated with a mild lysis buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 85 mM KCl, 0.5 % NP40, 1x PIC) and briefly pelleted for 5 min at 2000 g and 4°C. To digest DNA, nuclei were resuspended in an MNase digestion buffer (1 M sorbitol, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 5 mM CaCl2, 1x PIC). Subsequently, 2 µL MNase (NEB, 6000 gel units) was added and, after 1 min prewarming at 37°C, samples were incubated for 12.5 min at 37°C and at 1000 rpm in a thermal shaker. The reaction was quenched by the addition of EGTA to a final concentration of 50 mM.  Nuclei were then spun down and resuspended in the IP-Buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 100 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA, 0.3% SDS, 1.7% Triton X-100, 1x PIC). Samples were addressed to brief sonication (3x 30 s) at low setting in a Bioruptor Plus (Diagenode). Lysates were then centrifuged for 20 min at maximum speed and 4°C.  If the shearing efficiency was in the range of 150-500 bps the protein concentration of the ChIP-MS samples was estimated by a BCA assay (Thermo). Each replicate was diluted to 1 mg/mL in 1 mL total volume and 1 µg of antibody was added. The samples were incubated O/N at 4°C under constant rotation.  The next day, for each sample 20 µL (slurry volume) of magnetic protein A/G beads (Sigma) were washed 3x in the IP buffer and subsequently aliquoted to the samples. The samples were incubated at 4°C under constant rotation for 2 h. To enrich for direct HP1β interactors, samples were washed three times with a low-salt buffer (50 mM HEPES (pH 7.5), 140 mM NaCl, 1% Triton X-100) and once with a high-salt buffer (50 mM HEPES (pH 7.5), 500 mM NaCl, 1% Triton X-100). To reduce the detergent for subsequent protein digestion and proteomic analysis, samples were washed twice with TBS. After the last wash the supernatant was discarded carefully and the beads were resuspended in the elution buffer I (2 M Urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 2 mM DTT and 20 µg/mL Trypsin) and incubated for 30 min at 37°C in a thermal shaker at 1100 rpm. Next, the supernatants were saved and the beads were resuspended in 50 µL of elution buffer II (2 M Urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 40 mM CAA). After 5 min of incubation at 37°C, both supernatants were combined and digestion was continued O/N at 25°C. The next day, 1% TFA was added to stop the digestion and peptides were cleaned-up on Stage Tipps consisting of 3 layers of C18 material (Empore) (Rappsilber et al., 2007). Eluted and speedvac dried peptides were resuspended in 8 µL of A* buffer (0.1% TFA and 2% acetonitrile) and peptide concentrations were estimated by nanodrop at 280 nm.  Full proteome sample preparation For full proteome sample preparation was done as in M.D. Bartoschek et al., 2021 (https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkab132)   Enrichment of K-Gly-Gly peptides The K-Gly-Gly enrichment was performed by using the PTMScan Ubiquitin Remnant Motif Kit (Cell Signaling Technology) according to the manufacturer’s protocol.   Mass spectrometry of ChIP-MS, full proteomes and K-Gly-Gly peptides For mass spectrometry on a quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive HF-X, ThermoFisher Scientific), 300 ng of peptide solution per replicate was separated by nanoflow liquid chromatography on an Easy-nLC 1200 (ThermoFisher Scientific) during an increasing acetonitrile gradient for 120 min. As a column an in-house packed 50 cm column of ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 µM resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH) was used. The flow rate was constantly monitored and kept at 300 nL/min and the column oven temperature was fixed at 60°C. The injection was performed through a nanoelectrospray source. After each set of replicates, an additional washing step was scheduled. Data acquisition was performed in a data-dependent mode by selecting for the most abundant 12 peptides for MS/MS scans. The m/z range was set to 400-1650 m/z. The max. injection time was at 20 ms. The target value for the full scan MS spectra was 3 * 106 and the resolution at 60,000.

### Data Protocol
MS data analysis Raw MS files were first analyzed with the MaxQuant software package (version 1.6.0.7) (Cox and Mann, 2008). The FASTA files (reviewed and unreviewed) were obtained from Uniprot (version 2020). Contaminants were identified by the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011) with 245 entries. “Match between runs” option was enabled and the false discovery rate for both peptides (minimum length of 7 amino acids) and proteins was set to 1%. Determination of the relative protein amounts followed the MaxLFQ algorithm (Cox et al., 2014), with a minimum ratio count of two peptides. For the downstream analysis of the MaxQuant output, Perseus was used. Contaminants were filtered out, intensities were transformed to log2 and a two-sided Student’s t-test with a permutation-based FDR of 0.05 and a fold change cut-off of log2=1 was applied.

### Publication Abstract
Heterochromatin binding protein HP1&#x3b2; plays an important role in chromatin organization and cell differentiation, however the underlying mechanisms remain unclear. Here, we generated HP1&#x3b2;-/- embryonic stem cells and observed reduced heterochromatin clustering and impaired differentiation. We found that during stem cell differentiation, HP1&#x3b2; is phosphorylated at serine 89 by CK2, which creates a binding site for the pluripotency regulator KAP1. This phosphorylation dependent sequestration of KAP1 in heterochromatin compartments causes a downregulation of pluripotency factors and triggers pluripotency exit. Accordingly, HP1&#x3b2;-/- and phospho-mutant cells exhibited impaired differentiation, while ubiquitination-deficient KAP1-/- cells had the opposite phenotype with enhanced differentiation. These results suggest that KAP1 regulates pluripotency via its ubiquitination activity. We propose that the formation of subnuclear membraneless heterochromatin compartments may serve as a dynamic reservoir to trap or release cellular factors. The sequestration of essential regulators defines a novel and active role of heterochromatin in gene regulation and represents a dynamic mode of remote control to regulate cellular processes like cell fate decisions.

### Keywords
Pluripotency exit, Heterochromatin, Chromocenter, Phase separation, Chromatin structure

### Affiliations
Department of Humanbiology & BioImaging, Faculty of Biology, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München
Faculty of Biology and Center for Molecular Biosystems (BioSysM), Human Biology and BioImaging, LMU Munich & Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max-Planck Institute of Biochemistry

### Submitter
Enes Ugur

### Lab Head
Dr Heinrich Leonhardt
Department of Humanbiology & BioImaging, Faculty of Biology, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München


