### Accession
PXD001181

### Title
Phosphosite-specific regulation of the oxidative-stress response of P. brasiliensis: A Shotgun Phosphoproteomic Analysis

### Description
Paracoccidioides brasiliensis, a thermally dimorphic fungus, is the causative agent of paracoccidioidomycosis, a systemic mycosis that is widespread in Latin America. P. brasiliensis infection occurs when conidia or mycelial fragments are inhaled by the host, which causes these cells to transition to the yeast form. The development of disease requires conidia inside host alveoli to differentiate into yeast cells in a temperature-dependent manner. This fungus is a facultative intracellular pathogen able to survive and replicate inside non-activated macrophages. Therefore, the survival of P. brasiliensis inside the host depends on the ability to adapt to oxidative stress induced by immune cells, especially alveolar macrophages. For several years, reactive oxygen species (ROS) were only associated with pathological processes. Currently, a plethora of roles for ROS in cell signaling have emerged. We have previously reported that low ROS concentrations cause cell proliferation in the human pathogenic fungus P. brasiliensis. In the present report, we investigated the influence of phosphorylation events in that process. Using a mass spectrometry-based approach, we mapped 440 phosphorylation sites in 230 P. brasiliensis proteins and showed that phosphorylation at different sites determines fungal responses to oxidative stress. Furthermore, we described, for the first time, the presence of a two-component signal transduction system in P. brasiliensis. These findings will help us to understand the phosphorylation events involved in the oxidative stress response.

### Sample Protocol
Protein Digestion and Peptide Desalting: Protein reduction, alkylation and trypsin digestion were performed as described by Villén and Gygi (2008). Briefly, 2 mg of total protein extract was reduced with 5 mM DTT, alkylated by 15 mM IAA and digested with proteomics grade trypsin (1/250 enzyme/substrate) (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) overnight at 37°C. Trypsin digestion was stopped by acidifying samples with TFA. For desalting, cleanup and concentration of peptide mixtures, C18 stop-and-go-extraction tips (StageTips) manufactured in our laboratory were assembled and used as described by Rappsilber and co-workers (2007). Phosphopeptide Enrichment: To enrich phosphopeptides in samples, metal oxide chromatography (MOC) with TiO2 phosphoaffinity beads (GL Sciences Inc., Shanghai, CN) was performed as described in Rappsilber et al. (2007) with modifications. Briefly, 4 mg of TiO2 phosphoaffinity beads was washed with 100 µL of methanol and incubated with 2 mg of peptides for 1 h, with vigorous shaking, at room temperature. Phosphopeptides were separated using C8/C18 StageTips. NanoLC-MS/MS Analysis: Phosphopeptides enriched using MOC-TiO2 were concentrated using a Savant SpeedVac (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, GA, USA), resuspended in 0.1% formic acid and analyzed using an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, GA, USA) connected to an Easy-nLCII (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, GA, USA). All columns were packed in house. The trap column (50 mm × 100 μm I.D.) was packed with Jupiter C18 resin (10 µm, Phenomenex Inc, Torrance, CA, USA), and the analytical column (100 mm × 75 μm I.D.) was packed with ACQUA C18 resin (5 µm, Phenomenex Inc, Torrance, CA, USA). The sample was delivered to the trap column at 2 µL/min in 100% solvent A (0.1% formic acid, Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA). Solvent B consisted of 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. Gradient elution was performed as follows: 7-45% solvent B over 160 min, 45-85% solvent B over 15 min, 85% solvent B for 3 min, and then a return to the initial condition (7% solvent B over 13 min), at a flow rate of 200 nL/min. The source was operated in positive ionization mode, with the voltage and temperature adjusted to 1.8 kV and 200°C, respectively. The mass spectrometer was programmed in the data-dependent acquisition mode, in which a scanning mass in the region of  300-2000 Th was employed (with a target value of 106 ions) using the LTQ-Orbitrap analyzer with a resolution of 60,000 (in m/z 400), followed by high energy collision dissociation (HCD at 40%) of the 10 most intense ions at a resolution of 7500 (in m/z 400), with a dynamic exclusion time of 90 sec to fragment phosphopeptides in at least three independent experiments (Figure S1). The isolation window for the precursor ions was set to 2 Da, and the minimum number of ions to trigger events (MS2) was 10,000.

### Data Protocol
Data Analysis: The MS raw data were processed and searched using PEAKS Studio 7 software (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc, Waterloo, Canada) by querying against the P. brasiliensis strain Pb18 database (8,741 entries, Paracoccidioides brasiliensis Sequencing Project, Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT, http://www.broadinstitute.org/). Searches were performed with a precursor mass tolerance of 15 ppm; a fragment mass tolerance of 0.025 Da; carbamidomethylation of Cys as a fixed modification; and the oxidation of Met, the acetylation of protein N-terminal, the deamidation of Asn/Gln and the phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine as variable modifications. One non-specific and three missed cleavages were allowed for trypsin, and a maximum of four variable PTMs were allowed per peptide. All searches were performed using a decoy database, and a maximum false-positive ratio (FDR) of 1% was allowed. Additionally, only protein identifications containing at least two identified peptides with scores ≥ 20 were considered. For analyses requiring comparisons between groups, Student’s t-test was performed, and the data are presented as the mean ± standard deviation

### Publication Abstract
Paracoccidioides brasiliensis, a thermally dimorphic fungus, is the causative agent of paracoccidioidomycosis, a systemic mycosis that is widespread in Latin America. This fungus is a facultative intracellular pathogen able to survive and replicate inside non-activated macrophages. Therefore, the survival of P. brasiliensis inside the host depends on the ability to adapt to oxidative stress induced by immune cells, especially alveolar macrophages. For several years, reactive oxygen species (ROS) were only associated with pathological processes. Currently, a plethora of roles for ROS in cell signaling have emerged. We have previously reported that low ROS concentrations cause cell proliferation in the human pathogenic fungus P. brasiliensis. In the present report, we investigated the influence of phosphorylation events in that process. Using a mass spectrometry-based approach, we mapped 440 phosphorylation sites in 230 P. brasiliensis proteins and showed that phosphorylation at different sites determines fungal responses to oxidative stress, which are regulated by phosphatases and kinases activities. Furthermore, we present additional evidence for a functional two-component signal transduction system in P. brasiliensis. These findings will help us to understand the phosphorylation events involved in the oxidative stress response.

### Keywords
Post-translational modification, Cell proliferation, Oxidative stress, Phosphorylation, Paracoccidioides brasiliensis

### Affiliations
Universidade Federal de Sao Paulo
Departamento de Bioquimica, Escola Paulista de Medicina, Universidade Federal de Sao Paulo

### Submitter
Alexandre Keiji Tashima

### Lab Head
Dr Alexandre Keiji Tashima
Departamento de Bioquimica, Escola Paulista de Medicina, Universidade Federal de Sao Paulo


