### Accession
PXD013419

### Title
Exosomes proteome of human lung cancer cell lines 95C and 95D

### Description
Exosomes in the microenvironment play key roles in cellular signal transduction. The biological function of exosomes in cancer metastasis and progression, however, is still unknown.We used quantitative proteomics in this study to decipher the proteome of cellular exosomes derived from highly/lowly metastatic lung cancer cells and bioinformatics analysis showed that the differential proteins were associated with metastasis.

### Sample Protocol
Exosomes were isolated by differential centrifugation and dissolved in RIPA buffer.Exosomal proteins were extractedand digested through using FASP apporoach and equal amount of peptides (measured by Nanodrop, A280) were injected into Easy-nLC 1000 coupled with a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The raw data were submitted for database search by MaxQuant (version 1.6.1.0) software against with the UniProt Human database (release 2017_11_28, 20244 entries). Omicsbean and Ingenuity Pathway Analysis were used for bioinformatics analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Cancer progression is frequently caused by metastasis and leads to significantly increased mortality. Cell derived extracellular vesicles, including exosomes, in the microenvironment play key roles in cellular signal transduction, whereas their biological function in cancer metastasis and progression needs in-depth investigation. Here, we initially demonstrate that the small extracellular vesicles (sEVs) derived from highly metastatic lung cancer cells exhibited great capacity to promote the progression of recipient cells. Quantitative proteomics was employed to comprehensively decipher the proteome of cell derived sEVs and more than 1400 sEVs proteins were identified. Comparison analysis indicates that sEVs-HGF is a potential metastasis related protein and our verification data from clinical lung cancer plasma samples and <i>in vivo</i> experiments further confirmed the association. We found that sEVs-HGF could induce epithelial-mesenchymal transition and the coordination between HGF and c-Met was confirmed through corresponding target knockdown and kinase inhibition. Our data collectively demonstrate that cancer cell derived sEVs contribute to recipient cell metastasis through promoting HGF/c-Met pathway, which are potential targets for the prevention and treatment of cancer metastasis.

### Keywords
Exosome; lung cancer; metastasis; proteomics; hgf/c-met pathway

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Microbial Metabolism, School of Life Science and Biotechnology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Shanghai Jiao Tong University

### Submitter
Zhi Qiao

### Lab Head
Dr Hua Xiao
State Key Laboratory of Microbial Metabolism, School of Life Science and Biotechnology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University


