### Accession
PXD021178

### Title
Proteome in human hematopoietic stem and progenitor cell subpopulations from polycythemia vera patients and controls

### Description
Polycythemia vera (PV) is a myeloproliferative neoplasm (MPN) characterized by hyper-proliferation of the erythroid, megakaryocytic and granulocytic lineages and the presence of an activating mutation in JAK2. To elucidate mechanisms that regulate PV stem cells, we applied a newly developed data-independent acquisition (DIA) mass spectrometry (MS) technology to purified hematopoietic stem and progenitor cell (HSPC) subpopulations of patients with chronic and progressed PV. Proteomic analyses were supplemented by RNA-sequencing (RNA-seq) and identified targets validated by flow cytometry and functional in vitro assays.

### Sample Protocol
Human hematopoietic stem/multipotent progenitor cells (HSC/MPPs) and common myeloid/megakaryocyte erythrocyte progenitor cells (CMP/MEPs) were FACS-isolated and snap-frozen. Samples were lyophilized, resuspended in 8 M urea in 100 mM ammonium hydrogen carbonate and lysed aided by sonication. Samples were then treated with benzonase nuclease (Sigma-Aldrich), and disulfide bonds were reduced using tris-(2-carboxyethyl)-phosphine (Sigma-Aldrich). Alkylation of free thiol groups was performed by the addition of iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich). Proteins were digested with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) and desalted with Empore Disks C18 (3M) self-packed into StageTips format (Rappsilber et al. Anal Chem 2003). Samples were dried using a vacuum centrifuge and resuspended in 2 % acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid with the addition of iRT peptides (Escher et al. Proteomics 2012) (Biognosys) for the following MS analysis. Peptide concentration was determined using the quantitative fluorimetric peptide assay (Pierce/Thermo Scientific) following manufacturer’s instructions. Two MS analysis methods were employed. For generation of the spectral library required for subsequent analyses of FACS-isolated clinical cell samples, data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode of operation was used. For MS analysis of highly enriched human HSC/MPPs and CMP/MEPs from PV patients and controls, data-independent acquisition (DIA) mode of operation was applied. These MS analysis methods were performed as previously described (Amon et al. MCP 2019).

### Data Protocol
DDA data was searched by Mascot (Perkins et al. Electrophoresis 1999) (Matrix Science, version 2.5.1) as well as Comet (Eng et al. Proteomics 2013) version 2016.01 rev. 2 against the Swissprot reviewed subset of the human UniProt database with decoy sequences generated by sequence reversal (keeping C-terminal K and R residues). Spectral libraries from DDA runs were generated as previously specified (Schubert et al. Nat Protoc 2015). DIA data was evaluated by Spectronaut 11 (Bruderer et al. MCP 2015) (Biognosys), querying the library created from DDA runs. The Spectronaut report was exported for further processing in R.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Hematopoietic stem and progenitor cell subpopulations, Polycythemia vera

### Affiliations
Medical Oncology and Hematology, University Hospital and University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland; Institute of Molecular Systems Biology (IMSB), ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland
Department of Medical Oncology and Hematology, University and University Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland

### Submitter
Fabienne Meier-Abt

### Lab Head
Dr Fabienne Meier-Abt
Department of Medical Oncology and Hematology, University and University Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland


