### Accession
PXD005854

### Title
eIF2B links translational control to mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation in Vanishing White Matter disease

### Description
Eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2B is a master regulator of protein synthesis under normal and stress conditions. Mutations in any of the five genes encoding its subunits lead to Vanishing White Matter (VWM) disease, a recessive genetic deadly illness caused by progressive loss of white matter in the brain. Although fibroblasts are not involved in the disease, we used mouse embryo fibroblasts (MEFs) isolated from Eif2b5R132H/R132H mice to demonstrate their compromised mitochondrial translation, unbalanced stoichiometry of proteins involved in oxidative phosphorylation, decreased basal and maximal oxygen consumption rate, and increased mitochondrial abundance reflecting adaptation to meet energy requirements. The involvement of eIF2B in mitochondrial function and abundance was validated in primary astrocytes isolated from Eif2b5R132H/R132H mice brains. We found that oxidative respiration deficiency is more robust in astrocytes and does not reach normal cellular levels even following 2-fols increase in mitochondrial content. The consequent increase in basal and maximal glycolysis in mutant astrocytes demonstrates their enhanced sensitivity to the impaired oxidative phosphorylation, illuminating the importance of mitochondrial function in VWM pathology. The data demonstrates the critical role of eIF2B in tight coordination of expression from nuclear and mitochondrial genomes. Further dissection of the signalling network associated with eIF2B function will help generating therapeutic strategies for VWM disease and possibly other neurodegenerative disorders.

### Sample Protocol
Total of 4.3*105 MEFs were seeded on 10cm plate. 24 hr post plating the medium was changed as described above and 24 hr later were washed and removed. Cell pellets were lysed with a buffer containing 6 M urea, 2M thiourea in 100 mM Tris-HCl pH8.5. Each unlabeled lysate was mixed at a 1:1 protein ratio with 25µg of total cell lysate of the SILAC labeled cells.  Proteins were reduced with Dithiothreitol  and alkylated with 5mM Iodoacetamide . Protein digestion was performed with LysC –Trypsin Mix followed by an overnight digestion with sequencing grade modified Trypsin at room temperature. Peptides were acidified with trifluoroacetic acid followed by strong cation exchange fractionation into five fractions. Peptides were desalted and purified on C18 stage Tips. Spike-in SILAC standard was produced by culturing immortalized WT MEF in SILAC DMEM deprived of lysine and arginine and supplemented with heavy version of these amino acids 13C615N2-L-lysine (lysine 8) and heavy 13C615N4-L-arginine (arginine 10) for 9 passages. The labeled cells were then washed, harvested and lysed as described above. Protein concentration was determined using the Bradford protein assay .

### Data Protocol
Eluted peptides were separated using EASY-nLC-1000 HPLC system (Thermo Scientific) coupled to the Q Exactive Plus MS (Thermo Scientific). Each Fraction was analyzed using 4 hr runs. MS analysis was performed in a data dependent mode using a top 10 method for MS/MS acquisition. Analysis was performed with the MaxQuant Software (version 1.5.2.10) and MS/MS spectra were searched against the mouse UniprotKB database with the Andromeda search engine. FDR was set to 1% at both the peptide and protein levels Note: Due to low number of identifications samples WT5 and K1 are omitted from the analysis. K2, K3, K4, K5 are referred to as Mut1, Mut2, Mut3 and Mut4 respectively.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Translation, Mitochondria, Oxidative phosphorylation, Proteomics, Silac

### Affiliations
Weizmann Institute of Science
Department of Human Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry, Sackler faculty of Medecine, Tel Aviv University, Israel

### Submitter
Tamar Geiger

### Lab Head
Dr Tamar Geiger
Department of Human Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry, Sackler faculty of Medecine, Tel Aviv University, Israel


