### Accession
PXD012217

### Title
Mass spectrometry identification and systems analysis of cytosolic protein N- lysine methylation in anucleate blood platelets

### Description
Here, we characterize the methyl-lysine (meK) proteome of anucleate blood platelets. With high-resolution, multiplex mass spectrometry methods, we identify 190 mono-, di- and tri-meK modifications on 150 different platelet proteins, including 28 quantifiable meK modifications consistently present in platelets from multiple individuals. In addition to identifying meK modifications on calmodulin (CaM), GRP78 and EF1A1 that have been previously characterized in other cell types, we also uncover more novel modifications on numerous other cytosolic proteins. Together, our results and analyses support roles for lysine methylation in mediating cytoskeletal, translational, secretory and other cytosolic cellular processes.

### Sample Protocol
Sample Prep Human platelet samples were suspended in ysis buffer (100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, 65 mM NaCl, 10 mM Hepes, 6 mM NaHCO3, 1.45 mM KCl, 0.5 mM MgCl2, 0.17 mM Na2HPO4, 5 mM glucose, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 1 mM NaF and 1 mM sodium orthovanadate) and were lysed by probe sonication.  Approximately 30 mg of protein was reduced 150 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) at 55 C for 15 min (the pH was adjusted to 8 with NaOH), then alkylated with 100 mL of 500 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature in the dark for 60 min. Water was added to reduce the sodium deoxycholate concertation to 0.2%, then trypsin (97%, Worthington, Lakewood NJ) was added at a 25:1 protein:trypsin ratio. The samples were incubated overnight at 37 C before being quenched with TFA at a final concentration of 1%.  Peptide sample cleanup and purification The peptides were purified by solid phase extraction using Waters Sep-pak Vac 3 cc (500 mg) tC18 cartridges (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA). A PTMScan Pan-Methyl-Lysine kit (Cell Signaling Technology) was used to enrich the methylated peptides from the human platelet peptide samples. Each 80 mL tube of antibody slurry was split between two samples, so each sample was enriched with 40 mL of antibody slurry. The antibody slurry was washed 3x with 500 mL of PBS (50 mM Na2HPO4, 150 mM NaCl) and once with 400 mL of IAP buffer. The peptides were resuspended in 1 mL of IAP buffer, and 40 mL of antibody slurry was added to each sample. Each peptide sample-antibody slurry mixture was rotated at 4 C for 2 hrs. After the incubation, the slurry was washed 2x with 0.5 mL of IAP buffer, 2x with 0.5 mL of water, and a final time with 0.4 mL of water. The methylated peptides were eluted from the antibody slurry with 2x 50 mL of 0.5% formic acid, with a 10 min incubation with agitation each time. The enriched methylated peptides were purified by solid phase extraction using UltraMicroSpin columns (The Nest Group, Inc.). The samples were washed 3x with 25 microliters of 0.1%TFA then eluted 3x with 50 microliters of 40% ACN/0.1% FA. The samples were dried down in preparation for TMT labeling.  TMT labeling The TMT 10-plex reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific) were each dissolved in anhydrous ACN. The peptides were reconstituted in 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) and added to 0.133 mg of its respective 10-plex TMT reagent. The samples were incubated for 1 hour at room temperature with gentle mixing. Two microliters of each reaction mixture were then mixed, 2 microliters of 5% hydroxylamine added, and the combined sample incubated for a further 15 min with gentle mixing. The mixture was then dried down, dissolved in 5% formic acid, and methylated peptide analyzed by a single 2 h LC-MS/MS method using an Orbitrap Fusion. Following normalization, an equal ratio based on total reporter ion intensities was dried down for 2D-LC-MS/MS analysis.  LC-MS/MS analysis Multiplexed TMT-labeled samples were reconstituted in 10 mM ammonium formate pH 9 and separated by two-dimensional reverse-phase liquid chromatography using a Dionex NCS-3500RS UltiMate RSLCnano UPLC system. Sample was injected onto a NanoEase 5 micron XBridge BEH130 C18 300 micron x 50 mm column (Waters) at 3 microliter/min in a mobile phase containing 10 mm ammonium formate (pH 9). Peptides were eluted by sequential injection of 20 microliter volumes of 14, 20, 22, 24, 26, 28, 30, 40, and 90% ACN in 10 mm ammonium formate (pH 9) at 3 microliter/min flow rate. Eluted peptides were diluted with mobile phase containing 0.1% formic acid at 24 microliter/min flow rate and delivered to an Acclaim PepMap 100 micron x 2 cm NanoViper C18, 5 micron trap on a switching valve. After 10 min of loading, the trap column was switched on-line to a PepMap RSLC C18, 2 micron, 75 micron x 25 cm EasySpray column (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were then separated at low pH in the second dimension using a 7.5–30% ACN gradient over 90 min in mobile phase containing 0.1% formic acid at 300 nL/min flow rate.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectrometry data was collected using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid instrument configured with an EasySpray NanoSource (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Survey scans were performed in the Orbitrap mass analyzer (resolution = 120000), and data-dependent MS2 scans performed in the linear ion trap using collision-induced dissociation (normalized collision energy = 35) following isolation with the instrument's quadrupole. Reporter ion detection was performed in the Orbitrap mass analyzer (resolution = 60000) using MS3 scans following synchronous precursor isolation of the top 10 ions in the quadrupole, and higher-energy collisional dissociation in the ion-routing multipole (normalized collision energy = 65).  RAW instrument files were processed using Proteome Discoverer (PD) version 1.4.1.14 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For each of the TMT experiments, raw files from the 9 fractions were merged and searched with the SEQUEST HT search engine with a human Swiss-Prot canonical protein database downloaded October 2016 (20,120 entries) from UniProt.org. Searches were configured with static modifications for the N-Terminal TMT reagents (+229.163 Da) and carbamidomethyl (+57.021 Da) on cysteines, dynamic modifications for oxidation of methionine residues (+15.9949 Da), Monomethylation (+14.016), Dimethylation (+28.031), Trimethylation (+42.047), and TMT reagents (+229.163 Da) on lysine residues, parent ion tolerance of 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance of 1.0005 Da, monoisotopic masses, and trypsin cleavage (max 2 missed cleavages). Searches used a reversed sequence decoy strategy to control peptide false discovery and identifications were validated by Percolator software. Only peptides with q scores ≤ 0.05 were accepted. A maximum of 5 modifications per peptide was allowed. The list of potential methylation sites was further manually curated to remove sites localized to the peptide C-Terminus.

### Publication Abstract
Protein posttranslational modifications critically regulate a range of physiological and disease processes. In addition to tyrosine, serine, and threonine phosphorylation, reversible N-&#x3b5; acylation and alkylation of protein lysine residues also modulate diverse aspects of cellular function. Studies of lysine acyl and alkyl modifications have focused on nuclear proteins in epigenetic regulation; however, lysine modifications are also prevalent on cytosolic proteins to serve increasingly apparent, although less understood roles in cell regulation. Here, the methyl-lysine (meK) proteome of anucleate blood platelets is characterized. With high-resolution, multiplex MS methods, 190 mono-, di-, and tri-meK modifications are identified on 150 different platelet proteins-including 28 meK modifications quantified by tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling. In addition to identifying meK modifications on calmodulin (CaM), GRP78 (HSPA5, BiP), and EF1A1 that have been previously characterized in other cell types, more novel modifications are also uncovered on cofilin, drebin-like protein (DBNL, Hip-55), DOCK8, TRIM25, and numerous other cytoplasmic proteins. Together, the results and analyses support roles for lysine methylation in mediating cytoskeletal, translational, secretory, and other cellular processes. MS data for this study have been deposited into the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD012217.

### Keywords
Lysine methylation; methyllysine; methylation; platelets; post-translational modifications, Tandem mass tags, Isobaric labeling

### Affiliations
Knight Cardiovascular Institute  Oregon Health & Science University 3181 SW Sam Jackson Park Road Portland, Oregon 97239, USA
OHSU

### Submitter
Phillip Wilmarth

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Joseph E. Aslan
Knight Cardiovascular Institute  Oregon Health & Science University 3181 SW Sam Jackson Park Road Portland, Oregon 97239, USA


