### Accession
PXD010970

### Title
Reprograming of Trypanosoma cruzi metabolism triggered by parasite interaction with the host cell extracellular matrix

### Description
Trypanosoma cruzi, the etiological agent of Chagas’ disease, affects 8 million people predominantly living in socioeconomic underdeveloped areas. T. cruzi trypomastigotes (Ty), the classical infective stage, interact with the extracellular matrix (ECM), an obligatory step before invasion of almost all mammalian cells in different tissues. Here we have characterized the proteome and phosphoproteome of T. cruzi trypomastigotes upon interaction with ECM (MTy). Proteins involved with metabolic processes (such as the glycolytic pathway), kinases, flagellum and microtubule related proteins, transport-associated proteins and RNA/DNA binding elements are highly represented in the pool of proteins modified by phosphorylation. Further, important metabolic switches triggered by this interaction with ECM were indicated by decreases in the phosphorylation of hexokinase, phosphofructokinase, fructose-2,6-bisphosphatase, phosphoglucomutase, phosphoglycerate kinase in MTy. Concomitantly, a decrease in the pyruvate and lactate and an increase of glucose and succinate contents were detected by GC-MS. These observations led us to focus on the changes in the glycolytic pathway upon binding of the parasite to the ECM. Inhibition of hexokinase, pyruvate kinase and lactate dehydrogenase activities in MTy were observed and this correlated with the phosphorylation levels of the respective enzymes. Putative kinases involved in protein phosphorylation altered upon parasite incubation with ECM were suggested by in silico analysis. Taken together, our results show that in addition to cytoskeletal changes and protease activation, a reprograming of the trypomastigote metabolism is triggered by the interaction of the parasite with the ECM prior to cell invasion and differentiation into amastigotes, the multiplicative intracellular stage of T. cruzi in the vertebrate host.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen pellets of trypomastigotes were resuspended in 200 µL of 4 % SDS, 25 mM TCEP, 50 mM N-Ethyl Maleimide, 0.01 M NaPO4 pH 6.0, 0.1 M NaCl, containing phosphatase and protease inhibitors. Lysates were sonicated for 15 min (frequency of 30%), heated to 65oC for 10 min and then treated with: 400 µL methanol, 100 µL chloroform and 300 µL milliQ water, with 1 min of strong agitation between the additions. The samples were spun down at 9000 x g for 5 min at room temperature, the upper phase carefully removed, 300 µL methanol were added to the pellet and centrifuged as above. The entire supernatant was removed and the pellet was air dried at room temperature. The pellet was resuspended in 200 µL 8 M Urea, 0.1 M Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 1 mM CaCl2 and the total protein quantified. The material was digested overnight at 37oC with LysC (Pierce™) at 1:100 ratio (protease: total protein), diluted 8-fold in 1 M Urea, 0.1 M Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 1 mM CaCl2, and treated with trypsin (Pierce™) at 1:100 ratio (protease:total protein), for 4 h at 37oC. After the incubation, TFA was added to 1% final concentration and the peptides desalted by Sep-Pak columns (WATERS), as manufacturer recommendations. The material was air dried by speedvac, resuspended in 50 mM HEPES (pH 8.5) and the peptides quantified by CBQCA (Molecular probes/Invitrogen) prior to Tandem Mass Tag labelling. Three independent biological samples from parasites incubated or not with ECM were analyzed. After protein digestion, peptide labeling was done following the procedures for Tandem Mass Tags labeling (Thermo Fisher Scientific). TMT-tags (0.8 mg/tag) were diluted in 41 µL of anhydrous acetonitrile (ACN) and mixed for 5 min at room temperature. Each tag was carefully transferred to the peptide samples from trypomastigotes incubated with ECM (MTy = TMT-129-131) and incubated without ECM (control Ty= TMT-126- 128). The peptide-TMT mixtures were incubated for 120 min at room temperature. 8 µL of 5% hydroxylamine was added and incubated for 15 min. Samples were then mixed together in one tube. The mixture was then filtered on a Sep-Pak C18 cartridge to remove free tags and then dried in Speedvac. The sample was resuspended in 200 µL 80% ACN, 0.1% TFA. TMT labelled peptides were injected onto a TSKgel Amide-80 column (4.6mm x 25cm, 3um particle size) and guard column (TSKgel Amide-80, 4.6 x 1.0cm, 3um particle size), using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 HPLC system. Buffer A was 0.1% TFA in water and buffer B was 0.1% TFA in 100% acetonitrile. Chromatography was performed at 0.6 mL/min at 30oC, starting at 80% buffer B, reducing to 70% B after 10 min and then to 60%B after a further 30 min and finally to 0% B after a further 5 min (held for 10 min). Buffer B was then increased to 80%B for 35 min for re-equilibtation. Fractions were collected every 2 minutes. 5% of the fraction volume was taken for total proteome analysis and 95% was taken for phospho-enrichment. Phosphopeptide enrichment was carried out as described in the TitansphereTmPhos-TiO2 Kit manual, using TiO2 resin (Titansphere, GL Sciences Inc, Japan) in batch mode. LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out using an UltiMate 3000 nanoRSLC UHPLC system (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a Q Exactive HF hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) (FingerPrints Proteomic Facility, University of Dundee, Scotland). Proteome/phosphoproteome samples were injected onto a PepMap nanoViper C18 trap column (100 μm x 2 cm, 5 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific) at a flow rate of 5 µL/min. The trap column was equilibrated in 98% Buffer A (2% ACN, 0.1% Formic acid (FA)) and then after sample injection washed for 10 min with the same flow then moved in line with the C18 EasySpray resolving column (75 µm x 50 cm, PepMap RSLC C18, 2 µm, 100 Å). The peptides were eluted at a constant flow of 300 nL/min with a linear gradient from 5 to 40% Buffer B (80% ACN/ 0.08% FA) over 120 min and column was finally washed with Buffer B for 15 min and 98% Buffer A for 24 min. An ionspray voltage of 1.95kV and a capillary temperature of 250oC was applied to the EasySpray Column via the EasySpray source. The total ms runtime was set at 156min. The Full MS parameters were as follows: MS Resolution at 120,000; MS AGC target value at 3e6; maximum Ion Time at 50 msec and the mass range at 355-1800m/z. The data dependant MS/MS parameters were set as follows: MS/MS resolution at 60,000; MS/MS AGC at 1e5; maximum Ion Time at 200 msec; Loop count at 15; Isowidth at 1.2 m/z; fixed first mass at 100 m/z; Normalised Collision Energy (NCE) at 32. The data dependant parameters were set as follows: min AGC at 2.4e3; Intensity Threshold at 1.2e4; Charge exclusion at unassigned 1, 7, 8; Peptide Match as Preferred; Exclude Isotope as On and Dynamic Exclusion at 45 sec. Based on these parameters the top 15 most abundant ions were analysed per instrument duty cycle. Data was acquired with Xcalibur software (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Proteome and Phosphoproteome data analysis. The data processing was performed with COMPASS (Coon OMSSA (Open Mass Spectrometry Search Algorithm) Proteomic Analysis Software Suite [30] using DTA generation for data extraction from RAW files [31], and searching against the T cruzi Esmeraldo annotated protein database from TriTrypDB release 9.0 containing 358,801 entries, using OMSSA 2.1.8. The mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for precursor ions and MS/MS tolerance was set to 0.8 Da. The enzyme was set to trypsin, allowing up to 3 missed cleavages. NEM on cysteine and TMT sixplex on lysine was set as a fixed modification. Acetylation of protein N-termini, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, oxidation of methionine, pyro-glutamate and TMT sixplex on peptide N-termini were set as variable modifications. For analysis of the phospho-proteomic data, phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine were also set as variable modifications. Spectra were required to contain four or more multi-isotope peaks with the charge state derived from the input file. The false-discovery rate for protein and peptide level identification was set at 1%, using a target-decoy based strategy. TMT reporter intensities, corrected for reporter impurities, for each peptide were extracted using TagQuant 1.4 from within COMPASS. Protein groups were created using Protein Hoarder 2.4.7.0, also within COMPASS, ensuring quantified proteins were identified by 2 or more unique peptides. For proteome results Purity Corrected Normalised (PCN) values were used for fold change calculation (MTy/Ty). For phosphoproteome results, Purity Corrected (PC) values were normalized by the median between the total amount of proteins obtained from proteome data. PC manually normalized was used for phopho-fold change calculation (MTy/Ty). Statistical analysis for validation of the results was performed by T Student test (two-tail, 95%). Only peptides with ratio less than 0.8 or more than 1.2 (p-value less than 0.05) were considered.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Trypanosoma cruzi; extracellular matrix

### Affiliations
Departamento de Bioquímica, Instituto de Química, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil
Universidade de São Paulo

### Submitter
Eliciane Mattos

### Lab Head
Dr Walter Colli
Departamento de Bioquímica, Instituto de Química, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil


