### Accession
PXD043990

### Title
DNA damage induces nuclear envelope rupture through ATR-mediated phosphorylation of Lamin A/C - Synthetic Peptide

### Description
The integrity of the nuclear envelope (NE) is essential to maintain the structural stability of the nucleus. Rupture of the NE has been frequently observed in cancer cells, especially in the context of mechanical challenges, such as physical confinement and migration. However, spontaneous NE rupture events have also been described, without any obvious physical challenges to the cell. The molecular mechanism(s) of these spontaneous NE rupture events remain to be explored. Here, we show that DNA damage and subsequent ATR activation can lead to NE rupture. Upon DNA damage, Lamin A/C is phosphorylated in an ATR-dependent manner, leading to changes in lamina assembly and, ultimately, NE rupture. In addition, we show that cancer cells with intrinsic DNA repair defects undergo frequent events of DNA damage-induced NE rupture, which renders them extremely sensitive to further NE perturbations. Exploiting this NE vulnerability could provide a new angle to complement traditional, DNA damage-based chemotherapy.

### Sample Protocol
In order to separate nuclei and cytosol, cells were resuspended in Buffer A (10 mM Hepes PH 7.9 ; 10 mM KCl ; 1,5 mM MgCl2 ; 0,34 M sucrose ; 10% glycerol ; 1 mM DTT ; protease and phosphatase inhibitors ; 0,1% Triton) and left on ice for 10 min. After centrifugation, pellets (nuclei) were washed with Buffer A without detergent. Nuclei were lysed using RIPA 300 mM NaCl. Proteins from the perinuclear fractions were then reduced with 5 mM DTT for 1 h at 37 °C. Reduced lysates were alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. The samples were diluted in 200mM ammonium bicarbonate, 2 M urea to reach a final concentration of 1 M urea, and then digested overnight at 37 °C with Trypsin/Lys-C (Promega CAT#: V5071) at a ratio of 1/50. Digested peptide lysates were acidified with formic acid (FA) to a final concentration of 5% FA. Samples were centrifuged at 4000 rpm and desalted onto a custom-made C18 StageTips, Phosphorylated peptides were eluted and enriched using TitansphereTM Phos-TiO Kit (GL Sciences, Cat number 5010-21312) as described by the manufacturer.

### Data Protocol
For identification, the data were searched against the Homo Sapiens database (UP000005640_9606) using Sequest HT through Proteome Discoverer (PD version 2.4). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and a maximum of two missed cleavage sites were allowed. Oxidized methionine, N-terminal acetylation, methionine loss and methionine acetylation loss were set as variable modifications. Phospho serine, threonine and tyrosines were also set as variable modifications. Maximum allowed mass deviation was set to 10 ppm for monoisotopic precursor ions. For fragment ions, it was set to 0.02 Da for the Orbitrap Exploris. The resulting files were further processed using myProMS [PMID: 17610305; https://github.com/bioinfo-pf-curie/myproms] v.3.9.3. False-discovery rate was calculated using Percolator [PMID27572102] and was set to 1% at the peptide level for the whole study.

### Publication Abstract
The integrity of the nuclear envelope (NE) is essential for maintaining the structural stability of the nucleus. Rupture of the NE has been frequently observed in cancer cells, especially in the context of mechanical challenges, such as physical confinement and migration. However, spontaneous NE rupture events, without any obvious physical challenges to the cell, have also been described. The molecular mechanism(s) of these spontaneous NE rupture events remain to be explored. Here, we show that DNA damage and subsequent ATR activation leads to NE rupture. Upon DNA damage, lamin A/C is phosphorylated in an ATR-dependent manner, leading to changes in lamina assembly and, ultimately, NE rupture. In addition, we show that cancer cells with intrinsic DNA repair defects undergo frequent events of DNA-damage-induced NE rupture, which renders them extremely sensitive to further NE perturbations. Exploiting this NE vulnerability could provide a new angle to complement traditional, DNA-damage-based chemotherapy.

### Keywords
Ne vulnerability, Nuclear envelope rupture, Lamin a/c phosphorylation, Dna damage, Hr-deficiency, Synthetic lethality, Atr, Lamina

### Affiliations
Institut Curie - Centre de Recherche
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry Platform

### Submitter
Vanessa Masson

### Lab Head
Dr Damarys Loew
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry Platform


