### Accession
PXD006805

### Title
In-depth protein profiling of cytology samples in urothelial carcinoma

### Description
Urine cytologic examination is a widely used primary pathologic screening test in the diagnosis of bladder urothelial carcinoma (BLCA), however the low diagnostic accuracy remains challenging. We conducted high-throughput proteome on ten pairs of BLCA and benign urothelial lesion (BUL) to identify a supportive proteomic marker as an ancillary test in liquid based cytology (LBC).

### Sample Protocol
All cytology samples were analyzed with a mass spectrometry (MS)-based in-depth quantitative proteomics to present differentially expressed proteins (DEP). Protein extractions from LBC slides were performed using SDS-buffer. The proteins were digested using a filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) procedure. After desalting by C18-stageTip, peptide samples were analyzed by Q-exactive plus hybrid quadrupol-orbitrap mass spectrometer coupled to an Ultimate 3000 RSLC systems via a nano electrospray source.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were processed using the Maxquant versions 1.5.3.1. The MS/MS spectra were searched by the Andromeda search engine against the Human Uniprot protein sequence database (December 2014, 88,657 entries). Main searches were performed using a 6-ppm precursor ion tolerance for total protein level analysis. The MS/MS ion tolerance was set to 20 ppm. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification. N-acetylation of protein and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications. Peptides with minimum of six amino-acid length and 2 missed cleavages were considered. The required FDR was set to 1% at the peptide, protein, and modification level. To maximize the number of quantification events across samples, we enabled the ‘Match between Runs’ option in MaxQuant platform.

### Publication Abstract
Cytological examination of urine is the most widely used noninvasive pathologic screen for bladder urothelial carcinoma (BLCA); however, inadequate diagnostic accuracy remains a major challenge. We performed mass spectrometry-based proteomic analysis of urine samples of ten patients with BLCA and ten paired patients with benign urothelial lesion (BUL) to identify ancillary proteomic markers for use in liquid-based cytology (LBC). A total of 4,839 proteins were identified and 112 proteins were confirmed as expressed at significantly different levels between the two groups. We also performed an independent proteomic profiling of tumor tissue samples where we identified 7,916 proteins of which 758 were differentially expressed. Cross-platform comparisons of these data with comparative mRNA expression profiles from The Cancer Genome Atlas identified four putative candidate proteins, AHNAK, EPPK1, MYH14 and OLFM4. To determine their immunocytochemical expression levels in LBC, we examined protein expression data from The Human Protein Atlas and in-house FFPE samples. We further investigated the expression of the four candidate proteins in urine cytology samples from two independent validation cohorts. These analyses revealed AHNAK as a unique intracellular protein differing in immunohistochemical expression and subcellular localization between tumor and non-tumor cells. In conclusion, this study identified a new biomarker, AHNAK, applicable to discrimination between BLCA and BUL by LBC. To our knowledge, the present study provides the first identification of a clinical biomarker for LBC based on in-depth proteomics.

### Keywords
Human, Label free quantification, Quantitative proteomics, Cytology, Liquid biopsy

### Affiliations
Proteomics core facility, Biomedical research institute, Seoul national university hospital
Proteomics Core Facility, Biomedical Research Institute, Seoul National University Hospital

### Submitter
Dohyun Han

### Lab Head
Dr Dohyun Han
Proteomics core facility, Biomedical research institute, Seoul national university hospital


