### Accession
PXD021935

### Title
Comprehensive Proteomic Profiling of Urinary Exosomes and Identification of Potential Noninvasive Early Biomarkers of Alzheimer’s Disease in 5XFAD Mouse Model

### Description
To investigate the potential noninvasive early biomarkers of AD in 5XFAD mouse model, we investigate the proteome of urinary exosomes present in 1-month-old (before amyloid-β accumulation) 5XFAD mouse models and their littermate controls. Another two groups of 2 and 6 months-old urinary samples were collected for monitoring the dynamic change of target proteins during AD progression.

### Sample Protocol
Each urinary exosomes sample were isolated from 30 mL urine by Exosome Isolation Q3 kit (EIQ3-03001, Wayen Biotechnologies, Shanghai). The urine samples were taken from storage and kept it on ice. If starting with frozen sample, the samples were thawed completely in a 37 °C water bath and then placed on ice. The urine samples were centrifuged at 3,000 × g for 15 minutes at 4 °C. The supernatant was transferred to a new tube and placed on ice until ready to be performed for the isolation.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS data were analyzed with MaxQuant software (version 1.5.8.3, Max-Planck Institute for Biochemistry, Germany) (Tyanova et al., 2016), and proteins were identified by comparing the peptide spectra against the Swissprot databases (taxonomy: Mus musculus) (Table 3). Trypsin was selected as the digestion enzyme, up to two missed cleavage sites were allowed, and carbamidomethylation of a cysteine was deﬁned as a ﬁxed modiﬁcation. The precursor ion mass tolerance and the fragment ion mass tolerance were 0.05 Da. Peptide identiﬁcation was accepted at a false discovery rate (FDR) of less than 1.0% at the protein level and if the sample produced at least 2 unique peptides. The spectra counts of each protein were normalized by the total spectra counts of identified proteins. Data analysis was contract service offered by Wayen Biotechnologies (Shanghai), Inc. (Shanghai, China).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Early diagnosis, Urinary exosome proteome, Alzheimer’s disease, Biomarkers, 5xfad mouse model

### Affiliations
Key Laboratory of Human Disease Comparative Medicine, Chinese Ministry of Health, Beijing Key Laboratory for Animal Models of Emerging and Remerging Infectious Diseases, Institute of Laboratory Animal Science, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Comparative Medicine Center, Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, 100021 China.

### Submitter
Zhiqi Song

### Lab Head
Dr Chuan Qin
Key Laboratory of Human Disease Comparative Medicine, Chinese Ministry of Health, Beijing Key Laboratory for Animal Models of Emerging and Remerging Infectious Diseases, Institute of Laboratory Animal Science, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Comparative Medicine Center, Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, 100021 China.


