### Accession
PXD040161

### Title
Rescue of Escherichia coli auxotrophy by de novo small proteins

### Description
Increasing numbers of small proteins with diverse physiological roles are being identified and characterized in both prokaryotic and eukaryotic systems, but the origins and evolution of these proteins remain unclear. Recent genomic sequence analyses in several organisms suggest that new functions encoded by small open reading frames (sORFs) may emerge de novo from noncoding sequences. However, experimental data demonstrating if and how randomly generated sORFs can confer beneficial effects to cells are limited. Here we show that by up-regulating hisB expression, de novo small proteins (≤ 50 amino acids in length) selected from random sequence libraries can rescue Escherichia coli cells that lack the conditionally essential SerB enzyme. The recovered small proteins are hydrophobic and confer their rescue effect by binding to the 5’ end regulatory region of the his operon mRNA, suggesting that protein binding promotes structural rearrangements of the RNA that allow increased hisB expression. This study adds RNA regulatory elements as another interacting partner for de novo proteins isolated from random sequence libraries, and provides further experimental evidence that small proteins with selective benefits can originate from the expression of nonfunctional sequences.

### Sample Protocol
For the proteomic analysis, cells expressing either the empty vector control, hdp1, hdp2, hdp3 or hdp1L27Q were grown until late stationary phase (OD600 = 2.5-3) in LB medium in the presence of 1mM IPTG and 50 μg/ml ampicillin. Cells were collected and cell weight was determined. Samples were prepared and an equal amount of each sample was separated on SDS-PAGE until the dye front reached the bottom of the gel. The whole lane from each sample was cut out from the gel for further analysis. Experiments were performed with two or three independent biological replicates. Each gel lane was cut into two or six separate pieces, and proteins were reduced in-gel with 10 mM DTT in 25 mM NH4HCO3, alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide in 25 mM NH4HCO3, and thereafter digested with 17 ng/μl sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega) in 25 mM NH4HCO3 using a slightly modified in-gel digestion protocol. The resulting peptides were then eluted from the gel pieces using 1% (v/v) formic acid (FA) in 60% (v/v) acetonitrile, dried down in a vacuum centrifuge (ThermoSavant SPD SpeedVac, Thermo Scientific), and finally dissolved in 1% (v/v) FA.  Peptide samples were desalted using Stage Tips (Thermo Fisher) according to the manufacturer’s protocol, and subsequently dissolved in 0.1% (v/v) FA (solvent A). Desalted samples were separated by RP-HPLC using a Thermo Scientific nLC-1000 with a two-column setup, where an Acclaim PepMap 100 (2 cm x 75 μm, 3 μm particles; Thermo Fisher) pre-column was connected in front of an EASY-Spray PepMap RSLC C18 reversed phase column (50 cm x 75 μm, 2 μm particles; Thermo Fisher). The column was heated to 35°C and equilibrated in solvent A. A gradient of 2–40% solvent B (acetonitrile and 0.1% (v/v) FA) was run at 250 nL/min for 3 h. The eluted peptides were analyzed on a Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer, operated at a Top Speed data-dependent acquisition scan mode, ion-transfer tube temperature of 275°C, and a spray voltage of 2.4 kV. Full scan MS spectra (m/z 400 – 2000) were acquired in profile mode at a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200, and analyzed in the Orbitrap with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 2.0e5 and a maximum injection time of 100 ms. Ions with an intensity above 5.0e3 were selected for collision-induced dissociation (CID) fragmentation in the linear ion trap at a collision energy of 30%. The linear ion trap AGC target was set at 1.0e4 with a maximum injection time of 40 ms, and data was collected at centroid mode. Dynamic exclusion was set at 60 s after the first MS1 of the peptide. The system was controlled by Xcalibur software (version 3.0.63.3; Thermo Scientific). Quality control of the instrument was monitored using the Promega 6x5 LC-MS/MS Peptide Reference Mix before and after each MS experiment run, and analyzed using PReMiS software (version 1.0.5.1, Promega).

### Data Protocol
Data analysis of raw files was performed using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.2.3) and the Andromeda search engine, with cysteine carbamidomethylation as a static modification and methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. First search peptide MS1 Orbitrap tolerance was set to 20 ppm and ion trap MS/MS tolerance was set to 0.5 Da. Match between runs was enabled to identify peptides in fractions where only MS1 data were available. Minimum LFQ ratio count was set to 2, and the advanced ratio estimation option was enabled. Peak lists were searched against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot Escherichia coli K12 proteome database (UP000000625, version 2019-03-27), including the Hdp1 protein sequence, with a maximum of two trypsin miscleavages per peptide. The contaminants database of MaxQuant was also utilized. A decoy search was made against the reversed database, where the peptide and protein false discovery rates were both set to 1%. Only proteins identified with at least two peptides of at least 7 amino acids in length were considered reliable. The peptide output from MaxQuant was filtered by removing reverse database hits, potential contaminants and proteins only identified by site (PTMs). Differential expression analysis was performed by the DEP 1.7.0 package for Bioconductor and R. The LFQ intensity data was normalized by the variance stabilizing transformation (vsn) method, and missing values were imputed by a maximum likelihood-based imputation method using the EM algorithm. Protein-wise linear models and empirical Bayes statistics using LIMMA were used for the differential expression calculation. The P-values were adjusted for multiple testing using the Benjamini–Hochberg method.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
His operon, Rna-binding, De novo gene evolution, Small proteins, Escherichia coli, Gene regulation, Auxotroph

### Affiliations
Uppsala University
Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.

### Submitter
Mårten Larsson

### Lab Head
Dr Dan I. Andersson
Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.


