### Accession
PXD025472

### Title
C. elegans provide "milk" for their young

### Description
The nematode Caenorhabditis elegans exhibits rapid senescence that is promoted by the insulin/IGF-1 signaling (IIS) pathway via regulated processes that are poorly understood. IIS also promotes production of yolk for egg provisioning, which in post-reproductive animals continues, supported by destructive repurposing of intestinal biomass that contributes to senescence. Post-reproductive mothers vent this yolk which can be consumed by larvae and promotes their growth. This implies that later yolk production is not futile; instead vented yolk functions similarly to milk. Moreover, yolk venting is promoted by IIS. That this process is promoted by IIS provides new insights into how and why IIS shortens lifespan in C. elegans. Fully-fed d4 hermaphrodites were allowed to vent for 30 min, and vented proteins analysed against excretory/secretory products collected for L3 larvae as a negative control.

### Sample Protocol
Three independent samples (A, B and C + controls) were treated with Zwitergent/EDTA in tris buffer, followed by trypsin digestion and reduction with DTT (Kidney Int Rep, 2019;4: 977–986). They were analysed on a Thermo Scientific Q-Exactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer connected to an Ultimate 3000 nanoLC system.  Samples are trapped on a Thermo Scientific Acclaim PepMap C18 cartridge and then chromatographed on a Thermo Scientific Easy-Spray Acclaim PepMap C18 column eluting with acetonitrile:water:formic acid).  A full MS scan (m/z 350-1400) is acquired with a maximum injection time of 100 ms, and the 10 most intense ions with an intensity threshold 2.0e4 are selected for higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD).  The lock mass is set at m/z 445.12003.  The normalised collision energy is 28, with an isolation width of 2 Da and dynamic exclusion of 20 s; singly charged ions are excluded.

### Data Protocol
: Raw MS data (Thermo Q-Exactive plus) were analyzed using MASCOT,  and quantified using MaxQuant 1.6.12.0  with the default search settings and the C. elegans protein database from Uniprot (downloaded 20 December 2019). Downstream analysis was performed using the Proteus package in R.

### Publication Abstract
The nematode Caenorhabditis elegans exhibits rapid senescence that is promoted by the insulin/IGF-1 signalling (IIS) pathway via regulated processes that are poorly understood. IIS also promotes production of yolk for egg provisioning, which in post-reproductive animals continues in an apparently futile fashion, supported by destructive repurposing of intestinal biomass that contributes to senescence. Here we show that post-reproductive mothers vent yolk which can be consumed by larvae and promotes their growth. This implies that later yolk production is not futile; instead vented yolk functions similarly to milk. Moreover, yolk venting is promoted by IIS. These findings suggest that a self-destructive, lactation-like process effects resource transfer from postreproductive C. elegans mothers to offspring, in a fashion reminiscent of semelparous organisms that reproduce in a single, suicidal burst. That this process is promoted by IIS provides insights into how and why IIS shortens lifespan in C. elegans.

### Keywords
C. elegans, Reproductive death, Ageing, Semelparity, Milk, Yolk

### Affiliations
University College London
Wolfson Drug Discovery Unit Centre for Amyloidosis & Acute Phase Proteins Division of Medicine, Royal Free Campus University College London Rowland Hill Street, London NW3 2PF, UK

### Submitter
Graham Taylor

### Lab Head
Dr Graham W Taylor
Wolfson Drug Discovery Unit Centre for Amyloidosis & Acute Phase Proteins Division of Medicine, Royal Free Campus University College London Rowland Hill Street, London NW3 2PF, UK


