### Accession
PXD005137

### Title
Proteomic portraits of egg quality in zebrafish (Danio rerio)

### Description
Humans and animals have problems producing eggs with high embryo developmental competence, but the causes of poor egg quality are usually unknown. This study delivered the first proteomic portraits of egg quality in zebrafish, a leading model for vertebrate development. Egg batches of good and poor quality, evidenced by embryo survival for 24 h, were used to create pooled or replicated sample sets subjected to different levels of fractionation before LC-MS/MS. Obtained spectra were searched against a custom zebrafish proteome database and detected proteins were annotated, categorized and quantified based on their normalized spectral counts. Manual and automated enrichment analyses were highly confirmative, showing that good and poor quality eggs have disparate proteomes. Proteins involved in protein synthesis, energy metabolism, and lipid metabolism, and certain vitellogenin products were strikingly underrepresented in poor quality eggs. Poor quality eggs also had significantly higher representation of proteins related to immune system and endosome/lysosome functioning, oncogenes, and apoptosis, as well as lectins and egg envelope proteins. Quantitative comparisons of highly abundant proteins revealed 9 candidate egg quality markers warranting further study. In conclusion, the zebrafish egg proteome appears to be linked to embryo developmental potential, a phenomenon that begs further investigation.

### Sample Protocol
Spawns with <30% and >90% embryo survival after 24 h were considered as poor and good quality, respectively. In a first Pooled Samples Experiment intended to maximize resolution of both abundant and rare proteins, proteins extracted from pools of good quality or poor quality eggs (4 separate spawns; 40 egg/spawn) was separated by SDS-PAGE (20 fractions) before analysis of the trypsin-digested excised fractions individually to LC-MS/MS (LTQ-OrbitrapXL). In a second Replicated Samples Experiment intended to detect statistically significant differential expression of the more abundant proteins (exclusive of the major Lv-derived yolk proteins), proteins extracted from 4 good quality spawns and 4 bad quality spawns (40 eggs each) were individually separated by SDS-PAGE. A HMW fraction (30 to 66 kDa) and a LMW fraction (14 to 28 kDa) were excised and analyzed by LC-MS/MS (LTQ-orbitrap XL)after trypsin digestion.

### Data Protocol
Spectra were processed using ProteomeDiscoverer 1.2 software and searched against a custom Zebrafish proteome database using Mascot 2.2.07 search engine. The corresponding .dat files were transferred to ProteoIQ for quantification as normalized spectral counts (N-SC).

### Publication Abstract
Egg quality is a complex biological trait and a major determinant of reproductive fitness in all animals. This study delivered the first proteomic portraits of egg quality in zebrafish, a leading biomedical model for early development. Egg batches of good and poor quality, evidenced by embryo survival for 24 h, were sampled immediately after spawning and used to create pooled or replicated sample sets whose protein extracts were subjected to different levels of fractionation before liquid chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry. Obtained spectra were searched against a zebrafish proteome database and detected proteins were annotated, categorized and quantified based on normalized spectral counts. Manually curated and automated enrichment analyses revealed poor quality eggs to be deficient of proteins involved in protein synthesis and energy and lipid metabolism, and of some vitellogenin products and lectins, and to have a surfeit of proteins involved in endo-lysosomal activities, autophagy, and apoptosis, and of some oncogene products, lectins and egg envelope proteins. Results of pathway and network analyses suggest that this aberrant proteomic profile results from failure of oocytes giving rise to poor quality eggs to properly transit through final maturation, and implicated Wnt signaling in the etiology of this defect. Quantitative comparisons of abundant proteins in good versus poor quality eggs revealed 17 candidate egg quality markers. Thus, the zebrafish egg proteome is clearly linked to embryo developmental potential, a phenomenon that begs further investigation to elucidate the root causes of poor egg quality, presently a serious and intractable problem in livestock and human reproductive medicine.

### Keywords
Zebrafish, Egg quality, Protein markers, Proteome profiles

### Affiliations
Protim, Irset, Inserm U1085
Protim Irset Inserm U1085

### Submitter
E Com

### Lab Head
Dr Charles Pineau
Protim Irset Inserm U1085


