### Accession
PXD028421

### Title
“Identifying the SLC25A46 interactome in transgenic mice: cerebrum”

### Description
SLC25A46 is an outer mitochondrial protein, member of the mitochondrial carrier family (SLC25), whereas mutations result in mitochondrial structure abnormalities leading to a wide spectrum of neurological disorders. SLC25A46 is known to interact with members of the MICOS (Mitochondrial Contact Site) complex involved in mitochondrial cristae organization, and components of the endoplasmic reticulum membrane. In the present work, our aim was to identify the interactome of SLC25A46 in cerebrum from TgSLC25A46-FLAG transgenic mice through immunoprecipitation with anti-FLAG beads and proteomic analysis with LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
Tissues of TgSLC25A46-FLAG mice and their WT littermates were lysed in a buffer containing 50mM Tris/HCl pH 7.4, 150mM NaCl, 1mM EDTA, 1% Triton X-100 supplemented with proteinase inhibitors cocktail (Roche). Samples were incubated for 30 min at 4oC under mild agitation and subsequently centrifuged at 12000g for 10 min at 4oC. The supernatant was transferred, quantified by Bradford assay and 100 mg of whole protein extract was incubated with an anti-FLAG antibody coupled in agarose beads (Sigma-Aldrich). SLC25A46-FLAG proteins with their interacting proteins were eluted from the beads by incubation in 0.1 M Glycine (pH 3.5) under agitation at room temperature. Samples were digested with trypsin using the sp3 protocol and analysed by 90 min long LC-MS-MS runs in three technical replicas.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was analyzed using the MaxQuant software and visualized in Perseus.

### Publication Abstract
The outer mitochondrial membrane protein SLC25A46 has been recently identified as a novel genetic cause of a wide spectrum of neurological diseases. The aim of the present work was to elucidate the physiological role of SLC25A46 through the identification of its interactome with immunoprecipitation and proteomic analysis in whole cell extracts from the cerebellum, cerebrum, heart, and thymus of transgenic mice expressing ubiquitously SLC25A46-FLAG. Our analysis identified 371 novel putative interactors of SLC25A46 and confirmed 17 known ones. A total of 79 co-immunoprecipitated proteins were common in two or more tissues, mainly participating in mitochondrial activities such as oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) and ATP production, active transport of ions or molecules, and the metabolism. Tissue-specific co-immunoprecipitated proteins were enriched for synapse annotated proteins in the cerebellum and cerebrum for metabolic processes in the heart and for nuclear processes and proteasome in the thymus. Our proteomic approach confirmed known mitochondrial interactors of SLC25A46 including MICOS complex subunits and also OPA1 and VDACs, while we identified novel interactors including the ADP/ATP translocases SLC25A4 and SLC25A5, subunits of the OXPHOS complexes and F<sub>1</sub>F<sub>o</sub>-ATP synthase, and components of the mitochondria-ER contact sites. Our results show that SLC25A46 interacts with a large number of proteins and protein complexes involved in the mitochondria architecture, energy production, and flux and also in inter-organellar contacts.

### Keywords
, Mitochondria, Mouse, Cerebrum, Lc-ms/ms, Slc25a46

### Affiliations
Protein Analysis Laboratory
B.S.R.C. "Alexander Fleming",
Alexander Fleming Street 34
16672, Vari,
Greece
1. Biomedical Sciences Research Center "Alexander Fleming," Athens, Greece. 2. Department of Biotechnology, Agricultural University of Athens, Athens, Greece.

### Submitter
Martina Samiotaki

### Lab Head
Dr Eleni Douni
1. Biomedical Sciences Research Center "Alexander Fleming," Athens, Greece. 2. Department of Biotechnology, Agricultural University of Athens, Athens, Greece.


