### Accession
PXD039845

### Title
Proteomics analysis of extracellular vesicles purified by heparin chromatography.

### Description
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) were isolated from U2OS cell (Human) conditioned medium (Input) was fractionated into two subpopulations named non-heparin binding (NHB) and heparin-binding (HB). Proteomics analysis was performed on Input, NHB and HB samples. The two main goals for this analysis are: first, do a proteomics profiling study to identify proteins present in each of the 3 samples; second, perform quantitative analysis of the level of identified proteins in the samples and investigate if there is a certain enrichment pattern differences in samples "NHB" and "HB". Three biological replicates are included.

### Sample Protocol
EVs from U2OS cell (Human) conditioned medium was isolated by a tangential-flow filtration and Capto Core 700 based process (Input) followed by fractionation by heparin chromatography. Input, NHB and HB samples were further concentrated by ultrafiltration using 100K MWCO Amicon Centrifugal Filters. For each sample, 50ug of protein was dried down via vacuum centrifugation, then resuspended in 8M urea and reduced with DTT, alkylated with iodoacetamide, and digested with trypsin overnight. After trypsin treatment, peptides were cleaned using C18 desalting spin columns (Pierce). The protein concentration was determined via BCA peptide fluorometric assay and normalized to 0.25 ug/ul. Each sample was analyzed by LC-MS/MS using a Thermo Ultimate 3000-Exploris480, with a data-independent acquisition (DIA) method. To assess technical reproducibility, a pooled sample was created by combining 2 uL of each sample. The pooled sample was analyzed in duplicate (prior to and after the sample set to assess instrument performance/variability).

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified and quantified with Spectronaut (v. 15.6.211220.5606) and searched against the Uniprot reviewed Human database (~20,000 proteins) appended to the 'MaxQuant contaminants' (245 proteins) database.

### Publication Abstract
Purifying extracellular vesicles (EVs) has been challenging because EVs are heterogeneous in cargo yet share similar sizes and densities. Most surface marker-based affinity separation methods are limited to research or diagnostic scales. We report that heparin chromatography can separate purified EVs into two distinct subpopulations as ascertained by MS/MS: a non-heparin-binding (NHB) fraction that contains classical EV markers such as tetraspanins and a heparin-binding (HB) fraction enriched in fibronectins and histones. Both fractions were similarly fusogenic but induced different transcriptional responses in endothelial cells. While EVs that were purified by conventional, non-affinity methods alone induced ERK1/2 phosphorylation and Ki67, the NHB fraction did not. This result suggests heparin chromatography as an additional novel fractionation step that is inherently scalable, does not lead to loss of material,&#xa0;and separates inflammatory and pyrogenic EVs from unreactive EVs, which will improve clinical applications.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Extracellular vesicles, Lc-ms/ms, Heparin

### Affiliations
Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, United States of America. 
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill

### Submitter
Yijun Zhou

### Lab Head
Dr Dirk Dittmer
Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, United States of America. 


