### Accession
PXD043063

### Title
Comparison of adhesion complex-associated proteins in MDA-MB-231 cells in a 2D vs 3D microenvironment

### Description
Cell invasion and metastasis is a multi-step process, initiated by the acquisition of a migratory phenotype and the ability to move through differing and complex 3D extracellular environments. In this study we set out to identify the parameters required for invasive cell migration in 3D environments. Cells interact with the extracellular matrix via transmembrane-spanning integrin adhesion complexes. We establish a technique to determine the composition of cell-matrix adhesion complexes in invasive breast cancer cells in 3D matrices and on 2D surfaces and identify an interaction complex that is enriched in 3D adhesion sites and required for invasive migration.

### Sample Protocol
Isolation of 3D adhesion complexes:  Labelling of adhesions complexes: MDA-MB-231 cells expressing BioID2 constructs were either seeded on to Fibronectin/Collagen coated 10 cm [plastic tissue culture dishes] or embedded in 1.7 mg/mL collagen hydrogel supplemented with fibronectin. Cells were allowed to spread for 4 h before the culture medium was supplemented with 50 μM biotin. Cells were then incubated with biotin for 16 h prior to lysate extraction.  Lysate extraction:  2D and 3D samples were washed twice in 4°C PBS(-), followed by 4°C 50 mM EDTA PBS(-). 2D and 3D samples were then rocked at 4°C for 1 h. Collagen gels were centrifuged for 1 min at 3200 x g at 4°C and the supernatant removed. RIPA lysis buffer (150 mM NaCl, 1% (v/v) NP-40, 0.5% (w/v) Sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% Sodium dodecyl sulfate, 50 mM Tris pH 8.0, supplemented with 1x HALT protease and phosphatase inhibitor (Thermo Fisher Scientific)) was then added to each sample. Samples for each condition were pooled before being repeatedly passed through a 20 mL syringe, a 1 mL syringe and a 25-gauge needle to ensure homogenisation. Samples were transferred to pre-cooled Eppendorfs and centrifuged at 14,000 x g for 15 min at 4°C. The supernatant was retained as the sample.  Pull-down of biotinylated proteins:  An equal amount of protein was used for each pulldown in every condition (diluted to an equal volume in RIPA lysis buffer). 50 mM Tris pH 7.4 was added to each sample, equal to 50% of the total volume. Pierce™ NeutrAvidin™ agarose beads (Thermo Fisher Scientific) were pre-equilibrated with 2:1 RIPA lysis buffer:50 mM Tris pH 7.4. Samples and beads were rotated at 4°C overnight. To remove each wash, samples were centrifuged at 20 x g at room temperature (RT) for 1 min before removal of the supernatant. Each sample was washed with BioID Wash Buffer #1 (2% SDS in dH2O) for 8 min on a rotator. Beads for each condition were then pooled in BioID Wash Buffer #1 and washed for 8 min. Beads were washed with 1x BioID Wash Buffer #2 (0.1% (w/v) Sodium Deoxycholate, 1% (w/v) Triton X-100, 1 mM EDTA, 500 mM NaCl, 50 mM HEPES) and 1x BioID Wash Buffer #3 (0.5% (w/v) Sodium Deoxycholate, 0.5% (w/v) NP-40, 1 mM EDTA, 250 mM LiCl, 10 mM Tris pH 7.4.) for 8 min each. Beads were then washed with 50 mM Tris pH 7.4. Proteins were eluted from the beads by the addition of a volume equal to that of the beads of 2 x reducing elution buffer. Samples were boiled for 10 min at 96°C before collection of the eluate. This was repeated a further two times. Samples were diluted 4-fold in -20°C acetone and incubated overnight at -20°C. Samples were subjected to centrifugation at 14,000 x g for 10 min at 4oC. The supernatant was removed and protein pellets were allowed to air dry in a flow hood. Samples were re-suspended in 2x reducing sample buffer.   Samples were separated by polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. Polyacrylamide gels were stained with Instant Blue protein dye (Expedeon) for 45 min, and then washed with ddH20. Each sample was cut into 15 slices by hand using a clean glass tile and sterile scalpel. Slices were cut into cubes approximately 1 mm3 in size and transferred into a perforated 96-well plate (Glygen Corp). Gels pieces were de-stained with repeated 30 min incubations of 50% (v/v) Acetonitrile (ACN)/ 50% 25 mM NH4HCO3 (v/v) at RT. Gel pieces were dehydrated by 2 x 5 min incubations with ACN followed by vacuum centrifugation. Peptides were then reduced via incubation with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 56°C for 1 h. Peptides were then alkylated by incubation with 55 mM iodoacetamide (IA) for 45 min at RT whilst being protected from light. DTT and IA were removed by two rounds of washing and dehydration: 5 min incubations with 25 mM NH4HCO3 followed by a 5 min incubation with ACN. ACN was removed by centrifugation, the gel pieces were then dried via vacuum centrifugation. 1.25 ng/L porcine trypsin (Promega, Cat No:V5280) in 25 mM NH4HCO3 was added to the gel pieces, which were incubated at 4°C for 45 min to allow the trypsin to permeate the gel pieces. Samples were then transferred to 37°C to allow digestion overnight. Trypsinised peptides were collected from gel pieces via centrifugation. Residual peptides were extracted with a 30 min incubation at RT with 99.8% (v/v) ACN/0.2% (v/v) formic acid and then 50% (v/v) ACN/0.1% formic acid (v/v) which were each subsequently extracted via centrifugation. The collected eluate was dried by vacuum centrifugation. Dried peptides were then stored at -20°C until resuspension prior to analysis. Dried peptides were re-suspended in 5% (v/v) ACN in 0.1% formic acid. Each sample was separated on a Nanoacquity™ (Waters) Ultra Performance Liquid Chromatography column coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap XL (Thermo Fisher) equipped with a nanoelectrospray source (Proxeon). MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 30,000 and MS/MS was performed on the top 12 most intense ions.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data analysis: Obtained spectra were searched against a database containing both manually reviewed (UniProt) and unreviewed (TrEMBL) proteins (UniProt-Consortium, 2019) using Mascot Sever (version 2.3.2, Matrix Science) (Perkins et al., 1999). Mascot search results were imported into Scaffold (Version 4) for statistical analysis. Results were also searched against X!Tandem to increase confidence of protein identification. Protein and peptide confidence thresholds were set at 99% and 95%, respectively. Proteins were considered to be enriched in a given condition if they differed statistically significantly from the appropriate BioID2 only control (Fisher Exact, P < 0.05, Benjamini–Hochberg corrected). Individual protein levels in different samples were expressed relative to total BirA (biotin [acetyl-CoA-carboxylase] ligase) in the respective conditions, prior to further 2D vs 3D fold-change enrichment analyses.  Proteins assigned to unreviewed UniProt entries within the enriched protein list were manually curated to identify if an appropriate reviewed entry exists. Proteins were reassigned to a reviewed entry if the sequence of an unreviewed entry was contained wholly within that of a reviewed entry or if the identified peptides were all contained within a reviewed entry. Entries which were contained in more than 33% of CRAPome controls were also excluded from the enriched list (Mellacheruvu et al., 2013) in addition endogenously biotinylated enzymes involved in metabolic carboxylation and decarboxylation reactions were removed from protein lists (Cronan, 1990). Enriched protein lists were manually curated on the basis of their UniProt annotation for subcellular localisation to remove extracellular matrix/region proteins. Enriched protein lists were also manually curated to ensure that duplicate entries were not present, for display purposes the total spectral counts were combined for the entries P14923 and B4DE59 (junction plakoglobin, JUP), and the entry for E9PCX8 (tensin-3 fragment) was excluded as 1030 of the 1041 spectra identified across all experiments were shared with Q68CZ2 (tensin-3, TNS3 (1717 total spectra)).  Visualisation of data and protein interaction networks was conducted using Cytoscape (version 3.7.1). Interaction networks were obtained from the STRING 10.5 database, interactions with a confidence score > 0.4 on the basis of experimental and database evidence were included in the interaction network.

### Publication Abstract
Cell invasion is a multi-step process, initiated by the acquisition of a migratory phenotype and the ability to move through complex 3D extracellular environments. We determine the composition of cell-matrix adhesion complexes of invasive breast cancer cells in 3D matrices and identify an interaction complex required for invasive migration. &#x3b2;Pix and myosin18A (Myo18A) drive polarized recruitment of non-muscle myosin 2A (NM2A) to adhesion complexes at the tips of protrusions. Actomyosin force engagement then displaces the Git1-&#x3b2;Pix complex from paxillin, establishing a feedback loop for adhesion maturation. We observe active force transmission to the nucleus during invasive migration that is needed to pull the nucleus forward. The recruitment of NM2A to adhesions creates a non-muscle myosin isoform gradient, which extends from the protrusion to the nucleus. We postulate that this gradient facilitates coupling of cell-matrix interactions at the protrusive cell front with nuclear movement, enabling effective invasive migration and front-rear cell polarity.

### Keywords
Human, Arhgef7, Integrin, Focal adhesion, Talin, Extracellular matrix, Breast cancer, Betapix, Adhesion, Paxillin, Ecm

### Affiliations
Institute of Systems, Molecular & Integrative Biology
University of Liverpool
Institute of Systems, MOlecular & Intergative Biology, Faculty of Health & Life Sciences,  University of Liverpool

### Submitter
Mark Morgan

### Lab Head
Dr Mark Richard Morgan
Institute of Systems, MOlecular & Intergative Biology, Faculty of Health & Life Sciences,  University of Liverpool


