### Accession
PXD017328

### Title
Stress enhances secretory autophagy increasing extracellular Bdnf maturation

### Description
Stress response is a fundamental mechanism to maintain a healthy homeostasis and its disruption is implicated in several psychiatric disorders. Autophagy is one of the mechanisms  regulating homeostasis, and it is known to be activated by cellular stressors such as starvation. In a previous study, we revealed that glucocorticoid (GC)-mediated stress also activates macroautophagy via the stress-responsive co-chaperone FK506-binding protein 51 (FKBP51).  In this study we reveal that GC-mediated stress enhances secretory autophagy, a recently described Atg-dependent secretory pathway, via FKBP51. Strikingly we detected the matrix metallopeptidase 9 (Mmp9) as one of the stress-induced secreted proteins. Furthermore we found that enhanced Mmp9 secretion increases both in vitro and in vivo the cleavage of pro-brain derived neurotrophic factor (proBdnf) to its mature form (mBdnf), a key protein in neuroplasticity. This unravelled mechanism can represent a link between stress and the development of psychiatric disorders.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation: All samples were prepared in quadruplicate. HEK cells were transfected with a FLAG tagged FKBP51 expressing plasmid or a FLAG expressing control vector. 48 hours after transfection, a FLAG IP was performed on all the samples and the eluted proteins were separated by SDS gel electrophoresis. Separated proteins were stained with Coomassie staining solution for 20 min and destained overnight with Coomassie destaining solution. Each gel lane was cut into 16 21 approximately 2.5 mm slices per biological replicate and these further cut into smaller gel pieces.  In-gel-trypsin digestion and peptide extraction: The gel pieces were covered with 100μl of 25 mM Na4H4HCO3/50% ACN acetonitrilein order to destain the gel pieces completely and mixed for 10 min at room temperature. The supernatant was discarded and this step was repeated twice. Proteins inside the gel pieces are reduced with 75µl 1xof100 mM DTTdithiothreitol/25 mM NH4HCO3 mixed at 56 °C for 30 min in the dark. The supernatant was discarded and 100μl of 200 mM IAM iodoacetamidewere added for alkylation to the gel pieces and mixed for 30 min at room temperature. The supernatant was discarded and the gel pieces washed twice with 100μl 25 mMNa4HCO3/50% ACN acetonitrile and mixed for 10 min at room temperature. The supernatant was discarded and gel pieces were dried for approximately 20 min at room temperature. Proteins were digested with 50 μl trypsin solution [5 ng/μl trypsin/25 mM NH4HCO3] over night at 37 °C. Peptides were extracted from the gel pieces by mixing them in 50 μl of 2% FAformic acid/50% ACN acetonitrile for 20 min at 37 °C and subsequently sonicating them for 5 min. The supernatant contained the peptides. This step was repeated twice with 50 μL of 1% FAformic acid/50% ACNacetonitrile. The supernatants of three slides were pooled.  Each samples generated 7 samples to be submitted to LC-MS/MS analysis. LC MS/MS: Tryptic peptides were then dissolved in 0.1% FA formic acid and analyzed with a nanoflow HPLC-2D system (Eksigent, Dublin, CA, USA) coupled online to an LTQ-Orbitrap XLTM mass spectrometer. Samples were on-line desalted for 10 min with 0.1% FA formic acid at 3 μl/min (Zorbax-C18 (5 μm) guard column, 300 μm × 5 mm; Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA) and separated via RP-C18 (Dr. Maisch, Germany, 3 μm) chromatography (in-house packed Pico-frit column, 75 μm × 15  cm, New Objective, Woburn, MA, USA). Peptides were eluted with a gradient of 95% ACNacetonitrile/0.1% HCOOH formic acid from 10% to 45% over 93 min at a flow rate of 200 nl/min. Column effluents were directly infused into the mass spectrometer via a nano-electrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The mass spectrometer was operated in positive mode applying a data-dependent scan switch between MS and MS/MS acquisition. Full scans were recorded in the Orbitrap mass analyzer (profile mode, m/z 380–1600, resolution R = 60000 at m/z 400). The MS/MS analyses of the five most intense peptide ions for each scan were recorded in the LTQ mass analyzer in centroid mode.

### Data Protocol
Peptides and proteins identification.The MS raw data were first converted in a peaks list using Bioworks v. 3.3.1 (Thermo Fischer Scientific, San Jose, CA) and then were searched against the SwissProt_15.3 (uniprot 29.05.09) human database using Mascot search algorithm (v. 2.2.07, www.matrix.com)The peptides were then identified with Mascot Daemon(Matrix Sciences London, http://www.matrixscience.com/daemon.html).  The precursor and fragment mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm and 0.8 Da, respectively. Trypsin/P including one missed cleavage was set as enzyme. Methionine oxidation and carbamidomethylation of cysteine were searched as variable and static modifications, respectively. The significance level in protein identification was set p>0.95, the peptide score cut-off was set 20. Proteins identified with at least 3 peptides were considered for the protein data processing. The identified proteins  overlapping  in the four  replicates were considered  as protein interactors.

### Publication Abstract
The stress response is an essential mechanism for maintaining homeostasis, and its disruption is implicated in several psychiatric disorders. On the cellular level, stress activates, among other mechanisms, autophagy that regulates homeostasis through protein degradation and recycling. Secretory autophagy is a recently described pathway in which autophagosomes fuse with the plasma membrane rather than with lysosomes. Here, we demonstrate that glucocorticoid-mediated stress enhances secretory autophagy via the stress-responsive co-chaperone FK506-binding protein 51. We identify the matrix metalloproteinase 9 (MMP9) as one of the proteins secreted in response to stress. Using cellular assays and in vivo microdialysis, we further find that stress-enhanced MMP9 secretion increases the cleavage of pro-brain-derived neurotrophic factor (proBDNF) to its mature form (mBDNF). BDNF is essential for adult synaptic plasticity and its pathway is associated with major depression and posttraumatic stress disorder. These findings unravel a cellular stress adaptation mechanism that bears the potential of opening avenues for the understanding of the pathophysiology of stress-related disorders.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-msms, Interactome

### Affiliations
Department of Translational Research in Psychiatry, Proteomics Core Unit, Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry, Germany
Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry

### Submitter
Giuseppina Maccarrone

### Lab Head
Dr Maccarrone Giuseppina
Department of Translational Research in Psychiatry, Proteomics Core Unit, Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry, Germany


