### Accession
PXD033760

### Title
The autophagic protein FYCO1 controls TRAIL receptor induced apoptosis and is inactivated by caspase 8

### Description
Apoptosis and autophagy are programs of controlled cellular suicide or survival, closely interconnected at multiple levels to ensure balanced answers to stress signals, and often dysregulated in cancer. Here, we identified FYCO1, a protein that promotes microtubule plus end–directed transport of autophagic and endosomal vesicles as molecular interaction partner of activated caspase 8. The absence of FYCO1 sensitized cells to basal and TRAIL induced apoptosis by receptor accumulation and stabilization of the Death Inducing Signaling Complex (DISC), caused by defective interaction with the CCZ1-MON1A complex, necessary to activate RAB7A and allow proper endosome/autophagosome maturation and fusion with lysosomes. We demonstrated that FYCO1 is a novel and specific caspase 8 substrate, and that the cleavage at aspartate 1306 inactivates its function, allowing for the progression of apoptosis. Furthermore, a lack of FYCO1 resulted in a more efficient and prolonged formation of the TNF-R signaling complex. Thus, FYCO1 limits the ligand-induced and steady-state signaling of TNFR-superfamily members, providing a natural control mechanism that fine tunes both apoptotic and inflammatory answers.

### Sample Protocol
For mass spectrometry analysis, we performed three independent bTIP preparations according to the protocol described in Sciuto et al, Mol Cell Proteomics, 2018. 17(5): p. 993-1009. Each experiment consisted of three samples, starting from 5x107 Hela cells/sample. The cells were either left untreated or treated with TRAIL-Flag at 1 µg/ml for 3 h. Digested bTIP samples were separated and analyzed by nanoflow LC-MS/MS. We used a Dionex 3000 nanoUHPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in line with an Orbitrap Exploris mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide loading and washing was performed with 0.1% TFA in water for 3 min at a flow rate of 30 μl/min using a trapping cartridge Acclaim PepMap300 C18, 5μm, 300Å (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on a nanoEase, 1.7 μm, 300Å, 75 μm x 200 mm analytical column (Waters) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. A three step 90 min gradient consisting of the following steps was applied for nanoLC separation: 2-4% solvent B (99.9 % MeCN, 0.1% formic acid (FA)) in 4 min, 4-30% in 76 min and 30-80% in 3 min followed by a washing and an equilibration step with 0.1% FA in water. The spray voltage was 2.2 kV for nanoESI ionisation and the ion transfer tube temperature was set to 275°C. The MS instrument was operated in the data-dependent (DDA) mode. Full scan MS spectra (m/z 380–1,400) were acquired with a maximum injection time of 45 ms at 60,000 resolution and an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 300%. The normalized MS collision energy was set to 26. MS/MS scans cycles were triggered for 1.5 sec. High-resolution MSMS spectra were acquired in the orbitrap with a maximum injection time of 22 ms at 15,000 resolution. An isolation window of 1.4 m/z and an AGC target value of 100% was set for MSMS analyses. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s. Undetermined charge states and single charged signals were excluded from MS/MS fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
MS raw data data processing and statistical analysis was performed using MaxQuant v2.0.1.0 software package including Perseus v1.6.15.0 [54, 55]. For protein identification the UniProt database UP000000589 (Homo sapiens; 01, 2020; 20367 sequences) was applied. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as fixed modification. N-terminal acetylation, glutamine and asparagine deamidation and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications. Identification FDR cutoffs were 0.01 on the peptide level and on the protein level. The ‘match-between-runs’ function and LFQ option were enabled for label free quantification. Proteins were identified with a FDR ≤ 1%. A two-sample t-test (p value: ≤ 0.01) was performed in order to define significantly regulated proteins between TRAIL stimulated and unstimulated WT samples.

### Publication Abstract
Apoptosis is a tightly controlled cell death program executed by proteases, the so-called caspases. It plays an important role in tissue homeostasis and is often dysregulated in cancer. Here, we identified FYCO1, a protein that promotes microtubule plus end-directed transport of autophagic and endosomal vesicles as a molecular interaction partner of activated CASP8 (caspase 8). The absence of FYCO1 sensitized cells to basal and TNFSF10/TRAIL-induced apoptosis by receptor accumulation and stabilization of the Death Inducing Signaling Complex (DISC). Loss of FYCO1 resulted in impaired transport of TNFRSF10B/TRAIL-R2/DR5 (TNF receptor superfamily member 10b) to the lysosomes in TNFSF10/TRAIL-stimulated cells. More in detail, we show that FYCO1 interacted via its C-terminal GOLD domain with the CCZ1-MON1A complex, which is necessary for RAB7A activation and for the fusion of autophagosomal/endosomal vesicles with lysosomes. We demonstrated that FYCO1 is a novel and specific CASP8 substrate. The cleavage at aspartate 1306 resulted in the release of the C-terminal GOLD domain, inactivating FYCO1 function, and allowing for the progression of apoptosis. Furthermore, the lack of FYCO1 resulted in a stronger and prolonged formation of the TNFRSF1A/TNF-R1 signaling complex. Thus, FYCO1 limits the ligand-induced and steady-state signaling of TNFR-superfamily members, providing a control mechanism that fine-tunes both apoptotic and inflammatory answers.<b>Abbreviations</b>: AP: affinity purification; CHX: cycloheximide; co-IP: co-immunoprecipitation; CRISPR: clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats; DISC: death-inducing signaling complex; DR: death receptors; doxy: doxycycline; GEF: guanine nucleotide exchange factor; ind: inducible; KD: knockdown; KO: knockout; MS: mass spectrometry; shRNA: short hairpin RNA; siRNA: small interfering RNA; TIP: two-step co-immunoprecipitation; WB: western blot.

### Keywords
Apoptosis; autophagy; inflammation; death receptors; endosome maturation; lysosomal degradation; caspase 8; fyco1; ccz1

### Affiliations
German Cancer Research Center Heidelberg, Clinical Cooperation Unit Neurooncology B320
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ) Clinical Cooperation Unit (CCE) Neurooncology

### Submitter
Uwe  Warnken

### Lab Head
Dr Uwe Warnken
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ) Clinical Cooperation Unit (CCE) Neurooncology


