### Accession
PXD042369

### Title
Membrane proteomics of Caldalkalibacillus thermarum TA2.A1

### Description
Alkaliphilic microorganisms are similar to mesophilic counterparts with exception to membrane proteins. Detection of membrane proteins is difficult due to hydrophobicity and low absolute abundance. Caldalkalibacillus thermarum TA2.A1 is of interest due to growth from pH 7.5 to pH 10. Combination of whole cell lysate proteomics and membrane extracts solubilized with either SDS or FOS-choline-12 detected 158 membrane proteins, including a complete electron transport chain. Additionally, transporters for osmolytes ectoine and glycine betaine were observed.

### Sample Protocol
After thawing the membrane extracts, samples were transferred to a LoBind Eppendorf tube, vortexed and an additional 50 µL 200 mM ABC buffer was added. 100 µL (≈ 100 µg protein) of that mix was used to reduction & alkylation. For the whole cell sample, proteolytic digestion occurred straight after lysate preparation. In this case, the preceding protocol yielded 30 µg protein. For the following part, two volumes are given for every step, the lower volume corresponds to the whole cell sample, the higher volume to the membrane extracts.  Reduction was performed by incubation with 8.5 or 30 µL 10 mM dithiothreitol at 37°C for 60 minutes at 300 rpm. Alkylation subsequently was performed by adding 8.5 or 30 µL 20 mM iodoacetamide and incubating at 20°C for 30 minutes in the dark. Samples were then further diluted with 285 or 400 µL ABC and 5 or 20 µL of 0.1 µg µL-1 trypsin was added for digestion. Digestion occurred for approximately 18 hours at 37°C and 300 rpm. After digestion, all samples were treated equally again. After digestion, peptides were extracted by solid phase extraction in an Oasis HLB 96-well µElution Plate (Waters) according to manufacturer specifications. Peptides were eluted in two phases: (1) with 200 µL 2% formic acid in 80% methanol and (2) with 200 µL 1 mM ABC in 80% methanol. The peptides were then collected in an Integrated SpeedVacTM System (Thermo Scientific) at 50°C for 2 hours. Samples were stored at -20°C until analysis.

### Data Protocol
Shotgun proteomic analysis was performed as described earlier (Pabst et al., 2021). Speed vac dried samples were dissolved in 20 µL 3% acetonitrile plus 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. Protein concentrations were estimated by NanoDrop ND-1000 spectrophotometry (Thermo Scientific). An aliquot corresponding to approximately 0.5 µg protein were analysed using a one dimensional shotgun proteomics approach, using a nano-liquid-chromatography system consisting of an EASY nano-LC 1200 (Acclaim PepMap RSLC RP C18 separation column, 50 μm x 150 mm, 2 μm, Cat. No. 164568) and a QE plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany). The flow rate was maintained at 350 nL/min over a linear gradient from 5% to 25% solvent B over 88 min, then from 25% to 55% over 60 min, followed by back equilibration to starting conditions. Data were acquired from 5 to 240 min. Solvent A was H2O containing 0.1% formic acid and solvent B consisted of 80% ACN in H2O and 0.1% FA. The Orbitrap was operated in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode acquiring peptide signals from 385–1250 m/z at 70 K resolution in full MS mode with a maximum ion injection time (IT) of 75 ms and an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3E6. The top 10 precursors were selected for MS/MS analysis and subjected to fragmentation using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD). MS/MS scans were acquired at 17.5 K resolution with AGC target of 2E5 and IT of 75 ms, 2 m/z isolation width and normalized collision energy (NCE) of 28. Processing of mass spectrometric raw data. Data were analysed against the proteome database from Saccharomyces cerevisiae (GenBank: CP082237.1, strain Caldalkalibacillus thermarum TA2.A1 complete genome, Tax ID: 559292) using PEAKS Studio X (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, Canada), allowing for 20 ppm parent ion and 0.02 m/z fragment ion mass error, 3 missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation and methionine oxidation and N/Q deamidation as variable modifications. Peptide spectrum matches were filtered against 1% false discovery rates (FDR) and identifications with ≥2 unique peptides were considered as significant. Results from PEAKS were exported to ‘proteins.csv’, listing the identified proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Membrane proteome, Caldalkalibacillus thermarum, Shotgun proteomics, Qe plus

### Affiliations
TUD
Department of Biotechnology, Applied Sciences, Delft University of Technology, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Martin Pabst

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Pabst
Department of Biotechnology, Applied Sciences, Delft University of Technology, The Netherlands


