### Accession
PXD032389

### Title
Quantitative proteomics of tau and Aβ amyloid in detergent insoluble fractions from Alzheimer’s disease brains

### Description
The two hallmarks of Alzheimer’s disease (AD) are A-amyloid- (A) plaques and neurofibrillary tangles marked by phosphorylated tau. There is compelling evidence that aggregating A drives tau accumulation, a process that involves synaptic degeneration leading to cognitive impairment. Conversely there is a growing realization that non-fibrillar (oligomeric) forms of Aβ mediate toxicity in AD. Using quantitative proteomics, we find that AD brain sarkosyl-insoluble pellets are greatly enriched with A at almost equimolar levels to N-terminal truncated microtubule binding region (MTBR) isoforms of tau with multiple post-translational modifications (PTMs). The extracted R3-R4 tau peptides are 100-fold higher compared to N-terminus intact tau peptides. Substantial proportions of site-specific phosphorylation at T181 (~ 22 %) and T217 (~ 16 %) along with other PTMs in the proline rich region (PRR) and MTBR indicate a regional susceptibility of PTMs in aggregated tau. Immuno-electron microscopy reveals that co-purified A and tau co-localize to globular non-filamentous aggregates.

### Sample Protocol
Purified sarkosyl-insoluble pellet from one AD brain was first used to optimize the extraction protocol for quantitative proteomics. 10 L of sarkosyl pellet was digested with 10 L of 70% FA for 2 hours at room temperature. For quantitative analysis of the rest of the 10 AD and 10 control brains 4 L of sarkosyl pellet were digested with 10 L of 70% FA for 2 hours at room temperature, out of which 4 L was used for ELISA and the rest was processed for proteomics. The digested sample was lyophilized in a speed-vacuum. The sample was resolubilized in 20 L of sample buffer (BioRad) with sonication for 30 seconds. 10 L of 1:5 Lamelli buffer: TCEP mix was added, and the sample was equally divided and loaded on a 4–20% Criterion© gel. The gel was electrophoresed on at 160V for 45 minutes. After electrophoresis the gel was stained with Oriole stain for 90 minutes, in darkness. Gel was imaged using Typhoon Imager machine, using methanol to clean before taking care for minimizing keratin contamination. Gel image was printed out and regions to cut were noted and numbered. The gel bands were cut using a sterilized scalpel and corresponding in-gel digestion using either trypsin or Lys-N protease was performed.

### Data Protocol
The raw data was analyzed in MaxQuant using human proteome database downloaded in January 2019 from Uniprot (only reviewed entries and appended with in-house Fasta containing A sequences) using Andromeda search engine. The following settings were applied: trypsin (specificity set as C-terminal to arginine and lysine) with up to two missed cleavages, the mass tolerance was set to  20 ppm for the precursor. Fixed modifications included carbamidomethylation on cysteine (C, +57.0215 Da) with variable modifications including phosphorylation (S/T/Y, +79.9663 Da), lysine ubiquitination (K, +114.0429 Da), acetylation (N-term/K, +42.420106 Da), deamidation (Q/N +0.98 Da) and methionine oxidation (M, +15.9949 Da). False discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% on peptide and protein levels with a minimum length of seven amino acids and was determined by searching a reverse database. For all other search parameters, default settings were used. Similar parameters were used for the Lys-N digested samples with the setting for the corresponding enzyme. Label-free quantification was done using the in-built label-free quantification (LFQ) algorithm integrated into MaxQuant. iBAQ (intensity based absolute quantitation) was used for data analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
In0gel digest, Ad, Tau

### Affiliations
Washington University at St Louis School of Medicine
Neuropathology and Neurodegenration Laboratoty, The Florey Institute

### Submitter
Soumya Mukherjee

### Lab Head
Dr Colin Masters
Neuropathology and Neurodegenration Laboratoty, The Florey Institute


