### Accession
PXD005835

### Title
CELL LYSATE DATA only from “Selective stalling of human translation through small molecule engagement of the ribosome nascent chain”

### Description
Human genetics as well as pharmacological intervention reveal that Proprotein Convertase Subtilisin/Kexin Type 9 (PCSK9) plays a key role in regulating the levels of plasma low density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C). Here we demonstrate that the compound PF-06446846 inhibits translation of PCSK9 by stalling the ribosome near codon 34 of its messenger RNA. Inhibition by PF-06446846 is sensitive to the amino acid sequence of the PCSK9 nascent chain, and not the messenger RNA. PF-06446846 also reduces plasma PCSK9 and total cholesterol levels in rats following oral dosing. Using ribosome profiling to examine the proteome-wide effects of PF-06446846, we find that it is exceptionally specific for PCSK9 and has no measurable effect on 99.7% of the translatome at concentrations sufficient for 90% inhibition of PCSK9 expression.  Together, PF-06446846 represents the first example of an orally administered small molecule directly targeting PCSK9 that functions by a mechanism inhibiting translation during elongation with a high degree of selectivity.  Selective inhibition of translation in human may represent a new approach to target proteins with small molecules.

### Sample Protocol
A full description of the methods has been uploaded with this record.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification and relative protein quantification were carried out by searching the mass spectra against a database in which the UniProtHuman and UniProtBovine databases were combined with a database of common contaminant sequences (keratins, trypsin, etc.).  Searches were performed using Mascot (45) (Matrix Science) operating under Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Scientific).  The search parameters took into account static modification of S-carboxamidomethylation at Cys, and variable modifications of S-oxidation on Met and stable isotopic substitution (medium and heavy forms) of Lys and Arg.  Peptide identifications were made at a 1% false discovery rate. Compound-induced changes in the protein levels were calculated from the peak intensity ratios of unlabeled and isotopically-substituted peptides.  The ratios of medium-labeled peptides to controls reported effects of 0.25 µM PF-06446846, and the ratios of heavy-labeled peptides to their controls reported effects of 1.25 µM compound.  As an important precaution, only sequence-unique peptides were used for these calculations to minimize contamination of results for human proteins by peak signals from their bovine orthologs.  Specifically, the option "Use Only Unique Peptides" was selected under the Protein Quantification tab in the Workflow Editor of Proteome Discoverer 1.4. In further settings, the options "Replace Missing Quan Values with Minimum Intensity" and "Use Single-Peak Quan Channels" were not selected, and the option to "Reject All Quan Values If Not All Quan Channels Are Present" was activated.  The Maximum Allowed Fold Change was set to 15.  Further constraints placed on the reporting of SILAC ratios included requiring a minimum of 4 unique peptides per protein, a maximum overall variability of 60% for SILAC ratios, a minimum of 10% sequence coverage, and a minimum of 10 peptide spectral matches per protein.  Results for keratins and trypsin were deleted from the output.  Protein hit lists (by UniProt accession) were also searched against the UniProt database to identify those designated as "Secreted", and those lacking this designation were designated for present purposes as "Not Secreted".  Results exported from Proteome Discoverer were first managed collectively in Microsoft Excel, then exported for graphic viewing using TIBCO Spotfire software.

### Publication Abstract
Proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 (PCSK9) plays a key role in regulating the levels of plasma low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C). Here, we demonstrate that the compound PF-06446846 inhibits translation of PCSK9 by inducing the ribosome to stall around codon 34, mediated by the sequence of the nascent chain within the exit tunnel. We further show that PF-06446846 reduces plasma PCSK9 and total cholesterol levels in rats following oral dosing. Using ribosome profiling, we demonstrate that PF-06446846 is highly selective for the inhibition of PCSK9 translation. The mechanism of action employed by PF-06446846 reveals a previously unexpected tunability of the human ribosome that allows small molecules to specifically block translation of individual transcripts.

### Keywords
Huh7 cells, Pcsk9, Translational stalling, Silac

### Affiliations
Pfizer Worldwide Research Groton, CT 06340 USA
Pfizer Worldwide Research

### Submitter
Kieran Geoghegan

### Lab Head
Dr Kieran Francis Geoghegan
Pfizer Worldwide Research Groton, CT 06340 USA


