### Accession
PXD023653

### Title
Elp2 mutations perturb the epitranscriptome and lead to a complex neurodevelopmental phenotype

### Description
Neurodevelopmental disorders have a variety of aetiologies and most often these are complex genomic traits involving numerous mutations. Intellectual disability (ID) and autism spectrum disorder (ASD) are the most common neurodevelopmental disorders and are characterized by substantial impairment in intellectual and adaptive functioning, with their genetic and molecular basis remaining largely unknown. Here, we identified biallelic variants in the gene encoding one of the Elongator complex subunits, ELP2, in patients with ID and ASD. Modelling the variants in mice recapitulated the patient features, with brain imaging and tractography analysis revealing microcephaly, loss of white matter tract integrity and an aberrant functional connectome. We show that the Elp2 mutations negatively impact the activity of the complex and its function in translation via tRNA modification. Further, we elucidate that the mutations perturb protein homeostasis by reducing expression of the genes that guide cell cycle and translation, and up-regulating protein degradation in neurons and oligodendroglia. This leads to impaired neurogenesis, myelin loss and neurodegeneration. Collectively, our data demonstrate an unexpected role for tRNA modification in the pathogenesis of monogenic ID and ASD and defines Elp2 as a key regulator of brain development.

### Sample Protocol
Total of 6 mouse embryos (14.5 dpc) collected (3 Elp2H26R (labelled in the dataset as W1-3 and 3 control (labelled as C1-3)) and forebrains dissected and homogenized in radioimmunoprecipitation assay (RIPA) buffer (150 mM NaCl, 1% Nonidet P-40, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS, 25 mM Tris pH 7.4) with protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Cell Signalling).  Ten samples were excised from each lane of the Coomassie blue-stained SDS PAGE gel (70 ug of protein lysate per sample) and placed into separate Eppendorf tubes for destaining. The gels were destained by adding 500 µl of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate/acetonitrile (1:1; vol/vol) and incubated with occasional vortexing for 30 min. The ammonium bicarbonate/acetonitrile buffer was removed, and the gel pieces dried for 15 min by the addition of 200 µl of acetonitrile. The acetonitrile was removed and discarded and another 200 µl aliquot was added and left for 15-30 min. The acetonitrile was removed in preparation for trypsin digestion. The gel pieces were covered with 200 µl of sequence-grade trypsin of 20 ng/µl concentration in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8 buffer (Promega Corporation). The gel pieces were left for 1 hour and if required a further 100 µl of the solution was added to cover the gel pieces. The samples were placed in an incubator at 37 °C overnight. Next day, the trypsin solution was removed, and each sample placed in a clean Eppendorf tube. This was followed by the addition of 200 µl of 5% formic acid/acetonitrile (3:1; vol/vol) to each tube and incubation for 15 min at room temperature on a shaker. The supernatant was placed into pre-cleaned Eppendorf tubes, together with the trypsin solution for each sample and dried down in a vacuum centrifuge.  Prior to high-performance liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry analysis, 12 µl of 1% (vol/vol) TFA in water was added to each tube, vortexed and/or incubated for 2 min in the sonication bath. This was followed by centrifugation for 1 min at 10,000 r.p.m. Finally, the samples were transferred to an autosampler vials for the analysis. The tryptic peptide extracts were analyzed by nano-high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) and mass spectrometry on an Eksigent, Ekspert nano LC400 HPLC (SCIEX, Canada) coupled to a Triple TOF 6600 mass spectrometer (SCIEX, Canada) equipped with a PicoView nanoflow (New Objective, USA) ion source. 2 µl of each extract was injected onto a 5 mm x 300 µm, C18 3 µm trap column (SGE, Australia) for 5 min at 10 µl/min. The trapped tryptic peptide extracts were then washed onto the analytical 75 µm x 150 mm ChromXP C18 CL 3 µm column (SCIEX, Canada) at 400 nl/min and a column temperature of 45 °C. Linear gradients of 2 - 40% solvent B over 60 min at 400 nl/min flow rate, followed by a steeper gradient from 40% to 90% solvent B in 5 min, then 90% solvent B for 5 min, were used for peptide elution. The gradient was then returned to 2% solvent B for equilibration prior to the next sample injection. Solvent A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water and solvent B contained 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. The ionspray voltage was set to 2600 V, declustering potential (DP) 80 V, curtain gas flow 30, nebuliser gas 1 (GS1) 30, interface heater at 150 °C. The mass spectrometer acquired 50 ms full-scan TOF-mass spectrometry data followed by up to 30 100 ms full-scan product ion data, with a rolling collision energy, in an Information Dependant Acquisition (IDA) mode for protein identification and peptide library production. Full scan TOFMS data was acquired over the mass range 350-1800 and for product ion ms/ms 100-1500. Ions observed in the TOF-MS scan exceeding a threshold of 200 counts and a charge state of +2 to +5 were set to trigger the acquisition of product ion, ms/ms spectra of the resultant 30 most-intense ions.

### Data Protocol
For peptide and protein quantification, data was acquired under the same HPLC and mass spectrometry experimental conditions, with the following exceptions. Data was acquired using a SWATH, product ion ms/ms all approach. The SWATH experiment was set to acquire 100 product ion spectra from m/z 350 to 1500 per scan cycle with a product ion window was set to 6 Da and collision energy from 16 to 60 V with an energy spread of 5 V. The TOFMS scan acquisition time was set to 50 ms and each product ion scan to 25 ms.  The data was acquired and processed using Analyst TF 1.7 software (ABSCIEX, Canada). Protein identification and library compilation was carried out using Protein Pilot 5.0.2 for database searching. Peptide sequence identification and protein grouping was conducted by merging all individual IDA acquisition file from the gel fractions using Paragon algorithm from Protein Pilot 5.0.2 against the Mus musculus Uniprot database complemented by the contaminant sequences from thegpm.org/crap/ with the following parameters: Cys alkylation was set to iodoacetamide, Trypsin was chosen as digestion enzyme, Special Factors: Gel-based-ID was enabled to account for potential, ID Focus: Biological modifications, Thorough ID, ProtScore (Conf) > 10%, and False discovery analysis. Total of 3454 individual proteins were identified with less than 1% global FDR and shared peptides across multiple proteins were removed before being aligned with the SWATH acquisition files using SWATH Acquisition MicroApp 2.0 on the PeakView 2.2 software. The processing settings were set as follow for the peak area extraction in all SWATH acquisition using the local generated ion library: Number of peptides per Protein: 6, Number of Transitions per Peptides: 6, Peptide Confidence Threshold: 99%, less than 1% FDR. Modified peptides were excluded for the protein quantitation and XIC extraction window: 15 min with a mass width of 50 ppm and retention times were aligned using a set of high intense Trypsin autodigest peptides. The ion, peptide and protein area were exported as a text file and the integrated area values for each protein that was present in different gel bands for each gel lane were summed before statistical evaluations, correlation of variation and fold change computation. Normalization evaluation were done using the Normalyzer tool.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Autism, Intellectual disability, Mouse, Brain cortex, Elp2, Trna modifications, Epitranscriptome, Elongator complex

### Affiliations
Lab Head, UQ Diamantina Institute,The University of Queensland
The University of Queensland Diamantina Institute, Translational Research Institute, the University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD 4102

### Submitter
Marija Kojic

### Lab Head
Dr Brandon Wainwright
Lab Head, UQ Diamantina Institute,The University of Queensland


