### Accession
PXD012125

### Title
Quantitative proteomics profiling revealed serum exosomes inhibited the differentiation of osteoclast in SAPHO patients during the active period

### Description
The serum samples from patients and normal volunteers were pooled together, respectively, to perform isolation of exosomes by ultracentrifugation.TMT-labeled quantitative proteomics were performed to find out the differently expressed proteins.

### Sample Protocol
The serum samples from patients and normal volunteers were pooled together, respectively, to perform isolation of exosomes by ultracentrifugation.The TMT labelled peptides (100 μL in 0.1% TFA) were transferred to tubes for HPLC (UltiMate 3000 UHPLC, Thermo Scientific) fractionation, using an Xbridge BEH300 C18 column maintained at 45°C with a flow rate of 1.0 mL/min. UV absorbance was detected at 214 nm. The gradient elution buffer consisted of ddH2O (phase A, pH 10.0) and 98％ acetonitrile (phase C, pH 10.0). Each 1.5 mL fractions were collected into a Microcentrifuge tube, then a total of 47 tubes were collected, dried and combined into 12 samples according to the peptide abundance, and were dissolved in 20 μL of 0.1% TFA for liquid chromatography (LC)-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The Proteome Discoverer software (Version 2.2, Thermo Scientific) was used to analysis MS/MS raw data against the reviewed Swiss-Prot human FASTA database of UniProt database (released on 20180302). The criteria for searching were set as follows according to the software recommendations: A maximum number of two missed trypsin/Lys-C cleavages were allowed. Mass tolerance for precursor and fragment ions was set as 10 ppm (all MS in an Orbitrap mass analyzer) and 0.02 Da (all MS2 spectra), respectively. Carbamidomethylation (C, +57.021 Da) and TMT-6plex (K and peptide N-terminus) were set as static modifications, and oxidation (methionine, M) was specified as the dynamic modification. The proteins and peptides identified within a 1% global FDR were selected for further analysis. Based on the representative MS/MS spectral data of identified peptides and the intensity of TMT precursor, relative protein intensities were quantified using the TMT-6plex method.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, Exosome, Sapho, Osteoclast

### Affiliations
National Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology & Department of Immunology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences 
Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, National Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology & Department of Immunology

### Submitter
Wei Ge

### Lab Head
Dr Wei Ge
Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, National Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology & Department of Immunology


