### Accession
PXD007094

### Title
Small molecule interactome mapping by photo-affinity labeling (SIM-PAL)

### Description
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are one of the most common pharmaceutical agents in the world. However, despite well-studied interactions with cyclooxygenase-2, little is known about the broader proteomic interactions and additional mechanisms that the NSAIDs elicit. Here we present a global binding site identification platform for the direct in cellulo characterization of NSAID binding sites. The platform uses (1) photochemical conjugation of NSAID derivatives in the whole proteome, (2) enrichment of the binding sides, for (3) targeted mass spectrometry-based assignment. Using our approach, we identified the NSAID “interactome” consisting of nearly 200 binding sites in Jurkat and K562 cells. We observed a binding site hotspot on the nucleosome where three NSAIDs (but not fragment-based small molecules) interacted. These data suggest that the NSAIDs may behave as a novel type of epigenetic mark. Our approach is potentially amenable to production of precise, whole proteome binding site maps for virtually any molecule of interest.

### Sample Protocol
ive K562 or Jurkat cells were incubated with photo-NSAIDs for 3 hours and then photo-irradiated with UV at 4 degree. Cell lysates were reacted with CuCCA click reagents containing SiC2N3 probe. The biotinylated proteins were enriched with streptavidin agarose beads and trypsinized.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed with Proteome Discoverer v2.0 using SEQUEST HT, allowing for variable modifications (methionine oxidation: +15.995 Da; cysteine alkylation: +57.021 Da; photo-naproxen: +452.206 Da, +454.222 Da; photo-celecoxib: +543.151 Da, +545.167 Da; photo-indomethacin: +592.220 Da, +594.236 Da), two missed cleavages and mass tolerance of 10 ppm for the precursor ion, 0.02 Da and 0.6 Da for fragment ions from HCD and CID, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
Many therapeutics elicit cell-type specific polypharmacology that is executed by a network of molecular recognition events between a small molecule and the whole proteome. However, measurement of the structures that underpin the molecular associations between the proteome and even common therapeutics, such as the nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), is limited by the inability to map the small molecule interactome. To address this gap, we developed a platform termed small molecule interactome mapping by photoaffinity labeling (SIM-PAL) and applied it to the in cellulo direct characterization of specific NSAID binding sites. SIM-PAL uses (1) photochemical conjugation of NSAID derivatives in the whole proteome and (2) enrichment and isotope-recoding of the conjugated peptides for (3) targeted mass spectrometry-based assignment. Using SIM-PAL, we identified the NSAID interactome consisting of over 1000 significantly enriched proteins and directly characterized nearly 200 conjugated peptides representing direct binding sites of the photo-NSAIDs with proteins from Jurkat and K562 cells. The enriched proteins were often identified as parts of complexes, including known targets of NSAID activity (e.g., NF-&#x3ba;B) and novel interactions (e.g., AP-2, proteasome). The conjugated peptides revealed direct NSAID binding sites from the cell surface to the nucleus and a specific binding site hotspot for the three photo-NSAIDs on histones H2A and H2B. NSAID binding stabilized COX-2 and histone H2A by cellular thermal shift assay. Since small molecule stabilization of protein complexes is a gain of function regulatory mechanism, it is conceivable that NSAIDs affect biological processes through these broader proteomic interactions. SIM-PAL enabled characterization of NSAID binding site hotspots and is amenable to map global binding sites for virtually any molecule of interest.

### Keywords
Interactome, Nsaid, Proteome, Binding site, Photo-crosslinking

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Woo Lab, Harvard University, US
Harvard University

### Submitter
Christina Woo

### Lab Head
Dr Christina May Woo
Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Woo Lab, Harvard University, US


