### Accession
PXD027364

### Title
Thrombospondin-4 is a soluble dermal signal that selectively promotes fibroblast migration and keratinocyte proliferation for skin regeneration and wound healing

### Description
Thrombosponin-4 (THBS4) is a non-structural extracellular matrix molecule associated with tissue regeneration and a variety of pathological processes characterized by increased cell proliferation and migration. However, the mechanisms of how THBS4 regulates cell behaviour as well as the pathways contributing to its effects have remained largely unexplored. In the present study we investigated the role of THBS4 in skin regeneration both in vitro and in vivo. We found that THBS4 expression was upregulated in the dermal compartment of healing skin wounds in humans as well as in mice. Application of recombinand THBS4 protein promoted cutaneous wound healing in mice and selectively stimulated migration of primary fibroblasts as well as proliferation of keratinocytes in vitro. By using a combined proteotranstriptomic pathway analysis approach we discovered that beta-catenin acted as a hub for THBS4-dependent cell signaling and likely plays a key role in promoting its downstream effects. Out results suggest that THBS4 is an important contributor to wound healing and its incorporation into novel wound healing therapies may be a promising strategy for treatment of hard-to-heal wounds.

### Sample Protocol
Fibroblasts were grown on 100mm-diameter cell culture dishes until 70-80% confluency and then stimulated with recombinant THBS4-conditioned medium or control medium for 24 h. Cells were lysed in an NP40 buffer containing protease inhibitors. For the full proteome analysis 5 ug of protein was precipitated with 100% (w/v) Trichoroacetic acid/sodium deoxycholate solution. Next, proteins were reduced, alkylated and digested by Lys-C protease and trypsin. The peptides were separated on a Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) using a C18 cartridge trap-column in a backflush configuration and in-house packed (3 um C18 particles, Dr Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany) analytical 50 cm x 50 um emitter-colums (New Objective, Woburn, MA, USA). Separated peptides were eluted to a quadrupole-orbitrap Q Exactive Plus (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) tandem mass spectrometer (MS) operating with a top-10 data acqusition strategy.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed with the MaxQuant software package and UniProt (www.uniprot.org) database using the tryptic digestion rule.

### Publication Abstract
Thrombospondin-4 (THBS4) is a non-structural extracellular matrix molecule associated with tissue regeneration and a variety of pathological processes characterized by increased cell proliferation and migration. However, the mechanisms of how THBS4 regulates cell behavior as well as the pathways contributing to its effects have remained largely unexplored. In the present study we investigated the role of THBS4 in skin regeneration both <i>in vitro</i> and <i>in vivo</i>. We found that THBS4 expression was upregulated in the dermal compartment of healing skin wounds in humans as well as in mice. Application of recombinant THBS4 protein promoted cutaneous wound healing in mice and selectively stimulated migration of primary fibroblasts as well as proliferation of keratinocytes <i>in vitro</i>. By using a combined proteotranscriptomic pathway analysis approach we discovered that &#x3b2;-catenin acted as a hub for THBS4-dependent cell signaling and likely plays a key role in promoting its downstream effects. Our results suggest that THBS4 is an important contributor to wound healing and its incorporation into novel wound healing therapies may be a promising strategy for treatment of cutaneous wounds.

### Keywords
Thrombospondin-4, Wound healing, Psoriasis, Fibroblasts, Skin regeneration, Burns

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Tartu, Riia 23b, 51010, Tartu, Estonia
University of Tartu

### Submitter
Viljar Jaks

### Lab Head
Dr Viljar Jaks
Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Tartu, Riia 23b, 51010, Tartu, Estonia


