### Accession
PXD001594

### Title
Specific growth rate-dependent proteome resource allocation dynamics in Escherichia coli

### Description
Cells usually respond to changing growth conditions with a change in the specific growth rate (μ) and adjustment of their proteome to adapt and maintain metabolic efficiency. Description of the principles behind proteome resource allocation is thus important for understanding metabolic regulation in responce to changing specific growth rate. We analysed the allocation dynamics of Escherichia coli proteome resources into different metabolic processes in response to changing μ. E. coli was grown on minimal and defined rich media in steady state continuous cultures at different μ and characterised by absolute quantitative LC-MS/MS based proteomics. We detected slowly growing cells investing more proteome resources in energy generation and carbohydrate transport and metabolism whereas for achieving faster growth cells needed to devote most resources to translation and processes closely related to the protein synthesis pipeline. Furthermore, down-regulation of energy generation and carbohydrate metabolism proteins with faster growth displayed very similar expression dynamics with the global transcriptional regulator CRP (cyclic AMP receptor protein), pointing to a dominant protein resource allocating role for this protein. Our data also suggest that acetate overflow may be the result of global proteome resource optimisation as cells saved proteome resources by switching from fully respiratory to respiro-fermentative growth. The presented results give a quantitative overview how E. coli adjusts its proteome to achieve faster growthin response to perturbations in μ. Quantitative understanding of proteome resource allocation could contribute to the design of more efficient cell factories through proteome optimisation towards proteins related to target molecule synthesis.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation was carried out as described previously (Peebo et al. 2014). Shortly, 1 ml of culture broth was harvested, centrifuged (14000 × g for 1 min at 4°C), washed once, flash-frozen with liquid nitrogen and kept at -80°C until further processing. Frozen pellets were melted on ice and mixed in 1:1 ratio (100 μg : 100 μg) with heavy SILAC-labelled (Ong et al. 2002) E. coli biomass (internal standard biomass) and frozen at -80°C. This allowed direct comparison between all samples through comparison of heavy (internal standard biomass) and light (cultivation sample) peptide intensities. Mixed biomass pellets were suspended in 100 µL of SDS lysis buffer (4% SDS/100 mM TRIS-HCl pH 8/100 mM DTT) and heated at 95°C for 5 min. Cell lysates were sonicated with ultrasound for a few pulses and pelleted by centrifugation. Cell lysates were digested with trypsin according to Filter Aided Sample Preparation protocol (FASP) (Wiśniewski et al. 2009) and purified with C-18 StageTips (Rappsilber et al. 2007). LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using an Agilent 1200 series nanoflow system (Agilent Technologies) connected to an LTQ Orbitrap mass-spectrometer (Thermo Electron, San Jose, CA, USA) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source (Proxeon, Odense, Denmark). Peptides were separated with a 240-minute gradient from 2 to 40% B (A: 0.5% acetic acid, B: 0.5% acetic acid/80% acetonitrile) using a flow-rate of 200 nl min-1.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis of raw MS-files was performed by the MaxQuant software package version 1.3.0.5 (Cox and Mann 2008). Peak lists were searched against an E. coli database using the Andromeda search engine built into MaxQuant. In the MaxQuant search, a maximum of two missed cleavages, full tryptic specificity and a mass tolerance of 0.5 Da for fragment ions was specified. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification. Methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. A decoy revert search option was used and the false discovery rate was set to 1% for both peptide and protein levels. Minimum required peptide length was set to seven amino acids. To increase the number of peptide identifications, “Match between runs” option with a time window of two minutes was allowed. Absolute proteome quantification to determine intracellular protein concentrations (protein copies per fL of biomass) was performed using a label-free protein quantification method termed the total protein approach (Arike et al. 2012; Wiśniewski et al. 2012).  This method assumes that most of the expressed proteins are detected by MS and this is usually the case as top 1000 proteins make up more than 90% of the total protein mass in biomass (Milo 2013; Valgepea et al. 2013). The total protein approach used here is based on LFQ intensities reported by MaxQuant. First, relative fractions from the total proteome for all proteins were derived from the ratio of each protein’s individual LFQ intensity to the total LFQ intensity. This ratio was then converted into protein concentration (copies fL-1) by dividing it with the protein’s molecular weight, and multiplying with the Avogadro constant and the protein concentration in a cell (g protein per ml cell volume) (Milo 2013). We determined the protein concentration using measured biomass concentration and protein fraction of dry biomass, cell buoyant density of 1.1 g ml-1 (Baldwin et al. 1995; Loferer-Krössbacher et al. 1998) and dry fraction of wet biomass of 30% (Cayley et al. 1991). The label-free quantification method was used only for the quantification of proteins in the 23 labelled (heavy) internal standard biomass samples. The average of 23 measurements was calculated for each protein and by taking into account the heavy-to-light ratio, protein concentration for all unlabelled (light) samples (cultivation samples) was calculated. This allowed us to maintain the accuracy of the SILAC method and add the absolute scale to our protein data.

### Publication Abstract
Cells usually respond to changing growth conditions with a change in the specific growth rate (&#x3bc;) and adjustment of their proteome to adapt and maintain metabolic efficiency. Description of the principles behind proteome resource allocation is important for understanding metabolic regulation in response to changing &#x3bc;. Thus, we analysed the proteome resource allocation dynamics of Escherichia coli into different metabolic processes in response to changing &#x3bc;. E. coli was grown on minimal and defined rich media in steady state continuous cultures at different &#x3bc; and characterised combining two LC-MS/MS-based proteomics methods: stable isotope labelling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) and intensity based label-free absolute quantification. We detected slowly growing cells investing more proteome resources in energy generation and carbohydrate transport and metabolism whereas for achieving faster growth cells needed to devote most resources to translation and processes closely related to the protein synthesis pipeline. Furthermore, down-regulation of energy generation and carbohydrate metabolism proteins with faster growth displayed very similar expression dynamics with the global transcriptional regulator CRP (cyclic AMP receptor protein), pointing to a dominant protein resource allocating role of this protein. Our data also suggest that acetate overflow may be the result of global proteome resource optimisation as cells saved proteome resources by switching from fully respiratory to respiro-fermentative growth. The presented results give a quantitative overview of how E. coli adjusts its proteome to achieve faster growth and in future could contribute to the design of more efficient cell factories through proteome optimisation.

### Keywords
E. coli label-free specific growth rate dependent data

### Affiliations
Center of Food and Fermentation Technologies
Competence Center of Food and Fermentation Technology

### Submitter
Karl Peebo

### Lab Head
Dr Raivo Vilu
Competence Center of Food and Fermentation Technology


