### Accession
PXD007052

### Title
Spatial tissue proteomics quantifies inter- and intra-tumor heterogeneity in hepatocellular carcinoma

### Description
The inter-patient variability of tumor proteomes has been investigated on a large scale but many tumors display also intra-tumoral heterogeneity (ITH) regarding morphological and genetic features. To what extent the local proteome of tumors intrinsically differs remains largely unknown. Here, we used hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) as a model system, to quantify both inter- and intra-tumor heterogeneity across human patient specimens with spatial resolution. We first defined proteomic features that robustly distinguish neoplastic from the directly adjacent non-neoplastic tissue by integrating proteomic data from human patient samples and genetically defined mouse models with available gene expression data. We then demonstrated the existence of intra-tumoral variations in protein abundance that re-occur across different patient samples, and affect clinically relevant proteins, even in the absence of obvious morphological differences or genetic alterations. Our work demonstrates the suitability and the benefits of using mass spectrometry based proteomics to analyze diagnostic tumor specimens with spatial resolution

### Sample Protocol
FFPE sample processing: Tissue slides were deparaffinized and microdissected to separate different tumor sectors. Tissue sections were placed in solubilization buffer (80 μM Tris pH 8.0, 80μM DTT and 4% SDS). Samples were then sonicated using a Bioruptor (Diagenode) for 25.2 min, and then boiled for 1h at 99°C. Sonication followed by boiling was performed twice. Cysteine residues were alkylated by adding 200 mM iodoacetamide to a final concentration of 15 mM (incubated for 30 min at room temperature in the dark). Protein purification, digestion and peptide desalating for FFPE samples was performed using SP3 protocol (Hughes, et al., 2014) with LysC/trypsin digestion (or only LysC for TMT-6plex experiment).   Fresh-frozen tissue processing: Sample of murine HCCs (~60mg per sample) were homogeneized by bead beating in ice-cold PBS. After a quick spin to remove tissue debris, proteins were solubilized using 4M urea and 0.1% (v/v) Rapigest (Waters). Protein digestion was performed using a sequential incubation with LysC  and trypsin . Digested peptides were desalted using MacroSpin columns (Harvard Apparatus) according to manufacturer instructions TMT experiment: Petpides were analyzed by liquid chromatography coupled tandem mass spectrometry using the nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters) connected online to the Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo). Peptides were separated on BEH C18, 2.5 µm, 75 µm x 500 mm nanoAcquity UPLC column with a flow rate of 0.3 µL/min. During the elution step, the percentage of solvent B increased in a linear fashion from 5% to 7% in 10 minutes, then from 7% B to 30% B in a further 105 min and to 45% B by 130 min. Solvent A was water, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid and solvent B was acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. Full scan MS spectra with mass range 300-1500 m/z were acquired in the Orbitrap with resolution of 60000. The most intense ions were selected for MS2.  CID was performed in the ion trap with normalized collision energy of 35%. Only multiply charged (2+ to 7+) precursor ions were selected for MS2. For the MS3, the precursor selection window was set to the range 400-1300 m/z, with an exclude width of 30 m/z (high) and 5 m/z (low). MS3 spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap over the mass range 100-200 m/z and resolution set to 30000. A similar strategy was used for the acquisition of TMT-10plex experiment, with the following exceptions: The analytical column used for the LC separation was 250mm and the MS data acquisition took place on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo) Full scan MS spectra with mass range 375-1500 m/z were in the Orbitrap with resolution of 60000. The most intense ions (instrument operated for a 3 second cycle time) from the full scan MS were selected for MS2, using quadrupole isolation and a window of 1 Da. HCD was performed with collision energy of 35%. MS2 data were acquired with fixed first mass of 120 m/z. MS3 spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap over the mass range 100-1000 m/z and resolution set to 50000. DIA experiment: LC separation of peptides was carried out using an EASY nano-LC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific), equipped with a heated RP-HPLC column (75 μm x 50 cm) with 1.9 μm C18 resin (Reprosil-AQ Pur, Dr. Maisch). Peptides were separated using a linear gradient ranging from 95% solvent A (0.15% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile) and 5% solvent B (98% acetonitrile, 2% water, 0.15% formic acid) to 30% solvent B over 120 minutes at a flow rate of 200 nL/min. Mass spectrometry analysis was performed on a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo). For DDA runs, MS1 scan was followed by high-collision-dissociation (HCD) of the 20 most abundant precursor ions with dynamic exclusion for 60 seconds. For MS1, resolution was set to 120000. MS2 scans were acquired with resolution 15000. The mass selection window was set to 1.4 Da. Singly charged ions and ions with unassigned charge state were excluded from triggering MS2 events. For data-independent acquisition (DIA) analysis, the same LC-MS platform and settings with a few modifications was employed. Specifically, a survey scan at a resolution of 120000 using was followed by 38 DIA mass windows acquired at a resolution of 30000. The mass range scanned was 400-1,220 m/z and stepped normalized collision energy (22.5, 25 and 27.5) was employed. 38 overlapping mass windows (Bruderer et al., 2015) splitting each mass window in to equal halves were employed to cover mass range of interest (400-1,200 m/z). Label-free analysis of mouse models: Samples were analyzed using a nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters GmbH) connected online to a LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific GmbH). Peptides were separated on a BEH300 C18 (75 µm x 250 mm, 1.7 µm) nanoAcquity UPLC column (Waters GmbH) using a stepwise 145 min gradient between 3 and 85% (v/v) ACN in 0.1% (v/v) FA. Data acquisition was performed by collision-induced dissociation using a TOP-20 strategy with standard parameters. Charge states 1 and unknown were rejected.

### Data Protocol
TMT experiment analysis: TMT-6plex data were processed using Proteome Discoverer v1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Data were searched against Uniprot Human fasta database (release 2014_07) using Mascot v2.2.7 (Matrix Science) with the following settings:  Enzyme was set to LysC, with up to 1 missed cleavage.  MS1 mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and MS2 to 0.5 Da. Carbamidomethyl cysteine was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of Methionine as variable.  Other modifications included the TMT-6plex modification from the quan method used.  The quan method was set for reporter ions quantification with HCD and MS3 (mass tolerance, 20 ppm).  The false discovery rate for peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) was set to 0.01 using Percolator (Brosch et al., 2009).  TMT-10plex data were processed using Proteome Discoverer v2.0 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Data were searched against Swissprot Human fasta database (release 2016_11) using Mascot v2.5.1 (Matrix Sceince) with the following settings: Enzyme was set to trypsin, with up to 1 missed cleavage.  Other settings were as for TMT-6plex search data, with the exception of the modifications from the quan method, which was set to TMT10 and Acetyl (Protein N-term) as a variable modification. Reporter ion intensity values for the filtered PSMs were exported and processed using in-house written R scripts to remove common contaminants and decoy hits. Additionally only PSMs having reporter ion intensities above 1 x 103 in all the relevant TMT channels were retained for quantitative analysis. DIA experiment analysis: A spectral library was generated by acquiring 5 shotgun runs. Raw files were processed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.8) (Cox and Mann, 2008). The search was performed against the human UniProt fasta database (release 2014_07) using Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011) with following search criteria: Carbamidomethylation (C) as a fixed modification; oxidation (M) and acetylation (protein N-term) were set as a variable modifications; mass tolerance of 10ppm (precursor ions) and 0.02 Da (fragment ions); minimal peptide length of 7 amino acids. The spectral library was generated in Spectronaut (Biognosys AG) using default settings.  DIA files were searched in Spectronaut against the generated spectral library using default settings. For quantification only peptides with qvalue < 0.01 and signal to noise ratio (S/N) > 20 were selected and exported. Label-free quantification analysis for mouse model experiment: Raw files were processed using MaxQuant (version 1.3.0.5) (Cox and Mann, 2008). The search was performed against the mouse Ensembl database (GRCm38.70) using Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011) with following search criteria: Carbamidomethylation (C) as a fixed modification; oxidation (M) and acetylation (protein N-term) were set as a variable modifications; mass tolerance of 20 ppm (precursor ions) and 0.5 Da (fragment ions); minimal peptide length of 7 amino acids. The reversed sequences of the target database were used as a decoy database. Peptide and protein hits were filtered at a false discovery rate of 1%. Protein quantification was performed using the label-free quantification (LFQ) function of MaxQuant and the match between run option was selected using a time window of 2 min.

### Publication Abstract
The interpatient variability of tumor proteomes has been investigated on a large scale but many tumors display also intratumoral heterogeneity regarding morphological and genetic features. It remains largely unknown to what extent the local proteome of tumors intrinsically differs. Here, we used hepatocellular carcinoma as a model system to quantify both inter- and intratumor heterogeneity across human patient specimens with spatial resolution. We defined proteomic features that distinguish neoplastic from the directly adjacent nonneoplastic tissue, such as decreased abundance of NADH dehydrogenase complex I. We then demonstrated the existence of intratumoral variations in protein abundance that re-occur across different patient samples, and affect clinically relevant proteins, even in the absence of obvious morphological differences or genetic alterations. Our work demonstrates the suitability and the benefits of using mass spectrometry-based proteomics to analyze diagnostic tumor specimens with spatial resolution. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD007052.

### Keywords
Intra-tumoral heterogeneity, Liver, Hepatocellular carcinoma

### Affiliations
European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Structural and Computational Biology Unit, Heidelberg, Germany
European Molecular Biology Laboratory

### Submitter
Katarzyna Buczak

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Beck
European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Structural and Computational Biology Unit, Heidelberg, Germany


