### Accession
PXD040358

### Title
Compromised transcription-mRNA export factor THOC2 causes R-loop accumulation, DNA damage and adverse neurodevelopment

### Description
We implicated the X-chromosome THOC2 gene, which encodes largest subunit of the highly-conserved TREX (Transcription-Export) complex, in a clinically variable neurodevelopmental disorder with intellectual disability as the core phenotype. To study how compromised function of this essential eukaryotic gene leads to NDD outcomes, we generated a clinically-relevant mouse model based on a hypomorphic Thoc2 exon 37-38 deletion variant of a patient with ID, speech delay, hypotonia, and microcephaly. The Thoc2 exon 37-38 deletion male (Thoc2/Y) mice recapitulate the core phenotypes of THOC2 syndrome including smaller size and weight, and significant deficits in spatial learning, working memory and sensorimotor functions. The Thoc2/Y mouse brain development is significantly impacted by compromised THOC2/TREX function resulting in R-loop accumulation, DNA damage and consequent cell death. Overall, we suggest that perturbed R-loop homeostasis, in stem cells and/or differentiated cells in mice and the patient, and DNA damage-associated functional alterations are at the root of THOC2 syndrome. 

### Sample Protocol
Label-free proteomics 
Embryonic day 18.5 and adult Day 10 mouse brains were placed in a tube with 500ul 0.1 M triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) and lysed using the Precellys® tube homogeniser. The cell lysates were heat-treated for 5 minutes at 95°C and further homogenized using a sonicator probe at 4°C (80% output). Samples were centrifuged at 13000 rpm for 10 minutes at 4°C to remove cell debris. Protein concentration in the supernatants was estimated using the Nanodrop (Thermo Fisher Scientific). A total of 100µg protein from each sample was reduced using 10mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) with 0.05% SDS, alkylated with 200 mM methyl methanethiosulfonate (Sigma Aldrich, Australia) and digested overnight with 50:1 trypsin (Pierce Thermo Fischer Scientific, Australia) at 37°C. Trypsin digestion was stopped by incubation with 10% trifluoroacetic acid at 37°C for 15 minute followed by centrifugation at 13000 rpm for 10 minute at 4°C The supernatants containing digested peptides were dried down and dissolved in 0.1% trifluroacetic acid (TFA, 50ul) and desalted using home-made POROS R3 (Life Technologies, Mulgrave, Victoria, Australia) micro-column. The clean peptides were then used for LC-MS/MS.

LC-MS/MS and DIA-PASEF 
The peptide samples (200 ng per sample) were separated by nano-liquid chromatography (nLC) using the Dionex RSLC 3500 system (Thermo Fischer, Australia) coupled online to the trapped-ion mobility spectrometry Time-of-Flight (timsTOF) Pro mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics, Germany) using the Data Independent Acquisition-Parallel Accumulation Serial Fragmentation (DIA-PASEF) mode. Reversed-phase chromatography was done using a 25 cm, 75 µm ID Aurora C18 nano column (IonOpticks, Australia) with an integrated captive spray emitter. The peptides were eluted using a 125-minute gradient from 0% to 35% buffer B (acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid) at a rate of 400 nL/minute. Buffer A consisted of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. 


### Data Protocol
The raw data files from each sample generated on the timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer was processed using the software package Spectronaut™ v16.3 (Biognosys). directDIA™ analysis was performed and the data were searched against the Uniprot Mus musculus FASTA database (17,056 entries; Year 2021). The following additional parameters were applied: variable modifications - deamidation (N/Q), oxidation (M); fixed modification – methylthio (C); enzyme – Trypsin/P; missed cleavages – 2. All other parameters were set to default values. Proteins with a false discovery rate (FDR) of ≤ 1% were reported. Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment analysis was performed using Enrichr web-platform104,105. For the Enricher plots, p-value values for function clustering and multiple detection corrections were calculated, and the plots were sorted based on the Benjamini-Hochberg corrected p-value represented as the length of the GO term bars. Volcano plots were generated using R-studio . Venn diagrams were generated using jvenn online platform.

### Publication Abstract
We implicated the X-chromosome THOC2 gene, which encodes the largest subunit of the highly-conserved TREX (Transcription-Export) complex, in a clinically complex neurodevelopmental disorder with intellectual disability as the core phenotype. To study the molecular pathology of this essential eukaryotic gene, we generated a mouse model based on a hypomorphic Thoc2 exon 37-38 deletion variant of a patient with ID, speech delay, hypotonia, and microcephaly. The Thoc2 exon 37-38 deletion male (Thoc2<sup>&#x394;/Y</sup>) mice recapitulate the core phenotypes of THOC2 syndrome including smaller size and weight, and significant deficits in spatial learning, working memory and sensorimotor functions. The Thoc2<sup>&#x394;/Y</sup> mouse brain development is significantly impacted by compromised THOC2/TREX function resulting in R-loop accumulation, DNA damage and consequent cell death. Overall, we suggest that perturbed R-loop homeostasis, in stem cells and/or differentiated cells in mice and the patient, and DNA damage-associated functional alterations are at the root of THOC2 syndrome.

### Keywords
Brain, Proteomics, Mice, Thoc2

### Affiliations
South Australian Health and Medical Research Institute
University of Adelaide
Adelaide Medical School Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences University of Adelaide

### Submitter
Sushma Rao

### Lab Head
Dr Raman Sharma
Adelaide Medical School Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences University of Adelaide


