### Accession
PXD016705

### Title
Identifying mTOR regulated RNA binding proteins

### Description
To investigate the RNA binding proteins that change following mTOR inhibition, HeLa cells were treated with and without 200nM Torin1 for an hour. Cells were the UV254 cross-linked, lysed and large scale  whole cell oligo(dT) based pulldowns were performed with identification and quantification of purified proteins by label free mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Per treatment 15cn plates of Hela cells were seeded to give approximately 2.8x10*7 at harvesting. 24 hours post-plating Torin1 (200nM) or DMSO (vehicle control)were added for 60 minutes. Media was  aspirated and the cells washed with PBS, the cells were then irradiated at 150mJ/cm*2. The cells were lysed and selection performed using magnetic oligo(dT) beads at RT for 75 minutes. The beads were  separated, washed and the bound proteins eluted. RNA concentration was measured using nanodrop. Samples were treated with benzonase and RNase I and run on SDS-PAGE gels. The gels were stained with  ProtoBlue colloidal coomassie, sliced, destained and digested with trypsin. Peptides were eluted from the gel sliced, concentrated to dryness in a Speedvac and resuspended in injection solvent  containing an internal standard (ADH1, 20fmol/ul). Separations were performed using nanoflow liquid chromatograpphy and analysed usong a Waters Synapt G2S in MSe mode.

### Data Protocol
Data was collected in MSe mode using IMS and processed using ProteinLynx Global Server (Waters)(PLGS, v3), the processed data was searched against Uniprot (release 2014_05, human reviewed)using PLGS at anFDR of 1%. The results were re-analysed using ISOQuant (Kuharev and Tenzer, University of Mainz) using highly stringent parameters (FDR 0%-0.1%), further the data was visualised and analysed using  Scaffold (Proteome Software, Oregon).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rna-binding proteins, Larp1, Synapt g2s, Mtor, Nanoflow.

### Affiliations
Beatson Institute for Cancer Research - Glasgow  MRC Toxicology Unit - University of Cambridge - Leicester
MRC Toxicology Unit

### Submitter
Rebekah Jukes-Jones

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Bushell
Beatson Institute for Cancer Research - Glasgow  MRC Toxicology Unit - University of Cambridge - Leicester


