### Accession
PXD028404

### Title
Systematic Identification of SHP2 Phosphatase Substrates

### Description
Phosphatases play essential roles in normal cell physiology and diseases like cancer. The challenges of studying phosphatases have limited our understanding of their substrates, molecular mechanisms, and unique functions within highly complicate networks. Here we introduce a novel strategy using substrate trapping mutant coupled with quantitative mass spectrometry to identify physiological substrates of protein tyrosine phosphatase Src homology 2 containing protein tyrosine phosphatase 2 (SHP2) in a high-throughput manner. SHP2 plays a critical role in numerous cellular processes through the regulation of various signaling pathways. The method integrates three separate MS-based experiments; in vitro dephosphorylation assay, in vivo global phosphoproteomics, and pull down of substrate trapping mutant complex using HEK293SHP2KO cells.  PTPN11-C459S/D425A is an optimized substrate trap mutant of SHP2. We identified eleven direct substrates, including both known and novel SHP2 substrates in EGFR signaling pathways, among which docking protein 1 (DOK1) was further validated as a new SHP2 substrate. This advanced workflow significantly improves the systemic identification of direct substrates of phosphatase, facilitating the comprehension of equally important roles of phosphatase signaling.

### Sample Protocol
Wild type and double mutant (CSDA)-SHP2 HEK293 cells were stimulated with EGF. For phosphoproteomics analysis, digested peptides were enriched by PolyMAC in immunoprecipitation experiment or by PT66 pY antibody and PolyMAC in global experiment. In dephosphorylation assay experiment, the SHP2 substrate candidates were isolated by immunoprecipitation and used competitive inhibitor, vanadate, to release substrates from complex and then were directly dephosphorylated by WT SHP2. Resulting phosphopeptides of all three experiments were analyzed by LC-MS/MS and database search analysis of raw data was performed using Proteome Discoverer 2.2. Data were filtered and the resulting phosphopeptides from Co-IP, global, and dephosphorylation assay experiment were overlapped together to determine the direct substrate candidates.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were searched against the Homo sapiens database with no redundant entries (Uniprot FASTA file released August 2017) using the SEQUEST search engine built into Proteome Discoverer 2.2. Peptide precursor mass tolerance for the main search was set to 10 ppm, and MS/MS tolerance was set to 0.6 Da. Searches were performed with full tryptic digestion, and peptides were allowed a maximum of two missed cleavages. Search criteria included a static modification of cysteine residues of +57.021 Da to account for alkylation and a variable modification of +15.995 Da for potential oxidation of methionine residues. A variable modification of +79.996 Da was also set on serine, threonine, and tyrosine residues for the identification of phosphorylation sites. The false discovery rate (FDR) for PSMs, proteins, and phosphorylation sites was set to 1% for each analysis using a reverse decoy database, and proteins matching the reverse decoy database or the common laboratory contaminant database were discarded. Both unique and razor peptides were used for protein quantitation. All three experiments were performed three times, so tyrosine phosphorylation sites unique to the dephosphorylation samples as well as sites with at least 2-fold increased phosphorylation relative to the control were used for further analysis. Volcano plots and heat maps illustrating which tyrosine phosphorylation sites were up or down-regulated generated using Perseus 1.6.15.0. First, the phosphorylation site intensities were transformed into their log2 counterparts, and any missing values were imputed according to a normal distribution using the default settings (width 0.3, down-shift 1.8). A two-sample Student’s T-test (FDR ≤ 0.05) was then used to determine which phosphorylation sites were significantly different in the SHP2 dead samples versus the SHP2 WT samples for each replicate. The sequences containing the phospho-sites identified in three separate experiments were aligned according to the phosphotyrosine residue by shorten sequence containing with six amino acids on either side of the phosphosite, were analyzed with WebLogo 3.7.4.

### Publication Abstract
Protein phosphatases play an essential role in normal cell physiology and the development of diseases such as cancer. The innate challenges associated with studying protein phosphatases have limited our understanding of their substrates, molecular mechanisms, and unique functions within highly coordinated networks. Here, we introduce a novel strategy using substrate-trapping mutants coupled with quantitative proteomics methods to identify physiological substrates of Src homology 2 containing protein tyrosine phosphatase 2 (SHP2) in a high-throughput manner. The technique integrates three parallel mass spectrometry-based proteomics experiments, including affinity isolation of substrate-trapping mutant complex using wild-type and SHP2 KO cells, <i>in vivo</i> global quantitative phosphoproteomics, and <i>in vitro</i> phosphatase reaction. We confidently identified 18 direct substrates of SHP2 in the epidermal growth factor receptor signaling pathways, including both known and novel SHP2 substrates. Docking protein 1 was further validated using biochemical assays as a novel SHP2 substrate, providing a mechanism for SHP2-mediated Ras activation. This advanced workflow improves the systemic identification of direct substrates of protein phosphatases, facilitating our understanding of the equally important roles of protein phosphatases in cellular signaling.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Shp2, Phosphoproteomics, Tyrosine phosphatase substrates

### Affiliations
Purdue University
Department of Biochemistry, Department of Chemistry, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47906

### Submitter
Peipei  Zhu

### Lab Head
Dr Weiguo Andy Tao
Department of Biochemistry, Department of Chemistry, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47906


