### Accession
PXD023218

### Title
Linking post-translational modifications and protein turnover by site-resolved protein turnover (SPOT) profiling

### Description
Proteome-wide measurements of protein turnover have largely ignored the impact of post-translational modifications (PTMs). To address this gap, we employ stable isotope labelling and mass spectrometry to measure the turnover of >120,000 peptidoforms including >33,000 phosphorylated, acetylated and ubiquitinated peptides for >9,000 native proteins. This site-resolved protein turnover (SPOT) profiling discloses global and site-specific differences in turnover associated with the presence or absence of PTMs. While causal relationships may not always be immediately apparent, we hypothesize that PTMs with diverging turnover may distinguish states of differential protein stability, structure, localization, enzymatic activity, or protein-protein interactions. We exemplify how the turnover data may facilitate insights into unknown functions of PTMs and provide a web-tool for the scientific community that allows interrogation and visualisation of all turnover data. Since the methodology is applicable to many cell types and modifications, it has substantial potential to prioritize PTMs for functional investigation in the future.

### Sample Protocol
Two different pulsed SILAC (pSILAC) methods were employed to investigate the effects of PTMs on protein turnover. For both, we determined the turnover of (un)modified peptides in a bottom-up proteomics approach and utilized it as a proxy for the turnover of (un)modified proteins. To this end, HeLa cells were pulsed with SILAC medium in quadruplicates including two label swap experiments: For two replicates, medium containing light lysine (K0) and arginine (R0) on unlabelled cells was exchanged with medium containing 13C and 15N labelled, heavy lysine (K10) and arginine (R10). For the other two replicates, K8R10 medium on fully K8R10 labelled cells was replaced with K0R0 medium. For pSILAC data, we lysed cells after four time-points (1, 6, 24, 40 h). Proteins were digested, and phosphorylated, di-glycine (ubiquitin-remnant)-modified and acetylated peptides were sequentially enriched followed by the quantification of light and heavy labelled peptides via mass spectrometry. For pSILAC-TMT experiments, we multiplexed 10 pulse time-points (0, 1, 3, 6, 10, 16, 24, 34, 48, >200 h) using TMT (tandem mass tags) and performed a sequential enrichment of phosphorylated and acetylated peptides.

### Data Protocol
For pSILAC data, we utilized SILAC intensitiy ratios representing the ratio of newly synthesized to pre-existing peptide species (N/P ratio) to compare their turnover within a particular pulse period. For pSILAC-TMT data, we measured the time-resolved SILAC labelling behaviour and obtained absolute turnover rates via fitting curve fitting.

### Publication Abstract
Proteome-wide measurements of protein turnover have largely ignored the impact of post-translational modifications (PTMs). To address this gap, we employ stable isotope labeling and mass spectrometry to measure the turnover of &gt;120,000 peptidoforms including &gt;33,000 phosphorylated, acetylated, and ubiquitinated peptides for &gt;9,000 native proteins. This site-resolved protein turnover (SPOT) profiling discloses global and site-specific differences in turnover associated with the presence or absence of PTMs. While causal relationships may not always be immediately apparent, we speculate that PTMs with diverging turnover may distinguish states of differential protein stability, structure, localization, enzymatic activity, or protein-protein interactions. We show examples of how the turnover data may give insights into unknown functions of PTMs and provide a freely accessible online tool that allows interrogation and visualisation of all turnover data. The SPOT methodology is applicable to many cell types and modifications, offering the potential to prioritize PTMs for future functional investigations.

### Keywords
Human, Turnover, Silac, Ptms

### Affiliations
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technical University of Munich, Germany
Technical University of Munich, Freising, Germany

### Submitter
Jana Zecha

### Lab Head
Dr Bernhard Kuster
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technical University of Munich, Germany


