### Accession
PXD040654

### Title
Laser microdissection and proteomic study of paraffin-embedded fetal and paediatric lung tissues.

### Description
The goal of this project was to understand if lasermicrodissected epithial portions of postanatal and fetal human lung tissue could be used for proteomics, and then, further confirmed by immunostaining. The proteomic data obtained from postanatal bronchi was compared to the one obtained from alveoli, with the same being applied to the fetal bronchi and canaliculi.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomic sample preparation LMD samples were pooled by adding 60 µl of acetonitrile (10055454, Thermo Fisher Scientific) to each tube and spun down, then pooled in a new 1.5 mL Eppendorf tube and dried under speed-vacuum. Samples were resuspended in 0.1% RapiGest Surfactant (186001860, Waters) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate as to obtain a ratio of 1,2 x 106 µm2 per 100 µl. They were sonicated (6 x 30 s) at 70% amplitude and 0.5 pulse, and kept on ice 30 s between each cycle of sonication. Sample were then heated for 1 h at 95 °C, 1 h at 65 °C, and followed by a second round of sonication. For 100 µl of sample, 2 μl of 50 mM dithioerythritol were then added and the reduction was carried out at 37 °C for 1 h. Alkylation was performed by adding 2 μl of 400 mM iodoacetamide (per 100 µl of sample) during 1 h at room temperature in the dark. Overnight digestion was performed at 37 °C with 2 μL of freshly prepared trypsin 0.1 μg/μl (V5111, Promega) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate; per 100 µl of sample. To remove RapiGest, samples were acidified with 5 µl of 10% trifluoroacetic acid (91719, Sigma-Aldrich), heated at 37 °C for 45 min and centrifuged 10 min at 17’000 x g. Each sample was desalted with a C18 microspin column (Harvard Apparatus) according to manufacturer’s instructions, completely dried under speed-vacuum and stored at -20°C.  Liquid chromatography electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry (LC/ESI-MS/MS) Samples were resuspended in 12 µl of loading buffer (5% CH3CN, 0.1% Formic Acid). Biognosys iRT peptides were added to each sample and 4 μl of peptides were injected on column. LC/ESI-MS/MS was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with an Easy nLC1200 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were trapped on an Acclaim pepmap100, C18, 3μm, 75μm x 20mm nano trap-column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated on a 75 μm x 500 mm, C18 ReproSil-Pur (Dr. Maisch GmBH), 1.9 μm, 100 Å, home-made column. The analytical separation was run for 135 min using a gradient of H2O/CH2O2 (99.9%/0.1% - solvent A) and CH3CN/H2O/CH2O2 (80.0%/19.9%/0.1% - solvent B). The gradient was run from 8% to 28 % of solvent B in 110 min, to 42% of solvent B in 25 min, then to 95% solvent B in 5 min, with a final stabilization step of 20 min in 95% solvent B. Flow rate was of 250 nL/min, with a total run time of 160 min. Data-Independant Acquisition (DIA) was performed with precursor full scan (MS1) at a resolution of 60’000 full width at half maximum (FWHM), followed by 30 product ion scan (MS2) with fix wide precursor isolation windows. MS1 was performed in the Orbitrap with an AGC target of 1 x 106, a maximum injection time of 50 ms and a scan range from 400 to 1240 m/z. DIA MS2 was performed in the Orbitrap using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) at 30%. Isolation windows was set to 28 m/z with an AGC target of 1 x 106 and a maximum injection time of 54 ms.

### Data Protocol
DIA raw files were loaded into Spectronaut v.15 (Biognosys) and analyzed by directDIA using default settings. Briefly, data were searched against human reference proteome database (Uniprot; 20660 entries). Trypsin was selected as the enzyme, with one potential missed cleavage. Variable amino acid modifications were oxidized methionine and deaminated (NQ). Fixed amino acid modification was carbamidomethyl cysteine. Both peptide precursor and protein false discovery rate (FDR) were controlled at 1% (Q value < 0.01). Single hit proteins were excluded.  For quantitation, Top 3 precursor area per peptides were used, “only protein group specific” was selected as proteotypicity filter and normalization was set to “global normalization”. The quantitative analysis was performed with MapDIA tool, using the precursor quantities extracted from Spectronaut output. No further normalization was applied. The following parameters were used: min peptides = 2, max peptides = 10, min correl = -1, Min_DE = 0.01, max_DE = 0.99, and experimental_design = Independant design. Proteins were considered to have significantly changed in abundance with an FDR ≤ 0.05 and an absolute fold change FC≥ |1.5| (log2FC ≥ |0.58|). Gene Ontologies term enrichment analysis, as well as associated plots, were performed with ClusterProfiler (Yu, Wang et al. 2012, Wu, Hu et al. 2021) R package, using the EnrichGO function. Enrichment tests were calculated for GOterms, based on hypergeometric distribution. P-value cutoff was set to 0.05, and Q-value cutoff to 0.01. The gofilter function was use prior to cnetplot drawing, to filter results at specific levels. To determine protein cellular localization, we used the NeXtProt knowledge database (reviewed and annotated for the human proteome) and extracted the gold and silver annotated proteins for four Gene Ontologies and Uniprot Subcellular Location (SL) terms: plasma membrane (GO:0005886 and SL-0036), extracellular matrix (GO:0031012), cytosol (GO:0005829 and SL-0091) and nuclear (GO:0005634 and SL-0191).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ffpe; human lung; fetal tissue; lmd

### Affiliations
Dept of Pathology and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Geneva
Department of Paediatrics, Gynaecology and Obstetrics, University Hospital of Geneva, Switzerland

### Submitter
Luis Cardoso dos Santos

### Lab Head
Dr Isabelle Ruchonnet-Metrailler
Department of Paediatrics, Gynaecology and Obstetrics, University Hospital of Geneva, Switzerland


