### Accession
PXD006326

### Title
Synaptic GAP and GEF Complexes Cluster Proteins Essential for GTP  Signaling

### Description
GTPase-activating proteins (GAPs) and guanine exchange factors (GEFs) play essential roles in regulating the activity of small GTPases. Several GAPs and GEFs have been shown to be present at the postsynaptic density (PSD) within excitatory glutamatergic neurons and regulate the activity of glutamate receptors. However, it is not known how synaptic GAP and GEF proteins are organized within the PSD signaling machinery, if they have overlapping interaction networks, or if they associate with proteins implicated in contributing to psychiatric disease. Here, we determine the interactomes of three interacting GAP/GEF proteins at the PSD, including the RasGAP Syngap1, the ArfGAP Agap2, and the RhoGEF Kalirin. We describe the functional properties of each interactome and show that these GAP/GEF proteins are highly associated with and cluster other proteins directly involved in GTPase signaling mechanisms. We also utilize Agap2 as an example of GAP/GEFs localized within multiple neuronal compartments and determine additional interactions involving Agap2 outside of the PSD. Functional analysis of PSD and non-PSD interactomes illustrates both common and unique functions of Agap2 determined by its subcellular location.

### Sample Protocol
For post-synaptic density preparations - Adult mouse (3-4 months in age) cortex was homogenized in sucrose buffer (0.32 M sucrose, 10 mM Hepes buffer (pH 7.4), 2 mM EDTA, 30 mM NaF, 20 mM β-glycerol phosphate, 5 mM sodium orthovanadate, and Roche cOmplete protease inhibitor cocktail) and centrifuged at 500g for 6 minutes. Supernatant was collected and then spun at 10,000g for 10 minutes. The resulting pellet was solubilized in triton buffer (50 mM Hepes (pH 7.4), 2 mM EGTA, 2 mM EDTA, 50 mM NaF, 20 mM β-glycerol phosphate, 5 mM sodium orthovanadate, Roche cOmplete, and 1% Triton X-100. The solubilized pellet was centrifuged at 30,000 rpm for 30 min and supernatant was collected for non-PSD fractions. The resulting pellet was collected and solubilized in DOC buffer (50 mM Tris (pH 9), 30 mM NaF, 5 mM sodium orthovanadate, 20 mM β-glycerol phosphate, 20 µM ZnCl 2 , Roche cOmplete, and 1% sodium deoxycholate) and served as the PSD fraction.  For Immunoprecipitation - Lysate containing 2 mg of total protein was incubated with the indicated primary antibody at a concentration of 1 µg/µl at 4 degrees Celsius overnight with rotation. The following day, IPs were incubated with Dynabeads protein G (Novex) for 2 hours at 4 degrees Celsius with rotation. IPs were washed three times with IP wash buffer (25 mM Tris (pH 7.4), 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, and 1% Triton X-100 or sodium deoxycholate where appropriate). IPs were re-suspended in 2X LDS sample buffer and incubated at 95 degrees Celsius for 15 minutes to elute protein complexes. The elutant was incubated with DTT at a final concentration of 1 mM at 56 degrees Celsius for 1 hour followed by incubation with Iodoacetamide at a final concentration of 20 mM at room temperature for 45 minutes.  For MS preparation - Samples were separated on 4-12% Bis-Tris gels (NuPAGE Novex) followed by staining with InstantBlue (Expedeon) for protein visualization. Following destaining, lanes were cut and placed in 96-well perforated plates for destaining and peptide digestion via trypsin at 37 degrees Celsius overnight. Peptides were then extracted with acetonitrile, dried down using a Savant SPD 1010 SpeedVac Concentrator (Thermo Scientific), and then suspended in 3% ACN/0.1% FA. A Nano/Capillary LC System Ultimate 3000 (Thermo/Dionex) was used for desalting and reverse-phase separation of peptides. The LC system was coupled to a hybrid linear ion-Fourier transform ion cyclotron resonance LTQ-FT (FTICR) Tesla mass spectrometer (LC/MS) for data acquisition.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Scientific) was used to process MS data which was analyzed using both the Sequest and Mascot V2.4 (Matrix science) against a modified mouse database from Uniprot combined with its decoy database. With respect to analysis settings, the mass tolerance was set 10 parts per million for precursor ions and 0.8 daltons for fragment ions, no more than two missed cleavage sites were allowed, static modification was set as cysteine carboxyamidation, and dynamic modification was set as methionine oxidation. False discovery rates (FDRs) were automatically calculated by the perculator node of Proteome Discoverer and a peptide FDR of 0.01 was used for cut-offs. Peptides with high confidence were considered as true hits and proteins with at least two different peptides were accepted.

### Publication Abstract
GTPase-activating proteins (GAPs) and guanine exchange factors (GEFs) play essential roles in regulating the activity of small GTPases. Several GAPs and GEFs have been shown to be present at the postsynaptic density (PSD) within excitatory glutamatergic neurons and regulate the activity of glutamate receptors. However, it is not known how synaptic GAP and GEF proteins are organized within the PSD signaling machinery, if they have overlapping interaction networks, or if they associate with proteins implicated in contributing to psychiatric disease. Here, we determine the interactomes of three interacting GAP/GEF proteins at the PSD, including the RasGAP Syngap1, the ArfGAP Agap2, and the RhoGEF Kalirin, which includes a total of 280 interactions. We describe the functional properties of each interactome and show that these GAP/GEF proteins are highly associated with and cluster other proteins directly involved in GTPase signaling mechanisms. We also utilize Agap2 as an example of GAP/GEFs localized within multiple neuronal compartments and determine an additional 110 interactions involving Agap2 outside of the PSD. Functional analysis of PSD and non-PSD interactomes illustrates both common and unique functions of Agap2 determined by its subcellular location. Furthermore, we also show that these GAPs/GEFs associate with several proteins involved in psychiatric disease.

### Keywords
Gtp, Neuron, Mouse

### Affiliations
University of Southern California

### Submitter
Brent Wilkinson

### Lab Head
Dr Marcelo Coba
University of Southern California


