### Accession
PXD033913

### Title
Critical regulatory roles of SLFN11 on NF-kB signaling and its effects on glioblastoma growth and survival

### Description
Glioblastoma (GBM) is an aggressive and incurable brain tumor in nearly all instances, whose disease progression is driven in part by the glioma stem cell (GSC) subpopulation. Here, we explored the effects of Schlafen family member 11 (SLFN11) in the molecular, cellular and tumor biology of GBM.

### Sample Protocol
We employed CRISPR/Cas9 mediated knockout (KO) of SLFN11 in GBM cell lines and patient-derived xenograft (PDX) models of GBM. Proteomic analysis was used to elucidate the mechanistic effects of SLFN11 in GBM.

### Data Protocol
Loss of SLFN11 was associated with reduced expression of progenitor/stem cell marker genes, such as NES, SOX2 and CD44. Loss of SLFN11 stimulated expression of NF-kB target genes, consistent with a negative regulatory role for SLFN11 on the NF-kB pathway. Further, our studies identify p21 as a direct transcriptional target of NF-kB2 in GBM whose expression was stimulated by loss of SLFN11. Genetic disruption of SLFN11 inhibited GBM cell proliferation and neurosphere growth, blocked GBM growth and significantly extended survival in an orthotopic PDX model.

### Publication Abstract
Glioblastoma (GBM) is an aggressive and incurable brain tumor in nearly all instances, whose disease progression is driven in part by the glioma stem cell (GSC) subpopulation. Here, we explored the effects of Schlafen family member 11 (SLFN11) in the molecular, cellular and tumor biology of GBM. CRISPR/Cas9 mediated knockout (KO) of <i>SLFN11</i> inhibited GBM cell proliferation and neurosphere growth and was associated with reduced expression of progenitor/stem cell marker genes, such as <i>NES</i>, <i>SOX2</i> and <i>CD44</i>. Loss of <i>SLFN11</i> stimulated expression of NF-&#x3ba;B target genes, consistent with a negative regulatory role for SLFN11 on the NF-&#x3ba;B pathway. Further, our studies identify p21 as a direct transcriptional target of NF-&#x3ba;B2 in GBM whose expression was stimulated by loss of <i>SLFN11</i>. Genetic disruption of <i>SLFN11</i> blocked GBM growth and significantly extended survival in an orthotopic patient-derived xenograft model. Together, our results identify SLFN11 as a novel component of signaling pathways that contribute to GBM and GSC with implications for future diagnostic and therapeutic strategies.

### Keywords
Qe-hf, Glioblastoma, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Northwestern University

### Submitter
Renu Goel

### Lab Head
Dr Mariafausta Fischietti
Northwestern University


