### Accession
PXD034074

### Title
The eWAT proteomics of wild type mice and Mdm2 adipocyte-specific knock-in mice fed high-fat diet

### Description
The epididymal adipose tissue (eWAT) samples from wild type mice fed high-fat diet for 12 weeks (H_WT_E) and Mdm2 adipocyte-specific knock-in mice fed high-fat diet for 12 weeks (H_KI_E) were mixed separately, and subjected to proteomic study by Label-free quantitative techniques and mass spectrometry-based proteomics techniques, etc. The proteomics of mixed eWAT samples were performed in Jingjie PTM BioLab (Hangzhou) Co. Ltd (www.ptm-biolab.com.cn). The difference was determined by 1.5-fold-change criterion, FDR < 0.01.

### Sample Protocol
The sample was grinded by liquid nitrogen into cell powder and then transferred to a 5-mL centrifuge tube. After that, four volumes of lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail) was added to the cell powder, followed by sonication three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the supernatant was collected and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to urea concentration less than 2M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion. After trypsin digestion, peptide was desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. Peptide was reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for TMT kit/iTRAQ kit. Briefly, one unit of TMT/iTRAQ reagent were thawed and reconstituted in acetonitrile. The peptide mixtures were then incubated for 2 h at room temperature and pooled, desalted and dried by vacuum centrifugation. The tryptic peptides were fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Thermo Betasil C18 column (5 μm particles, 10 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, peptides were first separated with a gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile (pH 9.0) over 60 min into 60 fractions. Then, the peptides were combined into 6 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging.The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 6% to 23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 26 min, 23% to 35% in 8 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Based on the above data, we performed systematic bioinformatics analysis (protein functional annotation) of all identified proteins, and performed functional classification, functional enrichment and functional enrichment-based clustering analysis of all differentially expressed proteins. And the above information was synthesized to provide a reference direction for in-depth proteome-based research downstream.

### Publication Abstract
Healthy adipose tissue is crucial to maintain normal energy homeostasis. Little is known about the role of murine double minute 2 (MDM2), an E3 ubiquitin ligase and has been highlighted in oncopathology, in adipose tissue. Our results indicated that MDM2 expression was associated with nutritional status. <i>Mdm2</i> adipocyte-specific knock-in (<i>Mdm2</i>-AKI) mice exhibited exacerbated weight gain, insulin resistance, and decreased energy expenditure. Meanwhile, chronic high-fat diet (HFD) exposure caused obvious epididymal white adipose tissue (eWAT) dysfunction, such as senescence, apoptosis, and chronic inflammation, thereby leading to hepatic steatosis in <i>Mdm2</i>-AKI mice. Mechanically, MDM2&#xa0;could interact with six-transmembrane epithelial antigen of prostate 4 (STEAP4) and inhibit STEAP4 expression through ubiquitin-mediated STEAP4 degradation. Thereinto, the K18 and K161 sites of STEAP4 were ubiquitin-modificated by MDM2. Finally, STEAP4 restoration in eWAT of <i>Mdm2</i>-AKI mice on a HFD rescued MDM2-induced adipose dysfunction, insulin resistance, and hepatic steatosis. Summary, the MDM2-STEAP4 axis in eWAT plays an important role in maintaining healthy adipose tissue function and improving hepatic steatosis.

### Keywords
Ewat, High-fat diet, Proteomics, Mdm2, Mice

### Affiliations
Institute of Basic Medical Sciences Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & School of Basic Medicine Peking Union Medical College
State Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & School of Basic Medicine Peking Union Medical College,  Beijing 100005, China

### Submitter
Xiaojun Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Xiaojun Liu
State Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & School of Basic Medicine Peking Union Medical College,  Beijing 100005, China


