### Accession
PXD015680

### Title
Dissecting the antibacterial activity of Oxadiazolone-core derivatives against Mycobacterium abscessus

### Description
Mycobacterium abscessus is nowadays under the spotlight of the scientific community. This pathogenic mycobacteria is indeed responsible for a wide spectrum of infections involving mostly pulmonary infections in patients with cystic fibrosis. M. abscessus is intrinsically resistant to a broad range of antibiotics, including most antitubercular drugs, and is considered the most pathogenic and chemotherapy-resistant rapidly growing mycobacterium. Consequently, with very limited treatment options, the development of new therapeutic approaches to fight this pathogen are urgently needed. In this context, 19 oxadiazolone (OX) derivatives have been investigated for their antibacterial activity against both the rough (R) and smooth (S) variants of M. abscessus. Several OXs were active against extracellular M. abscessus growth with moderated minimal inhibitory concentrations (MIC), or intracellularly by inhibiting M. abscessus growth inside infected macrophages with MIC values similar to those of imipenem. Such promising results prompted us to identify the potential target enzymes of the sole extra and intracellular inhibitor of M. abscessus growth, i.e., iBpPPOX via activity-based protein profiling combined with mass spectrometry. This approach led to the identification of 21 potential protein candidates being mostly involved in M. abscessus lipid metabolism and/or in cell wall biosynthesis.

### Sample Protocol
Mass spectrometry analysis. Protein extract were loaded on NuPAGE 4-12% bis-Tris acrylamide gels (Life Technologies) to stack proteins in a single band that was stained with Imperial Blue (Pierce, Rockford, IL) and cut from the gel. Gels pieces were submitted to an in-gel trypsin digestion1 with slight modifications. Briefly, gel pieces were washed and destained using 100 mM NH4HCO3. Destained gel pieces were shrunk with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate in 50% acetonitrile and dried at room temperature. Protein spots were then rehydrated using 10 mM DTT in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0 for 45 min at 56 °C. This solution was replaced by 55 mM iodoacetamide in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0 and the gel pieces were incubated for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. They were then washed twice in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate and finally shrunk by incubation for 5 min with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate in 50% acetonitrile. The resulting alkylated gel pieces were dried at room temperature. The dried gel pieces were reswollen by incubation in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0 supplemented with trypsin (12.5 ng/µl; Promega) for 1 h at 4°C and then incubated overnight at 37°C. Peptides were harvested by collecting the initial digestion solution and carrying out two extractions; first in 5% formic acid and then in 5% formic acid in 60% acetonitrile. Pooled extracts were dried down in a centrifugal vacuum system. Samples were reconstituted with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in 4% acetonitrile and analyzed by liquid chromatography (LC)-tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) using a LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Electron, Bremen, Germany) online with a nanoLC Ultimate 3000 chromatography system (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA). Peptides were separated on a Dionex Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 column. First peptides were concentrated and purified on a pre-column from Dionex (C18 PepMap100, 2 cm x 100 µm I.D, 100 Å pore size, 5 µm particle size) in solvent A (0.1% formic acid in 2% acetonitrile). In the second step, peptides were separated on a reverse phase LC EASY-Spray C18 column from Dionex (PepMap RSLC C18, 15 cm x 75 µm I.D, 100 Å pore size, 2µm particle size) at 300 nL/min flow rate. After column equilibration using 4% of solvent B (20% water - 80% acetonitrile - 0.1% formic acid), peptides were eluted from the analytical column by a two steps linear gradient (4-20% acetonitrile/H2O; 0.1 % formic acid for 90 min and 20-45% acetonitrile/H2O; 0.1 % formic acid for 30 min). For peptide ionisation in the EASY-Spray source, spray voltage was set at 1.9 kV and the capillary temperature at 275 °C. The Orbitrap Velos was set up in data dependent mode to switch consistently between MS and MS/MS. MS spectra were acquired with the Orbitrap in the range of m/z 300-1700 at a FWHM resolution of 30 000 measured at 400 m/z. For internal mass calibration the 445.120025 ions was used as lock mass. The 10 abundant precursor ions were selected and collision-induced dissociation fragmentation was performed in the ion trap on the 10 most intense precursor ions measured to have maximum sensitivity and yield a maximum amount of MS/MS data. The signal threshold for an MS/MS event was set to 500 counts. Charge state screening was enabled to exclude precursors with 0 and 1 charge states. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a repeat count of 1, exclusion list size 500 and exclusion duration of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry analysis. Protein extract were loaded on NuPAGE 4-12% bis-Tris acrylamide gels (Life Technologies) to stack proteins in a single band that was stained with Imperial Blue (Pierce, Rockford, IL) and cut from the gel. Gels pieces were submitted to an in-gel trypsin digestion1 with slight modifications. Briefly, gel pieces were washed and destained using 100 mM NH4HCO3. Destained gel pieces were shrunk with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate in 50% acetonitrile and dried at room temperature. Protein spots were then rehydrated using 10 mM DTT in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0 for 45 min at 56 °C. This solution was replaced by 55 mM iodoacetamide in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0 and the gel pieces were incubated for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. They were then washed twice in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate and finally shrunk by incubation for 5 min with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate in 50% acetonitrile. The resulting alkylated gel pieces were dried at room temperature. The dried gel pieces were reswollen by incubation in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0 supplemented with trypsin (12.5 ng/µl; Promega) for 1 h at 4°C and then incubated overnight at 37°C. Peptides were harvested by collecting the initial digestion solution and carrying out two extractions; first in 5% formic acid and then in 5% formic acid in 60% acetonitrile. Pooled extracts were dried down in a centrifugal vacuum system. Samples were reconstituted with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in 4% acetonitrile and analyzed by liquid chromatography (LC)-tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) online with a nanoLC Ultimate 3000 chromatography system (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA).

### Publication Abstract
Mycobacterium abscessus (M. abscessus), a rapidly growing mycobacterium, is an emergent opportunistic pathogen responsible for chronic bronchopulmonary infections in individuals with respiratory diseases such as cystic fibrosis. Most treatments of M. abscessus pulmonary infections are poorly effective due to the intrinsic resistance of this bacteria against a broad range of antibiotics including anti-tuberculosis agents. Consequently, the number of drugs that are efficient against M. abscessus remains limited. In this context, 19 oxadiazolone (OX) derivatives have been investigated for their antibacterial activity against both the rough (R) and smooth (S) variants of M. abscessus. Several OXs impair extracellular M. abscessus growth with moderated minimal inhibitory concentrations (MIC), or act intracellularly by inhibiting M. abscessus growth inside infected macrophages with MIC values similar to those of imipenem. Such promising results prompted us to identify the potential target enzymes of the sole extra and intracellular inhibitor of M. abscessus growth, i.e., compound iBpPPOX, via activity-based protein profiling combined with mass spectrometry. This approach led to the identification of 21 potential protein candidates being mostly involved in M. abscessus lipid metabolism and/or in cell wall biosynthesis. Among them, the Ag85C protein has been confirmed as a vulnerable target of iBpPPOX. This study clearly emphasizes the potential of the OX derivatives to inhibit the extracellular and/or intracellular growth of M. abscessus by targeting various enzymes potentially involved in many physiological processes of this most drug-resistant mycobacterial species.

### Keywords
Drug susceptibility; intracellular activity; activity based-protein profiling; proteomic analysis

### Affiliations
Life Sciences
Aix Marseille Univ, Inserm, CNRS, Institut Paoli-Calmettes, CRCM, Marseille Protéomique & Aix Marseille Univ, CNRS, LISM, Institut de Microbiologie de la Méditerranée

### Submitter
Luc Camoin

### Lab Head
Dr Luc Camoin
Aix Marseille Univ, Inserm, CNRS, Institut Paoli-Calmettes, CRCM, Marseille Protéomique & Aix Marseille Univ, CNRS, LISM, Institut de Microbiologie de la Méditerranée


