### Accession
PXD040330

### Title
The DNA-binding induced (de)AMPylation activity of a Coxiella burnetii Fic enzyme targets Histone H3

### Description
Intracellular bacterial pathogens such as Coxiella burnetii evade their host's immune response by secreting effector proteins that bind and modify host proteins, thereby reshaping cell signaling pathways that help establish a replication-friendly niche. Previous research has identified Filamentation induced by cyclic AMP (Fic) enzymes as effector proteins in bacterial infections that modify their target proteins via the post-translational modification AMPylation. Fic enzymes use adenosine triphosphate (ATP) as co-substrate to transfer the adenosine monophosphate (AMP) group to a hydroxyl-containing side chain of their target protein. Many representatives of this enzyme class contain an autoinhibitory helix that suppresses AMPylation activity in vitro by contacting the active site. The mechanisms reversing this inhibition are incompletely understood. Extensive studies of the only human Fic protein FICD have revealed that FICD can switch between AMPylation and the reversal of this modification, deAMPylation, by a monomer-dimer transition. However, so far FICD remained the only example where deAMPylation by dimerization could be shown. Here we identify the protein product of C. burnetii CBU_0822, termed C. burnetii Fic 2 (CbFic2), to AMPylate host cell histone H3 at S10 and S28. We show that CbFic2 is a bifunctional enzyme, both capable of AMPylation as well as deAMPylation, and is regulated by the binding of DNA via its C-terminal helix-turn-helix domain. We propose that CbFic2 is capable of AMPylation in its monomeric form, and that binding to DNA induces a deAMPylating dimer.

### Sample Protocol
All chemicals used in this experimental setup were proteomic grade. Only low-binding reaction tubes (Sarstedt) were used. Glycerol-free anti-AMP antibody 17G6 (Höpfner et al. 2020) was centrifuged for 10 min, 16000 x g at 4 °C. To avoid elution of the antibody with the target protein, 17G6 was covalently coupled to beads. For this, 7 mg of magnetic Dynabeads™ M-270 epoxy beads (Thermo Fisher Scientific) were coupled with 180 µg of 17G6 according to the manufacturer's instructions of the Dynabeads™ Co-Immunoprecipitation Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and stored at a concentration of 10 mg ml 1 of 17G6-coupled beads at 4 °C. To allow enrichment of AMPylated proteins, competing nucleotides were removed by proteome precipitation. 250 µg of differentiated THP-1 lysates after 48 h of CbFic2E66G or CbFic2H205A expression were methanol/chloroform precipitated in biological and technical triplicates: lysate was diluted with 3 volumes of methanol and vortexed before adding 1 volume of chloroform (Sigma-Aldrich) and vortexing the samples. 3 volumes of ddH2O were added and the samples vortexed before centrifugation at 15000 rpm for 2 min at 4 °C. The aqueous upper phase was carefully aspirated, 3 volumes of methanol were added, the samples vortexed before centrifugation at 15 000 rpm for 5 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was then removed and the protein pellets were air dried. Pellets were dissolved under polymer-free conditions in a final volume of 100 µl binding buffer (25 mM Tris pH 7.4, 100 mM NaCl) and pH was adjusted to 7.5 with 5 M NaOH. 100 µl of magnetic epoxy-coupled anti-AMP antibody beads per batch were washed with 900 µl of binding buffer, resuspended in 100 µl binding buffer and combined with the solubilized protein pellet. Samples were incubated oN at 4 °C under rotation and then washed 3 times with 200 µl binding buffer. The supernatant was removed and bound proteins were eluted with 120 µl 0.5 M NH4OH, 0.5 mM EDTA for 20 min at RT. The procedure was repeated, and the eluates combined. Elutions were dried in a SpeedVac alpha RVC (Christ) without heat, and then submitted for trypsin digestion and LC-MS/MS analysis. After anti-AMP IP from cell lysates, all samples were dissolved in 0.1M TEAB with 1% SDC and heated for 5 minutes at 95°C for protein denaturation. Disulfide bonds were reduced, using 10mM DTT for 30 minutes at 60°C. Alkylation of free thiol groups was achieved with 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 minutes at 37°C in the dark. For tryptic digestion, 250ng protein were used. Digestion was performed at 37°C overnight . SDC was precipitated by 1% formic acid (FA). The supernatant was dried in a vacuum concentrator (SpeedVac SC110 Savant, (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany)) and stored at -80°c until further usage.

### Data Protocol
Directly prior to LC-MS analysis, samples were resolved in 10 µl 0.1 % FA. 1 µl was injected into a UPLC (nano Ultra-Performance Liquid Chromatography, nanoAcquity system, Waters, Milford, MA, USA). Chromatographic separation of peptides was achieved with a two-buffer system (buffer A: 0.1% FA in water, buffer B: 0.1% FA in ACN). Attatched to the UPLC was a peptide trap (180 μm × 20 mm, 100 Å pore size, 5 μm particle size, Symmetry C18, Waters) for online desalting and purification followed by a 25-cm C18 reversed-phase column (75 μm × 200 mm, 130 Å pore size, 1.7 μm particle size, Peptide BEH C18, Waters). Peptides were separated using an 80-min method with linearly increasing ACN concentration from 2% to 35% ACN in 60 minutes. Eluting peptides were analyzed on a Quadrupole Orbitrap hybrid mass spectrometer (QExactive, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Here, the top 12 ions (intensity) per precursor scan (AGC Target:1 × 106 ions; Resolution: 70,000 at 200m/z; Fill time:240ms) were analyzed by MS/MS (Higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD):25 NES; AGC Target:1 × 105 ions; Resolution:17,500 at 200m/z; Fill time: 50 ms; Mass range:400–1,200 m/z; Dynamic precursor exclusion: 20s).  LC-MS/MS data were searched with the Sequest algorithm integrated in the Proteome Discoverer software (v 2.41.15, Thermo Fisher Scientific) against a reviewed human Swissprot database, obtained in April 2020, containing 20365 entries. Carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification for cysteine residues (+57.021 Da). The oxidation of methionine (+15.995 Da), pyro-glutamate formation at glutamine residues and the peptide N-terminus (+17.027 Da), acetylation of the protein N-terminus (+42.001 Da) and the AMPylation of Serin, Tyrosine and Threonine residues (+329.053 Da) were allowed as variable modifications. A maximum number of 2 missing tryptic cleavages was allowed. Peptides between 6 and 144 amino acids where considered. A precursor mass tolerance of 10ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.02Da were allowed. A strict cutoff (false discovery rate (FDR) <0.01) was set for peptide and protein identification. Protein quantification was carried out, using the Minora Algorithm, implemented in Proteome Discoverer. For statistical analysis protein abundance values were log2 transformed and median normalized across columns to compensate for injection amount differences.   Statistical testing was carried out, using the Perseus software (Max Plank Institute for Biochemistry, Version 1.5.8.5). Proteins, identified with a p-value < 0.05 and a at least 2 times higher abundance in AMP pulldowns were considered further.

### Publication Abstract
The intracellular bacterial pathogen Coxiella burnetii evades the host response by secreting effector proteins that aid in establishing a replication-friendly niche. Bacterial filamentation induced by cyclic AMP (Fic) enzymes can act as effectors by covalently modifying target proteins with the posttranslational AMPylation by transferring adenosine monophosphate (AMP) from adenosine triphosphate (ATP) to a hydroxyl-containing side chain. Here we identify the gene product of C. burnetii CBU_0822, termed C. burnetii Fic 2 (CbFic2), to AMPylate host cell histone H3 at serine 10 and serine 28. We show that CbFic2 acts as a bifunctional enzyme, both capable of AMPylation as well as deAMPylation, and is regulated by the binding of DNA via a C-terminal helix-turn-helix domain. We propose that CbFic2 performs AMPylation in its monomeric state, switching to a deAMPylating dimer upon DNA binding. This study unveils reversible histone modification by a specific enzyme of a pathogenic bacterium.

### Keywords
Dna-binding, Fic enzyme, Ampylation, Coxiella burnetii, Histone h3

### Affiliations
Institute of Biochemistry and Signal Transduction, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf (UKE), Martinistraße 52, 20246 Hamburg, Germany
University Medical Center Hamburg Eppendorf, Institute of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine, Group of Mass Spectrometric Proteomics

### Submitter
Hannah Voß

### Lab Head
Dr Aymelt Itzen
Institute of Biochemistry and Signal Transduction, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf (UKE), Martinistraße 52, 20246 Hamburg, Germany


