### Accession
PXD011073

### Title
DUX4 interactors by LC-MSMS

### Description
The aim of this study is to define the molecular mechanisms underlying DUX4-associated toxicity in the context of facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy (FSHD). DUX4 is a transcription factor, which induces cell death by activating the transcription of its targets. No molecule able to directly control DUX4 activity is currently known. By using a tandem affinity purification protocol combined to mass spectrometry analysis, we identified Matrin 3 (MATR3), as the first cellular factor able to directly block DUX4 toxic activity. We found that MATR3 binds to the DNA binding domain of DUX4 blocking the activation of its genomic targets.

### Sample Protocol
DUX4 was fused to a streptavidin-binding peptide and a hemagglutinin tag (STREP-HA-tag) that allows for tandem affinity purification under high stringency prior to mass spectrometry (TAP-MS) to reduce nonspecific background binding and identify tight DUX4 interactors. For the STREP-HA affinity purifications of parental and STREP-HA DUX4 Flp-In T-REx 293 cells, 1μg/mL doxycycline was added to the cell culture media for 8h prior to cell harvesting. Nuclear protein extraction and STREP-HA affinity purification was conducted as described below. Briefly, cells were lysed in buffer N (300 mM sucrose, 10 mM HEPES pH 7.9, 10 mM KCl, 0.1 mM EDTA, 0.1 mM EGTA, 0.1 mM DTT, 0.75 mM spermidine, 0.15 mM spermine, 0.1% Nonidet P-40, 50 mM NaF, protease inhibitors) for 5 min on ice and then centrifuged (500g for 5min) to separate the nuclear pellet from the supernatant containing the cytoplasmic fraction. The nuclear pellet was then washed with buffer N and resuspended in buffer C420 (20 mM HEPES pH 7.9, 420 mM NaCl, 25% glycerol, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA, 0.1 mM DTT, 50 mM NaF, protease inhibitors), vortexed briefly, and shaken vigorously for 30 min. Samples were then centrifuged for 1 h at 100000g and the supernatant containing the soluble nuclear proteins were collected and quantified by Bradford assay. Hundred milligrams of nuclear extracts were used for the two-steps affinity purifications. Prior to purification, nuclear extracts were adjusted to 150 mM NaCl with HEPES buffer (20 mM HEPES, 50 mM NaF, protease inhibitors) and brought to the final volume of 7.5 mL with TNN-HS buffer (50 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA, 0.5% NP-40, 50 mM NaF, protease inhibitors). Samples were then incubated for 20 min at 4 °C on a rotating wheel with RNase A, benzonase and avidin to remove nucleic acids and to saturate endogenously biotinylated proteins, respectively. Next, the nuclear extracts were incubated overnight at 4 °C on a rotating wheel and the day after the flow-through was removed, beads were washed 3 times with TNN-HS and proteins bound to the beads were eluted with 3 consecutive incubations with 300 μL of 2.5 mM biotin in TNN-HS buffer. The biotin eluate was subsequently incubated with anti-HA-agarose beads (Merck) for 2 h at 4 °C on a rotating wheel. Samples were centrifuged for 3 min at 300g and the beads were washed 3 times with TNN-HS buffer. Another two washing steps with TNN-HS buffer without detergent and inhibitors were performed to remove traces of detergent that are detrimental to LC−MS analysis. Finally, proteins were eluted in 50 μL 2% SDS buffer, boiled 5 min at 95°C and centrifuged 3 min at 300g. The supernatant containing the eluted proteins were processed according to the Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) protocol to remove the SDS prior trypsin digestion using EMD Millipore Amicon Ultra-0.5 Centrifugal Filter Units (Fisher Scientific). Within the procedure, samples were reduced with Dithiothreitol (DTT), alkylated with Iodocetamide and digested with Trypsin sequencing grade (MERCK). Tryptic peptides were desalted using StageTip C18 (Thermo Scientific) and analyzed by nLC-MS/MS using a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a nano-electrospray ion source (Proxeon Biosystems) and a nanoUPLC Easy nLC 1000 (Proxeon Biosystems). Peptide separations occurred on a homemade (75 µm i.d., 12 cm long) reverse phase silica capillary column, packed with 1.9-µm ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany). A gradient of eluents A (distilled water with 0.1% v/v formic acid) and B (acetonitrile with 0.1% v/v formic acid) was used to achieve separation (300 nL/min flow rate), from 5% B to 50% B in 88 minutes. Full scan spectra were acquired with the lock-mass option, resolution set to 70,000 and mass range from m/z 300 to 2000 Da. The ten most intense doubly and triply charged ions were selected and fragmented.

### Data Protocol
To quantify proteins, the raw data were loaded into the MaxQuant software version 1.5.2.8 to search the human_proteome 20180425 (93,606 sequences; 37,037,628 residues). Searches were performed with the following settings: trypsin as proteolytic enzyme; 3 missed cleavages allowed; carbamidomethylation on cysteine as fixed modification; protein N-terminus-acetylation, methionine oxidation as variable modifications. Peptides and proteins were accepted with a FDR less than 1%. Label-free protein quantification was based on the spectral counts considering only proteins identified with minimum two peptides in any STREP-HA DUX4 purification. The following filtering criterion was used to discriminate the specific interactors of STREP-HA DUX4: the protein must be detected in all the three STREP-HA DUX4 biological replicates with spectral counts fold enrichment ≥ 2 with respect of the control affinity purifications performed on parental cells.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Fshd muscular dystrophy, Matr3, Human cells, Dux4

### Affiliations
Gene Expression and Muscular Dystrophy Unit, Division of Genetics and Cell Biology, IRCCS San Raffaele Scientific Institute, 20132 Milan, Italy
Ospedale San Raffaele

### Submitter
Annapaola Andolfo

### Lab Head
Dr Davide Gabellini
Gene Expression and Muscular Dystrophy Unit, Division of Genetics and Cell Biology, IRCCS San Raffaele Scientific Institute, 20132 Milan, Italy


