### Accession
PXD008587

### Title
Lysine acetylation of DosR regulates the hypoxia response of Mycobacterium tuberculosis

### Description
Tuberculosis caused by Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) infection remains a huge global public health problem. One striking characteristic of Mtb is its ability to adapt to hypoxia, and thus ensuing transition to dormant state for persistent infection, but how the hypoxia responses of Mtb is regulated remains largely unknown. Here, we performed a quantitative acetylome analysis to compare the acetylation profile of Mtb under aeration and hypoxia, and showed that 377 acetylation sites in 269 proteins of Mtb were significantly change under hypoxia. Especially, deacetylation of Dormancy Survival Regulator (DosR) at K182 promoted the hypoxia response of Mtb and enhanced transcription of DosR-targeted genes. Mechanistically, recombinant DosRK182R protein demonstrated enhanced DNA-binding activity in comparison with DosRK182Q protein. Moreover, Rv0998 was identified as an acetyltransferase that mediates the acetylation of DosR at K182. Deletion of Rv0998 also promoted the adaption of Mtb to hypoxia and transcription of DosR-targeted genes. Mice infected with Mtb strain containing acetylation-defective DosRK182R or lacking Rv0998 had much lower bacterial counts, and less severe histopathological impairments compared with those infected with the wild-type strain. Our findings suggest that hypoxia induces the deacetylation of DosR, which in turn increases its DNA binding ability to promote the transcription of target genes, allowing Mtbto transit to dormancy under hypoxia.

### Sample Protocol
Cultured cells were harvested and washed twice with cold phosphate buffered saline (PBS), lysed in 8M urea supplemented with 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), 2 mMethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA), 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail Set III (Calbiochem, San Diego, CA), and 30 mM nicotinamide, and then disrupted by sonication. Soluble proteins were collected after centrifugation at 20,000 ×g for 10 min at 4°C. Protein concentrations were determined with a BCA protein assay kit(Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For trypsin digestion, the protein sample was diluted by adding 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEAB; Sigma–Aldrich, St Louis, MI) to a urea concentration less than 2 M; trypsin was then added at a 1:50 trypsin–to–protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and at a 1:100 trypsin–to–protein mass ratio for a second 4 h digestion. After trypsin digestion, peptides were desalted using a Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex, Torrance, CA) and vacuum-dried. Peptides were reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and labeled according to the manufacturer’s protocol for a tandem mass tag (TMT) 6-plex kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). To enrich Kac peptides, tryptic peptides dissolved in NETN buffer (100 mMNaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0) were incubated with pre-washed antibody beads (PTM Biolabs, Hangzhou, China) at 4°C overnight with gentle shaking. The beads were washed four times with NETN buffer and twice with ddH2O. Bound peptides were eluted from beads with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. The eluted fractions were combined and vacuum-dried. The resulting peptides were cleaned with C18 ZipTips (Millipore, Billerica, MA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were dissolved and directly loaded onto a reversed-phase pre-column (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide separation was performed using a reversed-phase analytical column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the resulting peptides were analyzed by a Q ExactiveTMplus hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). The resulting tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) data was processed using MaxQuant with an integrated Andromeda search engine (v.1.4.1.2). Tandem mass spectra were searched against a Mtb H37Rv database concatenated with a reverse decoy database. For the quantification method, TMT-6-plex was selected. After checking the mass error and length of all identified peptides that fit both requirements, the relative quantitation was divided into two categories: a quantitative ratio of more than 1.5 was considered as up-regulated while a quantitative ratio of less than 0.67 was considered as down-regulated when performing the bioinformatics analysis. The Gene Ontology (GO) annotation proteome was performed using a UniProt-GOA Database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/). Proteins were categorized into biological processes and molecular functions according to the GO annotation. The Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) was utilized to annotate pathways. For functional enrichment analysis, we used Fisher’s exact test to check the enrichment or depletion (two-tailed test) of specific annotation terms among members of resulting protein clusters. Any terms with adjusted p values below 0.05 in any of the clusters were treated as significant.

### Publication Abstract
Tuberculosis caused by Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) infection remains a large global public health problem. One striking characteristic of Mtb is its ability to adapt to hypoxia and trigger the ensuing transition to a dormant state for persistent infection, but how the hypoxia response of Mtb is regulated remains largely unknown. Here we performed a quantitative acetylome analysis to compare the acetylation profile of Mtb under aeration and hypoxia, and showed that 377 acetylation sites in 269 Mtb proteins were significantly changed under hypoxia. In particular, deacetylation of dormancy survival regulator (DosR) at K182 promoted the hypoxia response in Mtb and enhanced the transcription of DosR-targeted genes. Mechanistically, recombinant DosR<sup>K182R</sup> protein demonstrated enhanced DNA-binding activity in comparison with DosR<sup>K182Q</sup> protein. Moreover, Rv0998 was identified as an acetyltransferase that mediates the acetylation of DosR at K182. Deletion of Rv0998 also promoted the adaptation of Mtb to hypoxia and the transcription of DosR-targeted genes. Mice infected with an Mtb strain containing acetylation-defective DosR<sup>K182R</sup> had much lower bacterial counts and less severe histopathological impairments compared with those infected with the wild-type strain. Our findings suggest that hypoxia induces the deacetylation of DosR, which in turn increases its DNA-binding ability to promote the transcription of target genes, allowing Mtb to shift to dormancy under hypoxia.

### Keywords
Lysine acetylation; mtb;dosr; hypoxia growth;dna binding

### Affiliations
PTM Biolabs Inc.
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Tuberculosis, Clinic and Research Center of Tuberculosis,Shanghai Pulmonary Hospital, Tongji University School of Medicine

### Submitter
Rachel  Green

### Lab Head
Dr Baoxue Ge
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Tuberculosis, Clinic and Research Center of Tuberculosis,Shanghai Pulmonary Hospital, Tongji University School of Medicine


