### Accession
PXD023270

### Title
Crotonylation versus acetylation in PaACL-silenced corollas in petunia

### Description
Protein acetylation and crotonylation are important post-translational modifications (PTMs) of lysine. In animal cells, histone lysines are crotonylated or acetylated depends on the relative intracellular concentrations of crotonyl-CoA and acetyl-CoA, and adding crotonate to cell cultures, or reducing the intracellular levels of acetyl-CoA, leads to an increase in histone crotonylation through the direct production of crotonyl-CoA. However, in plant the relationship of acetylation and crotonylation and the effect of the concentration of acetyl-CoA on protein crotonylation were not well known. Our previous study showed that PhACL silencing changed the content of acetyl CoA in petunia corollas. In this study, we performed a global crotonylation proteome analysis of petunia (Petunia hybrida) and found that protein crotonylation have close relationship with protein acetylation and the protein with more crotonylation sites often had more acetylation sites. Crotonylated proteins and acetylated proteins enriched in many common KEGG pathway. However, PhACL silencing resulted in different KEGG pathway enrichment of proteins with different level of crotonylated sites and acetylated sites. Cytoplasm non-histone lysine crotonylation may not depend on the concentrations of acetyl-CoA in petunia corollas. There was a positive correlation between crotonylome and acetylome expression levels in corollas of PhACL-silenced plants and control.

### Sample Protocol
The flowers were harvested at anthesis (corollas 90° reflexed) and immediately placed in tap water. All tissues were frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at –80°C until used. All experiments were conducted at least three times with independently collected and extracted tissues unless otherwise noted. Protein Extraction Petunia corollas were ground in liquid nitrogen, then the cell powder was transferred to 5 mL centrifuge tube and sonicated three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Triton-100, 65 mM DTT and 0.1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 20,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the protein was precipitated with cold 15% TCA for 2 h at -20 °C. After centrifugation at 4 °C for 10 min, the supernatant was discarded. The remaining precipitate was washed with cold acetone for three times. The protein was redissolved in buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM TEAB, pH 8.0) and the protein concentration was determined with 2-D Quant kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Three biology replicates were performed. For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 10 mM DTT for 1 h at 37 °C and alkylated with 20 mM IAA for 45 min at room temperature in darkness. For trypsin digestion, the protein sample was diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to urea concentration less than 2M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion. Approximately 100 μg protein for each sample was digested with trypsin for the following experiments. TMT Labeling  After trypsin digestion, peptide was desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. Peptide was reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for 6-plex TMT kit. Briefly, one unit of TMT reagent (defined as the amount of reagent required to label 100 μg of protein) were thawed and reconstituted in 24 μl ACN. The peptide mixtures were then incubated for 2 h at room temperature and pooled, desalted and dried by vacuum centrifugation.  HPLC Fractionation The sample was then fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Agilent 300 Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, peptides were first separated with a gradient of 2% to 60% acetonitrile in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 10 over 80 min into 80 fractions, Then, the peptides were combined into 18 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging. Affinity Enrichment To enrich Kcro peptides, tryptic peptides dissolved in NETN buffer (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0) were incubated with pre-washed antibody beads (PTM Biolabs) at 4°C overnight with gentle shaking. The beads were washed four times with NETN buffer and twice with ddH2O. The bound peptides were eluted from the beads with 0.1% TFA. The eluted fractions were combined and vacuum-dried. The resulting peptides were cleaned with C18 ZipTips (Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s instructions, followed by LC-MS/MS analysis. LC-MS/MS Analysis Three parallel analyses for each fraction were performed. LC-MS/MS Analysis was performed according to previously described protocols(Wu et al., 2015). Peptides were dissolved in 0.1% FA, directly loaded onto a reversed-phase pre-column (Acclaim PepMap 100, Thermo Scientific). Peptide separation was performed using a reversed-phase analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, Thermo Scientific). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 8% to 25% solvent B (0.1% FA in 98% ACN) over 26 min, 25% to 38% in 8 min and climbing to 85% in 4 min then holding at 85% for the last 4min, all at a constant flow rate of 280 nl/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The resulting peptides were analyzed by Q ExactiveTM Plus hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. Intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 30; ion fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans was applied for the top 20 precursor ions above a threshold ion count of 1.5E4 in the MS survey scan with 30.0s dynamic exclusion. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. Automatic gain control (AGC) was used to prevent overfilling of the ion trap; 5E4 ions were accumulated for generation of MS/MS spectra. For MS scans, the m/z scan range was 350 to 1800. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Database Search The resulting MS/MS data were processed using MaxQuant with an integrated Andromeda search engine (v.1.4.1.2). Tandem mass spectra were searched against a database (40,341 sequences) made from RNA sequencing of petunias in this study. For proteomic peptides, Trypsin/P was used as a cleavage enzyme, allowing up to 2 missed cleavages. Mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and to 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethyl on Cys, TMT-6plex (N-term) and TMT-6plex (K) were specified as fixed modifications, and oxidation on Met was specified as a variable modification. FDR was adjusted to < 1%, and peptide ion score was set to > 20. For Kcro peptides, Trypsin/P was specified as a cleavage enzyme, allowing up to 3 missed cleavages. First, the search range was set to 5 ppm for precursor ions, and the main search range was set to 5 ppm and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as a fixed modification, and GlyGly on lysine and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications. The label-free quantification method was LFQ, and FDR was adjusted to < 1%, while the minimum score for modified peptides was set to > 40. Bioinformatic Analysis Bioinformatic analysis was performed according to previously described protocols (Wu et al., 2015; Xie et al., 2015). GO term association and enrichment analysis were performed using the Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery (DAVID). The KEGG database was used to annotate protein pathways (Kanehisa and Goto, 2000). The KEGG online service tool KAAS was used to annotate the proteins’ KEGG database descriptions. The annotation results were mapped on the KEGG pathway database using the KEGG online service tool KEGG Mapper. The domain annotation was performed with InterProScan on the InterPro domain database via web-based interfaces and services. WoLF PSORT was used for predicting subcellular localization (Horton et al., 2007). The CORUM database was used to annotate protein complexes. Motif-X software was used to analyze the models of the sequences with amino acids in specific positions of acetyl-21-mers (ten amino acids upstream and downstream of the Kcro site) in all of the protein sequences. In addition, the petunia proteome was used as the background database, and the other parameters were set to the default values. The setting parameters for searching motifs using Motif-X software were ‘occurrences 20’ and ‘the Bonferroni corrected P = 0.005’. Protein–protein interaction networks were analyzed with the IntAct database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/intact/). The protein–protein interaction network map was generated with the Cytoscape software (Shannon et al., 2003). Protein quantitative ratio analysis Protein quantitative ratio was calculated as median of all unique peptides’ ratio. Student's t test was performed to investigate differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) effects. In order to meet the condition of student's t test, logarithmic transformation was performed to achieve the ratio of all peptides. Then, Student's t test was explored to calculate the p value.

### Publication Abstract
Protein acetylation and crotonylation are important posttranslational modifications of lysine. In animal cells, the correlation of acetylation and crotonylation has been well characterized and the lysines of some proteins are acetylated or crotonylated depending on the relative concentrations of acetyl-CoA and crotonyl-CoA. However, in plants, the correlation of acetylation and crotonylation and the effects of the relative intracellular concentrations of crotonyl-CoA and acetyl-CoA on protein crotonylation and acetylation are not well known. In our previous study, PaACL silencing changed the content of acetyl-CoA in petunia (Petunia hybrida) corollas, and the effect of PaACL silencing on the global acetylation proteome in petunia was analyzed. In the present study, we found that PaACL silencing did not significantly alter the content of crotonyl-CoA. We performed a global crotonylation proteome analysis of the corollas of PaACL-silenced and control petunia plants; we found that protein crotonylation was closely related to protein acetylation and that proteins with more crotonylation sites often had more acetylation sites. Crotonylated proteins and acetylated proteins were enriched in many common Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathways. However, PaACL silencing resulted in different KEGG pathway enrichments of proteins with different levels of crotonylation sites and acetylation sites. PaACLB1-B2 silencing did not led to changes in the opposite direction in crotonylation and acetylation levels at the same lysine site in cytoplasmic proteins, which indicated that cytoplasmic lysine acetylation and crotonylation might not depend on the relative concentrations of acetyl-CoA and crotonyl-CoA. Moreover, the global crotonylome and acetylome were weakly positively correlated in the corollas of PaACL-silenced and control plants.

### Keywords
Crotonylation, Gene silencing, Acetylation, Paacl, Petunia; crotonylome

### Affiliations
South China Agricultural University
Guangdong Key Laboratory for Innovative Development and Utilization of Forest Plant Germplasm, College of Forestry and Landscape Architecture, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou 510642, China

### Submitter
Yixun Yu

### Lab Head
Dr Yixun Yu
South China Agricultural University


