### Accession
PXD004524

### Title
Sheep fecal microbiota -  Diversity and functions of the sheep faecal microbiota: a multi-omic characterization

### Description
Characterization of the fecal metaproteome of dairy sheep

### Sample Protocol
Five sheep stool samples (average weight 356 ± 31 mg) were resuspended by vortexing in SDS-based extraction buffer and then heated and subjected to a combination of bead-beating and freeze-thawing steps as detailed elsewhere.  Protein extracts were subjected to on-filter reduction, alkylation, and trypsin digestion according to the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol, with slight modifications. LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out using an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) interfaced with an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano LC system (Thermo Scientific). The single-run 1D LC peptide separation was performed loading 4 μg of peptide mixture per each sample and applying a 485 min separation gradient. The mass spectrometer was set up in a data dependent MS/MS mode, with Higher Energy Collision Dissociation as the fragmentation method.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification was performed using the Proteome Discoverer informatic platform (version 1.4; Thermo Scientific), with a workflow consisting of the following nodes (and respective parameters): Spectrum Selector for spectra pre-processing (precursor mass range: 350-5000 Da; S/N Threshold: 1.5), Sequest-HT as search engine (Protein Database: see above; Enzyme: Trypsin; Max. missed cleavage sites: 2; Peptide length range 5-50 amino acids; Max. Delta Cn: 0.05; Precursor mass tolerance: 10 ppm; Fragment mass tolerance: 0.02 Da; Static modification: cysteine carbamidomethylation; Dynamic modification: methionine oxidation), and Percolator for peptide validation (FDR < 1% based on peptide q-value). Results were filtered in order to keep only rank 1 peptides, and protein grouping was allowed according to the maximum parsimony principle. Parallel searches were performed using three different sequence databases. The first database was composed by the metagenomic sequences obtained from the same samples, both as raw reads and assembled contigs (8 595 757 sequences). The second database was a selection of all bacterial, archaeal, fungal and gut microbiota sequences (79 203 800 sequences in total) from the 2015_02 release of the UniProtKB database. The metaproteomic data (regarding the microbial component of the fecal material) were obtained by merging results of searches against the two above mentioned databases. A third database (specifically, the whole UniProtKB database, release 2014_12, 89 136 540 sequences) was finally employed to achieve information only concerning the non-microbial components of the sheep microbiota.

### Publication Abstract
Little is currently known on the microbial populations colonizing the sheep large intestine, despite their expected key role in host metabolism, physiology and immunity. This study reports the first characterization of the sheep faecal microbiota composition and functions, obtained through the application of a multi-omic strategy. An optimized protocol was first devised for DNA extraction and amplification from sheep stool samples. Then, 16S rDNA sequencing, shotgun metagenomics and shotgun metaproteomics were applied to unravel taxonomy, genetic potential and actively expressed functions and pathways respectively. Under a taxonomic perspective, the sheep faecal microbiota appeared globally comparable to that of other ruminants, with Firmicutes being the main phylum. In functional terms, we detected 2097 gene and 441 protein families, finding that the sheep faecal microbiota was primarily involved in catabolism. We investigated carbohydrate transport and degradation activities and identified phylum-specific pathways, such as methanogenesis for Euryarchaeota and acetogenesis for Firmicutes. Furthermore, our approach enabled the identification of proteins expressed by the eukaryotic component of the microbiota. Taken together, these findings unveil structure and role of the distal gut microbiota in sheep, and open the way to further studies aimed at elucidating its connections with management and dietary variables in sheep farming.

### Keywords
Stool, Metaproteomics, Sheep

### Affiliations
Proteomics Laboratory, Porto Conte Ricerche, Alghero, Italy
Porto Conte Ricerche

### Submitter
Alessandro Tanca

### Lab Head
Dr Sergio Uzzau
Porto Conte Ricerche


