### Accession
PXD007278

### Title
Comprehensive redox profiling of the thiol proteome of Clostridium difficile

### Description
The strictly anaerobic bacterium C. difficile has become one of the most problematic hospital acquired pathogens and a major burden for health care systems. Although antibiotics work effectively in most C. difficile infections (CDIs), their detrimental effect on the intestinal microbiome paves the way for recurrent episodes of CDI. To develop alternative, non-antibiotics-based treatment strategies, deeper knowledge on the physiology of C. difficile, stress adaptation mechanisms and regulation of virulence factors is mandatory. Focus of this work was to tackle the thiol proteome of C. difficile and its stress-induced alterations, since recent research reported the amino acid cysteine to play a central role in the metabolism of the pathogen. We developed a novel cysteine labeling approach to determine the redox state of protein thiols on a global scale. Applicability of the technique was demonstrated by inducing disulfide stress using the chemical diamide. The method can be transferred to any kind of redox challenge and was applied in this work to assess the effect of bile acids on the thiol proteome of C. difficile. We present redox-quantification of more than 1,500 thiol peptides and discuss the general difficulty of redox analyses of peptides possessing more than a single cysteine residue. The presented method will be especially useful when not only redox status shall be determined, but information on protein quantity is needed as well. Not least, our comprehensive dataset reveals protein cysteine sites particularly susceptible to oxidation and builds a groundwork for redox proteomics studies in C. difficile.

### Sample Protocol
One culture was shocked with sublethal concentrations of diamide (2 mM), a second with 0.03% of a mixture of the sodium salts of the four major human bile acids and the third subculture left untreated (control). 5 mL of each culture was harvested, cells pelleted  and washed twice. For the iodoTMT approach 1.1 mL of control and diamide shock samples were harvested and cell pellets washed three times with PBS buffer. Cell pellets were resuspended in 600 µl lysis buffer (8 M urea, 10 mM EDTA, 1% CHAPS, 200 mM TrisHCl pH 8.0) containing 50 mM iodoacetamide (IAM). The third of three independent replicates of each condition (control, diamide, bile) was dissolved in 600 µl lysis buffer containing heavy IAM, (label switch). Cells were lyzed  and left for 30 min at 30 °C in the dark. Cell lysates were centrifuged to remove cell debris and proteins precipitated with acetone. Air-dried protein pellets were each solubilized in 100 µl lysis buffer provided with 5 mM TCEP and 50 mM heavy IAM (replicates 1 and 2) or 50 mM light IAM (replicate 3). Reduction and alkylation proceeded for 30 min at 30 °C before proteins were acetone precipitated once more. Dry protein pellets were solubilized in 50 µl of buffer (8 M urea, 10 mM EDTA, 50 mM TrisHCl pH 8.0) and protein concentration. 30 µg of proteins were separated via SDS-PAGE and Coomassie-stained. Gel lanes were cut into 10 slices, proteins trypsinized in-gel, peptides eluted and desalted. For a iodoTMT labeling three independent replicates of control and diamide shock samples were dissolved in 600 µL UHE containing the content of one vial of iodoTMT. Cells were lyzed and incubated 1 h at 30 °C in the dark. Samples were centrifuged and soluble proteins acetone precipitated overnight. Protein pellets were resuspended in 200 µl UHT buffer (8 M urea, 20 mM HEPES, 5 mM TCEP, pH 8.0) each and protein concentration determined. 200 µg of each sample were provided with the content of one vial of iodoTMT (2nd alkylation of cysteines) and incubated at 30 °C in the dark for 1 h. Proteins of each of the two resulting mixtures precipitated by acetone overnight. Protein pellets were resuspended in 1 mL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer each and trypsin added for protein digestion (protein:trypsin ratio 100:1). After 2 h, 37 °C and 800 rpm the same amount of trypsin was added a second time to a final protein:trypsin ratio of 50:1. Trypsinization proceeded overnight and was stopped next morning by the addition of trifluoric acid (final 1 %). Samples were frozen at -80 °C and freeze-dried. Dry pellets were dissolved in 600 µL TBS (50 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, pH 7.6). Immobilized anti-TMT antibody resin of 600 µl were washed three times with the same volume of TBS buffer. The antibody was subsequently combined with the peptide sample and incubated overnight at 4 °C on a rotary shaker. Samples were centrifuged for 2 min at 1,500 rpm. Pellets were incubated in 1 mL TBS, 0.1 % NP-40 for 30 min at 22 °C and 1,500 rpm, centrifuged (2 min, 1,500 rpm) and the pellets washed twice with 1 mL TBS, 0.1 % NP-40 and twice with ddH2O. Pellets were dissolved in 400 µl TMT elution buffer and incubated for 10 min at 65 °C and 1,500 rpm. Pellets were centrifuged 2 min at 1,500 rpm, supernatants collected and pellets eluted a second time. Elutions were combined, frozen at -80 °C and freeze-dried. Dry pellets were dissolved in 20 µl 5 % acetonitrile and 0.1 % TFA, another 20 µl 0.1 % TFA added and peptides desalted by stage tipping. Peptide material of each of the two samples was sufficient to be analyzed in two technical replicates by LC-MS/MS. For LC–MS/MS analyses, in-house self-packed columns were prepared and used with an EASY-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Scientific). Fused-silica emitter tips with an inner diameter of 100 μm and an outer diameter of 360 μm were prepared. Peptides were loaded onto the column at a constant flow rate of 500 nL/min without trapping. Peptides of the DiaCys approach were subsequently eluted using a nonlinear 85 min gradient from 1 to 99% buffer B (0.1% (v/v) acetic acid in acetonitrile) with a flow rate of 300 nL/min and injected online into the mass spectrometer. The 20 most abundant precursor ions were selected for fragmentation. Collision-induced dissociation (CID) fragmentation was performed for 30 ms with normalized collision energy of 35, and fragment ions were recorded in the linear ion trap. IodoTMT peptides were eluted using a non-linear 160 min gradient from 1% to 99% buffer B at a flow of 300 nL/min and directly injected. MS survey scans at a resolution of R = 60,000 were acquired in the m/z range of 300 to 1,600. The 10 most abundant precursors with a minimum signal of 10,000 and a minimum charge of 2 were selected for HCD fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 40% and an activation time of 100 ms. Precursors were excluded for 60 s with an exclusion mass width of +/-10 ppm.

### Data Protocol
Database searching and quantification was performed within the framework of the MaxQuant software suite (version 1.5.2.8), (Cox et al. 2008). Only fully tryptic peptides with not more than 2 missed cleavages were considered. Spectra were searched against the Uniprot Peptoclostridium difficile 630Derm database (UP000032805) containing 3764 protein entries and common contaminations. Precursor ion mass tolerance was 10 ppm. Fragment ion tolerance for diaCys samples was 0.5 Da and 20 ppm for HCD fragments of iodoTMT samples. Methionine oxidation was considered as variable modification. Peptide and protein identifications were accepted with a false discovery rate (FDR) of at most 1%. DiaCys samples were searched twice, firstly as label experiment of cysteine (light IAM C2H4INO and heavy IAM 13C2H2D2INO) and secondly with a variable IAM modification of cysteine. Information on the abundance of reduced and oxidized species of cysteine peptides was obtained from the MaxQuant intensities of corresponding peptides. Protein quantification was based on LFQ intensities based on at least two peptides. Further data processing was performed in Excel.

### Publication Abstract
The strictly anaerobic bacterium <i>C. difficile</i> has become one of the most problematic hospital acquired pathogens and a major burden for health care systems. Although antibiotics work effectively in most <i>C. difficile</i> infections (CDIs), their detrimental effect on the intestinal microbiome paves the way for recurrent episodes of CDI. To develop alternative, non-antibiotics-based treatment strategies, deeper knowledge on the physiology of <i>C. difficile</i>, stress adaptation mechanisms and regulation of virulence factors is mandatory. The focus of this work was to tackle the thiol proteome of <i>C. difficile</i> and its stress-induced alterations, because recent research has reported that the amino acid cysteine plays a central role in the metabolism of this pathogen. We have developed a novel cysteine labeling approach to determine the redox state of protein thiols on a global scale. Applicability of this technique was demonstrated by inducing disulfide stress using the chemical diamide. The method can be transferred to any kind of redox challenge and was applied in this work to assess the effect of bile acids on the thiol proteome of <i>C. difficile</i> We present redox-quantification for more than 1,500 thiol peptides and discuss the general difficulty of redox analyses of peptides possessing more than a single cysteine residue. The presented method will be especially useful not only when determining redox status, but also for providing information on protein quantity. Additionally, our comprehensive data set reveals protein cysteine sites particularly susceptible to oxidation and builds a groundwork for redox proteomics studies in <i>C. difficile</i>.

### Keywords
Clostridium difficile, Thiol redox proteomics

### Affiliations
Institute of Microbiology, Department of Microbial Physiology & Molecular Biology, University of Greifswald, Felix-Hausdorff Str. 8, 17489 Greifswald, phone: ++49 3834 420 5913
University of Greifswald

### Submitter
Susanne Sievers

### Lab Head
Dr Susanne Sievers
Institute of Microbiology, Department of Microbial Physiology & Molecular Biology, University of Greifswald, Felix-Hausdorff Str. 8, 17489 Greifswald, phone: ++49 3834 420 5913


