### Accession
PXD042043

### Title
Differential Effects of Cocaine and Morphine on the Diurnal Regulation of the Mouse Nucleus Accumbens Proteome

### Description
Substance use disorders (SUDs) are associated with disruptions in sleep and circadian rhythms that persist during abstinence and may contribute to relapse risk. Repeated use of substances such as psychostimulants and opioids may lead to significant alterations in molecular rhythms in the nucleus accumbens (NAc), a brain region central to reward and motivation. Previous studies have identified rhythm alterations in the transcriptome of the NAc and other brain regions following the administration of psychostimulants or opioids. However, little is known about the impact of substance use on the diurnal rhythms of the proteome in the NAc. We used liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry-based (LC-MS/MS) quantitative proteomics, along with a data-independent acquisition (DIA) analysis pipeline, to investigate the effects of cocaine or morphine administration on diurnal rhythms of proteome in the mouse NAc. Overall, our data reveals cocaine and morphine differentially alters diurnal rhythms of the proteome in the NAc, with largely independent differentially expressed proteins dependent on time-of-day. Pathways enriched from cocaine altered protein rhythms were primarily associated with glucocorticoid signaling and metabolism, whereas morphine was associated with neuroinflammation. Collectively, these findings are the first to characterize the diurnal regulation of the NAc proteome and demonstrate a novel relationship between phase-dependent regulation of protein expression and the differential effects of cocaine and morphine on the NAc proteome.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of mouse NAc samples for LC-MS/MS was performed as follows: 50 µL of RIPA containing protease inhibitor (cat#87786, ThermoFisher Scientific) and phosphatase inhibitor (cat#78420, ThermoFisher Scientific) were added to each sample. Samples were sonicated (15s with two 0.5s pulses), then centrifuged (4°C at 14.6K rpm) for 10min. Supernatant was transferred to a new vial and protein were precipitated using MeOH:Chloroform:Water (4:1:3). Extracted proteins were transferred to new tube and volume was brought to 100µL with 8M Urea, 400mM ammonium bicarbonate. Protein was reduced with 8µL of 45mM DTT and incubated at 37°C for 30min. Protein was alkylated with 8µL of 100mM iodoacetamide (IAM), then incubated in the dark at room temperature for 30min. After diluting with water to bring the urea concentration to 2M, sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) was added at a weight ratio of 1:20 (trypsin:protein) and incubated at 37°C for 16-hrs. Samples were desalted using C18 spin columns (The Nest Group, Inc., Southborough, MA, USA) and dried in a rotary evaporator. Samples were resuspended in 0.2% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and 2% acetonitrile (ACN) in water prior to LCMS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Data-independent acquisition (DIA)  DIA LC-MS/MS was performed using a nanoACQUITY UPLC system (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA, USA) connected to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid (ThermoFisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) mass spectrometer. After injection, samples were loaded into a trapping column (nanoACQUITY UPLC Symmetry C18 Trap column, 180µm × 20mm) at a flow rate of 5 µL/min and separated with a C18 column (nanoACQUITY column Peptide BEH C18, 75µm × 250mm). The compositions of mobile phases A and B were 0.1% formic acid in water and 0.1% formic acid in ACN. Peptides were eluted with a gradient extending from 6% to 35% mobile phase B in 90min and then to 85% mobile phase B in another 15min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min and a column temperature of 37°C. The data were acquired with the mass spectrometer operating in a dataindependent mode with an isolation window width of 25m/z. The full scan was performed in the range of 400–1,000m/z with “Use Quadrupole Isolation” enabled at an Orbitrap resolution of 120,000 at 200m/z and automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 4 × 105. Fragment ions from each peptide MS2 were generated in the C-trap with higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) at a collision energy of 28% and detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 60,000. DIA Data analysis DIA spectra were searched against a peptide library generated from DDA spectra using Scaffold DIA software ( v.1.1.1, Proteome Software, Portland, OR, USA). Within Scaffold DIA, raw files were first converted to mzML format using ProteoWizard (v.3.0.11748). The samples were then aligned by retention time and individually searched against a Mus musculus proteome database exported from UniProt with a peptide mass tolerance of 10ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 10ppm. The data acquisition type was set to “Non-Overlapping DIA”, and the maximum missed cleavages was set to 1. Fixed modifications included carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.02). Peptides with charge states between 2-3 and 6-30 amino acids in length were considered for quantitation, and the resulting peptides were filtered by Percolator (v.3.01) at a threshold False Discovery Rate (FDR) of 0.01. Peptide quantification was performed by EncyclopeDIA v. 0.6.12, and 6 of the highest quality fragment ions were selected for quantitation 53 . Proteins containing redundant peptides were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony, and proteins were filtered at a threshold of 2 peptides per protein and an FDR of 1%. Data were median normalized between the samples to remove unwanted experimental variation. Out of 3047 proteins, 58 have missingness in more than 40% of samples and are removed. The missingness in the remaining proteins was imputed with K-nearest-neighbors using the impute.knn() function in R package impute. All analyses were performed based on log2 transformed values.

### Publication Abstract
Substance use disorders are associated with disruptions in sleep and circadian rhythms that persist during abstinence and may contribute to relapse risk. Repeated use of substances such as psychostimulants and opioids may lead to significant alterations in molecular rhythms in the nucleus accumbens (NAc), a brain region central to reward and motivation. Previous studies have identified rhythm alterations in the transcriptome of the NAc and other brain regions following the administration of psychostimulants or opioids. However, little is known about the impact of substance use on the diurnal rhythms of the proteome in the NAc. We used liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry-based quantitative proteomics, along with a data-independent acquisition analysis pipeline, to investigate the effects of cocaine or morphine administration on diurnal rhythms of proteome in the mouse NAc. Overall, our data reveal cocaine and morphine differentially alter diurnal rhythms of the proteome in the NAc, with largely independent differentially expressed proteins dependent on time-of-day. Pathways enriched from cocaine altered protein rhythms were primarily associated with glucocorticoid signaling and metabolism, whereas morphine was associated with neuroinflammation. Collectively, these findings are the first to characterize the diurnal regulation of the NAc proteome and demonstrate a novel relationship between the phase-dependent regulation of protein expression and the differential effects of cocaine and morphine on the NAc proteome. The proteomics data in this study are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD042043.

### Keywords
Nucleus accumbens, Circadian rhythms, Proteomics, Morphine, Cocaine

### Affiliations
Yale University
Keck MS & Proteomics Resource Yale School of Medicine

### Submitter
TuKiet Lam

### Lab Head
Dr TuKiet Lam
Keck MS & Proteomics Resource Yale School of Medicine


