### Accession
PXD043393

### Title
Dietary Laminaria digitata and enzymatic supplementation on the ileum function on weaned piglets: a combined proteomics and metabolomics analysis

### Description
Laminaria digitata is a brown seaweed with prebiotic properties that has the potential to improve the response of weaned piglets to nutritional stress. However, its cell wall polysaccharides are not digested by the endogenous enzymes of monogastric animals. Alginate lyase has shown promise in degrading them under in vitro conditions. The objective of this study is to evaluate the effect of a 10% incorporation of L. digitata, and alginate lyase supplementation on the ileum proteome and metabolome, in a hypothesis generating approach. Control piglets increased the use of glucose as an enteric source of energy, demonstrated by the higher abundance of PKLR and PCK2 proteins and the lower concentration of glucose found in the tissue. Furthermore, seaweed inclusion promoted an increased abundance of proteins related with improved enterocyte structural integrity (ACTBL2, CRMP1, FLII, EML2 and MYLK), peptidase activity (NAALADL1, CAPNS1) and anti-inflammatory activity (C3), demonstrating improved intestinal function. Coherently, they lowered the abundance of apoptosis (ERN2) and proteolytic (DPP4) proteins. Alginate lyase supplementation seems to magnify the baseline effects of feeding the seaweed alone, by increasing the number of differential proteins in the same pathways, possibly as a consequence of increased intracellular nutrient release.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction was realised with 50 mg of freeze-dried tissue. Then, 20 µg of protein were run on a short migration using precast 1Dgel 12% Bis-Tris (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA). Samples were divided in two groups of bands (low and high molecular weight). Proteins were reduced, alkylated and unstained further trypsin digestion incubated overnight at 37°C. Extracted peptides were analysed by NanoLC-MSMS.

### Data Protocol
Acquired data were imported into Progenesis QI software for Proteomics (version 4.2, Nonlinear Dynamics, Waters). The protein and peptide identification searching Sus scrofa database on UniprotKB (189,471 sequences; released 7th of September 2021) via Mascot Daemon (version 2.8.0. Matrix Science) were imported to Progenesis QIP and matched to peptide spectra. The following Mascot research parameters were used: peptide tolerance of 20 ppm, fragment mass tolerance of 0.3 Da, up to two missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification and methionine oxidation, N-terminal protein acetylation and tryptophan to kynurenine as variable modifications. Only the proteins identified with a significance Mascot calculated confidence of 95% were accepted. Proteins were considered reliably identified when at least 2 peptides and at least 1 unique peptide per protein. Proteins were considered differentially abundant when fold change was above 2 or below 0.67, and the ANOVA p-value was < 0.05. Principal components analysis (PCA) was conducted for the whole ileal proteome using the ClustVis platform. Differentially abundant proteins were further processed with functional enrichment using the Metascape® tool.

### Publication Abstract
Laminaria digitata, a brown seaweed with prebiotic properties, can potentially enhance the resilience of weaned piglets to nutritional distress. However, their cell wall polysaccharides elude digestion by monogastric animals' endogenous enzymes. In vitro studies suggest alginate lyase's ability to degrade such polysaccharides. This study aimed to assess the impact of a 10% dietary inclusion of L. digitata and alginate lyase supplementation on the ileum proteome and metabolome, adopting a hypothesis-generating approach. Findings indicated that control piglets escalated glucose usage as an enteric energy source, as evidenced by the increased abundance of PKLR and PCK2 proteins and decreased tissue glucose concentration. Additionally, the inclusion of seaweed fostered a rise in proteins linked to enhanced enterocyte structural integrity (ACTBL2, CRMP1, FLII, EML2 and MYLK), elevated peptidase activity (NAALADL1 and CAPNS1), and heightened anti-inflammatory activity (C3), underscoring improved intestinal function. In addition, seaweed-fed piglets showed a reduced abundance of proteins related to apoptosis (ERN2) and proteolysis (DPP4). Alginate lyase supplementation appeared to amplify the initial effects of seaweed-only feeding, by boosting the number of differential proteins within the same pathways. This amplification is potentially due to increased intracellular nutrient availability, making a compelling case for further exploration of this dietary approach. SIGNIFICANCE: Pig production used to rely heavily on antibiotics and zinc oxide to deal with post-weaning stress in a cost-effective way. Their negative repercussions on public health and the environment have motivated heavy restrictions, and a consequent search for alternative feed ingredients/supplements. One of such alternatives is Laminaria digitata, a brown seaweed whose prebiotic components that can help weaned piglets deal with nutritional stress, by improving their gut health and immune status. However, their recalcitrant cell walls have antinutritional properties, for which alginate lyase supplementation is a possible solution. By evaluating ileal metabolism as influenced by dietary seaweed and enzyme supplementation, we aim at discovering how the weaned piglet adapts to them and what are their effects on this important segment of the digestive system.

### Keywords
Metabolomics, Piglet, Proteomics, Laminaria digitata, Ileum

### Affiliations
LIST-ERIN-BEAP Bascharage1 Luxembourg
LIST-ERIN-ERTP-BEAP-HAU platform

### Submitter
Céline LECLERCQ

### Lab Head
Dr Céline LECLERCQ
LIST-ERIN-BEAP Bascharage1 Luxembourg


