### Accession
PXD024241

### Title
A novel Traditional Chinese Medicine, Ramulus Mori (Sangzhi) alkaloids ameliorates glucose metabolism accompanied by the modulation of gut microbiota and ileal inflammatory damage in type 2 diabetic KKAy mice

### Description
The novel Traditional Chinese Medicine Ramulus Mori (Sangzhi) alkaloid tablets (SZ-A) are approved by The China National Medical Products Administration for the treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM). However, the extensive pharmacological characteristics and the underlying mechanism are unknown. This study investigated the mechanisms by which SZ-A ameliorates glucose metabolism in KKAy mice, an animal model of T2DM. Diabetic KKAy mice were treated intragastrically with SZ-A once daily for 8 weeks, after which glucose levels, lipid metabolism, gut microbiome, systemic inflammatory factors, luminal concentrations of short-chain fatty acids (fecal samples), and ileal proteomic changes were evaluated. The ileum tissues were collected, and the effects of SZ-A on pathological inflammatory damage were evaluated by hematoxylin and eosin staining, immunofluorescence, and immunohistochemistry. The mRNA and protein expression levels of various inflammatory markers, including monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 and phosphorylated nuclear factor kappa B p65, were detected in the ileum tissues. SZ-A improved glucose metabolism with enhanced insulin response and elevated glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1) during the glucose tolerance test in diabetic KKAy mice. Gut microbiota analysis demonstrated that SZ-A administration elevated the abundance of Bacteroidaceae and Verrucomicrobia, reduced the levels of Rikenellaceae and Desulfovibrionaceae; and increased the concentrations of fecal acetic and propionic acids compared to the diabetic model group. Additionally, SZ-A markedly improved ileal inflammatory injury and pro-inflammatory macrophage infiltration and improved intestinal mucosal barrier function in diabetic KKAy mice. SZ-A also attenuated the levels of circulating endotoxin, pro-inflammatory cytokines, and chemokines in the mice sera. Collectively, SZ-A ameliorated the overall metabolic profile including glucose and lipid metabolism in KKAy mice, which may be associated with an improvement in GLP-1 and insulin secretion, at least in part by modulating the gut microbiome and relieving the degree of ileal and systemic inflammation.

### Sample Protocol
Protein Extraction  The mouse ileums were grinded by liquid nitrogen into cell powder and then transferred to a 5-mL centrifuge tube. After that, four volumes of lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail) was added to the cell powder, followed by sonication three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 12,000g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the supernatant was collected and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions.  Trypsin Digestion  For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to urea concentration less than 2M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4h digestion. TMT Labeling  After trypsin digestion, peptide was desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. Peptide was reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for TMT kit. Briefly, one unit of TMT reagent were thawed and reconstituted in acetonitrile. The peptide mixtures were then incubated for 2h at room temperature and pooled, desalted and dried by vacuum centrifugation. HPLC Fractionation The tryptic peptides were fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Agilent 300Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, peptides were first separated with a gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile (pH 9.0) over 60 min into 60 fractions. Then, the peptides were combined into 18 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging.  LC-MS/MS Analysis  The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 6% to 23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 26 min, 23% to 35% in 8 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were processed by GO Annotation (www. http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/), Domain Annotation (InterProScan) and KEGG Pathway Annotation (KEGG online service tools KAAS mapper)

### Publication Abstract
The novel Traditional Chinese Medicine Ramulus Mori (Sangzhi) alkaloid tablets (SZ-A) are approved by The China National Medical Products Administration for the treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM). However, the extensive pharmacological characteristics and the underlying mechanism are unknown. This study investigated the mechanisms by which SZ-A ameliorates glucose metabolism in KKAy mice, an animal model of T2DM. Diabetic KKAy mice were treated intragastrically with SZ-A once daily for 8 weeks, after which glucose levels, lipid metabolism, gut microbiome, systemic inflammatory factors, luminal concentrations of short-chain fatty acids (fecal samples), and ileal proteomic changes were evaluated. The ileum tissues were collected, and the effects of SZ-A on pathological inflammatory damage were evaluated by hematoxylin and eosin staining, immunofluorescence, and immunohistochemistry. The mRNA and protein expression levels of various inflammatory markers, including monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 and phosphorylated nuclear factor kappa B p65, were detected in the ileum tissues. SZ-A improved glucose metabolism with enhanced insulin response and elevated glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1) nearly 2.7-fold during the glucose tolerance test in diabetic KKAy mice. Gut microbiota analysis demonstrated that SZ-A administration elevated the abundance of <i>Bacteroidaceae</i> and <i>Verrucomicrobia</i>, reduced the levels of <i>Rikenellaceae</i> and <i>Desulfovibrionaceae;</i> and increased the concentrations of fecal acetic and propionic acids compared to the diabetic model group. Additionally, SZ-A markedly improved ileal inflammatory injury and pro-inflammatory macrophage infiltration and improved intestinal mucosal barrier function in diabetic KKAy mice. SZ-A also attenuated the levels of circulating endotoxin, pro-inflammatory cytokines, and chemokines in the mice sera. Collectively, SZ-A ameliorated the overall metabolic profile including glucose and lipid metabolism in KKAy mice, which may be associated with an improvement in GLP-1 and insulin secretion, at least in part by modulating the gut microbiome and relieving the degree of ileal and systemic inflammation.

### Keywords
Ramulus mori (sangzhi) alkaloids; type 2 diabetes; gut microbiome; ileal damage; inflammation

### Affiliations
Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College
Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, No.1 Xiannongtan Street, Beijing 100050, China.

### Submitter
quan liu

### Lab Head
Dr Quan Liu
Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, No.1 Xiannongtan Street, Beijing 100050, China.


