### Accession
PXD040435

### Title
The Plant Unique ESCRT Component FREE1 Regulates Autophagosome Closure

### Description
The energy sensor AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) can activate autophagy when cellular energy production becomes compromised. However, the degree to which nutrient sensing impinges on the autophagosome closure remains unknown. Here, we provide the mechanism underlying a plant unique protein FREE1, upon autophagy-induced SnRK1α1-mediated phosphorylation, functions as a linkage between ATG conjugation system and ESCRT machinery to regulate the autophagosome closure upon nutrient deprivation. Using high-resolution microscopy, 3D-electron tomography, and protease protection assay, we showed that unclosed autophagosomes accumulated in free1 mutants. Proteomic, cellular and biochemical analysis revealed the mechanistic connection between FREE1 and the ATG conjugation system/ESCRT-III complex in regulating autophagosome closure. Mass spectrometry analysis showed that the evolutionary conserved plant energy sensor SnRK1α1 phosphorylates FREE1 and recruits it to the autophagosomes to promote closure. Mutagenesis of the phosphorylation site on FREE1 caused the autophagosome closure failure. Our findings unveil how cellular energy sensing pathways regulate autophagosome closure to maintain cellular homeostasis.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from 5 DAG seedlings in IP buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM MgCl2, 20% glycerol, 0.2% NP-40, 1× protease inhibitor cocktail, Roche). The collected supernatant was then co-incubated with GFP-Trap magnetic beads (Chromotek) at 4 °C as instructed by the manufacture handbook. The beads were washed five times with the same ice-cold IP buffer and eluted by boiling in reducing SDS sample buffer before SDS-PAGE gel electrophoresis. The gel was then stained with Imperial™ Protein Stain after SDS–PAGE separation, and proteins were cut out for in-gel trypsin digestion as previously described. In general, the cut gel was dehydrated and rehydrated using acetonitrile and water repeatedly for three times before reducing the disulfide-bond using dithiothreitol (DTT) and iodizing the gel using iodoacetamide (IAA). The gel was further dehydrated using acetonitrile for three times before trypsin digestion at 30 °C overnight. The digested peptide mixture was fractionated by nano-liquid chromatography-MS (nano-LCMS) using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc). MS data were then acquired with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc).

### Data Protocol
The raw MS/MS data was analyzed with MaxQuant version 2.0.3.1 as described in previous study55. The reference sequences of Arabidopsis thaliana proteome (Araport11_pep_20220103.fasta) were from TAIR database (arabidopsis.org), which contain 48231 entries. The false discovery rate (FDR) threshold of peptide-to-spectrum match (PSM) and protein were set as 0.05. “Trypsin digestion” and “Orbitrap” were chosen in the parameters setting while other searching parameters were kept as default. The “iBAQ” value was set for label free quantification. Data matrix of protein expression levels in all samples were merged by in-house Perl scripts.

### Publication Abstract
The retromer is a heteromeric protein complex that localizes to endosomal membranes and drives the formation of endosomal tubules that recycle membrane protein cargoes. In plants, the retromer plays essential and canonical functions in regulating the transport of vacuolar storage proteins and the recycle of endocytosed plasma membrane proteins (PM); however, the mechanisms underlying the regulation of assembly, protein stability, and membrane recruitment of the plant retromer complex remain to be elucidated. In&#xa0;this study, we identify a plant-unique endosomal regulator termed BLISTER (BLI), which colocalizes and associates with the retromer complex by interacting with the retromer core subunits VPS35 and VPS29. Depletion of BLI perturbs the assembly and membrane recruitment of the retromer core VPS26-VPS35-VPS29 trimer. Consequently, depletion of BLI disrupts retromer-regulated endosomal trafficking function, including transport of soluble vacuolar proteins and recycling of endocytosed PIN-FORMED (PIN) proteins from the endosomes back to the PM. Moreover, genetic analysis in <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i> mutants reveals BLI and core retromer interact genetically in the regulation of endosomal trafficking. Taken together, we identified BLI as a plant-specific endosomal regulator, which functions in retromer pathway to modulate the recycling of endocytosed PM proteins and the trafficking of soluble vacuolar cargoes.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Ap-ms, Escrt, Free1, Autophagosome

### Affiliations
The Chinese University of Hong Kong

### Submitter
Lei Feng

### Lab Head
Dr Lei Feng
The Chinese University of Hong Kong


