### Accession
PXD002578

### Title
Rat liver ESI-MS/MS -  Proteomic analysis of one-carbon metabolism-related marker in liver of rat offspring

### Description
one-carbon metabolism in the liver plays a critical role in placental and fetal growth. Impaired functioning of one-carbon metabolism is associated with increased homocysteine (Hcy) levels. In this study, we applied a comprehensive proteomic approach to identify differential expression of proteins related to one-carbon metabolism in the livers of rat offspring as an effect of maternal food restriction during gestation. We determined that betaine-homocysteine S-methyltransferase 1 (BHMT1), methylenetetrahydrofolate dehydrogenase 1 (MTHFD1), and ATP synthase subunit beta mitochondrial (ATP5B) expression levels were significantly reduced in the livers of rat offspring exposed to maternal food restriction during gestation compared with in the offspring of rats fed a normal diet (p<0.05).

### Sample Protocol
Approximately 0.2 g of frozen liver were prepared in lysis buffer on ice. . Each sample was sonicated for 30 s and centrifuged at 14 000 rpm for 30 min at 4°C. The supernatant was collected and the protein concentration was determined using a BCA protein assay kit (Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA). Equal amounts of lysate, 250 µg was used for the 2-DE.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS was assigned as the ion search option in MASCOT software (v2.4, Matrix Science, London, UK). Peptide fragment files were obtained from the peptide peaks in ESI-MS by ESI-MS/MS. Trypsin was selected as the enzyme with one potentially missing cleavage site. ESI-QTOF was selected as the instrument type. The peptide fragment files were searched based on the database by using the MASCOT search engine [Database: NCBInr20100708 20100716 (11411477 sequences; 3893939158 residues) Timestamp: 31 May 2011] and limited to Rattus norvegicus.

### Publication Abstract
Maternal food intake has a significant effect on the fetal environment, and an inadequate maternal diet may result in intrauterine growth restriction. Intrauterine growth restriction newborn rat pups nursed by normal diet-fed dams exhibited rapid catch-up growth, which plays a critical role in the risk for metabolic and cardiovascular disease in later life. Specifically, one-carbon metabolism in the liver plays a critical role in placental and fetal growth. Impaired functioning of one-carbon metabolism is associated with increased homocysteine levels. In this study, we applied a comprehensive proteomic approach to identify differential expression of proteins related to one-carbon metabolism in the livers of rat offspring as an effect of maternal food restriction during gestation. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD002578. We determined that betaine-homocysteine S-methyltransferase 1, methylenetetrahydrofolate dehydrogenase 1, and ATP synthase subunit beta mitochondrial (ATP5B) expression levels were significantly reduced in the livers of rat offspring exposed to maternal food restriction during gestation compared with in the offspring of rats fed a normal diet (p &lt; 0.05). Moreover, the expression levels of betaine-homocysteine S-methyltransferase 1, methylenetetrahydrofolate dehydrogenase 1, and ATP synthase subunit beta mitochondrial were negatively correlated with serum homocysteine concentration in male offspring exposed to maternal food restriction during gestation and normal diet during lactation. However, in female offspring only expression levels of methylenetetrahydrofolate dehydrogenase 1 were negatively correlated with homocysteine concentration. This study shows that maternal food restriction during late gestation and normal diet during lactation lead to increased homocysteine concentration through disturbance of one-carbon metabolism in the livers of male offspring. This suggests that male offspring have an increased gender-specific susceptibility to disease in later life through fetal programming.

### Keywords
Rat, Liver, Esi-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Ewha Womans University, South Korea
Ewha Womans University, south Korea

### Submitter
Young-Ah You

### Lab Head
Dr Young-Ah, You
Ewha Womans University, South Korea


