### Accession
PXD025443

### Title
A proteomic approach for systematic mapping of human deubiquitinating enzymes substrates

### Description
In the present study we implemented the bioUb approach to identify DUB substrates in a systemic manner. DUBs have been individually silenced so that the ubiquitination levels of their respective substrates are increased, and hence, upon isolation, susbtrates have been detected by mass spectrometry. Here we report quantitative proteomic data of the putative substrates of 5 human DUBs: USP1, USP7, USP9X, USP11 and USP42.

### Sample Protocol
Human HEK293 cells were transfected with specific siRNAs (Ambion) and the BioUb construct in order to individually silence a given human DUB and to isolate ubiquitinated proteins, respectively. Ubiquitinated, and hence, biotinylated proteins were enriched using avidin resin, and subsequently fractionated by SDS-PAGE. Gel bands were cut into 4 slices, which were subjected to in-gel trypsin digestion. Finally, resulting peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Acquired raw MS data was processed using the MaxQuant software and further statistical analysis were done in the Perseus.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Substrate, Deubiquitinating enzyme, Bioub, Database, Dubase

### Affiliations
Teacher/Researcher
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Science and Technology, UPV/EHU, Leioa 48940, Bizkaia, Spain

### Submitter
Nerea Osinalde

### Lab Head
Dr Ugo Mayor
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Science and Technology, UPV/EHU, Leioa 48940, Bizkaia, Spain


