### Accession
PXD001633

### Title
Label free proteomics of isolated lysosomes from a wild type and LIMP2 knock out mouse

### Description
Quantitative label free proteomics on an n=1 experiment of isolated tritosomes (lysosomes) from mus musculus, WT and a knock out of the LIMP2 protein.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were denatured by heating at 95 °C for 15 min,followed by reduction of disulfide bridges with 5 mM DTT 30 min at 60°C and alkylation for 30 min with 15 mM iodoacetamide ambient temperature in the dark .Trypsinization was carried out overnight at 37°C (1:25 w/w trypsin ratio). Finally, RapiGest detergent was removed by acidifying digest to pH = 2 with trifluoroacetic acid and incubation for 15 min at 37°C followed by centrifugation at 10.000xg for 10 minutes and transfer of the supernatant to a clean tube.  Nanoscale LC separation of the tryptic peptides was performed with a NanoAcquity system (Waters). Samples were loaded on to a Symmetry C18 5 µm, 2 cm×180 µm trap column (Waters) at a flow rate of 5 µl/min prior to separation on a Bridged Ethyl Hybrid C18 1.7 µm, 25 cm×75 µm analytical reversed-phase column (Waters) by application of a 90 min gradient from 1% ACN and 0.1% formic acid to 40% ACN and 0.1% formic acid at a column flow rate of 0.25 µl/min. The column temperature was maintained at 35ºC. Analysis of the eluted tryptic peptides was performed using a Synapt G2 Q-TOF (quadrupole time-of-flight) mass spectrometer (Waters) equipped with a nanolockspray source (Waters) fitted with a pico-tip emitter (New Objective) operated at a capillary voltage of approximately 3 kV. For all measurements, the mass spectrometer was operated in v-mode with a typical resolution of at least 20,000 full width at half maximum. All analyses were performed in positive mode ESI. The time-of-flight analyzer of the mass spectrometer was externally calibrated with a NaI mixture from m/z 50 to 1990. The collision gas used was argon, maintained at a constant pressure of 2.0×10-3 mbar (1 bar=100 kPa) in the collision cell. The lock mass, [Glu1]fibrinopeptide B, was delivered from the auxiliary pump of the NanoAcquity system with a concentration of 100 fmol/µl at 0.5 µl/min to the reference sprayer of the nanolockspray source. The data were post-acquisition lock-mass corrected using the monoisotopic mass of the doubly charged precursor of [Glu1]fibrinopeptide B, delivered through the reference sprayer, which was sampled every 120 s. Accurate mass precursor and fragment ion LC-MS data were collected in data independent, alternate scanning (LC-MSE) mode of acquisition.

### Data Protocol
Continuum LC-MS data were processed and searched using ProteinLynx GlobalSERVER v2.5 (Waters Corporation). Protein identifications were obtained by searching databases of mus musculus (release 2011_12, Uniprot). Sequence information of Alcohol dehydrogenase and Enolase 1(Saccharomyces cerevisiae) was added to the databases to afford the ability to normalize the data sets, A decoy was generated on the fly with every database search experiment conducted to estimate the protein false positive rate of identification. Data independent scanning protein identifications were accepted when more than three fragment ions per peptide, seven fragment ions per protein and more than 2 peptides per protein were identified, in at least one technical replicate per sample. Protein quantitation was only reported when the protein was detected in at least 2 out of 3 technical replicate of at least one biological replicate. Typical search criteria used for protein identification included automatic peptide and fragment ion tolerance settings (approximately 10 and 25 ppm, respectively), 1 allowed missed cleavage, fixed carbamidomethyl-cysteine modification and variable methionine oxidation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Scrb2, Mouse, Proteomics, Tritosome, Lysosome

### Affiliations
Proteomics of Stem Cells and Cancer.
University Clinic Heidelberg.
German Cancer Research Center.
Im Neuenheimer Feld 581
Heidelberg, Germany.
Clinical Proteomics Facility, Medical Biochemistry, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam

### Submitter
Gertjan Kramer

### Lab Head
Dr J.M.F.G. Aerts
Clinical Proteomics Facility, Medical Biochemistry, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam


