### Accession
PXD016369

### Title
Purification of ubiquitylated proteins from HCT116 cells

### Description
By hyperosmotic stimuli, a slight increase in the level of ubiquitylated proteins was observed. So we tried to identify the di-Gly peptides.

### Sample Protocol
HCT116 cells (1×107) were treated with 0.2 M sucrose for the indicated periods of time (0, 15, 30 min) before harvesting. The cells were lysed in a urea-containing lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 100 mM NaCl, 10% glycerol, 6 M Urea) supplemented with 10 µM bortezomib (LC Laboratories, Boston, MA, US), 10 mM iodoacetamide (GE Healthcare), and 1×Complete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche, EDTA free), and sonicated on a Handy Sonic (Tomy Seiko). The lysate was then clarified by centrifugation (20,000 g for 20 min), and the protein concentration was determined using the BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Scientific). To capture ubiquitylated proteins, we used a biotinylated trypsin-resistant tandem ubiquitin-binding entity (BIOTR-TUBE). BIOTR-TUBE (10 µg) and 5 mg of cell lysate were incubated for 1 h at 4°C, and incubated for an additional for 1 h at 4°C with 50 µL of Dynabeads MyOne streptavidin C1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). After two washes with lysis buffer containing 6 M urea and two washes with urea-free lysis buffer, the beads were suspended in 50 µL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AMBC) and 0.1% RapiGest SF (Waters, Milford, MA, USA). Proteins on beads were reduced in 5 mM TCEP for 30 min at 50°C, and then alkylated with 10 mM methylmethanethiosulfonate (MMTS) for 10 min at room temperature. The alkylated proteins were digested overnight at 37°C with 1 μg of trypsin Gold (Promega, Madison, WI, US). After tryptic digestion, samples were acidified to ∼pH 2 with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and desalted by solid-phase extraction using GL-Tip SDB and GL-Tip GC (GL Sciences, Tokyo, Japan). Ubiquitinated peptides were enriched using the PTMScan ubiquitin Remnant Motif (K-ε-GlyGly) Kit (Cell Signaling Technology) 43. After three washes with 200 mM triethanolamine (pH 8.2), antibody-coupled beads were cross-linked with 20 mM dimethyl pimelimidate (DMP) in 200 mM triethanolamine (pH 8.2) for 1 h at room temperature. The beads were then washed three times with 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 100 mM NaCl, and stored at 4°C until use. Trypsinised peptides prepared as described above were suspended in 0.2 mL IAP buffer (50 mM MOPS, pH 7.2, 10 mM sodium phosphate, 50 mM NaCl) and incubated with 10 μL of antibody-coupled beads for 2 h at 4°C. After two washes with 250 μL of IAP buffer and three washes with 250 μL of Milli-Q water (Millipore), di-Gly peptides were eluted with 3×20 μL of 0.15% TFA. The eluted peptides were desalted to 0.1% TFA using GL-Tip SDB and GL-Tip GC, and analysed by mass spectrometry (MS).

### Data Protocol
The Q Exactive was operated by the Xcalibur software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in data-dependent MS/MS mode, and the top 10 most intense ions with charge state +2 to +5 were selected with an isolation window of m/z = 2.0 and fragmented by higher-energy collisional dissociation with a normalised collision energy of 25. Resolution and automatic gain control (AGC) target for the survey scans were set to 70,000 and 3E6, respectively. Ions selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 5 sec (for diGly peptide identification) or 30 sec (for binding protein identification). The data were analyzed using the Mascot search program (Matrix Science, London, UK) in Proteome Discoverer 1.3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Maximum missed cleavage site of trypsin was set to two. Oxidation (Met), GlyGly (Lys), phosphorylation (Ser, Thr, Tyr) and pyroglutamate conversion (Gln) were selected as variable modifications. For the diGly proteome, Cys-methylthio modification was set as a static modification for database searches. Peptide identification was filtered at a false discovery rate < 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
The proteasome is a major proteolytic machine that regulates cellular proteostasis through selective degradation of ubiquitylated proteins<sup>1,2</sup>. A number of ubiquitin-related molecules have recently been found to be involved in the regulation of biomolecular condensates or membraneless organelles, which arise by liquid-liquid phase separation of specific biomolecules, including stress granules, nuclear speckles and autophagosomes<sup>3-8</sup>, but it remains unclear whether the proteasome also participates in such regulation. Here we reveal that proteasome-containing nuclear foci form under acute hyperosmotic stress. These foci are transient structures that contain ubiquitylated proteins, p97 (also known as valosin-containing protein (VCP)) and multiple proteasome-interacting proteins, which collectively constitute a proteolytic centre. The major substrates for degradation by these foci were ribosomal proteins that failed to properly assemble. Notably, the proteasome foci exhibited properties of liquid droplets. RAD23B, a substrate-shuttling factor for the proteasome, and ubiquitylated proteins were necessary for formation of proteasome foci. In mechanistic terms, a liquid-liquid phase separation was triggered by multivalent interactions of two ubiquitin-associated domains of RAD23B and ubiquitin chains consisting of four or more ubiquitin molecules. Collectively, our results suggest that ubiquitin-chain-dependent phase separation induces the formation of a nuclear proteolytic compartment that promotes proteasomal degradation.

### Keywords
Ubiquitylated proteins, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
okyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical Science
Laboratory of Protein Metabolism, Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical Science

### Submitter
Hikaru Tsuchiya

### Lab Head
Dr Yasushi Saeki
Laboratory of Protein Metabolism, Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical Science


