### Accession
PXD005293

### Title
Scophthalmus maximus spleen iTRAQ

### Description
Scophthalmus maximus spleen proteome after polyI:C-injection under high or low temperature were compared by iTRAQ(isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation).

### Sample Protocol
spleens were ground in liquid nitrogen and suspended in 10 volume of lysis buffer containing 7M Urea, 2M thiourea, 0.1% CHAPS, one piece/50ml Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, then sonicated. Reduce the disulfide bond of supernatant,block the cysteine,and then add to Millpore Amicon Ultra-15 (MWCO 10k) followed by washing three times using iTRAQ Dissolution Buffer (AB Sciex, USA) and adding 4μg Trypsin Gold (Promega, USA) for protein digestion overnight at 37oC. Collect the resulting peptide solution after centrifugation 12,000g for 20 min. The peptide solution was then labeled with iTRAQ reagents (AB Sciex, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.The iTRAQ labeled peptides were fractionated using high-pH reversed-phase (RP) chromatography approach. The fractioned peptides were collected and combined into 20 final fractions, which were applied to LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
All the LC-MS/MS raw data were converted to Mascot generic Format (.mgf) by thermo scientific tool Proteome Discoverer 1.3. Mascot version 2.4.1 (Matrix Sciences, UK) was used to search against the predicted protein database translated from the S. maximus transcriptome obtained in this study for peptide sequence assignments.To reduce the probability of false peptide identification, only peptides at a 95% confidence interval (P<0.05) with a false discovery rate (FDR) estimation≤1.04% were counted as being successfully identified. Each identified positive protein contained at least one unique peptide. IQuant software (Wen et al. 2014) was used for quantitatively analyzing the labeled peptides with isobaric tags. It integrates Mascot Percolator and advanced statistical algorithms to process the MS/MS signals generated from the peptides labeled by isobaric tags.The sample of 0h was used as reference. Quantitative protein ratios were weighted and normalized by the median ratio in Mascot.Any proteins changed with 1.2-fold difference (>1.2-fold or <0.83-fold) and a corrected P value<0.05 would be designated as DEPs.

### Publication Abstract
A worldwide increase in the reports of diseases affecting marine organisms has paralleled the climate warming over the past few decades. In this study, we applied omics to explore the mechanisms underlying thermo-linked epizootics, by comparing both the transcriptome- and proteome-wide response of turbots to a mimic pathogen (poly I:C) between high temperature and low temperature using a time-course approach. Our results showed that myeloperoxidase (MPO) and insulin were differentially expressed transcripts shared by all five time-points post poly I:C-injection between high and low temperature and also had a consistent expression trend as differentially expressed proteins at 24&#x2009;h post injection. Combined with other data, it was suggested that the elevated temperature enhanced neutrophil-mediated immunity and the resultant MPO-mediated oxidative stress, which lasted for at least 5 days. The contents of malondialdehyde and protein carbonyls, markers of oxidative damage for lipids and proteins, respectively, were compared between different temperature groups, and the results further implied the emergence of oxidative damage under high temperature. It was also suggested that metabolism disorder likely occur considering the sustained expression changes of insulin. Hence, prolonged MPO-mediated oxidative stress and metabolic disorder might be involved in the thermo-linked epizootic.

### Keywords
Scophthalmus maximus, Spleen, Lc-ms/ms, Itraq

### Affiliations
Key Laboratory of Experimental Marine Biology, Institute of Oceanology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
IOCAS

### Submitter
Xin Yue

### Lab Head
Dr Baozhong,Liu  
Key Laboratory of Experimental Marine Biology, Institute of Oceanology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China


