### Accession
PXD040284

### Title
Experimental strategies to improve drug-target identification in mass spectrometry-based thermal stability assays

### Description
Mass spectrometry (MS)-based thermal stability assays have recently emerged as one of the most promising solutions for the identification of protein-ligand interactions. Here, we have investigated eight combinations of several recently introduced MS-based advancements, including the Phase-Constrained Spectral Deconvolution Method, Field Asymmetric Ion Mobility Spectrometry, and the implementation of a carrier sample as improved MS-based acquisition approaches for thermal stability assays (iMAATSA). We used intact Jurkat cells treated with a commercially available MEK inhibitor, followed by heat treatment, to prepare a set of unfractionated isobarically-labeled proof-of-concept samples to compare the performance of eight different iMAATSAs. Finally, the best-performing iMAATSA was compared to a conventional approach and evaluated in a fractionation experiment. Improvements of up to 82% and 86% were demonstrated in protein identifications and high-quality melting curves, respectively, over the conventional approach in the proof-of-concept study, while an approximately 12% improvement in melting curve comparisons was achieved in the fractionation experiment.

### Sample Protocol
Equivalent volumes from each heat-challenged temperature point that corresponded to 25 µg from the 37˚C aliquot of each replicate were aliquoted into new tubes. SDS and Tris were added for final concentrations of 1% and 100 mM at pH 8, respectively, and each sample was brought to a volume of 106.25 µL with deionized water. Reduction and alkylation were performed in a one-step process using a final concentration of 20 mM TCEP and 40 mM CAA in each sample, followed by heating at 57 ˚C for 1 hour in a thermomixer.       Protein precipitation for the POC experiment was accomplished by the addition of six volumes of ice-cold acetone to each sample, followed by overnight incubation at -20 ˚C. The following day samples were pelleted by centrifugation at 12,000 x g for 15 minutes at – 4 °C, and the supernatant was removed. Samples were washed with 800 µL of acetone and again centrifuged as previously described. The samples were then dried briefly with the cap open for ≤ 5 minutes, followed by the addition of 50 µL of 100 mM TEAB (pH 8.5) and trypsin/LysC at a ratio of protein to the enzyme of 50:1 and incubated in the Thermomixer® C at 37 °C 500 rpm for four hours. A second aliquot of trypsin/LysC was added for a final ratio of protein to enzyme of 25:1, followed by overnight incubation.      Samples for the fractionation experiment were prepared similarly in 96 deep-well plates (sample plates), except detergent removal was accomplished using an SP3 magnetic bead approach (instead of acetone precipitation)24 enabled using the Thermo Kingfisher automated purification system. Following a one-step reduction and alkylation as described above, an equivalent volume of 100% ethanol was added to each sample. Sera-mag beads (equal amounts of hydrophilic and hydrophobic) were washed three times with DI water, and a 250 µg/µL slurry was prepared in 50% ethanol. Slurry aliquots of 100 µL were distributed to a 96-deep well plate and subsequently washed again for two minutes in 50% ethanol using the Kingfisher automated system. The magnetic beads were then transferred into the sample plate and incubated for 14 minutes with gentle mixing. The bead-protein mixture was washed three times with 70% ethanol and then transferred to a 350 µL 96 well plate containing 100 µL of 100 mM TEAB pH 8.5 and digested as described above.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were first analyzed individually using Proteome Discoverer (PD) (version 2.4 for POC and 3.0 for the fractionation set, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with the Sequest HT search engine. Tryptic peptides were included in the searches with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Precursor and fragment mass tolerances were set to 15 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively. Static modifications included either TMT6plex or TMTpro on the peptide N-terminus and lysine residues and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues. Oxidation of methionine residues was set as a dynamic modification, along with acetylation of the protein N-terminus. The UniProt human reviewed reference proteome (release 2018_03 or 2022_01 for the POC and fractionation set, respectively) was used. Peptide filtering was set to "high" confidence resulting in a 1% FDR. In the POC experiments, after confirmation that technical replicates (n=3) for each sample within the same iMAATSA had RSD ≤ 15% for protein, peptide, and PSM identifications, triplicates were reprocessed together using the same PD methods for all subsequent analyses.         In the POC experiment, the R-based package TPP 29 was used for melting curve fitting, and filtering for high-quality melting curves was accomplished, using the following criteria based on the listed experimentally determined parameters: all four samples have a determined melting temperature, slope ≤ -0.06, plateau ≤ -0.3, and R2 ≥ 0.8. To further interrogate the data, we developed an R script to analyze data at the protein, PSM, and peptide group levels. Normalization at the protein level was adapted from the existing TPP software. Briefly, the number of proteins selected had to pass the initial quality criteria stated above. Next, we selected proteins present in all iMAATSA and chose the experiment with the greatest number of melting curves. Afterward, median fold changes were calculated for each reporter ion channel, and these were fit using a sigmoidal fit. Finally, the curve with the greatest R2 value was used as a correction factor to apply to all the data over the entire temperature range. The MS proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE30 partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD034087. Additional experimental details about materials, reagents, and methods, including cell culture, sample processing, LC conditions, mass spectrometry parameters, and data analysis, are provided in the Supporting Information file.      In the fractionation experiment, an in-house virtual basic (VBA) script was used to process the triplicate data sets. Each replicate treatment ("DMSO" or "TREATED") was normalized to the 37 ˚C channel. Corrected ratios were imported into Spotfire (TIBCO, version 11.4), and the Tm for each replicate treatment was determined using the "logistic regression curve fit" function. Melting-curves were assessed and filtered out by removing proteins, which had a Tm of 37 ˚C or below and that failed to have a calculated Tm for at least two out of the three melting-curves for both treatments.

### Publication Abstract
Mass spectrometry (MS)-based thermal stability assays have recently emerged as one of the most promising solutions for the identification of protein-ligand interactions. Here, we have investigated eight combinations of several recently introduced MS-based advancements, including the Phase-Constrained Spectral Deconvolution Method, Field Asymmetric Ion Mobility Spectrometry, and the implementation of a carrier sample as improved MS-based acquisition approaches for thermal stability assays (iMAATSA). We used intact Jurkat cells treated with a commercially available MEK inhibitor, followed by heat treatment, to prepare a set of unfractionated isobarically-labeled proof-of-concept samples to compare the performance of eight different iMAATSAs. Finally, the best-performing iMAATSA was compared to a conventional approach and evaluated in a fractionation experiment. Improvements of up to 82% and 86% were demonstrated in protein identifications and high-quality melting curves, respectively, over the conventional approach in the proof-of-concept study, while an approximately 12% improvement in melting curve comparisons was achieved in the fractionation experiment.

### Keywords
Tpp, Target identification, Thermal stability assays, Drug-protein interactions, Mass spectrometry, Cetsa

### Affiliations
Northeastern University, 360 Huntington Ave., Boston, Massachusetts 02115, United StatesBarnett Institute of Chemical and Biological Analysis, Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology,
sanofi


### Submitter
Clifford Phaneuf

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Alexander R. Ivanov
Northeastern University, 360 Huntington Ave., Boston, Massachusetts 02115, United StatesBarnett Institute of Chemical and Biological Analysis, Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology,


