### Accession
PXD031972

### Title
Protection of nascent DNA at stalled replication forks is mediated by phosphorylation of RIF1 intrinsically disordered region

### Description
RIF1 is a multifunctional protein that plays key roles in the regulation of DNA processing. During repair of DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs), RIF1 functions in the 53BP1-Shieldin pathway that inhibits resection of DNA ends to modulate the cellular decision on which repair pathway to engage. Under conditions of replication stress, RIF1 protects nascent DNA at stalled replication forks from degradation by the DNA2 nuclease. How these RIF1 activities are regulated at the post-translational level has not yet been elucidated. Here, we identified a cluster of conserved ATM/ATR consensus SQ motifs within the intrinsically disordered region (IDR) of mouse RIF1 that are phosphorylated in proliferating B lymphocytes. We found that phosphorylation of the conserved IDR SQ cluster is dispensable for the inhibition of DSB resection by RIF1, but is essential to counteract DNA2-dependent degradation of nascent DNA at stalled replication forks. Therefore, our study identifies a key molecular feature that enables the genome-protective function of RIF1 during DNA replication stress.

### Sample Protocol
Tryptic on-bead digest was carried out after the last washing step of the immunoprecipitation following essentially the protocol from Hubner et al. (2010). Proteins were digested from the beads in the presence of 2 M urea, 50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and 5 µg/ml trypsin [Promega] at 25°C for 1 h. Eluted bead-free pre-digested material were reduced with 4 mM DTT at 25°C for 30 min followed by an alkylation step with 10 mM iodoacetamide at 25°C for 30 min. Main digest occurred by addition of 1 µg trypsin (Promega) at 25°C overnight. Samples were acidified by adding 1% (v/v) formic acid and then desalted on stage-tips (Rappsilber et al. 2007). Eluted peptides were subjected to a modified SP3 procedure for an additional cleanup on peptide level (Hughes et al., 2019). Therefore, peptides were precipitated on 1 mg SP3 bead mix (Sera-Mag A and Sera-Mag B beads; GE Healthcare) by adding acetonitrile to a final concentration of >=98% (v/v). After incubation for 20 min and three washes with pure acetonitrile, samples were eluted twice with 50 µl water. After lyophilization samples were taken up in MS sample buffer for measurement. LC-MS measurements were carried out on an orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) applying a 110 min gradient in data-dependent MS2-mode. MS1 resolution was set to 60,000 for a scan range of 300-1800, MS2 resolution was specified to 15,000 while the maximum injection time for MS2 was set to 100 ms with an isolation width of 1.3 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Database search was done with MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.8; Cox et al. 2008) applying an Andromeda search against a Uniprot mouse database (2018) plus common contaminants and applying an FDR of 0.01 on peptide as well as site level. The match-between-runs feature was applied and phosphorylation on serine, threonine and tyrosine, acetylation on protein N-termini as well as oxidized methionine were set as variable modifications. The number of maximum missed cleavages was set to 5 and the number of allowed variable modifications specified to 4. Phospho-site intensities were normalized to the bait protein. A requirement of at least 60% valid values (across all samples except the WT control) was used to filter for phospho-STY-sites for quantitation and further normalized by median. For two-sample moderated t-testing (limma R package; Ritchie et al., 2015) across all sites, imputation was applied by replicate using a randomized Gaussian distribution with a width of 0.2 and a downshift of 1.8. Significance calling on sites was done after multiple comparison correction by calculating adjusted p-values with the Benjamini-Hochberg method.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rif1, Dsb resection inhibition, Dna replication fork protection, Sq motifs, Intrinsically disordered region

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Genome Diversification and Integrity, Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz Association, Berlin 13125, Germany
MDC Berlin

### Submitter
Oliver Popp

### Lab Head
Dr Michela Di Virgilio
Laboratory of Genome Diversification and Integrity, Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz Association, Berlin 13125, Germany


