### Accession
PXD003213

### Title
Bistability in the Rac1, PAK and RhoA signalling network is a feature of cell motility.

### Description
Dynamic interactions between RhoA and Rac1, members of the Rho small GTPase family, play a vital role in the control of cell migration. Using predictive mathematical modelling and experimental validation in MDA-MB-231 mesenchymal breast cancer cells, we show that Rac1 and RhoA interactions via the PAK-family kinases can produce bistable, switch-like responses to a graded PAK inhibition. Using a small chemical inhibitor of PAK we confirm the model conjecture demonstrating that cellular RhoA and Rac activation levels respond in a bistable manner to PAK inhibition where for a given inhibition level these levels are high or low depending on the history of the system. Consequently, we show that downstream signalling, actin dynamics and cell migration also behave in a bistable fashion, displaying abrupt switches and hysteresis in response to PAK inhibition. In summary, our results demonstrate that PAK is a critical component in the Rac1-RhoA inhibitory crosstalk that mediates bistable GTPase activity and cell migration switches.

### Sample Protocol
MDA-MB-231 cells were lysed in 1% SDS and lysates were washed, reduced, alkylated, digested with trypsin and analysed on a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer following the FASP protocol

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified and quantified by using the MaxQuant software suite (Cox et al., 2011) by searching against the human swissprot database, with Carbamylations of Cysteine as fixed and N-terminal acetylation and Methionine oxidation as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Dynamic interactions between RhoA and Rac1, members of the Rho small GTPase family, play a vital role in the control of cell migration. Using predictive mathematical modeling, mass spectrometry-based quantitation of network components, and experimental validation in MDA-MB-231 mesenchymal breast cancer cells, we show that a network containing Rac1, RhoA, and PAK family kinases can produce bistable, switch-like responses to a graded PAK inhibition. Using a small chemical inhibitor of PAK, we demonstrate that cellular RhoA and Rac1 activation levels respond in a history-dependent, bistable manner to PAK inhibition. Consequently, we show that downstream signaling, actin dynamics, and cell migration also behave in a bistable fashion, displaying switches and hysteresis in response to PAK inhibition. Our results demonstrate that PAK is a critical component in the Rac1-RhoA inhibitory crosstalk&#xa0;that governs bistable GTPase activity, cell morphology, and cell migration switches.

### Keywords
Cell motility, Bistable switches, Pak inhibition, Mathematical modelling, Rac1, Rhoa

### Affiliations
University of Edinburgh

### Submitter
Alex von kriegsheim

### Lab Head
Dr Alex von Kriegsheim
University of Edinburgh


