### Accession
PXD018948

### Title
Proteomic study of low-birth-weight nephropathy molecular pathogenesis in rats

### Description
We investigated the molecular pathogenesis of LBW rats obtained by intraperitoneal injection of dexamethasone into pregnant animals. Normal-birth-weight (NBW) rats were used as controls with seven animals per group. When the rats were four weeks old, the left kidneys were removed and used for comprehensive label-free proteomic studies

### Sample Protocol
The rat kidney specimens used for the proteomics studies were only obtained from the cortex area. After separating the cortex from the medulla, the isolated cortex specimens were immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen and protein extraction was performed using a potter in RIPA buffer. Ten micrograms of each protein sample were solubilized in Laemmli buffer and were deposited onto SDS-PAGE gels. After colloidal blue staining, the gels were cut into eight equal bands, each band being subsequently cut again into 1- × 1-mm gel pieces. The gel pieces were destained in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate with 50% acetonitrile (ACN), rinsed twice in ultrapure water, and shrunk in ACN for 10 min. After ACN removal, the gel pieces were dried at room temperature, covered with trypsin solution (10 ng/µL in 40 mM NH4HCO3 and 10% ACN), rehydrated at 4°C for 10 min, and finally incubated overnight at 37°C. Spots were then incubated for 15 min in 40 mM NH4HCO3 and 10% ACN at room temperature with rotary shaking. The supernatant was collected, and an H2O/ACN/HCOOH (47.5:47.5:5) extraction solution was added to the gel slices for 15 min. The extraction step was repeated twice. The supernatants were then dried in a vacuum centrifuge and suspended in 100 µL H2O/HCOOH (100:0.1).

### Data Protocol
Data were searched by SEQUEST through the Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software program (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) against a subset of the September 2012 version of the UniProt database restricted to a Human Reference Proteome Set (67,949 entries). Spectra from peptides larger than 5000 Da or smaller than 350 Da were rejected. The search parameters were as follows: the mass accuracy of the monoisotopic peptide precursor and peptide fragments was set to 10 ppm and 0.6 Da, respectively. Only b- and y-ions were considered for mass calculations. The oxidation of methionines (+16 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteines (+57 Da) were considered to be variable modifications. Two missed trypsin cleavages were allowed. Peptide validation was performed using the Percolator algorithm (19), and only “high confidence” peptides were retained corresponding to a 1% false-positive rate at the peptide level. Raw LC-MS/MS data were imported into the Progenesis LC-MS 4.0 software program (Nonlinear Dynamics Ltd, Newcastle, UK). The data processing included the following steps: (i) features detection, (ii) features alignment across the samples, (iii) volume integration for two to six charge-state ions, (iv) normalization to the total protein abundance, (v) import of sequence information, (vi) ANOVA testing at the peptide level and filtering for features with values of p < 0.05, (vii) calculation of protein abundance (sum of corresponding peptide volume), and (viii) ANOVA testing at the protein level and filtering for features with values of p <0.05. Of note, only non-conflicting features and unique peptides were considered for calculation at the protein level. Quantitative data were considered for proteins quantified by a minimum of two peptides. Furthermore, we selected proteins that showed a statistically significant > 20% change in expression levels (p < 0.05) for differences between two groups (n = 7 in each group). A global analysis of the data was performed using the computer platform Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA; Qiagen). We used the ‘Core Analysis’ package to identify relationships, mechanisms, functions, and pathways relevant to the dataset of interest. We also used the ‘regulators’ package to identify predicted regulators of the proteomic changes.

### Publication Abstract
The hyperfiltration theory has been used to explain the mechanism of low birth weight (LBW)-related nephropathy. However, the molecular changes in the kidney proteome have not been defined in this disease, and early biomarkers are lacking. We investigated the molecular pathogenesis of LBW rats obtained by intraperitoneal injection of dexamethasone into pregnant animals. Normal-birth-weight (NBW) rats were used as controls. When the rats were four weeks old, the left kidneys were removed and used for comprehensive label-free proteomic studies. Following uninephrectomy, all rats were fed a high-salt diet until 9 weeks of age. Differences in the molecular composition of the kidney cortex were observed at the early step of LBW nephropathy pathogenesis. Untargeted quantitative proteomics showed that proteins involved in energy metabolism, such as oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS), the TCA cycle, and glycolysis, were specifically downregulated in the kidneys of LBW rats at four weeks. No pathological changes were detected at this early stage. Pathway analysis identified NEFL2 (NRF2) and RICTOR as potential upstream regulators. The search for biomarkers identified components of the mitochondrial respiratory chain, namely, ubiquinol-cytochrome c reductase complex subunits (UQCR7/11) and ATP5I/L, two components of mitochondrial F<sub>1</sub>F<sub>O</sub>-ATP synthase. These findings were further validated by immunohistology. At later stages of the disease process, the right kidneys revealed an increased frequency of focal segmental glomerulosclerosis lesions, interstitial fibrosis and tubular atrophy. Our findings revealed proteome changes in LBW rat kidneys and revealed a strong downregulation of specific mitochondrial respiratory chain proteins, such as UQCR7.

### Keywords
Low birth weight; kidney; nephropathy; mitochondria; meprin

### Affiliations
Plateforme Proteome, Bordeaux University, Bordeaux, France
Plateforme Proteome

### Submitter
Stephane Claverol

### Lab Head
Dr Marc Bonneu
Plateforme Proteome, Bordeaux University, Bordeaux, France


