### Accession
PXD001554

### Title
Chronic exposure to chewing tobacco induces growth in normal oral cells via overexpression of Stearoyl-CoA desaturase

### Description
The practice of using chewing tobacco is common in certain socio-economic sections of southern Asia particularly in the Indian subcontinent. The molecular mechanism of smokeless tobacco which leads to malignancy is unclear. Chewing tobacco demonstrates a carcinogenic effect through chronic and not acute exposures. Using a cell line model, we studied the chronic effects of chewing tobacco on the proteome in normal oral keratinocytes (OKF6/TERT1). We carried out iTRAQ-based quantitative proteomic analysis of the untreated and chewing tobacco treated oral keratinocytes. LC-MS/MS analysis of this cell line pair resulted in the identification of 3,638 proteins of which 408 were found to be differentially expressed.

### Sample Protocol
OKF6/TERT1 and OKF6/TERT1-Tobacco cells were grown to 80% confluence. The cells were serum starved for 12h. Then the cells were washed with 1X PBS and harvested in 1X ice-cold PBS. Cells were lysed in 0.5% SDS buffer followed by sonication and centrifugation. Protein concentration of the cleared lysate was estimated using bicinchoninic acid assay. Equal amounts of lysates from both the conditions was reduced with (tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP)) at 60°C for 1h followed by alkylation using methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS) for 10 min at room temperature. The samples were subjected to trypsin digestion at 37°C for 12-16 h. Following trypsin digestion, the peptides from OKF6/TERT1 cells were labelled with reporter ions of m/Z 114 and 115 and those from OKF6/TERT1-Tobacco cells were labelled with reporter ions of m/Z 116 and 117. Further, the samples from both the conditions were pooled and subjected to strong cation exchange chromatography (SCX) fractionation.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data obtained from all LC-MS analysis were searched against Human RefSeq database (Version 65 containing 71,614 protein sequences and known contaminants) using Sequest and Mascot (version 2.2) search algorithms through Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Enzyme specificity was set as trypsin with maximum one missed cleavage allowed. Oxidation of methionine as dynamic modification, methylthio at cysteine, iTRAQ modification at N-terminus of the peptide and lysine were set as static modifications. The mass error of parent ions was set to 20 ppm and 0.1 Da for fragment ions. The data was also searched against a decoy database and MS/MS identifications of 1% false discovery rate (FDR) score threshold was considered for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Chewing tobacco is a common practice in certain socio-economic sections of southern Asia, particularly in the Indian subcontinent and has been well associated with head and neck squamous cell carcinoma. The molecular mechanisms of chewing tobacco which leads to malignancy remains unclear. In large majority of studies, short-term exposure to tobacco has been evaluated. From a biological perspective, however, long-term (chronic) exposure to tobacco mimics the pathogenesis of oral cancer more closely. We developed a cell line model to investigate the chronic effects of chewing tobacco. Chronic exposure to tobacco resulted in higher cellular proliferation and invasive ability of the normal oral keratinocytes (OKF6/TERT1). We carried out quantitative proteomic analysis of OKF6/TERT1 cells chronically treated with chewing tobacco compared to the untreated cells. We identified a total of 3,636 proteins among which expression of 408 proteins were found to be significantly altered. Among the overexpressed proteins, stearoyl-CoA desaturase (SCD) was found to be 2.6-fold overexpressed in the tobacco treated cells. Silencing/inhibition of SCD using its specific siRNA or inhibitor led to a decrease in cellular proliferation, invasion and colony forming ability of not only the tobacco treated cells but also in a panel of head and neck cancer cell lines. These findings suggest that chronic exposure to chewing tobacco induced carcinogenesis in non-malignant oral epithelial cells and SCD plays an essential role in this process. The current study provides evidence that SCD can act as a potential therapeutic target in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma, especially in patients who are users of tobacco.

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, Chewing tobacco, Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma

### Affiliations
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905
McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland 21205 USA

### Submitter
Akhilesh Pandey

### Lab Head
Dr Akhilesh Pandey
McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland 21205 USA


