### Accession
PXD041914

### Title
Dynamics of de novo heterochromatin assembly and disassembly at replication forks ensures fork stability 

### Description
Analysis of histone PTM levels in proliferating, quiescent and HU-treated TIG3 fibroblasts. TIG3 fibroblasts were cultured in the absence or presence of HU (600 μM) for at least 6 days, rendering cells quiescent due to contact inhibition or long-term exposure to replication stress, respectively. The dataset contains RAW MS data used for histone PTM quantification presented in Gaggioli et al, 2023 (Fig.1c, Extended Data Fig. 1f and 2c)

### Sample Protocol
Histone proteins were acid extracted and prepared for LC-MS analysis as described previously (Alabert et al, 2015) Specifically, Total histones from TIG-3 fibroblasts were isolated by acid extraction. After precipitation with trichloroacetic acid (TCA) histones were resuspended in 1 mM calcium acetate, 7.5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.0) by vortexing. 10 µg of histones at the concentration of 0.5 µg/µl were digested by adding the proteolytic enzyme Arginine-C at an enzyme:sample ratio 1:50 at room temperature overnight. Digestion was interrupted by adding 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). 1 µg of sample was loaded onto a 100 µm ID x 2 cm trap column packed with Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ (3 µm; Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany) material coupled online with a 75 µm ID x 16 cm picofrit-analytical column packed with the same material using an Easy-nLC nanoHPLC (Proxeon, Odense, Denmark). Injection volume was set to 5 µL. The HPLC gradient was 0-34% solvent B (A = 0.1% formic acid; B = 95% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) over 60 min and from 34% to 100% solvent B in 5 min at a flow-rate of 250 nL/min. LC was coupled online with a mass spectrometer triple quadrupole TSQ Vantage (ThermoFisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Nanoelectrospray was used with a spray voltage of 2.3 kV. No sheath, sweep, and auxiliary gasses were used, and capillary temperature was set to 270 °C. TSQ Vantage was used in selected reaction monitoring (SRM) mode. Acquisition was performed with a quadrupole peak width of 0.7 and a scan time of 0.025 s for each transition. We selected three transitions for each peptide, based on which provided the most intense signal. The collision energy was the one set by default by the software Skyline (MacLean et al. 2010). Some samples were analyzed using a Q Exactive instrument operated in SIM/PRM mode. 

### Data Protocol
Data processing and search were performed by uploading the result files in Skyline (MacLean et al. 2010) to integrate the area below the chromatographic peak for each peptide. The three transitions were used to determine the correct peak, but only the most intense transition was used for quantification. Trimethylation (mass 42.047 Da) and acetylation (mass 42.011 Da) were discriminated by using the retention time. No discrimination could be performed for isobaric PTM combinations such as K27acK36me3 / K27me3K36ac. The relative quantification for a given peptide was obtained by dividing its quantification by the sum of all quantifications of all peptides sharing the same amino acid sequence.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Histone ptms, H3k9me

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Genetics, Erasmus University Medical Center, Erasmus MC Cancer Institute; Dr. Molewaterplein 40, 3015GD Rotterdam, The Netherlands
Institute of Functional Epigenetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, 85764 Neuherberg, Germany

### Submitter
Andrey Tvardovskiy

### Lab Head
Dr Nitika Taneja
Department of Molecular Genetics, Erasmus University Medical Center, Erasmus MC Cancer Institute; Dr. Molewaterplein 40, 3015GD Rotterdam, The Netherlands


