### Accession
PXD028351

### Title
The Hsp90 cochaperone TTT promotes cotranslational maturation of PIKK kinases prior to complex assembly

### Description
PIKKs are a family of kinases that control fundamental processes, including cell growth, DNA damage repair, and gene expression. Although their regulation and activities are well characterized, little is known about how PIKKs fold and assemble into active complexes. Previous work identified an Hsp90 cochaperone, the TTT complex, which specifically stabilizes PIKKs. Here we describe a mechanism by which TTT promotes their de novo maturation in fission yeast. We show that TTT recognizes newly synthesized PIKKs during translation. Although PIKKs form multimeric complexes, we found that they do not engage in cotranslational assembly with their partners. Rather, we accumulated evidence that TTT protects nascent PIKK polypeptides from misfolding and degradation and that PIKKs acquire their native state after translation is terminated. Thus, PIKK maturation and assembly are temporally segregated, suggesting that the biogenesis of large complexes requires both dedicated chaperones and cotranslational interactions between subunits.

### Sample Protocol
S. pombe protein extracts are denatured, reduced and alkylated. Briefly, each sample (dry TCA precipitate) was dissolved in 89 μL of TEAB 100 mM. One microliter of DTT 1 M was added and incubation was performed for 30 min at 60 °C. A volume of 10 μL of IAA 0.5 M was added (incubation for 30 min in the dark). Enzymatic digestion was performed by addition of 1 μg trypsin (Gold, Promega, Madison USA) in TEAB 100 mM and incubation overnight at 30 °C. After completing the digestion step, peptides were purified and concentrated using OMIX Tips C18 reverse-phase resin (Agilent Technologies Inc.) according to the manufacturer’s specifications. Peptides were dehydrated in a vacuum centrifuge. Samples were resuspended in formic acid (0.1%, buffer A), separated and analyzed with an Ultimate 3000 RSLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a mass spectrometer (Orbitrap technology, Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Analysis of MS data was performed using MaxQuant software package (v 1.5.5.1). Tandem mass spectra (MS/MS) were searched by the Andromeda search engine with label-free quantification (LFQ). The maximum false peptide and protein discovery rate was specified as 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Multimeric complex, Translation, Chaperone, Pikk kinases

### Affiliations
Regulation of gene expression, CRBM, France
FPP CNRS

### Submitter
Functional Proteomics Platform FPP

### Lab Head
Dr Dominique Helmlinger
Regulation of gene expression, CRBM, France


