### Accession
PXD016293

### Title
Human plasma extracellular vesicles LC-MS/MS

### Description
Extracellular vesicles was isolated from plasma of healthy and psychotic patients. Changes in proteomes was assessed on individual samples (n=68) by LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
Extracellular vesicles was siolated from plasma by centrifugation. Pelleted material was dissolved in ammonium bicarbonate (100mM), TFE (50%) and DTT (2% of volume, 200mM) was added for denaturation and breaking sulfide bridges. IAM was used to cap sulfide (10% of volume, 200mM). Samples was diluted 5x in ammonium bicarbonate (25mM) and digested by trypsin (1:35 enzyme:protein ratio) overnight. Enzyme activity was stopped by formic acid. Samples were desalted by Pepclean C-18 spin columns and subjected to MS-analysis on a Q-Exactive.

### Data Protocol
The raw data was converted to Mascot Generic Format (mgf) peak lists with MS convert with peak picking of MS2 to convert to centroid data. Peak lists obtained from MS/MS spectra were identified using X!Tandem (X!Tandem Vengeance,  v2015.12.15.2) [PMID 14976030]. The search was conducted using SearchGUI (v3.3.15). Protein identification was conducted against a concatenated target/decoy database of Homo sapiens (reference proteome downloaded from UniProtKB [PMID 14681372] in March 2018) and contaminant proteins. The decoy sequences were created by reversing the target sequences in SearchGUI. The identification settings were as follows: specific trypsin digest with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages; 10 ppm as MS1 and 0.02 Da as MS2 tolerances; fixed modifications: Carbamidomethylation of C (+57.021464 Da); variable modifications: Oxidation of M (+15.994915 Da); fixed modifications during refinement procedure: Carbamidomethylation of C (+57.021464 Da); variable modifications during refinement procedure: Acetylation of protein N-term (+42.010565 Da), Pyrolidone from E (--18.010565 Da), Pyrolidone from Q (--17.026549 Da), Pyrolidone from carbamidomethylated C (--17.026549 Da).  Peptides and proteins were inferred from the spectrum identification results using PeptideShaker (v1.16.38). Peptide Spectrum Matches (PSMs), peptides and proteins were validated at a 1.0% False Discovery Rate (FDR) estimated using the decoy hit distribution. Post-translational modification localizations were scored using the D-score.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Psychosis, Human, Plasma, Extracellular vesicles, Exosomes

### Affiliations
SINTEF
SINTEF AS, Department of Biotechnology, Richard Birkelands vei 3B, 7034 Trondheim, Norway, (+47)95843463

### Submitter
Hanne Haslene-Hox

### Lab Head
Dr Hanne Haslene-Hox
SINTEF AS, Department of Biotechnology, Richard Birkelands vei 3B, 7034 Trondheim, Norway, (+47)95843463


