### Accession
PXD008979

### Title
CHEMICAL PROTEOMIC ANALYSIS OF ENDOCANNABINOID HYDROLASE ACTIVITY  IN NIEMANN-PICK TYPE C MOUSE BRAIN

### Description
The endocannabinoid system is considered to be an endogenous protective system in various neurodegenerative diseases. Niemann-Pick Type C is a neurodegenerative disease in which the role of the endocannabinoid system has not been studied yet. Here, we report the endocannabinoid hydrolase activity in brain proteomes of a Niemann-Pick type C mouse model as measured by activity-based protein profiling. Diacylglycerol lipase α, α/β-hydrolase domain-containing protein 4 (ABHD4), ABHD6, ABHD12, fatty acid amide hydrolase and monoacylglycerol lipase activities were quantified. Chemical proteomics showed no difference in endocannabinoid hydrolase activity in the brain of wildtype compared to Niemann-Pick C1 protein (NPC1)  knockout mice. Three lysosomal serine hydrolases were identified with increased activity in NPC1 knockout mouse brain: retinoid-inducible serine carboxypeptidase, cathepsin A and palmitoyl-protein thioesterase 1, and we conclude that these might be interesting therapeutic targets for future validation studies.

### Sample Protocol
Mouse brain membrane or soluble proteome was incubated with MB108 or FP-Biotin. The labeling reaction was quenched and excess probe was removed by chloroform/methanol precipitation. The pellet was resuspended in MeOH by sonication. After centrifugation the methanol was removed and the protein pellet was redissolved in 6M Urea/25 mM ammonium bicarbonate. After reduction/alkylation (10 mM DTT, 40 mM IAA), SDS (2% wt/vol) was added and the proteome was heated for 5 minutes at 65 °C. The sample was diluted with 2 mL PBS. 50 µL of 50% slurry of Avidin-Agarose from egg white (Sigma-Aldrich) was washed with PBS and added to the proteome sample in 1 mL PBS. The beads were incubated with the proteome for 3h, while rotating. The beads were isolated by centrifugation and washed with 0.5% (wt/vol) SDS in PBS (1x) and PBS (3x). The proteins were digested overnight with 500 ng sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) in 250 μL on-bead digestion buffer (100 mM Tris pH 8, 100 mM NaCl, 1 mM CaCl2, 2% ACN) at 37 °C with vigorous shaking. The pH was adjusted with formic acid to pH 3 and the beads were removed. The peptides were isotopically labeled by on-stage tip dimethyl labeling. Wildtype and knockout samples were differently labeled with isotopic dimethyl labeling and combined after labeling to allow comparison (wildtype light and knockout heavy). Inhibitor treated samples were compared using label free quantification. Labeled tryptic peptides were analyzed on a Surveyor nanoLC system (Thermo) hyphenated to a LTQ-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo). Data analysis was performed using Maxquant. Non-labeled tryptic peptides were analyzed on a NanoACQUITY UPLC System coupled to a SYNAPT G2-Si high definition mass spectrometer. Raw data is processed in PLGS (v3.0.3) and ISOQuant v1.5.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using Maxquant with acetylation (protein N term) and oxidation (M) as variable modifications. The false discovery rate was set at 1% and the peptides were screened against reviewed mouse proteome (Uniprot). Serine hydrolases that were identified in at least two repetitive experiments and for which at least one unique peptide and two peptides in total were identified were considered as valid quantifiable hits. For proteins identified by both probes, the normalized ratios from Maxquant were combined for further analysis. The binary logarithm of each ratio was compared to 0 with a student’s t-test. The resulting p-values were subjected to a Benjamini-Hochberg correction, setting the false discovery rate at 10% (q=0.1). Briefly, the p-values of all quantifiable hits were ordered from lowest to highest, and the Benjamini-Hochberg statistic was calculated as q * (position in the list) divided by the number of tests. Subsequently, the proteins for which the p-value is smaller than the BH statistic are controlled for a FDR of q*10%. For the label-free experiment, raw data is processed in PLGS (v3.0.3) and ISOQuant v1.5.

### Publication Abstract
The endocannabinoid system (ECS) is considered to be an endogenous protective system in various neurodegenerative diseases. Niemann-Pick type C (NPC) is a neurodegenerative disease in which the role of the ECS has not been studied yet. Most of the endocannabinoid enzymes are serine hydrolases, which can be studied using activity-based protein profiling (ABPP). Here, we report the serine hydrolase activity in brain proteomes of a NPC mouse model as measured by ABPP. Two ABPP methods are used: a gel-based method and a chemical proteomics method. The activities of the following endocannabinoid enzymes were quantified: diacylglycerol lipase (DAGL) &#x3b1;, &#x3b1;/&#x3b2;-hydrolase domain-containing protein 4, &#x3b1;/&#x3b2;-hydrolase domain-containing protein 6, &#x3b1;/&#x3b2;-hydrolase domain-containing protein 12, fatty acid amide hydrolase, and monoacylglycerol lipase. Using the gel-based method, two bands were observed for DAGL &#x3b1;. Only the upper band corresponding to this enzyme was significantly decreased in the NPC mouse model. Chemical proteomics showed that three lysosomal serine hydrolase activities (retinoid-inducible serine carboxypeptidase, cathepsin A, and palmitoyl-protein thioesterase 1) were increased in Niemann-Pick C1 protein knockout mouse brain compared to wild-type brain, whereas no difference in endocannabinoid hydrolase activity was observed. We conclude that these targets might be interesting therapeutic targets for future validation studies.

### Keywords
Brain, Niemann-pick type c, Synapt, Mouse, Activity-based protein profiling, Orbitrap

### Affiliations
Leiden Institute for Chemistry
Molecular Physiology, Leiden Institute for Chemistry, Leiden University, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Bogdan Florea

### Lab Head
Dr Mario van der Stelt
Molecular Physiology, Leiden Institute for Chemistry, Leiden University, The Netherlands


