### Accession
PXD035569

### Title
UGO is a multipass membrane protein that is key to sense and transduce cues for schizont egress and gametocyte activation in malaria parasites

### Description
Many critical events in the Plasmodium lifecycle depend on tight regulation of cGMP homeostasis by guanylyl cyclases (GC) and phosphodiesterases including egress of schizonts from the host erythrocyte and activation of gametocytes upon a mosquito blood-feed. Both processes are triggered by distinct cues but similarly depend on GCα for cGMP production. How these cues are integrated by the same pathway remains a mystery. Here we show that in gametocytes, temperature-dependent epistatic interactions between phosphodiesterases prevent activation prior to a blood-feed. We demonstrate that GCα interacts with two multipass membrane cofactors, UGO and SLF, in schizonts and gametocytes. While SLF is important to regulate GCα basal activity, UGO is essential for schizont egress and gametocyte activation but not for GCα basal activity. Instead, UGO is key to upregulate GCα in response to signals that lower the tension of parasite membranes, including the mosquito molecule xanthurenic acid or a rise in extracellular pH. Altogether our results suggest that intramembrane sensing of distinct signals by UGO represents a focal point to enhance GCα activity and trigger timely schizont egress and activation of gametogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
Co-immunoprecipitations (IPs) of proteins were performed with purified gametocytes. Samples were on-beads digested with trypsin.LC-ESI-MS/MS was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with an Easy nLC1200 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Data-dependant analysis (DDA) was performed with MS1 full scan at a resolution of 120’000 FWHM followed by as many subsequent MS2 scans on selected precursors as possible within 3 second maximum cycle time.

### Data Protocol
Peak lists (MGF file format) were generated from raw data using the MS Convert conversion tool from ProteoWizard. The peaklist files were searched against the Plasmodium bergheii ANKA database (PlasmoDB.org, release 48, 5076 entries) combined with an in-house database of common contaminant using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.5.1). Trypsin was selected as the enzyme, with one potential missed cleavage. Precursor ion tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment ion tolerance to 0.6 Da. Variable amino acid modifications were oxidized methionine and deaminated (NQ) as well as phosphorylated serine, threonine and tyrosine. Fixed amino acid modification was carbamidomethyl cysteine. The Mascot search was validated using Scaffold 4.11.1 (Proteome Software).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Plasmodium berghei, Immunoprecipitation, Lc-msms, Gametocyte

### Affiliations
University of Geneva
Department of Microbiology and Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland.

### Submitter
alexandre Hainard

### Lab Head
Dr Mathieu Brochet
Department of Microbiology and Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland.


