### Accession
PXD017642

### Title
Interactome analysis of FAM50A via affinity purification coupled to mass spectrometry

### Description
FAM50A missense variants are present in Armfield XLID syndrome patients. Zebrafish lacking fam50a display related phenotypes and show dysregulation of the transcriptome, increased spliceosome mRNAs and a preponderance of 3’ alternative splicing events, suggesting a role for Fam50a in the spliceosome C complex. Fam50A protein-protein interaction studies show that in 293T cells FAM50A interacts with spliceosome components. In sum, aberrant mRNA processing caused by FAM50A mutation underpins Armfield XLID syndrome.

### Sample Protocol
Whole cell extracts were incubated with Mag-Strep “type 3” XT beads (IBA). Beads with bound proteins were washed first with IPP150 buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% Igepal-630) and then with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Bound proteins were digested with 0.5 ug of trypsin (sequencing grade, Roche) overnight at 37 °C. The peptide solution was separated from the beads, acidified with formic acid and filtered through an HTS Multiscreen filter plate (Millipore). The peptide solution was dried in a SpeedVac (Thermo). Peptides were reduced in 40 mM TCEP for 15 min at room temperature and acidified to a final concentration of 0.5% formic acid before mass spectrometry analysis. Peptides were analysed by online nanoLC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer coupled with an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano System. Samples were first loaded and desalted on a nanotrap (100 µm id x 2 cm) (PepMap C18, 5 µ) at 10 µL/min with 0.1% formic acid for 10 min, and then separated on an analytical column (75 µm id x 50 cm) (PepMap C18, 2µ) over a 120 min linear gradient of 5 – 40% B (B = 80% CH3CN/0.1% formic acid) at 300 nL/min, and the total cycle time was 150 min. The Orbitrap Fusion was operated in the Top Speed mode at 3 s per cycle. The survey scans (m/z 375-1500) were acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200 (AGC 4x105 and maximum injection time 50 ms). The multiply charged ions (2-7) with a minimal intensity of 1x104 counts were subject to MS/MS in HCD with a collision energy at 30% and an isolation width of 1.6 Th, then detected in the linear ion trap (AGC 1x104 and maximum injection time 35 ms). Dynamic exclusion width was set at ± 10 ppm for 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed with Proteome Discoverer v. 1.4 (Thermo). Database searches were performed with Mascot v. 2.2 (Matrix Science) against the human Uniprot database (v. January 2018) appended with the cRAP database (www.thegpm.org/crap/). The search parameters were: trypsin digestion, 2 missed cleavages, 10 ppm mass tolerance for MS, 0.5 Da mass tolerance for MS/MS, with variable modifications of N-acetylation (protein), oxidation(M), and pyro-glu (N-term Q). Peptide false discovery rates (FDR) were estimated based on matches to reversed sequences in a concatenated target-decoy database using Percolator and set at 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
Intellectual disability (ID) is a heterogeneous clinical entity and includes an excess of males who harbor variants on the X-chromosome (XLID). We report rare FAM50A missense variants in the original Armfield XLID syndrome family localized in Xq28 and four additional unrelated males with overlapping features. Our fam50a knockout (KO) zebrafish model exhibits abnormal neurogenesis and craniofacial patterning, and in vivo complementation assays indicate that the patient-derived variants are hypomorphic. RNA sequencing analysis from fam50a KO zebrafish show dysregulation of the transcriptome, with augmented spliceosome mRNAs and depletion of transcripts involved in neurodevelopment. Zebrafish RNA-seq datasets show a preponderance of 3' alternative splicing events in fam50a KO, suggesting a role in the spliceosome C complex. These data are supported with transcriptomic signatures from cell lines derived from affected individuals and FAM50A protein-protein interaction data. In sum, Armfield XLID syndrome is a spliceosomopathy associated with aberrant mRNA processing during development.

### Keywords
Nanolc-ms/ms, Streptavidin affinity purification, Fam50a, Protein interactions

### Affiliations
The Institute of Cancer Research

### Submitter
James Wright

### Lab Head
Dr Jyoti Choudhary
The Institute of Cancer Research


