### Accession
PXD018172

### Title
Structural basis for DNA recognition and allosteric control of the Retinoic Acid Receptors RAR-RXR

### Description
Retinoic Acid Receptors (RARs) as a functional heterodimer with Retinoid X Receptors (RXRs), bind a diverse series of RA-response elements (RAREs) in regulated genes. Among them, the non-canonical DR0 elements are bound by RXR-RAR with comparable affinities to DR5 elements but DR0 elements do not act transcriptionally as independent RAREs. In this work, we present structural insight for the recognition of DR5 and DR0 elements by RXR-RAR heterodimer using x-ray crystallography, small angle x-ray scattering, and hydrogen/deuterium exchange coupled to mass spectrometry. We solved the crystal structure of RXR-RAR DNA-binding domain in complex with the Rarb2 DR5 and RXR DNA-binding domain in complex with Hoxb13 DR0. While cooperative binding was observed on DR5, on DR0 the two molecules bound non-cooperatively on opposite sides of the DNA. In addition, our data unveil the structural organization and dynamics of the multi-domain RXR-RAR DNA complexes providing evidence for DNA-dependent allosteric communication between domains. Differential binding mode between DR0 and DR5 were observed leading to differences in the conformation and structural dynamics of the multi-domain RXR-RAR DNA complex. These results reveal that the topological organization of the RAR binding element confer regulatory information by modulating the overall topology and structural dynamics of the RXR-RAR heterodimers.

### Sample Protocol
Liganded RXR-RAR, RXR-RAR-Rarb2 DR5 and RXR-RAR-Hoxb13 DR0 complexes were prepared in 20 mM Tris, 75 mM NaCl, 75 mM KCl, 2 mM CHAPS, 4 mM MgSO4, 1 mM TCEP, pH 8 buffer at a final concentration of 32 µM. Preparation and injection of the samples were automatically conducted by the CTC PAL robot (Leap Technologies, Zwingen, Switzerland), while chromatographic step was carried out on Acquity UPLC system with HDX technology (Waters, Manchester, UK). Samples were incubated at 20°C for 5 deuteration timepoints including 0.5, 2, 10, 30 and 60 minutes in 95% of 20 mM Tris, 75 mM NaCl, 75 mM KCl, 2 mM CHAPS, 4 mM MgSO4, 1 mM TCEP, pD 8 deuterated buffer. The labelling reaction was then stopped by adding 1:1 (v/v) 2 M guanidine-HCl, 100 mM glycine, 100 mM TCEP, pH 2.5 quench buffer at 1°C during 0.5 minutes. Samples were then digested (40 pmoles injections) through a pepsin-immobilized cartridge (Enzymate pepsin column, 300 Å, 5 µm, 2.1 x 30 mm, Waters, Manchester, UK) in 0.1% aqueous formic acid solution and generated peptides were  trapped on UPLC pre-column (ACQUITY UPLC BEH C18 VanGuard pre-column, 2.1 mm I.D. × 5 mm, 1.7 µM particle diameter, Waters, Manchester, UK) at 200 µl.min-1. Digested peptides were then separated on UPLC column (ACQUITY UPLC BEH C18, 1.0 mm I.D. × 100 mm, 1.7 µM particle diameter, Waters) at 0.1 °C with a gradient elution of solvent A (0.1% formic acid aqueous) and solvent B (acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid) [2%   40% B (7 min), 40%   85% B (0.5 min), and 85% B (1 min)] at a flow rate of 40 µL.min-1. MS/MS analyses were acquired on a Synapt G2SI HDMS (Waters, Manchester, UK) in positive polarity and resolution mode initially calibrated and using a lock-mass correction with glufibrinogen peptide. Data were acquired in MSE acquisition mode with the following parameters: capillary voltage, 3 kV; sampling cone voltage, 40 V; source temperature, 80°C; desolvation gas, 150°C and 600 L.h-1; acquisition range, acquisition range, 50−2000 m/z; scan time, 0.3 s; trap collision energy, 15 to 40 eV.

### Data Protocol
Generated data were then processed using Waters ProteinLynx Global Server 2.5.3 and filtered with DynamX 3.0 as follows: each experiment was carried out in triplicate and only peptides identified in all replicates were kept with a minimum fragment of 0.2 per amino acid with a minimum intensity at 103, and a length between 5 and 30 residues. Deuterium uptakes for all identified peptides were manually checked and validated. Deuterium uptakes were not corrected for back-exchange, represented as relative. HDX MS results were statistically validated using MEMHDX software with a p value set to 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
Retinoic acid receptors (RARs) as a functional heterodimer with retinoid X receptors (RXRs), bind a diverse series of RA-response elements (RAREs) in regulated genes. Among them, the non-canonical DR0 elements are bound by RXR-RAR with comparable affinities to DR5 elements but DR0 elements do not act transcriptionally as independent RAREs. In this work, we present structural insights for the recognition of DR5 and DR0 elements by RXR-RAR heterodimer using x-ray crystallography, small angle x-ray scattering, and hydrogen/deuterium exchange coupled to mass spectrometry. We solved the crystal structures of RXR-RAR DNA-binding domain in complex with the Rarb2 DR5 and RXR-RXR DNA-binding domain in complex with Hoxb13 DR0. While cooperative binding was observed on DR5, the two molecules bound non-cooperatively on DR0 on opposite sides of the DNA. In addition, our data unveil the structural organization and dynamics of the multi-domain RXR-RAR DNA complexes providing evidence for DNA-dependent allosteric communication between domains. Differential binding modes between DR0 and DR5 were observed leading to differences in conformation and structural dynamics of the multi-domain RXR-RAR DNA complexes. These results reveal that the topological organization of the RAR binding element confer regulatory information by modulating the overall topology and structural dynamics of the RXR-RAR heterodimers.

### Keywords
Structural ms, Hdx-ms, Nuclear receptors, Hdx

### Affiliations
IPHC (LSMBO - Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse Bio-Organique), UMR 7178, Université de Strasbourg, CNRS
LSMBO - IPHC / CNRS

### Submitter
Maxime BOURGUET

### Lab Head
Dr Sarah Cianférani
IPHC (LSMBO - Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse Bio-Organique), UMR 7178, Université de Strasbourg, CNRS


