### Accession
PXD032753

### Title
Developmet and Characterization of Three Cell Culture Ststems to Investigate the Relationship Between Primary Bone Marrow Adipocytes and Myeloma Cells

### Description
The unique properties of the bone marrow allow for migration and proliferation of multipl myeloma (MM) cells, while also providing the perfect environment for development of quiescent, drug-resistant MM cell clones. Bone marrow adipocytes (BMAds), which have recently been identified as important contributors to systemic adipokine levels, bone strength, hematopoiesis, and progression of metastatic and primary bone marrow cancers, such as MM. Recent studies in myeloma suggest that BMAds can be reprogrammed by tumor cells to contribute to myeloma-induced bone disease, and reciprocally, BMAds support MM cells in vitro. Importantly, most data investigating BMAds have been generated using adipocytes derived by differentiating bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs) into adipocytes in vitro using adipogenic media, due to the extreme technical challenges associated with isolating and culturing primary adipocytes. However, if studies could be performed with primary adipocytes, they likely will recapitulate in vivo biology better than MSC-derived adipocyte, as the differentiation process is artificial and differs from in vivo differentiation, and progenitor cell(s) of the primary BMAd may not be the same as the MSCs precursors used for adipogenic differentiation in vitro. Therefore, we developed and refined three methods for culturing primary BMAds (pBMAds): 2D coverslips, 2D transwells, and 3D silk scaffolds, all of which can be cultured alone or with MM cells to investigate bidirectional tumor-host signaling. To develop an in vitro model with a tissue-like structure to mimic the bone marrow microenvironment, we developed the first 3D, tissue engineered model utilizing pBMAds derived from human bone marrow. We found that pBMAds, which are extremely fragile, can be isolated and stably cultured in 2D for 10 days and in 3D for short term (~2 weeks) or long term (1 month) in vitro. To investigate the relationship between pBMAds and myeloma, MM cells can be added to investigate physical relationships through confocal imaging and soluble signaling molecules via mass spectrometry. In sum, we developed three in vitro cell culture systems to study primary bone marrow adipocytes and myeloma cells, which could be adapted to investigate many diseases and biological processes involving the bone marrow, including other bone-homing tumor types.

### Sample Protocol
Protein precipitation from conditioned media samples is initiated with the addition of a 10-fold volumetric excess of ice-cold ethanol. Alternatively, a 5-fold volumetric excess of acetone can be used. Samples are then placed in an aluminum block at -20°C for one hour, then protein pelleted in a refrigerated tabletop centrifuge (4°C) for 20 minutes at 16,000 × g. The overlay is removed and discarded. Protein samples are allowed to dry under ambient conditions. Samples are resuspended in 25 mM Tris buffer (pH = 8.0 – 8.5) containing 8.0 M urea. Protein content is measured relative to bovine serum albumin protein concentration standards using the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay. Approximately 100 μg protein from each sample is used in further analysis. Each sample is brought to 10 mM TCEP (tris[2-carboxyethyl]phosphine hydrochloride) from a 300 mM stock solution prepared in 1.0 M Tris base. Reduction of cysteine residues is performed in an aluminum heating block at 55°C for 1 hour. After cooling to room temperature, each sample is brought to 25 mM iodoacetamide and cysteine alkylation allowed to proceed for 30 minutes in the dark. Reaction is quenched with the addition of 1-2 μL 2-mercaptoethanol.Samples are 529 diluted with 25 mM Tris buffer (pH = 8.0 – 8.5) containing 1.0 mM calcium chloride such that the urea concentration is brought below 1.0 M. Trypsin stock solutions are prepared at a 2 μg/μL concentration using the enzyme storage solution received with the trypsin. Stocks are frozen in aliquots at -80°C until needed. Sequencing-grade modified trypsin is added to a final proportion of 2% by mass relative to sample total protein as measured with the BCA assay. Proteolysis is performed overnight at 37°C in the dark. Samples are evaporated to dryness using a centrifugal vacuum concentrator. Each is redissolved in 4% acetonitrile solution containing 5% formic acid. Peptides are freed of salts and buffers using Top Tip Micro-spin columns packed with C18 media according to manufacturer-suggested protocol. Samples are again evaporated to dryness using a centrifugal vacuum concentrator and peptides redissolved in 4% acetonitrile solution containing 5% formic acid. All sample separations performed in tandem with mass spectrometric analysis are performed on an Eksigent NanoLC 425 nano-UPLC System in direct injection mode with a 3 μL sample loop. Fractionation is performed on a reverse-phase nano HPLC column held at 45°C with a flow rate of 350 nL/min. Solvents are blended from LC-MS-grade water and acetonitrile. Mobile phase A is 2% acetonitrile solution, while mobile phase B is 99.9% acetonitrile. Both contain 0.1% formic acid. Approximately 1 μg of peptides are applied to the column equilibrated at 3% B and loading continued for 12 minutes. The sample loop is then taken out of the flow path and the column washed for 30 seconds at starting conditions. A gradient to 35% B is executed at constant flow rate over 90 minutes followed by a 3-minute gradient to 90% B. The column is washed for 5 minutes under these conditions before being returned to starting conditions over 2 minutes. Analysis is performed in positive mode on a TripleTOF 6600 quadrupole time-of-flight (QTOF) mass spectrometer running Analyst software TF 1.8.1. The column eluate is directed to the mass spectrometer source through a silica capillary emitter maintained at 2400-2600 V. Nitrogen nebulizer gas is held at 4-6 psi, with the curtain gas at 21-25 psi. The source is kept at 150°C.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics Data analysis Protein identification is performed using Protein Pilot software running the Paragon algorithm. Data is searched against a human proteome database containing over 20,000 manually-annotated entries in FASTA format downloaded from the Uniprot website (https://www.uniprot.org/uniprot/?query=proteome:UP000005640%20reviewed:yes). Searches were performed with cysteines modified (iodoacetamide) and with the biological modifications focus selected. A target false-discovery rate of 0.05 and a thorough ID search effort is selected for any analysis. A minimum of 95% confidence is used as a threshold for peptide identification as calculated by Protein Pilot. Relative quantification is performed using the SWATH processing microApp in PeakView software. Peak groups are extracted with a 99% peptide confidence threshold and 1% peptide FDR limit. SWATH chromatograms are extracted in 10-minute windows with fragment ion mass tolerance set to 50 ppm. Resulting protein quantitative peak areas are further analyzed using MarkerView software to compare relative quantities of all detected proteins between samples. Statistical analyses including t-tests and principal component analyses, are completed for both data sets using Sciex MarkerView software. Significantly different proteins are determined via t-test (p < .05). Data is exported as Microsoft Excel files that can be analyzed Human gene symbols for overexpressed proteins can be entered into the STRING database for connectivity and enrichment analyses.

### Publication Abstract
The unique properties of the bone marrow (BM) allow for migration and proliferation of multiple myeloma (MM) cells while also providing the perfect environment for development of quiescent, drug-resistant MM cell clones. BM adipocytes (BMAds) have recently been identified as important contributors to systemic adipokine levels, bone strength, hematopoiesis, and progression of metastatic and primary BM cancers, such as MM. Recent studies in myeloma suggest that BMAds can be reprogrammed by tumor cells to contribute to myeloma-induced bone disease, and, reciprocally, BMAds support MM cells <i>in vitro</i>. Importantly, most data investigating BMAds have been generated using adipocytes generated by differentiating BM-derived mesenchymal stromal cells (BMSCs) into adipocytes <i>in vitro</i> using adipogenic media, due to the extreme technical challenges associated with isolating and culturing primary adipocytes. However, if studies could be performed with primary adipocytes, then they likely will recapitulate <i>in vivo</i> biology better than BMSC-derived adipocytes, as the differentiation process is artificial and differs from <i>in vivo</i> differentiation, and progenitor cell(s) of the primary BMAd (pBMAds) may not be the same as the BMSCs precursors used for adipogenic differentiation <i>in vitro</i>. Therefore, we developed and refined three methods for culturing pBMAds: two-dimensional (2D) coverslips, 2D transwells, and three-dimensional (3D) silk scaffolds, all of which can be cultured alone or with MM cells to investigate bidirectional tumor-host signaling. To develop an <i>in vitro</i> model with a tissue-like structure to mimic the BM microenvironment, we developed the first 3D, tissue engineered model utilizing pBMAds derived from human BM. We found that pBMAds, which are extremely fragile, can be isolated and stably cultured in 2D for 10 days and in 3D for up to 4 week <i>in vitro</i>. To investigate the relationship between pBMAds and myeloma, MM cells can be added to investigate physical relationships through confocal imaging and soluble signaling molecules <i>via</i> mass spectrometry. In summary, we developed three <i>in vitro</i> cell culture systems to study pBMAds and myeloma cells, which could be adapted to investigate many diseases and biological processes involving the BM, including other bone-homing tumor types.

### Keywords
3d, Tissue engineering, Bone marrow adipose, Silk scaffolds, Adipocytes, Myeloma

### Affiliations
Maine Medical Center Research Institute, Proteomics and Lipidomics Facility, Scarborough, Maine, United States
Maine Medical Center Research Institute

### Submitter
Carlos Gartner

### Lab Head
Dr Calvin Vary
Maine Medical Center Research Institute, Proteomics and Lipidomics Facility, Scarborough, Maine, United States


