### Accession
PXD009909

### Title
The Comprehensive Mouse Retina Proteome

### Description
Diverse groups of proteins play integral roles in both the physiology and pathophysiology of the mouse retina. A comprehensive mouse retina proteome has been developed using a discovery-based proteomic approach.

### Sample Protocol
Retinas were placed in a 1% SDS solution and immediately homogenized. The samples were heated to 80C for 10 minutes and the protein concentration determined using BCA protein assay kit (Pierce, Thermo Scientific). Based on the protein concentration, 100µg of protein sample was adjusted to a final volume of 100µL using 100mM TEAB was reduced using 10mM Tris (2- Carboxyethyl) Phosphine Hydrochloride (TCEP) at 55°C for 1 hour. The reduced samples were subsequently alkylated using 5µL of 375mM Iodoacetamide at room temperature for 30 min. Next, the protein sample was precipitated by chloroform-methanol extraction, air-dried and digested with 2ug of trypsin (Trypsin Protease, MS Grade, Thermo Scientific Pierce) at 37°C overnight.  After SepPak cartridge purification (Waters, Ireland) using acidic reverse phase conditions, an off-line basic reverse phase fractionation step was employed to reduce the complexity of the sample. The sample was brought up in 260ul of 10mM Ammonium Hydroxide, pH 10 and separated using an Acquity UPLC Peptide BEH column, 300A, 1.7um, 2.1mm x 50mm (Waters, Ireland) on a Dionex U3000 HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA). Briefly, UV monitored at 215nm for an injection of 130ul at 0.1ml/min with a gradient developed from 10mM Ammonium Hydroxide, pH=10 to 100% ACN (AH pH 10) over 96 minutes. A total of 48 fractions (200ul each) were collected in a 96-well microplate and recombined in a checkerboard fashion to create 12 “super fractions” (Original fractions 1, 13, 25, and 37 became New Super Fraction #1, Original Fractions 2, 14, 26, and 38 became New Super Fraction # 2, etc.)  The 12 “super fractions” were then run on a Dionex U3000 nano flow system coupled to a Thermo Fusion mass spectrometer. Each fraction was subjected to a 120 minute chromatographic method employing a gradient from 2-25% Acetonitrile in 0.1% Formic Acid (ACN/FA) over the course of 100 minutes, a gradient to 50% ACN/FA for an additional 10 minutes, a step to 90% ACN/FA for 5 minutes and a re-equilibration into 2% ACN/FA in a “trap-and-load” configuration. The trap column was an Acclaim C18 PepMap100, 5um, 100A and the column was an Acclaim PepMap RSLC 75um x 15cm (Thermo Fisher Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA). The entire run was 0.3ul/min flow rate and sample was ionized through a Thermo Nanospray Flex Ion Source.  MS1 scans were performed in the Orbitrap utilizing a resolution of 240,000. And data dependent MS2 scans were performed in the Orbitrap using High Energy Collision Dissociation (HCD) of 30% using a resolution of 30,000. This was repeated for a total of three technical replicates.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 using SEQUEST HT scoring. The Protein FASTA database was M. musculus (TaxID=10090) version 2017-07-05. Static modification included carbamidomethyl on cysteines (=57.021), and dynamic modification of oxidation of methionine (=15.9949). Parent ion tolerance was 10ppm, fragment mass tolerance was 0.6Da, and the maximum number of missed cleavages was set to 2. Only high scoring peptides were considered utilizing a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse retina proteome, Swiss-webster nd4

### Affiliations
LSUHSC Proteomics Core Facility Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology LSU Health Sciences Center New Orleans, LA 70112
Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center

Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology
LSUHSC Proteomics Core Facility

### Submitter
Jessie Guidry

### Lab Head
Dr Jessie J Guidry
LSUHSC Proteomics Core Facility Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology LSU Health Sciences Center New Orleans, LA 70112


