### Accession
PXD049090

### Title
The HisRS-like domain of GCN2 is a pseudoenzyme that can bind uncharged tRNA - HX-MS Data

### Description
GCN2 is a stress response kinase that phosphorylates the translation initiation factor eIF2to inhibit general protein synthesis when activated by uncharged tRNA and stalled ribosomes. The presence of a HisRS-like domain in GCN2, normally associated with the ability to bind and aminoacylate tRNAs, led to the hypothesis that eIF2 kinase activity is regulated by the direct binding of this domain to uncharged tRNA. Here we solved the structure of the HisRS-like domain in the context of full-length GCN2 by cryoEM. Structure and function analysis shows the HisRS-like domain of GCN2 has lost tRNA charging, ATP binding, and histidine binding activity but retains the ability to bind tRNA. Hydrogen deuterium exchange mass spectrometry (HX-MS), site-directed mutagenesis and computational docking experiments support a tRNA binding model that overlaps with but is partially shifted from that employed by bona fide HisRS enzymes. These results demonstrate that the HisRS-like domain of GCN2 is a pseudoenzyme and advance our understanding of GCN2 regulation and function.

### Sample Protocol
HX-MS Peptide mapping analysis: 
Samples of isolated HisRS-like domain of hGCN2 protein were made into 10 µM solutions in (provided) HEPES buffer (20 mM, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM TCEP). Using a LEAP-PAL robotic autosampler, solutions were mixed 1:1 (v/v) with either pure buffer or 20 µM solution of tRNA resuspended in the same buffer and pre-incubated for 30 minutes. After pre-incubation, the mixture was further mixed 1:1 (v/v) with H2O-based HEPES buffer (20 mM, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1mM TCEP) to simulate deuterium labelling at room temperature. The samples were subsequently mixed 1:1 (v/v) with quench buffer (500 mM glycine pH 2.3, 6 M urea, 200 mM TCEP) and injected into an LC-MS system (described below). Peptides were analyzed by mass spectrometry in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode to identify peptides and establish a searchable library for DIA-based HX analysis. Mass range was set to 375-1000 m/z and 12 precursors were selected for fragmentation at each scan cycle. The cycle time in DDA was 2.2 seconds. Resolution was set to 70 000 for MS1 scans with Maximum accumulation time of 100 ms and AGC target of 1e6. Resolution was set to 35 000 for MS2 scans with isolation window of 2.5 m/z, scan range of 200 to 2000 m/z, maximum accumulation time of 110 ms, AGC target was set to 1e6 and NCE (normalized collision energy) set to 30. Samples of the protein alone and protein with tRNA were analyzed in triplicate each and the peptide library was built from a combination of all six files. Peptide search was performed using OMSSA+ algorithm with MS1 with following settings: MS1 mass accuracy of 8 ppm, MS2 mass accuracy of 15 ppm.

Differential HX-MS2 analysis: 
Samples of isolated HisRS-like domain of hGCN2 protein were made into 10 µM solutions in (provided) HEPES buffer (20 mM, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM TCEP). Using a LEAP-PAL robotic autosampler, solutions were mixed 1:1 (v/v) with either pure buffer or 20 µM solution of tRNA resuspended in the same buffer and pre-incubated for 30 minutes. After pre-incubation, the mixture was further mixed 1:1 (v/v) with D2O-based HEPES buffer (20 mM, pD 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1mM TCEP) to initiate deuterium labelling at 50% D2O at room temperature. Reactions with different labelling times: 15 seconds, 2 minutes, 20 minutes and 1hr of labelling were performed and the reactions were quenched by mixing in 1:1 (v/v) ratio with quench buffer (500 mM glycine pH 2.3, 6 M urea, 200 mM TCEP). Samples were subsequently injected into an LC-MS system (described below). Peptides were analyzed by mass spectrometry in DIA mode to collect peptide and fragment deuteration values. Samples of the protein alone and protein with tRNA were analyzed in triplicate each in a randomized order. Mass range was set to 375-911 m/z with 14 DIA windows 42 m/z wide each with 4 m/z overlap covering the whole mass range. The cycle time in DIA was 2.2 seconds. Resolution was set to 70 000 for MS1 scans with maximum accumulation time of 65 ms and AGC target of 1e6. Resolution was set to 35 000 for DIA scans with maximum accumulation time of 110 ms, AGC target of 1e6 and NCE (normalized collision energy) set to 30.  Parameters of the LC-MS system used for HX-MS analysis Thermo QExactive Plus mass spectrometer with microflow HESI-II probe, UltiMate 3000 LC and HDX-PAL autosampler) with an online digestion collumn (P.N.: AP-PC-004 Nepenthesin II column from AffiPro s.r.o., 2.1 mm x 20 mm, volume 69.3 µl) chilled to 8°C. Solvent A composition: 0.4% FA. Solvent B composition: 80% ACN, 0.4% FA. Digestion and desalting flowrate was 125 ul/min, eluting gradient flowrate was 40 ul/min and length of the gradient was 15 minutes 4%-45% B. Trap column used: Thermo PepMap™ 100 C18, 1mm x 5 mm catridge, Particle Size=5 µm, Pore Size=100 Å. Analytical column used: Hypersil GOLD™ C18 1mm x 50mm. Particle size=1.9 µm, Pore Size=175 Å. LC peak full widths at half maximum (FWHM) were around 7.5 seconds.

### Data Protocol
HX-MS data processing: 
All data were processed in (proprietary) Mass Spec Studio 2.0 (2.4.0.3597) software https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.08.25.554852. The manuscript describing the data processing approach has been accepted into Nature Communications, but is still undergoing pre-print edits. GCN2 protein sequence was mapped using the DDA files and the HX-PIPE app in the Studio to create a library of high quality, unique identifications used to generate a searchable library for HX-DIA analysis. The search was performed with mass accuracy precision of 10 ppm for both MS1 and MS2 features and 9 second XIC extraction window. The deuteration data from DIA acquisitions were mined in the AutoHX app in the Studio, to identify and read the deuteration content of peptides and their fragments. The data were exported in the form of standardized HX-MS export files, Woods Plots, and Sequence Maps. For the purposes of visualizing the data on a model structure, each amino acid residue was given a deuteration difference value calculated as an average of deuteration difference values of all peptides covering the given residue. All raw data, field standard results exports, protein FASTA sequence file, processing parameters for both HX-PIPE mapping and AutoHX data validation (full kinetics and 1-hour timepoint separately) along with the DIA bin file needed for replication of the analysis is included in this PRIDE repository submission.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hdx-ms

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary

### Submitter
Frantisek Filandr

### Lab Head
Dr David Schriemer
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary


