### Accession
PXD006768

### Title
The Study of ATRA-Induced Differentiation of the HL-60 Cell Line

### Description
Shotgun mass-spectrometric experiment was performed with HL-60 cells induced to differentiation at 0, 3, 24, 48 and 96h after ATRA treatment. Obtained data has been used for label-free quantification by SPIRE platform based on spectral count. Results on proteome profiling were used for up-stream regulator search in geneXplain platform (http://genexplain.com/).

### Sample Protocol
HL-60 cells were induced to differentiation by ATRA treatment in 3 biological replicates. The promyelocytic cell maturation into neutrophils was assessed by CD11b marker expression using flow cytometry. Cell samples were collected at 0, 3, 24, 48, and 96h after ATRA treatment followed by protein extraction with lysis buffer containing 3% sodium deoxycholate (DOC), 2,5mM EDTA, 75 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8,5 and protease inhibitors with the following sample ultrasonication using Bandelin Sonopuls sonicator. Total protein concentration was measured by BCA assay and 100 µg of each sample was subjected to tryptic digestion according protocol described by Zgoda et al. (Zgoda et al., J Proteome Res. 2013; 12(1):123-34.). Peptide samples at each time point were subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis using Orbitrap Velos mass-spectrometer in 5 technical replicates with following settings: peptides separation was carried out on a RP-HPLC Zorbax 300SB-C18 column (C18 3.5 µm, 75 µm inner diameter and 150 mm length) using a linear gradient from 95% solvent A (water, 0.1% formic acid) and 5 % solvent B (water, 0.1% formic acid, and 80% acetonitrile (ACN)) to 40% solvent A and 60% solvent B over 85 min at a flow rate of 0.3 µl/min. Mass spectra were acquired in the positive ion mode using Orbitrap analyzer with a resolution of 30,000 (m/z 400) for MS and 7,500 (m/z 400) for MS/MS scans. Survey MS scan was followed by MS/MS spectra of the 5 most abundant precursors. For peptide fragmentation higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) was used, the signal threshold was set to 5000 for an isolation window of 2 m/z. The collision energy was set to 35 eV. Fragmented precursors were dynamically excluded from targeting for 60 s. Singly charged ions and ion with not defined charge state were excluded from triggering the MS/MS scans. AGC target was set to 2*10^6 and 10^5 with injection time 50 ms and 100 ms for MS and MS\MS scans, respectively.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data was identified using SPIRE pipeline (Kolker et al. J Proteomics. 2011;75(1):122-6.) by the «Composite» search engine with following parameters: enzyme specificity was set to trypsin with no cleavage after proline the maximum of 2 missed cleavages was allowed; static modifications = carbamidomethylation of cysteine; variable modifications = oxidation of methionine; the mass tolerance for precursor ions was 20 ppm; the mass tolerance for fragment ions was 0.1 ppm. Human FASTA file was used as a protein sequence database.

### Publication Abstract
Induced granulocytic differentiation of human leukemic cells under all-<i>trans</i>-retinoid acid (ATRA) treatment underlies differentiation therapy of acute myeloid leukemia. Knowing the regulation of this process it is possible to identify potential targets for antileukemic drugs and develop novel approaches to differentiation therapy. In this study, we have performed transcriptomic and proteomic profiling to reveal up- and down-regulated transcripts and proteins during time-course experiments. Using data on differentially expressed transcripts and proteins we have applied upstream regulator search and obtained transcriptome- and proteome-based regulatory networks of induced granulocytic differentiation that cover both up-regulated (HIC1, NFKBIA, and CASP9) and down-regulated (PARP1, VDR, and RXRA) elements. To verify the designed network we measured HIC1 and PARP1 protein abundance during granulocytic differentiation by selected reaction monitoring (SRM) using stable isotopically labeled peptide standards. We also revealed that transcription factor CEBPB and LYN kinase were involved in differentiation onset, and evaluated their protein levels by SRM technique. Obtained results indicate that the omics data reflect involvement of the DNA repair system and the MAPK kinase cascade as well as show the balance between the processes of the cell survival and apoptosis in a p53-independent manner. The differentially expressed transcripts and proteins, predicted transcriptional factors, and key molecules such as HIC1, CEBPB, LYN, and PARP1 may be considered as potential targets for differentiation therapy of acute myeloid leukemia.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Time-course study, Differentiation, Atra, Hl60 cell line

### Affiliations
Institute of Biomedical Bhemistry (IBMC), Moscow
Department of Proteomic Research and Mass Spectrometry, Laboratory of Systems Biology, IBMC, Moscow, Russia

### Submitter
Svetlana Novikova

### Lab Head
Dr Victor Zgoda
Department of Proteomic Research and Mass Spectrometry, Laboratory of Systems Biology, IBMC, Moscow, Russia


