### Accession
PXD004027

### Title
Variation in auxin sensing guides AUX/IAA repressor ubiquitylation  and destruction

### Description
Auxin is a drug-like small molecule and morphogen that triggers the formation of SCFTIR1/AFB-AUX/IAA co-receptor complexes leading to ubiquitylation and proteasome-dependent degradation of AUX/IAA transcriptional repressors in plants. Here, we systematically dissect auxin sensing by SCFTIR1-IAA6 and SCFTIR1-IAA19 co-receptor complexes, and assess IAA6/IAA19 ubiquitylation in vitro and IAA6/IAA19 degradation in vivo. TIR1-IAA19 and TIR1-IAA6 interactions form co-receptors with different affinities, which specify ubiquitylation and turnover rate of the AUX/IAA. We demonstrate lysine ubiquitylation in IAA6/IAA19 and propose this ubiquitylation signature to be a consequence of auxin-mediated SCFTIR1-AUX/IAA interactions. We present evidence for an evolving AUX/IAA repertoire, typified by the IAA6/IAA19 ohnologs, that contributes differentially to auxin sensing. We postulate that AUX/IAAs have emerged as a versatility toolbox for auxin-modulated transcriptional control, as the gamut of AUX/IAA destruction kinetics enables fine-tuning of transcriptional auxin response and contributes to the complexity of hormone signaling.

### Sample Protocol
Preparations of recombinantly expressed GST-tagged ASK1-TIR1, HsCul1-MmRBX1 and AUX/IAAs proteins (either AtIAA6 or AtIAA19) from either SF9 insect cells or E. coli, were essentially performed as previously described (Tan et al. 2007; Petroski and Deshaies 2005; Calderón Villalobos et al. 2012). For each biological replicate for each AUX/IAA protein, we prepared 3 different reactions (without auxin, without Ub, with auxin with Ub). Additionally we ran a control reaction without AUX/IAA protein, but with auxin and Ub. For that, two mixtures (mix A and mix B) were prepared in parallel at 4°C. Note: Component concentrations are relative to the concentration of AUX/IAA in Mix B. Mix A contained 15-fold molar excess of AtUb, 6x His-AtUBC8 (1x [AUX/IAA]), and 6x His-Uba1 (0.2x [AUX/IAA]) in reaction buffer (30 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 100 mM NaCl, 2 mM DTT, 5 mM MgCl2, 1 µM ZnCl2). Mix B was prepared by mixing 0.1x [AUX/IAA] of Cul1-RBX1, 0.1x [AUX/IAA] of ASK1-TIR1 with 10 μM AUX/IAA in reaction buffer. Mix B was aliquoted and supplemented without  or with 8 μM IAA (final concentration 4 μM IAA). Mixtures A and B were separately incubated for 5 minutes at 25 °C and 500 rpm. Equal volumes of mix A and B were combined to initiate the ubiquitylation reactions (time 0). After 30 minutes (end point), IVUs were stopped, 20 µl of the IVUs were supplemented with 1 volume 16 M urea to denature proteins. Proteins were reduced by adding 0.5 µl of 200 mM dithiotreitol (DTT) and alkylated by adding 2 µl of 200 mM iodoacetamide. The reaction was quenched with 2 µl of 200 mM DTT and subsequently 160 µl 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.5 were added. Alternatively samples were also processed without reduction and alkylation. The proteins were digested with trypsin (enzyme:substrate 1:50 (w/w)) at 37°C with gentle rotation overnight. The reaction was quenched by adding formic acid (FA) to a final concentration of 0.1% and the peptides were desalted as described (Majovsky et al., 2014). Dried peptides were dissolved in 0.1% trifluoric acid, and 0.5 µg were injected into the LC-MS system. Peptides were separated using liquid chromatography C18 reverse phase chemistry employing a 120 min gradient increasing from 5% to 40% acetonitrile in 0.1% FA, and a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Eluted peptides were electrosprayed on-line into a QExactive Plus Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The spray voltage was 1.9 kV, the capillary temperature 275°C and the Z-Lens voltage 240 V. A full MS survey scan was carried out with chromatographic peak width set to 15 sec, resolution 70,000 automatic gain control (AGC) 3E+06, and a max injection time (IT) of 200 msec. MS/MS peptide sequencing was performed using a Top10 DDA scan strategy with HCD fragmentation. MS/MS scans were acquired with resolution 17,500, AGC 5E+04, IT 150 msec, isolation width 1.6, normalized collision energy 28, underfill ratio 3%, dynamic exclusion duration 40s, and an intensity threshold of 1E+04.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified and ubiquitylated residues on identified peptides were mapped using both the Mascot software v2.5.0 (Matrix Science) linked to Proteome Discoverer v1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the MaxQuant software v1.5.0.0. A precursor ion mass error of 7 ppm and a fragment ion mass error of 20 mmu were tolerated in searches of a custom made database containing the IVU proteins. GG and LRGG on lysine (K) and on serine, threonine and cysteine (S,T,C) were tolerated as variable modifications as well as oxidation of methionine (M). Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification in searches of reduced and alkylated samples. A peptide spectral match (PSM) and peptide level FDR threshold of 0.01 was applied for peptide identification employing the target-decoy database model. All ubiquitylated peptides that were also identified in IVUs lacking Ub (negative control) were discarded. In all cases save one, K ubiquitylation produced higher scores than S,T,C ubiquitylation when the ubiquitylation site was alternatively mapped to a K or a S,T or C residue on the same peptide, therefore S,T,C ubiquitylation was deprecated. A FDR specifically for the identification of ubiquitylated peptides was calculated. Ubiquitylated peptides identified in the IVUs lacking Ub (negative control) where used to model the H0 that identification of ubiquitylated peptides is a random event of erroneous peptide spectral matching and estimate the number of false positives (FP). Ubiquitylated peptides identified in the IVUs containing Ub (supplemented with AUX/IAA or not; target) were used to estimate the number of true and false positives (TP + FP), because while all identifications in the negative control are FP by design, some of the identifications in the target will also be FP. The number of acquired MS/MS spectra and PSMs was essentially the same for the negative control and targets (190272, 178910, 182152 MS/MS spectra and 38994, 38984, 40288 PSMs respectively) underscoring the validity of the H0 model. The simple FDR was calculated as FP/TP+FP. The percentage incorrect in target (FP in denominator; PIT) was estimated by determining the ratio of non significant to total peptide identifications by the Mascot software. The simple FDR was adjusted accordingly. For further explanation see Käll et al., 2008. The first part of the file headers represents the analysis date. Therefore 090316 corresponds to experiment 1, 160316 to experiment 2 and 230316 to experiment 3. This is followed by the IAA protein in the IVU, IAA6 or IAA19. This is followed by further information regarding IVU components: all corresponds to plus auxin, minus auxin and minus Ub are clear. "_ohne" refers to no reduction and alkylation in sample processing.

### Publication Abstract
Auxin is a small molecule morphogen that bridges SCF<sup>TIR1/AFB</sup>-AUX/IAA co-receptor interactions leading to ubiquitylation and proteasome-dependent degradation of AUX/IAA transcriptional repressors. Here, we systematically dissect auxin sensing by SCF<sup>TIR1</sup>-IAA6 and SCF<sup>TIR1</sup>-IAA19 co-receptor complexes, and assess IAA6/IAA19 ubiquitylation in vitro and IAA6/IAA19 degradation in vivo. We show that TIR1-IAA19 and TIR1-IAA6 have distinct auxin affinities that correlate with ubiquitylation and turnover dynamics of the AUX/IAA. We establish a system to track AUX/IAA ubiquitylation in IAA6 and IAA19 in vitro and show that it occurs in flexible hotspots in degron-flanking regions adorned with specific Lys residues. We propose that this signature is exploited during auxin-mediated SCF<sup>TIR1</sup>-AUX/IAA interactions. We present evidence for an evolving AUX/IAA repertoire, typified by the IAA6/IAA19 ohnologues, that discriminates the range of auxin concentrations found in plants. We postulate that the intrinsic flexibility of AUX/IAAs might bias their ubiquitylation and destruction kinetics enabling specific auxin responses.

### Keywords
Aux/iaa, Ubiquitination, Auxin, Proteolysis, Ubiquitylation, Tir1/afbs, Phytohormone, Scf-type e3 ligase

### Affiliations
Leibniz Institute of Plant Biochemistry

### Submitter
Wolfgang Hoehenwarter

### Lab Head
Dr Wolfgang Hoehenwarter
Leibniz Institute of Plant Biochemistry


