### Accession
PXD002369

### Title
Selective labeling and eradication of antibiotic tolerant bacterial populations in pathogenic biofilms

### Description
Drug resistance and tolerance eliminate the therapeutic potential of antibiotics against pathogens. Antibiotic tolerance by bacterial biofilms often leads to persistent infections, but its mechanisms are unclear. To uncover antibiotic tolerance mechanisms in biofilms, we applied stable isotope labeling with amino acids (SILAC) proteomics to selectively label and compare proteomes of sensitive and tolerant subpopulations of biofilms formed by Pseudomonas aeruginosa towards colistin, a 'last-resort' antibiotic against multidrug-resistant Gram-negative pathogens. Migration was essential in forming colistin-tolerant biofilm subpopulations, as colistin-tolerant cell-aggregates migrated with type IV pili, onto the top of killed biofilm. The colistin-tolerant cell-aggregates employed quorum sensing (QS) to initiate the formation of fresh colistin-tolerant subpopulations, highlighting multicellular behavior in antibiotic tolerance development. Erythromycin treatment which inhibits motility and QS, boosted biofilm eradication by colistin. This novel ‘-omics’ strategy to study antibiotic tolerant cells provides key insights for designing novel treatments against infections unsuppressed by conventional antimicrobials.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were separated on a SDS-PAGE gel. Protein bands were washed with ddH2O mixed with 50% ACN/50% 25 mM NH4HCO3 via vigorous vortexing for 30 min, and dehydrated with 100% ACN until the gel particles became white. They were then reduced with 10 mM DTT at 56 ºC for 1 h and alkylated with 55 mM IAA for 45 min in the dark. The proteins were then washed with 25 mM NH4HCO3 and 50% ACN/50% 25 mM NH4HCO3. Gel particles were then dehydrated with 100% ACN and dried under vacuum. Trypsin (V5111, Promega, Madison, WI) was added to the gel particles at a ratio of 1:30 and allowed to be completely adsorbed by the gel particles. 25 mM NH4HCO3 was then added to completely cover the particles for incubation at 37 ºC overnight. Peptides were extracted from the gel particles by two 20 min sonications in the presence of 50% ACN containing 0.1% TFA. Extracts were combined, vacuum-dried, and resuspended in 0.1% FA for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files of the five technical replicates were processed and searched as five experiments using MaxQuant (v1.5.2.8){Cox, 2011 #2;Tyanova, 2014 #1} {Cox, 2011 #2;Tyanova, 2014 #1}and the GenebankUniProt Pseudomonas aeruginosa protein database (release 2013_06 ,downloaded on ## May 2015,  55063 sequences, 17906244 residues) together with the common contaminant proteins.  and Proteome Discoverer 1.4.0.288. Standard search type with 2 multiplicity, 3 maximum labeled AAs and heavy labeled Lys6 were used for the SILAC quantitation. The database search was performed using the AndromedaSequestHT workflow node embedded in Proteome search engine bundled with MaxQuant using the MaxQuant default parameters for Q-Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer. Briefly, the first and main searches peptide mass tolerance were 20ppm and 4.5ppm respectively while theDiscover with an MS tolerance of 5 ppm and an MS/MS match tolerance was 20ppm with FTMS de-isotoping enabled.of 0.02 Da. The absence of two trypsin cleavage sites per protein was allowed. Carbamidomethylation (C) was set as a fixed modification. Oxidation (M), and deamidation (NQ) and Lys6 (K) were set as variable modifications. The search was performed in the Revert decoy mode with PSM FDR, protein FDR and site decoy fraction set to 0.01. The FDR of peptide identification was set to 1% based on q-values generated from the Percolator workflow node embedded in Proteome Discoverer 44,45. Proteins were automatically quantified by the workflow node of the Precursor Ions Quantifier embedded in Proteome Discoverer. Only peptides that were unique to each protein were used for protein quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Drug resistance and tolerance greatly diminish the therapeutic potential of antibiotics against pathogens. Antibiotic tolerance by bacterial biofilms often leads to persistent infections, but its mechanisms are unclear. Here we use a proteomics approach, pulsed stable isotope labelling with amino acids (pulsed-SILAC), to quantify newly expressed proteins in colistin-tolerant subpopulations of Pseudomonas aeruginosa biofilms (colistin is a 'last-resort' antibiotic against multidrug-resistant Gram-negative pathogens). Migration is essential for the formation of colistin-tolerant biofilm subpopulations, with colistin-tolerant cells using type IV pili to migrate onto the top of the colistin-killed biofilm. The colistin-tolerant cells employ quorum sensing (QS) to initiate the formation of new colistin-tolerant subpopulations, highlighting multicellular behaviour in antibiotic tolerance development. The macrolide erythromycin, which has been previously shown to inhibit the motility and QS of P. aeruginosa, boosts biofilm eradication by colistin. Our work provides insights on the mechanisms underlying the formation of antibiotic-tolerant populations in bacterial biofilms and indicates research avenues for designing more efficient treatments against biofilm-associated infections.

### Keywords
Biofilm

### Affiliations
School of Biological Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
Nanyang Technological University

### Submitter
Sunil Adav

### Lab Head
Dr Siu Kwan Sze
School of Biological Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore


