### Accession
PXD023408

### Title
Global mapping of RNA-binding proteins in multi-drug resistant Staphylococcus aureus using 2C_3

### Description
S. aureus strain JKD6009 RNase III-HTF and USA300 RNase III-HTF were used in our study to capture the RNA-binding proteome in Staphylococcus aureus. Both strains were inoculated in TSB (Tryptone soya broth, Oxioid CM0129) and overnight cultured in 37°C, 200 rpm shaker. Strain JKD6009 RNase III-HTF was sub-cultured into 190 ml LPM (Coombes et al., 2004) (Low phosphate, low magnesium medium, 5 mM KCl, 7.5 mM (NH4)2SO4, 0.5 mM K2SO4, 8 µM MgCl2, 1 M KH2PO4, 16 mM Tris-HCl, 0.1% casamino acids, 0.3% Glycerol) and grew from OD600 0.01 to 1. Overnight cultures of USA300 RNase III-HTF was re-inoculated to 65 ml fresh TSB to OD600 0.05 and left to grow to an OD600 of ~3. Cells were then filtered through 0.45 µm filters using a vacuum filtration device (UVO3; (McKellar et al., JoVe 2020; Van Nues et al., Nature Communications 2017)) shifted to same volume of LPM medium for 15 min at 37ºC and UV irradiated in LPM in the Vari-X-linker (λ =254 nm) (https://www.vari-x-link.com; (McKellar et al., 2020; Van Nues et al., 2017)) with an energy dose of 2J/cm2. In total, 6 replicates were collected (three technical and two biological replicates) for each experiment.

### Sample Protocol
Samples for RBPome capture were washed off the filter with 30 mL of ice-cold PBS (phosphate-buffered saline) and transfer to a new 50 mL Falcon. Cells were harvested by centrifugation and resuspended in 300 µL 2C-lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH7.8, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1 % NP-40, 5 mM MgCl2, 5 mM CaCl2) in the presence of 10 µL RNase inhibitor (SUPERaseIn™, Invitrogen AM2694), 10 µL of Lysostaphin (10 mg/mL, Prospect Bio ENZ-269) to degrade the cell wall, 10 µL of RQ DNase 1 (Promega M6101) to degrade extra-and intracellular DNA and 6 µL of 50x Protease Inhibitors (cOmplete™, EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, Roche 4693132001). After a 20-30-minute incubation at 37ºC, cells were lysed in a TissueLyser (Qiagen 85220) for 5 min with 300 µL of 0.1 mm zirconia beads (Biospec Products 11079110zx). Samples were centrifuged in a microfuge for 12000 rpm for 20 min at 4°C and the protein concentration was subsequently measured using the Qubit 4 system (Life Technologies). Clarified lysates were subsequently transferred to new tubes and and add EDTA to final concentration 25 mM for subsequent silica purification. 100 µg protein from the lysate was kept as “input” for protein level control. The 2C RBPome capture was adapted from a previously described protocol (Asencio et al., 2018). After preparing the lysates, four volumes of GTC RNA lysis buffer (Zymo Research 1060-1) and five volumes of ethanol was added to the lysates and RBPs were captured by passing the mixture through the RNA-binding column (Zymo- Spin V-E, Zymo Research C1024) using vacuum. To further minimise the recovery of DNA-binding proteins, we first washed the column with 400 µL of RNA wash buffer (Zymo Research 1060-3) followed by a DNase treatment on the column (5 µL RQ1 DNase, 8 µL 10X RQ1 DNase buffer and 67 µL H2O mixture) for 15 min at room temperature. After washing the column with 400 µL RNA prewash buffer (Zymo Research 1060-2) and 400 µL RNA wash buffer, the RNA and cross-linked RPBs were eluted twice with 100 µL DEPC-treated H2O (Invitrogen 750023). RNA and protein concentrations were determined using the Qubit 4 system (Life Technologies) and the integrity of the RNA was verified using the Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer. The eluted RNA was subsequently degraded by treating the eluates with 25 units of Benzonase nuclease (Sigma-Aldrich E8263) for 30 minutes at 37ºC. Proteins were denatured with 10 mM Dithiothreitol (DTT) at 55°C for 30 min then mixed with three volumes of UA buffer (8 M urea in 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8). Denatured proteins were cleaned with filter-aided sample preparation columns (FASP, Microcon-30kDa Centrifugal Filter Unit, Millipore MRCF0R030) (Wiśniewski et al., 2009). After passing the mixture through the FASP column, the proteins were washed with 200 µL UA buffer. Proteins were alkylated in the dark using 100 µL 50 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich I6125) at room temperature for 20 min and then washed with two rounds with 100 uL UA, followed by two rounds of washes with 100 uL Ammonium bicarbonate (ABC; 50 mM Sigma-Aldrich 09830). MS Grade Trypsin Protease (1 µg per sample, Thermo Scientific 90057) in 39 µL ABC was applied TO the membrane and incubated in 37°C overnight. Spin down the peptides and repeat elution with 40 µL ABC. Peptide concentrations were measured using NanoDrop spectrophotometers (Thermo Scientific ND-2000C). Peptides were subsequently acidified with Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) at pH <=3 and then desalted using C18-StageTips (Rappsilber et al., 2003). Briefly, two pieces of C18 filters (Empore 2215) was placed on the and activated with 15 µL methanol, followed by an equilibration step with 50 µL 0.1% TFA. Samples were passed through the StageTips and washed with 50 µL 0.1% TFA on the tips and subsequently eluted with 40 µL 80% Acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1% TFA). The tryptic peptides eluted from StageTips (80% Acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1% TFA), lyophilised, resuspended in 0.1% TFA and analysed on a Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer connected to an Ultimate Ultra3000 chromatography system (both Thermo Scientific, Germany) incorporating an autosampler. 5 μL of the tryptic peptides, for each sample, was loaded on an Aurora column (IonOptiks, Australia, 250 mm length), and separated by an increasing ACN gradient, using a 90-min reverse-phase gradient (from 3%–40% ACN) at a flow rate of 400 nL/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode with a capillary temperature of 275 °C, with a potential of 1300 V applied to the column. Data were acquired with the mass spectrometer operating in automatic data-dependent switching mode, MS 120k resolution in the Orbitrap, MS/MS obtained by HCD fragmentation (36 normalised collision energy), read out in the ion-trap with “rapid” resolution with a cycle-time of 2 s.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant version 1.6.2.10/ 1.6.10.43 (Cox & Mann, 2008) was used for mass spectra analysis and peptide identification via Andromeda search engine (Cox et al, 2011). Match between runs and iBAQ log fit were chosen. Trypsin was chosen as protease with minimum peptide length 7 and maximum two missed cleavage sites. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was set as fixed modification, methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. Proteome databases were obtained from GenBank nucleotide sequence database (Wheeler et al, 2007): Staphylococcus aureus subsp. aureus USA300_FPR3757 (NC_007793.1) and Staphylococcus aureus subsp. aureus str. JKD6008 (NC_017341.1). First search peptide tolerance was 20 ppm and main search peptide tolerance 4.5. Peptide spectrum match (PSM) was filtered to 1% FDR.

### Publication Abstract
RNA-binding proteins play key roles in controlling gene expression in many organisms, but relatively few have been identified and characterised in detail in Gram-positive bacteria. Here, we globally analyse RNA-binding proteins in methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) using two complementary biochemical approaches. We identify hundreds of putative RNA-binding proteins, many containing unconventional RNA-binding domains such as Rossmann-fold domains. Remarkably, more than half of the proteins containing helix-turn-helix (HTH) domains, which are frequently found in prokaryotic transcription factors, bind RNA in vivo. In particular, the CcpA transcription factor, a master regulator of carbon metabolism, uses its HTH domain to bind hundreds of RNAs near intrinsic transcription terminators in vivo. We propose that CcpA, besides acting as a transcription factor, post-transcriptionally regulates the stability of many RNAs.

### Keywords
Rna-binding proteins, Rbpome, Rbdome, Uv cross-linking, Silica purification, Protein-rna interactions, Staphylococcus aureus

### Affiliations
Edinburgh University
Medical Research Council Senior Research Fellow  Associate Professor in RNA Biochemistry and Research Group Leader Centre for Synthetic and Systems Biology (SynthSys) University of Edinburgh Max Born Crescent                                                                  CH Waddington Building, room 3.06 EH9 3BF Edinburgh UK

### Submitter
Liangcui Chu

### Lab Head
Dr Sander Granneman
Medical Research Council Senior Research Fellow  Associate Professor in RNA Biochemistry and Research Group Leader Centre for Synthetic and Systems Biology (SynthSys) University of Edinburgh Max Born Crescent                                                                  CH Waddington Building, room 3.06 EH9 3BF Edinburgh UK


