### Accession
PXD007675

### Title
Molecular basis of Tousled-Like-Kinase 2 (TLK2) activation – LC-MS/MS-based analysis of TLK2 phosphorylation state

### Description
In this study on human Tousled-Like-Kinase 2 (TLK2) mass spectrometry-based analysis was applied as part of a molecular characterization of TLK2 in the aim to increase the understanding of the mode of activation of this protein. Specifically, different TLK2 constructs were analyzed to generate a “phosphorylation map” of the TLK2 protein. To analyse the phosphorylation state of TLK2 we used recombinant protein purified from Escherichia coli. Samples of different TLK2 constructs were used for in-gel digestion and analysed by mass spectrometry. All samples were prepared and run in triplicates for label-free quantification. Explanation for MS raw files with TLK2 construct included: Ac: TLK2 construct consisting of amino acid residues 191-772 (Ac indicates active form). KD: TLK2 construct consisting of amino acid residues 191-772 with mutation D613A (KD indicates kinase-dead form). FusionKD: Kinase-dead part of a heterodimeric TLK2 construct (amino acid residues 191-772) with mutation D613A (KD indicates kinase-dead form). FusionAC: Active part of a heterodimeric TLK2 construct (amino acid residues 191-772) (Ac indicates kinase-dead form). KDlong: Kinase domain of TLK2 with C-tail (amino acid residues 450-772). KDshort: Kinase domain of TLK2 without C-tail (amino acid residues 450-753).

### Sample Protocol
Purified recombinant TLK2 coming from Escherichia coli cells were used to analyse TLK2 phosphorylation status for the different protein constructs. Proteins were resolved by SDS-PAGE, visualised by Coomassie staining, the TLK2-specific band was excised from the gel and in-gel trypsin digested. Resulting peptide mixtures were analysed by nanoflow LC-MS/MS on a Q Exactive HF orbitrap mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
All raw LC-MS/MS data files were analysed using the MaxQuant software version 1.5.3.36 with the integrated Andromeda search engine. Data were searched against a target/decoy (forward and reversed) version of the complete Escherichia coli UniProt database supplemented with the sequences of TLK2 and TLK1.

### Publication Abstract
Tousled-like kinases (TLKs) are required for genome stability and normal development in numerous organisms and have been implicated in breast cancer and intellectual disability. In humans, the similar TLK1 and TLK2 interact with each other and TLK activity enhances ASF1 histone binding and is inhibited by the DNA damage response, although the molecular mechanisms of TLK regulation remain unclear. Here we describe the crystal structure of the TLK2 kinase domain. We show that the coiled-coil domains mediate dimerization and are essential for activation through ordered autophosphorylation that promotes higher order oligomers that locally increase TLK2 activity. We show that TLK2 mutations involved in intellectual disability impair kinase activity, and the docking of several small-molecule inhibitors of TLK activity suggest that the crystal structure will be useful for guiding the rationale design of new inhibition strategies. Together our results provide insights into the structure and molecular regulation of the TLKs.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-msms, Tlk2

### Affiliations
NNF Center for Protein Research, University of Copenhagen
Macromolecular Crystallography Group, NNF Centre for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3B, Copenhagen 2200,  Denmark

### Submitter
Anna-Kathrine Pedersen

### Lab Head
Dr Guillermo Montoya
Macromolecular Crystallography Group, NNF Centre for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3B, Copenhagen 2200,  Denmark


