### Accession
PXD006246

### Title
Cross-linking/mass spectrometry analysis of AUGMIN complex

### Description
We applied cross-linking/mass spectrometry to characterize in vivo Augmin from Drosophila in absence of any other structural information. The identified cross-links revealed topology of the Augmin complex and allowed us to predict potential interfaces between Augmin and γ-TuRC.

### Sample Protocol
The in vivo Augmin from Drosophila was isolated using immuno-affinity purification vial the GFP tagged Msd1 subunit. About 80 μg of purified Augmin on GFP-TRAP-A beads was resuspended in 200 μl ice cold buffer (50mM HEPES [pH 7.4], 50mM KCl, 1mM MgCl2, 1mM EGTA) and cross-linked using 400 μg of bis[sulfosuccinimidyl] suberate (BS3) (i.e. 1:5 protein to cross-linker ratio (g/g)). The cross-linking reaction was incubated on ice for 2 hours with periodic agitation. After removal of supernatant, the beads were incubated with 200 μl of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 30 mins on ice with periodic agitation. 3 μg trypsin was added and digestion left to occur at 37 °C with shaking overnight. After digestion, peptide mixture (in supernatant) was collected and fractionated using SCXStageTips with a small variation to the protocol previously described for linear peptides. In short, the peptide mixture was acetified with 2.5% acetic acid to pH3 and was loaded on a SCX-Stage-Tip. The bound peptides were eluted in four steps with buffers (10% v/v ACN, 0.5% v/v acetic acid) containing 50 mM, 100 mM, 200 mM and 500 mM ammonium acetate into four fractions. Cross-linked peptides were expected to be in the three fractions that were eluted with higher ammonium acetate concentrations. Peptides in these three fractions were desalted using C18-StageTips prior to mass spectrometric analysis. Samples were analyzed using an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (ThermoElectron, Germany). Peptides were separated on an analytical column packed with C18 material (ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 3 μm; Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) in a spray emitter (75 μm inner diameter, 8 μm opening, 250 mm length; New Objectives). Mobile phase A consisted of water and 0.5% acetic acid. Mobile phase B consisted of acetonitrile and 0.5% acetic acid. SCX-Stage-Tip fractions were analyzed using same LC-MS/MS system as described above however with a high-high strategy. Peptides were loaded at a flow rate of 0.5 μl/min and eluted at 0.3 μl/min using a linear gradient going from 3% B to 35% B in 130 minutes followed by a linear increase from 35% to 80% in 5 minutes. The eluted peptides were directly introduced into the mass Spectrometer and analysed using a “high-high” acquisition strategy. MS data was acquired in the data-dependent mode. For each acquisition cycle, the mass spectrometric spectrum was recorded in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 100,000. The eight most intense ions in the with a precursor charge state 3+ or higher were fragmented in the ion-trap by collision-induced disassociation (CID). The fragmentation spectra were then recorded in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 7500. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with single repeat count and 60 second exclusion duration

### Data Protocol
The raw mass spectrometric data files were processed into peak lists using MaxQuant version 1.2.2.5 with default parameters, except “Top MS/MS Peaks per 100 Da” was set to 100. The peak lists were searched against the sequences and the reversed sequences (as decoy) of the 8 Augmin subunits, using Xi software (https://github.com/Rappsilber-Laboratory/XiSearch) for identification of cross-linked peptides. Search parameters were as follows: MS accuracy, 6 ppm; MS/MS accuracy, 20 ppm; enzyme, trypsin; specificity, fully tryptic; allowed number of missed cleavages, four; cross-linker, BS3; variable modifications, oxidation on methionine. The linkage specificity for BS3 was assumed to be for lysine, serine, threonine, tyrosine and protein N-termini. Linkage FDR was set to 5%.

### Publication Abstract
The hetero-octameric protein complex, Augmin, recruits &#x3b3;-Tubulin ring complex (&#x3b3;-TuRC) to pre-existing microtubules (MTs) to generate branched MTs during mitosis, facilitating robust spindle assembly. However, despite a recent partial reconstitution of the human Augmin complex <i>in vitro</i>, the molecular basis of this recruitment remains unclear. Here, we used immuno-affinity purification of <i>in vivo</i> Augmin from <i>Drosophila</i> and cross-linking/mass spectrometry to identify distance restraints between residues within the eight Augmin subunits in the absence of any other structural information. The results allowed us to predict potential interfaces between Augmin and &#x3b3;-TuRC. We tested these predictions biochemically and in the <i>Drosophila</i> embryo, demonstrating that specific regions of the Augmin subunits, Dgt3, Dgt5 and Dgt6 all directly bind the &#x3b3;-TuRC protein, Dgp71WD, and are required for the accumulation of &#x3b3;-TuRC, but not Augmin, to the mitotic spindle. This study therefore substantially increases our understanding of the molecular mechanisms underpinning MT-dependent MT nucleation.

### Keywords
Augmin complex, Cross-linking/mass spectromentry

### Affiliations
Technischen Universität Berlin
1.Chair of Bioanalytics, Institute of Biotechnology, Technische Universität Berlin 2. Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell Biology, University of Edinburgh

### Submitter
Zhuo Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Juri Rappsilber
1.Chair of Bioanalytics, Institute of Biotechnology, Technische Universität Berlin 2. Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell Biology, University of Edinburgh


