### Accession
PXD010276

### Title
Early biomarkers of preeclampsia found by urine proteomics

### Description
Preeclampsia (PE), affecting 2-8% of all pregnancies, is a  multiorgan disease and characterized by elevated blood pressure and proteinuria after 20 weeks of gestation. It is a major cause of maternal and perinatal morbidity and mortality worldwide. there are benefits for early intervention however sensitive early deetection biomarkers are not available. With label-free quantitative proteomics we quantified urine proteins in 17 pregnant women sampled at every trimester. three hudnred sixy one proteins were quantified with 2 or more unique peptides and several proteins could classify the preecalmpsia vs healthy vs women at risk.

### Sample Protocol
After depeltion of albumin, the total proteins were reduced, alkylated and trypsin digested. Then peptides were cleaned with Pierce C18 (Thermofisher) according to manufacturer’s protocol, dried and dissolved to 0.1% formic acid in water. The tryptic peptide mixture, totalling 1.4 µg peptide, was analysed by Waters Synapt G2-Si, coupled to the nano-Acquity UPLC system.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were processed using Progenesis QI for Proteomics software (v3, Nonlinear Dynamics), and matched against the Uniprot FASTA sequences. Search parameters included fixed modification at cysteine (carbamidomethyl) and variable in methionine (oxidation). Label-free quantitation was performed after lock mass correction with Glu1 Fibrinopeptide. Protein identification required 2 unique peptides, and the parsimony principle was used to group peptides into protein categories.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Opls-da, Urine proteomics, Preeclampsia, Variable influence on projections, Label-free proteomics

### Affiliations
Transplantation Laboratory, Faculty of Medicine, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland
Helsinki University

### Submitter
Sakari Joenväärä

### Lab Head
Dr Risto Renkonen
Transplantation Laboratory, Faculty of Medicine, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland


