### Accession
PXD019836

### Title
Proteomics of WT or G2A deficient macrophages with 9-HODE

### Description
Macrophages from WT or G2A deficient mice were either control or 9-HODE treated and TMT10 multiplexed proteomics performed

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics were performed as previously described with some adjustments [44]. Lysates were precipitated using 3 volumes of ice-cold methanol, 1 volume Chloroform and 2.5 volumes ddH2O. After centrifugation (14,000 g, 45 min, 4°C) the upper aqueous phase was aspirated, and 3 volumes of ice-cold methanol were added. Samples were mixed and proteins pelleted by centrifugation (14,000 g, 5 min, 4°C). The pellets were washed with ice-cold methanol. Protein pellets were dried at RT and then resuspended in 8M Urea, 10mM EPPS pH 8.2 and 1mM CaCl2 followed by protein concentration determination using a µBCA assay (ThermoFisher Scientific, 23235). Samples were then diluted to 2M urea using digestion buffer (10mM EPPS pH 8.2, 1mM CaCl2) and incubated with LysC (Wako Chemicals) at 1:50 (w/w) ratio overnight at 37°C. Then digestion reactions were diluted to 1M Urea using digestion buffer and incubated at 1:100 (w/w) ratio of trypsin (Promega, V5113) for 6h at 37°C. Digests were acidified to a pH of 2-3 using trifluoroaceticacid (TFA). Peptides were purified with SepPak tC18 columns (Waters, WAT054955) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Eluates were dried and peptides were resuspended in TMT labeling buffer (0.2M EPPS pH 8.2, 10% Acetonitrile). Peptide concentration was determined by µBCA. Peptides were mixed with TMT reagents (ThermoFisher Scientific, 90111, A37724, 90061) 1:2 (w/w) (2µg TMT reagent per 1µg peptide). Reactions were incubated (1h, RT) and subsequently quenched by addition of hydroxylamine to a final concentration of 0.5% (15 min, RT). Samples were pooled in equimolar ratio (unless stated otherwise), acidified, and dried. Before MS-analysis and fractionation, peptide samples were purified using either Empore C18 (Octadecyl) resin material (3M Empore) or tC18 SepPak (50mg; Waters). Material was activated by incubation with Methanol for 5 min, followed by washing each with 70% acetonitrile / 0.1% TFA and 5% acetonitrile / 0.1% TFA. Samples were resuspended in 5% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA and loaded to resin material. Peptides were washed with 5% acetonitrile / 0.1% TFA and eluated with 70% acetonitrile (ACN). Samples were dried for further use. High-pH Reverse Phase fractionation For high pH reversed phase fractionation on the Dionex HPLC, 500 µg of pooled and purified TMT labelled samples were resuspended in 10mM ammonium-bicarbonate (ABC), 5%ACN, and separated on a 250 mm long C18 column (Aeris Peptide XB-C18, 4.6mm ID, 2.6 µm particle size; Phenomenex) using a multistep gradient from 100% Solvent A (5% ACN, 10mM ABC in water) to 60% Solvent B (90% ACN, 10mM ABC in water) over 70 minutes. Eluated peptides were collected every 45 seconds into a total of 96 fractions, which were cross-concatenated into 12 fractions and dried. LC-MS3 Peptides were resuspended in 0.1% FA and separated on an easy nLC 1200 (ThermoFisher Scientific) and a 22 cm long, 75µm ID fused-silica column, which has been packed in house with 1.9 µm C18 particles (ReproSil-Pur, Dr. Maisch), and kept at 45°C using an integrated column oven (Sonation). Peptides were eluted by a non-linear gradient from 5-38% acetonitrile over 120 minutes and directly sprayed into a Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer equipped with a nanoFlex ion source (ThermoFisher Scientific) at a spray voltage of 2.6 kV. Full scan MS spectra (350-1400 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200, a maximum injection time of 100 ms and an AGC target value of 4x 105 charges. MS2 scans were performed for up to 10 most intense ions in the IonTrap (Rapid) with an isolation window of 0.7 Th, a maximum injection time of 85 ms and CID fragmented using a collision energy of 35% for 10 ms. SPS-MS3 was performed on the 10 most intense MS2 fragment ions with an isolation window of 0.7 Th (MS1) and 2 m/z (MS2). Ions were fragmented using HCD with a normalized collision energy of 65 and analyzed in the Orbitrap with a resolution setting of 50,000 at m/z 200, scan range of 110-500 m/z, AGC target value of 1x 105 and a maximum injection time of 86 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set to 45 s to minimize repeated sequencing of already acquired precursors.

### Data Protocol
RAW files were processed with Proteome Discoverer 2.2 software and searched against mouse SwissProt reference database including isoforms (2018-12-10) and common contaminants. PSMs were filtered for a co-isolation threshold of 50% and an average reporter S/N of at least 10. For quantification, only unique peptides were considered and data was corrected for impurities according to Lot-number and normalized using the total peptide amount to account for unequal loading in the TMT multiplex.

### Publication Abstract
Nerve injury-induced neuropathic pain is difficult to treat and mechanistically characterized by strong neuroimmune interactions, involving signaling lipids that act via specific G-protein coupled receptors. Here, we investigated the role of the signaling lipid receptor G2A (GPR132) in nerve injury-induced neuropathic pain using the robust spared nerve injury (SNI) mouse model. We found that the concentrations of the G2A agonist 9-HODE (9-Hydroxyoctadecadienoic acid) are strongly increased at the site of nerve injury during neuropathic pain. Moreover, G2A-deficient mice show a strong reduction of mechanical hypersensitivity after nerve injury. This phenotype is accompanied by a massive reduction of invading macrophages and neutrophils in G2A-deficient mice and a strongly reduced release of the proalgesic mediators TNF&#x3b1;, IL-6 and VEGF at the site of injury. Using a global proteome analysis to identify the underlying signaling pathways, we found that G2A activation in macrophages initiates MyD88-PI3K-AKT signaling and transient MMP9 release to trigger cytoskeleton remodeling and migration. We conclude that G2A-deficiency reduces inflammatory responses by decreasing the number of immune cells and the release of proinflammatory cytokines and growth factors at the site of nerve injury. Inhibiting the G2A receptor after nerve injury may reduce immune cell-mediated peripheral sensitization and may thus ameliorate neuropathic pain.

### Keywords
Mouse, Proteomics, Tmt, Macrophages

### Affiliations
Institute of Biochemistry II, Faculty of Medicine, University Hospital, Goethe-University, D-60590 Frankfurt am Main, Germany  Frankfurt Cancer Institute, D-60590 Frankfurt am Main, Germany;   Cardio-Pulmonary Institute, D-60590 Frankfurt am Main, Germany
Universitätsklinikum Frankfurt am Main

### Submitter
Kevin Klann

### Lab Head
Dr Christian Münch
Institute of Biochemistry II, Faculty of Medicine, University Hospital, Goethe-University, D-60590 Frankfurt am Main, Germany  Frankfurt Cancer Institute, D-60590 Frankfurt am Main, Germany;   Cardio-Pulmonary Institute, D-60590 Frankfurt am Main, Germany


