### Accession
PXD016486

### Title
Silence as a way of niche adaptation: mecC-MRSA with variations in the accessory gene regulator (agr) functionality express kaleidoscopic phenotypes

### Description
Functionality of the accessory gene regulator (agr) quorum sensing system is an important switch promoting either acute or chronic infections, mediated by the notorious opportunistic human and veterinary pathogen Staphylococcus aureus. Spontaneous alterations of the agr system are known to frequently occur in human healthcare-associated S. aureus lineages. However, data on agr integrity and function are sparse regarding other major lineages. Here we report on the agr system functionality and activity level in mecC-carrying methicillin resistant S. aureus (MRSA) of various animal origins (n=33) in Europe together with closely related isolates of human patients (n=12). Whole genome analysis assigned all isolates to four clonal complexes (CC) with distinct agr types (CC599 agr I, CC49 agr II, CC130 agr III and CC1943 agr IV). Different levels of agr functionality were detected by use of different phenotype assays and proteomics for isolates of each CC, including completely non-functional variants. Genomic comparison of the agr I-IV encoding regions revealed that variants of AgrA and AgrC were associated with these phenotype changes, especially among the isolates of pet- and wild animal origin. Since a role in adaptation is most likely when genomic changes occur independently in divergent lineages, agr variation might foster viability and niche adjustment capacities of rare MRSA lineages.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were prepared using Sample Preparation by Easy Extraction and Digestion (SPEED). Cells were re-suspended in trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) (sample/TFA 1:4 (v/v)) and incubated at 70°C for 3 min. Samples were neutralized with 2M TrisBase using 10 x volume of TFA and further incubated at 95°C for 5 min after adding TCEP to a final concentration of 10 mM and CAA to a final concentration of 40 mM. Protein concentrations were determined by turbidity measurements at 360 nm, adjusted to 0.25 µg/µL using a 10:1 (v/v) mixture of 2M TrisBase and TFA and then diluted 1:5 with water. Digestion was carried out for 20 h at 37°C using Trypsin at a protein/enzyme ratio of 50:1. Resulting peptides were desalted using StageTips C18. Peptides were analyzed on an EASY-nanoLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled online to a Q Exactive™ Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). 1 µg peptides were loaded on a Acclaim™ PepMap™ trap column (20 mm x 75 μm i.d., 100 Å, C18, 3 μm; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) and were subsequently separated on a 200 cm μPAC™ column (PharmaFluidics, Ghent, Belgium) The flow rate was set to 800 nL/min and a stepped 40 min gradient was applied: 3-10% B in 4 min, 10-33%B in 17 min, 33-49% B in 4 min, 49-80% B in 7.5 min and 80% B for 7.5 min. Solvent A was 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (FA) in water, solvent B consisted of 80% (v/v) acetonitrile in 0.1% (v/v) FA. The Q Exactive™ Plus was operated in data-independent (DIA) manner in the m/z range of 350 – 1,150. Full scan spectra were recorded with a resolution of 70,000 using an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 3 × 10^6 with a maximum injection time of 100 ms. The Full scans were followed by 53 DIA scans of dynamic window widths using an overlap of 0.5 Th. DIA spectra were recorded at a resolution of 17,500@200m/z using an AGC target value of 3 × 106 with a maximum injection time of 55 ms and a first fixed mass of 200 Th Normalized collision energy (NCE) was set to 25% and default charge state was set to 3.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectra were searched in DIA-NN (Version 1.7.6)74 using the deep-learning based spectra and RT prediction for sequences from the complete proteome of S. aureus strain NCTC 8325 (UP000008816, 2889 sequences, downloaded 4/10/18) and sequences of selected genes (HLA, HLB, HLD) obtained from whole genome sequencing. Spectra were searched with a tolerance of 10 ppm in MS1 and 20 ppm in MS² mode, strict trypsin specificity (KR not P) and allowing up to one missed cleavage site. Cysteine carbamidomethylation and N-terminal methionine excision were set as modifications. Peptide length was restricted to 7-30 amino acids. The m/z ranges were 350-1150 for full scans and 200-1800 for DIA scans. A false discovery rate of 1% was applied for precursor and protein identifications.

### Publication Abstract
Functionality of the accessory gene regulator (agr) quorum sensing system is an important factor promoting either acute or chronic infections by the notorious opportunistic human and veterinary pathogen Staphylococcus aureus. Spontaneous alterations of the agr system are known to frequently occur in human healthcare-associated S. aureus lineages. However, data on agr integrity and function are sparse regarding other major clonal lineages. Here we report on the agr system functionality and activity level in mecC-carrying methicillin resistant S. aureus (MRSA) of various animal origins (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;33) obtained in Europe as well as in closely related human isolates (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;12). Whole genome analysis assigned all isolates to four clonal complexes (CC) with distinct agr types (CC599 agr I, CC49 agr II, CC130 agr III and CC1943 agr IV). Agr functionality was assessed by a combination of phenotypic assays and proteome analysis. In each CC, isolates with varying agr activity levels were detected, including the presence of completely non-functional variants. Genomic comparison of the agr I-IV encoding regions associated these phenotypic differences with variations in the agrA and agrC genes. The genomic changes were detected independently in divergent lineages, suggesting that agr variation might foster viability and adaptation of emerging MRSA lineages to distinct ecological niches.

### Keywords
S. aureus, Bacteria, Mecc-mrsa

### Affiliations
Proteomics and Spectroscopy (ZBS6), Robert Koch-Institute
Robert Koch-Institute, Centre for Biological Threats and Special Pathogens, Proteomics and Spectroscopy (ZBS6), Berlin, Germany

### Submitter
Joerg Doellinger

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Lasch
Robert Koch-Institute, Centre for Biological Threats and Special Pathogens, Proteomics and Spectroscopy (ZBS6), Berlin, Germany


