### Accession
PXD016872

### Title
Neuroretinal-derived caveolin-1 promotes endotoxin-induced inflammation in the murine retina

### Description
Chronic ocular inflammation is associated with many retinal degenerative diseases that result in vision loss. The immune-privileged environment and complex organization of retinal tissue allow for the retina’s essential role in visual function processes, yet confound inquiries into cell-specific inflammatory effects that lead to retinal dysfunction and degeneration. Caveolin-1 (Cav1) is an integral membrane protein expressed in many retinal cell populations and has been implicated in retinal immune regulation. However, the direction (i.e., promotion or inhibition) in which Cav1 regulates inflammatory processes in the retina (as well as in other tissues) remains unclear. Previously, we showed that global-Cav1 depletion in the retina paradoxically resulted in reduced retinal inflammatory cytokine production with concurrent elevated retinal immune cell infiltration. We hypothesized that our previous results could be explained by cell-specific Cav1 functions in the retina. Here, we utilized our Chx10 (visual system homeobox 2)-Cre knockout model to deplete Cav1 specifically in the neural retinal (NR) compartment in order to clarify the role of neural retinal-specific Cav1 (NR-Cav1) in the retinal immune response to intravitreal LPS (lipopolysaccharide) challenge. Our data support that neural retinal-derived Cav1 promotes retinal tissue inflammation as Chx10-mediated Cav1 depletion was sufficient to suppress both retinal cytokine production and immune cell infiltration following inflammatory stimulation. Additionally, we identify Traf3 (tumor necrosis factor (TNF) receptor-associated factor 3) as a highly expressed potential immune modulator in retinal tissue that is upregulated with NR-Cav1 depletion. Furthermore, this study highlights the importance for understanding the role of Cav1 (and other proteins) in cell-specific contexts.

### Sample Protocol
Membrane proteins were prepared from whole frozen retinal tissue as described previously (22). Briefly, retinal tissues were lysed in high salt buffer (2M NaCl, 10mM HEPES-NaOH, pH 7.4, 1mM EDTA, complete protease inhibitors). Pellets were harvested via high-speed centrifugation and were subsequently homogenized in carbonate buffer (0.1M Na2CO3, pH 11.3, 1mM EDTA, complete protease inhibitors). Pellets were collected and re-extracted with carbonate buffer a second time. Pellets were collected and re-homogenized in urea buffer (4 M urea, 100 mM NaCl, 10 mM HEPES/NaOH, PH 7.4, 1 mM EDTA, complete protease inhibitors). The resulting membrane fractions were collected via centrifugation and were used for tryptic digest as described previously (Hauck et al., MCP 2010). Label-free mass spectrometry was used to measure peptide abundances from membrane-enriched fractions of retinal samples from both NR-Cav1 WT and NR-Cav1 KO mice. Hauck, S. M., Dietter, J., Kramer, R. L., Hofmaier, F., Zipplies, J. K., Amann, B., Feuchtinger, A., Deeg, C. A., and Ueffing, M. (2010) Deciphering membrane-associated molecular processes in target tissue of autoimmune uveitis by label-free quantitative mass spectrometry. Mol Cell Proteomics 9, 2292-2305

### Data Protocol
For an in-depth description of the LC-MSMS procedure and detailed label-free peptide quantification analysis parameters, please refer to Hauck, et al., 2010. Briefly, peptide spectra obtained by LC-MSMS on an Ultimate3000 nano HPLC system (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA) online coupled to a LTQ OrbitrapXL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) were transformed to peak lists using Progenesis software, followed by label-free quantification based on peak intensities. Total list of identified peptides and proteins are available in Supporting Information (Supplemental Table 1). Hauck, S. M., Dietter, J., Kramer, R. L., Hofmaier, F., Zipplies, J. K., Amann, B., Feuchtinger, A., Deeg, C. A., and Ueffing, M. (2010) Deciphering membrane-associated molecular processes in target tissue of autoimmune uveitis by label-free quantitative mass spectrometry. Mol Cell Proteomics 9, 2292-2305

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Caveolin-1; caveolin; caveolae; inflammation; neural retina; retina; retinal degeneration; immune response

### Affiliations
LMU München
Helmholtz Zentrum München
Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg, Germany

### Submitter
Sandra Sagmeister

### Lab Head
Dr Stefanie M. Hauck
Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg, Germany


