### Accession
PXD001856

### Title
Comprehensive transcriptomic and proteomic characterization of human mesenchymal stem cells reveals source specific cellular markers

### Description
Mesenchymal stem cells (MSC) are multipotent cells with great potential in therapy, reflected by more than 500 MSC-based clinical trials registered with the NIH. MSC are derived from multiple tissues but require invasive harvesting and imply donor-to-donor variability. Embryonic stem cell-derived MSC (ESC-MSC) may provide an alternative, but how similar they are to ex vivo MSC is not known. Here we performed an in depth characterization of human ESC-MSC, comparing them to human bone marrow-derived MSC (BM-MSC) as well as hESC by transcriptomics (RNA-Seq) and quantitative proteomics (nano LC-MS/MS using SILAC). Data integration highlighted and validated a central role of vesicle-mediated transport and exosomes in MSC biology and also demonstrated, through enrichment analysis, their versatility and broad application potential. A particular emphasis was placed on comparing profiles between ESC-MSC and BM-MSC and assessing their equivalency. Data presented here shows that differences between ESC-MSC and BM-MSC are similar in magnitude to those reported for MSC of different origin and the former may thus represent an alternative source for therapeutic applications. Finally, we report an unprecedented coverage of MSC CD markers, as well as membrane associated proteins which may benefit immunofluorescence-based applications and contribute to a refined molecular description of MSC.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for mass spectrometry Subcellular fractionation was performed using the Nuclear Extract Kit (ActiveMotif) resulting in cytosolic (CYT), nuclear (NUC) and chromatin-bound (CH) proteins. All extraction buffers were supplemented with protease inhibitors (Complete EDTA-free, Roche)and phosphatase inhibitors (PhosStop, Roche). Protein was methanol/chloroform precipitated and resuspended in urea/thiourea buffer (6 M/2 M, 30 mM HEPES, pH 8). Protein concentration was determined by Bradford. Unlabeled and SILAC (M, H) samples were mixed at a ratio 1:1:1 using 60 μg of protein per sample. After reduction (5 mM DTT, 30 min) and alkylation (10 mM iodoacetamide, 20 min, in the dark) proteins were digested for 3 h by Lys-C (Wako) at a protein:enzyme ratio of 100:1. Samples were diluted with 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate to 2 M urea prior to overnight trypsin digestion (Sequencing grade, Promega) at a protein:enzyme ratio of 100:1. Isoelectric focusing Peptides (180 μg) were separated by in-solution isoelectric focusing (OFFGEL fractionator, Agilent) into 12 fractions over a pH range of 3-10. Fractionation was performed according to manufacturer’s protocol with adaptation. Glycerol in the running buffer was reduced to 0.3% (original: 6%) and the ampholytes to 0.1% (original: 1%). Peptides were focused for 20 kVh. Peptides were harvested and wells incubated with 50μl 50:49:1 methanol:dH2O:TFA for 15 min, pooling the wash with the corresponding fractions. Fractionated peptides were dried down with a speedvac concentrator and kept at -80°C until further use. Peptides were solubilized by 1% acetonitrile/0.05% TFA and desalted on C18 STAGETips. Briefly, STAGETips were packed with 3 C18 disks and activated with methanol. After 2 washes of 2% acetonitrile/0.1% TFA peptides were loaded. STAGETips were washed with 0.1 % acetic acid and 2% acetonitrile/0.1% TFA before elution with 60% acetonitrile/0.1% TFA. Eluates were dried down completely in a speedvac concentrator and reconstituted in mobile phase A (0.5% acetic acid) prior LC-MS/MS analysis. Mass spectrometry nanoLC-MS/MS analysis: Peptides were subsequently analyzed by liquid chromatography (LC) using an EASY nLC-II coupled to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer MS (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Emitter columns were packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 3 μm diameter beads (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany). Liquid chromatography analysis was performed with a segmented gradient from 10 to 60% mobile phase B over 100 min. Mobile phase composition was as follows: mobile phase A, H2O with 0.5% acetic acid; mobile phase B, H2O: acetonitrile (20:80 volume ratio with 0.5% acetic acid). A data dependent mass spectrometric method was employed, where the 10 most intense ions, excluding unassigned charge states and singly charged ions, detected in the preceding full scan are isolated (3 Th isolation width) and fragmented using higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) (normalized collision energy). Precursor scans (MS1 level) were acquired at a resolution of 70000 (m/z 300) and an AGC target value of 3000000 charges (maximum ion injection time 20 ms). Fragmentation spectra were acquired at a resolution of 17500 (m/z300) and an AGC target value of 100000 charges (maximum ion injection time 120 ms). All scan events were recorded in profile mode. A dynamic exclusion list of 25 s was employed and the exclude isotopes functionality was activated.

### Data Protocol
MS data was analyzed by MaxQuant suite of algorithms version 1.4.1.2. MaxQuant analysis was performed both on the combined (36 MS runs per sample) and separate organelle fractions (12 MS runs per sample). Despite reducing the ampholyte concentration during in-solution isoelectric focusing (0.1% instead of the recommended 1%) and additional washing on C18 STAGETips, ampholytes eluted in the beginning of the chromatogram, interfering with timely MaxQuant processing. Raw files were thus preprocessed with the RecalOffline application (ThermoFisher Scientific) to exclude the first 35 min of acquisition. Proteomics data sets were analyzed with the empirical Bayes moderated t test implemented by the limma bioconductor package in the R environment (http://www.r-project.org/). P values were corrected for multiple hypothesis testing using the Benjamini-Hochberg method (FDR <0.05). Differential expression was calculated on normalized log2 ratios (nanoLC-MS/MS).

### Publication Abstract
Mesenchymal stem cells (MSC) are multipotent cells with great potential in therapy, reflected by more than 500 MSC-based clinical trials registered with the NIH. MSC are derived from multiple tissues but require invasive harvesting and imply donor-to-donor variability. Embryonic stem cell-derived MSC (ESC-MSC) may provide an alternative, but how similar they are to ex vivo MSC is unknown. Here we performed an in depth characterization of human ESC-MSC, comparing them to human bone marrow-derived MSC (BM-MSC) as well as human embryonic stem cells (hESC) by transcriptomics (RNA-seq) and quantitative proteomics (nanoLC-MS/MS using SILAC). Data integration highlighted and validated a central role of vesicle-mediated transport and exosomes in MSC biology and also demonstrated, through enrichment analysis, their versatility and broad application potential. Particular emphasis was placed on comparing profiles between ESC-MSC and BM-MSC and assessing their equivalency. Data presented here shows that differences between ESC-MSC and BM-MSC are similar in magnitude to those reported for MSC of different origin and the former may thus represent an alternative source for therapeutic applications. Finally, we report an unprecedented coverage of MSC CD markers, as well as membrane associated proteins which may benefit immunofluorescence-based applications and contribute to a refined molecular description of MSC.

### Keywords
Human embryonic stem cells, Quantitative proteomics, Rna sequencing, Aptamer-based somsscan assay, Bone marrow, Lc-ms/ms, Human mesenchymal stem cells

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Heart and Lung Research
Weill Cornell Medical College in Qatar

### Submitter
Johannes Graumann

### Lab Head
Dr Johannes Graumann
Weill Cornell Medical College in Qatar


