### Accession
PXD013504

### Title
Tunneling nanotubes contribute to the stroma-mediated imatinib resistance of leukemic cells DID

### Description
Intercellular communication within the bone marrow niche significantly influences leukemogenesis and the sensitivity of leukemic cells to therapy. However, the landscape of possible cell-cell interactions is still incomplete. Tunneling nanotubes (TNTs) are a novel mode of intercellular cross-talk. They are long, thin membranous conduits that enable the direct transfer of various cargo between cells. The present study found that TNTs are formed between leukemic and bone marrow stromal cells. Confocal three-dimensional reconstructions, correlative light-electron microscopy, and electron tomography provided evidence that TNTs transfer cellular vesicles between cells. The quantitative analysis demonstrated the stimulation of TNT-mediated vesicle transfer from stromal cells to leukemic cells by the stromal component. The vesicular cargo that was received from stroma cells conferred resistance to anti-leukemic treatment. Moreover, specific sets of proteins with a potential role in survival and the drug response were transferred within these vesicles. Altogether, we found that TNTs are involved in a novel and potent mechanism that participates in leukemia-stroma cross-talk and the stroma-mediated cytoprotection of leukemic cells. Our findings implicate TNT connections as a possible target for therapeutic interventions within the leukemia microenvironment to attenuate stroma-conferred protection.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of the samples: 20171204_Q1_AWH_ColID_501_PojID_936_Proteomics_sample_1 20171204_Q1_AWH_ColID_501_PojID_936_Proteomics_sample_2 20171204_Q1_AWH_ColID_501_PojID_936_Proteomics_sample_3 20171204_Q1_AWH_ColID_501_PojID_936_Proteomics_sample_4 20171204_Q1_AWH_ColID_501_PojID_936_Proteomics_sample_5 20171204_Q1_AWH_ColID_501_PojID_936_Proteomics_sample_6 20171204_Q1_AWH_ColID_501_PojID_936_Proteomics_sample_7 20171204_Q1_AWH_ColID_501_PojID_936_Proteomics_sample_8 20171204_Q1_AWH_ColID_501_PojID_936_Proteomics_sample_9 20171204_Q1_AWH_ColID_501_PojID_936_Proteomics_sample_10 20171204_Q1_AWH_ColID_501_PojID_936_Proteomics_sample_11 20171204_Q1_AWH_ColID_501_PojID_936_Proteomics_sample_12 20171204_Q1_AWH_ColID_501_PojID_936_Proteomics_sample_13 20171204_Q1_AWH_ColID_501_PojID_936_Proteomics_sample_14 20171204_Q1_AWH_ColID_501_PojID_936_Proteomics_sample_15 20171204_Q1_AWH_ColID_501_PojID_936_Proteomics_sample_16 20171204_Q1_AWH_ColID_501_PojID_936_Proteomics_sample_17 20171204_Q1_AWH_ColID_501_PojID_936_Proteomics_sample_18 20171204_Q1_AWH_ColID_501_PojID_936_Proteomics_sample_19 20171204_Q1_AWH_ColID_501_PojID_936_Proteomics_sample_20 20171204_Q1_AWH_ColID_501_PojID_936_Proteomics_sample_21 20171204_Q1_AWH_ColID_501_PojID_936_Proteomics_sample_22 20171204_Q1_AWH_ColID_501_PojID_936_Proteomics_sample_23 20171204_Q1_AWH_ColID_501_PojID_936_Proteomics_sample_24 Sample preparation Samples were diluted with 4x Laemmli buffer, boiled for 5 min at 95°C and loaded onto a SDS-PAGE gel. Lanes were cut into six pieces and proteins were digested using trypsin according to standard protocols (REF https://www.nature.com/articles/nprot.2006.468). Peptides were extracted, purified by SDB-RP stage tips (REF https://www.nature.com/articles/nmeth.2834) and stored at 4°C prior MS analysis. MS analysis All samples were analyzed by LC-MSMS using an EASY nLC 1000 coupled to a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen). Samples were loaded onto an in-house packed analytical columns (50 cm x 75 µm) packed with Poroshell EC180 C18 2.8 µm material. Peptides were seperated at a flow rate of 250 nL/min using 150 min methods and standard settings (REF https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28546288). Briefly, MS survey scans were acquired from 300-1750 m/z at a nominal resolution of 70,000. The ten most abundant peptides were subsequently selected for fragmentation, isoltaed within a 1.8 Da window at an AGC target of 5e5 and a maximum injection time of 55 ms. MSMS scans were acquired at a resolution of 17,500. Dynamic exclusion was enabled (309 s) and peptides with charges 1, 5 and higher were exlcuded from fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed using the Max-Quant 1.6.0.1 platform. The reference human proteome database from UniProt was used. False discovery rates of protein and peptide-spectrum matches (PSM) levels were estimated using the target-decoy approach at 0.01% (protein FDR) and 0.01% (PSM FDR), respectively. The minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids, and carbamidomethyolation at cysteine residues was considered a fixed modification. Oxidation (M) and Acetyl (Protein N-term) were included as variable modifications. Only proteins that were represented by at least two unique peptides in two biological replicates are shown and were further considered. The data analysis was performed using MaxQuant software and the MaxLFQ algorithm. Analysis of LC-MS/MS data. Only proteins that were identified in both biological replicates underwent further analysis. Lists of proteins were analyzed using the Panther application for GeneOntology software (Mi et al, 2017), STRING-confidence view (Szklarczyk et al, 2015), and Venny 2.1. Venny is an interactive tool that is used to compare lists with Venn diagrams (http://bioinfogp.cnb.csic.es/tools/venny/index.html). Additionally, lists of proteins were grouped according to their molecular weights based on the UniProt database. Statistical analysis All of the experiments were performed in at least three independent repetitions. All of the data are presented as mean ± SEM. Student’s t-test with Welch correction was used to test differences between two conditions. Values of p < 0.05 were considered statistically significant. Microsoft Excel and GraphPad Prism software were used for the data analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Intercellular communication within the bone marrow niche significantly promotes leukemogenesis and provides protection of leukemic cells from therapy. Secreted factors, intercellular transfer of mitochondria and the receptor-ligand interactions have been shown as mediators of this protection. Here we report that tunneling nanotubes (TNTs)-long, thin membranous structures, which have been identified as a novel mode of intercellular cross-talk-are formed in the presence of stroma and mediate transfer of cellular vesicles from stroma to leukemic cells. Importantly, transmission of vesicles via TNTs from stromal cells increases resistance of leukemic cells to the tyrosine kinase inhibitor, imatinib. Using correlative light-electron microscopy and electron tomography we show that stromal TNTs contain vesicles, provide membrane continuity with the cell bodies and can be open-ended. Moreover, trans-SILAC studies to reveal the non-autonomous proteome showed that specific sets of proteins are transferred together with cellular vesicles from stromal to leukemic cells, with a potential role in survival and adaptation. Altogether, our findings provide evidence for the biological role of the TNT-mediated vesicle exchange between stromal and leukemic cells, implicating the direct vesicle and protein transfer in the stroma-provided protection of leukemic cells.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Qexatoive, Bone marrow

### Affiliations
Medical University of Bialystok
Laboratory of Cytometry, Nencki Institute of Experimental Biology, Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland

### Submitter
Dominik Cysewski

### Lab Head
Dr Katarzyna Piwocka
Laboratory of Cytometry, Nencki Institute of Experimental Biology, Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland


