### Accession
PXD029130

### Title
Comparative proteomic analysis for revealing the advantage mechanisms of Salt-tolerant tomato (Solanum lycopersicum)

### Description
Salt stress causes the quality change and significant yield loss of tomato. However, the resources of salt-resistant tomato were still deficient and the mechanisms of tomato resistance to salt stress  were still unclear. In this study, the proteomic profiles of two salt-tolerant and salt-sensitive tomato cultivars were investigated to deciphered the salt-resistance mechanism of tomato and provide novel resources for tomato breeding. We found that there is an over-abundant proteins relevant to Nitrate and amino acids metabolisms in the Salt-tolerant cultivars. The significant increase in expression of proteins involved in Brassinolides and GABA biosynthesis were verified in salt-tolerant cultivars, strengthening the salt resistance of tomato. Meanwhile, salt-tolerant cultivars with higher abundance and activity of antioxidant-related proteins have more advantages in dealing with reactive oxygen species caused by salt stress. And the salt-tolerant cultivars had higher photosynthetic activity based on overexpression of proteins functioned in chloroplast, guaranteeing the sufficient nutrient for plant growth under salt stress. Furthermore, three key proteins were identified as important salt-resistant resources for breeding salt-tolerant cultivars, including Sterol side chain reductase, gamma aminobutyrate transaminase and Starch synthase. Our results provided series valuable strategies for salt-tolerant cultivars which can be used in future

### Sample Protocol
The experiment was carried out in the sunlight greenhouse of Xinjiang Academy of Agricultural Sciences in April 2019. Tomato(Solanum lycopersicum) seeds were seeded in peat, perlite and vermiculite (1:1), seedling raising in conventional greenhouse.The roots of the grass, perlite and vermiculite were cleaned when the seedlings grow to the four-true-leaf stage, after that transplanted the plant into 1/2 concentration Hoagland standard nutrient solution for hydroponic culture. The seedlings were cultivated at 25/18°C (day/night) with a relative humidity of 40%, and at a photoperiod of 14h/10 h (day/night).Seedlings were treated with salt stress at various concentrations and replenishes the evaporated water to its initial volume, until one week, once every 30mins for 2 days. The following experimental groups were arranged with 3 replicates and treated as follows:(1)CK: 1/2 Hoagland Nutrient Solution; (2) Salt Stress Treatment:1/2 Hoagland nutrient solution with 200 mmol·L-1 NaCl. The physiological indexes of tomato plants were measured using four true-leaf  at 0, 1, and 12 h after treatment. The leaves were selected and stored in the refrigerator at -80 ℃.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (vs 1.6.3.3, Cox and Mann, 2008). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the uniprot database. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. P-value was adjusted to<5% and minimum score for modified peptides was set >40.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tomato (solanum lycoperscium); salt-tolerant; proteome; salt tolerant variety

### Affiliations
Institute of Horticulture Crops, Xinjiang Academy of Agricultural Sciences

### Submitter
wang qiang

### Lab Head
Dr Qiang wang
Institute of Horticulture Crops, Xinjiang Academy of Agricultural Sciences


