### Accession
PXD030622

### Title
Comprehensive human plasma N-glycoproteome profiling based on EThcD-sceHCD-MS/MS

### Description
N-glycoproteins are involved in various biological processes. More than one-third of plasma tumor protein biomarkers approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) are glycoproteins which would enhance the specificity and/or sensitivity of cancer diagnosis. Therefore, the characterization of plasma N-glycoproteome is essential. In previous studies, we developed an integrated method based on combinatorial peptide ligands library (CPLL) and stepped collision energy/higher-energy collisional dissociation (sceHCD) for in-depth and comprehensive N‑glycoproteome proﬁling of human plasma. Recently, we presented a new mass spectrometry fragmentation method (EThcD-sceHCD) which outperformed sceHCD in the accuracy of identification. Herein, we integrated CPLL into EThcD-sceHCD, and compared the performance of EThcD-sceHCD with those previous approaches (EThcD and sceHCD) in pooled prostatic cancer (PCa) patients’ plasma intact N-glycopeptide analysis. We found that EThcD-sceHCD outperformed other methods in both the depth and accuracy of intact N-glycopeptides identification, and sceHCD and EThcD-sceHCD have good complementarity. Combining sceHCD and EThcD-sceHCD can cover almost all glycoproteins and intact N-glycopeptides. Our study holds great potential for human plasma biomarker discovery.

### Sample Protocol
Plasma samples from PCa patients were pooled before analysis. The plasma proteins were prepared using the combinatorial peptide ligands library (CPLL) method as described before. Specifically, 200 μl pooled plasma were loaded into the ProteoMiner column (Hercules, CA) and incubated in room temperature for 2 h. After centrifuging at 1,000 g for 30 s at 4 ℃, the column was washed with 200 μl of PBS for 5 min and centrifuged for 30 s at 4 ℃. After washing with 200 μl ddH2O, the CPLL bound proteins were eluted with 20 μl of elution buffer (8 M urea, 2% CHAPS) for 3 times. The eluent was collected into 1.5 mL tube and stored at –80 ℃ until use.

### Data Protocol
The raw data files of intact N-glycopeptides were searched against the human Uniprot database (version 2015_03, 20,410 entries) using Byonic software (version 3.6.0, Protein Metrics, Inc.). Parameters are listed as follows: mass tolerance for precursors and fragment ions were set as ± 6 ppm and ± 20 ppm, respectively. Two missed cleavages sites were allowed for enzyme digestion. The fixed modification was Carbamidomethyl (C). Variable modifications contained Oxidation (M) and Acetyl (Protein N-term). Additionally, the "182 human N-glycans" was specified as the N-glycan modification for all searches. All other settings were set at the default values, and protein groups were filtered to 1% FDR based on the number of hits obtained for searches against these databases. Stricter quality control methods for intact N-glycopeptide identification included a Byonic score of over 200, a logProb value of over 2, and at least 5 amino acids to be considered an intact N-glycopeptide. Analysis of variance (ANOVA) was used for the statistical comparison among four groups, and Student’s T-test was used for the statistical comparison between two groups. P-value < 0.05 was considered significant. Other analyses were run a customized in-house Wukong platform (http://www.omicsolution.org/wu-kong-beta-linux/main/).

### Publication Abstract
Glycoproteins are involved in a variety of biological processes. More than one-third of the plasma protein biomarkers of tumors approved by the FDA are glycoproteins, and could improve the diagnostic specificity and/or sensitivity. Therefore, it is of great significance to perform the systematic characterization of plasma N-glycoproteome. In previous studies, we developed an integrated method based on the combinatorial peptide ligand library (CPLL) and stepped collision energy/higher energy collisional dissociation (sceHCD) for comprehensive plasma N-glycoproteome profiling. Recently, we presented a new fragmentation method, EThcD-sceHCD, which outperformed sceHCD in the accuracy of identification. Herein, we integrated the combinatorial peptide ligand library (CPLL) into EThcD-sceHCD and compared the performance of different mass spectrometry dissociation methods (EThcD-sceHCD, EThcD, and sceHCD) in the intact N-glycopeptide analysis of prostate cancer plasma. The results illustrated that EThcD-sceHCD was better than EThcD and sceHCD in the number of identified intact N-glycopeptides (two-folds). A combination of sceHCD and EThcD-sceHCD methods can cover almost all glycoproteins (96.4%) and intact N-glycopeptides (93.6%), indicating good complementarity between the two. Our study has great potential for medium- and low-abundance plasma glycoprotein biomarker discovery.

### Keywords
Mass spectrometry; human plasma; n-glycoproteomics; combinatorial peptide ligands library; ethcd-scehcd

### Affiliations
West China Hospital, Sichuan University
Sichuan University

### Submitter
Yong Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Yong Zhang
West China Hospital, Sichuan University


