### Accession
PXD012017

### Title
Proteomic analysis of the NF2/Merlin Interactome by Proximity Biotinylation

### Description
Neurofibromatosis type 2 is an inherited neoplastic disease consisting of schwannomas, meningiomas, and ependymomas that is caused by inactivation of the tumor suppressor gene NF2.  The NF2 gene product, merlin, has no intrinsic catalytic activity; its tumor suppressor function is mediated through the proteins with which it interacts. However, there is no consensus about which merlin interactions are necessary for tumor suppression.  We used proximity biotinylation followed by mass spectrometry and direct binding assays to characterize the proteins that associate with merlin and merlin mutants in immortalized Schwann cells.  We identified 52 proteins that associate with merlin, including a previously unreported merlin binding protein, ASPP2.  Our results identify merlin as a component of mechanosensing signal transduction pathways in cell junctions, in the context of a specific set of structures and molecules through which it acts, in a cell type relevant to schwannoma formation.

### Sample Protocol
Excised gel bands were cut into approximately 1 mm3 pieces, washed and dehydrated with acetonitrile, dried in a speed-vac.  Gel fragments were reduced with 1mM DTT in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate for 30 minutes at 60˚C.  The samples are then cooled to room temperature and alkylated in 5 mM iodoacetamide in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate for 15 minutes in the dark at room temperature then quenched with 5 mM DTT and digested with 5 ng/ul sequence grade trypsin over-night at 37ºC.  The samples were then run through a desalting column.  The extracts were then dried in a speed-vac (~1 hr).    Samples were reconstituted in 5 - 10 µl of HPLC solvent A (2.5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) and fractionated with nano-scale reverse-phase HPLC capillary column was created by packing 2.6 µm C18 spherical silica beads into a fused silica capillary (100 µm inner diameter x ~30 cm length) with a flame-drawn tip.  After equilibrating the column each sample was loaded via a Famos auto sampler (LC Packings, San Francisco CA) onto a column.    A gradient was formed, and peptides were eluted with increasing concentrations of solvent B (97.5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid).  Eluted peptides were subjected to electrospray ionization and then entered into an LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro ion-trap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  Peptides were detected, isolated, and fragmented to produce a tandem mass spectrum of specific fragment ions for each peptide.

### Data Protocol
Peptide sequences were determined by matching protein databases with the acquired fragmentation pattern by the software program, Sequest (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  All databases include a reversed version of all the sequences and the data was filtered to between a one and two percent peptide false discovery rate.

### Publication Abstract
Neurofibromatosis type 2 is an inherited, neoplastic disease associated with schwannomas, meningiomas, and ependymomas and that is caused by inactivation of the tumor suppressor gene <i>NF2</i> The <i>NF2</i> gene product, Merlin, has no intrinsic catalytic activity; its tumor suppressor function is mediated through the proteins with which it interacts. We used proximity biotinylation followed by mass spectrometry and direct binding assays to identify proteins that associated with wild-type and various mutant forms of Merlin in immortalized Schwann cells. We defined a set of 52 proteins in close proximity to wild-type Merlin. Most of the Merlin-proximal proteins were components of cell junctional signaling complexes, suggesting that additional potential interaction partners may exist in adherens junctions, tight junctions, and focal adhesions. With mutant forms of Merlin that cannot bind to phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PIP<sub>2</sub>) or that constitutively adopt a closed conformation, we confirmed a critical role for PIP<sub>2</sub> binding in Merlin function and identified a large cohort of proteins that specifically interacted with Merlin in the closed conformation. Among these proteins, we identified a previously unreported Merlin-binding protein, apoptosis-stimulated p53 protein 2 (ASPP2, also called Tp53bp2), that bound to closed-conformation Merlin predominately through the FERM domain. Our results demonstrate that Merlin is a component of cell junctional mechanosensing complexes and defines a specific set of proteins through which it acts.

### Keywords
Proximity biotinylation, Bioib, Interactome, Schwann cell., Nf2, Neurofibromatosis type 2, Merlin

### Affiliations
Experimental Hematology and Cancer Biology Cincinnati Children's Hopital Medical Center
Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center

### Submitter
Robert Hennigan

### Lab Head
Dr Nancy Ratner
Experimental Hematology and Cancer Biology Cincinnati Children's Hopital Medical Center


