### Accession
PXD028817

### Title
Integrator complex subunit 7 (INTS7) immunocoprecipitation (IP) LC-MS/MS

### Description
To identify proteins that interact with INTS7 in BM-MSCs, IP experiments were performed and subjected to three independently LC-MS/MS analysis and Label-free quantification

### Sample Protocol
Anti-INTS7 antibody (Proteintech) was incubated with total BM-MSC lysates for 2 h, followed by the addition of 20 µl of washed protein A/G beads (Santa Cruz Biotechnology) and incubated for another 16 h at 4 °C. Beads were then pelleted and washed three times in 20× bed volume of lysis buffer. The bound protein was eluted by heating the beads at 95 °C for 5 min with 2× SDS buffer and then separated by SDS-PAGE.  The gel particles were cut into blocks approximately 1 mm3 in size for in-gel digestion. Gel particles were first washed with deionized water, 50% acetonitrile (can), and 100% ACN. Next, the proteins were reduced and alkylated for 45 min at room temperature in the dark. The gel particles were then thoroughly washed, dried naturally, rehydrated at 4 °C for 30 min, and subjected to protein digestion at 37 °C for 12 h. Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), at a final concentration of 0.1%, was added to stop the digestion, and the supernatants were transferred to fresh tubes. All extracts and supernatants were combined and dried in a SpeedVac. The digested peptides were desalted with StageTip and analyzed using an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
The MaxQuant software (version 1.3.0.5) was used for searching the raw files against UniProt mouse proteome database. The FDR of identified peptides and proteins was set to 1%. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 20ppm and product ions were searched with a mass tolerance 0.5 Da. Searches were performed using Trypsin/P enzyme specificity while allowing up to two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.0215Da) were set as fixed modifications. Variable modifications included oxidation of methionines and acetylation of protein N termini. For label-free quantification, the protein expression levels were estimated using the iBAQ algorithm embedded in MaxQuant

### Publication Abstract
Increased adipocyte and decreased osteoblast differentiation, combined with the ectopic proliferation of bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells (BM-MSCs), represent the primary causes of osteoporosis. The dysregulation of numerous intracellular bioactive factors is responsible for the aberrant differentiation and growth of BM-MSCs. In this study, we focused on a new stimulative factor, integrator complex subunit 7 (INTS7), and its cooperative protein ATP-binding cassette subfamily D member 3 (ABCD3)/high-density lipoprotein-binding protein (HDLBP) in mouse BM-MSCs. We aimed to uncover the effects of the INTS7-ABCD3/HDLBP interaction on BM-MSC biological behaviors and the potential mechanism underlying these effects. Functional <i>in vitro</i> experiments showed that the suppression of the INTS7-ABCD3 interaction rather than HDLBP could impair BM-MSC proliferation and induce cell apoptosis. Moreover, Alizarin Red S and Oil Red O staining, respectively, revealed that INTS7 and ABCD3 knockdown but not HDLBP knockdown could decrease osteoblastic differentiation and accelerate the adipogenic differentiation of BM-MSCs. Mechanistically, reactive oxygen species (ROS) and histone &#x3b3;-H2AX quantities significantly increased, whereas the levels of antioxidants declined due to INTS7 and ABCD3 inhibition in BM-MSCs. These findings indicated that the suppression of oxidative stress could be involved in the INTS7/ABCD3 co-regulatory mechanisms for BM-MSC proliferation and differentiation, identifying new potential candidates for osteoporosis therapy.

### Keywords
Mouse, Ip, Lc-ms/ms, Ints7

### Affiliations
Nanjing Medical University
Department of orthopaedics, the First Affiliated Hopital of Soochow University, Suzhou, China 215006

### Submitter
Yueshuai Guo

### Lab Head
Dr Yaozeng Xu
Department of orthopaedics, the First Affiliated Hopital of Soochow University, Suzhou, China 215006


