### Accession
PXD024538

### Title
Identification and drug-induced reversion of molecular signatures of Alzheimer´s disease onset and progression in AppNL-G-F, AppNL-F and 3xTg-AD mouse models

### Description
Alzheimer´s disease (AD) is the most common form of dementia. Over fifty years of intense research have revealed many key elements of the biology of this neurodegenerative disorder. However, our understanding of the molecular bases of the disease is still incomplete, and the available medical treatments for AD are mainly symptomatic and hardly effective. Indeed, the robustness of biological systems have revealed that the modulation of a single target is unlikely to yield the desired outcome, and we should move from gene-centric to systemic therapeutic strategies. Here, we present the complete characterization of three murine models of AD at different stages of the disease (i.e. onset, progression and advanced). To identify genotype-to-phenotype relationships, we combine the cognitive assessment of these mice with histological analyses and a full transcriptional and protein quantification profiling from hippocampus. Comparison between the gene and protein expression trends observed in AD progression and physiological ageing exposed certain commonalities, such as the upregulation of microglial and inflammation markers. However, although there is an accelerated ageing in AD models, there are other factors specifically associated with Aβ pathology. Despite the clear correlation between mRNA and protein levels of the dysregulated genes, we discovered a few proteins whose abundance increases with AD progression, while the corresponding transcript levels remain stable. Indeed, we show that at least two of these proteins, namely lfit3 and Syt11, co-localize with Aβ plaques in the brain. Finally, we derive specific Aβ-related molecular AD signatures, and we look for drugs able to globally revert them. We found two NSAIDs (dexketoprofen and etodolac) and two anti-hypertensives (penbutolol and bendroflumethiazide) that overturn the cognitive impairment in AD mice while reducing Aβ plaques in the hippocampus and partially restoring the physiological levels of AD signature genes to wild-type levels.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen mouse hippocampi were homogenized in 0.2 ml of pre-cooled homogenization buffer (0.3 M sucrose, 10 mM MOPSNaOH and 1mM EDTA) supplemented with complete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche). 50µl of lysis buffer (8% SDS and 0.2 M DTT in 0.2 M Tris-HCl pH 7.6) was added to 50µl homogenate and the mixture was incubated for 3 min at 95°C. Once cooled, the total protein extracts were stored at -20°C until quantification. Protein samples were quantified using the Pierce 660 Protein Assay Kit, reduced with tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP), alkylated and digested with trypsin. After digestion, all samples were isotopically labeled with the corresponding iTRAQ-8plex reagent according to the experimental design following manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo Fisher Scientific). iTRAQ labels were randomized minimizing the co-occurrence of labels within a biological condition. Samples were desalted using C18 and strong cationic exchange tips. Each batch was fractionated off-line by basic reversed-phase chromatography. Sample fractionation was performed with a Zorbax 300 Extend-C18 column (2.1 x 150 mm, 3.5 mm) in an AKTA micro ETTAN gradient LC system (Amersham Biosciences). Peptides were separated in a total of 84 collected fractions and grouped into 24 fraction groups per batch and dried via vacuum centrifugation. Fraction groups (~5µg) were reconstituted in 48µl of 3% acetonitrile (ACN), 1% formic acid (FA) aqueous solution for nano LC-MS/MS analysis. Mass spectrometry data were collected on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos™ Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a Thermo Scientific Dionex Ultimate 3000 ultrahigh pressure chromatographic system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and an Advion TriVersa NanoMate (Advion Inc. Biosciences) as the nanospray interface. Peptide mixtures (6µl) were loaded into a µ-Precolumn (300µm i.d x 5 mm, C18 PepMap100, 5 µm, 100 Å, C18 Trap column; Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 15 µL/min and separated using a C18 analytical column (Acclaim PepMap TM RSLC: 75 µm x 75 cm, C18 2 m, nanoViper) with a flow rate of 200 nl/min and a 210 min run, comprising three consecutive steps with linear gradients from 1 to 35% ACN in 180 min, from 35 to 50% ACN in 5 min, and from 50% to 85% ACN in 2 min, followed by isocratic elution at 85% ACN in 5 min and stabilization to initial conditions. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. In each data collection cycle, one full MS scan (400-1600 m/z) was acquired in the Orbitrap (120k resolution setting and automatic gain control (AGC) of 2 x 105). The following MS2-MS3 analysis was conducted with a top-speed approach. The most abundant ions were selected for fragmentation by collision-induced dissociation (CID). CID was performed with collision energy of 35%, 0.25 activation Q, an AGC target of 1 x 104, an isolation window of 0.7 Da, a maximum ion accumulation time of 50 ms and turbo ion scan rate. Previously analyzed precursor ions were dynamically excluded for 30 s. For the MS3 analyses for iTRAQ quantification, multiple fragment ions from the previous MS2 scan (SPS ions) were co-selected and fragmented by HCD using a 65% collision energy and a precursor isolation window of 2 Da. Reporter ions were detected using the Orbitrap with a resolution of 30k, an AGC of 1 x 105 and a maximum ion accumulation time of 120 ms. Spray voltage in the NanoMate source was set to 1.60 kV. RF Lens were tuned to 30%. The minimal signal required to trigger MS to MS/MS switch was set to 5,000. The mass spectrometer was working in positive polarity mode and single charge state precursors were rejected for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Database searches were performed with Proteome Discoverer v2.1.0.81 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using Sequest HT search engine and SwissProt Mouse_canonical_2016_11 including contaminants and MAPT, PSEN1 and APP humanized and/or mutated sequences according to each of the mouse models analyzed. Search was run against targeted and decoy database to determine the false discovery rate (FDR). Search parameters included trypsin, allowing for two missed cleavage sites, carbamidomethyl in cysteine and iTRAQ 8-plex peptide N-terminus as static modification and iTRAQ 8plex in K/Y, methionine oxidation and acetylation in protein N-terminus as dynamic modifications. Peptide mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and the MS/MS tolerance to 0.6 Da. Peptides with an FDR < 1% were considered as positive identifications with a high confidence level.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Alzheimer’s disease, Transcriptomics, Proteomics, Data-driven drug discovery, In vivo models.

### Affiliations
Institute for Research in Biomedicine
ICREA Research Professor Structural Bioinformatics & Network Biology Institute for Research in Biomedicine (IRB Barcelona)

### Submitter
Marina Gay

### Lab Head
Dr Patrick Aloy
ICREA Research Professor Structural Bioinformatics & Network Biology Institute for Research in Biomedicine (IRB Barcelona)


