### Accession
PXD008082

### Title
Optimized NHS-amine labeling for multiplexed phosphoproteome study.

### Description
In this project, we report the detrimental effect of hydroxylamine, a quenching reagent for NHS-amine reaction, on phosphopeptides. The degree of phosphopeptide enrichment was greatly improved by a desalting method compared with a vacuum-drying method right after quenching reaction. We demonstrate that vacuum-drying in presence of hydroxylamine promotes β-elimination of phosphate groups from phosphoserine and phosphothreonine.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins extracted from cell lysates were reduced with 5 mM TCEP and then alkylated with 5 mM iodoacetamide and digested with 1:25 trypsin/lys-C mix for 16 h at 37 °C. Digests were acidified with TFA and peptides were desalted on an OASYS HLB cartridge followed by drying to completion. An aliquot equivalent to 200 μg (200 µl) was taken and mixed with 1.6 mg of TMT0 label reagent priory prepared in 82 µl of acetonitrile (ACN) and incubated for 1 hr at room temperature. TMT labeling reaction was quenched by addition of 16 µl of 5% aqueous hydroxylamine. For removal of excess TMT and quenching reagent, following two methods were used. a) Drying and desalting workflow: Samples were dried in a vacuum centrifuge and then dissolved in 0.5% TFA and 5% ACN before application to HLB cartridge. b) Dilution and desalting workflow: TMT reaction mixture was diluted with HPLC water to adjust ACN concentration to 5% and acidified with 0.5% TFA. The diluted sample was desalted on an HLB cartridge. Eluted TMT-labeled peptides were dried in a vacuum centrifuge to completion. The pulverized frozen tissue samples were lysed and digested into peptide same as cell lysate sample preparation. TMT-labeled peptides were fractionated by high pH reversed-phase liquid chromatography (RPLC) using an Agilent 1290 Infinity LC System. The chromatography performed with XBridge BEH130 C18 column (4.6 μm i.d. × 250 mm length; pore size 130 Å and particle size 3.5 μm) at a flow rate of 0.5 mL/min. The mobile phases were 10 mM ammonium formate (pH 10) set as phase A and 10 mM ammonium formate (pH 10) in 90% ACN (pH 10) set as phase B. Gradient setup was initially 2-5%B for 10 min, 5–40%B for 40 min, 40–70%B for 15 min, holding %B for 10 min, and finally 70-5%B for 15 min. Fractionation was done by collecting 84 tubes (0.8 min/tube) throughout the chromatographic run. Then, 84 fractions were pooled to 12 concatenated fractions.The fractions were dried in a vacuum centrifuge directly. For all experiments, phosphopeptides were enriched with metal oxide affinity enrichment (MOAC) using titanium dioxide beads (10 μm, Titansphere Phos-TiO Bulk). Beads were added to each peptide sample to 10:1 (w/w) ratio, which was then incubated for 30 min in RT with agitation. Bound phosphopeptides were eluted with 1.5 % NH4OH and 5% pyrrolidine sequentially. Eluates were directly acidified with 1% TFA and desalted using graphite spin columns according to the manufacturer’s instructions.) The phosphopeptide samples reconstituted with 0.4% acetic acid were injected from an auto sampler into a reversed-phase C18 column (20 cm × 75 μm i.d., 3 μm, 120 Å, packed in-house;) on an Eksigent nanoLC-ultra 1D plus system at a flow rate of 3 μL/min. Before use, the column was equilibrated with 95% mobile phase A (0.1% formic acid in H2O) and 5% mobile phase B (0.1% formic acid in ACN). The peptides were eluted with a linear gradient from 5-40%B over 200 min followed by 80%B wash and re-equilibration with 5%B at a flow rate of 300 nL/min with a total run time of 270 min. The HPLC system was connected to a Q-Exactive quadrupole mass spectrometer operated in DDA mode. Survey full-scan MS spectra (m/z 300–1800) were acquired with a resolution of 70,000. Source ionization parameters were as follows: spray voltage, 2.5 kV; capillary temperature, 300C; s-lens level, 44.0. The MS peak width at half height was <15 s. The MS/MS spectra of the 12 most intense ions from the MS1 scan with a charge state ≥2 were acquired with the following options: resolution, 35,000; isolation width, 2.0 m/z; normalized collision energy, 32; fixed first mass, 120.0 m/z; ion selection threshold, 2.00E+03 counts; peptide match, ‘preferred’; dynamic exclusion, 60 sec. Peptide samples obtained prior to phosphoenrichment were reconstituted with 0.4 % acetic acid and injected from an auto sampler into a reversed-phase C18 column (20 cm × 75 μm i.d., 3 μm, 300 Å, packed in-house; Dr. Maisch GmbH) on an Eksigent MDLC system at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Before use, the column was equilibrated with 95% mobile phase A (0.1% formic acid in H2O) and 5% mobile phase B (0.1% formic acid in ACN). The peptides were eluted with a linear gradient from 5-40%B over 100 min followed by 80%B wash and re-equilibration with 5%B at a flow rate of 300 nL/min with a total run time of 130 min. The HPLC system was connected to an LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer operated in DDA mode. Survey full-scan MS spectra (m/z 400–2000) were acquired with a resolution of 60,000. Source ionization parameters were as follows: spray voltage, 1.9 kV; capillary temperature, 275C. The MS/MS spectra of the 10 most intense ions from the MS1 scan with a charge state ≥1 were acquired with the following options: isolation width, 2.0 m/z; normalized collision energy, 45%; dynamic exclusion, 60 sec.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data were processed by MaxQuant (ver.1.5.8.2) supported by the Andromeda search engine. The MS/MS spectra were searched against the UniProt human database (released in Jan. 2016)  with the following search parameters: full tryptic specificity, up to three missed cleavage sites, carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues, TMT0 or TMT6 labeling of peptide N-terminal and lysine residues set as a fixed modification, and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. For phosphoproteome analysis, phosphorylation at serine, threonine, and tyrosine residues was added as variable modification. For β-elimination analysis, substitutions of serine to dehydroalanine and threonine to β-methyl-dehydroalanine were also added as variable modification.

### Publication Abstract
One of the most common chemistries used to label primary amines utilizes N-hydroxysuccinimide (NHS), which is also structurally incorporated in various quantitative proteomic reagents such as isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification (iTRAQ) and tandem mass tags (TMT). In this paper we report detrimental effect of hydroxylamine, a widely used quenching reagent for excess NHS, on phosphopeptides. We found an impairment in the degree of phosphopeptide identification when hydroxylamine-quenched TMT-labeled samples were vacuum-dried and desalted compared to the nondried (just diluted) and desalted ones prior to phosphoenrichment. We have also demonstrated that vacuum-drying in the presence of hydroxylamine promotes &#x3b2;-elimination of phosphate groups from phosphoserine and phosphothreonine while having a minimalistic effect on phosphotyrosine. Additionally, we herein report that this negative impact of hydroxylamine could be minimized by direct desalting after appropriate dilution of quenched samples. We also found a 1.6-fold increase in the number of phosphopeptide identifications after employing our optimized method. The above method was also successfully applied to human tumor tissues to quantify over 15000 phosphopeptides from 3 mg TMT 6-plex labeled-peptides.

### Keywords
Hydroxylamine, Phosphorylation, Β-elimination, Isobaric tag, Tandem mass tag, Phosphoproteome, N-hydroxysuccinamide-esters

### Affiliations
Center for Theragnosis, Korea Institute of Science and Technology, Seoul 02792, Korea
Korea Institute of Science and Technology

### Submitter
Yumi Kwon

### Lab Head
Dr Cheolju Lee
Center for Theragnosis, Korea Institute of Science and Technology, Seoul 02792, Korea


