### Accession
PXD041617

### Title
Secretomes of mesenchymal stromal cells and leukocyte and platelet rich fibrin

### Description
The objective of the present study was to compare the secretome of BMSC (BMSC-CM) to that of L-PRF (LPRF-CM) – an established standard for GF therapy, in the context of wound healing and regeneration.

### Sample Protocol
The proteomic profiles of BMSC-CM (n=3 BMSC donors) and LPRF-CM (n=3 L-PRF donors) were analyzed using LC-MS/MS through Label Free Quantitation (LFQ). Briefly, total protein concentrations of BMSC-CM and LPRF-CM were measured using bicinchoninic acid assay (Pierce BCA Kit, Thermo Fisher) and 10 μg protein was processed to obtain tryptic peptides. About 0.5 µg protein as tryptic peptides dissolved in 2% acetonitrile and 0.5% formic acid, was injected into an Ultimate 3000 RSLC system connected online to a Exploris 480 mass spectrometer equipped with EASY-spray nano-electrospray ion source (all from Thermo Scientific, Sunnyvale, CA, USA).

### Data Protocol
A systematic bioinformatic approach was applied to analyze the data herein. LC-MS/MS raw files were searched using Proteome Discoverer software (version 2.5.0.400; Thermo Scientific) and data were analyzed using Perseus software (version 2.3.0.1)

### Publication Abstract
Secretomes of mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs) are emerging as a novel growth factor (GF)-based strategy for periodontal and bone regeneration. The objective of this study was to compare the secretome of human bone marrow MSC (BMSC) to that of leukocyte- and platelet-rich fibrin (L-PRF), an established GF-based therapy, in the context of wound healing and regeneration. Conditioned media from human BMSCs (BMSC-CM) and L-PRF (LPRF-CM) were subjected to quantitative proteomic analysis using liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry. Global profiles, gene ontology (GO) categories, differentially expressed proteins (DEPs), and gene set enrichment (GSEA) were identified using bioinformatic methods. Concentrations of selected proteins were determined using a multiplex immunoassay. Among the proteins identified in BMSC-CM (2157 proteins) and LPRF-CM (1420 proteins), 1283 proteins were common. GO analysis revealed similarities between the groups in terms of biological processes (cellular organization, protein metabolism) and molecular functions (cellular/protein-binding). Notably, more DEPs were identified in BMSC-CM (<i>n</i> = 550) compared to LPRF-CM (<i>n</i> = 118); these included several key GF, cytokines, and extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins involved in wound healing. GSEA revealed enrichment of ECM (especially bone ECM)-related processes in BMSC-CM and immune-related processes in LPRF-CM. Similar trends for intergroup differences in protein detection were observed in the multiplex analysis. Thus, the secretome of BMSC is enriched for proteins/processes relevant for periodontal and bone regeneration. The in vivo efficacy of this therapy should be evaluated in future studies.

### Keywords
Conditioned media, Mesenchymal stromal cells, Leukocyte and platelet rich fibrin

### Affiliations
University of Bergen

### Submitter
Siddharth Shanbhag

### Lab Head
Dr Siddharth Shanbhag
University of Bergen


