### Accession
PXD029588

### Title
Shotgun proteomics (qMS) of zinc-replete wild type and zinc-limited wild type, altRP operon deletion mutant and its complement strain in Mycolicibacterium (Mycobacterium) smegmatis

### Description
The study was designed to describe the effects of zinc limitation on gene expression in M. smegmatis by comparing the proteomes of zinc-replete and zinc-limited wild type. Additionally, the study informs how loss of the altRP operon impacts the proteome during zinc limitation by comparing the proteomes of zinc-limited ΔaltRP mutant to the zinc-replete and zinc-limited wild type, and to confirm which changes are complemented in the complement strain (ΔaltRP/c).

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from cell pellets resuspended in Trizol following the materials and methods outlined in the manuscript. Peptides were prepared by FASP. Proteins were treated with iodoacetamide and digested on-column using Trypsin/LysC. Peptides were purified, desalted and dried. Peptides were sent to the UC Davis proteomics core for LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
.RAW files were converted into .mzXML format using RawConverter (ProteoWizard). Data searches were performed using X! Tandem via GPM Fury 3.1.

### Publication Abstract
Zinc ion (Zn<sup>2+</sup>) is an essential micronutrient and a potent antioxidant. However, Zn<sup>2+</sup> is often limited in the environment. Upon Zn<sup>2+</sup> limitation, <i>Mycolicibacterium</i> (basonym: <i>Mycobacterium</i>) <i>smegmatis (Msm)</i> undergoes a morphogenesis, which relies on alternative ribosomal proteins (AltRPs); i.e., Zn<sup>2+</sup>-independent paralogues of Zn<sup>2+</sup>-dependent ribosomal proteins. However, the underlying physiological changes triggered by Zn<sup>2+</sup> limitation and how AltRPs contribute to these changes were not known. In this study, we expand the knowledge of mechanisms utilized by <i>Msm</i> to endure Zn<sup>2+</sup> limitation, by comparing the transcriptomes and proteomes of Zn<sup>2+</sup>-limited and Zn<sup>2+</sup>-replete <i>Msm</i>. We further compare, corroborate and contrast our results to those reported for the pathogenic mycobacterium, <i>M. tuberculosis</i>, which highlighted conservation of the upregulated oxidative stress response when Zn<sup>2+</sup> is limited in both mycobacteria. By comparing the multi-omics analysis of a knockout mutant lacking AltRPs (&#x394;<i>altRP</i>) to the <i>Msm</i> wild type strain, we specify the involvement of AltRPs in the response to Zn<sup>2+</sup> limitation. Our results show that AltRP expression in <i>Msm</i> does not affect the conserved oxidative stress response during Zn<sup>2+</sup> limitation observed in mycobacteria, but AltRPs do significantly impact expression patterns of numerous genes that may be involved in morphogenesis or other adaptive responses. We conclude that AltRPs are not only important as functional replacements for their Zn<sup>2+</sup>-dependent paralogues; they are also involved in the transcriptomic response to the Zn<sup>2+</sup>-limited environment.

### Keywords
Ribosomal proteins, Mycobacteria, Transcriptome, Mycobacterium smegmatis, Proteome, Multi-omics, Oxidative stress response, Zinc

### Affiliations
University of Hawaii at Manoa School of Life Sciences United States
University of Hawaii at Manoa

### Submitter
Allexa Dow

### Lab Head
Dr Sladjana Prisic
University of Hawaii at Manoa School of Life Sciences United States


