### Accession
PXD005645

### Title
PBAN-regulated Phosphopeptides research in Pheromone gland of Helicoverpa armigera

### Description
PBAN-regulated Phosphopeptide research used Itraq method in Pheromone gland of Helicoverpa armigera

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction     Newly-emerged females were first decapitated, and then maintained for 24 hours. PGs were collected from the decapitated females and incubated at room temperature with Grace’s Insect Medium. After 1 h of incubation, medium was replaced with fresh Grace’s Insect Medium containing 10 pmol PBAN. Samples were incubated for different time points (0 min (referred to as C0), 10 min (referred to as T10) and 30 min (referred to as T30)). Three biological replicates were prepared for T10 and T30 respectively, a duplicate were prepared for C0. Every replicate included at least 1000 PGs.      All samples were homogenized in lysis buffer (4% SDS, 1 mM DTT, 150 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, protease inhibitor). After 3 min incubation in boiling water, the homogenate was sonicated on ice. The crude extract was then incubated in boiling water again and clarified by centrifugation at 16000 x g at 25°C for 10 min. Protein content was determined with the BCA protein assay reagent (Beyotime). The supernatants were stored at -80C until use.  Protein Digestion and iTRAQ Labeling     Protein digestion was performed according to the FASP procedure described by Wisniewski, Zougman et al. (2009) and the resulting peptide mixture was labeled using the 8-plex iTRAQ reagent according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Applied Biosystems).  Enrichment of phosphorylated peptiedes by the TiO2 beads     The labeled peptides were mixed, concentrated by a vacuum concentrator and resuspended in 500 µL loading buffer (2% glutamic acid/ 65% ACN/ 2% TFA). Then, TiO2 beads were added and then agitated for 40 min. The centrifugation was carried out for 1 min at 5000 g, resulting the first beads. The supernatant from the first centrifugation were mixed with another TiO2 beads, resulting in the second beads which collected as before. Both beads were combined and washed with 50 uL of washing buffer I (30% ACN/ 3%TFA) three times and then 50 uL of washing buffer II (80% ACN/0.3% TFA) three times to remove the remaining non-adsorbed material. Finally, the phosphopeptides were eluted with 50 uL of elution buffer (40% ACN/15% NH4OH), followed by lyophilization and MS analysis.  Liquid Chromatography (LC) - Electrospray Ionization (ESI) Tandem MS (MS/MS) Analysis by Q Exactive.     Experiments were performed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer that was coupled to Easy nLC (Proxeon Biosystems, now Thermo Fisher Scientific). 10 μl of each fraction was injected for nanoLC-MS/MS analysis. The peptide mixture (5 μg) was loaded onto a the C18-reversed phase column (15 cm long, 75 μm inner diameter) packed in-house with RP-C18 5μm resin in buffer A (0.1% Formic acid) and separated with a linear gradient of buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 0.1% Formic acid) at a flow rate of 250 nl/min controlled by IntelliFlow technology over 140 min. MS data was acquired using a data-dependent top10 method dynamically choosing the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan (300–1800 m/z) for HCD fragmentation. Determination of the target value is based on predictive Automatic Gain Control (pAGC). Dynamic exclusion duration was 60 s. Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200 and resolution for HCD spectra was set to 17,500 at m/z 200. Normalized collision energy was 30 eV and the underfill ratio, which specifies the minimum percentage of the target value likely to be reached at maximum fill time, was defined as 0.1%. The instrument was run with peptide recognition mode enabled.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched using MASCOT engine (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.2) embedded into Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Electron, San Jose, CA.)against RNA-seq  database. For protein identification, the following options were used. Peptide mass tolerance=20 ppm, MS/MS tolerance=0.1 Da, Enzyme=Trypsin, Missed cleavage=2, Fixed modification: Carbamidomethyl (C), iTRAQ8plex (K), iTRAQ8plex (N-term), Variable modification: Oxidation (M), Phosphorylation (S/T/Y), FDR ≤0.01. The phosphorylation peptides were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 1.3 (Thermo Electron, San Jose, CA.). pRS score above 50 indicate a good PSM (Peptide Spectrum Matches) and pRS probabilities above 75 percent indicate that a site is truly phosphorylated.

### Publication Abstract
Chemical signaling plays a critical role in the behavior and physiology of many animals. Female insects, as many other animals, release sex pheromones to attract males for mating. The evolutionary and ecological success of insects therefore hinges on their ability to precisely mediate (including initiation and termination) pheromone biosynthesis. Pheromone biosynthesis activating neuropeptide (PBAN) acts directly on pheromone glands to regulate sex pheromone production using Ca<sup>2+</sup> and cyclic-AMP as secondary messengers in the majority of species. However, the molecular mechanism downstream of the secondary messengers has not yet been elucidated in heliothine species. The present study shows that calcineurin, protein kinase A (PKA) and acetyl-coA carboxylase (ACC) are key components involved in PBAN-induced sex pheromone biosynthesis in <i>Helicoverpa armigera</i> using PBAN-dependent phosphoproteomics in combination with transcriptomics. RNAi-mediated knockdown and inhibitor assay demonstrated that calcineurin A is required for PBAN-induced ACC activation and sex pheromone production. Calcineurin-dependent phosphoproteomics and <i>in vitro</i> calcineurin phosphorylation assay further revealed that calcineurin regulated ACC activity by dephosphorylating ser84 and ser92. In addition, PKA-dependent phosphoproteomics and activity analysis revealed that PKA reduces the activity of AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK), a negative regulator of ACC by phosphorylating the conserved ser92. Taken together, our findings indicate that calcineurin acts as the downstream signal of PBAN/G-protein receptor/Ca<sup>2+</sup> to activate ACC through dephosphorylation while inactivating AMPK via PKA to reduce ACC phosphorylation, thus facilitating calcineurin activation of ACC.

### Keywords
Helicoverpa armigera, Proteomics, Pheromone gland, Phosphopeptides, Itraq

### Affiliations
Shanghai Hoogen Biotechnology Co., Ltd.
Hoogen biotech company

### Submitter
Amy Ma

### Lab Head
Dr Maxiaolin  
Shanghai Hoogen Biotechnology Co., Ltd.


