### Accession
PXD004611

### Title
Somatic embryogenesis of Pinus nigra

### Description
There are several issues complicating somatic embryogenesis in conifers, for instance the low initiation frequency, the weak maturation capacity, and the loss of an embryogenic potential after a prolonged cultivation. The aim of our study was to clarify molecular details of the this process in the tree Pinus nigra Arn. We performed comparative proteomic analysis based on the two-dimensional gel electrophoresis in 2 genotypes coded 362 and 366 of: 1) proliferating embryogenic tissues (E) initiated from immature zygotic embryos, 2) non-embryogenic calli (NEC) started from cotyledons of somatic seedlings, 3) embryogenic tissues that lost the maturation capacity (E-L). Pine tissues showed distinct morphologic features: a) E362 and E366 were characterized by the presence of early bipolar structures capable of maturation and plantlet regeneration; b) NEC362 and NEC366 were composed of round shaped cells without any organisation; c) for E-L362 and E-L366 the long-term culture of initially embryogenic tissues resulted in the disorganisation of early bipolar structures. We found 24 differentially accumulated protein spots common for both genotypes after comparison of E versus NEC.

### Sample Protocol
Megagametophytes containing immature zygotic embryos were used to initiate embryogenic tissues in Pinus nigra Arn. Protein isolation was performed by phenol extraction followed by ammonium acetate precipitation protocol. Isoelectric focusing was conducted using 7 cm immobilized pH gradient strips (Bio-Rad) with a pH range of 5-8 using the Protean IEF Cell (Bio-Rad). Molecular mass separation was done on 10% SDS-PAGE gels at 80 V. Gels were stained with colloidal coomassie, and analysed using PDQuest 8.0 software (Bio-Rad). Excised gel plugs were gigested with trypsin. Mass spectra of peptides were measured on the ultrafleXtreme time-of-flight (TOF) instrument (Bruker), equipped with the 355 nm smartbeam-2 laser. Up to the 25 of the most intense precursor peaks per sample were selected for the tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS), with the minimal signal to noise (S/N) 14. Fragmentation was achieved by the laser induced dissociation (LID) mechanism.

### Data Protocol
Acquired spectra were processed by the flexAnalysis 3.3 software (Bruker). Peak lists were imported into the ProteinScape 2.1 proteomic data management software (Bruker). Peptide identification was performed by the in-house Mascot 2.3 server (Matrix Science). Search parameters were the following: fixed cysteine carbamidomethylation, variable methionine oxidation, one missed trypsin cleavage site, 40 ppm precursor mass tolerance, 0.4 Da fragment mass tolerance. Two queries were done: a) against Pinaceae protein sequence database, downloaded from the Uniprot in November 2014, containing 41809 entries; b) against Pinus sp. tensus consensus sequences “Pinus gene indices” release 9 from March 2011, containing 77326 entries.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cell wall biosynthesis; conifers; embryogenic tissue; loss of maturation capacity; non-embryogenic callus; 2-d gel electrophoresis

### Affiliations
Plant Science and Biodiversity Center SAS
Institute of Plant Genetics and Biotechnology, Plant Science and Biodiversity Center SAS

### Submitter
Maksym Danchenko

### Lab Head
Dr Katarína Klubicová
Institute of Plant Genetics and Biotechnology, Plant Science and Biodiversity Center SAS


