### Accession
PXD011940

### Title
Vascular endothelial protein tyrosine phosphatase: Identification of novel cell junction-related substrates and a ternary receptor complex with EPHB4 and TIE2

### Description
Vascular endothelial protein tyrosine phosphatase (VE-PTP, PTPRB) is a receptor type phosphatase that is crucial for the regulation of endothelial junctions and blood vessel development. VE-PTP regulates vascular integrity by dephosphorylating substrates which are key players in endothelial junction stability, such as the angiopoietin receptor TIE2, the endothelial adherens junction protein VE-cadherin and the vascular endothelial growth factor receptor VEGFR2. Here, we have systematically searched for novel substrates of VE-PTP in endothelial cells by utilizing two approaches. First, we studied changes in the endothelial phosphoproteome upon exposing cells to a highly VE-PTP-specific phosphatase inhibitor followed by affinity isolation and mass-spectrometric analysis of phosphorylated proteins by phosphotyrosine-specific antibodies. Second, we used a substrate trapping mutant of VE-PTP to pull down phosphorylated substrates in combination with SILAC-based quantitative mass spectrometry measurements. We identified a set of substrate candidates of VE-PTP, of which a remarkably large fraction is related to cell junctions (48/165; 29.1%). Several of those were found in both screens and displayed very high connectivity in predicted functional interaction networks. The receptor protein tyrosine kinase EPHB4 was the most prominently phosphorylated protein upon VE-PTP inhibition among those VE-PTP targets that were identified by both proteomic approaches. Further analysis revealed that EPHB4 forms a ternary complex with VE-PTP and TIE2 in endothelial cells. VE-PTP controls the phosphorylation of each of these two tyrosine kinase receptors. Despite of their simultaneous presence in a ternary complex, stimulating each of the receptors with their own specific ligand did not cross-activate the respective partner receptor. Our systematic approach has led to the identification of novel substrates of VE-PTP, of which many are relevant for the control of cellular junctions further promoting the importance of VE-PTP as a key player of junctional signalling.

### Sample Protocol
Following treatment with AKB-9778 (50 µM; Aerpio, Cincinatti, USA) for 30 min at 37°C bEnd.5 cells were lysed, insoluble material removed by centrifugation and cleared lysates weresubjected to immunoprecipitation using 4G10 anti-phosphotyrosine antibody. Protein G sepharose was used to precipitated immunocomplexes from which they were eluted using 0.1M glycine pH 2.5 and neutralized by the addition of 1M Tris buffer. Eluted proteins were then acetone precipitated prior to GelC-MS/MS carried out as described below. For SILAC substrate trapping pull-down experiments, labeled bEnd.3 cells were pretreated with 1 mM pervanadate for 30 min and lysed. After centrifugation cleared lysates were incubated with glutathione-sepharose to remove proteins binding unspecifically to the sepharose. Following centrifugation lysates were then incubated overnight with either 20 µg GST-VE-PTP or GST-VE-PTP C/S D/A (n=4). Beads were washed, combined, boiled in Laemmli sample buffer to elute and denature bound proteins, followed by 1D-separation by SDS-PAGE and LC-MS/MS analysis.  Proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE, stained with Coomassie Blue R250 and cut into 13-15 slices. In gel digests were performed according to Shevchenko et al., peptide fractions were desalted and stored on StageTips until analyzed by LC-MS/MS. Using a Proxeon EasyLC nanoflow system each peptide fraction was injected onto a in house packed fused silica capillary column (length 15cm; ID 75µm; ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 3µm) that was online coupled via a Proxeon electrospray ion source to an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer. Bound peptides were eluted using a linear 120 min gradient from 5 – 35% B (80% ACN, 0.5% acetic acid) followed by a gradient from 35 – 98% B in 15 min. After washing at 98% B the column was re-equilibrated at starting conditions. The mass spectrometer was operated in the positive ion mode, switching in a data-dependent fashion between survey scans in the orbitrap (mass range m/z = 300-1650 (300-1750 in pY-specific pulldowns); resolution R=60000; target value = 1E6; lockmass set to 445.120025) and collision induced fragmentation and MS/MS acquisition in the LTQ part. MS/MS spectra of the 15 most intense ion peaks (10 in pY-specific pulldowns) detected in the MS were recorded. Raw MS data were processed using MaxQuant (v. 1.5.3.8) with the built-in Andromeda search engine.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were searched against the mouse uniprotKB database (UP000000589_10090.fasta; version from 12/2015) concatenated with reversed sequence versions of all entries and also containing common contaminants. Carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification for the search in the database, while oxidation at methionine, acetylation of the protein N-termini were set as variable modifications. For the identification of phosphopeptides, phosphorylation at Ser, Thr and Tyr were allowed as variable modifications in addition. Trypsin was defined as the digesting enzyme, allowing a maximum of two missed cleavages and requiring a minimum length of 7 amino acids. The maximum allowed mass deviation was 20 ppm for MS and 0.5 Da for MS/MS scans. Protein groups were regarded as being unequivocally identified with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% for both the peptide and protein identifications. To further increase the stringency of the identification process, proteins had to be identified with at least 2 different peptides, one of which being unique to the protein group. Phosphosites were accepted when they were identified with a localization probability of >0.75 and a score difference >5 (class I phosphosites). Data transformation as well as evaluation was performed using Perseus software (version 1.5.5.3). Common lab contaminants and proteins containing reverse sequences that were derived from the decoy database were filtered out from the dataset prior to any further analysis. For label free quantification of immunoprecipitated proteins upon inhibitor treatment, normalized intensity (LFQ) values were first log2 transformed, followed by filtering for at least 2 valid values in one of both experimental groups (inhibitor-treatment; control). Missing values were replaced by imputation (width 0.3; down shift 1.8). Significant differences between control and inhibitor-treated samples were determined using Student´s t-test with a threshold p-value set to 0.05. Only proteins, which were > 2 fold enriched were considered for further evaluation. For quantification of SILAC trapping results significance B was calculated on log2 transformed average H/M ratios (n=4) using a p-value set to 0.05 for truncation. Proteins enriched > 2.9 fold were considered for further evaluation.  Network construction and gene ontology (GO) enrichment analysis of the proteins identified from the immunoprecipitation experiment involving the phosphotyrosine specific 4G10 antibody and the SILAC trapping approach were performed using Cytoscape (v3.6.0) in combination with the stringapp (v1.3.0) and the enhancedGraphics plugin (v1.2.0). False discovery rate p-values for GO term enrichments were calculated using the stringapp. The Venn diagram was generated using the BioVenn web application (22).

### Publication Abstract
Vascular endothelial protein tyrosine phosphatase (VE-PTP, PTPRB) is a receptor type phosphatase that is crucial for the regulation of endothelial junctions and blood vessel development. We and others have shown recently that VE-PTP regulates vascular integrity by dephosphorylating substrates that are key players in endothelial junction stability, such as the angiopoietin receptor TIE2, the endothelial adherens junction protein VE-cadherin and the vascular endothelial growth factor receptor VEGFR2. Here, we have systematically searched for novel substrates of VE-PTP in endothelial cells by utilizing two approaches. First, we studied changes in the endothelial phosphoproteome on exposing cells to a highly VE-PTP-specific phosphatase inhibitor followed by affinity isolation and mass-spectrometric analysis of phosphorylated proteins by phosphotyrosine-specific antibodies. Second, we used a substrate trapping mutant of VE-PTP to pull down phosphorylated substrates in combination with SILAC-based quantitative mass spectrometry measurements. We identified a set of substrate candidates of VE-PTP, of which a remarkably large fraction (29%) is related to cell junctions. Several of those were found in both screens and displayed very high connectivity in predicted functional interaction networks. The receptor protein tyrosine kinase EPHB4 was the most prominently phosphorylated protein on VE-PTP inhibition among those VE-PTP targets that were identified by both proteomic approaches. Further analysis revealed that EPHB4 forms a ternary complex with VE-PTP and TIE2 in endothelial cells. VE-PTP controls the phosphorylation of each of these two tyrosine kinase receptors. Despite their simultaneous presence in a ternary complex, stimulating each of the receptors with their own specific ligand did not cross-activate the respective partner receptor. Our systematic approach has led to the identification of novel substrates of VE-PTP, of which many are relevant for the control of cellular junctions further promoting the importance of VE-PTP as a key player of junctional signaling.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Mouse, Tyrosine phosphatase, Substrate trapping, Endothelial cells

### Affiliations
Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry
Max Planck Institute for Molecular Biomedicine Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Röntgenstr. 20 48149 Münster Germany

### Submitter
Hannes Drexler

### Lab Head
Dr Hannes C. A. Drexler
Max Planck Institute for Molecular Biomedicine Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Röntgenstr. 20 48149 Münster Germany


