### Accession
PXD007982

### Title
Quantitive protein profiling and pathway analysis for spinal arteriovenous malformations

### Description
Spinal arteriovenous malformations (sAVM) were rare and heterogeneous group of blood vessel disorders that affected the function of spinal cord directly or indirectly. In the past decades, the pathogenesis for SAVM was still not elucidated. Here we compared the specimens of four sAVM obtained from surgery and control samples from donations using TMT labeled proteomic study. In our proteomic study, we identified a total of 3101 proteins and 654-proteins were changed in SAVM compares with control, among which 96 proteins were upregulated and 358 proteins were downregulated. Gene Ontology (GO) analysis revealed that extracellular matrix organization in biological process and integrin binding proteins in molecular function were the most enriched items. Four significant changed proteins (PLG, MPZ, MMP9 and RPL23a) were verified by Western blot. The pathway analysis revealed that the changed proteins in pathways of angiogenesis, focal adhesion and cytoplasmic ribosome likely contributed to SAVM. The protein profile changes identified by our proteomic studies provide a comprehensive understanding of sAVM for us.

### Sample Protocol
Each of the vessels were frozen immediately under liquid nitrogen and homogenized with mortar before dissolved with the ice-cold homogenization buffer (8 M urea in PBS, pH 8.0, 1× cocktail [Roche, IN, USA]). The homogenization buffer was maintained at 4 oC for 40 min and centrifuged at 4 °C for 10 min at 12,000 rpm to remove the tissue debries. Protein concentration was determined with a Nanodrop 2000 (Thermo Scientific, NJ, USA) following the manufacturer’s instructions.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS spectra were searched against the UniProt human FASTA database (released on July 21, 2017) using Proteome Discoverer 2.1 software (Thermo Scientific). The alterations to the recommended search criteria were listed as follow: full tryptic specificity required; two missed cleavages allowed; static modifications, carbamidomethylation (C, +57.021 Da) and TMT plex (lysine [K] and any N-terminal); dynamic modification, oxidation (methionine, M); precursor ion mass tolerances, 20 ppm for all MS acquired on an Orbitrap mass analyzer; fragment ion mass tolerance, 20 mmu for all MS2 spectra acquired. Relative protein quantification was performed using the reporter ion intensities per peptide according to manufacturer’s instructions. Quantitative precision was expressed as protein ratio variability. The upregulation and downregulation thresholds were set at 1.50 and 0.667, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
Spinal arteriovenous malformations (sAVM) are rare and heterogeneous group of blood vessel disorders that affect spinal cord function directly or indirectly; however, the pathogenesis of sAVM is still unclear. In this study, we compared four sAVM specimens obtained during surgery and donated control samples in a Tandem Mass Tag (TMT)-labeled proteomic analysis. We identified 3101 proteins, 654 of which were differentially expressed in sAVM samples compared with the controls. Of these, 96 proteins were upregulated and 358 proteins were downregulated. Gene ontology (GO) analysis revealed that extracellular matrix organization in the biological process category and integrin-binding proteins in the molecular function category were the most enriched items. Two significant differentially expressed proteins (MYLK and MMP9) were verified by Western blot analysis. The pathway analysis indicated that the differentially expressed proteins in the pathways of angiogenesis, focal adhesion and cytoplasmic ribosome contributed to sAVM. The changes in protein profiles identified in this proteomic study provide an improved understanding of the pathogenesis of sAVM. The proteomics data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD007982.

### Keywords
Angiogenesis, Ribosome, Focal adhesion, Proteomic, Spinal arteriovenous malformation

### Affiliations
National Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology & Department of Immunology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences 
State Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology & Department of Immunology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, No. 5 Dongdansantiao, Dongcheng District, Beijing, 100005 China

### Submitter
Wei Ge

### Lab Head
Dr Wei Ge
State Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology & Department of Immunology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, No. 5 Dongdansantiao, Dongcheng District, Beijing, 100005 China


