### Accession
PXD029931

### Title
Proteomic analysis of E. coli MG1655 after removal of oriC

### Description
The project aim was to describe proteomic changes in E. coli MG1655 strain after removal of oriC. Temperature-sensitive transcriptional repressor cI857 and its target promoter was used to control the expression of a serine recombinase from bacteriophage phiC31 (phiC31 integrase). cI857 is a temperature-sensitive mutant that represses its target promoter at 30°C, but the repression is relieved at 37°C. We generated an E. coli “switcher” strain in which the oriC sequence in the chromosome is flanked by phiC31-integrase-specific attP and attB sites and in this strain the oriC is irreversibly excised when cells are incubated at 37°C.

### Sample Protocol
Triplicate cultures of switcher and control strains were pre-grown overnight in sterile MOPS medium (Neidhardt, Bloch and Smith, 1974) with 0.3% glucose (MOPSglucose) at 30°C and diluted 800 times into fresh MOPSglucose at the start of the experiment. Cultures were grown for 8 hours at 30°C and thereafter 28 hours at 37°C. Samples were collected 4–7 h after the temperature shift (growing phase, OD ~1.0), 11–17 h after the temperature shift (early stationary phase, OD = 2.3¬–3.0) and 28 h after the temperature shift (late stationary phase, OD ~2.0–2.8). To collect samples from the switcher low plateau, triplicates of switcher strains were grown overnight in sterile MOPSglucose and diluted 2400 times into fresh MOPSglucose. Cultures were grown for 8 hours at 30°C, then 11.5 h at 37°C. Low-plateau samples were collected 11.5 h after the temperature shift. 1 mg dry weight of cells were harvested by centrifugation at 600 RCF for 7 min. All the samples were washed with PBS, pelleted by centrifugation, and then the pellets were flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C.  Sample preparation was conducted using methods described by Ainsaar et al. (2019). Frozen bacterial pellets were thawed and resuspended in lysis buffer (4% SDS, 100 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 10 mM dithiothreitol), heated at 95°C for 5 min, and sonicated. The protein concentration was determined by tryptophan fluorescence, and 30 μg of total protein was loaded into 30-kDa-cutoff Vivacon 500 ultrafiltration spin columns (Sartorius). Samples were digested for 4 h on a filter with 1:50 Lys-C (Wako) and thereafter overnight with 1:50 proteomics-grade dimethylated trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich) as described for the filter-aided sample preparation protocol (Wiśniewski et al., 2009). Peptides were desalted using C18 Stage Tips (Rappsilber, Mann and Ishihama, 2007), eluted, dried, and reconstituted in 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid. Nano-liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis was performed as described previously (Kasvandik et al., 2016) using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Dionex) and a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) operating with top-10 data-dependent acquisition.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics data were analysed using Perseus software (Tyanova et al., 2016) v. 1.6.15.0. Normalized LFQ intensity values were used as the quantitative measure of protein abundance. Protein identifications classified as "Only identified by site" and "Contaminants" were excluded from further analysis. LFQ intensity values of the whole proteome of each sample were used to conduct principal component analysis.  Protein LFQ intensity values were log2 transformed (Quackenbush, 2002) and normal data distribution was verified from histogram distribution plots of log2 transformed data for each sample (data not shown). Samples were allocated into groups (two strains, four conditions: control growing, control early plateau, control late plateau, switcher growing, switcher early plateau, switcher late plateau, switcher low plateau). For hierarchical clustering analysis, only proteins with complete data for all 21 samples were included. First, proteins with statistically significant changes in abundance between sample groups were identified using a multiple-sample ANOVA test, with p-values adjusted for multiple testing by the Benjamini–Hochberg permutation FDR at 1%. Statistically significant proteins were subjected to Z-score normalization. Hierarchical clustering analysis using Euclidean distances was performed and presented as a heatmap using Perseus software. Proteins with three valid values in at least one sample group were used for further analysis. A two-way Student’s t-test was used to compare sample groups (Benjamini–Hochberg FDR < 0.01) (Supplementary File 5). Of the statistically significant proteins, proteins with more than a twofold difference between LFQ intensities (|log2(LFQ a/LFQ b)| > 1) were interpreted as biologically significant. The list of genes for differentially expressed proteins was used for enrichment analysis. Enrichment analysis for pathways was conducted using the SmartTables function of Pathway Tools v. 19.0 (Keseler et al., 2017)(Karp et al., 2016) with a threshold of Fisher’s exact test (p< 0.05), which is available at BioCyc.org.

### Publication Abstract
Efficient production of biochemicals and proteins in cell factories frequently benefits from a two-stage bioprocess in which growth and production phases are decoupled. Here, we describe a novel growth switch based on the permanent removal of the origin of replication (<i>oriC</i>) from the <i>Escherichia coli</i> chromosome. Without <i>oriC</i>, cells cannot initiate a new round of replication, and they stop growing while their metabolism remains active. Our system relies on a serine recombinase from bacteriophage phiC31 whose expression is controlled by the temperature-sensitive cI857 repressor from phage lambda. The reporter protein expression in switched cells continues after cessation of growth, leading to protein levels up to 5 times higher compared to nonswitching cells. Switching induces a unique physiological state that is different from both normal exponential and stationary phases. The switched cells remain in this state even when not growing, retain their protein synthesis capacity, and do not induce proteins associated with the stationary phase. Our switcher technology is potentially useful for a range of products and applicable in many bacterial species for decoupling growth and production.

### Keywords
Switcher, Oric, Growth decoupling, E. coli

### Affiliations
Institute of Technology, University of Tartu, Estonia
University of Tartu

### Submitter
Villu Kasari

### Lab Head
Dr Arvi Jõers
Institute of Technology, University of Tartu, Estonia


