### Accession
PXD033764

### Title
Assesing Orthogonality of ER-HRP and cyt-APEX proximity labeling

### Description
This project was evaluating the orthogonality of proximity labeling peroxidases that are used to determine partitioning of proteins between the ER and the cytosol.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293T cells were transfected with either APEX2.NES or ER.HRP and treated with either 50 nM MG132 and either vehicle or 25 nM mycolactone for 16h. Following proximity biotinylation with biotin-phenol and peroxide, labeling was quenched and biotinylated proteins were avidin-purified from lysate. Eluates were prepared for shotgun proteomics, TMT-labeled, and characterized by MuDPIT on an LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro interfaced with a Thermo nLC1000. Both MS1 (30000) and MS2 (7500) were acquired in the Orbitrap, with 30s dynamic exclusion, 1.0 Da isolation window, and stepped collision voltage HCD.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were converted to mzml files using MSConvert and searched in FragPipe against a 07/11/2021 Uniprot release (longest entry for each protein group) with 20429 proteins plus reverse sequences and common contaminants, with a FDR of 0.01 at the peptide level. TMT modification on N-termini and lysine, as well as cysteine alkylation, were included as fixed modifications. Methionine oxidation, biotin-phenol addition at tyrosine and N-terminal acetylation were included as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Orbitrap velos pro, Hek293t, Proximity labeling

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry, University of California, Riverside
University of California, Riverside

### Submitter
Joseph Genereux

### Lab Head
Dr Joseph Genereux
Department of Chemistry, University of California, Riverside


