### Accession
PXD011154

### Title
Comparative analysis of Salmonella Typhi, Paratyphi A, Enteritidis and Typhimurium core proteomes

### Description
Salmonella enterica subsp. enterica contains more than 2,600 serovars of which four are of major medical relevance for humans. While the typhoidal serovars (Typhi and Paratyphi A) are human-restricted and cause enteric fever, non-typhoidal Salmonella serovars (Typhimurium and Enteritidis) have a broad host range and predominantly cause gastroenteritis. In this study, we compared the core proteomes of Salmonella Typhi, Paratyphi A, Typhimurium and Enteritidis using contemporary proteomics. Five isolates, covering different geographical origins, and one reference strain per serovar were grown in vitro to the exponential phase. Protein levels of orthologous proteins between serovars were compared and subjected to gene ontology term enrichment and inferred regulatory interactions. Differential expression of the core proteomes of the typhoidal serovars appears mainly related to cell surface components and, for the non-typhoidal serovars, to pathogenicity. Our findings may guide future development of novel diagnostics and vaccines, and understanding of disease progression.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation: Five clinical isolates per Salmonella serovar Typhi, Paratyphi A, Typhimurium and Enteritidis, covering different geographical regions, and one reference strain for each Salmonella serovar were selected for the study. The strains were grown in a synthetic medium and harvested in the log-phase. Duplicate samples of 1 ml were taken from each culture and centrifuged at 5000 x g for 10 min at 4°C and the cell pellets were washed twice with phosphate buffered saline (PBS). Proteins were extracted from the bacterial pellets with the Qproteome Bacterial Protein Prep Kit (Qiagen) following the manufacturer’s instructions. The protein concentration was determined with the BCA Protein Assay Kit (Pierce). Proteins were reduced with 15 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP-HCl) and alkylated with 30 mM iodoacetamide (IAM) for 15 min in the dark while shaking at 37°C. The buffer was exchanged to digestion buffer (50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 7.9) using G-25 illustra NAP-5 gel filtration columns (GE Healthcare). The eluates were then heated at 99°C for 5 min, put immediately on ice and, after cooling, sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega) was added to a 1:100 trypsin to protein ratio upon which digestion proceeded at 37°C for 16 h. The trypsin activity was stopped by adding 60 µl of 10% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) (0.6% final concentration). LC-MS/MS analysis: The peptide mixtures were subjected to LC−MS/MS analysis using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano LC (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) in-line connected to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The sample mixture was first loaded on a trapping column (made in-house, 100 μm internal diameter (I.D.), 20 mm long, filled with 5 μm C18 Reprosil-HD beads, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). After flushing from the trapping column, the peptides were loaded on an analytical column (75 μm I.D., 400 mm long and filled with 3 μm C18 Reprosil-HD beads (Dr. Maisch)) packed in the needle PicoFrit SELF/P PicoTip emitter (PF360-75-15-N-5 (NewObjective, Woburn, USA)). Peptides were loaded with loading solvent (0.1% TFA in water) and separated with a linear gradient from 98% solvent A’ (0.1% formic acid in water) to 40% solvent B′ (0.1% formic acid in water/acetonitrile, 20/80 (v/v)) in 130 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. This was followed by a 15 min wash reaching 99% solvent B’. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent, positive ionization mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 10 most abundant peaks in a given MS spectrum. The source voltage was 3.4 kV and the capillary temperature was at 275°C. One MS1 scan (m/z 400−2000, AGC target 3 × 106 ions, maximum ion injection time 80 ms) acquired at a resolution of 70,000 (at 200 m/z) was followed by up to 10 tandem MS scans (resolution 17,500 at 200 m/z) of the most intense ions fulfilling the defined selection criteria (AGC target 5 × 104 ions, maximum ion injection time 60 ms, isolation window 2 Da, fixed first mass 140 m/z, spectrum data type: centroid, underfill ratio 2%, intensity threshold 1.7xE4, exclusion of unassigned 1, 5-8, >8 charged precursors, peptide match preferred, exclude isotopes: on, dynamic exclusion time 20 s). The HCD collision energy was set to 25% normalized collision energy and the polydimethylcyclosiloxane background ion at 445.120025 Da was used for internal calibration (lock mass).

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were analyzed by MaxQuant version 1.5.0.25 and MS/MS spectra were searched against the translated protein sequences of the annotated genomes of Salmonella Typhi CT18 (NCBI accession number AL513382.1), Paratyphi A ATCC 9150 (CP000026.1), Typhimurium 14028S (CP001363.1) and Enteritidis PT4/P125109 (AM933172.1). The following parameters were applied for the database search: enzyme specificity was set to trypsin/P allowing for a maximum of two missed cleavages; carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification; methionine oxidation, and conversion of N-terminal glutamine to pyroglutamate were set as variable modifications. The first search for precursor ions was performed with a mass tolerance of 20 ppm for calibration, while 6 ppm was applied for the main search. For protein identification, at least two unique peptides were required per protein group and the minimum peptide length was set to 7. The false discovery rate for peptide and protein identification was set to 1%. The minimum score threshold for both modified and unmodified peptides was set to 30. MS runs were analyzed with the “match between runs” option between samples of a given serovar. For matching, a retention time window of 42 s was selected. Protein quantification was based on the MaxQuant label-free (MaxLFQ) algorithm. For all other parameters, default settings were applied.  The MaxQuant output file “proteinGroups.txt” was loaded into Perseus 1.5.0.8. The protein entries were filtered to remove potential contaminants, reverse hits and proteins only identified by site. Then, the LFQ intensities were log2 transformed and data were filtered for proteins containing a minimum number of valid values in 9 out of 12 samples. The log2 transformed data were then normalized by subtracting the median per sample within the dataset. In order to compare the different Salmonella serovars we used orthology mapping. Orthologous genes within the four serovars were retrieved from the Orthologous Matrix (OMA) database with NCBI Taxonomy IDs 220341 (STY), 295319 (SPTA), 550537 (SENT) and 588858 (STM). Statistical significant differences in LFQ intensities were assessed using a two-sided t-test with Bonferroni adjusted P values using R. Proteins were considered differentially expressed if they showed a minimal 2-fold change in their overall levels with an adjusted P-value lower than 0.05. Principal component analysis (PCA) was done in Perseus 1.5.0.8 using default settings.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Comparative analysis, Non-typhoidal salmonella, Core proteome, Typhoidal salmonella

### Affiliations
University of Ghent - 
Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences -
Department of Biochemistry 
Department of Biomedical Sciences, unit of Diagnostic Bacteriology, Institute of Tropical Medicine

### Submitter
Sara Saleh

### Lab Head
Dr Stijn Deborggraeve
Department of Biomedical Sciences, unit of Diagnostic Bacteriology, Institute of Tropical Medicine


