### Accession
PXD030667

### Title
Integrated Proteogenomic Characterization of Adenocarcinoma of the esophagogastric junction

### Description
In this study, we performed comprehensive genomic, transcriptomic, proteomic, and phosphorylation analysis of tumor tissues and paired normal adjacent tissues (NATs) of AEG. we describe integrative proteogenomic analyses of the largest cohort to date of AEG samples that focused particularly on novel and clinically actionable insights revealed in the proteome and Phosphorylation modifications. The data may improve current knowledge about AEG and contribute to its diagnosis, prognosis and drug development.

### Sample Protocol
Protein Extraction  123 cases tumor tissues and NATs were analyzed by Proteomic and Phosphoproteomic. The samples were taken out from -80°C. About 20-60 mg tissue sample was taken into a mortar that pre-cooled with liquid nitrogen, and fully ground to a powder under liquid nitrogen. 4 times of the volume lysis buffer (1% Triton X-100, 1% protease inhibitor, 1% phosphatase inhibitor) were added to the samples powder of each group for ultrasonic lysis. The debris was removed by centrifugation at 12 000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the supernatant was collected and transferred to a new centrifuge tube and the protein concentration was determined using the BCA protein assay (BCA Protein Assay Kit, Pierce).  Tryptic Digestion For digestion, the same amount of each sample protein was took out, and the volume of each group was adjusted with lysate. Then, 20% trichloroacetic acid was added slowly, and precipitated at 4 ℃ for 2 h. Centrifuged at 4500g for 5 min, discarded the supernatant, and wash the precipitate with pre-cooled acetone for three times. After drying the protein pellet, added triethyl-ammonium bicarbonate buffer at a concentration of 200 mM, ultrasonically dispersed the pellet, Then, added trypsin at a ratio of 1:50(protease: protein, m/m), and hydrolyze the proteins overnight at 37°C. Besides, dithiothreitol (DTT) was added to make the final concentration at 5 mM and reduced at 56℃ for 30 min. Finally, Iodoacetamide (IAA) was added to make the final concentration at 11 mM and incubated at room temperature for 15 min in dark.  Phosphorylation modification enrichment The peptides were dissolved in the enrichment buffer solution (50% acetonitrile/0.5% acetic acid), the supernatant was transferred to the pre-washed immobilized metal affinity capture (IMAC) material, and placed on a rotating shaker and incubated by gentle shaking. The IMAC microspheres with enriched phosphopeptides were collected by centrifugation, and the supernatant was removed. To remove nonspecifically adsorbed peptides, the IMAC microspheres were washed with 50% acetonitrile/6% trifluoroacetic acid and 30% acetonitrile/0.1% trifluoroacetic acid, sequentially. To elute the enriched phosphopeptides from the IMAC microspheres, elution buffer containing 10% NH4OH was added and the enriched phosphopeptides were eluted with vibration. The supernatant containing phosphopeptides was collected and lyophilized for LC-MS/MS analysis.  Liquid-chromatography/ mass spectrometry ( LC-MS) analysis The tryptic peptides were dissolved in solvent A (0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile/ in water), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (25-cm length, 100 μm i.d.). Liquid gradient setting (proteomic analysis): Peptides were separated with a gradient from 6% to 24% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) over 70 min, 24% to 35% in 14 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 450 nL/min on a NanoElute UHPLC system (Bruker Daltonics). Liquid gradient setting (phosphoproteomic analysis): Peptides were separated with a gradient from 2% to 22% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) over 50 min, 22% to 35% in 2 min and climbing to 80% in 4 min then holding at 80% for the last 4 min, all at a constant flow rate of 450 nL/min on a nanoElute UHPLC system (Bruker Daltonics). Then, the peptides were subjected to Capillary source followed by the timsTOF Pro (Bruker Daltonics) mass spectrometry. The electrospray voltage applied was 1.7 kV. Precursors and fragments were analyzed at the TOF detector, with a MS/MS scan range from 100 to 1700 m/z. The timsTOF Pro was operated in parallel accumulation serial fragmentation (PASEF) mode. Precursors with charge states 0 to 5 were selected for fragmentation, and 10 PASEF-MS/MS scans were acquired per cycle. The dynamic exclusion was set to 30s/24s (proteomic analysis/phosphoproteomic analysis).

### Data Protocol
Database searching The resulting tandem mass spectrometry data were processed using MaxQuant search engine (v.1.6.6.0). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the Homo_sapiens_9606 database (20366 entries) concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 20 ppm in main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 20 ppm. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification, and acetylation on protein N-terminal, oxidation on Met, and phosphorylation on Ser, Thr, Tyr were specified as variable modifications. The quantitative method was set as Label Free Quantitative (LFQ), and the FDR of protein identification and peptide-spectrum match (PSM) identification was set as 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Adenocarcinoma of the esophagogastric junction，aeg，lc-ms/ms, Proteogenomic

### Affiliations
The Cancer Hospital of the University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (Zhejiang Cancer Hospital), Institutes of Basic Medicine and Cancer (IBMC), Chinese Academy of Sciences, Hangzhou 310022, China

### Submitter
Li Yuan

### Lab Head
Dr Xiang-Dong Cheng
The Cancer Hospital of the University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (Zhejiang Cancer Hospital), Institutes of Basic Medicine and Cancer (IBMC), Chinese Academy of Sciences, Hangzhou 310022, China


