### Accession
PXD022207

### Title
Heat Shock Factor 1-dependent extraceHeat Shock Factor 1-dependent extracellular matrix remodeling mediates the transition from chronic intestinal inflammation to colon cancerllular matrix remodeling mediates the transition from chronic intestinal inflammation to colon cancer

### Description
Chronic inflammation underlies tumor initiation, progression, invasion, and metastasis. In the colon, long-term exposure to chronic inflammation drives colitis associated colon cancer (CAC) in patients with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). While the causal and clinical links between chronic inflammation and CAC are well established, our molecular understanding of how chronic inflammation leads to the development of colon cancer is still lacking. Here we deconstruct the evolving microenvironment of CAC, by measuring proteomic changes and extracellular matrix (ECM) organization over time in a genetically modified mouse model of CAC. We detect early changes in ECM structure and composition, and report that the transcriptional regulator heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) plays a crucial role in orchestrating these events. Activated in stromal fibroblasts of the gut, HSF1 promotes ECM remodeling and inflammatory programs which lead to the development of CAC. Loss of HSF1 abrogates ECM assembly by colon fibroblasts in cell culture, prevents inflammation-induced ECM remodeling in mice and significantly inhibits progression to CAC. Establishing the relevance of our experimental findings to human disease, we find high activation of stromal HSF1 in CAC patients, and detect the HSF1-dependent proteomic ECM signature in human colorectal cancer. Thus, HSF1-dependent ECM remodeling plays a crucial role in mediating inflammation-driven colon cancer.

### Sample Protocol
Tissues for mass spectrometry were collected from the distal part of the colon after a brief PBS wash, snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored in -80˚ C until processing. Tissues were homogenized with an Omni-Th homogenizer in Urea buffer containing: 8M Urea, 400mM Ammonium bicarbonate, and 10mM DTT. Homogenates were sonicated (5’, [10/10 on/off pulses], 90% energy. Sonics Vibra-Cell) and briefly centrifuged to pellet insoluble debris. Protein amount was estimated using Bradford readings. 20ug protein from each sample were reduced with DTT (60ºC for 30 min), modified with 40mM iodoacetamide in 100mM ammonium bicarbonate (in the dark, RT,30’) and digested in 2M Urea, 100mM ammonium bicarbonate with modified trypsin (V5111, Promega, WI, USA), overnight at 37oC with a 1:50 enzyme-to-substrate ratio. An additional second digestion with trypsin was done for 4 h at 37oC with a 1:100 enzyme-to-substrate ratio. The tryptic peptides were desalted using C18 tips (74-46, Harvard apparatus, MA, USA) dried and re-suspended in 0.1% Formic acid. The peptides were resolved by reverse-phase chromatography on 0.075 X 300-mm fused silica capillaries (J&W scientific) packed with Reprosil reversed phase material (Dr Maisch GmbH, Germany). The peptides were eluted with linear 180 min gradient of 5 to 28%, 15 min gradient of 28 to 95%, and 25 min at 95% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid in water at flow rates of 0.15 μl/min. Mass spectrometry was performed by Q Exactive plus mass spectrometer (Thermo fischer scientific) in a positive mode using repetitively full MS scan followed by High Collision Dissociation (HCD) of the 10 most dominant ions selected from the first MS scan.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometry data from all the biological repeats was analyzed using the MaxQuant software 1.5.2.8 59 vs. the Mus-Musculus portion of the Uniprot database, with 1% FDR. The data was quantified by label free analysis using the same software, based on extracted ion currents (XICs) of peptides enabling quantitation from each LC/MS run for each peptide identified in any of experiments. Statistical analysis of the identification and quantification of results was done using Perseus 1.5.2.4 software

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Colon cancer, Hsf1, Tumor microenvironmnet, Cancer associated fibroblasts, Ecm, Cancer

### Affiliations
Bio-molecular sciences, The Weizmann Institue of Science, Israel
The Weizmann institute of science

### Submitter
hagar lavon

### Lab Head
Dr Ruth Scherz-Shouval
Bio-molecular sciences, The Weizmann Institue of Science, Israel


