### Accession
PXD020602

### Title
Identification of small molecule activators of the ubiquitin ligase E6AP/UBE3A and Angelman syndrome-derived E6AP/UBE3A variants

### Description
Genetic aberrations of the UBE3A gene encoding the E3 ubiquitin ligase E6AP underlie the development of Angelman syndrome (AS). Approximately 10 percent of AS individuals harbor UBE3A genes with point mutations, frequently resulting in the expression of full-length E6AP variants with defective E3 activity. Since E6AP exists in two states, an inactive and an active one, we hypothesized that distinct small molecules can stabilize the active state and that such molecules may rescue the E3 activity of AS-derived E6AP variants. Therefore, we established an assay that allows identifying modulators of E6AP in a high-throughput format. We identified several compounds that not only stimulate wild-type E6AP but also rescue the E3 activity of certain E6AP variants. Moreover, by chemical crosslinking coupled to mass spectrometry we provide evidence that the compounds stabilize an active conformation of E6AP. Thus, these compounds represent potential lead structures for the design of drugs for AS treatment.

### Sample Protocol
Experiments were carried out essentially as described (Sailer et al., 2018). In short, approximately 100 Î¼g of E6AP or the AS-derived E6AP variants F583S and E584Q were crosslinked by addition of H12/D12 DSS (Creative Molecules) at a ratio of 1.5 nmol / 1 Âµg protein and slight shaking for 30 min at 37 Â°C. Samples contained either 100 ÂµM of OF232, alloxazine or an equal volume of DMSO (1 % v/v). After addition of the compounds or DMSO, samples were incubated for 30 min on ice prior to crosslinking. In order to crosslink E6AP in complex with HPV-16 E6, a 1.5-fold molar excess of GST-16 E6 to E6AP was used and incubated and crosslinked under the same conditions. Proteins were crosslinked directly after purification without freezing. After quenching by addition of ammonium bicarbonate to a final concentration of 50 mM, samples were reduced, alkylated, and digested with trypsin. Digested peptides were separated from the solution and retained by a solid phase extraction system (SepPak, Waters), and then separated by size exclusion chromatography prior to liquid chromatography (LC)-MS/MS analysis on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). MS measurement was performed in data-dependent acquisition mode with a cycle time of 3 s. The full scan was done in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 120,000, a scan range of 400-1500 m/z, AGC Target 2.0e5 and injection time of 50 ms. Monoisotopic precursor selection and dynamic exclusion was used for precursor selection. Only precursor charge states of 3-8 were selected for fragmentation by CID using 35 % activation energy. MS2 was carried out in the Ion Trap in normal scan range mode, AGC target 1.0e4 and injection time of 35 ms.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched using xQuest (Leitner et al., 2014) in ion-tag mode with a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm. For matching of fragment ions, tolerances of 0.2 Da for common ions and 0.3 Da for crosslink ions were applied. Crosslinked samples were prepared in biological triplicates (i.e. separately expressed and purified batches of proteins) for all investigated samples, and each of these was measured with technical duplicates. Crosslinks were only considered during structural analysis, if they were identified in at least 2 of 3 biological replicates with deltaS < 0.95 and at least one Id score ≥ 25. For quantitative XL-MS analysis, the chromatographic peaks of identified crosslinks were integrated and summed up over different peak groups (taking different charge states and different unique crosslinked peptides for one unique crosslinking site into account) for quantification by xTract (Walzthoeni et al., 2015). Amounts of potential crosslinks were normalized prior to MS by measuring peptide bond absorption at 215 nm for each fraction. Only high-confidence crosslinks that were identified consistently over different biological and technical replicates in a peak group (xTract settings violations was set to 0) were selected for further quantitative analysis. Changes in crosslinking abundance are expressed as log2 ratio (e.g. abundance state 1 was quantified versus abundance state 2). The p-value using a two-sided t-test indicates the regression between the two conditions. Thus, in this study, only changes that showed at least a change of log2ratio ≥ ±1.0 and a p-value of ≤ 0.01 were considered significant changes in abundance and are shown in green (log2ratio ≥ 1) and red (log2ratio ≤ 1) in the 2D visualizations, respectively. All other changes were considered insignificant and are shown in grey.

### Publication Abstract
Genetic aberrations of the UBE3A gene encoding the E3 ubiquitin ligase E6AP underlie the development of Angelman syndrome (AS). Approximately 10% of AS individuals harbor UBE3A genes with point mutations, frequently resulting in the expression of full-length E6AP variants with defective E3 activity. Since E6AP exists in two states, an inactive and an active one, we hypothesized that distinct small molecules can stabilize the active state and that such molecules may rescue the E3 activity of AS-derived E6AP variants. Therefore, we established an assay that allows identifying modulators of E6AP in a high-throughput format. We identified several compounds that not only stimulate wild-type E6AP but also rescue the E3 activity of certain E6AP variants. Moreover, by chemical cross-linking coupled to mass spectrometry we provide evidence that the compounds stabilize an active conformation of E6AP. Thus, these compounds represent potential lead structures for the design of drugs for AS treatment.

### Keywords
E6ap, Small molecule activator, Fluorescence polarization, Angelman syndrome, Ubiquitin ligase, Crosslinking coupled to mass spectrometry, Xl-ms, High-throughput screen, Ube3a

### Affiliations
Universität Konstanz
Department of Biology University of Konstanz Germany

### Submitter
Florian Stengel

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Florian Stengel
Department of Biology University of Konstanz Germany


