### Accession
PXD022487

### Title
A microenvironment-inspired synthetic 3D model for pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma organoids - IAC Sets

### Description
Integrin adhesion complex (IAC) datasets from KPC-1 and iKRAS cells after 3h or 12h of adhesion on a fibronectin pre-coated surface. IACs were isolated using previously established methods and IACs were investigated using LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
IAC enrichment was conducted as described in Jones et al 2015. Thereafter, protein complexes were then precipitated overnight using four volumes of -20ºC acetone at -80ºC. Precipitated proteins were centrifuged at 16,000 xg for 20 min at 4ºC and protein pellets washed with -20ºC acetone (16,000 x g, 20 min, 4ºC). Proteins were then allowed to dry at room temperature for about 20 minutes. Precipitated complexes were resuspended in 2x reducing sample buffer (RSB; 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 6.8, 10% (v/v) glycerol, 4% (w/v) SDS, 0.004% (w/v) bromophenol blue, 15% (v/v) β-mercaptoethanol) and heated to 70 °C for 10 min and then heated for three minutes at 95ºC. Protein samples were loaded on 4-15% polyacrylamide gels and electrophoretically separated for 3 minutes at 200 volts to allow proteins to fully migrate into the gel. Gels were then stained with Coomassie blue solution (Biorad) for 10 minutes at RT, and protein-bands were cut into 1 mm cubed pieces and transferred to a 96-well PVDF plate (FiltrEx; Corning; Cat.-No.: 3504) with a pore size of 0.2 µm. Gel pieces were then washed with a freshly prepared 25 mM NH4HCO3 (Sigma Aldrich) solution in H2O followed by another wash in 100% (v/v)acetonitrile to dry the pieces. Samples were then washed twice with 100% (v/v) acetonitrile for 5 minutes and gel pieces dried using a vacuum centrifuge for 30 min at RT. Proteins were reduced by incubation in 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) diluted in 25 mM NH4HCO3 for 1 h at 56 °C and alkylated in 55 mM iodoacetamide diluted in 25 mM NH4HCO3 for 45 min at RT in the dark. Samples were washed using alternating 25 mM NH4HCO3 and acetonitrile for 5 minutes each and gels dried for 25 min at RT in the vacuum centrifuge. 50 µL of 12 µg trypsin (Pierce) in 25 mM NH4HCO3 was added to each sample and incubated for 15 minutes at 4ºC followed by an overnight incubation at 37ºC. Upon digestion, peptides were extracted using 100% (v/v) acetonitrile in 0.2% (v/v) formic acid (FA, Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 30 minutes at RT followed by 50% (v/v) acetonitrile in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid into a clean tube. Peptides were dried using a vacuum centrifuge and subsequently resuspended in 5% (v/v) acetonitrile in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid to conduct desalting using 5 mg of POROS R3 beads (Applied Biosystems). Beads were conditioned using 50% (v/v) acetonitrile followed by adding 0.1% (v/v) FA in HPLC-grade water. Peptides were then washed using 0.1% (v/v) FA in HPLC-grade water and eluted in 30% (v/v) acetonitrile in 0.1% (v/v) FA, dried and resuspended in 5% (v/v) acetonitrile in 0.1% (v/v) FA for LC-MS/MS. Peptides were analysed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded onto a pre-column (200 mm x 180 µm i.d., Waters) and separated on an bridged ethyl hybrid (BEH) C18 column (250 mm x 75 mm i.d., 1.7 µm particle size) (Waters) over a 2h gradient from 8 to 33% (vol/vol) ACN in 0.1% (v/v) FA at a flow rate of 200 nl/min. Liquid chromatography tandem MS analysis was performed using a data-dependent mode to allow selection of peptide fragmentation in an automated manner. The resulting data were searched against the SwissProt database with species set to Mus musculus on an in-house Mascot server (Matrix Science; 2016) in ProteomeDiscoverer (ThermoFisher Scientific, V. 2.1). Search parameters included peptide modifications for carbamidomethylation (C) as static modification and oxidation (M, P and K) as well as deamination (N, Q) as dynamic modification. A decoy database search was performed to determine the peptide FDR with the Percolator module. A 1% peptide FDR threshold was applied, and peptides were filtered for high peptide confidence, minimum peptide length of 6, and finally peptides without protein reference were removed. All proteins that exhibited a confidence of less than ‘high’ and with less than two uniquely identified peptides were excluded from further analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw spectras were analysed in proteome discoverer V2.1 with modifications described as above in "sample processing protocol". Raw data was then exported and analysed using the open source software package R (V4.0.0). In brief, only proteins with "high" FDR confidence and at least >= 2 unique peptides/protein were included in the analysis. For the final set, only those proteins identified in all three biological replicates were included in the analysis. For quantitative information, the PSMs per protein were divided by the sum of PSMs in each replicate and sample and multiplied by 1000 to get a normalized abundance count.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pdac, Organoids, Syntheticmatrice, Tumour

### Affiliations
CRUK Manchester Institute
Lab head of the Systems Oncology group at CRUK MI.

### Submitter
Christopher  Below

### Lab Head
Dr Claus Jorgensen
Lab head of the Systems Oncology group at CRUK MI.


