### Accession
PXD005081

### Title
AP-MS of Elongin B in mouse embryonic stem cells

### Description
A Flag-tagged version of murine Elongin B was expressed in mouse embryonic stem cells (ESCs) at near to endogenous levels and purified using an anti-FLAG affinity matrix.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were harvested by scraping on ice and resuspended in IP buffer (50 mM Tris [pH 7.5], 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 0.5% NP-40, 10% glycerol, 1.5 mM MgCl2, protease, and phosphatase inhibitors). After a 30 min incubation on ice, samples were cleared for 20 min with centrifugation at 13,000 rpm. Anti-FLAG M2-agarose affinity gel (Sigma) was equilibrated twice in TBS (50 mM Tris [pH 7.5], 150 mM NaCl) and once in IP buffer. Extracts were incubated with equilibrated anti-FLAG beads for 2 hr with rotation at 4°C. After immunoprecipitation, resin was washed three times with IP buffer, and once with TBS. Immunoprecipitates were eluted twice with 50 ul U/T buffer (6 M urea/2 M thiourea in 10 mM HEPES [pH 8.0]). The combined eluates were reduced with 1 mM DTT, alkylated with 5 mM 2-chloroacetamide (CAA), diluted 4-fold with digestion buffer (50 mM ammonium bicarbonate), and digested with 1 ug trypsin and 1 ug Lys-C overnight. The resulting peptide mixture was acidified by addition of 1% TFA and desalted on StageTips with 3 layers of C18 material. Peptides were separated on columns of ReproSil‐Pur C18‐AQ 1.9 μm resin. Liquid chromatography was performed with an Easy-nLC coupled through a nanoelectrospray source to a LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
MS raw data was analyzed with MaxQuant version 1.5.3.29. Peak lists were searched against the mouse Uniprot FASTA database combined with 262 common contaminants by the integrated Andromeda search engine. False discovery rate was set to 1% for both peptides (minimum length of 7 amino acids) and proteins. ‘Match between runs’ (MBR) with a maximum time difference of 0.5 min was enabled. Relative protein amounts were determined by the MaxLFQ algorithm, with a minimum ratio count of two peptides. Estimation of absolute protein amounts was determined by the iBaq algorithm provided by MaxQuant.

### Publication Abstract
The cellular plasticity of pluripotent stem cells is thought to be sustained by genomic regions that display both active and repressive chromatin properties. These regions exhibit low levels of gene expression, yet the mechanisms controlling these levels remain unknown. Here, we describe Elongin BC as a binding factor at the promoters of bivalent sites. Biochemical and genome-wide analyses show that Elongin BC is associated with Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2) in pluripotent stem cells. Elongin BC is recruited to chromatin by the PRC2-associated&#xa0;factor EPOP (Elongin BC and Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 Associated Protein, also termed C17orf96, esPRC2p48, E130012A19Rik), a protein expressed in the inner cell mass of the mouse blastocyst. Both EPOP and Elongin BC are required to maintain low levels of expression at PRC2 genomic targets. Our results indicate that keeping the balance between activating and repressive cues is a more general feature of chromatin in pluripotent stem cells than previously appreciated.

### Keywords
Esc, Prc2, Tceb2, Polycomb, Elob

### Affiliations
Center for Genomic Regulation Differentiation and Cancer Passeig Maritim 37-49 Barcelona 08003 SPAIN
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max-Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany

### Submitter
Michael Wierer

### Lab Head
Dr Luciano di Croce
Center for Genomic Regulation Differentiation and Cancer Passeig Maritim 37-49 Barcelona 08003 SPAIN


