### Accession
PXD043175

### Title
HDX-MS Analysis of CeSpartin and CtSpartinL

### Description
HDX-MS analysis of SPG20, determining the seconday structure of CeSpartin and comparing WT CtSpartinL and A290P CtSpartinL.

### Sample Protocol
HDX reactions examining CeSpartin were carried out in 40 µl reaction containing 20 pmol of protein. The exchange was initiated by the addition of 30 µl of D2O buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 100 mM NaCl) to 10 µl of protein (final D2O [c]of 70.7% [v/v]). Reactions proceeded for 3s, 30s, 300s, and 3000s at 20°C before being quenched with ice cold acidic quench buffer, resulting in a final concentration of 0.6M guanidine HCl and 0.9% formic acid post quench. HDX reactions comparing WT CtSpartinL and A290P CtSpartinL were carried out in 20 µl reaction containing 20 pmol of protein. The exchange reactions were initiated by the addition of 18 µl of D2O buffer to 2 µl of protein (final D2O [C] of 84.9% [v/v]). Reactions proceeded for 0.3s (3s on ice), 3s, 30s, and 300s at 20°C before quenching. All conditions and timepoints were created and run in triplicate. Maximally deuterated (Max-D) samples were created for each condition (Peterle et al., 2022): CeSpartin (2 µM) and CtSpartinL (WT and A290P, 10 µM) were resuspended to 2 µM in 7M guanidine HCl. After vertexing, samples were heated to 90°C for 5 minutes and cooled down to 20°C. To initiate the exchange reactions, 30 µl of D2O buffer was added to 10 µl of denatured CeSpartin, and 18 µl of D2O buffer was added to 2 µl of denatured CtSpartinL proteins. Exchange proceeded for 10 minutes at 50°C before samples were cooled to 20°C and then 0°C. Samples were quenched using acidic buffer. All samples were flash frozen immediately after quenching and stored at -80°C until MS analysis. Protein samples were rapidly thawed and injected onto an automated LC system as described in (Stariha et al., 2021). Protein samples were run through immobilized pepsin columns for digestion. The resulting peptides were collected and desalted on a C18 trap column (Waters 186003975). The trap was subsequently eluted using a gradient of 3-35% B (Buffer A: 0.1% formic acid; Buffer B: 100% acetonitrile) over 11 minutes immediately followed by a gradient of 35-80% B over 5 minutes. Mass spectrometry experiments acquired over a mass range from 150 to 2200 m/z using an electrospray ionization source operated at a temperature of 200°C and a spray voltage of 4.5 kV.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified from non-deuterated samples of CeSpartin, WT CtSpartinL, or A290P CtSpartinL using data-dependent acquisition following tandem MS/MS experiments. Peptide identification was carried out by using a false discovery-based approach using a database of purified proteins and known contaminants (da Veiga Leprevost et al., 2020; Dobbs et al., 2020; Kong et al., 2017; Perez-Riverol et al., 2022). HD-Examiner Software (Sierra Analytics) was used to automatically calculate the level of deuterium incorporation into each peptide. All peptides were manually inspected for correct charge state, correct retention time, appropriate selection of isotopic distribution, etc. Deuteration levels were calculated using the centroid of the experimental isotope clusters. Results are presented as levels of deuterium incorporation. Back exchange is controlled with a maximally deuterated sample for each condition.In comparing WT CtSpartinL, or A290P CtSpartinL, differences in exchange in a peptide were considered significant if they met all three of the following criteria: ≥4.5% change in exchange, ≥0.45 Da difference in exchange, and a p value <0.01 using a two tailed student t-test.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hdx-ms, Spartin, Spg20

### Affiliations
University of Victoria

### Submitter
John Burke

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. John
University of Victoria


