### Accession
PXD012211

### Title
Pinctada fucata martensii mantle edge tissue LC-MS/MS

### Description
We have got a yellow shell variety of Pinctada fucata martensii after years of artificial breeding. To identify differentially expressed genes between yellow shell and normal black shell pearl oysters, we performed label-free proteomic analyses by LC-MS using mantle edge tissues.

### Sample Protocol
1.Sample preparation and separation Samples were homogenised with an MP Fastprep-24 Automated Homogenizer (MP Biomedicals, USA) in a buffer comprising 4% sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS), 1mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and 100mM TRIS-HCl (SDT lysis, pH 7.6). Dodecyl sulfate, sodium salt - Polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) was performed for each sample (20μg) on a 12.5% SDS-PAGE gel (constant current 14 mA, 90 min). Protein bands were visualised by staining with Coomassie Brilliant Blue R-250 staining. Filter-aided sample preparation (FASP Digestion) was performed as Wisniewski’s methods. LC analysis of each peptide mixture was performed on an EASY-nLC System (Thermo Fisher Scientific). LC-MS analysis for the eluate was performed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Proxeon Biosystems, now Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Easy nLC System for 60 min. Briefly, homogenation in SDT lysis, separation with SDS-PAGE, FASP digestion, HPLC and LC-MS anlysis are included.  2.Enrichment Strategies Gene Ontology (GO) Annotation: The top 10 blast hits datasts with E-value less than 1e-3 for each query sequence were retrieved and loaded into Blast2GO9 (Version 3.3.5) for GO mapping and annotation. In this work, an annotation configuration with an E-value filter of 1e-6, default gradual EC weights, a GO weight of 5, and an annotation cutoff of 75 were chosen. Un-annotated sequences were then re-annotated with more permissive parameters. The sequences without BLAST hits and un-annotated sequences were then selected to go through an InterProScan against EBI databases to retrieve functional annotations of protein motifs and merge the InterProScan GO terms to the annotation set. The GO annotation results were plotted by R scripts.  KEGG Pathway Annotation: The FASTA protein sequences of differentially changed proteins were blasted against the online Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database (http://geneontology.org/) to retrieve their KOs and were subsequently mapped to pathways in KEGG. The corresponding KEGG pathways were extracted. Functional Enrichment analysis: To further explore the impact of differentially expressed protein in cell physiological process and discover internal relations between differentially expressed proteins, enrichment analysis was performed. GO enrichment on three ontologies (biological process, molecular function, and cellular component) and KEGG pathway enrichment analyses were applied based on the Fisher’ exact test, considering the whole quantified protein annotations as background dataset. Benjamini-Hochberg correction for multiple testing was further applied to adjust derived p-values. And functional categories and pathways with p-values under a threshold of 0.05 were considered as significant. 3.Mass spectrometry protocols Enzyme Trypsin Max Missed Cleavages 2 Main search 6 ppm First search 20 ppm MS/MS Tolerance 20 ppm Fixed modifications Carbamidomethyl (C) Variable modifications Oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein N-term) Database See the project report Database pattern Reverse Peptide FDR ≤0.01 Protein FDR ≤0.01 Time window (match between runs) 2min Protein Quantification Razor and unique peptides were used for protein quantification. LFQ  True LFQ min. ratio count 1

### Data Protocol
1.Bioinformatic Analysis The protein sequences of differentially expressed proteins were in batches retrieved from UniProtKB database (Release 2016_10) in FASTA format. The retrieved sequences were locally searched against SwissProt database (mouse) using the NCBI BLAST+ client software (ncbi-blast-2.2.28+-win32.exe) to find homologue sequences from which the functional annotation can be transferred to the studied sequences.  2.Hierarchical Clustering The studied protein relative expression data was used to performing hierarchical clusteringanalysis.Forthispurpose,Cluster3.0(http://bonsai.hgc.jp/~mdehoon/software/cluster/software.htm) and the Java Treeview software (http://jtreeview.sourceforge.net) were used. Euclidean distance algorithm for similarity measure and average linkage clustering algorithm (clustering uses the centroids of the observations) for clustering were selected when performing hierarchical clustering. Heatmap is often presented as a visual aid in addition to the dendrogram.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Q exactive mass spectrometer, Lc-ms/ms, Yellow shell and black shell, Mantle edge tissue, Pinctada fucata martensii

### Affiliations
Chinese Academy of Sciences
Key Laboratory of Marine Bio-resources Sustainable Utilization, South China Sea Institute of Oceanology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou 510301, China.

### Submitter
Xu Meng

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Maoxian He
Key Laboratory of Marine Bio-resources Sustainable Utilization, South China Sea Institute of Oceanology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou 510301, China.


