### Accession
PXD026102

### Title
Secretome of control and srGAP1 knockdown MDA-MB-231 cells

### Description
Proteomic of the secretome of control or srGAP knockdown MDA-MB-231 cells

### Sample Protocol
Conditioned media from 5x10^6 cells was collected after 48 h and concentrated with Amicon Ultra-15 3000 MWCO filters (Millipore).  Amicon Ultra-4 3000 MWCO filters (Millipore) were used for buffer exchange to 1X PBS.  Protein concentration was measured with a Pierce™ BCA protein assay (Thermo Fisher). Proteomics analysis was conducted at the Northwestern Proteomics Core facility. Briefly, 50 μg each protein was concentrated and purified by acetone/TCA precipitation and resulting protein pellet was resuspended in 50 μl of 8 M urea in 400 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 7.8, reduced with 4 mM dithiothreitol at 50 °C for 30 min., and cysteines were alkylated with 18 mM iodoacetamide in the dark for 30 min. The solution was then diluted to < 2 M urea (final concentration) and trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) was added at final trypsin/protein ratio of 1:50 prior to overnight incubation at 37 °C with shaking. The resulting peptides were desalted using solid phase extraction on a Pierce C18 Spin column and eluted in 80 μl of 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. After lyophilization, peptides were reconstituted with 5% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 Rapid Separation nanoLC and a Q Exactive™ HF Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc, San Jose, CA). Approximately 2 μg of peptide samples was loaded onto the trap column, which was 150 μm  x 3 cm in-house packed C18 beads. The analytical column was a 75 μm  x 10.5 cm PicoChip column packed with 3 μm  C18 beads (New Objective, Inc. Woburn, MA). The flow rate was kept at 300nL/min. Solvent A was 0.1% FA in water and Solvent B was 0.1% FA in ACN. The peptide was separated on a 120-min analytical gradient from 5% ACN/0.1% FA to 40% ACN/0.1% FA. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode.  The source voltage was 2.40 kV. MS1 scans were acquired from 300-2000 m/z at 60,000 resolving power and automatic gain control (AGC) set to 3x106.  The top 20 most abundant precursor ions in each MS1 scan were selected for fragmentation. Precursors were selected with an isolation width of 2 m/z and fragmented by Higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) at 30% normalized collision energy in the HCD cell. Previously selected ions were dynamically excluded from re-selection for 20 seconds. The MS2 minimum AGC was set to 1x103. Data was acquired in technical duplicates.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified from the tandem mass spectra extracted by Xcalibur version 4.0. MS/MS spectra were searched against the SwissProt  Homo sapiens database using Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.7.0). All searches included carbamidomethyl cysteine as a fixed modification and oxidized Lys, Pro, and Met; deamidated Asn and Gln; and acetylated N-term as variable modifications. Three missed tryptic cleavages were allowed. The MS1 precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and the MS2 tolerance was set to 0.05 Da. The search result was visualized by Scaffold v 5.0(Proteome Software, INC., Portland, OR).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Secretome, Metastasis, Mammary tumor cells

### Affiliations
University of Illinois at Chicago

### Submitter
Alexandra Naba

### Lab Head
Dr Alexandra Naba
University of Illinois at Chicago


