### Accession
PXD016861

### Title
Role of Specialized Composition of SWI/SNF Complexes in Prostate Cancer Lineage Plasticity

### Description
Advanced prostate cancer initially responds to hormonal treatment, but ultimately becomes resistant and requires more potent therapies.  One mechanism of resistance seen in 10% of these patients is through lineage plasticity, which manifests in a partial or complete small cell or neuroendocrine prostate cancer (NEPC) phenotype. Here, we investigate the role of the mammalian SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complex in NEPC. Using large patient datasets, patient-derived organoids and cancer cell lines, we identify SWI/SNF subunits that are deregulated in NEPC, demonstrate that SMARCA4 (BRG1) overexpression is associated with aggressive disease and that SMARCA4 depletion impairs prostate cancer cell growth. We also show that SWI/SNF complexes interact with different lineage-specific factors in prostate adenocarcinoma and in NEPC cells, and that induction of lineage plasticity through depletion of REST is accompanied by changes in SWI/SNF genome occupancy. These data suggest a specific role for mSWI/SNF complexes in therapy-related lineage plasticity, which may be relevant for other solid tumors.

### Sample Protocol
For the co-immunoprecipitation (co-IP) using an anti-BAF155 antibody (results shown in Fig.4a,b and Supplementary tables ST 4.1, 4.2), nuclear fractions of LNCaP-AR and NCI-H660 cells were isolated using the using the Universal CoIP Kit (Actif Motif). Chromatin of the nuclear fraction was mechanically sheared using a Dunce homogenizer. Nuclear membrane and debris were pelleted by centrifugation and protein concentration of the cleared lysate was determined with the Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). 2μg of the anti-BAF155 antibody (ab172638, Abcam) and 2μg of rabbit IgG Isotype Control antibody (026102, Thermo Fisher Scientific) were incubated with 2mg supernatant overnight at 4°C with gentle rotation. The following morning, 30μl of Protein G Magnetic Beads (Active Motif) were washed twice with 500μl CoIP buffer and incubated with Antibody-containing lysat for 1 hour at 4°C with gentle rotation. Bead-bound SWI/SNF complexes were washed 3 times with CoIP buffer and twice with a buffer containing 150mM NaCl, 50mM Tris-HCL (pH 8) and Protease and Phosphatase inhibitors. Air-dried and frozen (-20°C) beads were subjected to mass spectrometry (MS) analysis. Briefly, proteins on the affinity pulldown beads were digested overnight at room temperature with 100 ng sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) and peptides analyzed by nano-liquid tandem MS as described in [1] using an 75 μm × 150 mm analytical column (C18, 3µm, 155Å, Nikkyo Technos, Tokyo, Japan) and a acetonitrile gradient instead.   [1] Brügger V, Duman M, Bochud M, Münger E, Heller M, Ruff S, Jacob C. (2017) Delaying Histone Deacetylase Response to Injury Accelerates Conversion into Repair Schwann Cells and Nerve Regeneration. Nature Commun. 8:14272. doi: 10.1038/ncomms14272]

### Data Protocol
MS data was interpreted with MaxQuant (version 1.6.1.0) against a SwissProt human database (release 2019_02) using the default MaxQuant settings, allowed mass deviation for precursor ions of 10 ppm for the first search, maximum peptide mass of 5500Da, match between runs activated with a matching time window of 0.7 min and the use of non-consecutive fractions for the different pulldowns to prevent over-fitting. Settings that differed from the default setting included: strict trypsin cleavage rule allowing for 3 missed cleavages, fixed carbamidomethylation of cysteines, variable oxidation of methionines and acetylation of protein N-termini.  For differential expression testing the empirical Bayes test (R function EBayes from the limma package version 3.40.6) was performed on Top3 and LFQ protein intensities as described earlier in [2], using variance stabilisation for the peptide normalization. The Benjamini and Hochberg method [3] was further applied to correct for multiple testing. The criterion for statistically significant differential expression is that the maximum adjusted p-value for large fold changes is 0.05, and that this maximum decreases asymptotically to 0 as the log2 fold change of 1 is approached (with a curve parameter of one time the overall standard deviation).   [2] Buchs N, Braga-Lagache S, Uldry A-C, Brodard J, Debonneville C, Reynard J-S, Heller M. (2018) Absolute Quantification of Grapevine Red Blotch Virus in Grapevine Leaf and Petiole Tissues by Proteomics. Frontiers in Plant Science. 9:1735. 10.3389/fpls.2018.01735]   [3] Benjamini, Y., and Hochberg, Y (1995) Controlling the false discovery rate: a practical and powerful approach to multiple testing. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series B, 57, 289–300 ].

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Swi/snf complex, Epigenetic, Lineage plasticity, Prostate cancer

### Affiliations
Departement for Biomedical Research University of Bern Switzerland
Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry Core Facility, Department for BioMedical Research (DBMR), University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland

### Submitter
Manfred Heller

### Lab Head
Dr Mark A. Rubin
Departement for Biomedical Research University of Bern Switzerland


