### Accession
PXD017578

### Title
Proteomic analysis of proteins responsive to drought and low temperature stress in a hard red spring wheat cultivar

### Description
Drought stress is becoming more prevalent with global warming, and has been shown to have large effects on gluten proteins linked to wheat bread making quality. Likewise, low temperature stress can detrimentally affect proteins in wheat. This study was done to determine the differential expression of high molecular weight (HMW) glutenin proteins in a drought and low temperature stressed high quality hard red spring wheat cultivar (PAN3478), against a control. The treatments were applied in the greenhouse at the soft dough stage. HMW glutenin proteins were extracted from the flour, and separated by two-dimensional gel electrophoresis.  Protein spots that had p values lower than 0.05 and fold value equal to or greater than 1.2 were considered significantly differentially expressed. These proteins were further analyzed by tandem mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
A commercial hard red spring wheat irrigation cultivar (PAN3478), was used for the study as it has excellent baking quality characteristics. It was planted in 3 l pots filled with soil, in the greenhouse. Three treatments were applied to 15 pots per replication, three replications and three plants per pot. A randomized complete block design with two factors, treatments and cultivars, was used. Optimal watering of the pots was done throughout the experiment for the cold stress regime and the control, and up to the soft dough stage for the drought stress experiment. After harvesting the seed was milled to a whole flour with a laboratory mill. Samples of 100 mg were washed three times with 1 mL of 50% (v/v) 1-propanol in order to remove gliadins. The pellet was treated with a solution (1:10) composed of 50% 1-propanol, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.8, 1% Dithiothreitol (DTT), 1 mM EDTA, 10 mM 10mM Iodoacetamide  for 1 h at 65°C. After centrifugation (13000 rpm, 10 min), the proteins were precipitated overnight at -20°C in 1 ml of cold acetone and centrifuged. The precipitated proteins were further rinsed with cold acetone and dried. The dried pellets, corresponding to about 400 µg proteins were subjected to 2d-gel separation. In order to quantitatively compare the proteins present in each of the gels, these were stained overnight with Coomassie Brilliant Blue G-250, then destained for 4 h in distilled water and scanned at 300 dot per inch and 16-bit grayscale pixel depth.  Gels were analyzed with the software SameSpots Progenesis (version 4.6.1.218, Nonlinear Dynamics, UK). Those protein spots that had p value, obtained from analysis of variance (ANOVA), lower than 0.05 and fold value equal to or greater than 1.2 were considered as significant differentially expressed. Principal Components Analysis (PCA) was done on the data. Following this analysis, differential spots were selected from those gels in which the spot color was more intense, that is, where the protein concentration was higher and transferred into 1.5 ml tubes. The excision of the spots was carried out by using an EXQuestTM Spot Cutter of Bio-Rad. Spots were subsequently analyzed and identified by liquid chromatography tandem-mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Selected protein spots from the 2-DE gels were excised manually and transferred to 1.5 mL microcentrifuge tubes. The spots were then washed and subjected to in-gel trypsin digestion and subsequently to mass spectrometric analysis [27, 28]. After soaking trypsin (modified porcine trypsin, Promega, Milan, Italy) into the gel pieces, the supernatant containing excess trypsin was removed and the gel pieces were covered with 50 μL of 50 mM NH4HCO3 and incubated at 37°C overnight. The enzymatic reaction was stopped by cooling the gel pieces and the supernatant solution at -20°C. After in-gel digestion, the peptides solutions were transferred into clean 0.5 mL tubes. The peptides were extracted from gel pieces with 40 µL of 0.5% formic acid (FA) and subsequently with the same volume of acetonitrile. This extraction procedure was repeated three times. The total extracts were pooled, combined with the first supernatant, lyophilized and dissolved in 20 µL of 0.5% FA. Capillary RP-HPLC/nESI-MS/MS was performed using an Ultimate 3000 LC system combined with an autosampler and a flow splitter 1:100 (Dionex Corporation, Sunnyvale, CA, USA), coupled on-line with a linear ion trap nano-electrospray mass spectrometer (LTQ, Thermo Fischer Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA). Ionization was performed with a liquid junction using an uncoated capillary probe (30±2µm i.d.; New Objective, Woburn, MA, USA). The peptide solution was loaded onto a C18 μ-pre-column cartridge (0.3 mm x 5 mm, 100 Å, 5 μm, PepMap, Dionex) equilibrated with 0.5% aqueous FA at a flow rate of 20 μL/min for 4 min. Subsequently, the solution was switched onto a reversed-phase C18 column (0.18 mm x 150 mm, 300 Å, 5 μm, BioBasic, ThermoFisher Scientic) and peptides were separated by elution at room temperature with a linear gradient of solvent B (CH3CN + 0.5%) in A (H2O + 0.5% FA) from 10 to 50% in 50 min at a flow rate of 1.5 μL/min. HPLC-grade water and CH3CN were provided by Carlo Erba (Milan, Italy). The nESI source was operated under the following conditions: capillary temperature 220°C and spray voltage 1.9 kV. Repetitive mass spectra were acquired in positive ion mode in the m/z range 250-2000. Characterization of peptide ions was performed by the data-dependent method as follows: i) full scan MS in the m/z range 250-2000; ii) zoom scan of the three most intense ions (isolation width: 2 Da); iii) MS/MS analysis of the three most intense ions (normalized collision energy; 30 a.u., activation Q: 0.250). Mass calibration was made using a standard mixture of caffeine (Mr 194.1 Da), MRFA peptide (Mr 523.6 Da) and Ultramark (Mr 1621 Da). Data acquisition was performed using the Excalibur v. 1.4 software (ThermoFisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
LC–MS/MS data were processed by PEAKS software v. 8.5 (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, ON, Canada). Data were searched against the “Viridiplantae” SwissProt database, 40218 sequences, and TrEMBL, 9314329 sequences (release November 2019). Full tryptic peptides with a maximum of 3 missed cleavage sites were subjected to bioinformatics search. Cysteine carboxyamidomethylation was set as fixed modification, whereas oxidation of methionine, and transformation of N-terminal glutamine and N-terminal glutamic acid residue in the pyroglutamic acid form were included as variable modifications. The precursor mass tolerance threshold was ±1.2 Da and a tolerance of ±0.6 Da for the fragment ions was set. Peptide spectral matches (PSMs) were validated using Target Decoy PSM Validator node based on q-values at a 1% FDR. A protein was considered identified with a minimum of 2 peptides; proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. In the case of gliadins and some LMW- and HMW-GS, they were considered also identified with a single peptide and its MS/MS spectrum was manually verified for the purpose of supporting this identification. This derogation from the number of peptides for the identifications is applied given the peculiarity of the amino acid sequence.

### Publication Abstract
Drought stress is becoming more prevalent with global warming, and has been shown tohave large effects on gluten proteins linked to wheat bread making quality. Likewise, lowtemperature stress can detrimentally affect proteins in wheat. This study was done to determine thedifferential abundance of high molecular weight (HMW) glutenin proteins in a drought and lowtemperature stressed high quality hard red spring wheat cultivar (PAN3478), against a control. Thetreatments were applied in the greenhouse at the soft dough stage. HMW glutenin proteins wereextracted from the flour, and were separated by using two-dimensional gel electrophoresis. Proteinspots that had p values lower than 0.05 and fold values equal to or greater than 1.2 were consideredto be significantly differentially abundant. These proteins were further analyzed by using tandemmass spectrometry. There was a 1.3 to 1.8 fold change in 17 protein spots due to the cold treatment.The drought treatment caused a 1.3 to 3.8 fold change in 19 protein spots. These spots matchedeither HMW or low molecular weight (LMW) glutenin subunits. In the latter case, the C subunits ofLMW glutenins were notably found to be up-regulated under both stress conditions. All the proteinsthat have been identified can directly influence dough characteristics. Data are available viaProteomeXchange with the identifier PXD017578.

### Keywords
Abiotic stress; bread wheat; glutenin; proteomics

### Affiliations
Department of Chemical Sciences, Organic Mass Spectrometry Laboratory, University of Catania, Viale A. Doria 6, 95125 Catania, Italy
 Department of Chemical Sciences, University of Catania

### Submitter
Vera   Muccilli

### Lab Head
Dr Salvatore Foti
Department of Chemical Sciences, Organic Mass Spectrometry Laboratory, University of Catania, Viale A. Doria 6, 95125 Catania, Italy


