### Accession
PXD000731

### Title
Proteomic Analysis of Mouse Liver Microsomes by 2D-LC-MSMS

### Description
Liver plays a crucial role in numerous metabolic processes and therefore is the primary target of study in drug discovery and molecular toxicology. Devising an appropriate analytical strategy for an efficient analysis of the liver samples has been a major concern in proteomics. The aim of this study was to develop an LC-MS based analytical method for identification of liver proteins with adequate peptide-level confidence and protein sequence coverage. The present dataset will improve the existing knowledge on the proteins identified in mouse liver microsomes.

### Sample Protocol
Two mouse liver microsomes (MLM) samples were solubilized in 2% SDS; one was digested by trypsin (MMT) while the other was subjected to a pepsin digestion (MMP). Digest peptides from each sample were cleaned up using solid-phase extraction (SPE) and fractionated into six fractions by strong cation exchange (SCX) prior to an ultra-high pressure reverse-phase chromatography (RP-UHPLC) directly coupled to tandem mass spectrometer. All MS and MS/MS spectra were collected on a high-resolution hybrid quadrupole-time of flight TripleTOF 5600 mass spectrometer equipped with a DuoSpray ion source in positive ion mode. The instrument performed a survey TOF-MS acquisition from m/z 140–1250 with an accumulation time of 250 ms, followed by MS/MS on the fifteen most intense ions from m/z 80–1500 with exclusion after two occurrences for 20 s using information-dependent acquisition (IDA) with dynamic background subtraction (DBS). Each MS/MS had an accumulation time of 50 ms and collision energy ranging from 20 to 40 V, depending on the charge state and mass of the product ion. The total cycle time was 1.05 s. All samples were prepared in duplicates.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS files from the tryptic and peptic digests (MMT and MMP) were combined and searched against UniProt protein database (release date 26/06/2013) by ProteinPilot software (version 4.1) using Paragon algorithm. The ID focus was on biological modifications, including false discovery rate analysis and detection protein threshold of unused ProtScore > 0.05 (confidence >10%). The search was performed for +2 to +4 charge states and MS tolerance was 0.05 Da on precursor ions and 0.1 Da on fragment ions using ProteinPilot’s default workflow directory.

### Publication Abstract
Rat, mouse and human liver microsomes and S9 fractions were analyzed using an optimized method combining ion exchange fractionation of digested peptides, and ultra-high performance liquid chromatography (UHPLC) coupled to high resolution tandem mass spectrometry (HR-MS/MS). The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org) via the PRIDE partner repository (Vizca&#xed;no et al., 2013 [1]) with the dataset identifiers PXD000717, PXD000720, PXD000721, PXD000731, PXD000733 and PXD000734. Data related to the peptides (trypsin digests only) were also uploaded to Peptide Atlas (Farrah et al., 2013 [2]) and are available with the dataset identifiers PASS00407, PASS00409, PASS00411, PASS00412, PASS00413 and PASS00414. The present dataset is associated with a research article published in EuPA Open Proteomics [3].

### Keywords
Mouse liver microsomes, 2d-lc-msms, Tripletof, Proteinpilot

### Affiliations
Université du Québec à Montréal (UQÀM), Chemistry Department / Pharmaqam, Montréal, QC, Canada
Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Research Group, Chemistry Department, Universite du Quebec a Montreal (UQAM), Montreal (Quebec), Canada

### Submitter
Lekha Sleno

### Lab Head
Dr Lekha Sleno
Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Research Group, Chemistry Department, Universite du Quebec a Montreal (UQAM), Montreal (Quebec), Canada


