### Accession
PXD003929

### Title
Identification and Characterization of MCM3 as a KEAP1 Substrate

### Description
KEAP1 is a substrate adaptor protein for a CUL3-based E3 ubiquitin ligase. Ubiquitylation and degradation of the antioxidant transcription factor NRF2 is considered the primary function of KEAP1; however, few other KEAP1 substrates have been identified. Because KEAP1 is altered in a number of human pathologies and has been proposed as a potential therapeutic target therein, we sought to better understand KEAP1 through systematic identification of its substrates. Towards this goal, we combined parallel affinity capture proteomics and candidate-based approaches. Substrate-trapping proteomics yielded NRF2 and the related transcription factor NRF1 as KEAP1 substrates. Our targeted investigation of KEAP1 interacting proteins revealed MCM3, an essential subunit of the replicative DNA helicase, as a new substrate. We show that MCM3 is ubiquitylated by the KEAP1-CUL3-RBX1 complex in cells and in vitro. Using ubiquitin remnant profiling, we identify the sites of KEAP1-dependent ubiquitylation in MCM3, and these sites are on predicted exposed surfaces of the MCM2-7 complex. Unexpectedly, we determined that KEAP1 does not regulate total MCM3 protein stability or subcellular localization. Our analysis of a KEAP1 targeting motif in MCM3 suggests MCM3 is a point of direct contact between KEAP1 and the MCM hexamer. Moreover, KEAP1 associates with chromatin in a cell cycle-dependent fashion with kinetics similar to the MCM2-7 complex. KEAP1 is thus poised to affect MCM2-7 dynamics or function rather than MCM3 abundance. Together, these data establish new functions for KEAP1 within the nucleus and identify MCM3 as a novel substrate of the KEAP1-CUL3-RBX1 E3 ligase.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293T cells (3-5x15cm plates) stably expressing either FLAG-MCM3 or SBPHA-KEAP1 were lysed in 0.1% NP-40 lysis buffer for FLAG immunoprecipitations (IP) or streptavidin affinity purifications (AP), respectively. Cell lysates were incubated, rotating with FLAG or Streptavidin resin for 1 hr at 4 C, then washed 3X with lysis buffer. The precipitated proteins were next trypsinized (Promega) on beads at 37 C overnight (12-18 h) using the FASP Protein Digestion Kit (Protein Discovery). For the KEAP1 substrate-trapping experiment, SBPHA-KEAP1 expressing HEK293T cells were grown in SILAC media (light: K0R0; heavy: K6R10) for at least 10 cell divisions prior to harvesting for lysis. Tryptic peptides were cleaned up using a C18 Spin Column (Thermo Scientific), then separated by reverse phase nano-HPLC using a nanoAquity UPLC system (Waters Corp.). Chromatographic separation and mass spectrometry analysis of peptides from FLAG-MCM3 experiments was performed using the same methods as our previous work. Peptides from SBPHA-KEAP1 and ubiquitin remnant experiments were first trapped in a 2 cm trapping column (Acclaim® PepMap 100, C18 beads of 3.0-μm particle size, 100-Å pore size) and a 25-cm EASY-spray analytical column (75-μm ID, C18 beads of 2.0-μm particle size, 100-Å pore size) at 35°C. The flow rate was 250 nl/min over a gradient of 1% buffer B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) to 30% buffer B in 180 min and an in-line Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) performed mass spectral analysis. The ion source was operated at 2.4–2.8 kV with ion transfer tube temperature set at 300 °C. Full MS scan (300–2000 m/z) was acquired in Orbitrap with 120,000 resolution setting, data-dependent MS2 spectra were acquired in the linear ion trap by collision induced dissociation (CID) using the 15 most intense ions. Precursor ions were selected based on charge states (³+2) and intensity thresholds (above 1e5) from the full scan, dynamic exclusion (one repeat during 30-s, a 60-s exclusion time window) was also used. The polysiloxane lock mass of 445.120030 was used throughout spectral acquisition.

### Data Protocol
For the MCM3 protein interaction network, the raw mass spectrometry data was searched with MaxQuant (1.5.2.6) along with an internal lab FLAG APMS dataset of an additional 17 baits and 35 experiments. Search parameters were as follows: specific tryptic digestion, up to 2 missed cleavages, a static carbamidomethyl cysteine modification, variable protein N-term acetylation, and variable methionine oxidation using the human UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot sequence database (Release 2013_07). Proteins were then filtered for a 1% protein level false discovery rate (FDR). Filtering of false interactions was then accomplished using Spotlite, with a 10% FDR for the entire dataset including the additional baits. These results were then imported into Cytoscape v3.2.1 for network visualization. For the SBPHA-KEAP1 SILAC experiments, the additional MaxQuant parameters were a variable GlyGly modification on lysines, and K6 and R10 heavy SILAC labels.   For ubiquitin remnant profiling, raw files were searched using SorcererTM-SEQUEST® (build 5.0.1, Sage N Research) and the Transproteomic Pipeline (TPP v4.7.1). Search parameters used were a precursor mass between 400 and 4,500 amu, maximum of 2 missed cleavages, a precursor-ion tolerance of 3 amu, accurate mass binning within PeptideProphet, semi-tryptic digestion, a static carbamidomethyl cysteine modification (57.021465), and variable methionine oxidation (+15.99492), ubiquitylated lysine (114.042931), and STY phosphorylation (79.966331). A 1% peptide-level FDR was determined by PeptideProphet.

### Publication Abstract
KEAP1 is a substrate adaptor protein for a CUL3-based E3 ubiquitin ligase. Ubiquitylation and degradation of the antioxidant transcription factor NRF2 is considered the primary function of KEAP1; however, few other KEAP1 substrates have been identified. Because KEAP1 is altered in a number of human pathologies and has been proposed as a potential therapeutic target therein, we sought to better understand KEAP1 through systematic identification of its substrates. Toward this goal, we combined parallel affinity capture proteomics and candidate-based approaches. Substrate-trapping proteomics yielded NRF2 and the related transcription factor NRF1 as KEAP1 substrates. Our targeted investigation of KEAP1-interacting proteins revealed MCM3, an essential subunit of the replicative DNA helicase, as a new substrate. We show that MCM3 is ubiquitylated by the KEAP1-CUL3-RBX1 complex in cells and in vitro Using ubiquitin remnant profiling, we identify the sites of KEAP1-dependent ubiquitylation in MCM3, and these sites are on predicted exposed surfaces of the MCM2-7 complex. Unexpectedly, we determined that KEAP1 does not regulate total MCM3 protein stability or subcellular localization. Our analysis of a KEAP1 targeting motif in MCM3 suggests that MCM3 is a point of direct contact between KEAP1 and the MCM hexamer. Moreover, KEAP1 associates with chromatin in a cell cycle-dependent fashion with kinetics similar to the MCM2-7 complex. KEAP1 is thus poised to affect MCM2-7 dynamics or function rather than MCM3 abundance. Together, these data establish new functions for KEAP1 within the nucleus and identify MCM3 as a novel substrate of the KEAP1-CUL3-RBX1 E3 ligase.

### Keywords
Hek293t, Label free quantification, Apms, Silac, Di-gly

### Affiliations
Cell Biology and Physiology
Institute for Informatics
Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, Dept of Cell Biology & Physiology, UNC Chapel Hill

### Submitter
Dennis Goldfarb

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Benjamin Major
Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, Dept of Cell Biology & Physiology, UNC Chapel Hill


