### Accession
PXD006686

### Title
Glycolytic Enzyme Coalesce in G bodies Under Hypoxic Stress

### Description
Glycolysis is upregulated in cells under specific conditions, such as hypoxia and high energy demand, to achieve the metabolic requirements for continued cell proliferation. However, the mechanism of this increased glycolytic rate remains poorly understood. In the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, we discovered that hypoxia induces concentration of many glycolytic enzymes, including the Pfk2p subunit of the ratelimiting enzyme, phosphofructokinase, into a single, non-membrane-bound granule that we define as the "glycolytic body" or "G body". Pfk2p localization to G bodies depends on its N-terminal, intrinsically disordered region.  In order to identify factors important for G body formation, we conducted a yeast kinome screen and identified the AMP kinase ortholog, Snf1p, to be required for the localization of multiple glycolytic enzymes to G bodies. Further, proteomic analyses of purified G bodies identified a core set of resident factors, many of which are essential for G body integrity. Cells incapable of forming G bodies in hypoxic conditions display abnormal cell division and produce inviable daughter cells.  Conversely, cells that form G bodies show increased glucose consumption and decreased levels of glycolytic intermediates. Importantly, G bodies also form in human, hepatocarcinoma cells upon hypoxic stress. Together, our results suggest that G body formation is a conserved, adaptive response to increase glycolytic output during hypoxia or tumorigenesis.

### Sample Protocol
Cultures were inoculated from overnight starter cultures to an OD600 of 0.03 and grown for  17 h in hypoxia to an OD600 between 0.9 and 1.1 in YPD.  Normoxic cultures were grown  to an OD600 of 1.  A total of 150ml of culture was spun down at 3,000Xg for 10 min and  resuspended in 1.5 ml lysis buffer (1XPBS pH 7.4, 0.5% Tween-20, 1 mM PMSF, 1 mM  MgCl2 complete EDTA free protease inhibitor cocktail) and bead beat for 10 min.  Debris  was removed by centrifugation at 500XG 5 min at 4°C.  The supernatant constituting the  crude lysate fraction was collected and further clarified by centrifugation at 5,000XG for 5  min.  The pellet, containing G bodies, was then resuspended in 200 µL lysis buffer.  This P5  fraction was then added to the Dynabeads and allowed to rotate on a nutator for 2 h at 4°C.  The supernatant was saved as the flow through fraction (FT).  The beads were then washed   23  3X in 200 µL of 0.2 M phosphate citrate pH 5.6, resuspended in 50 µL 0.1 M Tris-HCl pH  7.5, 2% SDS, 100 mM DTT, and heated at 95°C to elute the protein.  The eluate was then  moved to a new tube and stored at -80°C until analysis. Proteins were precipitated with 23% TCA and washed with acetone. Protein pellets were  solubilized in 8 M urea 100 mM Tris pH 8.5, reduced with 5 mM Tris(2 carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, product C4706), and  alkylated with 55 mM 2-Chloroacetamide (Fluka Analytical, product 22790). Proteins were  digested for 18 hr at 37 °C in 2 M urea 100 mM Tris pH 8.5, 1 mM CaCl2 with 2 ug trypsin  (Promega, Madison, WI, product V5111). Twelve–step MudPIT analysis was performed  using an Agilent 1200 G1311 quaternary pump and a Thermo LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro using  an in-house built electrospray stage (Wolters et al., 2001).     24  Protein and peptide identification as well as protein quantitation were done with Integrated  Proteomics Pipeline - IP2 (Integrated Proteomics Applications, Inc., San Diego, CA.   http://www.integratedproteomics.com/). Tandem mass spectra were extracted from raw files  using RawConverter with monoisotopic peak option and searched against  a SGD protein database  (http://downloads.yeastgenome.org/sequence/S288C_reference/orf_protein/orf_trans),  released 1/13/2015 with reversed sequences and recombinant proteins added using  ProLuCID (Peng et al., 2003, Xu et al., 2006).  The search space included all fully-tryptic  and half-tryptic peptide candidates with a fixed modification of 57.02146 on C. Peptide  candidates were filtered using DTASelect (Tabb et al., 2002).

### Data Protocol
For each protein, averages of peptide counts for two biological replicates were taken.  The  proportion of total spectral counts was calculated, and both the ratio of this proportion to the  wild-type control as well as the ratio to the normoxic Pfk2p-GFP samples were calculated.   A cutoff of two-fold enrichment over each control condition was instituted for further  screening.  In addition, peptides only present in one hypoxic Pfk2p-GFP sample and  peptides with less than 10 spectral counts were censored.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hypoxia;  glycolytic enzymes;  rna granules;  amp kinase;  phosphorylation; saccharomyces cerevisiae;  phosphofructokinase

### Affiliations
Johns Hopkins University
Department of Biology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21218 USA

### Submitter
John Kim

### Lab Head
Dr John K. Kim
Department of Biology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21218 USA


