### Accession
PXD032965

### Title
Binding of a bovine ultralong CDRH3 to the SARS-CoV RBD

### Description
Here, we have used a SARS-naïve, bovine ultralong CDRH3 library to isolate a bovine paratope that engages the SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 receptor-binding domain (RBD). This scFv (B9-scFv) neutralises viruses pseudo-typed with SARS-CoV Spike protein. Using differential hydrogen-deuterium exchange mass spectrometry and site-directed mutagenesis, we demonstrate that this CDRH3 recognises a conserved, cryptic epitope.

### Sample Protocol
For HDX-MS experiments, a robot for automated HDX (LEAP Technologies) was coupled to an Acquity M-Class liquid chromatography (LC) system and HDX manager (Waters). Samples comprised protein (SARS-CoV RBD, or SARS-CoV RBD and B9-scFv, at a concentration of 10 µM and 50 µM, respectively) in 50 mM potassium phosphate, pH 8, 0.3 M NaCl. To initiate the HDX experiment, 95 μL of deuterated buffer (50 mM potassium phosphate, pD 8, 0.3 M NaCl) was added to 5 μL of protein-containing solution, and the mixture was incubated  at 4 °C for 0.5, 2 and 30 minutes. For each time point and condition, three replicate measurements were performed. The HDX reaction was quenched by adding 100 μL of quench buffer (10 mM potassium phosphate, 0.05 % n-dodecyl-β-D-maltoside (DDM), pH 2.2) to 50 μL of the labelling reaction. The quenched sample (50 μL) was proteolyzed by flowing through immobilised pepsin and aspergillopepsin columns (Affipro) connected in series (20 °C). The resulting peptides were trapped on a VanGuard Pre-column [Acquity UPLC BEH C18 (1.7 μm, 2.1 mm × 5 mm, Waters)] for 3 min. The peptides were separated using a C18 column (75 μm × 150 mm, Waters, UK) by gradient elution of 0–40% (v/v) buffer B in buffer A, where buffer A is H2O, 0.3% v/v formic acid and buffer B is acetonitrile, 0.1% v/v formic acid, over 7 min at 40 μL min−1.  Peptides were detected using a Synapt G2Si mass spectrometer (Waters) operating in HDMSE  mode, with dynamic range extension enabled. Ion mobility (IM) separation was used to separate peptides prior to collision induced dissociation (CID) fragmentation in the transfer cell. CID data were used for peptide identification, and uptake quantification was performed at the peptide level.

### Data Protocol
Data were analysed using ProteinLynx Global Server (PLGS) (v3.0.2) and DynamX (v3.0.0) software (Waters). Search parameters in PLGS were as follows: peptide and fragment tolerances = automatic, minimum fragment ion matches = 1, digest reagent = non-specific, false discovery rate = 4. Restrictions for peptides in DynamX were as follows: minimum intensity = 1000, minimum products per amino acid = 0.3, max sequence length = 25, max ppm error = 5, file threshold = 3. The software Deuteros was used to identify peptides with statistically significant increases/decreases in deuterium uptake and to prepare Wood’s plots.

### Publication Abstract
Broadly neutralizing antibodies have huge potential as novel antiviral therapeutics due to their ability to recognize highly conserved epitopes that are seldom mutated in viral variants. A subset of bovine antibodies possess an ultralong complementarity-determining region (CDR)H3 that is highly adept at recognizing such conserved epitopes, but their reactivity against Sarbecovirus Spike proteins has not been explored previously. Here, we use a SARS-na&#xef;ve library to isolate a broadly reactive bovine CDRH3 that binds the receptor-binding domain of SARS-CoV, SARS-CoV-2, and all SARS-CoV-2 variants. We show further that it neutralizes viruses pseudo-typed with SARS-CoV Spike, but this is not by competition with angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) binding. Instead, using differential hydrogen-deuterium exchange mass spectrometry, we demonstrate that it recognizes the major site of vulnerability of Sarbecoviruses. This glycan-shielded cryptic epitope becomes available only transiently via interdomain movements of the Spike protein such that antibody binding triggers destruction of the prefusion complex. This proof of principle study demonstrates the power of in&#xa0;vitro expressed bovine antibodies with ultralong CDRH3s for the isolation of novel, broadly reactive tools to combat emerging pathogens and to identify key epitopes for vaccine development.

### Keywords
Human, Antibody, Sars-cov

### Affiliations
School of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Leeds
Astbury Centre for Structural Molecular Biology, Faculty of Biological Sciences, University of Leeds, Leeds, LS2 9JT, UK

### Submitter
Antonio Calabrese

### Lab Head
Dr Antonio Calabrese
Astbury Centre for Structural Molecular Biology, Faculty of Biological Sciences, University of Leeds, Leeds, LS2 9JT, UK


