### Accession
PXD013841

### Title
Substrate-induced conformational dynamics of the dopamine transporter

### Description
The dopamine transporter is a member of the neurotransmitter:sodium symporters (NSSs), which are responsible for termination of neurotransmission through Na+-driven reuptake of neurotransmitter from the extracellular space. Experimental evidence elucidating the coordinated conformational rearrangements related to the transport mechanism has so far been limited. Here we probe the global Na+- and dopamine-induced conformational dynamics of the wild-type Drosophila melanogaster dopamine transporter using hydrogen-deuterium exchange mass spectrometry. We identify Na+- and dopamine-induced changes in specific regions of the transporter, suggesting their involvement in protein conformational transitions. Furthermore, we detect ligand-dependent slow cooperative fluctuations of helical stretches in several domains of the transporter, which could be a molecular mechanism that assists in the transporter function. Our results provide a framework for understanding the molecular mechanism underlying the function of NSSs by revealing detailed insight into the state-dependent conformational changes associated with the alternating access model of the dopamine transporter.

### Sample Protocol
Prior to HDX, dDAT was incubated at 25°C for 30 min at a concentration of 1.5 µM in buffer A containing 200 mM of either NaCl, CsCl, or 200 mM NaCl and 400 µM DA. The exchange reaction was initiated by diluting the dDAT samples 1:4 with 94% D2O buffer A supplemented with 200 mM of either NaCl or CsCl at 25°C resulting in 75.2% deuterium content during HDX and 40 µM DA in the NaCl and DA condition. The labeling reaction was quenched at various time points (15 sec, 1 min, 10 min, 60 min, and 480 min) by mixing a sample 1:1 with ice cold 220 mM phosphate buffer, pH 2.3, 2 M urea. Quenched samples were immediately frozen and stored at -80°C until further use. For maximum-labeled control samples, dDAT was predigested using the same conditions as for the HDX experiments. After online pepsin digestion, dDAT peptides were desalted, eluted and collected manually in a single fraction and lyophilized. The dDAT peptides were then reconstituted in 75.2% deuterated buffer A containing 200 mM NaCl and incubated for 24 hours at 25 °C to reach full deuteration before quenching the reaction. The HDX-MS data presented in this paper is the average of at least three technical replicate measurements for each time point.  Quenched samples (15 pmol) were thawed and loaded onto a cooled (0°C) nanoACQUITY UPLC system (Waters) with HDX technology. Samples were first subjected to proteolytic digestion at 20°C on an in-house packed pepsin column containing immobilized pepsin agarose resin (Thermo Fisher scientific) followed by rapid desalting on a C8 trap column (VanGuard pre-column ACQUITY UPLC BEH C8 1.7 µm, Waters) for 3 min at a flow rate of 200 µl min-1 solvent A (0.23% formic acid in water, pH 2.5). The peptides were then separated by reversed-phase chromatography over a C8 analytical column (ACQUITY UPLC BEH C8 1.7 µm, 100 mm, Waters) with a C8 trap column in front using a linear gradient from 8 - 30% solvent B (0.23% formic acid in acetonitrile) over 10 min at a flow rate of 40 µl min-1. Subsequently, peptides were analyzed on a hybrid Q-TOF SYNAPT G2-Si mass spectrometer (Waters) with electrospray ionization in positive ion mode and lock-mass correction using Glu-fibrinopeptide B. Ion mobility was used to further separate ions in the gas-phase in order to enhance peak capacity and minimize spectral overlap. The ion mobility cell was operated using a constant nitrogen flow of 90 ml min-1 at a wave velocity of 580 m s-1 and a wave height of 40 V. The maximum-labeled control samples were processed and analyzed using the HDX-MS workflow as described above with the only exception that the pepsin column was removed to avoid additional digestion. Non-deuterated samples were used for peptide identification by tandem mass spectrometry (CID) using a combination of data-independent acquisition (DIA) and data-dependent acquisition (DDA) with the ion mobility cell turned off.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified from non-deuterated samples using ProteinLynx Global Server 3.0 (PLGS) (Waters). Only peptide hits with a PLGS Ladder Score above 1.0 and with a mass error below 10 ppm for the precursor ion were accepted for peptides identified by data-dependent acquisition. Peptides identified by data-independent acquisition were filtered using DynamX 3.0 (Waters) so that only peptides with at least 2 fragmentation products, 0.2 fragment ions per amino acid, and below 10 ppm mass error for the precursor ion were accepted. Furthermore, peptides had to be identified in 50% of the DIA runs. The deuterium uptake was determined for all identified peptides using DynamX 3.0 (Waters). All peptide assignments were manually verified and noisy and overlapping spectral data were discarded from the HDX analysis. Maximum-labeled control samples were used to calculate the back-exchange (BE) for all individual peptides by the equation BE(%)=(1-(m(75.2%)-m(0%))/(m(MAX)-m(0%)))*100%  (1) where m(75.2%) is the mass of the maximum-labeled peptide, m(0%) is the mass of the non-deuterated peptide, and m(MAX) is the theoretical maximum deuterium uptake of the peptide (excluding N-terminus and prolines). The calculated back-exchange was used to normalize the back-exchange between measuring days allowing quantitative comparison of samples not measured on the same day.

### Publication Abstract
The dopamine transporter is a member of the neurotransmitter:sodium symporters (NSSs), which are responsible for termination of neurotransmission through Na<sup>+</sup>-driven reuptake of neurotransmitter from the extracellular space. Experimental evidence elucidating the coordinated conformational rearrangements related to the transport mechanism has so far been limited. Here we probe the global Na<sup>+</sup>- and dopamine-induced conformational dynamics of the wild-type Drosophila melanogaster dopamine transporter using hydrogen-deuterium exchange mass spectrometry. We identify Na<sup>+</sup>- and dopamine-induced changes in specific regions of the transporter, suggesting their involvement in protein conformational transitions. Furthermore, we detect ligand-dependent slow cooperative fluctuations of helical stretches in several domains of the transporter, which could be a molecular mechanism that assists in the transporter function. Our results provide a framework for understanding the molecular mechanism underlying the function of NSSs by revealing detailed insight into the state-dependent conformational changes associated with the alternating access model of the dopamine transporter.

### Keywords
Ms; protein-ligand interactions; membrane proteins; mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Department of Pharmacy, University of Copenhagen
Protein Analysis Group, Department of Pharmacy, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark

### Submitter
Kasper  Rand

### Lab Head
Dr Kasper D. Rand
Protein Analysis Group, Department of Pharmacy, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark


