### Accession
PXD025835

### Title
Systematic analysis of the lysine malonylome in Sanghuangporus sanghuang

### Description
Background: Sanghuangporus sanghuang is a well-known traditional medicinal mushroom associated with mulberry, which has enormous economic and medical value. Despite being known for many years, the regulatory mechanisms of bioactive compounds biosynthesis in this medicinal mushroom are still unclear.Lysine malonylation is one of a post-translational modifications that has many critical functions in various aspects of cell metabolism. However, at present we do not know its role in S. sanghuang. In this study, a global investigation of lysine malonylome in S. sanghuang was therefore carried out. Results: In total, 714 malonyl modification sites were matched to 255 different proteins. The analysis indicated that malonyl modifications were involved in a wide range of acellular functions and displayed a distinct subcellular localization. Bioinformatics analysis indicated that malonylated proteins were engaged in different metabolic pathways, including glyoxylate and dicarboxylate metabolism, glycolysis/gluconeogenesis, and the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle. Notably, a total of 26 enzymes related to triterpene and polysaccharide biosynthesis were found to be malonylated, indicating an indispensable role of lysine malonylation in bioactive compounds biosynthesis in S. sanghuang. Conclusions: These findings suggest that malonylation is associated with many metabolic pathways, particularly the metabolism of bioactive compounds triterpene and polysaccharide. This paper represents the first comprehensive survey of malonylation in S. sanghuang and provides an important data for further study on the physiological function of lysine malonylation in S. sanghuang and other medicinal mushrooms.

### Sample Protocol
In this study, strain S. sanghuang was stored at 4°C  in  solid medium slants composed of 20g/l bran,30g/l corn ,30g/l glucose, 1g /l KH2PO4, 0.5g/l MgSO4.7H2O, 4g/l yeast extract, 3g/l peptone and 20g/l agar .The strain was incubated on fluid medium (the medium was prepared as the solid medium mentioned-above except the agar) at 26 °C, 150 rpm for 7 d. After that, filter the fermentation broth to collect the mycelium, liquid nitrogen flash freeze, -80 °C for storage used for lysine malonylation analysis Protein extraction and trypsin digestion The protein extraction was performed as previously described [7, 10]. Briefly, the tissue samples were grinded to powder in a pre-cooled mortar with liquid nitrogen. A four-fold volume of  extraction buffer containing 10 mM dithiothreitol (Sigma-Aldrich, USA), 1% protease inhibitor (Calbiochem, Merck, USA), 3 μM trichostatin A (Sigma-Aldrich, USA), and 50 mM nicotinamide (Sigma-Aldrich, USA) was added and lysed by sonication using a ultrasonic processor (Scientz, Ningbo, China)  as described [10]. Equivalent volumes of tris equilibrium phenol were added. After centrifugation at 5500 × g and 4 °C for 10 min (eppendorf, Germany), the supernatants were collected and sedimented overnight with a 5-fold volume of 0.1 M ammonium acetate (Sigma-Aldrich, USA), and the protein precipitate was washed with methanol (Sigma-Aldrich, USA) and acetone (Sigma-Aldrich, USA). Then, 8 M urea (Sigma-Aldrich, USA) was re-dissolved for precipitation. The protein concentration was measured using bicinchoninic acid (BCA) kits (Beyotime Biotechnology, China). Finally, the extracted proteins were digested by trypsin (Promega, Madison, USA) as according to the procedures described [7, 10].HPLC fractionation and affinity enrichment High-pH reverse HPLC fractionation was used for peptides on an Agilent 300 Extend C18 column (5 μm, 4.6 mm, 250 mm) (Agilent, Santa Clara, USA). The operation was performed as follows: sterilized peptide fractions were isolated in a gradient between 8%-32% acetonitrile (Fisher Chemical, USA) (pH 9) for 60 min. They were merged into 4 fractions and freeze-dried under vacuum. The polypeptides were dissolved in IP buffer (100 mM NaCl (Sigma-Aldrich, USA), 1 mM EDTA (Sigma-Aldrich, USA), 50 mM Tris-HCl (Sigma-Aldrich, USA), and 0.5% NP-40 (Sigma-Aldrich, USA), pH 8.0) [10]. The polypeptides were incubated with pan anti-malonyllysine antibody conjugated agarose beads (PTM-904, PTMBiotech, China) at 4 °C overnight. Finally, the bound peptides on the agarose beads were eluted three times with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (Sigma-Aldrich, USA), followed by desalting using C18 ZipTips (Merck Millipore, USA)[19-21].  LC-MS/MS analysis The obtained  peptides were dissolvedwith 0.1% formic acid (Fluka, USA)and separated by ultrahigh-performance liquid chromatography (UHPLC) using EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific, USA). Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid (Fluka, USA) and 2% acetonitrile (Fisher Chemical, USA). Mobile phase B consisted of 0.1% formic acid and 90% acetonitrile. The liquid phase gradient was set as follows: 0-20 min, 7%-25% B; 20-34 min, 25%-38% B; 34-37 min, 38%-80% B; and 37-40 min, 80% B, with a flow rate of 500 nL/min.  After HPLC separation, the peptides were injected into a nanospray ionization (NSI) ion source for ionization and mass spectrometry (MS) analysis by Q Exactiv Plus (ThermoFisher Scientific, USA) [10]. The ion source voltage was set to 2.2 kV. The primary MS scanning range was 350 - 1800 m/z, and the secondary MS scanning range was 100.0 m/z. Data collection was performed using the data-dependent acquisition (DDA) procedure. The automatic gain control (AGC) was set to 5e4. [22], The dynamic rejection time was set to 15 s to avoid repeated scanning, the parameter threshold was set to 5e3 ions/s, and the maximum injection time was set to 200 ms. Database search The obtained MS/MS  data were analysed with MaxQuant [23]. The database was S. sanghuang (transcriptome, 23290 sequences). Reverse libraries were added to calculate the false discovery rate (FDR), and contamination libraries were added to eliminate the effects of contaminated proteins. Trypsin/P was applied as cleavage enzyme and the missed cleavages was set to 4 [10]. The first search and main search primary parent ion mass error tolerance was set to 20 ppm and 5 ppm, respectively. Cysteine alkylation was set as the fixed modification, and the variable modifications were the acetylation of the protein N-terminus, deamidation of aspartylation/glutamylation, and malonylation of lysine. All the FDRs were set to 1% [24].

### Data Protocol
Bioinformatics analyses Gene Ontology (GO) annotations of proteins are classified according to biological process, cellular component, and molecular function [25]. GO annotations of the malonylated proteins were from the UniProt-Gene Ontology Annotation (GOA) database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/) [26]. InterProScan was used to annotate the domain functional description of the malonylated proteins [27-28]. The metabolic pathways involved in the modified proteins were analyzed using the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database (https://www.genome.jp/kegg/). The subcellular localizations of the identified proteins were annotated using WoLF PSORT [29]. The significance of malonylated protein enrichment was measured by Fisher's exact (two-sided) test and p value < 0.05 were considered to be significant [30-34]. To investigate protein-protein interaction (PPI) network, all the modified proteins were searched against STRING database [35]Then, the visualization of PPI network form STRING was presented with the R package "networkD3" [36, 37]

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Malonylation, Malonylproteome, Sanghuangporus sanghuang, Post-translational modification (ptm)

### Affiliations
PTM Biolabs Inc
Qingdao Agricultural University

### Submitter
Meng Large

### Lab Head
Dr tong Wang
Qingdao Agricultural University


