### Accession
PXD015183

### Title
SUMOylation regulates chromatin protein network and accessibility at glucocorticoid receptor-binding sites

### Description
Glucocorticoid receptor (GR) is an essential transcription factor (TF), controlling metabolism, development and immune responses. SUMOylation regulates chromatin occupancy and target gene expression of GR in a locus-selective manner, but the mechanism of regulation has remained elusive. Here, we show using selective isolation of chromatin-associated proteins that the protein network around chromatin-bound GR is affected by SUMOylation, with several nuclear receptor coregulators and chromatin modifiers being more avidly associated with SUMOylation-deficient than SUMOylation competent GR. This difference is reflected in our chromatin accessibility and gene expression data, showing that the SUMOylation-deficient GR is more potent in opening chromatin at glucocorticoid-regulated enhancers and inducing expression of their target loci. Our results thus show that SUMOylation determines GR specificity by regulating the chromatin protein network and accessibility at GR-driven enhancers. We speculate that a similar mechanism is utilized by many other SUMOylated TFs.

### Sample Protocol
Mixture of EtOH treated HEK293flpGR and HEK293flpGR3KR cells were metabolic labeled with light SILAC, Dex treated HEK293flpGR cells were labeled with medium SILAC, and Dex treated HEK293flpGR3KR cells were labeled with heavy SILAC. Cells were crosslinked and lysed in RIPA buffer Chromatin preparation and ChIP were performed with anti-GR antibodies followed by capture of on-chromatin GR interactors following ChIP-SICAP protocol where the 3’-ends of sheared DNA are in vitro biotinylated and used as bait in streptavidin pull down for on-chromatin functional interactor identification. Tryptic protein digestion was performed on streptavidin beads and the resulting peptides were subjected to peptide SP3 de-salting before MS analysis. Peptides were eluted in trifluoroacetic acid 0.1% and then loaded on a PepMap100 trap column followed by separation over a 50cm Acclaim PepMap RSLC analytical column using a 70min linear gradient of acetonitrile from 6 to 40% (Thermo EasynLC 1200, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were analyzed on a Tri-Hybrid Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) operated in data dependent acquisition mode with HCD fragmentation. The MS1 and MS2 scans were acquired in the Orbitrap and ion trap, respectively.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analyzed using MaxQuant free software including the Andromeda search Engine. Peptide identification was performed using Uniprot database of Homo sapiens. Default parameters of MaxQuant were used with match between runs and re-quantify options were active and both Label Free Quantification (LFQ) and iBAQ scores were calculated. Only proteins with at least 1 unique peptide in both replicates were used for further processing steps.

### Publication Abstract
Glucocorticoid receptor (GR) is an essential transcription factor (TF), controlling metabolism, development and immune responses. SUMOylation regulates chromatin occupancy and target gene expression of GR in a locus-selective manner, but the mechanism of regulation has remained elusive. Here, we identify the protein network around chromatin-bound GR by using selective isolation of chromatin-associated proteins and show that the network is affected by receptor SUMOylation, with several nuclear receptor coregulators and chromatin modifiers preferring interaction with SUMOylation-deficient GR and proteins implicated in transcriptional repression preferring interaction with SUMOylation-competent GR. This difference is reflected in our chromatin binding, chromatin accessibility and gene expression data, showing that the SUMOylation-deficient GR is more potent in binding and opening chromatin at glucocorticoid-regulated enhancers and inducing expression of target loci. Blockage of SUMOylation by a SUMO-activating enzyme inhibitor (ML-792) phenocopied to a large extent the consequences of GR SUMOylation deficiency on chromatin binding and target gene expression. Our results thus show that SUMOylation modulates the specificity of GR by regulating its chromatin protein network and accessibility at GR-bound enhancers. We speculate that many other SUMOylated TFs utilize a similar regulatory mechanism.

### Keywords
Chromatin regulation, Transcription factors, Glucocorticoid receptor, Proteomics, Sumoylation

### Affiliations
Institute of Biomedicine, University of Eastern Finland, Kuopio, Finland
DKFZ

### Submitter
Gianluca Sigismondo

### Lab Head
Dr Jorma J. Palvimo
Institute of Biomedicine, University of Eastern Finland, Kuopio, Finland


