### Accession
PXD009860

### Title
Comparative Two-Dimensional Polyacrylamide Gel Electrophoresis (2D-PAGE) of Human Milk to Identify Dysregulated Proteins in Breast Cancer

### Description
Breast Cancer (BC) remains a major cause of mortality, and early detection is considered important for reducing BC-associated deaths. Early detection of BC is challenging in young women, due to the limitations of mammography on the dense breast tissue of young women. We recently reported results of a pilot study, using one-dimensional polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (1D-PAGE)-based mass spectrometry (MS) to investigate differences in milk proteins from women with and without BC. Here, we applied two-dimensional polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (2D-PAGE)-based MS to compare the protein pattern in milk from the breasts of a single woman who was diagnosed with BC in one breast 24 months after donating her mil. Statistically different gel spots were picked for protein digestion followed by nanoLC-MS/MS analysis. The upregulated proteins in BC versus control are alpha-amylase, gelsolin isoform a precursor, alpha-2-glycoprotein 1 zinc isoform CRA_b partial, apoptosis-inducing factor 2 and vitronectin. Several proteins were downregulated in the milk of the breast later diagnosed with cancer as compared to the milk from the healthy breast, including different isoforms of albumin, cholesterol esterase, different isoforms of lactoferrin, different proteins from the casein family and different isoforms of lysozyme. Results warrant further studies to determine the usefulness of these milk proteins for assessing risk and detecting occult disease.

### Sample Protocol
Intact human breast milk samples (without any centrifugation or fractionation prior to 2D-PAGE analysis) were used for this study. The concentrations of breast milk samples were measured performing Bradford assay and equal amount of proteins for each sample were loaded for both Coomassie stained (550 µg) and silver stained gels (150 µg). Carrier ampholine method of isoelectric focusing was applied by Kendrick Labs, Inc. (Madison, WI) to run 2D-PAGE which has been described elsewhere in details. The first part of 2D was isoelectric focusing which was performed in a 3.3 mm (inner diameter) glass tube with the pH range of 3 to 10 made by 2% Isodalt Servalytes (Serva, Heidelberg, Germany), running at 20,000 volt-hrs. Tropomyosin (protein spot with MW 33,000 and pI 5.2, was used as the internal standard. For Coomassie stained gels, 1 µg per sample and for silver stained gels 100 ng per sample of tropomyosin was added. The pH gradient plot for the tube gel, (not shown here) was obtained using surface pH electrode. The tube gel was equilibrated in the equilibration buffer (10% glycerol, 50mM dithiothreitol, 2.3% SDS and 0.0625 M tris, pH 6.8) for 10 minutes, then sealed on top of the stacking gel which overlaid the slab gel (10% acrylamide slab gel, 1.0 mm thick). SDS-PAGE ran for approximately 5 hours (25 mA/gel). The MW standards used for SDS-PAGE, were as follow: myosin (220 kDa), phosphorylase A (94kDa), catalase (60 kDa), actin (43kDa), carbonic anhydrase (29kDa) and lysozyme (14kDa) (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO and EMD Millipore, Billerica, MA). The gels were put between cellophane paper sheets (lower pH to the left) and dried.

### Data Protocol
For computerized analysis, we had two technical replicates of silver stained gels for each sample, which were scanned with laser densitometer (model PDSI, Molecular Dynamics Inc, Sunnyvale, CA). The linearity of the scanner was checked with a calibrated neutral density filter set (Melles Griot, Irvine, CA) before scanning the gels. Progenesis Same Spots software (version 4.5, 2011, TotalLab, UK) and Progenesis PG240 software (version 2006, TotalLab, UK) were used for analysis of the gel images. Briefly, the images were wrapped, and the protein spots were found, then the background was subtracted followed by matching and quantification (measuring the spot percentage). Accurate manual checking was performed all the time. Spot percentage was defined as the spot integrated density above background. The dysregulation was measured as the fold change of the spot percentages. Fold change for upregulation (spot % of BC divided by spot % of control) is shown with positive numbers and downregulation (spot % of Control sample divided by spot % of BC sample) is shown with negative numbers. The differentially regulated protein spots from the Coomassie blue stained gels were picked and digested performing in-gel trypsin digestion: the gel spots were cut into very small pieces, then washed and de-stained followed by overnight in-gel trypsin digestion. After digestion, the peptide extraction was done, and the peptide mixture was cleaned using Zip-Tip reversed phase chromatography (C18 Ziptip™; Millipore, Billerica, MA). After ziptip was done and the sample were dried, the peptide mixtures were re-solubilized and analyzed by nanoliquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (nanoLC-MS/MS) using a nanoACQUITY® UPLC coupled with a QTOF Ultima API mass spectrometer (Waters, Milford, MA) as described elsewhere. Using ProteinLynx Global Server (PLGS version 2.4, Waters) software, the raw data files from the mass spectrometer were converted to pkl (peak list) files as described elsewhere. The processing parameters used for this conversion were as follows: Background polynomial of order 5 with background subtraction threshold of 35%, with smoothing iterations of 2, smoothing window of 3 channels and smoothing type of Savitzky-Golay. Centroid top was considered as top 80% of peaks and minimum peak width was considered as 4 channels. The pkl files were undergone data base search using web based MASCOT search engine (www.matrixscience.com). The database search parameters used in this study were as follow: National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI), NCBInr 20150425 (65519838 sequences; 23472502492 residues) database, selected for Homo sapiens (human) (304503 sequences), cysteine propionamide as fixed modification, methionine oxidation as variable modifications, peptide mass tolerance of ±1.3 Da (one 13C isotope), fragment mass tolerance of ±0.8 Da, maximum missed cleavages=4. Apart from the proteins, which were identified directly from mascot database search, there were some spots that did not show any protein identification in mascot, but peptides from the corresponding protein to that spot were identified. For those peptides we performed de novo sequencing on MS/MS raw data files to identify more dysregulated proteins in our experiment.

### Publication Abstract
Breast cancer (BC) remains a major cause of mortality, and early detection is considered important for reducing BC-associated deaths. Early detection of BC is challenging in young women, due to the limitations of mammography on the dense breast tissue of young women. We recently reported results of a pilot proteomics study, using one-dimensional polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (1D-PAGE) and mass spectrometry (MS) to investigate differences in milk proteins from women with and without BC. Here, we applied two-dimensional polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (2D-PAGE) and MS to compare the protein pattern in milk from the breasts of a single woman who was diagnosed with BC in one breast 24 months after donating her milk. Statistically different gel spots were picked for protein digestion followed by nanoliquid chromatography tandem MS (nanoLC-MS/MS) analysis. The upregulated proteins in BC versus control are alpha-amylase, gelsolin isoform a precursor, alpha-2-glycoprotein 1 zinc isoform CRA_b partial, apoptosis-inducing factor 2 and vitronectin. Several proteins were downregulated in the milk of the breast later diagnosed with cancer as compared to the milk from the healthy breast, including different isoforms of albumin, cholesterol esterase, different isoforms of lactoferrin, different proteins from the casein family and different isoforms of lysozyme. Results warrant further studies to determine the usefulness of these milk proteins for assessing risk and detecting occult disease. MS data is available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD009860.

### Keywords
2d-page, Proteomics, Biomarkers, Breast cancer, Mass spectrometry, Breast milk

### Affiliations
Clarkson University

### Submitter
Roshanak Aslebagh

### Lab Head
Dr Costel C. Darie
Clarkson University


