### Accession
PXD002637

### Title
PME1 interactome -  Relevance Rank Platform (RRP) for Functional Filtering of High Content Protein-Protein Interaction Data

### Description
For a single step AP-MS identification of PME1 interactome was established a cell line stably expressing either Strep-tag alone or        Strep_PME-1 fusion protein.  After Strep-tag affinity purification, proteins were separated on SDS-PAGE gel, silver stained and protein bands that showed visually enrichment in StrepPME-1 samples compared to Strep-tag samples  were isolated from both lanes for MS analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were in-gel digested by trypsin, LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a nanoflow HPLC system (CapLC, Waters) coupled to a QSTAR Pulsar mass spectrometer (AB Sciex) equipped with a nano-electrospray ionization source.

### Data Protocol
MS data was aquired using Analyst QS 1.1 software. An information dependent acquisition method consisted of one second TOF MS survey scan of a mass range 350-1600 amu and two seconds product ion scan. Data was searched against the SwissProt database using Mascot. Mascot search results were imported to Scaffold for data evaluation. No filtering was done in Scaffold. The final aim was to test Relevance Rank Platform for functional filtering of protein-protein interaction data.

### Publication Abstract
High content protein interaction screens have revolutionized our understanding of protein complex assembly. However, one of the major challenges in translation of high content protein interaction data is identification of those interactions that are functionally relevant for a particular biological question. To address this challenge, we developed a relevance ranking platform (RRP), which consist of modular functional and bioinformatic filters to provide relevance rank among the interactome proteins. We demonstrate the versatility of RRP to enable a systematic prioritization of the most relevant interaction partners from high content data, highlighted by the analysis of cancer relevant protein interactions for oncoproteins Pin1 and PME-1. We validated the importance of selected interactions by demonstration of PTOV1 and CSKN2B as novel regulators of Pin1 target c-Jun phosphorylation and reveal previously unknown interacting proteins that may mediate PME-1 effects via PP2A-inhibition. The RRP framework is modular and can be modified to answer versatile research problems depending on the nature of the biological question under study. Based on comparison of RRP to other existing filtering tools, the presented data indicate that RRP offers added value especially for the analysis of interacting proteins for which there is no sufficient prior knowledge available. Finally, we encourage the use of RRP in combination with either SAINT or CRAPome computational tools for selecting the candidate interactors that fulfill the both important requirements, functional relevance, and high confidence interaction detection.

### Keywords
Human

### Affiliations
Centre for Biotechnology, University of Turku and Åbo Akademi
University of Turku

### Submitter
Anne Rokka

### Lab Head
Dr Jukka Westermarck
Centre for Biotechnology, University of Turku and Åbo Akademi


