### Accession
PXD038849

### Title
Complementarity Determining Regions in SARS-CoV-2 hybrid immunity

### Description
Pre-vaccination SARS-CoV-2 infection can boost protection elicited by COVID-19 vaccination and post-vaccination breakthrough SARS-CoV-2 infection can boost existing immunity conferred by COVID-19 vaccination. Such ‘hybrid immunity’ is effective against SARS-CoV-2 variants. In order to understand ‘hybrid immunity’ at the molecular level we studied the complementarity determining regions (CDR) of anti-RBD (receptor binding domain) antibodies isolated from individuals with ‘hybrid immunity’ as well as from ‘naive’ (notSARS-CoV-2 infected) vaccinated individuals. CDR analysis was done by liquid  chromatography/mass spectrometry-mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Anti-RBD enrichment Costar plates were coated with RBD (0,5μg per well) and left overnight at 4°C. The  following day,coated plates were washed thrice with PBS-T (0,05% Tween-20 in PBS).  Diluted serum (1/10 in PBS-T)was added and the plates were incubated in a thermomixer (RT, 800rpm, 1h). After incubation,plates were washed three times with PBS-T, followed by washing twice in PBS. Finally, plates were washed with 50mM Tris-HCl. Digestion with Lys-C/Chymotrypsin Following enrichment, 60μl 4M urea/50mM Tris-HCl was added to each well. Afterwards, reduction of proteins was executed for 1h in the thermomixer (800 rpm, 37°C) in the  presence of 8 mM DTT,followed by alkylation for 30 min in the dark (37°C) in the presence of 22mM IAM. Digestion was started by addition of Lys-C at 0,4 μg/well and leftovernight (thermomixer 37°C, 800 rpm, dark). The next day, 50mM Tris-HCl was added untilurea concentration dropped below 1M. Chymotrypsin was added at 1μg/well and digestion ofthe proteins continued in the thermomixer (4h, 37°C, 800 rpm). Finally, digestion was  stopped in the presence of 1% FA. Desalting Desalting was performed on Sep-Pak 96-well tC18 μElution plates using a vacuum pump. To activate the column, 200μl 50% acetonitrile (ACN) was added to each well and the pump was activated for 1 minute. This activation step was repeated once. During equilibration, 200μl 0.5% formic acid (FA)/5% ACN was added to each well and the pump was activated  for 1 minute. This equilibration step was repeated once. Next, samples were loaded on  the column and the pump was activated. The flowthrough was passed through the column  again to ensure maximum binding. Afterwards, the column was washed 4 times with 0.5% FA/5% ACN. To elute samples, 50μl 70% ACN was loaded on the column, the pump was activated and the flow-through was collected in a new 96-well plate. Samples were transferred to  Eppendorf 1.5ml tubes and dried in the Speedvac centrifuge (Uniequip Univapo 150 ECH). Dried samples were stored at -20°C.Dried samples were resuspended in 15μl 0.1%FA/5% before being injected.

### Data Protocol
Bio-informatics Analysis Progenesis software (version 4.1; Nonlineair Dynamics Ltd, New Castle, UK) was used for relative quantification of data by normalized peptide abundance values. Mascot (version 2.2.06; Matrix Science Inc., London, UK) was used for identification of peptides by searching against the Uniprot Homo sapiens database (194,319 entries). Peptides with a  Mascot peptide sequence score ≥20 and identified as immunoglobulin (Ig)-like were  further aligned to databases containing V, D or J region germline sequences.Peptides with a Mascot score ≥20 identified as non-Ig-like or with a Mascot score <20 were analyzed by de novo sequencing. De novo sequencing was performed starting from the raw data files using the PEAKS Studio software (Version 10.6; Bioinformatics Solutions Inc.,Waterloo, Canada). A de novo score(Average of Local Confidence, ALC%) was assigned by PEAKS based on the reliability of each amino acid in a de novo sequence. Only de novo peptides with scores of ALC% >80% were included for further analysis (VDJ alignment). Included peptide sequences were subsequently aligned to databases containing V, D or  J-region germline sequences derived from IMGT database using IgBLAST and IMGT/DomainGapAlign algorithms. Peptides with sufficient match (IgBLAST criteria for FR and CDR1/2: E-value ≤ 0.05; IMGT criteria for CDR3: E-value ≤ 1, Smith-Watermann score >30, and min. 3 amino acids aligned to CDR3) to the human immunoglobulin V-region databases were assigned to a frame region (FR) or complementarity determining region (CDR) of the  corresponding immunoglobulin germline gene. Only peptides that were assigned to a CDR (with or without amino acids overlapping neighboring FRs) were used for further statistical analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Cdr, Covid 19

### Affiliations
KU Leuven

### Submitter
Doreen Dillaerts

### Lab Head
Dr Xavier Bossuyt
KU Leuven


