### Accession
PXD034044

### Title
The HLA peptide repertoire of SaOS-2 cell line transfected with TP53 protein

### Description
Analysis of the immunopeptidome of Human Leukocyte Antigen(HLA)class I of SaOS-2 osteosarcoma cells transfected with pBR322 vector only, and 2 mutants of TP53 protein namely R175H and R273H.

### Sample Protocol
HLA class I bound peptides were pulled down using antibodies including anti HLA A:02:01 antibody (BB7.2) and remainder of class I peptides were pulled using anti pan class I antibody (W6/32). Samples were analysed by SCIEX 5600+ TripleTOF mass spectrometer using a NanoUltra cHiPLC system (Eksigent)

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra in Wiff files were searched against the human proteome (Uniprot 15/06/2017; 20,182 entries) using Peaks X Pro software. The following search parameters were used: error tolerance of 15 ppm using monoisotopic mass for precursor ions and 0.1 Da tolerance for fragment ions; enzyme use was set to none with following variable modifications: oxidation at Met, deamidation at Asp and Gln. False discovery rate (FDR) was estimated using a decoy fusion method and  all datasets were analyzed at 5% FDR.

### Publication Abstract
The p53 protein is mutated in more than 50% of human cancers. Mutated p53 proteins not only lose their normal function but often acquire novel oncogenic functions, a phenomenon termed mutant p53 gain-of-function. Mutant p53 has been shown to affect the transcription of a range of genes, as well as protein-protein interactions with transcription factors and other effectors; however, no one has intensively investigated and identified these proteins, or their MHC presented epitopes, from the viewpoint of their ability to act as targets for immunotherapeutic interventions. We investigated the molecular changes that occurred after the <i>TP53</i> null osteosarcoma cells, SaOS-2, were transfected with one of two conformational p53-mutants, either R175H or R273H. We then examined the phenotypic and functional changes using macroscopic observations, proliferation, gene expression and proteomics alongside immunopeptidome profiling of peptide antigen presentation in the context of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I molecules. We identified several candidate proteins in both <i>TP53</i> mutant cell lines with differential expression when compared to the <i>TP53</i> null vector control, SaOS-V. Quantitative SWATH proteomics combined with immune-peptidome analysis of the class-I eluted peptides identified several epitopes presented on pMHC and in silico analysis shortlisted which antigens were expressed in a range of cancerous but not adjacent healthy tissues. Out of all the candidates, KLC1 and TOP2A showed high levels of expression in every tumor type examined. From these proteins, three A2 and four pan HLA-A epitopes were identified in both R175H and R273H from TOP2A. We have now provided a short list of future immunotherapy targets for the treatment of cancers harboring mutated <i>TP53</i>.

### Keywords
Immunopeptidomics, Tp53 protein, Lc-ms/ms, Saos-2, Hla

### Affiliations
Monash University
Infection and Immunology Program, Biomedicine DiscoveryInstitute Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Monash University, Clayton VIC 3800 Australia

### Submitter
Kirti Pandey

### Lab Head
Dr Anthony Wayne Purcell
Infection and Immunology Program, Biomedicine DiscoveryInstitute Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Monash University, Clayton VIC 3800 Australia


