### Accession
PXD043660

### Title
Deep Proteomic Compound Profiling with the Orbitrap Ascend Tribrid Mass Spectrometer Using Tandem Mass Tags and Real-Time Search

### Description
We evaluated the performance of the Orbitrap Ascend in comparison to the Orbitrap Eclipse in RTS-SPS-MS3-based analysis of human proteomes using fractionated and unfractionated samples labeled with TMT and TMTpro reagents. We did this comparison in the context of different sample input amounts; we analyzed differences in quantitative precision; we compared the effectiveness in identifying protein abundance changes induced by treatment with covalent inhibitors of PIN1.

### Sample Protocol
Yeast cultures and human cells were harvested and lysed. Lysates were reduced with DTT and alkylated with IAA. Proteins were precipitated by chloroform-methanol precipitation and then digested with LysC then trypsin. Peptides were labeled with TMT or TMTpro reagents, quenched with hydroxylamine, and combined. The resulting plexes were desalted on Sep-Pak (Waters), evaporated using a speedvac, and resuspended at 0.5 ug/ul in 3% acetonitrile + 1% formic acid in water.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched using a Comet-based in-house pipeline. Peptide-spectrum matches were adjusted to a 1% false discovery rate using a linear discriminant analysis and then assembled further to a final protein-level FDR of 1%. Peptides and proteins were only counted as being quantified if the sum of TMT peak signal-to-noise ratios exceeded 10 per channel.

### Publication Abstract
Tandem mass tags (TMT) and tribrid mass spectrometers are a powerful combination for high-throughput proteomics with high quantitative accuracy. Increasingly, this technology is being used to map the effects of drugs on the proteome. However, the depth of proteomic profiling is still limited by sensitivity and speed. The new Orbitrap Ascend mass spectrometer was designed to address these limitations with a combination of hardware and software improvements. We evaluated the performance of the Ascend in multiple contexts including deep proteomic profiling. We found that the Ascend exhibited increased sensitivity, yielding higher signal-to-noise ratios than the Orbitrap Eclipse with shorter injection times. As a result, higher numbers of peptides and proteins were identified and quantified, especially with low sample input. TMT measurements had significantly improved signal-to-noise ratios, improving quantitative precision. In a fractionated 16plex sample that profiled proteomic differences across four human cell lines, the Ascend was able to quantify hundreds more proteins than the Eclipse, many of them low-abundant proteins, and the Ascend was able to quantify &gt;8000 proteins in 30% less instrument time. We used the Ascend to analyze 8881 proteins in HCT116 cancer cells treated with covalent sulfolane/sulfolene inhibitors of peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase NIMA-interacting 1 (PIN1), a phosphorylation-specific peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase implicated in several cancers. We characterized these PIN1 inhibitors' effects on the proteome and identified discrepancies among the different compounds, which will facilitate a better understanding of the structure-activity relationship of this class of compounds. The Ascend was able to quantify statistically significant, potentially therapeutically relevant changes in proteins that the Eclipse could not detect.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Tmt, Drug discovery, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Steven Shuken

### Lab Head
Dr Qing Yu
Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School


