### Accession
PXD000730

### Title
Drosophila melanogaster exp 132

### Description
PeptideRank is an approach that uses a rank-based algorithm for peptide detectability prediction from shotgun proteomics data. The best performance is achieved when it is trained on organism-specific shotgun proteomics datasets. The Drosophila shotgun proteomics data presented here have been used amongst others to train and validate PeptideRank.

### Sample Protocol
Drosophila KC 167 cells were fractionated into cytoplasmic/nuclear fractions using cytoskeleton buffer ((CSK): 10mM PIPES, 300mM Sucrose, 100mM NaCl, 3mM MgCl2, 1mM EGTA) and douncing. Nucelar extracts were further porcessed in digestion buffer (10 mM PIPES, 1 mM EGTA, 50 mM NaCl, 3 mM MgCl2, DNAse) . After digestion 250 mM ammonium sulfate was added for protein extraction. After tryptic digestion peptides were fractionated using strong cation exchange chromatography (SXC) (Nat Biotechnol. 2007 May;25(5):576-83. Epub 2007 Apr 22)

### Data Protocol
MS2 spectra were searched with TURBOSequest (v27) against the ENSEMBL fly protein database release v27.3c. PSMs were post-processed with PeptideProphet and only peptides equal to or above a PeptideProphet threshold of p >= 0.9 (corresponding to an FDR around 3% at the spectrum level) were considered further. As above, the Drosophila dataset was post-processed to remove shared peptides and to conform to a rank compatible format.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Nuclear and cytoplasmic fraction, Drosophila melanogaster, Kc167 cells

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Life Sciences, University of Zurich, Switzerland
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology

Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Zurich (ETH)

Auguste-Piccard.Hof 1
CH-8093 Zürich

### Submitter
Sandra Goetze

### Lab Head
Dr Erich Brunner
Institute of Molecular Life Sciences, University of Zurich, Switzerland


