### Accession
PXD025935

### Title
Palm oil-rich diet affects murine liver proteome and S-palmitoylome

### Description
Palmitic acid (C16:0) is the most abundant saturated fatty acid in animals serving as a substrate in lipid synthesis and β-oxidation, and in the modification of proteins called palmitoylation. The influence of dietary palmitic acid on protein palmitoylation in the context of metabolic processes remains largely unknown. In this study we performed high-throughput proteomic analyses of the liver membrane fraction in the mouse to examine the influence of a palm oil-rich diet on the level and S-palmitoylation of proteins. For this purpose, mice were fed for 4 or 12 weeks a diet containing 19.1% of palm oil in addition to 4% soybean oil (45% kcal from fat) while 4% soybean oil (10% kcal from fat) was the only fat source in the control diet. Liver functioning and pro-inflammatory responses of the liver and peritoneal macrophages as well as the input of protein S-palmitoylation to these aspects were assessed in parallel. We found that the diet rich in palm oil induced transient accumulation of C16:0 and C18:1 fatty acids in murine liver leading to changes of the level and S-palmitoylation of numerous proteins involved in liver metabolism and selected innate immune responses. The relatively mild negative impact of such diet on liver functioning can be attributed to a lower bioavailability of palm oil-derived C16:0 vs. that of C18:1 and the efficiency of mechanisms preventing liver injury, including dynamic protein S-palmitoylation.

### Sample Protocol
The enriched membrane fraction from liver was prepared according to Shen et al. (Sci. Rep. 2017, 7:2182) with minor modifications. Crude homogenate of liver was prepared in LB buffer (50 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA, pH 7.2, 2x protease inhibitor cocktail and 2 mM PMSF; 3% w/v in buffer). The membrane fraction was collected by centrifugation and resuspended in LB buffer supplemented with 1.7% Triton X-100 and 4% SDS. After cell debris removal, membrane proteins were precipitated with chloroform:methanol:H2O (1:4:3, v:v:v), dissolved in LB.2 (5 mM EDTA, 4% SDS, 100 mM Hepes, pH 7.4) and subjected to acyl-biotin exchange (ABE). For isobaric mass tagging for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) of the protein abundance, the pelleted proteins were resuspended at 5% (w/v) in buffer containing 8 M urea, 2 M thio-urea, 4% Chaps, 100 mM TEAB, pH 8.5. In ABE procedure, membrane proteins dissolved in LB.2 (2 mg/ml) were treated sequentially with 5 mM TCEP and 20 mM MMTS to reduce disulfide bonds and block free protein thiol groups. The proteins were then precipitated three times with chloroform:methanol:H2O followed by their solubilization in LB.2 buffer. Finally, each sample (2mg/ml protein) was diluted 20 times with a buffer containing 0.2 mM HPDP-biotin, 0.2% Triton X-100 and 100 mM Hepes, pH 7.4, halved and supplemented with hydroxylamine to final concentration of 0.75 M (HA+) or corresponding volume of 50 mM Tris, pH 7.5 (HA-) for 18 h (200C). Next, proteins were subjected to three rounds of precipitation with chloroform:methanol:H2O and finally solubilized in LB.2. A sample containing 550 μg protein was diluted 20 times with 150 mM NaCl, 0.2% SDS, 20 mM Hepes, pH 7.4, protease and phosphates inhibitors and supplemented with 50 μl of streptavidin-agarose (2.5 h at 200C) and washed. Proteins were eluted from the beads with 5 mM TCEP in 50 mM NaCl, 20 mM Hepes, pH 7.4 , precipitated with cold acetone, dissolved in 60 μl of 0.5% SDS, 10 mM Hepes, pH 8.5, and 50 μl of this solution was subjected to LC-MS/MS. For this, proteins were treated with 30 mM TCEP and 80 mM MMTS and digested using modified SP3 protocol (Hughes et al., 2019, Nature Protoc. 14:68-85) with an increased number of washes to ensure complete removal of detergents. Thus, proteins were bound to of Sera-Mag Carboxyl hydrophilic and hydrophobic particles, washed and subjected to trypsin/Lys-C mix. After overnight digestion at 370C, the beads were washed with ACN, peptides eluted by sonications in 2% DMSO in MS-grade water, dried and dissolved in 0.1% FA and 2% ACN. Proteins of 3 mice fed palm oil rich-diet and 3 control mice were analysed after 4 and 12 weeks of feeding. iTRAQ samples were prepared according to the iFASP protocol with some modifications (MsDowell et al., 2013, J. Proteome Res. 12:3809-3812), including protein digestion with a trypsin/LysC mix The procedure was carried out separately for mice fed the regular or the palm oli-rich diet for 4 weeks (4 mice in each variant) and 12 weeks (3 control mice and 5 mice fed the palm oli-rich diet). The samples from each iTRAQ set (mice fed for 4 or 12 weeks) were then combined, the peptides were purified using 30-mg Oasis HLB columns and subjected to high-pH reversed-phase fractionation on an XBridge Peptide BEH C18 column  using an Acquity UPLC H-class. Elution was carried out in an ACN (phase B) gradient in MS-grade water (phase A) with a constant NH4OH concentration of 10 mM. The fractions were dried, dissolved in 60 μl of 0.1% FA and 2% ACN.

### Data Protocol
Label-free samples obtained using ABE procedure and iTRAQ fractions were analysed using an LC-MS system comprised of an UPLC chromatograph and a Q Exactive mass spectrometer Thus, samples were injected onto a C18 pre-column using 0.1% FA in MS-grade water as a mobile phase, next peptides were transferred to a BEH C18 using a linear ACN gradient (0-35% ACN in 160 minutes) in the presence of 0.1% FA at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. Data acquisition was carried out in a data-dependent mode with top 12 precursors selected for MS2 analysis after CID fragmentation with an NCE of 27. The electrospray voltage of the source was set at 3.5 kV and the temperature of the capillary was set to 2500C. Full MS scans covering the m/z range of 300–1650 were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 with a maximum injection time of 60 ms and an AGC target of 1e6. MS2 scans were acquired at the resolution of 17,500 and the AGC target of 5e5. Precursor ion dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s.  Obtained raw data were pre-processed with Mascot Distiller software (v. 2.5, Matrixscience) and proteins were identified using the Mascot Server search engine (v. 2.5, Matrixscience) using Mus musculus protein sequences deposited in the Swissprot database (versions 2018_07, 16992 sequences, 2019_01, 17064 sequences and 2019_02, 17016 sequences). Search parameters were as follows: Enzyme: Trypsin, Fixed modifications: Methylthio (C) (for iTRAQ, additionally iTRAQ8plex (K) and iTRAQ8plex (N-term)), Variable modifications: Oxidation (M) (for iTRAQ, additionally iTRAQ8plex(Y)), Miscleavages: 1, Instrument: HCD, Quantitation for iTRAQ samples: iTRAQ 8plex. Parent and fragment mass tolerance was set individually for each raw file after offline mass recalibration (as described in Malinowska et al., 2012, J. Proteom. 75: 4062-4073). Statistical assessment of confidence of peptide identifications was based on target/decoy search strategy, resulting in q-value estimate for each peptide spectrum. Only peptides with q-value lower than 0.01 were included in further computations. Proteins identified as peptide subsets and single-peptide proteins were excluded from further analysis. Proteins matching the same group of peptides were joined into a single protein cluster. Mass re-calibration and filtering was carried out with the in-house software MScan (http://proteom.ibb.waw.pl/mscan/). In label-free (ABE) analysis, identified peptide ions were than localized on 2-D heatmaps generated from LC-MS/MS datasets and 2-D fit volumes for LC peaks were recorded as quantitative values. After protein inference, each protein was assigned an intensity – the sum of its peptide ion intensities (similar to Tyanova et al., 2016, Nature Protoc. 11:2301-2319). The lists of proteins identified in LC-MS/MS runs from individual mice fed RD (3 mice) or HPD (3 mice) for 4 or 12 weeks were merged into two respective lists. Only proteins represented by at least two unique peptides in at least one (HA+) sample were further considered. To identify S-palmitoylated proteins, the signal strength (MS protein intensity) in the HA+ sample was divided by that in the corresponding HA- sample (HA+/HA- ratio), separately for each liver. The protein was scored as S-palmitoylated when its HA+/HA- ratio was ≥ 1.5 in at least three samples out of the total six examined for each time point (4 and 12 weeks).  To determine how the S-palmitoylated proteins were affected by the HPD diet, the HPDs/RDs ratio was calculated for each S-palmitoylated protein by dividing the sum of the HA+/HA- ratios for this protein from 3 HPD mice by the sum of the HA+/HA- ratios from 3 RD mice. The obtained HPDs/RDs ratio was then normalized to the corresponding HPDsp/RDsp ratio reflecting the relative abundance of the protein species (both S-palmitoylated and non-palmitoylated molecules of the protein obtained from iTRAQ-based analysis) to give the HPDpalm/RDpalm ratio reflecting the effect of the HPD diet on the extent of S-palmitoylation of the protein (the fraction of its molecules carrying a palmitoyl group). The extent of S-palmitoylation of a given protein was considered up-regulated by the HPD diet if its HPDpalm/RDpalm ratio was ≥ 1.5 and down-regulated if this value was ≤ 0.67 Quantification and statistics for iTRAQ data was performed using the Diffprot software (Malinowska et al., 2012, J. Proteom. 75: 4062-4073 ) with LOWESS reporter intensity normalization. Peptide sets with more than 90% similarity were clustered. With this approach the HPDtp/RDtp ratios reflecting proportions of proteins in HPD vs. RD livers were calculated. The abundance of the subset of proteins which were S-palmitoylated was in further analyzes characterized by the HPDsp/RDsp ratio.

### Publication Abstract
Palmitic acid (C16:0) is the most abundant saturated fatty acid in animals serving as a substrate in synthesis and &#x3b2;-oxidation of other lipids, and in the modification of proteins called palmitoylation. The influence of dietary palmitic acid on protein <i>S</i>-palmitoylation remains largely unknown. In this study we performed high-throughput proteomic analyses of a membrane-enriched fraction of murine liver to examine the influence of a palm oil-rich diet (HPD) on <i>S</i>-palmitoylation of proteins. HPD feeding for 4 weeks led to an accumulation of C16:0 and C18:1 fatty acids in livers which disappeared after 12-week feeding, in contrast to an accumulation of C16:0 in peritoneal macrophages. Parallel proteomic studies revealed that HPD feeding induced a sequence of changes of the level and/or <i>S</i>-palmitoylation of diverse liver proteins involved in fatty acid, cholesterol and amino acid metabolism, hemostasis, and neutrophil degranulation. The HPD diet did not lead to liver damage, however, it caused progressing obesity, hypercholesterolemia and hyperglycemia. We conclude that the relatively mild negative impact of such diet on liver functioning can be attributed to a lower bioavailability of palm oil-derived C16:0 vs. that of C18:1 and the efficiency of mechanisms preventing liver injury, possibly including dynamic protein <i>S</i>-palmitoylation.

### Keywords
S-palmitoylation, Palm oil, High-fat diet, Calfacilitin/tlcd1, Neutrophil degranulation, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
IBB PAS
Mass Spectrometry Laboratory, Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Polish Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Agata Malinowska

### Lab Head
Dr Michal Dadlez
Mass Spectrometry Laboratory, Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Polish Academy of Sciences


