### Accession
PXD046086

### Title
The antimicrobial peptide Esc(1-21)-1c increases susceptibility of Pseudomonas aeruginosa to conventional antibiotics by decreasing the expression of the MexAB-OprM efflux pump

### Description
The increase in bacterial strains resistant to conventional antibiotics is an alarming problem for human health and could lead to pandemics in the future. Among bacterial pathogens responsible for a large variety of severe infections there is Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Therefore, there is an urgent need for new molecules with antimicrobial activity or that can act as adjuvants of antibiotics already in use. In this scenario, antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) hold great promise. Recently, we characterized a frogskin AMP derived from esculentin-1a, namely Esc(1-21)-1c, endowed with antipseudomonal activity without being cytotoxic to human cells. Here, we investigated the effect of combining this peptide with a panel of antibiotics from different classes and found that Esc(1-21)-1c can synergistically inhibit the growth of P. aeruginosa cells with three different antibiotics, including tetracycline. We therefore investigated the underlying mechanism implemented by the peptide using a differential proteomic approach. The data revealed a significant decrease in the production of three proteins belonging to the MexAB-OprM efflux pump upon treatment with sub-inhibitory concentration of Esc(1-21)-1c. Downregulation of these proteins was confirmed by transcriptional analysis and direct measurement of their relative levels in bacterial cells by tandem mass spectrometry analysis in multiple reaction monitoring scan mode. This would increase the intracellular drug content making bacteria more susceptible to the antibiotic. Overall, these results highlight the importance of characterizing new molecules able to synergize with conventional antibiotics, paving the way for the development of alternative therapeutic strategies based on AMP/antibiotic formulations to counteract the emergence of resistant bacterial strains and increase the use of "old" antibiotics in medical practice.

### Sample Protocol
Fifty µg of each sample were digested with trypsin onto S-trapTM micro spin column, according to the manufacturer(Protifi, Huntington, NY). The obtained peptide mixtures were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using a LTQ Orbitrap XL coupled to a nanoLC system (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). All peptide mixtures were fractionated onto a C18 capillary reversephase column (200 mm length, 75 μm ID, 5 μm biosphere), using a non-linear 5%–50% gradient for eluent B (0.2% formic acid in 95% acetonitrile) in A (0.2% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile in MilliQ water) over 260 min. MS/MS analyses were performed in Data-Dependent Acquisition (DDA) mode by fragmenting the 10 most intense ions in Collision-induced dissociation (CID) modality. All samples were run in duplicates.

### Data Protocol
The obtained data were analyzed with MaxQuant (v.1.5.2.8) using UniProt P. aeruginosa as database for Andromeda search (Cox et al., 2011). Proteins were identified by selecting minimum 2 peptides, at least 1 unique, and considering methionine oxidation and pyroglutamate formation at the N-terminal glutamine as variable modifications. The accuracy for the first search was set at 10 ppm, then lowered to 5 ppm in the main search; 0.01 False Discovery Rate (FDR) was used, with a reverse database as decoy; retention time alignment and second peptide search functions were allowed. Fold changes (FCs) were calculated according to Label Free Quantification (LFQ) values.

### Publication Abstract
<b>Introduction:</b> The increase in bacterial strains resistant to conventional antibiotics is an alarming problem for human health and could lead to pandemics in the future. Among bacterial pathogens responsible for a large variety of severe infections there is <i>Pseudomonas aeruginosa</i>. Therefore, there is an urgent need for new molecules with antimicrobial activity or that can act as adjuvants of antibiotics already in use. In this scenario, antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) hold great promise. Recently, we characterized a frog-skin AMP derived from esculentin-1a, namely Esc(1-21)-1c, endowed with antipseudomonal activity without being cytotoxic to human cells. <b>Methods:</b> The combinatorial effect of the peptide and antibiotics was investigated through the checkerboard assay, differential proteomic and transcriptional analysis. <b>Results:</b> Here, we found that Esc(1-21)-1c can synergistically inhibit the growth of <i>P. aeruginosa</i> cells with three different antibiotics, including tetracycline. We therefore investigated the underlying mechanism implemented by the peptide using a differential proteomic approach. The data revealed a significant decrease in the production of three proteins belonging to the MexAB-OprM efflux pump upon treatment with sub-inhibitory concentration of Esc(1-21)-1c. Down-regulation of these proteins was confirmed by transcriptional analysis and direct measurement of their relative levels in bacterial cells by tandem mass spectrometry analysis in multiple reaction monitoring scan mode. <b>Conclusion:</b> These evidences suggest that treatment with Esc(1-21)-1c in combination with antibiotics would increase the intracellular drug content making bacteria more susceptible to the antibiotic. Overall, these results highlight the importance of characterizing new molecules able to synergize with conventional antibiotics, paving the way for the development of alternative therapeutic strategies based on AMP/antibiotic formulations to counteract the emergence of resistant bacterial strains and increase the use of "old" antibiotics in medical practice.

### Keywords
Efflux pumps, Antibiotics, Proteomic, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Antimicrobial peptide, Tetracycline

### Affiliations
Federico Secondo ii
Department of Chemical Sciences, University of Naples “Federico II”, Naples, Italy.

### Submitter
angela di somma

### Lab Head
Dr Angela Duilio
Department of Chemical Sciences, University of Naples “Federico II”, Naples, Italy.


