### Accession
PXD010325

### Title
Pericentriolar satellite proteome

### Description
Label-free quantitative affinity purification experiments were performed to identify the protein composition of pericentriolar satellites in the wild-type and two acentrosomal (stil KO; cep152 KO) DT40 cell lines.

### Sample Protocol
Pericentriolar satellites were isolated from the wild-type and two acentrosomal (stil KO; cep152 KO) DT40 cell lines (endogenous PCM1 was tagged with GFP in all cell lines). Isolation was performed in two sequential steps: first by sucrose density gradient centrifugation, followed by affinity purification using anti-GFP antibodies and IgG isotype controls. A separate anti-GFP pull-down was performed with untagged DT40 cells to assess non-specific binding to the anti-GFP-coupled beads. Samples were in-gel digested and measured by an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry raw data files were processed using MaxQuant software (version 1.5.3.30). MS/MS mass spectra were searched using Andromeda search engine against a target-decoy database containing the forward and reverse protein sequences of UniProt G. gallus proteome release 2017_03 (29,733 entries), Avian leukosis virus – RSA (3 entries; retrieved on 27 July 2016 from NCBI), EGFP and the default list of 245 common contaminants. False discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% at both peptide and protein levels. Label-free quantification was performed using the MaxLFQ algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pcm1, Ap-ms, G. gallus, Lfq, Pericentriolar satellite, Dt40

### Affiliations
Cancer Research UK Cambridge Institute, University of Cambridge

### Submitter
Jia-Xuan Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Fanni Gergely
Cancer Research UK Cambridge Institute, University of Cambridge


