### Accession
PXD005892

### Title
Investigating Reporter Ion Signal Characteristics in Isobaric Mass Tag Proteome Quantification Experiments

### Description
In this study we sought to examine the characteristics of the reporter ion signal obtained using current generation OT-based MS hardware. We initially focus on re-analysis of a previous experiment where TMT was using in combination with OT-MS3 to study protein expression diversity between histotypes of ovarian carcinoma where the presence of a notch – a region with no reported values – was observed in the reporter ion signal distributions.

### Sample Protocol
Aliquots of this pooled digest were individually labeled with TMT 6-plex reagents in a 1:1:1:1:1:1 ratio (TMT126 – TMT131). The pool was then spiked with a mixture of 550 synthetic tryptic peptides labeled in a 3:3:3:1:1:1 ratio (TMT126 – TMT131). This mixture of synthetic peptides contained no sequences found in the Human proteome and would serve as a positive control to monitor instrument performance and quantification accuracy.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed using Proteome Discoverer and R.

### Publication Abstract
Multiplexed quantification with isobaric chemical tags (e.g., TMT, iTRAQ) provides a robust and efficient means to comparatively examine proteome dynamics between several biological states using a mass spectrometer (MS). The quantitative nature of isobaric tags necessitates strict validation of the observed ion signals in the chosen MS detector before differential patterns are extracted between biological states. We present an in-depth analysis of isobaric tag data acquired on current generation Orbitrap MS hardware to illustrate pitfalls in acquisition settings that can negatively impact results. We establish, for the first time, the presence of a notch, a region of no observed values, in the reporter ion distributions from isobaric-labeled peptide mixtures acquired on these instruments. We determine that this notch is present in published data across a wide range of instruments of the same or different type and is isolated to the Orbitrap mass analyzer. We demonstrate that the impact of the notch can be minimized using manipulations of Orbitrap scan parameters and on-column injection amounts. Lastly, using a mixture of synthetic standard peptides we investigated the impact on identification rates and quantification precision. Together, these data highlight an important phenomenon that negatively impacts peptide identification and quantification in the Orbitrap analyzer as well as outlining guidelines to follow to ensure minimization of MS-induced artifacts in isobaric tag experiments resulting from the notch.

### Keywords
Tmt, Ms3, Orbitrap fusion

### Affiliations
BC Cancer Agency
Head of Proteomics

### Submitter
Christopher Hughes

### Lab Head
Dr Gregg Morin
Head of Proteomics


