### Accession
PXD008073

### Title
Human follicular fluid proteomic and peptidomic composition quantitative studies by SWATH-MS methodology. Applicability of high pH RP-HPLC fractionation

### Description
Analysis of proteomic composition of human follicular fluid (hFF) has been proposed as a potential tool of oocyte quality evaluation. In order to develop an efficient method to investigate the hFF proteome and peptidome components, we applied a prefractionation scheme of hFF material  consisting of ultrafiltration, optional immunodepletion, and high pH RP-HPLC separation. Resulting from ultrafiltration Low Molecular-Weight Fraction peptides (LMWF, <10 kDa) and High Molecular-Weight Fraction proteins (HMWF, >10 kDa) were processed, measured, and analyzed separately. We identified 302 proteins in HMWF and 161 proteins in LMWF in all qualitative experiments. Combining data from single fractionation experiments we obtained and compared 18 spectral libraries (10 for HMWF, 8 for LMWF). We conducted quantitative SWATH-MS measurements of pool hFF samples for 108 HMWF proteins and 250 LMWF peptides. HMWF proteomic libraries were of similar quality with a few exceptions, even when comparing most basic and complex libraries. All LMWF peptidomic libraries turned out to be of poor quantification quality, however they enabled measurement of higher numbers of peptides with increasing input of experiment data, in contrast to proteomic libraries.

### Sample Protocol
Each 400µl of a pool hFF sample was mixed with 100µl of ACN, and subjected to ultrafiltration on a 10kDa Amicon membrane to divide the material into filtrates containing peptides (LMWF), and retentates containing proteins (HMWF). Five samples of LMWF resulting from separate ultrafiltrations of the pool sample of hFF were individually evaporated to dryness in SpeedVac. Subsequently, LMWF samples were dissolved in 50µl of 0.5% TFA in water, filtrated through 0.22µm cellulose acetate membrane, and desalted on C18 SpinTips. Resulting eluates were evaporated and reconstituted in 30 µl of 50% ACN 0.1% FA in water and subjected to LC-MS/MS measurements. Obtained HMWF was diluted by 50mM NH4HCO3 to concentration of 1mg/ml. Five samples of diluted HMWF containing 18µg of protein were subjected to proteolytic digestion. Samples were incubated with 10mM of DTT in 56°C for 30min. After cooling off, samples were incubated with 20mM of IAA in darkness at room temperature for 30min. Trypsin in 1:50 ratio of enzyme to substrate was added to the samples, and the digestion reaction was carried out in 37°C for 19h. Samples were evaporated, reconstituted in 50µl of 0.5% TFA in water, desalted, and prepared for the LC-MS/MS measurements. For additional spectral libraries construction multiple LMWF samples resulting from ultrafiltration were combined before HPLC separation to increase the amount of proteomic material resulting in samples of 0.8, 1.2, 1.6, 2.4ml of ultrafiltrated hFF. Prior to fractionation, samples were reconstituted in HPLC separation buffer A. Five samples of 100µg of diluted HMWF were subjected tryptic digestion as it was described previously. Samples were reconstituted in a respective HPLC separation buffer A prior to HPLC fractionation. A part of the pool material was subjected to fractionation prior to ultrafiltration to obtain immunodepleted material for HMWF measurements. Those samples were depleted of 14 most abundant human serum proteins using a MARS-14 kit. Both, immunodepleted material and high abundant proteins eluted from the resin were subjected to trypsin digestion and desalted. Three samples of 100µg of immunodepleted protein material were not desalted after digestion and instead reconstituted in a respective HPLC separation buffer A and further fractionated by HPLC. Three LMWF samples resulting from ultrafiltration of 800µl of hFF were evaporated, desalted and prepared for IDA experiments. We further divided the material in a series of high pH RP-HPLC fractionation experiments. All experiments were carried out on analytical Nexera XR HPLC System with the PDA detector. The column temperature was kept at 40°C and the flow rate was 1 ml/min during each separation. The combination of column and buffer system used was either Jupiter Proteo 90Å column (4µm, 250 x 2.6mm) and buffers A: 100mM NH4HCO3 pH 8, and B: 100% ACN or Zorbax Extend-C18 column (4.6 × 150mm, 5μm) and buffers A: 0.1% NH4OH in water, pH 10, and B: 0.1% NH4OH in ACN, pH 10. Chromatographic gradients varied for each fractionated sample. In each 30 min of run 16 fractions were manually collected; 15 +1 additional fraction collected immediately after the end of the separation. All collected fractions from all separations were evaporated and reconstituted in 12 µl of 50% ACN 0.1% FA in water for the LC-MS/MS measurements. Chromatographic separation was performed on the Ekspert MicroLC 200 Plus System using the ChromXP C18CL column (3µm, 120Å, 150 x 0.3mm). Samples were loaded onto the column using the CTC Pal Autosampler with each injection of 5µl of sample. Buffers A and B constituted of 0.1% FA in water and 0.1% FA in ACN, respectively. The chromatographic gradient was 10-90% B in 30min for each run. Eluate from the column was analyzed in a positive ion mode on a TripleTOF 5600+ mass spectrometer with DuoSpray Ion Source. The system was controlled by the Analyst TF 1.7.1 software. The TOF MS survey scan was performed in the m/z range of 100-2000 with the accumulation time of 40ms, which resulted in a duty cycle of 1.11s. Each analysis was carried out with rolling collision energy, and the precursor ions were excluded from reselection for 5 s after two occurrences. SWATH-MS analyses were performed for the 5 repetitions of non-fractionated pool sample filtrates (LMWF) and digested retentates (HMWF). Experiments were performed in a looped product ion mode. A set of 25 transmission windows (25 Da wide) was constructed and covered the precursor mass range of 400-1000m/z. The collision energy for each window was calculated for a +2 to +5 charged ions centered upon the window with a spread of 2. The SWATH-MS1 survey scan was acquired in high sensitivity mode in the range of 100-2000Da in the beginning of each cycle with the accumulation time of 50 ms, and it was followed by 40ms accumulation time high sensitivity product ion scans, which resulted in the total cycle time of 1.11s.

### Data Protocol
Protein database searches were conducted in ProteinPilot 4.5 Software (SCIEX) using the Paragon algorithm against the SwissProt Homo sapiens database (ver. 31.07.2017, 20 214 entries) with an automated false discovery rate. The search parameters for HMWF included: instrument TripleTOF 5600, alkylation of cysteines by iodoacetamide, trypsin enzyme digestion, ID focus on biological modifications, search effort “thorough ID”, and detected protein threshold [Conf] > 10%. The LMWF samples were processed accordingly with following changes in parameters: no modification of cysteines and no enzyme specified in digestion. Protein identifications in HMWF were considered to be genuine only at protein FDR < 0.01 to reduce the possibility of false discovery as much as possible, considering the fact that hFF proteome has already been studied extensively. We have set more relaxed conditions for peptide identifications in the less studied LMWF: (1) peptide confidence ≥ 99%, and (2) peptide FDR < 0.5, to obtain more comprehensive results that could be narrowed in the future research. Database searches of HMWF were performed for listed combinations: (1) five non-fractionated samples, (2) desalted immunodepleted and most abundant proteins fractions, (3) database search number 1, and database search number 2, (4) combined searches of 16 fractions resulted from a single RP-HPLC separation run for each individual fractionation (eight in total), (5) database search number 3 with database searches number 4 (eight in total), and (6) all conducted HMWF measurements. Database searches for LMWF were carried out in a similar manner, excluding samples resulting from, not performed in this fraction, immunodepletion and instead utilizing additional concentrated LMWF samples resulting in 8 final spectral libraries. SWATH MS measurements were processed with libraries resulting from database searches number 1, 5, and 6, as it was described before. Each resulting ProteinPilot .group file was loaded into MS/MS All with SWATH Acquisition MicroApp 2.01 in PeakView 2.2 to automatically create a spectral library with following parameters: maximum number of proteins equal to number of proteins at the FDR threshold set for a given fraction, modified peptides allowed, and shared peptides excluded. Each spectral library was processed with SWATH measurements of the pool hFF sample (three technical and five biological repetitions resulting in 15 runs). During data processing the maximum number of peptides per protein was set to 6. In HMWF only proteins with 2 valid peptides were quantified, while for LMWF proteins one peptide was sufficient for quantification as we focused on specific peptides. The number of transitions for each peptide was 6, and any peptide with less measurable transitions was excluded from the analysis. Starting parameters for peptides were [Conf] ≥ 99 and FDR < 1. Extracted ion chromatogram (XIC) width was set to 75 ppm, and the offset XIC extraction window was set to 15 min. In HMWF experiments we performed retention time calibration based on 3-6 peptides equally distributed according to their elution time (with the exception of libraries 6 and 10 due to differences in elution times from different experiments). After calibration the XIC extraction window was narrowed to 5-12 minutes depending on the library. In LMWF we did not perform the retention time calibration and instead used a wider extraction window of 10 minutes from the beginning. In each library we manually selected peptides and transitions used for quantification according to their quality. Afterwards, we processed the data automatically and removed any remaining peptides that failed the evaluation in this step.

### Publication Abstract
Analysis of proteomic composition of human follicular fluid (hFF) has been previously proposed as a potential tool of oocyte quality evaluation. In order to develop an efficient method to investigate the hFF proteome and peptidome components, we applied and tested a few prefractionation schemes of hFF material consisting of ultrafiltration, optional immunodepletion, and high pH RP-HPLC separation by building spectral libraries and comparing their quantification capabilities of unfractionated samples. Low Molecular-Weight Fraction peptides (LMWF, &lt;10&#x202f;kDa) and High Molecular-Weight Fraction proteins (HMWF, &gt;10&#x202f;kDa) resulting from ultrafiltration were analyzed separately. We identified 302 proteins in HMWF and 161 proteins in LMWF in all qualitative experiments. All LMWF peptidomic libraries turned out to be of poor quantification quality, however they enabled measurement of higher numbers of peptides with increasing input of experiment data, in contrast to HMWF proteomic libraries. We were able to quantify a total of 108 HMWF proteins and 250 LMWF peptides (from 84 proteins) in all experiments. Employment of high RP-HPLC fractionation allowed for identification of a much broader set of proteins, however did not significantly improve the quantification capabilities of the applied method. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD008073. SIGNIFICANCE: In the search of biomarkers for assessment of oocyte quality in assisted reproductive technology, many studies are devoted to analysis of follicular fluid composition. Candidates for such biomarkers can be located in both the proteome and the recently investigated peptidome of hFF. Reliable qualitative and especially quantitative analysis of complex mixtures such as hFF, requires development of a fast and preferably inexpensive analytical procedure. The powerful SWATH-MS technique is well suited for quantitative label-free analysis of complex protein and peptide mixtures. However, for efficient usage it needs well designed and constructed MS-spectral libraries as well as a proper protocol for sample preparation. We investigated the influence of the size and quality of MS-spectral libraries (different spectral libraries are constructed using various sample prefractionation protocols) on SWATH experiments on hFF proteome and peptidome. In the case of peptidome investigation, increasing the size of spectral libraries led to quantification of more peptides in a single experiment. For the proteome, increasing the size of spectral libraries improved quantification only to a limited extend, and further extension of spectral libraries even worsened results. Nevertheless, using the best selected prefractionation schemes and spectral libraries we were able to quantify as many as 79 proteins of hFF proteome and 106 peptides (from 53 proteins) of hFF peptidome in single experiments. The spectral libraries and prefractionation protocols we developed allow for a large scale fast scan of hundreds of clinical hFF samples in the search for biomarkers for evaluation of oocyte quality.

### Keywords
Human, Fractionation, Follicular fluid, Swath-ms

### Affiliations
Justus Liebig University Giessen
Laboratory of Biopolymer Structure, Intercollegiate Faculty of Biotechnology UG-MUG, University of Gdansk, Gdansk, Poland

### Submitter
Aleksandra Bogucka

### Lab Head
Dr Stanislaw Oldziej
Laboratory of Biopolymer Structure, Intercollegiate Faculty of Biotechnology UG-MUG, University of Gdansk, Gdansk, Poland


