### Accession
PXD021194

### Title
Novel skin photoageing biomarkers of epidermis and dermis revealed by traditional relative quantification in combination with a novel peptide locational fingerprinting MPLF.

### Description
Human skin undergoes profound structural remodelling following chronic exposure to ultraviolet radiation (UVR) – photoageing - that is normally studied by comparing photoexposed and photoprotected skin sites. Whilst it is well established that the abundance and distribution of major dermal extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins (principally collagen I and elastin) are compromised in skin, the influence of UVR exposure on other skin protein constituents, including epidermal proteins, is poorly understood. We used label-free LC-MS/MS proteomics to characterise the proteomic profiles of intrinsically aged buttock and photoaged forearm epidermis and dermis. Besides traditional shotgun proteomics we have also developed and used novel proteomics analysis approach to reveal locational changes in peptide yields from proteins named Manchester Peptide Locational Fingerprinting (MPLF) which is based on spectral counting. MPLF is a new proteomic analysis tool that can identify structural modification-associated differences within proteins from label-free liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) datasets generated from biological samples. We have identified a total of 174 dermal proteins and 146 epidermal proteins with MPLF while relative quantification revealed a total of 635 dermal proteins and 926 epidermal proteins significantly different between photoaged forearm and intrinsically-aged buttock according to peak area intensity.

### Sample Protocol
Healthy, photoaged volunteers (Fitzpatrick skin phototype I-III) were recruited for this study (n=7; 62-79 years; 3 males) and provided 3 mm diameter, full thickness skin biopsies from both photoprotected buttock and photoexposed forearm sites. On collection, samples were snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C until used in experiments. Ethical approval was granted by the University of Manchester Research Ethics committee. Studies were conducted according to the Declaration of Helsinki, with participants providing written informed consent.   Skin samples were defrosted at room temperature and placed in a small Petri dish containing 20 mM Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) for two hours at 37°C to which induced dermal-epidermal separation. Biopsies were washed in PBS and the epidermis removed as previously described (Scaletta and MacCallum, 1972; Mackenzie and Squier, 1975). Subsequently, the dermis was minced to increase surface area of the tissue prior to submerging in 8 M urea buffer (8 M urea + 25mM ammonium bicarbonate (AB) + 25 mM dithiothreitol (DTT)). Six 1.6 mm steel balls were added to each tube containing the ECM-rich dermal samples and homogenised using a bullet blender (Next Advance Inc., New York, USA) at maximum speed (speed setting 10) for three minutes. Where homogenisation was incomplete, the blending step was repeated. Following homogenisation, dermal samples were centrifuged at 10000 rpm for 5 minutes. Supernatant aliquots (25 µl) were taken from each sample and diluted in 175 µl of AB + 1.3 mM calcium chloride (CaCl2) for MS analysis. The epidermis was placed in ultrasonicator tubes containing 130 µl of 8 M urea buffer and homogenised in an ultrasonicator (S220X, Covaris Ltd, Woodingdean, Brighton, UK) with 175 W peak power for 480 seconds until no tissue was visible. Samples were transferred to Eppendorf® tubes and centrifuged at 10000 rpm (10621 rcf) for five minutes.  Excess supernatants (dermal and/or epidermal) were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored in -80°C until required.  Following homogenisation, samples were digested with trypsin SMART Digest™ Beads (Lanshoeft et al., 2016) via agitation with an Eppendorf® ThermoMixer® C (Sigma, USA) at 1400 rpm, overnight at 37°C. The next day, samples were reduced via the addition of 4 μL of 500 mM dithiothretol (DTT; Sigma) in AB, to each SMART digest kit tube and shaken in thermocycler for ten minutes at 1400 rpm, 60°C. Samples were then alkylated via the addition of 12 μL of 500 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma) in AB for 30 min, while agitated at 1400 rpm in a thermocycler at room temperature. SMART Digest Beads were then filtered out and peptide mixture transferred to 1.5 ml LoBind Eppendorf® tubes.  This was then acidified with 5 µl of 10 % trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) in deionized water.   Next, biphasic extraction was performed. Ethyl acetate (EA; 200 µl) was added to each tube and vortexed. Next, this was centrifuged for 5 minutes at 10000 rpm (10621 rcf) and the upper layer containing organic molecules and surfactants discarded. This was performed twice more and resulting solution vacuum dried for two hours.   Once dry, 200 μl of injection solution (5% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA) was added to the tube prior to peptide desalting. This involved the use of Oligo R3 beads. Beads were wetted by mixing in a ratio of 1:1 elute solution (50% Acetonitrile (ACN) in water; 50 μl). Samples were aliquoted and washed (using 0.1% TFA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Finally, peptides were eluted from beads via addition of50 μl of elute solutionand transferred to MS vials prior to vacuum drying. Once dried, samples were suspended in 20 µl of MS injection solution and the peptide concentration measured by infra-red spectroscopy (Direct Detect Infrared Spectrometer; Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany).   Digested samples were analysed by LC-MS/MS using an UltiMate® 3000 Rapid Separation Liquid Chromatography system (RSLC; Dionex Corporation, Sunnyvale, CA) coupled to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). Peptide mixtures were separated using a multistep gradient from 95% A (0.1% formic acid (FA) in water) and 5% B (0.1% FA in ACN) to 7% B at 1 min, 18% B at 58 min, 27% B in 72 minutes and 60% B at 74 minutes at 300 nL min-1, using a 75 mm x 250 μm i.d. 1.7 µM CSH C18, analytical column (Waters, Hertfordshird, UK). Peptides were selected for fragmentation automatically by data dependant analysis.

### Data Protocol
All the MS/MS samples were processed using The Mascot Daemon application v 2.5.1 (Matrix Science; London, UK) searching SwissProt_2018_01 database and selecting Homo Sapiens as species with total of 161629 entries. Trypsin was assumed as a digestion enzyme; 0.020 Da fragment ion mass tolerance was used; 10.0 ppm parent ion tolerance; carbamidomethyl of cystine was specified as a fixed modification; oxidation of methionine was specified as a variable modification; instrument used was ESI-TRAP. Scaffold 4.11.0 (Proteome Software Inc. Portland, OR) was used to validate the peptide assignments and protein identifications. Input data was generated by exporting Mascot search results as DAT files for every run performed.  Peptide identifications with more than 90% probability by Peptide Prophet algorithm with Scaffold delta-mass correction were accepted for protein identifications. Proteins that had at least 2 peptides and the protein probabilities as detected by Peptide Prophet Algorithm with Scaffold delta mass correction were accepted. Threshold was increased to perform subsequent analysis using MPLF; for this peptide identifications with more than 95% probability by Peptide Prophet algorithm with Scaffold delta-mass correction were accepted giving a low peptide false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.5% for epidermis samples and 0.6% for dermis samples; only unique and assigned peptides were used for MPLF analysis. Subsequent analysis was performed using our developed algorithm reported in our manuscript.

### Publication Abstract
Although dysfunctional protein homeostasis (proteostasis) is a key factor in many age-related diseases, the untargeted identification of structurally modified proteins remains challenging. Peptide location fingerprinting is a proteomic analysis technique capable of identifying structural modification-associated differences in mass spectrometry (MS) data sets of complex biological samples. A new webtool (Manchester Peptide Location Fingerprinter), applied to photoaged and intrinsically aged skin proteomes, can relatively quantify peptides and map statistically significant differences to regions within protein structures. New photoageing biomarker candidates were identified in multiple pathways including extracellular matrix organisation (collagens and proteoglycans), protein synthesis and folding (ribosomal proteins and TRiC complex subunits), cornification (keratins) and hemidesmosome assembly (plectin and integrin &#x3b1;6&#x3b2;4). Crucially, peptide location fingerprinting uniquely identified 120 protein biomarker candidates in the dermis and 71 in the epidermis which were modified as a consequence of photoageing but did not differ significantly in relative abundance (measured by MS1 ion intensity). By applying peptide location fingerprinting to published MS data sets, (identifying biomarker candidates including collagen V and versican in ageing tendon) we demonstrate the potential of the MPLF webtool for biomarker discovery.

### Keywords
#skin #epidermis #dermis #biomarkers

### Affiliations
University of Manchester
Affiliation: Division of Cell Matrix Biology & Regenerative Medicine, The University of Manchester  [Data also submitted and owned by Dr Matiss Ozols (matiss.ozols@manchester.ac.uk)]

### Submitter
Alexander Eckersley

### Lab Head
Dr Michael J Sherratt
Affiliation: Division of Cell Matrix Biology & Regenerative Medicine, The University of Manchester  [Data also submitted and owned by Dr Matiss Ozols (matiss.ozols@manchester.ac.uk)]


