### Accession
PXD015649

### Title
Towards a better understanding the testicular proteome of domestic pig

### Description
For gaining additional insights into the composition of the testicular proteome of the domestic pig (Sus scrofa domestica), we conducted 2DE-MS. Two-dimensional SDS PAGE was run on testicular lysates of three boars, with three gels per boar. Upon matching across gels, we arbitrarily selected protein spots for mass spectrometry analysis. Excised slices were vacuum dried and soaked with digestion buffer containing trypsin (0.01 μg/μl), followed by overnight incubation at 37°C in the same buffer without trypsin. Subsequently, peptides were extracted in solvents of increasing acetonitrile content, by sonication. Upon vacuum-centrifugation, peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid (FA). Following this, peptides were fractionated by reversed phase liquid chromatography (C18; buffer A: 0.1% FA dissolved in HPLC-H2O; buffer B: 0.1% FA, dissolved in CAN; flow-rate: 0.4 µL/min; gradient: 2-30% in 30 minutes). Eluted peptides were injected via an electrospray ionization interface into a Q-TOF mass spectrometer (one boar, Q TOF Ultima, Micromass/Waters, Manchester, UK) and an ion-trap mass spectrometer (two other boars, XCT ion-trap, Agilent Technologies, Waldbronn, Germany). We used ProteomeDiscoverer 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, USA) for peptide and protein identification. Using Sequest HT, we searched peak lists (*.mgf) against the Sus scrofa reference proteome database (UniProt Proteome ID: UP000008227, 49,793 proteins).

### Sample Protocol
Tissue pieces were cut from the ultra-frozen testicles of three boars. Thawing at 4◦Cwas followed by solubilization of the samples at room temperature (RT) in lysis buffer containing 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4% CHAPS, 1.5% DTT(w/v), 1% ampholytes (pH 3−10; Bio-Rad), and 10 μL protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich). 250–400 μg of total protein was placed on immobilized pH gradient strips (7 cm IPG ReadyStrip, pH 5–8; Bio-Rad), for passive rehydration (2 h at RT). Subsequently, strips were covered with mineral oil for active rehydration for 14 h at 50 V. One-dimensional separation by isoelectric focussing (IEF) was conducted at 20◦C in a Protean IEF cell (Bio-Rad): 2 h at 200 V, 2 h at 500 V, and 5 or 6 h at 4000 V (increments with rapid ramp).We equilibrated IPG strips for 25 min in a buffer containing 6 M urea, 0.375 M Tris (pH 8.8), 30% glycerol, 2% SDS, and 2% DTT. Following this, the strips were exposed for 25 min to the same buffer supplemented with 2.5% iodoacetamide instead of DTT, and 20 μL of 1% bromophenol blue. Equilibrated strips were placed on 10% polyacrylamide gels, followed by electrophoresis at 120 or 140 V. Three gels (technical replicates) for each of the three boars (biological replicates)were run.  Arbitrarily selected 2-DE spots were excised using biopsy punches. Gel slices were vacuum dried, soaked with digestion buffer supplemented with trypsin (0.01 μg/μL), and incubated overnight at 37◦C. Tryptic peptides were analyzed by LC-MS using a QTOF (one boar, Q-TOF Ultima, Micromass/Waters, Manchester, UK) and an ion-trap mass spectrometer (two other boars, XCT ion-trap, Agilent Technologies, Waldbronn, Germany).

### Data Protocol
Peptide and proteins were identifed using ProteomeDiscoverer 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, USA). Peak lists (*.mgf) were searched with Sequest HT against the S. scrofa reference proteome database (UniProt Proteome ID: UP000008227, 49 793 proteins). The searches were performed with precursor mass tolerance of 30 ppm (Q-TOF) or 2 Da (IT) and fragment mass tolerance of 0.1 Da (Q-TOF) or 0.5 Da (IT). For identification, the following variable modifications were considered: oxidation of methionine, deamidation of glutamine and asparagine, phosphorylation of threonine, serine and tyrosine, acetylation of lysine, protein N-terminal acetylation, protein Nterminal methionine loss, protein N-terminal methionine loss plus acetylation. The Percolator function implemented in Sequest was used to calculate posterior error probabilities and q-values for the identified peptide-spectrum matches. Threshold for correct peptide identification was set to a q-value of 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Multiple spotting due to protein speciation might increase a protein's chance of being captured in a random selection of 2-DE spots. We tested this expectation in new (PXD015649) and previously published 2-DE/MS data of porcine and human tissues. For comparison, we included bottom-up proteomics studies (BU-LC/MS) of corresponding biological materials. Analyses of altogether ten datasets proposed that amino acid modification fosters multispotting in 2-DE. Thus, the number of 2-DE spots containing a particular protein more tightly associated with a peptide diversity measure accounting for amino acid modification than with an alternative one disregarding it. Furthermore, every 11th amino acid was a post-translational modification candidate site in 2-DE/MS proteins, whereas in BU-LC/MS proteins this was merely the case in every 21st amino acid. Alternative splicing might contribute to multispotting, since genes encoding 2-DE/MS proteins were found to have on average about 0.3 more transcript variants than their counterparts from BU-LC/MS studies. Correspondingly, resolution completeness as estimated from the representation of transcript variant-rich genes was higher in 2-DE/MS than BU-LC/MS datasets. These findings suggest that the ability to resolve proteomes down to protein species can lead to enrichment of multispotting proteins in 2-DE/MS. Low sensitivity of stains and MS instruments appears to enhance this effect.

### Keywords
2de-ms, Proteomics, Sus srofa

### Affiliations
Institute of Organismic and Molecular Evolution, Anthropology, Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz, Germany
University of Innsbruck

### Submitter
Marcel Kwiatkowski

### Lab Head
Dr Holger Herlyn,
Institute of Organismic and Molecular Evolution, Anthropology, Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz, Germany


