### Accession
PXD041242

### Title
Convergence of distinct RNA-silencing pathways on GW182/Tnrc6

### Description
The RNA-binding protein Trim71/Lin41 is a phylogenetically conserved developmental regulator that functions in mammalian stem cell reprogramming, brain development and cancer. Trim71 recognizes target mRNAs through hairpin motifs and silences them through molecular mechanisms that await identification. Deposited data are mass spectrometry data from immunoprecipitation experiments with endogenously tagged Tnrc6a. Experiments are carried out in mouse embryonic stem cells (mESCs) in the presence and absence of RNase A.

### Sample Protocol
Mass spectrometry. The generated peptides were acidified with 0.8% TFA (final) and analyzed by LC–MS/MS on an Vanquish Neo UHPLC system (Thermo Scientific) with a two-column set-up. The samples were loaded on a C18 (0.3x5mm) trap and backward flush was used for the analysis. The peptides were separated on a 75umx15 cm EasyC18 column mounted on an EASY-Spray™ source (Thermo Scientific) connected to an Orbitrap Eclipse (Thermo Scientific) using a flow rate of 200 nl/min, peptides were separated at 45°C with a linear gradient of 2%–6% buffer B in buffer A in 1 min followed by a linear increase from 6 to 20% in 42 min, 20%–35% in 22 min, 35%–45% in 2.5 min, 45%-100% in 1min and the column was finally washed for 11.5 min at 100% buffer B. Buffer A: 0.1% formic acid in water; buffer B: 0.1% formic acid, 80% acetonitrile in water. The data were acquired using 120,000 resolution for the peptide measurements in the Orbitrap and a top T (3 s) method with HCD fragmentation for each precursor and fragment measurement in the ion trap according the recommendation of the manufacturer (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data analysis Protein identification and relative quantification of the proteins was performed with MaxQuant v.1.5.3.8 using Andromeda as search engine (Cox et al., 2011), and label-free quantification (LFQ) (Cox et al., 2014; Hubner et al., 2010). The mouse subset of the UniProt v.2019_04 combined with the contaminant database from MaxQuant was searched and the protein and peptide FDR were set to 0.01. Cox J, Neuhauser N, Michalski A, Scheltema RA, Olsen JV, Mann M. Andromeda: a peptide search engine integrated into the MaxQuant environment. J Proteome Res. 2011 Apr 1;10(4):1794-805. doi: 10.1021/pr101065j. Epub 2011 Feb 22. Cox J, Hein MY, Luber CA, Paron I, Nagaraj N, Mann M. Accurate proteome-wide label-free quantification by delayed normalization and maximal peptide ratio extraction, termed MaxLFQ. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2014 Sep;13(9):2513-26. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M113.031591. Epub 2014 Jun 17. Hubner NC, Bird AW, Cox J, Splettstoesser B, Bandilla P, Poser I, Hyman A, Mann M. Quantitative proteomics combined with BAC TransgeneOmics reveals in vivo protein interactions.J Cell Biol. 2010 May 17;189(4):739-54. doi: 10.1083/jcb.200911091.

### Publication Abstract
The RNA-binding protein TRIM71/LIN-41 is a phylogenetically conserved developmental regulator that functions in mammalian stem cell reprogramming, brain development, and cancer. TRIM71 recognizes target mRNAs through hairpin motifs and silences them through molecular mechanisms that await identification. Here, we uncover that TRIM71 represses its targets through RNA-supported interaction with TNRC6/GW182, a core component of the miRNA-induced silencing complex (miRISC). We demonstrate that AGO2, TRIM71, and UPF1 each recruit TNRC6 to specific sets of transcripts to silence them. As cellular TNRC6 levels are limiting, competition occurs among the silencing pathways, such that the loss of AGO proteins or of AGO binding to TNRC6 enhances the activities of the other pathways. We conclude that a miRNA-like silencing activity is shared among different mRNA silencing pathways and that the use of TNRC6 as a central hub provides a means to integrate their activities.

### Keywords
Trim71 ago2 tnrc6a rna silencing

### Affiliations
Multicellular Systems  Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research
Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research

### Submitter
Daniel Hess

### Lab Head
Dr Helge Grosshans
Multicellular Systems  Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research


