### Accession
PXD006327

### Title
B-catenin downregulates Dicer to promote ovarian cancer metastasis

### Description
Ovarian cancer is a nearly uniform lethal disease and its highly aggressive metastatic phenotype portends a poor prognosis. Lack of a well-controlled, relevant experimental model has been a major obstacle to identifying key molecules causing metastasis. Here we describe the creation of a new isogenic model of spontaneous human ovarian cancer metastasis exhibiting opposite phenotypes - highly metastatic (HM) and non-metastatic (NM) - both in vitro and in vivo. HM was unique in its ability to metastasize consistently to the peritoneum, mimicking the major dissemination route of human ovarian cancer. In contrast, NM failed to form detectable metastases although it was equally tumorigenic. Using comparative label-free quantitative LC-MS/MS, we identified b-catenin which we demonstrated for the first time a direct role in the pathogenesis of ovarian cancer metastasis. Our studies also revealed a previously unrecognized role of b-catenin in the downregulation of multiple microRNAs (miRNAs) through attenuating miRNA biogenesis by targeting Dicer, a key component of the microRNA processing machinery. One such downregulated miRNAs was miR-29s involved in epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition and subsequent stem cell traits. Silencing b-catenin or overexpressing Dicer or miR-29 mimics in HM significantly reduced the ability of these cells to migrate. B-catenin knockdown cells also failed to metastasize in an orthotopic model of ovarian cancer. Meta-analysis revealed an increase in CTNNB1 and a decrease in DICER1 expression levels in the high-risk group. These results uncover b-catenin as a critical player in promoting ovarian cancer aggressiveness and a new mechanism linking between b-catenin and miRNA downregulation underlying this process.

### Sample Protocol
LC-MS/MS experiments were performed on a linear ion trap Oribtrap Velos mass spectrometer (LTQ Orbitrap Velos, Thermo-Scientific) connected to a high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) consisted of an autosampler (Finnigan, Thermo-Scientific). The analytical column was a 10 cm fused silica capillary with emitter (75 μm I.D., 375 μm O.D.; PicoTipTM emitter, New Objective Inc., MA) packed in-house with a solvent - slurry (30% isopropanol, 70% acetonitrile) of reverse-phased, fully end-capped YMC*Gel ODS-A 5 μm resin (YMC Co. Ltd., Japan), using a pressurized “packing bomb” (Next Advance, USA) operated at 60 bar. Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in miniQ water (v/v); mobile phase B consisted of 0.1% formic acid in HPLC graded acetonitrile (v/v). 3 μg of desalted peptide mixture was loaded onto column by autosampler and rinsed for 8 minutes with 2% buffer B at a flow rate of ~1000 nL/min. Followed by a 100 min gradient from 2 to 30% buffer B at a flow rate of ~250 nL/min. MS analysis was performed using unattended data-dependent acquisition mode switching between a high resolution survey scan with Oribtrap (resolution=60,000, m/z range 300 to 1,800) and collision-induced dissociation (CID) of the twenty most abundant ions of peptides eluting at a given time with minimum ion intensity threshold of 3000 counts. Dynamic exclusion was enabled. Exclusion list size was set to 500 and duration was 90 s. Singly-charged ions and ions with unassigned charge states were excluded. Selected ions for CID were isolated with isolation width of 2.0 m/z, activated with collision energy of 35 (arb. units) for 10 ms.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified by searching against the IPI Human database (version 3.86) using the search engine Mascot (Matrix Science). Searches were performed with trypsin specificity (up to two missed cleavages), with oxidation of methionine as the dynamic modification and iodoacetamide derivative of cysteine as the static modification. The mass tolerance for peptide identification was set to 10 ppm and 0.5 Da for fragment ions. Minimum of two peptides per protein was needed for protein identification. The final peptide false discovery rate (FDR) was < 1%, determined by a decoy search strategy. The search results were imported into Quanty (home-written program provided by Prof. Roman Zubarev from Karolinska Institutet, Sweden) and peptides were label-free quantified using the area under chromatographic peak from extracted ion chromatograms (XICs) and protein abundances were calculated by the summation of corresponding abundances of peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Ovarian cancer is a nearly uniform lethal disease and its highly aggressive metastatic phenotype portends a poor prognosis. Lack of a well-controlled, relevant experimental model has been a major obstacle to identifying key molecules causing metastasis. Here we describe the creation of a new isogenic model of spontaneous human ovarian cancer metastasis exhibiting opposite phenotypes-highly metastatic (HM) and non-metastatic (NM)-both in vitro and in vivo. HM was unique in its ability to metastasize consistently to the peritoneum, mimicking the major dissemination route of human ovarian cancer. In contrast, NM failed to form detectable metastases, although it was equally tumorigenic. Using comparative label-free quantitative liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS), we identified &#x3b2;-catenin, which we demonstrated for the first time as having a direct role in the pathogenesis of ovarian cancer metastasis. Our studies also revealed a previously unrecognized role of &#x3b2;-catenin in the downregulation of multiple microRNAs (miRNAs) through attenuating miRNA biogenesis by targeting Dicer, a key component of the miRNA-processing machinery. One such downregulated miRNAs was miR-29s involved in epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition and subsequent stem cell traits. Silencing &#x3b2;-catenin or overexpressing Dicer or miR-29 mimics in HM significantly reduced the ability of these cells to migrate. &#x3b2;-catenin-knockdown cells also failed to metastasize in an orthotopic model of ovarian cancer. Meta-analysis revealed an increase in CTNNB1 and a decrease in DICER1 expression levels in the high-risk group. These results uncover &#x3b2;-catenin as a critical factor in promoting ovarian cancer aggressiveness and a new mechanism linking between &#x3b2;-catenin and miRNA downregulation underlying this process.

### Keywords
-catenin, Microrna, Dicer, Metastasis, Ovarian cancer

### Affiliations
The University of Hong Kong
Department of Chemistry, Chemical Biology Centre and State Key Laboratory of Synthetic Chemistry, The University of Hong Kong

### Submitter
Yi Man Eva Fung

### Lab Head
Dr Chi-Ming Che
Department of Chemistry, Chemical Biology Centre and State Key Laboratory of Synthetic Chemistry, The University of Hong Kong


