### Accession
PXD014877

### Title
The Proteome Landscape of the Kingdoms of Life

### Description
Proteins preform the vast majority of functions in all biological domains but their large-scale investigation has lagged behind for technological reasons. Since the first essentially complete eukaryotic proteome was reported1, advances in mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics2 have enabled increasingly comprehensive identification and quantification of the human proteome3456. However, there are few comparisons across species, especially compared to genomics initiatives7. Here, we employ an advanced proteomics workflow, in which the peptide separation step is performed by a microstructured and extremely reproducible chromatographic system, for the in-depth measurement of 100 taxonomically diverse organisms. With two million peptide and 340,000 stringent protein identifications obtained in a standardized manner, we double the number of proteins with solid experimental evidence known to the scientific community. The data also provide a foundation for machine learning, as we demonstrate by experimentally confirming predicted peptide properties of bacteroides uniformis. Our results provide a comparative view into the functional organization of organisms across the entire evolutionary range. A remarkably high fraction of the total proteome mass in all kingdoms is dedicated to protein homeostasis and folding, highlighting the challenge of maintaining protein structure across all of life. Likewise, a constantly high fraction is involved in supplying energy resources, although the pathways range from photosynthesis through iron sulphur metabolism to carbohydrate metabolism.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation was carried out according to our in-house developed in-StageTip protocol 8 with an automated set-up on an Agilent Bravo liquid handling platform as previously described 9. In brief, samples were incubated in PreOmics lysis buffer (P.O. 00001, PreOmics GmbH) for reduction of disulfide bridges, cysteine alkylation and protein denaturation at 95°C for 10 min. Root and sprout parts of Arabidopsis thaliana, whole Drosophila melanogaster and leaves of Porphyra umbilicalis were grinded on liquid nitrogen with a mortar and pestle beforehand. Samples were sonicated using a bioruptor (15 cycles of 30 sec) and the protein concentration was measured using a tryptophan assay. In total, 200 µg of each organism material were further processed on the Agilent Bravo liquid handling system by adding Trypsin and LysC (1:100 ratio (µg of enzyme to µg of sample protein)), mixing and at 37 °C for 4h.  We purified the peptides in consecutive steps according to the PreOmics iST protocol (www.preomics.com). The after elution from the solid phase extraction material, the peptides were completely dried using a SpeedVac centrifuge at 60 °C (Eppendorf, Concentrator plus). Peptides were suspended in buffer A* (2% acetonitrile (v/v), 0.1% formic acid (v/v)) and sonicated (Branson Ultrasonics, Ultrasonic Cleaner Model 2510). Eukaryotes have a larger number of genes, resulting in a larger number of proteins and consequently peptides. To reduce the complexity for the mass spectrometric measurements, we separated Eukaryotic peptide mixtures into 8 fractions using the high-pH reversed-phase `Spider fractionator` as described previously 11.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were analyzed by MaxQuant software, version 1.6.1.1312, and peptide lists were searched against their species level Uniprot FASTA database. A contaminant database generated by the Andromeda search engine24 was configured with cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification and N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. We set the false discovery rate (FDR) to 0.01 for protein and peptide levels with a minimum length of 7 amino acids for peptides and the FDR was determined by searching a reverse database. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to arginine and lysine as expected using trypsin and LysC as proteases. A maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Peptide identification was performed with an initial precursor mass deviation up to 7 ppm and a fragment mass deviation of 20 ppm. All proteins and peptides matching to the reversed database were filtered out.

### Publication Abstract
Proteins carry out the vast majority of functions in all biological domains, but for technological reasons their large-scale investigation has lagged behind the study of genomes. Since the first essentially complete eukaryotic proteome was reported<sup>1</sup>, advances in mass-spectrometry-based proteomics<sup>2</sup> have enabled increasingly comprehensive identification and quantification of the human proteome<sup>3-6</sup>. However, there have been few comparisons across species<sup>7,8</sup>, in stark contrast with genomics initiatives<sup>9</sup>. Here we use an advanced proteomics workflow-in which the peptide separation step is performed by a microstructured and extremely reproducible chromatographic system-for the in-depth study of 100 taxonomically diverse organisms. With two million peptide and 340,000 stringent protein identifications obtained in a standardized manner, we double the number of proteins with solid experimental evidence known to the scientific community. The data also provide a large-scale case study for sequence-based machine learning, as we demonstrate by experimentally confirming the predicted properties of peptides from Bacteroides uniformis. Our results offer a comparative view of the functional organization of organisms across the entire evolutionary range. A remarkably high fraction of the total proteome mass in all kingdoms is dedicated to protein homeostasis and folding, highlighting the biological challenge of maintaining protein structure in all branches of life. Likewise, a universally high fraction is involved in supplying energy resources, although these pathways range from photosynthesis through iron sulfur metabolism to carbohydrate metabolism. Generally, however, proteins and proteomes are remarkably diverse between organisms, and they can readily be explored and functionally compared at www.proteomesoflife.org.

### Keywords
Systems biology, Machine learning, Proteomics, Phylogeny, Mass spectrometry, Bioinformatics

### Affiliations
Proteomics
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany 2NNF Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany 2NNF Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark


