### Accession
PXD008078

### Title
Nudt21 controls cell fate by connecting alternative polyadenylation to chromatin signaling

### Description
Cell fate transitions involve rapid changes of gene expression patterns and global chromatin remodeling, yet the underlying regulatory pathways remain incompletely understood. Here, we used transcription-factor induced reprogramming of somatic cells into pluripotent cells to screen for novel regulators of cell fate change. We identified the RNA processing factor Nudt21, a component of the pre-mRNA cleavage and polyadenylation complex, as a potent barrier to reprogramming. Importantly, suppression of Nudt21 not only enhanced the generation of induced pluripotent stem cells but also facilitated the conversion of fibroblasts into trophoblast stem cells and delayed the differentiation of myeloid precursor cells into macrophages, suggesting a broader role for Nudt21 in restricting cell fate change. Polyadenylation site sequencing (PAS-seq) revealed that Nudt21 directs differential polyadenylation of over 1,500 transcripts in cells acquiring pluripotency. While only a fraction of these transcripts changed expression at the protein level, this fraction was strongly enriched for chromatin regulators, including components of the PAF, polycomb, and trithorax complexes. Co-suppression analysis further suggests that these chromatin factors are largely responsible for Nudt21’s effect on reprogramming, providing a mechanistic basis for our observations. Collectively, our data uncover Nudt21 as a novel post-transcriptional regulator of mammalian cell fate and establish a direct, previously unappreciated link between alternative polyadenylation and chromatin signaling.

### Sample Protocol
Protein digestion and peptide labeling Proteins were digested for 16 hours with LysC (1:100 enzyme:protein ratio) at 23°C, followed by trypsin (1:100 enzyme:protein ratio) for 6 hours at 37C. Peptides were quantified using Pierce Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay. TMT reagents (0.8 mg) were dissolved in 40 μL anhydrous acetonitrile, and 7 μL was used to label 70 μg peptides in 30% (v/v) acetonitrile. Labeling continued for 1 hour at 23°C, until reaction was quenched using 7 μL 5% hyrdroxylamine. TMT-labeled peptides were pooled, vacuum centrifuged, and cleaned using 50 mg Sep-Pak (Waters).  Offline basic pH reversed-phase (BPRP) fractionation The pooled TMT-labeled peptide sample was fractionated using BPRP HPLC. We used an Agilent 1260 Infinity pump equipped with a degasser and a single wavelength detector (set at 220 nm). Peptides were subjected to a 50 minute linear gradient from 8% to 40% acetonitrile in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8 at a flow rate of 0.6 mL/min over an Agilent 300Extend C18 column (3.5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID and 250 mm in length). We fractionated into a total of 96 fractions, then consolidated samples into 24 fractions and vacuum centrifuged to near dryness. Twelve fractions were acidified to 1% formic acid, desalted via StageTip, dried via vacuum centrifugation, and reconstituted in 5% acetonitrile, 5% formic acid for LC-MS/MS processing.  Liquid chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry Mass spectrometry data were collected using an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific) equipped with a Proxeon EASY-nLC 1000 liquid chromatography (LC) system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on a 100 μm inner diameter microcapillary column packed with ~35 cm of Accucore C18 resin (2.6 μm, 150 Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific). We loaded ~2 μg sample onto the column. Peptides were separated using a 3 hour gradient of acidic acetonitrile. We used the multinotch MS3-based TMT method (McAlister et al., 2014). The scan sequence began with a MS1 spectrum (Orbitrap analysis; resolution 120,000; mass range 400−1400 Th). MS2 analysis followed collision-induced dissociation (CID, CE = 35) with a maximum ion injection time of 120 ms and an isolation window of 0.7 Da. The 10 most abundant MS1 ions of charge states 2-6 were selected for MS2/MS3 analysis. To obtain quantitative information, MS3 precursors were fragmented by high-energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD, CE = 65) and analyzed in the Orbitrap (resolution was 60,000 at 200 Th) with a maximum ion injection time of 150 ms and a charge state-dependent variable isolation window of 0.7 to 1.2 Da.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were processed using a SEQUEST-based in-house software pipeline. Spectra were converted to mzXML using a modified version of ReAdW.exe. Database searching used the mouse proteome downloaded from Uniprot in both forward and reverse directions. Common contaminating protein sequences were included as well. Searches were performed using peptide mass tolerance of 20 ppm, and a fragment ion tolerance of 0.9 Da. These wide mass tolerance windows were chosen to maximize sensitivity in conjunction with SEQUEST searches and linear discriminant analysis. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+229.163 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) was set as a variable modification.  Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were adjusted to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR). Linear discriminant analysis was used to filter PSMs, as described previously, while considering the following parameters: XCorr, ΔCn, missed cleavages, adjusted PPM, peptide length, fraction of ions matched, charge state, and precursor mass accuracy. PSMs were identified, quantified, and collapsed to a 1% peptide false discovery rate (FDR) and then collapsed further to a final protein-level FDR of 1%. PSMs were quantified from MS3 scans; those with poor quality, MS3 spectra with total TMT reporter signal-to-noise ratio that is <200, or no MS3 spectra were excluded from quantitation. Protein quantitation was performed by summing the signal-to-noise for all peptides for a given protein. Each TMT channel was summed across all quantified proteins and normalized assuming equal protein loading of all 10 channels.

### Publication Abstract
Cell fate transitions involve rapid gene expression changes and global chromatin remodeling, yet the underlying regulatory pathways remain incompletely understood. Here, we identified the RNA-processing factor Nudt21 as a novel regulator of cell fate change using transcription-factor-induced reprogramming as a screening assay. Suppression of Nudt21 enhanced the generation of induced pluripotent stem cells, facilitated transdifferentiation into trophoblast stem cells, and impaired differentiation of myeloid precursors and embryonic stem cells, suggesting a broader role for Nudt21 in cell fate change. We show that Nudt21 directs differential polyadenylation of over 1,500 transcripts in cells acquiring pluripotency, although only a fraction changed protein levels. Remarkably, these proteins were strongly enriched for chromatin regulators, and their suppression neutralized the effect of Nudt21 during reprogramming. Collectively, our data uncover Nudt21 as a novel post-transcriptional regulator of cell fate and establish a direct, previously unappreciated link between alternative polyadenylation and chromatin signaling.

### Keywords
Nudt21 tmt

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School
Harvard Department of Stem Cell and Regenerative Biology Cambridge, MA 02138, USA

### Submitter
Marian Kalocsay

### Lab Head
Dr Konrad Hochedlinger
Harvard Department of Stem Cell and Regenerative Biology Cambridge, MA 02138, USA


