### Accession
PXD026463

### Title
Iimmunopeptidomics pipeline for generation of personalized oncolytic cancer vaccines.

### Description
We used a streamlined pipeline for the generation of personalized cancer vaccines starting from the isolation and selection of the most immunogenic peptide candidates expressed on the tumour cells and ending in the generation of efficient therapeutic oncolytic cancer vaccines. We used MHC-I immunoaffinity purification in a murine colon tumor model from CT26 cells. The selection of the target candidates was then based on two separate approaches: RNAseq analysis and HEX software.

### Sample Protocol
MHC class I peptides were immunoaffinity purified from the CT26 mouse cell line using anti mouse MHC class I (clone 34-1-2S, BioXcell, BE0180 Lebanon, USA). For sample preparation, the snap-frozen cell pellet (1x108 cells for each replicate, in total 6 replicates) was incubated for 2h at 4°C in lysis buffer. The lysis buffer contained 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM TRIS-HCl, pH 7.4, protease inhibitors (A32955 Thermo Scientific Pierce, Waltham, Massachusetts, USA) and 1% Igepal (I8896 Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, Missouri, USA). The lysates were first cleared by low speed centrifugation for 10 min at 500xg, and then the supernatant was centrifuged for 30 min at 25,000xg. Next, MHC-I complexes were immunoaffinity purified loading the cleared lysate to the immunoaffinity column (AminoLink Plus Immobilization, Pierce) with covalently linked antibody. Following binding, the affinity column was washed using 7 column volumes of each buffer (150 mM NaCl, 20 mM Tris-HCl; 400 mM NaCl, 20 mM Tris-HCl; 150 mM NaCl, 20 mM Tris-HCl and 20 mM TrisHCl, pH 8.0) and bound complexes were eluted in 0.1M acetic acid. Eluted HLA peptides and the subunits of the HLA complexes were desalted using SepPac-C18 cartridges (Waters) according to the protocol previously described by Bassani et al. (16). Briefly, the cartridge was prewashed with 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and then with 0.1% TFA. The peptides were purified from the MHC-I complex by elution with 30% acetonitrile in 0.1% TFA. Finally, the samples were dried using vacuum centrifugation (Eppendorf). Each dry sample was dissolved in 10 μL of LCMS solvent A (0.1% formic acid) by dispensing/aspirating 20 times with the micropipette. The nanoElute LC system (Bruker, Bremen, Germany) injected and loaded the 10 μl of sample directly onto the analytical column (Aurora C18, 25 cm long, 75 µm ID, 1.6 µm bead size, Ionopticks, Melbourne, Australia) constantly kept at 50℃ by a heating oven (PRSO-V2 oven, Sonation, Biberach, Germany). After washing and loading sample at a constant pressure of 800 bar, the LC system started a 30 min gradient from 0 to 32% solvent B (acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid), followed by increase to 95% B in 5 min, and finally a wash of 10 min at 95% B, all at a flow rate of 300 nL/min.  Online LC-MS was performed using a Tims TOF Pro mass spectrometer (Bruker, Bremen, Germany) with the CaptiveSpray source, capillary voltage 1500V, dry gas flow of 3L/min, dry gas temperature at 180℃. MS data reduction was enabled. Mass Spectra peak detection maximum intensity was set to 10. Mobilogram peak detection intensity threshold was set to 5000. Mass range was 300-1100 m/z, and mobility range was 0.6-1.30 V.s/cm2. MS/MS was used with 3 PASEF (Parallel Accumulation – Serial Fragmentation) scans (300ms each) per cycle with a target intensity of 20000 and intensity threshold of 1000, considering charge states 0-5. Active exclusion was used with release after 0.4 min, reconsidering precursor if current intensity is >4 fold the previous intensity, and a mass width of 0.015 m/z and a 1/k0 width of 0.015 V.s/cm2. Isolation width was defined as 2.00 m/z for mass 700 m/z and 3.00 m/z for mass 800 m/z. Collision energy was set as 10.62 eV for 1/k0 0.60 V.s/cm2 and 51.46 eV for 1/k0 1.30 V.s/cm2. Precursor ions were selected using 1 MS repetition and a cycle overlap of 1 with the default intensities/repetitions schedule.

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS spectra were searched by PEAKS Studio X+ (v10.5 build 20191016) using a target-decoy strategy. The database used was the Swissprot Mouse protein database (including isoforms, 25284 entries, downloaded from uniprot.org on 20191127).  A precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm and a product mass tolerance of 0.02 Da for CID-ITMS2 were used. Enzyme was none, digest mode unspecific, and oxidation of methionine was used as variable modification, with max 3 oxidations per peptide. A false discovery rate (FDR) cut-off of 1% was employed at the peptide level.

### Publication Abstract
Besides the isolation and identification of major histocompatibility complex I-restricted peptides from the surface of cancer cells, one of the challenges is eliciting an effective antitumor CD8+ T-cell-mediated response as part of therapeutic cancer vaccine. Therefore, the establishment of a solid pipeline for the downstream selection of clinically relevant peptides and the subsequent creation of therapeutic cancer vaccines are of utmost importance. Indeed, the use of peptides for eliciting specific antitumor adaptive immunity is hindered by two main limitations: the efficient selection of the most optimal candidate peptides and the use of a highly immunogenic platform to combine with the peptides to induce effective tumor-specific adaptive immune responses. Here, we describe for the first time a streamlined pipeline for the generation of personalized cancer vaccines starting from the isolation and selection of the most immunogenic peptide candidates expressed on the tumor cells and ending in the generation of efficient therapeutic oncolytic cancer vaccines. This immunopeptidomics-based pipeline was carefully validated in a murine colon tumor model CT26. Specifically, we used state-of-the-art immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometric methodologies to isolate &gt;8000 peptide targets from the CT26 tumor cell line. The selection of the target candidates was then based on two separate approaches: RNAseq analysis and HEX software. The latter is a tool previously developed by Jacopo, 2020, able to identify tumor antigens similar to pathogen antigens in order to exploit molecular mimicry and tumor pathogen cross-reactive T cells in cancer vaccine development. The generated list of candidates (26 in total) was further tested in a functional characterization assay using interferon-&#x3b3; enzyme-linked immunospot (ELISpot), reducing the number of candidates to six. These peptides were then tested in our previously described oncolytic cancer vaccine platform PeptiCRAd, a vaccine platform that combines an immunogenic oncolytic adenovirus (OAd) coated with tumor antigen peptides. In our work, PeptiCRAd was successfully used for the treatment of mice bearing CT26, controlling the primary malignant lesion and most importantly a secondary, nontreated, cancer lesion. These results confirmed the feasibility of applying the described pipeline for the selection of peptide candidates and generation of therapeutic oncolytic cancer vaccine, filling a gap in the field of cancer immunotherapy, and paving the way to translate our pipeline into human therapeutic approach.

### Keywords
Cancer vaccines, Colon cancer, Mouse, Personalized cancer vaccines, Ct26, Immunopeptidome, Oncolytic virus, Ligandome, Murine

### Affiliations
Dep. of Oncology-Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, Scilifelab, Stockholm, Sweden
Clinical Proteomics Unit, Dep. of Oncology-Pathology

### Submitter
Rui Branca

### Lab Head
Dr Janne Lehtiö
Dep. of Oncology-Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, Scilifelab, Stockholm, Sweden


