### Accession
PXD013329

### Title
Proteome changes during oocyte to zygote transition in rainbow trout Oncorhynchus mykiss

### Description
The aim of present study is to identify and quantify proteins involved in the events of fertilization and early embryo development using a label-free protein quantification method in rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss) as an economically important fish species in aquaculture.

### Sample Protocol
Eggs were fertilized by mixing with pooled semen from sex males for 2 min. Fertilized eggs were gently washed and after absorbing of water and swelling, they were transferred to incubators equipped with running water at 4 ˚C. Samples were preserved separately for each of six females. Freshly ovulated unfertilized eggs were sampled as control. Fertilized eggs were sampled after 50 min, 200 min and 15 h of fertilization. All samples were immediately plunged into liquid nitrogen (-196 ˚C) and transferred to -80 ˚C freezer until beginning of protein analysis process.  Protein extraction and measurement: Eggs were pulverized using 1 mm Zirconia Beads in a Mini-Beadbeater™ (BioSpec Products, Inc). Pulverized samples were mixed with 1% SDS on cold ice. The supernatant of samples were obtained by centrifugation (16100 rcf) for 30 min. The protein concentration of samples were measured using Micro-Lowry Assay kit (Sigma-Aldrich). In-gel trypsin digestion and label-free experimental design:  Protein from each sample (100 µg) was separately mixed with sample buffer (62.5 mM Tris-HCl, pH 6.8, 2% SDS, 25% glycerol, 0.01% bromophenol blue, 5% mercaptoethanol) and heated for 5 min at 95 ˚C. The protein samples were run approximately 2 cm into 12% SDS-PAGE (Criterion Precast TGX Gels, BioRad). Gel Code Blue Stain Reagent (Pierce) was used to stain the gel. Lanes were cut into smaller parts, destained in 50% acetonitrile (ACN) and 25 mM NH4HCO3, and dried using Speed-Vac (SAVANT, SPD131DDA, Thermo Scientific). Reduction of gel slices were carried out using 10 mM DL-dithiothreitol in 100 mM NH4HCO3 for 1 h at 56 ˚C. In addition, alkylation was performed by adding 55 mM iodoacetamide in 100 mM NH4HCO3 and incubating for 45 min at room temperature in darkness. Gels were washed twice with 100 mM NH4HCO3 followed by ACN, and gels were dried using Speed-Vac. Trypsin (12.5 ng ml-1 modified Trypsin V5111, Promega Biotech AB) in 50 mM NH4HCO3 was added to the dehydrated gels. The samples were stored for 30 min at 4 ˚C prior to an overnight incubation at 37 ˚C. The extraction of peptides was carried out using 5% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and 75% ACN and incubating of gels for 30 min at room temperature. This was repeated twice to obtain three extractions, and a fourth extraction was obtained using ACN only with 10 min incubation. After combination of extracts, the volume reduced using Speed-Vac, and the samples were dissolved in 10 µl of 0.1% formic acid (FA). An Eksigent 2D NanoLC system (Eksigent Technologies, Dublin, CA, USA) coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap XL (Thermo Electron, Bremen, Germany) were used to separate and analyze samples. A repeated injections of standard samples (6 Bovine Tryptic Digest Equal Molar Mix, Thermo-Scientific) was used to monitor the instrument stability. Peptides were loaded by a constant flow of 10 µl min-1 onto a pre-column (PepMap 100, C18, 5 µm, 5 mm × 0.3 mm, LC Packings, Amsterdam, Netherlands) and subsequently separated on an RP-LC analytical column (10 µm) fused silica emitter, 75 µm x 16 cm (PicoTipTM Emitter, New Objective, Inc.Woburn, MA, USA), packed in-house with Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ resin (3 µm, Dr. Maisch Gmbh, Ammerbuch-Enteringen, Germany) with a flow rate of 300 nL min-1. A 60 min linear gradient of 3-35% ACN (0.1% FA) followed by a 10 min linear gradient from 35 to 90% ACN (0.1% FA) were used to elute peptides. The four most intense ions were chosen for fragmentation with the dynamic exclusion duration of 2 min.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were imported in profile mode into Progenesis LC-MS version 3.1 (Nonlinear Dynamics, Newcastle, UK). A reference run was selected for alignment and retention times of other runs were aligned using the reference by six to seven manual landmark vectors followed by automatic alignment of all retention times to achieve maximum overlay of all runs. The normalization was carried out automatically by Progenesis LC-MS (Niksirat et al., 2015). For protein identification, search was performed against the rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss) section of the Uniprot database (2018-08-13, 50,246 sequences), by Mascot version 2.3 at p < 0.01. The mass tolerance was set at 5 ppm for parent ions and 0.5 Da for fragment ions with one missed protease cleavage allowed. Cys carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification, and Met oxidation as variable. - Raw files order: 1T to 6T first treatment (freshly ovulated eggs), 7T to 12T second treatment (fertilized eggs after 50 min), 13T to 18T third treatment (fertilized eggs after 200 min), 19T to 24T fourth treatment (fertilized eggs after 15 h).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Egg, Fertilization, Trout, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Department of Immunotechnology, Hus 406, Medicon Village, Lund University, 223 81, Lund, Sweden
University of South Bohemia in České Budějovice

### Submitter
Hamid Niksirat

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Peter James
Department of Immunotechnology, Hus 406, Medicon Village, Lund University, 223 81, Lund, Sweden


