### Accession
PXD029147

### Title
A proteomic analysis reveals novel miRNA-200c targets and altered signaling pathways in the field of detoxification

### Description
MircoRNAs are small RNAs which regulate a pleiotropy of cellular processes and are also involved in tumorigenesis, cancer progression and therapy resistance. We investigated the influence of miRNA-200c on chemoresistance of tumor cells. A proteomic approach identified glutathione S-transferases to be differentially expressed when miR-200c was knocked out and cells were treated with the chemotherapeutic drug doxorubicin.

### Sample Protocol
24 hours after cell seeding (n=3), samples were treated with 5 µM doxorubicin hydrochloride for 6 hours. After washing the cells three times with cold PBS they were lysed with 8 M urea in 400 mM ammonium hydrogen carbonate. Cell lysis was assisted with sonication followed by homogenization using QIAshredder spin columns (Qiagen). 20 µg of protein was incubated for 30 min at a final concentration of 5 mM dithioerythritol (DTE) to reduce disulfide bridges. Cleaved disulfide bonds were then alkylated with iodoacetamide (final concentration 15 mM) for 30 min in the dark. After dilution with water to a concentration of 1 M urea, samples were digested over night with 400 ng porcine trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) at 37°C. Samples were desalted using C18 spin columns (Pierce, ThermoFisher Scientific) following the manufacturers recommended procedure. 1 µg of peptides, dissolved in 15 µl solvent A (0.1 % formic acid in water), were injected in an Ultimate 3000 (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) chromatography system and loaded on a capillary trap column (PepMap 100 C18, 100 µm x 2 cm, 5 µM particles, Thermo Scientific). Peptides were subsequently separated at 250 nL/min using an EASY-Spray column (PepMap RSLC C18, 75 µm x 50 cm, 2 µm particles, Thermo Scientific) with a two-step gradient: first step ramping from 5 % solvent A to 25 % solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) in 160 min, followed by a second ramp from 25 % to 40 % solvent B in 10 min. MS analysis was performed with a QExactive HF-X mass spectrometer. Using data dependant acquisition, up to 15 MS/MS spectra per precursor scan were acquired. Precursor spectra were acquired at a resolution 60,000 (mass-range: 350-1600) and MS/MS spectra at a resolution of 15,000.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry (MS) data was processed with MaxQuant (version: 1.6.5.0) using the human subset from Swiss-Prot (downloaded 05/02/2020) and the MaxQuant common contaminants database. The false discovery rate was set to be < 0.01 and proteins that were only identified by site or potential contaminants were filtered out.

### Publication Abstract
Acquired drug resistance constitutes a serious obstacle to the successful therapy of cancer. In the process of therapy resistance, microRNAs can play important roles. In order to combat resistance formation and to improve the efficacy of chemotherapeutics, the mechanisms of the multifaceted hsa-miR-200c on drug resistance were elucidated. Upon knockout of hsa-miR-200c in breast carcinoma cells, a proteomic approach identified altered expression of glutathione S-transferases (GSTs) when cells were treated with the chemotherapeutic drug doxorubicin. In different hsa-miR-200c expression systems, such as knockout, inducible sponge and inducible overexpression, the differential expression of all members of the GST family was evaluated. Expression of hsa-miR-200c in cancer cells led to the repression of a multitude of these GSTs and as consequence, enhanced drug-induced tumor cell death which was evaluated for two chemotherapeutic drugs. Additionally, the influence of hsa-miR-200c on the glutathione pathway, which is part of the phase II detoxification mechanism, was investigated. Finally, the long-term effects of hsa-miR-200c on drug efficacy were studied in vitro and in vivo. Upon doxycycline induction of hsa-miR-200c, MDA-MB 231 xenograft mouse models revealed a strongly reduced tumor growth and an enhanced treatment response to doxorubicin. A combined treatment of these tumors with hsa-miR-200c and doxorubicin resulted in complete regression of the tumor in 60% of the animals. These results identify hsa-miR-200c as an important player regulating the cellular phase II detoxification, thus sensitizing cancer cells not expressing this microRNA to chemotherapeutics and reversing drug resistance through suppression of GSTs.

### Keywords
Microrna, Chemotherapy, Mir-200c, Glutathione s-transferase, Cancer

### Affiliations
Genzentrum der LMU München
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München Genzentrum Laboratory for Functional Genome Analysis Feodor-Lynen-Str. 25 D-81377 München

### Submitter
Jan Bernd Stöckl

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Fröhlich
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München Genzentrum Laboratory for Functional Genome Analysis Feodor-Lynen-Str. 25 D-81377 München


