### Accession
PXD000203

### Title
Mouse splenocyte proteome -  Proteome characterization of splenocytes from an Aβpp/ps-1 Alzheimer's disease model

### Description
Splenocytes from 14-month Alzheimer's Disease mouse model were separated with CD90.2 magetic beads into two cell subsets: CD90+ and CD90-. Proteome for these two subset were characterized with offline SCX-nanoLC-MS/MS.        MS data was analyzed with Proteome Discoverer 1.3 software. MS/MS spectra were searched against the IPI mouse database (August 16, 2012, 59 534 sequences). SEQUEST search parameters were as follows: two maximum trypsin miscleavages; precursor and fragment mass tolerances of 10 ppm and 0.8 Da, respectively; carbamidomethyl modification on cysteine was a static modification; oxidation of methionine was a dynamic modification. Decoy database searching was employed to control the false discovery rate (FDR) and generate lists of peptides with high (FDR < 0.01) and medium (FDR < 0.05) confidence.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the sixth leading cause of US deaths. In addition to neurodegenerative deficits in AD, changes in the immune system have also been observed. Proteomic analysis of specific immune cell populations may help gain insights into mechanisms of peripheral immunity in AD. Herein, we report proteome characterization for two subsets of splenocytes (i.e. CD90+ cells and a heterogeneous pool of CD90- cells) from a double transgenic mutant amyloid precursor protein/presenilin-1 (A&#x3b2;pp/ps-1) AD mouse model. Overall, 906 proteins were identified from both cell types with 275 and 334 proteins uniquely identified as CD90+ and CD90- cells, respectively. Proteins identified in CD90+ and CD90- cells were significantly involved in 18 and 19 KEGG pathways, respectively. Amongst these, pathways associated with AD and antigen processing and presentation were identified in CD90+ and CD90- subsets, respectively. This is the first study to provide a reference proteome map for splenocyte populations in A&#x3b2;pp/ps-1 double transgenic mice which will be helpful for future studies focused on understanding peripheral changes in this model. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD000203 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD000203).

### Keywords
Alzheimer’s disease, App/ps-1, Splenocytes, Proteomics, Cd90, Mice, T cells

### Affiliations
Chemistry

### Submitter
Zhiyun Cao

### Lab Head


