### Accession
PXD016422

### Title
Biotin proximity tagging favors unfolded proteins and enables the study of intrinsically disordered regions

### Description
Intrinsically Disordered Regions (IDRs) are enriched in disease-linked proteins known to have multiple post-translational modifications, but there is limited in vivo information about how locally unfolded protein regions contribute to biological functions. We reasoned that IDRs should be more accessible to targeted in vivo biotinylation than ordered protein regions, if they retain their flexibility in vivo. Indeed, we observed increased biotinylation density in predicted IDRs in several cellular compartments >20 000 biotin sites from four human proximity proteomics studies.  We show that in a biotin ‘painting’ time course experiment biotinylation events in Escherichia coli ribosomes progress from unfolded and exposed regions at 10 seconds, to structured and less accessible regions after five minutes. We conclude that biotin proximity tagging favours sites of local disorder in proteins and suggest the possibility of using biotin ‘painting’ as a method to gain unique insights into in vivo condition-dependent subcellular plasticity of proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial 70S ribosome purification Strain JE28 79 was grown in 2 x YT media with 50 g/ml kanamycin in baffled flasks at 37 °C to OD600 nm of 1.0 and harvested by centrifugation and resuspended in ‘High Mg2+ buffer A’ (50 mM HEPES pH 7.0; 20 mM MgCl2; 50 mM NaCl; 50 mM KCl; 100 mM NH4Cl; 5% glycerol; 1 tablet per 250 mL of cOmplete protease inhibitor cocktail tablet (Roche). Cells were flash frozen with liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C. A thawed cell suspension was lysed with emulsiflex at 15,000 psi and clarified by centrifugation at 32000 g for 30 minutes at 5 °C.  For 70S, the lysate was applied to HiTrap chelating resin with bound Ni 2+ in high Mg2+  buffer and eluted with gradient 0 to 100%  ‘High Mg2+  buffer B’ (50 mM HEPES pH 7.0; 20 mM MgCl2; 50 mM NaCl; 50 mM KCl; 100 mM NH4Cl; 5% glycerol; 1 tablet per 250 mL of cOmplete protease inhibitor cocktail;0.5 M imidazole, adjust pH to 7.0). The 70S particles were concentrated and applied to a preparative S200 column (S200 buffer: 50 mM HEPES pH 7.0; 20 mM MgCl2; 75 mM KCl; 75 mM NaCl; 5% glycerol).  While the matrix was not optimal for removing higher MW contaminants, it was effective to remove contaminants smaller than the 30S, 50S and 70S. Biotin painting the bacterial 70S ribosome To test fast and slow biotinylation, 70S ribosomes were incubated with 1mM NHS-biotin in triplicates for 10 seconds, 120 seconds, 300 seconds and 1 hour. The 1 hour timepoint was used as a carrier reference and excluded from statistical analyses. The incubation took place at 37 °C in a buffer containing 20 mM MgCl2 (and 50 mM HEPES pH 7.0; 75 mM KCl; 75 mM NaCl; 5% glycerol) and then quenched using 60 mM hydroxylamine for 15 minutes. Biotinylated ribosomes were heated to 95 °C for 10 minutes in 6M guanidine hydrochloride, 5 mM TCEP, 10 mM Chloracetamide to denature proteins and alkylate cysteine residues. Contaminants and biotin were removed using the modified SP3 protocol, briefly by precipitation using 20:1 (v/v) ethanol to peptide-bead mix and three subsequent washes using 50 bead volume equivalents of 80% ethanol washing off the magnetic beads as previously reported80. Samples were digested overnight at 37 °C with 1.2 µg modified trypsin-LysC (Promega). TMT labelling was performed directly on beads using 60 g per sample and channel using 10-plex (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a sufficient molar excess of TMT label in HEPES buffer as previously described81.  Mass spectra were acquired in positive ion mode applying data acquisition using synchronous precursor selection MS3 (SPS-MS3) acquisition mode as in Queiroz et al.82,83. Samples were analyzed in an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Fisher Scientific), coupled to a 50 cm long PepMap nanoLC column (on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC). All samples were analyzed in a 120-min gradient from 9% – 45% buffer B (containing 80% acetonitrile) and SPS-MS3.

### Data Protocol
MS spectra processing and peptide and protein identification. Raw data were processed using Proteome Discoverer v2.3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The raw files were submitted to a database search using Proteome Discoverer with Mascot and SequestHF algorithms against the E. coli database downloaded in early 2017, UniProt/TrEMBL. Common contaminant proteins (several types of human keratins, BSA and porcine trypsin) were added to the database, and all contaminant proteins identified were removed from the result lists before further analysis. The spectra identification was performed with the following parameters: MS accuracy, 10 p.p.m.; MS/MS accuracy of 0.05Da for spectra acquired in Orbitrap analyzer and 0.5Da for spectra acquired in Ion Trap analyzer; up to two missed cleavage sites allowed; carbamidomethylation of cysteine (as well as TMT6plex tagging of lysine and peptide N terminus for TMT labeled samples) as a fixed modification; and oxidation of methionine and deamidated asparagine and glutamine as variable modifications. Percolator node was used for false discovery rate estimation and only rank 1 peptide identifications of high confidence (FDR<1%) were accepted. TMT reporter values were assessed through Proteome Discoverer v2.3 using the Most Confident Centroid method for peak integration and integration tolerance of 20 p.p.m. Reporter ion intensities were adjusted to correct for the isotopic impurities of the different TMT reagents (according to the manufacturer specifications for the respective batch number). TMT data analysis The data obtained from Proteome discoverer was abundance data at the peptide level. We filtered the data to remove missing values and any non-biotinylationed peptides as well as peptides that were non-ribosomal. The data were not median-normalised before the statistical analysis because we did not want to introduce normalization artifacts by (artificially) equalizing actually very different fractions of biotinylated peptides within the total peptide pools in TMT channels corresponding to 10 seconds and 300 seconds in our 10-plex TMT set (note: such a normalization would make sense after specific enrichment for biotinylated peptides). We used the R84 package limma85 to test the significant increase of labelling between triplicate measurements at 10 seconds and triplicate measurements at either 120 seconds or at  300 seconds. TMT reporter ion intensities of biotin-peptides at 10 seconds were used as reference and any significant increases (using adjusted p values smaller than 0.05) were selected as ‘late’ biotinylation events while those that did not statistically increase further after the 10 seconds timepoint were designated as ‘early’ biotinylation events and used for mapping of biotinylated sites within the 70S cryoEM structure.

### Publication Abstract
Intrinsically Disordered Regions (IDRs) are enriched in disease-linked proteins known to have multiple post-translational modifications, but there is limited in vivo information about how locally unfolded protein regions contribute to biological functions. We reasoned that IDRs should be more accessible to targeted in vivo biotinylation than ordered protein regions, if they retain their flexibility in human cells. Indeed, we observed increased biotinylation density in predicted IDRs in several cellular compartments &gt;20,000 biotin sites from four proximity proteomics studies. We show that in a biotin 'painting' time course experiment, biotinylation events in Escherichia coli ribosomes progress from unfolded and exposed regions at 10&#x2009;s, to structured and less accessible regions after five minutes. We conclude that biotin proximity tagging favours sites of local disorder in proteins and suggest the possibility of using biotin painting as a method to gain unique insights into in vivo condition-dependent subcellular plasticity of proteins.

### Keywords
Idr, Biotin, E. coli, H. sapiens, Lc-sps-ms3

### Affiliations
CPC
Prof. Kathryn S. Lilley Cambridge Centre for Proteomics Department of Biochemistry University of Cambridge  and Milner Therapeutics Institute  +441223760255 www.bio.cam.ac.uk/proteomics/ @lilley_ks @CamCProteomics  secretary: secretariat@bioc.cam.ac.uk

### Submitter
David-Paul Minde

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Kathryn S. Lilley
Prof. Kathryn S. Lilley Cambridge Centre for Proteomics Department of Biochemistry University of Cambridge  and Milner Therapeutics Institute  +441223760255 www.bio.cam.ac.uk/proteomics/ @lilley_ks @CamCProteomics  secretary: secretariat@bioc.cam.ac.uk


