### Accession
PXD029835

### Title
MOUSE CSF Parallel Reaction Monitoring

### Description
MOUSE CSF PRM Mecp2 - 20 samples with AQUA standards

### Sample Protocol
All CSF (5ul) samples were diluted with 50 ul of 50 mM NH4HCO3 and treated with TCEP and CAA and heated at 90°C for 10 minutes. The samples were digested with 1:20 (w/w) lysyl endopeptidase (Wako) at 25°C overnight.  Further overnight digestion was carried out with 1:20 (w/w) trypsin (Promega) at 25°C. Resulting peptides were desalted with a HLB  microelution plate (Waters) and dried under vacuum

### Data Protocol
Liquid Chromatography Tandem Mass Spectrometry for Parallel Reaction Monitoring (PRM) AQUA standard peptides (ThermoFisher Scientific)  were spiked into digested mouse CSF samples.  For each sample and equivalent of 1 ul of CSF was loaded onto a Water’s 1.7 µm CSH C18 column (15 cm × 150μM internal diameter).  Peptides were eluted using a Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano and PRM spectra were collected using an Orbitrap HFX mass spectrometer

### Publication Abstract
MECP2 loss-of-function mutations cause Rett syndrome, a neurodevelopmental disorder resulting from a disrupted brain transcriptome. How these transcriptional defects are decoded into a disease proteome remains unknown. We studied the proteome of Rett cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) to identify consensus Rett proteome and ontologies shared across three species. Rett CSF proteomes enriched proteins annotated to HDL lipoproteins, complement, mitochondria, citrate/pyruvate metabolism, synapse compartments, and the neurosecretory protein VGF. We used shared Rett ontologies to select analytes for orthogonal quantification and functional validation. VGF and ontologically selected CSF proteins had genotypic discriminatory capacity as determined by receiver operating characteristic analysis in <i>Mecp2</i> <sup><i>-/y</i></sup> and <i>Mecp2</i> <sup><i>-/+</i></sup> <i>.</i> Differentially expressed CSF proteins distinguished Rett from a related neurodevelopmental disorder, CDKL5 deficiency disorder. We propose that <i>Mecp2</i> mutant CSF proteomes and ontologies inform putative mechanisms and biomarkers of disease. We suggest that Rett syndrome results from synapse and metabolism dysfunction.

### Keywords
Mouse, Csf, Prm

### Affiliations
Professor Dept. Cell Biology  615 Michael Street Whitehead 446 Atlanta, GA, 30322 Emory University
Center of Neurodegenerative Diseases

### Submitter
Duc Duong

### Lab Head
Dr Victor Faundez
Professor Dept. Cell Biology  615 Michael Street Whitehead 446 Atlanta, GA, 30322 Emory University


