### Accession
PXD002740

### Title
Succinylome analyses in the germinating rice seed

### Description
The dehulled rice (Oryza sativa L. japonica. cv. Nipponbare) seeds were washed with distilled water for three times and then imbibed with distilled water in dark growth chamber at 26 °C and 70% relative humidity. About 100 embryos (50 mg) of rice seeds were sliced manually and collected at intervals of 24h after imbibitions (HAI), respectively. After frozen with liquid nitrogen, the samples were stored in −80 °C until used for protein extraction.

### Sample Protocol
Arfter degestion, the succinylated peptides were enriched by pan-anti-succinyllysine agarose beads, and then the enriched peptides were used for LC-MS/MS

### Data Protocol
The obtained MS/MS data were processed using MaxQuant with integrated Andromeda search engine (version 1.4.1.2). Tandem mass spectra were searched against UniProt database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 4 missing cleavages, 5 modifications per peptide and 5 charges. Mass error was set to 10 parts per million (ppm) for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine was specified as fixed modification, whereas oxidation on methionine, acetylation or on succinylation lysine and acetylation on protein N-terminal were specified as variable modifications. Succinyllysine add 42.0106 and 100.0160 mass shifts that are readily distinguishable from other acylations (Weinert et al, 2013). Peptide was identified with PEP score < 0.05 and andromeda peptide score > 40. False discovery rate (FDR) thresholds for protein, peptide and modification site were specified at 1%. Minimum peptide length was set at 7. All the other parameters in MaxQuant were set to default values.

### Publication Abstract
Regulation of rice seed germination has been shown to mainly occur at post-transcriptional levels, of which the changes on proteome status is a major one. Lysine acetylation and succinylation are two prevalent protein post-translational modifications (PTMs) involved in multiple biological processes, especially for metabolism regulation. To investigate the potential mechanism controlling metabolism regulation in rice seed germination, we performed the lysine acetylation and succinylation analyses simultaneously. Using high-accuracy nano-LC-MS/MS in combination with the enrichment of lysine acetylated or succinylated peptides from digested embryonic proteins of 24 h after imbibition (HAI) rice seed, a total of 699 acetylated sites from 389 proteins and 665 succinylated sites from 261 proteins were identified. Among these modified lysine sites, 133 sites on 78 proteins were commonly modified by two PTMs. The overlapped PTM sites were more likely to be in polar acidic/basic amino acid regions and exposed on the protein surface. Both of the acetylated and succinylated proteins cover nearly all aspects of cellular functions. Ribosome complex and glycolysis/gluconeogenesis-related proteins were significantly enriched in both acetylated and succinylated protein profiles through KEGG enrichment and protein-protein interaction network analyses. The acetyl-CoA and succinyl-CoA metabolism-related enzymes were found to be extensively modified by both modifications, implying the functional interaction between the two PTMs. This study provides a rich resource to examine the modulation of the two PTMs on the metabolism pathway and other biological processes in germinating rice seed.

### Keywords
Succinylome, Seed germination, Rice

### Affiliations
Wuhan Botanical Garden, CAS
Wuhan botanical garden

### Submitter
Zhang Hui

### Lab Head
Dr Yang pingfang
Wuhan Botanical Garden, CAS


