### Accession
PXD022018

### Title
Chromophobe renal cell carcinoma versus renal oncocytoma: a proteomic approach

### Description
The proteome of clinical tissue samples diagnosed with chromophobe renal cell carcinomas (chRCC) and renal oncocytomas (RO) were evaluated to establish a potential discriminative biomarker panel of proteins for these two tumors subtypes.

### Sample Protocol
: The present work utilized high resolution mass spectrometry to analyze the proteome of 15 flash-frozen, OCT-embedded, human renal tissue biopsies from chRCC (n=5) and RO (n=5) including normal adjacent renal tissue (NAT, n=5). Tissue biopsies were first cleaned of OCT and then proteins extracted with the aid of an ultrasonic bath and an ultrasonic probe, respectively. Next, protein digested was carried out using trypsin enzyme over four minutes using an ultrasonic microplate horn assemble device. The extracts containing the digested proteomes were subsequently analyzed by label-free nanoLC-HR-MS/MS approach. For each biopsy, two instrumental replicates were generated.

### Data Protocol
Label-free quantification was carried out using MaxQuant software V1.6.0.16. All raw files were processed in a single run with default parameters. Database searches were performed using Andromeda search engine with the UniProt-SwissProt H. sapiens as a reference and a contaminants database of common contaminants. Data processing was performed using Perseus (version 1.6.2.3) with default settings. Protein group LFQ intensities were log2-transformed and the quantitative profiles were filtered for missing values with the following settings: min valid percentage of 70 in at least one group, and values greater than 0. To overcome the obstacle of missing LFQ values, missing values were imputed using default parameter, with = 0.3 and down shift = 1.8.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteins, Renal cancer, Biomarkers renal oncocytoma, Chromophobe renal cell carcinoma, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
NOVA School of Science and Technology,  NOVA University Lisbon,  Portugal
LAQV-REQUIMTE, Department of Chemistry, School of Science and Technology, NOVA University of Lisbon

### Submitter
Hugo M. Santos

### Lab Head
Dr Hugo M. Santos
NOVA School of Science and Technology,  NOVA University Lisbon,  Portugal


