### Accession
PXD004569

### Title
Liquid Chromatography Ion Mobility Mass Spectrometry analysis of CPTAC Comparator Reference sample CompRef P6

### Description
Proteomic discovery and targeted monitoring of proteins in a breast cancer xenograft tissue sample using LC Ion Mobility Mass Spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were digested with trypsin, then analyzed by LC-MS/MS or by LC-IMS-MS

### Data Protocol
Data was searched with MSGF+ and DeconTools, then correlated with VIPER using PNNL's DMS Processing pipeline

### Publication Abstract
Current proteomic approaches include both broad discovery measurements and quantitative targeted analyses. In many cases, discovery measurements are initially used to identify potentially important proteins (e.g. candidate biomarkers) and then targeted studies are employed to quantify a limited number of selected proteins. Both approaches, however, suffer from limitations. Discovery measurements aim to sample the whole proteome but have lower sensitivity, accuracy, and quantitation precision than targeted approaches, whereas targeted measurements are significantly more sensitive but only sample a limited portion of the proteome. Herein, we describe a new approach that performs both discovery and targeted monitoring (DTM) in a single analysis by combining liquid chromatography, ion mobility spectrometry and mass spectrometry (LC-IMS-MS). In DTM, heavy labeled target peptides are spiked into tryptic digests and both the labeled and unlabeled peptides are detected using LC-IMS-MS instrumentation. Compared with the broad LC-MS discovery measurements, DTM yields greater peptide/protein coverage and detects lower abundance species. DTM also achieved detection limits similar to selected reaction monitoring (SRM) indicating its potential for combined high quality discovery and targeted analyses, which is a significant step toward the convergence of discovery and targeted approaches.

### Keywords
Ion mobility, Proteomics, Ims

### Affiliations
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory

### Submitter
Matthew Monroe

### Lab Head
Dr Richard D. Smith
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory


