### Accession
PXD034391

### Title
Human sepsis with plasma samples

### Description
The project examines the mechanisms of neutrophil dysfunction during sepsis. Our work uncovered the central role of cell free circulating histones in eliminating mature neutrophil in favour of immature cells and characterized the mechanisms that regulate their release following systemic infection. Mature and immature neutrophil Ly6Ghigh and Ly6Glow populations isolated from the spleens of WT and TCRα-deficient mice either naïve or infected with C. albicans were characterized. In addition, these populations were compared to neutrophils isolated from WT mice receiving Clodronate-liposomes and recombinant G-CSF. These studies demonstrated that T-cell derived histones drive the release of G-CSF in the spleen and progressively eliminate mature neutrophils by shortening their lifespan. Finally, we conducted proteomic analysis of plasmas isolated from patients with microbial sepsis to correlate markers of neutrophil death to plasma cytokine and histone levels, confirming the pathogenic role these molecules play during sepsis in humans.

### Sample Protocol
Plasma sample preparation for proteomic analysis Healthy donor and patient plasma samples were randomised and plated in a 96-well plate (Eppendorf). Protein/peptide extraction and proteomics analysis was performed following the protocol described in detail in Messner et al., 2020. 5μL of plasma was denatured in 50μl 8M Urea (Honeywell Research Chemicals), 100mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC, Honeywell Research Chemicals) and reduced with 5μL of 50mM dithiothreitol (DTT, Sigma Aldrich) at 30oC for 1 hour. Followed by alkylation with 5μL of 100mM iodoacetamide (IAA, Sigma Aldrich) at 23oC for 30 minutes in the dark. The samples were diluted with 340μL of 100mM ABC and 220μL was added to trypsin solution (Promega) for protein digestion at a trypsin/protein ratio of 1/40 and incubated at 37°C overnight (17h). Quenching of digestion was done by the addition of 25μL of 10% v/v formic acid (FA, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Rounds of solid phase extraction clean-up steps were performed with the use of C18 96-well plates (BioPureSPE Macro 96-Well, 100mg PROTO C18, The Nest Group) as described previously in Messner et al. 2020 24. Methanol (Fisher Chemicals), 50% v/v acetonitrile (ACN, Fisher Chemicals) or 0.1% v/v FA was used at each centrifugation step as required. After final elution, the collected peptide material was dried by a vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf Concentrator Plus) and redissolved in 50μl 0.1% v/v FA, to be processed by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry.   Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry 1μg of protein digest (peptides) was injected and analysed on a nanoAcquity Liquid Chromatograph (Waters) coupled to a TripleTOF 6600 Mass Spectrometer (Sciex) at a flow-rate of 5µl/min. This was followed by a separation using a Waters HSS T3 column (150mm x 300µm, 1.8µm particles) in 20-minute non-linear gradients starting with 3% B up to 40% B (Buffer A: 0.1% v/v FA; Buffer B: ACN / 0.1% v/v FA). A data independent acquisition (DIA/SWATH) method was used, with MS1 scan from m/z 400 to m/z 1250 and 50ms accumulation time followed by 40 MS2 scans of 35ms accumulation time with variable precursor isolation width covering the mass range from m/z 400 to m/z 1250. Ion source gas 1 (nebulizer gas), ion source gas 2 (heater gas) and curtain gas were set to 30, 15 and 25 respectively. The source temperature was set to 450°C and the ion spray voltage to 5500V. Injections of samples took place in a random order.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analysed by DIA-NN with post-processing analysis in R as described previously 32,92. Briefly, DIA-NN (version 1.7.12) was run in Robust LC (high precision) quantification mode, with maximum MS2 and MS1 mass tolerances set to 20 ppm and 12 ppm, respectively. The scan window size was set to 8. Raw-data processing was performed in two steps. First, the spectral library described previously was ‘refined’ based on the respective SWATH dataset, with the original information in the library such as spectra and retention times being replaced by the empirical information obtained from the SWATH data, as enabled by the functionality of DIA-NN 36. Subsequently, the SWATH-based ‘refined’ library was used to re-analyse the respective dataset. During all steps, precursor FDR filtering was set to 1%.

### Publication Abstract
The mechanisms linking systemic infection to hyperinflammation and immune dysfunction in sepsis are poorly understood. Extracellular histones promote sepsis pathology, but their source and mechanism of action remain unclear. Here, we show that by controlling fungi and bacteria captured by splenic macrophages, neutrophil-derived myeloperoxidase attenuates sepsis by suppressing histone release. In systemic candidiasis, microbial capture via the phagocytic receptor SIGNR1 neutralizes myeloperoxidase by facilitating marginal zone infiltration and T cell death-dependent histone release. Histones and hyphae induce cytokines in adjacent CD169 macrophages including G-CSF that selectively depletes mature Ly6G<sup>high</sup> neutrophils by shortening their lifespan in favour of immature Ly6G<sup>low</sup> neutrophils with a defective oxidative burst. In sepsis patient plasma, these mediators shorten mature neutrophil lifespan and correlate with neutrophil mortality markers. Consequently, high G-CSF levels and neutrophil lifespan shortening activity are associated with sepsis patient mortality. Hence, by exploiting phagocytic receptors, pathogens degrade innate and adaptive immunity through the detrimental impact of downstream effectors on neutrophil lifespan.

### Keywords
Human plasma sepsis

### Affiliations
The Francis Crick Institute
Markus Ralser, Prof. Dr.  Einstein Professor of Biochemistry Head, Institute of Biochemistry, Charité University Medicine, Berlin markus.ralser@charite.de  Senior Group Leader, The Francis Crick Institute, London markus.ralser@crick.ac.uk

### Submitter
Spyros Vernardis

### Lab Head
Dr Markus Ralser
Markus Ralser, Prof. Dr.  Einstein Professor of Biochemistry Head, Institute of Biochemistry, Charité University Medicine, Berlin markus.ralser@charite.de  Senior Group Leader, The Francis Crick Institute, London markus.ralser@crick.ac.uk


