### Accession
PXD030265

### Title
Multi-omics analyses demonstrate a critical role for EHMT1 methyltransferase in transcriptional
repression during oogenesis

### Description
EHMT1 (also known as GLP) is a multifunctional protein, best known for its role as an H3K9me1 and H3K9me2 methyltransferase through its reportedly obligatory dimerization with EHMT2 (also known as G9A). Here, we investigated the role of EHMT1 in the oocyte in comparison to EHMT2 using oocyte-specific conditional knockout mouse models (Ehmt2 cKO, Ehmt1cKO, Ehmt1/2 cDKO), with ablation from the early phase of oocyte growth. Loss of EHMT1 in Ehmt1 cKO and Ehmt1/2 cDKO oocytes recapitulated meiotic defects observed in the Ehmt2 cKO; however, there was a significant impairment in oocyte maturation and developmental competence in Ehmt1 cKO and Ehmt1/2 cDKO oocytes beyond that observed in the Ehmt2
cKO. Consequently, loss of EHMT1 in oogenesis results, upon fertilization, in mid-gestation embryonic lethality. To identify H3K9 methylation and other meaningful biological changes in each mutant to explore the molecular functions of EHMT1 and EHMT2, we performed immunofluorescence imaging, multi-omics sequencing, and mass spectrometry (MS)–based proteome analyses in cKO oocytes. Although H3K9me1 was depleted only upon loss of EHMT1, H3K9me2 was decreased, and H3K9me2-enriched domains were eliminated equally upon loss of EHMT1 or EHMT2. Furthermore, there were more significant changes in the transcriptome, DNA methylome, and proteome in Ehmt1/2 cDKO than Ehmt2 cKO oocytes, with
transcriptional derepression leading to increased protein abundance and local changes in genic DNA methylation in Ehmt1/2 cDKO oocytes. Together, our findings suggest that EHMT1 contributes to local transcriptional repression in the oocyte, partially independent of EHMT2, and is critical for oogenesis and oocyte developmental competence

### Sample Protocol
Oocytes were lysed in 20µl dissolution buffer, containing 100mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (Sigma, T4708) and 0.1% Sodium Dodecyl Sulfate (SDS), followed by water bath sonication and boiling at 90℃ for 5min.  Proteins were reduced with tris-2-carboxyethyl phosphine (ΤCEP, Sigma) for 1h at 60℃ at a final concentration of 5mM, followed by cysteine blocking for 10min at room temperature using methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS, Sigma) at final concentration of 10mM. Samples were digested overnight at 37℃ with trypsin (Pierce #90058) and the next day peptides were labelled with TMT11plex reagents (0.4mg per sample) according to manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo Scientific). To quench the reaction, 3µl of 5% hydroxylamine (Thermo Scientific) was added for 15min and samples combined and dried with centrifugal vacuum concentrator. The TMT mix was fractionated with Reversed-Phase spin columns at high pH (Pierce #84868). Nine fractions were collected using different elution solutions in the range of 5–50% ACN and were analysed on a Dionex UltiMate 3000 UHPLC system coupled with the nano-ESI Fusion-Lumos (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer. Samples were loaded on the Acclaim PepMap 100, 100μm × 2cm C18, 5μm, 100Ȧ trapping column with the ulPickUp injection method at loading flow rate 5μl/min for 10 min. For peptide separation, the EASY-Spray analytical column 75μm × 25cm, C18, 2μm, 100 Ȧ column was used for multi-step gradient elution. The full scans were performed in the Orbitrap in the range of 380-1500 m/z at 120K resolution and peptides were isolated in the quadrupole with isolation window 1.2Th, HCD collision energy 38% and resolution 50K.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed with the SequestHT search engine in Proteome Discoverer 2.1 software and searched against a Uniprot database containing mouse reviewed entries. The parameters for the SequestHT node were as follow: Precursor Mass Tolerance 20ppm, Fragment Mass Tolerance 0.02Da, Dynamic Modifications were Oxidation of M (+15.995Da), Deamidation of N, Q (+0.984Da) and Static Modifications were TMT6plex at any N-Terminus, K (+229.163Da) and Methylthio at C (+45.988Da). The consensus workflow included TMT signal-to-noise (S/N) calculation and the level of confidence for peptide identifications was estimated using the Percolator node with decoy database search. Strict FDR was set at q-value<0.01. For the downstream data analysis, the R package qPLEXanalyzer (https://www.nature.com/articles/s41467-018-04619-5) was used.

### Publication Abstract
EHMT1 (also known as GLP) is a multifunctional protein, best known for its role as an H3K9me1 and H3K9me2 methyltransferase through its reportedly obligatory dimerization with EHMT2 (also known as G9A). Here, we investigated the role of EHMT1 in the oocyte in comparison to EHMT2 using oocyte-specific conditional knockout mouse models (<i>Ehmt2</i> cKO, <i>Ehmt1</i> cKO, <i>Ehmt1/2</i> cDKO), with ablation from the early phase of oocyte growth. Loss of EHMT1 in <i>Ehmt1</i> cKO and <i>Ehmt1/2</i> cDKO oocytes recapitulated meiotic defects observed in the <i>Ehmt2</i> cKO; however, there was a significant impairment in oocyte maturation and developmental competence in <i>Ehmt1</i> cKO and <i>Ehmt1/2</i> cDKO oocytes beyond that observed in the <i>Ehmt2</i> cKO. Consequently, loss of EHMT1 in oogenesis results, upon fertilization, in mid-gestation embryonic lethality. To identify H3K9 methylation and other meaningful biological changes in each mutant to explore the molecular functions of EHMT1 and EHMT2, we performed immunofluorescence imaging, multi-omics sequencing, and mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteome analyses in cKO oocytes. Although H3K9me1 was depleted only upon loss of EHMT1, H3K9me2 was decreased, and H3K9me2-enriched domains were eliminated equally upon loss of EHMT1 or EHMT2. Furthermore, there were more significant changes in the transcriptome, DNA methylome, and proteome in <i>Ehmt1/2</i> cDKO than <i>Ehmt2</i> cKO oocytes, with transcriptional derepression leading to increased protein abundance and local changes in genic DNA methylation in <i>Ehmt1/2</i> cDKO oocytes. Together, our findings suggest that EHMT1 contributes to local transcriptional repression in the oocyte, partially independent of EHMT2, and is critical for oogenesis and oocyte developmental competence.

### Keywords
Dna methylation, Glp/ehmt1, Epigenetics, Histone methyltransferase, Histone modification, H3k9 methylation, Oocyte

### Affiliations
Epigenetics Programme, Babraham Institute, Cambridge CB22 3AT, United Kingdom
Senior Scientific Assistant

### Submitter
Evangelia Papachristou

### Lab Head
Dr Gavin Kelsey
Epigenetics Programme, Babraham Institute, Cambridge CB22 3AT, United Kingdom


