### Accession
PXD039381

### Title
Proteomic analysis of sialoliths from calcified, lipid and mixed groups as a source of potential biomarkers of deposit formation in the salivary glands.

### Description
Salivary stones, also known as sialoliths, are formed in a pathological situation in the salivary glands. So far, neither the mechanism of their formation nor the factors predisposing to their formation are known. Although they do not directly threaten human life, they significantly deteriorate the patient's quality of life. Although this is not a typical research material, attempts are made to apply various analytical tools to characterize sialoliths and search for their biomarkers in their proteins. In this work, we used mass spectrometry and SWATH-MS qualitative and quantitative analysis to investigate the composition and select proteins that may contribute to solid deposits in the salivary glands. Twenty sialoliths, previously characterized spectroscopically and divided into the following groups: calcified (CAL), lipid (LIP) and mixed (MIX), were used for the study. Proteins unique for each of the groups were found, including: for the CAL group among them, e.g. proteins from the S100 group (S100 A8/A12 and P), mucin 7 (MUC7), keratins (KR1/2/4/5/13), elastase (ELANE) or stomatin (STOM); proteins for the LIP group - transthyretin (TTR), lactotransferrin (LTF), matrix Gla protein (MPG), submandibular gland androgen-regulated protein 3 (SMR3A); mixed stones had the fewest unique proteins. Bacterial proteins present in sialoliths have also been identified. The analysis of the results indicates the possible role of bacterial infections, disturbances in calcium metabolism and neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs) in the formation of sialoliths.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction from salivary stones.  The used approaches treating salivary stone samples were based on protocols described in the publication with the results of trial proteomic analysis of sialoliths [48]. The first step included crushing the stones into the powder in a mortar.  Procedure 1. The portion of the 50 mg of powdered sialolith was treated with 250 ul lysis buffer (1% SDS, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8,0, 50 mM DTT), incubated at 95°C for 20 minutes with mixing and left in the fridge at 4°C. The incubation with occasional mixing lasted one day, and then the supernatant was collected. The procedure was repeated three times, finally obtaining a supernatant fraction (three lysis buffer fractions combined).  Procedure 2. The portion of the 50 mg of powdered sialolith was treated with 250 ul lysis buffer (1% SDS, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8,0, 50 mM DTT), incubated at 95°C for 20 minutes with mixing and left in the fridge at 4°C with occasional mixing for 3 days. After this time, the supernatant was not collected – the whole fraction with powder and supernatant was used in the next step for supernatant/pellet digestion.  Protein digestion For the supernatant fraction obtained according to Procedure 1, standard FASP digestion was performed on a 10 kDa membrane [66]. For the supernatant/ stone powder mix from Procedure 2, FASP digestion was performed by introducing a pellet of stones and the supernatant onto a membrane. Further steps followed the classic FASP procedure; the stone pellets did not interfere with filtration and did not clog the membrane. In all cases, proteins were digested overnight at 37°C after adding trypsin. Obtained peptide fractions were prepared for MS analysis by final clean-up on C18 (exchange disks 3M EmporeTM) StageTips according to the protocol described by Rappsilber [67].

### Data Protocol
Qualitative analysis The results of MS analysis performed in DDA mode were analysed in PeaksSTUDIO software with the following settings: instrument – TripleTOF, fragmentation method – CID, acquisition – DDA, precursor mass tolerance error – 0,1 Da using monoisotopic mass, fragment ion tolerance – 0,2, digestion - trypsin, reduction and alkylation of proteins (fixed modification – carbamidomethylation; variable modification – acetylation N-term, oxidation M), maximum allowed variable PTM per peptide - 3. The raw data generated during MS analysis had to be converted from .wiff format to .mzML format with MSconvert software [61]. First, the data were analysed against the Homo sapiens database (Uniprot, 15.11.2021) and then, using the Multi-Round Search function, were analysed against the entire bacterial database (Uniprot, 15.11.2021). It allowed for identifying proteins from different organisms in one experiment.  Quantitative analysis Data were analysed in PeakView 2.2 software (SCIEX), and DIA spectra were processed against the constructed sialoliths spectral library, which was constructed using ProteinPilot 4.5 software (Sciex; Homo sapiens database, Uniprot, 01.02.2022) from DDA spectra for all clinical samples, pooled ones (HPLC and SageELF fractionated). After processing all of the clinical samples registered in DIA mode in PeakView software according to settings described by Lewandowska [60], SWATH data were generated.  Statistical and enrichment data analysis First, SWATH results were analysed to identify statistically significant proteins. First, final files from PeakView software were exported to MarkerView 1.2.1.1 software (Sciex). Data were normalized with the use total area sums (TAS) approach. Then, the output table was exported to Perseus 1.6.13 software (MaxQuant) [62] for the normalization of data (log2(x)), and their statistical tests were performed to get the q-value (adjusted p-value; q-value<0,05) for each protein. This software also calculated fold change values (FC) for each protein and sample, so sets of proteins were obtained, which are up-regulated and down-regulated. Control was pooled sample. Based on the results of the quantitative analysis, the enrichment analysis was carried out. For this purpose, several bioinformatic tools were used: STRING 11.5 [63], Gene Set Annotation (GSAn) [64] and g:Profiler [65]. The results were visualized in the Cytoscape 3.9.1 software [75]. Venn diagram was generated with the use InteractiVenn tool [66]

### Publication Abstract
Salivary stones, also known as sialoliths, are formed in a pathological situation in the salivary glands. So far, neither the mechanism of their formation nor the factors predisposing to their formation are known despite several hypotheses. While they do not directly threaten human life, they significantly deteriorate the patient's quality of life. Although this is not a typical research material, attempts are made to apply various analytical tools to characterise sialoliths and search for the biomarkers in their proteomes. In this work, we used mass spectrometry and SWATH-MS qualitative and quantitative analysis to investigate the composition and select proteins that may contribute to solid deposits in the salivary glands. Twenty sialoliths, previously characterized spectroscopically and divided into the following groups: calcified (CAL), lipid (LIP) and mixed (MIX), were used for the study. Proteins unique for each of the groups were found, including: for the CAL group among them, e.g. proteins from the S100 group (S100 A8/A12 and P), mucin 7 (MUC7), keratins (KRT1/2/4/5/13), elastase (ELANE) or stomatin (STOM); proteins for the LIP group-transthyretin (TTR), lactotransferrin (LTF), matrix Gla protein (MPG), submandibular gland androgen-regulated protein 3 (SMR3A); mixed stones had the fewest unique proteins. Bacterial proteins present in sialoliths have also been identified. The analysis of the results indicates the possible role of bacterial infections, disturbances in calcium metabolism and neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs) in the formation of sialoliths.

### Keywords
Salivary stones, Sialolithiasis, Functional analysis, Mass spectrometry, Swath-ms

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Mass Spectrometry Intercollegiate Faculty of Biotechnology UG-MUG
Intercollegiate Faculty of Biotechnology UG&MUG

### Submitter
Natalia Musiał

### Lab Head
Dr Paulina Czaplewska
Laboratory of Mass Spectrometry Intercollegiate Faculty of Biotechnology UG-MUG


