### Accession
PXD006087

### Title
Astrocyte-shed extracellular vesicles regulate the peripheral leukocyte response to inflammatory brain lesions

### Description
Brain injury induces a peripheral acute cytokine response (ACR) that directs the transmigration of leukocytes into brain. This brain-to-peripheral immune communication affects patient recovery, thus understanding how it is regulated is important. Contrary to expectations   it is not regulated by sympathetic innervation. Using a mouse model of an inflammatory brain injuryXXX  , we set out to find a soluble mediator for this phenomenon. We found that extracellular vesicles (EVs) shed from astrocytes in response to intracerbral injection of interleukin-1 (IL-1) rapidly entered into peripheral circulation and promoted the transmigration of leukocytes through modulation of the peripheral ACR. Bioinformatic interrogation of the protein and miRNA cargo of EVs identified Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-α (PPAR-α)   as a primary molecular target of astrocyte-shed EVs. We confirmed in mice that astrocytic EVs promoted the transmigration of leukocytes into the brain by modulating inhibiting  PPAR and presumably subsequentlyresulting in the increase of NF-κB activity thus,   triggering the production of cytokines in liver. These findings expand our basic understanding of the mechanisms regulating communication between the brain and peripheral immune system, and identify astrocytic EVs as a molecular regulator of the immunological response to inflammatory brain damage.

### Sample Protocol
EV isolated from astrocytes were digested with trypsin overnight. LC–MS/MS analyses were performed on an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Electron, Bremen, Germany) mass spectrometer with an attachment of Eksigent 2D nanoflow LC system. The samples were dissolved in 8 μL of solvent, and 7.5 μL of it was used for injection. The reverse phase LC system used consisted of two parts: a peptide trap column (75 μm × 2 cm) and an analytical column (75 μm × 10 cm), which were both packed with Magic AQ C18 material (5 μm, 120 Å, www.michrom.com). After elution, the peptides were sprayed directly into an LTQ Orbitrap Velos at 2.0 kV, with a flow rate of 300 nL/min, using an electrospray (internal diameter: 8 μm) emitter tip (New Objective, Woburn, MA) with a capillary temperature of 200 ºC. The entire tandem-MS analysis was carried out in Orbitrap instrument at 60 000 and 7500 resolution (measured at m/z 400) for precursor and the fragment ions, respectively. FTMS full MS and MSn AGC target were set to 1 million and 50 000 ions, respectively. Additionally, survey scans were acquired from m/z ratio of 350–1800 with up to 15 peptide masses (precursor ions) individually isolated with a 1.9 Da window and fragmented (MS/MS) using a collision energy of 35% in a higher collision dissociation (HCD) cell and 30 s dynamic exclusion. Minimum signal requirement for triggering an MS2 scan was set to 2000, and the first mass value was fixed at m/z ratio of 140. An ambient air lock mass was set at m/z ratio of 371.10123 for real-time calibration.17 Monoisotopic precursor mass selection and rejection of singly charged ion criteria were enabled for the MS/MS analysis. with precursor and the fragment ions analyzed at resolution 30,000 and 15,000, respectively.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified from the MS/MS spectra extracted in Proteome Discoverer (v1.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific) interfaced with Mascot (v 2.5, Matrix science, London) to search the SwissProt_2014_07 database with the following criteria: Mus musculus species; precursor and the fragment ions mass tolerance of 0.050 Da and and 15 ppm, respectively; fixed modification cysteine carbamidomethylation; and variable modifications of asparagine and glutamine deamination, methionine oxidation, and serine, threonine, and tyrosine phosphorylation. Protein identifications were confirmed using Scaffold v4.4.1 (Proteome Software Inc) at > 91% probability with < 1% false discovery rate (FDR) with at least two peptides sequences per protein.   The gene ontology classifications were carried out in Scaffold v4.4.1 (Proteome Software Inc.). Proteins were classified using the Protein Analysis Through Evolutionary Relationship (PANTHER) tool

### Publication Abstract
Brain injury induces a peripheral acute cytokine response that directs the transmigration of leukocytes into the brain. Because this brain-to-peripheral immune communication affects patient recovery, understanding its regulation is important. Using a mouse model of inflammatory brain injury, we set out to find a soluble mediator for this phenomenon. We found that extracellular vesicles (EVs) shed from astrocytes in response to intracerebral injection of interleukin-1&#x3b2; (IL-1&#x3b2;) rapidly entered into peripheral circulation and promoted the transmigration of leukocytes through modulation of the peripheral acute cytokine response. Bioinformatic analysis of the protein and microRNA cargo of EVs identified peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor &#x3b1; (PPAR&#x3b1;) as a primary molecular target of astrocyte-shed EVs. We confirmed in mice that astrocytic EVs promoted the transmigration of leukocytes into the brain by inhibiting PPAR&#x3b1;, resulting in the increase of nuclear factor &#x3ba;B (NF-&#x3ba;B) activity that triggered the production of cytokines in liver. These findings expand our understanding of the mechanisms regulating communication between the brain and peripheral immune system and identify astrocytic EVs as a molecular regulator of the immunological response to inflammatory brain damage.

### Keywords
Il-1beta, Extracellular vesicles, Neuroinflammation, Brain injury

### Affiliations
Departments of Neurology and Psychiatry, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA, 21287;
University of Turku

### Submitter
Alex Dickens

### Lab Head
Dr Norman J Haughey
Departments of Neurology and Psychiatry, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA, 21287;


