### Accession
PXD028632

### Title
Multi-omic Characterization of Pancreatic Cancer-Associated Macrophage Polarization Reveals Deregulated Metabolic Programs Driven by the GMCSF-PI3K Pathway

### Description
The pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) microenvironment is composed of a variety of cell types and marked by extensive fibrosis and inflammation. Tumor-associated macrophages (TAM) are abundant, and they are important mediators of disease progression and invasion. TAMs are polarized in situ to a tumor promoting and immunosuppressive phenotype via cytokine signaling and metabolic crosstalk from malignant epithelial cells and other components of the tumor microenvironment (TME).  However, the specific distinguishing features and functions of TAMs remain poorly defined. Here, we generated tumor-educated macrophages (TEM) in vitro and performed detailed, multi-omic characterization (i.e. transcriptomics, proteomics, metabolomics). Our results reveal unique genetic and metabolic signatures of TEMs, the veracity of which were queried against our in-house single cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) dataset of human pancreatic tumors. This analysis identified expression of novel, metabolic TEM markers in human pancreatic TAMs, including ARG1, ACLY, and TXNIP. We then utilized our TEM model system to study the role of mutant Kras signaling in cancer cells on TEM polarization. This revealed an important role for GM-CSF and lactate on TEM polarization, molecules released from cancer cells in a mutant Kras-dependent manner. Lastly, we demonstrate that GM-CSF dysregulates TEM gene expression and metabolism through PI3K-AKT pathway signaling. Collectively, our results define new markers and programs to classify pancreatic TAMs, how these are engaged by cancer cells, and the precise signaling pathways mediating polarization.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation: Six total samples from six macrophage subtypes were prepared in duplicate for mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics. The supernatant of each sample’s cell lysate was collected to obtain >70ug of total protein or a protein concentration of 2 ug/ul per sample. Samples were stored at −80 °C until the proteomics experiments. Tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling: Tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling was performed for mass spectrometry (MS) using the TMT 6-plex isobaric labeling kit (ThermoFisher, Cat #90111) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Two TMT kits were used to label the duplicate sets of the 6 macrophage samples. 60 μg of protein lysates from each sample were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 45 °C for 1 hour, followed by alkylation with 15 mM 2-chloroacetamide at room temperature for 30 minutes. Proteins were precipitated by adding 6 volumes of cold acetone and incubating at −20 °C overnight and were later pelleted by centrifuging at 8000 × g at 4 °C for 10 minutes. Supernatants were discarded, and pellets were resuspended in 100 μl of 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) and subsequently digested overnight at 37 °C by adding 1.1 μg of sequencing-grade modified porcine trypsin (Promega, V5113). TMT reagents were reconstituted in 40 μl of anhydrous acetonitrile, and digested peptides were transferred to the TMT reagent vial and incubated at room temperature for 1 hour. The reaction was quenched with 8 μl of 5% hydroxylamine and incubated for 15 minutes. For each of the two TMT experiments, the six samples were combined and dried, followed by 2-dimensional (2D) separation, with the first dimension containing an aliquot from each sample mixture (100 μg). The samples then underwent fractionation using a high pH reverse phase fractionation kit according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Pierce). Fourteen fractions per experiment were dried and reconstituted in 10 μl of loading buffer, 0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile. Liquid chromatography (LC)-MS3 analysis: For raw data acquisition from a total of 28 runs (14 in duplicate), an Orbitrap Fusion (ThermoFisher) and Rapid Separation Liquid Chromatography (RSLC) Systems UltiMate 3000 nano-Ultra Performance Liquid Chromatography (UPLC) (Dionex) were used. To increase accuracy and confidence in protein abundance measurements, a multinotch-MS3 analysis method was employed for MS data analysis. Two microliters from each fraction were resolved in 2D on a nanocapillary reverse phase column (Acclaim PepMap C18, 2 micron particle size, 75 μm diameter × 50 cm length, ThermoFisher) using a 0.1% formic/acetonitrile gradient at 300 nL/min (2–22% acetonitrile in 150 min, 22–32% acetonitrile in 40 min, 20 minute wash at 90% acetonitrile, followed by 50 minute re-equilibration) and sprayed directly onto the Orbitrap Fusion with EasySpray (ThermoFisher; Spray voltage (positive ion) = 1900 V, Spray voltage (negative ion) = 600 V, method duration = 180 minutes, ion source type = nanoelectrospray ionization (NSI)). The mass spectrometer was set to collect the MS1 scan (Orbitrap; 120 K resolution; automatic gain control (AGC) target 2 × 105; max injection time (IT) 100 ms), and then data-dependent Top Speed (3 sec) MS2 scans (collision-induced dissociation; ion trap; NCD 35; AGC 5 × 103; max IT 100 ms). For multinotch-MS3 analysis, the top 10 precursor ions from each MS2 scan were fragmented by high-energy collisional dissociation (HCD), followed by Orbitrap analysis (NCE 55; 60 K resolution; AGC 5 × 104; max IT 120 ms; 100-500 m/z scan range).

### Data Protocol
TMT quantification and data analysis: Protein identification and TMT quantification were performed using Proteome Discoverer (v2.1, ThermoFisher Scientific).  MS2 spectra were searched against M musculus protein database (UniProt, 25,510 entries, downloaded on 10/03/2017) using the following search parameters: MS1 and MS2 tolerance were set to 10 ppm and 0.6 Da, respectively; carbamidomethylation of cysteines (57.02146 Da) and TMT labeling of lysine and N-termini of peptides (229.16293 Da) were considered static modifications; oxidation of methionine (15.9949 Da) and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine (0.98401 Da) were considered variable.  Percolator PSM validator was used to filter Identified proteins and peptides to retain only those that passed ≤2% FDR threshold.  Quantitation was performed using high-quality MS3 spectra (Average signal-to-noise ratio of 6 and <50% isolation interference).   A total of 6,919 proteins were quantified and 5,437 proteins were common in the two TMT experiments. The mean and median of Pearson correlation coefficients between the abundance profiles of individual proteins in both TMT datasets were 0.68 and 0.84, respectively. There were 3,631 proteins whose abundance profile correlations were greater than the mean, which we considered consistent between the two TMT experiments. For downstream analysis, the mean-centered normalized data were used. The candidate markers of differentially abundant proteins for each macrophage subtype were identified by a one-tailed t-test for each direction of up- and/or down-regulation against the remaining subtypes with a p-value threshold of 0.001. No multiple testing correction was made in favor of downstream functional analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Polarization, Proteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Metabolism, Macrophage

### Affiliations
Yale University
Department of Molecular & Integrative Physiology, Department of Internal Medicine,  Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology,  University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA

### Submitter
Ho-Joon Lee

### Lab Head
Dr Costas A. Lyssiotis
Department of Molecular & Integrative Physiology, Department of Internal Medicine,  Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology,  University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA


