### Accession
PXD018395

### Title
Exoproteomes of marine cyanobacteria grown under different regimes to detect their pili production; analysed by LC-MS/MS

### Description
Exoproteomes generated from Synechococcus sp. WH7803 and Prochlorococcus sp. MIT9313 cultures grown under different nutrient, light and temperature conditions. The aim was to see how the production of the pili were affected. Exoproteomes of marine Prochlorococcus under different growth regimes analysed by LC-MS/MS

### Sample Protocol
Synechococcus sp. WH7803 was grown in ASW medium and oligotrophic seawater using conditions previously described [Christie-Oleza et al 2017 Nat Microbiol.]. Experiments were performed using 20 ml cultures contained in Falcon 25cm² rectangular cell culture flasks with vented caps. Cultures were incubated at 22 °C at a light intensity of 10 μmol photons m−2 s−1 with shaking (140 r.p.m.). To study the influence of nutrients on pili production, media was prepared by i) not adding different nutrient sources from the ASW media, i.e. nitrogen, phosphorous and trace metals, or ii) diluting ASW in oligotrophic seawater (i.e. 1:1000, 1:100 and 1:10). The low light-adapted ecotype Prochlorococcus sp. MIT9313 was grown in 40 ml Pro99 medium and PCR-S11 medium with no vitamins. Different light intensities (i.e. 4 and 15 μmol photons m−2 s−1) and temperatures (i.e. 14 and 22 °C) were tested. 20 ml of cultures were centrifuged at 4,000 xg for 15 min at 21 °C and supernatants were further filtered through 0.2 um filters to remove all cells. Exoproteomes were concentrated using a trichloroacetic acid precipitation protocol and prepared for LC-MS/MS via an in-gel trypsin digestion as previously described [Christie-Oleza et al 2010 Marine Drugs]. Tryptic peptides were analysed with an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Dionex), using conditions described [Christie-Oleza et al 2017 Nat Microbiol].

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were identified using Synechococcus sp. WH7803 and Prochlorococcus sp. MIT9313 UniProt databases (downloaded on 09/11/2017) and quantified using default parameters in MaxQuant v1.6.10.43. Comparative proteomic analyses were performed using MS intensity values in Perseus v1.6.2.2.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Prochlorococcus, Pili, Exoproteomes, Synechococcus, Nutrient limitation

### Affiliations
Universitat de les Illes Balears
University of the Balearic Islands

### Submitter
Joseph Christie-Oleza

### Lab Head
Dr Joseph A. Christie-Oleza
University of the Balearic Islands


