### Accession
PXD017005

### Title
Rhododendron hainanense SWATH-MS

### Description
Heat stress is the primary obstacle for landscape application of azalea in hot-summer areas. Heat acclimation can confer acquired thermotolerance to R. hainanense even after a long recovery. The mechanisms and key factors involved in the heat acclimation memory were investigated.

### Sample Protocol
Plants were subjected to three different pretreatments: non-acclimation (NA), acclimation (AC) (37°C, 1h) and acclimation with recovery (AR), before heat stress (42/35°C). There were three biological replicates for each treatment. Two sampling time points: initial time point before heat stress(NA/AC/AR) and 7 d of long-term heat stress (NA/AC/AR_LHS) were selected.Approximately 0.5 g of leaves were used for protein extraction and trypsin digestion. The SWATH-MS spectral ion library was first generated with mixed samples using data-dependent acquisition (DDA) on a mass spectrometer Q-Exactive HF (Thermo Fisher Scientific). And individual samples were detected with data-independent acquisition (DIA) mode.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant was used for identification of DDA data and information satisfying FDR<=1% will be used to establish the final spectral library. ProteinPilot 4.5 (Sciex) was used to search all of the DDA data thoroughly against the UniProt Swiss-Prot protein database to generate a spectral library. DIA data were quantified with Spectronaut and differentially expressed proteins (DEP) were identified and enriched using MSstats at fold change >=2 and P value<0.05. Protein and protein interaction (PPI) was performed using STRING database and the first 100 credibility of the interaction relation were selected to draw the network interaction graph. Prediction of subcellular localization of proteins was carried out with WoLF PSORT.

### Publication Abstract
Plants can obtain superinduction of defense against unpredictable challenges based on prior acclimation, but the mechanisms involved in the acclimation memory are little known. The objective of this study was to characterize mechanisms of heat acclimation memory in <i>Rhododendron hainanense</i>, a thermotolerant wild species of azalea. Pretreatment of a 2-d recovery (25/18&#xb0;C, day/night) after heat acclimation (37&#xb0;C, 1&#xa0;h) (AR-pt) did not weaken but enhanced acquired thermotolerance in <i>R. hainanense</i> with less damaged phenotype, net photosynthetic rate, and membrane stability than non-acclimation pretreated (NA-pt) plants. Combined transcriptome and proteome analysis revealed that a lot of heat-responsive genes still maintained high protein abundance rather than transcript level after the 2-d recovery. Photosynthesis-related genes were highly enriched and most decreased under heat stress (HS: 42&#xb0;C, 1&#xa0;h) with a less degree in AR-pt plants compared to NA-pt. Sustainably accumulated chloroplast-localized heat shock proteins (HSPs), Rubisco activase 1 (RCA1), beta-subunit of chaperonin-60 (CPN60&#x3b2;), and plastid transcriptionally active chromosome 5 (pTAC5) in the recovery period probably provided equipped protection of AR-pt plants against the subsequent HS, with less damaged photochemical efficiency and chloroplast structure. In addition, significant higher levels of RCA1 transcripts in AR-pt compared to NA-pt plants in early stage of HS showed a more important role of RCA1 than other chaperonins in heat acclimation memory. The novel heat-induced RCA1, rather than constitutively expressed RCA2 and RCA3, showed excellent thermostability after long-term HS (LHS: 42/35&#xb0;C, 7&#xa0;d) and maintained balanced Rubisco activation state in photosynthetic acclimation. This study provides new insights into plant heat acclimation memory and indicates candidate genes for genetic modification and molecular breeding in thermotolerance improvement.

### Keywords
Proteomic, Leaf, Azalea

### Affiliations
College of Agriculture and Biotechnology, Zhejiang University
Zhejiang University

### Submitter
Xiuyun Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Yiping Xia
College of Agriculture and Biotechnology, Zhejiang University


