### Accession
PXD032925

### Title
Distinct roles of the two Elongator subcomplexes during neurodevelopment

### Description
The highly conserved Elongator complex is a translational regulator and a subject of growing interest due to its critical role in neurodevelopment, neurological diseases and brain tumors. Clinically relevant mutations have been reported in the catalytic Elp123 subcomplex, while no mutation in the accessory subcomplex Elp456 have been described so far. Here, we identify pathogenic variants of ELP4 and ELP6 in patients with developmental delay, epilepsy as well as intellectual and motor impairment. We use single particle cryo-EM to determine the structures of human and murine Elp456 subcomplexes and reconstitute an active mouse Elongator comprising of all six subunits. We show that patient derived mutations in Elp456 affect the affinity for specific tRNA molecules and diminish the tRNA modification activity of Elongator in vitro as well as in human and murine cells. Modelling the mutations in mice recapitulates the clinical features of the patients and reveals neuropathology that differs from the one caused by previously characterized Elp123 mutations. Altogether, our study demonstrates a direct correlation between Elp4 and Elp6 mutations, reduced Elongator activity and neurological defects. Foremost, our data indicate distinct roles of the Elp123 and Elp456 subcomplexes for different tRNA species, in different cell types and in different key steps during the neurodevelopment of higher organisms.

### Sample Protocol
Total of 9 samples were analysed, ELP4Y91C/L296I, ELP6L118W/L118W and commercially available control fibroblasts (TIG-102; JCRB Cell Bank), n = 3 per genotype. The samples were excised from each lane of the Coomassie blue-stained SDS PAGE gel and placed into separate Eppendorf tubes (10 gel pieces per each lane/sample were obtained). Destaining of these samples was performed by adding 500 µl of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate/acetonitrile (1:1; vol/vol) buffer and incubating the samples for 30 min. The buffer was replaced with 200 µl of acetonitrile in two separate batches. Upon removal of acetonitrile, the gel pieces were covered with 200 µl of sequence-grade trypsin of 20 ng/µl concentration in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8 buffer (Promega Corporation) and incubated at 37 °C overnight. Next day, 200 µl of 5% formic acid/acetonitrile (3:1; vol/vol) was added to the samples. The supernatant with the trypsin solution was transferred to a clean tube for each sample and dried in a vacuum centrifuge. Prior to high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) and mass spectrometry (MS) analysis, 12 µl of 1% (vol/vol) TFA in water was added to each tube, followed by centrifugation for 1 min at 12,000 × g. The tryptic peptide extracts were analyzed by nano- HPLC and MS on an Eksigent, Ekspert nano LC400 HPLC (SCIEX, Canada) coupled to a Triple TOF 6,600 mass spectrometer (SCIEX, Canada) with a PicoView nanoflow ion source (New Objective, USA). Two microliters of extract for each sample was injected onto a 5 mm × 300 µm, C18 3 µm trap column (SGE, Australia) for 5 min at 10 µl/min. This was followed by washing the trapped tryptic peptide extracts onto analytical 75 µm × 150 mm ChromXP C18 CL 3 µm column (SCIEX, Canada) at 400 nl/min flow rate at 45 °C. For peptide elution, a linear gradient of 2–40% of 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile over 60 min at 400 nl/min was used, followed by 40–90% gradient and then 90% of this solvent, each for 5 min. Following each elution, the gradient was returned to 2% of 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile for equilibration prior to injecting the next sample. The ionspray voltage was set to 2600 V, declustering potential (DP) 80 V, curtain gas flow 30, nebuliser gas 1 (GS1) 30, interface heater at 150 °C. 50 ms full-scan TOF-mass spectrometry (TOF-MS) data was acquired by the spectrometer, followed by up to 30 100 ms full-scan product ion data with a rolling collision energy and in an Information Dependant Acquisition (IDA) mode. The TOF-MS data were acquired over the mass range 350–1800 and for product ion ms/ms 100–1500. Ions in the TOF-MS scan that were found to exceed a 200 counts threshold and +2 to +5 charge state were set to trigger the acquisition of product ions.

### Data Protocol
Data were acquired under the same HPLC and mass spectrometry experimental conditions, with the following exceptions. Data were acquired using a SWATH, product ion ms/ms all approach. The SWATH experiment was set to acquire 100 product ion spectra from m/z 350 to 1500 per scan cycle with a product ion window was set to 6 Da and collision energy from 16 to 60 V with an energy spread of 5 V. The TOF-MS scan acquisition time was set to 50 ms and each product ion scan to 25 ms. The data were acquired and processed using Analyst TF 1.7 software (ABSCIEX, Canada). Protein identification and library compilation were carried out using Protein Pilot 5.0.2 for database searching. Peptide sequence identification and protein grouping were conducted by merging all individual IDA acquisition file from the gel fractions using the Paragon algorithm from Protein Pilot 5.0.2 against the Homo sapiens Uniprot database complemented by the contaminant sequences from thegpm.org/crap/ with the following parameters: Cys alkylation was set to iodoacetamide, Trypsin was chosen as digestion enzyme, Special Factors: Gel-based-ID was enabled to account for potential, ID Focus: Biological modifications, Thorough ID, ProtScore (Conf) >10%, and False discovery analysis. The processing settings were set as follows for the peak area extraction in all SWATH acquisition using the local generated ion library: Number of peptides per Protein: 6, Number of Transitions per Peptides: 6, Peptide Confidence Threshold: 99%, <1% FDR. Modified peptides were excluded for the protein quantitation and XIC extraction window: 15 min with a mass width of 50 ppm and retention times were aligned using a set of high intense Trypsin autodigest peptides. The ion, peptide, and protein area were exported as a text file and the integrated area values for each protein that was present in different gel bands for each gel lane were summed before statistical evaluations, correlation of variation, and fold change computation. Normalization evaluations were done using the Normalyzer tool. A total number of 2730 peptides corresponding to 660 proteins were identified by DIA/SWATH-MS.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Intellectual disability, Epilepsy, Fibroblasts, Homo sapiens, Developmental delay

### Affiliations
Senior Research Officer, WEHI, Parkville, VIC
Lab Head, UQ Diamantina Institute,The University of Queensland

### Submitter
Ahmed Mohamed

### Lab Head
Dr Brandon Wainwright
Lab Head, UQ Diamantina Institute,The University of Queensland


