### Accession
PXD029047

### Title
Multilayered Regulation of Autophagy by the Atg1 Kinase Orchestrates Spatial and Temporal Control of Autophagosome Formation

### Description
Autophagy is a conserved intracellular degradation pathway exerting various cytoprotective and homeostatic functions by utilizing de novo double membrane vesicle (autophagosome) formation to target a wide range of cytoplasmic material for vacuolar/lysosomal degradation. The Atg1 kinase is one of its key regulators coordinating a complex signaling program to orchestrate autophagosome formation. Combining in vitro reconstitution and cell based approaches, we demonstrate that Atg1 is activated by lipidated Atg8 (Atg8-PE) stimulating substrate phosphorylation along the growing autophagosomal membrane. Atg1 dependent phosphorylation of Atg13 triggers Atg1 complex dissociation resulting in rapid turnover of Atg1 complex subunits at the pre-autophagosomal structure. Moreover, Atg1 recruitment by Atg8-PE self-regulates Atg8-PE levels in the growing autophagosomal membrane by phosphorylating and inhibiting the Atg8 specific E2 and E3. Taken together, our work uncovers the molecular basis for positive and negative feedback imposed by Atg1, and opposing phosphorylation and dephosphorylation events governing the spatiotemporal regulation of autophagy.

### Sample Protocol
Atg proteins (2 μM) were phosphorylated by Atg1 (50 nM) in vitro. Samples were TCA precipitated and the resultant pellets were washed twice with ice-cold acetone and resuspended in ABC Urea buffer (50 mM NH4HCO3, 8 M Urea). TCEP was added to a final concentration of 5 mM and samples were incubate for 30 minutes at room temperature. Iodoacetamide was added to a final concentration of 10 mM and reactions were incubated for 30 minutes in the dark at room temperature. Samples were diluted to a final urea concentration of 6 M using ABC buffer (50 mM NH4HCO3) and Lysyl-endopeptidase (LysC; Wako) was added (1:100). Digests were incubated shaking for 4-5 hours at 37ºC. Samples were diluted to 2 M Urea and incubated with trypsin overnight shaking in the dark. Formic acid (FA) was added to a final concentration of 1% and samples were loaded on a pre-equilibrated C18 Sep-PAK column (Waters). Columns were washed with 2% acetonitrile ACN containing 0.1% FA and samples were eluted with 50% ACN containing 0.1% FA. Samples were dried in a SpeedVac, resuspended in 5% ACN containing 0.1% FA, sonicated and analysed by mass spectrometry.  The same procedure was followed for endogenous Atg3 and Atg12 containing samples with the only differences that samples were not TCA precipitated and only trypsin was used for protein digestion. C18 cleaned samples were phospho-enriched using the High-Select Fe-NTA Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) following the manufacturer’s instructions.  Mass spectrometry data were acquired in data dependent acquisition mode using a 5600 TripleTOF (Sciex) or LTQ-Orbitrap XL (Thermo Fisher Scientific) instrument for in vitro kinase reactions, or a TimsTOF Pro for endogenously purified Atg3 samples. For TripleTOF acquisition peptides were separated using an Eksigent NanoLC Ultra nanoLC system using a 60 min gradient from 2–35% (buffer A 0.1% (v/v) formic acid, 2% (v/v) acetonitrile, buffer B 0.1% (v/v) formic acid, 90% (v/v) acetonitrile) after direct injection onto a 20-cm PicoFrit emitter (New Objective) packed to 20 cm with Magic C18 AQ 3-μm 200-Å stationary phase. MS1 spectra were collected for 250 ms with nominal resolving power of 30,000. The 20 most intense precursors with charge state 2–5 were selected for fragmentation, and MS2 spectra were collected in the range 50–2,000 m/z for 100 ms with nominal resolving power of 15,000 (high sensitivity mode); precursor ions were excluded from reselection for 15 s. For LTQ-Orbitrap XL acquisition peptide separation was carried out by reversed phase on a Proxeon EASY-nLC II liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The reverse phase column (75 mm x 10 cm) was packed with Magic C18 AQ 3-μm 200-Å stationary phase. A linear gradient from 5% to 35% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid was run for 60 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Data acquisition was set to obtain one high resolution MS scan in the Orbitrap (60,000 at 400 m/z) followed by six collision induced fragmentation (CID) MS/MS fragment ion spectra in the linear trap quadrupole (LTQ). Orbitrap charge state screening was enabled and ions with unassigned or single charge states were rejected. The dynamic exclusion window was set to 15 s and limited to 300 entries. The minimal precursor ion current to trigger CID and MS/MS scan was set to 150. The ion accumulation time was set to 500 ms (MS) and 250 ms (MS/MS) using a target setting of 106 (MS) and 104 (MS/MS) ions. For TimsTOF Pro data acquisition peptide separation was carried on a nanoElute liquid chromatography system (Bruker) using a reversed phase nanoElute TEN (Bruker) 75mm x 10 cm column packed with 1.9 μm C18 ReproSil AQ beads maintained at 50°C using a linear gradient from 3% to 28% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid at 400 nl/min over 60 minutes. Data was acquired In ddaPASEF mode (Meier et al., 2018) using the vendor provided standard 1.1 second cycle time acquisition method (10 PASEF ramps per cycle, collision energy ramp 20-59 V).

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched in MaxQuant v1.6.12.0 (Cox and Mann, 2008) against a yeast protein sequence database retrieved from UniProt (September 2020 - strain ATCC 204508 / S288c – taxon identifier – 559292 - containing 6164 sequences) appended with common contaminants, affinity tag sequences, and decoys generated by protein sequence reversal. Search settings were set to fully-tryptic cleavage with 2 missed cleavages allowed, variable modification of oxidation allowed on methionine, phosphorylation on serine/threonine/tyrosine, acetylation on protein N-terminus and fixed modification of carbamidomethylation on cysteines. All other search parameters were set to default for the respective instruments. False discovery rate was controlled at 1% at peptide and protein levels. For quantification we extracted MS1 level extracted Ion chromatograms using Skyline v20.2.1.404. Mapping of peptide identifications and phosphosite localizations was performed by Importing MaxQuant search results into Skyline.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Atg8 lipidation, Protein phosphatases, Metabolism, Signalling, Protein kinases, Autophagy, Ubiquitin-like proteins

### Affiliations
Queen's University Belfast

### Submitter
Ben Collins

### Lab Head
Dr Ben Collins
Queen's University Belfast


