### Accession
PXD018389

### Title
Airway exosomes released during influenza virus infection serve as a key component of the antiviral innate immune response

### Description
Exosomes are extracellular vesicles secreted by cells that have an important biological function in intercellular communication by transferring biologically active proteins, lipids, and RNAs to neighbouring or distant cells. While a role for exosomes in antimicrobial defence has recently emerged, currently very little is known regarding the nature and functional relevance of exosomes generated in vivo, particularly during an active viral infection. Here, we characterised exosomes released into the airways during influenza virus infection. We show that these vesicles dynamically change in protein composition over the course of infection, increasing expression of host proteins with known anti-influenza activity, and viral proteins with the potential to trigger host immune responses. We show that exosomes released into the airways during influenza virus infection trigger pulmonary inflammation and carry viral antigen that can be utilized by antigen presenting cells to drive the induction of a cellular immune response. Moreover, we show that attachment factors for influenza virus, namely α2,3 and α2,6-linked sialic acids, are present on the surface of airway exosomes and these vesicles have the ability to neutralize influenza virus, thereby preventing the virus from binding and entering target cells. These data reveal a novel role for airway exosomes in the antiviral innate immune defence against influenza virus infection.

### Sample Protocol
Exosomes were prepared for mass spectrometry analysis using the SP3 protocol but with some modifications. On bead enzymatic digest (Trypsin/LysC) was performed for 1 hour followed by C18 stage tip clean up. Peptides were analysed by nano LC-MS/MS analysis on a Bruker Impact II QTOF coupled to a Waters MClass HPLC.

### Data Protocol
Raw files consisting of high-resolution MS/MS spectra were processed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.5.1) for feature detection and protein identification using the Andromeda search engine 35.  Extracted peak lists were searched against the reviewed Mus musculus (UniProt, July 2015) and Influenza A virus (strain A/X-31 H3N2) databases as well as a separate reverse decoy database to empirically assess the false discovery rate (FDR) using strict trypsin specificity, allowing up to 2 missed cleavages.  The minimum required peptide length was set to 7 amino acids.  In the main search, precursor mass tolerance was 0.006 Da and fragment mass tolerance was 40 ppm. The search included variable modifications of oxidation (methionine), amino-terminal acetylation, the addition of pyroglutamate (at N-termini of glutamine) and a fixed modification of carbamidomethyl (cysteine). The “match between runs” option in MaxQuant was used to transfer identifications made between runs on the basis of matching precursors with high mass accuracy. LFQ quantification was selected, with a minimum ratio count of 2.  The time-course analysis was performed in R using the package time course using the proteins’ LFQ_Intensity values and were ranked according to the Hotelling’s T-squared statistic resulted from the analysis. Clustering of the top 150 proteins was done in Spotfire (TIBCO) using k-means algorithm and using correlation as a distance metric.

### Publication Abstract
Exosomes are extracellular vesicles secreted by cells that have an important biological function in intercellular communication by transferring biologically active proteins, lipids, and RNAs to neighboring or distant cells. While a role for exosomes in antimicrobial defense has recently emerged, currently very little is known regarding the nature and functional relevance of exosomes generated <i>in vivo</i>, particularly during an active viral infection. Here, we characterized exosomes released into the airways during influenza virus infection. We show that these vesicles dynamically change in protein composition over the course of infection, increasing expression of host proteins with known anti-influenza activity, and viral proteins with the potential to trigger host immune responses. We show that exosomes released into the airways during influenza virus infection trigger pulmonary inflammation and carry viral antigen that can be utilized by antigen presenting cells to drive the induction of a cellular immune response. Moreover, we show that attachment factors for influenza virus, namely &#x3b1;2,3 and &#x3b1;2,6-linked sialic acids, are present on the surface of airway exosomes and these vesicles have the ability to neutralize influenza virus, thereby preventing the virus from binding and entering target cells. These data reveal a novel role for airway exosomes in the antiviral innate immune defense against influenza virus infection.

### Keywords
Mucosal immunity, Airway inflammation, Influenza, Antiviral activity, Exosomes

### Affiliations
Laboratory Head,  Microbiology and Immunology Department, The University of Melbourne, Australia
WEHI

### Submitter
Laura Dagley

### Lab Head
Dr Linda Wakim
Laboratory Head,  Microbiology and Immunology Department, The University of Melbourne, Australia


