### Accession
PXD025346

### Title
SPI-ART and the features of cis-spliced peptides in HLA class I immunopeptidomes

### Description
The identification of peptides presented by HLA class I molecules to CD8+ T cells – i.e. the HLA-I immunopeptidome - is a useful tool to fish epitopes suitable for vaccinations and immunotherapies against cancer, infection and autoimmunity. These peptides are mainly generated by proteasomes through peptide hydrolysis and peptide splicing. Post-translationally spliced epitopes can enlarge the antigenic landscape and thus immunotherapy efficacy. Their identification is challenging, and the few methods proposed so far hinted toward a controversial broad spectrum of cis-spliced peptide frequencies in HLA-I immunopeptidomes. We here developed a new method named SPI-ART, which can identify cis-spliced peptides in HLA-I immunopeptidomes with precision and recall outperforming all other methods. The benchmark of the methods’ performances provided the proper analytical framework to explain the discordant results published so far. It also allowed to estimate the frequency of cis-spliced peptides in HLA-I immunopeptidomes, and to shed light on the biochemistry of these unconventional peptides and their potential antigenicity.

### Sample Protocol
All peptides used for construction of the synthetic libraries were synthesized using Fmoc solid phase chemistry. The library contains 9, 10 or 15 amino acid long peptides related to CD4+ and CD8+ T cell response to Dengue and Varicella Zoster viruses. Around 10,000 synthetic peptides were subdivided in 8 batches, with each measured at two concentrations (100 fmol and 500 fmol of each peptide were loaded in the mass spectrometers). HLA-I-bound peptides were isolated from 109 cells of K562 clones. For the K562-B*07:02 cell clone we collected two biological replicates measured 1-2 times each. For the K562-A*02:01 cell clone we collected two biological replicates each measured three times.  MS data generated for this project were collected using either Orbitrap Fusion Lumos or Q Exactive Hybrid-Quadrupol mass spectrometers. Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer was coupled to an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano pump (both from ThermoFisherScientiﬁc). Briefly, peptides were loaded and separated by a nanoflow HPLC (RSLC Ultimate 3000) on an Easy-spray C18 nano column (50 cm length, 75 mm internal diameter; ThermoFisherScientific) coupled on-line to a nano-electrospray ionization Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (ThermoFisherScientific). Peptides were eluted with a linear gradient of 2%–45% buffer B (80% ACN, 0.05% formic acid) at a flow rate of 250 nl/min over 60 min at 50°C. The instrument was programmed within Xcalibur 4.1 to acquire MS data using a “Universal” method by defining a 3s cycle time between a full MS scan and MS/MS fragmentation. This method takes advantage of multiple analyzers in the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos and drives the system to use all available parallelizable time, resulting in decreasing the dependence on method parameters (such as Data Dependent Acquisition; DDA). We acquired one full-scan MS spectrum at a resolution of 120,000 at 200m/z with an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 2x105 ions and a scan range of 350~1550m/z. The MS/MS fragmentation was conducted using HCD collision energy (30%) with an orbitrap resolution of 30000 at 200m/z. The AGC target value was set up as 5x104 with a max injection time of 120ms.  A dynamic exclusion of 30s and 1-4 included charged states were defined within this method.   Alternatively, samples were separated by a nanoflow HPLC (RSLC Ultimate 3000) on an Easy-spray C18 nano column (30 cm length, 75 m internal diameter; Dr. Maisch) coupled on-line to a nano-electrospray ionization Q Exactive Hybrid-Quadrupol-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were eluted with a linear gradient of 5%–55% buffer B (80% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) over 88 minutes at 50°C at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The instrument was programmed within Xcalibur 3.1.66.10 to acquire MS data in a Data Dependent Acquisition mode using Top 20 precursor ions. We acquired one full-scan MS spectrum at a resolution of 70000 with an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 1000000 ions and a scan range of 350~1600 m/z. The MS/MS fragmentation was conducted using HCD collision energy (30%) with an Orbitrap resolution of 35000 at 200 m/z with an isolation window of 2 m/z with Fixed First Mass set to 110 m/z. The AGC target value was set up at 100,000 with a maximum injection time of 128 msec. For Data Dependent Scans the minimum AGC target value and the intensity threshold were set to 2,600 to 20,000 accordingly. A dynamic exclusion of 25 s and 1-6 included charged states were defined within this method.

### Data Protocol
For synthetic peptide libraries, the RAW mass spectrometry data were first converted with ms-convert 4.1.12 from ProteoWizard  to the open mzML format, which is readable by most MS software platforms. MzML files were analyzed by both Mascot and PEAKS DB. The database used to obtain PSMs was a FASTA file containing all synthetic peptide sequences included in the peptide library. Enzyme specificities were set to ‘no cleave’ in Mascot and ‘no processing’ in PEAKS DB. Precursor mass tolerances were set to 5ppm and 6ppm for measurements on Fusion Lumos and Q Exactive Hybrid-Quadrupol, respectively. Fragment ion mass tolerances were set to 0.02 Da and 0.03 Da for measurements on Fusion Lumos and Q Exactive Hybrid-Quadrupol. MS2 spectra assigned with the same sequence by both PEAKS and Mascot after filtering peptides for 1% FDR were extracted.  Further detail about the data processing strategy and protocol can be found in the cognate paper. Whole HLA-I immunopeptidome datasets have originally been analysed with SPI-ART. Further data analysis could have been done.

### Publication Abstract
Synthetic peptides are commonly used in biomedical science for many applications in basic and translational research. While peptide synthesis is generally easy and reliable, the chemical nature of some amino acids as well as the many steps and chemical compounds involved can render the synthesis of some peptide sequences difficult. Identification of these problematic sequences and mitigation of issues they may present can be important for the reliable use of peptide reagents in several contexts. Here, we assembled a large dataset of peptides that were synthesized using standard Fmoc chemistry and whose identity was validated using mass spectrometry. We analyzed the mass spectra to identify errors in peptide syntheses and sought to develop a computational tool to predict the likelihood that any given peptide sequence would be synthesized accurately. Our model, named Peptide Synthesis Score (PepSySco), is able to predict the likelihood that a peptide will be successfully synthesized based on its amino acid sequence.

### Keywords
Hla-i, Peptide splicing, K562 cell line, Cis-spliced peptides, Immunopeptidome, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
King's College London
Head of research group Quantitative and Systems Biology; Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry; Goettingen; Germany

### Submitter
Michele Mishto

### Lab Head
Dr Juliane Liepe
Head of research group Quantitative and Systems Biology; Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry; Goettingen; Germany


