### Accession
PXD027239

### Title
Metabolic labeling of NMT substrates by photoactivatable/clickable myristate probes X3/X8/X10

### Description
Efficiency of labelling by photoactivatable/clickable myristate probes X3/X8/X10 is compared to the positive control probe YnMyr. Additionally, negative controls for each probe were obtained by treatment with NMT ihibitor IMP-366 (DDD85464). The resulting data indicates efficient labeling of NMT substrates by photoactivatable probes that is NMT-dependent.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC heavy spike-in mixture was prepared as follows. HeLa cells passaged in R10K8 SILAC media supplemented with 10% FCS for at least 5 passages were treated in separate 10 cm tissue culture-treated dishes with YnMyr (5 μl), X3 (100 μl), X8 (100 μl), X10 (100 μl). After 24 h, cells were lysed and protein concentration measured. Equal amounts of proteins from all four conditions were mixed to create the spike-in.  HeLa cells in normal (light) media were treated with YnMyr (5 μl), X3 (100 μl), X8 (100 μl), X10 (100 μl) for 24 h with and without the addition of 0.5 μM of IMP-366 (DDD85646) NMT inhibitor, each treatment regime in triplicate. Cells were lysed and protein concentration measured. 250 μg of heavy spike-in was added to 250 μg of each lysate. Alkyne-tagged proteins were ligated to AzRB regent using Cu-catalyzed azide-alkyne cycloaddition.The lysates were enriched on streptavidin-agarose beads. Samples were reduced with TCEP, alkylated with IAA and digested with trypsin. The samples were desalted using STAGE-tipping. Peptides were separated on nano-LC column and detected using Thermo QExactive.

### Data Protocol
RAW files were analysed using MaxQuant, using protein database for Homo sapiens (downloaded from UniProt). MaxQuant output file proteinGroups.txt was processed in Perseus.

### Publication Abstract
Protein-protein interactions (PPIs) are essential and pervasive regulatory elements in biology. Despite the development of a range of techniques to probe PPIs in living systems, there is a dearth of approaches to capture interactions driven by specific post-translational modifications (PTMs). Myristoylation is a lipid PTM added to more than 200 human proteins, where it may regulate membrane localization, stability or activity. Here we report the design and synthesis of a panel of novel photocrosslinkable and clickable myristic acid analog probes, and their characterization as efficient substrates for human <i>N</i>-myristoyltransferases NMT1 and NMT2, both biochemically and through X-ray crystallography. We demonstrate metabolic incorporation of probes to label NMT substrates in cell culture and <i>in situ</i> intracellular photoactivation to form a covalent crosslink between modified proteins and their interactors, capturing a snapshot of interactions in the presence of the lipid PTM. Proteomic analyses revealed both known and multiple novel interactors of a series of myristoylated proteins, including ferroptosis suppressor protein 1 (FSP1) and spliceosome-associated RNA helicase DDX46. The concept exemplified by these probes offers an efficient approach for exploring the PTM-specific interactome without the requirement for genetic modification, which may prove broadly applicable to other PTMs.

### Keywords
Nmt, Photocrosslinking, Diazirine, Metabolic labeling, Myristoylation

### Affiliations
The Francis Crick Institute
Professor of Chemical Biology, Imperial College London Satellite Group Leader, Francis Crick Institute Founder & SAB, Myricx Pharma Ltd Room 301B, Molecular Sciences Research Hub, White City Campus 82 Wood Lane, London W12 0BZ, UK

### Submitter
Roman Fedoryshchak

### Lab Head
Dr Edward Tate
Professor of Chemical Biology, Imperial College London Satellite Group Leader, Francis Crick Institute Founder & SAB, Myricx Pharma Ltd Room 301B, Molecular Sciences Research Hub, White City Campus 82 Wood Lane, London W12 0BZ, UK


