### Accession
PXD014137

### Title
Rapid single-step affinity purification of HA-tagged mitochondria from Arabidopsis thaliana

### Description
Photosynthesis in plant cells would not be possible without the supportive role of mitochondria. However, isolating mitochondria for physiological and biochemical analyses from plant cells is a lengthy and tedious process. Established isolation protocols require multiple centrifugation steps and substantial amounts of starting material. To overcome these limitations, we tagged mitochondria in plant cells with a triple haemagglutinin-tag for rapid purification by a single affinity purification step. This protocol yields highly purified mitochondria from 1 g of Arabidopsis seedlings that are suitable for enzyme activity measurements and delivers sufficient amounts of mitochondrial proteins for deep proteomic profiling. We demonstrate that the method can be applied to proteomic analysis of an Arabidopsis mutant deficient in the mitochondrial glutamate transporter À bout de souffle (BOU) and we identify 27 differentially expressed proteins in the bou mutant. Our work also sets the stage for the development of advanced isolation protocols for mitochondria from distinct cell types.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were eluted from magnetic beads by adding 30 µl laemmli buffer and heat the samples for 10 min and 95°C. 20 µl protein per sample were loaded on a SDS-PAGE for in-gel-digestion. The isolated gel pieces were reduced (50 µl, 10 mM DTT), alkylated (50 µl, 50 mM iodoacetamide) and underwent afterwards tryptic digestion (6 µl, 200 ng trypsin in 100 mM ammonium bicaonate). The peptides were resolved in 15 µl 0.1 % trifluoracetic acid and subjected to liquid chromatography.

### Data Protocol
Peptide and protein identification and quantification was done by using MaxQuant (version 1.5.5.1, MPI for Biochemistry, Planegg, Germany) applying standard parameters. As samples from Arabidopsis thaliana were analyzed, searches were conducted using a specific proteome database (UP0000006548, downloaded 12/11/17) from UniProt. Methionine oxidation and acetylation at protein N-termini were set as variable modification and carbamidomethylations at cysteines were considered as fixed modification. Peptides and proteins were accepted with a false discovery rate set to 1%. Unique and razor peptides were used for label-free quantification and peptides with variable modifications were included in the quantification. The minimal ratio count was set to two and the matched between runs option was enabled.  The normalized intensities as provided by MaxQuant were analyzed by using Perseus framework (version 1.5.0.15, MPI for Biochemistry, Planegg, Germany). Only proteins containing at least two unique peptides and a minimum of 3 valid values in at least one group were taken into consideration for protein quantification. Proteins which were identified only by site or marked as contaminant (from the MaxQuant contaminant list) were excluded from the analysis. For the calculation of enriched proteins in the two groups a Student’s t-tests was applied. The significance analysis was applied on log2 transformed values using a S0 constant = 0 and a 5% false discovery rate based cutoff.

### Publication Abstract
Photosynthesis in plant cells would not be possible without the supportive role of mitochondria. However, isolating mitochondria from plant cells for physiological and biochemical analyses is a lengthy and tedious process. Established isolation protocols require multiple centrifugation steps and substantial amounts of starting material. To overcome these limitations, we tagged mitochondria in Arabidopsis (<i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i>) with a triple hemagglutinin tag for rapid purification via a single affinity-purification step. This protocol yields a substantial quantity of highly pure mitochondria from 1 g of Arabidopsis seedlings. The purified mitochondria were suitable for enzyme activity analyses and yielded sufficient amounts of proteins for deep proteomic profiling. We applied this method for the proteomic analysis of the Arabidopsis <i>bou-2</i> mutant deficient in the mitochondrial Glu transporter &#xc0; BOUT DE SOUFFLE (BOU) and identified 27 differentially expressed mitochondrial proteins compared with tagged Col-0 controls. Our work sets the stage for the development of advanced mitochondria isolation protocols for distinct cell types.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Arabidopsis, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
BMFZ/MPL
Institute for Molecular Medicine I, Medical Faculty, Heinrich-Heine-University Duesseldorf, Universitaetsstrasse 1, 40225 Duesseldorf, Germany

### Submitter
Nina Overbeck

### Lab Head
Dr Kai Stuehler
Institute for Molecular Medicine I, Medical Faculty, Heinrich-Heine-University Duesseldorf, Universitaetsstrasse 1, 40225 Duesseldorf, Germany


