### Accession
PXD040383

### Title
The role of serine/threonine-specific protein kinases in cyanobacteria - SpkB is involved in acclimation to fluctuating conditions in Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803

### Description
Protein phosphorylation via serine/threonine protein kinases (Spk) is a widespread mechanism to adjust cellular processes toward changing environmental conditions. To study their role(s) in cyanobacteria, we established a collection of 11 completely segregated spk mutants among the 12 annotated Spk’s in the model cyanobacterium Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803. Screening of the mutant collection revealed that especially the mutant defective in SpkB encoded by slr1697 showed clear deviations compared to wild type (WT) regarding carbon metabolism, i.e., a reduced growth rate at low CO2 and in the presence of glucose, different glycogen accumulation patterns, and a higher tolerance to external H2O2 than the WT. The proteome of ∆spkB showed several distinct differences compared to WT, which indicate changes of the cell surface but also metabolic functions. A phospho-proteome analysis revealed decreased phosphorylation of the carboxysome-associated protein CcmM and the regulatory PII protein in the mutant compared to WT, whereas the allophycocyanin alpha subunit was stronger phosphorylated. The decreased phosphorylation of PII was verified in Western-blot experiments, indicating a clearly delayed PII phosphorylation in cells shifted from nitrate-containing to nitrate-free medium. Furthermore, the mutant ∆spkB showed differences in the state transition consistent with the changed phosphorylation of allophycocyanin. Collectively our results indicate that SpkB is an important regulator under different environmental conditions in Synechocystis and seems to interact in the PII phosphorylation and probably with further substrates in a kinase network.

### Sample Protocol
Cells of the WT or the serine/threonine kinase deficient mutant strain ΔspkB were pre-cultivated in batch cultures under high Ci-conditions (5% CO2, HC) in buffered BG-11 medium (TES pH 8.0) at 30°C and 120 µmol photons m-2 s-1 in glass tubes until the cell suspension reached the OD750 of 1 – 1.2. The cultures were transferred daily into fresh BG-11 medium. Two days before the shift experiment, the pre-cultures were adjusted to an OD750 of 1.0 and split into three individual cultures that were kept under HC conditions. After growth for 24 h, the cell suspensions were again re adjusted to OD750 of 0.8 - 1.0. Cells were harvested by centrifugation and re-suspended in fresh BG-11 medium to inoculated 6 individual cultures of 120 ml with an OD750 of 1. To allow recovery and acclimation to the new conditions, cells were agitated with 5% CO2 in the light for 2 h before HC samples was taken. From each individual culture two 20 ml aliquots were withdrawn into 50 ml tubes filled with ice to cool the suspension to less than 4 °C, ensuring rapid inhibition of enzyme activities. The cells were immediately harvested by centrifugation (6000 g, 7 min, 4°C). Cell pellets were washed with 7 ml ice-cold PBS-buffer, snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C until further processing. For the shift to LC conditions, the medium of the remaining culture was removed by centrifugation and the cells were re-suspended in the same volume of BG-11 (TES pH 7.0) and further cultivated with ambient air (0.04% CO2). Samples from LC-shifted cultures were taken after 3 h and 24 h. Three independent cultivations were conducted for phospho-proteome analysis. The sample preparation, isotopic labeling and mass spectrometric analysis of the phospho-proteome was performed as described previously (https://doi.org/10.1111/nph.17423). In short, proteins were extracted from thawed cell pellets in presence of detergents and phosphatase-inhibitors and purified by precipitation. A total of 3 mg protein per sample was digested to peptides using Lys-C/trypsin. For a quantitative comparison between all samples, one third (1 mg) of each sample was separated and added to a standard mixture, containing equal fractions from each condition and replicate. Subsequently, samples and standard were subjected to triplex dimethylation labeling as outlined in the experimental design (Suppl. Figure S1). The labeling efficiency was analyzed in pilot measurements for all samples and exceeded 95% efficiency in all cases. For 1:1:1 triplex mixtures, differentially labeled WT and ΔspkB samples from identical conditions were mixed with an equal amount of the standard yielding a total of 6 mg initial protein. For proteome analyses, an aliquot corresponding to 0.1 mg was separated from each triplex mixture. Peptides were subsequently separated using a high-pH reversed-phase peptide fractionation kit (Pierce), resulting in nine individually measured fractions. The remaining material was subjected to phosphopeptide enrichment by TiO2 chromatography using Sachtopore NP 5 μm spheres for 8 consecutive rounds, of which rounds 1+2, 3-5 and 6-8 were pooled for measurements. In all samples, (phospho)peptides were separated by RP-chromatography on an EASY-nLC 1200 system using 60 min gradients, ionized in an on-line coupled ESI source and analyzed on a Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer in the data-dependent acquisition mode (Thermo Scientific) as described before (https://doi.org/10.1111/nph.17423).

### Data Protocol
All acquired MS raw data was processed with the MaxQuant software suite (version 1.6.0.8) as described before (https://doi.org/10.1111/nph.17423). Statistical analysis of significantly changing proteins and phosphorylation events was performed with Perseus software suite (version 1.6.5.0). For the direct comparison of ΔspkB to WT in each condition and replicate, intermediate (M) to light (L) label ratios were analyzed, and for the strain specific comparison between different conditions, ratios relative to the heavy labeled (H) internal standard were calculated as 1/[(H/X LC condition)/(H/X HC condition)], with X=L forWT and X=M for ΔspkB. Identified phospho-peptides were manually validated and filtered with stringent acceptance criteria. One sample t-test was performed for determination of proteins and phosphorylation events with significantly changing abundances compared to the overall distribution between independent replicates.

### Publication Abstract
Protein phosphorylation via serine/threonine protein kinases (Spk) is a widespread mechanism to adjust cellular processes toward changing environmental conditions. To study their role(s) in cyanobacteria, we investigated a collection of 11 completely segregated spk mutants among the 12 annotated Spks in the model cyanobacterium Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803. Screening of the mutant collection revealed that especially the mutant defective in SpkB encoded by slr1697 showed clear deviations regarding carbon metabolism, that is, reduced growth rates at low CO<sub>2</sub> or in the presence of glucose, and different glycogen accumulation patterns compared to WT. Alterations in the proteome of &#x394;spkB indicated changes of the cell surface but also metabolic functions. A phospho-proteome analysis revealed the absence of any phosphorylation in two proteins, while decreased phosphorylation of the carboxysome-associated protein CcmM and increased phosphorylation of the allophycocyanin alpha subunit ApcA was detected in &#x394;spkB. Furthermore, the regulatory P<sub>II</sub> protein appeared less phosphorylated in the mutant compared to WT, which was verified in Western blot experiments, indicating a clearly delayed P<sub>II</sub> phosphorylation in cells shifted from nitrate-containing to nitrate-free medium. Our results indicate that SpkB is an important regulator in Synechocystis that is involved in phosphorylation of the P<sub>II</sub> protein and additional proteins.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Spkb, Cyanobacteria, Synechocystis sp. pcc6803, Kinases, Adaptation

### Affiliations
University Tuebingen Department of Quantitative Proteomics
Institut für Biowissenschaften, Abteilung Pflanzenphysiologie, Universität Rostock, A.-Einstein-Str. 3, Rostock D-18059, Germany

### Submitter
Philipp Spaet

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Martin Hagemann
Institut für Biowissenschaften, Abteilung Pflanzenphysiologie, Universität Rostock, A.-Einstein-Str. 3, Rostock D-18059, Germany


