### Accession
PXD004690

### Title
Hydrophobic tagging-assisted N-termini enrichment (HYTANE) for  in-depth N-terminome analysis

### Description
The analysis of protein N-termini is of great importance for understanding the protein function and elucidating the proteolytic processing. Herein, we develop a negative enrichment strategy, termed as hydrophobic tagging-assisted N-termini enrichment (HYTANE) to achieve a global N-terminome analysis. The  HYTANE strategy showed a high efficiency in hydrophobic tagging and C18 material-assisted depletion using bovine serum albumin (BSA) as the sample. Furthermore, this strategy was also applied to N-termini profiling from S. cerevisiaecell lysates and enabled the identification of 1096 protein N-termini, representing the largest N-terminome dataset of  S. cerevisiae. The identified N-terminal peptides accounted for 99% of all identified peptides and no deficiency in acidic and histidine-containing N-terminal peptides was observed. The presented HYTANE strategy is therefore a highly selective, efficient and unbiased strategy for the large scale N-terminome analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Sacchoromyces  cerevisiae was  cultured  in  YPD medium  at  37  °C  for  48  h.  Cells  were  harvested  by  centrifugation  at  4000  g  for  2  min at  4  °C.  After washing three times with cold phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), cell pellets were suspended in lysis buffer consisting  8  M  urea  and  2%  (v/v)  protease  inhibitor cocktail  with  the  pellet/buffe ratio  of  1:4  (v/m). Subsequently, the cell suspension was subjected to  ultrasonication for 360 s (10 s on, 10 s off, 18 runs) on ice to break the cells. The resulting solution was centrifuged at 20 000 g for 30 min at 4 °C to remove cellular debris.The supernatant was collected, and the concentration of proteins was determined by BCA assay using BSA as a standard.The  free  amines  at  N-termini  and  lysine  residues were blocked by dimethylation. 100 µg proteins dissolved in 6 M guanidine hydrochloride containing100 mM TEAB (pH 8.2) were reduced by 10 mM DTT  for  1  h  at  56  °C,  followed  by  alkylation  of  thiol  group  with  30  mM  acrylamide  for  1  h  at  room temperature.  The  excess  acrylamide  was  extinguished with  an  additional  10  mM  DTT.  After  that, formaldehyde and sodium cyanoborohydride were addedto a final concentration of 100 mM and 60 mM respectively for dimethylation of free amines. The reaction was allowed to proceed for 2 h at 37 °C before the addition of 10-fold excess of glycine to quenchexcess formaldehyde and sodium cyanoborohydride. The residual reagents were removed using FASP method.  Following  dimethylation,  the  protein  samples  were transferred  to centrifugal  filters  with  10  K  molecular  weight  cut  off,  and  washed  four  times  with  6  M  guanidine hydrochloride containing 1 M glycine and 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate to remove residual reagents. Afterward, background solution was exchanged to 50  mM sodium phosphate (pH 7.5) and subjected to proteolytic digestion with a substrate/enzyme ratioof 50:1 (m/m) for 12 h at 37 °C.To  remove  N-terminal  pyroglutamate,  the  tryptic  digests were treated with Qcyclase and pGAPase. Before reaction, pGAPase was activated by incubation with  the same volume of activation buffer consisting 50 mM sodium phosphate (pH 7.5), 160 mM NaCl and 10 mMDTT for 10 min at 37 °C. For 100 µg tryptic digests, 100  mU  of  pGAPase and  300 mU  Qcyclase  were used. The  mixture  was  incubated  for 2  h at 37 °C. Then, the  pGAPase and  Qcyclase  were  removed  by centrifugal filters, and the filtrate fractions containing digests were collected, desalted using a C18 trap column (4.6 mm i.d. × 1 cm) packed in-house with 5 µm Reprosil Pur C18-AQ and dried using a Speed Vac Concentrator.The  free  amines  of  the  internal  peptides  were  further derivatized with hexadecanal to incorporate two long alkyl chains. The digests were dissolved in 100 µL pure water, and then 50 µL 50 mM HEPES buffer (pH 9), 20 µL 600 mM NaBH3CN (dissolved in normal propyl alcohol), 500 µL 10 mg/mL hexadecanal (dissolved in normal propyl alcohol) were added to the solution in sequence. The solution was incubated for 8 h at 50 °C.20 µL of freshly prepared NaBH3CN (600 mM) was added to the solution, and the solution was then dried in a Speed Vac Concentrator. The dried sample was redissolved in 2% ACN containing 0.1% TFA. The precipitated hexadecanal was removed by centrifugation at 12 000 g for 15 min. The supernatant was collected and loaded onto C18 trap column, followed by washing with 2% ACN containing 0.1% TFA, after that, C18 trap column was washed with 80% ACN containing 0.1% TFA to elute the N-terminal peptides. The eluate was collected and dried for further use.

### Data Protocol
The  raw  data  were  analyzed  by  Proteome  Discoverer  (version  1.4,  Thermo  Fisher Scientific)  using  a  Mascot  server  (version  2.4,  Matrix  Science).  The  S.  cerevisiae protein  database downloaded from UniProt (20151224, 6,720 entries) was used as target sequences. Mass tolerances were set  as  7  ppm  for  parent  ions  and  20  mmu  for  fragments.  Propionamidation  (71.0371  Da)  on  cysteine, dimethylation (+28.0313 Da) on lysine were set as fixed modifications. Dimethylation (+28.0313 Da) and acetylation  (+42.0105  Da)  on  protein  N-terminus,  oxidation  (+15.9949  Da)  on  methionine, mono-hexadecylation  (+224.2504  Da)  and  bis-hexadecylation  (+448.5008  Da)  on  peptide  N-terminus, pyroglutamate (-17.0265 Da) on asparagine were set as variable modifications. Arg-C was selected as the protease allowing 2 missed cleavages. Only the hitswith Mascot significance threshold  pvalue < 0.01  and ion score ≥ 25 were passed for identification, which resulted in the false discovery rate low than 0.5%. To identify the neo-N-termini, semi-style cleavage searches were applied with up to two missed cleavages and dimethylation and acetylation on peptide N-terminus instead of protein N-terminus was adopted in variable modification. Only the hits with Mascot significance threshold  pvalue < 0.01, ion score ≥ 35, and the peptide terminated with Arg were accepted for discussion, which resulted in the false discovery rate low than 0.5%.

### Publication Abstract
The analysis of protein N-termini is of great importance for understanding the protein function and elucidating the proteolytic processing. Herein, we develop a negative enrichment strategy, termed as hydrophobic tagging-assisted N-termini enrichment (HYTANE) to achieve a global N-terminome analysis. The HYTANE strategy showed a high efficiency in hydrophobic tagging and C18 material-assisted depletion using bovine serum albumin (BSA) as the sample. This strategy was applied to N-termini profiling from S.&#xa0;cerevisiae cell lysates and enabled the identification of 1096 protein N-termini, representing the largest N-terminome data set of S.&#xa0;cerevisiae. The identified N-terminal peptides accounted for 99% of all identified peptides, and no deficiency in acidic, histidine (His)-containing, and His-free N-terminal peptides was observed. The presented HYTANE strategy is therefore a highly selective, efficient, and unbiased strategy for the large scale N-terminome analysis. Furthermore, using the HYTANE strategy, we identified 329 cleavage sites and 291 substrates of caspases in Jurkat cells, demonstrating the great promise of HYTANE strategy for protease research. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD004690.

### Keywords
Sacchoromyces cerevisiae, Caspase, Jurkat, N-termini

### Affiliations
Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences
Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics

### Submitter
Lingfan Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Lihua Zhang
Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences


