### Accession
PXD010232

### Title
Hypolipidemic effects of Tamarindus indica fruit pulp extract

### Description
In this study, the hypolipidemic effects of Tamarindus indica fruit pulp extract (Tifpe) in the serum obtained from diet-induced hypercholesterolemic hamsters were investigated using two-dimensional gel electrophoresis and mass spectrometry.  Significantly altered levels of serum proteins were validated using ELISA. Hamsters fed with Tifpe, both in the absence and presence of high-cholesterol diet, were shown to have significantly reduced levels of serum triglyceride, LDL-C and total cholesterol.  The Tifpe fed non-hypercholesterolemic hamsters also showed significant enhanced levels of serum apolipoprotein A1 (APOA1), antithrombin III (ATIII), transferrin (TF), transthyretin and vitamin D binding protein (VDBP).  In diet-induced hypercholesterolemic hamsters, APOA1, ATIII and TF, which were relatively low in levels, became significantly enhanced when the hamsters were fed with Tifpe.  These Tifpe-fed hypercholesterolemic hamsters also showed significant higher levels of serum VDBP.  Ingenuity Pathway Analysis of the Tifpe modulated serum proteins singled out “Lipid metabolism, molecular transport, small molecule biochemistry” as the top network. Our results suggest that the hypolipidemic effects of Tifpe are associated with alterations of serum proteins that are known to be cardioprotective and involved in the metabolism of lipids.

### Sample Protocol
Sample collection Male Syrian hamsters (6 week-old; n=20), were divided randomly into four group and treated as follows, Group I: standard chow plus distilled water; Group II: standard chow and Tifpe; Group III: cholesterol-enriched diet plus distilled water and Group IV: cholesterol-enriched diet and Tifpe.  At the end of ten weeks, the animals were anesthetized and the blood samples were collected in BD Vacutainer® Thrombin tube via cardiac puncture.  Serum was separated by centrifugation at 1250 x g for 15 minutes and stored at − 80°C until further analyses.  Protein concentration of the serum samples were quantified using the Bradford assay kit (Bio-Rad, Hercules, USA).  Biochemical analyses Serum triglyceride, LDL-C, HDL-C and total cholesterol levels were assayed using EnzyChrom triglyceride, LDL/VLDL and HDL assay kits (Hayward, CA, USA) in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. 2DE Serum protein (150 µg) was reconstituted in sample buffer and incubated for 45 minutes.  The sample was mixed with rehydration buffer and further incubated for another 45 minutes before incubating with rehydrated IPG Immobiline Drystrips pH 4–7, 13 cm (GE Healthcare, Uppsala, Sweden) overnight.  The strips were subjected to isoelectric focusing using the IPGphor (GE Healthcare, Uppsala, Sweden) for a total duration of 20 kV.  Focused strips were equilibrated with SDS-equilibration buffer containing 1% (w/v) DTT for 30 min followed by a second equilibration in the same buffer but containing 4.5% (w/v) iodoacetamide instead of DTT for another 30 minutes.  Second dimension separation was performed on 8-18% gradient gel using the SE 600 Ruby electrophoresis system (GE Healthcare). Gel was then stained using PlusOne Silver Staining Kit.  For protein identification, gels were stained with Coomassie Blue R250 stain. Image and data analyses Differential image analysis of silver stained gels that were scanned was performed using the ImageMaster 2D Platinum V 7.0 software (GE Healthcare), with the protein spots being normalized using volume percentage.  In-gel trypsin digestion   Protein spots of interest were excised from the gels.  The excised gel bits were destained, reduced, alkylated and digested using trypsin (Pierce, Rockford, USA) at 37°C, overnight.  Peptides were extracted using 50% ACN and 100% ACN, sequentially.  Concentrate tryptic peptide mixtures were dissolved and desalted using micropipette Zip Tip C18 (Millipore, Billerica, USA). Mass spectrometry  Peptide samples were mixed with α-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid matrix, spotted onto the target plate and analyzed using a 4800 MALDI TOF/TOF mass spectrometer (Applied Biosystem, Foster City, USA).    ELISA  TTR, APOAI, ATIII, TF and VDBP ELISA kits were used to measure the levels of the serum proteins, and performed according to manufacturers’ instructions.  Standard curves were constructed to calculate the proteins present in the samples.  All assays were carried out in triplicate. Functional pathway analyses and network generation  Functional pathway analyses were conducted using the IPA software (Ingenuity® Systems, www.ingenuity.com).  A dataset containing protein identifier, p value and fold change was uploaded.  Each protein identifier was scanned to identify networks using information in the Ingenuity Pathway Knowledge Base.  The protein networks were generated algorithmically, and a score was used to rank the networks, whilst their associated p values were calculated using Fischer’s exact test. Statistical analysis Determination of significant differences was performed by one-way ANOVA using SPSS, followed by Tukey’s Honestly Significant Different post hoc test.  All analyses were performed in triplicate and values corresponding to p < 0.05 were regarded as significant, statistically.

### Data Protocol
Identification of proteins was performed using the MASCOT search engine (ver. 2.6.2). The MS data obtained was searched against all entries in the Swiss-Prot database (Last update: May, 2018, containing 557 491 sequences) according to the following selection parameters: enzyme - trypsin, missed cleavage - 1, variable modification - 2; i) carbamidomethylation of cysteine and ii) oxidation of methionine, MS precursor ion mass tolerance - 100 ppm, MS/MS fragment ion mass tolerance - 0.3 Da, and inclusion of monoisotopic masses only.

### Publication Abstract
The hypolipidemic effects of Tamarindus indica fruit pulp extract (Ti-FPE) have been earlier reported but the underlying molecular mechanisms are still uncertain. In this study, hamsters fed with Ti-FPE, both in the absence and presence of high-cholesterol diet, were shown to have significantly reduced levels of serum triglyceride, LDL-C and total cholesterol. The Ti-FPE-fed non-hypercholesterolemic hamsters also showed significant enhanced levels of serum apolipoprotein A1, antithrombin III, transferrin and vitamin D binding protein. In diet-induced hypercholesterolemic hamsters, apolipoprotein A1, antithrombin III and transferrin, which were relatively low in levels, became significantly enhanced when the hamsters were fed with Ti-FPE. These Ti-FPE-fed hypercholesterolemic hamsters also showed significant higher levels of serum vitamin D binding protein. When the different treated groups of hamsters were analyzed for the levels of the four serum proteins by ELISA, similar altered abundance were detected. Ingenuity Pathway Analysis of the Ti-FPE modulated serum proteins singled out "Lipid metabolism, molecular transport, small molecule biochemistry" as the top network. Our results suggest that the hypolipidemic effects of Ti-FPE are associated with alterations of serum proteins that are known to be cardioprotective and involved in the metabolism of lipids. The MS data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium with the dataset identifier PXD010232.

### Keywords
Fruit pulp extract, Hypolipidemia, Serum proteins, Tamarindus indica, Hamsters

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Malaya, 50603, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia
University of Malaya

### Submitter
Jaime Jayapalan

### Lab Head
Dr Onn Haji Hashim
Department of Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Malaya, 50603, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia


