### Accession
PXD035844

### Title
Utilising crosslinking MS to explore protein structure and interactions

### Description
In this study, we performed proteome-wide crosslinking mass spectrometry (XLMS) on human HEK293 intact organelles and examined the combined utility of these crosslinks with AlphaFold.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293 cells were fractionated into organellar fractions and crosslinked with three orthogonal crosslinkers. Trypinised peptides were further fractionated using sequential offline size exclusion chromatography and high pH HPLC, prior to MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
DSSO- and DHSO-crosslinked MS datasets were processed and searched using Proteome Discoverer 2.3 using the XlinkX plugin. DMTMM-crosslinked datasets were processed and searched using pLINK v2.3.9

### Publication Abstract
Significant recent advances in structural biology, particularly in the field of cryoelectron microscopy, have dramatically expanded our ability to create structural models of proteins and protein complexes. However, many proteins remain refractory to these approaches because of their low abundance, low stability, or-in the case of complexes-simply not having yet been analyzed. Here, we demonstrate the power of using cross-linking mass spectrometry (XL-MS) for the high-throughput experimental assessment of the structures of proteins and protein complexes. This included those produced by high-resolution but in&#xa0;vitro experimental data, as well as in silico predictions based on amino acid sequence alone. We present the largest XL-MS dataset to date, describing 28,910 unique residue pairs captured across 4,084 unique human proteins and 2,110 unique protein-protein interactions. We show that models of proteins and their complexes predicted by AlphaFold2, and inspired and corroborated by the XL-MS data, offer opportunities to deeply mine the structural proteome and interactome and reveal mechanisms underlying protein structure and function.

### Keywords
Xlms, Crosslinking ms, Alphafold, Crosslinking

### Affiliations
The University of Sydney
School of Life and Environmental Sciences, The University of Sydney, Australia

### Submitter
Jason Low

### Lab Head
Dr Jason Low
School of Life and Environmental Sciences, The University of Sydney, Australia


