### Accession
PXD038336

### Title
Circadian Proteomics Landscape of Mouse Livers Organized by Time-restricted Feeding: Phosphorylation

### Description
Meal timing is essential in synchronization of circadian rhythms in different organ systems through clock-dependent and -independent mechanisms. The liver is a critical metabolic organ whose circadian clock and transcriptome can be readily reset by meal timing. However, it remains largely unexplored how circadian rhythms in the liver are organized in time-restricted feeding that intervenes meal timing. Here, we applied affinity-purification based shotgun proteomics for protein phosphorylation to characterize circadian features associated with day/sleep- (DRF) and night/wake (NRF)-time restricted feeding in nocturnal female mice. The transcriptomics and metabolomics datasets are public (see www.circametdb.org.cn).

### Sample Protocol
Mouse liver samples were pulverized in liquid nitrogen, and sonicated in the urea lysis buffer containing 100 mM NH4HCO3 (pH 8), 8 M Urea and 0.2% Sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) for 5 min on ice. The lysate was centrifuged at After centrifuging for 12,000 g for 15 min at 4℃, the supernatants were reduced by 10 mM DTT for 1 h at 56℃, and subsequently alkylated with sufficient iodoacetamide for 1 h at room temperature in the dark. Next, samples were completely mixed with 4X volume of precooled acetone by vortexing and incubated at -20℃ for at least 2 h. After centrifugation, the pellet was washed twice with cold acetone, and dissolved by dissolution buffer，which containing 0.1 M triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB, pH 8.5) and 6 M urea. Protein samples were subjected to 12% SDS-PAGE, all of which showed no visible sign of degradation. Peptide digestion: 5 mg protein of each sample was taken and the volume was made up to 1 mL with lysis buffer, 50 μg trypsin and 10 mL of 50 mM TEAB buffer were added, sample was mixed and digested at 37 °C for 4 h. 50 μg trysin and CaCl2 were added for digesting overnight. Formic acid was mixed with digested sample to adjusted pH to less than 3 and centrifuged at 12,000 g for 5 min at room temperature. The supernatant was slowly loaded to the C18 desalting column, washed with washing solution (0.1% formic acid, 3% acetonitrile) three times, then eluted by appropriate amounts of elution buffer (0.1% formic acid, 70% acetonitrile). The eluents of each sample were collected and lyophilized. Phosphopeptide enrichment using phos-select iron affinity gel: Add phosphopeptide binding buffer (2 M lactic acid, 50% acetonitrile) and to dissolve the lyophilized powder, centrifuge at 12,000 g at 4°C for 5 min. The supernatant was loaded to the pretreated IMAC-Fe column and incubated at room temperature for 30 min. Then centrifuge at 2000 g for 30 s and wash with washing solution and water each once. Centrifuge at 2,000 g for 30 s. Elute with elution buffer to a clean centrifuge tube and lyophilized.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS Analysis: Prepare mobile phase A (100% water, 0.1% formic acid) and B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). The lyophilized powder was dissolved in 10 μL solution A and centrifuged at 14,000 g for 20 min at room temperature. 1 μg supernatant was used for detection. Shotgun proteomics analyses were performed using an EASY-nLCTM 1200 UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher) coupled with an Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) operating in the data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. 1 μg sample was injected into a home-made C18 Nano-Trap column (2 cm×75 μm, 3 μm). Peptides were separated in a home-made analytical column (15 cm×150 μm, 1.9 μm), using a linear gradient elution. The separated peptides were analyzed by Q Exactive HF-X, with ion source of Nanospray Flex™(ESI), spray voltage of 2.3 kV and ion transport capillary temperature of 320°C. Full scan ranges from m/z 350 to 1500 with resolution of 120000 (at m/z 200), an automatic gain control (AGC) target value was 3×106 and a maximum ion injection time was 80 ms. The 30 most abundant precursor ions from full scan were selected and fragmented by higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) and analyzed in MS/MS, where resolution was 15000 (at m/z 200), the automatic gain control (AGC) target value was 5×104 and the maximum ion injection time was 100 ms, a normalized collision energy was set as 27%, an intensity threshold was 5×103, and the dynamic exclusion parameter was 30 s. Protein identification and quantification: The resulting spectra from each fraction were searched against UniProt database (Mus_musculus_uniprot_2019.01.18.fasta) by the search engines: Proteome Discoverer (v.2.2). The searched parameters as follows. A mass tolerance of 10 ppm for precursor ion scans and a mass tolerance of 0.02 Da for the product ion scans were used. The search included cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification, and N-terminal protein acetylation, oxidation of methionine and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine residue (STY) as variable modifications. FDR of less than 0.1% at the level of proteins, peptides and modifications. Proteins containing similar peptides and could not be distinguished based on MS/MS analysis were grouped separately as protein groups. Precursor quantification based on intensity was used for Label-free quantification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics; circadian rhythm; time-restricted feeding; inverted feeding; liver; phosphorylation

### Affiliations
Southwest Hospital
Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Center for Circadian Metabolism and Cardiovascular Disease, Southwest Hospital, Army Medical University; Chongqing, China.

### Submitter
Min-Dian Li

### Lab Head
Dr Min-Dian Li
Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Center for Circadian Metabolism and Cardiovascular Disease, Southwest Hospital, Army Medical University; Chongqing, China.


