### Accession
PXD019331

### Title
H. sapiens First trimester placental villous explant 0conditioned media; galectin-7/BSA treatment; 2% O2

### Description
Identification of factors in conditioned media of first-trimester placental villous explants. Explants were cultured under hypoxia (2% O2), 5% CO2 in serum-free DMEM/F12 and treated with recombinant galectin-7 (1ug/ml) or vehicle control (BSA) for 72h.  Identification of factors in conditioned media of first-trimester placental villous explants. Explants were cultured under superoxia (20% O2), 5% CO2 in serum-free DMEM/F12 and treated with recombinant galectin-7 (1ug/ml) or vehicle control (BSA) for 72h.

### Sample Protocol
Sample Digestion and Alkylation. Samples (10ug) were reconstituted in 50 mM Triethyl ammonium Bicarbonate buffer (TEAB) Add TCEP or DTT to 10mM and shake for 45 min at 37 degree. You can add TCEP/DTT to the solubilization buffer if you are using a reducing agent compatible BCA assay. Add iodoacetamide to 55mM, shake for 45 min at 37 degree. SP3 protein cleanup and digestion Precool the ThermoMixer to 24 °C. Dilute 10 μg to a final volume of 48 μL in 50mMTEAB solution. Add 10 μg of prepared SP3 beads and pipette-mix to homogenize the solution. This will be 2 μL of a prepared 50 μg/μL SP3 bead stock, giving a final total volume of 50 μL of protein solution. CRITICAL STEP Ensure complete homogenization of the SP3 beads in the solution. Mixing can be achieved with gentle pipetting. Improper mixing will reduce the efficiency of protein recovery with SP3. To induce binding of the proteins to the beads, add 50 μL of ethanol to the protein mixture containing the SP3 beads. Briefly shake the tube to homogenize. Incubate the binding mixture in a ThermoMixer at 24 °C for 5 min at 1,000 r.p.m. After the binding is complete, place the tube in a magnetic rack and incubate it until the beads have migrated to the tube wall.  Remove and discard the unbound supernatant in an appropriate waste container. Remove the tube from the magnetic rack, and add 180 μL of 80% ethanol SP3 rinse solution and pipette-mix to reconstitute and rinse the beads. Place the tube on the magnetic rack and incubate until the beads have migrated to the tube wall. Remove the supernatant, taking care to not disrupt the beads. CRITICAL STEP The supernatant can be retained and analysed by another assay (e.g., SDS–PAGE) as part of a troubleshooting process to determine potential losses during rinse steps. Little to no protein should be observed in this supernatant. Repeat Steps 6–9 two further times to completely rinse the proteins bound to the SP3 beads. Remove the tube from the magnetic rack and add 100 μL of digestion solution trypsin 1:10 ratio. If available, sonicate for 30 s in a water bath to fully disaggregate the beads. If a sonicating water bath is not available, incubate the tube at 37 °C in a ThermoMixer for 10 min at 1,000 r.p.m. mixing. Pipette-mix to ensure proper reconstitution of the beads, and incubate for 18 h at 37 °C in ThermoMixer at 1,000 r.p.m. mixing. After the digestion is complete, centrifuge the tube at 20,000g at 24 °C for 1 min. Place the tube on a magnetic rack until the beads have settled onto the tube wall and remove the supernatant to a fresh tube. Proceed with MS analysis of the peptide sample.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were searched against the Human protein reference proteomes (UniProt Proteome ID: UP000005640) using MaxQuant-Andromeda (version 1.6.7.0). The false discovery rate (FDR) was set at 0.01 for both peptides and proteins. Search parameters were set as follows: variable modifications: Oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein N-term); fixed modifications: cysteine carbamidomethylation. The analysis of the samples was based on the label-free quantification (LFQ) intensities. The data was statistically evaluated using Perseus software (version 1.6.7.0). The protein data was filtered categorically by row for reverse identifications (false positives), contaminants, and proteins “only identified by site”. The fold changes in the protein levels were evaluated by comparing the mean LFQ intensities amid all experimental groups. A protein was considered to be differentially expressed if the difference was statistically significant (p < 0.05), the fold change >1.2 and < 0.88 was identified with a minimum of 2 peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Preeclampsia is a serious pregnancy-induced disorder unique to humans. The etiology of preeclampsia is poorly understood; however, poor placental formation is thought causal. Galectin-7 is produced by trophoblast and is elevated in first-trimester serum of women who subsequently develop preeclampsia. We hypothesized that elevated placental galectin-7 may be causative of preeclampsia. Here, we demonstrated increased galectin-7 production in chorionic villous samples from women who subsequently develop preterm preeclampsia compared with uncomplicated pregnancies. In vitro, galectin-7 impaired human first-trimester trophoblast outgrowth, increased placental production of the antiangiogenic sFlt-1 splice variant, <i>sFlt-1-e15a</i>, and reduced placental production and secretion of ADAM12 (a disintegrin and metalloproteinase12) and angiotensinogen. In vivo, galectin-7 administration (E8-E12) to pregnant mice caused elevated systolic blood pressure, albuminuria, impaired placentation (reduced labyrinth vascular branching, impaired decidual spiral artery remodeling, and a proinflammatory placental state demonstrated by elevated IL1&#x3b2;, IL6 and reduced IL10), and dysregulated expression of renin-angiotensin system components in the placenta, decidua, and kidney, including angiotensinogen, prorenin, and the angiotensin II type 1 receptor. Collectively, this study demonstrates that elevated galectin-7 during placental formation contributes to abnormal placentation and suggests that it leads to the development of preeclampsia via altering placental production of sFlt-1 and renin-angiotensin system components. Targeting galectin-7 may be a new treatment option for preeclampsia.

### Keywords
2% o2, Placenta, Label free quantification, Galectin-7/bsa treatment, Villous, Conditioned media

### Affiliations
Post-doctoral fellow
Department of Obsetrics and Gynecology, The University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Swati Varshney

### Lab Head
Dr Eva Dimitriadis
Department of Obsetrics and Gynecology, The University of Melbourne


