### Accession
PXD009650

### Title
53BP1 cooperation with the REV7–shieldin complex underpins DNA structure-specific NHEJ

### Description
53BP1 governs a specialized, context-specific branch of the classical non-homologous end joining DNA double-strand break repair pathway. Mice lacking 53bp1 (also known as Trp53bp1) are immunodeficient owing to a complete loss of immunoglobulin class-switch recombination, and reduced fidelity of long-range V(D)J recombination. The 53BP1-dependent pathway is also responsible for pathological joining events at dysfunctional telomeres, and its unrestricted activity in Brca1-deficient cellular and tumour models causes genomic instability and oncogenesis. Cells that lack core non-homologous end joining proteins are profoundly radiosensitive, unlike 53BP1-deficient cells, which suggests that 53BP1 and its co-factors act on specific DNA substrates. Here we show that 53BP1 cooperates with its downstream effector protein REV7 to promote non-homologous end joining during class-switch recombination, but REV7 is not required for 53BP1-dependent V(D)J recombination. We identify shieldin—a four-subunit putative single-stranded DNA-binding complex comprising REV7, c20orf196 (SHLD1), FAM35A (SHLD2) and FLJ26957 (SHLD3)— as the factor that explains this specificity. Shieldin is essential for REV7-dependent DNA end-protection and non-homologous end joining during class-switch recombination, and supports toxic non-homologous end joining in Brca1-deficient cells, yet is dispensable for REV7-dependent interstrand cross-link repair. The 53BP1 pathway therefore comprises distinct double-strand break repair activities within chromatin and single-stranded DNA compartments, which explains both the immunological differences between 53bp1- and Rev7- deficient mice and the context specificity of the pathway.

### Sample Protocol
Pellets harvested from cultures of ~4x107 CH12-F3 were lyzed in BLB (Benzonase Lysis buffer: 20 mM HEPES pH 7.9, 40 mM KCl, 2 mM MgCl2, 10% glycerol, 0.5% NP40, 50 U/ml Benzonase (Novagen), 0.05% (v/v) phosphatase inhibitors (Sigma-Aldrich) and protease inhibitors (Complete EDTA-free, Roche)) and were incubated on ice for 30 min before a second incubation with adjusted salt (450mM KCl). Flag-REV7 or control complexes were isolated from clarified lysates, following their dilution in NSB (no-salt buffer: 20 mM HEPES (pH 7.9), 10% Glycerol, 0.5mM DTT, 0.5 mM EDTA, 0.05% [v/v] phosphatase inhibitors [Sigma-Aldrich] and protease inhibitors [Roche]) to a final salt concentration of 125 mM. Flag-HA-REV7 complexes were immunopurified on antiFLAG(M2) magnetic resin (Sigma-Aldrich), washed extensively in wash buffer (BLM supplemented with 125 mM KCl and 0.1% NP-40) and eluted with 3× Flag peptide (Sigma-Aldrich). Flag-peptide eluted complexes were reduced and alkylated using DTT and iodoacetamide, followed by a Chloroform/Methanol precipitation. Proteins were resuspended in 6M Urea and digested over night with trypsin (Promega). Peptides were desalted (Sola, Thermo) analysed on a LC-MS platform consisting of a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nHPLC and Q-Exactive mass spectrometer. Peptides were separated on an EASYSpray column (50 cm, ES803, Thermo) with a gradient of 3-35% Acetonitrile in 5% DMSO and 0.1% formic acid @ 250 nl/min. MS1 spectra were acquired at a resolution of 70000 @ 200m/z. Up to the 15 most abundant precursor ions were selected for subsequent MS/MS analysis after ion isolation with a mass window of 1.6 Th. Peptides were fragmented by HCD with 28% collision energy.

### Data Protocol
Progenesis QI (v. 3, Waters) was used for spectral counting and LFQ of the LC-MS/MS data with default parameters (Top 3 quantitation mode). Proteins were identified with PEAKS 8.0 (Bioinformatics Solutions) using standard parameters and the Uniprot mouse reviewed proteome (retrieved 28/11/2017). Peptide false discovery rate was set to 1% with a resulting protein FDR of 1.88%.

### Publication Abstract
The PROTAC (<i>PROteolysis TArgeting Chimera</i>) technology is a method of targeting intracellular proteins previously considered undruggable. This technology utilizes the ubiquitin-proteasome system in cells to specifically degrade target proteins, thereby offering significant advantages over conventional small-molecule inhibitors of the enzymatic function. Preclinical and preliminary clinical trials of PROTAC-based compounds (degraders) are presented. The review considers the general principles of the design of degraders. Advances and challenges of the PROTAC technology are discussed.

### Keywords
Rev7 shieldin

### Affiliations
Target Discovery Institute, University of Oxford
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Roman Fischer

### Lab Head
Dr Roman Fischer
Target Discovery Institute, University of Oxford


