### Accession
PXD029994

### Title
Comparative Phenotypic, Proteomic, and Phosphoproteomic Analysis Reveals Different Roles of Serine/Threonine  Phosphatase and Kinase in the Growth, Cell Division,  and Pathogenicity of Streptococcus suis

### Description
To investigate the influence of STP and STK on protein expression in S. suis, we performed a comparative proteomics analysis with the WT, Δstp, and Δstk strains using liquid chromatography mass spectrometry/mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS).STK and STP are serine/threonine kinases and phosphatases, respectively. Therefore, we next analyzed the changes in the abundance of serine/threonine phosphorylated proteins in Δstp and Δstk compared with the WT strain.

### Sample Protocol
1.Trypsin Digestion:Triplicate cultures were harvested at the mid-log phase, resuspended in lysis buffer, and ultrasonicated (PTM Bio, Zhejiang, China). The protein was precipitated with precooled 20% trichloroacetic acid (TCA) for 2 h at −20 °C and redissolved in 8 M urea. The protein was digested overnight with trypsin (1: 50 trypsin: protein mass ratio). 2.TMT Labeling:The peptide was desalted using a Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex), vacuum-dried, and reconstituted with 0.5 M TEAB according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Each sample was labeled with different tags, incubated for 2 h at room temperature, pooled, desalted, and dried by vacuum centrifugation. 3.HPLC Fractionation and Enrichment of Phosphorylated Peptides Peptide fractions were acquired on a Thermo Betasil C18 column (5 μm particles, 10 mm ID, 250 mm length) through high pH reversed-phase HPLC. For enrichment of phosphomodified peptides, tryptic peptide mixtures were mixed with IMAC microspheres in loading buffer with gentle vibration. After centrifugation, the supernatant was removed, and IMAC microspheres with bound phosphopeptides were acquired. These IMAC microspheres were washed with 50% acetonitrile/6% trifluoroacetic acid and 30% acetonitrile/0.1% trifluoroacetic acid continuously to remove nonspecifically adsorbed peptides. To elute the enriched phosphopeptides from the IMAC microspheres, elution buffer containing 10% NH4OH was added, and the enriched phosphopeptides were eluted with vibration. Finally, the peptides were lyophilized for LC-MS/MS analysis. 4.LC-MS/MS Analysis:After the peptides were dissolved using 0.1% formic acid and separated with an EASY-nLC 1000 ultrahigh-performance liquid phase system, they were subjected to the NSI source followed by Orbitrap FusionTM system analysis. The NCE (set to 28) and Orbitrap (resolution = 17500) were used to select peptides for MS/MS and detect the fragments.

### Data Protocol
In this study, both proteomics and phosphoproteomics assays were conducted on the same cohort with the same batch of samples. The relative quantitative value of the phosphopeptide is divided by the relative quantitative value of corresponding proteins to remove the influence from protein expression. The MaxQuant search engine (v.1.5.2.8) was used to analyze the MS/MS data. Parameter setting: UniProt_Streptococcus_suis_strain_SC84 (2104 sequences).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Streptococcus suis; serine/threonine phosphatase; serine/threonine kinase; coordinated regulation; growth; cell division; pathogenicit

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, College of Veterinary Medicine, 
Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan 430070
State Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, College of Veterinary Medicine,  Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan 430070, China

### Submitter
Qiao Hu

### Lab Head
Dr Qiao Hu
State Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, College of Veterinary Medicine,  Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan 430070, China


