### Accession
PXD014307

### Title
UBR5 in B cell development TMT

### Description
Coordination of a number of molecular mechanisms including transcription, alternative splicing, and class switch recombination are required to facilitate development, activation, and survival of B cells. Disruption of these pathways can result in malignant transformation. Recently, next generation sequencing has identified a number of novel mutations in mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) patients including the ubiquitin E3 ligase UBR5. Approximately 18% of MCL patients were found to have mutations in UBR5 with the majority of mutations within the HECT domain of the protein which can accept and transfer ubiquitin molecules to the substrate. Determining if UBR5 controls the maturation of B cells is important to fully understand malignant transformation to MCL. To elucidate the role of UBR5 in B cell maturation and activation we generated a conditional mutant disrupting UBR5’s C-terminal HECT domain. Loss of the UBR5 HECT domain leads to a block in maturation of B cells in the spleen and up-regulation of proteins associated with mRNA splicing via the spliceosome. Our studies reveal a novel role of UBR5 in B cell maturation by regulating alternative splicing of key transcripts during B cell development and suggests UBR5 mutations may promote mantle cell lymphoma initiation.

### Sample Protocol
B220 cells were isolated from mice spleens using streptavidin mojosort beads. Samples were prepared and TMT labeled following manufacturers protocol (ThermoFisher TMT 10plex kit), cleaned with C18 tips, combined in equal concentration (Pierce colorimetric peptide assay kit), and fractionated using high pH reverse phase fractionation kit (ThermoFisher). Samples were speedvac to dry, resuspended in 0.1% formic acid before analysis. Samples 1/2 were combined for the MS run as well as samples 7/8 due to low protein concentration. Samples were loaded onto trap column Acclaim PepMap 100 75µm x 2 cm C18 LC Columns (Thermo ScientificTM) at flow rate of 5µl/min then separated with a Thermo RSLC Ultimate 3000 (Thermo ScientificTM) from 5-20% solvent B (0.1% FA in 80% ACN) from 10-98 minutes at 300nL/min and 50ºC with a 120 minutes total run time for fractions one and two. For fractions three to six, solvent B was used at 5-45% for the same duration. Eluted peptides were analyzed by a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid (Thermo ScientificTM) mass spectrometer in a data dependent acquisition mode using synchronous precursor selection method. A survey full scan MS (from m/z 375-1500) was acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 120,000. The AGC target for MS2 in iontrap was set as 1x104 and ion filling time set as 150ms and fragmented using CID fragmentation with 35% normalized collision energy. The AGC target for MS3 in orbitrap was set as 1x105 and ion filling time set as 200ms with a scan range of 100-500 and fragmented using HCD with 65% normalized collision energy.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was performed using proteome discoverer software version 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) by searching MS/MS data against the UniProt mouse protein database. The search was set up for full tryptic peptides with a maximum of 2 missed cleavage sites. Oxidation, TMT6plex of the amino terminus, GG and GGQ ubiquitination, phosphorylation, and acetylation were included as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation and TMT6plex of the amino terminus were set as fixed modifications. The precursor mass tolerance threshold was set at 10ppm for a maximum fragment mass error of 0.6 Da with a minimum peptide length of 6 and a maximum peptide length of 144. The significance threshold of the ion score was calculated based on a false discovery rate calculated using the percolator node. Protein accessions were put into Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (QIAGEN Inc.) to identify gene symbols and localizations. Gene ontology pathway analysis was performed using DAVID Bioinformatics Database 6.8 using the functional annotation tool.

### Publication Abstract
Coordination of a number of molecular mechanisms including transcription, alternative splicing, and class switch recombination are required to facilitate development, activation, and survival of B cells. Disruption of these pathways can result in malignant transformation. Recently, next-generation sequencing has identified a number of novel mutations in mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) patients including mutations in the ubiquitin E3 ligase UBR5. Approximately 18% of MCL patients were found to have mutations in UBR5, with the majority of mutations within the HECT domain of the protein that can accept and transfer ubiquitin molecules to the substrate. Determining if UBR5 controls the maturation of B cells is important to fully understand malignant transformation to MCL. To elucidate the role of UBR5 in B-cell maturation and activation, we generated a conditional mutant disrupting UBR5's C-terminal HECT domain. Loss of the UBR5 HECT domain leads to a block in maturation of B cells in the spleen and upregulation of proteins associated with messenger RNA splicing via the spliceosome. Our studies reveal a novel role of UBR5 in B-cell maturation by stabilization of spliceosome components during B-cell development and suggests UBR5 mutations play a role in MCL transformation.

### Keywords
Tmt ubr5 bcells spleen mouse

### Affiliations
University of Nebraska Medical Center
Department of Genetics, Cell Bioliogy, & Anatomy Buckley Lab University of Nebraska Medical Center Omaha, Nebraska United States of America

### Submitter
Samantha Swenson

### Lab Head
Dr Shannon Mychel Buckley
Department of Genetics, Cell Bioliogy, & Anatomy Buckley Lab University of Nebraska Medical Center Omaha, Nebraska United States of America


