### Accession
PXD025595

### Title
The biochemical basis of mitochondrial dysfunctionin Zellweger Spectrum Disorder

### Description
Peroxisomal Biogenesis Disorders (PBDs) are genetic disorders of peroxisome biogenesis and metabolism that are characterized by  profound developmental and neurological phenotypes. The most severe class of PBDs—Zellweger Spectrum Disorder(ZSD)—is caused by mutations in peroxin genes that result in both non-functional peroxisomes and mitochondrial dysfunction. It is unclear, however, how defective peroxisomes contribute to mitochondrial impairment. In order to understand the molecular basis of this inter-organellar relationship, we investigated the fate of peroxisomal mRNAs and proteins in ZSD model systems. We found that peroxins were still expressed and a subset of them accumulated on the mitochondrial membrane, which resulted in gross mitochondrial abnormalities and impaired mitochondrial metabolic function. We showed that overexpression of ATAD1, a mitochondrial quality control factor, was sufficient to rescue several aspects of mitochondrial function in human ZSD fibroblasts. Together, these data suggest that aberrant peroxisomal protein localization is necessary and sufficient for the devastating mitochondrial morphological and metabolic phenotypes in ZSDs.

### Sample Protocol
Fifty microliters of the mitochondrial suspensions were lysed in buffer containing 2% SDS, 20 mM HEPES pH 8.5 and protease inhibitors on rotator for 1 hour followed by 45 minutes on a vortexer, both at 4C. After centrifugation, protein concentration was estimated using Bicinchoninic acid (BCA) protein assay (Thermo Fischer Scientific). Proteins were then subjected to disulfide reduction with 5 mM tris (2 carboxyethyl) phosphine for 30 minutes at room temperature followed by alkylation with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 30 minutes in the dark at room temperature. To quench excess iodoacetamide, 15 mM dithiothreitol was added and incubated 15 minutes in the dark at room temperature. Proteins were precipitated using methanol/chloroform and washed with methanol prior to air drying. Proteins were then resuspended in buffer containing 8 M urea and 50 mM EPPS, pH 8.5. Prior to digestion, samples were diluted to 4 M urea with 50mM EPPS, pH 8.5. LysC was added at a 1:50 enzyme:protein ratio, and digestion proceeded at room temperature for 16 hours. Samples were then diluted to 1 M urea using 50 mM EPPS, pH 8.5 followed by trypsin digestion (1:100 enzyme:protein ratio) for 6 hours at 37C. Digests were clarified into fresh tubes before peptide quantification using Pierce Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay. TMT-10 reagents (0.8 mg) were dissolved in 40 uL anhydrous acetonitrile, and 10uL was added to 100 ug of each sample along with anhydrous acetonitrile to a final concentration of 30% (v/v). The labeling reaction proceeded for 1 hour at room temperature before quenching with 0.5% hydroxylamine. Labeled peptides were then pooled, vacuum centrifuged to dryness, and cleaned using 50 mg Sep-Pak (Waters).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were processed using a SEQUEST-based software pipeline (Huttlin et al., 2010, McAlister et al., 2012, McAlister et al., 2014). Spectra were converted to mzXML using a modified version of ReAdW.exe. Database searching used the yeast proteome downloaded from Uniprot (Magrane and Consortium, 2014) in both forward and reverse directions, along with common contaminating protein sequences. Searches were performed using a peptide mass tolerance of 20 ppm, and a fragment ion tolerance of 0.9 Da. These wide-mass-tolerance windows were chosen to maximize sensitivity in conjunction with SEQUEST searches and linear discriminant analysis (Huttlin et al., 2010, Beausoleil et al., 2006). TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+229.163 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) was set as a variable modification.  Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were adjusted to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) using linear discriminant analysis while considering the following parameters: XCorr, ΔCn, missed cleavages, adjusted PPM, peptide length, fraction of ions matched, charge state, and precursor mass accuracy (Elias and Gygi, 2007 and Huttlin et al., 2010). PSMs were then collapsed further to a final protein-level FDR of 1%. PSMs were quantified from MS3 scans after filtering out those with poor quality (required TMT reporter signal-to-noise ratio > 200 and isolation specificity > 0.5). Protein quantitation was performed by summing the signal-to-noise values for all peptides for a given protein. Each TMT channel was summed across all quantified proteins and normalized to enforce equal protein loading. Each protein’s quantitative measurements were then scaled to sum to 100 across all samples.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Peroxisomal biogenesis disorders, Lc-ms/ms, Zellweger spectrum disorder

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School
Jared Rutter  University of Utah Salt Lake City, UT, 84112

### Submitter
Joao Paulo

### Lab Head
Dr Jared Rutter
Jared Rutter  University of Utah Salt Lake City, UT, 84112


