### Accession
PXD008131

### Title
SILAC proteome of MTase deficient cells

### Description
SILAC proteome of MTase deficient HAP-1 cells and corresponding WT.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins from the two isotope channels were mixed in a one-to-one ratio and sequentially digested with LysC and trypsin. Resulting peptides were fractionated off-line into 46 fractions using reversed-phase chromatography at alkaline pH prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
RAW MS files were analyzed in MaxQuant and searched against a human protein database containing canonical isoforms of proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Eukaryotic elongation factor 1 alpha (eEF1A) delivers aminoacyl-tRNA to the ribosome and thereby plays a key role in protein synthesis. Human eEF1A is subject to extensive post-translational methylation, but several of the responsible enzymes remain unknown. Using a wide range of experimental approaches, we here show that human methyltransferase (MTase)-like protein 13 (METTL13) contains two distinct MTase domains targeting the N terminus and Lys55 of eEF1A, respectively. Our biochemical and structural analyses provide detailed mechanistic insights into recognition of the eEF1A N terminus by METTL13. Moreover, through ribosome profiling, we demonstrate that loss of METTL13 function alters translation dynamics and results in changed translation rates of specific codons. In summary, we here unravel the function of a human MTase, showing that it methylates eEF1A and modulates mRNA translation in a codon-specific manner.

### Keywords
Methyltransferase, Ptm, Lc-ms/ms, Silac, Methylation, Knockout

### Affiliations
Proteomics Program, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research (NNF-CPR), University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3B, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark
University of Copenhagen

### Submitter
Magnus Jakobsson

### Lab Head
Dr Jesper Velgaard Olsen
Proteomics Program, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research (NNF-CPR), University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3B, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark


