### Accession
PXD017494

### Title
Data Descriptor: Proteomic profiling across breast cancer cell lines and models

### Description
We performed quantitative proteomics and phosphoproteomics of 43 human-derived breast cancer cell lines to a depth of 11, 000 proteins and 45,000 phosphopeptides respectively. The resulting high-throughput datasets were assessed for quality and reproducibility. We used the two omics datasets to identify and characterize the subtypes of breast cancer and showed that they conform with known transcriptional subtypes, revealing that molecular subtypes are preserved even in under-sampled molecular feature datasets. The datasets are made freely available as a public resource on the LINCS portal. We anticipate that these datasets, either in isolation or combination with measurements of complementary molecular features, can be mined for the purpose of predicting drug response, informing context in mathematical models of signalling pathways, inferring cell-type or subtype specific pathways activities of unperturbed cellular states, and identifying markers of sensitivity or resistance to therapeutics.

### Sample Protocol
Cells grown in Maintenance Medium without growth factors for 0 to 15 days were rinsed once with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and then gently scraped from 15 cm dishes in PBS supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitors followed by centrifugation at 300g for 3 minutes. The supernatant was discarded and pellets were stored at -80o C.Cell pellets were solubilized for 2 minutes by vortexing in lysis Buffer (2% SDS, 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris pH 7.4) supplemented with HaltTM Protease and Phosphatase Inhibitor Single-Use Cocktail, EDTA Free. Cell lysates were then transferred to QiaShredder Mini Spin Columns, and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Disulfide reduction was performed by adding dithiothreitol (DTT) to a final concentration of 5 mM and heating to 37oC for 1 hour, followed by alkylation with iodoacetamide at a final concentration of 15 mM and incubation at room temperature in the dark for 30 minutes. Protein concentration was determined using a Micro BCA Protein Assay Kit following the manufacturer’s protocol. For each sample, an aliquot corresponding to 150 µg of total protein was withdrawn.Detergent was removed by methanol/chloroform protein precipitation as described previously16. Precipitates were solubilized in freshly prepared 8M urea in 20 mM EPPS, pH 8.5 and 60 µg of solubilized total protein from each sample was then used for TMT labelling. Following a 10 min incubation at 37oC, the urea concentration was diluted with 20 mM EPPS to 4M final concentration and digestion was performed by overnight incubation at room temperature in the presence of Lys-C protease (Wako, Catalog Number 129-02541) at an enzyme-to-substrate ratio of 1:75. Following further dilution of the sample with 20 mM EPPS to a final urea concentration of 1.6M, further digestion was performed by incubation at 37oC for 6 hours with trypsin at an enzyme to substrate ratio of 1:75.The missed cleavage rate was determined by LC-MS/MS. 1 µg of total protein was withdrawn from each sample and combined into a single sample. Equal amounts of protein were removed from each sample and labelled using a TMT11plex Mass Tag Labelling Kit. TMT labelling efficiency and ratio checks were measured by LC-MS3 analysis of a combined 11-plex sample after combining equal volumes (about 1 µg) from each sample. Equal amounts of labelled peptide from each sample (as judged from ratio check data) were then combined for subsequent analysis.Quenching of TMT labelling reactions was performed by adding hydroxylamine to a final concentration of 0.5% (v/v) and incubating samples for 10 minutes at room temperature. Formic acid (FA) was added to a final volume of 2% (v/v) to lower the pH below 3.0 and samples were combined and de-salted using a SepPak tC18 Vac RC Cartridge. HPLC fractionation was performed using an Agilent 1200 Series instrument with a flow rate of 600 µl/minute over a period of 75 minutes. Peptides were collected in a 96-well plate over a 65 min-gradient of 13-44 %B with Buffer A comprising 5% acetonitrile, 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8 and Buffer B comprising 90% acetonitrile,10 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8. Fractions were then pooled into 24 samples, followed by sample clean-up using the Stage Tip protocol. This protocol uses C18 Empore Extraction Disks. The matrix was primed with methanol and equilibrated with 70% acetonitrile, 1% FA followed by washing twice with 1% FA, loading the sample in 1% FA, followed once again by two 1% FA washes, and finally peptide elution using 70% acetonitrile, 1% FA. Samples were dried before resuspension in MS Loading Buffer (3% acetonitrile, 5% FA).LC-MS: Peptides were injected onto a 40 cm, 75 µm (internal diameter) column and separated using an EASYnLC 1200 HPLC (ThermoFisher Scientific). The flow rate was 300 nl/min with a gradient of 5-100%B over 240 minutes with Buffer A comprising 0.125% FA and Buffer B comprising 95% acetonitrile, 0.125% FA. The column was packed with 2.6 µm Accucore C18 beads heated to 60oC using a column heater. Samples from the HPLC were injected into an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid MS using a multi-notch MS3 method. MS scans were performed in the Orbitrap over a scan range of 400-1400 m/z with dynamic exclusion. The top 10 ions with charge states from 2 to 6 were selected for MS/MS. Turbo rate scans were performed in the Ion Trap with a collision energy of 35% and a maximum injection time of about 200 ms. TMT quantification was performed using SPS-MS3 in the Orbitrap with a scan range of 100-1000 m/z and an HCD collision energy of 55%. Orbitrap resolution was 50,000 with varying maximum injection times of up to 450 ms.

### Data Protocol
A compilation of commercially available software (Core software program described in the Code Availability section) was used to convert mass spectrometric data (Thermo “.RAW” files) to mzXML format and to correct monoisotopic m/z measurements and erroneous peptide charge state assignments. Assignment of MS/MS spectra was performed using the Sequest20 (version 28 (http://fields.scripps.edu/yates/wp/?page_id=17)) and the Human UniProt database (downloaded February 2014). The database search included reversed protein sequences and known contaminants such as human keratins which were excluded for subsequent analyses. Linear discriminant analysis was used to distinguish forward and reverse hits. Peptides were identified using an MS2 spectrum and a false discovery rate (FDR) < 1% was achieved by applying the target-decoy database search strategy. Filtering was performed as described previously. Variable extents of modification including the presence of oxidized methionine were considered during peptide assignment for whole-protein experiments. Methionine oxidation and phosphorylation on serine, threonine and tyrosine were used as variable modifications for phosphoproteomics experiments. For protein identification and quantification, shared peptides were collapsed into the minimally sufficient number of proteins using rules of parsimony. Peptides with a total TMT value of > 200 and an isolation specificity of > 0.7 were included for quantification. For phosphopeptides, site localization confidence was assessed using the A-score method, and a score above 13 indicated good confidence in phosphosite localization.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Lincs, Breast cancer, Cancer cell lines

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School
Otto Krayer Professor Department of Systems Biology Head of the Harvard Program in Therapeutic Sciences - HiTS Harvard Medical School (lab head)

### Submitter
Marian Kalocsay

### Lab Head
Dr Peter K. Sorger, PhD
Otto Krayer Professor Department of Systems Biology Head of the Harvard Program in Therapeutic Sciences - HiTS Harvard Medical School (lab head)


