### Accession
PXD029475

### Title
Clostridioides difficile phosphoproteomics  shows an expansion of  phosphorylated proteins in stationary growth phase

### Description
Phosphorylation is a post-translational modification that can affect both house-keeping functions and virulence characteristics in bacterial pathogens. In the Gram-positive enteropathogen Clostridioides difficile the extent and nature of phosphorylation events is poorly characterized, though a protein-kinase mutant strain demonstrates pleiotropic phenotypes. Here, we used an immobilized metal affinity chromatography strategy to characterize serine, threonine and tyrosine phosphorylation in C. difficile. We find limited protein phosphorylation in the exponential growth phase but a sharp increase in the number of phosphopeptides after the onset of stationary growth phase. Among the overall more than 1500 phosphosites, our approach identifies expected targets and phosphorylation sites, including the protein kinase PrkC, the anti-sigma-F factor antagonist (SpoIIAA), the anti-sigma-B factor antagonist (RsbV) and HPr kinase/phosphorylase (HprK).. Analysis of high-confidence phosphosites shows that phosphorylation on serine residues is most common, followed by threonine and tyrosine phosphorylation. This work forms the basis for a further investigation into the contributions of individual kinases to the overall phosphoproteome of C. difficile and the role of phosphorylation in C. difficile physiology and pathogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
C. difficile 630∆erm cells were grown at 37 °C in brain-heart infusion medium (BHI; Oxoid) supplemented with yeast extract (YE) in a Don Whitley VA-1000 workstation (10% CO2, 10% H2 and 80% N2 atmosphere).  An initial pre-culture was grown until an optical density at 600 nm (OD600nm) of 0.36. Three independent cultures were started by adding 31 mL of the pre-culture to 400 mL fresh BHI-YE for each new culture. Samples were taken at mid-exponential (3.25h post inoculation), early stationary (5.25h post inoculation) and late stationary phase (24h post inoculation). To get a roughly equivalent amount of cells, 100 mL was taken at the mid-exponential time point (OD600nm 0.96), while 50 mL was taken at the two later time points (OD600nm ~2). JY cells were grown at 37 °C in Iscove's modified Dulbecco's medium, supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum and L-glutamine. Both eukaryotic and bacterial cells were harvested by centrifugation (3184 x g, 10 min), and washed three times with 25 mL of phosphate buffered saline (PBS; Fresenius Kabi Nederland BV). Cell pellets were subsequently stored at -20 °C until further use.   Cell pellets were re-suspended in 3 mL lysis buffer (8 M urea/50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 1 mM orthovanadate, 5 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP), 30 mM chloroacetamide (CAA), phosphoSTOP phosphatase inhibitor (Thermo Fischer Scientific), cOmpleteTM mini EDTA free protease inhibitor,  1 mM MgCl2) and incubated for 20 min at room temperature. Cells were lysed by sonication (Soniprep 150 ultrasonic disintegrator (MSE), 5x 30 s, amplitude 12 microns). In between sonication steps samples were cooled on ice for 30 s. Next, samples were centrifuged for 15 min at 7200 x g at 4 °C. The urea concentration was adjusted to 6 M by the addition of 1 mL of 50 mM Tris-HCL pH 7.4, after which 1 μL Benzonase (250 U/ μL) was added and samples were incubated for two hrs at room temperature.  Proteins were precipitated by first adding 16 mL of methanol (Actu-All Chemicals) and mixing, followed by 4 mL of chloroform (Merck Millipore) and mixing. After the addition of twelve mL of Milli-Q water (obtained from a Elga Pure Lab Chorus 1 Machine), the samples were mixed by vortexing. Samples were then centrifuged for 15 min at 11000 g, followed by another 5 min at 11000 x g (this resulted in better separation of the two phases than one round of 20 min of centrifugation).  The protein precipitates at the interphase were collected and washed twice with 2 mL methanol, followed by 5 min centrifugation at 11000 x g.  The protein pellets were air-dried and re-suspended in 5 mL 25 mM NH4HCO3 pH 8.4.  Trypsin was added at a ratio of 1:25 (w/w) and overnight digestions were performed at 37 °C. The next day, samples were centrifuged for 10 min at 11000 x g and the supernatants were collected. Desalting of the samples was performed using Oasis HLB 1 cc Vac cartidges (Waters). Briefly, the cartridge was washed once with 1 mL acetonitrile (Actu-All Chemicals)/H2O 90/10 (v/v), equilibrated with Milli-Q H2O/acetonitrile/formic acid (Fluka Analytical) (95/3/0.1 v/v/v) (solution A, 2x 1 mL). Following sample loading, the column was washed with solution A (3x 1 mL) after which peptides were eluted with acetonitrile/water/formic acid (30/70/0.1 v/v/v). Tryptic peptides were lyophilized (Salm en Kipp Christ RVC 2-18 CD plus) and stored at -20 °C until use.   A one-step phosphopeptide IMAC enrichment procedure was performed using a 4 x 50 mm ProPac IMAC-10 analytical column (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For the JY cells an equivalent of 5 mg of protein was used for one IMAC purification while for the C. difficile cells, the total amount of peptides from each sample were applied, with an average of 11 (± 1.4 (S.D.)) mg protein per sample. Prior to each IMAC run the column was stripped using 50 mM EDTA/0.5 M NaCl pH 4 and charged with 25mM FeCl3 in 100mM acetic acid, according to the manufacturer’s instructions, using an offline pump system (Shimadzu). After this, the column was  connected to an Agilent 1200 chromatography system running at a flow rate of 0.3 mL/min. Prior to sample loading, the column was equilibrated in solvent A (water/acetonitrile/trifluoroacetic acid 70/30/0.07 (v/v/v)) for 30 mins at a constant flow rate of 0.3 ml/min.  Tryptic peptides (resuspended in 260 µL solvent A, of which 250 µL injected) were loaded and non-phosphopeptides were removed by washing the column for 20 min at with solvent A. Peptide separation was performed using a linear gradient from 0 to 45% of solvent B (0.5% v/v NH4OH). The peak fraction of phosphopeptides between 46-49 min was manually collected and lyophilized prior to mass spectrometric analysis.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant software (version 1.5.1.2) was used to process the raw data files, which were searched against the C. difficile strain 630 database (4103 entries) or human canonical database (67911 entries). The mass tolerance for MS1 and MS2 was set to 4.5 and 20 ppm, respectively. Trypsin was selected as the enzyme with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was selected as a fixed modification and phosphorylation on serine, threonine and tyrosine, as well as oxidation of methionine and acetylation of the protein N-terminus were selected as variable modifications. The match between runs option was selected with a window of 2 min. The false discovery rate at the peptide level was set to 1% and for modified peptides a score cut-off of 40 was used.  The MaxQuant output table “phospho (STY)Sites.txt” was used for further analysis of the phosphopeptides. For the stringent phosphorylation site assignment, only peptides with a localisation probability score >0.95 were selected. Because we used the match between runs option, we only used unique peptides without considering the phosphorylation site (i.e. not considering phospho-isomers) for comparison of different samples.

### Publication Abstract
Phosphorylation is a posttranslational modification that can affect both housekeeping functions and virulence characteristics in bacterial pathogens. In the Gram-positive enteropathogen Clostridioides difficile, the extent and nature of phosphorylation events are poorly characterized, though a protein kinase mutant strain demonstrates pleiotropic phenotypes. Here, we used an immobilized metal affinity chromatography strategy to characterize serine, threonine, and tyrosine phosphorylation in C. difficile. We find limited protein phosphorylation in the exponential growth phase but a sharp increase in the number of phosphopeptides after the onset of the stationary growth phase. Our approach identifies expected targets and phosphorylation sites among the more than 1,500 phosphosites, including the protein kinase PrkC, the anti-sigma-F factor antagonist (SpoIIAA), the anti-sigma-B factor antagonist (RsbV), and HPr kinase/phosphorylase (HprK). Analysis of high-confidence phosphosites shows that phosphorylation on serine residues is most common, followed by threonine and tyrosine phosphorylation. This work forms the basis for a further investigation into the contributions of individual kinases to the overall phosphoproteome of C. difficile and the role of phosphorylation in C. difficile physiology and pathogenesis. <b>IMPORTANCE</b> In this paper, we present a comprehensive analysis of protein phosphorylation in the Gram-positive enteropathogen Clostridioides difficile. To date, only limited evidence on the role of phosphorylation in the regulation of this organism has been published; the current study is expected to form the basis for research on this posttranslational modification in C. difficile. &#x2003;.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Clostridioides difficile

### Affiliations
LUMC/UVIC
Center for Proteomics and Metabolomics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Yassene Mohammed

### Lab Head
Dr Paul J. Hensbergen
Center for Proteomics and Metabolomics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands


