### Accession
PXD014742

### Title
Proteome analysis of Corynebacterium glutamicum ATCC13032 Δefp

### Description
Bacterial translational elongation factor P (EF-P) is required during translation of proteins containing consecutive proline motifs. Several transcription and translational regulators contain polyproline motifs and therefore, EF-P might also affect levels of proteins that do not contain polyproline motifs.

### Sample Protocol
Total protein from 5x108 cells were purified and processed using iST kit by PreOmics according to manufacturer’s protocol. For LC-MS/MS purposes, 5 µl of desalted peptides were injected in an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo), separated in a 15-cm analytical column (75μm ID home-packed with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 2.4 μm from Dr. Maisch) with a 120-min gradient from 5 to 60% acetonitrile in 0.1% (vol/vol) formic acid. The effluent from the HPLC was directly electrosprayed into a Q Exactive HF (Thermo) operated in data dependent mode to automatically switch between full scan MS and MS/MS acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (from m/z 375–1600) were acquired with resolution 60,000 at m/z 400 (AGC target of 3x106). The 10 most intense peptide ions with charge states between 2 and 5 were sequentially isolated to a target value of 1x105, and fragmented at 27% normalized collision energy with resolution 15,000 at m/z 400. Typical mass spectrometric conditions were: spray voltage, 1.5 kV; no sheath and auxiliary gas flow; heated capillary temperature, 250°C; ion selection threshold, 33.000 counts.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant 1.5.2.8 was used to identify proteins and quantify by LFQ with the following parameters: Database, uniprot_3AUP000000582_Cglutamicum _15032017; MS tol, 10ppm; MS/MS tol, 20ppm; Peptide FDR, 0.1; Protein FDR, 0.01 Min. peptide Length, 5; Variable modifications, Oxidation (M); Fixed modifications, Carbamidomethyl (C); Peptides for protein quantitation, razor and unique; Min. peptides, 1; Min. ratio count, 2. Identified proteins were analysed by a two sample-test adjusted for multiple comparisons (Perseus).

### Publication Abstract
Translation of consecutive proline motifs causes ribosome stalling and requires rescue via the action of a specific translation elongation factor, EF-P in bacteria and archaeal/eukaryotic a/eIF5A. In Eukarya, Archaea, and all bacteria investigated so far, the functionality of this translation elongation factor depends on specific and rather unusual post-translational modifications. The phylum Actinobacteria, which includes the genera Corynebacterium, Mycobacterium, and Streptomyces, is of both medical and economic significance. Here, we report that EF-P is required in these bacteria in particular for the translation of proteins involved in amino acid and secondary metabolite production. Notably, EF-P of Actinobacteria species does not need any post-translational modification for activation. While the function and overall 3D structure of this EF-P type is conserved, the loop containing the conserved lysine is flanked by two essential prolines that rigidify it. Actinobacteria's EF-P represents a unique subfamily that works without any modification.

### Keywords
Elongation factor p, Ef-p, Corynebacterium glutamicum, Actinobacteria

### Affiliations
Biomedical Center-LMU
Microbiology Department  Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München Biozentrum Department Biologie I, Ber. Mikrobiologie Großhaderner Str. 2-4 82152 Martinsried  http://www.mikrobiologie.biologie.uni-muenchen.de/personen/kjung/jung_k/index.html

### Submitter
Ignasi Forne

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Kirsten Jung
Microbiology Department  Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München Biozentrum Department Biologie I, Ber. Mikrobiologie Großhaderner Str. 2-4 82152 Martinsried  http://www.mikrobiologie.biologie.uni-muenchen.de/personen/kjung/jung_k/index.html


