### Accession
PXD006353

### Title
An optimised method for CSF extracellular vesicle extraction and comparative proteomic analysis

### Description
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are implicated in the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative diseases and offer a source of biomarkers for diagnostic, stratification and therapeutic monitoring purposes.  A major limitation in the development of specific biomarkers based on cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) EVs is the difficulty of extracting sufficient quantities of vesicles for discovery techniques such as proteomics.  This study describes a novel application of a size-based extraction technique for CSF EVs using ultrafiltration liquid chromatography (UFLC), and comparison with the gold-standard ultracentrifugation (UC) method.

### Sample Protocol
EV extraction  Samples were thawed on ice and combined.  Pooled samples were divided into 8mL aliquots and subsequently underwent centrifugation at 1200xg for 10 minutes to remove any cell debris or large aggregates and were filtered through a 0.22μm syringe-driven filter  to remove larger MVs and apoptotic bodies (Merck Millipore) prior to ultrafiltration or ultracentrifugation.  Ultracentrifugation  Ultracentrifugation was performed as described previously, with minor modifications (Thery, Amigorena et al. 2006).  Following 0.22μm filtration, samples were centrifuged in an Optima Max ultracentrifuge with MLS-50 swinging bucket rotor (Beckman Coulter (UK) Ltd; k-factor 71) at 120,000xg for 120 minutes.  The EV pellet was resuspended in 4mL phosphate buffered saline (PBS) and subjected to a further spin at 120,000xg for 120 minutes.  The pellet was then resuspended in 100μL PBS.  Ultrafiltration liquid chromatography  The UFLC protocol is summarised in figure 1A.  Following 0.22μm filtration, samples were filtered using Amicon Ultra-15 100kDa molecular weight cut-off (MWCO) centrifugal filters (Merck Millipore, Damstadt, Germany) at 3500xg for 8 minutes, washed with 4mLs PBS and centrifuged at 3500xg for a further 4 minutes.  The retentate volume was adjusted to 800μL with PBS prior to injection into a 24 mL size exclusion column packed with sepharose 4 fastflow, 24mL volume and eluted with PBS to 1.5 column volumes.  EV-containing fractions (i.e. the void volume fractions) were concentrated for further analysis using Amicon 10kDa MWCO 4mL centrifugal filters. Liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry  Peptides were analysed by nano ultra-high performance liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (nano-UPLC-MS/MS) using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nanoUPLC, (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).  Equal volumes of extracted EV were loaded onto an EASY-Spray column (75 μm×500 mm, 2 μm particle size, Thermo Scientific) and eluted using a 60 minutes gradient starting with 2% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid and 5% DMSO and increasing to 35% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid and 5% DMSO at a flow rate of 250nl/min. The data were acquired with a resolution of 120,000 full-width half maximum at mass/charge 200 with EASY-IC using the reagent ion source (202 m/z) for internal calibration enabled, Top 20 precursor ion selection, Dynamic Exclusion of 60 seconds and fragmentation performed in Collision Induced dissociation (CID) mode with Collision Energy of 35.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data were analysed using Progenesis QI for Proteomics software v3.0 (Nonlinear Dynamics).  MS/MS spectra were searched against the UniProt Homo Sapiens Reference proteome (retrieved 15/11/2016) using Mascot v2.5.1 (Matrix Science) allowing for a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and a fragment ion tolerance of 0.5 Da.  Carbamidomethylation on Cysteines was defined as fixed modification and variable modification included Deamidation on Asparagine and Glutamine and Oxidation on Methionine. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set at 1 % and all peptides with an ion score cutoff higher than 20 into were imported into Progenesis QIP. Proteins that were defined with at least two unique peptides were included in the protein data set for further analysis.  Protein abundance values were normalised to the median abundance of the 90% of proteins with the lowest variance across all runs.  Missing values were imputed by random sampling from a normal distribution downshifted 1.8 standard deviations from the mean intensity of normalised values, with standard deviation 0.25 times the standard deviation of normalised values (Keilhauer, Hein et al. 2015).  Statistical analysis of relative abundance data was performed in R (R Core Team 2015) using a Student’s T-test with multiple comparisons correction using a Benjamini-Hochberg procedure.   Gene ontology enrichment analysis was performed using GOrilla, using Benjamini-Hochberg multiple comparisons correction, with corrected p<0.05 to denote statistical significance (Eden, Navon et al. 2009).  Analysis of tissue-specific protein enrichment was performed using cerebral cortex enriched proteins from the Human Protein Atlas using differentially abundant proteins with corrected p-value < 0.05 (Hawrylycz, Lein et al. 2012).

### Publication Abstract
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) extracellular vesicles (EVs) show promise as a source of neurological disease biomarkers, although their precise origin is poorly understood. Current extraction techniques produce disappointing yield and purity. This study describes the application of ultrafiltration LC (UFLC) to CSF-EVs, compared with ultracentrifugation (UC), and explores CSF-EV origin. EVs are extracted from human CSF by UC and UFLC and characterized using nanoparticle tracking analysis, electron microscopy, and immunoblotting. EV and CSF proteomes are analyzed by LC-MS/MS. UFLC-isolated particles have size, morphology, and marker expression characteristic of EVs. UFLC provides greater EV yield (UFLC 7.90 &#xd7; 10<sup>8</sup> &#xa0;&#xb1; SD 1.31 &#xd7; 10<sup>8</sup> EVs&#xa0;mL<sup>-1</sup> CSF, UC 1.06 &#xd7; 10<sup>8</sup> &#xa0;&#xb1;&#xa0;0.57 &#xd7; 10<sup>8</sup> p&#xa0;&lt;&#xa0;0.001). UFLC enhances purity, proteomic depth (UFLC 622&#xa0;&#xb1;&#xa0;49, UC 298&#xa0;&#xb1;&#xa0;50, p&#xa0;=&#xa0;0.001), and consistency of quantification (CV 17% vs 23%). EVs contain more intracellular proteins (Odds ratio [OR] 2.63 p&#xa0;&lt;&#xa0;0.001) and fewer plasma proteins than CSF (OR 0.60, p&#xa0;&lt;&#xa0;0.001). CSF and EV-enriched proteomes show overrepresentation of brain-specific proteins (EV OR 3.18, p&#xa0;&lt;&#xa0;0.001; CSF OR 3.37, p&#xa0;&lt;&#xa0;0.001). Overrepresentation of cerebral white matter (OR 1.99, p = 0.015) and choroid plexus proteins (OR 1.87, p&lt;0.001) is observed in EVs. UFLC improves yield and purity of CSF-EVs. The EV-enriched proteome better reflects the intracellular and white matter proteome than whole CSF.

### Keywords
Extracellular vesicles, Lc-ms/ms, Cerebrospinal fluid

### Affiliations
University of Oxford, NDM Research Building, Target Discovery Institute, Kessler Group.   OXFORD
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Marie-Laëtitia Thézénas

### Lab Head
Dr Pr. Benedikt Kessler
University of Oxford, NDM Research Building, Target Discovery Institute, Kessler Group.   OXFORD


