### Accession
PXD001069

### Title
Francisella tularensis LVS MSMS spectral library for SRM design

### Description
This analysis was performed in order to collect a library of MSMS spectra for tryptic peptides derived from Francisella tularensis LVS proteins. Such MSMS library facilities the design and refinement of LC-SRM assays.

### Sample Protocol
Bacteria were resuspended in urea and deoxycholate and lyzed using a French Pressure cell. After reduction with TCEP thiomethylation with MMTS, proteins were digested by rLys-C and trypsin. Peptides were pre-fractionated using high-pH revered phase and peptides from each fraction were analyzed using nanoLC hyphenated to Q-Exactive.

### Data Protocol
Data were evaluated in ProteomeDiscoverer using MASCOT. No misscleavage was allowed.

### Publication Abstract
The posttranscriptional regulatory protein Hfq was shown to be an important determinant of the stress resistance and full virulence in the dangerous human pathogen Francisella tularensis. Transcriptomics brought rather limited clues to the precise contribution of Hfq in virulence. To reveal the molecular basis of the attenuation caused by hfq inactivation, we employed iTRAQ in the present study and compared proteomes of the parent and isogenic &#x394;hfq strains. We show that Hfq modulates the level of 76 proteins. Most of them show decreased abundance in the &#x2206;hfq mutant, thereby indicating that Hfq widely acts rather as a positive regulator of Francisella gene expression. Several key Francisella virulence factors including those encoded within the Francisella pathogenicity island were found among the downregulated proteins, which is in a good agreement with the attenuated phenotype of the &#x394;hfq strain. To further validate the iTRAQ exploratory findings, we subsequently performed targeted LC-SRM analysis of selected proteins. This accurate quantification method corroborated the trends found in the iTRAQ data.

### Keywords
Spectral library, Msms, Francisella tularensis lvs

### Affiliations
Faculty of Pharmacy, Charles University
Institute of Molecular Pathology, Faculty of Military Health Sciences, University of Defence

### Submitter
Juraj Lenco

### Lab Head
Dr Jiri Stulik
Institute of Molecular Pathology, Faculty of Military Health Sciences, University of Defence


