### Accession
PXD000319

### Title
Maniupulating root water supply elicits major shifts in the shoot proteome

### Description
Detailed information: Rice (*Oryza sativa* L. cv. Nipponbare) is a drought-susceptible species which is well suited for studies of abiotic stress response because of the comprehensive bioinformatics resource available. By withholding water from the entire root system of young rice plants, or half the root system only, it was possible to infer the relative impact of signals arriving from roots growing in wet and dry soil on the shoot proteome. The global proteome of shoots had 685 proteins in common to all three drought treatments but there were major shifts in abundance of individual proteins within 16 functional categories. The dominant changes were analyzed more deeply. First, we investigated transport and cell component organization, where some proteins were up-regulated by drought but many more down-regulated. Proteins involved in protein metabolism were up-regulated in general by drought when they were responsible for protein degradation but those involved in protein synthesis were down-regulated when water was withheld. Stress-related proteins behaved very consistently by increasing in droughted plants but notably some proteins were most abundant when roots of the same plant were growing in both wet and dry soil. This suggests that drought signals are complex interactions and not simply the additive effect of water supply to the roots. Changes in carbohydrate-processing proteins were consistent with the passive accumulation of soluble sugars in shoots under drought, with hydrolysis of sucrose and starch synthesis both enhanced.        Data analysis information: The result raw files were converted to mzXML format and processed through the global proteome machine (GPM) software (version 2.1.1) of the X!Tandem algorithm (freely available at http://www.thegpm.org). The 16 gel fractions were processed serially for each experiment and the output files were generated as non-redundant, merged files with protein identifications with log (e) values less than -1, for each individual gel fraction. A protein database compiled from NCBI *O*. *sativa* with 26938 protein sequences (August 2011) was used in GPM to search the tandem mass spectra; the database also included common trypsin and human peptide contaminants. False discovery rates (FDR) were evaluated by searching against a reversed sequence database. Search parameters included MS and MS/MS tolerances of +2 Da and +0.2 Da, carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modifications, oxidation of methionine as variable modifications and tolerance of two missed tryptic cleavages and K/R-P cleavages.

### Sample Protocol
Seeds of Oryza sativa L. cv. IR64 were obtained from the International Rice Research Institute (Los Baños, The Philippines). The seeds were surface sterilized, pregerminated for 3 d, and grown on Yoshida culture solution11 for 10 days prior to transplantation into rectangular pots (measuring 26 cm × 20 cm) and 15 cm deep. Pots had an internal wall that divided them into two equal volumes of soil which were watered, either identically or differentially. A mixture of loam, sand, and clay (1:2:1) was added to within 5 cm of the top of the pot. The roots of each seedling were distributed equally between the two parts of the pot by training seminal roots of small seedlings into each half and plants watered normally for 14 days after transplantation. Then, three watering treatments were imposed for 14 d, with three replicates in a randomized strategy. The three treatments were: plants watered daily (WellWatered, WW); same as WW plants for 14 d after transplanting, then watering was stopped in both halves of the pot (Droughted plants, DD); same as WW plants for 14 d after transplanting, then watering was stopped in one-half of each pot, producing a root system that is partially wet and partially dry (Split-root plants, WD). Experiments were carried out in a glasshouse during the spring-summer season at 36°N latitude using natural illumination in a glasshouse. Urea (2.73 g), Solophos (1.84 g), and muriate of potash (1.04 g) were added to each pot, as sources of nitrogen, phosphate, and potassium, respectively. Shoots from three individual pots were sampled to form three replicates. Proteomic analysis was executed in a randomized design with three replicates.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification: The result raw files were converted to mzXML format and processed through the global proteome machine (GPM) software (version 2.1.1) of the X!Tandem algorithm (freely available at http://www.thegpm.org). The 16 gel fractions were processed serially for each experiment, and the output files were generated as nonredundant, merged files with protein identifications with log (e) values less than −1, for each individual gel fraction. A protein database compiled from NCBI O. sativa with 26 938 protein sequences (August 2011) was used in GPM to search the tandem mass spectra; the database also included common trypsin and human peptide contaminants. False discovery rates (FDR) were evaluated by searching against a reversed sequence database. Search parameters included MS and MS/MS tolerances of ±2 Da and ±0.2 Da, respectively, carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modifications, oxidation of methionine as variable modifications, and tolerance of two missed tryptic cleavages and K/R-P cleavages. Data processing and quality control: The GPM outputs from each of the three replicates with protein identification were combined to produce a single shotgun proteomic analysis output file for each treatment. The contaminants and reversed database hits were excluded. In each treatment, the final data set contained the proteins that were common in each of the three replicates and had a total spectral count of at least six for at least one condition.13,14 The protein false discovery rate was calculated using the reverse database, hence protein FDR = {(no. reverse proteins identified)/(total protein identifications)} × 100.15 Peptide false discovery rate was calculated as peptide FDR = {2 × (no. reverse peptide identifications)/(total peptide identifications)} × 100.

### Publication Abstract
Substantial reductions in yield caused by drought stress can occur when parts of the root system experience water deficit even though other parts have sufficient access to soil water. To identify proteins associated to drought signaling, rice (Oryza sativa L. cv. IR64.) plants were transplanted into plastic pots with an internal wall dividing each pot into two equal compartments, allowing for equal distribution of soil and the root system between these compartments. The following treatments were applied: either both compartments were watered daily ("wet" roots), or water was withheld from both compartments ("dry" roots), or water was withheld from only one of the two compartments in each pot ("wet" and "dry" roots). The substantial differences in physiological parameters of different growth conditions were accompanied by differential changes in protein abundances. Label-free quantitative shotgun proteomics have resulted in identification of 1383 reproducible proteins across all three conditions. Differentially expressed proteins were categorized within 17 functional groups. The patterns observed were interesting in that in some categories such as protein metabolism and oxidation-reduction, substantial numbers of proteins were most abundant when leaves were receiving signals from "wet" and "dry" roots. In yet other categories such as transport, several key transporters were surprisingly abundant in leaves supported by partially or completely droughted root systems, especially plasma membrane and vacuolar transporters. Stress-related proteins behaved very consistently by increasing in droughted plants but notably some proteins were most abundant when roots of the same plant were growing in both wet and dry soils. Changes in carbohydrate-processing proteins were consistent with the passive accumulation of soluble sugars in shoots under drought, with hydrolysis of sucrose and starch synthesis both enhanced. These results suggest that drought signals are complex interactions and not simply the additive effect of water supply to the roots.

### Keywords
Split-root, Shotgun proteomics, Drought, Rice

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Systems Biology at Cell Science Research Center, Royan Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Technology, ACECR, Tehran, Iran
chemistry and biomolecular science department

### Submitter
Mehdi mirzaei

### Lab Head
Dr Ghasem Hosseini Salekdeh
Department of Molecular Systems Biology at Cell Science Research Center, Royan Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Technology, ACECR, Tehran, Iran


