### Accession
PXD023423

### Title
Mining gastric cancer cellular quantitative proteomics data to analyse the proteome change upon CAMKK2 inhibition

### Description
Gastric cancer is a global health concern. Molecular alterations in various signaling pathways have been implicated in the development and late-stage progression/metastasis of gastric cancer. Reports have suggested that Wnt signaling pathway might contribute to gastric carcinogenesis by stimulating migration and invasion of gastric cancer cells. This study aimed at analysing the proteome change upon CAMKK2 inhibition in gastric cancer cells using LC-MS/MS based quantitative proteomic approach. A TMT based quantitative approach was used to identify the significantly altered proteins upon CAMKK2 inhibition. Gene Ontology (GO) analysis and pathway analysis was done for the significantly altered proteins and was later validated by immunoblotting.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction was done using lysis buffer (2%SDS in 50 mM TEABC with protease and phosphatase inhibitors), cells were grown to 70% confulency and washed with ice-cold PBS before harvesting. The cells were lysed in lysis buffer (1mM sodium orthovanadate, 2.5mM Sodium pyrophosphate, 1mM beta glycerol phosphate in 50mM of Triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEABC) and 2% SDS). Protein concentration was determined using the BCA assay (Pierce, Waltham, MA). Equal amounts of protein (800 µg) were used for digestion. The protein sample was reduced and alkylated using 5 mM Dithiothreitol (DTT) 10 mM iodoacetamide (IAA). Before trypsin digestion, acetone precipitation was carried out to remove SDS present in the sample Trypsin digestion was carried using modified sequence grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI).

### Data Protocol
The raw files obtained after data acquisition were searched using Proteome Discoverer software suite version 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Data were searched against the Human RefSeq 94 database along with known mass spectrometry contaminants by using SEQUEST and Mascot algorithms. Search parameters included carbamidomethylation of cysteine, TMT at peptide N-terminal and lysine as static modifications. Dynamic modifications included oxidation of methionine and acetylation at protein N-terminus.   Minimum peptide length was set as 7 amino acids with 1 missed cleavage allowed. Mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm at MS level and 0.05 Da for MS/MS level, and the false discovery rate was set to 1% at the PSM level.

### Publication Abstract
Gastric cancer is the fifth most common cancer and the third leading cause of cancer-related death worldwide. We showed previously that calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase kinase 2 (CAMKK2), a serine-threonine kinase, is highly expressed in gastric cancer and leads to progression. In the present study, we identified the molecular networks involved in CAMKK2-mediated progression of gastric adenocarcinoma. Treatment of gastric cancer cell lines with a CAMKK2 inhibitor, STO-609, resulted in decreased cell migration, invasion, and colony-forming ability and a G1/S-phase arrest. In addition, tandem mass tag (TMT)-based quantitative proteomic analysis resulted in the identification of 7609 proteins, of which 219 proteins were found to be overexpressed and 718 downregulated (1.5-fold). Our data identified several key downregulated proteins involved in cell division and cell proliferation, which included DNA replication licensing factors, replication factor C, origin recognition complex, replication protein A and GINS, and mesenchymal markers, upon CAMKK2 inhibition. Immunoblotting and immunofluorescence results showed concordance with our mass spectroscopy data. Taken together, our study supports CAMKK2 as a novel therapeutic target in gastric cancer.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Sto-609, Data mining, Camkk2, Mass spectrometry, Gastric cancer

### Affiliations
Institute of Bioinformatics, Bangalore, Karnataka, India
Center for Systems Biology and Molecular Medicine (CSBMM) Yenepoya(Deemed to be University) Mangalore - 575018, India

### Submitter
Aditi Chatterjee

### Lab Head
Dr Aditi Chatterjee
Center for Systems Biology and Molecular Medicine (CSBMM) Yenepoya(Deemed to be University) Mangalore - 575018, India


