### Accession
PXD020014

### Title
"In-gel cross-linking mass spectrometry (IGX-MS) of proteins and protein complexes"

### Description
Cross-linking mass spectrometry has developed into an important method to study protein structures and interactions. The in-solution cross-linking workflows involve time and sample consuming steps and do not provide sensible solutions for differentiating cross-links obtained from co-occurring protein oligomers, complexes, or conformers. Here we developed a cross-linking workflow combining blue native PAGE with in-gel cross-linking mass spectrometry (IGX-MS). This workflow circumvents steps, such as buffer exchange and cross-linker concentration optimization. Additionally, IGX-MS enables the parallel analysis of co-occurring protein complexes using only small amounts of sample. Another benefit of IGX-MS observed by experiments on GroEL and purified bovine heart mitochondria, is the substantial reduction of artificial over-length cross-links when compared to in-solution cross-linking. We next used IGX-MS to investigate the complement components C5, C6, and their hetero-dimeric C5b6 complex. The obtained cross-links were used to generate a refined structural model of the complement component C6, resembling C6 in its inactivated state. This finding shows that IGX-MS can be used to provide new insights into the initial stages of the terminal complement pathway.

### Sample Protocol
Blue native page analysis was performed according to the manufacturer's protocol and recently published protocols (Wittig et al., 2006). Briefly, proteins were mixed with NativePAGE sample buffer (1x final concentration), and subsequently, 5-20 µg of protein sample was loaded onto a Bis-Tris gel (3-12 %). Electrophoresis was started with a dark blue cathode buffer (1x NativePAGE cathode additive) for 30 min at 80 V before the dark blue buffer was changed to light blue cathode buffer (0.1x NativePAGE cathode additive). After change of buffer, the voltage was increased to 120-140 V for additional 2-4 hours. Readily run gels were briefly rinsed with ddH2O before gel bands of interest were excised and further cut into smaller pieces under a laminar flow hood. Excised protein bands were stored in Eppendorf tubes for subsequent cross-linking experiments. Excised gel pieces were incubated with either DSS or DSSO. Cross-linking experiments were performed in triplicates. After quenching of cross-linking reactions, the supernatant was removed, and gel pieces were briefly washed using ddH2O and subsequently subjected to standard in-gel digestion (Shevchenko et al., 2006). Briefly, gel pieces containing cross-linked proteins were washed, reduced by incubation in reduction buffer (50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AmBic), 6.5 mM DTT, pH 8.5) for one hour at RT. Reduction buffer was removed, and gel pieces were dehydrated using 100 % ACN. Next, dehydrated gel pieces were subjected to alkylation buffer (50 mM AmBic, 54 mM iodoacetamide (IAA), pH 8.5) for 30 min at RT in the dark. Alkylation buffer was removed, and gel pieces were dehydrated using 100 % ACN. For digestion of cross-linked proteins, dehydrated gel pieces were covered with digestion buffer (3ng/µL Trypsin in 50 mM AmBic, pH 8.5) and pre-incubated for minimum 30 min on ice. Next, excess of digestion buffer was removed, and an equivalent volume of AmBic buffer (50 mM AmBic, pH 8.5) was added to cover the gel pieces, before incubating at 37 °C overnight. Next, the supernatant containing digested peptides was collected, and gel pieces were once again dehydrated using 100 % ACN for 15 min at RT. Resulted supernatant was collected and combined with the previous supernatant. Finally, the samples were completely dried and stored at -80 °C until MS analysis. For MS analysis, cross-linked peptides were resuspended in MS buffer (10 % FA in water) and analyzed as described below.

### Data Protocol
Data for IGX-MS samples was acquired using an UHPLC 1290 system (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA) coupled on-line to an Orbitrap Fusion or Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA). Firstly, peptides were trapped using a 100-µm inner diameter 2-cm trap column (packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 3µm) prior to separation on an analytical column (50 cm of length, 75 µM inner diameter; packed in-house with Poroshell 120 EC-C18, 2.7 µm). Trapping of peptides was performed for 5 min in solvent A (0.1 % FA in water) at a flow rate of 0.005 mL/min. DSS cross-linked peptides were subsequently separated as follows: 0-13 % solvent B (0.1 % FA in 80 % v/v ACN) in 10 sec, 13-44 % in 40 min, 44-100 % in 3 min and finally 100 % for 2 min. DSSO cross-linked samples were separated using the following gradient: 0-10 % solvent B in 10 sec, 10-40 % in 40 min, 40-100 % in 3 min, and finally 100 % for 2 min. For each of the gradients, the flow was passively split to approximately 200 nL/min. Mass spectrometers were operated in a data-dependent mode (DDA). For DSS cross-linked peptides, full scan MS spectra from 350-1500 Th were acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 60,000 with the AGC target set to 1 x 106 and maximum injection time of 20 ms. For measurements on the Orbitrap Fusion, in-source fragmentation was turned on and set to 15 eV. Cycle time for MS2 fragmentation scans was set to 3 s. Only peptides with charged states 3-8 were fragmented, and dynamic exclusion properties were set to n = 1, for a duration of 20 ms. Fragmentation was performed using in a stepped HCD collision energy mode (31.5, 35, 38.5 %) in the ion trap and acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 30,000 after accumulating a target value of 1 x 105 with an isolation window of 1.4 Th and maximum injection time of 120 ms. For the acquisition of DSSO cross-linked peptides, full scan MS spectra from 310-1600 Th were acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000 with the AGC target set to 5 x 105 and maximum injection time of 50 ms. For the identification of DSSO signature peaks, peptides were fragmented using a fixed CID collision energy (30 %) and MS2 scan was performed at in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 30,000 after accumulating a target value of 5 x 104 ions using an isolation window of 1.6 Th and maximum injection time of 54 ms. For sequencing selected signature peaks, selected ions were fragmented using a fixed HCD collision energy (30 %) in the ion trap MS3, with the AGC target set to 1 x 104 and maximum injection time of 120 ms.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bn-page/ cross-linking/ protein complexes/ complement/ protein modeling

### Affiliations
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Johannes Hevler

### Lab Head
Dr Albert J. R Heck
Utrecht University


### SDRF

