### Accession
PXD034214

### Title
Plasma glycoproteomics delivers high-specificity disease biomarkers by detecting site-specific glycosylation abnormalities

### Description
The human plasma glycoproteome holds enormous potential to identify personalized biomarkers to diagnose and understand disease. Recent advances in mass spectrometry and software development are opening novel avenues to mine the glycoproteome for protein- and site-specific glycosylation changes. Here, we describe a novel plasma N-glycoproteomics method for disease diagnosis and evaluated its clinical applicability by performing comparative glycoproteomics in blood plasma of 40 controls and a cohort of 74 patients with 13 different genetic diseases that directly impact the protein N-glycosylation pathway. The plasma glycoproteome yielded high-specificity biomarker signatures for each of the individual genetic defects. Bioinformatic analyses revealed site-specific glycosylation differences that could be explained by underlying glycobiology and in specific diseases by protein-intrinsic factors. Our work illustrates the strong potential of plasma glycoproteomics to significantly increase specificity of glycoprotein biomarkers with direct insights in site-specific glycosylation changes to better understand the mechanisms underlying human disease.

### Sample Protocol
Ten microliter of plasma was denatured in 10µl urea (8 M urea, 10 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0) and reduced with 15 µl 10 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at room temperature (RT). Reduced cysteines were alkylated through incubation with 15 µl 50 mM 2-chloroacetamide (CAA) in the dark for 20 min at RT. Next, proteins were subjected to LysC digestion (1 µg LysC/50µg protein) by incubating the sample at RT for 3 hours. Then, samples were diluted with 3 volumes of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and trypsin was added (1 µg trypsin /50 µg protein) for overnight digestion at 37°C. Glycopeptides were enriched using 100 µl Sepharose CL-4B beads slurry (Sigma) per sample well in a 0.20 µm pore size 96 multi well filter plate (AcroPrep Advance, VWR). The beads were washed three times with 20% ethanol and 83% acetonitrile (ACN), respectively, prior to sample application. The sample was then incubated on the beads for 20 min at room temperature on a shaking plate. The filter plate was then centrifuged and beads were first washed three times with 83% ACN and then three times with 83% ACN with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Next, glycopeptide eluates were collected by incubation of the beads with 50 µl milliQ water for 5 min at room temperature, followed by centrifugation. Samples were analyzed in randomized order by means of liquid chromatography (nano-Advance, Bruker Daltonics) with online tandem mass spectrometry (maXis Plus, Bruker Daltonics) interfaced via a vacuum-assisted axial desolvation nanoflow electrospray ionization source (CaptiveSpray, Bruker Daltonics) for data-dependent acquisition. Five microliters of sample were loaded onto the trapping column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, 100 μm × 2 cm, nanoViper, 5 μm 100Å C18 particles, Thermo Scientific) using 0.1% acetic acid at a flow rate of 7000 nl/min for 3 minutes at RT. Next, peptides were separated on a C18 reversed phase 15 cm length × 7 μm internal diameter C18RP analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, C18 ReproSil AQ, 1.9 µm particles, 120 Å pore size, Thermo Scientific) at 45°C using a linear gradient of 3–45% ACN 0.1% acetic acid in 60 minutes at a flow rate of 500 nl/min. Electrospray ionization conditions were 3 L/min 180°C N2 drying gas, 1500 V capillary voltage and 0.2 Bar N2 nebulizer gas flow for gas phase supercharging using ACN as dopant (nanoBooster, Bruker Daltonics). All samples were analysed by data dependent acquisition (AutoMSn) for feature map data generation and glycan-moiety identifications by using a 3s duty cycle at 2 Hz acquisition rate for full MS spectra and a variable number of MS/MS experiments at precursor intensity scaled acquisition rate (4 Hz MS/MS spectral rate at 10.000 counts, 9 Hz MS/MS spectral rate at 75.000 counts). Collision induced dissociation (CID) parameters used for glycan fragmentation: Charge state values [z]: 1; 2; 3; 4; 5; 1; 2; 3; 4; 5; 1; 2; 3; 4; 5; 1; 2; 3; 4; 5, Isolation mass values [m/z]: 300; 300; 300; 300; 300; 500; 500; 500; 500; 500; 1000; 1000; 1000; 1000; 1000; 2000; 2000; 2000; 2000; 2000, Isolation width values [Th]: 4; 4; 4; 4; 4; 5; 5; 5; 5; 5; 8; 8; 8; 8; 8; 20; 20; 20; 20; 20, Collision energy values [eV]: 34; 28; 23; 18; 18; 40; 28; 22; 18; 18; 55; 44; 39; 36; 36; 77; 54; 50; 50; 50, Fallback chargestate [z]: 3. Ion optics tuning: 110 µsec transfer time, 23 µsec pre-pulse storage time, 1200 Volt peak-to-peak (Vpp) collision cell radio frequency (RF). Respective pooled samples of healthy individuals and selected CDG patient groups (ATP6AP1, ATP6V0A2, B4GALT1, CCDC115, COG5, Cohen syndrome, DYM, MAN1B1, NANS, PGM1, SLC10A7, SLC35A2, TMEM199, VMA21) were analysed in random order to generate peptide-moiety identification data using CID energy stepping to acquire glycan- and peptide-moiety fragmentation data within a merged MS/MS spectrum27. To this end, fragmentation spectra were recorded at 100% base collision energy for glycan fragmentation and 200% base collision energy for peptide fragmentation in a 3:7 spectra acquisition stoichiometry. Collision cell tuning was respectively stepped for 50% of each CE MS/MS step time interval from 1000 to 1200 Vpp collision cell RF at 64 to 110 µsec transfer time. Intensity dependent MS/MS spectra acquisition rate was scaled between 2Hz at 10.000 counts and 4Hz at 1.000.000 counts. Precursor ions above 700 m/z with charge state z=2+ or higher (preferred charge state range of z=2+ to z=6+) were selected for MS/MS analysis with active exclusion enabled (excluded after one spectrum, released after 0.5 min, reconsidered precursor if current intensity/previous intensity ≥3, smart exclusion disabled).

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using DataAnalysis 4.2 for post-acquisition internal mass calibration (sodium-acetate clusters) and subsequent export of MS/MS data to MGF file format. Mass calibrated raw data files were converted to mzML using compassXport (Bruker Daltonics) and subsequently processed by OpenMS (Knime v3.2.1) to generate a consensus feature map that contains intensities and associated metadata for aligned features from all analysis files. The OpenMS workflow can be downloaded from [ID proteomeXchange]. The MGF-files were processed in ProteinScapeTM 3.1 (Bruker Daltonics) to classify glycopeptide fragmentation spectra using sugar mass distance pattern matching and to calculate peptide- and glycan-moiety masses, respectively. Classified glycopeptide fragmentation MS/MS spectra were searched against the Carbbank glycan structure database (date: 2016-08-05) using GlycoQuest (ProteinScapeTM 3.1, Bruker Daltonics) and following acceptance criteria: score>20, >10% spectral intensity coverage and >10% theoretical fragment ion coverage (B-,Y- and internal-fragment ions). An in-house developed Perl script was used to remove oxonium ions (B-, and i-ions) based on 25% detection frequency and glycan-peptide fragment ions (Y-ions) with mass above the calculated non-glycosylated peptide moiety from CE stepping fragmentation spectra and searched against the human SwissProt protein sequence database (date: 2016-08-05) by MASCOT (v2.5.1.1, Matrix science) with the following settings: tryptic cleavage specificity, precursor mass tolerance of 20.0 ppm, MS/MS tolerance of 0.05 Da, allowing for 1 missed cleavage and a fixed carbamidomethyl modification (C), and variable deamidation (NQ), oxidation (M), acetyl (protein N-terminus), HexNAc (N) and pyro-carbamidomethyl (peptide N-terminus) modifications, with percolator enabled to achieve ≤1.0% false discovery rate.   In-house developed MATLAB R2014b functions and Perl scripts were used to map the identification data onto features of the consensus feature map using a rectangular bucketing approach and to perform subsequent data pre-processing and downstream analyses. Briefly, in pre-processing relevant features within specified retention time and mass-to-charge ranges ( 10 - 67 min, 600 - 3700 m/z) and with detection frequency of at least 75% in samples within any sample group were subjected to quantile intensity normalization prior to missing value imputation for subsequent machine learning approaches. Identified non-redundant peptide- and glycan-moieties from individual search results were first subjected to retention time alignment by LOESS regression and subsequently linked to consensus features in rectangular buckets (1 min retention time width x 20 ppm mass width). Inter-search result conflicts were resolved by majority vote calling for respectively peptide- and glycan-moieties prior to filtering out cases where the sum of the glycan- and peptide-moiety masses was greater than the (combined) feature mass after proximal HexNAc classification ambiguity correction, when possible. Next, identification results from annotated features were transferred onto unannotated co-eluting features with identical charge deconvoluted mass. Finally, peptide identifications from fully annotated features (both peptide- and glycan-moiety elucidated) were matched to co-eluting features with identified glycan-moieties when the calculated peptide-moiety mass from the glycan identification corresponded with the experimental mass of the identified peptide-moiety mass within 20 ppm and number of sialic acids between both features’ glycan-moieties were identical.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Plasma, Glycoproteomics, Glycopeptide, Congenital disorders of glycosylation, Blood

### Affiliations
Radboudumc
Translational Metabolic Laboratory, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Radboudumc, Nijmegen, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Hans Wessels

### Lab Head
Dr Alain J van Gool
Translational Metabolic Laboratory, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Radboudumc, Nijmegen, The Netherlands


