### Accession
PXD011198

### Title
hSWATH: Unlocking SWATH’s full potential for an untargeted histone perspective

### Description
Mass spectrometry (MS) has become the technique of choice for large-scale analysis of histone post-translational modifications (hPTMs) and their combinatorial patterns, especially in untargeted settings where novel discovery-driven hypotheses are being generated. However, MS-based histone analysis requires a distinct sample preparation, acquisition and data analysis workflow when compared to traditional MS-based approaches. To this end, sequential window acquisition of all theoretical fragment ion spectra (SWATH) has great potential, as it allows for untargeted accurate identification and quantification of hPTMs. Here, we present a complete SWATH workflow specifically adapted for the untargeted study of histones (hSWATH). We assess its validity on a technical dataset of a time-lapse deacetylation of a commercial histone extract using HDAC1, which contains a ground truth, i.e. acetylated substrate peptides reduce in intensity. We successfully apply this workflow in a biological setting and subsequently investigate the differential response to HDAC inhibition in different breast cancer cell lines. 

### Sample Protocol
Three different samples were used throughout this manuscript: (i) sample A: a dilution series of a commercial bovine histone extract to assess optimal loading for DDA library building and SWATH, (ii) sample B: a time-series in which histones form a commercial bovine histone extract were deacetylated by HDAC1 (1:10) to provide targets with known identifications and quantifications in an untargeted setting to validate the workflow, and (iii) sample C: a time-series of breast cancer cells (MDA-MB-468 and MDA-MB-453) treated with HDACi Panobinostat, to illustrate the applicability to generate novel biological hypotheses. Cells were treated with DMSO (1 hour treatment) or 15 nM Panobinostat (Sigma-Aldrich, in DMSO) (1 and 4 hour treatment). Histone extraction in sample C was performed using a hypotonic lysis buffer to extract the nuclei from the cells, followed by acid extraction of histones (according to “protocol B” in Govaert et al.2016). Propionylation and trypsin digestion is commonly applied to samples A, B and C. Propionylation was conducted as previously described in Meert et al 2015 and Meert et al 2016. Histones were analyzed by micro-RPLC-MS/MS using a Eksigent NanoLC 425 system operated in microflow mode coupled to a Triple TOF ™ 5600 mass spectrometer (AB SCIEX, Concord, Canada). To create a DDA spectral library independently for all three datasets, all spectra obtained with DDA were annotated. Briefly, raw data files were peakpicked with PeakView 1.2 and resulting *.mgf files were merged for each of the three datasets and searched with Mascot 2.6 using three different search parameter sets to identify (i) non-propionylated Beta-Galactosidase and iRT spike-ins, (ii) contaminating and co-extracted proteins present in the sample as well as unexpected PTMs with an error tolerant search, and (iii) histone peptidoforms with a set of five multiple sequential searches (Willems et al.2016).

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed in three distinct stages: (i) DDA library building using Peakview, Python and Mascot, (ii) library tuning and analysis of SWATH data with Python and Skyline and (iii) statistical evaluation with python, Qlucore and R. To create a DDA spectral library independently for all three datasets, all spectra obtained with DDA were annotated. Briefly, raw data files were peakpicked with PeakView 1.2 and resulting *.mgf files were merged for each of the three datasets and searched with Mascot 2.6 using three different search parameter sets to identify (i) non-propionylated Beta-Galactosidase and iRT spike-ins, (ii) contaminating and co-extracted proteins present in the sample as well as unexpected PTMs with an error tolerant search, and (iii) histone peptidoforms with a set of five multiple sequential searches (Willems et al.2016).

### Publication Abstract
Mass spectrometry (MS) has become the technique of choice for large-scale analysis of histone post-translational modifications (hPTMs) and their combinatorial patterns, especially in untargeted settings where novel discovery-driven hypotheses are being generated. However, MS-based histone analysis requires a distinct sample preparation, acquisition, and data analysis workflow when compared to traditional MS-based approaches. To this end, sequential window acquisition of all theoretical fragment ion spectra (SWATH) has great potential, as it allows for untargeted accurate identification and quantification of hPTMs. Here, we present a complete SWATH workflow specifically adapted for the untargeted study of histones (hSWATH). We assess its validity on a technical dataset of time-lapse deacetylation of a commercial histone extract using HDAC1, which contains a ground truth, i.e., acetylated substrate peptides reduce in intensity. We successfully apply this workflow in a biological setting and subsequently investigate the differential response to HDAC inhibition in different breast cancer cell lines.

### Keywords
Sequential window acquisition of all theoretical fragment ion spectra (swath); data independent acquisition (dia); histone; mass spectrometry (ms); post-translational modification (ptm); epigenetics

### Affiliations
ProGenTomics, Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Ghent University, B-9000 Ghent, Belgium
Faculity of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology

### Submitter
Maarten Dhaenens

### Lab Head
Dr Maarten Dhaenens
ProGenTomics, Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Ghent University, B-9000 Ghent, Belgium


