### Accession
PXD034871

### Title
Structure of the human heparan sulfate polymerase complex EXT1-EXT2

### Description
Heparan sulfates are complex polysaccharides that mediate the interaction with a broad range of protein ligands at the cell surface. A key step in heparan sulfate biosynthesis is catalyzed by the bi-functional glycosyltransferases EXT1 and EXT2, which generate the glycan backbone consisting of repeating Nacetylglucosamine and glucuronic acid units. The molecular mechanism of heparan sulfate chain polymerization remains, however, unknown. Human EXT1 and EXT2, lacking the N-terminal transmembrane helix, were co-expressed as a secreted complex using human embryonic kidney cells (FreeStyle 293-F). We purified 0.5 mg of the complex from 900 mL suspension culture using two immobilized metal affinity chromatography steps and an interspersed protease treatment to cleave off the alkaline phosphatase fusion protein serving as a secretion signal. Mass spectrometry-based proteomic analysis confirmed the quality of the sample with EXT1 and EXT2 found to be the most abundant proteins, and being present in comparable amounts.

### Sample Protocol
For soluble, secreted expression, the coding regions of N-terminal truncated EXT1 (aa29-aa746) and EXT2 (aa47-aa718) were cloned into the pTT22-SSP4 vector (National Research Center Canada, Biotechnology Research Institute) using NheI and BamHI restriction sites. The construct contained a N-terminal secreted alkaline phosphatase fusion protein, followed by a tobacco etch virus (TEV) cleavage site, EXT1 or EXT2 and a C-terminal 8x His tag44. 900 mL of Freestyle 293-F cells (Invitrogen) were co-transfected with both vectors using polyethyleneimine and incubated at 37°C for 96 hours. All subsequent steps were carried out either at 4°C or on ice. The supernatant was recovered by centrifugation, sterile filtered and 50mM Tris pH 7.8, 150 mM NaCl, 10mM imidazole and 10 mM MgCl2 were added, before loading onto a HisTrap HP column (GE Healthcare). After washing with 5CV of buffer A (50mM Tris pH 7.8, 150mM NaCl) supplemented with 50mM imidazole, protein was eluted with buffer A containing 500mM imidazole. 2 mg of Strep-tagged TEV protease were added to the eluate and the sample was dialyzed for 16 hours in buffer A. Cleaved-off alkaline phosphatase and TEV protease were removed by re-purifying EXT1-EXT2 using a second HisTrap HP purification step and by passing protein sample through 1 mL Strep-Tactin XT resin (IBA Lifesciences). Buffer was exchanged by several rounds of concentration and dilution with buffer B (20mM HEPES pH 7.2, 150 mM NaCl) and the final protein concentration was 0.5 – 0.8 mg/mL. The proteins were digested in-gel using trypsin (modified, sequencing purity, Promega). The resulting peptides were analyzed by online nanoliquid chromatography coupled to MS/MS (Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano and Q-Exactive Plus, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a 50 min gradient. For this purpose, the peptides were sampled on a precolumn (300 μm (m x 5 mm PepMap C18, Thermo Scientific) and separated in a 75 μm (m x 250 mm C18 column (Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 μm (m, Dr. Maisch). The MS and MS/MS data were acquired by Xcalibur (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Peptides and proteins were identified by Mascot (version 2.8.0, Matrix Science) through concomitant searches against the Uniprot database (Homo sapiens taxonomy, 20220114 download), a homemade database containing the sequences of TEV-cleaved EXT1 and EXT2 proteins, and a homemade database containing the sequences of classical contaminant proteins found in proteomic analyses (bovine albumin, keratins, trypsin, etc.). Trypsin/P was chosen as the enzyme and two missed cleavages were allowed. Precursor and fragment mass error tolerances were set at 10 and 20 ppm, respectively. Peptide modifications allowed during the search were: Carbamidomethyl (C, fixed), Acetyl (Protein Nterm, variable) and Oxidation (M, variable). The Proline software was used for the compilation, grouping, and filtering of the results (conservation of rank 1 peptides, peptide length ≥ 6 amino acids, false discovery rate of peptide-spectrum-match identifications < 1%, and minimum of one specific peptide per identified protein group).

### Publication Abstract
Heparan sulfates are complex polysaccharides that mediate the interaction with a broad range of protein ligands at the cell surface. A key step in heparan sulfate biosynthesis is catalyzed by the bi-functional glycosyltransferases EXT1 and EXT2, which generate the glycan backbone consisting of repeating N-acetylglucosamine and glucuronic acid units. The molecular mechanism of heparan sulfate chain polymerization remains, however, unknown. Here, we present the cryo-electron microscopy structure of human EXT1-EXT2, which reveals the formation of a tightly packed hetero-dimeric complex harboring four glycosyltransferase domains. A combination of in vitro and in cellulo mutational studies is used to dissect the functional role of the four catalytic sites. While EXT1 can catalyze both glycosyltransferase reactions, our results indicate that EXT2 might only have N-acetylglucosamine transferase activity. Our findings provide mechanistic insight into heparan sulfate chain elongation as a nonprocessive process and lay the foundation for future studies on EXT1-EXT2 function in health and disease.

### Keywords
Ext2, Ext1, Nanolc-ms/ms, Heparan sulfates, Cell surface

### Affiliations
EDyP

### Submitter
Yohann Couté

### Lab Head
Dr Yohann Couté
EDyP


