### Accession
PXD028534

### Title
Phosphorylation of the FACT histone chaperone subunit SPT16 modulates Arabidopsis development and affects chromatin at RNA polymerase II transcriptional start sites

### Description
The heterodimeric histone chaperone FACT consisting of SSRP1 and SPT16 contributes to dynamic nucleosome rearrangements during various DNA-dependent processes including transcription. In search of post-translational modifications that may regulate the activity of FACT, SSRP1 and SPT16 were isolated from Arabidopsis cells and analysed by mass spectrometry. Four acetylated lysine residues could be mapped within the basic C-terminal region of SSRP1, while three phosphorylated serine/threonine residues were identified in the acidic C-terminal region of SPT16. Mutational analysis of the SSRP1 acetylation sites revealed only mild effects. However, phosphorylation of SPT16 that is catalysed by protein kinase CK2, modulates histone interactions. A non-phosphorylatable version of SPT16 displayed reduced histone binding and (unlike the phosphorylatable wild-type and phosphomimic versions) proved inactive in complementing the growth and developmental phenotypes of spt16 mutant plants. In plants expressing the non-phosphorylatable SPT16 version we detected at a subset of genes enrichment of histone H3 directly upstream of RNA polymerase II transcriptional start sites (TSSs) in a region that usually is nucleosome-depleted. This is associated with altered transcript levels, suggesting that some genes require phosphorylation of the SPT16 acidic region for establishing the correct nucleosome occupancy at the TSS as a prerequisite for proper transcription.

### Sample Protocol
Arabidopsis suspension cultured PSB-D cells were maintained and transformed as previously described (55). Proteins of 15 g cultured cells were isolated and GS-tagged proteins were purified by IgG affinity chromatography as previously described (44,52).  1.5 µg of in solution trypsin digested sample were analysed by LC-MS/MS using a Proxeon Easy nLC system (Thermo Scientific) essentially as previously described (56). Samples were loaded through a two-column system (analytical- (15 cm) and trap-column (3 cm) with an internal diameter of 75 µm filled C18-AQ 3 µm (150 x 4 mm) ReproSil-Pur beads). Separations were performed using gradient elution at RT with a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The mobile phase consisted of a linear gradient containing 0.1% formic acid (v/v) (eluent A) and 0.1% formic acid in 95% acetonitrile (eluent B). The LC system was coupled to a Q Exactive hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) via an electrospray ionisation source operated in positive ion mode. Mass spectra were acquired using a top 12 high collision dissociation (HCD) data-dependent acquisition (DDA) method.

### Data Protocol
The obtained peptide mass fingerprints were analysed using the proteome discoverer 2.0 software, searching the UniProt database. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin allowing up to two missed cleavages. The search included cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification, protein N-terminal acetylation, acetylation of lysine and arginine, mono-, di- and tri- methylation of lysine, mono- and di-methylation of arginine, oxidation of methionine and phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine as variable modifications. Peptide identification was based on a search with a mass deviation of the precursor ion up to 2.5 ppm after recalibration, and the allowed fragment mass deviation was set to 0.01 Da.

### Publication Abstract
The heterodimeric histone chaperone FACT, consisting of SSRP1 and SPT16, contributes to dynamic nucleosome rearrangements during various DNA-dependent processes including transcription. In search of post-translational modifications that may regulate the activity of FACT, SSRP1 and SPT16 were isolated from Arabidopsis cells and analysed by mass spectrometry. Four acetylated lysine residues could be mapped within the basic C-terminal region of SSRP1, while three phosphorylated serine/threonine residues were identified in the acidic C-terminal region of SPT16. Mutational analysis of the SSRP1 acetylation sites revealed only mild effects. However, phosphorylation of SPT16 that is catalysed by protein kinase CK2, modulates histone interactions. A non-phosphorylatable version of SPT16 displayed reduced histone binding and proved inactive in complementing the growth and developmental phenotypes of spt16 mutant plants. In plants expressing the non-phosphorylatable SPT16 version we detected at a subset of genes enrichment of histone H3 directly upstream of RNA polymerase II transcriptional start sites (TSSs) in a region that usually is nucleosome-depleted. This suggests that some genes require phosphorylation of the SPT16 acidic region for establishing the correct nucleosome occupancy at the TSS of active genes.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Arabidopsis, Acetylation, Fact complex

### Affiliations
Department of Cell Biology & Plant Biochemistry, Center for Biochemistry, University of Regensburg, Universitätsstr. 31, D-93053 Regensburg, Germany
Institute of Functional Epigenetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg 85764, Germany

### Submitter
Andrey Tvardovskiy

### Lab Head
Dr Klaus Grasser
Department of Cell Biology & Plant Biochemistry, Center for Biochemistry, University of Regensburg, Universitätsstr. 31, D-93053 Regensburg, Germany


