### Accession
PXD037945

### Title
4D label-free quantitative proteomics analyses of peritoneal extracellular vesicles isolated from normal mice and peritoneal dialysis fluid-treated mice

### Description
Peritoneal fibrosis is regard as a significant cause of the loss of peritoneal function, markedly limiting the application of peritoneal dialysis(PD). However, the pathogenesis of peritoneal fibrosis remains unclear. Tissue-derived extracellular vesicles(EVs) mediate intercellular communications and play a central role in organ fibrosis. We performed a proteomics profiling of EVs from normal peritoneum and PD-induced fibrotic peritoneum in mice.

### Sample Protocol
The peptide segment was desalted by C18 column and peptide content was estimated by UV light spectral density at 280 nm. Then MS/MS analysis was performed on a nanoElute coupled to a timsTOF Pro.Peptides were separated on analytical column. Next, eluted peptides were analyzed by timsTOF Pro in the PASEF mode for 90 min.Mass spectra: 100-1700m/z, ions with ion mobility: 0.75-1.4 Vs/cm2. MS data were obtained by 10 MS/MS scans per cycle.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data were analyzed using MaxQuant software and searched in the database Uniprot_MusMusculus_17107_20220308_swissprot. The initial search was set at a precursor mass window of 10 ppm, allowing a maximum of two missed cut sites and a mass tolerance of 20 ppm for fragment ions.The cutoff of false discovery rate for peptide and protein identification was set to 0.01. Protein abundance was evaluated based on the normalized spectral protein intensity.

### Publication Abstract
Peritoneal fibrosis progression is regarded as a significant cause of the loss of peritoneal function, markedly limiting the application of peritoneal dialysis (PD). However, the pathogenesis of peritoneal fibrosis remains to be elucidated. Tissue-derived extracellular vesicles (EVs) change their molecular cargos to adapt the environment alteration, mediating intercellular communications and play a significant role in organ fibrosis. Hence, we performed, for the first time, four-dimensional label-free quantitative liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry proteomic analyses on EVs from normal peritoneal tissues and PD-induced fibrotic peritoneum in mice. We demonstrated the alterations of EV concentration and protein composition between normal control and PD groups. A total of 2339 proteins containing 967 differentially expressed proteins were identified. Notably, upregulated proteins in PD EVs were enriched in processes including response to wounding and leukocyte migration, which participated in the development of fibrosis. In addition, EV proteins of the PD group exhibited unique metabolic signature compared with those of the control group. The glycolysis-related proteins increased in PD EVs, while oxidative phosphorylation and fatty acid metabolism-related proteins decreased. We also evaluated the effect of cell-type specificity on EV proteins, suggesting that mesothelial cells mainly cause the alterations in the molecular composition of EVs. Our study provided a useful resource for further validation of the key regulator or therapeutic target of peritoneal fibrosis.

### Keywords
Mouse, 4d label-free, Extracellular vesicles, Peritoneum

### Affiliations
The Third Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-Sen University
Nephrology Division, Department of Medicine, The Third Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University

### Submitter
qiang huang

### Lab Head
Dr hui peng
Nephrology Division, Department of Medicine, The Third Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University


