### Accession
PXD033515

### Title
Single-shot proteome of AML cell lines and AML ex vivo cells upon selinexor treatment

### Description
Single-shot proteome analysis of 4 AML cell lines; 2 selinexor sensitive cell lines (GDM-1, MV4-11) and 2 resistant cell lines (NOMO-1 and PL-21) and ex vivo AML cells from 30 patients treated with DMSO (B; before treatment) or 1 uM selinexor (A; after treatment) for 6 hours.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were lysed in 5% SDS lysis buffer (cell lines) or 6M GndHCl (ex vivo), boiled, reduced (TCEP) and alkylated (CAA). Peptides were generated by PAC as previosly described (Batth et al. 2019) (cell lines) or in-solution digest (ex vivo). For all samples, 750 ng were loaded onto evotips, run by a 30 SPD gradient in a Evosep coupled to an Exploris 480 in DIA-aquisition mode.

### Data Protocol
Data was analyzed by spectronaut v. 15.7 and searched against a human fasta file.

### Publication Abstract
Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a heterogeneous disease with variable patient responses to therapy. Selinexor, an inhibitor of nuclear export, has shown promising clinical activity for AML. To identify the molecular context for monotherapy sensitivity as well as rational drug combinations, we profile selinexor signaling responses using phosphoproteomics in primary AML patient samples and cell lines. Functional phosphosite scoring reveals that p53 function is required for selinexor sensitivity consistent with enhanced efficacy of selinexor in combination with the MDM2 inhibitor nutlin-3a. Moreover, combining selinexor with the AKT inhibitor MK-2206 overcomes dysregulated AKT-FOXO3 signaling in resistant cells, resulting in synergistic anti-proliferative effects. Using high-throughput spatial proteomics to profile subcellular compartments, we measure global proteome and phospho-proteome dynamics, providing direct evidence of nuclear translocation of FOXO3 upon combination treatment. Our data demonstrate the potential of phosphoproteomics and functional phosphorylation site scoring to successfully pinpoint key targetable signaling hubs for rational drug combinations.

### Keywords
Human, Aml, Lc-msms

### Affiliations
Proteomics Program, The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, University of Copenhagen, Denmark
NNF Center for Protein Research, Proteomics Program, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen.

### Submitter
Kristina Bennet Emdal

### Lab Head
Dr Jesper V. Olsen
Proteomics Program, The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, University of Copenhagen, Denmark


