### Accession
PXD036174

### Title
VAMP2/3-dependent membrane proteome in oligodendrocytes

### Description
Which proteins in oligodendrocytes require VAMP2/3-mediated exocytosis for membrane trafficking? We isolated primary oligodendrocytes from transgenic mice expressing oligodendrocyte-targeted botulinum toxin and littermate controls and used surface biotinylation to determine which proteins were differentially trafficked to the cell surface.

### Sample Protocol
1x106 primary oligodendrocyte precursors were replated onto 10-cm dishes directly into differentiation media. Two 10-cm dishes were grown for each condition in each biologically independent replicate. After 5 days of differentiation in culture, cells were washed with cold PBS (10 ml x 3 rinses on the plate) and then incubated with 1 mg of Sulfo-NHS-SS-biotin (BioVision #2323) dissolved in 10 ml of cold PBS on a rotating platform at 4oC. Non-biotinylated samples were incubated with cold PBS only. After 1 hr, excess biotinylation reagent was quenched with 65 mM Tris pH 7.5 at 4oC, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM MgSO4, 1 mM CaCl2. (10 ml for 5 min x 3) followed by a rinse with cold PBS. Cells were harvested by cell scraping into 2 ml of PBS with a protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche cOmplete 4693159001). The cell suspension was centrifuge at 200xg for 10 min, and the supernatant was discarded to isolate the pellet. The cell pellet was flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen for storage at -80oC. For immunoprecipitation, the cell pellets were resuspended in 500 l of cold lysis buffer (150 mM NaCl, 0.5% SDS, 50 mM Tris, pH 8.0) supplemented with Roche protease inhibitor cocktail. Cells were lysed by mechanical shearing through a 27.5G needle with 15 passes, on ice. Unlysed cells were cleared via centrifuging at 3000xg for 10 min at 4°C. Meanwhile, streptavidin magnetic beads (Pierce 88817, 25 ul of beads per sample) were washed with three rounds of 500 ul of lysis buffer. Then, cleared cell lysate was incubated with the streptavidin beads on a rotating platform overnight in the cold room. After removing the flow-through, the beads are washed with 2x 1 ml of lysis buffer for 10 min, followed by 1 M KCl for 10 min, and another 2x 1 ml lysis buffer for 10 min. Beads were finally washed with cold PBS before mass spectrometry analysis.  In a typical mass spectrometry experiment, beads were reconstituted in TEAB prior to reduction in 10 mM DTT followed by alkylation using 30 mM acrylamide to cap cysteine residues. Digestion was performed using Trypsin/LysC (Promega) in the presence of 0.02% ProteaseMax (Promega) overnight. Following digestion and quenching, eluted peptides were desalted, dried, and reconstituted in 2% aqueous acetonitrile prior to analysis. Mass spectrometry experiments were performed using liquid chromatography (LC/MS) using an Acquity M-Class UPLC (Waters) followed by mass spectrometry using an Orbitrap Q Exactive HF-X (Thermo Scientific). For a typical LC/MS experiment, a flow rate of 300 nL/min was used, where mobile phase A was 0.2% (v/v) formic acid in water and mobile phase B was 0.2% (v/v) formic acid in acetonitrile. Analytical columns were prepared in-house by pulling and packing fused silica with an internal diameter of 100 microns. These columns were packed with NanoLCMS solutions 1.9 m C18 stationary phase to a length of approximately 25 cm. Peptides were directly injected into the analytical column using a gradient (2% to 45% B, followed by a high-B wash) of 90 min. Mass spectrometry was operated in a data-dependent fashion using Higher Energy Collison Dissociation (HCD) for peptide fragmentation on the HF-X.

### Data Protocol
For data analysis, the .RAW data files were checked using Preview (Protein Metrics) to verify calibration and quality metrics. Data were processed using Byonic v4.1.5 (Protein Metrics) to identify peptides and infer proteins using the isoform-containing Mus musculus database from Uniprot, concatenated with common contaminant proteins, e.g., human keratins. Proteolysis with Trypsin/LysC was assumed to be semi-specific allowing for ragged n-termini with up to two missed cleavage sites, and allowing for common modifications. Precursor and fragment mass accuracies were held within 12 ppm. Proteins were held to a false discovery rate of 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Myelin is required for rapid nerve signaling and is emerging as a key driver of CNS plasticity and disease. How myelin is built and remodeled remains a fundamental question of neurobiology. Central to myelination is the ability of oligodendrocytes to add vast amounts of new cell membrane, expanding their surface areas by many thousand-fold. However, how oligodendrocytes add new membrane to build or remodel myelin is not fully understood. Here, we show that CNS myelin membrane addition requires exocytosis mediated by the vesicular SNARE proteins VAMP2/3. Genetic inactivation of VAMP2/3 in myelinating oligodendrocytes caused severe hypomyelination and premature death without overt loss of oligodendrocytes. Through live imaging, we discovered that VAMP2/3-mediated exocytosis drives membrane expansion within myelin sheaths to initiate wrapping and power sheath elongation. In conjunction with membrane expansion, mass spectrometry of oligodendrocyte surface proteins revealed that VAMP2/3 incorporates axon-myelin adhesion proteins that are collectively required to form nodes of Ranvier. Together, our results demonstrate that VAMP2/3-mediated membrane expansion in oligodendrocytes is indispensable for myelin formation, uncovering a cellular pathway that could sculpt myelination patterns in response to activity-dependent signals or be therapeutically targeted to promote regeneration in disease.

### Keywords
Myelin, Oligodendrocytes

### Affiliations
Stanford University
Assistant Professor of Neurosurgery, Stanford University

### Submitter
Mable Lam

### Lab Head
Dr J. Bradley Zuchero
Assistant Professor of Neurosurgery, Stanford University


