### Accession
PXD031354

### Title
Cephalotaxus hainanensis LC-MSMS

### Description
In previous work, cephalotaxine, harringtonine, homoharringtonine were shown to be accumulated differentially after various stimuli. Especially, after MeJA treatment, the concentration of 3 cephalotaxus alkaloids all showed decreasing. We speculated that the genes expressed lower after MeJA treatment might encode some enzymes responsible for the biosynthesis of cephalotaxus alkaloids. Therefore, choosing the sample treated with MeJA and the control sample for comparative iTRAQ analysis will greatly facilitate dissection of the genes involved in the biosynthesis of cephalotaxus alkaloids and even the acyl portions of cephalotaxus ester alkaloids. This approach is widely used for mining and identifying novel genes in the biosynthesis of secondary metabolites without genome data in plants.

### Sample Protocol
Plants of C. hainanensis were introduced from Jianfeng Mountain, Hainan Province, China. In this study, compound leaves excised from five-year-old C. hainanensis were used for MeJA stimuli treatments. The leaves were immersed into MeJA (100 μM) and sterile water (control) respectively for about 30 minutes and then placed in a moisture chamber. After treatment, leaves were harvested after 48 h.

### Data Protocol
Collected leaf proteins were extracted with phenol according to the procedure. Then protein pellets were air-dried and re-suspended by 100 mM tetraethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) and 1 M urea and, pH 8.5. The concentrations were estimated using the Bradford method. All protein samples were trypsin digested with Trypsin Gold (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) at 37°C overnight. The digested peptides were reconstituted in 0.5M TEAB and processed with the 8-plex iTRAQ reagents (AB Sciex, Foster City, CA) according to manufacturer's protocol. After 2 h incubation at room temperature, the reaction solvents were removed by vacuum centrifugation. The labeled peptides were purified and fractionated by HPLC system with 300Extend C18 column (5-μm particles; inner diameter, 4.6mm; length, 250mm) (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA). Finally, the peptides were pooled into 18 fractions with a gradient of 5% to 30% acetonitrile (ACN) (pH 9.0). Then the collected fractions were dried by vacuum centrifugation. A Q EXACTIVE mass spectrometry (MS)/MS platform coupled online to the UPLC (EASY-nLC1000) system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) was used to analyze the HPLC fractions at Novogene (Beijing). Peptides were selected for MS/MS with a normalized collision energy (NCE) setting of 27 in High-energy collision dissociation (HCD) operating mode, and the ion fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17500. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for a full scan and the electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. Spectra generated by the Orbitrap was optimized by automatic gain control (AGC), 3E-6 and 1E-5 were selected as full MS and MS2. For MS scans, 350-2000 Da as the m/z scan range were selected. For MS2 scans, 100-1800 were selected.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Cephalotaxus hainanensis

### Affiliations
Tropical Crops Genetic Resources Institute, Chinese Academy of Tropical Agricultural Sciences
Tropical Crops Genetic Resources Institute, Chinese Academy of Tropical Agricultural Sciences, Haikou, China

### Submitter
Hanqing Cong

### Lab Head
Dr Hanqing Cong
Tropical Crops Genetic Resources Institute, Chinese Academy of Tropical Agricultural Sciences, Haikou, China


