### Accession
PXD038364

### Title
Monitoring α-synuclein ubiquitination dynamics reveals key endosomal effectors mediating its trafficking and degradation

### Description
While defective α-synuclein homeostasis is central to the pathogenesis of Parkinson’s, fundamental questions about its intracellular trafficking remain unresolved. We have developed a bimolecular fluorescence complementation assay in living cells to monitor de novo ubiquitination of α-synuclein. We identified lysine residues 45, 58 and 60 as critical ubiquitination sites for the degradation of α-synuclein. This is mediated by NBR1 binding to ubiquitinated α-synuclein and entry into endosomes in a process that involves ESCRT I-III complexes for subsequent lysosomal degradation. Autophagy or the autophagic chaperone Hsc70 are dispensable for this pathway. Antibodies against diglycine-modified α-synuclein peptides confirmed that endogenous α-synuclein is similarly ubiquitinated in brain and targeted to the lysosome in rat primary and human iPSC-derived neurons. Ubiquitinated α-synuclein was detected in Lewy bodies and cellular models of aggregation suggesting that it may be entrapped with endo/lysosomes in inclusion bodies. Collectively, our data elucidate the intracellular trafficking of de novo ubiquitinated α-synuclein and provide the tools for investigating the rapidly turned-over fraction of this disease-causing protein.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were alkylated with iodoacetamide (final concentration 40 mM) and incubated for 45 min at RT. SMART Digest Trypsin (Thermo Fisher) was added in a 1:50 ratio with respect to total protein content and samples were digested at 70oC for 1hour. Samples were analysed on a nLC-MS/MS system consisting of an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos or Q-Exavtive connected to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 (Thermo Fisher). Peptides were separated on an Easyspray column (50cm) with a gradient of 2-35% ACN in 5% DMSO in 0.1% Formic Acid over 60 minutes. MS1 spectra were acquired with a resolution of 120k and an AGC target of 4E5. MS2 spectra were acquired in the linear ion trap after HCD fragmentation @ 28% normalized collision energy for up to 35ms and an AGC target of 4E3. Selected precursors masses were excluded for 60 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed in Maxquant (v1.6.2.3)(40). Peptide precursor ion abundance was used to compare the volume under the chromatographic signal of each peptide detected for a protein. Peptide signals were then summarised into ratios for each protein across the different conditions, yielding a fold change value. Searches were performed with a mass tolerance of 10ppm for precursors and 0.5 Da for fragments. Swissprot/Trembl FASTA file was used as database. Protein and peptide FDR were set to 1% with Match between Runs option enabled.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Degradation, Parkinson's, Ubiquitination, Homeostasis, Α-synuclein

### Affiliations
Discovery Proteomics Facility Target Discovery Institute University of Oxford
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Roman Fischer

### Lab Head
Dr Roman Ficher
Discovery Proteomics Facility Target Discovery Institute University of Oxford


