### Accession
PXD033412

### Title
Hepatic urea, creatinine and uric acid metabolism in dairy cows with divergent milk urea concentrations

### Description
Milk urea concentration is an indicator for dietary nitrogen (N)-supply and urinary nitrogen excretion. Dairy cows with high (HMU) compared to low milk urea (LMU) concentration have greater plasma urea, creatinine and uric acid concentrations, but if the liver metabolism accounts for these differences is unknown. Eighteen HMU and 18 LMU cows were fed either a diet with a low (LP) and normal (NP) crude protein concentration. An N-balance study was performed and a 13C-urea bolus was administered followed by a series of blood samplings. Liver samples were analysed by 2D-gel-based proteomics and real-time RT-PCR. Although HMU cows had a higher urea pool, plasma urea, uric acid, and hippuric acid concentrations, these differences were not associated with increased activation of the hepatic urea cycle or non-urea nitrogen metabolite pathways. Instead, HMU cows had a higher oxidative stress level. Conclusively, other factors than hepatic urea metabolism account for the milk urea concentration. Despite higher plasma urea concentrations on the LP diet, urea cycle mRNA expression was not affected, indicating it is not controlled at transcriptional level. Feeding the LP diet resulted in higher expressions of enzymes catabolizing fatty acids, which is likely due to diminished microbial growth and insufficient energy supply.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen liver tissue was ground to fine powder using a mortar and pestle under liquid nitrogen. For protein extraction, 50 mg tissue powder and 200 µl lysis buffer consisting of Triton X-100 (1% v/v), sodium deoxycholate (DOC; 0.5% v/v), sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS; 0.1% w/v), 8 mM NaCl, 2.7 mM KCl, 6.9 mM Na2HPO4, 1.5 mM KH2PO4, 100 µl PhosSTOP (Roche) and 10 µl Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (AppliChem) were placed in the shaker for 45 s. Samples were centrifuged for 20 min at 4 °C and 13,000 x g. The protein concentration was measured using the bicinchonin acid method and bovine serum albumin as standard. For each animal, two 2D-gels were prepared resulting in a total of 72 gels. For each gel, 300 µg protein extract was mixed with rehydration buffer (8 M urea, 2% CHAPS, 0.5% IPG strip buffer, 15 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and 0.002% bromophenol blue to a final volume of 450 µl, and applied to 24 cm-IPG BlueStrip (Serva Electrophoresis) with a pH gradient of 3 - 10. The strips were covered with 1 ml of mineral oil and placed in the Ettan IPGphor3 (GE Health-care, Munich, Germany) for isoelectric focusing (IEF). Active rehydration and IEF was performed at 50 µA/strip at 50 V for 8 h, 500 V for 1 h, 1000 V for 2 h, and 8,000 V for 8 h 40 min. The IPGs were first equilibrated in a buffer of 75 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.8), 29.3% glycerol, 2% SDS, 6 M urea, 0.002% bromophenol blue, and 1% DTT for 15 min and then agitated again for 15 min with the same buffer but instead of DTT with 2.5% iodoacetamide (IAA). The IPG strips were transferred to 12.5% polyacrylamide gels (255 x 200 x 0.65 mm; 2D HPE Large Gel NF, Serva Electrophoresis) and the 2D-GE was performed on HPE BlueHorizon tower (Serva Electrophoresis) at 1 W for 30 min, 3 W for 30 min, 5 W for 10 min, 30 W for 3 h 50 min and 40 W for 50 min. The SDS-PAGE gels were stained overnight in colloidal coomassie and then de-stained in 25% methanol. The gels were scanned and the images saved as tiff format. The image analysis was performed using the software DELTA2D version 4.6 (DECODON, Greifswald, Germany; http://www.decodon.com). Spot volumes significantly different between groups or diets were stamped out of the gel with a spot cutter (Ø 2mm) and transferred to a 96-well micro titer plate. Protein identification was performed as previously described15. Briefly, proteins were digested using trypsin and the molecular masses of the tryptic digest were measured using a 4800 MALDI TOF/TOF Analyzer (Applied Biosystems, Forster City, CA, USA).

### Data Protocol
For the identification of the proteins, data base search with peptide mass fingerprint (PMF) was performed against the NCBInr (National Center for Biontechnology Information, http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/) database using the Mascot search engine version 2.4.1 (Matrix Science, London, UK). Search parameters were: taxonomy: “all entries”; variable modifications: “carbamidomethyl (C)” and “oxidation (M)”; precursor tolerance ±50 ppm; peptide charge “1+”; MS/MS fragment tolerance “0.5 Da”; “monoisotopic”.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Gel electrophoresis, Proteomics, Nitrogen excretion, Purine, Pcr

### Affiliations
Institut of Microbiology, Univerity of Greifswald
EMAU

### Submitter
Dirk Albrecht

### Lab Head
Dr Dirk Albrecht
Institut of Microbiology, Univerity of Greifswald


