### Accession
PXD025233

### Title
Structured elements drive circular RNA translation and expand the human proteome, part3

### Description
The human genome encodes tens of thousands circular RNAs (circRNAs) whose levels correlate with many disease states. While studies have focused on the non-coding functions of circRNAs, emerging evidence suggests that a handful of circRNAs encode proteins. Translation canonically starts by recognition of mRNA 5’cap and scanning to the start codon; how circRNA translation initiates remains unclear. Here, we developed a high-throughput screen to systematically identify and quantify RNA sequences that can direct circRNA translation. We identify and validate over 17,000 circRNA internal ribosome entry sites (IRES) and reveal that 18S rRNA complementarity and a structured RNA element on the IRES are important for facilitating circRNA cap-independent translation. With genomic and peptidomic analyses of the IRES, we identified nearly 1,000 putative endogenous protein-coding circRNAs and hundreds of translational units encoded by these circRNAs. We further characterized circFGFR1p, a protein encoded by circFGFR1, functions as a negative regulator of FGFR1 to suppress cell growth under stress conditions. The circRNA proteome may be important links among circRNA, biological control, and disease.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed using 8M urea, 50 mM HEPES pH 8.5, 75 mM NaCl, Pierce Protease Inhibitor Tablet (A32963 ThermoFischer Scientific). Lysate were then reduced and alkylated with 10 mM TCEP  and 10 mM CAA respectively, followed by 15 mM DTT quench. Proteins were precipitated using methanol chloroform precipitation and resuspended using 200 mM HEPES pH 8.5. Proteins were digested with Trypsin/Lys-C Mix (V5073, Promega) and 0.01% ProteaseMAX (V2072, Promega). Digestion was quenched using TFA and the peptides were cleaned up using C18 stage tips. Cleaned peptides were fractionated using Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (84868, Thermofischer Scientific) as manufacture instructions.

### Data Protocol
Bruker raw data files were processed with Byonic software (Protein Metrics Inc)

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Human, Circular rna

### Affiliations
Stanford University
Baxter Laboratory for Stem Cell Biology Department of Microbiology & Immunology Stanford University School of Medicine 269 Campus Drive CCSR 3205b Stanford, CA 94305, USA

### Submitter
Janos Demeter

### Lab Head
Dr Peter K. Jackson
Baxter Laboratory for Stem Cell Biology Department of Microbiology & Immunology Stanford University School of Medicine 269 Campus Drive CCSR 3205b Stanford, CA 94305, USA


