### Accession
PXD011719

### Title
Chemoproteomic selectivity profiling of PIKK and PI3K kinase inhibitors

### Description
"Here, we report the development of a novel version of Kinobeads that extends kinome coverage to PIKK and PI3K kinases. This is achieved by inclusion of two affinity probes derived from the clinical PI3K/MTOR inhibitors Omipalisib and BGT226. The new affinity matrix was used to profile 13 clinical and pre-clinical PIKK/PI3K inhibitors. The large discrepancies between the PI3K affinity values obtained and reported results from recombinant assays led us to perform a phosphoproteomic experiment showing that the chemoproteomic assay is the better approximation of PI3K inhibitor action in-vivo."

### Sample Protocol
"96-well plate Kinobead competition assays have been performed as described previously. (Medard, G., Pachl, F., Ruprecht, B., Klaeger, S., Heinzlmeir, S., Helm, D., Qiao, H., Ku, X., Wilhelm, M., Kuehne, T., Wu, Z., Dittmann, A., Hopf, C., Kramer, K., and Kuster, B. (2015) Optimized chemical proteomics assay for kinase inhibitor profiling, J Proteome Res 14, 1574-1586.) Briefly, 5 mg mixed protein lysate (K-562, MV-4-11, SK-N-BE(2), OVCAR-8 and COLO-205) was pre-incubated with compound dilutions in DMSO (0, 3, 10, 30, 100, 300, 1000, 3000, 30000 nM final concentrations) for 45 min at 4 °C. Subsequently, lysate was incubated with 35 μl settled and equilibrated Kinobeads for 30 min at 4 °C. DMSO control lysate was recovered for the pulldown of pulldown experiment. Beads were washed and bound proteins were eluted with LDS sample buffer (NuPAGE, Invitrogen) containing 50 mM DTT. Reduced disulfide bridges were alkylated using chloroacetamide (55 mM) and in-gel digestion was performed according to standard procedures. Peptides were then measured via LC-MS/MS on a Dionex Ultimate3000 nano HPLC coupled to an Orbitrap HF. Up to 12 precursor where subjected to fragmentation by HCD in a data dependent setup. A kinase peptide inclusion list was enabled."

### Data Protocol
"Raw data was processed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.30) and searched against all canonical protein sequences as annotated in the Swissprot reference database (20193 entries, downloaded 22.03.2016, annotated in-house with PFAM domains). Label-free quantification and match-between-runs options were enabled and results were filtered for 1% peptide and protein FDR."

### Publication Abstract
Chemical proteomic approaches utilizing immobilized, broad-selective kinase inhibitors (Kinobeads) have proven valuable for the elucidation of a compound's target profile under close-to-physiological conditions and often revealed potentially synergistic or toxic off-targets. Current Kinobeads enrich more than 300 native protein kinases from cell line or tissue lysates but do not systematically cover phosphatidylinositol 3-kinases (PI3Ks) and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-related kinases (PIKKs). Some PIKKs and PI3Ks show aberrant activation in many human diseases and are indeed validated drug targets. Here, we report the development of a novel version of Kinobeads that extends kinome coverage to these proteins. This is achieved by inclusion of two affinity probes derived from the clinical PI3K/MTOR inhibitors Omipalisib and BGT226. We demonstrate the utility of the new affinity matrix by the profiling of 13 clinical and preclinical PIKK/PI3K inhibitors. The large discrepancies between the PI3K affinity values obtained and reported results from recombinant assays led us to perform a phosphoproteomic experiment showing that the chemoproteomic assay is the better approximation of PI3K inhibitor action in cellulo. The results further show that NVP-BEZ235 is not a PI3K inhibitor. Surprisingly, the designated ATM inhibitor CP466722 was found to bind strongly to ALK2, identifying a new chemotype for drug discovery to treat fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva.

### Keywords
Drug profiling, Chemoproteomics", "kinobeads

### Affiliations
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technical University of Munich, Freising, Germany 
"Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technical University of Munich, Freising, Germany"

### Submitter
Maria Reinecke

### Lab Head
Dr Bernhard Kuster
"Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technical University of Munich, Freising, Germany"


