### Accession
PXD035947

### Title
The acetyltransferase chameau (chm) functions as metabolic sensor in regulating energy homeostasis and starvation response in Drosophila melanogaster

### Description
The coupling of metabolism to the posttranslational modification of proteins has been suggested to play an important role in the modulation of protein function in response to physiological variation. This interplay could potentially establish feedback loops that buffer extreme environmental challenges. Protein acetylation is one such posttranslational protein modification that is tightly coupled to metabolic variation. Here, we show that the acetyltransferase chameau (chm), which affects life span in Drosophila, is also involved in the regulation of metabolism upon environmental cues. While chm haploinsufficiency increases life span in flies that have sufficient access to nutrients, it reduces their ability to cope with starvation. We hypothesize the starvation susceptibility in mutant flies is caused by their reduced ability to modulate energy homeostasis. Interestingly, this effect is highly dependent on the ambient temperature, suggesting that it evolved to allow organisms to adapt to a wider range of environmental conditions by modulating their energy metabolism.

### Sample Protocol
Flies for the fed and starved conditions were transferred to a 2.0 ml Eppendorf, snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen, shaken to separate heads, bodies and wings/legs and passed through two sieves on top of each other. First sieve (width: 710 um) separates the bodies from remaining and the second (width: 355 um) separates heads from wings/legs.  Approx. 300 μl of homogenization buffer [60 mM KCl, 15 mM NaCl, 4 mM MgCl2, 15 mM HEPES (pH 7.5), 0.5% Triton-X-100, 0.5 mM DTT, 20 mM sodium butyrate and 1 tablet protease inhibitor] were added to 30-50 fly heads and were homogeneized extensively with an electrical stirrer (5 x 10 s ON and 15 s OFF). Following this, sonication was performed with Bioruptor® Pico for 3 x 10 s ON and 45 s OFF at 4˚C. Obtained lysate was centrifuged at 20,817 x g for 30 min. Obtained pellet was resuspended in 200 μl of 0.2 M H2SO4, vortexed heavily and rotated overnight at 15 rpm and 4˚C. Subsequently, overnight incubated lysate was centrifuged at 20,817 x g (max. Speed) for 10 min at 4˚C. Histone were precipitated by adding trichloroacetic acid (TCA) to reach 26% final concentration. Tubes were mixed and incubated at 4˚C for 2 hr and spun at 20,817 g for 15 min. Pellets were washed thrice with ice-cold 100% acetone (5 min rotation at 4˚C, 15 min of 20,817 g spin at 4˚C between washes), dried for 15 min at room temperature and resuspended in 20 μl of 1x Laemmli sample buffer for million cell and boiled at 95˚C for 5 min. The histones corresponding to 0.5 million cells were separated onto 4–20% pre-cast polyacrylamide gels. Gels were briefly stained with InstantBlue Coomassie Protein Stain. For targeted mass-spectrometry analysis, histones bands were excised, washed once with MS-grade water and de-stained twice (or until transparent) by incubating 30 min at 37˚C with 200 μl of 50% acetonitrile (ACN) in 50 mM Ammonium bicarbonate (NH4HCO3). Gel pieces were then washed twice with 200 μl MS-grade and twice with 200 μl of 100% ACN to dehydrate them. Histones were in-gel acylated by first adding 20 μl of d6 acetic anhydride, followed by 40 μl of 100 mM NH4HCO3. After 5 min, 140 μl of 1 M NH4HCO3 was slowly added to the reaction. pH of the final solution should be around 7 (In cases where pH was acidic, few microlitres of 1 M NH4HCO3 was added). Samples were incubated at 37˚C for 45 min at 550 rpm. Following this, samples were washed 5 times with 200 μl of 100 mM NH4HCO3, 4 times with 200 μl of MS-grade water and 4 times with 200 μl of 100% ACN. They were spun down briefly and all remaining ACN was removed. Gel pieces were rehydrated in 50 μl of trypsin solution (25 ng/ mL trypsin in 100 mM NH4HCO3) and incubated at 4˚C for 30 min. After the addition of 150 μl of 50 mM NH4HCO3, histones were in-gel digested overnight at 37˚C at 550 rpm. Peptides were sequentially extracted by incubating 10 min at room temperature with 150 μl of 50 mM NH4HCO3, twice with 150 μl of 50% ACN 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and twice 100 μl of 100% ACN. During each of the above washing step, samples were sonicated for 3 min in a water bath followed by a brief spin down. Obtained peptides were dried using a centrifugal evaporator and stored at -20˚C until resuspension in 30 μl of 0.1% TFA. Peptides were desalted seuqntially with C18 Stagetip and TopTip Carbon. Eluted peptides from both desalting steps were combined and evaporated in a centrifugal evaporator, resuspended in 15-17 μl of 0.1% TFA. Desalted histone peptides in 0.1% TFA were injected in an RSLCnano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated in a 15-cm analytical column (75μm ID home-packed with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 2.4 μm from Dr. Maisch) with a 50-min gradient from 4 to 40% ACN in 0.1% formic acid at 300 nl/min flowrate. The effluent from the HPLC was electrosprayed into Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer. The MS instrument was programmed to target several ions except for the MS3 fragmentation5. Survey full scan MS spectra (from m/z 270-730) were acquired with resolution R=60,000 at m/z 400 (AGC target of 3x106). Targeted ions were isolated with an isolation window of 0.7 m/z to a target value of 2x105 and fragmented at 27% normalized collision energy. Typical mass spectrometric conditions were: spray voltage, 1.5 kV; no sheath and auxiliary gas flow; heated capillary temperature, 250°C.

### Data Protocol
Raw data from mass spectrometry was analyzed using using Skyline1 v21.1. Peak integration was performed for H3 and H4 peptides for each of its corresponding modifications. Relative levels of each PTM was calculated from the obtained intensities using R environment2, based on the formula given in (3).   1. Pino LK, Searle BC, Bollinger JG, et al. The Skyline ecosystem: Informatics for quantitative mass spectrometry proteomics. Mass Spectrom Rev.39(3):229-244 (2020). 2. R Core Team (2020). R: A language and environment for statistical computing. R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria. URL https://www.R-project.org/. 3. Feller C, Forné I, Imhof A, Becker PB. Global and specific responses of the histone acetylome to systematic perturbation. Mol Cell. 57(3):559-71 (2015).

### Publication Abstract
Proteins involved in cellular metabolism and molecular regulation can extend lifespan of various organisms in the laboratory. However, any improvement in aging would only provide an evolutionary benefit if the organisms were able to survive under non-ideal conditions. We have previously shown that Drosophila melanogaster carrying a loss-of-function allele of the acetyltransferase chameau (chm) has an increased healthy lifespan when fed ad libitum. Here, we show that loss of chm and reduction in its activity results in a substantial reduction in weight and a decrease in starvation resistance. This phenotype is caused by failure to properly regulate the genes and proteins required for energy storage and expenditure. The previously observed increase in survival time thus comes with the inability to prepare for and cope with nutrient stress. As the ability to survive in environments with restricted food availability is likely a stronger evolutionary driver than the ability to live a long life, chm is still present in the organism's genome despite its apparent negative effect on lifespan.

### Keywords
Temperature, Starvation, Drosophila, Chameau, Acetylation, Metabolism, Hbo1

### Affiliations
Biomedical Center-LMU
Biomedical Center Munich  Molecular Biology  Großhaderner Strasse 9  82152 Planegg-Martinsried

### Submitter
Ignasi Forne

### Lab Head
Dr Prof Axel Imhof
Biomedical Center Munich  Molecular Biology  Großhaderner Strasse 9  82152 Planegg-Martinsried


