### Accession
PXD028063

### Title
Defining proximity proteomics of Histone modifications by antibody-mediated protein A-APEX2 labeling

### Description
Proximity labeling catalyzed by promiscuous enzymes, such as APEX2, has emerged as a powerful approach to characterize multiprotein complexes and protein–protein interactions. However, current methods depend on the expression of exogenous fusion proteins and cannot be applied to identify proteins surrounding of post-translationally modified proteins. To address this limitation, we developed a new method to label proximal proteins of interest by antibody-mediated protein A-APEX2 labeling (AMAPEX). In this method, a modified protein is bound in situ by a specific antibody, which then tehers a protein A-APEX2 (pA-APEX2) fusion protein. Activation of APEX2 labels the nearby proteins with biotin; these proteins are then purified using streptavidin beads and are identified by mass spectrometry. We demonstrate the utility of this approach by profiling the binding proteins of histone modifications including H3K27me3, H3K9me3, H3K4me3, H4K5ac and H4K12ac, verified the co-localization of these identified proteins with baits proteins by published ChIP-seq analysis and nucleosome immunoprecipitation. Overall, AMAPEX is an efficient tool to identify proteins that are proximal to modified histones.

### Sample Protocol
Streptavidin pull-down of biotinylated proteins and western blot analysis pA-APEX2–labeled cell pellets were lysed in RIPA lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 1 mM EGTA, 1% SDS, 1% NP-40, 0.4% sodium deoxycholate, 1 mM DTT, 1mM PMSF, and 1× Roche Complete EDTA-free protease inhibitor tablets) for 15 min on ice. Cell extracts were sonicated (100 W, 3s on, 3s off) for 3 min and then boiled for 10 min at 100°C. Cell extracts were clarified by centrifugation, and the amount of protein in each supernatant was measured. 5% of the supernatant was saved as input for western blot analysis. SDS in the sample was diluted to 0.2% with 1x cold RIPA buffer (RIPA buffer without SDS). Streptavidin–Sepharose beads (GE Healthcare) were washed twice with 1x cold RIPA buffer (0.2% SDS), and 800 μg of each sample was separately incubated with 50 µL bead slurry with rotation for 4 h at 4°C. 5% of the flow through was saved for western blot analysis. The beads were subsequently washed twice with 1 mL wash buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 1% SDS), twice with 1 mL RIPA wash buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 1 mM EGTA, 0.2% SDS, 1% NP-40, 1 mM DTT), twice with 1 mL 8 M urea buffer, twice with 1 mL 30% acetonitrile, and twice with 1 mL 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate. 5% of the beads were saved for western blot analysis, and the remaining beads were used for LC-MS/MS analysis. For western blot analysis, biotinylated proteins were eluted by boiling the beads in 10 µL 5× protein loading buffer and separated by 10% SDS-PAGE. The proteins were transferred to 0.22 μm PVDF membrane (Millipore) and stained with Ponceau S. The blots were then blocked in 1% BSA in TBST at room temperature for 1 h and stained with streptavidin-HRP (Beyotime, A0303, 1:5000 dilution) in TBST for 1 h at room temperature. Blots were then washed with TBST buffer three times for 5 min, developed with Clarity Western ECL substrate (Thermofisher), and imaged using a ChemiDoc MP Imaging System (Bio-Rad).  On-bead digestion and liquid chromatography mass spectrometry Mass spectrometry-based proteomic experiments were performed as previously described with minor modifications[45]. Briefly, after enrichment and washing, beads were resuspended in 200 µL on-bead digestion buffer (50 mM HEPES pH8.0, 1 μM CaCl2, 2% ACN); 10 mM TECP and 40 mM CAA were added and incubated for 30 min at room temperature. The beads were washed with 1 mL on-bead digestion buffer. The beads were resuspended in 100 µL on-bead digestion buffer with 1 µL 0.5 µg LysC (Wako, 125-05061) and incubated at 37°C for 3 h. Then, on-bead digestion buffer with 0.5 µg trypsin (Promega, V5280) was added for digestion at 37°C for 16 h. The samples were desalted using StageTips before LC-MS/MS analysis. The StageTips were made of C18 material inserted in 200 μL pipette tips. To desalt the peptide samples, C18 material was washed once with 200 μL acetonitrile, once with 200 μL StageTips buffer B (0.1% (vol/vol) formic acid in 50% (vol/vol) acetonitrile/H2O), and twice with 100 μL StageTips buffer A (0.1% (vol/vol) formic acid in H2O). Peptide samples were loaded on StageTips and washed twice with 100 μL StageTips buffer A. Finally, peptide samples were eluted with 100 μL StageTips buffer C (0.1% (vol/vol) formic acid in 40% (vol/vol) acetonitrile/H2O) and 100 μL StageTips buffer B. The solutions were passed through the StageTips by centrifugation at 500  g for 5 min at room temperature. The elution fractions were collected, and the solution was evaporated from peptide samples in a SpeedVac at 45 ℃. Finally, 10 μL StageTips buffer A was added to the samples to perform LC-MS/MS analysis.  LC-MS/MS analysis All peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% FA (vol/vol) and separated on reversed-phase columns (trapping column: particle size = 3 μm, C18, length = 20 mm (Thermo Fisher Scientific, P/N 164535), analytical column: particle size = 2 μm, C18, length = 150 mm (Thermo Fisher Scientific, P/N 164534)) on an Ultimate™ 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) coupled to Orbitrap Q-Exactive™ HF (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide separation was achieved using a 60-min gradient (buffer A: 0.1% FA in water, buffer B: 0.1% FA in 80% ACN) at a flow rate of 300 mL/min and analyzed by Orbitrap Q-Exactive™ HF in a data-dependent mode. The Orbitrap Q-Exactive™ HF mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode with ion transfer tube temperature 275°C. The positive ion spray voltage was 2.1 kV. Full-scan MS spectra (m/z 350–2000) was acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 60,000. HCD fragmentation was performed at normalized collision energy of 28%. The MS2 automatic gain control (AGC) target was set to 5e4 with a maximum injection time (MIT) of 50 ms, and dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s.

### Data Protocol
MS data analysis Protein identification and label-free protein quantification Raw data were processed with MaxQuant (version 1.6.10.43) and its built-in Andromeda search engine for feature extraction, peptide identification, and protein inference. Mouse reference proteome from UniProt Database (UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot and UniProtKB/TrEMBL, version 2020_12) combined with manually annotated contaminant were applied to search the peptides and proteins. The false discovery rate (FDR) values were set to 0.01, and a match-between-runs algorithm was enabled. After searching, the reverse hits, contaminants, and proteins only identified by one site were removed. Filtered results were exported and further visualized using the statistical computer language Python (version 3.8.3), online gene annotation and analysis tool Metascape (version 2021_02), and the complex network visualizing platform Cytoscape (version 3.8.2).  Interacting proteins detection of each specific histone mark First, raw data were analyzed in MaxQuant using the basic principles as described above. Search results were filtered at 0.01 FDR on precursor and protein group level. The Pearson correlation coefficients (PCC) of all replicates were calculated using the function Series.corr() in Python library pandas (version 1.0.5). Three replicate samples with the highest PCCs were retained for further analysis.  For each histone mark, the transformed protein intensities fold change (log2-FC) in the pA-APEX2 experiment compared to the no-H2O2 control experiment and in the pA-APEX2 experiment compared to the IgG control experiment were calculated. For proteins that were not identified in pA-APEX2 experiments but were identified in no-H2O2 or IgG controls, the log2-FCs were defined as -100. For proteins identified in pA-APEX2 experiments but not in no-H2O2 or IgG controls, the log2-FCs were defined as 100. Proteins with log2-FC > 1 were ultimately detached from background proteins in two independent measurements, which are considered to be potential interacting proteins of corresponding histone marks.  Functional gene set enrichment and interaction network visualization All proteins identified previously were mapped to mouse Metascape identifiers via the gene names. Functional gene set enrichment for each histone mark was performed using the “Custom Analysis” function in Metascape (version 2021_02). Min overlaps of 3, 0.01 p-value cutoff, and min enrichment value of 1.5 were used. From all enriched proteins in any of the interactions, the top 20 Gene Ontology Cellular Component terms (Gene Ontology Consortium, 2020) that were significantly enriched in at least three of the interactors were selected. STRING (version 11.0) interaction confidences with a confidence score of 0.4 and FDR stringency of 0.05 were added as links between identified proteins. Proteins in vital GO terms with a positive log2-FC in histone mark interactors compared to no-H2O2 and IgG were considered to be a visualization foreground. The network of each specific histone mark proximal proteome was imported into Cytoscape (version 3.8.2) and visualized. Cytoscape (version 3.8.2) was used to layout the potential interacting proteins of each histone mark in pA-APEX2 experiments that were members of vital enriched GO terms. Visualization was based on GO term membership.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proximity labeling; post-translationally; amapex; modified histones

### Affiliations
Institute of Synthetic Biology,
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology (SIAT),
Chinese Academy of Sciences
Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Synthetic Genomics, Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Synthetic Genomics, CAS Key Laboratory of Quantitative Engineering Biology, Shenzhen Institute of Synthetic Biology, Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenzhen 518055, China

### Submitter
zhao wenjuan

### Lab Head
Dr Li Nan
Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Synthetic Genomics, Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Synthetic Genomics, CAS Key Laboratory of Quantitative Engineering Biology, Shenzhen Institute of Synthetic Biology, Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenzhen 518055, China


