### Accession
PXD029454

### Title
Transcriptional repression activity of androgen receptor targets cell plasticity in prostate cancer: BioID analysis

### Description
Androgen receptor (AR) signaling remains the key therapeutic target in the management of hormone-naïve advanced prostate cancer (PCa) and castration-resistant PCa (CRPC). Recently, landmark molecular features have been reported for CRPC, including the expression of constitutively active AR variants that lack the ligand-binding domain. Besides their role in CRPC, AR variants lead to the expression of genes involved in tumor progression. However, little is known about the specificity of their mode of action compared with that of wild-type AR (AR-WT). We performed AR transcriptome analyses in an androgen-dependent PCa cell line as well as cross-analyses with publicly available RNA-seq dataset and established that transcriptional repression capacity that was marked for AR-WT was pathologically lost by AR variants. Functional enrichment analyses allowed us to associate AR-WT repressive function to a panel of genes involved in cell adhesion and epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition. So, we postulate that a less documented AR-WT normal function in prostate epithelial cells could be the repression of a panel of genes linked to cell plasticity, and that this repressive function could be pathologically abrogated by AR variants in PCA.

### Sample Protocol
Peptides were analyzed using an Ultimate 3000 nano-RSLC (Thermo Scientific, San Jose California) coupled in line with a LTQ-Orbitrap ELITE mass spectrometer via a nano-electrospray ionization source (Thermo Scientific, San Jose California). Briefly, one microgram of tryptic peptides was loaded in triplicate on a C18 Acclaim PepMap100 trap-column (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and then separated on a C18 Accucore nano-column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with linear gradients of acetonitrile, 5% to 35%, 35% to 80%, 99%, and then 5% sequentially. Peptides were analyzed in TOP20 CID data-dependent MS method.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed with Proteome Discoverer 2.4 and Maxquant 2.0.2 (parameters presented in mqpar.xml). Statistics were produced with Perseus 1.6.15.0.

### Publication Abstract
Androgen receptor (AR) signaling remains the key therapeutic target in the management of hormone-na&#xef;ve-advanced prostate cancer (PCa) and castration-resistant PCa (CRPC). Recently, landmark molecular features have been reported for CRPC, including the expression of constitutively active AR variants that lack the ligand-binding domain. Besides their role in CRPC, AR variants lead to the expression of genes involved in tumor progression. However, little is known about the specificity of their mode of action compared with that of wild-type AR (AR-WT). We performed AR transcriptome analyses in an androgen-dependent PCa cell line as well as cross-analyses with publicly available RNA-seq datasets and established that transcriptional repression capacity that was marked for AR-WT was pathologically lost by AR variants. Functional enrichment analyses allowed us to associate AR-WT repressive function to a panel of genes involved in cell adhesion and epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition. So, we postulate that a less documented AR-WT normal function in prostate epithelial cells could be the repression of a panel of genes linked to cell plasticity and that this repressive function could be pathologically abrogated by AR variants in PCa.

### Keywords
Androgen receptor; ar-v7; cell plasticity; prostate cancer; emt; transcriptional repression

### Affiliations
CNRS
ICANS - FMTS - IGBMC - University of Strasbourg - France

### Submitter
Luc Negroni

### Lab Head
Dr Jocelyn Céraline
ICANS - FMTS - IGBMC - University of Strasbourg - France


