### Accession
PXD001762

### Title
MoCBP3, an Antifungal Chitin-Binding Protein from Moringa oleifera Seeds, is a Member of the 2S Albumin Family

### Description
MoCBP3 is a chitin-binding protein from M. oleifera seeds that inhibits the germination and mycelial growth of phytopathogenic fungi. This protein is highly thermostable and resistant to pH changes, and therefore may be useful in the development of new antifungal drugs. However, the relationship of MoCBP3 with the known families of carbohydrate-binding domains has not been established. In the present study, full-length cDNAs encoding 4 isoforms of MoCBP3 (MoCBP3-1, MoCBP3-2, MoCBP3-3 and MoCBP3-4) were cloned from developing seeds. The polypeptides encoded by the MoCBP3 cDNAs were predicted to contain 160 (MoCBP3-3) and 163 amino acid residues (MoCBP3-1, MoCBP3-2 and MoCBP3-4) with a signal peptide of 20-residues at the N-terminal region. A comparative analysis of the deduced amino acid sequences revealed that MoCBP3 is a typical member of the 2S albumin family, as shown by the presence of an eight-cysteine motif, which is a characteristic feature of the prolamin superfamily. Furthermore, mass spectrometry analysis demonstrated that MoCBP3 is a mixture of isoforms that correspond to different mRNA products. The identification of MoCBP3 as a genuine member of the 2S albumin family reinforces the hypothesis that these seed storage proteins are involved in plant defense. Moreover, the chitin-binding ability of MoCBP3 reveals a novel functionality for a typical 2S albumin.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were reduced with 5 mM DTT at 60 °C for 30 min, treated with 15 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 30 min in the dark, and digested with sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega) at 37 °C for 16 h. The tryptic peptides were analyzed by LC-ESI-MS/MS using a Synapt G1 HDMS Q-ToF mass spectrometer (Waters Co., Milford, MA, USA) coupled to a Waters ultra-high-performance liquid chromatography (UPLC) unit. The digested samples were injected using the nanoACQUITY UPLC sample manager, and the chromatography was performed using a UPLC C18 nanoACQUITY column (75 µm x 10 cm, 1.7 µm particle size) at a flow rate of 0.35 µL/min. The mass spectra were acquired using the data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode, in which the top three peaks were subjected to MS/MS. Mobile phases A and B consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile, respectively. The peptides were eluted using the following step gradient: 3-40% B for 30 min and 40-85% B for 5 min.

### Data Protocol
The data were processed using Protein Lynx Global Server software (Waters Co.) and subjected to a database search using the Mascot search engine [36]. The searches were performed with the assumptions that there was a maximum of one missed trypsin cleavage, the peptides were mono-isotopic, methionine residues were partially oxidized and cysteine residues were completely carbamidomethylated. The peptide mass tolerance and fragment mass tolerance were both initially set to ± 0.1 Da for MS/MS ion searching. However, candidate peptide IDs were only accepted if the m/z values were within 0.1 Da (typically less than 0.05 Da) of the theoretical mass of the candidate ID, as determined when manually reviewing the MASCOT search results.

### Publication Abstract
Mo-CBP3 is a chitin-binding protein from M. oleifera seeds that inhibits the germination and mycelial growth of phytopathogenic fungi. This protein is highly thermostable and resistant to pH changes, and therefore may be useful in the development of new antifungal drugs. However, the relationship of MoCBP3 with the known families of carbohydrate-binding domains has not been established. In the present study, full-length cDNAs encoding 4 isoforms of Mo-CBP3 (Mo-CBP3-1, Mo-CBP3-2, Mo-CBP3-3 and Mo-CBP3-4) were cloned from developing seeds. The polypeptides encoded by the Mo-CBP3 cDNAs were predicted to contain 160 (Mo-CBP3-3) and 163 amino acid residues (Mo-CBP3-1, Mo-CBP3-2 and Mo-CBP3-4) with a signal peptide of 20-residues at the N-terminal region. A comparative analysis of the deduced amino acid sequences revealed that Mo-CBP3 is a typical member of the 2S albumin family, as shown by the presence of an eight-cysteine motif, which is a characteristic feature of the prolamin superfamily. Furthermore, mass spectrometry analysis demonstrated that Mo-CBP3 is a mixture of isoforms that correspond to different mRNA products. The identification of Mo-CBP3 as a genuine member of the 2S albumin family reinforces the hypothesis that these seed storage proteins are involved in plant defense. Moreover, the chitin-binding ability of Mo-CBP3 reveals a novel functionality for a typical 2S albumin.

### Keywords
Chitin-binding, Moringa oleifera

### Affiliations
Dr. professor
Biology Departament. Federal University of Ceara. Brasil, Ceara.

### Submitter
FREDERICO MORENO

### Lab Head
Dr Thalles Barbosa Grangeiro
Biology Departament. Federal University of Ceara. Brasil, Ceara.


