### Accession
PXD010828

### Title
Neurodegenerative disease mouse model SDS-insoluble proteins

### Description
The deposition of pathologic misfolded proteins in neurodegenerative disorders such as Alzheimer’s disease, Parkinson’s disease, frontotemporal dementia and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis is hypothesized to burden protein homeostatic (proteostatic) machinery, potentially leading to insufficient capacity to maintain the proteome. This hypothesis has been supported by previous work in our laboratory, as evidenced by the perturbation of cytosolic protein solubility in response to amyloid plaques in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s amyloidosis. In the current study, we demonstrate changes in proteome solubility are a common pathology to mouse models of neurodegenerative disease. Pathological accumulations of misfolded tau, α-synuclein and mutant superoxide dismutase 1 in CNS tissues of transgenic mice was associated with changes in the solubility of hundreds of CNS proteins in each model. We observed that changes in proteome solubility were progressive and, using the rTg4510 model of inducible tau pathology, demonstrated that these changes were dependent upon sustained expression of the primary pathologic protein. In all of the models examined, changes in proteome solubility were robust, easily detected, and provided a sensitive indicator of proteostatic disruption. Interestingly, a subset of the proteins that display a shift towards insolubility were common between these different models, suggesting that a specific subset of the proteome is vulnerable to proteostatic disruption. Overall, our data suggest that neurodegenerative proteinopathies modeled in mice impose a burden on the proteostatic network that diminishes the ability of neural cells to prevent aberrant conformational changes that alter the solubility of hundreds of abundant cellular proteins.

### Sample Protocol
The protocol used here is based on changes in protein solubility in buffers containing detergents and was developed in previous studies of proteome solubility in cultured cells (project PXD003914). Mice were anesthetized with isoflurane, perfused with PBS, followed by the extraction of the forebrain or spinal cord. These tissues were then homogenized in 4 ml PBS on ice with 1% protease inhibitor cocktail in DMSO (Sigma Aldrich) followed by sequential detergent extraction and ultracentrifugation. The sequence of detergents used was nonidet-P40 (NP40), followed by deoxycholate (DOC), and then sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) according to a similar protocol as project PXD003914. We ultimately compared PBS-soluble (PBS-S) and SDS-insoluble fractions, the latter of which was resuspended in 300 ul of 1x Laemmli buffer, in chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). 30 ul of each SDS-insoluble sample or 20 ul of each PBS-soluble sample was loaded into a 4-20% Tris-HCl (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA) gel and subjected to SDS-PAGE until proteins migrated about 1.5 cm into the gel. The gel was then stained with Coomassie blue and each lane was individually excised from the gel and cut into ~1 mm^3 pieces. This was followed by trypsin digestion and peptide extraction from the gel by standard protocols.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were generated by Xcaluber and exported with Proteome Discoverer 2.2. All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.4.1) and X! Tandem. Mascot was set up to search the MouseUUniProt database (2016, 89029 entries) with human transgenes added assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin. X! Tandem was set up to search a reverse concatenated subset of the same database also assuming trypsin. Mascot and X! Tandem were searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.0100 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 PPM. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified in Mascot and X! Tandem as a fixed modification. Ammonia-loss of asparagine, gln->pyro-Glu of the n-terminus, deamidated of asparagine and glutamine, oxidation of methionine and glyGly of lysine were specified in Mascot as variable modifications. Glu->pyro-Glu of the n-terminus, ammonia-loss of asparagine and the n-terminus, gln->pyro-Glu of the n-terminus, deamidated of asparagine and glutamine, oxidation of methionine and glyGly of lysine were specified in X! Tandem as variable modifications.   CRITERIA FOR PROTEIN IDENTIFICATION-- Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.8.7, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 50.0% probability. Peptide Probabilities from X! Tandem were assigned by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Peptide Probabilities from Mascot were assigned by the Peptide Prophet algorithm (Keller, A et al Anal. Chem. 2002;74(20):5383-92) with Scaffold delta-mass correction. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides.  Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii, Al et al Anal. Chem. 2003;75(17):4646-58). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters.

### Publication Abstract
The deposition of pathologic misfolded proteins in neurodegenerative disorders such as Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, frontotemporal dementia and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis is hypothesized to burden protein homeostatic (proteostatic) machinery, potentially leading to insufficient capacity to maintain the proteome. This hypothesis has been supported by previous work in our laboratory, as evidenced by the perturbation of cytosolic protein solubility in response to amyloid plaques in a mouse model of Alzheimer's amyloidosis. In the current study, we demonstrate changes in proteome solubility are a common pathology to mouse models of neurodegenerative disease. Pathological accumulations of misfolded tau, &#x3b1;-synuclein and mutant superoxide dismutase 1 in CNS tissues of transgenic mice were associated with changes in the solubility of hundreds of CNS proteins in each model. We observed that changes in proteome solubility were progressive and, using the rTg4510 model of inducible tau pathology, demonstrated that these changes were dependent upon sustained expression of the primary pathologic protein. In all of the models examined, changes in proteome solubility were robust, easily detected, and provided a sensitive indicator of proteostatic disruption. Interestingly, a subset of the proteins that display a shift towards insolubility were common between these different models, suggesting that a specific subset of the proteome is vulnerable to proteostatic disruption. Overall, our data suggest that neurodegenerative proteinopathies modeled in mice impose a burden on the proteostatic network that diminishes the ability of neural cells to prevent aberrant conformational changes that alter the solubility of hundreds of abundant cellular proteins.

### Keywords
Protein misfolding, Transgenic mice, Proteomics, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Neuroscience
Department of Neuroscience, School of Medicine, University of Florida

### Submitter
Guilian Xu

### Lab Head
Dr Guilian Xu
Department of Neuroscience, School of Medicine, University of Florida


