### Accession
PXD024218

### Title
Endometrium on-a-chip reveals insulin- and glucose-induced alterations in the transcriptome and proteomic secretome

### Description
The molecular interactions between the maternal environment and the developing embryo that are key for early pregnancy success are known to be influenced by factors such as maternal metabolic status. Our understanding of the mechanism(s) through which these individual nutritional stressors alter endometrial function and the in utero environment for early pregnancy success is, however, limited. Here we report, for the first time, the use of an endometrium-on-a-chip microfluidics approach to produce a multi-cellular endometrium in vitro, that was exposed to glucose and insulin concentrations associated with maternal metabolic stressors. Following isolation of endometrial cells (epithelial and stromal) from the uteri of non-pregnant cows in the early-luteal phase (Day 4-7 approximately), epithelial cells were seeded in the upper chamber of the device (4-6 104 cells/mL) and stromal cells seeded in the lower chamber (1.5-2 104 cells/mL). Three different concentration of glucose (0.5, 5.0 or 50 mM) or insulin (Vehicle, 1 or 10 ng/mL) were performed in the endometrial cells at a flow rate of 1µL/min for 72 hr to mimic the rate of secretion in vivo. Quantitative differences in the transcriptomic response of the cells and the secreted proteome of in vitro-derived uterine luminal fluid (ULF) were determined by RNA-sequencing and Tandem Mass Tagging Mass Spectrometry (TMT), respectively. Changes in maternal glucose altered 21 and 191 protein-coding genes in epithelial and stromal cells, respectively (p<0.05), with a dose-dependent quantitative change in the protein secretome (1 and 23 proteins in epithelial and stromal cells, respectively). Altering insulin concentrations resulted in limited transcriptional changes including transcripts for insulin-like binding proteins that were cell specific (5, 12, and 20) but altered the quantitative secretion of 196 proteins including those involved in extracellular matrix-receptor interaction and proteoglycan signaling in cancer. Collectively, these findings highlight one potential mechanism by which changes to maternal glucose and insulin associated with metabolic stress may alter uterine function.

### Sample Protocol
Medium (n=3 samples per group) from the upper chamber (in vitro-derived ULF) following glucose  and insulin exposure were subjected to albumin depletion according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Loughborough, UK). Individual samples were digested with trypsin (2.5 µg trypsin; 37 °C, overnight), labelled with Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) ten plex reagents according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and pooled. The pooled sample was evaporated to dryness, resuspended in 5% formic acid, and then desalted using a SepPak cartridge according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Waters, Milford, Massachusetts, USA). Eluate from the SepPak cartridge was again evaporated to dryness and resuspended in buffer A (20 mM ammonium hydroxide, pH 10) prior to fractionation by high pH reversed-phase chromatography using an Ultimate 3000 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Scientific). In brief, the sample was loaded onto an XBridge BEH C18 Column (130Å, 3.5 µm, 2.1 mm X 150 mm, Waters, UK) in buffer A and peptides eluted with an increasing gradient of buffer B (20 mM Ammonium Hydroxide in acetonitrile, pH 10) from 0-95% over 60 min. The resulting fractions were evaporated to dryness and resuspended in 1% formic acid prior to analysis by nano-LC MSMS using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). High pH reversed-phase (RP) fractions were further fractionated using an Ultimate 3000 nano-LC system in line with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides in 1% (vol/vol) formic acid were injected onto an Acclaim PepMap C18 nano-trap column (Thermo Scientific). After washing with 0.5% (vol/vol) acetonitrile 0.1% (vol/vol) formic acid peptides were resolved on a 250 mm × 75 μm Acclaim PepMap C18 reverse phase analytical column (Thermo Scientific) over a 150 min organic gradient, using 7 gradient segments (1-6% solvent B over 1 min, 6-15% B over 58 min, 15-32% B over 58 min, 32-40% B over 5 min, 40-90% B over 1min, held at 90% B for 6 min and then reduced to 1% B over 1 min) with a flow rate of 300 nl min−1. Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid and Solvent B was aqueous 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were ionized by nano-electrospray ionization at 2.0kV using a stainless-steel emitter with an internal diameter of 30 μm (Thermo Scientific) and a capillary temperature of 275 °C. All spectra were acquired using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer controlled by Xcalibur 4.1 software (Thermo Scientific) and operated in data-dependent acquisition mode using an SPS-MS3 workflow. Fourier transform mass analysers 1 (FTMS1) spectra were collected at a resolution of 120 000, with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 200 000 and a max injection time of 50 ms. Precursors were filtered with an intensity threshold of 5000, according to charge state (to include charge states 2-7) and with monoisotopic peak determination set to Peptide. Previously interrogated precursors were excluded using a dynamic window (60 s +/-10 ppm). The MS2 precursors were isolated with a quadrupole isolation window of 0.7 m/z. ITMS2 spectra were collected with an AGC target of 10 000, max injection time of 70ms and CID collision energy of 35%. For Fourier transform mass analysers 3 (FTMS3) analysis, the Orbitrap was operated at 50 000 resolution with an AGC target of 50 000 and a max injection time of 105ms. Precursors were fragmented by high energy collision dissociation (HCD) at a normalised collision energy of 60% to ensure maximal TMT reporter ion yield. Synchronous Precursor Selection (SPS) was enabled to include up to 5 MS2 fragment ions in the FTMS3 scan.

### Data Protocol
The raw data files were processed and quantified using Proteome Discoverer software v2.1 (Thermo Scientific) and searched against the UniProt Bos taurus database (downloaded June 2019: 46309 entries) using the SEQUEST algorithm. Peptide precursor mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm, and MS/MS tolerance was set at 0.6Da. Search criteria included oxidation of methionine (+15.9949) as a variable modification and carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.0214) and the addition of the TMT mass tag (+229.163) to peptide N-termini and lysine as fixed modifications. Searches were performed with full tryptic digestion and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages were allowed. The reverse database search option was enabled, and all data was filtered to satisfy false discovery rate (FDR) of 5%. Differences in protein abundance amongst groups were determined using an unpaired T test following the FDR filtration step.

### Publication Abstract
The molecular interactions between the maternal environment and the developing embryo are key for early pregnancy success and are influenced by factors such as maternal metabolic status. Our understanding of the mechanism(s) through which these individual nutritional stressors alter endometrial function and the in utero environment for early pregnancy success is, however, limited. Here we report, for the first time, the use of an endometrium-on-a-chip microfluidics approach to produce a multicellular endometrium in vitro. Isolated endometrial cells (epithelial and stromal) from the uteri of nonpregnant cows in the early luteal phase (Days 4-7) were seeded in the upper chamber of the device (epithelial cells; 4-6 &#xd7; 104 cells/mL) and stromal cells seeded in the lower chamber (1.5-2 &#xd7; 104 cells/mL). Exposure of cells to different concentrations of glucose (0.5, 5.0, or 50 mM) or insulin (Vehicle, 1 or 10 ng/mL) was performed at a flow rate of 1 &#xb5;L/minute for 72 hours. Quantitative differences in the cellular transcriptome and the secreted proteome of in vitro-derived uterine luminal fluid were determined by RNA-sequencing and tandem mass tagging mass spectrometry, respectively. High glucose concentrations altered 21 and 191 protein-coding genes in epithelial and stromal cells, respectively (P&#x2005;&lt;&#x2005;.05), with a dose-dependent quantitative change in the protein secretome (1 and 23 proteins). Altering insulin concentrations resulted in limited transcriptional changes including transcripts for insulin-like binding proteins that were cell specific but altered the quantitative secretion of 196 proteins. These findings highlight 1 potential mechanism by which changes to maternal glucose and insulin alter uterine function.

### Keywords
Bovine, Uterus, Cattle, Uterine luminal fluid, Microfluidics, Endometrium-on-a-chip

### Affiliations
University of Leeds
Inst Cardiovasc & Metabolic Med (LICAMM), University of Leeds, Leeds, United Kingdom

### Submitter
Leeds Omics

### Lab Head
Dr Niamh Forde
Inst Cardiovasc & Metabolic Med (LICAMM), University of Leeds, Leeds, United Kingdom


