### Accession
PXD013908

### Title
Proteomic analysis of the early development of the Phalaenopsis amabilis flower bud under low temperature induction

### Description
Phalaenopsis amabilis, one of the most important flowers in the current international flower market, is a plant that undergoes vernalization and requires low temperature treatment for flowering. There have been few reports on the proteomic analysis of the development of flower buds. In this study, by using isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification (iTRAQ), 4096 differentially expressed proteins were identified in P. amabilis under low temperature treatment, of which 42 were associated with early floral induction, and 18 were verified by mass spectrometry multi-reaction monitoring (MRM). Among the proteins associated with the vernalization pathway, PEQU_11434 (glycine-rich RNA-binding protein GRP1A-like) and PEQU_11045 (UDP-N-acetylglucosamine diphosphorylase) were upregulated compared to their expression in control flower buds. It was therefore inferred that O-GlcNAc glycosylation was involved in the posttranscriptional modification of VRN1 (API homolog) and that the GRP2 protein (glycine-rich RNA-binding protein) was glycosylated to relieve binding to the VRN1 mRNA precursor to promote the expression of VRN1, which initiates floral development. Furthermore, phytochromes A (PEQU_13449, PEQU_35378), B (PEQU_09249) and C (PEQU_41401) were downregulated under low temperature treatment compared to their expression in control flower buds, suggesting that they could repress the expression of the VRN2 gene and thus release its repression of VRN3 to enable the high-level expression of FTPEQU_19304 (FT, VRN3 homolog), which promotes VRN1 expression and then stimulates flowering.

### Sample Protocol
Phalaenopsis amabilis, one of the most important flowers in the present international flower market, is a vernalization plant that requires lower temperature treatment for flowering. In this study, by using isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification (iTRAQ), 4096 differentially expressed proteins were identified in P. amabilis under low temperature treatment

### Data Protocol
Protein extraction was performed according to a previously described method [10] with some modifications. Flower buds were ground to powder in liquid nitrogen and incubated in dissolution buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM TEAB, pH 8.0) on ice. The mixture was centrifuged for 20 min at 13,000 × g, and the collected supernatant was precipitated by precooled acetone containing 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at -20°C for 2 h. After centrifugation at 13,000× g for 20min at 4°C, the precipitate was collected, and 800 μl of chilled acetone (containing DTT at a final concentration of 10 mM) was added. The solution was resuspended for precipitation and centrifuged at 13,000 × g for 20 min at 4°C. The precipitate was collected, air-dried and then dissolved in 100 µl dissolution. The protein content was determined by the Bradford method.For each sample, 80 µg of protein was dissolved in 100 µL of dissolution buffer and then diluted in 500 µL of 50 mM NH4HCO3. Protein samples were reduced with 10 mM DTT at 56 °C for 30 min, alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide (IAM) at room temperature for 30 min in the dark. Two microgram trypsin was added and incubated overnight at 37°C for protein digestion, following which an equal volume of 0.1% formic acid was added to acidize the peptides. The peptides were purified on a Strata X C18 column (Phenomenex, Torrance, CA, USA) that was first activated with methanol, equilibrated by adding 1 ml of 0.1% FA three times, washed with 0.1% FA + 5% acetonitrile (ACN) twice, and eluted with 1 ml 0.1% FA + 80% ACN. The eluted peptides were dried with a vacuum concentrator. The dried peptide powder was redissolved with 20 µL 0.5 M TEAB for peptide labeling.The samples were labeled with the following iTRAQ 8-plex kits (AB Sciex UK Limited, Warrington, Cheshire, UK): kits 113 and 114 for CK-1 and CK-2 (biological replicate of CK-1), kits 115 and 116 for T10-1 and T10-2 (biological replicate of T10-1) under low temperature treatment for 10 d, and kits 117 and 118 for T20-1 and T20-20 (biological replicate of T20-1) under low temperature treatment for 20 d. The labeled samples were mixed in equivalent amounts and fractionated using an HPLC system (Thermo DIONEX Ultimate 3000 BioRS, USA) with a Durashell C18 column (Welch Materials, Inc., 5 µm, 100 Å, 4.6×250 mm). Finally, 13 fractions were collected. The fractionated samples were analyzed by LC-ESI-MS/MS, which was performed on an AB SCIEX nanoLC-MS/MS (AB Sciex，USA) system. The samples were chromatographed using a gradient from 2% to 30% (buffer A 0.1% (v/v) formic acid, 5% (v/v) acetonitrile, buffer B 0.1% (v/v) formic acid, 95% (v/v) acetonitrile) for 90 min after direct injection onto a 20 µm PicoFrit emitter (New Objective) packed to 10 cm with Magic C18 AQ 3 µm 120 Å stationary phase. MS1 spectra were collected in the 350e1500 m/z range for 250 ms. The 40 most intense precursors that exceeded 150 counts per second with a 2+ to 5+ charge state were selected for fragmentation, and MS2 spectra were collected in the 50-2000 m/z range for 100 ms. The dynamic exclusion was set as 12 s.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Phalaenopsis amabilis</i>, one of the most important plants in the international flower market due to its graceful shape and colorful flowers, is an orchid that undergoes vernalization and requires low-temperature treatment for flowering. There have been few reports on the proteomics of the development of flower buds. In this study, isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification (iTRAQ) were used to identify 5064 differentially expressed proteins in <i>P. amabilis</i> under low-temperature treatment; of these, 42 were associated with early floral induction, and 18 were verified by mass spectrometry multi-reaction monitoring (MRM). The data are available via ProteomeXchange under identifier PXD013908. Among the proteins associated with the vernalization pathway, PEQU_11434 (glycine-rich RNA-binding protein GRP1A-like) and PEQU_19304 (FT, VRN3 homolog) were verified by MRM, and some other important proteins related to vernalization and photoperiod pathway that were detected by iTRAQ but not successfully verified by MRM, such as PEQU_11045 (UDP-N-acetylglucosamine diphosphorylase), phytochromes A (PEQU_13449, PEQU_35378), B (PEQU_09249), and C (PEQU_41401). Our data revealed a regulation network of the early development of flower buds in <i>P. amabilis</i> under low temperature induction.

### Keywords
Phalaenopsis amabilis; low temperature; flower bud induction

### Affiliations
Guangdong Provincial Key Lab of Biotechnology for Plant Development, School of Life Sciences, South China Normal University, Guangzhou, China

### Submitter
Cong Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Qingsheng Ye
Guangdong Provincial Key Lab of Biotechnology for Plant Development, School of Life Sciences, South China Normal University, Guangzhou, China


