### Accession
PXD009775

### Title
ProTargetMiner: A proteome library of anticancer molecules for functional discovery

### Description
As a further development of our Functional Identification of drug Targets by Expression Proteomics (FITExP) method, a reference dataset was built of the proteomic responses of A549 human adenocarcinoma cells to 56 clinical and experimental anticancer molecules. For each molecule, a concentration was used killing 50% of the cells after 48 h. With 4557 proteins quantified across all treatments and controls, 11 orthogonal dimensions were found in factor analysis of the ProTargetMiner dataset, indicating the action of at least that many distinct cell death modalities. For convenience, the number of dimensions was reduced to three and two, thus producing a “death globe” and “death map”, respectively. As expected, molecules with similar mechanisms of action produced proteome signatures clustering together on the death globe and map. Interrogation of the dataset with partial least square modeling contrasting a given molecule against all other treatments unveiled drug targets and mechanistic proteins, even when the specific protein regulation was as subtle as a 15% change. The mechanisms of action were revealed by mapping the group of target candidates on known protein networks. The dataset allows for unique interrogation approaches, such as defining a set of co-regulated proteins.  The core (“untouchable”) proteome consisting of proteins with steady expression levels unaffected by the treatments was also defined; they are found to be involved in proteasome and mRNA surveillance pathway. Finally, a list of proteins most affected by the drugs was compiled; these proteins encompass many known drug targets. The ProTargetMiner represents a resource that may be useful to the community of drug developers or scientists interested in drug action mechanisms and cell death modalities. ProTargetMiner can be easily extended to other drugs.

### Sample Protocol
For proteomics analysis, the cells were seeded at a density of 250k per well and allowed to grow for 24 h in biological triplicates. Next, cells were either treated with vehicle (DMSO) or compounds at LC50 concentrations. Each 10 experiments included one vehicle-treated control, 3 control drugs and 6 library compounds. After treatment, cells were collected, washed twice with PBS and then lysed using 8M urea, 1% SDS, 50 mM Tris at pH 8.5 with protease inhibitors. The cell lysates were subjected to 1 min sonication on ice using Branson probe sonicator and 3 s on/off pulses with a 30% amplitude. Protein concentration was then measured for each sample using a BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo). 50 µg of each sample was reduced with DTT (final concentration 10 mM) for 1 h at room temperature. Afterwards, iodoacetamide was added to a final concentration of 50 mM. The samples were incubated in room temperature for 1 h in the dark, with the reaction being stopped by addition of 10 mM DTT. After precipitation of proteins using methanol/chloroform, the semi-dry protein pellet was dissolved in 25 µL of 8 M urea in 20 mM EPPS (pH 8.5) and was then diluted with EPPS buffer to reduce urea concentration to 4 M. Lysyl Endopeptidase (Wako) was added at a 1 : 100 w/w ratio to protein and incubated at room temperature overnight. After diluting urea to 1 M, trypsin (Promega) was added at the ratio of 1 : 100 w/w and the samples were incubated for 6 h at room temperature. Acetonitrile was added to a final concentration of 20% v/v. TMT10 reagents were added 4x by weight to each sample, followed by incubation for 2 h at room temperature. The reaction was quenched by addition of 0.5% hydroxylamine. Samples were combined, acidified by TFA, cleaned using Sep-Pak (Waters) and dried using a DNA 120 SpeedVac™ concentrator (Thermo).  Samples were then resuspended in 0.1% TFA and separated into 8 fractions using High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo). After resuspension in 0.1% FA (Fluka), each fraction was analyzed with a 90 min gradient in random order.  Samples in were loaded with buffer A (0.1% formic acid in water) onto a 50 cm EASY-Spray column (75 µm internal diameter, packed with PepMap C18, 2 µm beads, 100 Å pore size) connected to the EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo) and eluted with a buffer B (98% ACN, 0.1% FA, 2% H2O) gradient from 2% to 35% of at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. Mass spectra were acquired with an Orbitrap Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo) in the data-dependent mode at a nominal resolution of 30,000, in the m/z range from 375 to 1400. Peptide fragmentation was performed via higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) with energy set at 35 NCE.

### Data Protocol
The raw data from LC-MS were analyzed by MaxQuant, version 1.5.6.5. The Andromeda search engine searched MS/MS data against the International Protein Index (human, version UP000005640_9606, 92957 entries). Cysteine carbamidomethylation was used as a fixed modification, while methionine oxidation was selected as a variable modification. Trypsin/P and LysC/P were selected as enzyme specificity. No more than two missed cleavages were allowed. A 1% false discovery rate was used as a filter at both protein and peptide levels. For all other parameters, the default settings were used. After removing all the contaminants, only proteins with at least two peptides were included in the final dataset. Protein abundances were normalized by the total protein abundance in each sample.   STRING version 10.5 (http://string-db.org) protein network analysis tool was used. Medium confidence threshold (0.4) was used to define protein-protein interactions. In-built gene set enrichment analysis with the whole genome as a background was used to identify enriched gene ontology terms and pathways.

### Publication Abstract
Deconvolution of targets and action mechanisms of anticancer compounds is fundamental in drug development. Here, we report on ProTargetMiner as a publicly available expandable proteome signature library of anticancer molecules in cancer cell lines. Based on 287 A549 adenocarcinoma proteomes affected by 56 compounds, the main dataset contains 7,328 proteins and 1,307,859 refined protein-drug pairs. These proteomic signatures cluster by compound targets and action mechanisms. The targets and mechanistic proteins are deconvoluted by partial least square modeling, provided through the website http://protargetminer.genexplain.com. For 9 molecules representing&#xa0;the most diverse mechanisms and the common cancer cell lines MCF-7, RKO and A549, deep proteome datasets are obtained. Combining data from the three cell lines highlights common drug targets and cell-specific differences. The database can be easily extended and merged with new compound signatures. ProTargetMiner serves as a chemical proteomics resource for the cancer research community, and can become a valuable tool in drug discovery.

### Keywords
Drug, Chemotherapeutic, Expression, Proteomics, A549, Resource, Database, Compound, Mass spectrometry, Cancer

### Affiliations
Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden
Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, Stockhoom, Sweden

### Submitter
Amir Ata Saei 

### Lab Head
Dr Roman Zubarev
Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, Stockhoom, Sweden


