### Accession
PXD005131

### Title
Expression of ALS-linked mutant CCNF in zebrafish leads to increased cell death in the spinal cord and an aberrant motor phenotype

### Description
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a rapidly progressive, fatal neurodegenerative disease characterised by the loss of upper and lower motor neurons. Approximately 10% of ALS cases have a known family history of the disease and mutations in multiple genes have been identified. ALS-linked mutations in CCNF were recently reported, however the pathogenic mechanisms associated with these mutations are yet to be established. To investigate possible mechanisms, an in vitro model of ALS was developed that expressed mutant CCNF in a neuronal cell line (Neuro-2a). Proteomic analysis of this in vitro model identified the disruption of several cellular pathways, including those associated with caspase-3 mediated cell death and axonal outgrowth. To establish whether these findings were replicated in vivo, a zebrafish model was developed. Transient overexpression of human mutant CCNF in zebrafish led to increased caspase-3 activity, increased cell death and a motor neuron axonopathy consisting of shortened primary motor axons and increased frequency of aberrant axonal branching. A significant correlation between the severity of this mutant CCNF-induced axonopathy and reduced motor function was also demonstrated in this model, with zebrafish expressing the mutant protein demonstrating an impaired motor response to a light stimulus. This is the first report of an ALS-linked CCNF mutation in vivo and indicates that zebrafish will be a useful tool to model the pathogenesis of CCNF-linked motor neuron degeneration.

### Sample Protocol
The murine Neuro-2a cell line was grown and maintained in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM; Sigma Aldrich) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (Sigma Aldrich), 100 mg/mL streptomycin (Sigma Aldrich), and 100 U/mL penicillin (Sigma Aldrich) in a 37°C incubator with 5% CO2 and 95% humidity.  Transfection of CCNFWT and CCNFS621G plasmids were performed using Lipofectamine 2000 (Life Technologies) and opti-MEM media (Life Technologies). Expression of mCherry fused cyclin F was confirmed through western blotting using lysates collected at 8, 24 and 48 hours post transfection (Fig 1).  CCNF transfected Neuro-2a cells were harvested in ice-cold phosphate buffered saline (PBS) at 80% confluence, pelleted by centrifugation, and stored at -80oC if not used immediately. Cell pellets were resuspended in sodium deoxycholate lysis buffer (1% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1 M triethylammonium bicarbonate, 1.5 mM magnesium chloride, pH 8.0) and incubated at 95°C for two minutes to kill enzymatic activity. Lysates were then cooled and 1 μL Benzonase nuclease (Novagen) was added to digest genomic DNA, followed by probe sonication (10 pulses, Setting 3, Branson Sonifier). Cellular debris was pelleted by centrifugation at 14,000 g for 30 mins at 4oC. Approximately 100 µg of protein was reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol for 30 mins at 55oC and alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide for 1 h at room temperature in the dark. Trypsin (1 µg) was added and incubated overnight at 37oC. Following trypsin digestion, formic acid (1 µl) was added to kill residual trypsin activity and acidify the sample to precipitate the sodium deoxycholate. The peptide sample was recovered by centrifugation at 14,000 g for 30 mins, desalted on a C18 SepPak cartridge (Waters), and vacuum centrifuged to dry peptides. Peptides were stored at -80oC until LC-MS/MS analysis.Lyophilised peptides were resuspended in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid and analysed using on-line C18 reverse phase nanoscale liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry. 20 μg of sample was injected using an Eksigent nano-LC system with cHiPLC® system coupled to the 5600 TripleTOFTM mass spectrometer (AB SCIEX) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ionisation emitter (PicoTip Emitter, New Objective).  The 5600 Triple TOFTM was operated in an information-dependant acquisition (IDA) mode involving 1 full MS scan between 350-1500 m/z, and 20 MS/MS scans generating approximately 15-20 points per peak. Chosen parameters were monoisotopic precursor selection, charge state screening and dynamic exclusion. Charge states that were unassigned, >4 or +1 were not selected for MS/MS fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
The raw files  (*.wiff) from each analysis was searched in the ProteinPilot software incorporating the Mascot search algorithm using Swissprot_2014_04 database (selected for Mus musculus; 16676 entries). The following search parameters were chosen: carbamidomethylation of cysteines as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation, protein amino-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and allowed for 2 missed cleavages. Parent ion tolerance was set at 50 ppm and MS/MS fragment ion tolerance was within 0.1 Da. Peptide charges were set to 2+, 3+ and 4+. A target-decoy search strategy using a reversed database was used to estimate false discovery rates, which was set to 1% false discovery rate (FDR).  We employed label-free quantitative proteomics employing normalised spectral abundance factors (NSAF), which takes into account the length of a given protein as well as the total amount of protein in a given sample (Zybailov, 2006). A fraction (0.5) of a spectral count was added to all samples to account for missing values and total spectral counts for at least one condition was equal to 6. NSAF values were log2-transformed and Student’s t-tests were used to identify significant (p ≤0.05) changes in protein abundance between CCNFWT and CCNFS621G. Determining fold-changes made use of non-transformed NSAF values and changes of ≥ 1.5 or ≤ 0.67 were of interest. Statistical data preparation and tests were done using Microsoft Excel.

### Publication Abstract
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a rapidly progressive, fatal neurodegenerative disease characterised by the death of upper and lower motor neurons. Approximately 10% of cases have a known family history of ALS and disease-linked mutations in multiple genes have been identified. ALS-linked mutations in CCNF were recently reported, however the pathogenic mechanisms associated with these mutations are yet to be established. To investigate possible disease mechanisms, we developed in vitro and in vivo models based on an ALS-linked missense mutation in CCNF. Proteomic analysis of the in vitro models identified the disruption of several cellular pathways in the mutant model, including caspase-3 mediated cell death. Transient overexpression of human CCNF in zebrafish embryos supported this finding, with fish expressing the mutant protein found to have increased levels of cleaved (activated) caspase-3 and increased cell death in the spinal cord. The mutant CCNF fish also developed a motor neuron axonopathy consisting of shortened primary motor axons and increased frequency of aberrant axonal branching. Importantly, we demonstrated a significant correlation between the severity of the CCNF-induced axonopathy and a reduced motor response to a light stimulus (photomotor response). This is the first report of an ALS-linked CCNF mutation in vivo and taken together with the in vitro model identifies the disruption of cell death pathways as a significant consequence of this mutation. Additionally, this study presents a valuable new tool for use in ongoing studies investigating the pathobiology of ALS-linked CCNF mutations.

### Keywords
Motor neurone disease, Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, Zebrafish

### Affiliations
Department of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Macquarie University, North Ryde, NSW, 2109, Australia
Macquarie University

### Submitter
Albert Lee

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Albert Lee
Department of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Macquarie University, North Ryde, NSW, 2109, Australia


