### Accession
PXD040551

### Title
Milk protein based cryogel monoliths as novel encapsulant of probiotic bacteria. Part II: L. rhamnosus GG storage stability and bioactivity under in vitro digestion

### Description
The aim of the study was to assess the ability of milk protein-based cryogel monoliths to preserve the biological role of Lacticaseibacillus rhamnosus GG (LGG) under cryogenic processing, temperature and water activity controlled static storage and in vitro gastrointestinal transit conditions. Moreover, the matrix disintegration, digestibility, and release of bioactive peptides in the simulated gastrointestinal fluids was determined. The cryogelation process did not confer any significant cellular injuries (losses < 0.5 logCFU g-1) due to the achievement of a vitreous state under the implemented cryogenic conditions. Among the tested storage conditions i.e., temperature (5, 20 and 37 °C) was the most influential parameter of the LGG inactivation kinetics (kLGG = 0.002-0.008 to 0.25-0.56 day-1) followed by the protein composition (i.e., the presence of sodium caseinate alleviated the lethality of LGG). Cryogels stored at aw ≤ 0.33 (found in the vicinity or below Tg) allowed good LGG survivability (kLGG 0.033-0.045 day-1) compared to their rubbery analogues (i.e. aw > 0.33). All cryogels exerted a very limited disintegration during the oral and gastric processing steps helping the LGG cells to overcome the harsh gastric stressors. A complete disintegration of the cryogels was achieved during the intestinal step favouring the release of LGG cells and the advancement of the cryogel matrix digestibility (> 64%). The viable counts of LGG in the intestinal phases remained satisfactorily high (> 8.2 logCFU g-1). Peptidomic profiling of the gastric and intestinal phases confirmed the release of ACE and DPP-IV inhibitory, antimicrobial and antioxidant peptides.

### Sample Protocol
To determine the production of peptides from the milk proteins throughout the digestion, 10 mL aliquots of homogeneous gastric and intestinal chymes prepared in duplicate, were centrifuge-filtered using Amicon tubes equipped with a filter cut-off of 10 kDa. Conditions included different formulation doing varying the rate of whey protein and sodium caseinate as 50-50%, 25-75% and 75-25%. Then two technical replicates of 1 mL obtained filtra of each replicate were dried prior to perform nanoliquid chromatography – mass spectrometry (nanoLC-MS) analysis. All replicates were solubilised and diluted with 0.1% vol. formic acid (FA) solution. Peptide separation was performed on a NanoLC-425 Eksigent system coupled to TripleTOF 6600+ mass spectrometer (SCIEX, Darmstadt, Germany) as previously described (Ribeiro et al., 2020). The 30 most intense ions were selected to perform fragmentation with high sensitivity mode using the automatically adjusted system of rolling collision energy.

### Data Protocol
The acquired data were converted and submitted to Mascot search engine (Matrix science, London, UK) for peptide identifications. The searches were restricted to cow milk proteins database in UniprotKB (released on 27th of October 2022; 25 681 sequences) using Mascot Daemon interface (version 2.6.0. Matrix Science, London, UK). For all the research, the parameters were as follows: a mass tolerance value of 10 ppm for the precursor, 0.02 Da for the fragment ions; no proteolytic cleavage specificity; no missed cleavages; no static modifications; Met oxidation, pyroglutamic acid at the N-term Gln, and Ser/Thr phosphorylation as variable modifications. To eliminate false positives, peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) were filtered using the target decoy database with a false discovery rate (FDR) at peptide level at 1%, corresponding to a 99% confidence score. The MSMS spectra of the two technical replicates were merged into a single search. Data analysis and treatment was further computed. Only the proteins identified with a significance Mascot-calculated confidence of 95%, minimum of two peptides with at least one unique per proteins and a protein and peptide score ≥ 50 were retained.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lactobacillus; encapsulation; probiotics; viability; in vitro digestion; peptide

### Affiliations
LIST-ERIN-ERTP-BEAP-HAU platform
LIST-ERIN-BEAP,  Bascharage, Luxembourg

### Submitter
Céline LECLERCQ

### Lab Head
Dr Céline LECLERCQ
LIST-ERIN-BEAP,  Bascharage, Luxembourg


