### Accession
PXD045068

### Title
Biomolecular condensation orchestrates clathrin-mediated endocytosis in plants

### Description
Clathrin-mediated endocytosis is an essential cellular internalisation pathway involving the dynamic assembly of clathrin and accessory proteins to form membrane-bound vesicles. The evolutionarily ancient TSET/TPLATE complex (TPC) plays an essential, but not well-defined role in endocytosis in plants. Here, we show that two highly disordered TPC subunits, AtEH1 and AtEH2 function as scaffolds to drive biomolecular condensation of the complex. These condensates specifically nucleate on the plasma membrane through interactions with anionic phospholipids, and facilitate the dynamic recruitment and assembly of clathrin, early-, and late-stage endocytic accessory proteins. Importantly, clathrin forms ordered assemblies within the condensate environment. Biomolecular condensation therefore acts to promote dynamic protein assemblies throughout clathrin-mediated endocytosis. Furthermore, the disordered region sequence properties of AtEH1 regulate the material properties of the endocytic condensates in vivo. Alteration of the material properties influences endocytosis dynamics, and thereby impairs environmental adaption. In summary, our findings reveal how collective interactions shape endocytosis.

### Sample Protocol
TurboID-MS PSB-D A. thaliana cell suspension cultures were transformed with the AtEH1-linker-TurboID and experiments were performed as previously described (Arora et al., 2020). The TPLATE-linker-TurboID raw data was available from before (Arora et al., 2020) and re-analyzed with Mascot (Matrix Science).

### Data Protocol
The raw data was processed with Mascot. First, Mascot Generic Files were created using the Mascot Distiller software (version 2.5.0.0, Matrix Science, London, UK) using standard parameters. These peak lists were then searched with the Mascot search engine (version 2.6.2, Matrix Science) using the Mascot Daemon interface. Spectra were searched against the Araport11plus database (version DE2020, Van Leene et al., 2022) containing 49057 protein sequence entries. Variable modifications were set to acetylation of protein N-termini, oxidation of methionine and biotinylation of lysine. Peptide mass tolerance was set to ±10ppm (with Mascot's C13 option set to 1), and the fragment mass tolerance was set to ±20mmu. The peptide charge was set to 2+, 3+ and 4+, and instrument setting was ESI-QUAD. The enzyme setting was trypsin allowing for two missed cleavages, and cleavage was allowed when arginine or lysine were followed by proline. Peptide- and protein-level FDR were both set to 0.01. Proteins identified with at least 1 unique peptide were retained. The identified protein list was filtered versus a large dataset of TurboID-MS experiments, similarly as described for GSrhino pull downs (Van Leene et al., 2015). The baits in the large TurboID-MS dataset are functionally grouped into baitgroups, and baits related to the bait of interest are removed from this large dataset before comparison. For each identified protein a Normalized Spectral Abundance Factor (NSAF) is calculated. The Ln-transformed mean NSAF of all proteins identified in at least 2 replicates out of 3 are compared to the Ln-transformed mean NSAF of the same protein in the large dataset by a two-tailed t-test. For each identified protein, an Enrichment Score (ES) = NSAF ratio x -log(p-value) is calculated. Cut-offs to filter the list of identified proteins: ES>=20 for low enriched ES>=100 for medium enriched ES>=1000 for high enriched

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ateh1, Ap-ms, Clathrin-mediated endocytosis, Tplate complex, Arabidopsis

### Affiliations
Ghent University, Department of Plant Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, Technologiepark 71, 9052 Ghent, Belgium VIB Center for Plant Systems Biology, Technologiepark 71, 9052 Ghent, Belgium
Department of Plant Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, Ghent University, Ghent, B-9052, Belgium
VIB Center for Plant Systems Biology, Ghent, B-9052, Belgium


### Submitter
Dominique Eeckhout

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel Van Damme
Ghent University, Department of Plant Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, Technologiepark 71, 9052 Ghent, Belgium VIB Center for Plant Systems Biology, Technologiepark 71, 9052 Ghent, Belgium


