### Accession
PXD015487

### Title
Clostridium cellulovorans metabolism of cellulose as studied by comparative proteomic approach

### Description
Clostridium cellulovorans is among the most promising candidates for consolidated bioprocessing (CBP) of cellulosic biomass to liquid biofuels (e.g. ethanol, butanol). C. cellulovoranscan metabolize all the main plant polysaccharides (i.e. cellulose, hemicellusoses and pectins). Unlike other well established cellulolytic microorganisms, C. cellulovorans most abundant catabolite is butyrate. This attracted attention on this strain as potential butanol producer since most reactions involved in butyrate and butanol synthetic pathway from acetyl-coA are common. Recent studies demonstrated that the introduction of a single heterologous alcohol/aldehyde dehydrogenase can significantly divert the branching-point intermediate, i.e. butyryl-CoA, towards butanol production in this strain.  In spite of the potential of C. cellulovorans for application in CBP of plant biomass, engineering its metabolic pathways towards industrial utilization still requires enhanced understanding of its metabolism. Few recent studies aimed at understanding the regulation of C. cellulovorans central carbon metabolism in response to different substrate availability, which seem insufficient for the aforementioned purposes. The present study aimed at improving comprehension of cellulose metabolism in C. cellulovorans by comparing growth kinetics, substrate consumption/product accumulation and whole-cell soluble proteome with those of C. cellulovorans grown on a soluble carbohydrate, i.e. glucose, as the main carbon source. Modulations of the central carbon metabolism in response to changes in the growth substrate were detected, including the regulation of glycolytic enzymes, fermentation pathways and nitrogen assimilation. Our data suggest that a higher energy expenditure occurs in cellulose-grown C. cellulovorans which induces up-regulation of ATP synthetic pathways, e.g. acetate production and ATP synthase.

### Sample Protocol
Cytosolic protein extraction For both growth conditions, on D-Glucose or Avicel®, cells were harvested after 6 hours and 7 days, respectively, by centrifugation at 4000 xg, 4°C, 20 min and washed twice with 0.9% (w/v) NaCl. The protein extraction was performed according to Munir et al., 2015 (108). Briefly, the pellets were resuspended in 6 ml of 2% (v/v) SDT-lysis buffer (2 mM Tris-HCl, 0.4% (w/v) SDS, pH 7.6), with 100 mM DTT. The samples were incubated 10 min at 95°C and centrifuged at 4000 xg 20 min. The supernatant was centrifuged again for 10 min at 10000 xg to discard unlysed cells and cell debris. Proteins were precipitated from supernatants by methanol-chloroform method (109; Wessel and Flugge, 1984). The protein pellets were resuspended in 25 mM NH4HCO3 with 0.1% (w/v) SDS and the protein concentration was measured by the 2-D Quant kit (GE Healthcare, Chicago, IL, USA), following the manufacturer’s instructions.  In-solution protein digestion Prior to SWATH-MS (Sequential Window Acquisition of all Theoretical fragment ion spectra Mass Spectrometry) (40, 41; Collins et al., 2017; Ludwig et al., 2018) analysis, proteins were digested with trypsin. Briefly, the samples were prepared to have 100 μg of proteins in 25 μl of 100 mM NH4HCO3. The proteins were reduced by adding 2.5 μl DTT (200 mM DTT stock solution), incubating them at 90°C for 20 min and alkylated with 10 μl of Cysteine Blocking Reagent (200 mM Iodoacetamide, IAM) (Sigma-Aldrich Inc., St. Louis, MO, USA) for 1 h at room temperature in the dark. DTT stock solution was then added to eliminate the excess of IAM. After dilution with 300 μl of water and 100 μl of NH4HCO3 to raise the pH to 7.5-8.0, 5 μg of trypsin (Sequence Grade, Promega Corporation, Madison, WI, USA) was added and digestion was performed overnight at 37 °C. Trypsin activity was stopped by adding 2 μl of neat formic acid and digests were dried by Speed Vacuum (110; Dalla Pozza et al., 2018). The samples were desalted on the Discovery® DSC-18 solid phase extraction (SPE) 96-well Plate (25 mg/well) (Sigma-Aldrich Inc., St. Louis, MO, USA). The SPE plate was preconditioned with 1 ml of acetonitrile and 2 ml of water. After sample loading, the plate was washed with 1 ml of water. The adsorbed proteins were eluted with 800 μl of acetonitrile:water (80:20) solution. After desalting, the samples were vacuum evaporated and reconstituted with 20 μl of 0.05% formic acid in water. 2 μl of stable-isotope-labelled peptide standard (DPEVRPTSAVAA, Val- 13C5 15N1 at V10, Cellmano Biotech Limited, Anhui, China) was spiked into the samples before the LC-MS/MS analysis and used for instrument quality control.  SWATH-MS analysis LC–MS/MS analyses were performed using a micro-LC Eksigent Technologies (Dublin, OH, USA) system with a stationary phase of a Halo Fused C18 column (0.5 × 100 mm, 2.7 μm; Eksigent Technologies, Dublin, OH, USA). The injection volume was 4.0 μl and the oven temperature was set at 40 °C. The mobile phase was a mixture of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water (A) and 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in acetonitrile (B), eluting at a flow-rate of 15.0 μl/min at an increasing concentration of solvent B from 2% to 40% in 30 min. The LC system was interfaced with a 5600+ TripleTOF system (SCIEX, Concord, Canada) equipped with a DuoSpray Ion Source and CDS (Calibrant Delivery System). Samples used to generate the SWATH-MS spectral library were subjected to the traditional data-dependent acquisition (DDA): the mass spectrometer analysis was performed using a mass range of 100–1500 Da (TOF scan with an accumulation time of 0.25 s), followed by a MS/MS product ion scan from 200 to 1250 Da (accumulation time of 5.0 ms) with the abundance threshold set at 30 cps (35 candidate ions can be monitored during every cycle). The samples were then subjected to cyclic data independent analysis (DIA) of the mass spectra, using a 25-Da window: the mass spectrometer was operated such that a 50-ms survey scan (TOF-MS) was performed and subsequent MS/MS experiments were performed on all precursors. These MS/MS experiments were performed in a cyclic manner using an accumulation time of 40 ms per 25-Da swath (36 swaths in total) for a total cycle time of 1.5408 s. The ions were fragmented for each MS/MS experiment in the collision cell using the rolling collision energy. The MS data were acquired with Analyst TF 1.7 (SCIEX, Concord, Canada). Three instrumental replicates for each sample were subjected to the DIA analysis (111; Albanese et al., 2016).

### Data Protocol
Protein data search  The MS files were searched using Protein Pilot (SCIEX, Concord, Canada), Mascot (Matrix Science Inc., Boston, USA) and DIA-Umpire. Samples were input in the Protein Pilot software v. 4.2 (AB SCIEX, Concord, Canada), which employs the Paragon algorithm, with the following parameters: cysteine alkylation, digestion by trypsin, no special factors and False Discovery Rate at 1%. The UniProt/Swiss-Prot reviewed database containing C. cellulovorans proteins (NCBI_Clostridium_cellulovorans743B, version 30102017, 4278 sequence entries) was used for protein identification. The Mascot search was performed on Mascot v. 2.4, the digestion enzyme selected was trypsin, with 2 missed cleavages and a search tolerance of 50 ppm was specified for the peptide mass tolerance, and 0.1 Da for the MS/MS tolerance. The charges of the peptides to search for were set to 2 +, 3 + and 4 +, and the search was set on monoisotopic mass. The instrument was set to ESI-QUAD-TOF and the following modifications were specified for the search: carbamidomethyl cysteines as fixed modification and oxidized methionine as variable modification. The DIA files were converted to pseudo-MS/MS spectra with DIA-Umpire software and were searched as DDA files on Mascot and Protein Pilot using the same parameters used for the DDA search.  Protein quantification The label-free quantification was performed by integrating the extracted ion chromatogram of all the unique ions for a given peptide. SwathXtend was employed to build an integrated assay library, built with the DDA acquisitions, using a protein FDR threshold of 1%. The quantification was carried out with PeakView 2.0 and MarkerView 1.2. (Sciex, Concord, ON, Canada). Six peptides per protein and six transitions per peptide were extracted from the SWATH files. Shared peptides were excluded as well as peptides with modifications. Peptides with FDR lower than 1.0% were exported in MarkerView for the t-test. The up- and down-regulated proteins were selected using p-value < 0.05 and fold change > 1.5

### Publication Abstract
Clostridium cellulovorans is among the most promising candidates for consolidated bioprocessing (CBP) of cellulosic biomass to liquid biofuels (ethanol, butanol). C. cellulovorans metabolizes all the main plant polysaccharides and mainly produces butyrate. Since most butyrate and butanol biosynthetic reactions from acetyl-CoA are common, introduction of single heterologous alcohol/aldehyde dehydrogenase can divert the branching-point intermediate (butyryl-CoA) towards butanol production in this strain. However, engineering C. cellulovorans metabolic pathways towards industrial utilization requires better understanding of its metabolism. The present study aimed at improving comprehension of cellulose metabolism in C. cellulovorans by comparing growth kinetics, substrate consumption/product accumulation and whole-cell soluble proteome (data available via ProteomeXchange, identifier PXD015487) with those of the same strain grown on a soluble carbohydrate, glucose, as the main carbon source. Growth substrate-dependent modulations of the central metabolism were detected, including regulation of several glycolytic enzymes, fermentation pathways (e.g. hydrogenase, pyruvate formate lyase, phosphate transacetylase) and nitrogen assimilation (e.g. glutamate dehydrogenase). Overexpression of hydrogenase and increased ethanol production by glucose-grown bacteria suggest a more reduced redox state. Higher energy expenditure seems to occur in cellulose-grown C. cellulovorans (likely related to overexpression and secretion of (hemi-)cellulases), which induces up-regulation of ATP synthetic pathways, e.g. acetate production and ATP synthase. SIGNIFICANCE: C. cellulovorans can metabolize all the main plant polysaccharides (cellulose, hemicelluloses and pectins) and, unlike other well established cellulolytic microorganisms, can produce butyrate. C. cellulovorans is therefore among the most attractive candidates for direct fermentation of lignocellulose to high-value chemicals and, especially, n-butanol, i.e. one of the most promising liquid biofuels for the future. Recent studies aimed at engineering n-butanol production in C. cellulovorans represent milestones towards production of biofuels through one-step fermentation of lignocellulose but also indicated that more detailed understanding of the C. cellulovorans central carbon metabolism is essential to refine metabolic engineering strategies towards improved n-butanol production in this strain. The present study helped identifying key genes associated with specific catabolic reactions and indicated modulations of central carbon metabolism (including redox and energy balance) associated with cellulose consumption. This information will be useful to determine key enzymes and possible metabolic bottlenecks to be addressed towards improved metabolic engineering of this strain.

### Keywords
Ethanol, Alcohol dehydrogenase, Acetate, Glucose, Pyruvate phosphate dikinase, Atp

### Affiliations
Proteomics and Metabolomics Lab, Department of Translational Medicine (DiMeT), Center for Translational Research on Autoimmune & Allergic Diseases - CAAD, University of Piemonte Orientale, Novara (NO), Italy
University of Eastern Piedmont 

### Submitter
Marcello Manfredi

### Lab Head
Dr Marcello Manfredi
Proteomics and Metabolomics Lab, Department of Translational Medicine (DiMeT), Center for Translational Research on Autoimmune & Allergic Diseases - CAAD, University of Piemonte Orientale, Novara (NO), Italy


