### Accession
PXD017922

### Title
Trans-splicing of class I HLA bound peptides diversifies the immunopeptidome

### Description
The diversity of peptides displayed by class I HLA plays an essential role in T cell immunity. The peptide repertoire is extended by various post-translational modifications, including cis-splicing of peptides from the same protein. Here, we have applied a novel bioinformatic workflow and demonstrate that spliced-peptides are also generated through trans-splicing (fusion of peptide segments from distinct antigens) and their abundance challenges current models of proteasomal-splicing that predict cis-splicing as the most probable outcome. These trans-spliced peptides display canonical HLA binding motif sequence features. These results highlight the unanticipated diversity of the immunopeptidome and have important implications for autoimmunity, vaccine design and immunotherapy.

### Sample Protocol
C1R cells expressing different HLAs were lysed. Following lysis, peptide-HLA complexes were affinity purified by anti-HLA- antibody (w6/32). Affinity purified HLA molecules and their peptide cargo were separated using reversed-phase chromatography and peptides were subsequently analysed using mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Raw data (.wiff from Sciex TripleTof 5600) was searched using PEAKS Studion (v8.5) using following parameters: database: Human proteins from UniProt/SwissProt ,Oxidation of methionine and deamidation of asparagine or glutamine no cysteine alkylation, no enzyme digestion (considers all peptide bond cleavages), instrument-specific settings for TripleTOF 5600+ (MS tolerance 15 ppm, MS/MS tolerance 0.1 Da, charge state +2 to +5), detected peptide threshold 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
The diversity of peptides displayed by class I human leukocyte antigen (HLA) plays an essential role in T cell immunity. The peptide repertoire is extended by various posttranslational modifications, including proteasomal splicing of peptide fragments from distinct regions of an antigen to form nongenomically templated cis-spliced sequences. Previously, it has been suggested that a fraction of the immunopeptidome constitutes such cis-spliced peptides; however, because of computational limitations, it has not been possible to assess whether trans-spliced peptides (i.e., the fusion of peptide segments from distinct antigens) are also bound and presented by HLA molecules, and if so, in what proportion. Here, we have developed and applied a bioinformatic workflow and demonstrated that trans-spliced peptides are presented by HLA-I, and their abundance challenges current models of proteasomal splicing that predict cis-splicing as the most probable outcome. These trans-spliced peptides display canonical HLA-binding sequence features and are as frequently identified as cis-spliced peptides found bound to a number of different HLA-A and HLA-B allotypes. Structural analysis reveals that the junction between spliced peptides is highly solvent exposed and likely to participate in T cell receptor interactions. These results highlight the unanticipated diversity of the immunopeptidome and have important implications for autoimmunity, vaccine design, and immunotherapy.

### Keywords
Post-translational modification, Spliced peptides, Immunopeptidome, Hla, Mass spectrometry, Proteasome

### Affiliations
Deputy Head (Research), Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Head Immunoproteomics Laboratory Monash University, Clayton Campus Clayton 3800 Victoria Australia
Monash University

### Submitter
Pouya Faridi

### Lab Head
Dr Anthony Purcell
Deputy Head (Research), Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Head Immunoproteomics Laboratory Monash University, Clayton Campus Clayton 3800 Victoria Australia


