### Accession
PXD030172

### Title
Lysosomal fractions from MEFs under amino acid starvation and restimulation

### Description
Magnetically enriched lysosomal fractions from MEFs were prepared from cells in three different conditions: full media (control), 1 h amino acid starvation and 30 min amino acid restimulation.

### Sample Protocol
Lysosomes were loaded with ferromagnetic nanoparticles (DexoMAG C, Liquids Research) by incubating MEFs for 14 h in medium + 10% DexoMAG, 10 mM HEPES. To obtain the post-nuclear supernatants (PNS), nuclei were pelleted by centrifugation at 200 g for 10 min. To obtain an enriched lysosomal fraction, DexoMAG-loaded organelles were isolated over an LS MACS column (Miltenyi). Proteins were run for 0.5 cm into an SDS-PAGE gel. After Coomassie staining, the total sample was cut out and used for subsequent digestion using trypsin according to Shevchenko et al. (A. Shevchenko et al., In-gel digestion for mass spectrometric characterization of proteins and proteomes. Nature protocols 1, 2856-2860, 2006), adapted to a DigestPro MSi robotic system (INTAVIS Bioanalytical Instruments AG). Peptides were re-suspended in loading buffer containing 2.5 % hexafluoro-2-propanol, 0.1 % TFA in water. Analysis was carried out on an Ultimate 3000 UPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) directly connected to a Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer. Analysis time and method was chosen to accompany expected sample complexity and set to 90 min. Prior to the analytical separation, peptides were online desalted on a trapping cartridge (Acclaim PepMap300 C18, 5 µm, 300 Å wide pore; Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 3 min using 30 µl/min flow of 0.05 % TFA in water. The analytical multistep gradient was carried out on a nanoEase MZ Peptide analytical column (300 Å, 1.7 µm, 75 µm x 200 mm, Waters) using solvent A (0.1 % formic acid in water) and solvent B (0.1 % formic acid in acetonitrile). The concentration of B was linearly ramped from 2 % to 38 % for with respect to the total analysis procedure (72 min), followed by a quick ramp to 95 % B. After two minutes the concentration of B was lowered back to 2 % and a 10 min equilibration step appended. Eluting peptides were analyzed in the mass spectrometer using data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. A full scan at 120k resolution, 375-1500 mz/, 3e6 AGC target, 54 ms maxIT, was followed by up to 18 MS/MS scans. Peptide features were isolated with a window of 1.6 m/z and fragmented using 27 % NCE. Fragment spectra were recorded at 15k resolution, 1e5 AGC target and 22 ms maxIT. Unassigned and singly charged eluting features were excluded from fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was carried out by MaxQuant (version 1.6.14.0, S. Tyanova et al., The MaxQuant computational platform for mass spectrometry-based shotgun proteomics. Nature protocols 11, 2301-2319, 2016) using an organism specific database extracted from Uniprot.org under default settings (download 2020-02-26; number of entries 55435). Identification FDR cutoffs were 0.01 on peptide level and 0.01 on protein level. The match between runs option was enabled to transfer peptide identifications across RAW files based on accurate retention time and m/z. LFQ quantification was done using a label free quantification approach based on the MaxLFQ algorithm (J. Cox et al., Accurate proteome-wide label-free quantification by delayed normalization and maximal peptide ratio extraction, termed MaxLFQ. Molecular & cellular proteomics : MCP 13, 2513-2526, 2014). A minimum of 2 quantified peptides per protein was required for protein quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Bacteriophage T7 RNA polymerase (T7 RNAP) is widely used for synthesizing RNA molecules with synthetic modifications and unnatural base pairs (UBPs) for a variety of biotechnical and therapeutic applications. However, the molecular basis of transcription recognition of UBPs by T7 RNAP remains poorly understood. Here we focused on a representative UBP, 7-(2-thienyl)-imidazo[4,5-b]pyridine (Ds) and pyrrole 2-carbaldehyde (Pa), and investigated how the hydrophobic Ds-Pa pair is recognized by T7 RNAP. Our kinetic assays revealed that T7 RNAP selectively recognizes the Ds or Pa base in the templates and preferentially incorporates their cognate unnatural base nucleotide substrate (PaTP or DsTP) over natural NTPs. Our structural studies reveal that T7 RNAP recognizes the unnatural substrates at the pre-insertion state in a distinct manner compared to natural substrates. These results provide mechanistic insights into transcription recognition of UBP by T7 RNAP and provide valuable information for designing the next generation of UBPs.

### Keywords
Mefs, Mouse, Amino acid starvation, Lysosomes

### Affiliations
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ)
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ) Cell Signaling and Metabolism Group

### Submitter
Wilhelm Palm

### Lab Head
Dr Wilhelm Palm
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ) Cell Signaling and Metabolism Group


