### Accession
PXD028992

### Title
Hexokinase 2 is a transcriptional targetHexokinase 2 is a transcriptional target and a positive modulator of AHR signalling and a positive modulator of AHR signalling

### Description
The Aryl Hydrocarbon Receptor (AHR) regulates the expression of numerous genes in response to activation by agonists including xenobiotics. Although it is well appreciated that environmental signals and cell intrinsic features may modulate this transcriptional response, how it is mechanistically achieved remains poorly understood. We show that Hexokinase 2 (HK2) a metabolic enzyme fuelling cancer cell growth, is a transcriptional target of AHR as well as a modulator of its activity. Expression of HK2 is positively regulated by AHR upon exposure to agonists both in human cells and in mice lung tissues. Conversely, over-expression of HK2 regulates the abundance of many proteins involved in the regulation of AHR signalling and these changes are linked with altered AHR expression levels and transcriptional activity. HK2 expression also shows a negative correlation with AHR promoter methylation in tumours, and these tumours with high HK2 expression and low AHR methylation are associated with a worse overall survival in patients. In sum, our study provides novel insights into how AHR signalling is regulated which may help our understanding of the context-specific effects of this pathway and may have implications in cancer.

### Sample Protocol
Digestion: cells were lysed during 5 min at 95°C in 150 µL 100 mM Tris/HCl pH8.5, 2% SDS. Protein concentration was determined using SDS PAGE of an aliquot and Imagelab software (Bio-Rad Laboratories). 50 µg of proteins from each lysate were reduced and alkylated with 10mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and 50 mM chloroacetamide for 5 min at 95°C. After cooling to room temperature, extracts were diluted with 300 µL 8M Urea, 50mM Tris/HCl pH 8.5, transferred onto 30 kDa centrifugal filters and prepared for FASP digestion as described previously (64). Proteins were digested overnight at 37°C with 1µg trypsin (V511A; Promega). Peptide desalting: peptides were desalted on C18 StageTips, manufactured by stacking six layers of C18 reverse-phase from a disk of 3M Empore Octadecyl C18 High Performance Extraction Disk into a 200 μL micropipet tip. Peptide fractionation: peptides were then separated in 5 fractions using strong cation exchange (SCX) resin (65). Briefly, peptides were loaded into pipette-tip columns made by stacking six layers of a 3M Empore cation extraction disk into a 200 μL micropipet tip. Column conditioning was performed using acetonitrile (ACN). We used 0.1% Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) for column equilibration. Samples acidified with TFA were loaded on the column and washed with 0.1% TFA. Peptides were finally successively eluted using 20% ACN, 0.05% formic acid, ammonium acetate at 75mM, 125mM, 200mM, 300mM. The 5th fraction was eluted in 1.4% NH4OH, 80% ACN. LC-MSMS: after speed-vacuum drying, fractions were solubilized in 10 µL of 0.1% TFA, 10% ACN. Liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry analyses were performed on an U3000 RSLC nanoflow-HPLC system coupled to a Q-Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (both from Thermo Fisher Scientific). 1µL of each fraction were concentrated and washed on a C18 reverse-phase precolumn (3μm particle size, 100 Å pore size, 75 μm inner diameter, 2 cm length, Thermo Fischer Scientific), then separated using a C18 reverse-phase analytical column (2 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size, 75 μm inner diameter, 25 cm length from Thermo Fischer Scientific) with a 3h gradient starting from 99% of solvent A (0.1% formic acid) to 55% of solvent B (80% ACN and 0.085% formic acid). The mass spectrometer acquired data throughout the elution process and operated in a data-dependent scheme with full MS scans acquired, followed by up to 10 successive MS/MS HCD-fragmentations on the most abundant ions detected. Settings for Q-Exactive were: full MS automated gain control (AGC) target 1.106 with 60ms maximum ion injection time (MIIT) and resolution of 70 000. The MS scans spanned from 350 to 1500 Th. Precursor selection window was set at 2 Th. HCD Normalized Collision Energy (NCE) was set at 27% and MS/MS scan resolution was set at 17 500 with AGC target 1.105 within 60ms MIIT. Dynamic exclusion time was set to 30 s and spectra were recorded in profile mode. Identification and quantification: the mass spectrometry data were analyzed using Maxquant version 1.6.2.6 (66). The database used was a concatenation of human sequences from the Uniprot-Swissprot database (Uniprot, release 2018-06) and an incremented list of contaminants. The enzyme specificity was trypsin. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance to 20 ppm. Carbamidomethylation of cysteins was set as constant modification and acetylation of protein N-terminus and oxidation of methionines were set as variable modifications. Second peptide search was allowed and minimal length of peptides was set at 7 amino acids. False discovery rate (FDR) was kept below 1% on both peptides and proteins. Label-free protein quantification (LFQ) was done using both unique and razor peptides. At least 2 ratio counts were required for LFQ. All experiments were analyzed simultaneously with the ‘match between runs’ option with a match time window of 0.7 min and an alignment time window of 20 min.

### Data Protocol
Proteome data analysis: Using Perseus software (version 1.6.2.3) (67) false proteins discovery were filtered out, to wit proteins that match with contaminant, to the reverse database and proteins identified only with modified peptide, leading to a matrix of 7278 proteins. LFQ intensity data were transformed into log2 and a Student’s t-test was performed using the Benjamini-Hochberg False Discovery Rate to identify the differentially expressed protein. Proteins present in at least 3/4 replicates only in U2OS or U2OS-GFP-HK2 cells were manually given the scores: P-value = 0 and |log ratio| = 10 (i.e log2 (mean LFQ intensity in U2OS) – log2 (mean LFQ intensity in U2OS-GFP-HK2)). Then Canonical Pathways and Upstream Regulator analyses were generated through the use of Ingenuity Pathway Analysis software IPA (QIAGEN Inc., https://www.qiagenbioinformatics.com/products/ingenuitypathway-analysis) version 65367011, considering proteins with a cut-off P-value < 0.001 and an absolute |log ratio| > 1. Proteome data analysis: Using Perseus software (version 1.6.2.3) (67) false proteins discovery were filtered out, to wit proteins that match with contaminant, to the reverse database and proteins identified only with modified peptide, leading to a matrix of 7278 proteins. LFQ intensity data were transformed into log2 and a Student’s t-test was performed using the Benjamini-Hochberg False Discovery Rate to identify the differentially expressed protein. Proteins present in at least 3/4 replicates only in U2OS or U2OS-GFP-HK2 cells were manually given the scores: P-value = 0 and |log ratio| = 10 (i.e log2 (mean LFQ intensity in U2OS) – log2 (mean LFQ intensity in U2OS-GFP-HK2)). Then Canonical Pathways and Upstream Regulator analyses were generated through the use of Ingenuity Pathway Analysis software IPA (QIAGEN Inc., https://www.qiagenbioinformatics.com/products/ingenuitypathway-analysis) version 65367011, considering proteins with a cut-off P-value < 0.001 and an absolute |log ratio| > 1.

### Publication Abstract
The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) regulates the expression of numerous genes in response to activation by agonists including xenobiotics. Although it is well appreciated that environmental signals and cell intrinsic features may modulate this transcriptional response, how it is mechanistically achieved remains poorly understood. We show that hexokinase 2 (HK2) a metabolic enzyme fuelling cancer cell growth, is a transcriptional target of AHR as well as a modulator of its activity. Expression of HK2 is positively regulated by AHR upon exposure to agonists both in human cells and in mice lung tissues. Conversely, over-expression of HK2 regulates the abundance of many proteins involved in the regulation of AHR signalling and these changes are linked with altered AHR expression levels and transcriptional activity. HK2 expression also shows a negative correlation with AHR promoter methylation in tumours, and these tumours with high HK2 expression and low AHR methylation are associated with a worse overall survival in patients. In sum, our study provides novel insights into how AHR signalling is regulated which may help our understanding of the context-specific effects of this pathway and may have implications in cancer.

### Keywords
Human; iosteosarcoma; hexokinase 2; ahr

### Affiliations
INSERM U1016, Institut Cochin, Faculté de Médecine, Paris, FRANCE
INSERM U1016

### Submitter
Benoit Miotto

### Lab Head
Dr Benoit Miotto
INSERM U1016, Institut Cochin, Faculté de Médecine, Paris, FRANCE


