### Accession
PXD003188

### Title
Proteogenomic analysis in hibernating mammal suggests contribution of skeletal muscle physiology to hibernation phenotype

### Description
Mammalian hibernation is a strategy employed by many species to survive fluctuations in resource availability and environmental conditions.  Hibernating mammals endure conditions of dramatically depressed heart rate, body temperature, and oxygen consumption; yet show no typical pathological response. Because of the high abundance and metabolic cost of skeletal muscle, not only must it adjust to the constraints of hibernation, but is positioned to play a more active role in the initiation and maintenance of the hibernation phenotype.  In this study, MS/MS proteomic data were searched against a custom database of transcriptomic and genomic protein predictions built using the platform GalaxyP.  This proteogenomic approach allows for a thorough investigation of skeletal muscle protein expression throughout the circannual cycle of the 13-lined ground squirrel.  Of the 1,563 proteins identified by these methods, 232 were differentially expressed.  Not only do these data support previously reported physiological transitions, they also offer insight into specific mechanisms of how their muscles might be reducing nitrogenous waste, preserving mass and function, and signaling to other tissues.  Additionally, the combination of proteomic and transcriptomic data provides unique opportunities for determining the level of post-transcriptional regulation throughout the year and improving the genomic annotation of this non-model organism.

### Sample Protocol
Animal Models  Thirteen-lined ground squirrels (Ictidomys tridecemlineatus) used in this study were obtained and housed as described previously.9,10  All experimental animal procedures were approved by the University of Minnesota Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee.  The following collection points served to reveal changes in protein expression throughout the circannual cycle:  April Active (APR), August Active (AUG), October active (OCT), January torpor (TOR), January arousal (J-IBA), and March arousal (M-IBA).  Three females and three males were collected at each time point.  A single female sample and a single male sample were eventually pooled to produce 3 samples comprising both sexes.  Physiological state was determined by rectal temperature and animal behavior.  At all time points, animals were anesthetized with isoflourane and sacrificed by decapitation.  The quadriceps muscles were dissected and immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C.  Animals collected for all time points, except TOR, had a body temperature (Tb) of 35-37°C and were observed as being fully awake and active prior to sacrifice.  Torpid animals were collected after a minimum of three days of consecutive torpor, showed no outward signs of arousal, and had a Tb of 5-7°C at the time of sacrifice.   Protein Extraction and iTRAQ labeling  Frozen tissue was ground to a powder under liquid nitrogen.  Tissue was reconstituted in extraction buffer [7M urea, 2M thiourea, 0.4M triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) pH8.5, 20% acetonitrile, and 4mM Tris (2carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP)] at a ratio of 10ml/g.  While remaining on ice, the samples were sonicated with a Branson Digital Sonifier 250 at 30% amplitude for no more than 7 consecutive seconds to avoid carbamylation.  A volume of 150μl of each sample was transferred to a Pressure Cycling Technology tube and capped with a 150μl cap before being placed in the Barocycler NEP2320 (Pressure Biosciences, Inc., South Easton, MA).  Samples underwent 40 cycles of 35 kpsi for 30 seconds followed by 0 psi for 15 seconds.  Following pressure cycling, 200mM methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS) was added to a final concentration of 8mM, mixed, and incubated at room temperature for 15 minutes.  Samples were then transferred to a new 1.5ml microfuge Eppendorf Protein LoBind tube.  Protein concentration was determined by Bradford assay.   Protein from a single male and a single female (50μg each) were pooled to produce samples of 100μg.  This was brought up to a least common volume in protein extraction buffer and MMTS.  Samples were diluted 4-fold with ultrapure water followed by the addition of trypsin (Promega, Madison WI) at a ratio of 35:1 total protein to trypsin.  Samples were incubated at 37°C for 16 hours and then frozen at -80°C for 30 minutes prior to drying by vacuum centrifugation.  After cleaning the samples using normal phase solid phase extraction (SPE) (Extract CleanTM C18 SPE cartridge, Grace-Davidson, Deerfield IL), the elutants were vacuum dried and resuspended in dissolution buffer (0.5M TEAB pH8.5) to a final concentration of 2μg/μl.  iTRAQ® labeling was done per manufacturer’s protocol (AB Sciex, Foster City CA) (see supporting information for labeling strategy).  After labeling, samples were multiplexed and vacuum-dried.  Samples cleaned by normal phase SPE as before and elutants were dried by vacuum centrifuge.   Liquid Chromatography Fractionation and Mass Spectrometry  Labeled samples were resuspended in Buffer A (20mM ammonium formate pH=10 in 98:2 water:acetonitrile) and fractionated offline by high pH C18 reverse-phase chromatography.11  A Shimadzu Promenance HPLC (Shimadzu, Columbia MD) was used with a C18 XBridge column, 150mm × 2.1mm internal diameter, 5μm particle size (Walters Corporation, Milford MA).  Flow rate was 200μl/min with a gradient from 2-35% Buffer B (20mM ammonium formate pH=10 in 10:90 water:acetonitrile) over 60 minutes followed by 35-60% over 5 minutes.  Fractions were collected every 2 minutes and UV absorbances were monitored at 215nm and 280nm.  Peptide-containing fractions were divided into early and late groups, each containing an equal number of fractions.  The first early fraction was concatenated with the first late fraction and so on.  Concatenated samples were dried by vacuum centrifugation, resuspended in load solvent (98:2:0.01 water:acetonitrile:formic acid) and 1-1.5μg aliquots were run on a Velos Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Waltham MA) as described previously with the exception that the higher-energy collisional dissociation activation energy was 20ms.

### Data Protocol
Bioinformatic Analysis  MS/MS spectra were searched using a customized ground squirrel database generated by merging the NCBI annotated genome for the thirteen-lined ground squirrel with RNAseq data generated in this lab10 and a contaminants database (cRAP) containing common or unavoidable MS protein contaminants.  Databases were merged using Paragon Algorithm (V.4.5.0.0) search engines in Protein Pilot (V.4.5, ABSciex, Foster City CA) within the GalaxyP platform (University of Minnesota).  The precursor mass window was set to sub-ppm and MS/MS error tolerance was set at 0.1Da with up to one missed tryptic cleavage.  Eight-plex iTRAQ peptide labeling and cysteine MMTS alkylation were set as fixed modifications.  Search effort was set to thorough and ID focus was set for biological modifications.  All peptides were identified with at least a 95% confidence interval value as specified by the Paragon Algorithm and less than a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) based on forward and reverse searches.  Proteins were considered confidently identified with at least 2 unique peptides and an experiment-wide FDR of no more than 2%.  Relative quantification of proteins was determined by ProteinPilot.  Comparisons were done between consecutive time points throughout the circannual cycle [Figure 1].  A false discovery rate (FDR) of 2% was set by assigning a p-value threshold using the target-decoy method provided in the ProteinPilot Descriptive Statistics Template (ABSciex, Foster City CA).  Based on this established FDR, proteins were considered differentially expressed within a single replicate if they had a p-value of less than .05 for the first and third replicates, and a p-value below .001 for the second replicate.  A protein was considered differentially expressed using all three replicates if at least two of the three replicates were determined to be differentially expressed as stated above and showed similar expression (positive or negative).  Proteins that showed differential expression in conflicting directions were not used for further analysis.  Protein lists were submitted to DAVID for broad functional analysis.    The identification of novel peptides was done largely using the platform GalaxyP.  GalaxyP was used to filter out all peptides identified from the NCBI genome.  The remaining peptides, identified from RNAseq data, were filtered using BLAST-P to search against the NCBI 13-lined ground squirrel non-redundant database.  Identifications made by BLAST-P were further filtered to account for percent of identical amino acids, number of gaps in query, and length of the query relative to the input.  Resulting peptides were searched against the NCBI human database.  Novel peptides identified from this process were checked for good spectral match and the protein sequences were aligned to ground squirrel and human sequences to visualize how the novel peptide differed from the known or predicted sequences.

### Publication Abstract
This study uses advanced proteogenomic approaches in a nonmodel organism to elucidate cardioprotective mechanisms used during mammalian hibernation. Mammalian hibernation is characterized by drastic reductions in body temperature, heart rate, metabolism, and oxygen consumption. These changes pose significant challenges to the physiology of hibernators, especially for the heart, which maintains function throughout the extreme conditions, resembling ischemia and reperfusion. To identify novel cardioadaptive strategies, we merged large-scale RNA-seq data with large-scale iTRAQ-based proteomic data in heart tissue from 13-lined ground squirrels (Ictidomys tridecemlineatus) throughout the circannual cycle. Protein identification and data analysis were run through Galaxy-P, a new multiomic data analysis platform enabling effective integration of RNA-seq and MS/MS proteomic data. Galaxy-P uses flexible, modular workflows that combine customized sequence database searching and iTRAQ quantification to identify novel ground squirrel-specific protein sequences and provide insight into molecular mechanisms of hibernation. This study allowed for the quantification of 2007 identified cardiac proteins, including over 350 peptide sequences derived from previously uncharacterized protein products. Identification of these peptides allows for improved genomic annotation of this nonmodel organism, as well as identification of potential splice variants, mutations, and genome reorganizations that provides insights into novel cardioprotective mechanisms used during hibernation.

### Keywords
Fibromodulin, Hibernation, Proteomics, Galaxy-p, Itraq, Amp –deaminsase 1, Skeletal muscle

### Affiliations
University of Minnesota Duluth
Biology University of Minnesota Duluth

### Submitter
Kyle Anderson

### Lab Head
Dr Matthew T. Andrews
Biology University of Minnesota Duluth


