### Accession
PXD012013

### Title
Methyl ketone production by Pseudomonas putida is enhanced by plant-derived amino acids

### Description
Methyl ketone production by P. putida with A. thaliana and switchgrass hydrolysates obtained by dilute acid pretreatment led to the identification of plant-derived amino acids, rather than mono-aromatics, as key stimulative components of these hydrolysates. Shotgun proteomics indicated that the amino acids had a specific inductive effect on proteins involved in fatty acid biosynthesis, leading to a 9-fold increase in methyl ketone titer when amending glucose-containing minimal medium with a defined set of amino acids.

### Sample Protocol
Protein was extracted from P. putida cell biomass by Methanol/Chloroform precipitation procedure. Proteins were subjected to standard tryptic digestion protocol, and global proteomic analysis was performed using an Agilent 6550 iFunnel Q-TOF mass spectrometer (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA) coupled to an Agilent 1290 UHPLC system.

### Data Protocol
The acquired data were exported as mgf files and searched against the latest P. putida KT2440 protein database and the TOL plasmid with Mascot search engine version 2.3.02 (Matrix Science). The resulting search results were filtered and analyzed by Scaffold v 4.3.0 (Proteome Software Inc.). A total of 876 proteins were found that had at least two peptides identified with 95% confidence in at least one of the biological replicates. The normalized spectral counts of identified proteins were exported for relative quantitative analysis

### Publication Abstract
Plants are an attractive sourceof renewable carbon for conversion to biofuels and bio-based chemicals. Conversion strategies often use a fraction of the biomass, focusing on sugars from cellulose and hemicellulose. Strategies that use plant components, such as aromatics and amino acids, may improve the efficiency of biomass conversion. Pseudomonas putida is a promising host for its ability to metabolize a wide variety of organic compounds. P. putida was engineered to produce methyl ketones, which are promising diesel blendstocks and potential platform chemicals, from glucose and lignin-related aromatics. Unexpectedly, P. putida methyl ketone production using Arabidopsis thaliana hydrolysates was enhanced 2-5-fold compared with sugar controls derived from engineered plants that overproduce lignin-related aromatics. This enhancement was more pronounced (~seven-fold increase) with hydrolysates from nonengineered switchgrass. Proteomic analysis of the methyl ketone-producing P. putida suggested that plant-derived amino acids may be the source of this enhancement. Mass spectrometry-based measurements of plant-derived amino acids demonstrated a high correlation between methyl ketone production and amino acid concentration in plant hydrolysates. Amendment of glucose-containing minimal media with a defined mixture of amino acids similar to those found in the hydrolysates studied led to a nine-fold increase in methyl ketone titer (1.1&#x2009;g/L).

### Keywords
Lignin-related aromatics; methyl ketones; biomass hydrolysates; protein; amino acids.

### Affiliations
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory

### Submitter
Christopher Petzold

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher J. Petzold
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory


