### Accession
PXD024326

### Title
Interactome of Toxoplasma gondii Pre-mRNA 3’ Processing Complexes

### Description
A proper 3’end processing of mRNAs is regarded as one of the regulatory cornerstones of gene expression. In a parasite that must answer to the high regulatory requirements of its multi-host life style, the need is grand for adopting additional means to partition the distinct transcriptional signatures of the closely and tandemly-arranged stage specific genes. In this study, we report on our findings in T. gondii of an m6A-dependent 3’end polyadenylation serving as a transcriptional barrier at these loci. We identify the core polyadenylation complex within T. gondii and establish CPSF4 as a reader for m6A-modified mRNAs, via a YTH domain within its C-terminus, a feature which is shared with plants.

### Sample Protocol
T. gondii extracts from RH∆ku80 cells stably expressing HAFlag-tagged proteins were incubated with anti-FLAG M2 affinity gel (Sigma-Aldrich) for 1 hour at 4°C. Beads were washed with 10-column volumes of BC500 buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 500 mM KCl, 20% glycerol, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT, 0.5% NP-40, and protease inhibitors). Bound polypeptides were eluted stepwise with 250 μg/ml FLAG peptide (Sigma Aldrich) diluted in BC100 buffer. After the identification of elution fractions by SDS-PAGE using silver nitrate revelation (Sigma Aldrich), fractions of interest were precipitated in trichloroacetic acid for 1h at 4°C, centrifuged for 30 min at 14 000g and dried O.N at room temperature. For MS profiling, the entire precipitate was resuspended in 1X SDS-PAGE loading buffer, heated 5 min at 90°C then loaded on Nu PAGE gels. Protein bands were excised from gels stained with colloidal blue (Thermo Fisher Scientific) before in-gel digestion using modified trypsin (Promega, sequencing grade). The resulting peptides were analysed by online nanoliquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (UltiMate 3000 and LTQ- Orbitrap Velos Pro (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for the CPSF1, WDR33, FIP1 et PAP interactomes, and UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano and Q-Exactive Plus (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for the METTL3, METTL14 and WTAP interactomes). The peptides were sampled on a 300 μm × 5 mm Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 5µm, C18 precolumn and separated on a 75 μm × 250 mm Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 μm,  column (Dr. Maisch) using gradients of 25 min for the CPSF1, WDR33, FIP1 et PAP interactomes. For the METTL3, METTL14 and WTAP interactomes, the peptides were sampled on a 300 µm x 5 mm precolumn (PepMap C18, Thermo Scientific) and separated on a 75 µm x 250 mm column (Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 μm, Dr. Maisch) using gradients of 35 min.

### Data Protocol
MS and MS/MS data were acquired using Xcalibur (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides and proteins were identified using Mascot (v.2.7.0) through concomitant searches against the Toxoplasma gondii database (ME49 taxonomy, v.30, downloaded from ToxoDB), the UniProt database (H. sapiens taxonomy, January 2021 version), a homemade database containing the sequences of 250 classical contaminants found in proteomic analyses (human keratins, trypsin, bovine albumin, etc.), and the corresponding reversed databases. Trypsin was chosen as the enzyme and two missed cleavages were allowed. Precursor and fragment mass error tolerances were respectively set at 10 ppm and 0.6 Da for LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro data and 10 ppm and 20 ppm for Q-Exactive Plus data. Peptide modifications allowed during the search were: carbamidomethyl (C, fixed), acetyl (protein N-term, variable) and oxidation (M, variable). The Proline software was then used to perform a compilation and grouping of the protein groups identified in the different bands. Proline  was also used to filter the results: conservation of rank 1 peptide spectrum matches (PSMs), peptide length ≥ 6 amino acids, PSM score ≥ 25, false discovery rate of peptide-spectrum-match identifications < 1% as calculated on peptide-spectrum-match scores by employing the reverse database strategy, and a minimum of 1 specific peptide per identified protein group.

### Publication Abstract
Correct 3'end processing of mRNAs is one of the regulatory cornerstones of gene expression. In a parasite that must adapt to the regulatory requirements of its multi-host life style, there is a need to adopt additional means to partition the distinct transcriptional signatures of the closely and tandemly arranged stage-specific genes. In this study, we report our findings in <i>T. gondii</i> of an m6A-dependent 3'end polyadenylation serving as a transcriptional barrier at these <i>loci</i>. We identify the core polyadenylation complex within <i>T. gondii</i> and establish CPSF4 as a reader for m6A-modified mRNAs, via a YTH domain within its C-terminus, a feature which is shared with plants. We bring evidence of the specificity of this interaction both biochemically, and by determining the crystal structure at high resolution of the <i>T. gondii</i> CPSF4-YTH in complex with an m6A-modified RNA. We show that the loss of m6A, both at the level of its deposition or its recognition is associated with an increase in aberrantly elongated chimeric mRNAs emanating from impaired transcriptional termination, a phenotype previously noticed in the plant model <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i>. Nanopore direct RNA sequencing shows the occurrence of transcriptional read-through breaching into downstream repressed stage-specific genes, in the absence of either CPSF4 or the m6A RNA methylase components in both <i>T. gondii</i> and <i>A. thaliana</i>. Taken together, our results shed light on an essential regulatory mechanism coupling the pathways of m6A metabolism directly to the cleavage and polyadenylation processes, one that interestingly seem to serve, in both <i>T. gondii</i> and <i>A. thaliana</i>, as a guardian against aberrant transcriptional read-throughs.

### Keywords
Toxoplasma gondii, Nanolc-ms/ms, Interactomics, Pre-mrna processing, 3'utr

### Affiliations
EDyP

### Submitter
Yohann Couté

### Lab Head
Dr Virginie Brun
EDyP


