### Accession
PXD035777

### Title
Adaptor molecule of DNA methylation in IECs

### Description
We previously reported that gut microbiota induce de novo DNA methylation of the TLR4 gene in intestinal epithelial cells. Since DNA methyltransferase (DNMT) 3 mediates the transfer of methyl groups to any gene undergoing de novo methylation, the question of how gut microbiota induce the recruitment of DNMT3 to specific genes, including TLR4, remains to be addressed. In this study, we tried to identify an adaptor molecule that recruits DNMT3b to the TLR4 gene by comparing expression of DNMT3-interacting proteins between IEC lines with hypermethylated and hypomethylated TLR4 gene.

### Sample Protocol
Nuclear extracts prepared from HCT116 and SW480 cells were immunoprecipitated with anti-DNMT3b antibody. Immunoprecipitated proteins were separated by sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and silver-stained. The stained bands were excised from the gel, destained, reduced, and alkylated, followed by tryptic digestion. After drying using a centrifugal evaporator, the product was dissolved in 0.1 % formic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis using Advance LC and Q Exactive.

### Data Protocol
The data obtained were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 2.1 software to search against the NCBI database using Sequent HT.

### Publication Abstract
The intestine is inhabited by a large number of commensal bacteria that are immunologically non-self, potentially causing inflammation. However, in a healthy intestine, inflammation is strictly controlled at low levels to maintain homeostasis. We previously reported that the gut microbiota induce DNA methylation of the gene encoding Toll-like receptor (TLR) 4, a pattern recognition receptor that recognizes lipopolysaccharides of gram-negative bacteria, in colonic epithelial cells, suggesting its role in controlling intestinal inflammation. However, there remains a question of how gut microbiota cause methylation of only specific genes including TLR4, despite the fact that DNA methyltransferase (DNMT) is common to all genes targeted for methylation. Here, we identified RBM14 as an adaptor molecule that recruits DNMT to the TLR4 gene. RBM14 was shown to bind DNMT3 and be expressed at significantly higher levels in an intestinal epithelial cell (IEC) line with hypermethylated TLR4 gene than in an IEC line with hypomethylated TLR4 gene. In addition, RBM14 interacted with DNA regions of the TLR4 gene, and knockdown of RBM14 suppressed DNA methylation of the TLR4 gene in IECs. Furthermore, RBM14 expression was higher in colonic epithelial cells of conventional mice than in those of germ-free mice. Collectively, these results indicate that the gut microbiota induce methylation of the TLR4 gene in colonic epithelial cells by upregulating RBM14, which can recruit DNMT3 to the gene. The regulation of adaptor molecules such as RBM14, which bind to specific target genes and recruit DNMT, can explain, at least in part, how gut microbiota contribute to the maintenance of intestinal homeostasis through epigenetic control of specific gene expression in IECs.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Human intestinal epithelial cell lines

### Affiliations
Nihon University
Department of Applied Biological Science, College of Bioresource Sciences, Nihon University

### Submitter
Kyoko Takahashi

### Lab Head
Dr Kyoko Takahashi
Department of Applied Biological Science, College of Bioresource Sciences, Nihon University


