### Accession
PXD015197

### Title
Phosphoproteomics to uncover phosphorylation substrates changes when serine/threonine protein kinase PknA and PknB depletion

### Description
The Mycobacterium tuberculosis eukaryotic-like serine/threonine protein kinase (STPKs) PknA and PknB regulate several processes required for cell growth, both kinase have been found to be and can be investigated by using the conditional mutant. In the present study, we created the M. tuberculosis kinase PknA/ PknB depletion mutant and performed the phosphoproteomics to uncover phosphorylation substrates changes when PknA/ PknB depletion.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were reduced , alkylated , and digested with sequence grade trypsin overnight. Digested peptides were purified with a c18 column. Purified peptides were enriched for phosphorylated peptides using an online IMAC column using an HPLC system. The enriched phosphorylated peptides were again purified with c18 column. The purified phosphorylated peptides were subjected to LC MSMS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were searched with MaxQuant version 1.5.2.8 using M. tuberculosis H37RV ​ database. Evidence file from the MaxQuant output was used to extract identified peptides. The modified sequence column was used to calculate the average intensity of each modified peptide.

### Publication Abstract
The Mycobacterium tuberculosis Ser/Thr protein kinases PknA and PknB are essential for growth and have been proposed as possible drug targets. We used a titratable conditional depletion system to investigate the functions of these kinases. Depletion of PknA or PknB or both kinases resulted in growth arrest, shortening of cells, and time-dependent loss of acid-fast staining with a concomitant decrease in mycolate synthesis and accumulation of trehalose monomycolate. Depletion of PknA and/or PknB resulted in markedly increased susceptibility to &#x3b2;-lactam antibiotics, and to the key tuberculosis drug rifampin. Phosphoproteomic analysis showed extensive changes in protein phosphorylation in response to PknA depletion and comparatively fewer changes with PknB depletion. These results identify candidate substrates of each kinase and suggest specific and coordinate roles for PknA and PknB in regulating multiple essential physiologies. These findings support these kinases as targets for new antituberculosis drugs and provide a valuable resource for targeted investigation of mechanisms by which protein phosphorylation regulates pathways required for growth and virulence in M. tuberculosis.

### Keywords
Mycobacterium tuberculosis; serine/threonine protein kinase (stpks) pkna and pknb; phosphoproteomics

### Affiliations
Boston Children's Hospital

### Submitter
Saima Ahmed

### Lab Head
Dr Hanno Steen
Boston Children's Hospital


