### Accession
PXD046734

### Title
Phosphoprotein dynamics of interacting tumor and T cells by HySic

### Description
Functional interactions between cytotoxic T cells and tumor cells are central to anti-cancer immunity. Some of the proteins involved, particularly immune checkpoints expressed by T cells, serve as promising clinical targets in immunotherapy. However, our understanding of the complexity and dynamics of the interactions between tumor cells and T cells is only rudimentary. Here we present HySic (for Hybrid quantification of SILAC (Stable Isotope Labelling by Amino acids in Cell culture)-labeled interacting cells) as an innovative method to quantify protein and phosphorylation dynamics between and within physically interacting (heterotypic) cells. We show that co-cultured HLA/antigen/TCR-matched tumor and T cells engage in stable interactions, allowing for in-depth HySic analysis. This method does not require physical separation of the two cell types for subsequent MS proteome and phosphoproteome measurements using label-free quantification (LFQ). We demonstrate that HySic can be used to identify proteins whose abundance or activation status changes upon interactions between T cells and tumor cells. We validated HySic with established signal transduction pathways, including IFN. Using HySic we also identified the RHO/RAC/PAK1 signaling pathway to be activated upon T cell:tumor cell interaction. Pharmacologic inhibition of PAK1 sensitized tumor cells to T cell killing. Thus, HySic is a simple method to study short-term protein signaling dynamics in physically interacting cells, which can be easily extended to other biological systems.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC labelling: Tumor cell lines were cultured in “Heavy” 8K10R medium consisting of RPMI 1640 Medium for SILAC (88365, Thermofisher) with 10% dialyzed fetal bovine serum (Fisher Scientific, 15605639), 100U/ml Penicillin-Streptomycin (Invitrogen, 15140-122), 0.04 mg/L proline (Sigma Aldrich, P5607), 100ug/ml L-arginine:HCL 13C6, 99%; 15N4, 99% (Cambridge isotope laboratories, CNLM-539-H-0.25) and 40mg/ml L-lysine:2HCL 3,3,4,4,5,5,6,6-D8, 98% (Cambridge isotope laboratories, CNLM-539-H-0.25). Cells were grown in this medium for at least 5 doublings before testing isotope incorporation by MS. T cell:tumor co-culture with SILAC: CD8 T cells were isolated and transduced as described previously (David W. Vredevoogd et al., 2019). Briefly, CD8 T cells were isolated with Dynabeads from PBMCs from healthy donors, activated with αCD3 and αCD28 antibodies (eBioscience, 5 μg per well) for 48h and transduced with a MART-1 specific TCR by spinfection. Stable-isotope labelled tumor cells were counted and seeded at 3x106 cells per 10 cm petri dish. The next day, 3x106 MART-1-transduced T cells were added and incubated for the indicated hours (2, 4 or 6) in “Intermediate” 4K6R medium consisting of RPMI 1640 Medium for SILAC (88365, Thermofisher) with 10% dialyzed fetal bovine serum (15605639, Fisher Scientific), 100U/ml Penicillin-Streptomycin (Invitrogen, 15140-122), 0.04 mg/L proline (Sigma Aldrich, P5607), 100ug/ml L-arginine:HCL 13C6, 99% (Cambridge isotope laboratories, CLM-2265-H-0.1) and 40mg/ml L-lysine:2HCL 4,4,5,5-D4, 96-98% (Cambridge isotope laboratories, DLM-2640). After co-culture, T cells were washed away, spun down at 1700 rpm for 5 min and washed with PBS. Tumor cells were washed 2x PBS, scrapped in 1 ml PBS and pelleted by spin down at 1500 rpm for 5 min and combined together with the corresponding T cell samples recovered from the media.  HySic mass spectrometry sample preparation: Cell pellets were resuspended in 300 uL of 1%(w/v) sodium deoxycholate (SDC) lysis buffer (100mM Tris pH 8.0, 10mM Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP), 40mM chloroacetamide, phosphatase inhibitor (PhosSTOP, Roche), and protease inhibitor (complete mini EDTA-free, Roche). Resuspended samples were boiled for 5 min at 95oC and sonicated for 15 min in the Bioruptor (Diagenode) at 30 sec on, 30 sec off cycles. Lysates were clarified by centrifugation (20,000 x g for 10 min) and protein concentration was determined using a Bradford protein assay. For each sample, 210 ug of protein was digested using Lys C (Wako) at an enzyme:protein ratio of 1:100 and trypsin (Sigma) at 1:50 ratio overnight at 37 oC. Samples were acidified by addition of formic acid (FA) to a final concentration of 2% (v/v). Samples were centrifuged (20,000 x g for 10 min) and desalted using 5 uL C18 cartridges on the AssayMap BRAVO platform (Agilent Technologies). For each sample, 10 ug of digested protein was saved for proteome analysis and the remaining 200 ug of digested protein was enriched for phosphopeptides using 5 uL Fe(III)NTA cartridges on the AssayMap BRAVO platform, as described previously (Post et al., 2017). Briefly, samples were dissolved in 200 µL loading buffer (80% acetonitrile (ACN) / 0.1% TFA). Fe(III)-NTA 5 μL cartridges were primed with 200 μL of 0.1% TFA in ACN and equilibrated with 250 μL of loading buffer. Then, the column was loaded the samples at a loading speed of 5 µL/min. The columns were washed with 250 μL loading buffer and eluted with 35 μL of 5% ammonia solution into 35 μL of 10% FA. All elusions were dried in a vacuum centrifuge and resuspended in 2% FA for LC-MS injection. For phosphopeptide elutions, samples were injected twice when possible.  Generation of ‘T0’ control samples: For ‘T0’ samples, 8K10R labeled tumor cells were incubated for four hours in 4K6R media, without T cells, to establish an internal control for background translation. Following cell lysis, tumor T0 samples were mixed with lysed T cells (labeled 0K0R) to create an artificially mixed proteome sample. This mixed T0 sample possessed a comparable MS1 profile to 2h, 4h, and 6h co-culture lysates, which was necessary for subsequent LFQ analysis.

### Data Protocol
HySic mass spectrometry data acquisition: Proteome and phosphoproteome data was acquired on either an Orbitrap Exploris 480 MS (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an UltiMate 3000 UHPLC (Thermo Scientific) fitted with a C18 trapping column (PepMap100, 5um, 100A, 5mm x 300um; Thermo Scientiifc) and a homemade C18 analytical column (120 EC-C18, 2.7uM, 50 cm x 75um; Agilent Poroshell) or acquired on an Orbitrap Q Exactive H-FX MS (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Agilent 1290 Infinity UHPLC system fitted with a Reprosil pur C18 trap column (100um x 2cm, 3um, Dr. Maisch) and a homemade C18 analytical column, described above. The different instrumentation used corresponds to the two separate experimental batches (HySic Study I: A549 and NCI-H358 cell lines, H-FX-Agilent 1290 setup; HySic study II: LCLC-103H and EBC-1 cell lines, Explores 480-UltiMate setup). The LC-MS parameters for each experiment were as follows: SI proteome data was collected over a 175 min run following 5 min of trapping with buffer A (0.1% FA). Peptides were eluted over a 155 min gradient from 10% to 44% solvent B (0.1%FA, 80%ACN) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min, followed by a wash and re-equilibration step. MS data was acquired in Data-Dependent mode with MS1 settings at 60,000 resolution, scan-range 375-1600 m/z, AGC target at 3E6 and max ion injection time (IT) 20 msec. HCD-MS2 spectra were collected at 30,000 resolution for the top 15 precursors using a NCE of 27, max IT of 65 msec, AGC target of 1E5, isolation window of 1.4 Da, fixed first mass set at 120 m/z, and a dynamic exclusion time of 30 sec. Study I phosphoproteome data was collected for 115 min using a 9%-36% solvent B elution gradient over 95min. MS settings were identical as above with the following adjustments: the top 12 precursors were selected for fragmentation with a max IT of 85 msec and dynamic exclusion of 18 sec. Study II proteome and phosphoproteome data was collected using settings identical to Study I with the following exceptions: AGC targets were set to ‘standard’ and max IT was set to ‘auto’. MS2 scans were collected for a fixed cycle window of 3 sec with an NCE of 28 and a dynamic exclusion time of 24 sec for proteome and 16 sec for phosphoproteome data.   HySic mass spectrometry data processing: MS raw files were searched using MaxQuant software (versions 2.0.1.0 and 1.6.10.43) against a reviewed homo sapiens database (UniProt, 2017; 21,008 entries) and a contaminant database. Study I (A549 and NCI-H358 tumor cell lines) and Study II (LCLC-103H and EBC-1 tumor cell lines) raw files were processed separately and in each case proteome and phosphoproteome data was searched separately, generating a total of 4 datasets. For each MaxQuant search, labeling multiplicity was set to 3 with Arg6, Lys4 and Arg10 and Lys8 selected for medium and heavy labels, respectively. Match-between-runs was enabled, Re-quantify was disabled, fixed modifications were set to carbamidomethylation, variable modifications were set to methionine oxidation and protein N-term acetylation, and all other MaxQuant parameters were set to default. For phosphoproteome searches, phosphorylation at STY residues was selected as an additional variable modification. Protein and phosphosite intensities were extracted from MaxQuant output files for each SILAC label independently (‘H’, ‘M’, ‘L’). All SILAC ratio data was discarded. Extracted protein and peptide intensities were further processed in R using in-house scripts. Within each experimental dataset, the total summed intensity for each raw file were compared to identify sample outliers (i.e. failed sample injections). An outlier was defined as a sample with a signal intensity > 2x standard deviation below the mean of all samples. No outliers were identified in either proteome dataset, however, several injections were discarded from phosphoproteome data. Next, to correct for differences in sample loading or instrument performance, samples were median normalized based on the combined intensities of all SILAC channels in each sample. Injection replicates were averaged to generate one dataset per biological replicate. After this step, SILAC intensities for each sample were processed independently, generating a total of 3 data tables for each experimental dataset: tumor cell, T cell, and Newly Synthesized proteins. Extracted T cell and tumor cell data was median normalized to correct for any differences in cell mixing across co-culture samples. Newly Synthesized proteins did not undergo a second normalization because these abundances are not expected to be similar across all samples, but rather increase with time.

### Publication Abstract
Functional interactions between cytotoxic T&#xa0;cells and tumor cells are central to anti-cancer immunity. However, our understanding of the proteins involved is limited. Here, we present HySic (hybrid quantification of stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture [SILAC]-labeled interacting cells) as a method to quantify protein and phosphorylation dynamics between and within physically interacting cells. Using co-cultured T cells and tumor&#xa0;cells, we directly measure the proteome and phosphoproteome of engaged cells without the need for physical separation. We identify proteins whose abundance or activation status changes upon T&#xa0;cell:tumor cell interaction and validate our method with established signal transduction pathways including interferon &#x3b3; (IFN&#x3b3;) and tumor necrosis factor (TNF). Furthermore, we identify the RHO/RAC/PAK1 signaling pathway to be activated upon cell engagement and show that pharmacologic inhibition of PAK1 sensitizes tumor cells to T&#xa0;cell killing. Thus, HySic is a simple method to study rapid protein signaling dynamics in physically interacting cells that is easily extended to other biological systems.

### Keywords
Interacting cells, Human, Cell culture, Hysic, Phosphoproteomics, Silac, Co-culture, T cells, Cell signaling, Intercellular communication, Cancer

### Affiliations
Utrecht University, Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Kelly Stecker

### Lab Head
Dr Kelly E.
Utrecht University, Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics


