### Accession
PXD028140

### Title
RabA2b overexpression alters the Plasma-Membrane Proteome and Improves Drought Tolerance in Arabidopsis

### Description
Rab proteins are small GTPases that are important in the regulation of vesicle trafficking. RabA2b was identified through data mining to be stress responsive. Little is known about the involvement of RabA in plant responses to abiotic stresses. Promoter analysis of RabA2b showed strong activity during osmotic stress, which required ABA and was restricted to the vasculature. Sequence analysis of the promoter region identified predicted binding motifs for several ABA-responsive transcription factors. We cloned RabA2b and overexpressed it in Arabidopsis. The resulting transgenic plants were strikingly drought resistant. Subcellular localization studies detected strong colocalization between RabA2b and the plasma membrane (PM) marker PIP2. Further proteomic analysis of isolated PM fractions showed enrichment of stress-coping proteins as well as cell wall/cuticle modifiers in the transgenic lines. Finally, the cuticle permeability of transgenic leaves was significantly reduced compared to the wild type. Overall, these data provide new insights into the roles and modes of action of RabA2b during water stresses, and indicate that increased RabA2b mediated PM trafficking can affect the PM proteome and increase drought tolerance.

### Sample Protocol
Plasma membrane proteins were extracted, trypsinized and the peptides were analyzed by LC-MSMS using the Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
MS data was analyzed by the MaxQuant software using the andromeda search engine.

### Publication Abstract
Rab proteins are small GTPases that are important in the regulation of vesicle trafficking. Through data mining, we identified RabA2b to be stress responsive, though little is known about the involvement of RabA in plant responses to abiotic stresses. Analysis of the RabA2b native promoter showed strong activity during osmotic stress, which required the stress hormone Abscisic acid (ABA) and was restricted to the vasculature. Sequence analysis of the promoter region identified predicted binding motifs for several ABA-responsive transcription factors. We cloned <i>RabA2b</i> and overexpressed it in Arabidopsis. The resulting transgenic plants were strikingly drought resistant. The reduced water loss observed in detached leaves of the transgenic plants could not be explained by stomatal aperture or density, which was similar in all the genotypes. Subcellular localization studies detected strong colocalization between RabA2b and the plasma membrane (PM) marker PIP2. Further studies of the PM showed, for the first time, a distinguished alteration in the PM proteome as a result of <i>RabA2b</i> overexpression. Proteomic analysis of isolated PM fractions showed enrichment of stress-coping proteins as well as cell wall/cuticle modifiers in the transgenic lines. Finally, the cuticle permeability of transgenic leaves was significantly reduced compared to the wild type, suggesting that it plays a role in its drought resistant properties. Overall, these data provide new insights into the roles and modes of action of RabA2b during water stresses, and indicate that increased RabA2b mediated PM trafficking can affect the PM proteome and increase drought tolerance.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis, Drought, Plasma-membrane

### Affiliations
Technion
Departemnt of Plant Sciences MIGAL – Galilee Research Institute, 2 Tarshish st. P.O.B. 831 Kiryat-Shmona 11016 Israel

### Submitter
Tamar Ziv

### Lab Head
Dr Yehoram Leshem
Departemnt of Plant Sciences MIGAL – Galilee Research Institute, 2 Tarshish st. P.O.B. 831 Kiryat-Shmona 11016 Israel


