### Accession
PXD037725

### Title
Proteomic analysis of the role of RALF34 small signaling peptides in the regulation of cucumber (Cucumis sativus) root development

### Description
To elucidate the functional role of the small signaling peptide RALF34 in the parental root meristem and its role in lateral root initiation, we studied changes in Cucumis sativus proteome during CsRALF34 gene overexpression. Composite plants with transgenic root systems carrying the construct for CsRALF34 overexpression (p35S::CsRALF34-TermAct) and control roots carrying p35S-GUS-TermAct were obtained and their proteome profiles were compared.

### Sample Protocol
Roots of Cucumis sativus were frozen in liquid nitrogen and grounded in a mortar till forming a homogeneous plant powder. The resulting material (approximately 250 mg per sample) was placed in 2 mL safe-lock polypropylene tubes and transferred on ice, and 3 min later supplemented with 700 µL of cold (4°C) phenol extraction buffer (0.7 mol/L sucrose, 0.1 mol/L KCl, 5 mmol/L ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid, 2% (v/v) β-mercaptoethanol and 1 mmol/L phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride in 0.5 mol/L Tris-HCl buffer, pH 7.5). The suspensions were vortexed for 30 s. Then 700 µL of cold phenol (4°C) preliminarily saturated with 0.5 mol/L Tris-HCl buffer (pH 7.5) were added. After further mixing for 30 s, the samples were shaken (30 min, 900 rpm,4°C) and centrifuged (5000x g, 15 min, 4°C). Afterwards, the phenolic phase was transferred to new 1.5 mL polypropylene tubes, and washed two times with equal volumes of the phenol extraction buffer (after each buffer addition: vortexing 30 s, shaking for 30 min at 900 rpm at 4°C, and centrifugation at 5000x g for 15 min at 4°C). Then, the supernatants were transferred to new 1.5 mL tubes, and proteins were precipitated by addition of 1 mL of ice-cold ammonium acetate in methanol (0.1 mol/L), followed by storage overnight at −20°C. Next morning, the protein fraction was collected by centrifugation (5000x g, 10 min, 4°C), and the supernatants were discarded. The pellets were washed twice with two volumes of methanol, and twice with the same volume of acetone (both at 4°C). Each time after resuspension the samples were centrifuged (5000x g, 10 min, 4°C). In the end, the cleaned pellets were dried under air flow in a fume hood for 1 h and then diluted in 70 µL of 4% sodium dodecyl sulfate. Subsequent determination of protein concentration was done by Bicinchoninic Acid Kit for Protein Determination (Sigma-Aldrich, USA). The day before the procedure of digestion Amicon Ultra 30K filter units (Sigma-Aldrich, USA) were passivated in 500 µl 5% Tween-20 by shaking (350 rpm, 25°C, 12 h). The next day, filter units were twice washed with Milli-Q water while shaking (450 rpm, 30 min, 25°C). After the washing, 35 µg of protein were transferred to filter units, 200 µl of urea solution (8M urea, 50 mmol/L Tris-HCl buffer, pH 7.5, UA) were added and then the tubes with filters were centrifuged (14000x g, 10 min, 4°C). Supernatants were discarded. All the steps with UA were repeated for 3 times. Then 100 µl of reducing solution (100 mmol/L dithiothreitol in UA) were added, afterwards, mixed (450 rpm, 25°C, 1 h) and centrifuged (14000x g, 10 min, 25°C). In the end, supernatants were discarded. The same centrifugation and discarding were made after subsequent addition of 100 µl of alkylating solution (50 mmol/L iodoacetamide in UA), but the mixing (450 rpm, 25°C, 1 h)  occurred in the dark. Then the filters were washing with 200 µl of UA for twice (with centrifugation (14000x g, 10 min, 4°C) and discarding of supernatant). Then the same procedures were made with digestion solution (50 mmol/L ammonium bicarbonate, ABC) for twice. Afterwards, the stock solution of trypsin (enzyme to protein ratio 1:20)  was made, added to the filters and then incubated shaking (450 rpm, 37°C, 4 h). Further continuation of incubation was held with addition of trypsin stock solution (enzyme to protein ratio 1:50) and shaking (450 rpm, 37°C) overnight. Next morning, the samples were centrifuged (14000x g, 10 min, 25°C), filtrates were kept. The next step was washing filtrates with peptides with 40 µl of ABC buffer and centrifugation (14000x g, 10 min, 25°C). This step was repeated twice and then peptides were kept at -20°C. After digestion, the samples were desalted by solid phase extraction in self-made “Stage tips” (C-18 Extraction Disks (66883-U) (Sigma-Aldrich, USA)). The eluate was transferred to 0.5 mL polypropylene tubes and dried (4°C) under the reduced pressure in the vacuum concentrator CentriVap Vacuum Concentrator (Labconco, USA). After that dried peptides were diluted in 60 μl of 2% ACN, 0.1% formic acid. Approximate 500 ng of tryptic peptides were used for shotgun proteomics analysis by nanoHPLC-MS/MS using TimsToF Pro mass-spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics, Germany). The HPLC analysis was performed in two-column separation mode with Acclaim™ PepMap™ 5 mm Trap Cartridge and Bruker FORTY separation column (C18 ReproSil AQ, 40cm×75µm, 1.9µm, 120A; Bruker Daltonics, Germany) in gradient mode with 300 nL/min flow rate and 45°C. Phase A was water/0.1% formic acid, phase B was acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid. The gradient was from 2% to 40% phase B for 40 min with subsequent wash with 85% phase B for 15 min. MS/MS acquisition was performed in DDA mode with 3 s cycle in positive polarity with the fragmentation of ions with at least two charges in m/z range from 150 to 2200. CaptiveSpray ion source was used for electrospray ionization with 1500 V of capillary voltage, 3 l/min N2 flow, and 180°C source temperature.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was performed using Cucumis sativus (Chinese Long type) reference proteome (unpublished data, 2022; the proteome provided to us by the Laboratory of Cellular and Molecular Mechanisms of Plant Development, Komarov Botanical Institute of the Russian Academy of Sciences) with contaminations included in the PEAKS Studio software (v. 10.6). The search parameters were: parent mass error tolerance 10 ppm, fragment mass error tolerance 0.05 Da, protein and peptide FDR less than 2%, protease rule – trypsin (cleave after KR, but not before P), two possible missed cleavage sites, filter charge 1-7. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification. Methionine oxidation, deamidation, and acetylation of protein N-term were set as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
The main role of RALF small signaling peptides was reported to be the alkalization control of the apoplast for improvement of nutrient absorption; however, the exact function of individual RALF peptides such as RALF34 remains unknown. The Arabidopsis RALF34 (<i>At</i>RALF34) peptide was proposed to be part of the gene regulatory network of lateral root initiation. Cucumber is an excellent model for studying a special form of lateral root initiation taking place in the meristem of the parental root. We attempted to elucidate the role of the regulatory pathway in which RALF34 is a participant using cucumber transgenic hairy roots overexpressing <i>CsRALF34</i> for comprehensive, integrated metabolomics and proteomics studies, focusing on the analysis of stress response markers. <i>Cs</i>RALF34 overexpression resulted in the inhibition of root growth and regulation of cell proliferation, specifically in blocking the G2/M transition in cucumber roots. Based on these results, we propose that <i>CsRALF34</i> is not part of the gene regulatory networks involved in the early steps of lateral root initiation. Instead, we suggest that <i>Cs</i>RALF34 modulates ROS homeostasis and triggers the controlled production of hydroxyl radicals in root cells, possibly associated with intracellular signal transduction. Altogether, our results support the role of RALF peptides as ROS regulators.

### Keywords
Csralf34, Proteome, Cucumis sativus, Lateral root initiation, Ralf34, Cucumber

### Affiliations
Department of Bioorganic Chemistry, Leibniz Institute of Plant Biochemistry, 06120 Halle (Saale), Germany
Saint-Petersburg State University

### Submitter
Egor Repkin

### Lab Head
Dr Andrej Frolov
Department of Bioorganic Chemistry, Leibniz Institute of Plant Biochemistry, 06120 Halle (Saale), Germany


