### Accession
PXD040731

### Title
AMPK activation protects against prostate cancer by inducing a catabolic cellular state

### Description
Emerging evidence indicates that metabolic dysregulation drives prostate cancer (PCa) progression and metastasis. AMPK is a master regulator of metabolism although its role in PCa remains unclear. Here we show that genetic and pharmacological activation of AMPK provides a dramatic protective effect on PCa progression in vivo. We show that AMPK activation induces PGC1-alpha expression leading to a catabolic metabolic reprogramming of PCa cells. This catabolic state is characterised by increased mitochondrial gene expression, increased fatty acid oxidation, decreased lipogenic potential, decreased cell proliferation and decreased cell invasiveness. Together, these changes inhibit PCa disease progression. Additionally, we identify a gene network involved in cell cycle regulation that is inhibited by AMPK activation. Strikingly, we show a strong correlation between this gene network and PGC1-alpha gene expression in human PCa. Taken together our findings strongly support the use of AMPK activators for clinical treatment of PCa to improve patient outcome.

### Sample Protocol
Mass spectrometry sample processing:  Protein samples in 8M urea (100µg/sample) were processed using an in-solution digestion procedure. Briefly, samples were sequentially reduced and alkylated at room temperature and in the dark for 30 minutes, with final concentrations of 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and 50 mM 2-chloroacetamide (2-CAM) respectively. Samples were then diluted 1 in 2 with 20mM HEPES (pH8.0) for a final urea concentration of 4M. 200ng of LysC (Wako, 125-05061) was added to achieve an approximate 1:500 protease to protein ratio and samples were incubated at 37oC for 4 hours. This was followed by a further dilution to 1M urea with HEPES buffer and 2µg of trypsin gold (Promega, V5280) was added for an approximate 1:50 protease to protein ratio.  Samples were then incubated at 37oC for 17 hours. The digestion was stopped by acidification with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 0.2% and protein digests were desalted using Glygen C18 spin tips (Glygen Corp, TT2C18.96). Tryptic peptides were eluted with 60% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid (FA) and eluents dried by vacuum centrifugation.     Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis: Dried tryptic digests were re-dissolved in 0.1% TFA by shaking (1,200 rpm, 30 min) at room temperature, then sonicated on an ultrasonic water bath (5 min, degas setting), followed by centrifugation (13,000 rpm, 5°C, 10 min). LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano liquid chromatography system (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) via an EASY spray source (Thermo Scientific). Protein digests were injected and loaded onto a trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, 100μm ×2 cm) for desalting and concentration at a flow rate of 8μL/min (loading pump buffer: 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA). Final on-column digest amount was 1.4µg per injection. Peptides were then eluted on-line to an analytical column (Acclaim Pepmap RSLC C18, 75μm × 75 cm) at a flow rate of 200nL/min. Peptides were separated using a 90 min gradient, 1-25% of buffer A for 95 min followed by 25-45% buffer B for another 30 min (buffer A: 98% water, 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% FA; buffer B: 80% acetonitrile, 20% water, 0.1% FA) and subsequent column conditioning and equilibration. Eluted peptides were analysed by the mass spectrometer operating in positive polarity using a data-dependent acquisition mode. Ions for fragmentation were determined from an initial MS1 survey scan at 70,000 resolution, followed by HCD (Higher Energy Collision Induced Dissociation) fragmentation of the top 12 most abundant ions at 17,500 MS2 resolution. MS1 and MS2 scan AGC targets were set to 3e6 and 5e4, allowing maximum ion injection times of 50ms and 50ms, respectively. A survey scan m/z range of 400-1800 was used, normalised collision energy set to 27%, charge state exclusion enabled with unassigned and +1 charge states rejected and a minimal AGC target of 1e3. Dynamic exclusion was set to 45 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data processing: Data were processed using the MaxQuant software platform (v1.6.2.3), with database searches carried out by the in-built Andromeda search engine against a Swissprot M. musculus database (version 20201111, number of entries: 17,056). A reverse decoy search approach was used at a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) for both peptide spectrum matches and protein groups. Search parameters included: maximum missed cleavages set to 2, fixed modification of cysteine carbamidomethylation and variable modifications of methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation, carbamylation (KR), asparagine deamidation and glutamine cyclisation to pyro-glutamate. Label-free quantification was enabled with an LFQ minimum ratio count of 1. ‘Match between runs’ function was enabled with matching and alignment time windows of 0.7 and 20 minutes respectively. Samples 7-12: PTEN_KO, Samples 19-24: PTEN_KO/activated_AMPK

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Fatty acid oxidation, Mitochondria, Pgc1-alpha, High-fat diet, Ampk, Metastasis, Metabolism, Lipogenesis, Prostate cancer, Cell cycle regulation

### Affiliations
Head of Proteomics & Metabolomics core
Medical Research Council - London Institute of Medical Sciences

### Submitter
Alex Montoya

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Pavel Shliaha
Head of Proteomics & Metabolomics core


