### Accession
PXD038375

### Title
Sulfamate acetamides as self-immolative electrophiles for covalent ligand- directed release chemistry  - Pull Down data

### Description
Electrophiles for covalent inhibitors that are suitable for in vivo administration are rare. While acrylamides are prevalent in FDA approved covalent drugs, chloroacetamides are considered too reactive for such purposes. We report sulfamate-based electrophiles that maintain chloroacetamide-like geometry, with tunable reactivity. We prepared sulfamate-based inhibitors for BTK and Pin1 displaying high potency, low intrinsic reactivity and high stability. Finally, we show that sulfamate acetamides can be used for covalent ligand-directed release (CoLDR) chemistry, both for the generation of ‘turn-on’ probes as well as for traceless ligand-directed site-specific labeling of proteins. Using alkyne-modified sulfamate-based probes, we performed proteomics studies with samples enriched with probe-bound proteins, and the sulfamate probes displayed comparable or improved selectivity compared to the parent compounds. Further characterization of off-target using IsoDTB-ABPP confirmed this result. This submission contains the pull down data.

### Sample Protocol
Mino cells (15 million) were incubated for 1 h with either DMSO or compound followed by the incubation with 10 μM “probe 4” for 1 hour. The cells were washed with cold PBS and frozen. Each sample was lysed in 200 μL of RIPA for 15 min on ice and centrifuged at 20,000g at 4 °C. After quantification using BCA, for each sample, 250 μL of 1.7 mg/mL was mixed with 5 μL of 5 mM biotin azide, 9 μL of 100 mM CuSO4/THPTA complex, and 7.5 μL of fresh 150 mM sodium ascorbate. The samples were incubated at room temperature for 1 h and precipitated with methanol/chloroform. The dry pellet was resuspended in 1.2% SDS in PBS (250 μL), sonicated and heated to 95 °C for 5 min. The samples were then diluted to 1.5 mL with PBS, and incubated with streptavidin agarose beads for 3 hours at room temperature. Following the incubation, the beads were washed and the bound proteins were eluted with heating to 95°C in 5% SDS in Tris 50 mM pH = 8. The proteins were isolated and trypsinized using S-trap (Protify) and the peptides were further puritifed using Oasis desalting columns (Waters).

### Data Protocol
Samples were analyzed using EASY-nLC 1200 nano-flow UPLC system, using PepMap RSLC C18 column (2 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size, 75 μm diameter × 50 cm length), mounted using an EASY-Spray source onto an Exploris 240 mass spectrometer. uLC/MS-grade solvents were used for all chromatographic steps at 300 nL/min. The mobile phase was: (A) H2O + 0.1% formic acid and (B) 80% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid. Each sample (2 μL) was injected. Peptides were eluted from the column into the mass spectrometer using the following gradient: 1–40% B in 160 min, 40–100% B in 5 min, maintained at 100% for 20 min, 100 to 1% in 10 min, and finally 1% for 5 min. Ionization was achieved using a 1900 V spray voltage with an ion transfer tube temperature of 275 °C. Data were acquired in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. MS1 resolution was set to 120,000 (at 200 m/z), a mass range of 375–1650 m/z, normalized AGC of 300%, and the maximum injection time was set to 20 ms. MS2 resolution was set to 15,000, quadrupole isolation 1.4 m/z, normalized AGC of 50%, dynamic exclusion of 45 s, and automatic maximum injection time.

### Publication Abstract
Electrophiles for covalent inhibitors that are suitable for in vivo administration are rare. While acrylamides are prevalent in FDA-approved covalent drugs, chloroacetamides are considered too reactive for such purposes. We report sulfamate-based electrophiles that maintain chloroacetamide-like geometry with tunable reactivity. In the context of the BTK inhibitor ibrutinib, sulfamate analogues showed low reactivity with comparable potency in protein labeling, in vitro, and cellular kinase activity assays and were effective in a mouse model of CLL. In a second example, we converted a chloroacetamide Pin1 inhibitor to a potent and selective sulfamate acetamide with improved buffer stability. Finally, we show that sulfamate acetamides can be used for covalent ligand-directed release (CoLDR) chemistry, both for the generation of "turn-on" probes as well as for traceless ligand-directed site-specific labeling of proteins. Taken together, this chemistry represents a promising addition to the list of electrophiles suitable for in vivo covalent targeting.

### Keywords
Human, Pull down, Chemical probes

### Affiliations
Department of Chemical and Structural Biology, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot 76100, Israel
Department of Chemical and Structural Biology, Weizmann Institute of Science

### Submitter
Ronen Gabizon

### Lab Head
Dr Nir London
Department of Chemical and Structural Biology, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot 76100, Israel


