### Accession
PXD015648

### Title
Genome maintenance functions of Trypanosoma brucei DNA Polymerase N include telomere association and a role in antigenic variation

### Description
Maintenance of genome integrity is critical to guarantee transfer of an intact genome from parent to offspring during cell division. DNA polymerases (Pols) provide roles in both replication of the genome and the repair of a wide range of lesions. Amongst replicative DNA Pols, translesion DNA Pols play a particular role: replication to bypass DNA damage, often at the cost of mutation. All cells express a range of translesion Pols, but little work has examined their function in parasites, including whether the enzymes might contribute to hostparasite interactions. Here, we describe a dual function of translesion PolN in African trypanosomes. Previously we demonstrated that PolN is associated with telomeric sequences and now we show that RNAi-mediated depletion of PolN results in slowed growth, altered DNA content, changes in cell morphology, and increased sensitivity to DNA damaging agents. Depletion of PolN leads to chromosome segregation defects and accumulation of DNA damage. We also show that PolN displays discrete localisation at the nuclear periphery in the absence of exogenous DNA damage. In addition, we demonstrate that PolN depletion leads to deregulation of telomeric variant surface glycoprotein genes, linking the function of this translesion DNA polymerase to host immune evasion by antigenic variation.

### Sample Protocol
Approximately 4x10^7 cells were precooled for 10 min on ice and then harvested with 1500 xg for 10 min at 4 °C. The cell pellet was resuspended in 45 μl 10 mM sodium phosphate buffer with additional protease inhibitors (leupeptin, PMSF and TLCK). The suspension was incubated for 5 min at 37 °C and then cooled down for 2 min on ice. The cells were sedimented (14.000 g, 4 °C, 5 min) and only the supernatant transferred to a new reaction tube. 15 μl of 4x NuPage® Buffer (Invitrogen) supplemented with 400 mM DTT was added to the suspension and incubated at 70 °C for 10 min. The cell suspension was stored at -20 °C until the shipping to Falk Butter (IMB Mainz) for mass spectrometry analysis. The experiment was conducted in quadruplicate. The samples were loaded into a 10% NuPage NOVEX gel and run in 1x MES (Thermo) at 180V for 10 min. The gel was fixated and stained with Coomassie (Sigma). The gel lanes were sliced, destained in 50% EtOH/25 mM ABC (ammonium bicarbonate) pH 8.0, reduced in 10 mM DTT (Sigma) for 30 min at 56 degC and subsequently alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma) for 30 min at RT in the darkd. Proteins were digested with MS-grade trypsin (Sigma) overnight at 37 degC and tryptic peptides desalted and stored on StageTips. For MS analysis, peptides were separated on an in-house packed Reprosil C18-AQ 1.9 μm resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH) capillary (New Objective) with an optimized 75 min gradient from 2% to 40% ACN (with 0.1% formic acid) prepared with an Easy-nLC 1000 system (Thermo). The packed capillary was mounted in a column oven (Sonation) and sprayed peptides continuously into a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo) operated with a top10 data-dependent acquisition mode. Spray voltage was set between 1.8 -2.4 kV.

### Data Protocol
The MS raw files were processed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.8) using standard settings with additionally activated LFQ quantitation and match between runs option. For the search, a concatenated database of TriTrypDB- 8.1_TbruceiLister427_AnnotatedProteins.fasta (8,833 entries), TriTrypDB- 8.1_TbruceiTREU927_AnnotatedProteins.fasta (11,567 entries) and the Lister427 VSG gene fasta (GAM Cross) translated in three reading frames vsgs_tb427_cds.out.fasta (86,764 entries) was used. For data analysis, all protein groups with less than 2 peptides (1 unique + 1 razor) and all protein groups not containing a VSG annotation as primary entry were removed. For the remaining Lister427 VSG proteins from the VSG gene fasta, the mean LFQ expression value of the quadruplicates was calculated and plotted as VSG abundance in R.

### Publication Abstract
Maintenance of genome integrity is critical to guarantee transfer of an intact genome from parent to offspring during cell division. DNA polymerases (Pols) provide roles in both replication of the genome and the repair of a wide range of lesions. Amongst replicative DNA Pols, translesion DNA Pols play a particular role: replication to bypass DNA damage. All cells express a range of translesion Pols, but little work has examined their function in parasites, including whether the enzymes might contribute to host-parasite interactions. Here, we describe a dual function of one putative translesion Pol in African trypanosomes, which we now name TbPolIE. Previously, we demonstrated that TbPolIE is associated with telomeric sequences and here we show that RNAi-mediated depletion of TbPolIE transcripts results in slowed growth, altered DNA content, changes in cell morphology, and increased sensitivity to DNA damaging agents. We also show that TbPolIE displays pronounced localization at the nuclear periphery, and that its depletion leads to chromosome segregation defects and increased levels of endogenous DNA damage. Finally, we demonstrate that TbPolIE depletion leads to deregulation of telomeric variant surface glycoprotein genes, linking the function of this putative translesion DNA polymerase to host immune evasion by antigenic variation.

### Keywords
Trypanosomes; vsg

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB) Ackermannweg 4 55128 Mainz
Quantitative Proteomics
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB)

### Submitter
F Butter

### Lab Head
Dr Falk Butter
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB) Ackermannweg 4 55128 Mainz


