### Accession
PXD013114

### Title
Natural occurrence of the reductive glycine pathway in Desulfovibrio desulfuricans strain G11

### Description
This study was conducted to probe the natural occurrence of a novel CO2-fixation pathway in Desulfovibrio G11.

### Sample Protocol
Desulfovibrio desulfuricans strain G11 (DSM 7057)  was grown in basal medium supplemented with 20 mM of sulfate and two conditions: hydrogen/CO2/sulfate ( called CO2) and hydrogen/CO2/sulfate/acetate (called ACET). Each condition was performed in 5 biological replicates. Cells (50 mL), were pelleted, washed and re-suspended in 500 µL 100 mM Tris HCl. Cells were lysed by sonication and 10 ug of protein was loaded on an iST column (C18 Empore). Proteins were DTT reduced and alkylated with acrylamide in 100 mM TrisCl pH 8, and digested with trypsin. The resulting peptides were measured by nLC – LTQ-OrbitrapXL.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (1.5.2.8) with Andromeda search engine was used for identification and relative quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
Six CO<sub>2</sub> fixation pathways are known to operate in photoautotrophic and chemoautotrophic microorganisms. Here, we describe chemolithoautotrophic growth of the sulphate-reducing bacterium Desulfovibrio desulfuricans (strain G11) with hydrogen and sulphate as energy substrates. Genomic, transcriptomic, proteomic and metabolomic analyses reveal that D. desulfuricans assimilates CO<sub>2</sub> via the reductive glycine pathway, a seventh CO<sub>2</sub> fixation pathway. In this pathway, CO<sub>2</sub> is first reduced to formate, which is reduced and condensed with a second CO<sub>2</sub> to generate glycine. Glycine is further reduced in D. desulfuricans by glycine reductase to acetyl-P, and then to acetyl-CoA, which is condensed with another CO<sub>2</sub> to form pyruvate. Ammonia is involved in the operation of the pathway, which is reflected in the dependence of the autotrophic growth rate on the&#xa0;ammonia concentration. Our study demonstrates microbial autotrophic growth fully supported by this highly ATP-efficient CO<sub>2</sub> fixation pathway.

### Keywords
Reductive glycine pathway, Desulfovibrio, Novel pathway, Co2 fixation

### Affiliations
Biochemistry
Wageningen University

### Submitter
Sjef Boeren

### Lab Head
Dr Sjef Boeren
Wageningen University


