### Accession
PXD026861

### Title
LPA-TriCEPS crosslinked to human VICs

### Description
We used ligand-receptor capture mass spectrometry that identified major facilitator superfamily domain containing 5 (MFSD5) as a previously unreported Lp(a) receptor.

### Sample Protocol
TriCEPS reagents were commercially obtained as Flow-TriCEPS and ligand-receptor capture-TriCEPs kits (Dual Systems, Zurich, Switzerland). Dot blots to validate TriCEPS reagent coupling to Lp(a) were perfermed according to the manufacturer’s instructions, using 20 μg Lp(a) and blotted with three serial dilutions (1:10, 1:100, 1:1000). Transferrin was used as a positive control and glycine as a negative control. Oxidation of VICs was tested for cell death using calcein AM and ethidium homodimer-1 staining and assessed with a Nikon A1 confocal microscope, using a calcein AM cell viability assay kit according to manufacturer’s instructions (R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN). Phosphate buffered saline was used as a negative control, and methanol (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 70% incubation for 15 minutes) as a positive cell death control. Fluorescence-activated cell sorting of human VICs incubated without out Lp(a), with fluorescently-labeled TriCEPS coupled to Lp(a) or fluorescently-labeled TriCEPS coupled to Lp(a) that was quenched with glycine was assessed using an FACSAria machine (BD Biosciences, Franklin Lakes, NJ; Harvard Immunology FACS core facility) and commercially obtained Flow-TriCEPS reagents according to manufacturer’s instructions. For TriCEPS experiments six equally pooled human VIC donors were used with a commercially obtained TriCEPS kit. For ligand-receptor capture TriCEPS, the TriCEPS reagent was coupled to Lp(a) according to manufacturer’s instructions and then incubated with human VICs for 1 hour at 4 degrees Celsius to allow Lp(a) and receptor binding but not Lp(a) internalization. VICs were oxidized according to the TriCEPS kit instructions, allowing for crosslinking of TriCEPS-coupled Lp(a) to membrane proteins that were affinity purified and analyzed by LC/MS/MS. TriCEPS LC/MS/MS was outsourcing to Dual Systems and using a Thermo Orbitrap Elite spectrometer fitted with an electrospray ion source. Tryptic peptides were measured in data dependent mode in a 120-minute gradient using a 15 cm C18 packed column. Data analysis was performed by Dual Systems using Progenesis software for raw file alignment and feature detection.

### Data Protocol
Comet search engine was used for spectra identification and the Trans proteomic pipeline was used for statistical validation of putative identifications and protein inference. Upon protein inference, the relative quantification of control (transferrin incubated) and Lp(a) ligand samples were performed based on ion extracted intensity and differential protein abundance was testing using ANOVA with multiple testing correction. P values were adjusted for multiple comparisons to control the experiment-wide false discovery rate. The adjusted P value obtained for every protein was plotted against the magnitude of the fold enrichment between the experimental conditions. The annotated human proteome database from Uniprot was used and results were filtered for membrane proteins that may act as receptors. Criteria for a protein candidate interacting to the Lp(a) or transferrin control ligand were: minimum of 2 peptides identified, log2 fold change >2 -> fold change > 4, and -log10 (adjust P value) > 2 -> adjusted P value (qvalue) < 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mfsd5, Valve interstitial cells, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School
Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Sasha  Singh

### Lab Head
Dr Elena Aikawa
Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School


