### Accession
PXD019112

### Title
Defective metabolic programming impairs early neuronal morphogenesis in neural cultures and an organoid model of Leigh syndrome

### Description
Leigh syndrome (LS) is a severe manifestation of mitochondrial disease in children and is currently incurable. The lack of effective models hampers our understanding of the mechanisms underlying the neuronal pathology of LS. Using patient-derived induced pluripotent stem cells and CRISPR/Cas9 engineering, we developed a human model of LS due to mutations in the complex IV assembly gene SURF1. Single-cell RNA-sequencing and multi-omics analysis revealed compromised neuronal morphogenesis in mutant neural cultures and brain organoids. The defects emerged at the level of neural progenitor cells (NPCs), which retained a glycolytic proliferative state that failed to instruct neuronal morphogenesis. LS NPCs carrying mutations in the complex I gene NDUFS4 recapitulated morphogenesis defects. Interventions supporting the metabolic programming of NPCs restored neuronal morphogenesis, including SURF1 gene augmentation and PGC1A induction via bezafibrate treatment. Our findings provide mechanistic insights and suggest interventional strategies for a rare mitochondrial disease with major unmet medical needs.

### Sample Protocol
Three biological replicates of Surf1 patient and wt neuron iPSC were lysed under denaturing conditions in a buffer containing 3 M guanidinium chloride (GdmCl), 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine, 20 mM chloroacetamide and 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5. Lysates were denatured at 95°C for 10 min shaking at 1000 rpm in a thermal shaker and sonicated in a water bath for 10 min. A small aliquot of cell lysate was used for the BCA assay to quantify the protein concentration. Lysates (100 µg proteins) were diluted with a dilution buffer containing 10% acetonitrile and 25 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, to reach a 1 M GdmCl concentration. Then, proteins were digested with 1 µg LysC (MS-grade, Roche) shaking at 700 rpm at 37°C for 2 hours. The digestion mixture was diluted again with the same dilution buffer to reach 0.5 M GdmCl. Then, 1 µg trypsin (MS-grade, Roche) was added and the digestion mixture was incubated at 37°C overnight in a thermal shaker at 700 rpm. Solid phase extraction (SPE) disc cartridges (C18-SD, Waters, Milford, MA) were used for peptide desalting according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Desalted peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid in water and further separated into four fractions by strong cation exchange chromatography (SCX, 3M Purification, Meriden, CT). Eluates were first dried in a SpeedVac, then dissolved in 20 µl 5% acetonitrile and 2% formic acid in water, briefly vortexed, and sonicated in a water bath for 30 seconds prior injection to nano-LC-MS.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS was carried out by nanoflow reverse phase liquid chromatography (Dionex Ultimate 3000, Thermo Scientific) coupled online to a Q-Exactive HF Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Briefly, the LC separation was performed using a PicoFrit analytical column (75 μm ID × 55 cm long, 15 µm Tip ID; New Objectives, Woburn, MA) in-house packed with 2.1-µm C18 resin (Reprosil-AQ Pur, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany). Peptides were eluted using a gradient from 3.8 to 40% solvent B in solvent A over 120 min at 266 nL per minute flow rate. Solvent A was 0.1 % formic acid and solvent B was 79.9% acetonitrile, 20% H2O, 0.1% formic acid. Nanoelectrospray was generated by applying 3.5 kV. A cycle of one full Fourier transformation scan mass spectrum (300−1750 m/z, resolution of 60,000 at m/z 200, AGC target 1e6) was followed by 12 data-dependent MS/MS scans (resolution of 30,000, AGC target 5e5) with a normalized collision energy of 25 eV. In order to avoid repeated sequencing of the same peptides, a dynamic exclusion window of 30 sec was used. In addition, only peptide charge states between two to eight were sequenced. Raw MS data were processed with MaxQuant software (v1.6.0.1) and searched against the human proteome database UniProtKB with 21,074 entries, released in 12/2018. Parameters of MaxQuant database searching were: A false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 for proteins and peptides, a minimum peptide length of 7 amino acids, a mass tolerance of 4.5 ppm for precursor, 20 ppm for fragment ions were required and the function “match between runs” was used. A maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed for the tryptic digest. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification, while N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications. Contaminants, as well as proteins identified by site modification and proteins derived from the reversed part of the decoy database, were strictly excluded from further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mitochondrial disease; leigh syndrome; ipscs; npcs; brain organoids; surf1

### Affiliations
Mass Spectrometry Facility MPIMG
Principal Investigator „Stem Cell Metabolism“ Group Department of General Pediatrics, Neonatology, and Pediatric Cardiology University Clinic Düsseldorf (UKD), Heinrich Heine University (HHU) Moorenstraße 5, 40225 Düsseldorf, Germany Building 13.41, Level 3, Room 29

### Submitter
David Meierhofer

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Alessandro Prigione
Principal Investigator „Stem Cell Metabolism“ Group Department of General Pediatrics, Neonatology, and Pediatric Cardiology University Clinic Düsseldorf (UKD), Heinrich Heine University (HHU) Moorenstraße 5, 40225 Düsseldorf, Germany Building 13.41, Level 3, Room 29


