### Accession
PXD031429

### Title
FKH1 phosphoproteomics TMT LC-MS

### Description
Phosphoproteomics of FKH1 in comparison to U937 cells as negative control

### Sample Protocol
Aliquots of 100µg of protein per sample were digested with trypsin (2.5µg trypsin per 100µg protein; 37°C, overnight), labeled with TMTplex reagents according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the labeled samples pooled. This pooled sample was then desalted using a SepPak cartridge (Waters) and subjected to TiO2-based phosphopeptide enrichment according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Pierce). The phospho-enriched sample was evaporated to dryness and then resuspended in 1% formic acid prior to analysis by nano-LC MSMS using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer. The TMT-labelled phospho-enriched sample was fractionated using an Ultimate 3000 nano-LC system in line with an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The spectra were acquired using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer controlled by Xcalibur 2.0 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and operated in data-dependent acquisition mode using an SPS-MS3 workflow.

### Data Protocol
The raw data files were processed and quantified using Proteome Discoverer software v2.1 (Thermo Scientific) and searched against the Uniprot Human database (134169 sequences) using the SEQUEST algorithm. Further bioinformatic analysis was perfomed in an R environment.

### Publication Abstract
Patients within the WHO-subgroup of t(6;9)-positive acute myeloid leukemia (AML) differ from other AML subgroups as they are characterised by younger age and a grim prognosis. Leukemic transformation can often be attributed to single chromosomal aberrations encoding oncogenes, in the case of t(6;9)-AML to the fusion protein DEK-CAN (also called DEK-NUP214). As being a rare disease there is the urgent need for models of t(6;9)-AML. The only cell line derived from a t(6;9)-AML patient currently available is FKH1. By using phospho-proteomics on FKH1 cells, we found a strongly activated ABL1 kinase. Further investigation revealed the presence of ETV6-ABL1. This finding renders necessary to determine DEK-CAN- and ETV6-ABL1-related features when using FKH1. This can be done as ETV6-ABL1 activity in FKH1 is responsive to imatinib. Nevertheless, we provided evidence that both SFK and mTOR activation in FKH1 are DEK-CAN-related features as they were activated also in other t(6;9) and DEK-CAN-positive models. The activation of STAT5 previously shown to be strong in t(6;9)-AML and activated by DEK-CAN is regulated in FKH1 by both DEK-CAN and ETV6-ABL1. In conclusion, FKH1 cells still represent a model for t(6;9)-AML and could serve as model for ETV6-ABL1-positive AML if the presence of these leukemia-inducing oncogenes is adequately considered.Taken together, all our results provide clear evidence of novel and specific interdependencies between leukemia-inducing oncogenes and cancer signaling pathways which will influence the design of therapeutic strategies to better address the complexity of cancer signaling.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, U937, Fkh1

### Affiliations
Division of Cancer and Genetics, Medical School, Cardiff University, Cardiff, UK
Division of Cancer and Genetics, Department of Haematology, Cardiff University , Cardiff, UK

### Submitter
Martin Ruthardt

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Ruthardt
Division of Cancer and Genetics, Department of Haematology, Cardiff University , Cardiff, UK


