### Accession
PXD024120

### Title
Interactome screening of C9orf72 dipeptide repeats reveals sequestration and functional impairment of VCP by polyGA

### Description
Repeat expansions in the C9orf72 gene are a common cause of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD), two devastating neurodegenerative disorders. One of the proposed mechanisms of GGGGCC repeat expansion is their translation to produce unnatural dipeptide repeat (DPR) proteins that accumulate in aggregates and contribute to the pathology. There are 5 different DPRs poly(GA), poly(GR), poly(PR), poly(PA), poly(GP) which are neurotoxic in vitro. In our study, we identified the interactome of all five DPR proteins, consisting of 125 repeats, overexpressed in HEK293T cells using BioID2 proximity labeling. We identified 140 interacting partners for polyGR, 130 for polyGA, 138 for polyPR, 62 for polyPA, and 38 for polyGP. Gene ontology enrichment analysis of proteomic data identified interaction candidates involved in protein translation, signal transduction pathways, protein catabolic processes, amide metabolic processes, and RNA-binding. Through further analyses, we evaluated the interaction between polyGA and Valosin-containing protein (VCP) in HEK293T cells as well as in brains of C9orf72 patients.  Furthermore, we are showing that polyGA sequester VCP in polyGA aggregates and hinders its function. Additionally, we analyzed the effect of decreased level of VCP on autophagic markers p62 and LC3.

### Sample Protocol
BioID2 pull-down assay Briefly, for a large scale pull-down assay, biotin (50 µM) was added to the cells on 100-mm plates 24 h after transfection. After 16 h incubation with biotin, the cells were incubated for 5 min in fresh medium, washed three times in Dulbecco's phosphate-buffered saline (DPBS), and lysed in 600 µl of lysis buffer (50 mM Tris, pH 7.4, 500 mM NaCl, 0.2% SDS, 1 mM DTT, cocktail of protease inhibitors (Roche)) in a 2 ml microcentrifuge tube. When the cells were collected Triton X-100 was added at a 2% final concentration. After four times of sonication at 70% amplitude and 0.5 cycle (UP200S; Hielscher Ultrasound Technology), each interval of 15 s with 15 s cooling on ice, an equal volume of cold Tris pH 7.4 was added to the lysates. The lysates were centrifuged for 10 min at 16500 × g at 4 °C, the supernatant was collected and incubated with 100 µl of DynabeadsTM. MyOneTM Streptavidin T1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) overnight on a rotating mixer at 4°C. After incubation, the samples were equilibrated at room temperature, then the beads were collected using a magnetic stand and washed twice with 1500 µl of 2% (wt/vol) SDS. During each washing step, the samples were incubated on a rotating mixer for 8 min before collection of the beads on a magnetic stand. Then the beads were washed three times with wash buffer 1 containing 0.1% (wt/vol) deoxycholic acid, 1% (wt/vol) Triton X-100, 1 mM EDTA, 500 mM NaCl, 50 mM HEPES, pH 7.5), three times with wash buffer 2 (0.5% (wt/vol) deoxycholic acid, 0.5% (w/v) NP-40, 1 mM EDTA, 250 mM LiCl, 10 mM Tris, pH 7.4) and once with 50 mM Tris, pH 7.4. 20% of the sample was saved for future analysis, the remaining 80% were resuspended in 50 µl of 50 mM NH4HCO3 for MS analysis.  Mass Spectrometry All samples were subjected to a on bead digest: beads in 50ul NH4HCO3 buffer were diluted with 100ul Tris-HCL, pH 7,8 and digested over night at 37C with  1ug trypsin. After acidifying to a final concentration of 1% FA samples were desalted on SOLA HRP C-18 cartridges and dried down in a speedvac. Samples were resuspended in 50ul 100mM TEAB. Peptide quant was done using Pierce colorimetric peptide quantkit (TEAB diluted to 5mM). According to this, 15,6ug peptides were labelled with TMT as follows: triplicates of all samples BioID+  TMT126, GP+ TMT127N, GA+ TMT127C, PA+ TMT128N, GR+ TMT128C, PR+ TMT129N, and  2 pools 1/18Pool TMT 129C, 1% Pool (1%of each sample)  TMT 130N. Samples were separated on a 50 cm long EASY spray column (ES803, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and analysed on a Dionex Ultimate 3000/Orbitrap Fusion Lumos platform (both Thermo) as described earlier 19. Data was acquired using the MultiNotch MS3 method 20 with parameters as deposited in the data acquisition method 21.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data was analysed in Proteome Discoverer 2.2. Proteins were identified with Sequest HT against a reviewed Uniprot homo sapiens database (retrieved June 2018). Search parameters: Mass tolerances were set to 10 ppm for precursor and 0.5 Da fragment mass tolerance; TMT10plex (K), acetylation (protein N-term) and Oxidation (M) were set as dynamic modifications, and TMT10plex (N-term) and alkylation (C) as static modifications; up to 2 missed cleavages with trypsin were considered; results were filtered to 1% FDR stringency based on a target-decoy database strategy (percolator). The triplicate sample sets were quantified and fold change enrichment of proteins relative to the BioID negative control were determined, representing increased association of the identified proteins with the DPR substrates.

### Publication Abstract
Repeat expansions in the C9orf72 gene are a common cause of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal lobar degeneration, two devastating neurodegenerative disorders. One of the proposed mechanisms of GGGGCC repeat expansion is their translation into non-canonical dipeptide repeats, which can then accumulate as aggregates and contribute to these pathologies. There are five different dipeptide repeat proteins (polyGA, polyGR, polyPR, polyPA and polyGP), some of which are known to be neurotoxic. In the present study, we used BioID2 proximity labelling to identify the interactomes of all five dipeptide repeat proteins consisting of 125 repeats each. We identified 113 interacting partners for polyGR, 90 for polyGA, 106 for polyPR, 25 for polyPA and 27 for polyGP. Gene Ontology enrichment analysis of the proteomic data revealed that these target interaction partners are involved in a variety of functions, including protein translation, signal transduction pathways, protein catabolic processes, amide metabolic processes and RNA-binding. Using autopsy brain tissue from patients with C9orf72 expansion complemented with cell culture analysis, we evaluated the interactions between polyGA and valosin containing protein (VCP). Functional analysis of this interaction revealed sequestration of VCP with polyGA aggregates, altering levels of soluble valosin-containing protein. VCP also functions in autophagy processes, and consistent with this, we observed altered autophagy in cells expressing polyGA. We also observed altered co-localization of polyGA aggregates and p62 in cells depleted of VCP. All together, these data suggest that sequestration of VCP with polyGA aggregates contributes to the loss of VCP function, and consequently to alterations in autophagy processes in C9orf72 expansion disorders.

### Keywords
Bioid, Vcp, Dipeptide repeats, Neurodegeneration, Proteomics, Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, Als, Proximity labeeling, Valosin-containing protein

### Affiliations
InViva Consulting Ltd
Department of Biotechnology, Jožef Stefan Institute, Ljubljana, Slovenia

### Submitter
Andrew Thompson

### Lab Head
Dr Boris Rogelj
Department of Biotechnology, Jožef Stefan Institute, Ljubljana, Slovenia


