### Accession
PXD010046

### Title
Formaldehyde-crosslinking enables comprehensive profiling of in vivo RNA-interactome in UV-impermeable samples

### Description
Development of UV-crosslinking based RNA-interactome capture protocol have expanded the repertoire of RBPs. Apparent limitations of UV-crosslinking, however, have made the RBP profiling to be incomplete and inapplicable to many of the biological samples in physiological contexts. Here we developed formaldehyde-crosslinking based RNA binding protein profiling (FAX-RBP) method and quantitatively compared to UV-crosslinking based RBP profiling (UVX-RBP) in HeLa and Xenopus laevis oocyte/embryo. Quantitative comparison of FAX-RBP with UVX-RBP in HeLa cell demonstrated that FAX-RBP has greatly enhanced efficiency for profiling hundreds of RBPs in vivo. FAX-RBP was then applied to X. laevis oocyte and stage 8 embryo and profiled the dynamics of mRNP complex for over 500 RBPs. FAX-RBP thus provide the most comprehensive and unbiased RBP profile in vivo, demonstrating its potential to expand mRNP profiling into numerous physiological contexts.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were processed by FASP protocol and was subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis with following protocol. Analytical capillary columns (100 cm x 75 µm i.d.) and trap columns (3 cm x 150 µm i.d) were packed in-house with 3 µm Jupiter C18 particles (Phenomenex, Torrance, CA). The long analytical column was placed in a column heater (Analytical Sales and Services, Pompton Plains, NJ) regulated to a temperature of 45 °C. Ultimate 3000 nanoRSLC system (Thermo Scientific, Sunnyvale, CA) was operated at a flow rate of 350 nL/min over 2 hours with linear gradient ranging from 95 % solvent A (water with 0.1% formic acid) to 40 % of solvent B (acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid). The enriched samples were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) equipped with an in-house customized nanoelectrospray ion source. Precursor ions were acquired (m/z 300 – 1500 at 120k resolving power and the isolation of precursor for MS/MS analysis was performed with a 1.4 Th. Higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with 30% collision energy was used for sequencing with a target value of 5E4 ions determined by automatic gain control. Resolving power for acquired MS2 spectra was set to 30k at m/z 200 with 150 ms maximum injection time.

### Data Protocol
MS analysis data was analzyed and quantitatively compared by LFQ parameter in the MaxQuant program.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rbp formaldehyde

### Affiliations
Center for RNA Research, Institute for Basic Science, Seoul National University
Seoul National University

### Submitter
Yongwoo Na

### Lab Head
Dr Jong-Seo Kim
Center for RNA Research, Institute for Basic Science, Seoul National University


