### Accession
PXD035406

### Title
Proteomic analysis of secretions from pollen tubes and ovaries of Camellia oleifera cultured semi-in vivo

### Description
Self-inhibition of pollen tubes plays a key role in SI, but the underlying mechanism in Camellia oleifera is poorly understood. Collection of secreted proteins from Camellia oleifera pollen tubes and ovaries for high-throughput sequencing.

### Sample Protocol
Pistils of un-pollination and about 48 HAP cross- and self-pollination were the main materials used to construct libraries of mRNAs, proteins, and metabolites. However, the results made with these materials are diametrically inconsistent. The reason for these inconsistent results might be the differences in the genetic background of the pollen tubes inside the pistil used for sequencing, which is often overlooked. In this study, Camellia oleifera pollen tube and ovary were cultured semi-in vivo, and the filtrate was collected for proteome analysis after 24 hours of culture.

### Data Protocol
Samples for proteome analysis were concentrated by ultrafiltration, followed by protein extraction and enzymatic digestion. The peptides were separated using the EASY-nLC 1200 UHPLC system and then analysised by an Orbitrap Exploris鈩 480 mass spectrometer. The data acquisition mode used a data-dependent scanning (DDA) program. The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Proteome Discoverer (v2.4.1.15). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the protein sequence database of the transcriptome of C. oleifera (5,8031 sequences). Data quality was assessed using peptide length distributions. The relative quantitative value (R) of proteins in different samples was calculated by formula Rij=Iij/Mean(Ij) (鈥淚鈥, intensity after mean centering, 鈥渋鈥, samples, and 鈥渏鈥, proteins). Differential abundance proteins (DAPs) were determined by p-value<0.05 and absolute FC鈮1.5 (Appendix 1).

### Publication Abstract
<i>Camellia</i> oil extracted from the seeds of <i>Camellia oleifera</i> Abel. is a popular and high-quality edible oil, but its yield is limited by seed setting, which is mainly caused by self-incompatibility (SI). One of the obvious biological features of SI plants is the inhibition of self-pollen tubes; however, the underlying mechanism of this inhibition in <i>C. oleifera</i> is poorly understood. In this study, we constructed a semi-<i>in vivo</i> pollen tube growth test (SIV-PGT) system that can screen for substances that inhibit self-pollen tubes without interference from the genetic background. Combined with multi-omics analysis, the results revealed the important role of galloylated catechins in self-pollen tube inhibition, and a possible molecular regulatory network mediated by <i>UDP-glycosyltransferase</i> (<i>UGT</i>) and <i>serine carboxypeptidase-like</i> (<i>SCPL</i>) was proposed. In summary, galloylation of catechins and high levels of galloylated catechins are specifically involved in pollen tube inhibition under self-pollination rather than cross-pollination, which provides a new understanding of SI in <i>C. oleifera</i>. These results will contribute to sexual reproduction research on <i>C. oleifera</i> and provide theoretical support for improving <i>Camellia</i> oil yield in production.

### Keywords
Camellia oleifera, Proteome

### Affiliations
Central South University of Forestry and Technology

### Submitter
Yihong Chang

### Lab Head
Dr Yihong Chang
Central South University of Forestry and Technology


