### Accession
PXD029234

### Title
Multi-omic analysis reveals the biochemical changes underpinning the varied phenotypes of the Arabidopsis long-period mutant rve 4,6,8

### Description
Plants are able to sense changes in their light environments, such as the onset of day and night, as well as anticipate these changes in order to adapt and survive. Central to this ability is the plant circadian clock, a molecular circuit that precisely orchestrates plant cell processes over the course of a day. REVEILLE proteins (RVEs) are recently discovered members of the plant circadian circuitry that activate the evening complex and PRR genes to maintain regular circadian oscillation. The RVE4, 6 and 8 proteins in particular have been shown to limit the length of the circadian period, with rve4/6/8 plants possessing an elongated period as well as increased leaf surface area and biomass relative to wild-type Col-0 plants. Here, using a multi-omics approach consisting of phenomics, transcriptomics, proteomics, and metabolomics we demonstrate how RVE8-like proteins impact diel plant cell function and draw novel connections to a number of plant cell processes that underpin the growth and development phenotypes observed in rve4/6/8 plants. In particular, we reveal that loss of RVE8-like proteins results in altered carbohydrate and lipid metabolism, including a starch excess phenotype at ZT0. We further demonstrate that RVE8-like proteins has an unique impact on the abundance and phosphorylation 26S proteasome subunits, in addition to impacting the abundance and/or phosphorylation status of a number of protein kinases. . Overall, this robust, multi-omic dataset provides substantial new molecular insights into RVE8-like protein function demonstrating the far reaching impact RVE8-like proteins have on the diel plant cell environment.

### Sample Protocol
Sample protein concentrations were measured by bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay (23225; Thermo Scientific). Samples were then reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 95oC for 5 mins, cooled, then alkylated with 30 mM iodoacetamide (IA) for 30 min in the dark without shaking at room temperature. Subsequently, 10 mM DTT was added to each sample, followed by a quick vortex, and incubation for 10 min at room temperature without shaking. Total proteome peptide pools were then generated using a KingFisher Duo (Thermo Scientific) automated sample preparation device as outlined by Leutert et al. (2019) without deviation (10.15252/msb.20199021). Sample digestion was performed using sequencing grade trypsin (V5113; Promega), with generated peptide pools quantified by Nanodrop, normalized to 400ug for phosphopeptide enrichment and acidified with formic acid (FA) to a final concentration of 5% (v/v) prior to being desalted using 1cc tC18 Sep Pak cartridges (WAT036820; Waters) as previously described (10.1111/tpj.14315).  Phosphopeptide Enrichment – SepPak eluted peptides were topped up to 65% (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN) and 5% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) prior to enrichment using a KingFisher Duo (Thermo Scientific) automated sample preparation device as outlined by Leutert et al. (2019). We used 500ug of MagReSyn Ti-IMAC HP matrix (Resyn BioSciences) to enrich phosphorylated peptides. Unbound peptides (total proteome) and phosphopeptides were dried then dissolved in 3% (v/v) ACN / 0.1% (v/v) TFA, desalted using ZipTip C18 pipette tips (ZTC18S960; Millipore) as previously described (10.1111/tpj.14315).BoxCarDIA Mass Spectrometry – Changes in the protein abundancies was assessed using trypsin digested samples analysed using a Fusion Lumos Tribrid Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) in a data independent acquisition (DIA) mode using the BoxCarDIA method 30. Dissolved peptides (1 µg) were injected using an Easy-nLC 1200 system (LC140; Thermo Scientific) and separated on a 50 cm Easy-Spray PepMap C18 Column (ES803A; Thermo Scientific). A spray voltage of 2.2 kV, funnel RF level of 40 and heated capillary at 300oC was deployed, with all data were acquired in profile mode using positive polarity with peptide match off and isotope exclusion selected. All gradients were run at 300 nL/min with analytical column temperature set to 50oC. Peptides were eluted using a segmented solvent B gradient of 0.1% (v/v) FA in 80% (v/v) ACN from 4% - 41% B (0 - 107 min). BoxCar DIA acquisition was as previously described (Mehta et al 2021). MS1 analysis was performed by using two multiplexed targeted SIM scans of 10 BoxCar windows each, with detection performed at a resolution of 120,000 at 200 m/z and normalized AGC targets of 100% per BoxCar isolation window. Windows were custom designed as previously described (10.1101/2020.11.07.372276). An AGC target value for MS2 fragment spectra was set to 2000%. Twenty-eight 38.5 m/z windows were used with an overlap of 1 m/z. Resolution was set to 30,000 using a dynamic maximum injection time and a minimum number of desired points across each peak set to 6. DDA Mass Spectrometry – Changes in the protein phosphorylation status was assessed using trypsin digested samples analyzed using a Fusion Lumos Tribrid Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) in a data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode using the Universal  method 30. Dissolved phosphopeptides were analyzed as described above, using a linear gradient of solvent B (0.1% (v/v) FA in 80% (v/v) ACN): 5% to 22% B, 0 - 110min; 22% - 35% B, 110 - 120min; 35 - 95% B, 120 - 125min at a flow rate of 0.3 µl/min at 50oC. Peptides were eluted with a solvent B gradient (0.1% (v/v) FA in 80% (v/v) ACN): 4% - 41% B (0 – 120 min); 41% - 98% B (120-125 min). DDA acquisition was performed using the Universal Method (Thermo Scientific). Full scan MS1 spectra (350 - 2000 m/z) were acquired with a resolution of 120,000 at 200m/z with a normalized AGC Target of 125% and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. DDA MS2 were acquired in the linear ion trap using quadrupole isolation in a window of 2.5 m/z. Selected ions were HCD fragmented with 35% fragmentation energy, with the ion trap run in rapid scan mode with an AGC target of 200% and a maximum injection time of 100 ms. Precursor ions with a charge state of +2 - +7 and a signal intensity of at least 5.0e3 were selected for fragmentation. All precursor signals selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 30s.

### Data Protocol
BoxCarDIA Data Analysis - All acquired BoxCar DIA data was analyzed in a library-free DIA approach using Spectronaut v14 (Biognosys AG) using default settings. Key search parameters employed include: a protein, peptide and PSM FDR of 1%, trypsin digestion with 1 missed cleavage, fixed modification including carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues and variable modifications including methionine oxidation. Data was Log2 transformed, globally normalized by median subtraction with significantly changing differentially abundant proteins determined and corrected for multiple comparisons (Bonferroni-corrected p-value ≤ 0.05; q-value). DDA Data Analysis – All acquired DDA phosphoproteomic data was analyzed using MaxQuant 1.6.14.0 (http://www.maxquant.org/; 10.1038/nbt.1511) with the following parameters. A protein, peptide and PSM FDR of 1%, trypsin digestion with 1 missed cleavage, fixed modification including carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues and variable modifications including methionine oxidation and phosphorylated serine, threonine and tyrosine. Data was then imported into Perseus version 1.6.14.0 (10.1038/nmeth.3901) for further analysis. This involved the removal of reverse hits and contaminants, log2-transformation, assembly into treatment groups and filtering based on the presence of measured data in at least 2/3 replicates of at least one group. Data were then median normalized, followed by imputation of missing values based on the normal distribution function set to default parameters. All PTM analyses utilized a PTM site localization score threshold ≥ 0.75. Significantly changing differentially abundant phosphopeptides were determined by ANOVA and corrected for multiple comparisons (Benjamini-Hochberg corrected p-value ≤ 0.05; q-value).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Circadian clock, Arabidopsis, Phosphoproteome, Reveille, Boxcardia

### Affiliations
University of Alberta
Department of Biological Sciences, University of Alberta

### Submitter
Richard Uhrig

### Lab Head
Dr R. Glen Uhrig
Department of Biological Sciences, University of Alberta


