### Accession
PXD023415

### Title
The nucleolus functions as the compartment for histone 1 H2B protein degradation

### Description
Histones are the main components in chromatin organization, and the protein levels of histones significantly affect chromatin assembly. However, how the protein levels of histones are regulated, especially whether and how histones are degraded, is largely unclear. Here, we found that histone H2B is mainly degraded through the proteasome      mediated pathway, and the lysine 120 site of H2B is essential for the K48-linked polyubiquitination and protein degradation of H2B. Moreover, our results further indicated that the degradation-impaired H2BK120R mutant shows an increased nucleolus localization, and inhibition of the proteasome results in an elevated nucleolus distribution of wild-type H2B, which is similar to that of H2BK120R mutants. More importantly, our in vitro data showed that only the nucleolus fractions can ubiquitinate and degrade the purified H2B, suggesting that the nucleolus, in addition to its canonical roles in the regulation of ribosome genesis and protein translation, is likely associated with H2B protein degradation. Therefore, these findings revealed a novel mechanism for the regulation of H2B protein degradation in which a nucleolus associated proteasome pathway is involved.

### Sample Protocol
Nucleolus isolation 1.Cells were soaked in buffer A （10 mM Hepes，pH 7.9，10 mM KCl，1.5 mM MgCl₂,0.5 mM DTT). Then centrifuged at 218g for 5 min after grinding. Non-nucleolus component was collected after centrifugation. 2.The precipitate was washed by adding S1(0.25 M sucrose, 10mM MgCl₂) and added into S2(0.35 M sucrose, 0.5mM MgCl₂) . 3.The precipitate was then sonicated in S2 and added into S3(0.88 M sucrose,0.5mM MgCl₂).Nucleolus was collected after centrifugation at 3000 g for 10 min.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against human uniprot database concatenated with reverse decoy database.Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 4 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification and acetylation modification and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1% and minimum score for modified peptides was set > 40.Species（文章研究物种拉丁名）：Homo sapiens

### Publication Abstract
Histones are main components of chromatin, and the protein levels of histones significantly affect chromatin assembly. However, how histone protein levels are regulated, especially whether and how histones are degraded, is largely unclear. Here, we found that histone H2B is mainly degraded through the proteasome-mediated pathway, and the lysine-120 site of H2B is essential for its K48-linked polyubiquitination and degradation. Moreover, the degradation-impaired H2BK120R mutant shows an increased nucleolus localization, and inhibition of the proteasome results in an elevated nucleolus distribution of wild-type H2B, which is similar to that of H2BK120R mutants. More importantly, the nucleolus fractions can ubiquitinate and degrade the purified H2B <i>in&#xa0;vitro</i>, suggesting that the nucleolus, in addition to its canonical roles regulating ribosome genesis and protein translation, likely associates with H2B degradation. Therefore, these findings revealed a novel mechanism for the regulation of H2B degradation in which a nucleolus-associated proteasome pathway is involved.

### Keywords
H2b ;  protein degradation ;  nucleolus ;  polyubiquitination

### Affiliations
Jining Medical University
Xi’an Jiao Tong University Health Science Center

### Submitter
sheng li

### Lab Head
Dr Su chen
Xi’an Jiao Tong University Health Science Center


