### Accession
PXD029642

### Title
Regulatory role of E3 ubiquitin ligase Smurf2 on transcriptional corepressor KAP1

### Description
An E3 ubiquitin ligase Smurf2 and transcriptional co-repressor KAP1 have been documented to play crucial roles in similar cellular pathways including cell cycle, DNA damage response, chromatin compaction, senescence and cell death. Smurf2 and KAP1, through regulation of these cellular processes either drive or suppress tumorigenesis. Studies till date confer Smurf2 with a dual role in carcinogenesis, an oncogene and a tumor suppressor, depending on the cellular context. However, the molecular mechanisms governing Smurf2 functions remain unclear. Furthermore, studies have demonstrated significantly altered KAP1 protein levels in many human malignancies, despite which, the mechanisms operating in and regulating KAP1 stability and activity are obscure. In this study, we obtained evidence which indicates a strong and dynamic association between Smurf2 and KAP1. We found that Smurf2 directly binds KAP1 through its C2, WW1 and HECT domains. Further mechanistic studies also revealed that Smurf2 multi(mono)ubiquitinates KAP1 in E3 ligase-dependent manner. Moreover, Smurf2 differentially alters KAP1 protein levels in different types of mammalian and cancer cells and tissues, and significantly alters KAP1 interactome. Based on these findings, we propose a mechanism to explain the dual role and differential regulation of Smurf2 on KAP1 in a cell-context dependent manner. Further investigations of the identified Smurf2/KAP1 module could potentially lead to development of new, more efficient diagnostics tools and treatment paradigms.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293T cells were co- transfected with FLAG-KAP1 in combination with MYC-SMURF2 constructs, or MYC- Empty vector as an additional control, using PEI. Proteins were then extracted with 1% of NP- 40 lysis buffer supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitors. The lysates, which were consequently immuno-precipitated with anti- FLAG or anti- MYC antibodies, were first precleared for 2 hours at 4°C under rotation with protein A/G PLUS- Agarose beads (sc- 2003, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Dallas, TX, USA) or Protein- G- Sepharose beads, respectively. FLAG- KAP1 was IPed using anti- FLAG resin and MYC- SMURF2 was IPed with anti- MYC antibody followed by Protein- G- Sepharose beads pull down. Subsequently, protein samples were eluted from the beads using 8 M of urea buffer (8 M of urea, 20 mM of Tris [pH 7.5], 10 mM of DTT, and 100mM of NaCl) and submitted for analysis.

### Data Protocol
The eluted proteins were digested with trypsin and analyzed in Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The resulting peptides were annotated against human proteome database using the Proteome Discoverer 1.4 tool and two search algorithms: SEQUEST (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) and Mascot (Matrix Science, Boston, MA, USA). All the identified peptides were filtered with high confidence (FDR1%), top rank, mass accuracy, and a minimum coverage of two peptides.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Ubiquitination, Kap1, E3 ubiquitin ligase, Smurf2

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Molecular and Cellular Cancer Biology Azrieli Faculty of Medicine   Bar-Ilan University, Israel
MD Anderson Cancer Center

### Submitter
[Pooja Shah

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Blank
Laboratory of Molecular and Cellular Cancer Biology Azrieli Faculty of Medicine   Bar-Ilan University, Israel


