### Accession
PXD002670

### Title
Drosophila S2R+ / TSC1 / TSC2 mutant phosphoproteomics

### Description
The tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC) family of tumor suppressors, TSC1 and TSC2, function together in an evolutionarily conserved protein complex that is a point of convergence for major cell signaling pathways that regulate mTOR complex 1 (mTORC1). Mutation or aberrant inhibition of the TSC complex is common in various human tumor syndromes and cancers. The discovery of novel therapeutic strategies to selectively target cells with functional loss of this complex is therefore of substantial clinical relevance to TSC and sporadic cancers. We developed a CRISPR-based method to generate homogenous mutant Drosophila cell lines. By combining TSC1 and TSC2 mutant cell lines with RNAi screens against all kinases and phosphatases, we identified synthetic interactions with TSC1 and TSC2. Knockdown of three candidate genes (mRNA-cap, Pitslre and CycT; orthologs of RNGTT, CDK11 and CCNT1 in humans) reduced the population growth rate of both Drosophila TSC1 and TSC2 mutant cells but not that of wild-type cells. Moreover, knockdown of all three genes displayed similar selective effects in mammalian TSC2-deficient cell lines, including human tumor-derived cells, illustrating the power of this cross species screening strategy to identify potential drug targets.

### Sample Protocol
S2R+, TSC1 or TSC2 mutant cells were serum starved for 16 hours before lysis in 8M urea. Samples were then digested with trypsin, peptides chemically labeled with TMT Isobaric Mass Tags (Thermo Scientific), separated into 12 fractions by strong cation exchange (SCX) chromatography, purified with TiO2 microspheres and analyzed via LC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified by Sequest and filtered to a 1% peptide FDR. Proteins were filtered to achieve a 2% final protein FDR (final peptide FDR near 0.15%). TMT reporter ion intensities for individual phosphopeptides were normalized to the summed reporter ion intensity for each TMT label. The localizations of phosphosites were assigned using the AScore algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
The tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC) family of tumor suppressors, TSC1 and TSC2, function together in an evolutionarily conserved protein complex that is a point of convergence for major cell signaling pathways that regulate mTOR complex 1 (mTORC1). Mutation or aberrant inhibition of the TSC complex is common in various human tumor syndromes and cancers. The discovery of novel therapeutic strategies to selectively target cells with functional loss of this complex is therefore of clinical relevance to patients with nonmalignant TSC and those with sporadic cancers. We developed a CRISPR-based method to generate homogeneous mutant Drosophila cell lines. By combining TSC1 or TSC2 mutant cell lines with RNAi screens against all kinases and phosphatases, we identified synthetic interactions with TSC1 and TSC2. Individual knockdown of three candidate genes (mRNA-cap, Pitslre, and CycT; orthologs of RNGTT, CDK11, and CCNT1 in humans) reduced the population growth rate of Drosophila cells lacking either TSC1 or TSC2 but not that of wild-type cells. Moreover, individual knockdown of these three genes had similar growth-inhibiting effects in mammalian TSC2-deficient cell lines, including human tumor-derived cells, illustrating the power of this cross-species screening strategy to identify potential drug targets.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Drosophila, Tsc2, Tsc1

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School
Genetics Department, Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Benjamin Housden

### Lab Head
Dr Norbert Perrimon
Genetics Department, Harvard Medical School


