### Accession
PXD010162

### Title
Investigation of cytoplasmic cGAS interactions reveals association with OASL during HSV-1 infection

### Description
Viral DNA sensing is an essential component of mammalian innate immune response. Upon binding viral DNA, the cyclic-GMP-AMP synthase (cGAS) catalyzes the production of cyclic dinucleotides to induce type I interferons. However, little is known about how cGAS is homeostatically maintained or regulated upon infection. Here, we define cytoplasmic cGAS interactions with cellular and viral proteins upon herpes simplex virus (HSV-1) infection in primary human fibroblasts. We compare several HSV-1 strains (wild-type, d109, d106) that induce cytokine responses and apoptosis, and place cGAS interactions in the context of temporal proteome alterations using isobaric-labeling mass spectrometry. Follow-up analyses establish a functional interaction between cGAS and 2’-5’-oligoadenylate synthase-like protein OASL. The OAS-like domain interacts with the cGAS Mab21 domain, while the OASL ubiquitin-like domain further inhibits cGAS-mediated interferon response. Our findings explain how cGAS may be inactively maintained in cellular homeostasis, with OASL functioning as a negative feedback loop for cytokine induction.

### Sample Protocol
IP samples were processed by gel fractionation prior to MS analysis on either a Q Exactive HF or an LTQ Orbitrap Velos.  TMT samples were labelled and fractionated by 2D StageTips and run on a Q Exactive HF.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data were searched using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 or 2.2.  Protein assemblies were made in either Scaffold for the IP-MS data or in Proteome Discoverer 2.2 for the TMT data.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ip-ms, Cgas, Dna sensing, Tmt, Interactions, Oasl

### Affiliations
Princeton University
Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, USA

### Submitter
Joel Federspiel

### Lab Head
Dr Ileana M Cristea
Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, USA


