### Accession
PXD042852

### Title
Nanoparticle Enrichment Mass-Spectrometry Proteomics Identifies Protein Altering Variants for Precise pQTL Mapping

### Description
Proteogenomics studies generate hypotheses on protein function and provide genetic evidence for drug target prioritization. Most previous work has been conducted using affinity-based proteomics approaches. These technological face challenges, such as uncertainty regarding target identity, non-specific binding, and handling of variants that affect epitope affinity binding. Mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics can overcome some of these challenges. Here we report a pQTL study using the Proteograph™ Product Suite workflow (Seer, Inc.) where we quantify over 18,000 unique peptides from nearly 3,000 proteins in more than 320 blood samples from a multi-ethnic cohort in a bottom-up, peptide-centric, MS-based proteomics approach. We identify 184 protein-altering variants (PAVs) in 137 genes that are significantly associated with their corresponding variant peptides, confirming target specificity of co-associated affinity binders, identifying putatively causal cis-encoded proteins and providing experimental evidence for their presence in blood, including proteins that may be inaccessible to affinity-based proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
240 µL of previously un-thawed citrate plasma were loaded onto the SP100 Automation Instrument for sample preparation with Proteograph™ Assay Kits and the Proteograph™ workflow (Seer, Inc.) to generate purified peptides for downstream LC-MS analysis. Each plasma sample was incubated with five proprietary, physicochemically-distinct nanoparticles for protein corona formation. Samples were automatically plated, including process controls, digestion control, and MPE peptide clean-up control. A one-hour incubation resulted in a reproducible protein corona around each nanoparticle surface. After incubation, nanoparticle-bound proteins were captured using magnetic isolation. A series of gentle washes removed nonspecific and weakly-bound proteins. The paramagnetic property of the nanoparticles allows for retention of nanoparticles with the protein corona during each wash step. This results in a highly specific and reproducible protein corona. Protein coronas were reduced, alkylated, and digested with Trypsin/Lys-C to generate tryptic peptides for LC-MS analysis. All steps were performed in a one-pot reaction directly on the nanoparticles. The in-solution digestion mixture was then desalted, and all detergents were removed using a solid phase extraction and positive pressure (MPE) system on the SP100 Automation Instrument. Clean peptides were eluted in a high-organic buffer into a deep-well collection plate. Equal volumes of the peptide elution were dried down in a SpeedVac (3 hours-overnight), and the resulting dried peptides were stored at -80 °C. Using the results from the peptide quantitation assay, peptides were thawed and reconstituted to a final concentration of 50 ng/µL in the Proteograph™ Assay Kit Reconstitution Buffer. 4 µL of the reconstituted peptides were loaded on an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 (0.3 mm ID x 5 mm) trap column and then separated on a 50 cm μPAC analytical column (PharmaFluidics, Belgium) at a flow rate of 1 μL/minute using a gradient of 5 – 25% solvent B (0.1% FA, 100 % ACN) in solvent A (0.1% FA, 100% water) over 22 minutes, resulting in a 33 minute total run time. The peptides generated from these multi-nanoparticle-sampled proteins were analyzed using a diaPASEF method on a timsTOF Pro 2 mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics).

### Data Protocol
All MS files were processed using the DIA-NN 1.8.1 software and a library-free search with match-between-runs (MBR) enabled against the UniProt database (accessed June 2022) and thereof derived PAV-exclusive and PAV-inclusive   libraries, as described above. Peptide and protein intensities were quantified using the DIA-NN in match-between-runs mode with flags: --mass-acc-ms1 10, --mass-acc 10, --qvalue 0.1, --matrices, --missed-cleavages 2, --met-excision, --cut K*,R*, --smart-profiling, --relaxed-prot-inf, --pg-level 1, --reannotate, --gen-spec-lib, --threads 32, --predictor, --unimod4, --use-quant, --peak-center, --no-ifs-removal, and –-reanalyse.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Genome-wide association studies, Proteograph™ workflow, Proteomics, Protein altering variants, Mass spectrometry, Protein quantitative trait loci

### Affiliations
Bioinformatics Core, Weill Cornell Medicine-Qatar
Weill Cornell Medicine - Qatar

### Submitter
Karsten Suhre

### Lab Head
Dr Karsten Suhre
Bioinformatics Core, Weill Cornell Medicine-Qatar


