### Accession
PXD009194

### Title
Label-free quantitative Proteomics Analysis Reveals Distinct Molecular characteristics in Endocardial Endothelium

### Description
Endocardial endothelium, which lines the chambers of the heart, is distinct in its origin, structure, and function. However, though functionally very important, no studies at protein level have been conducted so far characterizing endocardial endothelium. In this study, we used endothelial cells from pig heart to investigate if endocardial endothelial cells are distinct at the proteome level. Using a high throughput liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry for proteome profiling and expression, we identified sets of proteins that belong to specific biological processes and metabolic pathways in endocardial endothelial cells supporting its specific structural and functional roles.

### Sample Protocol
Endothelial cells were isolated from three slaughtered male pigs (Sus scrofa domesticus) and cultured in 60X 15mm dish until 95% until they become confluent. The cells were harvested, lysed, and proteins were extracted. 100 micrograms of protein from each sample were used for in-solution trypsin digestion. DL-dithiothreitol (10 mM) (Sigma-Aldrich, USA) in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma-Aldrich, USA) buffer at 60ᴼC for 30 minutes was used to reduce the disulfide bonds. The subsequent alkylation of proteins was done with 200mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich, USA) in the same buffer at 27°C for 30 minutes in the dark. The alkylated proteins were digested with trypsin (sequencing-grade modified trypsin, Sigma-Aldrich, USA; 1:25 w/w) in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer by incubating overnight at 37ᴼC. Formic acid(Sigma-Aldrich, USA; 1% v/v) was used to terminate the trypsin digestion reaction. The digested peptide solution was centrifuged at 14,000 rpm at 4ºC for 12 minutes, and the supernatant was stored at -20ᴼC until the LC/MS/MS analysis.  The peptide samples were analyzed by using a nano ACQUITY UPLC® System (Waters, UK) coupled to a Quadrupole-Time of Flight (Q/TOF) mass spectrometer (SYNAPT-G2, Waters, UK) controlled by MassLynx4.1 SCN781 software (Waters, UK). In each sample, equivalent to 3µg of protein (3µl), was injected in ‘partial loop’ mode and was loaded into the reverse phase column with 0.1% formic acid in water as mobile phase A, and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile as mobile phase B, using the binary solvent manager. The trap column (Symmetry® 180µm x 20mm C18 5µm, Waters, UK) was used to remove any salt by employing a high flow rate (15µl/minute) with 99.9% mobile phase A and 0.1% mobile phase B for 1 minute. The peptide separation was performed in a 75µm x 100mm BEH C18 column (Waters, UK), with a particle size of 1.7µm. Gradient elution with 1-40% mobile phase B, for 55.5 minutes at 300nl/minute flow rate, was employed. After separation, the column was washed with 80 % mobile phase B for 7.5 minutes and re-equilibrated with 1% mobile phase B for 20 minutes. The column temperature was maintained at 40ᴼC. Three technical replicate runs were performed for each sample. Peptides eluted from the nano-LC were monitored by SYNAPT® G2 High Definition MS™ System (HDMSE System (Waters, UK). The time of flight analyzer (TOF) was calibrated with a solution of 500fmole/µl of human [Glu1]-Fibrinopeptide B (Sigma Aldrich, USA), and the lock mass acquisition was performed every 30 seconds by the same peptide delivered through the reference sprayer of the nano-LockSpray source at a flow rate of 500nl/minute. This calibration sets the analyzer to detect ions in the range of 50 - 2,000 m/z. The mass spectrometer was operated in the ‘resolution mode’ with a resolving power of 18,000 FWHM, and the data acquisition was performed in ‘continuum’ format. The data were acquired by rapidly alternating between two functions – Function-1 (low energy) and Function-2 (high energy-MSE). Each spectrum was acquired in 0.9 seconds with an interscan delay of 0.024s.

### Data Protocol
The LC- MSE data was analyzed by using Progenesis QI for Proteomics (Non-linear Dynamics, New castle upon Tyn, UK) for protein identification as well as for the relative protein quantification. Data processing includes lock mass correction post-acquisition. The database for sus scrofa (pig) was downloaded from NCBI. During database search, the protein false positive rate was set at 1%. The parameters for protein identification was made in such a way that a peptide was required to have at least one fragment ion match, the protein was required to have at least three fragment ion matches, and protein was required to have at least one peptide match for identification. Oxidation of methionine was selected as variable modification, and cysteine carbamidomethylation was selected as a fixed modification. Trypsin was chosen as the enzyme used with a specificity of 1 missed cleavage. Data sets were normalized using the automatic sensitivity method implemented in Progenesis. The protein dataset was filtered by considering only those identified proteins which have at least 2 matched peptides in any one of the technical replicates. The normalized intensity values obtained for commonly identified proteins from 3 biological replicates were used for differential expression analysis by t-test with a false discovery rate (FDR) < 0.05 and the fold change higher than 2.

### Publication Abstract
Endocardial endothelium, which lines the chambers of the heart, is distinct in its origin, structure, and function. Characterization studies using genomics and proteomics have reported molecular signatures supporting the structural and functional heterogeneity of various endothelial cells. However, though functionally very important, no studies at protein level have been conducted so far characterizing endocardial endothelium. In this study, we used endothelial cells from pig heart to investigate if endocardial endothelial cells are distinct at the proteome level. Using a high-throughput liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry for proteome profiling and expression, we identified sets of proteins that belong to specific biological processes and metabolic pathways in endocardial endothelial cells supporting its specific structural and functional roles. The study also identified several transcription factors and cell surface markers, which may have roles in the specificity of endocardial endothelium. The detection of sets proteins preferentially expressed in endocardial endothelium offers new insights into its role in the regulation of cardiac function. Data are made available through ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD009194.

### Keywords
Endocardium, Aorta, Label free proteomics, Endothelium

### Affiliations
Scientist F, Diabetes Biology Laboratory
PhD Student

### Submitter
Aneesh Kumar

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Abdul Jaleel KA
Scientist F, Diabetes Biology Laboratory


