### Accession
PXD032917

### Title
A proteomics approach towards identification and validation of blood-based protein biomarkers for the differentiation of ischemic stroke from intracerebral hemorrhage

### Description
Background & aims: Stroke diagnosis is challenging in the acute phase. We aimed to determine biomarkers for the differentiation of ischemic stroke (IS) from intracerebral hemorrhage (ICH) using SWATH-MS and validate the discovered biomarkers within 24 hours using MRM proteomics.   Methods: The study was conducted at Department of Neurology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India. Serum samples were collected within 24 hours from acute stroke (IS & ICH) patients & healthy controls. SWATH-MS proteomics identified significantly differentially expressed (SDE) proteins (fold change: 1.5, p<0.05 and confirmed/tentative selection using Boruta random forest) between IS and ICH which were then validated using protein MRM. Cut-off points were determined using Youden Index. Prediction models were developed using forward stepwise multivariate logistic regression analysis. Integrated discrimination improvement index determined the added value of biomarkers to clinical models.  Results: Discovery phase included 20 IS, 20 ICH and 40 controls while validation phase included 150 IS and 150 ICH subjects. Total 365 proteins were quantified using SWATH-MS. Between IS and ICH, 20 SDE proteins were identified. Prediction model including clinical variables (sex, hypertension, atrial fibrillation, current smoking, baseline NIHSS) and biomarkers (GFAP, MMP9, APOC1) independently differentiated IS from ICH (accuracy: 92%, sensitivity: 96%, specificity: 69%). Addition of biomarkers improved the discrimination capacity by 26% (p<0.001) compared to clinical variables alone.  Conclusion: Our study identified a range of potential protein biomarkers for the differentiation of IS. Protein biomarkers along with clinical predictors might be useful candidates in differentiating IS from ICH in acute settings.

### Sample Protocol
Ten microliters of serum samples were used for protein precipitation. To 90µl of 1X Phosphate Buffer Saline (PBS), 10 µl serum was added and vortex mixed. Protein precipitation was performed using pre-chilled acetone. Briefly, to 100 µl protein extract, four times volume of pre-chilled acetone was added, vortex mixed and centrifuged at 15000 g for 10 minutes at 4℃. The supernatant was discarded, and the protein pellets were air-dried at room temperature and suspended in 0.1 M Tris-HCl with 8M urea, pH 8.5. Protein quantitation was performed using the Bradford assay.  Reduction, alkylation and trypsin digestion A total of 20 µg of protein from each sample included in the discovery phase was reduced with 25 mM of Dithiothreitol (DTT) for 30 minutes at 60℃, followed by alkylation using 55 mM of Iodoacetamide (IAA) at room temperature (in the dark) for 30 minutes. These samples were then subjected to trypsin digestion in an enzyme to substrate ratio of 1:10 (trypsin: protein) for 16-18 hours at 37℃. Finally, the tryptic peptides were vacuum dried in vacuum concentrator.  SWATH-MS Data acquisition Peptides from each sample were cleaned up using C18 ZipTip using the manufacturer’s protocol. SWATH-MS analysis for the samples was performed on a quadrupole-TOF hybrid mass spectrometer (TripleTOF 6600, SCIEX) coupled to an Eksigent NanoLC-425 system. Optimized source parameters were used, curtain gas and nebulizer gas were maintained at 25 psi and 30 psi respectively. The ion spray voltage was set to 5.5 kV and temperature was set to 250°C. About 4 μg of peptides were loaded on a trap-column (ChromXP C18CL 5 µm 120 Å, Eksigent, SCIEX) and online desalting was performed with a flow rate of 10 µl per minutes for 10 minutes. Next, peptides were separated on a reverse-phase C18 analytical column (ChromXP C18, 3 µm 120 Å, Eksigent, SCIEX) in 57 minutes long gradient with a flow rate of 5 µl/minute using water with 0.1% formic acid and acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid. SWATH method was created with 95 precursor isolation windows, defined based on precursor m/z frequencies in Data Dependent Acquisition (DDA) run using the SWATH Variable Window Calculator (SCIEX), with a minimum window of 5 m/z. Data was acquired using Analyst TF 1.7.1 Software (SCIEX). Accumulation time was set to 250 msec for the MS scan (400–1250 m/z) and 25 msec for the MS/MS scans (100–1500 m/z). Rolling collision energies were applied for each window based on the m/z range of each SWATH and a charge 2+ ion, with a collision energy spread of 5. The total cycle time was 3.37 seconds.  Peptide selection for MRM Peptide selection was performed using search results from ProteinPilot,7 PeptideAtlas8 or in-silico generated peptides of proteins using Expasy PeptideCutter tool.9 Peptides with +2 and +3 charges were considered for MRM and for each peptide, 5-6 fragment ions were used for identification. Peptide selection for the list of shortlisted proteins is given in supplementary file.  MRM data acquisition Tryptic peptides obtained after digestion were desalted using reversed phase cartridges Oasis HLB cartridge (Waters, Milford, MA) according to the following procedure: wet cartridge with 1 × 1,000 μl of 100% acetonitrile, equilibrate with 1 × 1,000 μl of 0.1% formic acid, load acidified digest, washed peptides with 1 × 1,000 μl of 0.1% formic acid and elute with 1 × 1000 μl of 70% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. The peptide mixture was dried using a vacuum centrifuge, and the peptides were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid at a final concentration of 1 μg/μl. A heavy labeled peptide for Apo A1 (QGLLPVLESFK; K=Lysine-13C6,15N2) protein was spiked-in the resolubilized plasma digest at a final concentration of 1 ng/μl. The targeted MRM-MS analysis of the tryptic peptides was performed on a TSQ Altis (Thermo Fisher, San Jose, CA). The instrument was equipped to an H-ESI ion source. A spray voltage of 3.5 keV was used with a heated ion transfer tube set at a temperature of 325°C. Chromatographic separations of peptides were performed on Vanquish UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher, San Jose, CA). The 10 μl of the sample was injected and peptides were loaded on an ACQUITY UPLC BEH C18 column (130Å, 1.7 µm, 2.1 mm X 100 mm, Waters) from a cooled (4 °C) autosampler and separated with a linear gradient of water (buffer A) and acetonitrile (buffer B), containing 0.1% formic acid, at a flow rate of 300 µl/minute in 30 minutes’ gradient run.

### Data Protocol
For identification of the proteins using SWATH analysis, a high-pH fractionated peptide library for human serum proteins (obtained from SCIEX) comprising of 465 proteins was used. SWATH peaks were extracted using this library in SWATH 2.0 microapp in PeakView 2.2 software (SCIEX), excluding shared peptides. The processing settings for peak extraction were: maximum of 10 peptides per protein, 5 transitions per peptide, >95% peptide confidence threshold, 1% peptide false discovery rate (FDR). XIC extraction window was set to 55 minutes with 75 ppm XIC Width. All information was exported in the form of MarkerView (.mrkw) files. Data was normalized using total area sum normalization and log2 transformed. Batch correction for removing the non-biological experimental variations including the sample batches run at different timepoints was performed using the “ComBat” function inside the “sva” package in R version 3.6.2. Skyline version 21.1 was used to analyze the MRM data. The area for each peptide was spike-in normalized using a heavy labeled peptide for Apo A1 protein and then log2 transformed. The “missForest” package in R version 3.6.2 was used to perform the random forest-based imputation for peptides with <10% missing values. The normality of the data was assessed using the Shapiro-Wilk test. The continuous variables were represented as mean (standard deviation (SD)) or median (interquartile range (IQR)) while the dichotomous variables were represented as number (percentage). For continuous variables, those normally distributed (p >0.05) were analyzed using Student’s t-test whereas for variables with non-normal distribution, Mann–Whitney U test was used to determine the difference between the means of two groups. The dichotomous variables were analysed using the Chi-square test.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ischemic stroke; intracerebral hemorrhage; diagnosis; differentiation; blood; biomarkers; proteomics

### Affiliations
Department of Neurology,Neurosciences Centre,All India Institute of Medical Sciences,Ansari Nagar, New Delhi-110029, India
All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi

### Submitter
Shubham Misra

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Deepti Vibha
Department of Neurology,Neurosciences Centre,All India Institute of Medical Sciences,Ansari Nagar, New Delhi-110029, India


