### Accession
PXD016482

### Title
Phosphoproteomic analysis of mammalian infective Trypanosoma brucei subjected to heat shock suggest atypical mechanisms for thermotolerance

### Description
A phosphoproteomic analysis of heat shock response in the mammalian infective bloodstream form Trypanosoma brucei was conducted using SILAC-based quantitation. Treatment at 41 0C for 1h produced significantly altered phosphorylation at 193 sites and significantly altered the abundance of 20 proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Briefly, bloodstream form T. brucei cells were heat shocked at 41 0C for 1h in a water bath, and compared to untreated heavy SILAC (R6K10) labelled cells. After hypotonic lysis equal cell numbers were combined and subjected to FASP based solubilisation, reductive alkylation, and tryptic digest. FeIMAC was used to separate peptide from phosphopeptides, which were both processed in parallel. Off-line high pH reverse phase chromatography with concatenation to five fractionswas used to reduce the sample complexity prior to LC-MS/MS on an LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro with DDA, using MSA and technical duplicates for the phosphopeptides.

### Data Protocol
Data was processed using MaxQuant version 1.6.1.0 which incorporates the Andromeda search engine. Proteins were identified by searching a protein sequence database containing T. brucei brucei 927 annotated proteins (Version 37, 11,074 protein sequences, TriTrypDB http://www.tritrypdb.org/) supplemented with frequently observed contaminants (porcine trypsin, bovine serum albumins and mammalian keratins). Search parameters specified an MS tolerance of 6 ppm, an MS/MS tolerance at 0.5 Da and full trypsin specificity, allowing for up to two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine, N-terminal protein acetylation and N-pyroglutamate were allowed as variable modifications. The experimental design included matching between runs for the concatenated fractions in each experiment. Analysis of the multistage activation phosphoproteomic data used the same parameters, except for the addition of phosophorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine residues as variable modifications and the grouping of the two technical replicates together. Peptides were required to be at least 7 amino acids in length, with false discovery rates (FDRs) of 0.01 calculated at the levels of peptides, proteins and modification sites based on the number of hits against the reversed sequence database.    SILAC ratios for phosphorylation sites were calculated using only data from the phosphoproteomic experiments, and SILAC ratios for proteins were calculated using only data from the proteomic experiments. SILAC ratios were calculated where at least one peptide could be uniquely mapped to a given protein group and required a minimum of two SILAC pairs. To account for any errors in the counting of the number of cells in each sample prior to mixing, the distribution of SILAC ratios was normalised within MaxQuant at the peptide level so that the median of log2 ratios is zero.

### Publication Abstract
The symptoms of African sleeping sickness, caused by the parasite Trypanosoma brucei, can include periods of fever as high as 41&#xa0;<sup>&#xb0;</sup>C which triggers a heat shock response in the parasite. To capture events involved in sensing and responding to heat shock in the mammalian infective form we have conducted a SILAC-based quantitative proteomic and phosphoproteomic analysis of T. brucei cells treated at 41&#xa0;<sup>&#xb0;</sup>C for 1h. Our analysis identified 193 heat shock responsive phosphorylation sites with an average of 5-fold change in abundance, but only 20 heat shock responsive proteins with average of 1.5-fold change. These data indicate that protein abundance does not rapidly respond (&#x2264;1 h) to heat shock, and that the changes observed in phosphorylation site abundance are larger and more widespread. The heat shock responsive phosphorylation sites showed enrichment of RNA binding proteins with putative roles in heat shock response included P-body / stress granules and the eukaryotic translation initiation 4F complex. The ZC3H11-MKT1 complex, which stabilises mRNAs of thermotolerance proteins, appears to represent a key signal integration node in the heat shock response. SIGNIFICANCE: We report the first quantitative study of changes in protein and phosphorylation site abundance in response to heat shock in the clinically relevant form of the human parasite Trypanosoma brucei. The identification of heat shock responsive phosphorylation sites on proteins with putative roles in thermotolerance including the ZC3H11-MKT1 complex provides evidence of the role dynamic phosphorylation of RNA binding proteins in co-ordinating heat shock. Temperature changes in the host are a major physiological challenge to parasites and factors conferring tolerance to heat shock constitute overlooked virulence factors. A better understanding of these virulence factors will pave the way for the development of novel drug therapies which selectively target T. brucei.

### Keywords
Silac, Ls-ms/ms, Fe-imac, Heat shock

### Affiliations
Biomedical and Life Sciences, Lancaster University
Lancaster University

### Submitter
Michael Urbaniak

### Lab Head
Dr Michael D Urbaniak
Biomedical and Life Sciences, Lancaster University


