### Accession
PXD033884

### Title
Fitm2 is required for ER homeostasis and normal function of murine liver

### Description
The ER-resident prote in fat-inducing transcript 2 (FIT2) catalyzes acyl-CoA cleavage in vitro, and in cells is required for endoplasmic reticulum (ER)homeostasis and normal lipid storage. The gene encoding FIT2 is essential for viability of mice and worms. Whether FIT2 acts as anacyl-CoA diphosphatase in vivo and how this activity affects liver, where the protein was discovered,is unknown. Here, we report that hepatocyte-specific Fitm2 knockout (FIT2-LKO) mice exhibited elevated acyl-CoA levels, ER stress, and signs of liver injury. FIT2-LKO mice had increased triglyceride (TG) content in liver when fed a chow diet, compared with control littermates due in part to impaired secretion of TG-rich lipoproteins and reduced capacity for fatty acid oxidation. Challenging FIT2-LKO mice with a high-fat diet to increase FIT2 acyl-CoA substrates worsened hepatic ER stress and liver injury, yet unexpectedly reversed the steatosis phenotype, similar to what is observed in FIT2-deficient cells loaded with fatty acids. Our findings show that FIT2 acts as anacyl-CoA diphosphatase in vivo and is crucial for normal hepatocyte function and ER homeostasis in murine liver

### Sample Protocol
Liver (~20mg) was homogenized in 800ul PBS (supplemented with complete mini EDTA-free protease inhibitor (Sigma Aldrich) and 5mM EDTA) using a Bead Mill Homogenizer (VWR). Extraction of proteins were performed accordingto previously described method in (Gluchowski et al., 2019).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data were analyzed by MaxQuant software version 1.5.2.8 (Cox and Mann, 2008)using the following setting: oxidized methionine residues and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modification, cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification, first search peptide tolerance 20 ppm, and main search peptide tolerance 4.5 ppm. Protease specificity was set to trypsin with up to two missed cleavages allowed. Only peptides longer than six amino acids were analyzed, and the minimal ratio count to quantify a protein is 2. The false discovery rate was set to 5% for peptide and protein identifications. Database searches were performed using the Andromeda search engine integrated into the MaxQuant environment (Cox et al., 2011)against the UniProt-mouse database containing 54,185 entries (December 2018). “Matching between runs” algorithm with a time window of 0.7 min was utilized to transfer identifications between samples processed using the same nanospray conditions. Protein tables were filtered to eliminate identifications from the reverse database and common contaminants. Fold changes of proteins were calculated comparing mean area of log2 intensities between replicates of different genotypes. Statistical significance was calculated using a Student’s t-test

### Publication Abstract
The endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-resident protein fat storage-inducing transmembrane protein 2 (FIT2) catalyzes acyl-CoA cleavage in&#xa0;vitro and is required for ER homeostasis and normal lipid storage in cells. The gene encoding FIT2 is essential for the viability of mice and worms. Whether FIT2 acts as an acyl-CoA diphosphatase in&#xa0;vivo and how this activity affects the liver, where the protein was discovered, are unknown. Here, we report that hepatocyte-specific Fitm2 knockout (FIT2-LKO) mice fed a chow diet exhibited elevated acyl-CoA levels, ER stress, and signs of liver injury. These mice also had more triglycerides in their livers than control littermates due, in part, to impaired secretion of triglyceride-rich lipoproteins and reduced capacity for fatty acid oxidation. We found that challenging FIT2-LKO mice with a high-fat diet worsened hepatic ER stress and liver injury but unexpectedly reversed the steatosis phenotype, similar to what is observed in FIT2-deficient cells loaded with fatty acids. Our findings support the model that FIT2 acts as an acyl-CoA diphosphatase in&#xa0;vivo and is crucial for normal hepatocyte function and ER homeostasis in the murine liver.

### Keywords
Liver, Acyl-coa, Lipid metabolism, Endoplasmic reticulum, Fitm2

### Affiliations
Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health Harvard Medical School
Harvard T. H. Chan School of Public Health

### Submitter
Zon Weng Lai

### Lab Head
Dr Tobias Walther
Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health Harvard Medical School


