### Accession
PXD010579

### Title
Stable-protein Pair Analysis as A Novel Strategy to Identify Proteomic Signatures: Application to Seminal Plasma From Infertile Patients.

### Description
Our aim was to define seminal plasma proteome signatures of infertile patients categorized according to their seminal parameters using TMT-LC-MS/MS. To that extent, quantitative proteomic data was analyzed following two complementary strategies: (i) the conventional approach based on standard statistical analyses of relative protein quantification values; and (ii) a novel strategy focused on establishing stable-protein pairs. By conventional analyses, the abundance of some seminal plasma proteins was found to be positively correlated with sperm concentration. However, this correlation was not found for all the peptides within a specific protein, bringing to light the high heterogeneity existing in the seminal plasma proteome due to both the proteolytic fragments and/or the post-translational modifications. This issue was overcome by conducting the novel stable-protein pairs analysis proposed herein. A total of 182 correlations comprising 24 different proteins were identified in the normozoospermic-control population, while this proportion was drastically reduced in infertile patients with altered seminal parameters (18 in patients with reduced sperm motility, 0 in patients with low sperm concentration and 3 in patients with no sperm in the ejaculate). These results suggest the existence of multiple etiologies causing the same alteration in seminal parameters. Additionally, the repetition of the stable-protein pair analysis in the control group by adding the data from a single patient at a time enabled to identify alterations in the stable-protein pairs profile of individual patients with altered seminal parameters. These results suggest potential underlying pathogenic mechanisms in individual infertile patients, and might open up a window to its application in the personalized diagnostic of male infertility.

### Sample Protocol
Liquefied semen samples were centrifuged at 500 g for 10 min and 1500 g for 10 min, to separate the sperm cells from the seminal plasma. The resulting seminal plasma was filtered (0.45 µm pore size) to remove any cellular leftovers. All cell-free seminal plasma samples were frozen at -80 ºC until further processing. After thawing, seminal plasma samples were centrifuged at 16000 g for 10 min at 4ºC and the protein concentration from the supernatant of each sample was determined using the BCA protein Assay Kit (PierceTM BCA protein Assay Kit, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA), following manufacturer’s recommendations. A total of 16 seminal plasma samples were selected for the proteomics study, including 4 normozoospermics (NZ), 4 asthenozoospermics (AS), 4 oligozoospermics (OZ) and 4 azoospermics (AZ) patients. Differential peptide labeling was performed using tandem mass tag (TMT) 10-plex isotopic label reagent set (TMT 10-plex Mass Tag Labeling; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA), following manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, 60 µg of protein from each seminal plasma sample was adjusted to a final volume of 60 µl with 100mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), and protein quantification was repeated to ensure that all samples had the same concentration (1 µg/µl). Proteins were reduced in 9.5 mM tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP) for 1 h at 55 ºC, alkylated with 17 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 min in the dark, and precipitated with 500 µl of cold 100% acetone at -20 ºC overnight. Samples were centrifuged at 17500 g for 10 min at 4 ºC and the acetone-precipitated protein pellets were resuspended in 60 µl of 100 mM TEAB. Trypsin was then added at 1:20 protein-to-protease ratio and incubated overnight at 37 ºC with constant shaking. Prior to peptide labeling, aliquots with the same volume and concentration were taken out from each of the 16 samples and combined together, in order to constitute the internal control. After that, 30 µg of peptides from each individual seminal plasma sample (n=16) and internal control (n=1) were labeled with TMT isobaric tags (reporter ions intensity from m/z 127.1 to m/z 131.1 (TMT-127N, -127C, -128C, -129N, -129C, -130N, -130C, -131) and m/z 126 (TMT-126), respectively). Specifically, 19.5 µl of the TMT label reagents previously equilibrated at room temperature (RT) and dissolved in ACN (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) were added to the corresponding reduced and alkylated peptides. After 1 h of incubation at RT, the reaction was quenched with 4 µl of 5% hydroxylamine for 15 min. Labeled peptides from each sample were combined at equal amounts constituting two different multiplex pools (Pool A and Pool B; each one consisting of 8 different samples plus the internal control; Fig. 1), which were dried in a speed-vacuum centrifuge and peptides were resuspended in 20 µl of 0.5% TFA (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) in 5% ACN. Finally, the peptides were cleaned up via reversed-phase C18 spin columns (Pierce C18 Spin Columns, Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA) following manufacturer’s instructions. Labeled peptides were analyzed by a nano-LC Ultra 2D Eksigent (AB Sciex, Brugg, Switzerland) attached to an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos (Thermo scientific, San Jose, CA, USA). For HPLC separation, peptides were injected onto a C18 trap column (L 0.5 cm, 300 µm ID, 5µm, 100 Å; Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA). Chromatographic analyses were performed using an analytical column (L 15 cm, 75 µm ID, 3 µm, 100 Å; Thermo scientific, San Jose, CA, USA). Two different buffer systems were used for the analysis: buffer A (97% H2O-3% ACN, 0.1% Formic acid) and buffer B (3% H2O-97% ACN, 0.1% Formic acid). The following gradient was applied for peptide separation on the analytical column: from 0-4 min 0% of B to 4% of B, from 4-300 min 4% of B to 35% of B, from 300-305 min 35% of B to 100% of B, at a flow rate of 400 nl/min, and from 305-320 min 100% of B at a flow rate of 400 nl/min. MS/MS analyses were performed using an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) directly coupled to a nanoelectrospray ion source. The LTQ-Orbitrap Velos settings included one 30000 resolution at 400 m/z MS1 scan for precursor ions followed by MS2 scans of the 50 most intense precursor ions, at 30000 resolution at 400 m/z, in positive ion mode. The lock mass option was enabled, and Polysiloxane (m/z 445.12003) was used for internal recalibration of the mass spectra. MS/MS data acquisition was completed using Xcalibur 2.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The normalized collision energy for HCD-MS2 was set to 40%.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 1.4.1.14 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). For database searching, raw mass spectrometry files were submitted to the in-house Homo sapiens UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database with Pig Trypsin protein added to it (HUMAN_Tryp_UP_SP_R_2016_03.fasta; released March 2016; 20155 protein entries) using SEQUEST HT version 28.0 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). For re-scoring, Percolator search node was used. Searches were performed using the following parameters: five maximum missed cleavage sites for trypsin, TMT-labeled lysine (+229.163 Da) and methionine oxidation (+15.995 Da) as dynamic modifications, cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57.021 Da) as a static modification, 20 ppm precursor mass tolerance, 0.6 Da fragment mass tolerance, 5 mmu peak integration tolerance, and most confident centroid peak integration method. Percolator was used for protein identification with the following identification criteria: at least one unique peptide per protein with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Our aim was to define seminal plasma proteome signatures of infertile patients categorized according to their seminal parameters using TMT-LC-MS/MS. To that extent, quantitative proteomic data was analyzed following two complementary strategies: (1) the conventional approach based on standard statistical analyses of relative protein quantification values; and (2) a novel strategy focused on establishing stable-protein pairs. By conventional analyses, the abundance of some seminal plasma proteins was found to be positively correlated with sperm concentration. However, this correlation was not found for all the peptides within a specific protein, bringing to light the high heterogeneity existing in the seminal plasma proteome because of both the proteolytic fragments and/or the post-translational modifications. This issue was overcome by conducting the novel stable-protein pairs analysis proposed herein. A total of 182 correlations comprising 24 different proteins were identified in the normozoospermic-control population, whereas this proportion was drastically reduced in infertile patients with altered seminal parameters (18 in patients with reduced sperm motility, 0 in patients with low sperm concentration and 3 in patients with no sperm in the ejaculate). These results suggest the existence of multiple etiologies causing the same alteration in seminal parameters. Additionally, the repetition of the stable-protein pair analysis in the control group by adding the data from a single patient at a time enabled to identify alterations in the stable-protein pairs profile of individual patients with altered seminal parameters. These results suggest potential underlying pathogenic mechanisms in individual infertile patients, and might open up a window to its application in the personalized diagnostic of male infertility.

### Keywords
Male infertility, Stable-protein pairs, Proteomics, Tmt, Seminal plasma

### Affiliations
Director Molecular Biology of Reproduction and Development research Group, Genetics Unit, Faculty of Medicine, University of Barcelona, Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi iSunyer (IDIBAPS), and Hospital Clinic, Barcelona, Spain.
Genetics Unit, Department of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Casanova 143, 08036 Barcelona, Spain

### Submitter
Rafael Oliva

### Lab Head
Dr Rafael Oliva Virgili
Genetics Unit, Department of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Casanova 143, 08036 Barcelona, Spain


