### Accession
PXD015992

### Title
Influenza virus infection leads to global cardiac proteome remodeling during convalescence

### Description
Influenza virus infection leads to global cardiac proteome remodeling during convalescence MTD project_description "Influenza virus infections lead to more than 500,000 hospitalizations in the U.S. every year. Patients with cardiovascular diseases have been shown to be at high risk of influenza mediated cardiac complications. Importantly, recent reports have provided clinical data supporting a direct link between laboratory-confirmed influenza virus infection and adverse cardiac events. However, the molecular mechanisms of how influenza virus infection induces detrimental cardiac changes, even after resolution of the pulmonary infection, is completely unknown.

### Sample Protocol
Murine hearts were dissected twelve days after initial influenza A virus (IAV) infection. First, immunofluorescence microscopy and plaque assays were performed to detect the presence of IAV in the heart of mice during convalescence. Then, global proteome and phosphoproteome analyses using high resolution accurate mass based LC-MS/MS and label-free quantitation were performed to obtain an in-depth view of the molecular changes in cardiac tissue post-influenza infection. Laboratory grown rat myocytes were used to test changes in cell death, oxidative stress, and mitochondrial damage upon IAV infection. To determine the role of programmed necrosis in heart responses against influenza infection, necroptosis-deficient mice were used for the proteomic analysis.

### Data Protocol
Label-free quantitation by MaxQuant (v1.6); downstream bioinformatics analyses were performed on Perseus software (v1.6).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Influenza virus; proteome; remodeling; convalescence; heart

### Affiliations
University of Delaware
J. Craig Venter Institute, Rockville, MD 20850

### Submitter
Yanbao Yu

### Lab Head
Dr Yanbao Yu
J. Craig Venter Institute, Rockville, MD 20850


