### Accession
PXD005287

### Title
Chemical cross-linking of the Spindly-RZZ complex followed by mass spectrometry

### Description
Kinetochores are macromolecular assemblies that connect chromosomes to spindle microtubules during mitosis. The metazoan-specific ≈800 kilodalton ROD-Zwilch-ZW10 (RZZ) complex builds a fibrous corona that assembles on mitotic kinetochores prior to microtubule attachment to promote chromosome alignment and robust spindle assembly checkpoint signaling. Here, we combine biochemical reconstitutions, single particle electron cryo microscopy, cross-linking mass spectrometry, and structural modeling to build a complete model of human RZZ

### Sample Protocol
Cross-linking of the RZZ-(farnesyl) Spindly complex was performed by mixing 60 μg of the complex (at 0.3 mg/ml) with 450 μM of an equimolar mixture of isotopically light (d 0 ) and heavy (d 6 ) labeled DSS (disuccinimidyl suberate, Creative Molecules) for 30 min at 37oC or at 4oC for 15 hours. The reactions were quenched by adding a final concentration of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 20 min at 37oC. Cross-linked proteins were enzymatically digested and cross-linked peptides were identified by liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) as reported previously (Herzog et al., 2012). Briefly, cross-linked proteins were denatured by adding 2 sample volumes of 8 M urea (Sigma Aldrich) and were reduced by incubating with 5 mM TCEP (Thermo Scientific) at 35oC for 15 minutes. Proteins were alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma Aldrich) for 35 min at room temperature in the dark. Samples were proteolytically digested by incubating with lysyl endopeptidase (1/50, w/w, Wako) for 2 h at 35oC followed by adding trypsin (1/50, w/w, Promega) overnight at a final concentration of 1 M urea. Proteolysis was stopped by the addition of 1 % (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, Sigma Aldrich). Acidified peptides were purified by reversed-phase chromatography on C18 columns (Sep-Pak, Waters). Eluates were dried and reconstituted in 20 μL of mobile phase (water/acetonitrile/TFA, 75:25:0.1) and cross-linked peptides were enriched on a Superdex Peptide PC 3.2/30 column (GE Healthcare) at a flow rate of 50 μl/min. Fractions of the cross-linked peptides were analysed by LC-MS/MS using a LTQ Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Scientific) instrument.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were converted to mzXML files using MSconvert. Finally the cross-link fragment ion spectra were searched and identified by the open source software xQuest (Walzthoeni et al., 2012) using the default searching parameters. False discovery rates were calculated using xProphet and results were filtered using the following parameters: delta score < 0.85, MS1 tolerance window of -4 to 4 ppm and score > 22.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human; spindly-rzz complex; spindly; rod; zwilch; zw10; cx-ms; orbitrap

### Affiliations
Director, Department of Mechanistic Cell Biology Max-Planck Institute of Molecular Physiology Dortmund
EpiQMAx GmbH

### Submitter
Victor Solis

### Lab Head
Dr Andrea Musacchio
Director, Department of Mechanistic Cell Biology Max-Planck Institute of Molecular Physiology Dortmund


