### Accession
PXD041834

### Title
Actionable loss of SLF2 drives B-cell lymphomagenesis and impairs the DNA damage Response

### Description
The DNA damage response (DDR) acts as a barrier to malignant transformation and is often impaired during tumorigenesis. Exploiting the impaired DDR can be a promising therapeutic strategy; however, the mechanisms of inactivation and corresponding biomarkers are incompletely understood. Starting from an unbiased screening approach, we identified the SMC5-SMC6 Complex Localization Factor 2 (SLF2) as a regulator of the DDR and biomarker for a B-cell lymphoma (BCL) patient subgroup with an adverse prognosis. SLF2-deficiency leads to loss of DDR factors including CLSPN and consequently impairs CHK1 activation. In line with this mechanism, genetic deletion of Slf2 drives lymphomagenesis in vivo. Tumor cells lacking SLF2 are characterized by a high level of DNA damage, which leads to alterations of the post-translational SUMOylation pathway as a safeguard. The resulting co-dependency confers synthetic lethality to a clinically applicable SUMOylation inhibitor (SUMOi), and inhibitors of the DDR pathway act highly synergistic with SUMOi. Together, our results identify SLF2 as a DDR regulator and reveal co-targeting of the DDR and SUMOylation as a promising strategy for the treatment of aggressive lymphoma.

### Sample Protocol
Isolation of Formaldehyde-cross-linked chromatin associated Proteins-Removal of SDS by Filter-assisted sample processing-Digestion by Trypsin and LysC-Desalting of the peptides-TMT labeling-HPLC fractionation-Mass Spectrometry

### Data Protocol
Raw data was analyzed with Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (ThermoFisher Scientific). Acquired MS2-spectra were searched against the human trypsin digested proteome (20531 sequences) and a collection of common Zhang et al. 21 contaminants (from MaxQuant`s “contaminants.fasta”) using SequestHT, allowing a precursor mass tolerance of 7 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.5 Da after recalibration of mass errors using the Spectra RC-node applying default settings. In addition to standard dynamic (Oxidation on methionines and acetylation of protein N-termini) and static (Carbamidomethylation on cysteins) modifications, TMT-labelling of N-termini and lysines were set as static modifications. False discovery rates were controlled using Percolator (< 1% FDR on PSM level). Only PSMs with a signal-to-noise above 10 and a co-isolation below 50% derived from unique peptides we`re used for protein quantification after total intensity normalization. Peptide groups file was exported into .txt file and subsequent statistical analysis was done with the Perseus software (version 1.6.15.0). Log2 values of all the normalized abundances were calculated. Using the histogram analysis function of the software, the normal distribution of the abundance values was visually checked. Good correlation of the experimental replicates was assured by multi-scatterplot analysis. Samples were then grouped into triplicates and a Student’s t-test was performed with randomization of 250 and permutation based FDR 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
The DNA damage response (DDR) acts as a barrier to malignant transformation and is often impaired during tumorigenesis. Exploiting the impaired DDR can be a promising therapeutic strategy; however, the mechanisms of inactivation and corresponding biomarkers are incompletely understood. Starting from an unbiased screening approach, we identified the SMC5-SMC6 Complex Localization Factor 2 (SLF2) as a regulator of the DDR and biomarker for a B-cell lymphoma (BCL) patient subgroup with an adverse prognosis. SLF2-deficiency leads to loss of DDR factors including Claspin (CLSPN) and consequently impairs CHK1 activation. In line with this mechanism, genetic deletion of Slf2 drives lymphomagenesis in vivo. Tumor cells lacking SLF2 are characterized by a high level of DNA damage, which leads to alterations of the post-translational SUMOylation pathway as a safeguard. The resulting co-dependency confers synthetic lethality to a clinically applicable SUMOylation inhibitor (SUMOi), and inhibitors of the DDR pathway act highly synergistic with SUMOi. Together, our results identify SLF2 as a DDR regulator and reveal co-targeting of the DDR and SUMOylation as a promising strategy for treating aggressive lymphoma.

### Keywords
Slf2, Dna damage response, B-cell lymphoma

### Affiliations
Institute of Biochemistry II, Goethe University Frankfurt, Medical School, 60590 Frankfurt, Germany
Institute of Biochemistry II    
University Hospital Building 75    
Theodor-Stern-Kai 7    
60590 Frankfurt (Main)


### Submitter
Stefan Müller

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan Müller
Institute of Biochemistry II, Goethe University Frankfurt, Medical School, 60590 Frankfurt, Germany


