### Accession
PXD020606

### Title
Matrisome proteins of human and porcine cornea and amnion

### Description
In this project, for the first time, the Extracellular Matrix protein compositions of porcine cornea and human amnion (amniotic membrane) were  characterized using LC/MS-MS based on an already developed protocol, "Matrisome Project".

### Sample Protocol
Extracellular matrices (ECMs) produced and assembled by mouse dermal fibroblasts in vitro were decellularized using a decellularization buffer (0.5% Triton-X100, 20 mM ammonium hydroxide) according to previously published protocol (Franco-Barraza, J et al., Curr Protoc Cell Biol, 2016, 71:10.9.1-10.9.34).  ECM proteins were further solubilized using 8M urea and 10mM DTT, deglycosylated and digested into peptides using Lys-C and trypsin following an established protocol (Naba et al., Mol Cell Prot 2012; Naba et al., JoVE, 2015).  Approximately 300 ng of desalted peptides were analyzed at the University of Illinois Mass Spectrometry core facility on a Thermo Fisher Orbitrap Velos Pro coupled with Agilent NanoLC system (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA). The LC columns (15 cm × 75 μm ID, Zorbax 300SB-C18) were purchased from Agilent. Samples were analyzed with a 120-min linear gradient (0–35% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid) and data were acquired in a data-dependent manner, in which MS/MS fragmentation was performed on the top 12 intense peaks of every full MS scan. Full MS scans were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer over m/z 400–2000 range with resolution 30,000 (m/z 400). The target value was 1.00E+06. The ten most intense peaks with charge state ≥ 2 were fragmented in the HCD collision cell with normalized collision energy of 30%, these peaks were then excluded for 30 s after 2 counts within a mass window of 10 ppm. Tandem mass spectrum was acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer with a resolution of 7,500. The target value was 5.00E+04. The ion selection threshold was 5,000 counts, and the maximum allowed ion accumulation times were 500 ms for full scans and 250 ms for HCD.

### Data Protocol
RAW files were converted into. mgf files using MSConvert (ProteoWizard). Database search was carried out using Mascot server version 2.6.2 (from Matrix Science; human database containing 20,365 reviewed entries).  Mascot search parameters were: 10 ppm mass tolerance for precursor ions; 200 mmu for fragment-ion mass tolerance; two missed cleavages of trypsin; fixed modification was carbamidomethylation of cysteine; and variable modifications were oxidized methionine, deamidation of asparagine, pyro-glutamic acid modification at N-terminal glutamine, and hydroxylation of lysine and proline. Only peptides with a Mascot score ≥ 25 and an isolation interference ≤ 30 were included in the data analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Fabricating thermoresponsive hydrogels from decellularized tissues is a trending and promising approach to develop novel biomaterials for tissue engineering and therapeutic purposes. There are differences in the characteristics of the produced hydrogels related to the source tissue as well as the decellularization and solubilization protocols used. Detailed characterization of the hydrogels will support the efforts to optimize their application as biomaterials for tissue engineering and therapeutics. Here, we describe an optimized method for fabricating an <i>in situ</i> thermoresponsive hydrogel from decellularized porcine cornea extracellular matrix (COMatrix), and provide a detailed characterization of its structure, thermoresponsive rheological behavior (heat-induced sol-gel transition), as well as exploring its protein composition using proteomics. COMatrix forms a transparent gel (10-min time to gelation) after <i>in situ</i> curing with heat, characterized by alteration in light absorbance and rheological indexes. The rheological characterization of heat-formed COMatrix gel shows similar behavior to common biomaterials utilized in tissue engineering. The fibrillar structure of COMatrix gel was observed by scanning electron microscopy showing that the density of fibers attenuates in lower concentrations. Mass spectrometry-based proteomic analysis revealed that COMatrix hydrogel is rich in proteins with known regenerative properties such as lumican, keratocan, and laminins in addition to structural collagen proteins (Data is available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD020606). COMatrix hydrogel is a naturally driven biomaterial with favorable biomechanical properties and protein content with potential application as a therapeutic biomaterial in ocular regeneration and tissue engineering. Impact statement Fabrication and application of decellularized porcine corneal extracellular matrix is an emerging approach for corneal tissue engineering and regeneration. There are several protocols for decellularization of porcine cornea with various efficiencies. Here, we are presenting an optimized protocol for decellularization of porcine cornea followed by fabrication of a thermoresponsive hydrogel from the decellularized cornea matrix. Moreover, the fabricated hydrogel was rheologically and compositionally characterized as crucial features to be employed for further application of this hydrogel in corneal tissue engineering and regeneration.

### Keywords
Porcine cornea, Proteomics, Human amnion, Matrisome

### Affiliations
University of Illinois at Chicago
Corneal Stem Cell and Tissue Engineering Laboratory, Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Science, University of Illinois at Chicago

### Submitter
George Chlipala

### Lab Head
Dr Ali Djalilian
Corneal Stem Cell and Tissue Engineering Laboratory, Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Science, University of Illinois at Chicago


