### Accession
PXD020827

### Title
16-plex isobaric mass tags enable streamlined proteomics-based drug mechanism-of-action studies

### Description
Multiplexed quantitative proteomics enables the development of complex workflows for studying the mechanisms by which small molecule drugs interact with the proteome such as thermal proteome profiling (TPP) or multiplexed proteome dynamics profiling (mPDP). TPP measures changes in protein thermal stability in response to drug treatment and thus informs on direct targets and downstream regulation events, while the mPDP approach enables the discovery of regulated protein synthesis and degradation events caused by small molecules and other perturbations. The mass tags available for multiplexed proteomics have thus far limited the efficiency and sensitivity with which such experiments could be performed. Here we evaluate a new generation of 16-plex isobaric mass tags and demonstrate similar sensitivity and accuracy of quantification as the previously described TMT reagents. The TMT16 tags enabled the sensitive and time efficient identification of staurosporine targets in HepG2 cell extracts by recording full thermal denaturation/aggregation profiles of vehicle and compound treated samples in a single mass spectrometry experiment. In 2D-TPP experiments, isothermal titration over 7 concentrations per temperature enabled comprehensive selectivity profiling of staurosporine with EC50 values for kinase targets tightly matching to the kinobeads gold standard assay. Finally, we demonstrate time and condition-based multiplexing of dynamic SILAC labeling experiments to delineate proteome-wide effects of the molecular glue Indisulam on synthesis and degradation rates.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed in SDS based sample buffer (4 % SDS) and subjected to a modified single pot solid-phase sample preparation (SP3) protocol. Derived peptides were subjected to TMT labeling using either the 10-plex TMT reagents, enabling relative quantification of 10 conditions in a single experiment or TMTpro, enabling relative quantification of 16 conditions in a single experiment. The labeling reaction was performed in 100 mM HEPES pH 8,5 at 22 °C and quenched with hydroxylamine. Labeled peptide extracts were combined to a single sample per experiment.  Analysis of samples was performed as described, including high pH reversed phase prefractionation. Lyophilized samples were re-suspended 0.05 % trifluoroacetic acid in water and injected into an Ultimate3000 nanoRLSC (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA) coupled to a Q Exactive or an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on custom-made 50 cm × 100 µm (ID) reversed-phase columns (C18, Reprosil) at 55°C. Gradient elution was performed from 2 % acetonitrile to 40 % acetonitrile in 0.1 % formic acid and 3.5 % DMSO.

### Data Protocol
Mascot 2.5 was used for protein identification, in a first search 30 parts per million peptide precursor mass and 30 mDa (HCD) mass tolerance for fragment ions was used to perfrom software recalibration, followed by search using a 10 parts per million mass tolerance for peptide precursors and 20 mDa (HCD) mass tolerance for fragment ions. The search database consisted of a customized version of the SwissProt sequence database combined with a decoy version of the same created using scripts supplied by Matrix Science. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as fixed modification. Methionine oxidation, and N-terminal acetylation of proteins and TMT or TMTpro modification of peptide N-termini and Lysine were set as variable modifications. Searches for light and heavy SILAC were performed independently. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification. Lysine light or heavy (13C6 15N2) with TMT or TMTpro, and arginine light or heavy (13C6 15N4) were set as variable modifications in the respective light or heavy searches. Methionine oxidation, N-terminal acetylation of proteins and TMT or TMTpro modification of peptide N-termini were set as variable modifications in both searches.   Quantification of TMT or TMTpro reporter ions was achieved as described in21. Spectra matching to peptides were filtered according to the following criteria: FDR < 1%, signal-to-background of the precursor ion > 4, and signal-to-interference > 0.5. Fold changes were corrected for isotope purity and adjusted for interference caused by co-eluting nearly isobaric peptides as estimated by the signal-to-interference measure13. Protein quantification was derived from individual spectra matching to distinct peptides by using a sum-based bootstrap algorithm; 95% confidence intervals were calculated for all protein fold changes that were quantified with more than three spectra.

### Publication Abstract
Multiplexed quantitative proteomics enabled complex workflows to study the mechanisms by which small molecule drugs interact with the proteome such as thermal proteome profiling (TPP) or multiplexed proteome dynamics profiling (mPDP). TPP measures changes in protein thermal stability in response to drug treatment and thus informs on direct targets and downstream regulation events, while the mPDP approach enables the discovery of regulated protein synthesis and degradation events caused by small molecules and other perturbations. The isobaric mass tags available for multiplexed proteomics have thus far limited the efficiency and sensitivity by which such experiments could be performed. Here we evaluate a recent generation of 16-plex isobaric mass tags and demonstrate the sensitive and time efficient identification of Staurosporine targets in HepG2 cell extracts by recording full thermal denaturation/aggregation profiles of vehicle and compound treated samples in a single mass spectrometry experiment. In 2D-TPP experiments, isothermal titration over seven concentrations per temperature enabled comprehensive selectivity profiling of Staurosporine with EC<sub>50</sub> values for kinase targets tightly matching to the kinobeads gold standard assay. Finally, we demonstrate time and condition-based multiplexing of dynamic SILAC labeling experiments to delineate proteome-wide effects of the molecular glue Indisulam on synthesis and degradation rates.

### Keywords
2d-tpp, Tpp, Isobaric labeling, Tmt, Mpdp, Tmtpro

### Affiliations
Cellzome
Cellzome - a GSK company
Meyerhofstrasse 1, 
69117
HEIDELBERG

### Submitter
Toby Mathieson

### Lab Head
Dr Marcus Bantscheff
Cellzome


