### Accession
PXD024102

### Title
Tengdan Capsule Prevents Hypertensive Kidney Damage in SHR by Inhibiting Periostin-mediated Renal Fibrosis

### Description
In order to reveal the potential molecular mechanism of TDC in renal protection of rats with essential hypertension, TMT-based quantitative proteomics analysis method was used to conduct quantitative analysis of proteins extracted from kidney of SHR of model and TDC treatment groups after 4 weeks of administration. A total of 5688 proteins were identified by one or more unique peptides.

### Sample Protocol
Rats from the model group (n=3) and TDC medium dose group (n=3) were chosen for proteomic analysis. After 4 weeks of TDC administration, the rats were anesthetized and the kidney tissue was immediately removed, then snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and ground with a pestle and mortar. Five times volume of TCA/acetone (1:9) was added to the powder and mixed by vortex. The mixture was placed at -20℃ for 4h, and centrifuged at 6000g for 40 min at 4℃. The supernatant was discarded. The pre-cooling acetone was added and washed for three times. The precipitation was air dried. 30 times volume of SDT buffer was added to 20-30 mg powder, mixed and boiled for 5 min. The lysate was sonicated and then boiled for 15 min. After centrifugation at 14000g for 40 min, the supernatant was filtered with 0.22 µm filters. Total protein in the filtrate was quantified with the BCA Protein Assay Kit (Bio-Rad, USA). The sample was stored at -80 °C.

### Data Protocol
The protein sequences of differentially expressed proteins were in batches retrieved for GO mapping and annotation from UniProtKB database (Release 2016_10) in FASTA format. The FASTA protein sequences of differentially changed proteins were blasted against the online Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database (http://geneontology.org/) to retrieve their KOs and were subsequently mapped to pathways in KEGG12. The corresponding KEGG pathways were extracted. The acquired protein relative expression data was visualized as a tree heat map.

### Publication Abstract
<b>BACKGROUND:</b> Hypertension-induced renal damage is a serious and complex condition that has not been effectively treated by conventional blood pressure-lowering drugs. Tengdan capsule (TDC) is a China FDA-approved compound herbal medicine for treating hypertension; however, its chemical basis and pharmacological efficacy have not been fully investigated in a preclinical setting. <b>METHODS:</b> High-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) was used to identify and quantify the major chemical components of TDC extracted from ultrapure water. Adult spontaneously hypertensive rats (SHR) and age/sex-matched Wistar Kyoto normotensive rats (WKY) were both treated with TDC, losartan, or saline for one month, and their blood pressure (BP) was monitored at the same time by tail-cuff BP system. Biochemical indexes such as urine creatinine (CRE) and blood urea nitrogen (BUN) were determined. Kidney tissue sections were examined with (H&amp;E), and Masson staining to evaluate the pathological effect of TDC on SHR's kidneys. After TDC treatment, the differentially expressed proteins in the kidneys of SHR were identified by the TMT-based quantitative proteomics analysis, which may provide the targets and possible mechanisms of TDC action. In addition, Western blot analysis, RT-qPCR, and ELISA assays were carried out to further verify the proteomics findings. Finally, two different models involving <i>in vitro</i> renal injuries were established using human kidney HEK293 cells; and the molecular mechanism of TDC kidney protection was demonstrated. <b>RESULTS:</b> Seven chemical compounds, namely Notoginsenoside R1, Ginsenoside RG1, Ginsenoside Re, Ginsenoside Rb1, Sodium Danshensu, Protocatechualdehyde, and Salvianolic acid B, were identified and quantified from the water-soluble extracts of TDC by HPLC. <i>In vivo</i> study using rats showed that TDC effectively reduced BP, BUN, and CRE levels and attenuated renal fibrosis in SHR, and ameliorated damage to the kidneys. Proteomics and subsequent bioinformatics analyses indicated that periostin-mediated inflammatory response and TGF&#x3b2;/Smad signaling pathway proteins were closely related to the therapeutic effect of TDC in rat kidneys. Western blot analysis and RT-qPCR showed that TDC markedly downregulated the mRNA and protein expression of periostin in renal tissues compared to the untreated SHR. In addition, TGF-&#x3b2; and COL1A1 mRNA levels also decreased in SHR renal tissues following TDC treatment. <i>In vitro</i> studies showed that low to medium doses of TDC down-regulated the expression of periostin in the injury model of HEK293 cell. In addition, medium to high doses of TDC significantly inhibited collagen deposition in TGF&#x3b2;1-induced HEK293 cell fibrosis. <b>CONCLUSIONS:</b> Major components from the compound herbal medicine Tengdan Capsule are identified and quantified. TDC effectively lowers blood pressure and protects against renal damage caused by hypertension in SHR. Mechanistically, TDC blocks periostin by regulating the TGF-&#x3b2;/Smad signaling pathway in the kidney, both <i>in vivo</i> and <i>in vitro</i>. Preventing periostin-mediated renal fibrosis and inflammation might be a promising strategy for treating a hypertensive renal injury.

### Keywords
Teng dan capsule; hypertension-induced kidney damage; periostin; tgfβ/smad signaling pathway; inflammatory response; human kidney hek293 cells

### Affiliations
Tianjin University of Traditional Chinese Medicine

### Submitter
Xiaoli DU

### Lab Head
Dr Yan ZHU
Tianjin University of Traditional Chinese Medicine


