### Accession
PXD012834

### Title
Adentitious root in Taxodium ‘Zhongshanshan’

### Description
Here, we used an isobaric tag for relative and absolute quantitation-based quantitative proteomic analysis to measure changes in protein expression levels during AR formation in Taxodium ‘Zhongshanshan’.

### Sample Protocol
The plant materials used for the iTRAQ analysis were the same as those for RNA sequencing (RNA-Seq).

### Data Protocol
The iTRAQ analysis was carried out as previously reported with slight modifications

### Publication Abstract
Adventitious root (AR) formation from cuttings is the primary manner for the commercial vegetative propagation of trees. Cuttings is also the main method for the vegetative reproduction of <i>Taxodium</i> 'Zhongshanshan', while knowledge of the molecular mechanisms regulating the processes is limited. Here, we used mRNA sequencing and an isobaric tag for relative and absolute quantitation-based quantitative proteomic (iTRAQ) analysis to measure changes in gene and protein expression levels during AR formation in <i>Taxodium</i> 'Zhongshanshan'. Three comparison groups were established to represent the three developmental stages in the AR formation process. At the transcript level, 4743 genes showed an expression difference in the comparison groups as detected by RNA sequencing. At the protein level, 4005 proteins differed in their relative abundance levels, as indicated by the quantitative proteomic analysis. A comparison of the transcriptome and proteome data revealed regulatory aspects of metabolism during AR formation and development. In summary, hormonal signal transduction is different at different developmental stages during AR formation. Other factors related to carbohydrate and energy metabolism and protein degradation and some transcription factor activity levels, were also correlated with AR formation. Studying the identified genes and proteins will provide further insights into the molecular mechanisms controlling AR formation.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Institute of Botany, Jiangsu Province and Chinese Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Zhiquan Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Zhiquan Wang
Institute of Botany, Jiangsu Province and Chinese Academy of Sciences


