### Accession
PXD005706

### Title
Inhibition of pH regulation as a therapeutic strategy in hypoxic human breast cancer cells

### Description
Experiments were performed assessing whether targeting the pH regulatory proteins (CAIX, NHE1 and V-ATPase) that permit cancer cells to adapt to hypoxic conditions could produce an effective therapeutic response in breast cancer, using both 2D and 3D culture models. CAIX inhibitors were shown to combine effectively with irradiation in clonogenic assays. Proteomic-mass-spectrometric analysis was carried out to analyze the possible mechanisms through which the CAIX inhibitor used was combining with irradiation.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomic-mass spectrometric analysis was also performed with lysates that were acquired 24h after the initial treatment. The samples were subjected to FASP (Filter aided sample preparation) [58] and the resulting peptides cleaned up on stage tips [59] before analysis on a Thermo RSLC 3000 Nano with a home-packed 10 cm x 75 um, 1.8 um C18 particle, home-pulled packed emitter, coupled to QExactive Plus. 15 mins loading at 0.4 μL/min, 2% organic (ACN; 0.05% acetic acid) was followed by a 120 min linear gradient to 50% organic, and 80% wash. 2% equilibration completed the method. MS1 scan range was 300-1650, AGC 3x106 and max ion time 60 ms. Fragmentation was data dependent, with AGC 2x104, max ion time 250 ms, loop 12, top 12, and normalized collision energy of 26

### Data Protocol
Data were processed in MaxQuant version 1.5.3.17 [60] with uniprot human reference proteome (UP000005640_9606, release 2015_12), and normalized LFQ were generated with match-between-runs enabled. Initial analysis and QC was performed with R version 3.2.3 (2015-12-10)

### Publication Abstract
Hypoxic cancer cells exhibit resistance to many therapies. This study compared the therapeutic effect of targeting the pH regulatory proteins (CAIX, NHE1 and V-ATPase) that permit cancer cells to adapt to hypoxic conditions, using both 2D and 3D culture models. Drugs targeting CAIX, NHE1 and V-ATPase exhibited anti-proliferative effects in MCF-7, MDA-MB-231 and HBL-100 breast cancer cell lines in 2D. Protein and gene expression analysis in 2D showed that CAIX was the most hypoxia-inducible protein of the 3 targets. However, the expression of CAIX differed between the 3 cell lines. This difference in CAIX expression in hypoxia was consistent with a varying activity of FIH-1 between the cell lines. 3D expression analysis demonstrated that both CAIX and NHE1 were up-regulated in the hypoxic areas of multicellular tumor spheroids. However, the induction of CAIX expression in hypoxia was again cell line dependent. 3D invasion assays conducted with spheroids showed that CAIX inhibition significantly reduced the invasion of cells. Finally, the capability of both NHE1 and CAIX inhibitors to combine effectively with irradiation was exhibited in clonogenic assays. Proteomic-mass-spectrometric analysis indicated that CAIX inhibition might be combining with irradiation through stimulating apoptotic cell death. Of the three proteins, CAIX represents the target with the most promise for the treatment of breast cancer.

### Keywords
Caix, Irradiation, Breast, Hypoxic

### Affiliations
University of Edinburgh
Division of Pathology Laboratories, Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, University of Edinburgh

### Submitter
James Meehan

### Lab Head
Dr Simon P. Langdon
Division of Pathology Laboratories, Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, University of Edinburgh


