### Accession
PXD020441

### Title
Global Phosphoproteomics of DYRK1A Inhibition in Glioblastoma Cells

### Description
Here we performed a detailed investigation to delineate the role of DYRK1A in glioblastoma, using both pharmacological and genetic tools combined with global phosphoproteomics. Our data show that DYRK1A inhibitors affect a much broader proportion of the phosphoproteome than DYRK1A knockdown. By overlaying these datasets we identify a pool of 61 putative novel DYRK1A targets, and validate CDC23 Ser588 as a bona-fide DYRK1A substrate. CDC23 is a ubiquitin ligase that degrades mitotic proteins, and DYRK1A inhibiton thereby leads to the accumulation of cyclin B and activation of CDK1.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were processed using the EasyPhos workflow (PMID 30190555), and measured on a benchtop Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive HFX) in single-run format. Further details are provided in the associated manuscript.

### Data Protocol
Data was processed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.6.0), searched against the UniProt sequence database (January 2019). Further details are provided in the associated manuscript.

### Publication Abstract
Both tumour suppressive and oncogenic functions have been reported for dual-specificity tyrosine phosphorylation-regulated kinase 1A (DYRK1A). Herein, we performed a detailed investigation to delineate the role of DYRK1A in glioblastoma. Our phosphoproteomic and mechanistic studies show that DYRK1A induces degradation of cyclin B by phosphorylating CDC23, which is necessary for the function of the anaphase-promoting complex, a ubiquitin ligase that degrades mitotic proteins. DYRK1A inhibition leads to the accumulation of cyclin B and activation of CDK1. Importantly, we established that the phenotypic response of glioblastoma cells to DYRK1A inhibition depends on both retinoblastoma (RB) expression and the degree of residual DYRK1A activity. Moderate DYRK1A inhibition leads to moderate cyclin B accumulation, CDK1 activation and increased proliferation in RB-deficient cells. In RB-proficient cells, cyclin B/CDK1 activation in response to DYRK1A inhibition is neutralized by the RB pathway, resulting in an unchanged proliferation rate. In contrast, complete DYRK1A inhibition with high doses of inhibitors results in massive cyclin B accumulation, saturation of CDK1 activity and cell cycle arrest, regardless of RB status. These findings provide new insights into the complexity of context-dependent DYRK1A signalling in cancer cells.

### Keywords
Post-translational modification, Signal transduction, Phosphorylation, Phosphoproteomics, Dyrk1a, Glioblastoma, Proteomics, Phosphoproteome, Mass spectrometry, U251, Cancer

### Affiliations
Sydney University
Charles Perkins Centre, The University of Sydney

### Submitter
Sean Humphrey

### Lab Head
Dr Sean Humphrey
Charles Perkins Centre, The University of Sydney


