### Accession
PXD002821

### Title
Low mass blood peptides discriminative of IBD severity

### Description
The enriched low mass proteome is unexplored as a source of differentiators for diagnosing and monitoring Inflammatory Bowel Disease (IBD) activity, less invasively than colonoscopy and histopathology. Differences in the enriched low mass plasma proteome (<25kDa) were assessed by label-free quantitative mass-spectrometry. A panel of marker candidates were progressed to validation phase and ‘Tier-2’ FDA-level validated quantitative assay. Proteins important in maintaining gut barrier function and homeostasis at the epithelial interface have been quantitated by Multiple Reaction Monitoring (MRM) in plasma and serum including both inflammatory rheumatoid arthritis controls (RA) and non-inflammatory healthy controls (C), ulcerative colitis (UC) and crohn’s disease (CD) patients. Detection by immunoblot confirmed presence at the protein level in serum. Correlation analysis and receiver operator characteristics were used to report the sensitivity and specificity. Five peptides discriminating IBD activity and severity had very little-to-no correlation to Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), C-reactive protein (CRP), white cell or platelet counts. Three of these peptides were found to be binding partners to SPP24 protein alongside other known matrix proteins. These Proteins have the potentially improve effective diagnosis and evaluate IBD activity, reducing the need for more invasive techniques.

### Sample Protocol
Patient blood samples were collected using standard venepuncture techniques for plasma (EDTA-vacutainers) or Serum (gold-top), and centrifuged at 4000rpm for 10 minutes at room temperature. Plasma or serum was extracted and separated into 100 μl aliquots and stored at -80ºC. Pooled plasma samples were created from 30μL aliquots of patients based on their defined clinical activity. Fifteen μL of (10%) protease inhibitor  (Roche, Basel, Switzerland) was added to 150μL of the mixed pools of plasma resulting in 10 pools of grouped samples comprising of the groups: C(2 groups, n=10), UC (4 groups, n=20), CD (5 groups, n=25). Prior to enrichment, the pooled samples were diluted 1:1 with 165μL of 180mM Tris/20mM EACA/4M urea buffer, pH 10.2. A 5-chamber cartridge assembly using the ProteomeSep (MF10) for protein and peptide separation was prepared using 5, 25, 45, 65 and 125kDa polyacrylamide membranes (NuSep, Frenchs Forest, Sydney, Australia), and a 1 kDa regenerated cellulose membrane (Millipore, Massachusetts, USA), as previously described22. Here, only the 1 to 25 kDa fraction is further reported. The 1 to 25kDa fractions were concentrated with C18 stage tips (ThermoScientific, Illinois, USA) according to the manufacturers recommendations except that the elution buffer consisted of 80% CH3CN, 0.1% Formic acid. Peptides were re-solubilised with 50μL of 50mM NH4HCO3, pH 8.0. Subsequently, trypsin was added at an enzyme to protein ratio of approximately 1:100, and incubated overnight at 37°C. Following digestion, 4μL of formic acid was added and the samples were dried. Peptides were re-suspended in 10μL of 2% CH3COOH, 0.1% formic acid prior to LC-MS/MS. One μL (10%) of 1-25kDa was injected onto a nano-LC using an Ultimate 3000 HPLC and autosampler (Dionex, Amsterdam, Netherlands)for analysis.The samples were loaded onto a micro C18 pre-column (500μm × 2mm, MichromBioresources, Auburn, CA, USA) with Buffer (98% H2O, 2% CH3CN, 0.1% TFA) at 10μl min−1. After a 4-minute wash the pre-column was switched (Valco 10 port valve, Dionex) into line with a fritless nano column (75μm × 10cm) containing reverse phase C18 media (5μm, 200Å Magic, MichromBioresources). Peptides were eluted using a linear gradient of Buffer A (98% H2O, 2% CH3COOH, 0.01% HFBA) to Buffer B (98% CH3CN, 2% H2O, 0.01% HFBA) at 250nl min−1 over 60min.An LTQ-FT Ultra mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron, Bremen, Germany) was used to analyze the plasma fractions.The column tip was positioned ~0.5cm from the heated capillary (T=200°C) of the LTQ-FT, and 1800V was applied to a low volume tee (Upchurch Scientific, WA, USA). The instrument was operated in data dependent mode, with positive ions generated by electrospray. A survey scan of m/z 350-1750 was acquired in the FT ICR cell. Collision induced dissociation was used by the linear ion trap in which up to 8 of the most abundant ions (>2000 counts) with charge states of ≥ (M+2H)+2were successively isolated and fragmented. Mass to charge (m/z) ratios selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 60 seconds. There were a minimum of 3 replicates carried out for each of the pooled groups.

### Data Protocol
For label-free quantification MS peak intensities were analyzed using ProgenesisQI, LC-MS data analysis software v2.4 (Nonlinear Dynamics, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK). Ion intensity maps from each run were aligned to a reference sample and ion feature matching was achieved by aligning consistent ion m/z and retention times, normalized against total intensity (sample specific log-scale abundance ratio scaling factor), and compared between groups by one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA, p ≤ 0.05 for statistical significance). Type I errors were controlled for by False Discovery Rate (FDR) with q value significance set at <0.0125, 26. MS/MS spectra were searched against the Uniprot database (release 15, Nov 2009, containing >497,000sequence entries). ‘Mascot Daemon/extract_msn’ (Matrix Science, London, England) was used with 4ppm peptide tolerance and 0.6Da fragment tolerance, ‘All-species’ and ‘no enzyme’, and variable modifications to: Cysteine (Acrylamide); Methionine (Oxidation); Serine, Threonine, Tyrosine (Phosphorylation), selected to generate peak lists, which were submitted to the database search program Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK). Only peptides with anion score >20 were considered for protein identification. Enrichment pathway analysis was achieved using Ingenuity software (Qiagen, Limburg, Netherlands).

### Publication Abstract
Breakdown of the protective gut barrier releases effector molecules and degradation products into the blood stream making serum and plasma ideal as a diagnostic medium. The enriched low mass proteome is unexplored as a source of differentiators for diagnosing and monitoring inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) activity, that is less invasive than colonoscopy. Differences in the enriched low mass plasma proteome (&lt;25 kDa) were assessed by label-free quantitative mass-spectrometry. A panel of marker candidates were progressed to validation phase and "Tier-2" FDA-level validated quantitative assay. Proteins important in maintaining gut barrier function and homeostasis at the epithelial interface have been quantitated by multiple reaction monitoring in plasma and serum including both inflammatory; rheumatoid arthritis controls, and non-inflammatory healthy controls; ulcerative colitis (UC), and Crohn's disease (CD) patients. Detection by immunoblot confirmed presence at the protein level in plasma. Correlation analysis and receiver operator characteristics were used to report the sensitivity and specificity. Peptides differentiating controls from IBD originate from secreted phosphoprotein 24 (SPP24, p = 0.000086, 0.009); whereas those in remission and healthy can be differentiated in UC by SPP24 (p = 0.00023, 0.001), &#x3b1;-1-microglobulin (AMBP, p = 0.006) and CD by SPP24 (p = 0.019, 0.05). UC and CD can be differentiated by Guanylin (GUC2A, p = 0.001), and Secretogranin-1 (CHGB p = 0.035). Active and quiescent disease can also be differentiated in UC and CD by CHGB (p &#x2264; 0.023) SPP24 (p &#x2264; 0.023) and AMBP (UC p = 0.046). Five peptides discriminating IBD activity and severity had very little-to-no correlation to erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein, white cell or platelet counts. Three of these peptides were found to be binding partners to SPP24 protein alongside other known matrix proteins. These proteins have the potential to improve diagnosis and evaluate IBD activity, reducing the need for more invasive techniques. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD002821.

### Keywords
Biomarker, Spp24, Proteomic, Mrm, Ibd, Guc2a

### Affiliations
UNSW
The University of NSW, Australia

### Submitter
Valerie Wasinger

### Lab Head
Dr Valerie Wasinger
The University of NSW, Australia


