### Accession
PXD023586

### Title
AP-MS of helicase Upf1 in PC12 cells

### Description
DNA/RNA helicase Upf1 seems to interact with axonal transcripts in response to nerve growth factor (NGF, A. Ludanyi, M. Gaspari and A. Riccio, unpublished data). In order to shed light on Upf1 mechanism of action and to identify potential associations with molecules having cleavage activity, we performed an AP-MS experiment comprising Upf1 immunoprecipitation, on-beads digestion, isotopic labelling (18O) and quantitative LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Immuno-complexes were precipitated from 20x10^6 PC12 cells naïve or differentiated with NGF for 4 days. Immuno-precipitated proteins were released from the resin by on-beads digestion for 15 min at 37 °C using 200 ng of trypsin (Promega). The supernatants were collected and subjected to conventional in-solution tryptic digestion (overnight at 37ºC) in denaturing conditions after protein reduction and alkylation (10 mM DTT for 1hr at 37ºC, 24 mM iodoacetamide for 1hr at 37ºC, additional 2 mM DTT for 30 min at 37 ºC). Tryptic peptides were then subjected to differential labelling by oxygen18/16 (control IP experiments, performed with aspecific IGgs, were labelled “light”, Upf1 IP experiments were labelled “heavy”). For 18O labelling, peptides were resuspended in 100 μL of 80% H218O water containing 20% methanol (“heavy” label) and incubated for 24 h at 37 °C in presence of 200 ng of trypsin to catalyse oxygen exchange. The same procedure described above, but using as labelling solution 100 μL of 80% standard HPLC-grade water/20% methanol was used to label the samples with the “light” 16O. Trypsin inactivation was achieved by heating for 1 h at 56° C and boiling for 10 min at 100 °C. Heavy/light pairs were purified by SCX  StageTips (Rappsilber et al., 2007) and subjected to nanoLC-MS/MS analysis.   Chromatography was performed on an Easy LC 1000 nanoLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a pulled fused silica capillary, 75μm i.d., in-house packed to a length of 10 cm with 3μm C18 silica particles (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany). Peptides were eluted by a 60-min binary gradient (mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile, mobile phase B was 0.1% formic acid, 80% acetonitrile)  and MS detection was performed on a quadruple-orbitrap mass spectrometer Q-Exactive (Thermo Fisher Scientific) operating in positive ion mode with data-dependent (Top-12) scanning mode.  Three biological replicates of IP were performed per comparison (naïve:Igg, NGF:Igg), whereas two technical replicates (LC-MS/MS injection) per sample were carried out, for a total of 12 LC-MS/MS runs.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific), using Sequest as search engine, and querying the March 2015 RATTUS reference proteome sequence database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/uniprot). The protein sequence database was merged with a list of common contaminants named “Common Repository of Adventitious Proteins” retrieved from The Global Proteome Machine website (http://www.thegpm.org/crap/index.html). Search parameters were: MS1 tolerance 10 ppm, MS2 tolerance 0.02 Da, MC =2, variable modifications: Mox, (18)O label, fixed modifications: cysteine carbamidomethylation. Peptide identifications were filtered by Percolator (Kall et al., 2007) integrated in Proteome Discoverer. Percolator q-value was set to equal or less than 0.05. Quantitative information was retrieved in PD 1.4 using the precursor area integration node and using default parameters for (18)O labelling data. Qualitative and quantitative information for values based on < 3 peptides were manually checked in raw MS data. Protein H:L ratios from technical replicates were averaged after log2 space transformation.

### Publication Abstract
The 3' untranslated regions (3' UTRs) of messenger RNAs (mRNAs) are non-coding sequences involved in many aspects of mRNA metabolism, including intracellular localization and translation. Incorrect processing and delivery of mRNA cause severe developmental defects and have been implicated in many neurological disorders. Here, we use deep sequencing to show that in sympathetic neuron axons, the 3' UTRs of many transcripts undergo cleavage, generating isoforms that express the coding sequence with a short 3' UTR and stable 3' UTR-derived fragments of unknown function. Cleavage of the long 3' UTR of Inositol Monophosphatase 1 (IMPA1) mediated by a protein complex containing the endonuclease argonaute 2 (Ago2) generates a translatable isoform that is necessary for maintaining the integrity of sympathetic neuron axons. Thus, our study provides a mechanism of mRNA metabolism that simultaneously regulates local protein synthesis and generates an additional class of 3' UTR-derived RNAs.

### Keywords
Protein complex, Hud, Ago2, Impa1

### Affiliations
University of Catanzaro
Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, Magna Graecia University of Catanzaro, Italy

### Submitter
Marco Gaspari

### Lab Head
Dr Marco Gaspari
Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, Magna Graecia University of Catanzaro, Italy


