### Accession
PXD019813

### Title
Micobacterium smegmatis LC-MS/MS

### Description
Proteome comparison of two Mycolicibacterium smegmatis strains, mc2155 and the recombinant strain expressing MTS1338, a small non-coding RNA of Mycobacterium tuberculosis.  The recombinant strain was obtained by electroporation of MTS1338-expressing plasmid into M. smegmatis mc2155 cells

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation  M. smegmatis cultures were grown to OD 2,0 in the conditions described above, in biological triplicate for each condition. Bacterial pellets were resuspended in lysis buffer (100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 4% SDS, 10 mM DTT, 1x Protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich)), and disrupted by zirconia beads with Bead Beater (BioSpec Products, USA). The resulting lysate was centrifuged at 12,000 rpm for 10 min to sediment the cell debris. The supernatant was passed through a 20 μm filter and heated 10 min at 85C. Protein concentration was estimated by microBCA (ThermoScientific). Aliquots containing 50 g of protein material were diluted to 1 mg/ml with the lysis buffer and TCEP and CAA were added to the final concentrations of 10 and 20 mM respectively. Cys reduction and alkylation was achieved by 10 min heating of the sample at 80oC. Proteins were precipitated by addition of 5x volume of acetone and incubation at -20oC overnight. Protein pellet was washed twice with acetone. Then the pellet was resuspended in 50 l of the buffer (100 mM TRIS pH 8.5, 1% (w/v) SDC) in a sonication bath. Trypsin (Promega, USA) was added at the ratio 1/100 w/w to protein amount and incubated for 2 h at 37oC. Then the second trypsin portion 1/100 w/w was added and the sample was incubated at 37oC overnight. Proteolysis was stopped by adding TFA to 1%. Precipitated SDC was removed by centrifugation. The samples were loaded to LC-MS directly without SPE.  LC-MS/MS analyses  LC-MS analysis was carried out on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system connected to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). Samples were loaded to a home-made trap column 20*0.1 mm packed with Inertsil ODS3 3 m sorbent (GLSciences) in the loading buffer (2% ACN, 98% H2O, 0.1% TFA) at 10 l/min flow and separated in a home-packed fused-silica column 500*0.1 mm packed with Reprosil PUR C18AQ 1.9 (Dr. Maisch) into the emitter prepared with P2000 Laser Puller (Sutter, USA) [PMID: 30373789]. Samples were eluted with a linear gradient of 80% ACN, 19.9% H2O, 0.1% FA (buffer B) in 99.9% H2O, 0.1% FA (solvent A) from 4 to 36% of solvent B in 1 h at 0.44 l/min flow at RT.  MS data was collected in DDA mode. MS1 parameters were as follows: 70K resolution, 350-2000 scan range, max injection time 50 ms, AGC target 3x106. Ions were isolated with 1.4 m/z window and 0.2 m/z offset targeting 10 highest intensity peaks of +2 to +6 charge, 8x103 minimum AGC, preferred peptide match and isotope exclusion. Dynamic exclusion was set to 40 s. MS2 fragmentation was carried out in HCD mode at 17,5K resolution with 27% NCE. Ions were accumulated for max 45 ms with target AGC 1x105.  Each sample was analyzed in 3 biological replicates.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were analyzed by PEAKS Studio X (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc)  and peak lists were searched against UniProtKB/TrEMBLE FASTA (canonical and isoform) database version of April 2019 for M. smegmatis MC2 155 with methionine oxidation and asparagine and glutamine deamidation as variable modifications. False discovery rate was set to 0.01 for peptide-spectrum matches and was determined by searching a reverse database. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin in the database search. Peptide identification was performed with an allowed initial precursor mass deviation up to 10 p.p.m. and an allowed fragment mass deviation 0.05 Da.

### Publication Abstract
Small non-coding RNAs play a key role in bacterial adaptation to various stresses. <i>Mycobacterium tuberculosis</i> small RNA MTS1338 is upregulated during mycobacteria infection of macrophages, suggesting its involvement in the interaction of the pathogen with the host. In this study, we explored the functional effects of MTS1338 by expressing it in non-pathogenic <i>Mycobacterium smegmatis</i> that lacks the MTS1338 gene. The results indicated that MTS1338 slowed the growth of the recombinant mycobacteria in culture and increased their survival in RAW 264.7 macrophages, where the MTS1338-expressing strain significantly (<i>p</i> &lt; 0.05) reduced the number of mature phagolysosomes and changed the production of cytokines IL-1&#x3b2;, IL-6, IL-10, IL-12, TGF-&#x3b2;, and TNF-&#x3b1; compared to those of the control strain. Proteomic and secretomic profiling of recombinant and control strains revealed differential expression of proteins involved in the synthesis of main cell wall components and in the regulation of iron metabolism (ESX-3 secretion system) and response to hypoxia (<i>furA, whiB4, phoP</i>). These effects of MTS1338 expression are characteristic for <i>M. tuberculosis</i> during infection, suggesting that in pathogenic mycobacteria MTS1338 plays the role of a virulence factor supporting the residence of <i>M. tuberculosis</i> in the host.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Proteome, Micobacterium smegmatis

### Affiliations
Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute of bioorganic chemistry RAS
Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute of bioorganic chemistry Russian Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Rustam Ziganshin

### Lab Head
Dr Tatyana Azhikina
Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute of bioorganic chemistry RAS


