### Accession
PXD009143

### Title
Proteomic Analysis and Functional Characterization of P4-ATPase Phospholipid Flippases from Murine Tissues

### Description
P4-ATPases are a subfamily of P-type ATPases that flip phospholipids across membranes to generate lipid asymmetry, a property vital to many cellular processes. Mutations in several P4-ATPases have been linked to severe neurodegenerative and metabolic disorders.  Most P4-ATPases associate with one of three accessory subunit isoforms known as CDC50A (TMEM30A), CDC50B (TMEM30B), and CDC50C(TMEM30C).  To identify P4-ATPases that associate with CDC50A, in vivo, and determine their tissue distribution, we isolated P4-ATPases-CDC50A complexes from retina, brain, liver, testes, and kidney on a CDC50A immunoaffinity column and identified and quantified P4-ATPases from their tryptic peptides by mass spectrometry.  Of the 12 P4-ATPase that associate with CDC50 subunits, 10 P4-ATPases were detected. Four P4-ATPases (ATP8A1, ATP11A, ATP11B, ATP11C) were present in all five tissues. ATP10D was found in low amounts in liver, brain, testes, and kidney, and ATP8A2 was present in significant amounts in retina, brain, and testes. ATP8B1 was detected only in liver, ATP8B3 and ATP10A only in testes, and ATP8B2 primarily in brain. We also show that ATP11A, ATP11B and ATP11C, like ATP8A1 and ATP8A2, selectively flip phosphatidylserine and phosphatidylethanolamine across membranes. These studies provide insight into the distribution, relative abundance, subunit interactions and substrate specificity of P4-ATPase-CDC50 complexes.

### Sample Protocol
Slices of adult mouse tissues (retina, brain, liver, testes and kidney) were incubated in 10 mM Tris, pH7.4, 0.075 mM NaCl, and Protease Arrest for 1 h on ice.  The extracts were added to 1 volume of buffer consisting of 40 mM Tris, pH7.4, 0.15M NaCl, and 17% w/v sucrose, homogenized  in Dounce homogenizer, and layered on a 52% (w/v) sucrose cushion.  After centrifugation for 1 h at 100,000g, the membranes were collected on top of the 52% (w/v) sucrose, diluted 3 fold in 40 mM Tris buffer, pH 7.4, and pelleted at 30,000 g for 20 min. The pellet was solubilized in 18 mM CHAPS, 40mM Tris, pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2, and 1 mM DTT for 1 h at 4oC with stirring to obtain a protein concentration of 2 mg/ml. The solution was centrifuged at 40,000 rpm for 20 min. Ten ml of the solubilized extract (20 mg protein) was incubated with 75 µl of Cdc50-7F4-Sepharose pre-equilibrated in solubilization buffer at 4oC for 1 h and subsequently washed 6 times with 500 µl of buffer consisting of 10 mM CHAPS, 40 mM Tris, pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2 and 1 mM DTT.  The bound protein was eluted in the same buffer containing 0.2 mg/ml of 7F4 peptide.   For in gel tryptic digestion, the eluted samples were subjected to SDS gel electrophoresis allowing the proteins to just enter the separating gel.  In-gel trypsin digestion of the gel-slice was performed by established proceducres (Mol Cell Proteomics 7, 1053-1066, (2008)).   Alternatively, the eluted samples were digested with endopeptidase Lys-C followed by trypsin using the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) procedure of Wisniewski et al. (Nat Methods 6, 359-362, (2009)). The trypsin digested samples were acidified with 1% TFA and desalted using a C18 STAGE-tip.  Digested peptides were analyzed by a quadrupole–time of flight mass spectrometer (Impact II; Bruker Daltonics) coupled to an Easy nano LC 1000 HPLC (ThermoFisher Scientific) using an analytical column that was 40–50 cm long, with a 75-μm inner diameter fused silica with an integrated spray tip pulled with P-2000 laser puller (Sutter Instruments), packed with 1.9 μm diameter Reprosil-Pur C-18-AQ beads (Maisch, www.Dr-Maisch.com), and operated at 50°C with in-house built column heater. Buffer A consisted of 0.1% aqueous formic acid, and buffer B consisted of 0.1% formic acid and 80% (vol/vol) acetonitrile in water. A standard 60-min peptide separation was done, and the column was washed with 100% buffer B before re-equilibration with buffer A. The Impact II was set to acquire in a data-dependent auto-MS/MS mode with inactive focus fragmenting the 20 most abundant ions (one at the time at 18-Hz rate) after each full-range scan from m/z 200 to m/z 2,000 at 5 Hz rate. The isolation window for MS/MS was 2–3 depending on the parent ion mass to charge ratio, and the collision energy ranged from 23 to 65 eV depending on ion mass and charge. Parent ions were then excluded from MS/MS for the next 0.4 min and reconsidered if their intensity increased more than five times. Singly charged ions were excluded from fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched using MaxQuant (v1.5.3.30) 52. The search was performed against a database comprised of the protein sequences from Uniprot’s mouse entries plus common contaminants with variable modifications of methionine oxidation, and N-acetylation of the proteins. Only those peptides exceeding the individually calculated 99% confidence limit (as opposed to the average limit for the whole experiment) were considered as accurately identified. Three independent samples of retina tissue were analyzed and shown to have the same five P4-ATPases and CDC50A

### Publication Abstract
P4-ATPases are a subfamily of P-type ATPases that flip phospholipids across membranes to generate lipid asymmetry, a property vital to many cellular processes. Mutations in several P4-ATPases have been linked to severe neurodegenerative and metabolic disorders. Most P4-ATPases associate with one of three accessory subunit isoforms known as CDC50A (TMEM30A), CDC50B (TMEM30B), and CDC50C (TMEM30C). To identify P4-ATPases that associate with CDC50A, in vivo, and determine their tissue distribution, we isolated P4-ATPases-CDC50A complexes from retina, brain, liver, testes, and kidney on a CDC50A immunoaffinity column and identified and quantified P4-ATPases from their tryptic peptides by mass spectrometry. Of the 12 P4-ATPase that associate with CDC50 subunits, 10 P4-ATPases were detected. Four P4-ATPases (ATP8A1, ATP11A, ATP11B, ATP11C) were present in all five tissues. ATP10D was found in low amounts in liver, brain, testes, and kidney, and ATP8A2 was present in significant amounts in retina, brain, and testes. ATP8B1 was detected only in liver, ATP8B3 and ATP10A only in testes, and ATP8B2 primarily in brain. We also show that ATP11A, ATP11B and ATP11C, like ATP8A1 and ATP8A2, selectively flip phosphatidylserine and phosphatidylethanolamine across membranes. These studies provide new insight into the tissue distribution, relative abundance, subunit interactions and substrate specificity of P4-ATPase-CDC50A complexes.

### Keywords
P4-atpases, Mouse tissues, Affinity chromatography, Cdc50a, Lc-ms/ms, Phospholipid flippases, Tmem30a

### Affiliations
Professor, Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of British Columbia, UBC
University of British Columbia

### Submitter
Jenny Moon

### Lab Head
Dr Robert S. Molday
Professor, Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of British Columbia, UBC


