### Accession
PXD033579

### Title
SILAC proteomic analysis of secreted proteins from PLC cells expressing EV or PRSS35

### Description
Since PRSS35 only exhibited tumor suppressive effects in mice, but not in the cultured cells, we speculated that some factors in the microenvironment are affected by PRSS35. To explore this possibility, we performed SILAC proteomic analysis in conjunction with RNA sequencing to identify secreted proteins that decreased in accumulation, but not in transcription level, in the culture medium of PRSS35 overexpressing PLC cells.

### Sample Protocol
For SILAC labeling, vehicle-expressing PLC cells and constructed human PRSS35-expressing PLC cells cultured in light DMEM containing 12C6, 14N2-Lys (K0) and 12C6, 14N4-Arg (R0) or heavy DMEM containing 13C6, 15N2-Lys (K8) and 13C6, 15N4-Arg (R10), respectively. Cells were cultured and passaged until the labeling efficiency reached 98%.  Before harvesting secreted proteins, cells were cultured in serum starvation condition for 24 hours. Collected the media and filtered with 0.22µm filter (Millipore) to ensure removal of any dead cells. Thereafter samples were transferred to an Amicon Ultra-4 3K molecular weight cutoff centrifugal filter (Millipore), spun down until the remaining liquid is up to minimum volume. Transferred the remaining liquid to new tubes as the concentrated secreted proteins mixture. Collected secreted proteins and quantified using Bradford Protein Assay Kit (Sangon biology). For quantitative analysis, 200µg proteins of both samples were combined prior to subsequent procedures. Guanidine hydrochloride were added to the lysate to a final concentration of 4M for secreted proteins denature. Then the proteins were reduced with 5mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 37 °C for 45min and alkylated with 15mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in the dark at room temperature for 30min. The alkylation was quenched by DTT at the final concentration of 20mM at room temperature. Then 100µg protein mixture were transferred to the 3kD molecular weight cut-off filter, spun down and washed twice with 100mM HEPES buffer (pH 8.0). Then the proteins were resuspended in 100μL 50mM HEPES (pH 8.0) in the filter and digested by trypsin at a protein to enzyme ratio of 50:1 (w/w) (overnight, 37 °C). Then the digested peptides were filtered with 10kD molecular weight cut-off filter, desalted, and fractionated into four fractions using Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide samples were vacuum dried for HPLC−MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
For the SILAC labeled proteome profiling, the raw data were searched with Thermo Scientific Proteome Discoverer 2.2. The proteins documented with key word “secreted” in uniprot database was downloaded as target Human secreted protein database. SILAC 2plex was set as quantification method. Enzyme specificity with trypsin was used, and maximum missing cleavages was set as two. The mass error tolerance for precursor ions was 20 p.p.m. and fragment ions was 0.5Da. The fixed modification was set as Carbamidomethyl (C) and variable modifications were oxidation (M), acetylation (Protein N-term). False discovery rate (FDR) thresholds for protein and peptide were set at 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ev, Prss35, Plc, Secreted proteins

### Affiliations
University of Science and Technology of China

### Submitter
Ting Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Huafeng Zhang
University of Science and Technology of China


