### Accession
PXD013653

### Title
Analysis of protein abundance over the yeast respiratory oscillation at different dilution rates.

### Description
How does the abundance of different proteins change over the caurse of the yeast respirator oscillation and with nutrient availability (through changing dilution rate).

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics Sample preparation 20µl pellets of yeast were lysed in lysis buffer (6M urea, 2M thiourea, 20 mM HEPES pH8, with protease and phosphatase inhibitors. Lysates were clarified by centrifugation and 100 µL of supernatant from 4 biological replicates pooled to generate samples representing 9 time points.  A pooled cell extract reference sample was made by mixing 25ul from each of the 9 samples.  The concentration of each sample was normalised to 200µg at 1 mg/mL.  Protein digestion Samples were reduced with DTT and alkylated with iodoacetamide. They were digested with Lys-C, and then trypsin (Promega). Digestion was stopped by the addition of TFA to 1% final. Precipitates were removed by centrifugation. The supernatants were desalted using home-made C18 stage tips (3M Empore) containing  poros R3 resin. Bound peptides were eluted with 30-80% MeCN in 0.1% TFA and lyophilized.  Tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling Peptide mixtures were re-suspended in 100µL of 250mM TEAB. TMT 10plex reagent was re-constituted in 41 μL MeCN. 61.5 μL (1.5 x 0.8mg) of the reagent was used for each set of samples. The labeling reaction was performed at r.t. for 1 hr and terminated by incubation with 5% hydroxylamine. Each set of labeled peptides were combined into a single sample. The labeled mixture was desalted using C18 stage tips, with 6.6 mg of R3.  Proteome: off-line high pH reverse-phase peptides fractionation The experiment was carried out using XBridge BEH130 C18, 2.1 x 150mm column with XBridge BEH C18, Van Guard cartridge (Waters), connected to an Ultimate 3000 Nano/Capillary LC System (Dionex). Peptides were separated with a gradient of 1-90% B (A: 5% MeCN/10 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH8 [5:95]; B: 90% MeCN/10 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH8, [9:1]) in 60 min at a flow rate of 250 µl/min. 60 fractions were collected, combined into 20 fractions.   LC-MSMS LC was performed on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano System (Thermo Scientific) fitted with a 100 µm x 2 cm PepMap100 C18 nano trap column and a 75 μm×25 cm C18 nano-column. Samples were separated using a binary gradient consisting of buffer A (2% MeCN, 0.1% formic acid) and buffer B (80% MeCN, 0.1% formic acid) with a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The HPLC system was coupled to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer with a nanospray ion source. The mass spectrometer was operated in standard data dependent mode, performed MS full-scan at 350-1600 m/z range, resolution 140k. MS2 acquisitions of the 15 most intense ions with a resolution of 35k and NCE of 32%. MS target values of 3e6 and MS2 target values of 1e5 were used.  Isolation window of precursor was set at 1.2 Da.

### Data Protocol
Analysis The MSMS raw files were processed using Proteome Discoverer (v2.1, Thermo Scientific). MSMS spectra were searched against the reviewed Saccharomyces cerevisae, UniProt Fasta database (July 2017), using Mascot (version 2.4, Matrix Science) search engine. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as fixed modification, while methionine oxidation, N-terminal acetylation (protein), phosphorylation (STY) and TMT6plex (peptide N-terminus and Lysine) as variable modifications. Other parameters were set to default values. The output file from Proteome Discoverer, proteins table was filtered for proteins with FDR of 1% and exported as Excel files.   Sample:pooled sample ratio(SPS) was calculated for each time-point and normalised so that the median SPS = 1.  Sampling times were calculated from dissolved oxygen (DO) measurements and converted into radians where 2π radians is equal to the offset time where the correlation coefficient of a serial autocorrelation was at its maximum. Linear interpolation was used on each dataset to calculate the mean SPS across all dilution rates every 0.9 radians. The fold-change between the maximum and minimum SPS detected in the time course for each protein identified in all dilution rates was calculated (FC).  FC versus protein half-life and length in residues was calculated from32 FC versus relative protein abundance and protein cost (relative abundance x length in residues) was also calculated.  Protein SPS profiles where FC>1.33 were clustered (k means, Hartigan Wong algorithm, R version 3.3.3). The between cluster sum of squares / total within cluster sum of squares was calculated for 1-10 clusters.  Due to the lack of inflection points in the plotted data (Extended Data Fig. 2d) we used 2 clusters for our analysis where the greatest change in cluster/total sum sum-of-squares occurred. GO analysis was performed on each cluster independently, and when combined, using SGD GO Term Finder version 0.86 using the Process ontology with p<0.05 and default settings.

### Publication Abstract
Yeast physiology is temporally regulated, this becomes apparent under nutrient-limited conditions and results in respiratory oscillations (YROs). YROs share features with circadian rhythms and interact with, but are independent of, the cell division cycle. Here, we show that YROs minimise energy expenditure by restricting protein synthesis until sufficient resources are stored, while maintaining osmotic homeostasis and protein quality control. Although nutrient supply is constant, cells sequester and store metabolic resources via increased transport, autophagy and biomolecular condensation. Replete stores trigger increased H<sup>+</sup> export which stimulates TORC1 and liberates proteasomes, ribosomes, chaperones and metabolic enzymes from non-membrane bound compartments. This facilitates translational bursting, liquidation of storage carbohydrates, increased ATP turnover, and the export of osmolytes. We propose that dynamic regulation of ion transport and metabolic plasticity are required to maintain osmotic and protein homeostasis during remodelling of eukaryotic proteomes, and that bioenergetic constraints selected for temporal organisation that promotes oscillatory behaviour.

### Keywords
Respiratory oscillation, Yeast, Metabolic rhythm

### Affiliations
MRC-LMB
MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cell Biology Division

### Submitter
Sew Peak-Chew

### Lab Head
Dr John O'Neill
MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cell Biology Division


