### Accession
PXD031521

### Title
An evolutionary conserved, immobility associated antithrombotic mechanism

### Description
Venous thromboembolism (VTE) comprising deep venous thrombosis and pulmonary embolism is a main cause of morbidity and mortality that causes tremendous health care costs. Short term immobility related conditions arising from hospitalization, acute trauma and forced bed rest are major risk factors for the development of VTE. In contrast, chronically paralyzed patients with post-spinal cord injury are protected from VTE despite immobilization. Similarly, free-ranging brown bears (Ursus arctos) that hibernate (immobilize) have adapted to this threat through yet to be discovered mechanisms and do not develop VTE. This suggests that long-term immobility can induce antithrombotic mechanisms that are evolutionarily conserved. Here we aimed to identify these adaptive mechanisms of VTE protection in a cross-species approach. Mass spectrometry-based proteomics identified platelet expressed heat shock protein 47 (Hsp47) as the most substantially downregulated protein during brown bear hibernation. In a clinical bed rest study and in spinal-cord injured humans, we likewise observed drastic reduction of platelet-expressed Hsp47. Genetic ablation and pharmaceutical inhibition of platelet Hsp47 attenuates deep vein thrombosis and thromboinflammatory responses in mice and human blood cells. This suggests that Hsp47 downregulation is an evolutionarily conserved mechanism that also protects immobilized patients from VTE. Our translational approach thus identified an antithrombotic signature that may give rise to novel antithrombotic therapeutics and prognostic markers.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics sample preparation was carried out with the 96 well PreOmics iST kit (P.O.00027) following the manufacturers protocol. Purified peptide concentration was set to 0.2 mg/ml after determination of concentration by nanodrop.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were analyzed by Spectronaut software version 15.1.210713 (Biognosys) in reference to the human Uniprot FASTA database (standard and additional). Enzymatic cleavage was defined by Trypsin/P. We included peptide lengths of 7-52 amino acids and limited the maximum number of missed cleavages to 2. The FDR threshold for peptides was set to 0.01 while PTM localization filtering was disabled.

### Publication Abstract
Venous thromboembolism (VTE) comprising deep venous thrombosis and pulmonary embolism is a major cause of morbidity and mortality. Short-term immobility-related conditions are a major risk factor for the development of VTE. Paradoxically, long-term immobilized free-ranging hibernating brown bears and paralyzed spinal cord injury (SCI) patients are protected from VTE. We aimed to identify mechanisms of immobility-associated VTE protection in a cross-species approach. Mass spectrometry-based proteomics revealed an antithrombotic signature in platelets of hibernating brown bears with heat shock protein 47 (HSP47) as the most substantially reduced protein. HSP47 down-regulation or ablation attenuated immune cell activation and neutrophil extracellular trap formation, contributing to thromboprotection in bears, SCI patients, and mice. This cross-species conserved platelet signature may give rise to antithrombotic therapeutics and prognostic markers beyond immobility-associated VTE.

### Keywords
Vte, Platelets

### Affiliations
Director at Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry Department Proteomics und Signaltransduktion Am Klopferspitz 18, 82152 Martinsried
Proteomics

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Director at Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry Department Proteomics und Signaltransduktion Am Klopferspitz 18, 82152 Martinsried


