### Accession
PXD023221

### Title
Dual FAN1 activities stabilize the HTT CAG repeat

### Description
Recent data strongly suggest HTT CAG repeat expansion drives Huntington’s disease (HD) pathogenesis and that disease development is modulated by components of the DNA damage response (DDR) pathway. FAN1 has been identified as a major HD modifier which slows expansion of the HTT CAG repeat in several cell and animal HD models. Here we show dual FAN1 activities act to inhibit repeat expansion. A highly conserved SPYF motif in the FAN1 N-terminus is required for an MLH1 interaction, which slows expansion, with FAN1 nuclease activity also contributing towards repeat stabilisation. Our data supports a model where FAN1 binds MLH1, restricting its recruitment by MSH3 and the formation of the functional DNA mismatch repair (MMR) complex believed to promote CAG repeat expansion. FAN1 nuclease activity functions either concurrently or following MMR activity to maintain repeat stability. These data highlight a potential avenue for HD therapeutics in attenuating somatic expansion.

### Sample Protocol
Lymphoblastoid cells, expressing endogenous levels of FAN1, and HEK293T cells transiently overexpressing Myc-FAN1, were lysed 10 min on ice using PBS, 1% NP-40, Benzonase and protease inhibitors and centrifuged 5 min at 20,000 g to remove cell debris. Anti-c-Myc magnetic beads (Pierce – ThermoFisher) were incubated 2 h with HEK cell lysates. FAN1 antibody (CHDI) was incubated for 1 h with LB cell lysate and protein G magnetic beads (Dynabeads – ThermoFisher) were then added to the mix and incubated for an additional 1 h. Four washing steps were performed using lysis buffer. Crosslinking was done using 1 mM BS3 d0/d12 (CreativeMolecules) for 30 min at 37°C. The reaction was quenched for 20 min at 37°C using ammonium bicarbonate at a final concentration of 100 mM. Prior to digestion, beads were resuspended in a buffer containing 2 M Urea, 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 10 mM DTT and denatured for 20 min at room temperature under agitation (1000 rpms). Samples were then alkylated, at room temperature and in the dark, using a final concentration of 50 mM iodoacetamide for 20 min, and diluted with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution to obtain a final concentration of urea below 1 M. Digestion was performed using sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37°C. Samples were fractionated in 3 fractions using C18-SCX StageTips prepared in-house as previously described with the following concentrations of ammonium acetate: 200 mM, 1 M and 1.5 M. Prior to mass spectrometry analysis, samples were further processed using C18 StageTips.  Crosslinked peptide mixtures were resuspended in 3% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid and were analysed by nano-LC-MS/MS using an Acquity M-Class system coupled to a Synapt G2Si mass spectrometer (Waters Corporation). Samples were loaded on the system and desalted by a reversed-phase Symmetry C18 trap column (180 μm internal diameter, 20 mm length, 5 μm particle size, Waters Corporation) at a flow rate of 8 μL/min for 3 min in 99% solvent A (Solvent A: MS-grade water, 0.1% formic acid – solvent B: Acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). Peptides were then separated using a linear gradient (0.3 μL/min, 35°C; 3–60% solvent B over 90 min) using a BEH130 C18 nanocolumn (75 μm internal diameter, 400 mm length, 1.7 μm particle size, Waters Corporation). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode using a mass range of 50-2000 Th for both MS and MS/MS scans and scan times of 0.2 s and 0.3 s respectively. The ten most intense precursor ions with a charge state between 3+ and 6+ were selected for fragmentation using the ‘mid’ collision energy ramp as described in James et al, 2019, Anal. Chem. Dynamic exclusion was used with a 30 second window to prevent repeated selection of peptides.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry files were converted to MGF (Mascot Generic Format) using PLGS (v3.0.2) using slow deisotoping algorithm and automatic denoising for both MS and MS/MS data. MGF files were further converted to mzXML with MSConvert using 32-bit binary encryption. Crosslinking identification was performed using xQuest. Searches were performed using a database containing the sequences of FAN1, MLH1, PMS2, FACD2 and FANC1 using a search tolerance of 20 ppm. The amino acids involved in crosslinking reactions parameter was set to K, S, T, Y and N-terminal amino acid. Up to three missed cleavages were allowed, carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine was set as a variable modification. Extraction of the highest-ranking identification from xQuest xml output was done using a modified version of Validate XL and only crosslinks scoring higher than 20 were considered and further manual validation for the presence of light and heavy crosslinked doublets was performed in the RAW MS files. Automated generation of tables and MGF files was done using an in-house Python script to allow crosslinking map representation using xiVIEW.

### Publication Abstract
CAG repeat expansion in the HTT gene drives Huntington's disease (HD) pathogenesis and is modulated by DNA damage repair pathways. In this context, the interaction between FAN1, a DNA-structure-specific nuclease, and MLH1, member of the DNA mismatch repair pathway (MMR), is not defined. Here, we identify a highly conserved SPYF motif at the N terminus of FAN1 that binds to MLH1. Our data support a model where FAN1 has two distinct functions to stabilize CAG repeats. On one hand, it binds MLH1 to restrict its recruitment by MSH3, thus inhibiting the assembly of a functional MMR complex that would otherwise promote CAG repeat expansion. On the other hand, it promotes accurate repair via its nuclease activity. These data highlight a potential avenue for HD therapeutics in attenuating somatic expansion.

### Keywords
Crosslinking, Fan1

### Affiliations
Institute of Structural and Molecular Biology - UCL
Institute of Structural and Molecular Biology, University College London, London, United Kingdom

### Submitter
Thomas Menneteau

### Lab Head
Dr Konstantinos Thalassinos
Institute of Structural and Molecular Biology, University College London, London, United Kingdom


