### Accession
PXD001118

### Title
Histione HCD and CID datasets for evaluation of search engines

### Description
To identify confident spectra from histone peptides containing PTMs, we present a method in which one kind of modification is searched each time. We then combine the identifications of multiple search engines to obtain confident results. We find that two search engines, pFind and Mascot, identify most of the confident results. This study will be beneficial those who are interested in histone proteomics analysis.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa Cell Culture ─ As previously described (1), HeLa cells were cultured in suspension with Minimum Essential Medium Eagle (MEM) Joklik modification for Suspension Cultures with 10% Newborn Calf Serum (Thermo Scientific SH30118.03), 1% Glutmax, and 1% Penicillin/Streptomycin. The cell density was maintained within the range of 1-10x105 cells/mL. Histones were acid extracted and subjected to chemical derivatization using propionic anhydride and trypsin digestion as previously described (2). Samples were then desalted and injected onto an online nano LC-MS/MS as described in (2).  Nano Liquid Chromatography Tandem Mass Spectrometry ─ The samples were loaded onto one of the two instrument setups as shown in Supplemental Table 1, all at 300 nL/min. Histone peptides were resolved on a two-step gradient from 2% ACN to 30% ACN in 0.1% formic acid over 40 minutes, then from 30% ACN to 95% ACN in 0.1% formic acid over 20 minutes. Q-Exactive and Orbitrap Velos Pro were operated in the data dependent mode with dynamic exclusion enabled (repeat count: 1, exclusion duration: 0.5 min). MS instrument methods were set up as previously reported (3). Settings for resolution, automatic gain control (AGC), and normalized collision energy (NCE) were listed in Supplemental Table 1. Every cycle one full MS scan (m/z 290 to 1600) was collected and followed by 15 or 12 MS/MS scans using either HCD or CID. All isolation windows were set at 2.0 m/z. Ions with a charge state of one and a rejection list of common contaminant ions (including keratin, trypsin and BSA) (exclusion width=10 ppm) were excluded from MS/MS.    1. Zee, B. M.; Britton, L. M.; Wolle, D.; Haberman, D. M.; Garcia, B. A., Origins and formation of histone methylation across the human cell cycle. Mol Cell Biol 2012, 32, (13), 2503-14.    2. Lin, S.; Garcia, B. A., Examining histone posttranslational modification patterns by high-resolution mass spectrometry. Methods Enzymol 2012, 512, 3-28.    3. Zee, B. M.; Levin, R. S.; Dimaggio, P. A.; Garcia, B. A., Global turnover of histone post-translational modifications and variants in human cells. Epigenetics Chromatin 2010, 3, (1), 22.

### Data Protocol
Database and Data ─ Protein sequences and MS/MS spectra are prepared first. A histone fasta file is built from the Uniprot human database (57 entries, including H1, H2A, H2B, H3, and H4). Two datasets (noted as HCD_Histone and CID_Histone) are obtained from the same HeLa histone sample. We note that some precursor m/z values exported by the instrument software Xcalibur are not monoisotopic, and some MS/MS spectra are from two or more co-fragmented peptides. Therefore, we use pParse to convert RAW files to MGF files by exporting the monoisotopic peaks of all precursors, including co-eluted precursors (1). The MGF files are searched using pFind, Mascot, Sequest HT in ProteomeDiscoverer, ProteinPilot, and PEAKS. Because OMSSA in COMPASS, X!Tandem in TPP, and Andromeda in MaxQuant have their own input format, we then convert MGF files to TXT files for OMSSA, use ReAdW (2) to convert RAW files to mzXML files for X!Tandem (in which some precursors are calibrated to the monoisotopic but no co-eluted peptides are exported), and use RAW files directly for Andromeda (in MaxQuant the ‘second peptide’ mode can detect some co-eluted peptides).  Search parameters ─ Search parameters are set for all search engines. The version of each search engine is shown in Supplemental Table 2. We set the following search parameters (as shown in Table 1): precursor mass tolerance ±10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance ±0.02 Th for HCD and ±0.4 Th for CID, trypsin only cleaving after arginine and up to 2 miscleavages, peptide N-terminal propionylation (Propionyl[Peptide N-term]/+56.026) as the fixed modification. To obtain more identification for different kinds of peptides, we set seven sets of variable modifications: (1) only Propionyl[K]/+56.026 for unmodified peptides, (2) Propionyl[K]/+56.026 and Acetyl[K]/+42.011 for acetylated peptides, (3) Propionyl[K]/+56.026 and Methyl_Propionyl[K]/+70.042 for mono-methylated peptides, (4) Propionyl[K]/+56.026 and Dimethyl[K]/+28.031 for di-methylated peptides, (5) Propionyl[K]/+56.026 and Trimethyl[K]/+42.047 for tri-methylated peptides, Propionyl[K]/+56.026 and Phospho[ST]/+79.966 for phosphorylated peptides, and all the above modifications for multi-modified peptides. In total we have 112 searches (i.e. two datasets, eight search engines, and seven searches).  Workflow ─ The workflow is shown in Figure 1. Firstly, RAW files are converted to MGF files, TXT files, and mzXML files. Secondly, each search engine searches with separate modifications. Thirdly, search results are filtered for separate modifications. The target-decoy approach is used in most search engines (3), except TPP, which uses probability to filter search results (4). A FDR of less than 1% at the spectra level is used to filter search results. Fourthly, redundant IDs are removed. When there are redundant spectra in different searches for one specific engine, the peptide-spectral matches with higher scores were kept. Lastly, to obtain confident results, all the filtered IDs for different search engines are combined. The number of search engines identifying one specific spectrum is counted, and spectra identified by only one search engine are filtered out.    1. Yuan, Z. F.; Liu, C.; Wang, H. P.; Sun, R. X.; Fu, Y.; Zhang, J. F.; Wang, L. H.; Chi, H.; Li, Y.; Xiu, L. Y.; Wang, W. P.; He, S. M., pParse: a method for accurate determination of monoisotopic peaks in high-resolution mass spectra. Proteomics 2012, 12, (2), 226-35.    2. http://sourceforge.net/projects/sashimi/files/.    3. Elias, J. E.; Gygi, S. P., Target-decoy search strategy for increased confidence in large-scale protein identifications by mass spectrometry. Nat Methods 2007, 4, (3), 207-14.    4. Keller, A.; Nesvizhskii, A. I.; Kolker, E.; Aebersold, R., Empirical statistical model to estimate the accuracy of peptide identifications made by MS/MS and database search. Anal Chem 2002, 74, (20), 5383-92.

### Publication Abstract
Identification of histone post-translational modifications (PTMs) is challenging for proteomics search engines. Including many histone PTMs in one search increases the number of candidate peptides dramatically, leading to low search speed and fewer identified spectra. To evaluate database search engines on identifying histone PTMs, we present a method in which one kind of modification is searched each time, for example, unmodified, individually modified, and multimodified, each search result is filtered with false discovery rate less than 1%, and the identifications of multiple search engines are combined to obtain confident results. We apply this method for eight search engines on histone data sets. We find that two search engines, pFind and Mascot, identify most of the confident results at a reasonable speed, so we recommend using them to identify histone modifications. During the evaluation, we also find some important aspects for the analysis of histone modifications. Our evaluation of different search engines on identifying histone modifications will hopefully help those who are hoping to enter the histone proteomics field. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium with the data set identifier PXD001118.

### Keywords
Post-translational modification, Data analysis, Proteomics, Search engine, Histone

### Affiliations
UPenn
Epigenetics Program, Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania

### Submitter
Zuo-Fei Yuan

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin A. Garcia
Epigenetics Program, Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania


