### Accession
PXD038914

### Title
Quiescent vs. Activated Endothelial Cell-Derived Extracellular Vesicles

### Description
Proteomics was performed on extracellular vesicles derived from in vitro cultures of activated and quiescent human endothelial cells.

### Sample Protocol
Peptide samples were analyzed by data dependent acquisition on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer fronted with an EASY-Spray Source (heated at 45°C), and coupled to an Easy-nLC1000 HPLC pump (Thermo Scientific). The peptides were subjected to a dual column set-up: an Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 trap analytical column, 75 µm X 20 mm (pre-column), and an EASY-Spray LC column, 75 µm X 250 mm (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The analytical gradient was run at 300 nl/min, with Solvent A composed of water/0.1% formic acid and Solvent B composed of acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid). The analytical gradient was run from 5-21% Solvent B for 75 minutes and 21-30% Solvent B for 15 minutes. All reagents were MS-grade. EV samples were diluted 1:2 in loading buffer prior to injection. The Orbitrap analyzer was set to 120K resolution, and the top N precursor ions in 3 seconds cycle time within a scan range of 375-1500 m/z (60 seconds dynamic exclusion enabled) were subjected to collision induced dissociation (CID; collision energy, 30%; isolation window, 1.6 m/z; AGC target, 1.0 e4). The ion trap analyzer was set to a rapid scan rate for peptide sequencing (tandem mass spectrometry; MS/MS).

### Data Protocol
Resultant MS/MS data were queried against the human (UP000005640, downloaded September 10, 2020) UniProt database using the HT-SEQUEST search algorithm, via the Proteome Discoverer (PD) Package (version 2.2, Thermo Scientific). Trypsin was set as the digestion enzyme while allowing up to four miss-cleavages, using 10 ppm precursor tolerance window and 0.6 Da fragment tolerance window. Oxidation of methionine and N-terminus acetylation were set as variable modifications, and carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification. The peptide false discovery rate (FDR) was calculated using Percolator provided by PD and peptides were filtered based on a 1.0% FDR. Quantification utilized unique peptides (those assigned to a given Master protein group and not present in any other protein group) and razor peptides (peptides shared among multiple protein groups). Razor peptides were used to quantify only the protein with the most identified peptides and not for the other proteins they are contained in. A minimum of two unique peptides were required for a protein to be included in each dataset. To quantify peptide precursors detected in the MS1 but not sequenced from sample to sample, we enabled the ‘Feature Mapper’ node. Chromatographic alignment was done with a maximum retention time (RT) shift of 10 minutes and a mass tolerance of 10 ppm. Feature linking and mapping settings were: RT tolerance minimum of 0 minutes, mass tolerance of 10 ppm and signal-to-noise minimum of 5. Precursor peptide abundance quantification was based on chromatographic intensities and total peptide amount was used for normalization in all other cases.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Lc-msms, Extracellular vesicle, Endothelial cells

### Affiliations
University Health Network, Division of Vascular Surgery Toronto General Hospital Research Institute, Division of Biomedical Research; Department of Surgery, University of Toronto; Toronto, Canada
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Mark Blaser

### Lab Head
Dr Kathryn L Howe
University Health Network, Division of Vascular Surgery Toronto General Hospital Research Institute, Division of Biomedical Research; Department of Surgery, University of Toronto; Toronto, Canada


