### Accession
PXD036021

### Title
Plant signals anticipate the induction of the type III secretion system in Pseudomonas syringae 2 pv. actinidiae facilitating efficient temperature-dependent effector translocation

### Description
Disease resistance in plants depends on a molecular dialogue with microbes that involves many known chemical effectors, but the time course of the interaction and the influence of the environment are largely unknown. The outcome of host–pathogen interactions is thought to reflect the offensive and defensive capabilities of both players. When plants interact with Pseudomonas syringae, several well-characterized virulence factors contribute to early bacterial pathogenicity, including the type III secretion system (T3SS), which must be activated by signals from the plant and environment to allow the secretion of virulence effectors. The manner in which these signals regulate T3SS activity is still unclear. Here, we strengthen the paradigm of the plant–pathogen molecular dialogue by addressing overlooked details concerning the timing of interactions, specifically the role of plant signals and temperature on the regulation of bacterial virulence during the first few hours of the interaction. Whole-genome expression profiling after 1 h revealed that the perception of plant signals from kiwifruit or tomato extracts anticipates T3SS expression in P. syringae pv. actinidiae compared to apoplast-like conditions, facilitating more efficient effector transport in planta, as revealed by the induction of a temperature-dependent hypersensitive response in the non-host plant Arabidopsis thaliana Col-0. Our results show that, in the arms race between plants and bacteria, the temperature-dependent timing of bacterial virulence versus the induction of plant defenses is probably one of the fundamental parameters governing the outcome of the interaction.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial strains, grown on KB-agar plate, were inoculated in 50 ml of KB liquid medium supplemented and incubated overnight at 28 °C with shaking (200 rpm). Cell suspensions were centrifuged at 5000 rpm for 10 minutes at room temperature and the pellets were washed three times in HIM and resuspended in 50 mL of HIM supplemented or not with kiwifruit or tomato extract (final concentration of 1%) at a final OD600 of 0.8. Bacteria were incubated for 24 h at 18°C or 28°C with shaking (200 rpm). Following centrifugation at 5000 rpm for 10 minutes at 4°C, supernatants were concentrated 50 times using Amicon Ultra-4 (cut-off 3kDa) (Millipore).Supernatants obtained as described above were precipitated overnight at -20°C with 4 volumes of ice-cold acetone. Samples were then centrifuged at 14000 x g for 10 minutes at 4°C and pellets were air-dried for 10 minutes before being resuspended in the solubilization solution (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 3 % CHAPS, w/v , 40 mM Tris, and protease inhibitor cocktail (Complete, Mini; Roche, Basel, Switzerland). Proteins were quantified using Bradford method (15). Before LC-MS/MS analysis, secreted proteins were digested by trypsin following the protocol provided by the manufacture (Applied Biosystem).

### Data Protocol
The comparative proteomics analysis of digested samples was done by LC-MS/MS which was performed by using a micro-LC Eksigent Technologies (Dublin, OH, USA) coupled with a 5600+ TripleTOF mass spectrometer system (AB Sciex, Concord, ON, Canada). After separation of peptides on a Halo Fused C18 column (AB Sciex) using a 30 min gradient of acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid, the MS and MS/MS analysis were performed as previously reported. Briefly, data dependent analysis (DDA) was combined to cyclic data independent analysis (DIA) using a 25-Da window (36 swaths in total) for identification and label free quantification purposes. Two DDA and three DIA acquisitions were performed. The MS data were acquired with Analyst TF 1.7 (AB SCIEX). The DDA files were searched using Protein Pilot software v. 4.2 (AB SCIEX) and Mascot v. 2.4 (Matrix Science Inc., Boston, MA, USA). Trypsin as digestion enzyme was specified for both the software. For Mascot we used two missed cleavages, the instrument was set to ESI-QUAD-TOF, and the following modifications were specified for the search: carbamidomethyl cysteins as fixed modification and oxidized methionine as variable modification. A search tolerance of 0.08 Da was specified for the peptide mass tolerance, and 10 ppm for the MS/MS tolerance. The charges of the peptides to search for were set to 2 +, 3 +, and 4 +, and the search was set on monoisotopic mass. The UniProt Swiss-Prot reviewed database containing Pseudomonas syringae group proteins was used and a target-decoy database search was performed. False Discovery Rate was fixed at 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bacterial virulence, Effectors, Type iii secretion system, Plant signals, Plant-bacteria interactions

### Affiliations
University of Eastern Piedmont 
Biological Mass Spectrometry Lab, Department of Translational Medicine (DiMeT), Center for Translational Research on Autoimmune & Allergic Diseases - CAAD, University of Piemonte Orientale - UPO

### Submitter
Marcello Manfredi

### Lab Head
Dr Marcello Manfredi
Biological Mass Spectrometry Lab, Department of Translational Medicine (DiMeT), Center for Translational Research on Autoimmune & Allergic Diseases - CAAD, University of Piemonte Orientale - UPO


