### Accession
PXD042313

### Title
CLPB disaggregase dysfunction impacts the functional integrity of the proteolytic SPY complex

### Description
CLPB is a mitochondrial intermembrane space AAA+ domain–containing disaggregase. CLPB mutations are associated with 3-methylglutaconic aciduria and neutropenia; however, the molecular mechanism underscoring disease and the contribution of CLPB substrates to disease pathology remains unknown. Interactions between CLPB and mitochondrial quality control (QC) factors, including PARL and OPA1, have been reported, hinting at dysregulation of organelle QC in disease. Utilizing proteomic and biochemical approaches, we define a stress-specific aggregation phenotype in a CLPB-null environment and define the CLPB substrate profile. We show an interplay between intermembrane space proteins including CLPB, HAX1, HTRA2, and the inner membrane quality control proteins (STOML2, PARL, YME1L1; SPY complex), with CLPB deficiency impeding SPY complex function by virtue of protein aggregation in the intermembrane space. We conclude that there is an interdependency of mitochondrial QC components at the intermembrane space/inner membrane interface, and perturbations to this network may underscore CLPB disease pathology.

### Sample Protocol
For isolated mitochondria mass spectrometry analysis, 50 µg mitochondrial pellets were solubilized, reduced, and alkylated in SDC buffer (1% [wt/vol] sodium deoxycholate [SDC], 100 mM Tris-Cl, pH 8.1, 40 mM chloroacetamide [CAA], and 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine [TCEP]) by boiling for 5 min at 99°C with shaking followed by 15 min of sonication (Powersonic 603 Ultrasonic Cleaner, 40 KHz on high power) at RT. Proteins were digested with 1 µg trypsin (in 50 mM acetic acid) overnight at 37°C. Insoluble debris was removed via centrifugation at 20,000 g for 5 min at RT and clarified supernatant was loaded onto stage tips (​Kulak et al., 2014​) containing 3× styrene-divinylbenzene reversed phase sulfonate (SDB-RPS) substrate (3M Empore [Sigma-Aldrich]) plugs. Tryptic peptides were extracted upon addition of 100 µl isopropanol, 1% (vol/vol) TFA to stage tips, and bound following centrifugation at 3,000 g at RT. Stage tips were washed with 100 µl isopropanol, 1% (vol/vol) TFA, then 100 µl 0.2% (vol/vol) TFA at 3,000 g at RT, followed by elution in 100 µl 80% (vol/vol) ACN, 1% (vol/vol) ammonium hydroxide at 3,000 g at RT. Samples were acidified to 1% (vol/vol) TFA and dried using a CentriVap Benchtop Vacuum Concentrator (Labconco) and reconstituted in 40 µl 0.1% (vol/vol) TFA, 2% (vol/vol) ACN. Reconstituted samples were sonicated for 15 min as above and clarified via centrifugation at 20,000 g for 10 min at RT before being transferred to sample vials for analysis. For acetone-precipitated IP eluates, samples were resuspended in urea/ABC buffer (8 M urea, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate [ABC], pH 8.0) and solubilized via sonication for 15 min at RT. Proteins were reduced and alkylated with 5 mM TCEP, 50 mM CAA, respectively, followed by incubation at 37°C for 30 min with shaking. 50 mM ABC buffer was added to samples to dilute urea concentration to 2 M, and proteins were digested with 1 µg trypsin (in 50 mM acetic acid) overnight at 37°C. Stage tips (​Kulak et al., 2014​) containing 2×  styrene-divinylbenzene cross-linked copolymer (SDB-XC) substrate (3M Empore [Sigma-Aldrich]) plugs were made and activated with 50 µl 100% ACN and equilibrated with 50 µl 0.1% (vol/vol) TFA, 2% (vol/vol) ACN, both centrifuged at 2,500 g at RT. Following digest, samples were acidified to 1% (vol/vol) TFA and centrifuged at 20,000 g for 5 min at RT to pellet insoluble debris before supernatant was loaded onto stage tips. Tryptic peptides were bound to substrate via centrifugation at 2,500 g at RT, followed by a wash spin with 100 µl 0.1% (vol/vol) TFA, 2% (vol/vol) can, and elution in 100 µl 0.1% (vol/vol) TFA, 2% (vol/vol) ACN. Eluted peptides were dried using a CentriVap Benchtop Vacuum Concentrator (Labconco) and reconstituted in 15 µl 0.1% (vol/vol) TFA, 2% (vol/vol) ACN before being prepared for analysis as above.

### Data Protocol
Liquid chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis of isolated mitochondria, IP, and aggregation assay samples was performed on a QExactive plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a nanoESI interface in combination with an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nanoHPLC (Dionex Ultimate 3000). The LC system was equipped with an Acclaim Pepmap nano-trap column (Dinoex-C18, 100 Å, 75 µm × 2 cm) and an Acclaim Pepmap RSLC analytical column (Dinoex-C18, 100 Å, 75 µm × 50 cm). Samples were injected into the enrichment column at an isocratic flow of 5 µl/min of 2% (vol/vol) ACN containing 0.1% vol/vol formic acid for 5 min applied before the enrichment column was switched in-line with the analytical column. The eluents were 5% (vol/vol) DMSO in 0.1% (vol/vol) formic acid (solvent A) and 5% DMSO in 100% (vol/vol) ACN and 0.1% (vol/vol) formic acid (solvent B). For isolated mitochondria and aggregation assay samples, the flow gradient was (i) 0–6 min at 2% B, (ii) 6–35 min, 2–23% B, (iii) 35–45 min 23–40% B, (iv) 45–50 min, 40–80% B, (v) 50–55 min, 80-80% B, and (vi) 55–65 min, 80-2% and was equilibrated at 2% B for 10 min before the next sample injection. For IP samples, the flow gradient was (i) 0–6 min at 2% B, (ii) 6–65 min, 2–23% B, (iii) 65–75 min, 23–40% B, (iv) 75–80 min, 40–80% B, (v) 80–85 min, 80-80% B, and (vi) 85–95 min, 80-2% and was equilibrated at 2% B for 10 min before the next sample injection. The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent mode, full MS spectra were acquired in positive mode, 70,000 resolution, an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3e6, and maximum injection time (IT) time of 50 ms. The top 15 most intense peptide ions with z ≥ 2 and intensity threshold of 1.7e4 were subject to MS/MS using high-energy collision dissociation. The isolation window was set at 1.2 m/z and precursors were fragmented using a normalized collision energy of 30%. MS/MS resolution was set at 17,500 with AGC target of 1e5 and maximum IT time of 100 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set at 30 s. Raw files were analyzed using the MaxQuant platform (version 1.6.5.0; ​Tyanova et al., 2016a​) and were searched against the Uniprot human protein database (canonical and isoforms [reviewed], downloaded March 2021). Default LFQ search parameters were applied, with a minimum LFQ ratio count of 2 and “match between runs” enabled in all cases. Subsequent statistical analysis was performed using the Perseus platform (version 1.6.15.0; ​Tyanova et al., 2016b​). Briefly, the “proteinGroups.txt” output file from MaxQuant was loaded into Perseus, and hits labeled as “Only identified by site,” “Reverse,” or “Potential contaminant” was removed. LFQ intensities were Log2 transformed, replicates were labeled according to the experimental group (i.e., wild type or KO), and mitochondrial proteins were annotated using the MitoCarta 3.0 database (​Rath et al., 2021​; matching by Protein ID). At this point, subsequent analysis differed depending on the experiment. For isolated mitochondria and aggregation experiments, matrix rows were filtered for ≥2 valid values in each experimental group, and rows were globally normalized against proteins annotated as “mitochondrial” (designated “+” in MitoCarta 3.0) using the “Subtract row cluster” function. Non-mitochondrial proteins were excluded, and mitochondrial (“+”) and mito-interacting proteins were retained prior to statistical testing. For IP experiments, the “Summary statistics (rows)” function was used to calculate the number of valid values in the experimental (e.g., FLAG-tagged) protein eluate, and rows were filtered for ≥2 valid values in the experimental group alone. Control group (e.g., wild type or no tag) LFQ values were then imputed from the normal distribution to fill missing or non-valid values (1.8 σ [SD] downshift, 0.3 σ width). As above, the matrix was then filtered for non-mitochondrial proteins prior to statistical testing. In both cases, unpaired two-sample t tests were performed with statistical significance determined by P value (P value <0.05), displayed as a volcano plot using the “Scatter plot” function with “Student’s t test difference” on the x-axis and “−Log Student’s t test P value” on the y-axis.

### Publication Abstract
CLPB is a mitochondrial intermembrane space AAA+ domain-containing disaggregase. CLPB mutations are associated with 3-methylglutaconic aciduria and neutropenia; however, the molecular mechanism underscoring disease and the contribution of CLPB substrates to disease pathology remains unknown. Interactions between CLPB and mitochondrial quality control (QC) factors, including PARL and OPA1, have been reported, hinting at dysregulation of organelle QC in disease. Utilizing proteomic and biochemical approaches, we show a stress-specific aggregation phenotype in a CLPB-null environment and define the CLPB substrate profile. We illustrate an interplay between intermembrane space proteins including CLPB, HAX1, HTRA2, and the inner membrane quality control proteins (STOML2, PARL, YME1L1; SPY complex), with CLPB deficiency impeding SPY complex function by virtue of protein aggregation in the intermembrane space. We conclude that there is an interdependency of mitochondrial QC components at the intermembrane space/inner membrane interface, and perturbations to this network may underscore CLPB disease pathology.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Protein quality control, Protein transport, Mitochondrial disease, Disaggregase

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Pharmacology and The Bio21 Molecular Science and Biotechnology Institute, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, 3052, Australia
The University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Megan Baker

### Lab Head
Dr Diana Stojanovski
Department of Biochemistry and Pharmacology and The Bio21 Molecular Science and Biotechnology Institute, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, 3052, Australia


