### Accession
PXD025999

### Title
Development of a mass spectrometric method for the analysis of periplasmic proteins from Gram-negative bacteria

### Description
Mass spectrometry-based proteomics has emerged as a powerful technique in the field of clinical diagnostics but requires a multistep process for sample preparation. The purpose of clinical mass spectrometry is to detect and quantify protein targets using well-established methods. Here, we found that the osmotic shock (OS) process allowed us to reduce the salt concentration and simultaneously enrich periplasmic proteins, specifically target proteins associated with antibiotic resistance in Gram-negative bacteria. Furthermore, we demonstrated that an optimized condition of the OS lysis allows the highest sensitivity in the MS analysis, and the OS lysate containing the proteins of interest (e.g., KPC-2) can be directly injected into multiple mass spectrometers without desalting process. Our study provides a detergent-free, straightforward method for periplasmic protein analysis using mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
<Sample preparation> KPC-2-producing E. coli cells were cultured in Luria-Bertani media (Becton, Dickinson and Company, Sparks, MD, USA) containing 100 µg/mL ampicillin at 37°C for 16 h, and bacterial cell pellets were collected by centrifugation at 14,000 × g for 10 min at 4°C. Collected pellets were resuspended in a hypertonic solution containing NaCl in 25 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0). After incubation for 10 min at room temperature, the cells were centrifuged at 14,000 × g for 10 min at 4°C. The supernatant was removed, and the cell pellet was resuspended in distilled water (DW). After another incubation for 10 min at room temperature, the cell suspension was centrifuged at 14,000 × g for 10 min at 4°C, and the OS lysate was recovered in the supernatant (i.e., OS supernatant). The pellets were then lysed in 4% SDS for 10 min at 95°C. All samples and experiments were conducted in a volume of 100 µL. Protein concentrations were measured with a NanoDrop™ One spectrophotometer using the A280 method (Thermo Scientific, Madison, WI, USA). Samples for MS analyses were prepared according to the manufacturer’s instructions with slight modifications. Briefly, 60 µg of each sample was denatured in 5% SDS and 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB, Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA), pH 8.5, reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (final concentration, Sigma) at 56°C, and alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide (final concentration, Sigma) in the dark. Samples were then acidified by the addition of 1.2% phosphoric acid (final concentration) and diluted with binding/wash buffer (90% methanol and 100 mM TEAB, pH 7.1). After gentle mixing, the protein suspension was loaded onto an S-Trap microspin column (Protifi, Huntington, NY, USA) and centrifuged at 4,000 × g for 30 s to trap proteins. The filters were washed three times with binding/wash buffer. Trypsin (in 100 mM TEAB, pH 8.5, 1:25 enzyme:protein, Promega, Madison, WI, USA) was added to the column and incubated at 37°C for 16 h. Peptides were sequentially eluted with 50 mM TEAB, pH 8.5, 0.2% formic acid, and 0.2% formic acid in 50% acetonitrile (ACN). The eluted peptides were centrifuged, dried under vacuum, and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid.  <Bottom-up analysis> One microgram of peptides was loaded onto a C18 trap column (75 μm × 2 cm, packed in-house) and then separated on a C18 analytical column (75 μm × 70 cm, packed in-house) using the Ultimate 3000 NanoLC system (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA). The flow rate was 5 μL/min for sample loading and washing with 95% buffer A (0.1% formic acid in water) and 5% buffer B (0.1% formic acid in ACN) for 5 min. The peptides were eluted at 350 nL/min using a linear gradient of 10–40% buffer B over 1 h. Data were collected using a Q-Exactive HF-X (Thermo Scientific) with a full MS range (350–1,600 m/z), resolution of 60,000 at 400 m/z, and an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3 × 10^6 with a maximum injection time (IT) of 100 ms. MS/MS spectra of the 20 most intense ions were fragmented by 28% normalized collision energy (NCE) of higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD), an isolation window of 1.7 m/z, an ACG target of 5 × 10^5 with a maximum IT of 28 ms, a resolution of 15,000 at 400 m/z, and dynamic exclusion for 30 s.  <Top-down analysis> 1 µg of OS supernatant from the OS lysis was loaded onto a PLRP-S trap column (4,000 Å, 10 μm, 100 μm × 5 cm, packed in-house) and separated on a PLRP-S analytical column (4,000 Å, 10 μm, 100 μm × 60 cm, packed in-house) using the same LC system as described above. The flow rates were 4 μL/min for sample loading and washing with 95% buffer A and 5% buffer B and 500 nL/min for separating proteins using a linear gradient of 20–60% buffer B over 90 min. Data were collected using a Q-Exactive HF-X with a resolution of 240,000 at 400 m/z, an AGC target of 1 × 10^6, and a mass range of 1,050–1,650 m/z for all MS results. Fragmentation was set at six microscans, with a resolution of 120,000 at 400 m/z, an AGC target of 1 × 10^6, an isolation window of 10 m/z, and 29% NCE of HCD for the top seven data-dependent MS/MS results.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS (.RAW) files obtained from the Q-Exactive HF-X were searched using either Proteome Discoverer software (v2.4.0.305, Thermo Fisher Scientific) or ProSight PC 4.1 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the Swiss-Prot E. coli database (UniProt release 2021_01, 4518 proteins) including the KPC-2 protein sequence (UniProt accession Q93LQ9). The Proteome Discoverer software used the Sequest HT search engine for peptide/protein identification with default parameters (fixed modification of N-terminal acetylation, Met-loss and Met-loss/acetylation, and Met oxidation). The precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm, and the fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. Peptide/protein groups from the Percolator repository were filtered using a 1% false-discovery rate (FDR). Label-free quantification was performed based on precursor intensity and normalized using the total sum of the abundance values of all peptides. The ProSight PC software used both absolute search mode (100,000 Da precursor mass tolerance, 15 ppm fragment mass tolerance) and biomarker search mode (2.2 Da precursor mass tolerance, 15 ppm fragment mass tolerance) for proteoform analyses. For identification of proteoforms, matching fragments were filtered using at least four fragment ions and a threshold E-value cut-off lower than 10^-4 . The ProSight Light v1.4 tool (http://prosightlite.northwestern.edu/) was used to manually annotate post-translational modifications and cleaved protein products.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Top-down, Kpc-2 producing e. coli, Bottom-up, Lc-ms/ms, Gram-negative bacteria, Os supernatant, Osmotic shock lysis

### Affiliations
Research & Development Center for Clinical Mass Spectrometry, Seegene Medical Foundation, Seongdong-gu, Seoul, Korea
Seegene Medical Foundation

### Submitter
Dong Huey Cheon

### Lab Head
Dr Je-Hyun Baek
Research & Development Center for Clinical Mass Spectrometry, Seegene Medical Foundation, Seongdong-gu, Seoul, Korea


