### Accession
PXD031276

### Title
Proteome and glycoproteome analyses reveal the proteinProteome and glycoproteome analyses reveal the protein N-linked glycosylation specificity of STT3A and STT3B N-linked glycosylation specificity of STT3A and STT3B

### Description
STT3A and STT3B are the main catalytic subunit of oligosaccharyltransferase (OST-A and OST-B in mammalian cells), which primarily mediate cotranslational and posttranslocational N-linked glycosylation, respectively. To determine the specificity of STT3A and STT3B, we performed proteomics and glycoproteomics analyses to characterize the protein expression and glycosylation in STT3A-knockout (KO), STT3B-KO, and wild-type (WT) HEK293 cells. In total, 3,993 proteins, 4,020 unique N-linked intact glycopeptides (IGPs) and 723 glycosites, representing 401 glycoproteins were identified in KO and WT cells. Deletion of the STT3A gene had a greater impact on the protein expression than deletion of STT3B, especially on glycoproteins. In addition, mannosylated N-glycans from glycoproteins were reduced, while fucosylated N-glycans were increased in STT3A-KO cells. The glycan changes may be caused by the differential expression of glycosyltransferases and the activation of unfolded protein response (UPR) with further analysis of glycan-related enzymes. Interestingly, hyperglycosylated proteins were identified in KO cells. We verified that the hyperglycosylation of ENPL was caused by the ER stress and UPR, which were induced by the deletion of the STT3A. Overall, the specificity of STT3A and STT3B revealed that defects in the OST subunit not only broadly affect N-linked glycosylation of the protein but also affect protein expression.STT3A and STT3B are the main catalytic subunit of oligosaccharyltransferase (OST-A and OST-B in mammalian cells), which primarily mediate cotranslational and posttranslocational N-linked glycosylation, respectively. To determine the specificity of STT3A and STT3B, we performed proteomics and glycoproteomics analyses to characterize the protein expression and glycosylation in STT3A-knockout (KO), STT3B-KO, and wild-type (WT) HEK293 cells. In total, 3,993 proteins, 4,020 unique N-linked intact glycopeptides (IGPs) and 723 glycosites, representing 401 glycoproteins were identified in KO and WT cells. Deletion of the STT3A gene had a greater impact on the protein expression than deletion of STT3B, especially on glycoproteins. In addition, mannosylated N-glycans from glycoproteins were reduced, while fucosylated N-glycans were increased in STT3A-KO cells. The glycan changes may be caused by the differential expression of glycosyltransferases and the activation of unfolded protein response (UPR) with further analysis of glycan-related enzymes. Interestingly, hyperglycosylated proteins were identified in KO cells. We verified that the hyperglycosylation of ENPL was caused by the ER stress and UPR, which were induced by the deletion of the STT3A. Overall, the specificity of STT3A and STT3B revealed that defects in the OST subunit not only broadly affect N-linked glycosylation of the protein but also affect protein expression.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins (500 μg) were reduced using 10 mM DTT at 56°C for 45 min and alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide in the dark for 30 min at room temperature. The solutions were diluted 8-fold in 40 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and sequencing grade trypsin (Beijing Shengxia, China) was added to the solution at 1:40 (w/w), followed by incubation overnight at 37°C. The peptides were desalted using a C18 Sep-Pak column. Twenty micrograms of desalted peptides were reserved for peptides detection, and the remaining peptides were used for enrichment of intact glycopeptides (IGPs) using the Oasis MAX extraction cartridges (Waters). Lyophilized global peptides and glycopeptides were resuspended in 2% ACN/0.1% formic acid (FA) solution and analyzed using a high-resolution Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA). Each injection volume was 3 μL. Samples were separated on an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA) equipped with an internal RSLC C18 column (75 μm × 25 cm). The mobile phase consisted of phase A (water) and phase B (0.1% FA and 90% ACN). The flow rate was maintained at 550 nL/min. For global peptides, the elution gradient was set as follows: 0-8 min, 3% B; 8-88 min, 8% B; 88-110 min, 28% B; 110-115 min, 32% B; 115-120 min, 80% B. Other mass spectrometry parameters were performed according to methods previously established in our laboratory.16 For glycopeptides, the gradient elution was 2-6% B, 1 min; 6-30% B, 90 min; 30–38% B, 22 min; 38–80% B, 5 min; and 80% B, 5 min. Spectra were collected from 350 to 2000 m/z at a resolution of 60,000 using an AGC target of 4 × 105 and a maximum injection time of 250 ms. Secondary mass spectrometry analysis was then performed using the data-dependent HCD fragmentation pattern. The parameters were as follows: resolution of 60,000, collision energy of 35% for HCD, 5% for stepped collision, AGC target 5 × 104, maximum injection time 150 ms, and microscan 1.

### Data Protocol
For global peptides, the acquired MS/MS spectra were matched using MaxQuant software. The database uses HUMAN - UniProt-organism containing 20,432 proteins, updated on July 22, 2019. The search criteria were a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.02 Da and a precursor ion tolerance of 10.0 ppm. Iodoacetamide derivatives of cysteine were set as fixed modifications, and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications. The false discovery rate (FDR) for both PSM and protein was 0.01. For IGPs identification, the data were searched using GPQuest 2.017 and a database containing 45491 glycopeptides and 252 N-glycans18, respectively. The mass tolerance parameters for MS1 and MS2 are 10 and 20 ppm, respectively. Meanwhile, the spectrum containing the oxonium ion m/z 204.09 was selected for further searches. In addition, the matched results were filtered based on the following conditions: (1) FDR less than 1% for glycopeptides; (2) at least one N glycan for one peptide spectra match (PSM); and (3) more than one experimental detection.

### Publication Abstract
STT3A and STT3B are the main catalytic subunits of the oligosaccharyltransferase complex (OST-A and OST-B in mammalian cells), which primarily mediate cotranslational and post-translocational N-linked glycosylation, respectively. To determine the specificity of STT3A and STT3B, we performed proteomic and glycoproteomic analyses in the gene knock-out (KO) and wild-type HEK293 cells. In total, 3961 proteins, 4265 unique N-linked intact glycopeptides and 629 glycosites representing 349 glycoproteins were identified from all these cells. Deletion of the STT3A gene had a greater impact on the protein expression than deletion of STT3B, especially on glycoproteins. In addition, total mannosylated N-glycans were reduced and fucosylated N-glycans were increased in STT3A-KO cells, which were caused by the differential expression of glycan-related enzymes. Interestingly, hyperglycosylated proteins were identified in KO cells, and the hyperglycosylation of ENPL was caused by the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress due to the STT3A deletion. Furthermore, the increased expression of the ATF6 and PERK indicated that the unfolded protein response also happened in STT3A-KO cells. Overall, the specificity of STT3A and STT3B revealed that defects in the OST subunit not only broadly affect N-linked glycosylation of the protein but also affect protein expression.

### Keywords
Ost, Glycoproteomics，mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Jiangnan university
Jiangnan University, No. 1800 Lihu Avenue, Binhu District, Wuxi City, Jiangsu Province

### Submitter
Piaopiao Wen

### Lab Head
Dr Piaopiao Wen
Jiangnan University, No. 1800 Lihu Avenue, Binhu District, Wuxi City, Jiangsu Province


