### Accession
PXD001525

### Title
Molecular Characterization of LubX. AP-MS using Legionella lysate

### Description
Legionella pneumophila delivers over 300 effector proteins into the host cytosol. One of these effectors, LubX contains 2 U-box domains, and directs the proeosomal degradation of another translocated protein, SidH, however this 'metaeffector' activity is pooly understood. As part of our investigation of the interaction of LubX and SidH, we idenified a LubX mutant that was no longer able to abrogate the toxicity of ectopically expressed SidH in yeast. This dataset belongs to AP-MS experiments conducted to test the ability of these mutants for their ability to bind directly to SidH in Legionella lysate mixtures

### Sample Protocol
His-Streptavidin binding peptide (SBP) tagged bait proteins were recombinantly expressed in E.coli and proteins purified using Ni-NTA. Purified proteins were bound to magnetic strepatvidin beads (GE Heakthcare) and subsequently incubated with lysates of Legionella pneumophila (Lp03) grown to exponential and post-exponential stages that had been previously depleted of endogenous biotin by incubation with streptavidin beads. After incubation for 3 hours, followed by 3 sequential washes using the lysis buffer, bait and associated proteins were eluted using buffer containing 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 2.5 mM biotin. Eluted proteins were collected and digested with trypsin at 37 degrees celcius overnight. Reactions were terminated by the addition of TFA to a final concentration of 0.5% and subsequently processed using Agilent OMIX C18 tips according to the supplied instructions. Eluted peptides were dried to completion in a vacuum centrifuge and stored at -20 degrees until needed. Samples were resuspended in 0.1 % formic acid immediately prior to analysis on a Thermo LTQ XL

### Data Protocol
Raw data was converted to mzXML format using MSConvert (via MSConvertGUI) and subsequently seached against the Legionella Lp03 and E.coli K12 proteomes as well as a database of common contaminants (crap DB) using X! Tandem (Cyclone) via the GPM Manager.  Fragment mass error = 0.4 Da, Parent mass error (+3/-2 Da), Potential Mods = Oxidation (M), Refinement mods = (Round 1) Oxidation (M,W), Deamidation (N, Q) (Round 2) Dioxidation (M,W). Enzyme = trypsin. Missed cleavages = 1

### Publication Abstract
LubX is part of the large arsenal of effectors in Legionella pneumophila that are translocated into the host cytosol during infection. Despite such unique features as the presence of two U-box motifs and its targeting of another effector SidH, the molecular basis of LubX activity remains poorly understood. Here we show that the N terminus of LubX is able to activate an extended number of ubiquitin-conjugating (E2) enzymes including UBE2W, UBEL6, and all tested members of UBE2D and UBE2E families. Crystal structures of LubX alone and in complex with UBE2D2 revealed drastic molecular diversification between the two U-box domains, with only the N-terminal U-box retaining E2 recognition features typical for its eukaryotic counterparts. Extensive mutagenesis followed by functional screening in a yeast model system captured functionally important LubX residues including Arg121, critical for interactions with SidH. Combined, these data provide a new molecular insight into the function of this unique pathogenic factor.

### Keywords
Ap-ms, Dits, Legionella, Lubx, Sidh, Ltq xl

### Affiliations
University of Toronto
Department of Chemical Engineering and Applied Chemistry, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

### Submitter
Andrew Quaile

### Lab Head
Dr Alexei Savchenko
Department of Chemical Engineering and Applied Chemistry, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.


