### Accession
PXD037260

### Title
Identification of Aminopeptidase-B in mouse tissue and BV2 cells

### Description
Identification and relative quantification of aminopeptidase-B and other bioconverting enzymes in mouse brain, liver, and plasma tissues as well as in BV2 microglia cells.

### Sample Protocol
The whole lysates were denatured, reduced, and carboxymethylated prior to the digestion with LysC and TPCK-trypsin. Then, a total amount of 50 μg protein was digested by LysC (1:100, w/w) and 0.05% ProteaseMax for 3 hours followed by trypsin digestion (1:100, w/w) for 18 h at 37 °C. The tryptic digestion was quenched with formic acid. Subsequently, the samples were centrifuged at 18000 × g for 5 min at 4 °C, and the supernatants were transferred into UPLC vials for the analysis.  The tryptic peptides (10 µg) were analyzed by UPLC (Vanquish Flex, Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled with a high-resolution mass spectrometer (MS) (Orbitrap Q Exactive Classic, Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) following the full scan and data-independent acquisition mode (DIA). The injected peptides were first separated by reversed-phase chromatography composed of an Agilent AdvanceBio Peptide Map 2.1 × 250 mm, 2.7 μm column (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA) and eluents water (eluent A) and acetonitrile (eluent B) acidified with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. The injection volume was 20 µl and the flow rate was 0.3 ml/min over a direct gradient of 2% B for 80 minutes followed by a washing step of 80% B for 7 minutes before equilibrating the gradient back to 2% B for 3 minutes. An active gradient of 0-80 minutes was analyzed in the positive polarity by Full MS – SIM mode (Resolution: 35000, AGC target: 3e6, maximum injection time: 60 ms, and scan range: 385 to 1015 m/z) and DIA mode (Resolution: 17500, AGC target: 2e6, maximum injection time: 60 ms, loop count: 25, and isolation window: 24 m/z).

### Data Protocol
The raw data was processed by DIA-NN software (version 1.8) using the library-free DIA analysis mode (31). The MS/MS spectra and retention time were predicted by the DIA-NN algorithm using the Uniprot reference proteome database for Mus musculus (UP000000589_10090; version from 2021-06-16; 22,001 protein sequences). The predicted MS library was used to search the raw data with 1% precursor and protein group (PG) false detection rate (FDR) thresholds and at least one proteotypic peptide with a length of 7-30 amino acids. The resulting MaxLFQ normalized intensities were used for data evaluation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bioconverting enzymes, Aminopeptidase-b

### Affiliations
University of Eastern Finland
School of pharmacy, University of Eastern Finland

### Submitter
Ahmed Montaser

### Lab Head
Dr Seppo Auriola
School of pharmacy, University of Eastern Finland


