### Accession
PXD028994

### Title
Proteomic analysis of residues from experimental ceramics used for cooking a mixture of milk, meat and cereals

### Description
Ceramic vessels were used to cook a mixture of milk, meat (pork and beef) and cereals (wheat and barley), and proteomic studies were conducted on the ceramics to study the absorption and subsequent extraction and identification of the proteins from th various categories of foodstuff. A novel Deep Eutectic Solvent-based extraction procedure was also trialled and its efficacy compared with the standard GuHCl-based extraction procedure.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from ground ceramics using either 6M GuHCl solution or a urea-GuHCl DES, and purified using 3 kDa ultrafilters. The retentate was ultrafiltered into 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (twice), and finally dissolved on 0.5 ml of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. The proteins were then reduced and alkylated using 100 mM DTT and 100 mM IAM solution respectively, the alkylation quenched using DTT, and digested using trypsin. The tryptic peptides were desalted using C18 ZipTips with 50% acetonitrile in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid as an eluent, dried down, and analysed using an UltiMate 3000 Rapid Separation LC coupled with an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer after reconstituting them in 5% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid.

### Data Protocol
The mgf files were searched using Mascot 2.5.1 with trypsin as the specified enzyme, allowing for two missed cleavages with SwissProt as the reference database. Carbamidomethylation (C) was chosen as the fixed modification (mass shift = +57.02 Da), and deamidation (NQ; mass shift = +0.98 Da ), oxidation (M), oxidation (P), oxidation (K) (mass shift = +15.99 Da; equivalent mass to the process of hydroxylation), and aminoadipic acid (K; mass shift = +14.96 Da) as variable modifications. The peptide mass tolerance was set at +10 ppm and the MS/MS fragment ion mass tolerance at 0.5 Da.

### Publication Abstract
Proteomic analysis of absorbed residues is increasingly used to identify the foodstuffs processed in ancient ceramic vessels, but detailed methodological investigations in this field remain rare. Here, we present three interlinked methodological developments with important consequences in paleoproteomics: the comparative absorption and identification of various food proteins, the application of a deep eutectic solvent (DES) for extracting ceramic-bound proteins, and the role of database choice in taxonomic identification. Our experiments with modern and ethnoarcheological ceramics show that DES is generally more effective at extracting ceramic-bound proteins than guanidine hydrochloride (GuHCl), and cereal proteins are absorbed and subsequently extracted and identifiedat least as readily as meat proteins. We also highlight some of the challenges in cross-species proteomics, whereby species that are less well-represented in databases can be attributed an incorrect species-level taxonomic assignment due to interspecies similarities in protein sequence. This is particularly problematic in potentially mixed samples such as cooking-generated organic residues deposited in pottery. Our work demonstrates possible proteomic separation of fishes and birds, the latter of which have so far eluded detection through lipidomic analyses of organic residue deposits in pottery, which has important implications for tracking the exploitation of avian species in various ancient communities around the globe.

### Keywords
Deep eutectic solvent, Protein extraction, Lc-ms/ms, Residue analysis, Archaeological ceramics

### Affiliations
University of Manchester
Interdisciplinary Centre for Ancient Life, Department of Earth and Environmental Sciences, Manchester Institute of Biotechnology, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK

### Submitter
Manasij Pal Chowdhury

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Michael Buckley
Interdisciplinary Centre for Ancient Life, Department of Earth and Environmental Sciences, Manchester Institute of Biotechnology, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK


