### Accession
PXD042785

### Title
ONGOING CHROMOSOMAL INSTABILITY ACROSS ANEUPLOID SUBTYPES OF CHILDHOOD B-CELL ACUTE LYMPHOBLASTIC LEUKEMIA ASSOCIATES WITH DISEASE PROGRESSION

### Description
Chromosomal instability (CIN), defined as an increased occurrence of chromosome segregation errors during cell division, is a prominent form of genomic instability (Bakhoum and Avi Landau, 2017). It is the major cause of aneuploidy, an imbalanced complement of whole chromosomes or chromosome arms, which is the most prevalent genetic alteration in human cancers (Vasudevan et al., 2021; Santaguida and Amon, 2015). Importantly, aneuploidy is commonly associated with ongoing CIN through consecutive cell divisions (Shelzer et al. 2011; Passerini et al., 2016), resulting in intratumor genetic heterogeneity, a central driver of cancer evolution and therapeutic resistance (Sansregret et al., 2018; Ben-David and Amon, 2019). Indeed, aneuploidy has been shown to act both as a tumor suppressor and as a tumor initiator (Weaver et al., 2007; Silk et al., 2013; Vasudevan et al., 2020), most likely depending on the specific chromosomes that are gained or lost (Ben-David et al., 2011; Sack et al., 2018; Adell et al., 2023). Despite the ubiquitous presence of CIN in several aneuploid cancer types and its clinical relevance, its presence in B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (B-ALL) remains largely unexplored owing to the impaired proliferation of leukemic cells in vitro and the lack of reliable experimental models to comprehensively assess chromosome segregation in vivo. B-ALL is the most frequent childhood cancer, with 75% of cases occurring in children under 6 years of age, and it is characterized by the accumulation of highly proliferative immature B-cell precursors in the bone marrow (BM) (Hunger and Mullighan, 2015). The presence of CIN and its contribution to aneuploid cB-ALL progression is largely unknown due to the lack of preclinical models to study actively dividing cells. Accordingly, studies of CIN in cB-ALL are limited to the characterization of chromosomal copy-number heterogeneity (chr-CNH) in primary cB-ALL samples, but there is controversy over its presence due to the different techniques used to assess karyotype variability (Raimondi et al., 1996; Talamo et al., 2010; Alpar et al., 2014; Heerema et al.; 2007; Ramos-Muntada et al., 2022). Here, we explored the presence and the levels of CIN in different clinically-relevant aneuploid subtypes of cB-ALL using single-cell whole-genome sequencing (WGS) of primary samples to reliably assess chr-CNH, and by generating a large cohort of PDX models from primary cB-ALL samples (cB-ALL-PDX). Our results in cB-ALL-PDX models revealed variable levels of CIN in aneuploid cB-ALL subtypes, which significantly correlate with intraclonal karyotype heterogeneity and with disease progression. Additionally, mass-spectrometry analyses of cB-ALL-PDX samples revealed a CIN “signature” enriched in mitosis and chromosome segregation regulatory pathways. We speculate that this signature identifies adaptive mechanisms to ongoing CIN in aneuploid cB-ALL cells, which displayed a transcriptional signature characterized by an impaired mitotic spindle as observed by RNA-sequencing (RNA-Seq) analyses of a large cohort of primary cB-ALL patient samples. Our work might help to improve stratification of patients with cB-ALL with different levels of CIN who could benefit in the future from new therapeutic approaches aiming to target ongoing CIN.

### Sample Protocol
Whole-cell lysates (WCL) of 2×106 freshly-isolated cB-ALL cells from PDX samples were obtained using a lysis buffer containing 9 M Urea, 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate and 1 mM β-glycerophosphate. Protein samples (10 μg) were reduced with dithiothreitol (30 nmol, 37ºC, 60 minutes) and alkylated in the dark with iodoacetamide (60 nmol, 25ºC, 30 minutes). The resulting protein extract was first diluted to 2 M urea with 200 mM ammonium bicarbonate for digestion with endoproteinase LysC (1:10 w:w, 37ºC, 6 hours; Wako), and then diluted 2-fold with 200 mM ammonium bicarbonate for trypsin digestion (1:10 w:w, 37ºC, overnight; Promega). After digestion, the peptide mix was acidified with formic acid and desalted with a MicroSpin C18 column (The Nest Group, Inc.) prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.  Samples were analyzed using a Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific (Proxeon), Odense, Denmark). Peptides were loaded directly onto the analytical column and were separated by reversed-phase chromatography using a 50-cm column with an inner diameter of 75 μm, packed with 2 μm C18 particles. Chromatographic gradients started at 95% buffer A and 5% buffer B with a flow rate of 300 nl/min and gradually increased to 25% buffer B and 75% A in 79 min and then to 40% buffer B and 60% A in 11 minutes. After each analysis, the column was washed for 10 minutes with 100% buffer B. Buffer A: 0.1% formic acid in water. Buffer B: 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ionization mode with nanospray voltage set at 2.4 kV and source temperature at 305°C. The acquisition was performed in data-dependent adquisition mode and full MS scans with 1 micro scans at resolution of 120,000 were used over a mass range of m/z 350-1400 with detection in the Orbitrap mass analyzer. Auto gain control (AGC) was set to ‘standard’ and injection time to ‘auto’. In each cycle of data-dependent acquisition analysis, following each survey scan, the most intense ions above a threshold ion count of 10,000 were selected for fragmentation. The number of selected precursor ions for fragmentation was determined by the “Top Speed” acquisition algorithm and a dynamic exclusion of 60 seconds. Fragment ion spectra were produced via high-energy collision dissociation at normalized collision energy of 28%, and they were acquired in the ion trap mass analyzer. AGC was set to 2x104 and an isolation window of 0.7 m/z and a maximum injection time of 12 ms were used.   Digested BSA (New England Biolabs) was analyzed between each sample to avoid sample carryover and to assure stability of the instrument, and QCloud was used to control instrument longitudinal performance during the project (Chiva et al. 2018). Acquired spectra were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer software suite (v2.0, ThermoFisher Scientific) and the Mascot search engine v2.6 (Matrix Science) (Perkins et al., 1999). The data were searched against a Swiss-Prot human database (https://www.uniprot.org, April 2022, 20401 entries) plus a list of common contaminants and all the corresponding decoy entries (Beer et al., 2017). For peptide identification, a precursor ion mass tolerance of 7 ppm was used for MS1 level, trypsin was chosen as enzyme, and up to three missed cleavages were allowed. The fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da for MS2 spectra. Oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation were used as variable modifications, whereas carbamidomethylation on cysteines was set as a fixed modification. False discovery rate (FDR) in peptide identification was set to a maximum of 1%. Peptide quantification data were retrieved from the “Precursor ion area detector” node from Proteome Discoverer (v2.5) using 2 ppm mass tolerance for the peptide extracted ion current . Protein abundances were calculated as the average of the three most abundant distinct peptide groups and normalized based on total peptide amount. For the group comparison analysis, protein normalized abundances from Proteome Discoverer were Log2-transformed prior to calculation of fold change, P-value and adjusted P-value (q-value).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Aneuploidy, Childhood b-all, Chromosomal instability, B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia

### Affiliations
Laboratori Institut Josep Carreras (IJC) Ala Sud, Sector 2, Planta 4 Facultat de Medicina Universitat de Barcelona C. Casanova 143 08036 Barcelona
Institute Josep Carreras

### Submitter
Narcis Fuentes

### Lab Head
Dr Pablo Menendez
Laboratori Institut Josep Carreras (IJC) Ala Sud, Sector 2, Planta 4 Facultat de Medicina Universitat de Barcelona C. Casanova 143 08036 Barcelona


