### Accession
PXD006186

### Title
High-resolution mass spectrometry based label-free quantification of proteome changes during bile salt exposure of Lactobacillus fermentum RS2

### Description
Lactobacillus fermentum (strain RS2) is a common resident of the human gastrointestinal tract (GIT) and used as potential probiotics. The ability to adapt, colonize and survive in the harsh environment of the GIT, in the presence of gastric juice, is one of the unique properties that helps microflora to transiently harbor the host. In the current study, we used gel free quantification approach coupled with a high-resolution mass spectrometer to analyze the expression pattern of Lactobacillus fermentum RS2 strain under 1.2% bile acid stress condition. The analysis resulted in the identification of 1157 varieties of proteins that are engaged in coping up the efflux of bile effect or protons, by altering the carbohydrate metabolic pathways or through prevention of protein misfolding. The function of downregulated proteins were mostly unknown and the putative functions of the upregulated proteins were categorized as stress response, DNA repair, amino acids metabolism, signal transduction, transcription, translation, and carbohydrate metabolism. The finding suggests that these proteins are involved in bile resistance specific mechanisms as well as processes responsible for adaptation in GIT and showed the association of expression levels of proteins with a precise probiotic trait.

### Sample Protocol
The homogenous suspension was prepared using bacterial pellets through the brief vortex to disrupt the cell clumping from each sample. The samples were then lysed through resuspending in 500 μL of lysis buffer I [50 mM Tris-Cl (pH7.8), 0.3% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), 200 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF), 1 mM ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA)] containing a bacterial protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich). For complete lysis, samples were sonicated using the ON/OFF pulse of 5 sec by keeping the sample on ice to prevent overheating. Followed by centrifugation at 12000 rpm for 15 min to removed the undisrupted cells and the supernatant was transferred to another tube. The supernatant was used to precipitate the proteins by adding 10 volumes of cold acetone and overnight incubation at -200C. The precipitated proteins were collected by centrifugation at 20,000g for 10 min. The protein concentration in the cell-free extract was determined using a 2D Quant kit (GE Healthcare, Life Sciences), according to manufacturer protocol. For in-solution digestion, 20 μg protein samples from control and treatment group were taken and processed. Initially, disulfide bonds were reduced using 45 mM DTT in 50mM NH4HCO3 followed by alkylation of cysteine residues using 10 mM IAA in 50 mM NH4HCO3. Later, incubated overnight along with trypsin (1:20) (modified sequencing grade; Promega, USA) at 370C. The reaction was subsequently stopped with 10% TFA, peptides vacuum dried, desalted by Zip tip (Millipore, USA) and stored at -800C till further use.

### Data Protocol
The obtained raw .d files from the MS system were analyzed by MaxQuant software version 1.5.2.8 (23) using the label-free algorithm by normalized XIC. The integrated search engine Andromeda was used for the database search in the MaxQuant environment. For protein identification and quantitation ≥2 unique peptides were considered to ensure high-quality quantitation. The UniProt Lactobacillus fermentum database along with common contamination sequences was provided to Andromeda search engine for the search of MS/MS spectra. The precursor mass tolerance was kept as 0.07 Da for the first search while 0.006 Da for the main search. The mass tolerance for matching peaks to theoretical ion series was set to 40 ppm. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to <1% to ensure only high-confidence protein identifications for PSM (peptide to spectra match), protein, and site decoy fraction. The enzyme specificity was set to trypsin with the maximum number of 2 missed cleavages. The search included variable modifications of protein N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation, and fixed modification of carbamidomethylation of cysteines. The maximal number of modifications per peptide was set to be 6. The minimum peptide length parameter was set to 6, and the ‘peptide requantification’ function was enabled. To validate and transfer identifications across different replicates, the ‘match between runs’ option in MaxQuant was enabled with a retention time window of 0.7 minute and an alignment time window of 20 min. The statistical two-sided t tests were performed to identify significantly changed proteins and these proteins were used for subsequent analysis (FDR = 0.05).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Probiotics, Cytoscape, Lactobacillus fermentum, David, High-resolution mass spectrometer

### Affiliations
Dr. Pradip Behare Scientist- Department of Microbiology National Dairy Research Institute Karnal - 132001 Haryana, India
National Dairy Research Institute

### Submitter
Pradip Behare

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Pradip Behare
Dr. Pradip Behare Scientist- Department of Microbiology National Dairy Research Institute Karnal - 132001 Haryana, India


