### Accession
PXD005989

### Title
Post-translational modifications of vaccine candidates of Cryptosporidium parvum

### Description
Here we describe the post translational modifications on vaccine candidate proteins from Cryptosporidium parvum.  We have identified O-glycosylated peptides from GP15, GP40, GP900, and a novel mucin-like protein referred to as GP20. In addition, we have discovered that the immune dominant antigen, CP23, contains both N-myristoyl and C-palmitoyl modifications on the N-terminal region of the protein.

### Sample Protocol
Whole C. parvum oocysts were used for protein preparations and analyzed as whole cell lysates of in solution trypsin digests. Two methods were used for extraction of total protein: 1. a mechanical procedure, which involved disruption with glass beads in a bead beater, or, 2. a hot-phenol extraction protocol. Proteins were precipitated from solution, dried, re-constituted in ammonium bicarbonate buffer, and digested overnight at 37°C with proteomics grade trypsin. The resulting peptides were desalted with C18 filter-tip cartridges. The peptides were analyzed utilizing reversed phase C18 nano-UPLC-MS/MS coupled to either an LTQ-Orbitrap-XL or QE+ mass spectrometer, both manufactured by ThermoFisher Scientific.

### Data Protocol
The resulting .raw data were manually interpreted using Qual Browser within the Xcalibur ver. 2.2 software suite. Extracted ion chromatograms were generated from the HCD fragmentation MS/MS spectra for the oxonium ion 204.0866 (N-Acetyl-Hexosamine), indicating the fragmentation of a glycoconjugate. The spectra containing the HexNAc  oxonium ion were manually interpreted to determine the repertoire of glycans C. parvum can add to proteins. It was discovered that single HexNAc’s  on Ser/Thr  are the most abundant O-glycans observed.  Using PEAKS 8.0, .raw data were imported with only the precursor corrected for. For the de novo stage, trypsin was specified, a precursor error tolerance of 5.0ppm, 0.01Da fragment tolerance, and only fixed Cys carbamidomethylation specified as a PTM. For the PEAKS-DB search, trypsin was specified as the enzyme, with 2 missed cleavages maximum, with oue possible non-specific cleavage as a possibility.  A precursor error tolerance of 6.0ppm, 0.02Da fragment tolerance, and Cys carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification. For variable PTM’s, 1,2,3,and 4 HexNAcs on Ser/Thr, with 6 variable PTMs specified per peptide. Although we do not believe there are glycosidically linked tandem HexNAcs, we had to search with the aforementioned parameters to decrease computational overhead. Manual interpretations of the spectra indicated that several mucin-like peptide sequences containing long Thr/Ser stretches modified with  HexNAcs  approaching saturation of all available sites. Setting the variable PTMs in this manner allowed for results similar to what was found by manual interpretation, but provided a means to process larger data sets. Due to the limitations of PEAKS in annotating glycopeptides, the spectra were re-annotated with software developed in house, utilizing the open source Glycresoft code libraries. Thus, the MS/MS spectra were re-annotated to include assignments of oxonium ions and peptide backbone fragments with the presence or loss of the labile glycan modifications. A multiround search was performed on the de novo only results from the first PEAKS-DB search, to include myristate and palmitate as variable PTMs to encompass manually discovered lipo-peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Cryptosporidium parvum (studied here) and Cryptosporidium hominis are important causes of diarrhea in infants and immunosuppressed persons. C. parvum vaccine candidates, which are on the surface of sporozoites, include glycoproteins with Ser- and Thr-rich domains (Gp15, Gp40, and Gp900) and a low complexity, acidic protein (Cp23). Here we used mass spectrometry to determine that O-linked GalNAc is present in dense arrays on a glycopeptide with consecutive Ser derived from Gp40 and on glycopeptides with consecutive Thr derived from Gp20, a novel C. parvum glycoprotein with a formula weight of ~20 kDa. In contrast, the occupied Ser or Thr residues in glycopeptides from Gp15 and Gp900 are isolated from one another. Gly at the N-terminus of Cp23 is N-myristoylated, while Cys, the second amino acid, is S-palmitoylated. In summary, C. parvum O-GalNAc transferases, which are homologs of host enzymes, densely modify arrays of Ser or Thr, as well as isolated Ser and Thr residues on C. parvum vaccine candidates. The N-terminus of an immunodominant antigen has lipid modifications similar to those of host cells and other apicomplexan parasites. Mass spectrometric demonstration here of glycopeptides with O-glycans complements previous identification C. parvum O-GalNAc transferases, lectin binding to vaccine candidates, and human and mouse antibodies binding to glycopeptides. The significance of these post-translational modifications is discussed with regards to the function of these proteins and the design of serological tests and vaccines.

### Keywords
Cryptosporidium parvum, Lc-ms/ms, Lipopeptides, Glycopeptides, Vaccine candidates

### Affiliations
Boston University
Center for Biomedical Mass Spectrometry, Department of Biochemistry, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts, USA

### Submitter
John Haserick

### Lab Head
Dr Catherine E. Costello
Center for Biomedical Mass Spectrometry, Department of Biochemistry, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts, USA


