### Accession
PXD009714

### Title
PROMIS, global analysis of PROtein-Metabolite Interactions using Size separation in Arabidopsis thaliana

### Description
Herein, we describe a method, dubbed PROMIS that allows simultaneous, global analysis of endogenous protein–small-molecule and protein-protein complexes. To this end a cell-free native lysate was subjected to size-exclusion chromatography followed by quantitative metabolomic and proteomic analysis. Applying this approach to an extract from Arabidopsis thaliana cell cultures, we could retrieve known protein-protein (PPI) and protein–metabolite (PMI) interactions, validating our strategy.

### Sample Protocol
The Q-Exactive Plus was interfaced with a Nanospray Flex™ ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) with a spray voltage of +2.1 kV, capillary temperature set to 275°C and S-lens RF level of 50. We used a data dependent top-N method that fragmented the top 15 most intense ions per full scan. Full scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 with an AGC target 3e6, maximum injection time 100 ms, scan range 300 to 1600 m/z in profile mode. Each dd-MS2 scan was recorded in profile mode at a resolution of 17,500 with an AGC target of 1e5, maximum injection time 100 ms, isolation window 1.6 m/z, normalized collision energy 25, and an underfill ratio of 20%. Charges below 2 and above 4 were excluded, peptide match was set to preferred, apex trigger and exclude isotopes was set to on and the dynamic exclusion lasted for 15 sec.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was analyzed using MaxQuant 1.5.2.8 (Cox and Mann, 2008) and its implemented search engine Andromeda (Cox et al., 2011) using the standard settings with minor changes: first search and MSMS search mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm, LFQ ratio count was set to 1 and variable modifications set to Met oxidation, N-terminal acetylation and Ser, Thr, and Tyr phosphorylation. As databases we used the common contaminations database coming along with MaxQuant and the Arabidopsis proteome of canonical and isoform entries from Uniprot (http://www.uniprot.org/proteomes, UPID UP000006548, retrieved on 17 March 2017 containing 33037 proteins, last modified on December 18, 2016).

### Publication Abstract
Small molecules not only represent cellular building blocks and metabolic intermediates, but also regulatory ligands and signaling molecules that interact with proteins. Although these interactions affect cellular metabolism, growth, and development, they have been largely understudied. Herein, we describe a method, which we named <u>PRO</u>tein-<u>M</u>etabolite <u>I</u>nteractions using <u>S</u>ize separation (PROMIS), that allows simultaneous, global analysis of endogenous protein-small molecule and of protein-protein complexes. To this end, a cell-free native lysate from <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i> cell cultures was fractionated by size-exclusion chromatography, followed by quantitative metabolomic and proteomic analyses. Proteins and small molecules showing similar elution behavior, across protein-containing fractions, constituted putative interactors. Applying PROMIS to an <i>A. thaliana</i> extract, we ascertained known protein-protein (PPIs) and protein-metabolite (PMIs) interactions and reproduced binding between small-molecule protease inhibitors and their respective proteases. More importantly, we present examples of two experimental strategies that exploit the PROMIS dataset to identify novel PMIs. By looking for similar elution behavior of metabolites and enzymes belonging to the same biochemical pathways, we identified putative feedback and feed-forward regulations in pantothenate biosynthesis and the methionine salvage cycle, respectively. By combining PROMIS with an orthogonal affinity purification approach, we identified an interaction between the dipeptide Tyr-Asp and the glycolytic enzyme glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase. In summary, we present proof of concept for a powerful experimental tool that enables system-wide analysis of PMIs and PPIs across all biological systems. The dataset obtained here comprises nearly 140 metabolites and 5000 proteins, which can be mined for putative interactors.

### Keywords
Deconvolution, Correlation, Size exclusion chromatografy, Protein-metabolite, Interactions

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Molecular Plant Physiology, Small Molecule Signaling Department
Max Planck Institute for Molecular Plant Physiology | Celon Pharma

### Submitter
Michal Gorka

### Lab Head
Dr Aleksandra Skirycz
Max Planck Institute for Molecular Plant Physiology, Small Molecule Signaling Department


