### Accession
PXD018301

### Title
Tissue- and plasma-derived exosomal protein biomarkers define multiple human cancers

### Description
There is an unmet clinical need for improved tissue and liquid biopsy tools for cancer detection. We investigated the proteomic profile of exosomes in 426 human samples from tissue explants (TE), plasma and other bodily fluids. Among traditional exosome markers, CD9, HSPA8, ALIX, HSP90AB1 represent pan-exosomes/exomeres. Moreover, we identified novel pan-exosome/exomere markers (e.g., ACTB, MSN, RAP1B). As proof of principle that exosomes are ideal diagnostic tools, we analyzed the proteome of TE exosomes (n=151) or plasma-derived exosomes (n=120). Comparison of TE exosomes identified proteins (e.g., VCAN, TNC, THBS2) that distinguish tumors from normal tissues with 90% sensitivity/94% specificity. Machinelearning classification of plasma-derived exosomes revealed 95% sensitivity/90% specificity in identifying cancer-associated exosomes. Finally, we defined a panel of tumor-type specific exosomal proteins in TE and plasma, which may help classify tumors of unknown primary origin. Overall, exosomal proteins can serve as reliable biomarkers for cancer detection and for determining cancer type

### Sample Protocol
Exosomes were purified by sequential centrifugation, as previously described (Hoshino et al., 2015). In brief, cell contamination was removed from 3-4 day cell culture supernatant, bodily fluids or resected tissue culture supernatant by centrifugation at 500 xg for 10 min. To remove apoptotic bodies and large cell debris, the supernatants were then spun at 3,000 xg for 20 min, followed by centrifugation at 12,000 xg for 20 min to remove large microvesicles. Finally, exosomes were collected by spinning at 100,000 xg for 70min. Exosomes were washed in PBS and pelleted again by ultracentrifugation in a Beckman Coulter Optima XE or XPE ultracentrifuge. For PaCa samples, conditioned media was processed for exosome isolation with the final step using sucrose cushion as previously described (Lamparski et al., 2002). Briefly, 1 mL of sucrose density cushion, composed of 20mM Tris, 30% sucrose, deuterium oxide (D2O), pH 7.4, was overlayed with re-suspended exosome supernatant in a centrifuge tube. Amount of enriched exosomes samples (typical 5ug - adjusted based on BCA protein concentration measurements) was dried in SpeedVac and re-dissolved in 30-50uL 8M Urea/50mM ammonium bicarbonate/10mm DTT. Following lysis and reduction proteins was alkylated using 30mM iodoacetamide. Proteins were digested with Endopeptidase Lys C in <4M urea followed by trypsination in <2M Urea. Peptides were desalted and concentrated using Empore C18 based solid phase extraction prior to analysis by high resolution/high mass accuracy nano-LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
High resolution/high mass accuracy nano-LC-MS/MS data was processed using ProteomeDiscoverer 1.4.1.14/Mascot 2.5. Human data was queried against UniProts HUMAN complete proteome (February, 2020: 74,788 sequences). Mouse data was queried against MOUSE proteome (March, 2020; 55,412 sequences) using the following parameters: Enzyme: Trypsin/P, Maximum allowed missed cleavage sites: 2, mono isotopic precursor mass tolerance:  10 ppm, mono isotopic fragment mass tolerance:  0.02 Da, dynamic modifications: Oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein N-term), static modification: Carbamidomethyl (C). Percolator was used to calculate peptide False Discovery Rates. False Discovery Rates was calculated per file. 1% FDR was applied to each separate LC-MS/MS file. For exosome enriched samples that had been in contact with Fetal Bovine Serum (exemplified by samples that originated from cell culture) a FBS specific database was concatenated to the human and mouse data bases when querying the data. For plasma and tissue samples, the sequence of porcine trypsin and Enpeptides LysC was concatenated to the human and mouse data bases.

### Publication Abstract
There is an unmet clinical need for improved tissue and liquid biopsy tools for cancer detection. We investigated the proteomic profile of extracellular vesicles and particles (EVPs) in 426 human samples from tissue explants (TEs), plasma, and other bodily fluids. Among traditional exosome markers, CD9, HSPA8, ALIX, and HSP90AB1 represent pan-EVP markers, while ACTB, MSN, and RAP1B are novel pan-EVP markers. To confirm that EVPs are ideal diagnostic tools, we analyzed proteomes of TE- (n&#xa0;= 151) and plasma-derived (n&#xa0;= 120) EVPs. Comparison of TE EVPs identified proteins (e.g., VCAN, TNC, and THBS2) that distinguish tumors from normal tissues with 90% sensitivity/94% specificity. Machine-learning classification of plasma-derived EVP cargo, including immunoglobulins, revealed 95% sensitivity/90% specificity in detecting cancer. Finally, we defined a panel of tumor-type-specific EVP proteins in TEs and plasma, which can classify tumors of unknown primary origin. Thus, EVP proteins can serve as reliable biomarkers for cancer detection and determining cancer type.

### Keywords
Exosomes; extracellular vesicles; proteomics; cancer; liquid biopsy; biomarkers; mass spectrometry; early cancer detection

### Affiliations
THE ROCKEFELLER UNIVERSITY
Weill Cornell Medical College, New York City

### Submitter
henrik molina

### Lab Head
Dr David C. Lyden
Weill Cornell Medical College, New York City


