### Accession
PXD010943

### Title
SWATH-MS Analysis of Gfi1-mutant bone marrow neutrophils

### Description
This study investigates the proteomic alterations in bone marrow neutrophils isolated from 5-8 week old Gfi1+/-, Gfi1K403R/-, Gfi1R412X/-, and Gfi1R412X/R412X mice using the SWATH-MS technique. This dataset consists of 26 raw MS files, comprising 13 DDA (for spectral library generation)and 13 DIA (for SWATH) runs on a TripleTOF 5600 plus (SCIEX). Our findings revealed significant changes in the expression of neutrophil granule proteins and NADPH-oxidase complex components in Gfi1-mutant neutrophils.

### Sample Protocol
Isolated neutrophils (Gfi1+/- and Gfi1R412X/- (n=4 biological replicates per condition), Gfi1K403R/- (n=3 biological replicates), and Gfi1R412X/R412X (n=2 biological replicates) were lysed in 200 μL of the cell lysis buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 9 M urea, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM beta-glycerophosphate), sonicated three times at 15W of 15 sec each and centrifuged at 20,000 x g at 4ᵒC for 30 min. The protein estimation was done using a 660 nm colorimetric assay (Thermo Scientific, #22660). Peptide samples were prepared by in-gel tryptic digestion. Ten micrograms of each sample was resolved in a short length of 1.5 cm in the 1D (4-12%) Bis-Tris minigel. The gel was then fixed in 50% ethanol/10% acetic acid at room temperature, overnight, then washed in 30% ethanol for 10 min followed by two 10-min washes in deionized water. The corresponding lanes was cut into small gel pieces (~1 x 1 mm). The gel pieces were wash with 50 mM NH4HCO3, which then reduced and alkylated with 10 mM DTT and 100 mM iodoacetamide in 25 mM NH4HCO3, respectively. Proteins in the gel pieces were digested with a final ratio of 1:50 (w/w) trypsin (Promega Corp., WI, USA) in 25 mM NH4HCO3 and incubated at 37°C for 16-h. The digested peptides were collected and dried by a speed-vac (Speed-Vac plus, Savant, Ramsey, MN) and then recovered in 0.1% formic acid for proteomic analysis. NanoLC-ESI-MS/MS analyses was performed on a TripleTof 5600+ mass spectrometer (Sciex; Concord, Ontario, Canada) coupled with a nanoLC-ultra nanoflow system (Eksigent; Dublin, CA) in data dependent acquisition (DDA) or data independent acquisition (DIA) modes. Samples were loaded via an Eksigent NanoLC-AS-2 autosampler onto a column trap (Eksigent Chrom XP C18-CL-3 µm 120 Å, 350 µm x 0.5 mm; Sciex) at 2 µL/min in 0.1% formic acid for 15 min which then separated by Acclaim PepMap100 C18 LC column (75 µm x 15 cm, C18 particle sizes of 3 µm, 120 Å) (Dionex; Thermo Fisher) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min using a variable mobile phase gradient as followed; from 95% phase A (0.1% formic acid) to 40% phase B (99.9% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid) for 70 minutes, from 40% phase B to 85% phase B for 5 minutes, and then keeping 85% phase B for 5 minutes. The nanoLC eluate was ionized and sprayed into the mass spectrometer using NANOSpray III Source (Sciex). Ion source gas 1 (GS1), GS2 and curtain gas (CUR) were respectively kept at 13, 0 and 35 vendor specified arbitrary units. Interface heater temperature and ion spray voltage were kept at 150°C and at 2.6 kV, respectively. The DDA method was set to go through 1,929 cycles for 90 minutes in positive ion mode. Each cycle performed 1 time-of-flight (TOF) mass spectrometry scan type, 250 ms accumulation time, 350-1250 m/z window with a charge state of 2+ to 4+ followed by information dependent acquisition (IDA) of the most 50 intense candidate ions. The minimum MS signal for triggering MS/MS scan was set to 150 counts. Each MS/MS scan was operated in high sensitivity mode, an accumulation time of 50 ms and a mass tolerance of 100 ppm. To reduce redundant peptide sequencing, former MS/MS-analyzed candidate ions were excluded after its first occurrence for 12 s. The DDA data (*.wiff) was recorded using Analyst-TF (v.1.7) software. The DIA method was built using the SWATH-MS acquisition method editor using a predefined mass window width of 8 m/z with overlapping of 1 m/z for 57 transmission windows. A TOF-MS scan was set to go through 1,715 cycles, where each cycle performs one TOF-MS scan type (250 ms accumulation time, 350-750 precursor mass range, and a cycle time of ~3.15 s). MS spectra were collected from 100-1250 m/z with an accumulation time of 50 ms per SWATH window width. Nominal resolving power for MS1 and SWATH-MS2 scan were set at 30,000 and 15,000, respectively. The rolling collision energy was applied with the collision energy spread of 15. The DIA data (*.wiff) was recorded by Analyst-TF (v.1.7) software.

### Data Protocol
For a Spectral library generation, 2.5 µg of each sample was analyzed by nanoLC-ESI-MS/MS in DDA mode. Thirteen DDA files (from different conditions, i.e., Gfi1+/- and R412X/- (n=4 biological replicates per condition), K403R/- (n=3 biological replicates), and R412X/R412X (n=2 biological replicates) were subjected to a merged search by Protein Pilot v.5.0, revision 4769 (Sciex) using Paragon algorithm against SwissProt Mus musculus database (v.122017, 17,106 entries) with an automated false discovery rate. The search parameters included; alkylation on cysteine by iodoacetamide, tryptic digestion, TripleTOF 5600 instrument, ID focus on biological modification, thorough ID search effort, and detected protein threshold [unused ProtScore (Conf)] > 0.05 (10%). The standard target-decoy database searching method in the Protein Pilot software was applied to estimate false discovery rates (FDR) at the peptide spectrum match (PSM), peptides and protein levels, while the non-linear fitting method was used to determine both global and local FDR from the decoy database searching. The Protein Pilot search result was manually inspected for unique peptides with FDR<1% which were considered valid. The search file (*.group) was loaded onto SWATH Acquisition MicroApp v.2.0.2133 in PeakView software v.2.2 (Sciex) to generate the spectral library. The maximum number of protein to import for spectral library generation was set as the number of proteins identified at 1% global FDR from fit. Manual curation of spectral library was performed in Excel to remove the source of assay inconsistency and variability as followed; i) any peptide with modification, except carboxamidomethyl (CAM) of cysteine; ii) any peptide with missed cleavage; iii) any peptide that not terminated by lysine or arginine (which considered as non-tryptic peptides); iv) any peptide that identified as contamination or reversed sequences. Retention time (RT) alignment was performed using endogenous peptides which presented in all specimens and eluted at different RT covered chromatographic range. The curated spectral library was used for SWATH data extraction. For SWATH-MS analysis, 2.5 µg of each sample was subjected to nanoLC-ESI-MS/MS in DIA mode. SWATH data extraction of 13 DIA files (from Gfi1+/- and R412X/- (n=4 biological replicates per condition), K403R/- (n=3 biological replicates), and R412X/R412X (n=2 biological replicates)) was performed by SWATH Acquisition MicroApp (Sciex) and the curated spectral library using the following parameters: 10 peptides/protein, 6 transitions/peptide, excluding shared peptides, peptide confidence>99%, FDR<1% at the peptide level by the standard target-decoy analysis, XIC width of 0.05 Da, and an extraction window of 5 min. After data extraction, quantitative data of all valid peptides and proteins were exported to the Excel worksheet. Data preprocessing was performed by Total Area Sum (TAS) approach to control protein loading amount in proteomic experiments by using the following equation; [TAS-normalized protein intensity = (raw SWATH intensity of a particular protein/total intensity of all measured proteins) x 1.0E+08]. Thereafter, the expression data of mutant conditions (Gfi1K403R/-, Gfi1R412X/- and Gfi1R412X/R412X) were normalized against the control condition (Gfi1+/-), given their relative abundance when the abundance=1 was true for the particular proteins in the control. Missing value was not imputed, and thus, was set as 0 by the default. The relative protein abundance was used for data analysis. Data visualization and statistical analysis were performed by Excel and R package MetaboAnalystR (www.metaboanalyst.ca). The significant proteins were obtained using the cut-off fold change of 1.25x, and FDR-corrected p-value<0.05 between groups by ANOVA with Tukey post hoc analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Advances in genetics and sequencing have identified a plethora of disease-associated and disease-causing genetic alterations. To determine causality between genetics and disease, accurate models for molecular dissection are required; however, the rapid expansion of transcriptional populations identified through single-cell analyses&#xa0;presents a major challenge for accurate comparisons between mutant and wild-type cells. Here we generate mouse models of human severe congenital neutropenia (SCN) using patient-derived mutations in the GFI1 transcription factor. To determine the effects of SCN mutations, we generated single-cell references for granulopoietic genomic states with linked epitopes<sup>1</sup>, aligned mutant cells to their wild-type equivalents and identified differentially expressed genes and epigenetic loci. We find that GFI1-target genes are altered sequentially, as cells go through successive states of differentiation. These insights facilitated the genetic rescue of granulocytic specification but not post-commitment defects in innate&#xa0;immune effector function, and underscore the importance of evaluating the effects of mutations and therapy within each relevant cell state.

### Keywords
Gfi1, Swath, Neutrophil, Scn

### Affiliations
Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center
UC Proteomics Laboratory, Department of Cancer Biology, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, Ohio, Unite States

### Submitter
H. Leighton Grimes

### Lab Head
Dr Kenneth D. Greis
UC Proteomics Laboratory, Department of Cancer Biology, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, Ohio, Unite States


