### Accession
PXD015088

### Title
Cucumber mosaic virus resistance: Comparative proteomics of contrasting Cucumis sativus cultivars after long-term infection

### Description
Plant viruses are a major threat for a wide range of host species, causing substantial losses in agriculture. Particularly, Cucumber mosaic virus (CMV) evokes severe symptoms, thus dramatically limiting yield. Activation of plant immunity is associated with changes in the gene expression and consequently, cellular proteome to ensure virus resistance. Proteomics proved to be an extremely valuable tool for discovering multiple targets for the rational design of plant protection strategies. Herein, we studied two cultivars of cucumber (Cucumis sativus) resistant ´Heliana´ and susceptible ´Vanda´. Plant cotyledons were mechanically inoculated with CMV isolate PK1, and systemic leaves were harvested at 33 days post-inoculation. Upon protein extraction and filter-aided sample preparations, peptides were profiled by ultrahigh-performance liquid chromatography and comprehensively quantified by ion mobility enhanced mass spectrometry. From 1,516 reproducibly quantified proteins using label-free approach, 133 were differentially abundant among genotypes or treatments by strict statistic and effect size criteria. Pigments and hydrogen peroxide measurements corroborated proteomic findings. Advanced bioinformatics revealed a modular network of affected host proteins. Direct comparison of both genotypes in the uninfected state highlighted more abundant photosynthetic and development-related proteins in resistant cucumber cultivar. Long-term CMV infection showed worse preservation of energy processes and less robust translation in susceptible cultivar versus resistant genotype. Contrary, susceptible cultivar had numerous more abundant stress and defense-related proteins. We proposed promising targets for functional validation in transgenic lines a step toward durable virus resistance in cucurbits and other crops.

### Sample Protocol
Leaves from three plants (1.1 g fresh weight) per replicate were harvested at 33 dpi in biological triplicate. Green tissue was frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at ‒80°C until protein extraction. Leaves were ground to a fine powder in liquid nitrogen using a mortar and a pestle. Then, the powder was subjected to a phenol extraction/ammonium acetate precipitation with minor modifications. The final pellet was solubilized in SDS buffer (4% SDS, 100 mM Tris pH 7.6, and 100 mM dithiothreitol), concentration was measured by the Bradford assay, and 100 µg of proteins were aliquoted. Total protein extract (100 µg) adjusted to 200 µL with urea buffer (8 M urea in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate) was trypsinized using filter-aided sample preparation. Briefly, the extract was loaded onto Microcon Ultracel YM-10 centrifugal filter (Merck-Millipore) pretreated with 1% formic acid. Then, the sample was reduced for 15 min at 50°C with 10 mM dithiothreitol in urea buffer and alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide in urea buffer for the same time at room temperature in the dark. Before digestion, a centrifugal filter was washed by 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Trypsin gold (Promega) in the proportion 1:67 to total proteins was used. After 16 h of incubation at 37°C with mild agitation, peptides were eluted by centrifugation and slightly acidified by 10% trifluoroacetic acid. Finally, the peptide mixture was desalted on SEP PAK C18 light columns (Waters), vacuum-concentrated to 0.5 μg μL−1, and spectrophotometrically assessed by nanoDrop 2000 (ThermoFisher Scientific). Aliquots of purified complex peptide mixtures (300 ng) were separated in biological triplicate, using Acquity M-Class UHPLC (Waters). Samples were loaded onto the nanoEase Symmetry C18 trap column (20 mm length, 180 μm diameter, 5 μm particles size). After desalting, peptides were introduced to the nanoEase HSS T3 C18 analytical column (100 mm length, 75 μm diameter, 1.8 μm particle size). For the thorough separation, a 90 min gradient of 5-35% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid was applied at a flow rate 300 nL min-1. The column outlet was connected to the PicoTip emitter and samples were nanosprayed (2.9 kV capillary voltage) to the quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometer Synapt G2-Si with ion mobility option (Waters). Spectra were recorded in a data-independent manner in high definition MSE mode. Ions with 50-2000 m/z were detected in both channels, with a 1 s spectral acquisition scan rate. The external standard Glu1-Fibrinopeptide B was infused for mass correction.

### Data Protocol
Spectra were preprocessed with Compression and Archival Tool 1.0 (Waters) to reduce noise, removing ion counts below 15. Data processing was done in Progenesis QI 4.0 (Waters). For peak picking, the following thresholds were applied: low energy 320 counts and high energy 40 counts. Precursors and fragment ions were coupled, using correlations of chromatographic elution profiles in low/high energy traces. Then, peaks retention times were aligned across all chromatograms. Peak intensities were normalized to the median distribution of all ions, assuming the majority of signals are unaffected by experimental conditions. The label-free quantification relied on measurement of peak areas of three most intense precursor peptides, preferentially unique. For the protein identification, Ion Accounting 4.0 (Waters) search algorithm was applied. Spectra were searched against cucumber proteome sequences downloaded from UniProt in September 2018 supplemented with CMV proteins (23,750 entries, uniprot.org). Workflow parameters for the protein identification searches were: one possible trypsin miscleavage, a fixed carbamidomethyl cysteine, variable oxidized methionine, and deamidated glutamine/arginine. The software automatically determined the precursor and peptide fragment mass tolerance. Peptide matching was limited to less than 4% false discovery rate against the randomized database. Identifications were accepted if at least two distinct reliable peptides (score ≥ 5.75, mass accuracy ≤ 15 ppm) matched the protein sequence. Protein grouping feature was then applied to show only hits with unique peptides. We considered only those proteins as differentially abundant, which reached at least 1-fold of log2 transformed ratio and ANOVA p ≤ 0.01. When ANOVA of the four groups showed statistically significant change, post-hoc Tukey´s honestly significant difference test (HSD) was used.

### Publication Abstract
Plant viruses are a significant threat to a wide range of host species, causing substantial losses in agriculture. Particularly, Cucumber mosaic virus (CMV) evokes severe symptoms, thus dramatically limiting yield. Activation of plant defense reactions is associated with changes in the cellular proteome to ensure virus resistance. Herein, we studied two cultivars of cucumber (Cucumis sativus) resistant host Heliana and susceptible host Vanda. Plant cotyledons were mechanically inoculated with CMV isolate PK1, and systemic leaves were harvested at 33&#x202f;days post-inoculation. Proteome was profiled by ultrahigh-performance liquid chromatography and comprehensively quantified by ion mobility enhanced mass spectrometry. From 1516 reproducibly quantified proteins using a label-free approach, 133 were differentially abundant among cultivars or treatments by strict statistic and effect size criteria. Pigments and hydrogen peroxide measurements corroborated proteomic findings. Comparison of both cultivars in the uninfected state highlighted more abundant photosynthetic and development-related proteins in resistant cucumber cultivar. Long-term CMV infection caused worse preservation of energy processes and less robust translation in the susceptible cultivar. Contrary, compatible plants had numerous more abundant stress and defense-related proteins. We proposed promising targets for functional validation in transgenic lines: A step toward durable virus resistance in cucurbits and other crops. SIGNIFICANCE: Sustainable production of crops requires an understanding of natural mechanisms of resistance/susceptibility to ubiquitous viral infections. We report original findings of comparative analysis of plant genotypes exposed to CMV. Deep discovery proteomics of resistant and susceptible cucumber cultivars, inoculated with widespread phytovirus, allowed to suggest several novel molecular targets for functional testing in plant protection strategies.

### Keywords
Oxidative stress, Electron transport, Photosynthesis, Protein network, Cmv, Label-free quantification

### Affiliations
Institute of Neuroimmunology, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Slovak Republic
Plant Science and Biodiversity Center SAS

### Submitter
Maksym Danchenko

### Lab Head
Dr Andrej Kovac
Institute of Neuroimmunology, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Slovak Republic


