### Accession
PXD043123

### Title
Phenolic acid-induced phase separation and translation inhibition mediate plant interspecific competition

### Description
Phenolic acids (PAs) secreted by donor plants suppress the growth of their susceptible plant neighbours. However, how structurally diverse ensembles of PAs are perceived by plants to mediate interspecific competition remains a mystery. Here, we show that a plant stress granule (SG) marker, RNA-BINDING PROTEIN 47B (RBP47B), is a sensor of PAs in Arabidopsis. PAs including salicylic acid (SA), 4-hydroxybenzoic acid, protocatechuic acid, etc. directly bind RBP47B, promote its phase separation and trigger SG formation accompanied by global translation inhibition. SA-induced global translation inhibition depends on RBP47 family members. RBP47s regulate the proteome rather than the absolute quantity of SG. The rbp47 quadruple mutant shows a reduced sensitivity to the inhibitory effect of the PA mixture as well as to that of PA-rich rice when tested in a co-culturing ecosystem. Our study discovers RBP47B as the long sought-after PA sensor and unveils PA-induced SG formation and translation inhibition as one of the PA perception mechanisms.

### Sample Protocol
Plant root samples were homogenized and lysed to separate into supernatant and paired SG fractions for oligo(dT) affinity purification and anti-RBP47B immuno-purification. The purified proteins were used for peptide digestion and collected for vacuum-centrifuged dryness. All samples were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid in water before LC-MS/MS analysis. Samples were analyzed by Orbitrap Fusion LUMOS Tribrid Mass Spectrometer, the precursors were ionized using an EASY-Spray ionization source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Survey scans of peptide precursors were collected in the Orbitrap from 350-1600 Th with an AGC target of 400,000. Monoisotopic precursor selection was enabled for peptide isotopic distributions, precursors of z = 2-7 were selected for data-dependent MS/MS scans for 3 s of cycle time, and dynamic exclusion was set to 15 s with a ±10 ppm window set around the precursor monoisotope. In HCD scans, an automated scan range determination was enabled. An isolation window of 1.6 Th was used to select precursor ions with the quadrupole. Product ions were collected in the Orbitrap with the first mass of 110 Th, an AGC target of 50,000, a maximum injection time of 30 ms, HCD collision energy at 30%, and a resolution of 15,000. Three independent biological replicates were obtained.

### Data Protocol
Data processing was carried out using Thermo Proteome Discoverer 2.4 using a database downloaded from TAIR (version 2019-07-11). Carbamidomethyl (Cys) was chosen as static modification, and oxidation (Met) was chosen as variable modification. Mass tolerance was 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Maximum missed cleavages were set to 2. Peptide spectral matches (PSM) were validated using the percolator algorithm, based on q-values at a 1% FDR. For label-free quantitation of AP-MS data, normalization mode was set to “total peptide amount”. The protein abundances were calculated by summing the sample abundances of the corresponding peptides after normalization. The protein abundances were used as the input for filtering, background correction, variance stabilizing normalization, and data imputation by the DEP (Differential Enrichment analysis of Proteomics data) package (version 1.14.0) using RStudio. The statistical analysis was performed based on linear models and empirical Bayes tests with specified contrasts. For qualitative analysis of IP-MS data, proteins identified by at least 2 unique peptides in all the 3 biological replicates were considered as positive hits.

### Publication Abstract
Phenolic acids (PAs) secreted by donor plants suppress the growth of their susceptible plant neighbours. However, how structurally diverse ensembles of PAs are perceived by plants to mediate interspecific competition remains a mystery. Here we show that a plant stress granule (SG) marker, RNA-BINDING PROTEIN 47B (RBP47B), is a sensor of PAs in Arabidopsis. PAs, including salicylic acid, 4-hydroxybenzoic acid, protocatechuic acid and so on, directly bind RBP47B, promote its phase separation and trigger SG formation accompanied by global translation inhibition. Salicylic acid-induced global translation inhibition depends on RBP47 family members. RBP47s regulate the proteome rather than the absolute quantity of SG. The rbp47 quadruple mutant shows a reduced sensitivity to the inhibitory effect of the PA mixture as well as to that of PA-rich rice when tested in a co-culturing ecosystem. In this Article, we identified the long sought-after PA sensor as RBP47B and illustrated that PA-induced SG-mediated translational inhibition was one of the PA perception mechanisms.

### Keywords
Salicylic acid (sa), Phenolic acid, Stress granules (sg), Rna-binding protein 47b (rbp47b)

### Affiliations
Peking University
State Key Laboratory for Protein and Plant Gene Research, School of Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing, China

### Submitter
Zhouli Xie

### Lab Head
Dr Wei Wang
State Key Laboratory for Protein and Plant Gene Research, School of Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing, China


