### Accession
PXD044147

### Title
IL1B Fibrosis Secretome Samples

### Description
Our results identify IL-1β induced immune-competency in human cardiac fibroblasts and suggest that fibroblast secretome modulation may constitute a therapeutic approach to PAH and other diseases typified by inflammation and fibrotic remodeling.

### Sample Protocol
hCVF (2 x 106) were seeded and grown to 80% confluence and treated with IL-1β (10 ng/ml) for 24 h. Cell culture media were then collected and subjected to proteomic analysis. Conditioned media were concentrated using ProteoSpin TM column.  Concentrated samples were lysed with buffer (8 M urea, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 20 mM HEPES, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM β-glycerophosphate, pH 8.0), followed by sonication and cleared by centrifugation.  The LC-MS/MS was performed on a fully automated proteomic technology platform that includes an Agilent 1200 Series Quaternary HPLC system (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA) connected to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA).

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 17,500, with a targeted value of 2 ×104 ions or maximum integration time of 200 ms. The ion selection abundance threshold was set at 8.0 ×102 with charge state exclusion of unassigned and z =1, or 6-8 ions and dynamic exclusion time of 30 seconds. Peptide spectrum matching of MS/MS spectra of each file was searched against the human database (UniProt) using the Sequest algorithm within Proteome Discoverer v 2.3 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA).

### Publication Abstract
The source and roles of fibroblasts and T-cells during maladaptive remodeling and myocardial fibrosis in the setting of pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) have been long debated. We demonstrate, using single-cell mass cytometry, a subpopulation of endogenous human cardiac fibroblasts expressing increased levels of CD4, a helper T-cell marker, in addition to myofibroblast markers distributed in human fibrotic RV tissue, interstitial and perivascular lesions in SUGEN/Hypoxia (SuHx) rats, and fibroblasts labeled with pdgfr&#x3b1; CreERt2/+ in R26R-tdTomato mice. Recombinant IL-1&#x3b2; increases IL-1R, CCR2 receptor expression, modifies the secretome, and differentiates cardiac fibroblasts to form CD68-positive cell clusters. IL-1&#x3b2; also activates stemness markers, such as NANOG and SOX2, and genes involved in dedifferentiation, lymphoid cell function and metabolic reprogramming. IL-1&#x3b2; induction of lineage traced primary mouse cardiac fibroblasts causes these cells to lose their fibroblast identity and acquire an immune phenotype. Our results identify IL-1&#x3b2; induced immune-competency in human cardiac fibroblasts and suggest that fibroblast secretome modulation may constitute a therapeutic approach to PAH and other diseases typified by inflammation and fibrotic remodeling.

### Keywords
Il1b, Fibrosis

### Affiliations
Brown University
Siamwala Lab Department of Molecular Pharmacology, Physiology and Biotechnology, Brown University, Providence, RI Warren Alpert Medical School of Brown University, Providence VA Medical Center, Providence, RI

### Submitter
Francesco Pagano

### Lab Head
Dr Jamila H Siamwala
Siamwala Lab Department of Molecular Pharmacology, Physiology and Biotechnology, Brown University, Providence, RI Warren Alpert Medical School of Brown University, Providence VA Medical Center, Providence, RI


