### Accession
PXD033951

### Title
Proteomic analysis of the human hippocampus identifies neuronal pentraxin 1 (NPTX1) as synapto-axonal target in late-stage Parkinson's disease

### Description
Parkinson's disease (PD) affects a significant proportion of the population over the age of 60 years, and its prevalence is increasing. While symptomatic treatment is available for motor symptoms of PD, non-motor complications such as dementia result in diminished life quality for patients and are far more difficult to treat. In this study, we analyzed PD-associated alterations in the hippocampus of PD patients, since this brain region is strongly affected by PD dementia. We focused on synapses, analyzing the proteome of post-mortal hippocampal tissue from 16 PD cases and 14 control subjects by mass spectrometry. Whole tissue lysates and synaptosomal fractions were analyzed in parallel. Differential analysis combined with bioinformatic network analyses identified neuronal pentraxin 1 (NPTX1) to be significantly dysregulated in PD and interacting with proteins of the synaptic compartment. Modulation of NPTX1 protein levels in primary hippocampal neuron cultures validated its role in synapse morphology. Our analysis suggests that NPTX1 contributes to synaptic pathology in late-stage PD and represents a putative target for novel therapeutic strategies. 

### Sample Protocol
Snap-frozen post-mortem hippocampal tissue blocks weighting 600 mg were submerged into 5 mL of a cold homogenization buffer (320 mM sucrose, 5 mM HEPES in water) and homogenized using nine strokes of a Teflon/glass homogenizer. After the centrifugation for 2 min at 2988 × g in an SS 34 fixed angle rotor (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA), clarified supernatant was re-centrifuged for 12 min at 14462 × g to obtain a crude synaptosomal pellet. The pellet was gently resuspended in the homogenization buffer and layered onto a discontinuous Ficoll gradient (6%/9%/13%, wt/v Ficoll in the homogenization buffer). The gradients were centrifuged for 35 min at 86575 × g in an SW 41 swinging bucket rotor (Beckman Coulter, Krefeld, Germany). Two synaptosomal bands at the interfaces between 6%/9% and 9%/13% Ficoll were collected, pooled, and washed with the homogenization buffer.  Pelleted synaptosomes were lysed in 50 µL of lysis buffer (4% SDS, 100 mM HEPES, 1 mM EDTA, 1 × Halt Protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail in water) and sonicated for 10 min using 30 s on/30 s off – cycles at the maximum output of Bioruptor ultrasonication device (Diagenode, Seraing, Belgium). Protein concentration was determined using BCA Protein assay according to manufacturer’s instructions. 200 µg of proteins per sample were reduced and alkylated following the incubation with 10 mM TCEP and 40 mM CAA for 30 min at 37 °C. For protein purification steps, refer to protocol by Huges et al [2019]. Purified proteins were digested overnight at 37°C using trypsin (1:20 trypsin-to-protein ratio, wt/wt) in digestion buffer (10% (v/v) trifluoroethanol (TFE), 100 mM TEAB in water). 10 individual samples (6 × PD and 4 × CTR) and one technical replicate (separate synaptosomal preparation of a PD-sample) were labeled using TMT11 labeling reagents according to manufacturer’s instructions. The labeling reaction was quenched with 1% (v/v) of hydroxylamine in water. Samples were pooled, cleaned using the pre-packed C18 spin columns (Harvard Apparatus, Holliston, USA), and concentrated in a Savant SpeedVac vacuum concentrator (SpeedVac, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA). TMT11-labeled peptides were injected into Agilent 1100 seriees HPLC system (Agilent, Santa Clara, USA) equipped with a C18-X-Bridge column (3.5 μm particles, 1.0 mm inner diameter, 150 mm length; Waters, Milford, USA). The peptides were separated at the flow rate of 60 µL/min under basic pH (buffer A: 10 mM NH4OH in water, pH ~10; buffer B: 10 mM NH4OH and 80% (v/v) ACN in water, pH ~10). The column was equilibrated with 95% buffer A and 5% buffer B mixture. A linear gradient ranging from 5% to 50% buffer B for 74 min followed by a washing step at 90% buffer B for 5 min was applied. One minute fractions were collected and concatenated into 24 final fractions as suggested by Wang et al [2011]. BRP-Fractions were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and dried in the SpeedVac. Dried peptides were re-dissolved in 2% (v/v) ACN 0.1% (v/v) TFA in water and injected as a technical duplicate onto a C18 PepMap100-trapping column (0.3 x 5 mm, 5 µm, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA) connected to an in-house packed C18 analytical column (75 µm x 300 mm; Reprosil-Pur 120C18 AQ, 1.9 µm, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany). The columns were pre-equilibrated using a mixture of 98% buffer A (0.1% (v/v) FA in watter), 2% buffer B (80% (v/v) ACN, 0.1% (v/v) FA in water). Liquid chromatography was controlled by UltiMate 3000 RSLC nanosystem (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA). Peptides were eluted using a 120 min-linear gradient ranging from 2% to 7% buffer B over 1 min and 7% to 45% buffer B over 105 min, followed by a washing step at 90% of buffer B for 5 min. Eluting peptides were sprayed into a Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA). MS1 scans (350 to 2000 m/z) were acquired in a positive ion mode with a resolution of 120,000 at 200 m/z, 5e5 automatic gain control (AGC) target, and 50 ms maximum injection time. Precursor ions (allowed charges 2-7, dynamic exclusion 40 s) were isolated using a 1.6 m/z isolation window and fragmented at normalized collision energy (NCE) of 38%. The MS2 fragment spectra were acquired with a resolution of 15,000, 2.5e5 AGC target, and 40 ms maximum injection time. Ten most intense fragment ions were selected for a subsequent SPS-MS3 scan using an isolation window of 2 m/z and NCE of 45%. The SPS-MS3 spectra were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 and maximum injection time of 118 ms.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed using MaxQuant version 1.6.10.2 (Cox, et al., 2011; Tyanova, et al., 2016) under default settings. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was selected as a fixed modification, while methionine oxidation and acetylation of protein N-termini were allowed as variable modifications. Specific tryptic peptides with up to two missed cleavage sites and 5 variable modifications in total were allowed. Quantification using reporter ions in MS3 (TMT11plex) was selected. MS1 and MS2 mass tolerances were kept at 4.5 ppm and 20 ppm, respectively. Canonical amino acid sequences of Rattus norvegicus proteins were retrieved from Uniprot (Consortium, 2019) (April 2018, 20341 entries). The following steps were conducted in R statistical programming language using custom scripts available upon request. In brief, potential contaminants and matches to reverse sequences reported by MaxQuant were filtered out. Protein groups with less than two razor or unique peptides identified as well as protein groups containing four or more missing quantitative values were excluded from the analysis. Missing values were imputed for each TMT-channel individually by random sampling from a gauss distribution with a mean at the 10% quantile and a half standard deviation of the log-transformed intensities. Log2-transformed reporter ion intensities were then normalized using Tukey median polishing and subjected to statistical testing using limma package (Smyth, 2005). Differences in protein group intensities between PD- and control samples were tested. Empirical-Bayes moderated p-values [6] and log2 fold change (PD/Control) were applied.

### Publication Abstract
Parkinson's disease (PD) affects a significant proportion of the population over the age of 60&#x2009;years, and its prevalence is increasing. While symptomatic treatment is available for motor symptoms of PD, non-motor complications such as dementia result in diminished life quality for patients and are far more difficult to treat. In this study, we analyzed PD-associated alterations in the hippocampus of PD patients, since this brain region is strongly affected by PD dementia. We focused on synapses, analyzing the proteome of post-mortal hippocampal tissue from 16 PD cases and 14 control subjects by mass spectrometry. Whole tissue lysates and synaptosomal fractions were analyzed in parallel. Differential analysis combined with bioinformatic network analyses identified neuronal pentraxin 1 (NPTX1) to be significantly dysregulated in PD and interacting with proteins of the synaptic compartment. Modulation of NPTX1 protein levels in primary hippocampal neuron cultures validated its role in synapse morphology. Our analysis suggests that NPTX1 contributes to synaptic pathology in late-stage PD and represents a putative target for novel therapeutic strategies.

### Keywords
Parkinson’s disease; neurodegeneration; proteomics; synaptic dysfunction; nptx1; tmt

### Affiliations
Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Group, Max-Planck Institute for Multidisciplinary Sciences, Am Fassberg 11, 37077 Goettingen; Institute for Clinical Chemistry, University Medical Center Goettingen, Robert-Koch-Str. 40, 37075 Goettingen
Max-Plank Institute for Biophysical Chemistry

### Submitter
Henning Urlaub

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr.
Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Group, Max-Planck Institute for Multidisciplinary Sciences, Am Fassberg 11, 37077 Goettingen; Institute for Clinical Chemistry, University Medical Center Goettingen, Robert-Koch-Str. 40, 37075 Goettingen


