### Accession
PXD002916

### Title
Comparative proteome of two citrus species differing in  aluminum-tolerance in response to aluminum-toxicity  revealed by iTRAQ

### Description
After long-term aluminum treatment, thereafter, we investigated  leaves protein profiles of two citrus cultivars using isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification (iTRAQ).

### Sample Protocol
Different protein samples were reduced, alkylated and labeled according to i TRAQ 8-plex kits (AB Sciex Inc., MA, USA) manuafacturer's manual. Twenty fractions were pooled togather after fractionation by strong cation exchange (SCX) chromatography. Each fraction was re-suspended in buffer A (5% ACN, 0.1%FA) and centrifuged at 20000g for 10 min. Ten ul supernant was loaded on a DIONEX NCS3500 (Thermo Scientific) by the autosampler onto a 2 cm C18 trap column. Data acquisition was performed with a Q Exactive LC-MS/MS (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Raw data files acquired from the Orbitrap were converted into .msf  files using Proteome Discoverer 1.2 (PD 1.2, Thermo). Proteins identificati on were performed by using Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.3.02) against Citrus sinensis database (http://www.phytozome.net/cgi-bin/gbrowse/citrus/, 46147 sequences). Protein identification and quantification were processed by using Mascot software (version 2.3.02, Matrix Science Inc, Boston, MA, USA). The following search settings were used: MS/MS fragment ion mass tolerance of ±0.1 Da; threshold set-off at 0.05 Da in the ion-score cut-off; Peptide Length from 6 to 144; tryptic peptides with ≤2 missed cleavage site; pyrophosphorylation of glutamine and variable oxidation of methionine and iTRAQ labeling of tyrosine were set as variable modification; carbamidomethylation of cysteine and iTRAQ labeling of lysine the N-terminal amino group of peptides were set as fixed modification. Peptide tolerance was set at 10 ppm, and MS/MS tolerance was set at 0.05 Da. Peptide change was set Mr, and monoisotopic mass was chosen. iTRAQ 8 plex was chosen for identification during the search simultaneously. The search results were passed through additional filters before exporting the data. For protein identification, the filters were set as follows: significance threshold P, 0.05 (with 95% confidence) and ion score or expected cutoff less than 0.05 (with 95% confidence).

### Publication Abstract
Seedlings of aluminum-tolerant 'Xuegan' (Citrus sinensis) and Al-intolerant 'sour pummelo' (Citrus grandis) were fertigated for 18 weeks with nutrient solution containing 0 and 1.2 mM AlCl&#x2083;&#xb7;6H&#x2082;O. Al toxicity-induced inhibition of photosynthesis and the decrease of total soluble protein only occurred in C. grandis leaves, demonstrating that C. sinensis had higher Al tolerance than C. grandis. Using isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification (iTRAQ), we obtained more Al toxicity-responsive proteins from C. sinensis than from C. grandis leaves, which might be responsible for the higher Al tolerance of C. sinensis. The following aspects might contribute to the Al tolerance of C. sinensis: (a) better maintenance of photosynthesis and energy balance via inducing photosynthesis and energy-related proteins; (b) less increased requirement for the detoxification of reactive oxygen species and other toxic compounds, such as aldehydes, and great improvement of the total ability of detoxification; and (c) upregulation of low-phosphorus-responsive proteins. Al toxicity-responsive proteins related to RNA regulation, protein metabolism, cellular transport and signal transduction might also play key roles in the higher Al tolerance of C. sinensis. We present the global picture of Al toxicity-induced alterations of protein profiles in citrus leaves, and identify some new Al toxicity-responsive proteins related to various biological processes. Our results provide some novel clues about plant Al tolerance.

### Keywords
Citrus grandis, Citrus sinensis, Aluminum, Proteomic analysis, Itraq

### Affiliations
Fujian Agricultural and Forestry University
College of Resources and Environment, Fujian Agricultural and Forestry University

### Submitter
Lin-Tong Yang

### Lab Head
Dr Lisong Chen
College of Resources and Environment, Fujian Agricultural and Forestry University


