### Accession
PXD022641

### Title
High fat diet mice intestinal epithelial exosomal proteins were analyzed by MSMS.

### Description
High-fat diet (HFD) decreases insulin sensitivity. How high-fat diet causes insulin resistance is largely unknown. Here, we show that lean mice become insulin resistant after being administered exosomes isolated from the feces of obese mice fed a high-fat diet (HFD) or from human type II diabetic patients with diabetes. HFD altered the lipid composition of exosomes from predominantly PE in exosomes from lean animals (L-Exo) to PC in exosomes from obese animals (H-Exo). Mechanistically, we show that intestinal H-Exo is taken up by macrophages and hepatocytes, leading to inhibition of the insulin signaling pathway. Moreover, exosome-derived PC binds to and activates AhR, leading to inhibition of the expression of genes essential for activation of the insulin signaling pathway, including IRS-2, and its downstream genes PI3K and Akt. Together, our results reveal HFD-induced exosomes as potential contributors to the development of insulin resistance. Intestinal exosomes thus have potential as broad therapeutic targets.

### Sample Protocol
Fecal pellets (pooled from 10 mice) were re-suspended in PBS and minced manually. Differential centrifugation was deployed to isolate the fecal exosomes. Fecal suspensions were centrifuged at 1000g for 10 min, 2,000g for 20 min and 4,000g for 30 min to remove large particles. The supernatant was centrifuged at 8,000g for 1 h to remove micro-particles. Finally, each suspension was centrifuged at 100,000g for 2 hours. Pellets were suspended in PBS. The exosomes were further purified by sucrose gradient (8, 30, 45 and 60% sucrose in 20 mM Tris–Cl, pH 7.2) centrifugation. Proteins were extracted from these purified exosomes. Mice IEC exosomal protein sample’s concentrations were estimated using a RC DC Protein Assay Kit (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA) using an albumin standard.  Protein aliquots (50ug) were diluted into 4% SDS / 0.1M Tris-HCl pH8.5 and 1M DTT was processed according to the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method. The digested, ultra-filtered samples were trap-cleaned with C18 PROTOTM, 300Å Ultra MicroSpin columns, lyophilized by vacuum centrifugation, and re-dissolved into 16µL of 2% v/v acetonitrile and concentrations estimated using absorption at 205nm by Nanodrop 2000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) measurement.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer v1.4.1.114 (Thermo) was used to analyze the data collected by the mass spectrometer.  The database used in Mascot v2.5.1 and SequestHT searches was the version of the Mus musculus (strain C57BL/6) proteome from Uniprot KB (Proteome ID UP000000589).  In order to estimate the false discovery rate, a Target Decoy PSM Validator node was included in the Proteome Discoverer workflow.  MS2 scan data from the Xcalibur RAW file were parsed for separate searches of CID and ETD MS2 scans in Mascot and Sequest, and collection of the results into a single file (.msf extension).   The resulting .msf files from Proteome Discoverer were loaded into Scaffold Q+S v4.4.5 (Proteome Software, Portland, OR, USA).  Scaffold was used to calculate the false discovery rate using the Peptide and Protein Prophet algorithms.  Proteins were grouped to satisfy the parsimony principle.

### Publication Abstract
High-fat diet (HFD) decreases insulin sensitivity. How high-fat diet causes insulin resistance is largely unknown. Here, we show that lean mice become insulin resistant after being administered exosomes isolated from the feces of obese mice fed a HFD or from patients with type II diabetes. HFD altered the lipid composition of exosomes from predominantly&#xa0;phosphatidylethanolamine (PE) in exosomes from lean animals (L-Exo) to phosphatidylcholine (PC) in exosomes from obese animals (H-Exo). Mechanistically, we show that intestinal H-Exo is taken up by macrophages and hepatocytes, leading to inhibition of the insulin signaling pathway. Moreover, exosome-derived PC binds to and activates AhR, leading to inhibition of the expression of genes essential for activation of the insulin signaling pathway, including IRS-2, and its downstream genes PI3K and Akt. Together, our results reveal HFD-induced exosomes as potential contributors to the development of insulin resistance. Intestinal exosomes thus have potential as broad therapeutic targets.

### Keywords
Insulin resistance, H-exo, L-exo

### Affiliations
University of Louisville
Department of Microbiology & Immunology School of Medicine University of Louisville CTRB, Room 309 Louisville, KY, USA 40202

### Submitter
Anil Kumar

### Lab Head
Dr Huang-Ge Zhang
Department of Microbiology & Immunology School of Medicine University of Louisville CTRB, Room 309 Louisville, KY, USA 40202


