### Accession
PXD004930

### Title
Human intracranial tumors LC-MS/MS

### Description
We found the reality that each Coomassie blue-stained 2D gel spot contained lots of protein species in analysis of in tissue proteome.

### Sample Protocol
The intracranial tumor tissues were subjected to protein extraction,2DGE First Dimension-IEF,2DGE Second Dimension-SDS-PAGE,2DGE-Based Western Blotting,Image Analysis of a 2D Gel and of 2D-Western Blotting,and then the randomly selected 2D gel-spots was in-gel digested with trypsin.Finally the purified tryptic peptides was analyzed with LC-ESI-qTOF, LTQ-OrbiTrap Velos, or MALDI-TOF-TOF MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Each synthetic MS/MS spectrum was used for protein search with Mascot software against protein database Sprot 091215 (513877 sequences; 180750753 residues; Homo sapiens 513877 sequences; July 20, 2015) with searching parameters (MS/MS Ion Search, enzyme trypsin, fixed modification carbamidomethyl (C), variable modification Oxidation (M), monoisotopic mass value, peptide mass tolerance ± 100 ppm, fragment mass tolerance ± 0.7 Da, and max missed cleavage 1)

### Publication Abstract
Two-dimensional gel electrophoresis (2DE) in proteomics is traditionally assumed to contain only one or two proteins in each 2DE spot. However, 2DE resolution is being complemented by the rapid development of high sensitivity mass spectrometers. Here we compared MALDI-MS, LC-Q-TOF MS and LC-Orbitrap Velos MS for the identification of proteins within one spot. With LC-Orbitrap Velos MS each Coomassie Blue-stained 2DE spot contained an average of at least 42 and 63 proteins/spot in an analysis of a human glioblastoma proteome and a human pituitary adenoma proteome, respectively, if a single gel spot was analyzed. If a pool of three matched gel spots was analyzed this number further increased up to an average of 230 and 118 proteins/spot for glioblastoma and pituitary adenoma proteome, respectively. Multiple proteins per spot confirm the necessity of isotopic labeling in large-scale quantification of different protein species in a proteome. Furthermore, a protein abundance analysis revealed that most of the identified proteins in each analyzed 2DE spot were low-abundance proteins. Many proteins were present in several of the analyzed spots showing the ability of 2DE-MS to separate at the protein species level. Therefore, 2DE coupled with high-sensitivity LC-MS has a clearly higher sensitivity as expected until now to detect, identify and quantify low abundance proteins in a complex human proteome with an estimated resolution of about 500 000 protein species. This clearly exceeds the resolution power of bottom-up LC-MS investigations.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms/ms, 2d-gel, Intracranial tumors

### Affiliations
Central South University
State Local Joint Engineering Laboratory for Anticancer Drugs Hunan Engineering Laboratory for Structural Biology and Drug Design Key Laboratory of Cancer Proteomics of Chinese Ministry of Health Xiangya Hospital Central South University 87 Xiangya Road Changsha, Hunan 410008 P.R. China

### Submitter
Xianquan Zhan

### Lab Head
Dr Xianquan Zhan
State Local Joint Engineering Laboratory for Anticancer Drugs Hunan Engineering Laboratory for Structural Biology and Drug Design Key Laboratory of Cancer Proteomics of Chinese Ministry of Health Xiangya Hospital Central South University 87 Xiangya Road Changsha, Hunan 410008 P.R. China


