### Accession
PXD021629

### Title
Proteomic differences in methicillin-sensitive and methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus

### Description
To establish general differences between the protein expression in S. aureus strains, five methicillin sensitive S. aureus (MSSA) strains and five methicillin resistant S. aureus (MRSA) strains were compared both individually and as MSSA and MRSA groups in the absence of antibiotics. Proteins were compared by ultra-performance liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
A whole protein extract was obtained from each strain using a modified Bligh and Dyer method. This protein extract was then digested using trypsin and the the Waters RapidGest SF Surfactant Procedure. The digested protein sample was then analyzed by UPLC-MS using a Waters nanoAcquity UPLC sample manager fitted with a binary solvent manager. Mass spectrometric detection was conducted using a Waters Synapt G2-Si.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified using Progenesis QIP and the Uniprot S. aureus database. The following search conditions were used. The allowed maximum missed cleavages = 1, the allowed false discovery rate = 4% and the maximum protein size was set to 250 kDa. Peptide modifications were set to variable and included carbamidomethyl C, deamidation N, deamidation Q, oxidation M and propionamide C. The ion matching requirements were fragments/peptide of 1 or more, fragments/protein of 3 or more and peptides/protein of 1 or more.

### Publication Abstract
Staphylococcus aureus is a common disease-causing bacterium that has developed resistances to a wide variety of antibiotics. This increasing antibiotic resistance has made management of these infections difficult. A better understanding of the general differences among clinical S. aureus strains beyond the well characterized resistance mechanisms may help in identifying new anti-microbial targets. This study aimed to identify and compare the general differences in protein profiles among clinical strains of S. aureus sensitive and resistant to methicillin. The proteomic profiles of five methicillin sensitive (MSSA) and five methicillin resistant (MRSA) S. aureus strains were analyzed by ultra-performance liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry. Protein identification was done using Progenesis QI for Proteomics and the UniProt S. aureus database. Proteins that play roles in virulence, metabolism, and protein synthesis were found to be present at different abundances between MSSA and MRSA (Data available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD021629). This study shows differences in protein profiles between antibiotic sensitive and antibiotic resistant clinical strains of S. aureus that may affect the resistance mechanism. Further research on these differences may identify new drug targets against methicillin resistant S. aureus strains.

### Keywords
Mssa, Proteomics, Mrsa, Methicillin resistance, Staphylococcus aureus

### Affiliations
Western Sydney University
School of Medicine, Western Sydney University, Australia

### Submitter
Philip Nikolic

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Poonam Mudgil
School of Medicine, Western Sydney University, Australia


