### Accession
PXD033142

### Title
Large-Scale Analysis of Protein Crotonylation Reveals Its Diverse Functions in Pinellia ternate

### Description
We generated a global crotonylome analysis of the leaves in Pinellia ternata. We found 4509  crotonylated sites on 1757 proteins totally, and three specific amino acids surrounding crotonylation sites were identified in Pinellia ternata: KcrF, K***Y**Kcr and Kcr****R. Gene Ontology (GO) and KEGG pathway enrichment analyses showed that two crucial alkaloid biosynthesis related enzymes and many stress-related proteins were also highly crotonylated. Furthermore, several enzymes participate in the carbohydrate metabolism pathway, were modified also by lysine crotonylation.

### Sample Protocol
Plants of Pinellia ternata (Thunb.) were used in this study. The tubers of P. ternata were planted in nutrient soil in a greenhouse with a relative humidity of 50% and at 22 째C during the day and 18 째C at night. The leaves of three-week-old plants were collected and approximately 0.4 g of fresh leaf material was ground in liquid nitrogen and sonicated three times in lysis buffer, and then the remaining debris was depleted by centrifugation at 20,000 g for 10 min at 4 째C. The supernatant was precipitated by trichloroacetic acid (TCA) at -20 째C for at least 2 h and then the protein was collected by centrifugation. After alkylation and dilution, a two-step trypsin digestion was carried out according to Zhou et al (2016). After trypsin digestion, the peptides were fractionated into 80 fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Ultimate RSLCnano 3000. For affinity enrichment, the fractions of peptide were incubated with pan anti-crotony lysine antibody beads. The lysine crotonylated peptides bound to the agarose beads were eluted with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid, after being washed four times with NETN buffer and twice with double distilled water and the eluted fractions were vacuum-dried for further use. The enriched crotonylated peptides were investigated by mass spectrometry as described previously. The protein integrity was detected by the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000 (m/z 200) with NCE setting of 30. The m/z range was set from 350 to 1800 to scan MS. The LC-MS/MS analysis was performed blindly by Micrometer Biotech Company (Hangzhou, China).

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS data of crotonylated peptides were processed through MaxQuant with the integrated Andromeda search engine (v.1.5.2.8). The tandem mass spectra were searched against the transcriptome of the leaves of P. ternata (sequenced by Micrometer Biotech Company). The parameters in MaxQuant were performed according to Guo et al (2020).  The Gene Ontology (GO) annotation proteome was derived from the UniProt-GOA database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/). The domains of proteins were identified by InterProScan (a sequence analysis application) based on the protein sequence alignment method, and the InterPro domain database was used. The Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) and WoLF PSORT databases were used to annotate protein pathways and subcellular localization respectively. Motif analysis of lysine acetylation sites was performed by MoMo (motif-x algorithm) software. The enrichment-based clustering analysis was performed with R-package following the previous study.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Post-translational modification, Pinellia ternata, Lysine crotonylation, Crotonylome

### Affiliations
College of Agronomy, Qingdao Agricultural University, Qingdao Shandong, China
Micrometer Biotech

### Submitter
Xianliang Ma

### Lab Head
Dr Weiwei Guo
College of Agronomy, Qingdao Agricultural University, Qingdao Shandong, China


