### Accession
PXD027149

### Title
A Chemical Tool for Blue Light-Inducible Proximity Photo-crosslinking in Live Cells

### Description
We developed a proximity photo-crosslinking method (Spotlight) with a 4-azido-N-ethyl-1,8-naphthalimide (AzNP) moiety that can be converted to reactive aryl nitrene species using ambient blue light-emitting diode light. Using an AzNP-conjugated HaloTag ligand (VL1), blue light-induced photo-crosslinked products of various HaloTag-conjugated proteins of interest were detected in subcellular spaces in live cells. Using Spotlight, we further identified the host interactome of SARS-CoV-2 nucleocapsid (N) protein, which is essential for viral genome assembly. Mass analysis of the VL1-crosslinked product of N-HaloTag in HEK293T cells showed that RNA-binding proteins in stress granules were exclusively enriched in the cross-linked samples. These results tell that our method can reveal the interactome of protein of interest within a short distance in live cells.

### Sample Protocol
For the mass analysis of the crosslinked product HEK293T cells were grown as triplicate in 100π dish until confluency was 60-70% then 8,000 ng of plasmid DNA was transfected using PEI transfection reagent and media was changed to full media after 3 hours, after 24 hours of transfection 10 μM VL1 was incubated for 1 hour and washed 3 times with cold DPBS before crosslinking in Blue LED for 10 min, cells were scrapped in DPBS made pellet and lysed by RIPA buffer, then lysate was subjected to in-vitro biotinylation using recombinant wild type BirA solution (10 μM BirA, 10μM biotin, 200μM ATP, and 500μM MgCl2) for 12 hours at room temperature. For removing free biotin, lysates were loaded on amicon filter and centrifugated at 12,000 x g for 4 x 15 min. 1xTBS buffer was added into concentrated lysate up to 400 μL and then, 100 μL of washed streptavidin beads were added. After 10 min incubation, 2ml SDS in TBS was added up to 2~10% final concentration and incubated for an hour. Beads were washed by 2% SDS in TBS buffer 4 times and incubated with 10mM DTT in 50mM ABC buffer at 37℃ for an hour. Alkylation was performed by 55mM IAM in ABC buffer at 37℃ in dark condition. After an hour incubation, solution was replaced by 200 μL of trypsin solution (2 μg trypsin, 1mM CaCl2 in 50mM ABC buffer) and mixed at 37℃ for 12 hours. Then, supernatant was desalted using zip-tip (thermofisher, 87784), eluted fractions were dried using speed vac and kept in deep freezer until loaded on LC-MS/MS. Peptides were analyzed by Thermo-Scientific® Q Exactive Plus equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source. A C18 reverse-phase HPLC column (500 mm × 75 µm i.d.) was used to separate the peptide mixture using a 2.4–17.6% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid gradient for 120 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. For MS/MS analysis, precursor ion scan MS spectra (m/z 350 - 2000) were acquired using the Orbitrap spectrometer at a resolution of 70 K at 200 m/z with an internal lock mass. Resolution of 17,500 at m/z 200 for HCD spectra was set and the 15 most intensive ions were isolated and fragmented by higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD).

### Data Protocol
For protein identification, Scaffold (version 4.11.0, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptide.  Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. In database searching, tandem mass spectra were extracted by Proteome Discoverer (version 2.2, Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Sequest (XCorr Only). Sequest was set up to search Homo sapiens protein sequence database (42230 entries, UniProt (http://www.uniprot.org/)) assuming digestion with trypsin. Sequest was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.80 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 PPM. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified in Sequest as a fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine and acetyl of the n-terminus were specified in Sequest as variable modifications. For the volcano plot analysis, five multiple imputation of missing values were followed via panda-view software.

### Publication Abstract
We developed a proximity photo-crosslinking method (<i>Spotlight</i>) with a 4-azido-<i>N</i>-ethyl-1,8-naphthalimide (AzNP) moiety that can be converted to reactive aryl nitrene species using ambient blue light-emitting diode light. Using an AzNP-conjugated HaloTag ligand (VL1), blue light-induced photo-crosslinked products of various HaloTag-conjugated proteins of interest were detected in subcellular spaces in live cells. Chemical or heat stress-induced dynamic changes in the proteome were also detected, and photo-crosslinking in the mouse brain tissue was enabled. Using <i>Spotlight</i>, we further identified the host interactome of SARS-CoV-2 nucleocapsid (N) protein, which is essential for viral genome assembly. Mass analysis of the VL1-crosslinked product of <i>N</i>-HaloTag in HEK293T cells showed that RNA-binding proteins in stress granules were exclusively enriched in the cross-linked samples. These results tell that our method can reveal the interactome of protein of interest within a short distance in live cells.

### Keywords
Proximity crosslinking / sars-cov-2 / nucleocapsid

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry, Seoul National University, Seoul 08826, Korea
Department of Chemistry, Seoul National University, Seoul 08826, Korea 

### Submitter
Hyun-Woo Rhee

### Lab Head
Dr Hyun-Woo Rhee
Department of Chemistry, Seoul National University, Seoul 08826, Korea


