### Accession
PXD044402

### Title
Accelerating multiplexed profiling of protein-ligand interactions: high-throughput plate-based reactive cysteine profiling with minimal input

### Description
Chemoproteomics investigates small molecule-protein interactions and has made significant progress in recent years. Despite its vast potential, the proteome-wide profiling of reactive cysteine ligandability remains a formidable task to adapt for high throughput applications. This is primarily due to a lack of platforms capable of achieving the desired depth using low sample input in 96- or 384-well plates. Here we have revamped the cysteine profiling platform to address the challenge with an eye toward performing high-throughput library screening in plates. By incorporating several changes including i) an 18-plex TMT sample multiplexing strategy, ii) a magnetic beads-based one-pot workflow, iii) a 10X higher capacity streptavidin resin, and iv) optimized mass spectrometry analyses, a plate-based platform was developed that enables routine interrogation of either ~18,000 or ~24,000 reactive cysteines based on starting amounts of 10 or 20 µg, respectively. We applied the platform to screen a library of 192 electrophiles in the native HEK293T proteome, mapping the ligandablity of 38,450 reactive cysteines from 8,274 human proteins. The significantly improved depth revealed many previously unknown reactive cysteines and cysteine-ligand interactions and led to the identification of an azepane-containing acrylamide which has preferential binding to cysteines in EGF-like domains. We further applied the platform to characterize new cellular targets of well-studied compounds and covalent drugs in three different human cell lines. We found that ARS-1620, a KRASG12C inhibitor, also binds to cysteine 140 of an off-target adenosine kinase ADK, inhibiting its kinase activity. The platform represents a major step forward to high throughput evaluation of reactive cysteines on a proteome-wide scale.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysate was diluted to 2 µg/µL with lysis buffer. 5 or 10 µL lysate, containing 10 or 20 µg protein respectively, was loaded into each well in 96-well plate. The following steps are used for 20 µg protein input. Amount of each reagent should be adjusted accordingly depending on the input. 5 µL of compound solution in lysis buffer was added to a final concentration of 50 µM and incubated for 1 hour. 5 µL of DBIA solution in lysis buffer was added to a concentration of 500 µM and incubated in dark for 1 hour. Addition of 3 µL SP3 beads (1:1 mixture of hydrophobic and hydrophilic type, 50 mg/mL, Cat. #45152105050250 and Cat. #65152105050250,) was followed by addition of 30 µL ~98% ethanol supplemented with 20 mM DTT. Lysate-bead mixture was incubated for 10 minutes with mild shaking before placing the plate on a magnetic stand to aspirate the supernatant. Beads were washed once with 80% ethanol and resuspended in 30 µL lysis buffer supplemented with 20 mM IAA and incubated in dark for 30 minutes with vigorous shaking. 60 µL ~98% ethanol supplemented with 20 mM DTT was added to the mixture. Mild shaking was performed before two washes using 80 % ethanol. The aqueous phase was then removed followed by adding 30 µL 200 mM EPPS buffer (pH 8.5) containing 0.2 µg Lys-C. After 3-hour incubation at room temperature, 5 µL EPPS buffer containing 0.2 µg trypsin was added and incubated with beads at 37 °C overnight. To the mixture of digested peptides and beads, 11 µL acetonitrile and 4 µL TMT (10 µg/µL) reagent were sequentially added, followed by gentle mixing for 60 minutes at room temperature. Reaction was quenched by adding 7 µL 5% hydroxyl amine. Aqueous phase containing TMT-labeled peptides were combined and dried using a SpeedVac. The resulting sample was desalted using a 100-mg Sep-Pak column. Desalted TMT-labeled peptides were resuspended in 310 µL100 mM HEPES buffer (pH 7.4). Addition of 50 µL Pierce™ High Capacity Streptavidin Agarose (Cat. #20359) was followed by incubation of peptide-beads mixture at room temperature for 3 hours. Resulting mixture was then loaded on a Ultrafree-MC centrifugal filter (hydrophilic PTFE, 0.22 µm pore size) and centrifugated at 1000 g for 30 seconds. Beads were washed sequentially with 300 µL 100 mM HEPES (pH 7.4) with 0.05% NP-40 twice, 350 µL 100 mM HEPES (pH 7.4) three times and 400 µL water once. Peptide were eluted sequentially by 1) incubation with elution buffer (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) for 20 minutes at room temperature; 2) incubation with elution buffer for 10 minutes at room temperature; 2) incubation with elution buffer for 10 minutes at 72 °C. The combined eluent was dried in a SpeedVac and desalted via StageTip prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw files of cysteine profiling were searched using the open-source Comet search engine (ver. 2019.01.5)54 with the Uniprot human proteome database (downloaded 11/24/2021) with contaminants and reverse decoy sequences appended. Precursor error tolerance was 50 p.p.m. and fragment error tolerance was 0.02 Da. Static modifications include Cys carboxyamidomethylation (+57.0215) and TMTpro18 (+304.2071) on Lys side chains and peptide N-termini. Methionine oxidation (+15.9949) and DBIA-modification on cysteine residues (+239.1628) were allowed as variable modifications.  Peptide spectral matches were filtered to a peptide false discovery rate (FDR) of <1% using linear discriminant analysis employing a target-decoy strategy55,56. Resulting peptides were further filtered to obtain a 1% protein FDR at the entire dataset level (including all plexes in an experiment)57. Cysteine-modified peptides were filtered for site localization using the AScorePro algorithm with a cutoff of 13 (P < 0.05) as previously described58,59. Overlapping peptide sequences generated from different charge states, retention times and tryptic termini were grouped together into a single entry. A single quantitative value was reported, and only unique peptides were reported. Reporter ion intensities were adjusted to correct for impurities during synthesis of different TMT reagents according to the manufacturer’s specifications. For quantification of each MS2 spectrum, a total sum signal-to-noise of all reporter ions of 180 (TMTPro 18-plex) was required. Peptide quantitative values were normalized so that the sum of the signal for all proteins in each channel was equal to account for sample loading differences (column normalization).

### Publication Abstract
Chemoproteomics has made significant progress in investigating small-molecule-protein interactions. However, the proteome-wide profiling of cysteine ligandability remains challenging to adapt for high-throughput applications, primarily due to a lack of platforms capable of achieving the desired depth using low input in 96- or 384-well plates. Here, we introduce a revamped, plate-based platform which enables routine interrogation of either &#x223c;18,000 or &#x223c;24,000 reactive cysteines based on starting amounts of 10 or 20&#xa0;&#x3bc;g, respectively. This represents a 5-10X reduction in input and 2-3X improved coverage. We applied the platform to screen 192 electrophiles in the native HEK293T proteome, mapping the ligandability of 38,450 reactive cysteines from 8,274 human proteins. We further applied the platform to characterize new cellular targets of established drugs, uncovering that ARS-1620, a KRAS<sup>G12C</sup> inhibitor, binds to and inhibits an off-target adenosine kinase ADK. The platform represents a major step forward to high-throughput proteome-wide evaluation of reactive cysteines.

### Keywords
High throughput, Chemoproteomics, Reactive cysteine, Tmt, Abpp

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Qing Yu

### Lab Head
Dr Steven Gygi
Harvard Medical School


