### Accession
PXD042488

### Title
FLAG-Ub IP/MS of USP8-depleted cells

### Description
The analysis to identify ubiquitinated proteins increased on endosomes in USP8-depleted cells.

### Sample Protocol
FLAG-Ub conjugates were subjected to trypsin digestion in solution. Briefly, co-immunoprecipitates eluted with 200 ng/µL FLAG peptide (F3290; Sigma-Aldrich) were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and alkylated with 10 mM methyl methanethiosulfonate (Tokyo Chemical Industry). Proteins were precipitated with acetone and dried with a speed-vac. Proteins were resuspended in a solution of 8 M urea, 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, and 1 mM CaCl2 and diluted to 0.8 M urea after complete solubilization. Trypsin (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was added at a final concentration of 0.4 ng/µL, and samples were incubated for 16 h at 37°C. The resulting peptides were desalted using a tC18 96-well plate (Waters).

### Data Protocol
Peptides were then resuspended in 0.1% TFA and analyzed by LC-MS/MS on an EASY-nLC 1200-connected Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on an analytical column (C18, 1.6 µm particle size × 75 µm diameter × 250 mm, Ion Opticks) using a 120 min gradient (0–40% acetonitrile over 120 min) at a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min. Peptide ionization was performed using a Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). A “3-s cycle” data-dependent acquisition method was used, in which the most intense ions were selected every 3 s for MS/MS fragmentation by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD). MS raw files were analyzed using a Sequest HT search program in Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). MS/MS spectra were searched against the SwissProt reviewed human reference proteome (UniProt). Intensity-based non-label protein quantification was performed using a Precursor Ions Quantifier node in Proteome Discoverer 2.4.

### Publication Abstract
K63-linked ubiquitin chains attached to plasma membrane proteins serve as tags for endocytosis and endosome-to-lysosome sorting. USP8 is an essential deubiquitinase for the maintenance of endosomal functions. Prolonged depletion of USP8 leads to cell death, but the major effects on cellular signaling pathways are poorly understood. Here, we show that USP8 depletion causes aberrant accumulation of K63-linked ubiquitin chains on endosomes and induces immune and stress responses. Upon USP8 depletion, two different decoders for K63-linked ubiquitin chains, TAB2/3 and p62, were recruited to endosomes and activated the TAK1-NF-&#x3ba;B and Keap1-Nrf2 pathways, respectively. Oxidative stress, an environmental stimulus that potentially suppresses USP8 activity, induced accumulation of K63-linked ubiquitin chains on endosomes, recruitment of TAB2, and expression of the inflammatory cytokine. The results demonstrate that USP8 is a gatekeeper of misdirected ubiquitin signals and inhibits immune and stress response pathways by removing K63-linked ubiquitin chains from endosomes.

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Endosome, Usp8

### Affiliations
Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical Science
Protein Metabolism Laboratory, Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical Science, Japan

### Submitter
Akinori Endo

### Lab Head
Dr Yukiko Yoshida
Protein Metabolism Laboratory, Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical Science, Japan


