### Accession
PXD036489

### Title
Ectopic expression of the AtCDF1 transcription factor in potato enhances tuber starch and amino acid contents and yield under open field conditions through proteome resetting

### Description
Cycling Dof Factor (CDF) transcription factors have been implicated in different aspects of plant growth and development. In Arabidopsis and tomato, two members of this family CDF1 and CDF3 have recently been associated with the regulation of primary metabolism and abiotic stress responses, but their roles in crop production under open field conditions remain unknown. In this study, we compared growth and tuber yield and composition of wild-type (WT) potato plants and plants ectopically expressing the CDF1/3 genes from Arabidopsis under the control of the 35S promoter cultured under growth chamber and open field conditions. In growth chambers, the 35S::AtCDF1 and 35S::AtCDF3 potato plants showed higher than WT biomass production and tuber yield. Under field conditions, 35S::AtCDF1 plants showed significant increases in tuber yield with a significant increase in tuber weight, whereas 35S::AtCDF3 plants showed no significant changes in yield, but produced more than WT number of tubers. Metabolomic analysis revealed that tubers of 35S::AtCDF1 plants cultured under open field conditions accumulated higher levels of glucose, starch and amino acids than WT tubers. Comparative proteomic analysis of tubers of 35S::AtCDF1 and control plants cultured under open field revealed that these changes can be accounted for by changes in the expression of proteins involved in energy production and different aspects of C and N metabolism. Results from this study advance our collective understanding of the role of CDFs and are of interest to improve yield and breeding of crop plants

### Sample Protocol
Digested sample was cleaned-up/desalted using Stage-Tips with Empore 3M C18 disks (Sigma-Aldrich). A 1 µg aliquot of each digested sample was subjected to 1D-nano LC ESI-MSMS analysis using a nano liquid chromatography system (Eksigent Technologies nanoLC Ultra 1D plus, SCIEX, Foster City, CA) coupled to high-speed Triple TOF 5600 mass spectrometer (SCIEX, Foster City, CA) with a Nanospray III source. The analytical column used was a silica-based reversed phase Acquity UPLC M-Class Peptide BEH C18 Column, 75 µm × 150 mm, 1.7 µm particle size and 130 Å pore size (Waters). The trap column was a C18 Acclaim PepMapTM 100 (Thermo Scientific), 100 µm × 2 cm, 5 µm particle diameter, 100 Å pore size, switched on-line with the analytical column. The loading pump delivered a solution of 0.1% formic acid in water at 2 µl/min. The nano-pump provided a flowrate of 250 nl/min and was operated under gradient elution conditions. Peptides were separated using a 250 minutes gradient ranging from 2% to 90% mobile phase B (mobile phase A: 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid; mobile phase B: 100% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). Injection volume was 5 µl.  Data acquisition was performed with a TripleTOF 5600 System (SCIEX, Foster City, CA). Data was acquired using an ion spray voltage floating (ISVF) 2300 V, curtain gas (CUR) 35, interface heater temperature (IHT) 150, ion source gas 1 (GS1) 25, declustering potential (DP) 100 V. All data was acquired using information-dependent acquisition (IDA) mode with Analyst TF 1.7 software (SCIEX, USA). For IDA parameters, 0.25s MS survey scan in the mass range of 350–1250 Da were followed by 35 MS/MS scans of 100ms in the mass range of 100–1800 (total cycle time: 4 s). Switching criteria were set to ions greater than mass to charge ratio (m/z) 350 and smaller than m/z 1250 with charge state of 2–5 and an abundance threshold of more than 90 counts (cps). Former target ions were excluded for 15s. IDA rolling collision energy (CE) parameters script was used for automatically controlling the CE.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometry data obtained were processed using PeakView® 2.2 Software (SCIEX, Foster City, CA) and exported as mgf files. Proteomics data analysis were performed by using 4 search engines (Mascot Server v.2.6.1, OMSSA, XTandem and Myrimatch) and a target/decoy database built from sequences in the S. tuberosum proteome at Uniprot Knowledgebase. All search engines were configured to match potential peptide candidates to recalibrated spectra with mass error tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment ion tolerance of 0.02 Da, allowing for up to two missed tryptic cleavage sites and a maximum isotope error (13ºC) of 1, considering fixed MMTS modification of cysteine and variable oxidation of methionine, pyroglutamic acid from glutamine or glutamic acid at the peptide N-terminus. Score distribution models were used to compute peptide-spectrum match p-values (Ramos-Fernandez et al., 2008), and spectra recovered by a FDR* <= 0.01 (peptide-level) filter were selected for quantitative analysis. Differential regulation was measured using linear models (Lopez-Serra et al., 2014), and statistical significance was measured using q-values (FDR, False Discovery Rate). All analyses were conducted using software from Proteobotics (Madrid, Spain). Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment analyses was performed on the up- and down-regulated proteins using gPROFILER software (Reimand et al., 2016). Significantly enriched (Padj < 0.05) GO terms describing biological process (GO BP) for the differential expressed proteins are displayed shown in the figures. Significant metabolic pathways were analyzed using Mapman tool (Schaacker et al., 2019)

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cdf, Abiotic stress, Photosynthesis, Crop yield, C/n metabolism

### Affiliations
Centro de Biotecnología y Genómica de Plantas (CBGP) UPM-INIA/CSIC, Campus de Montegancedo. Autopista M40 (km 38). 28223 Madrid, Spain.
Proteobotics S.L.

### Submitter
Antonio Ramos Fernández

### Lab Head
Dr Joaquín Medina
Centro de Biotecnología y Genómica de Plantas (CBGP) UPM-INIA/CSIC, Campus de Montegancedo. Autopista M40 (km 38). 28223 Madrid, Spain.


