### Accession
PXD003485

### Title
Detergents assisted glycoprotein capture

### Description
A detergents assisted glycoprotein capture method was developed to increase the coverage of N-glycoproteome of various samples.Application of this approach in the larger scale N-glycoproteomics analysis of the HEK 293 cell membrane led to the identification of 2253 unique N-glycosites from 953 proteins. Application of this approach to human serum resulted in the identification of 850 N-glycosylation sites without any immuno-depletion and fractionation.

### Sample Protocol
Glycoproteins were captured on the hydrazide beads followed by trypsin digestion and PNGase F deglycosylation. Isolated glycopeptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS wiht Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometry

### Data Protocol
Data files for human samples were processed with MaxQuant (1.5.2.8). The resulting precursor masses were matched to the Uniprot human database (downloaded on August 27th, 2015 with 73018 entries), complemented with the standard MaxQuant contaminant database. For MaxQuant, Andromeda [18] was used to search the acquired CID spectra against the in-silico fragmentation spectra of the matching database entries. Mass tolerances were 6 ppm and 0.5 Da for the precursor and fragment, respectively. Enzyme specificity was set as KR/P, and a maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed. Cysteine residue was set as a static modification of 57.0215 Da, and the methionine oxidation and asparagine deamination was set as a variable modification of 15.9949 Da and 0.9840 Da, respectively. The false discovery rate cut-off for both peptides and proteins was set at 1%. Peptides with deamidated asparagine within N-X-S/T motif(X could be any amino acid except proline) were considered as glycopeptides. The results from MaxQuant were directly exported to an Excel file.

### Publication Abstract
Large-scale N-glycoproteome studies have been hindered by poor solubility of hydrophobic membrane proteins and the complexity of proteome samples. Herein, we developed a detergent-assisted glycoprotein capture method to reduce these issues by conducting hydrazide chemistry-based glycoprotein capture in the presence of strong detergents such as sodium dodecyl sulfate and Triton X-100. The strong detergents helped to solubilize hydrophobic membrane proteins and then increased the access of hydrazide groups to oxidized glycoproteins, thus increasing the coverage of the N-glycoproteome. Compared with the conventional glycopeptide capture method, the detergent-assisted glycoprotein capture approach nearly doubled the number of N-glycosylation sites identified from HEK 293T cells with improved specificity. Application of this approach in the larger scale N-glycoproteomics analysis of the HEK 293T cell membrane led to the identification of 2253 unique N-glycosites from 953 proteins. Furthermore, the application of this approach to human serum resulted in the identification of 850 N-glycosylation sites without any immunodepletion or fractionation. Overall, the detergent-assisted glycoprotein capture method simplified the capture process, and it increased the number of sites observed on both hydrophobic membrane proteins and hydrophilic secreted proteins.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Human serum, Hek 293, N-glycoproteome

### Affiliations
Ottawa Institute of Systems Biology, Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology and Immunology and Department of Chemistry and Biomolecular Sciences, University of Ottawa
University of Ottawa

### Submitter
Rui Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel Figeys
Ottawa Institute of Systems Biology, Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology and Immunology and Department of Chemistry and Biomolecular Sciences, University of Ottawa


