### Accession
PXD031726

### Title
TcdB of Clostridioides difficile mediates necrosis in epithelial cells and is depend on RAS

### Description
A Clostridioides difficile infection (CDI) is the most common nosocomial infection worldwide. The main virulence factors are TcdA and TcdB, which inhibit small Rho-GTPases. Inhibition of small Rho-GTPases leads to the so-called cytopathic effect, a reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton, an impairment of the colon epithelium barrier function, and inflammation. Additionally, TcdB induces a necrotic cell death termed pyknosis in vitro independently from its glucosyltransferas-es characterized by chromatin condensation and ROS production. To understand the underlying mechanism of this pyknotic effect, we conducted a large-scale phosphoproteomic study. We in-cluded the analysis of alterations in the phosphoproteome after treatment with TcdA, that was investigated for the first time. TcdA exhibit no glucosyltransferase-independent effect and was, thus, a good control to elucidate the underlying mechanism of the glucosyltransferase inde-pendent effect of TcdB. We found RAS to be a central upstream regulator for the glucosyltrans-ferase independent effect of TcdB. Inhibition of RAS leads to a 68% reduction in necrosis. Further analysis revealed apolipoprotein C-III (APOC3) as a possible crucial factor of CDI induced in-flammation in vivo.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysed with 8 M Urea, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.0), 1 mM sodium ortho-vanadate and protease inhibitor and phosphostop Reduction with 5 mM DTT at 37°C for 1 h and afterward alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide at RT - Alkylation quenched with 5mM DTT - diluted 1:5 with 20mM ABC - digestion 1:100 trypsin and 1:100 Lys-C - Phosphoenrichment pipeline SMOAC Thermo Scientific - TMT 11 plex

### Data Protocol
Search: MaxQuant software (version 1.6.3.3) - Carbamidomethylation of cysteine fixed modification, oxidation of methionine, N-terminal acetylation, deamidation of glutamine as variable modification, Phospho (STY), FDR 1%, Max missed cleavage 2 Dataprocessing with Perseus (version 1.6.2.3.)

### Publication Abstract
A <i>Clostridioides difficile</i> infection (CDI) is the most common nosocomial infection worldwide. The main virulence factors of pathogenic <i>C. difficile</i> are TcdA and TcdB, which inhibit small Rho-GTPases. The inhibition of small Rho-GTPases leads to the so-called cytopathic effect, a reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton, an impairment of the colon epithelium barrier function and inflammation. Additionally, TcdB induces a necrotic cell death termed pyknosis in vitro independently from its glucosyltransferases, which are characterized by chromatin condensation and ROS production. To understand the underlying mechanism of this pyknotic effect, we conducted a large-scale phosphoproteomic study. We included the analysis of alterations in the phosphoproteome after treatment with TcdA, which was investigated for the first time. TcdA exhibited no glucosyltransferase-independent necrotic effect and was, thus, a good control to elucidate the underlying mechanism of the glucosyltransferase-independent effect of TcdB. We found RAS to be a central upstream regulator of the glucosyltransferase-independent effect of TcdB. The inhibition of RAS led to a 68% reduction in necrosis. Further analysis revealed apolipoprotein C-III (APOC3) as a possible crucial factor of CDI-induced inflammation in vivo.

### Keywords
Clostridioides difficile; c.diff.; tcdb; phosphoproteomics; ras; tcda; pyknosis; glucosyltransferase independent effect

### Affiliations
MHH - Toxicology
Hannover Medical School - Institute of Toxicology Research Core Unit - Proteomics Carl-Neuberg-Str. 1 30625 Hannover,Germany

### Submitter
Florian Stieglitz

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Pich
Hannover Medical School - Institute of Toxicology Research Core Unit - Proteomics Carl-Neuberg-Str. 1 30625 Hannover,Germany


