### Accession
PXD016964

### Title
Proteomic analysis of various Bemisia tabaci population with variable TYLCV transmission abilities

### Description
Begomoviruses, the largest, most damaging and emerging group of plant viruses in the world, infect hundreds of plant species and new virus species of the group are discovered each year. They are transmitted by species of the whitefly Bemisia tabaci. Tomato yellow leaf curl virus (TYLCV) is one of the most devastating begomoviruses worldwide and causes major losses in tomato crops as well as in many more agriculturally important plant species. Different B. tabaci populations vary in their virus transmission abilities; the causes for these differences are attributed among others to genetic diversity of vector populations, as well as to differences in the bacterial symbiont flora of the insects.  Here, we performed discovery proteomic analyses in nine whiteflies populations from both B (MEAM1) and Q (MED) species with different TYLCV transmission abilities. The results provide the first comprehensive list of candidate insect and bacterial symbiont (mainly Rickettsia) proteins associated with virus transmission. Efficient vector populations from two different B. tabaci species over-expressed or downregulated expression of proteins belonging to two different molecular pathways.

### Sample Protocol
samples were grinded using a mortar and pestle while kept frozen using liquid nitrogen. 1ml of 10% TCA-acetone, 2% -mercaptoethanol was added per sample. Samples were then incubated for 16 h at -20C, then centrifuged at 5000 x g, 4C, 30 minutes. Pellets were saved and washed 3 times with cold acetone, dried and re-suspended in 8M urea in 100mM ABC. Protein was quantified using a Bradford assay, protein integrity was examined by running 5g from each sample on 1D gel with BSA as a control, and a Coomassie Brilliant Blue staining. Protein samples then proceeded to reduction, Cystein blocking and Trypsin digestion- 50 g of protein was added a final volume of 10 mM of DTT in 100 mM ABC, samples were then incubated at 30C for an hour. A final volume of 30 mM of MMTS in 100 mM ABC was added and samples were incubated for one hour in room temperature. Samples were then diluted to ~1M urea with 100 mM ABC and Trypsin was added in a 1:50 ratio (Trypsin:protein). Samples were incubated for 16 h at 37C, desalted using Waters Sep Pak SPE cartridges (according to manufacturers protocol), dried and kept at -80C till MS analyses.  Dried protein pellets were sonicated for five minutes in 0.2% TFA 2% acetonitrile, strongly vortexed one minute, and vortexed further at 1,200 rpm at 37C for at least 10 minutes. Samples given a hard spin to pellet particles prior to placing in auto-sampler vials, and 3l injected (i.e., 50g/ 75l x 3l loaded to trap). Jupiter C12 5-micron beads were used to make a 2 cm x 150 micron trap prior to a 30 cm x 75 micron Dr Maisch 3 micron C18 packed tip. Samples were analyzed on a ThermoScientific  Orbitrap in the MacCoss lab (University of Washington) using a top 10 DDA method. Samples were analyzed in triplicate and randomized with a blank run every third injection.

### Data Protocol
An initial search of all animal protein sequences on NCBI (monthly) showed approximately 1,000 proteins identified per run. A FASTA database of whitefly and whitefly endosymbiont bacterial DNA sequences from NCBI was compiled and used for Mascot searching. Using this as a database, the search was drastically improved, with an average of 3350.5 peptides being matched per LCMS run, with an average FDR of 0.9%. Percolator [59, 60] was used for correcting for multiple hypothesis testing and computing q-values. Mascot files were then loaded into the Progenesis QI program (Nonlinear) and aligned to a randomly selected reference run. Each and every run was then aligned and problematic regions with low alignment were removed. The data was then analyzed 3 times, once for every technical replicate of every biological replicate. Hence the data was analyzed as three separate experiments, each containing three biological replicates for every population and one technical replicate of each. Average normalized abundance was calculated for each protein, based on protein features without conflict only, and fold change between the highest and lowest values was calculated. All peaks were then compared and only those showing a >2-fold in expression with P values <0.05 in B and <0.01 in Q were selected for analysis. Further sifting of the data was done to keep only proteins that had at least one unique peptide sequence identified. All three final lists of proteins, from the three technical replicates, were then compared and only proteins that appeared in at least two of the three were kept.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tylc, Bacterial symbiont, Bemisia tabaci, Transmission

### Affiliations
USDA-ARS; Boyce Thompson Institute, Cornell University
USDA-ARS

### Submitter
Kevin Howe

### Lab Head
Dr Michelle Heck
USDA-ARS; Boyce Thompson Institute, Cornell University


