### Accession
PXD009401

### Title
AGO1x stop codon readthrough isoform

### Description
Translational readthrough (TR), the elongation of the polypeptide chain by the ribosome beyond the stop codon, was initially observed for viral RNA and more recently reported for yeast and animal transcripts. TR modulates the protein output and diversifies the proteome 1–5. Here, we report that the expression of a TR isoform of Argonaute 1 (AGO1x) is strongly correlated with the proliferative potential of human breast tumors. In contrast to the canonical AGO1 isoform, AGO1x localizes to the nucleus of human cells. Loss of AGO1x impairs the growth of rapidly dividing cells and leads to accumulation of double stranded RNAs with consequent induction of the interferon response and apoptosis. Our data thus uncover a novel function for a mammalian member of the Argonaute protein family, beyond the miRNA effector pathway. As the specific targeting of the AGO1x strongly impacts the proliferation of cancer cells, our study provides a new approach to interfering with tumor growth.

### Sample Protocol
For each sample, 5E6 cells were lysed and AGO1 affinity purified using Ago1x antibody. After washing , the beads and the associated proteins were reduced with 5 mM TCEP for  30 min at 60°C and alkylated with 10 mM chloroacetamide for 30 min at 37 °C. Subsequently, the protein sample was digested by incubation with sequencing-grade modified trypsin (1/50, w/w; Promega, Madison, Wisconsin) overnight at 37°C. Finally, peptides were desalted on C18 reversed phase spin columns according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Microspin, Harvard Apparatus), dried under vacuum and stored at -80°C until further processing. Next , 0.1 µg of peptides of each sample were subjected to targeted MS analysis. Therefore, 6 peptide sequences specific for pan and extended AGO1 were selected and imported into the Skyline software V2.1, https://brendanx-uw1.gs.washington.edu/labkey/project/home/software/Skyline/begin.view). Then, a mass isolation list comprising the precursor ion masses with charge 2 and 3+ of all peptides was exported and used for parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) 36, quantification on a Q-Exactive HF platform. In brief, peptide separation was carried out using an EASY nLC-1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a RP-HPLC column (75μm × 30cm) packed in-house with C18 resin (ReproSil-Pur C18–AQ, 1.9μm resin; Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) using a linear gradient from 95% solvent A (0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile) and 5% solvent B (98% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) to 45% solvent B over 60 min at a flow rate of 0.2μl/min. 3e6 ions were accumulated for MS1 and MS2 and scanned at a resolution of 60,000 FWHM (at 200 m/z). Fill time was set to 150 ms for both scan types. For MS2, a normalized collision energy of 28% was employed, the ion isolation window was set to 0.4 Th and the first mass was fixed to 100 Th. Each condition was analyzed in biological triplicates.

### Data Protocol
All raw-files were imported into Skyline for protein / peptide quantification. To control for variation in injected sample amounts, samples were normalized using the total ion current from the MS1 scans. Finally, all generated raw files were subjected to standard database searching to validate the peptide identity. Therefore, the acquired raw-files were converted to the mascot generic file (mgf) format using the msconvert tool (part of ProteoWizard, version 3.0.4624 (2013-6-3)). Using the MASCOT algorithm (Matrix Science, Version 2.4.0), the mgf files were searched against a decoy database containing normal and reverse sequences of the predicted SwissProt entries of homo sapiens (www.uniprot.org, release date 29/06/2015), the extended version of AGO1 and commonly observed contaminants (in total 41159 protein sequences) generated using the SequenceReverser tool from the MaxQuant software (Version 1.0.13.13). The precursor ion tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment ion tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. The search criteria were set as follows: full tryptic specificity was required (cleavage after arginine residues unless followed by proline), 1 missed cleavage was allowed, carbamidomethylation (C), was set as fixed modification and oxidation (M) was set as variable modifications. Next, the database search results were imported to the Scaffold Q+ software (version 4.3.3, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) and the peptide and protein false identification rate was set to 1% based on the number of decoy hits.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Ago1, Prm

### Affiliations
Proteomics Core Facility
Proteomics Core Facility, Biozentrum, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland

### Submitter
Alexander Schmidt

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Schmidt
Proteomics Core Facility, Biozentrum, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland


