### Accession
PXD011320

### Title
DIGE based quantitation of Atta columbica ant male seminal fluid exposed to queen spermatheca fluid.

### Description
Polyandrous ant queens are inseminated early in their life and store sperm mixtures for a potential reproductive life of decades. However, they cannot re-mate later in life and are thus expected to control the loss of viable sperm because their life-time reproductive success is ultimately limited by the viability of sperm obtained in their single reproductive event. In the leaf-cutting ant Atta colombica, we have previously shown that sperm survival is lowered when getting in contact with seminal fluid of other males, and remains stable when in contact with secretions of the queen sperm storage organ (spermatheca). Here we aim to resolve the main protein-level interactions that mediate sperm competition dynamics and sperm preservation. We used artificial insemination and DIGE-based proteomics to identify proteomic changes when seminal fluid is exposed to spermathecal fluid. Seminal fluid was collected from mature males during field season experiments in Panama, by gently squeezing males’ abdomen until the ejaculate came out. Ejaculates from several males were kept together in ice and then centrifuged for 10 minutes at 13,500 g, the supernatant collected in a separate tube and then centrifuged again. The resulting supernatant was then transferred to another tube and stored at -20° C until further use. Four biological replicates of SF were collected from 4 colonies, each consisting of 400 µl SF from approximately 350 males. From each biological replicate three 100 µl aliquots were retrieved, and assigned to one of the following treatments: (1) un-inseminated controls, (2) inseminated SF retrieved after 30 min, and (3) inseminated SF retrieved after 12 h (Fig 1). Next, each of those aliquots was used to artificially inseminate 10 virgin queens (10 µl of aliquot per queen), for a total of 80 queens inseminated. Queens were allowed to recover for 30 min or 12 h before dissecting them to obtain the spermathecal content. All these spermathecal contents were then pooled per treatment and replicate, resulting in a total of 12 samples (3 treatments – un-inseminated SF, inseminated SF retrieved after 30 min inside the queen, and inseminated SF retrieved after 12 hours inside the queen - with 4 biological replicates). Proteins were precipitated in each sample by adding 4 volumes of ice-cold acetone for 4 hours at -20°C and centrifuged at 14,000 g for 10 minutes, after which supernatants were discarded and the protein pellets were stored at -80°C until further use. All of those 12 samples entered the DIGE analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Each protein sample was re-suspended in 100 µl of DIGE buffer (7M urea, 2M thiourea, 4% CHAPS, 20mM Tris, 1% DTT) and cOmplete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche), sonicated 4 times for 30 s and placed on ice for 1 min, followed by centrifugation at 14,000 g for 10 min at 4°C. Samples were desalted using the PlusOne Mini Dialysis Kit (GE Healthcare) according to the manufacturer’s protocol, and dialysed against DIGE buffer. IPG strips (24 cm Immobiline Drystrips pH 3-10 NL; GE Healthcare) were rehydrated overnight with DIGE buffer (DTT replaced by 1.2% DeStreak Reagent and 0.5% IPG buffer pH 3-10 (both GE Healthcare). Each protein sample was minimally labelled with DIGE Cy3 fluorescent dye and an internal standard containing equal amounts of each sample was labelled with Cy5 dye (GE Healthcare) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Using cup loading, we loaded 100 µg proteins (50 µg per sample plus 50 µg of internal standard) in 150 µl of DIGE buffer using isoelectric focusing. Isoelectric focussing (IEF) was performed with an IPGphor Manifold (GE Healthcare) at 20°C allowing a maximum of 50 µA per strip using the following setup: 4 h at 300V, 3 h gradient to 600V, 2 h gradient to 1000V, 2 h gradient to 3500V, 3 h gradient to 8000V, 5 h at 8000V (total 60000 Vh). Strips were stored at -80°C and thawed at room temperature (RT) prior to SDS-PAGE separation. Each strip was equilibrated twice at RT by incubation for 15 min in equilibration buffer (6M urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.8), 30% glycerol, 2% SDS) containing either 1% w/v DTT (reduction step) or 4% w/v iodoacetamide (alkylation step, in the dark). The second dimension was separated by polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (1 mm thick, 12%T, 2.6%C) and using a Hoefer SE90010NA at 10°C for 1 h at 7 mA per gel followed by overnight at 50 mA per gel. All gels were scanned using a Typhoon fluorescence scanner (GE Healthcare) and the resulting images were imported into Delta2D software (v 4.34, Decodon GmbH) for spot analyses.Each spot was inspected manually and only spots present on at least 3 of the 4 gels per treatment were kept for further analyses. Principal Component Analysis was used to exclude one outlier gel belonging to the 30 min treatment and ANOVAs were used to test for significant differences in spot intensity between treatments, based on log-transformed ratios. We finally used Student’s t-tests for pairwise post hoc comparisons among treatments using the “p-values based on permutations – all permutations” and the “False Discovery Rate (FDR) – number of false positive spots should not be exceed” correction options available in the Delta2D software. Protein spots with significant abundance differences (P < 0.05) between treatments and fold-change differences larger than 2 were selected for protein identification. To do this, we silver-stained one gel per treatment-group using a MS compatible protocol (25), then de-stained spots by incubating them in 15 mM K3[Fe(CN)6] and 50 mM Na2S2O3, and rinsed them in water until fully de-stained. Spots were then dehydrated in 100% ACN, followed by drying in a speed-vac and in-gel protein digestion with trypsin (Promega, 20 ng/µl in NH4HCO3, pH 8.4) overnight at 37°C. Tryptic peptide extraction was done in 70% ACN, 5% FA in 10mM NH4HCO3 (pH 8.4) with sonication repeated three times. All supernatant extracts were dried in a vacuum centrifuge and stored at -20°C.   For MS identification, each tryptic digest was resuspended in 5% ACN, 0.1% FA, and filtered with Ultrafree Centrifugal Filters (Durapore, PVDF 0.2 µM, Millipore). The individual digests were analysed with LC-MS/MS using a Q-TOF mass spectrometer (Agilent 6550 with a HPLC-Chip Cube and a large capacity C18 chip), coupled to an Agilent 1200 series HPLC and a 20 min gradient (5-35% ACN, 0.1% FA).

### Data Protocol
Data files were opened in Mass Hunter Qualitative Analysis B.06.00 and peak lists were exported as mgfs. Data files were analysed using a Mascot server (v. 2.5.1) against the A. colombica total proteome (16,519 sequences; 7,007,606 residues, downloaded from UniProt on September 2015 and reassessed on June 2017) using the following settings: MS error tolerance ±100 ppm, MS/MS error tolerance ±0.5 Da, maximum missed cleavages tolerated as 1, peptide charge as 2+, 3+ and 4+, and the instrument selected ESI-Q-TOF setting allowing for modifications: Carbamidomethyl (C) and Oxidation (M). We accepted protein identifications when at least two different peptides were detected with an overall MOWSE ion score greater than 30.

### Publication Abstract
All social insects with obligate reproductive division of labor evolved from strictly monogamous ancestors, but multiple queen-mating (polyandry) arose <i>de novo</i>, in several evolutionarily derived lineages. Polyandrous ant queens are inseminated soon after hatching and store sperm mixtures for a potential reproductive life of decades. However, they cannot re-mate later in life and are thus expected to control the loss of viable sperm because their lifetime reproductive success is ultimately sperm limited. In the leaf-cutting ant <i>Atta colombica,</i>, the survival of newly inseminated sperm is known to be compromised by seminal fluid of rival males and to be protected by secretions of the queen sperm storage organ (spermatheca). Here we investigate the main protein-level interactions that appear to mediate sperm competition dynamics and sperm preservation. We conducted an artificial insemination experiment and DIGE-based proteomics to identify proteomic changes when seminal fluid is exposed to spermathecal fluid followed by a mass spectrometry analysis of both secretions that allowed us to identify the sex-specific origins of the proteins that had changed in abundance. We found that spermathecal fluid targets only seven (2%) of the identified seminal fluid proteins for degradation, including two proteolytic serine proteases, a SERPIN inhibitor, and a semen-liquefying acid phosphatase. <i>In vitro</i>, and <i>in vivo</i>, experiments provided further confirmation that these proteins are key molecules mediating sexual conflict over sperm competition and viability preservation during sperm storage. <i>In vitro</i>, exposure to spermathecal fluid reduced the capacity of seminal fluid to compromise survival of rival sperm in a matter of hours and biochemical inhibition of these seminal fluid proteins largely eliminated that adverse effect. Our findings indicate that <i>A. colombica</i>, queens are in control of sperm competition and sperm storage, a capacity that has not been documented in other animals but is predicted to have independently evolved in other polyandrous social insects.

### Keywords
Dige, Seminal fluid, Atta colombica, Sexual conflict, Spermathecal fluid.

### Affiliations
Plant energy Biology Centre - School of Molecular Sciences  UWA 
Centre for Integrative Bee Research (CIBER) Department of Entomology University of California      Riverside, CA 92521                                                    United States of America

### Submitter
Julia Grassl

### Lab Head
Dr Prof Boris Baer
Centre for Integrative Bee Research (CIBER) Department of Entomology University of California      Riverside, CA 92521                                                    United States of America


