### Accession
PXD025979

### Title
Sulfur and methane oxidation by a single bacterium

### Description
Natural and anthropogenic wetlands are main sources of the atmospheric greenhouse gas methane. Methane emissions from wetlands are mitigated by methanotrophic microorganisms and by processes at the oxic-anoxic interface, such as sulfur cycling, that reduce the activity of methanogens. In this study, we obtained a pure culture (strain HY1) of a versatile wetland methanotroph that oxidizes various organic and inorganic compounds. This strain represents (i) the first isolate that can aerobically oxidize both methane and reduced sulfur compounds and (ii) a  new alphapoteobacterial species, named Candidatus Methylovirgula thiovorans. Genomic and proteomic analyses showed that soluble methane monooxygenase and XoxF-type alcohol dehydrogenases are the only enzymes for methane and methanol oxidation, respectively. Unexpectedly, strain HY1 harbors various pathways for respiratory sulfur oxidation and oxidized reduced sulfur compounds to sulfate using the Sox-rDsr pathway (without SoxCD) and the S4I system. It employed the Calvin-Benson-Bassham cycle for CO2 fixation during chemolithoautotrophic growth on the reduced sulfur compounds. Methane and thiosulfate were independently and simultaneously oxidized by strain HY1 for growth. Proteomic and microrespiratory analyses showed that the metabolic pathways for methane and thiosulfate oxidation were induced in the presence of their substrates. The discovery of this versatile methanotroph demonstrates that methanotrophy and thiotrophy is compatible in a single bacterium and adds a new aspect to interactions of methane and sulfur cycles in oxic-anoxic interface environments.

### Sample Protocol
For proteome analysis, cells of strain HY1 were cultivated in 160-ml serum bottles containing 20 ml medium at pH 5.0 with headspace containing 10% (v/v) CO2. Methane (20%), thiosulfate (8 mM), or ethanol (20 mM) were used individually as a sole energy source. A set of 4 replicates were conducted for each growth condition. The cells were harvested at the mid-exponential phase (Methane and ethanol; OD600 = 0.2, thiosulfate; OD600 = 0.1) at 5,000 ×g (10 min, 25 °C). The cell pellets were frozen immediately in liquid dinitrogen and stored at -80 °C until analyses. After protein extraction and proteolytic cleavage using trypsin, the peptide lysates were injected into the nano high-performance liquid chromatograph (HPLC) (UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano, Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptide separation was performed on a C18-reverse-phase trapping column (C18 PepMap100, 300 µm × 2 cm, particle size 5 µm, nano viper, Thermo Fischer Scientific), followed by a C18-reverse-phase analytical column (Acclaim PepMap® 100, 75 µm × 25 cm, particle size 3 µm, nanoViper, Thermo Fischer Scientific). Mass spectrometric analysis of peptides was performed on a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled with a TriVersa NanoMate (Advion, Ltd., Harlow, UK) source in LC chip coupling mode. LC gradient, ionization mode and mass spectrometry mode have been used as described (Haange et al., 2018).

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed with Proteome Discoverer (v2.4.0.305, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Search settings for the Sequest HT search engine were set to trypsin (full), max. missed cleavage: 2, precursor mass tolerance: 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance: 0.02 Da, dynamic modification: oxidation (methionine), static modification: carbamidomethyl (cysteine). The raw files were searched against the protein-coding sequences the strain HY1 (and common laboratory contaminations in order to prevent false-positive hits). The false discovery rates (FDR) were determined with the node Percolator embedded in Proteome Discoverer and we set to the FDR threshold at a peptide and protein level of 0.01. Protein grouping was performed according to strict parsimony principle.  For subsequent statistical analysis, Perseus (v1.6.14, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany) was used. Missing value imputation of protein intensity were performed from a normal distribution (width: 0.3, down shift: 1.4) after log2 transformation. Student’s t-test, controlled by permutation-based FDR threshold of 0.05, was used to identify the significant differences between sample groups.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Thiotrophy, Sulfur oxidation, Wetland, Facultative methanotrophy

### Affiliations
Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research GmbH - UFZ  Department of Molecular Systems Biology Permoserstraße 15, 04318 Leipzig, Germany
Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ

### Submitter
Nico Jehmlich

### Lab Head
Dr Nico Jehmlich
Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research GmbH - UFZ  Department of Molecular Systems Biology Permoserstraße 15, 04318 Leipzig, Germany


