### Accession
PXD003033

### Title
Multiplexed, Proteome-wide Protein Expression Profiling: Yeast Deubiquitylating Enzyme Knockout Strains

### Description
Characterizing a protein’s function often requires a description of the cellular state in its absence. Multiplexing in mass spectrometry-based proteomics has now achieved the ability to globally measure protein expression levels in yeast from 10 cell states simultaneously. We applied this approach to quantify expression differences in wild type and 9 deubiquitylating enzyme (DUB) knockout strains with the goal of creating “information networks” which might provide deeper, mechanistic insights into a protein’s biological role. In total, more than 3,700 proteins were quantified with high reproducibility across three biological replicates (30 samples in all). DUB mutants demonstrated different proteomics profiles, consistent with distinct roles for each family member. These included differences in total ubiquitin levels and specific chain linkages. Moreover, specific expression changes suggested novel functions for several DUB family members. For instance, the ubp3Δ mutant showed large expression changes for members of the cytochrome C oxidase complex, consistent with a role for Ubp3 in mitochondrial regulation. Several DUBs also showed broad expression changes for phosphate transporters as well as other components of the inorganic phosphate signaling pathway, suggesting a role for these DUBs in regulating phosphate metabolism. These data highlight the potential of multiplexed proteome-wide analyses for biological investigation and provide a framework for further study of the DUB family. Our methods are readily applicable to the entire collection of yeast deletion mutants, and may help facilitate systematic analysis of yeast and other organisms.

### Sample Protocol
Yeast proteins were extracted, digested with a combination of LysC and trypsin, TMT labeled, separated by basic pH-reversed phase (BPRP) fractionation, and finally analyzed by mass spectrometry. To avoid ratio compression due to co-isolated precursor  interference, we introduced an MS3 method that dissociates a precursor by CID and then simultaneously isolates multiple fragment ions which are further dissociated by HCD to produce reporter ions and enable quantitative measurements with little or no interference (SPS-MS3 method).

### Data Protocol
Instrument data files were processed using a SEQUEST-base in-house software pipeline17. Spectra were converted from .raw to mzXML using a modified version of ReadW.exe. Database searching included all predictive ORFs for entries from the yeast SGD (http://www.yeastgenome.org/download-data; downloaded March 12th, 2014). This database was concatenated with a database composed of all protein sequences in the reversed order. Searches were performed using a 50 ppm precursor ion tolerance for total protein level analysis. The product ion tolerance was set to 0.9 Da. These wide mass tolerance windows were chosen to maximize sensitivity besides Sequest searches and linear discriminant analysis17,18. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+229.163 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) was stablished as a variable modification. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were adjusted to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR)19. PSM filtering was performed using a linear discriminant analysis, as described previously17, while considering the following parameters: XCorr, ΔCn, missed cleavages, peptide length, charge state, and precursor mass accuracy. For TMT-based reporter ion quantitation, we extracted the signal-to-noise (S/N) ratio for each TMT channel and found the closest matching centroid to the expected mass of the TMT reporter ion. PSMs were identified, quantified, and collapsed to a 1% peptide false discovery rate (FDR) and then collapsed further to a final protein-level FDR of 1%. Moreover, for protein assembly principles of parsimony were used to produce the smallest set of proteins necessary to account for all observed peptides. Proteins were quantified by summing reporter ion counts across all matching PSMs using in-house software, as described previously17. Briefly, a 0.003 Th window around the theoretical m/z of each reporter ion (126: 126.1278 Th, 127N: 127.1249 Th, 127C: 127.1310 Th, 128N: 128.1283 Th, 128C: 128.1343 Th, 129N: 129.1316 Th, 129C: 129.1377 Th, 130N: 130.1349 Th, 130C: 130.1410 Th, 131:131,1382 Th) was scanned for ions, and the maximum intensity nearest the theoretical m/z was used. PSMs with poor quality, MS3 spectra with more than nine TMT reporter ion channels missing, MS3 spectra with TMT reporter summed signal to noise ratio less than 387, or no MS3 spectra were excluded from quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
Characterizing a protein's function often requires a description of the cellular state in its absence. Multiplexing in mass spectrometry-based proteomics has now achieved the ability to globally measure protein expression levels in yeast from 10 cell states simultaneously. We applied this approach to quantify expression differences in wild type and nine deubiquitylating enzyme (DUB) knockout strains with the goal of creating "information networks" that might provide deeper, mechanistic insights into a protein's biological role. In total, more than 3700 proteins were quantified with high reproducibility across three biological replicates (30 samples in all). DUB mutants demonstrated different proteomics profiles, consistent with distinct roles for each family member. These included differences in total ubiquitin levels and specific chain linkages. Moreover, specific expression changes suggested novel functions for several DUB family members. For instance, the ubp3&#x394; mutant showed large expression changes for members of the cytochrome C oxidase complex, consistent with a role for Ubp3 in mitochondrial regulation. Several DUBs also showed broad expression changes for phosphate transporters as well as other components of the inorganic phosphate signaling pathway, suggesting a role for these DUBs in regulating phosphate metabolism. These data highlight the potential of multiplexed proteome-wide analyses for biological investigation and provide a framework for further study of the DUB family. Our methods are readily applicable to the entire collection of yeast deletion mutants and may help facilitate systematic analysis of yeast and other organisms.

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Inorganic phosphate pathway., Quantitative proteomics, Ubp3, Isobaric labeling, Tmt, Deubiquitinases, Cox complex, High throughput proteomics, Orbitrap fusion

### Affiliations
Cell Biology Department Harvard Medical School
Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Marta Isasa

### Lab Head
Dr Steven P. Gygi
Cell Biology Department Harvard Medical School


