### Accession
PXD030365

### Title
Low-Density Lipoprotein Receptor fuels the cellular cholesterol-mTORC1 axis required for CD8+ T cell activation

### Description
In this study, the contribution of cholesterol uptake by the low-density-lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) in the metabolic reprogramming of activated T cells was investigated at proteome level by mass-spectrometry-assisted shotgun proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics analyses were performed on 2x106 purified CD8+ T lymphocytes from 4 wild type (WT) or Ldlr -/- mice after 96-hours in resting (IL-2, 25 U/mL) or stimulated condition induced by their exposure to the combination of ionomycin (20 ng/L) and phorbol acetate myristate (PMA, 1 ng/L). Cells were lysed with urea 8M, Tris-HCl 0.1M pH 8.5 in the presence of a protease inhibitor cocktail. Samples were then dried completely using a vacuum concentrator (45°C, 45 min) and resuspended in 5.0 mM DTT in 50 mM ambic buffer (pH 8.5, 30 min at 50°C under mechanical agitation). Samples were then cooled down to RT and alkylation performed by addition of 150 mM IAA in ambic buffer 50 mM (15 mM final concentration) and incubated in the dark for 20 min at RT. Trypsin was added at an enzyme-to-protein ratio of 1:20 and the digestion was performed overnight at 37°C, under agitation under mechanical agitation (600 rpm). Medium pH was in the range 8-8.5 pH units. The digestion was stopped by sample acidification with 50% TFA (final concentration: 1%). Final protein concentration was 0.33 μg/μl. The proteolytic peptide mixtures were purified by C18 pipette tips (ZipTip) and analyzed in duplicate by nano-liquid chromatography MS/MS (nLC-MS/MS).Samples were analyzed using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano-LC system (Sunnyvale CA, USA)  connected to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a nano-ESI ion source. Peptide mixtures were pre-concentrated onto an Acclaim PepMap C18, 5 μm, 100 Å, 100 μm ID x 2 cm (Thermo Scientific) and separated at 35°C on an EASY-Spray PepMap RSLC C18 column (3 μm, 100 Å, 75 μm ID × 15 cm; Thermo Scientific). Elutions were run in gradient mode from 96% buffer A (0.1% formic acid in water) to 40% buffer B (0.1% formic acid in water/acetonitrile (20/80 v/v). Total gradient: 110 min. Flow rate: 300 nl/min. Total run time: 144 min. MS acquisition was done in in positive ion mode over an m/z range of 375–1500 Da at 120,000 resolution in the data dependent mode, cycle time 3 s between master scans. MS/MS spectra were collected in centroid mode. Higher collision decomposition (HCD) energy: 35 eV.

### Data Protocol
Prior to data analysis, each LC-MS raw file was converted from raw to mzML format in centroid mode using the MSconvert tool of the software ProteoWizard (version 3.0.1957). The mzML files were analyzed using a pipeline adapted from Weisser et al., built using OpenMS [25] (version 2.5.0) operating within the open-source software platform KNIME (version 4.1.3, available at https://www.knime.com/). Spectral search with SpectraST was run using the NIST_mouse_IT_2012-04-21_7AA.splib, NIST_human_IT_2012-05-30_7AA.splib and NIST_yeast_IT_2012-04-06_7AA.splib files were appropriate and downloaded at the URL http://www.peptideatlas.org/speclib/. Human and yeast spectral libraries were concatenated in a single consensus library using the specific command lines in available in SpectraST (http://tools.proteomecenter.org/wiki/index.php?title = Software:SpectraST). Peptide identification was done using a multiple search engine pipeline combining X!Tandem algorithm, (XTandemAdapter node), MS-GF+, Novor (for peptide de novo identification) and the MS/MS spectral search tool SpectraST (SpectraSTSearchAdapter node). X!Tandem, MS-GF+ search and peptide indexing were done against a mouse FASTA Swiss-Prot reviewed protein sequence database (uniprot-filtered-organism_Mus.musculus-(Mouse)-[10090] (n = 17046 entries), downloaded at www.uniprot.org (October 2020), including in the protein database a list of common contaminant proteins (n = 179, https://github.com/pwilmart/fasta_utilities/blob/master/Thermo_contams.fasta). To this database, for subsequent FDR computation, a decoy reverse sequence database was appended by application of the DecoySequence OpenMS node. For all search engines except SpectraST, cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification and methionine oxidation was set as variable modification. Fragment mass tolerance was set at 0.02 Da and precursor mass tolerance at 5.0 ppm. Peptide sequences were indexed through the OpenMS Peptide Indexer node, setting leucine/isoleucine equivalence. Protein inference was carried out using the Protein Inference Algorithms (PIA, version 1.3.11) node. The parameters settings of all individual nodes are reported in Appendix S1. Protein abundance estimates were calculated with prior generation of spectral features by the node FeatureFinderIdentification (FFid) [29] followed by PIA-assisted FDR estimation and filtering at PSM level (PSM combined FDR score > 0.01, equivalent to FDR < 1%) with subsequent further filtering at peptide and protein group level through IDfiter node options (FDR < 1%), their ID mapping and combination with peptide IDs, their subsequent grouping and normalization (e.g., FeatureLinkerUnlabeledQT and ConsensusmapNormalizer nodes) . Proteins and peptides LFQ was then computed with the OpenMS ProteinQuantifier node based on intensities of all quantitative proteotypic peptide intensities (quantitative peptide number equal/greater than n = 2).

### Publication Abstract
Activation of T cells relies on the availability of intracellular cholesterol for an effective response after stimulation. We investigated the contribution of cholesterol derived from extracellular uptake by the low-density lipoprotein (LDL) receptor in the immunometabolic response of T cells. By combining proteomics, gene expression profiling, and immunophenotyping, we described a unique role for cholesterol provided by the LDLR pathway in CD8+ T cell activation. mRNA and protein expression of LDLR was significantly increased in activated CD8+ compared to CD4+ WT T cells, and this resulted in a significant reduction of proliferation and cytokine production (IFN&#x3b3;, Granzyme B, and Perforin) of CD8+ but not CD4+ T cells from Ldlr -/- mice after in vitro and in vivo stimulation. This effect was the consequence of altered cholesterol routing to the lysosome resulting in a lower mTORC1 activation. Similarly, CD8+ T cells from humans affected by familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) carrying a mutation on the LDLR gene showed reduced activation after an immune challenge.

### Keywords
Mtorc1, Lfq, Ldlr, Cd8+, Cholesterol

### Affiliations
Department of environmental science and policy, University of Milan, Milan, Italy
Department of environmental science and policy

### Submitter
Giangiacomo Beretta

### Lab Head
Dr Giangiacomo Beretta
Department of environmental science and policy, University of Milan, Milan, Italy


