### Accession
PXD021673

### Title
LC-MS/MS analysis of lesional and normally looking psoriatic skin

### Description
Background: Plaque psoriasis is a chronic autoimmune disorder characterized by the development of red scaly plaques. To date psoriasis lesional skin transcriptome has been extensively studied, whereas only few proteomic studies of psoriatic skin are available. Aim: The aim of this study was to compare protein expression patterns of lesional and normally looking skin of psoriasis patients with skin of the healthy volunteers, reveal differentially expressed proteins and identify changes in cell metabolism caused by the disease. Methods: Skin samples of normally looking and lesional skin donated by psoriasis patients (n = 5) and samples of healthy skin donated by volunteers (n = 5) were analyzed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). After protein identification and data processing, the set of differentially expressed proteins was subjected to protein ontology analysis to characterize changes in biological processes, cell components and molecular functions in the patients' skin compared to skin of the healthy volunteers. Results: The performed analysis identified 405 and 59 differentially expressed proteins in lesional and normally looking psoriatic skin compared to healthy control. We discovered decreased expression of KNG1, APOE, HRG, THBS1 and PLG in normally looking skin of the patients. Presumably, these changes were needed to protect the epidermis from spontaneous activation of kallikrein-kinin system and delay the following development of inflammatory response. In lesional skin, we identified several large groups of proteins with coordinated expression. Mainly, these proteins were involved in different aspects of protein and RNA metabolism, namely ATP synthesis and consumption; intracellular trafficking of membrane-bound vesicles, pre-RNA processing, translation, chaperoning and degradation in proteasomes/immunoproteasomes.  Conclusion: Our findings explain the molecular basis of metabolic changes caused by disease in skin lesions, such as faster cell turnover and higher metabolic rate. They also indicate on downregulation of kallikrein-kinin system in normally looking skin of the patients that would be needed to delay exacerbation of the disease.

### Sample Protocol
Skin biopsies were obtained from 5 psoriasis patients: 3 males and 2 females between the ages of 30 and 68 years (mean age 49.2 years) and equal number of healthy volunteers (h): 3 males and 2 females between the ages of 39 and 79 years (mean age 61.6 years). The patients participated in our study discontinued systemic therapies for 2 weeks prior to biopsy collection (1 week in case of topical treatment). Each patient donated two 4 mm punch biopsies of lesional (p) and normally looking (asymptomatic) skin (n) following a local anesthesia. Biopsies of normally looking patients' skin were taken at least 6 cm away from the nearest skin lesion. The collected biopsies were flash frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at −85 °C until processing. Each sample was washed twice with 0.5 mL phosphate-buffered saline. The samples were homogenized by mechanical disruption in liquid nitrogen. Cell lysis, reduction, alkylation and digestion of the proteins were performed as described previously [Kulak NA et al., 2014, doi:10.1038/nmeth.2834] with minor modifications. Briefly, sodium deoxycholate (SDC) lysis, reduction and alkylation buffer pH 8.5 contained 100 mM TRIS, 1% (w/v) SDC, 10 mM TCEP and 40 mM 2-chloroacetamide were added to a cell sample. The sample was sonicated and boiled for 10 min, protein concentration in the sample was determined by Bredford assay and the equal volume of trypsin solution in 100 mM TRIS pH 8.5 was added in a 1:100 (w/w) ratio. After overnight digestion at 37oC, peptides were acidified by 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) for SDB-RPS binding, and 20 g was loaded on two 14-gauge StageTip plugs, equal volume of ethyl acetate was added, and the StageTips were centrifuged at 300 g. After washing the StageTips with a 100 l of 1% TFA/ethyl acetate mixture and 100 l of 0.2% TFA, peptides were eluted by 60 l 80% acetonitrile/5% ammonia mixture. The collected material was vacuum-dried and stored at -80oC. Before analyses peptides were dissolved in 2% acetonitrile/0.1% TFA buffer) and sonicated for 2 min.   Liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry.  Samples were loaded to a home-made trap column 20x0.1 mm, packed with Inertsil ODS3 3 m sorbent (GLSciences), in the loading buffer (2% ACN, 98% H2O, 0.1% TFA) at 10 l/min flow and separated at RT in a home-packed [Kovalchuk et. al., 2018, DOI: 10.1074/mcp.TIR118.000953] fused-silica column 500x0.1 mm packed with Reprosil PUR C18AQ 1.9 (Dr. Maisch) into an emitter prepared with P2000 Laser Puller (Sutter, USA). Reverse-phase chromatography was performed with an Ultimate 3000 Nano LC System (Thermo Fisher Scientific), which was coupled to the Q Exactive Plus benchtop Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) via a nanoelectrospray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides (5 were loaded in buffer A (97% 0.1% (v/v) formic acid, 3% (v/v) acetonitrile) and eluted with a linear gradient: 3–35% buffer B (0.1% (v/v) formic acid, 80% (v/v) acetonitrile) for 55 min; 35-55% B for 5 min, and 55-100% B for 1 min at a flow rate of 440 nl/min. After each gradient, the column was washed with 100% buffer B for 5 min and reequilibrated with buffer A for 5 min. Peptides were analyzed on a mass spectrometer, with one full scan (350–2000 m/z, R = 70,000 at 200 m/z) at a target of 3e6 ions and max ion fill time 50 ms, followed by up to 10 data-dependent MS/MS scans with higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) (target 2e5 ions, max ion fill time 45 ms, isolation window 1.4 m/z, normalized collision energy (NCE) 27%), detected in the Orbitrap (R = 17,500 at fixed first mass 100 m/z). Other settings: charge exclusion - unassigned, 1, >6; peptide match – preferred; exclude isotopes – on; dynamic exclusion - 40 s was enabled.

### Data Protocol
Label-free protein quantification was made by MaxQuant software version 1.5.6.5, and a common contaminants database by the Andromeda search engine, with cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification and protein N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidations as variable modifications. Peak lists were searched against the human protein sequences extracted from the Uniprot (28.06.19) database. The FDR was set to 0.01 for both proteins and peptides with a minimum length of seven amino acids. Peptide identification was performed with an allowed initial precursor mass deviation up to 20 ppm and an allowed fragment mass deviation of 20 ppm. Downstream bioinformatics analysis was performed with Perseus (versions 1.5.5.1). Protein groups only identified by site, only from peptides identified also in the reverse database, or belonging to the common contaminants database were excluded from the analyses. For Student’s t-test, missing values were imputed with a width of 0.3 and a downshift of 1.8 over the total matrix. Two sample tests were performed in Perseus with s0 set to 0. Label free quantification was performed with a minimum ratio count of 1.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Plaque psoriasis, Lc-ms/ms, Proteome

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Molecular Immunology, I. Mechnikov Research Institute for Vaccines and Sera Director of the I. Mechnikov Research Institute for Vaccines and Sera
Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute of bioorganic chemistry Russian Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Rustam Ziganshin

### Lab Head
Dr Oxana A. Svitich
Laboratory of Molecular Immunology, I. Mechnikov Research Institute for Vaccines and Sera Director of the I. Mechnikov Research Institute for Vaccines and Sera


