### Accession
PXD011598

### Title
QUANTITATIVE PROTEOME PROFILING OF NEUROSPORA CRASSA REVEALS A CELLOBIOSE-DEPENDENT NETWORK COORDINATING LIGNOCELLULOLYTIC RESPONSES

### Description
Cellulose, particularly the major cellulolytic product cellobiose, can induce the production of enzymes associated with deconstruction of lignocellulose in filamentous fungi. However, the detailed mechanisms underlying this biotechnologically important process remain to be disclosed. Here, the proteome response to cellobiose, crystalline cellulose (Avicel), and carbon starvation of a Neurospora crassa triple β-glucosidase mutant were compared using tandem mass tag (TMT)-based proteome quantification. Improved quantification accuracy was achieved with synchronous precursor selection (SPS)-based MS3 technology compared to MS2 using a high resolution tribrid mass spectrometer. Exposure to carbon starvation, cellobiose or Avicel induced the production of cellulase and lytic polysaccharide monooxygenase enzymes in N. crassa, as well as a cellobionic acid transporter, indicating their functional roles in the early adaptation to plant cell wall. In particular, cellobiose specifically induced the production of proteins in the functional categories of protein processing and export as well as cell wall organization. The data presented here integrates the signaling pathway associated with cellobiose transporters CDT-1 and/or CDT-2 with the direct targets of the transcription factors CLR-1, CLR-2, and XLR-1, the unfolded protein response (UPR) mediated by Ire-1/Hac-1, as well as calcium homeostasis and cell wall organization. The cellobiose-dependent response network will be useful for rational strain improvement to facilitate the production of lignocellulases in filamentous fungi and plant biomass-based products.

### Sample Protocol
A N. crassa strain bearing a deletion of a gene encoding an intracellular -glucosidase plus two genes encoding extracellular beta-glucosidases was grown in VMM with 2% sucrose for 16 h before being washed and re-suspended in fresh VMM containing sucrose, cellobiose, Avicel, or media lacking any carbon source. Mycelia were harvested at 4 h after media shift by filtering through Miracloth and immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen. Frozen mycelia (100 mg) were ground into fine powder with pre-cooled mortar and pestle. The powder was suspended in 0.5 ml of ice-cold lysis buffer (250 mM sucrose, 20 mM HEPES, 0.1 mM EGTA, 1 mM EDTA, pH 7.4 adjusted with 1 N KOH, 4°C) with freshly added 1 Roche Complete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail. Cell lysate was centrifuged for 20 min at 20,000 ×g at 4°C to remove cell debris. Protein concentration was determined using the Bradford assay (Biorad Laboratories). Proteins were reduced by adding dithiothreitol (DTT) to a final concentration of 10 mM and incubating for 30 min at 60C, and alkylated with iodoacetamide (final concentration 20 mM) for 30 min in the dark at room temperature. Excess iodoacetamide was quenched by the addition of DTT to a final concentration of 20 mM. 5 volumes of acetone (pre-cooled at -20°C) were added to the protein solution and were incubated at -20°C for 3 h, before being centrifuged at 8,000 ×g for 10 min. Protein pellet was washed with pre-cooled 90% acetone and air-dried.  An aliquot of 25-100 g of acetone-precipitated protein was suspended in 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), crushed into fine particles, and incubated at 37°C overnight after trypsin was added at a protein/trypsin ratio of 40:1 (w/w). Digested peptides were labeled using TMT 6-plex isobaric mass tagging reagents (Thermo Scientific) according to the manufacturer instructions. The peptide solution was centrifuged for 10 min at 20,000 ×g to remove any insoluble material. Peptides were concentrated and desalted on a peptide trap column (Michrom) and eluted from the trap with 1-2 trap volumes of buffer B (80/20/0.1 acetonitrile/H2O/TFA). Peptide solution was acidified with 10% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), centrifuged, and lyophilized by vacuum centrifugation and stored at -80°C.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Scientific) was used to search MS/MS spectra against the N. crassa strain OR74A database from NCBI and the resulting peptide hits were filtered for maximum 1% FDR. The TMT sixplex quantification method was used to calculate the reporter ratios with mass tolerance ±10 ppm. Only peptide spectra containing all reporter ions were designated as “quantifiable spectra”. Spectra of the non-TMT, standard peptides were analyzed manually. For datasets from the MS3 method which contained both MS2 and MS3 spectra, CID (MS2) spectra were used for identification and HCD (MS3) spectra were used for quantification.  The reporter ion intensities in the spectrum of each non-TMT, standard peptide represent background interference for that peptide. The reporter ion intensities in the spectrum of each TMT-labeled peptide represent the total quantification signal for that peptide. To estimate the percentage of interference for each quantified TMT peptide, the average interference measured across all the standard peptides was used. The level of interference for each TMT-labeled peptide was calculated as the ratio of average interference to total quantification signal. Two biological replicates were performed for each carbon conditions and proteomic differences were evaluated by t-tests with Excel 2016 (Microsoft).

### Publication Abstract
Filamentous fungi are intensively used for producing industrial enzymes, including lignocellulases. Employing insoluble cellulose to induce the production of lignocellulases causes some drawbacks, e.g., a complex fermentation operation, which can be overcome by using soluble inducers such as cellobiose. Here, a triple &#x3b2;-glucosidase mutant of <i>Neurospora crassa</i>, which prevents rapid turnover of cellobiose and thus allows the disaccharide to induce lignocellulases, was applied to profile the proteome responses to cellobiose and cellulose (Avicel). Our results revealed a shared proteomic response to cellobiose and Avicel, whose elements included lignocellulases and cellulolytic product transporters. While the cellulolytic proteins showed a correlated increase in protein and mRNA levels, only a moderate correlation was observed on a proteomic scale between protein and mRNA levels (<i>R</i><sup>2</sup>&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.31). Ribosome biogenesis and rRNA processing were significantly overrepresented in the protein set with increased protein but unchanged mRNA abundances in response to Avicel. Ribosome biogenesis, as well as protein processing and protein export, was also enriched in the protein set that showed increased abundance in response to cellobiose. NCU05895, a homolog of yeast CWH43, is potentially involved in transferring a glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchor to nascent proteins. This protein showed increased abundance but no significant change in mRNA levels. Disruption of CWH43 resulted in a significant decrease in cellulase activities and secreted protein levels in cultures grown on Avicel, suggesting a positive regulatory role for CWH43 in cellulase production. The findings should have an impact on a systems engineering approach for strain improvement for the production of lignocellulases.<b>IMPORTANCE</b> Lignocellulases are important industrial enzymes for sustainable production of biofuels and bio-products. Insoluble cellulose has been commonly used to induce the production of lignocellulases in filamentous fungi, which causes a difficult fermentation operation and enzyme loss due to adsorption to cellulose. The disadvantages can be overcome by using soluble inducers, such as the disaccharide cellobiose. Quantitative proteome profiling of the model filamentous fungus <i>Neurospora crassa</i> revealed cellobiose-dependent pathways for cellulase production, including protein processing and export. A protein (CWH43) potentially involved in protein processing was found to be a positive regulator of lignocellulase production. The cellobiose-dependent mechanisms provide new opportunities to improve the production of lignocellulases in filamentous fungi.

### Keywords
Tmt-labeling, Quantitative proteomics, Cellobiose, Upr, Cellulose, Sps-ms3, Cellulase secretion, Protein trafficking, Cellulase expression

### Affiliations
Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi, China
Northwest A&F University

### Submitter
Shaolin Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Shaolin Chen
Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi, China


