### Accession
PXD039715

### Title
Mouse tumor cells secrete heterogenous particles including EVs, ENPs and VLPs into the extracellular medium - a proteome study

### Description
In addition to soluble proteins, cells secrete various types of membrane-enclosed extracellular vesicles (EVs: exosomes, ectosomes and others) and non-vesicular nanoparticles (ENPs) that are thought to play a role in intercellular communication. We exhaustively characterized the protein composition of secreted EVs and ENPs of murine tumor cell lines, including thorough separation of small EVs from co-isolated virus-like particles.

### Sample Protocol
Conditioned medium was recovered from cells cultured in serum-free medium for 24h. Crude preparations of EVs were obtained by differential centrifugation. Thorough separation of EV subtypes, VLPS and ENPs was achieved by combination of differential centrifugation and velocity gradient separation (see figure) For the qualitative analysis 200k pellets from EO771, 4T1 or mixed 200k and 10k pellets of MutuDC (10 µg each) were used. For the quantitative analysis 10k, sEVs, VLPs, ENPs and Mix (20 µg each) samples from EO771 were used. Samples were resuspended in 5 µl (qualitative) or 10 µL (quantitative) (2 µg/µL) of 8 M Urea, 200 mM ammonium bicarbonate respectively. After reduction with 5 mM DTT for 30min at 57 °C and alkylation with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in the dark, samples were diluted in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate to reach a final concentration of 1 M urea. For the qualitative analysis, the 200k pellets were digested for 2 h at 37°C with 0.4 µg of Trypsin/Lys-C (Promega CAT#: V5071) and then overnight by adding 0.4 µg of Trypsin/Lys-C. For quantitative analyses, samples were digested overnight at 37 °C with Trypsin/Lys-C at a ratio of 1/50. Digested samples were loaded onto homemade C18 StageTips for desalting, then eluted using 40/60 MeCN/H2O + 0.1 % formic acid and vacuum concentrated to dryness. Peptides were reconstituted in 10 µl of injection buffer in 0.3% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) before liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis.

### Data Protocol
For identification, the data was searched against the Mus musculus (UP000000589_10090) UniProt database and a manually curated list of murine virus protein sequences using Sequest-HT through Proteome Discoverer (version 2.4). The database of murine virus proteins includes protein sequences from all known mouse endogenous and exogenous retroviruses (523 sequences manually extracted from Swissprot) and from endogenous MLV envelope glycoproteins (53 sequences), translated from the nucleotide sequences of proviruses annotated as previously described (PMID: 29312197). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and a maximum of two-missed cleavage sites were allowed. Oxidized methionine, Met-loss, Met-loss-Acetyl and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation of cysteins was set as fixed modification. Maximum allowed mass deviation was set to 10 ppm for monoisotopic precursor ions and 0.6 Da for MS/MS peaks. The resulting files were further processed using myProMS (PMID: 17610305; https://github.com/bioinfo-pf-curie/myproms) v3.9. FDR calculation used Percolator (PMID: 27572102) and was set to 1% at the peptide level for the whole study. The label free quantification was performed by peptide Extracted Ion Chromatograms (XICs), reextracted across all conditions and computed with MassChroQ version 2.2.1 (PMID: 21751374). For protein quantification, XICs from proteotypic and non-proteotypic peptides were used by assigning to the best protein, peptides shared by multiple match groups, and missed cleavages, charge states and sources were allowed. Median and scale normalization was applied on the total signal to correct the XICs for each biological replicate (N=5) for total signal and global variance biases. Label-free quantification (LFQ) was performed following the algorithm as described (PMID: 24942700). The final LFQ intensities were used as protein abundance.

### Publication Abstract
Cells secrete extracellular vesicles (EVs) and non-vesicular extracellular (nano)particles (NVEPs or ENPs) that may play a role in intercellular communication. Tumor-derived EVs have been proposed to induce immune priming of antigen presenting cells or to be immuno-suppressive agents. We suspect that such disparate functions are due to variable compositions in EV subtypes and ENPs. We aimed to characterize the array of secreted EVs and ENPs of murine tumor cell lines. Unexpectedly, we identified virus-like particles (VLPs) from endogenous murine leukemia virus in preparations of EVs produced by many tumor cells. We established a protocol to separate small EVs from VLPs and ENPs. We compared their protein composition and analyzed their functional interaction with target dendritic cells. ENPs were poorly captured and did not affect dendritic cells. Small EVs specifically induced dendritic cell death. A mixed large/dense EV/VLP preparation was most efficient to induce dendritic cell maturation and antigen presentation. Our results call for systematic re-evaluation of the respective proportions and functions of non-viral EVs and VLPs produced by murine tumors and their contribution to tumor progression.

### Keywords
Retroviruses, Extracellular vesicles, Tumors

### Affiliations
Institut Curie - Centre de Recherche
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry Platform

### Submitter
Vanessa Masson

### Lab Head
Dr Damarys Loew
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry Platform


