### Accession
PXD010388

### Title
Lotus rhizome LC-MSMS -  Proteomic analysis showing the signaling pathways involved in the rhizome enlargement process in Nelumbo nucifera

### Description
Nelumbo, a perennial aquatic herbage that belongs to the family of Nelumbonaceae, comprises two extant species: N. nucifera Gaertn. and N. lutea (Wild.) Pers. Based on a previous study, N. nucifera is distributed in over Asia and Northern Australia while N. lutea is found in North America and northern of South America (1). N. nucifera can be divided into two cultivars including temperate lotus and tropical lotus based on its rhizome phenotype. The temperate lotus rhizome is expanded at the end of growth while tropical lotus root is of no significant enlargement during development (2). Normally, the temperate lotus root buds germinate in April, thereafter it takes several days from sowing to long roots and leaves. In mid-to-late may, vertical leaves rise out of the water, following July and August are the blooming period. Secondarily the first half of September is the final flowering period. The fruit ripening period is from late July to mid September, which is also the period of stem expansion and enrichment. After mid-October, it’s the dormant period, which is the lotus storage organ’s substance accumulation period. Thus the storage organ, mainly lotus rhizome, provides the energy for the lifecycle (Fig.1). Lotus rhizome, which is called metamorphic storage organ, is a kind of modified subterraneous stem, like potato (Solanum tuberosum) tuber and onion (Allium cepa L.) bulb (3). Most parts of lotus like rhizome, leaf, lotus seed and germ are used for traditional medicine (4). Rhizome especially is a kind of popular vegetable in Asia for its richness in nutrients including starch, proteins, vitamins (5). Nowadays it is a worldwide product in the form of the processed and semi-finished form like tea and vegetables. In general, the development of lotus rhizome can be classified into four stages: stolon stage, initial swelling, middle swelling, and later swelling stage (6, 7). The first three stages mainly focus on cell division and synthesis of some important carbohydrates, like starch, which play a critical part in the quantity and quality of rhizome, while accumulation of starch greatly increases at the last stage. Numerous studies have done in lotus to shed light on the environmental factors and morphometric indexes relevant to rhizome formation (8, 9). Short day light and low temperature promote tuber formation (10, 11). Also genes and proteins related to hormone, photoperiod (12, 13), starch synthesis (14, 15) and flowering time locus family genes were involved in the lotus rhizome formation (16). Previous studies include transcriptomics (6), genomics (17) and certain physiological researches, revealing numerous genes involved in photoperiod pathway, starch metabolism and hormone signal transduction, trying to make lotus a model plant of rhizome growth, while there is a lack of protein-level dynamic analysis and protein phosphorylation information, which is a strong proof for the dynamic processes in lotus rhizome. Proteomics is an indispensable method in storage organs research findings (18, 19), 2-DE and MALDI-TOF-TOF was employed to find some different protein profiles in fresh-cut lotus tuber before and after browning (20). And comparative proteomic was employed to analyze the Horsetail (Equisetum hyemale) underground stem to throw light upon the related proteins of developing rhizomes in ancient vascular plant Equisetum hyemale and different monocot species (21). Proteomics can also assist us in getting the changes of proteins in differently treated samples of potato tuber by using a LC-MS spectral-counting proteomics strategy (1), and shed light on the molecular basis of tuberization in potato to monitor differentially expressed proteins at different development stages (22). But the proteomic study of lotus rhizome enlargement hasn’t been reported now. Here, we employed comparative proteomics and phosphoproteomics to get proteins and its phosphorylation changes in the course of different rhizome development stages. Our data highlights some pathways, proteins and phosphorylated proteins during the development, and the difference between proteome and phosphoproteome in rhizome formation process.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from the rhizome by phenol extraction methods performed previously (24). Briefly, 10 g of rhizome was ground in 15 mL precooled homogenization buffer containing 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 250 mM sucrose, 10 mM Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA), 1 mM Phenylmethane sulfonyl fluoride (PMSF), 1 mM Dithiothreitol (DTT), 1 mM phosphatases (Protein phosphatase inhibitor complex 100×, Beiijng Zoman Biotechnology Co,.td). The homogenate was transferred, vortexed, and incubated by shaking for in ice 10 min. Afterwards, an equal volume of Tris-saturated phenol was added and incubated on shaker for 10 min at 5500×g and 4℃，the top phenolic phase was transferred to a new tube and added with four volumes precipitation solution (0.1 M ammonium acetate in cold methanol), and incubated overnight at-20℃. Proteins were finally precipitated by centrifugation (10 min, 5500×g at 4℃) and the precipitate was washed with cooled acetone for three times and vacuum-dried. The pellet was stored at -80℃ for further use. For protein digestion, the protein pellet was resuspended in lysis buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4% CHAPS, 1 mM DTT and 1 mM PMSF). After dissolving, the concentration of protein was measured, and subsequently reduced in 10 mM DTT for 1 h at 56℃. After cooling down to room temperature, the sample was alkylated by incubating in 40 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark. Afterwards, the sample was diluted with seven to eight volumes of distilled deionized water, trypsin was then added to the protein sample in a 1:50 ratio (trypsin/protein: w/w). The protein sample was digested by incubating at 37℃ on a rocking shaker overnight.  IMAC enrichment of phosphopeptides For phosphopeptides enrichment, the dried peptides were enriched by IMAC method (25, 26). The Ti4+-IMAC resin was synthesized and prepared as described by Feng et al. (27). In detail, the dried peptides were resuspended in 400μL of 1% acetic acid and loaded onto three loading tip columns containing 40 μL IMAC resin. After binding, the columns were washed twice, firstly with 40 μL wash buffer 1 (200mM NaCl, 50% ACN, and 6% acetic acid), subsequently with 40 μL buffer 2 (1% acetic acid and 30% ACN). Finally, the binding phosphopeptides were eluted from the resin with 120 μL of 10% NH4OH and dried under vacuum before MS analysis. Sample desalination was performed by SepPak C18 columns (Waters, USA), washed twice with 10 mL of 1% acetic acid, and eluted in 7 mL of 80% ACN and 0.1% acetic acid. The elution was dried under vacuum and stored at -80℃.  NanoLC-MS/MS analysis Both of the phosphopeptides eluted form IMAC resin and the peptides from total protein resuspended in 5% ACN and 0.1% formic acid were separately loaded into a nanoLC instrument nanoACQuity (Waters, USA) with the cHiPLC trap (200 um × 500 um ChromXP C18-CL, 3 um, 300 Å) and washed for 15 min with flow rate of 2 μL/min. Then, an elution gradient of 7–52% ACN (0.1% formic acid) for 44 min with flow rate of 300 nL/min was used on a nano cHiPLC column (75μm × 15 cm ChromXP C18-CL, 3 μm, 300 Å). The MS analysis was performed on a Nanospray III source and a TripleTOF 5600 plus (AB SCIEX, USA) mass spectrometer in information-dependent acquisition mode(28). MS spectra were acquired across the mass range of 350–1500 m/v in high-resolution mode (>25 000) using 250 ms accumulation time per spectrum. A maximum of 30 precursors per cycle were chosen for fragmentation from each MS spectrum, with 50 ms minimum accumulation time for each precursor and dynamic exclusion for 12 s. Tandem mass spectra were recorded in high-resolution mode (resolution >25 000) with rolling collision energy.

### Data Protocol
The raw mass spectrometry MS/MS spectra search was processed using MaxQuant-associated Andromeda search engine (30), and a lotus peptide database (14,833 peptides) was used from LOTUS.DB (http://lotus-db.wbgcas.cn/) (31). Initial maximum precursor and fragment mass deviations were set to 6 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. Variable modification (methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation) and fixed modification (cysteine carbamidomethylation) were set for the search and trypsin with a maximum of two missed cleavages was chosen for searching. The minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and the false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide and protein identification was set at 0.01. The precursor ion mass accuracy was improved using the time- and mass-dependent recalibration option software. The FDR was controlled at various levels by using a target-decoy search strategy, which integrates multiple peptide parameters such as length, charge, number of modifications and the identification score into a single quality that acts as the statistical evidence on the quality of each single peptide spectrum match (32). The frequently observed laboratory contaminants were removed and the protein identification was considered valid only when at least 2 matched peptides and 1 unique peptide were present.  Motif Analysis Overrepresented motifs from localized phosphopeptides were identified using Motif-X online (34). Localized phosphopeptides were mapped back to the lotus phosphoproteome to identify the surrounding amino acids. Phosphopeptides with two phosphorylation sites were broken into two separate entries. Ser, Thr, and Tyr phosphorylation sites were analyzed separately. Motif-X default settings of width = 13, occurrence = 20, and significance = 0.000001 were used for Ser, Thr and Tyr. A background file of the protein sequences from all uniquely identified phosphoproteome was created and used.  Protein annotation, functional classification and enrichment Quantified proteins in this project were annotated by employing Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway. Proteins GO annotation have three categories: biological process, cellular compartment and molecular function, employing a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test to test the enrichment of the differentially abundant protein against all identified proteins. Correction for multiple hypothesis testing was carried out using standard false discovery rate control methods. The GO with a corrected p-value < 0.05 is considered as significant. KEGG database was used to identify enriched pathways by a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test to test the enrichment of the differentially abundant protein against all identified proteins and classified these proteins into hierarchical categories according to the KEGG website. Correction for multiple hypothesis testing was carried out using standard false discovery rate control methods. Pathways with a corrected p-value < 0.05 were considered as significant.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Rhizome, Lotus

### Affiliations
15827442337
Key Laboratory of Plant Germplasm Enhancement and Speciality Agriculture, Wuhan Botanical Garden, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuchang Moshan

### Submitter
Cao Dingding

### Lab Head
Dr Pingfang Yang
Key Laboratory of Plant Germplasm Enhancement and Speciality Agriculture, Wuhan Botanical Garden, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuchang Moshan


