### Accession
PXD027175

### Title
Mitochondrial One-Carbon Flux has a Growth-Independent Role in Promoting Breast Cancer Metastasis

### Description
Progression of primary cancer to metastatic disease is the most common cause of death in cancer patients with minimal treatment options available. Canonical drugs mainly target the proliferative capacity of cancer cells, which often leaves slow-proliferating, persistent cancer cells unaffected. Thus, we aimed to identify metabolic determinants that enable cell plasticity and foster treatment resistance and tumor escape. Using a panel of anti-cancer drugs, we uncovered that antifolates, despite inducing strong growth arrest, did not impact the cancer cell’s motility potential, indicating that nucleotide synthesis is dispensable for cell motility. Prolonged treatment even selected for more motile cancer subpopulations. We found that cytosolic inhibition of DHFR by MTX only abrogates cytosolic folate cycle, while mitochondrial one-carbon cycle remains highly active. Despite a decreased cellular demand for biomass production, de novo serine synthesis and formate overflow are increased, suggesting that mitochondria provide a protective environment that allows serine catabolism to support cellular motility during nucleotide synthesis inhibition. Enhanced motility of growth-arrested cells was reduced by inhibition of PHGDH-dependent de novo serine synthesis and genetic silencing of mitochondrial one-carbon cycle. In vivo targeting of mitochondrial one-carbon cycle and formate overflow strongly and significantly reduced lung metastasis formation in an orthotopic breast cancer model. In summary, we identified mitochondrial serine catabolism as a targetable, growth-independent metabolic vulnerability to limit metastatic progression.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC (Stable Isotope Labeling with Amino acids in Cell culture) strategy was used for the proteomic analysis. In general, MDA-MB468 cells were cultivated in DMEM-F12 SILAC medium supplemented either with Lys0 and Arg0 (light channel) or Lys8 and Arg10 (heavy channel). After 6 passages, labeling efficiency of heavy channel was checked using LC-MS/MS. Cells in light channel were treated with 50 nM MTX for 24h and 72h, while heavy channel was used as control. Cell pellets of biological duplicates were collected after the treatment. Proteins were extracted in lysis buffer (50mM ammonium bicarbonate, 6M Urea, 2M Thio-urea, pH 8) following a 30 min incubation at 4 °C in the presence of protease inhibitors (cOmplete™ EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, Roche). Following a centrifugation at 16,000 g for 10 min, supernatants were taken for protein quantification. Samples from light channel (50 μg protein) were mixed with control heavy channel (50 μg protein) for protein reduction (5 mM DTT, 1 hour incubation at 37°C) and alkylation (10 mM IAA, 45min in dark at room temperature). Protein digestion was performed with Lys-C (FUJIFILM Wako, 125-05061) at 1:30 ratio (enzyme/protein substances) for 4 hours at 37 °C, then samples were diluted 4 times with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and digested overnight with 1 μg of trypsin at 37 °C. Digestion was terminated through addition of formic acid (1% final concentration). Digested peptides were cleaned up with reverse phase Sep-Pak C18 1 cc Vac Cartridge (Waters, WAT054955) and eluted with 1 mL 50% ACN. Eluted peptides were dried by Speedvac (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and re-suspended in 0.1% formic acid. Peptide concentration was measured with Nanodrop. Peptides were measured by LC-MS/MS on Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) connected to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 (Thermo Fisher). 500 ng of peptides were loaded onto a trap column (Acclaim PepMap 75 μm x 2 cm, C18, 3 μm) and separated on a 25 cm Acclaim pepmap RSLC column (75 μm x 25 cm, C18, 2 μm) using a 150 min gradient (2% to 90% acetonitrile) with a flow rate of 0.3 μL/min. MS data were acquired in data dependent mode (DDA). Survey scans of peptide precursors from 375 to 1500 m/z were performed at 70,000 resolution with a 3×106 ion count target and the top 12 abundant peaks from survey scan were selected for fragmentation. Tandem MS was performed by isolation at 1.4 m/z with the quadrupole, HCD fragmentation with a normalized collision energy of 28. The MS2 ion count target was set to 1×105 and the max injection time was 45 ms. Only precursors with a charge state of 2–7 were sampled for MS2. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 20 s with a 10 ppm mass tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. Each sample was analyzed twice as technical replicates. All raw data was analyzed with MaxQuant (version 1.6.7.0) and searched with Andromeda against the mus musculus database from Uniprot. The minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and the maximum of 3 missed cleavages were allowed. The search included variable modifications of methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation, deamidation (N and Q) and fixed modification of carbamidomethyl cysteine. The “Match between run” was checked within 1 min retention time window. Mass tolerance for peptide precursor and fragments were set as 10 ppm and 20 ppm, respectively. The FDR was set to 0.01 for peptide and protein identifications. SILAC based protein quantification (MaxQuant built-in) was used for quantitative evaluation of identified protein.

### Data Protocol
ProTIGY (https://github.com/broadinstitute/protigy), an R based tool, was used for differential analysis of MaxQuant output.

### Publication Abstract
Metastasis is the most common cause of death in cancer patients. Canonical drugs target mainly the proliferative capacity of cancer cells, which leaves slow-proliferating, persistent cancer cells unaffected. Metabolic determinants that contribute to growth-independent functions are still poorly understood. Here we show that antifolate treatment results in an uncoupled and autarkic mitochondrial one-carbon (1C) metabolism during cytosolic 1C metabolism impairment. Interestingly, antifolate dependent growth-arrest does not correlate with decreased migration capacity. Therefore, using methotrexate as a tool compound allows us to disentangle proliferation and migration to profile the metabolic phenotype of migrating cells. We observe that increased serine de novo synthesis (SSP) supports mitochondrial serine catabolism and inhibition of SSP using the competitive PHGDH-inhibitor BI-4916 reduces cancer cell migration. Furthermore, we show that sole inhibition of mitochondrial serine catabolism does not affect primary breast tumor growth but strongly inhibits pulmonary metastasis. We conclude that mitochondrial 1C metabolism, despite being dispensable for proliferative capacities, confers an advantage to cancer cells by supporting their motility potential.

### Keywords
Human, Formate, Metastasis, Cancer

### Affiliations
LIH
Luxembourg Instititute of Health

### Submitter
Gunnar Dittmar

### Lab Head
Dr Gunnar Dittmar
Luxembourg Instititute of Health


