### Accession
PXD023865

### Title
Complex-dependent histone acetyltransferase activity of KAT8 determines its role in transcriptional regulation and cellular homeostasis [TMT11plex whole proteome analysis]

### Description
Histone acetylation is associated with open chromatin and transcriptionally active genes. Specifically, acetylation of lysine 16 on histone H4 (H4K16ac) has been shown to prevent the assembly of nucleosomal arrays in vitro. This modification is catalyzed by the MYST-family histone acetyltransferase KAT8 (also known as MOF and MYST1), which is part of two distinct chromatin-associated complexes: NSL and MSL. While extensively studied in Drosophila, the functions of H4K16ac and the two KAT8-containing complexes in mammalian cells are not well understood. Here, we demonstrate a surprising complex-dependent activity of KAT8. We found that KAT8 catalyzes H4K5 and H4K8 acetylation as part of the NSL complex, whereas it catalyzes the bulk of H4K16 acetylation as part of the MSL complex. Furthermore, we show that the core proteins of the MSL complex and H4K16ac are not required for cell proliferation and global chromatin accessibility, whereas the NSL complex is essential for cell survival, as it is enriched at the promoters of housekeeping genes and is required for their transcription initiation. In summary, we show that KAT8 switches catalytic activity and function depending on its associated proteins, and that, as part of the NSL complex, it catalyzes H4K5 and H4K8 acetylation required for the expression of genes essential for cell survival

### Sample Protocol
5 million cells were lysed in 330 µL of ice-cold RIPA buffer with 3 U of benzonase and protease and phosphatase inhibitors (cOmplete and PhosStop, Roche) using a sonication probe with 5 cycles of 50% amplitude with 5 seconds intervals. Proteins were precipitated by addition of 1.2 ml of ice-cold acetone for 2 hours at -20C and then pelleted by centrifugation at 20.000 g. The samples were resuspended in 150 µL of the digestion buffer, containing 8M urea, 0.1M HEPES, pH 8.0 using a sonication probe with 5 cycles of 50% amplitude with 5 seconds intervals. Protein concentration was estimated with Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit. An aliquot containing 300 µg of protein material was adjusted to 200 µL with the digestion buffer. Proteins were reduced and alkylated by addition of 10 mM TCEP and 40 mM chloroacetamide and digested with lysC (1:50 protease: protein ratio) at 37C for 4 hours. The sample was then diluted 8-fold with 0.1 M HEPES, pH 8 buffer and digested with trypsin (1:25 protease:protein ratio) at 37C overnight. The obtained peptides were desalted on a 30 mg Oasis HLB cartridge (WAT094225) according to the manufacturer recommendations, vacuum-dried to 2-3 µL volumes with 2 µL DMSO to prevent complete evaporation and resuspended in TMT labelling buffer (0.1 M HEPES, pH 8). Peptide concentration was measured by Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit. 60 µg of peptide material for each sample was labelled with 0.5 mg of the TMT labelling reagent according to the manufacturer recommendations. 11 samples were labelled by 11plex TMT reagents using the following strategy: 3 replicates of the cells transduced with NegCtrl sgRNA, 3 replicates with sgRNAs against KANSL2 and KAT8 and 2 replicates with the sgRNA against KANSL3. Sample was pre-fractionated into 30 high pH fractions[see PMID: 31611688 for fractionation details].

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed in Proteome Discoverer 2.3 software using TMT11plex MS3 template. The database search was performed with Mascot 2.3.2 using Homo Sapiens UniProt database containing only reviewed entries and canonical isoforms (retrieved on 06/11/2017). Oxidation (M), Deamidattion (NQ) were set as variable modifications, while Carbamidomethyl (C), TMT6plex(K), and TMT6plex (N-term) were specified as fixed modifications. A maximum of two missed cleavages were permitted. The precursor and fragment mass tolerances were 10 ppm and 0.6 Da, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
Acetylation of lysine 16 on histone H4 (H4K16ac) is catalyzed by histone acetyltransferase KAT8 and can prevent chromatin compaction in&#xa0;vitro. Although extensively studied in Drosophila, the functions of H4K16ac and two KAT8-containing protein complexes (NSL and MSL) are not well understood in mammals. Here, we demonstrate a surprising complex-dependent activity of KAT8: it catalyzes H4K5ac and H4K8ac as part of the NSL complex, whereas it catalyzes the bulk of H4K16ac as part of the MSL complex. Furthermore, we show that MSL complex proteins and H4K16ac are not required for cell proliferation and chromatin accessibility, whereas the NSL complex is essential for cell survival, as it stimulates transcription initiation at the promoters of housekeeping genes. In summary, we show that KAT8 switches catalytic activity and function depending on its associated proteins and that, when in the NSL complex, it catalyzes H4K5ac and H4K8ac required for the expression of essential genes.

### Keywords
Nsl, Msl, Kat8, Histone

### Affiliations
Syddansk University
University of Southern Denmark, Department of Biochemistryand Molecular Biology, Protein Research Group (lab head)

### Submitter
Pavel Shliaha

### Lab Head
Dr Ole N Jensen
University of Southern Denmark, Department of Biochemistryand Molecular Biology, Protein Research Group (lab head)


