### Accession
PXD011825

### Title
Proteomic analysis of TMV and TMV 24A+UPD infected N. benthamiana plants by iTRAQ reveal differences in stress signalling, cell death and response to intracellular iron

### Description
TMV was mutated by introducing different lengths of internal poly (A) tract in front of the upstream pseudo knotted domain .Twenty four nucleotides were inserted into the TMV genome, this mutant is designated TMV 24A +UPD TMV 24+UPD shows more severe leaf necrosis and stem collapse, leading to plant death within a few days.  The difference in rate of virus replication and plant death may be because the poly (A) tract introduced into TMV may interact with UPD and affect its interaction with host factors. To understand TMV 24A+UPD interaction with the host and the events leading to the altered pathogenesis, we opted to evaluate its proteome profile and compare it to TMV using Isobaric tag for relative and absolute quantitation( iTRAQ).

### Sample Protocol
The protein concentration was determined using Quick Start™ Bradford Protein Assay and normalized to 100µg for all the samples. The protein samples were directly incorporated into a polyacrylamide gel matrix without electrophoresis. Proteins were immobilized in a gel matrix and then reduced with tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine TCEP and then alkylated with methyl methane-thiosulfonate (MMTS). Trypsin digestion was carried out at 37ºC for 16h . The proteins were extracted from the gel using 0.5M trimethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), pH8.5. The samples were processed for iTRAQ by labelling with iTRAQ reagent 8-plex kit (ABI-SCIEX) following the manufacturer’s protocol. In total, eight samples were tagged. The samples were pooled in an 8-plex and passed through a strong-cation exchange column according to manufacturer’s protocol (SCIEX) to remove unused reagents and organic solvents. Sample desalting was carried out using C18 Sep-Pak (Pierce) cartridge followed by protein lyophilisation. Lyophilized protein samples were prepared by dissolving in 1ml, 20mM ammonium formate in water, pH 10. For downstream LC–ESI–MS/MS analysis, iTRAQ labelled peptides were subjected to reverse-phase high performance liquid chromatography (RP-HPLC) equipped with C18 column. Mobile phase A comprises of 20mM ammonium formate water while mobile phase B consisted of 80% acetonitrile (ACN). All fractions were collected at 1min interval with the flow rate 0.5mL/min. The elution were pooled into five fractions, lyophilized and reconstituted in 2% CAN in water. Each fraction was subjected to MS analysis on a 5600 Triple TOF system (SCIEX). The precursor ion selection parameters were mass range 400-1800 m/z and accumulation time 250 ms/sec.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data was searched against protein sequences database Nicotiana using ProteinPilot™ software. User defined search parameters were a) Sample type: iTRAQ 8-plex (b) Alkylation: MMTS (c) Digestion: Trypsin; (d) Instrument,  TripleTOF5600 (e) Special factors: None

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tmv 24a+upd, Tmv

### Affiliations
Department of Biological Science, National University of Singapore Singapore
Shantou university

### Submitter
Defu Yao

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Wong Sek Man
Department of Biological Science, National University of Singapore Singapore


