### Accession
PXD002671

### Title
Tandem affinity purification of histones, coupled to mass spectrometry, identifies new sites of post-translational modification and associated proteins in Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Description
Our results can be considered as a starting point to gain understanding of how nucleosome modification and composition affect basic cellular processes in yeast.

### Sample Protocol
Two litters of cultured cells grown to an OD600 ≈ 2.0 were harvested by centrifugation, instantly frozen in liquid nitrogen and cryo-ground 6 times during a 3-minute period at maximum speed using a MM301 ball mill (Retsch). Frozen powdered cells were transferred to 100-mL containers and were stored at -80ºC until use. Whole extracts were prepared with 2 mL/g of cells of two different extraction buffers of distinct harsh properties: Buffer A (10 mM HEPES, pH 7.9, 210 mM KCl, 1.5 mM MgCl2 and 0.5 mM DTT), as previously described [  ](Puig O 2001) and Buffer W (40 mM HEPES, pH 7.9, 350 mM NaCl, 10% glycerol and 0.1% Nonidet NP-40) were prepared as described [  ] (Eberharter A 1998).  Both extraction buffers contained the following protease inhibitors: 2 mM benzamidine, 1 mM PMSF, 2 mg/mL leupeptine, 2 mg/mL pepstatin A, 2.4 mg/mL chymostatin, and 10 µL/mL Trasylol (Bayer). All the chromatography affinity purification steps were carried out at 4ºC, as described elsewhere [  ][Puig O 2001]. TAP-tagged proteins were detected throughout the purification procedure with the anti-protein A antibody (P1291 Sigma), and the anti-calmodulin-binding protein (CBP) antibody (CAB1001 Open Biosystems). Samples from the solutions containing TAP-purified protein complexes were either directly processed for analysis by MS, or speed-vac dryed, solved on sample loading solution, and resolved by 12% Tricine-SDS-PAGE [  ] (Schägger H 1987) for 7 h 30 min at 60 mA at room temperature. After running, gels were stained with Colloidal Blue (R0571, Fermentas) prior to the MS analysis. Proteins were precipitated with 10% trichloroacetic acid (TCA) for 4 h at 5°C. Precipitated proteins were collected by centrifugation, washed with cold acetone, air dried, and finally dissolved with 20 µL of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC). Protein concentration was quantified by fluorescence using the Qubit protein assay kit (Molecular Probes), following the manufacturer’s instructions. Cysteine residues were reduced with 2 mM DL-dithiothreitol (DTT) in 50 mM ABC for 20 min at 60°C. The resulting sulfhydryl groups were alkylated after 30 min incubation with 5 mM iodoacetamide (IAM) in 50 mM ABC in the dark at room temperature. IAM excess then was neutralised by adding DTT at a final concentration of 10 mM and incubating for 30 min at room temperature. Next, the protein samples were subjected to overnight trypsin digestion with 200 ng (100 ng/µL) of sequencing-grade modified trypsin (Promega) in 50 mM ABC at 37°C. The reactions were stopped by adding trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) at a final concentration of 0.1%. The final peptide mixtures were concentrated in a speed vacuum concentrator to a final concentration of 0.3 µg/µL. The peptides were analysed by LC-MS/MS. 5 μL of each sample were loaded into a trap column (Nano LC Column, 3μ C18‐CL, 75umx15cm; Eksigen) and desalted with 0.1% TFA at 3 μL/min for 5 min. Peptides then were loaded onto an analytical column (LC Column, 3 μ C18‐CL, 75umx25cm, Eksigen), equilibrated in 5% acetonitrile (CAN), 0.1% formic acid (FA). Peptides were eluted  with a linear gradient of 5-35% of solvent B in solvent A for 120 min (A: 0.1% FA; B: ACN, 0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The eluted peptides were analyzed in a nanoESI qQTOF mass spectrometer (5600 TripleTOF, AB Sciex).The Triple TOF was operated in the information‐dependent acquisition (IDA) mode, in which a 0.25‐s TOF MS scan from 350-1250 m/z was performed, followed by 0.05‐s production scans from 100-1500 m/z on the 50 most intense 2‐5 charged ions.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified using Protein-Pilot v4.5 (ABSciex) or Mascot v2.4 (Matrix Science) search engines. Protein-Pilot default parameters were used to generate peak list directly from 5600 Triple TOF wiff files. The Paragon algorithm of Protein-Pilot was used to search Expasy yeast protein database with the following parameters: trypsin specificity, cys-alkylation: IAM, and the search effort set to thorough. To avoid using the same spectral evidence for more than one protein, the identified proteins were grouped based on MS/MS spectra by the Protein-Pilot Progroup algorithm. Thus, proteins sharing MS/MS spectra were grouped, regardless of the peptide sequence assigned. The protein within each group explaining more spectral data with confidence is shown as the primary protein in the group. Only the proteins in the group for which there is individual evidence (unique peptides with enough confidence) are also listed, usually toward the end of the protein list. For modification analysis all peptide matches were initially filtered based on protein Pilot peptide confidence (>95%) followed by manual validation of all spectra with the aid of Protein Pilot. For Mascot searches, the peak lists were generated directly from wiff files by Protein-Pilot. Database search was done in Expasy Saccharomyces cerevisiae (baker's yeast) (7,641 sequences) protein. The search parameters were set to tryptic specificity, Cys-carbamidomethylation, one missed cleavage and a tolerance in the mass measurement of 50 ppm in MS mode and 0.5 Da for MS/MS ions. Met oxidation and Asn/Gln deamination were set as variable modifications. The significant threshold was set to p<0.05. Manual validation of ubiquitination was performed for the most represented proteins in our analyses: Histone H3, Histone H4, Histone H2B, Histone H2A, Rtt106, Pob3, Spt16 and Psh1. The MS/MS spectra of the assigned modified peptides were extracted by Protein-Pilot, and ubiquitine modification was accepted if two of the following three criteria were met: 1) Protein Pilot identified the modified peptide with a 99% confidence level; 2) the complete b/y ions series was found in the MS/MS spectrum; and 3) the immonium ion of the ubiquitinated residue was found in the MS/MS spectrum.

### Publication Abstract
Histones and their post-translational modifications contribute to regulating fundamental biological processes in all eukaryotic cells. We have applied a conventional tandem affinity purification strategy to histones H3 and H4 of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Mass spectrometry analysis of the co-purified proteins revealed multiple associated proteins, including core histones, which indicates that tagged histones may be incorporated to the nucleosome particle. Among the many other co-isolated proteins there are histone chaperones, elements of chromatin remodeling, of nucleosome assembly/disassembly, and of histone modification complexes. The histone chaperone Rtt106p, two members of chromatin assembly FACT complex and Psh1p, an ubiquitin ligase, were the most abundant proteins obtained with both H3-TAP and H4-TAP, regardless of the cell extraction medium stringency. Our mass spectrometry analyses have also revealed numerous novel post-translational modifications, including 30 new chemical modifications in histones, mainly by ubiquitination. We have discovered not only new sites of ubiquitination but that, besides lysine, also serine and threonine residues are targets of ubiquitination on yeast histones. Our results show the standard tandem affinity purification procedure is suitable for application to yeast histones, in order to isolate and characterize histone-binding proteins and post-translational modifications, avoiding the bias caused by histone purification from a chromatin-enriched fraction.

### Keywords
Chromatin, Yeast, Tandem affinity purification, Proteomics, Histones

### Affiliations
Departament de Bioquímica i Biologia Molecular, Universitat de València. C/ Dr. Moliner 50. 46100 Burjassot, València. Spain
Universitat de Valencia

### Submitter
Luz Valero

### Lab Head
Dr Mercè Pamblanco
Departament de Bioquímica i Biologia Molecular, Universitat de València. C/ Dr. Moliner 50. 46100 Burjassot, València. Spain


