### Accession
PXD033906

### Title
Comparative proteomics of extracellular vesicles derived from wildtype or mutant EMCV-infected cells

### Description
Non-enveloped viruses, such as picornaviruses, can escape infected host cells via release in extracellular vesicles (EVs) prior to the induction of lysis. These EVs cloak the secreted virus particles in a host-derived membrane, which alters virus-host interactions that affect infection efficiency and antiviral immunity. Currently, little is known about the viral and host factors regulating the formation and release of EV-enclosed viruses. The encephalomyocarditis virus (EMCV), belonging to the family of picornaviruses, expresses a Leader protein that targets various host cell processes. In this study, LC-MS/MS proteomic analysis was performed on EVs isolated via density gradient-based separation from HeLa cells infected with wildtype or Leader-deficient EMCV. Proteomes of these EVs were compared and proteins incorporated in EVs in a Leader-dependent manner were subjected to functional enrichment analysis and protein-interaction analysis.

### Sample Protocol
SDS-PAGE and in gel digestion  EV-containing density fractions (1.06-1.13 g/ml) were diluted in PBS containing 0.1% BSA and centrifuged at 100,000×g for 90 min in an SW32 rotor. EV pellets were resuspended in reducing Laemmli sample buffer and denatured at 100°C for 4 min. EV-protein input was equalized between conditions and proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE on 8-16% TGX-Criterion gels. Gels were fixed in 50% methanol/10% acetic acid, stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue R-250 (Bio-Rad) and destained sequentially with 40% methanol/10% acetic acid and MilliQ. Each lane was excised in 7 bands for in-gel digestion using trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI), as previously described (Shevchenko et al, 1996, Analytical Chemistry). After extraction with 100% acetonitrile the samples were dried and reconstituted in 10% formic acid/5% DMSO.  High-resolution LC-MS/MS analysis  The samples were analyzed with a Q-Exactive (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) connected to an Agilent 1290 Infinity LC system, a trap column of 20 mm x 100 μm ID Reprosil C18 (Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany) and a 450 mm x 75 μm ID Poroshell C18 analytical column (Zorbax, Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA), all packed in-house. Solvent A consisted of 0.1 M acetic acid (Merck, Kenilworth, NJ) in Milli-Q (Millipore, Burlington, MA), while solvent B consisted of 0.1 M acetic acid in 80% acetonitrile (Biosolve, Valkenswaard, The Netherlands). Trapping was performed at a flow rate of 5 μl/min for 10 min and peptides were eluted at 100 nl/min for 55 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode to automatically switch between MS and MS/MS. For the MS/MS analysis the fifteen most intense ions in the survey scan (375 to 1600 m/z, resolution 60,000, AGC target 3e6) were subjected to HCD fragmentation (resolution 30,000, AGC target 1e5), with the normalized collision energy set to 27% for HCD. The signal threshold for triggering an MS/MS event was set to 500 counts. The low mass cut-off for HCD was set to 180 m/z. Charge state screening was enabled, and precursors with unknown charge state or a charge state of 1, 6 – 8 and >8 were excluded. Dynamic exclusion was enabled (exclusion size list 500, exclusion duration 8 s).

### Data Protocol
MS raw data were processed with Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4.1.14, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide identification was performed using Mascot 2.3 (Matrix Science, UK). Peak lists were generated from the raw data files using Proteome Discoverer version 1.4.1.14 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and searched against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database (all entries for identification of EMCV proteins, Homo sapiens for identification of host proteins) (Consulted in July 2018), supplemented with frequently observed contaminants. Trypsin was chosen as enzyme and two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation (C) was set as a fixed modification and oxidation (M) was set as variable modification. The searches were performed using a peptide mass tolerance of 50 ppm and a product ion tolerance of 0.05 Da, followed by data filtering using percolator, resulting in 1% false discovery rate (FDR). Only ranked 1 PSMs with Mascot scores >20 were accepted.

### Publication Abstract
Naked viruses can escape host cells before the induction of lysis via release in extracellular vesicles (EVs). These nanosized EVs cloak the secreted virus particles in a host-derived membrane, which alters virus-host interactions that affect infection efficiency and antiviral immunity. Currently, little is known about the viral and host factors regulating this form of virus release. Here, we assessed the role of the encephalomyocarditis virus (EMCV) Leader protein, a 'viral security protein' that subverts the host antiviral response. EV release upon infection with wildtype virus or a Leader-deficient mutant was characterized at the single particle level using high-resolution flow cytometry. Inactivation of the Leader abolished EV induction during infection and strongly reduced EV-enclosed virus release. We demonstrate that the Leader promotes the release of virions within EVs by stimulating a secretory arm of autophagy. This newly discovered role of the EMCV Leader adds to the variety of mechanisms via which this protein affects virus-host interactions. Moreover, these data provide first evidence for a crucial role of a non-structural viral protein in the non-lytic release of picornaviruses via packaging in EVs.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Extracellular vesicles (evs), Picornaviruses

### Affiliations
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Maarten Altelaar

### Lab Head
Dr Maarten Altelaar
Utrecht University


