### Accession
PXD031491

### Title
Murine islets identified by TMT-labeled phosphoproteome after short time stimulation with neurotransmitters ACh and NE

### Description
Norepinephrine (NE) and acetylcholine (ACh) are important neurotransmitters of sympathetic and parasympathetic nerves, which play antagonistic roles in regulating different islet hormones secretion. Phosphorylation is reported as a critical post-translational modification participates in neural regulation on various physiological activities in islet. However, the molecular mechanisms of these two transmitters in islet are unknown and whether the neuronal regulation is abnormal in diabetes mellitus also unclear. Quantitative phosphoproteome analysis were performed on murine islet after short time stimulation with neurotransmitters NE and ACh to reveal the key moleculars and phosphorylated proteins in islet which participate in the innervation of nerve signaling.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation The proteome and phosphoproteome analyses were performed in APTBIO (Shanghai, China). Isolated murine islets were treated with neurotransmitters NE or ACh for 30mins in vitro and lysed in SDT buffer (4% SDS, 100mM Tris-HCl and 1Mm DTT, pH 7.6, 30μl buffer per 100 islets). The fully lysed protein samples were boiled at 100℃ for 15min and centrifuged at 14000 × g for 40min. The supernatant was filtered using a 0.22μm filter and stored at -80℃. The protein concentration of supernatant was determined by a BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA). Protein digestion and TMT labeling Protein digestion was performed according to the protocol reported previously. 30μl SDT buffer (4% SDS, 100mM DTT, 150mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0) was used per 200μg of protein. UA buffer (8M Urea and 150mM Tris-HCl) was used to remove the DTT and detergent at 14000 × g for 10min. After washing twice with UA buffer and DS buffer, the proteins were digested with trypsin at 37℃ overnight. Then, the peptides were collected and desalted by C18 Cartridges, and concentrated by vacuum centrifugation. The peptides were dissolved with 0.1% formic acid and measured by using ultraviolet spectrophotometer at 280nm (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA). Finally, the peptides were labeled by using TMT Mass Tag Labeling Kits (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Enrichment of phosphorylated peptides The labeled peptides were mixed and concentrated by the vacuum concentrator, and then resuspended with 500μl loading buffer. Then, TiO2 beads were added to the solution and stirred well for 40 min. The beads were collected after centrifugation at 5000 × g for 1 min at room temperature. After centrifuging with beads for 3 times with washing buffer Ⅰ (30% ACN, 3% TFA) and Ⅱ (80% CAN, 0.3 TFA). The elution buffer was added to elute and collect the phosphopeptides for LC-MS/MS analysis.  LC-MS/MS analysis Enriched phosphorylated peptides were separated using high-performance liquid chromatography Easy nLC1000 (HPLC, Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA). The mixed peptides were loaded on the reverse phase trap column (Acclaim PepMap100, nanoViper C18) that connected to the reversed phase analytical column in buffer A and separated in buffer B. Buffer A was 0.1% formic acid and buffer B was 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. Then, the separated peptide fractions were analyzed by LC-MS/MS based on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) couple to Easy nLC. MS data was acquired as previously described by using a data-dependent top 10 method dynamically and choosing the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan (300-1800m/z) for higher collision dissociation (HCD) fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Database search and data analysis Raw MS/MS data were analyzed for database search in the MaxQuant environment (version 1.6.2.0) using the Andromeda engine according to the protocol described previously. The Mus Murine UniProt FASTA database was used to match with the MS/MS spectra in this study with an FDR < 1% at the level of peptides, proteins, and modifications. The TMT labeled proteome analysis was also performed in MaxQuant environment.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Neurotransmitters, Tmt-labeled, Phosphoproteome, Islet, Murine

### Affiliations
Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical University.
The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical University

### Submitter
Yunqiang He

### Lab Head
Dr Tao Yang
Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical University.


