### Accession
PXD019674

### Title
Requirement of Nuclear Pore Complex subunits for transposon silencing in Drosophila

### Description
The piRNA pathway is a small RNA-based immune system that silences mobile genetic elements in animal germlines. In Drosophila ovaries, piRNAs are produced from discrete genomic loci, called piRNA clusters, which are composed of inactive transposon copies and fragments and thus constitute a genetically encoded memory of past transposon challenges. Two types of piRNA clusters exist in flies: dual-strand clusters, expressed only in the germline via a highly specialised machinery, and uni-strand cluster, which are predominantly expressed in the somatic follicle cells. Flamenco (flam) is the major uni-strand piRNA cluster in Drosophila, giving rise to the majority of somatic piRNAs. Flam resembles a canonical RNA polymerase II transcriptional unit, nonetheless it can be specifically recognised by the piRNA pathway and directed to the biogenesis machinery. Recent work has implicated the RNA helicase Yb in the licensing of somatic piRNA production, however a detailed understanding of the molecular mechanisms underlying flam export and specification is still lacking. Here, we show that flam export triggers the assembly of peri-nuclear condensates of Yb and provide evidence that piRNA production from flam specifically requires subunits of the Nuclear Pore Complex (NPC). In the absence of some NPC subunits, transposons become de-silenced and piRNA biogenesis is compromised exclusively from flam. We also show that Yb transiently associates with the NPC to promote flam export. Taken together, our data shed light on how the export of uni-strand cluster transcripts is achieved and suggest the evolution of a specialised machinery that couples transcription, nuclear export and piRNA production.

### Sample Protocol
10x106 OSCs were nucleofected with 2 µl of an siRNA targeting Yb 3’UTR and, two days later, again with 2 µl of the same siRNA and 5 µg of plasmid expressing 3xFLAG-tagged constructs, as described in 2.2.2.3. Cell pellets were lysed in 250 μl of CoIP Lysis Buffer (Choi et al.) with cOmplete™ Mini EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche; 11836170001) and rotated at 4°C for 30 min. Cell lysates were cleared with centrifugation at top speed for 15 min at 4°C and protein concentration measured with a Direct Detect Spectrometer (Merck Millipore; DDHW00010-WW). 400 μg of protein for each sample were diluted to 1 ml with CoIP Lysis Buffer and incubated with 50 μl of anti-FLAG M2 Magnetic Beads (Sigma M8823) overnight at 4°C. The beads were washed 3x15 min in TBS with protease inhibitors and a 10% aliquot was saved for western blot analysis. The remaining beads were rinsed 2x in PBS and 2x in 100 mM Ammonium Bicarbonate, prior to submission for TMT labelling and quantitative Mass Spectrometry. TMT chemical isobaric labelling was performed as described (Papachristou et al., 2018).

### Data Protocol
Spectral .raw files were processed with the SequestHT search engine on Thermo ScientificTM Proteome Discoverer™ 2.1. Data was searched against a custom FlyBase database (“dmel-all-translation-r6.24”) at a 1% spectrum level FDR criteria using Percolator (University of Washington). MS1 mass tolerance was constrained to 20 ppm and the fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+229.163 Da) were set as static modifications. Oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da), deamidation (+0.984) of asparagine and glutamine residues, and biotinylation of lysines and protein N-terminus (+226.078) were included as dynamic modifications. For TMT-based reporter ion quantitation, we extracted the signal-to-noise ratio for each TMT channel. Parsimony principle was applied for protein grouping and the level of confidence for peptide identifications was estimated using the Percolator node with decoy database search. Strict FDR was set at q-value < 0.01. Downstream data analysis was performed on R using the qPLEXanalyzer package (https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.1237825) as described (Papachristou et al., 2018). Only proteins with more than one unique peptide were plotted.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pirna piwi npc nuclear export

### Affiliations
Cambridge University
CRUK Cambridge Institute University of Cambridge Li Ka Shing Centre Robinson Way CB2 0RE Cambridge United Kingdom

### Submitter
Marzia Munafo

### Lab Head
Dr Gregory J. Hannon
CRUK Cambridge Institute University of Cambridge Li Ka Shing Centre Robinson Way CB2 0RE Cambridge United Kingdom


