### Accession
PXD035552

### Title
Mouse muscle spindle proteomics

### Description
The proprioceptive system is essential for the control of coordinated movement, posture and skeletal integrity. The sense of proprioception is produced in the brain using peripheral sensory input from receptors such as the muscle spindle, which detects changes in the length of skeletal muscles. Despite its importance, the molecular composition of the muscle spindle is largely unknown. In this study, we generated comprehensive transcriptomic and proteomic datasets of the entire muscle spindle. We then associated differentially expressed genes with the various tissues composing the spindle using bioinformatic analysis. Immunostaining verified these predictions, thus establishing new markers for the different spindle tissues. Utilizing these markers, we identified the differentiation stages the spindle capsule cells undergo during development. Together, these findings provide comprehensive molecular characterization of the intact spindle as well as new tools to study its development and function in health and disease.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were subjected to in-solution tryptic digestion using the suspension trapping (S-trap) as previously described [1]. Briefly, tissue was homogenized in the presence of lysis buffer containing  5% SDS in 50mM Tris-HCl. Lysates were incubated at 96°C for 5 min, followed by six cycles of 30 s of sonication (Bioruptor Pico, Diagenode, USA). Protein concentration was measured using the BCA assay (Thermo Scientific, USA). 50 ug of total protein was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide in the dark. Each sample was loaded onto S-Trap microcolumns (Protifi,USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. After loading, samples were washed with 90:10% methanol/50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Samples were then digested with trypsin (1:50 trypsin/protein) for 1.5 h at 47°C. The digested peptides were eluted using 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Trypsin was added to this fraction and incubated overnight at37°C. Two more elutions were made using 0.2% formic acid and 0.2% formic acid in 50% acetonitrile. The three elutions were pooled together and vacuum-centrifuged to dryness. Samples were kept at−80°C until further analysis.  Liquid chromatography  ULC/MS grade solvents were used for all chromatographic steps. Dry digested  samples were dissolved in 97:3% H2O/acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid. Each sample was loaded using split-less nano-Ultra Performance Liquid Chromatography (10 kpsi nanoAcquity; Waters, Milford, MA, USA). The mobile phase was: A) H2O + 0.1% formic acid and B) acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid. Desalting of the samples was performed online using a reversed-phase Symmetry C18 trapping column (180 µm internal diameter, 20 mm length, 5 µm particle size; Waters). The peptides were then separated using a T3 HSS nano-column (75 µm internal diameter, 250 mm length, 1.8 µm particle size; Waters) at 0.35 µL/min. Peptides were eluted from the column into the mass spectrometer using the following gradient: 4% to 20%B in 155 min, 20% to 90%B in 5 min, maintained at 90% for 5 min and then back to initial conditions.  Mass Spectrometry The nanoUPLC was coupled online through a nanoESI emitter (10 μm tip; New Objective; Woburn, MA, USA) to a quadrupole orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive HFX, Thermo Scientific) using a FlexIon nanospray apparatus (Proxeon).  Data was acquired in data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode, using a Top10 method. MS1 resolution was set to 120,000 (at 200m/z), mass range of 375-1650m/z, AGC of 3e6 and maximum injection time was set to 60msec. MS2 resolution was set to 15,000, quadrupole isolation 1.7m/z, AGC of 1e5, dynamic exclusion of 40sec  and maximum injection time of 60msec.

### Data Protocol
Data processing and analysis Raw data was processed with MaxQuant v1.6.0.16 [2]. The data was searched with the Andromeda search engine against the mouse (Mus musculus) protein database as downloaded from Uniprot (www.uniprot.com), and appended with common lab protein contaminants. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Fixed modification was set to carbamidomethylation of cysteines and variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionines, and deamidation of glutamines and asparagines. Peptide precursor ions were searched with a maximum mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and fragment ions with a maximum mass deviation of 20 ppm. Peptide and protein identifications were filtered at an FDR of 1% using the decoy database strategy (MaxQuant’s “Revert” module). The minimal peptide length was 7 amino-acids and the minimum Andromeda score for modified peptides was 40. Peptide identifications were propagated across samples using the match-between-runs option checked. Searches were performed with the label-free quantification option selected. The quantitative comparisons were calculated using Perseus v1.6.0.7. Decoy hits were filtered out. A Student’s t-Test, after logarithmic transformation, was used to identify significant differences between the experimental groups, across the biological replica. Fold changes were calculated based on the ratio of geometric means of the different experimental groups.

### Publication Abstract
The proprioceptive system is essential for the control of coordinated movement, posture, and skeletal integrity. The sense of proprioception is produced in the brain using peripheral sensory input from receptors such as the muscle spindle, which detects changes in the length of skeletal muscles. Despite its importance, the molecular composition of the muscle spindle is largely unknown. In this study, we generated comprehensive transcriptomic and proteomic datasets of the entire muscle spindle isolated from the murine deep masseter muscle. We then associated differentially expressed genes with the various tissues composing the spindle using bioinformatic analysis. Immunostaining verified these predictions, thus establishing new markers for the different spindle tissues. Utilizing these markers, we identified the differentiation stages the spindle capsule cells undergo during development. Together, these findings provide comprehensive molecular characterization of the intact spindle as well as new tools to study its development and function in health and disease.

### Keywords
Nerve, Dda, Spindle, Mouse, Lfq, Proteomics, Muscle

### Affiliations
The Weizmann Institute of Science
Department of Molecular Genetics Faculty of Biochemistry Weizmann Institute of Science Rehovot 7610001 Israel

### Submitter
Alon Savidor

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Elazar Zelzer
Department of Molecular Genetics Faculty of Biochemistry Weizmann Institute of Science Rehovot 7610001 Israel


