### Accession
PXD023612

### Title
Allergenicity Assessment and Allergen Profile Analysis of Different Chinese Wheat Cultivars

### Description
Allergenicity Assessment and Allergen Profile Analysis of Different Chinese Wheat Cultivars

### Sample Protocol
The gel piece was cut into small cubes of 1mm3 that were washed thrice with 500ul H2O and destained with 500ul of 100mM ammonium bicarbonate in 50% acetonitrile on a 50℃ thermo mixer. The gel pieces were dehydrated with 500ul acetonitrile. Disulfide bond was cleaved by incubating gel pieces for 30min at 56℃ with 200ul of 10mM DTT in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate. Alkylation of cysteines was performed by incubating for 45min at room temperature in darkness with 200ul of 55mM iodoacetamide in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate. The gel pieces were washed and dehydrated again and supernatant was discarded after each step. Gel pieces were covered with trypsin solution (10ng/ul in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate). After 10min incubation on ice, the remaining trypsin solution was removed, and appropriate amount of 50mM ammonium bicarbonate was added to cover gel pieces. Proteolysis was performed overnight at 37℃ and stopped by adjusting the samples to 2% formic acid. The peptide in gel was extracted once by 200ul 0.1% formic acid in 50% acetonitrile and twice by 200ul 0.1% formic acid in 100% acetonitrile.

### Data Protocol
Mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Trypsin/P was selected for enzyme specificity and two missed cleavage was allowed. Carbamidomethylation on Cys was specified as fixed modification, oxidation on Met and acetylation on protein N-terminal was specified as variable modification. Decoy (reverse) database was searched against to estimate false discovery rate (FDR).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Chinese wheat cultivars, Allergen

### Affiliations
Micrometer Biotech
Food Safety Key Laboratory of Zhejiang Province, School of Food Science and Biotechnology, Zhejiang Gongshang University, Hangzhou, 310018, P.R. China

### Submitter
Xianliang Ma

### Lab Head
Dr Linglin Fu
Food Safety Key Laboratory of Zhejiang Province, School of Food Science and Biotechnology, Zhejiang Gongshang University, Hangzhou, 310018, P.R. China


