### Accession
PXD018595

### Title
Part2: Dual element (C/Cl) isotope analysis indicates distinct mechanisms of reductive dehalogenation of chlorinated ethenes and dichloroethane in Dehalococcoides mccartyi strain BTF08 with defined reductive dehalogenase inventories

### Description
Dehalococcoides mccartyi strain BTF08 has the unique property to couple complete dechlorination of tetrachloroethene and 1,2-dichloroethane to ethene with growth by using the halogenated compounds as terminal electron acceptor. The genome of strain BTF08 encodes 20 genes for reductive dehalogenase homologous proteins (RdhA) including those described for dehalogenation of tetrachloroethene (PceA, PteA), trichloroethene (TceA) and vinyl chloride (VcrA). Thus far it is unknown under which conditions the different RdhAs are expressed, what their substrate specificity is and if different reaction mechanisms are employed. Here we found by proteomic analysis from differentially activated batches that PteA and VcrA were expressed during dechlorination of tetrachloroethene to ethene, while TceA was expressed during 1,2-dichloroethane dehalogenation. Carbon and chlorine compound-specific stable isotope analysis suggested distinct reaction mechanisms for the dechlorination of (i) cis-dichloroethene and vinyl chloride and (ii) tetrachloroethene. This differentiation was observed independent of the expressed RdhA proteins. Differently, two stable isotope fractionation patterns were observed for 1,2-dichloroethane transformation, for cells with distinct RdhA inventories. Conclusively, we could link specific RdhA expression with functions and provide an insight into the apparently substrate-specific reaction mechanisms in the pathway of reductive dehalogenation in D. mccartyi strain BTF08.

### Sample Protocol
Cell harvesting and sample preparation for proteomic analysis D. mccartyi strain BTF08 cultures cultivated with different halogenated electron acceptors PCE, cDCE, 1,2-DCA or VC, were harvested by centrifugation of 30 mL culture at 10,000 g for 45 min at 16°C. Cell pellets were washed with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer pH 7.9, centrifuged at 10,000 g for 30 min at 16°C and subsequent removal of the supernatant. The cell pellet was re-suspended in 30 µL 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer pH 7.9 and the cells were disrupted by three cycles of freezing, using liquid nitrogen, and thawing at 40°C while shaking at 750 rpm. Proteins were reduced using 50 mM dithiothreitol for 1 h at 30°C (400 rpm) and alkylated by 130 mM 2-iodoacetamide for 1 h at 22°C and 400 rpm prior to trypsin digest overnight through 0.6 µg trypsin (Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin, Promega) at 37°C at 400 rpm. Trypsin digest was stopped by 1 µL 100% formic acid and followed by centrifugation at 13,000 rpm (Centrifuge 5430, rotor FA-45-24-11, Eppendorf, Germany) for 20 min. The pellet was discarded, the supernatant concentrated to 10 µL by vacuum centrifugation at 20 mbar and stored until further processing at -20°C. Peptides for LC-MS/MS analysis were desalted before injection using ZipTip-µC18 material (Merck Millipore, Germany). Solvents were evaporated under vacuum and samples re-suspended in 0.1 % formic acid prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. LC-MS/MS and proteomic data analysis Proteomic analysis was performed via nano-liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (nLC-MS/MS) using an Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled with a nano ultra-performance liquid chromatography system (Dionex Ultimate 3000RSLC; Thermo Scientific, Germany) and an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 LC-Column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) as described previously (Goris et al., 2016). For liquid chromatography 0.1 % formic acid (eluent A) and 80 % acetonitrile with 0.08 % formic acid (eluent B) were used and 3 µL of sample was injected. With a constant flow rate of 300 nL·min-1 4 % eluent A was hold for 6 min prior to increase to 55 % eluent A over 120 min being further increase to 90 % within 1 min, hold for 4 min and decreased back to 4% eluent A within 1 min. Goris, T., Schiffmann, C.L., Gadkari, J., Adrian, L., von Bergen, M., Diekert, G., and Jehmlich, N. (2016) Proteomic data set of the organohalide-respiring Epsilonproteobacterium Sulfurospirillum multivorans adapted to tetrachloroethene and other energy substrates. Data Brief 8: 637-642.

### Data Protocol
Subsequent peptide analysis was conducted using ProteomeDiscoverer (v2.2, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany) with the D. mccartyi strain BTF08 genome as search database (UniProt Proteome ID: UP000011727) (Pöritz et al., 2013). Determination of the orthologous groups to which the identified RdhA proteins belong was done via sequence alignment of the data used by Hug et al. (2013) and the proteome of D. mccartyi strain BTF08 (UniProt Proteome ID: UP000011727) (Hug et al., 2013; Pöritz et al., 2013) followed by phylogenetic analysis of this alignment. The alignment and phylogenetic tree (Minimum Evolution Tree with 100 bootstrap repetitions) were performed using Mega X. Hug, L.A., Maphosa, F., Leys, D., Loffler, F.E., Smidt, H., Edwards, E.A., and Adrian, L. (2013) Overview of organohalide-respiring bacteria and a proposal for a classification system for reductive dehalogenases. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 368: 20120322. Pöritz, M., Goris, T., Wubet, T., Tarkka, M.T., Buscot, F., Nijenhuis, I. et al. (2013) Genome sequences of two dehalogenation specialists - Dehalococcoides mccartyi strains BTF08 and DCMB5 enriched from the highly polluted Bitterfeld region. FEMS Microbiol Lett 343: 101-104.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dehalococcoides mccartyi strain btf08, Cis-dichloroethene, 1, Tetrachloroethene, Reductive dehalogenation, Nlc-ms/ms, Compound-specific stable isotope analysis, Vinyl chloride, 2-dichloroethane

### Affiliations
Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ
Department Isotope Biogeochemistry, Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research – UFZ, Permoserstrasse 15, 04107 Leipzig, Germany

### Submitter
Lorenz Adrian

### Lab Head
Dr Ivonne Nijenhuis
Department Isotope Biogeochemistry, Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research – UFZ, Permoserstrasse 15, 04107 Leipzig, Germany


