### Accession
PXD024177

### Title
Quantitative profiling of axonal guidance proteins during the differentiation of human neurospheres

### Description
Axon guidance is required for the establishment of brain circuits. Whether much of the molecular basis of axon guidance is known from animal models, the molecular machinery coordinating axon growth and pathfinding in humans remains to be elucidated. The use of induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSC) from human donors has revolutionized in vitro studies of the human brain. iPSC can be differentiated into neuronal stem cells which can be used to generate neural tissue-like cultures, known as neurospheres, that reproduce, in many aspects, the cell types and molecules present in the brain. Here, we analyzed quantitative changes in the proteome of neurospheres during differentiation. Relative quantification was performed at early time points during differentiation using iTRAQ-based labeling and LC-MS/MS analysis. We identified 6438 proteins, from which 433 were downregulated and 479 were upregulated during differentiation. We show that human neurospheres have a molecular profile that correlates to the fetal brain. During differentiation, upregulated pathways are related to neuronal development and differentiation, cell adhesion and axonal guidance whereas cell proliferation pathways were downregulated. We developed a functional assay to check for neurite outgrowth in neurospheres and confirmed that neurite outgrowth potential is increased after 10 days of differentiation and is enhanced by increasing cyclic AMP levels. The proteins identified here represent a resource to monitor neurosphere differentiation and coupled to the neurite outgrowth assay can be used to functionally explore neurological disorders using human neurospheres as a model.

### Sample Protocol
Neurospheres were washed twice with cold PBS and centrifuged at 300 xg for 5 minutes. Residual liquid was removed before storage at -80 °C until further processed. Neurospheres formed from  3 x 106 cells were lysed with buffer containing 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 50 mM HEPES pH 8, 75 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride and protease/phosphatase inhibitor cocktails (Roche). The lysates were sonicated and centrifuged at 10,000 xg for 10 min at 4 °C. Total protein content in supernatant was quantified with Qubit® fluorometric assay (Invitrogen) following the manufacturer's instructions. Two independent biological replicates of each condition were used in the experiments. Proteins (100 μg each condition) were incubated with dithiothreitol at 10 mM final concentration  for 1 h at 30 °C; afterwards, iodoacetamide (final concentration of 40 mM) was added and the samples were incubated for 30 min in the dark at room temperature. Samples were diluted 10-fold with 50 mM HEPES pH 8 and incubated with sequence-grade modified Trypsin (Promega) at 1/50 trypsin/protein ratio for 16 h at 37 °C. The resultant peptides were further labeled using isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification (iTRAQ) 4-plex commercial reagent kit (AB Sciex) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Peptides from two biological replicates of each condition were labeled as follows: 114 and 116 isobaric tags for 3-day old neurospheres; 115 and 117 for 10-day old neurospheres. Labeled peptides were mixed in a unique tube and desalted with C-18 macro spin column (Harvard Apparatus) and then dried in a vacuum centrifuge. Dried peptides were pre-fractionated offline using hydrophilic interaction chromatography (HILIC) and each fraction or pool of fractions were analysed in three technical replicates.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed using Proteome Discoverer 2.4 Software (Thermo Scientific). Peptide identification was performed with the Sequest HT algorithm against the Human proteome database provided by Uniprot (http://www.uniprot.org/downloaded in 2020 26-04-2016). The searches were run with peptide mass tolerance of 10 ppm, MS/MS tolerance of 0.1 Da, tryptic cleavage specificity, 2 maximum missed cleavage sites, fixed modification of carbamidomethyl (Cys) and variable modification of iTRAQ 4-plex (Tyr, Lys and N-terminus), and oxidation (Met), false discovery rates (FDR) were obtained using Target Decoy PSM Validator node selecting identifications with a q-value equal or to less than 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Itraq-based quantitative proteomics, Neural differentiation, Neural stem cells (nsc), Human neurospheres, Human induced pluripotent stem cells, Axon guidance

### Affiliations
Proteomics Unit, Department of Biochemistry, Chemistry Institute, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro (UFRJ). Av. Athos da Silveira Ramos, 149 - bloco A 5° andar - Cidade Universitária da Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro - RJ, 21941-909, Brazil.
UFRJ

### Submitter
Michele Martins

### Lab Head
Dr Magno Junqueira
Proteomics Unit, Department of Biochemistry, Chemistry Institute, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro (UFRJ). Av. Athos da Silveira Ramos, 149 - bloco A 5° andar - Cidade Universitária da Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro - RJ, 21941-909, Brazil.


