### Accession
PXD015210

### Title
Tumour exosomal CEMIP protein promotes cancer cell colonization in brain metastasis

### Description
Development of effective therapies against brain metastasis is currently hindered by limitations in our understanding of the molecular mechanisms driving it. Here we define the contributions of tumour-secreted exosomes to brain metastatic colonization and demonstrate that pre-conditioning the brain microenvironment with exosomes from brain metastatic cells enhances cancer cell outgrowth. Proteomic analysis identified cell migration-inducing and hyaluronan-binding protein (CEMIP) as elevated in exosomes from brain metastatic, but not lung or bone metastatic cells. CEMIP depletion in tumour cells impaired brain metastasis, disrupting invasion and tumour cell association with the  brain vasculature, phenotypes rescued by pre-conditioning the brain microenvironment with CEMIP+ exosomes. Moreover, uptake of CEMIP+ exosomes by brain endothelial and microglial cells induced endothelial cell branching and inflammation in the perivascular niche by upregulating Ptgs2, Tnf, and Ccl/Cxcl 86 cytokines, known to promote brain vascular remodeling and metastasis. CEMIP was elevated in tumour tissues and exosomes from patients with brain metastasis and predicted brain metastasis progression and patient survival. Collectively, our findings suggest that targeting of exosomal CEMIP could constitute a future avenue for the prevention and treatment of brain metastasis.

### Sample Protocol
Denaturing in 8M UREA/DTT. Digestions w/LysC and trypsin. STAGE tip desalting. Analysis by high/high LCMS

### Data Protocol
Data were quantified and searched against Human Uniprot database (July 2014) using MaxQuant(version 1.5.0.9). Perseus software (version 1.5.0.9) was used for bioinformatics and  statistical analysis. Protein abundances were expressed as LFQ (label free quantitation)  values.

### Publication Abstract
The development of effective therapies against brain metastasis is currently hindered by limitations in our understanding of the molecular mechanisms driving it. Here we define the contributions of tumour-secreted exosomes to brain metastatic colonization and demonstrate that pre-conditioning the brain microenvironment with exosomes from brain metastatic cells enhances cancer cell outgrowth. Proteomic analysis identified cell migration-inducing and hyaluronan-binding protein (CEMIP) as elevated in exosomes from brain metastatic but not lung or bone metastatic cells. CEMIP depletion in tumour cells impaired brain metastasis, disrupting invasion and tumour cell association with the brain vasculature, phenotypes rescued by pre-conditioning the brain microenvironment with CEMIP<sup>+</sup> exosomes. Moreover, uptake of CEMIP<sup>+</sup> exosomes by brain endothelial and microglial cells induced endothelial cell branching and inflammation in the perivascular niche by upregulating the pro-inflammatory cytokines encoded by Ptgs2, Tnf and Ccl/Cxcl, known to promote brain vascular remodelling and metastasis. CEMIP was elevated in tumour tissues and exosomes from patients with brain metastasis and predicted brain metastasis progression and patient survival. Collectively, our findings suggest that targeting exosomal CEMIP could constitute a future avenue for the prevention and treatment of brain metastasis.

### Keywords
Tumour exosomal cemi brain metastasis

### Affiliations
THE ROCKEFELLER UNIVERSITY
Weill Cornell Medicine

### Submitter
henrik molina

### Lab Head
Dr Lyden, David
Weill Cornell Medicine


