### Accession
PXD009594

### Title
Loss of the Mia40a oxidoreductase leads to hepato-pancreatic insufficiency in the zebrafish

### Description
Development and function of tissues and organs are powered by the activity of mitochondria.  In humans, inherited genetic mutations that lead to progressive mitochondrial pathology often manifest during infancy and can lead to death, reflecting the indispensable nature of mitochondrial function and biogenesis.  Here, we describe a zebrafish mutant for the gene mia40a, the life-essential homologue of the evolutionarily conserved Mia40 oxidoreductase which drives the biogenesis of cysteine-rich mitochondrial proteins.  We report that mia40a mutant animals undergo progressive cellular respiration defects and develop enlarged mitochondria in skeletal muscles before their ultimate at the larval stage.  We generated a rich transcriptomic and proteomic resource that allowed us to identify abnormalities in the development of endodermal organs, in particular the liver and pancreas.  We identify the acinar cells of the exocrine pancreas to be severely affected by mutations in the MIA pathway.  Our data contribute to a better understanding of the molecular, cellular and organismal effects of mitochondrial deficiency, important for the accurate diagnosis and future treatment strategies of these diseases.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation  Protein was extracted from pools of 5 larvae (WT AB or mia40a waw1/waw1 siblings) at 5dpf or 8dpf in three biological replicates.  Larvae were lysed in SDS buffer (4% SDS in 0.1 M Tris/HCl, pH 7.6) using a sterile pestle to disrupt the tissue (Axygen).  Samples were heated to 70°C for 10 min.  DNA was sheared by sonication and cell debris was removed by centrifugation at 14.000 x g for 10 min.  The colorimetric 660 nm protein assay (Pierce) was used to determine the concentration of solubilized proteins in the supernatants.  Proteins were subsequently precipitated by addition of four volumes of ice-cold acetone and incubation at -20°C overnight, followed by pelleting at 14.000 x g for 10 min and washing of the pellet with 90% acetone.  Samples were dried to remove remaining acetone and dissolved in urea buffer (6 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 10 mM HEPES, pH 8.0).  In-solution digest was performed to enzymatically digest the proteins (Graumann, Hubner et al. 2008).  First, protein disulfide bonds were reduced with 4 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and cysteines subsequently alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide (IA).  Next, proteins were cleaved using Lys-C (50:1 protein-to-enzyme ratio) (Wako Chemicals GmbH) at room temperature for 3 hours, followed by overnight trypsination (50:1 protein-to-enzyme ratio) (Serva) at room temperature.  Peptide labeling by reductive dimethylation was performed as previously described (Boersema, Raijmakers et al. 2009).  The Fluorimetric Peptide Assay (Pierce) was used to estimate peptide concentration in trypsin-digested samples. Samples containing equal amounts of peptides (65 µg) were subjected to a dimethyl (in-solution) labeling protocol.  In brief, the N-termini and lysine residues were methylated for 1 h in RT by formaldehyde-H2 and cyanoborohydride (light, mia40a +/+) and formaldehyde-13C–D2 and cyanoborodeuteride (heavy, mia40a waw1/waw1), respectively (all reagents: Sigma).  Upon quenching the reaction by acidification, differentially labelled samples were mixed at a 1:1 ratio.  Resulting samples were fractionated using the high pH reversed-phase peptide fractionation kit (Pierce) according to the manufacturers’ protocol.  Liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry (LC/MS2).   Fractionated peptides were reconstituted in 10 µl of solvent A (0.1% formic acid) and subjected to mass spectrometric analysis in line to reversed phase capillary chromatography.  Peptides were separated using an UHPLC system (EASY-nLC 1000, ThermoFisher Scientific) and 20 cm in-house packed C18 silica columns (1.9 µm C18 beads, Dr.  Maisch GmbH) coupled to a QExactive HF orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) using an electrospray ionization source.  The gradient employed consisted of linearly increasing concentrations of solvent B (90% acetonitrile, 1% formic acid) over solvent A (5% acetonitrile, 1% formic acid) from 5% to 30% over 215 min, from 30% to 60%, from 60% to 95% and from 95% to 5% for 5 min each, followed by re-equilibration with 5% of solvent B.  The constant flow rate was set to 400 nl/min.  Full MS spectra were collected for a mass range of 300 to 1750 m/z with a resolution of 60,000 at 200 m/z.  The ion injection target was set to 3 x 106 and the maximum injection time limited to 20 ms.  Ions were fragmented by higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) using a normalized collision energy of 27, an isolation window width of 2.2 m/z and an ion injection target of 5 x 105 with a maximum injection time of 20 ms.  Precursors characterized with unassigned charge state and a charge state of 1 were excluded from selection for fragmentation.  The duration of dynamic exclusion was 20 s.  Resulting tandem mass spectra (MS/MS) were acquired with a resolution of 15,000 at 200 m/z using data dependent mode with a top 15 loop count.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis.   MS raw data were processed by MaxQuant software (1.6.0.1) (Cox and Mann 2008) using the Uniprot zebrafish database (as of 17.08.2017) containing 59064 entries and the following parameters: a maximum of two missed cleavages, mass tolerance of 4.5 ppm for the main search, trypsin as the digesting enzyme, carbamidomethylation of cysteines as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine as well as acetylation of the protein N-terminus as variable modifications.  For the dimethyl-labeled protein quantification, isotope labels were configured for peptide N-termini and lysine residues with a monoisotopic mass increase of 28.0313 and 36.0757 Da for the light and heavy labels, respectively.  Peptides with a minimum of seven amino acids and at least one unique peptide were included in the analysis.  MaxQuant was set to filter for 1% false discovery rate on the peptide and protein levels, both.  Only proteins with at least two peptides and one unique peptide were considered identified and included in further data analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Development and function of tissues and organs are powered by the activity of mitochondria. In humans, inherited genetic mutations that lead to progressive mitochondrial pathology often manifest during infancy and can lead to death, reflecting the indispensable nature of mitochondrial biogenesis and function. Here, we describe a zebrafish mutant for the gene mia40a (chchd4a), the life-essential homologue of the evolutionarily conserved Mia40 oxidoreductase which drives the biogenesis of cysteine-rich mitochondrial proteins. We report that mia40a mutant animals undergo progressive cellular respiration defects and develop enlarged mitochondria in skeletal muscles before their ultimate death at the larval stage. We generated a deep transcriptomic and proteomic resource that allowed us to identify abnormalities in the development and physiology of endodermal organs, in particular the liver and pancreas. We identify the acinar cells of the exocrine pancreas to be severely affected by mutations in the MIA pathway. Our data contribute to a better understanding of the molecular, cellular and organismal effects of mitochondrial deficiency, important for the accurate diagnosis and future treatment strategies of mitochondrial diseases.

### Keywords
Dimethyl labeling (dml), Mitochondria, Proteomics, Danio rerio, Biological, Mia pathway

### Affiliations
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry, Max Planck Institute for Heart and Lung Research, Bad Nauheim, Germany
Centre of New Technologies, University of Warsaw, S. Banacha 2c, 02-097 Warsaw, Poland

### Submitter
Anna Sokol

### Lab Head
Dr Agnieszka Chacinska
Centre of New Technologies, University of Warsaw, S. Banacha 2c, 02-097 Warsaw, Poland


