### Accession
PXD012328

### Title
Kbhb proteome in 293 cells

### Description
We performed an global Kbhb proteome screening and identified ~3000 Kbhb substrate.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from 293 cells and tryptic digested, and separated into 26 fractions. Pan anti-Kbhb antibody (PTM Biolabs, Chicago, IL) was used for the immunoaffinity enrichment. The enriched peptides were desalted by C18 ZipTip (EMD Millipore, Billerica, MA).

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data were searched by MaxQuant with integrated Andromeda search engine (v.1.3.0.5). All the data were searched against UniProt Human protein database (88,277 entries, http:// http://www.uniprot.org). Trypsin was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing a maximum of 2 missing cleavages. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was specified as fixed modification. Methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation, lysine acetylation, and lysine beta-hydroxybutyrylation were specified as variable modifications. FDR thresholds for protein, peptide and modification site were specified at 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Metabolism-mediated epigenetic changes represent an adapted mechanism for cellular signaling, in which lysine acetylation and methylation have been the historical focus of interest. We recently discovered a &#x3b2;-hydroxybutyrate-mediated epigenetic pathway that couples metabolism to gene expression. However, its regulatory enzymes and substrate proteins remain unknown, hindering its functional study. Here, we report that the acyltransferase p300 can catalyze the enzymatic addition of &#x3b2;-hydroxybutyrate to lysine (Kbhb), while histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) and HDAC2 enzymatically remove Kbhb. We demonstrate that p300-dependent histone Kbhb can directly mediate in vitro transcription. Moreover, a comprehensive analysis of Kbhb substrates in mammalian cells has identified 3248 Kbhb sites on 1397 substrate proteins. The dependence of histone Kbhb on p300 argues that enzyme-catalyzed acylation is the major mechanism for nuclear Kbhb. Our study thus reveals key regulatory elements for the Kbhb pathway, laying a foundation for studying its roles in diverse cellular processes.

### Keywords
Kbhb, Proteome, Ptms

### Affiliations
The University of Chicago
Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica

### Submitter
He Huang

### Lab Head
Dr Yingming Zhao
The University of Chicago


