### Accession
PXD004416

### Title
The activity of the Caenorhabditis elegans Aquarius helicase EMB-4 enables the nuclear RNAi machinery to engage nascent RNA

### Description
Germline small RNA pathways initiate silencing of repetitive elements in animals and an interplay of nuclear small RNAs and chromatin modifications maintain this silencing, protecting the germline from spreading of transposable elements. In C. elegans germline, nuclear argonaute protein HRDE-1 initiates the transcriptional silencing pathway that is crucial for long term and heritable silencing of genes and repetitive regions. Here, we show that HRDE-1 interacts with components of the splicing machinery and the exon-junction complex. One such factor is the conserved RNA helicase EMB-4/AQR that binds introns and recruits the exon-junction proteins to newly spliced RNA. Our data shows that EMB-4/AQR is required for the transcriptional silencing pathway initiated by HRDE-1 and it functions by removing the intronic barriers to silencing thorugh its helicase function.

### Sample Protocol
HRDE-1 co-immunoprecipitations Worms were harvested 24 hours post-L4 stage in 30 mM HEPES, 100 mM potassium acetate, 2 mM magnesium acetate and 10% glycerol (DROSO buffer). To lyse the worms, samples were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen as droplets and grinded to powder. Worm powder was then re-suspended in DROSO buffer supplemented with 0.01% NP-40, 2mM DTT and further lysed by bead-beating. Lysates were subsequently cleared by centrifugation. 2mg of proteins were used per IP at 4 mg/ml. 10ug antibody was added to the lysates and incubated overnight at 4oC with rotation. 30 ul of proteinA/G-agarose beads were incubated for 2 hours the next morning. Immunoprecipitants were washed 4 times with DROSO buffer and boiled with 2x sample buffer for 5 minutes to elute. Samples were then analysed by western blotting. Cat no for reagents: Normal rabbit IgG: santa cruz biotechnology, sc-2027 Anti-Ollas: Novusbio, NBP1-06713 Protein A/G-Plus agarose beads: santa cruz bioctechnology, sc-2003  SILAC Proteomics Bacterial and nematode growth conditions for SILAC experiments are previously described (Larance et al., 2011). Heavy (R10K8) labelled wild type animals and medium (R6K4) labelled hrde-1 mutant animals were grown to young adult stage, washed 3x with M9 buffer and lysed in native lysis buffer (10mM Tris-HCl pH7.5, 150mM NaCl, 0.5mM EDTA, 0.5% NP40, Roche complete protease inhibitor cocktail) by beat beating using zirconia beads and PreCelys instrument (6500rpm, 3X30s with 30s intervals at 4°C). The lysate was kept on ice for 30 min and centrifuged for 10 min at 16,000rcf at 4°C to remove insoluble material. BCA assay (Thermo Scientific) was used to determine protein concentration of the supernatant. 3-8mg of total protein has been used for immunoprecipitations (IP) with 3mg of anti-HRDE-1 antibody coupled dynabeads M270 (20ug antibody / mg beads) for 1hr at 4C. Beads were washed 3X with wash buffer (10mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 300mM NaCl, 0.5mM EDTA, Roche complete protease inhibitor cocktail) and equal amounts of beads from heavy and medium labelled IPs were mixed together prior to elution at the final wash. Elution was done by heating beads to 70°C for 10 min in LDS loading buffer.  In-gel protein tryptic digestion Protein bands of interest were excised and destained in 1 ml of 50% acetonitrile and 250 mM ammonium bicarbonate at room temperature for 45 min with shaking. The gel slice was dehydrated by incubation in 1 ml of 100% acetonitrile for 10 min at room temperature. All solution was carefully removed prior to the addition of 50ul MS-grade trypsin (Promega) (12.5 ng/μl) in 100 mM NH4HCO3 and incubation overnight at 37 °C. Peptides were extracted by the addition of 0.1 ml of 5% formic acid and incubation at 37 °C for 1 h. Peptides were further extracted by the addition of 0.1 ml of 100% acetonitrile and incubation at 37 °C for 1 h. The gel slice was completely dehydrated by the addition of 0.5 ml of 100% acetonitrile and incubation at 37 °C for 10 min. The entire supernatant was then vacuum-dried.  LC-MS/MS and analysis of spectra Using a Thermo Fisher Scientific Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano UHPLC, 15ul of peptides in 5% (vol/vol) formic acid (final volume ~10 μL) were injected onto an Acclaim PepMap C18 nano-trap column. After washing with 2% (vol/vol) acetonitrile, 0.1% (vol/vol) formic acid, peptides were resolved on a 50 cm × 75 μm C18 EasySpray reverse phase analytical column with integrated emitter over a gradient from 2% acetonitrile to 35% acetonitrile over 220 min with a flow rate of 200 nL min−1. The peptides were ionized by electrospray ionization at +2.0 kV. Tandem mass spectrometry analysis was carried out on a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using HCD fragmentation. The data-dependent acquisition method used acquired MS/MS spectra on the top 30 most abundant ions at any one point during the gradient.

### Data Protocol
The RAW data produced by the mass spectrometer were analysed using the MaxQuant quantitative proteomics software package  (22) (http://www.maxquant.org, version 1.3.0.5). The MaxQuant output has also been uploaded to the ProteomeXchange Consortium under the same identifier given above. This version of MaxQuant includes an integrated search engine, Andromeda. Peptide and Protein level identification were both set to a false discovery rate of 1% using a target-decoy based strategy. The database supplied to the search engine for peptide identifications was the combined C. elegans and E. coli Swissprot and Trembl databases downloaded on the 12th July 2012. The mass tolerance was set to 7 ppm for precursor ions and MS/MS mass tolerance was set at 20 ppm. Enzyme was set to trypsin (cleavage C-terminal to lysine and arginine) with up to 2 missed cleavages. Deamidation of Asn and Gln, oxidation of Met, pyro-Glu (with peptide N-term Gln), phosphorylation of Ser/Thr/Tyr, and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. N-ethylmaleimide on Cys was searched as a fixed modification. The output from MaxQuant provided peptide level data as well as protein group level data. We used the protein groups as defined by the Maxquant package (Cox and Mann 2008).  HRDE-1 SILAC IP experimental design and statistical rationale and data analysis Three biological replicates were performed for SILAC-IP analysis of HRDE-1 and this level of replication was chosen based upon the variance detected in previous experiments using SILAC-IP analysis  (Larance, 2012, MCP). To avoid disregarding low affinity binders, we used a low stringency cutoff such that a protein needed to have a H/M SILAC ratio >1 in two out of three biological replicates in our data analysis with MaxQuant to eliminate non-specific binding proteins. This yields excellent removal of environmental contaminants (keratins, trypsin, antibody, etc.) that do not incorporate stable isotopes.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Nematode, Silac, Emb-4

### Affiliations
University of Dundee

### Submitter
Mark Larance

### Lab Head
Dr Angus Lamond
University of Dundee


