### Accession
PXD033488

### Title
Human RIPK3 C-lobe phosphorylation is essential for necroptotic signaling

### Description
Necroptosis is a caspase-independent, pro-inflammatory mode of programmed cell death which relies on the activation of the terminal effector, MLKL, by the upstream protein kinase RIPK3. To mediate necroptosis, RIPK3 must stably interact with, and phosphorylate the pseudokinase domain of MLKL. While the precise molecular cue that prompts RIPK3 to activate MLKL is incompletely understood, it is known that RIPK3 is highly regulated by phosphorylation. Here, we sought to identify phosphorylation sites of RIPK3 and dissect their regulatory functions. Phosphoproteomics identified 21 phosphorylation sites in HT29 cells overexpressing human RIPK3. By comparing cells expressing wild-type and kinase-inactive D142N RIPK3, autophosphorylation sites and substrates of other cellular kinases were distinguished. Of these 21 phosphosites, extensive mutational analyses identified only pT224 and pS227 as crucial, synergistic sites for stable interaction with MLKL to promote necroptosis, while the recently reported activation loop phosphorylation at S164/T165 negatively regulate the kinase activity of RIPK3. Despite being able to phosphorylate MLKL to a similar or higher extent than the wild-type RIPK3, mutation of T224, S227, and RHIM in RIPK3 attenuated or compromised their abilities to mediate necroptosis. This finding highlights the stable recruitment of human MLKL by RIPK3 to the necrosome as an essential checkpoint in necroptosis signaling, which is independent from and precedes the phosphorylation of MLKL.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitation for mass spectrometry. HT29 RIPK3-/- cells reconstituted with either wild-type FLAG-RIPK3 or that carrying D142N mutation were seeded into 15 cm plates at 1 x107 cells/plate and left to attach overnight. On day 2, cells were treated with 500 ng/ml doxycycline overnight, before being treated with TNF (100 ng/mL), the Smac-mimetic compound A (500 nM) and the pan-caspase inhibitor IDN-6556 (5 μM) to induce necroptosis for 3 h. Cells were harvested in lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 1% v/v Triton X-100, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM PMSF, 2 mM Sodium Vanadate, 10 mM Sodium Fluoride, Complete protease inhibitor tablet (Roche)) and supernatants divided equally into two fractions. One fraction is spiked with 50 g/mL flag peptide as negative controls. Each cell lysate was mixed with 15 μl Anti-FLAG M2 Affinity Gel (Millipore) and allowed to bind for 1 hour at 4 ℃ with gentle agitation. Beads were washed in lysis buffer for 3 times, before performing two elutions with 50 μl of 0.5 mg/ml FLAG peptide in Dulbecco's phosphate-buffered saline (ThermoFisher Scientific). Eluates were stored at -80 ℃ until further processing. Five replicates were performed in total.   Recombinant protein preparation for mass spectrometry. Recombinant human MLKL pseudokinase domain (residue 190-471)24, human RIPK3 kinase domain (residue 1-316):MLKL pseudokinase domain (residue 190-471) complex, and human RIPK3 kinase domain (residue 2-316)37, were expressed and purified from Sf21 insect cells as previously described. After protein purification and determination of protein concentration by measuring absorbance at 280 nm, 20 μg purified RIPK3:MLKL complex, 10 μg RIPK3 kinase domain, and 10 μg MLKL pseudokinase domain were subjected to further processing by tryptic digest and filter-aided sample preparation.  Sample digestion and analysis by Mass spectrometry. Protein samples were resuspended in 6M Urea, 10 mM TCEP and 100 mM Tris-HCl pH7.0 and subjected to protein digestion using FASP (filter aided sample preparation) before lyophilisation to dryness using a SpeedVac AES 1010.

### Data Protocol
All raw files were analyzed by MaxQuant v1.6.15.0 software using the integrated Andromeda search engine. Experiment type was set as TIMS-DDA with no modification to default settings. Data was searched against the human Uniprot Reference Proteome with isoforms (downloaded March 2019) and a separate reverse decoy database using a strict trypsin specificity allowing up to 2 missed cleavages. The minimum required peptide length was set to 7 amino acids. Modifications: Carbamidomethylation of Cys was set as a fixed modification, while N-terminal acetylation of proteins, oxidation of Met and phosphorylation of Ser, Thr, and Tyr were set as variable modifications. First search peptide tolerance was set at 20ppm and main search set at 10ppm (other settings left as default). Matching between runs and LFQ quantitation was turned on. Maximum peptide mass [Da] was set at 8000. All other settings in group or global parameters were left as default.  Further analysis was performed using a custom pipeline developed in R (3.6.1), which utilizes the LFQ intensity values in the MaxQuant output file proteinGroups.txt. Proteins not found in at least 50% of the replicates in one group were removed. Missing values were imputed using a random normal distribution of values with the mean set at mean of the real distribution of values minus 1.8 s.d., and a s.d. of 0.3 times the s.d. of the distribution of the measured intensities. The probability of differential site modification expression between groups was calculated using the Limma R package (3.4.2).

### Publication Abstract
Necroptosis is a caspase-independent, pro-inflammatory mode of programmed cell death which relies on the activation of the terminal effector, MLKL, by the upstream protein kinase RIPK3. To mediate necroptosis, RIPK3 must stably interact with, and phosphorylate the pseudokinase domain of MLKL, although the precise molecular cues that provoke RIPK3 necroptotic signaling are incompletely understood. The recent finding that RIPK3 S227 phosphorylation and the occurrence of a stable RIPK3:MLKL complex in human cells prior to exposure to a necroptosis stimulus raises the possibility that additional, as-yet-unidentified phosphorylation events activate RIPK3 upon initiation of necroptosis signaling. Here, we sought to identify phosphorylation sites of RIPK3 and dissect their regulatory functions. Phosphoproteomics identified 21 phosphorylation sites in HT29 cells overexpressing human RIPK3. By comparing cells expressing wild-type and kinase-inactive D142N RIPK3, autophosphorylation sites and substrates of other cellular kinases were distinguished. Of these 21 phosphosites, mutational analyses identified only pT224 and pS227 as crucial, synergistic sites for stable interaction with MLKL to promote necroptosis, while the recently reported activation loop phosphorylation at S164/T165 negatively regulate the kinase activity of RIPK3. Despite being able to phosphorylate MLKL to a similar or higher extent than wild-type RIPK3, mutation of T224, S227, or the RHIM in RIPK3 attenuated necroptosis. This finding highlights the stable recruitment of human MLKL by RIPK3 to the necrosome as an essential checkpoint in necroptosis signaling, which is independent from and precedes the phosphorylation of MLKL.

### Keywords
Protein kinase, Pseudokinase, Ripk1, Tnf, Programmed necrosis

### Affiliations
Division Head, WEHI
WEHI

### Submitter
Jarrod Sandow

### Lab Head
Dr James Murphy
Division Head, WEHI


