### Accession
PXD036089

### Title
Mass Spectrometry identifies temporal changes and hallmarks of Delayed Recovery in the COVID19 Neutrophil proteomes part2

### Description
Mass Spectrometry identifies temporal changes and hallmarks of Delayed Recovery in the COVID19 Neutrophil proteomes MTD project_description High-resolution mass spectrometry and the parallel quantitative evaluation of thousands of proteins has been used to characterise the proteomes of peripheral blood neutrophils from >200 individuals. This work has comprehensively mapped neutrophil molecular changes associated with mild versus severe COVID19 and identified significant quantitative changes in more than 1700 proteins in neutrophils from patients hospitalised with COVID19 versus patients with non-COVID19 acute respiratory infections. The study identifies neutrophil protein signatures associated with COVID19 disease severity. The data also show that alterations in neutrophil proteomes can  persist in fully recovered patients and identify distinct neutrophil proteomes in recovered versus non recovered  patients. Our study provides novel insights into neutrophil responses during acute COVID-19  and reveal that altered neutrophil phenotypes persist in convalescent COVID19 infections.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for LC-MS To minimise batch effects of lysis buffers and conditions, stored cell pellets (5x106 cells) were lysed in batches of 50–100 samples. For this, 400µl of freshly-prepared lysis buffer was added (5% sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS), 10mM tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP) and 50mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB; pH8.5) in dH2O) at RT. Samples were vortexed at 20,000 rpm for 10s, twice, at 5 min intervals. Samples were shaken at 500 rpm at room temperature for 5 minutes and then boiled at 98 C for 5 minutes. Samples were allowed to cool before sonicating for 30 cycles (30 seconds on and 30 seconds off). 1 µl of benzonase (Millipore) was added to each sample and samples incubated at 37 C for 15 minutes. Samples were alkylated with the addition of iodoacetamide to a final concentration of 20 mM and incubated for 1 hour in the dark. During the alkylation step, protein was quantified using the EZQ assay (Thermo Fisher). 100 µg of protein was loaded onto S-Trap mini columns1 (Protifi) and processed following the manufacturer’s instructions. Digests were performed using 5 µg trypsin/sample at 47 C for 2 hours. Peptides were eluted from S-Trap columns firstly with 50mM ammonium bicarbonate, followed by 0.2% aqueous formic acid and lastly with 50% aqueous acetonitrile containing 0.2% formic acid. Eluted peptides were dried and suspended in 1 % formic acid and quantified using the CBQCA assay (Thermo Fisher).      Liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LC-MS) analysis  1.5 µg of peptide for each sample was analysed on a Q-Exactive-HF-X (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer coupled with a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RS (Thermo Scientific) as described previously2. The following LC buffers were used:  buffer A (0.1% formic acid in Milli-Q water (v/v)) and buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in Milli-Q water (v/v)). 1 μg aliquot of each sample was loaded at 15 μL/min onto a trap column (100 μm × 2 cm, PepMap nanoViper C18 column, 5 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific) equilibrated in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). The trap column was washed for 3 min at the same flow rate with 0.1% TFA then switched in-line with a Thermo Scientific, resolving C18 column (75 μm × 50 cm, PepMap RSLC C18 column, 2 μm, 100 Å). Peptides were eluted from the column at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min with a linear gradient from 3% buffer B to 6% buffer B in 5 min, then from 6% buffer B to 35% buffer B in 115 min, and finally to 80% buffer B within 7 min. The column was then washed with 80% buffer B for 4 min and re-equilibrated in 3% buffer B for 15 min. Two blanks were run between each sample to reduce carry-over. The column was kept at a constant temperature of 50o C at all times.     The data was acquired using an easy spray source operated in positive mode with spray voltage at 1.9 kV, the capillary temperature at 250° C and the funnel RF at 60° C.  The MS was operated in DIA mode using parameters previously described (Muntel et al, 2019) with some modifications. A scan cycle comprised a full MS scan (m/z range from 350-1650, with a maximum ion injection time of 20 ms, a resolution of 120 000 and automatic gain control (AGC) value of 5 × 106).  MS survey scan was followed by MS/MS DIA scan events using the following parameters: default charge state of 3, resolution 30.000, maximum ion injection time 55 ms, AGC 3 x 106, stepped normalized collision energy 25.5, 27 and 30, fixed first mass 200 m/z. The inclusion list (DIA windows) and windows widths are shown below. Data for both MS and MS/MS scans were acquired in profile mode. Mass accuracy was checked before the start of samples analysis.

### Data Protocol
The raw DIA data was processed using Spectronaut3 14. As the whole dataset was too large to analyse in a single cell batch, the data was processed in multiple batches. Firstly, a DIA library was generated from 106 DIA raw files using Pulsar, this library is included in the PRIDE submisison. Protein inference was performed using Trypsin/P as Digest Rule, and Specific as Digest Type. PSM, Peptide and Protein FDR were set to 0.01. The library consisted of 126,065 precursors, 70,531 Peptides and 5,901 Protein Groups. The data was subsequently searched against this library with the parameters personalised as follows: the decoy method was set to ‘Inverse’, the Precursor and Protein q-value Cutoff was set to 0.01, major grouping was set to ‘Protein Group Id’ and minor grouping to ‘Stripped Sequence’. The major group quantity was set to ‘Sum peptide quantity’ and the minor group quantity to ‘Sum precursor quantity’. The Major Group Top N and Minor Group Top N were unselected. The quantity MS-Level was set to ‘MS2’ and the quantity type set to ‘Area’, data filtering was set to ‘Qvalue’. Cross Run Normalization was disabled as was the imputation strategy. The data search was split into 6 batches of less than 75 raw files, and the results were then combine using the ‘SNE combine’ feature. The individual SNE files and the spectral library are included in the PRIDE4 submission under identified PXD

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Covid19, Proteomics, Interferon, Neutrophil, Dia, Mass spectrometry, Long covid

### Affiliations
Cell Signalling & Immunology, School of life Sciences, University of Dundee
University of Dundee

### Submitter
Alejandro Brenes

### Lab Head
Dr Doreen A Cantrell
Cell Signalling & Immunology, School of life Sciences, University of Dundee


