### Accession
PXD035084

### Title
A combination of molecular and clinical parameters provides a new strategy for high-grade serous ovarian cancer patient management

### Description
High-grade serous carcinoma (HGSC) is the most common and deadly subtype of ovarian cancer. Although most patients will initially respond to first-line treatment with a combination of surgery and platinum-based chemotherapy, up to a quarter will be resistant to treatment. We aimed to identify a new strategy to improve HGSC patient management at the time of cancer diagnosis (HGSC-1LTR). Using proteomics in ready-available HGSC tissues, we have identified a molecular signature (TKT, LAMC1 and FUCO) that combined with ready available clinical data is able to predict patient response to first-line treatment (AUC: 0.82). Identification of chemoresistance at the time of diagnosis can facilitate the study of alternative treatments aimed at improving patient outcome. In addition, those patients classified as chemosensitive could undergo standard care with platinum-based agents. Therefore, the HGSC-1LTR strategy can allow optimization of therapeutic decision making and individualize HGSC patients’ care

### Sample Protocol
Tissue sections were deparaffinated in 1 ml xylene (3 min at 50ºC) and washed twice with 1 ml absolute ethanol. Ethanol was removed completely and sections were left to air-dry. Samples were resuspended in lysis buffer (40 mM TrisHCl, 1% SDS, pH 8.2) and left to incubate at 99ºC for 30 min and 80ºC for 2 h in a thermomixer. Following centrifugation (20 min, RT, 15,000 g) the supernatant was quantified using BCA protein assay. Protein extracts were diluted 20 times with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate for digestion with trypsin (1:50 w:w, 37ºC, 8h, Promega cat # V5113). Detergent was removed from protein digests using the HIPPRTM Detergent Removal Spin Column Kit (Thermo Scientific, PN 88305) following manufacturer instructions. Peptide mix was acidified with formic acid 5% and desalted with a MicroSpin C18 column (The Nest Group, Inc). One microgram of digested sample was analysed by PRM using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an EASY-nanoLC 1000 UPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a 50-cm C18 chromatographic column. Peptide mixes were separated with a chromatographic gradient starting at 95% buffer A and 5% buffer B with a flow rate of 300 nL/min and going up to 25% buffer B and 75% A in 52 min and to 40% B and 60% A in 8 min (Buffer A: 0.1% formic acid in water and Buffer B: 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile). The Orbitrap Fusion Lumos was operated in positive ionization mode with an EASY-Spray nanosource at 2.4 kV and at a source temperature of 275 ºC. A scheduled PRM method was used for data acquisition with a quadrupole isolation window set to 1.4 m/z and MS2 scans over a mass range of m/z 340-950, with detection in the Orbitrap mass analyser at a 60K resolution. MS2 fragmentation was performed using HCD fragmentation at normalised collision energy of 30%, the AGC was set at 50,000 and the maximum injection time at 118 ms. The size of the scheduled window was 6 min and the maximum cycle time was 2.8 s

### Data Protocol
Product ion chromatographic traces corresponding to the targeted precursor peptides were evaluated with Skyline software. Peak areas were obtained for each product ion and data were log2-transformed prior to normalization and statistical analysis (Supplementary Table 6). Normalization relied on internal isotopically-labelled standard peptides which were used to equalise the median abundance of the internal standard peptides across all runs and then shift all endogenous areas in a run by a same amount. Protein abundance estimates were performed with the software package MSstats. Missing quantification values were imputed with a minimum estimated log2-transformed abundance for a given protein across runs.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics, Ovarian cancer

### Affiliations
UPF-CRG
UPF

### Submitter
Eva Borràs

### Lab Head
Dr Eduard Sabido
UPF-CRG


