### Accession
PXD040208

### Title
Kinase Selectivity Profiling of anti-MRSA Diarylimidazoles in HEK293 Cells

### Description
Antimicrobial resistance (AMR) is widely acknowledged as one of the most serious public health threats facing the world, yet the private sector finds it challenging to generate much-needed medicines. As an alternative discovery approach, a small array of diarylimidazoles was screened against the ESKAPE pathogens and the results made publicly available through the Open Source Antibiotics (OSA) consortium. Of the 18 compounds tested (at 32 μg/mL), 15 showed >90% growth inhibition activity against MRSA alone. In the subsequent hit-to-lead optimization of this chemotype, 147 new heterocyclic compounds containing the diarylimidazole and other core motifs were synthesized, tested against MRSA and structure-activity relationships identified. While potent, these compounds have moderate to high clearance rates and some associated toxicity. The best overall balance of parameters was found with OSA_975, a compound with good potency and solubility and slow clearance in rat hepatocytes. In this study, we used multiplexed kinase inhibitor beads/mass spectrometry (MIB/MS) to study the human molecular targets of these phenotypically active compounds.

### Sample Protocol
MIB/MS Kinase selectivity of OSA_820 and OSA_822 was profiled against HEK-293 cells using the previously described multiplexed kinase inhibitor beads/mass spectrometry (MIB/MS) Assay.1 Briefly, HEK-293 cells were lysed in MIB-MS lysis buffer by sonication followed by centrifugation and filtration. Protein quantification was performed with the Bradford Protein Assay. The filtered lysate was normalized to 1.2mg/mL across samples and treated with DMSO or inhibitors (0.1 µM or 1 µM) for 1 h on ice prior to increasing the salt concentration to 1 M NaCl. Samples passed through MIB-MS columns composed of a MIB mix made up of six immobilized kinase inhibitors. The MIB mix contained 14% V/V Shokat, PP58, Purvalanol B, and UNC2147A each and 22% V/V VI-16832 and CTx-0294885 each. MIB-MS columns were washed with MIB-MS high salt buffer, MIB-MS low salt buffer, and SDS wash buffer. Kinases were eluted twice from MIB columns by boiling for 15 minutes in 500 µL elution buffer. The resulting kinases were reduced, alkylated, and digested with sequencing grade porcine trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37 °C.  The resulting peptides underwent ethyl acetate extraction followed by cleaning with Pierce C-18 spin columns according to manufacturer’s protocol.  LC-MS/MS Analysis LC-MS/MS analysis was performed with a Thermo Scientific Easy nLC 1200 coupled to a Thermo Scientific Q Exactive HF Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer equipped with an Easy-Spray Nano Source. Tryptic peptides were chromatographically separated using an Easy-Spray C18 column (75 µm ID X 25cm, 2 µm particle size) and eluted over a 90 min method.  Separation was achieved with a gradient of 5-45% B at a 250 nl/min flow rate with mobile phase A (water with 0.1% formic acid, v/v) and mobile phase B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid, v/v).  The Q Exactive HF was operated in data-dependent mode where the 15 most intense precursors were selected for subsequent fragmentation.  Resolution for the precursor scan (m/z 375–1700) was set to 60,000 with a target value of 3 × 106 ions, 100 ms max IT.  MS/MS scans resolution was set to 15,000 with a target value of 1 × 105 ions, 100 ms max IT. The normalized collision energy was set to 27% for HCD.  Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s and precursors with unknown charge or a charge state of 1 and ≥ 7 were excluded. References: 1. McDonald, I. M., Grant, G. D., East, M. P., Gilbert, T. S. K., Wilkerson, E. M., Goldfarb, D., Beri, J., Herring, L. E., Vaziri, C., Cook, J. G., Emanuele, M. J., & Graves, L. M. (2020). Mass spectrometry-based selectivity profiling identifies a highly selective inhibitor of the kinase MELK that delays mitotic entry in cancer cells. The Journal of biological chemistry, 295(8), 2359–2374. https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.RA119.011083

### Data Protocol
Data Analysis:  For label-free quantitation, the raw data was imported into MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.10).2 The data was searched against a reviewed human database (Feb 2020, 20350 entries) from Uniprot and a contaminants database. Two missed cleavages were allowed for trypsin. Methionine oxidation and acetylation at the protein N-termini were set as dynamic modifications. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine residues was set as fixed modification. Match between runs was enabled with a 4 min and 20 min matching and alignment time windows, respectively. The resulting kinases were imported into Perseus (version 1.6.14.0) for further processing.3 Log2 transformation of LFQ intensity was performed.  Log2 fold change (FC) ratios were calculated using the Log2 LFQ intensities of drug treated sample compared to control. References: 2. Cox, J., & Mann, M. (2008). MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nature biotechnology, 26(12), 1367–1372. https://doi.org/10.1038/nbt.1511 3. Tyanova, S., Temu, T., Sinitcyn, P. et al. The Perseus computational platform for comprehensive analysis of (prote)omics data. Nat Methods 13, 731–740 (2016). https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.3901

### Publication Abstract
Antimicrobial resistance (AMR) is widely acknowledged as one of the most serious public health threats facing the world, yet the private sector finds it challenging to generate much-needed medicines. As an alternative discovery approach, a small array of diarylimidazoles was screened against the ESKAPE pathogens, and the results were made publicly available through the Open Source Antibiotics (OSA) consortium (https://github.com/opensourceantibiotics). Of the 18 compounds tested (at 32 &#x3bc;g/mL), 15 showed &gt;90% growth inhibition activity against methicillin-resistant <i>Staphylococcus aureus</i> (MRSA) alone. In the subsequent hit-to-lead optimization of this chemotype, 147 new heterocyclic compounds containing the diarylimidazole and other core motifs were synthesized and tested against MRSA, and their structure-activity relationships were identified. While potent, these compounds have moderate to high intrinsic clearance and some associated toxicity. The best overall balance of parameters was found with OSA_975, a compound with good potency, good solubility, and reduced intrinsic clearance in rat hepatocytes. We have progressed toward the knowledge of the molecular target of these phenotypically active compounds, with proteomic techniques suggesting TGFBR1 is potentially involved in the mechanism of action. Further development of these compounds toward antimicrobial medicines is available to anyone under the licensing terms of the project.

### Keywords
Hek293, Antimicrobials, Mib-ms, Kinases, Diarylimidazole

### Affiliations
Department of Pharmacology at UNC Chapel Hill
School of Pharmacy, University College London, 29-39 Brunswick Square, London WC1N 1AX

### Submitter
Aurora Cabrera

### Lab Head
Dr Matthew H. Todd
School of Pharmacy, University College London, 29-39 Brunswick Square, London WC1N 1AX


