### Accession
PXD043251

### Title
Isolated Mitochondria from Cold and TN Mice LC MS/MS

### Description
: Proteomic Analysis from isolated mitochondria from the brown fat of C57BL6/J mice that were exposed to cold or thermoneutrality for 8 days.

### Sample Protocol
Sample Processing: Brown fat pads were isolated and mechanically disrupted with scissors in a hypotonic mitochondrial isolation buffer (300mM sucrose, 5mM HEPES, 1mM EDTA, pH 7.2 with KOH). Minced brown adipose tissue was then lysed using a glass-Teflon homogenizer with a tight-fitting pestle using 15 strokes. Homogenates were filtered by 100 mM mesh filter and centrifuged at 600g to remove the nuclei and cellular debris. The supernatant was retained and centrifuged at 8,500g for 10 min to isolate mitochondria. Mitochondria were then lysed in radio immunoprecipitation buffer. Sample lysates were quantified by bicinchoninic protein assay and delivered to the Biotechnology Resource Center (BRC) at Cornell University for Tandem Mass-Tagged (TMT) shotgun-based quantitative proteomics. Briefly, proteins were denatured, reduced, cysteine blocked, and digested using the S-trap approach. The resulting trypic peptides were TMT-labeled, and pooled. The labeled peptides were then fractionated by high pH reverse phase chromatography by the Ultimate 3000 MDLC platform into 10 fractions. Then samples were subjected to nanoLC-MS/MS analysis using a reverse phase HPLC separation and NanoLC RP coupled with an Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a nano ion source.

### Data Protocol
Ion quantification and proteomic database searches were conducted using the Proteome Discoverer 2.4 software against the mouse database. All MS and MS/MS raw spectra were processed using Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (PD 2.4, Thermo) for reporter ion quantitation analysis. Statistics were calculated according to the Cold/TN mice in mitochondrial proteomics. Gene ontology was performed by EnrichR

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Nipsnap1, Cold, Thermoneutrality

### Affiliations
Cornell University

### Submitter
Qin Fu

### Lab Head
Dr Qin Fu
Cornell University


