### Accession
PXD029337

### Title
rat bladder LC-MS/MS proteomics

### Description
Objective: Bladder outlet obstruction (BOO) is a common urologic disease associated with poorly understood molecular mechanisms. This study aimed to investigate the possible involvements of circRNAs (circular RNAs) and circRNA-encoded proteins in BOO development.  Methods: The rat BOO model was established by the partial bladder outlet obstruction surgery. Differential expression of circRNA and protein profiles were characterized by deep RNA sequencing and iTRAQ quantitative proteomics respectively. Novel proteins encoded by circRNAs were predicted through ORF (open reading frame) selection using the GETORF software and verified by the mass spectrometry in proteomics, combined with the validation of their expressional alterations by quantitative RT-PCR.  Results: Totally 3051 circRNAs were differentially expressed in bladder tissues of rat BOO model with widespread genomic distributions, including 1414 up-regulated and 1637 down-regulated circRNAs. Our following quantitative proteomics revealed significant changes of 85 proteins in rat BOO model, which were enriched in multiple biological processes and signaling pathways such as the PPAR and Wnt pathways. Among them, 21 differentially expressed proteins were predicted to be encoded by circRNAs and showed consistent circRNA and protein levels in rat BOO model. The expression of five protein-encoding circRNA were further validated by quantitative RT-PCR and mass spectrometry.   Conclusion: The circRNA and protein profiles were substantially altered in rat BOO model, with great expressional changes of circRNA-encoded novel proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Separated rat bladder peptides were subsequently to LC-MS/MS (Liquid Chromatography-Tandem Mass Spectrometry) analysis using the AB SCIEX Triple-TOF 5600 mass spectrometer (AB SCIEX). Briefly, labelled rat bladder peptides were loaded onto the nano-LC HPLC system equipped with an EASY C18 column (75 µm * 100 mm; 3 µm; Thermo Fishier Scientific). Buffer A used for LC was 0.1% FA (formic acid), Buffer B was 0.1% FA solution containing 84% ACN, and the flow rate was set as 250nl/min. The concentration gradient of Buffer B during the elution was as follows: 0%, 100 min; 0%-35%, 8 min; 35%-100%, 12 min. Subsequently, the separate peptides were subjected to mass spectrometric analysis using the AB SCIEX Triple-TOF 5600 system. The time scale for MS was 120 min, which was carried out in the positive ion mode using the following settings: precursor ion scanning range: 300-1800 m/z; MS1 resolution: 70,000 at m/z 200; AGC target: 3e6; Number of scan ranges: 1; Dynamic exclusion: 40.0 s. Ten MS2 scans were performed after each full scan, and the MS2 Activation Type was HCD, using an isolation window of 2 m/z, an MS2 resolution of 17,500 at m/z 200, a normalized collision energy of 30 eV and an Underfill ratio of 0.1 %.

### Data Protocol
Raw data from LC-MS/MS in the form of wiff files were analyzed using the ProteinPilot (AB SCIEX; Version: 4.5) for protein identification and quantitation, which was searched against the UniProt proteome dataset (species: rat; downloaded on May 31, 2017) that containing 36663 entries. Unique peptides were characterized using an FDR (false discovery rate) of < 0.05. Significantly differentially expressed proteins were defined by the combination of fold change (>1.5) and P value (<0.05). The R language was used to perform the hierarchical clustering of differentially expressed proteins and volcano plot as well. Functional categorization of differentially expressed proteins based on GO (gene ontology) and KEGG (Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes) databases were done using the DAVID (Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery) website (https://david.ncifcrf.gov).

### Publication Abstract
Bladder outlet obstruction (BOO) is a common urologic disease associated with poorly understood molecular mechanisms. This study aimed to investigate the possible involvements of circRNAs (circular RNAs) and circRNA-encoded proteins in BOO development. The rat BOO model was established by the partial bladder outlet obstruction surgery. Differential expression of circRNA and protein profiles were characterized by deep RNA sequencing and iTRAQ quantitative proteomics respectively. Novel proteins encoded by circRNAs were predicted through ORF (open reading frame) selection using the GETORF software and verified by the mass spectrometry in proteomics, combined with the validation of their expressional alterations by quantitative RT-PCR. Totally 3,051 circRNAs were differentially expressed in bladder tissues of rat BOO model with widespread genomic distributions, including 1,414 up-regulated, and 1,637 down-regulated circRNAs. Our following quantitative proteomics revealed significant changes of 85 proteins in rat BOO model, which were enriched in multiple biological processes and signaling pathways such as the PPAR and Wnt pathways. Among them, 21 differentially expressed proteins were predicted to be encoded by circRNAs and showed consistent circRNA and protein levels in rat BOO model. The expression levels of five protein-encoding circRNAs were further validated by quantitative RT-PCR and mass spectrometry. The circRNA and protein profiles were substantially altered in rat BOO model, with great expressional changes of circRNA-encoded novel proteins.

### Keywords
Rat, Bladder, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Forevergen Biosciences Co.,Ltd
company

### Submitter
hongchang huang

### Lab Head
Dr hongchang huang
Forevergen Biosciences Co.,Ltd


