### Accession
PXD003779

### Title
Differential protein expression of midgut proteins of An. culicifacies species A and species B using iTRAQ approach

### Description
Background: Mosquito midgut is an important target for the host parasite interaction studies as this major immune organ plays a role in parasite growth, maturation and vector competence. Most important rural malaria vector of India is Proteomic approaches coupled with bioinformatics analysis have been used to study expression of functional proteins/enzymes of An. culicifacies susceptible and refractory species midgut in order to understand the mechanism of refractoriness that may help in contributing to unravel the host pathogen interactions Methodology/Principle findings: Basic shot gun proteomics approaches along with iTRAQ based differential studies followed by LC/MS/MS were employed to study the proteome of sugar fed An. culicifacies midgut. Further bioinformatics analysis was carried out using Gene ontology, SMART analysis, CELLO algorithm etc. Here proteins identified with iTRAQ Ratio more than 1.5 was considered up regulated and less than 0.67 were considered down regulated. Ratio from 1.5 – 0.67 were considered as moderate to no change.  Using these criteria we observed total 80 proteins in An. culicifacies midgut and when compared susceptible species against refractory species, total 30 proteins were found to be downregulated. 3 proteins were found to be upregulated in refractory species Conclusion/Significance: Based on the present data a significant increase in number of proteins in midgut of refractory An. culicifacies species B were found that may conclude that these proteins may be responsible for the inhibiting parasite growth and linked to the melanization of oocysts or parasite lysis mechanisms in natural populations of refractory mosquito. Hence the progress of our studies at protein level suggests that these identified annotated putative proteins/enzymes may help to explore natural vector-parasite systems and reveal valuable insights into the mechanism of refractoriness which in turn further useful for bringing of novel strategies for control of malaria.

### Sample Protocol
Mosquitoes   An. culicifacies species A (susceptible) and An. culicifacies species B (refractory) sugar fed mosquitoes of age 2-3 days old were used. These mosquitoes were reared and propagated in an insectary at National Institute of Malaria Research, Delhi under standard conditions as described by Adak et al (Adak et al., 1999). Adult mosquitoes were kept on water soaked raisins and 1% glucose soaked cotton pads as a source of energy.    Midgut collection and extract preparation  100 mosquitoes each of sugar fed An. culicifacies species A and An. culicifacies species B were collected for midgut dissection. Before dissection mosquitoes were chilled on ice for 15-20 minutes. Midgut tissue was isolated by a longitudinal section to the mosquito abdomen with the help of needle and pulled off the midgut using forceps. The dissected midguts were pooled in a 100 µl lysis buffer (50mM Tris, 150mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, 1 tablet of protease inhibitor). Pooled midgut extracts were then sonicated for 3 pulses for 15-20 sec on ice. Homogenized midgut tissue was centrifuged at 5000 rpm for 5-10 mins and supernatant was collected and stored at −800C in a fresh tube for further proteomic experiments. Total protein concentration was quantified by Bradford method (Sigma) using bovine serum albumin (BSA) as a standard.    ITRAQ labeling and LC/MS/MS Analysis  The midgut samples of both An. culicifacies susceptible species A and refractory species B were digested using trypsin and labeled with iTRAQ 8-plex reagent using 8 plex Protein Quantitation kit (AB Sciex) according to manufacturer’s protocol. Labeled peptides were mixed and cleaned by strong cation exchange (SCX) chromatography. The iTRAQ-labeled peptides were eluted from the SCX column using 250mM, 350mM and 450mM ammonium acetate. Eluted peptides were dried and re-dissolved in 2% acetonitrile in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. Samples were loaded onto a 100 micron x 20 mm Magic C18 100Å 5U reverse phase trap where they were desalted online before being separated using a 75 micron x 150 mm Magic C18 200Å 3U reverse phase column.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS Method LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using a standard top 15 method on Thermo Scientific Q-Exactive orbitrap mass spectrometer in conjunction with a Proxeon Easy-nLC II HPLC (Thermo Scientific) and Proxeon nanospray source. The digested peptides were reconstituted in 2% acetonitrile /0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and loaded onto a 100 micron x 20 mm Magic C18 100Å 5U reverse phase trap where they were desalted online before being separated using a 75 micron x 150 mm Magic C18 200Å 3U reverse phase column.  Data dependent MS/MS data was collected using a normalized higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) of 30. MS1 AGC was set to 1e6 with an ion trap time of 60ms, and MS2 AGC was set at 5e4 with 250ms ion trap time. Unassigned charge states and charge states of +1 and >+6 were excluded for MS/MS selection. A dynamic exclusion of 15s was set. Peptides were eluted using a flow rate of 300nL/min and a gradient of 0.1% formic acid (A) and 100% acetonitrile (B). A 180 minute gradient was ran with 5% to 35% B over 155 minutes, 35% to 80% B over 10 minutes, 80% B for 2 minute, 80%  to 5% B over 3 minute, and finally held at 5% B for 10 minutes.  Database search and bioinformatics  The MS/MS spectra were searched and protein identification was performed using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Scientific). For MS/MS search both MASCOT and SEQUEST search engines was used against the updated and most recent species-specific mosquito database (Anopehles sp, Aedes sp, Cules sp etc) from Uniprot/Swiss-prot protein sequence database. Search parameters used were: trypsin was the selected enzyme allowing for up to two missed cleavages per peptide; static modifications: Methylthio Cysteine, N-terminal iTRAQ 8-plex, and Lysine iTRAQ 8-plex; variable modification: oxidation of methionine; Precursor mass tolerance: 10 ppm, Fragment mass tolerance: 0.6 Da, Max Delta Cn: 0.05. False discovery rate (FDR) was calculated using decoy database. FDR is set for 95% confidence for peptide ID’s. Peptide-level filters (high confidence peptides only) were used in the search results. Significant protein was validated on the basis of sequence coverage, peptide number, Cross correlation (Xcorr). Downregulated and upregulated proteins were identified using iTRAQ Ratio. Ratio > 1.5 is said to be up regulated, < 0.67 said to be down regulated and ratio from 1.5 – 0.67 : Moderate to no change.   Bioinformatics analysis of identified functional putative proteins were carried out using gene ontology (GO) and SMART programme (http://smart.embl-heidelberg.de/). Cellular localization of identified putative proteins was assigned using CELLO (http://cello.life.nctu.edu.tw/). Network pathway for functional and protein interaction analyses as an evidence view was done using String 9.0 database (Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting Genes/Proteins) (http://string-db.org/).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Anopheles, Midgut, Itraq method, Lc/ms/ms

### Affiliations
Scientist F Protein Biochemistry and Structural Biology head
National Institute of Malaria Research

### Submitter
sonam vijay

### Lab Head
Dr Arun Sharma
Scientist F Protein Biochemistry and Structural Biology head


