### Accession
PXD035006

### Title
ZSWIM1 promotes the proliferation and metastasis of lung adenocarcinoma cells through the STK38/MEKK2/ERK1/2 axis

### Description
Investigating the functions of the proteins with no or less functional annotations is an important goal of C-HPP (Chromosome-centric Human Proteome Project). In this study, we investigated the function of such a protein, ZSWIM1 (C20orf162). Its expression is upregulated in lung adenocarcinoma compared with the adjacent normal tissues and negatively correlated with the overall survival (OS). Overexpressing ZSWIM1 markedly promotes the proliferation, migration, invasion as well as epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in lung adenocarcinoma cells, while knocking down ZSWIM1 functions oppositely. Immunoprecipitation-mass spectrometry (IP-MS) identified the interactome of ZSWIM1 and we verified the interaction of it with the top partner, STK38. ZSWIM1 antagonized the function of STK38. Mechanically, ZSWIM1 promoted the activation of MEKK2/ERK1/2 pathway through interacting with STK38, leading to the release of MEKK2. Taken together, ZSWIM1 can be annotated as an oncogene in lung adenocarcinoma, and the STK38/MEKK2/ERK1/2 axis mediates its promoting role on lung adenocarcinoma.

### Sample Protocol
Firstly, the standard co-IP assay was performed using the FLAG antibody to pull down FLAG-ZSWIM1, and the immune complex was separated by the SDS-PAGE. Then, the gel was stained with the Coomassie brilliant blue solution, and the protein bands in the full gel were sliced and extracted for tryptic in-gel digestion as described previously 6, 12. The tryptic digest was acidified to pH 3 using TFA and purified using C18 Microspin columns (Harvard Apparatus). The dried peptides were dissolved in 0.1 % formic acid which containing 2 % acetonitrile before mass spectrometer analysis. Dried peptides (2µg) containing 1 µL of standard peptides (iRT kit) (Biognosys, Ki-3002-2, Switzerland) were loaded on a nano trap column (Acclaim PepMap100 C18, Thermo Scientific, USA), and then separated on a PepMap C18 analytical column (Thermo Scientific, 164941, USA) at a flow rate of 600 nL/min. The effluent was directly electrosprayed into the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) operated with the data-dependent MS acquisition. The mass spectrometric parameters include: MS1 scan from 350 to 1500 m/z, 4e5 of the auto gain control (AGC), and 50 ms of the maximum injection time. MS2 scans at a resolution of 15k with an isolation window of 1.6 m/z, the higher collision energy dissociation (HCD) collision energy of 31%, the AGC of 5e4, and the maximal injection time of 50 ms, 3s of the cycle time with a dynamic exclusion of 30s.

### Data Protocol
the raw data were processed automatically by the Sequest HT engine of the Proteome Discoverer v2.1.1.21 against the database of Uniprot-Homo sapiens.FASTA (20180314) with the default settings. The false discovery rate for proteins and peptides determination was set to 0.01. At least two unique peptide identifications were required for the same protein.

### Publication Abstract
Investigating the functions of the proteins with no or less functional annotations is an important goal of the HPP (Human Proteome Project) Grand Project. In this study, we investigated the function of such a protein, ZSWIM1 (C20orf162), its gene located on chromosome 20. Its expression is upregulated in lung adenocarcinoma compared with the adjacent normal tissues and negatively correlated with the overall survival. Overexpressing ZSWIM1 markedly promotes the proliferation, migration, invasion as well as epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition in lung adenocarcinoma cells, while knocking down ZSWIM1 functions oppositely. The interactome of ZSWIM1 was identified by immunoprecipitation-mass spectrometry, and we verified the interaction of ZSWIM1 with the potential partner, STK38. ZSWIM1 antagonized the function of STK38. Mechanically, ZSWIM1 promoted the activation of MEKK2/ERK1/2 pathway through interacting with STK38, leading to the release of MEKK2. Taken together, ZSWIM1 can be annotated as an oncogene in lung adenocarcinoma, and the STK38/MEKK2/ERK1/2 axis mediates its promoting role in lung adenocarcinoma.

### Keywords
Erk1/2, Migration, Stk38, Lung adenocarcinoma, Proliferation, Zswim1

### Affiliations
Jinan university, guangzhou 
Jinan University, Guangzhou

### Submitter
Qionghua Lian

### Lab Head
Dr Xuejuan Gao
Jinan University, Guangzhou


