### Accession
PXD026974

### Title
Optimization of small extracellular vesicle isolation from expressed prostatic secretions in urine for in-depth proteomic analysis

### Description
Label-free quantitative proteomics was employed to compare the protein content of extracellular vesicles isolated by various differential centrifugation-based approaches from expressed prostatic secretions in urine (EPS-urine) from men with prostate cancer. The developed optimized approach improved EV purity by depleting the high-abundance urine protein Tamm-Horsfall protein (THP) and other common contaminants and achieved relative enrichment of prostate cancer-associated EV-resident proteins.

### Sample Protocol
EVs in PBS (15 µg protein) were concentrated in a SpeedVac (Thermo Fisher Scientific) to ~20 µL and prepared in Laemmli sample buffer (BioRad) containing 10 mM DTT. Samples were loaded into a 4-12% NuPAGE Bis-Tris gel (Invitrogen) and were run until samples traveled 2 cm in the gel. In gel digestion was performed as previously described [PMID: 21447706]. Peptides were extracted with 50% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid, dried in a SpeedVac, resuspended in 0.1% formic acid, and quantified with a NanoDrop One spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 205 nm). Tryptic peptides were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer coupled to an EASY nLC 1200 nano-flow UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For each injection, 2 µg of peptides were loaded onto a 2 cm C18 pre-column [75 µM diameter, 3 µM particle size, 100 Å pore size, Thermo Fisher 164946] before elution into a 50 cm analytical C18 column [75 µM diameter, 2 µM particle size, 100 Å pore size, Thermo Fisher ES803A]. LC solvents consisted of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid/water as buffer A and 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in 80% acetonitrile as buffer B. Peptides were separated using a 140-minute stepped linear gradient with 250 nl/min flow rate: 8-12% B for 5 min, 12-30% B for 100 min, 30-60% B for 20 min, 60-98% B for 5 min, hold 98% B for 10 min. Injections were performed in triplicate to yield 3 technical replicates per sample. At least two blank injections of buffer A (30-minute method) were included between sample injections to minimize sample carryover between consecutive runs. Data were acquired in data-dependent acquisition mode (DDA). MS1 data detection was performed in the Orbitrap under the following conditions: Resolution 120K, scan range (m/z) = 375-1500, maximum Injection time 50 ms and automatic gain control (AGC) of 4 x 10^5.  Precursor ions for MS2 scans were isolated in the quadrupole with a 1.6 m/z window and fragmented by HCD with a 35% collision energy prior to detection in the Ion Trap with a maximum injection time of 35 ms and an AGC of 1 x 10^4.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were searched using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.1.0) against a human Swiss-Prot database (20,215 entries , canonical database). Oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation were included as variable modifications, and carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification. The first search peptide tolerance was set to 20 ppm, and the main search peptide tolerance was set to 10 ppm. Trypsin was selected as the enzyme and a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. The minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids. The match between runs feature was enabled with default settings (match time window of 0.7 min and alignment time of 20 min). MaxQuant’s label-free quantification (LFQ) algorithm was enabled for the calculation of LFQ intensities, and the LFQ minimum ratio count was set to 2. False discovery rates (FDR) for peptide spectral matches (PSM) and protein identifications were set to 0.01 (1%). Default settings were used for the remaining options. Perseus software (version 1.6.2.2) was used for proteomic data statistical analysis. The MaxQuant proteingroups.txt file was imported and potential contaminants, reverse database hits, proteins only identified by site, and protein groups with fewer than two unique peptide identifications across raw files were removed. LFQ intensities of zero (missing values) were converted to NaN, and protein groups with at least two valid values (i.e. detection in at least two of three technical replicates) in at least one condition were selected for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
The isolation and subsequent molecular analysis of extracellular vesicles (EVs) derived from patient samples is a widely used strategy to understand vesicle biology and to facilitate biomarker discovery. Expressed prostatic secretions in urine are a tumor proximal fluid that has received significant attention as a source of potential prostate cancer (PCa) biomarkers for use in liquid biopsy protocols. Standard EV isolation methods like differential ultracentrifugation (dUC) co-isolate protein contaminants that mask lower-abundance proteins in typical mass spectrometry (MS) protocols. Further complicating the analysis of expressed prostatic secretions, uromodulin, also known as Tamm-Horsfall protein (THP), is present at high concentrations in urine. THP can form polymers that entrap EVs during purification, reducing yield. Disruption of THP polymer networks with dithiothreitol (DTT) can release trapped EVs, but smaller THP fibres co-isolate with EVs during subsequent ultracentrifugation. To resolve these challenges, we describe here a dUC method that incorporates THP polymer reduction and alkaline washing to improve EV isolation and deplete both THP and other common protein contaminants. When applied to human expressed prostatic secretions in urine, we achieved relative enrichment of known prostate and prostate cancer-associated EV-resident proteins. Our approach provides a promising strategy for global proteomic analyses of urinary EVs.

### Keywords
Human, Urine, Ev, Extracellular vesicles, Lc-ms/ms, Label-free, Eps-urine, Expressed prostatic secretions in urine, Prostate cancer

### Affiliations
Eastern Virginia Medical School
Leroy T. Canoles Jr. Cancer Research Center, Eastern Virginia Medical School, Norfolk, VA, USA. Department of Microbiology and Molecular Cell Biology, Eastern Virginia Medical School, Norfolk, VA, USA.

### Submitter
Vanessa Correll

### Lab Head
Dr O. John Semmes
Leroy T. Canoles Jr. Cancer Research Center, Eastern Virginia Medical School, Norfolk, VA, USA. Department of Microbiology and Molecular Cell Biology, Eastern Virginia Medical School, Norfolk, VA, USA.


