### Accession
PXD018505

### Title
Inclusion bodies formed by polyglutamine and poly(glycine-alanine) are enriched with distinct proteomes but converge in proteins that are risk factors for disease and involved in protein degradation

### Description
Poly(glycine-alanine) (polyGA) is one of the dipolypeptides expressed in Motor Neuron Disease caused by C9ORF72 mutations and accumulates as inclusion bodies in the brain of patients.  Superficially these inclusions are similar to those formed by polyglutamine (polyQ) in Huntington’s disease and both have been reported to form an amyloid-like structure suggesting they might aggregate via similar mechanisms to confer cellular dysfunction similarly. Here we investigated which endogenous proteins were enriched in these inclusions and whether aggregation-prone lengths of polyQ (Q97), in context of Huntingtin exon 1, shared similar patterns to aggregation-prone lengths of polyGA (101GA).  When co-expressed in the same cell, polyGA101 and HttQ97 inclusions adopted distinct phases with no overlap suggesting different endogenous proteins would be enriched.  Proteomic analyses indeed yielded distinct sets of endogenous proteins recruited into the inclusion types.  The proteosome, microtubules, Tric chaperones, and translational machinery were enriched in polyGA aggregates, whereas Dnaj chaperones, nuclear envelope and RNA splicing proteins were enriched in polyQ aggregates.  Both structures revealed a synergy of degradation machinery including proteins in the polyQ aggregates that are risk factors for other neurodegenerative diseases involving protein aggregation when mutated, which suggests a convergence point in the pathomechanisms of these diseases.

### Sample Protocol
Neuro-2a cells expressing either GFP-tagged 101xGA or Httex1 (97Q) in 3 replicates were harvested by pelleting (200 g; 5 min; 24 ºC) 24 h post transfection. Cell pellets were resuspended in lysis buffer (20 mM Tris, pH 8.0; 2 mM MgCl2; 150 mM NaCl; 1% (w/v) Triton X-100; 20 Units/mL Benzonase, Novagen);1x complete mini-protease cocktail; Roche) and then incubated for 30 min on ice. Lysates were diluted 2 times with PBS supplemented with protease inhibitor and aggregates were pelleted at 1000 xg for 6 minutes (this speed allowed recovery of more than 98% of aggregates). The aggregates were washed twice with 1 mL then resuspended in 1 ml PBS and subjected to fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) on a BD FACS Aria III instrument with an outlet nozzle of 100 µm in diameter. The flow rate was adjusted to ∼500 events/min, and EGFP fluorescence was monitored for sorting. Sorted aggregates were pelleted (12,000 g; 5 min; 4 °C), resuspended in PBS and washed 3 times by pelleting as above and resuspension in PBS. The final pellets were harvested by pelleting (21,000 g, 6 min, 4 ºC) and dissolved in 10 µL neat formic acid for 30 min at 37 ºC, vortexed for 20s and sonicated for 1 min three times then incubated in a shaking microfuge tube incubator (250 rpm, 30 min, 37 °C). Samples were neutralized to pH 7.0 by titration with unbuffered 3 M Tris. The protein concentration in the sample was determined by a Bradford assay using BSA as mass standard. A total protein of 200 µg were subjected to reduction with 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP), pH 8.0, and alkylation with 55 mM iodoacetamide for 45 min, followed by trypsin digestion (0.25 µg, 37 °C, overnight). The resultant peptides were then desalted by solid-phase extraction following acidification in 1% v/v formic acid; the cartridge (Oasis HLB 1 cc Vac Cartridge, product number 186000383, Waters Corp., Milford, Massachusetts) was pre-washed with 1 ml of 80% v/v acetonitrile (ACN) containing 0.1% v/v trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and equilibrated with 1.2 ml of 0.1% v/v TFA three times. Samples were then loaded on the cartridge and washed with 1.5 ml of 0.1% v/v TFA before being eluted with 0.8 ml of 80% v/v ACN containing 0.1% v/v TFA and collected in 1.5 ml microcentrifuge tubes. Peptides were then lyophilized by freeze drying (Virtis, SP Scientific, Warminster, PA). The peptides were resuspended in 100 μl distilled water and quantified using microBCA assay (Catalogue Number: 23235, Thermo Fischer Scientific) with BSA as the mass standard. Then, 10 µg of each sample (in a volume of 50 µl containing 100 mM TEAB) were differentially labelled by reductive dimethyl labelling using equal volumes (2 µl) of 4% light formaldehyde (CH2O) or 4% medium formaldehyde (CD2O, 98% D) and 0.6 M Sodium cyanoborohydride (NaCNBH3). The peptide solutions were incubated on an Eppendorf Thermomixer (Eppendorf South Pacific Pty. Ltd., Macquarie Park, NSW, Australia) at room temperature for 1 h. After quenching with 8 µl of 1% v/v ammonium hydroxide followed by 8 µl of neat formaldehyde, dimethyl-labelled peptides were mixed up in equal volumes. Peptides were analyzed by liquid chromatography-nano electrospray ionization-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-nESI-MS/MS) using Orbitrap Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) fitted with nanoflow reversed-phase-HPLC (Ultimate 3000 RSLC, Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The nano-LC system was equipped with an Acclaim Pepmap nano-trap column (Dionex - C18, 100 Å, 75 μm × 2 cm) and an Acclaim Pepmap RSLC analytical column (Dionex - C18, 100 Å, 75 μm × 50 cm, Thermo Fisher Scientific). For each LC-MS/MS experiment, 1 μg (whole proteome) or L (0.135 μg peptide) of the peptide mix was loaded onto the enrichment (trap) column at an isocratic flow of 5 μl/min of 3% CH3CN containing 0.1% formic acid for 6 min before the enrichment column is switched in-line with the analytical column. The eluents used for the LC were 5% DMSO/0.1% v/v formic acid (solvent A) and 100% CH3CN/5% DMSO/0.1% formic acid v/v. The gradient used was 3% B to 20% B for 95 min, 20% B to 40% B in 10 min, 40% B to 80% B in 5 min and maintained at 80% B for the final 5 min before equilibration for 10 min at 3% B prior to the next analysis. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive-ionization mode with spray voltage set at 1.9 kV and source temperature at 275 °C. Lockmass of 401.92272 from DMSO was used. The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent acquisition mode MS spectra scanning from m/z 400–1500 at 120,000 resolution with AGC target of 5e5. The “top speed” acquisition method mode (3 s cycle time) on the most intense precursor was used whereby peptide ions with charge states ≥2–5 were isolated with isolation window of 1.6 m/z and fragmented with high energy collision (HCD) mode with stepped collision energy of 30 ± 5%. Fragment ion spectra were acquired in Orbitrap at 15,000 resolution. Dynamic exclusion was activated for 30s.

### Data Protocol
Proteomic data analysis. Raw data were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer (version 2.3; Thermo Scientific) with the Mascot search engine (Matrix Science version 2.4.1). Database searches were conducted against the Swissprot Mus musculus database (version 2016_07; 16794 proteins) combined with common contaminant proteins. GFP sequence (UniProt ID: P42212) was also added to the database. Search was conducted with 20 ppm MS tolerance, 0.2 Da MS/MS tolerance and 2 missed cleavages allowed. Variable modifications were used for all experiments: oxidation (M), acetylation (Protein N-term), dimethylation (K), dimethylation (N-Term), 2H(4) dimethylation: (K) and 2H(4) dimethylation (N-term). A fixed modification used for all experiments was carbamidomethyl (C). The false discovery rate (FDR) was calculated by the Percolator node in Proteome Discoverer v 2.3.0.81 and was set to 0.5 % at the peptide identification level and 1 % at the protein identification level. Proteins were filtered for those containing at least two unique peptides in all n=3 biological replicates. Peptide quantitation was performed in Proteome Discoverer v.2.3 using the precursor ion quantifier node. Dimethyl labelled peptide pairs were established with a 2 ppm mass precision and a signal to noise threshold of 3. The retention time tolerance of isotope pattern multiplex was set to 0.6 min. Two single peak or missing channels were allowed for peptide identification. The protein abundance in each replicate was calculated by summation of the unique peptide abundances that were used for quantitation (light or medium derivatives). Missing quantitation values were replaced with a constant (zero-filling). The peptide group abundance and protein abundance values were normalized to account for sample loading. In brief, the total peptide abundances for each sample was calculated and the maximum sum for all files was determined. The normalization factor was the factor of the sum of the sample and the maximum sum in all files. After calculating the normalization factors, the Peptide and Protein Quantifier node normalized peptide group abundances and protein abundances by dividing abundances with the normalization factor over all samples. The normalized protein abundances were imported into Perseus software (v 1.6.5.0). Protein abundances were transformed to log2 scale. The samples were then grouped according to the replicates. For pairwise comparison of proteomes and determination of significant differences in protein abundances, paired Student's t test based on permutation-based FDR statistics was then applied (250 permutations; FDR = 0.05; S0 = 0.1). This was justified on the basis the proteomics abundance data is normally distributed.

### Publication Abstract
Poly(glycine-alanine) (polyGA) is one of the polydipeptides expressed in Frontotemporal Dementia and/or Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis 1 caused by C9ORF72 mutations and accumulates as inclusion bodies in the brain of patients. Superficially these inclusions are similar to those formed by polyglutamine (polyQ)-expanded Huntingtin exon 1 (Httex1) in Huntington's disease. Both have been reported to form an amyloid-like structure suggesting they might aggregate via similar mechanisms and therefore recruit the same repertoire of endogenous proteins. When co-expressed in the same cell, polyGA101 and Httex1(Q97) inclusions adopted immiscible phases suggesting different endogenous proteins would be enriched. Proteomic analyses identified 822 proteins in the inclusions. Only 7 were specific to polyGA and 4 specific to Httex1(Q97). Quantitation demonstrated distinct enrichment patterns for the proteins not specific to each inclusion type (up to ~8-fold normalized to total mass). The proteasome, microtubules, TriC chaperones, and translational machinery were enriched in polyGA aggregates, whereas Dnaj chaperones, nuclear envelope and RNA splicing proteins were enriched in Httex1(Q97) aggregates. Both structures revealed a collection of folding and degradation machinery including proteins in the Httex1(Q97) aggregates that are risk factors for other neurodegenerative diseases involving protein aggregation when mutated, which suggests a convergence point in the pathomechanisms of these diseases.

### Keywords
Proteosome, Huntington, Chaperones, Inclusions, C9orf72

### Affiliations
PhD student
NHMRC Senior Research Fellow Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology | Faculty of Medicine, Dentistry and Health Sciences Level 2 South, Bio21 Molecular Science and Biotechnology Institute, 30 Flemington Road The University of Melbourne, Victoria 3010 Australia

### Submitter
Mona Radwan

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Danny M. Hatters
NHMRC Senior Research Fellow Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology | Faculty of Medicine, Dentistry and Health Sciences Level 2 South, Bio21 Molecular Science and Biotechnology Institute, 30 Flemington Road The University of Melbourne, Victoria 3010 Australia


