### Accession
PXD032955

### Title
Identification of gamma-carboxyglutamic acid residues in mouse ERGP by LC-MS/MS.

### Description
Vitamin K (VK) is a micronutrient required for the gamma-carboxylation of secreted proteins. Clinical studies have recently implicated VK in the pathophysiology of diabetes. Our data indicate that rodent beta-cells lacking gamma-carboxylation fail to adapt their insulin secretion in response to glucose in the context of age-related insulin resistance or diet-induced beta-cell stress. In contrast, VK supplementation protects beta-cells from endoplasmic reticulum stress-induced apoptosis. Using anti-Gla immunoprecipitation, we identified ERGP as a putative gamma-carboxylated protein present in pancreatic beta-cells. We used LC-MS/MS to confirm the presence of gamma-carboxyglutamic residues in ERGP.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293 cells stably expressing mouse ERGP-3XFLAG were cultured in the presence of either VK1 or warfarin, an inhibitor of gamma-carboxylation, for at least 2 weeks, and carboxylated and uncarboxylated ERGP-3XFLAG were purified with anti-FLAG agarose beads.  On-bead proteins were first diluted in 2M Urea/50mM ammonium bicarbonate, and on-bead chymotrypsin digestion was performed overnight at 37C. The supernatants were acidified with trifluoroacetic acid and cleaned from residual detergents and reagents with MCX cartridges (Waters Oasis MCX 96-well Elution Plate) following the manufacturer’s instructions. After elution in 10% ammonium hydroxide /90% methanol (v/v), samples were dried with a Speed-vac, reconstituted under agitation for 15 min in 11 µL of 2%ACN-1%FA and loaded into a 75 μm i.d. × 150 mm, Self-Pack C18 column, installed in the Easy-nLC II system (Proxeon Biosystems). Peptides were loaded on-column and eluted with a two-slope gradient at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. Solvent B first increased from 1 to 32% in 86 min and then from 32 to 82% B in 22 min. The HPLC system was coupled to Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) through a Nanospray Flex Ion Source. Nanospray and S-lens voltages were set to 1.3-1.8 kV and 50 V, respectively. Capillary temperature was set to 250°C. Full scan MS survey spectra (m/z 320-1520) in profile mode were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 120,000 with a target value at 5e5. The most intense peptide ions were fragmented by ETD, CID and ETciD and analysed in the linear ion trap with a target value at 1e4. The peptide ion fragmentation parameters were as follow:  a reaction time of 120 ms, a reagent target of 2.0e5 and a maximum reagent injection time of 200 ms for ETD, a normalized collision energy of 32% for CID, calibrated charge dependent ETD parameters and normalized supplemental activation at 18% for ETciD. The duty cycle was set to 4 seconds and target ions selected for fragmentation were dynamically excluded for 30 sec after 2 MS/MS scan events. Uncarboxylated bacterially produced His-tagged ERGP was digested in-solution with chymotrypsin in the aforementioned conditions.

### Data Protocol
The peak list files were generated with Proteome Discoverer (version 2.1 or 2.4) using the following parameters: minimum mass set to 500 Da, maximum mass set to 6000 Da, no grouping of MS/MS spectra, precursor charge set to auto, and the minimum number of fragment ions set to 5. Protein database searching was performed with Mascot 2.6 (Matrix Science) against a user-defined mouse ERGP database. The mass tolerances for precursor and fragment ions were set to 10 ppm and 0.6 Da, respectively. A semi-specific search was performed using chymotrypsin as the enzyme allowing for up to 1 missed cleavage. Methionine oxidation and carboxylation of glutamic acid were specified as variable modifications. Data interpretation was performed using Scaffold (version 4.8).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Junctate, Mouse, Lc-ms/ms, Gamma-carboxylation, Vitamin k

### Affiliations
IRCM
Molecular Physiology Research Unit, Institut de Recherches Cliniques de Montréal, Montréal, Québec, Canada, H2W 1R7

### Submitter
Mathieu Ferron

### Lab Head
Dr Mathieu Ferron
Molecular Physiology Research Unit, Institut de Recherches Cliniques de Montréal, Montréal, Québec, Canada, H2W 1R7


