### Accession
PXD021984

### Title
Proteomic characterization of cerebrospinal fluid in patients with brain malignancies

### Description
Recent technological advances in molecular diagnostics through liquid biopsies hold the promise to monitor tumor evolution and treatment response of brain malignancies without the need of invasive surgical tissue accrual. Here, we implemented a new mass spectrometry-based protein analysis pipeline and analyzed 251 cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) samples from patients with four types of brain malignancies (glioblastoma, lymphoma, brain metastasis and meningeal disease) as well as from healthy individuals. On average, we identified 511 ± 121 proteins per CSF sample. 169 proteins were commonly deregulated in all four types of brain malignancies compared to controls. CSF analysis of glioblastoma patients identified two proteomic clusters that correlated with tumor size and patient survival. By integrating CSF data with proteomic analyses of matching glioma tumor tissue and primary glioma cells, we identified potential CSF biomarkers for glioblastoma, in particular chitinase-3-like protein 1 (CHI3L1) and glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP). Results were validated in a prospective cohort with 35 glioblastoma patients. Response of a patient with meningeal disease to combinatorial drug treatment was associated with a complex shift of the proteomic signature, including detection of potential drug resistance mechanisms. Therefore, proteomic analysis of CSF in brain malignancies has the potential to reveal biomarkers for diagnosis and therapy monitoring.

### Sample Protocol
Where not otherwise stated, chemicals were acquired from Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, USA. The volumes of CSF samples containing 100 µg of protein in a single experiment were equalized by adding 100 mmol/l ammonium bicarbonate (ABC). For protein reduction, dithiotreitol (DTT) was added to a final concentration of 1.4 mmol/l and samples were incubated at 600 rounds per minute (rpm) and 45°C for 30 min on a ThermoMixer (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany). For alkylation, iodoacetamide (IAA) was added to a final concentration of 2.75 mmol/l and samples were incubated at 600 rpm and 25°C for 30 min in the dark. Thereafter, proteins were precipitated to remove the solvent according to the Wessel-Flügge method (Wessel & Flügge 1984). Briefly, methanol and chloroform were added at a ratio of 4:1 and 1:1 to sample volume, respectively, and samples were centrifuged.  Next, water was added at a ratio of 3:1 to sample volume. After centrifuging, the aqueous top phase was removed, and methanol was added at a ratio of 3:1 to sample volume. Samples were again centrifuged, and the supernatant was discarded. Pellets were left to dry under a fume hood for 30 min. Centrifugation was done at 4,816 g and RT for 3, 3 and 5 min, respectively.  After precipitation, pellets were re-suspended in 142 µl ABC and incubated at 600 rpm and 25°C for 60 min. Sequencing-grade trypsin (Promaga, Madison, USA) was added at ratio of 1:25 to protein concentration and samples were incubated at 600 rpm and 37°C overnight. Enzymatic activity was stopped by adding 7.5 µl 20% trifluoracetic acid (TFA) (vol/vol). Samples were centrifuged at 16,200 g for 2 min and the supernatant containing peptides was retained and stored at -20°C. Peptide concentration was measured using the PierceTM Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA). 4 µg of peptides were prepared in 20 µl by adding 0.1% TFA.   nanoESI-LC-MS analysis  Nano-electrospray liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (nanoESI-LC-MS) analysis was performed on a Q ExactiveTM HF-X Hybrid Quadrupole-OrbitrapTM (RRID:SCR_018793) mass spectrometer coupled with an UltiMateTM 3000 RSLCnano System (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  500 ng peptides were loaded on a cartridge trap column, packed with Acclaim PepMap300 C18 (5 µm, 300 Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were subsequently eluted during a 120 min gradient by a stepwise increase of acetonitrile (ACN) eluent concentration from 2 to 95%, at a flow rate of 300 nL/min over a nanoEase MZ Peptide Analytical Column (300, 1.7 µm, 75 µm × 200 mm, Waters, Milford, USA). NanoESI ionization was performed at 2200 V. MS data was acquired using a data-dependent acquisition (DDA) strategy consisting of a full scan at a resolution of 120’000, followed by MS/MS scans of the top 15 most abundant peptide species at a resolution of 30’000. To minimize oversampling, dynamic exclusion time was set to 60 s.

### Data Protocol
We used the MaxQuant software package (version: 1.6.3.4, RRID:SCR_014485) to further processes MS raw data. Cysteine carbamidomethlyation was selected as a fixed modification, while methionine oxidation, glutamine deamidation and protein N-terminus acetylation were selected as variable modifications. Try/P was selected as protease, with a maximum of two missed cleavage sites allowed. First and main search mass tolerances were set to 20 and 6 parts per million (ppm), respectively. Matching between runs and label-free quantification (LFQ) were enabled. A false discovery rate of <1% was used to validate identifications on both the peptide and protein level.  In the resulting protein groups table, the contaminant annotation of serum albumin was manually removed. The protein groups table was then loaded into the Perseus suite (version: 1.6.2.3, RRID:SCR_015753). Decoy peptide hits, PTM identified proteins, remaining contaminants as well as hits not clearly assigned to a Swiss-Prot entry were removed to yield the number of identified proteins per sample. Intensities were log2 transformed and proteins identified in at least 70% of samples of a group, or in 70% of all samples for the discovery cohort, were retained for downstream analysis. Missing values were replaced by imputation. Matrices used to draw heatmaps were z normalized by subtracting the mean protein intensity from each value. Differentially expressed proteins between two groups were determined by two-sided unpaired Students’ t-test with a p-value of < 0.05 corrected with the Benjamini-Hochberg method for multiple testing in the Perseus suite.  Differentially expressed proteins were submitted to Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA, QIAGEN Inc., RRID:SCR_008653). The derived matrices were loaded into R (www.r-project.org, version: 3.6.0, RRID:SCR_001905) for further bioinformatic analysis.  The following R-based packages were downloaded either from CRAN (RRID_SCR_003005) or the Bioconductor (version, 3.10., RRID_SCR_006442) software project: The “ConsensusClusterPlus” package (from Bioconductor, version: 1.50.0) was used for k-means distance clustering. Furthermore, we used the “tSNE” (from CRAN, version 0.1.3) and “sva” (from Bioconductor, version 3.34.0) packages for dimensionality reduction, “ComplexHeatMap” (from Bioconductor, version: 2.2.0) and “circlize” (from CRAN, version: 0.4.8) to draw heatmaps  and for hierarchical clustering and “ggplot2” (from CRAN, version: 3.2.1.) to draw graphs. The random forest algorithm was calculated with the package “randomForest” (version 4.6-14). LFQ values from the glioma test cohort were used as the training dataset to predict the clustering of the glioma test cohort. Second, the model was applied on the LFQ value matrix of the glioma validation cohort and resulting cluster assignments were compared to the hierarchical clustering of the validation cohort.  Customized scripts are available upon request.

### Publication Abstract
Recent technological advances in molecular diagnostics through liquid biopsies hold the promise to repetitively monitor tumor evolution and treatment response of brain malignancies without the need of invasive surgical tissue accrual. Here, we implemented a mass spectrometry-based protein analysis pipeline which identified hundreds of proteins in 251 cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) samples from patients with four types of brain malignancies (glioblastoma, lymphoma, brain metastasis, and leptomeningeal disease [LMD]) and from healthy individuals with a focus on glioblastoma in a retrospective and confirmatory prospective observational study. CSF proteome deregulation via disruption of the blood brain barrier appeared to be largely conserved across brain tumor entities. CSF analysis of glioblastoma patients identified two proteomic clusters that correlated with tumor size and patient survival. By integrating CSF data with proteomic analyses of matching glioblastoma tumor tissue and primary glioblastoma cells, we identified potential CSF biomarkers for glioblastoma, in particular chitinase-3-like protein 1 (CHI3L1) and glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP). Key findings were validated in a prospective cohort consisting of 35 glioma patients. Finally, in LMD patients who frequently undergo repeated CSF work-up, we explored our proteomic pipeline as a mean to profile consecutive CSF samples. Therefore, proteomic analysis of CSF in brain malignancies has the potential to reveal biomarkers for diagnosis and therapy monitoring.

### Keywords
Brain tumor, Biomarker, Glioblastoma, Proteome

### Affiliations
DKFZ Heidelberg
Department of Neurology and Neurooncology Program of the National Center for Tumor Diseases, Heidelberg University Hospital, Germany

### Submitter
Tobias Kessker

### Lab Head
Dr Wolfgang Wick
Department of Neurology and Neurooncology Program of the National Center for Tumor Diseases, Heidelberg University Hospital, Germany


