### Accession
PXD000976

### Title
Rat Neural Stem Cell Phosphoproteome

### Description
Protein phosphorylation is central to the understanding of multiple cellular signaling pathways responsible for regulating the self-renewal and differentiation of neural stem cells (NSCs). Characterization of phosphoproteome is the key to unraveling the underlying mechanism. Here we performed a large-scale phosphoproteomic analysis of rat fetal NSCs (rfNSCs) utilizing strong cation exchange chromatography (SCX) prefractionation and citric acid-assisted two-step enrichment with TiO2 (CATSET) strategy followed by nanoLC-MS/MS analysis. Totally we identified 11,629 phosphosites on 3,046 phosphoproteins, among which 8,146 were class I phosphosites. More than 40% of class I phosphosites were novel when compared with PhosphoSitePlus database. Those phosphorylated proteins were implicated in modulation of diverse nuclear processes, such as transcription regulation, chromatin organization and chromatin modifications. Remarkably, 86 novel phosphosites on 43 transcriptional regulators were identified for the first time, including novel phosphorylation sites on Sox2 (S39) and Sox6 (S439, S442). Furthermore, bioinformatics analysis suggested that a large set of phosphosites were present on proteins involved in diverse pivotal signaling pathways associated with NSCs maintenance, and high degree of phosphorylation in insulin and Wnt signaling pathway was revealed. To our knowledge, this study presents the largest global survey of phosphorylation modification which revealed new regulation network in rfNSCs for the first time and may provide a valuable resource for studying the self-renewal and differentiation of NSCs.

### Sample Protocol
The rfNSCs were lysed in the buffer containing 100 mM Tris/HCl (pH 7.5), 100 mM dithiothreitol, protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma), 1 mM Na3VO4 and 10 mM NaF. After brief sonication on ice, the lysate was incubated with benzonase (Sigma) for 30 min at 37 °C to remove the nucleic acids. The protein concentration was determined by Bradford assay and proteins were digested with trypsin using filter aided sample preparation (FASP) method. Digested peptides were collected for SCX prefractionation and the concentration was determined by NanoDrop 1000 Spectrophotometer (ThermoFisher) at 280 nm absorption. The peptides were desalted by Sep-Pak tC18 cartridges (Waters) and dried in SpeedVac (ThermoFisher). About 2 mg peptides were dissolved in buffer A (5 mM KH2PO4, 0.05% FA, 30% ACN) and loaded onto an ?KTApurifier (GE Healthcare) for SCX. The peptide mixtures were eluted with a 0-35% gradient (buffer B, 5 mM KH2PO4, 350 mM KCl, 0.05% FA, 30% ACN) over 30 min. After combination, 12 fractions were collected and desalted for phosphopeptide enrichment. The multiply and mono-phosphorylated peptides were enriched separately by CATSET method as described. Briefly, peptides were dissolved in loading buffer (1 M citric acid, 2% TFA, 50% ACN). Precoated TiO2 beads were added into peptide solutions and incubated for 30 min with end-over-end rotation. The flow-through was collected and in which citric acid concentration was diluted to 50 mM and then incubated with TiO2 beads again. The phosphorylated peptides were eluted by 50% ACN and 5% ammonium solution50% ACN/5% NH4OH. Finally, 24 fractions of phosphorylated peptides were dried in SpeedVac (ThermoFisher). Peptide mixtures were suspended in 10 μl of 1% FA. Peptides were separated by online reversed-phase nanoscale capillary liquid chromatography (Microtech Scientific). Five microliter sample was autosampled directly onto a 100 μm * 20 mm traping column packed with a reversed-phase Aqua resin (5 μm, 200 ?, Phenomenex). The peptide mixtures were separated on a 100 μm * 10 cm in-house made fused silica emitter packed with a reversed-phase ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ resin (3 μm, 120 ?, Dr. Maisch GmbH) with a 100 minutes linear gradient from 5% to 30% ACN. The data-dependent mass spectra were acquired with the LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source (ThermoFisher). An electrospray voltage of 2.0 kV was applied. The instrument control was performed with Tune 2.6.0 and Xcalibur 2.2 (ThermoFisher). Full scan MS spectra (from m/z 300-1650) were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer with resolution 60,000 at 400 m/z after accumulation to a target value of 1, 000, 000, followed by up to 5 most intense ions per scan with charge states ≥2 were selected for CID fragmentation in the linear ion trap with normalized collision energy of 40% after accumulation to a target value of 3,000. The peptides with detected neutral loss of phosphoric acid (97.97, 48.88, and 32.66 m/z) were selected for additional multi-stage activation, which means the MS3 spectrum of neutral loss peptide was combined with the MS2 spectrum to make a pseudo-MS3 spectrum and searched with the same parameters as MS2 spectrum.

### Data Protocol
All raw files were processed with MaxQuant computational proteomics platform (Version 1.3.0.5). Data were searched against the UniProt knowledgebase of Rattus norvegicus (Release 2012_07, 37,327 sequences) supplemented with frequently observed contaminants and concatenated with reversed copies of all sequences. Searching parameters were set as follows: enzyme was trypsin; up to 2 missed cleavages; carbamidomethyl cysteine as fixed modification; methionine oxidation, phosphorylation (S, T, Y), and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. The precursor ion mass tolerance of first search and main search were set to 20 and 6 ppm respectively, and MS/MS tolerance was 0.5 Da. Peptides with a minimum length of seven amino acids were considered for phosphopeptide identification. The false discovery rates (FDR) for peptides and proteins and sites were set at 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Wnt signal pathway, Neural stem cell, Phosphoproteome, Tio2

### Affiliations
Peking University Institute of Systems Biomedicine
State Key Laboratory of Protein and Plant Gene Research, College of Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China

### Submitter
Xuyang Zhao

### Lab Head
Dr Jianguo Ji
State Key Laboratory of Protein and Plant Gene Research, College of Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China


