### Accession
PXD019051

### Title
Acute effects of Salbutamol in Mouse Kidney Distal Convoluted Tubules (mpkDCT) Cells

### Description
The sympathetic nervous system (SNS) plays a central role in blood pressure regulation. Recent studies have shown that cells of the distal convoluted tubule (DCT) can be stimulated directly via the beta-adrenergic receptor resulting in activation of the NaCl cotransporter NCC. Whether these effects are mediated by the beta1- or beta2-adrenergic receptor is unclear, and the acute signaling cascades rapidly activated by beta-adrenergic receptor stimulation in the DCT are unknown. Here in this study, we aim to identify the rapid salbutamol-mediated (beta2-adrenergic receptor) signaling in the DCT by looking at global protein phosphorylation changes in the mpkDCT cells.

### Sample Protocol
mpkDCT cells were grown in SILAC advanced DMEM/F12-Flex media (Invitrogen) in light (12C6 lysine, 12C6 14N4 arginine) or heavy (13C6 lysine, 13C6 15N4 arginine) conditions for at least 21 days (3-5 passages). Mass spectrometry (MS) confirmed labeling efficiency >98%. Cells were grown on filter plates until a fully confluent polarized monolayer was formed. Cells were incubated in phenol red and serum-free media for overnight before salbutamol (10 µM) was added to both apical and basolateral compartments of experimental group. After 5 min, 15 min, 30 min cells were washed in ice-cold PBS and scraped in cell lysis buffer (8 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 50 mM Tris, pH 7.5) containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Halt protease and phosphatase inhibitors). Protein concentrations were determined by Bradford assay (Biorad) and equal quantities of differentially labelled control or treated samples were pooled. 1 mg lysates from each biological replicate (light and heavy combined) were reduced, alkylated, pre-digested by lys-c, and followed by trypsin digestion overnight. Peptides were then desalted using Oasis PRiME HLB columns (Waters) and fractionated under high pH by reverse phase columns. The phosphopeptides from each fraction were enriched using home-made TiO2 columns. Samples were analyzed by Thermo EASY nLC 1000 coupled with QExactive, through an EASY-Spray nano-electrospray ion source. Peptides were 1st trapped by a pre-column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 75um*2cm, nanoviper fitting, C18, 3um, 100Å, Thermo Scientific) and then further separated by an analytical column (EASY-Spray column PepMap, 75um*25cm, nanoviper fitting, C18, 3um, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific). Buffer A was 0.1% FA and Buffer B was 100% ACN/0.1% FA. A gradient of 0-35% B was used for peptide separation. The MS was set up as full scan (m/z 300-1700) at the resolution of 70,000; 10 data dependent MS/MS scans at the resolution of 17,500; HCD collision energy, 30%; dynamic exclusion time 30s; charge state exclusion for less than +1 and above +8. 5 replicates were analyzed for all time points. Both the phospho-enriched fractions and the flow through fractions were analyzed.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer (version 2.1, Thermo Scientific) database searching using SEQUEST and MASCOT on a uniprot mouse protein database (mouse.protein.v20180126.fasta). The parameters for Proteome Discoverer were: precursor mass tolerance, 10 ppm; fragment mass tolerance, 0.02 Da; maximum miss cleavage, 2; static modification, cysteine carbamidomethylation; variable modification: N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation, 10+ for heavy arginine, 6+ for heavy lysine, phosphorylation of STY. Percolator was used to calculate false discovery rate (FDR); phosphoRS 3.0 algorithm was used to evaluate phosphorylation site probability score. Only rank 1 and high confidence (with a target false discovery rate (FDR) q-value below 0.01) peptides were included in the final results. The quantification of each unique peptide was obtained from the sum of raw values from different peptide charge states, different fractions and different technical replicates. The heavy-to-light ratio of each unique peptide was calculated from the summed raw intensities of heavy or light peptide from different charge states and different fractions. Quantification ratios were normalized based on median log2 ratios of each biological replicate. Normalization was done using all peptides, including phosphopeptides and non-phosphopeptides. Phosphopeptides identified and quantified in at least three replicates were subjected to Benjamini-Hochberg (BH) FDR analysis, and those that passed the 1% BH-FDR threshold were retained for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
The thiazide-sensitive sodium-chloride-cotransporter (NCC) in the kidney distal convoluted tubule (DCT) plays an essential role in sodium and potassium homeostasis. Here, we demonstrate that NCC activity is increased by the &#x3b2;2-adrenoceptor agonist salbutamol, a drug prevalently used to treat asthma. Relative to &#x3b2;1-adrenergic receptors, the &#x3b2;2-adrenergic receptors were greatly enriched in mouse DCT cells. In mice, administration of salbutamol increased NCC phosphorylation (indicating increased activity) within 30 minutes but also caused hypokalemia, which also increases NCC phosphorylation. In ex&#xa0;vivo kidney slices and isolated tubules, salbutamol increased NCC phosphorylation in the pharmacologically relevant range of 0.01-10 &#x3bc;M, an effect observed after 15 minutes and maintained at 60 minutes. Inhibition of the inwardly rectifying potassium channel (Kir) 4.1 or the downstream with-no-lysine kinases (WNKs) and STE20/SPS1-related proline alanine-rich kinase (SPAK) pathway greatly attenuated, but did not prevent, salbutamol-induced NCC phosphorylation. Salbutamol increased cAMP in tubules, kidney slices and mpkDCT cells (model of DCT). Phosphoproteomics indicated that protein phosphatase 1 (PP1) was a key upstream regulator of salbutamol effects. A role for PP1 and the PP1 inhibitor 1 (I1) was confirmed in tubules using inhibitors of PP1 or kidney slices from I1 knockout mice. On normal and high salt diets, salbutamol infusion increased systolic blood pressure, but this increase was normalized by thiazide suggesting a role for NCC. Thus, &#x3b2;2-adrenergic receptor signaling modulates NCC activity via I1/PP1 and WNK-dependent pathways, and chronic salbutamol administration may be a risk factor for hypertension.

### Keywords
Hypertention, Beta2-adrenergic receptor, Dct, Salbutamol

### Affiliations
Institute of biomedicine, Aarhus University
Institute of biomedicine, AU

### Submitter
Lei Cheng

### Lab Head
Dr Robert A. Fenton
Institute of biomedicine, Aarhus University


