### Accession
PXD026782

### Title
Serpinc1 acts as a tumor suppressor in hepatocellular carcinoma through inducing apoptosis and blocking macrophage polarization in an ubiquitin-proteasome manner

### Description
Serpinc1 is a serine protease inhibitor in the coagulation cascade, but its role in tumor biology remains obscure. Here, we report an unexpected role of serpinc1 in suppression of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). In HCC patients, the mRNA and protein expression of serpinc1 is up-regulated, which is negatively correlated with tumor grade, and has a better prognosis than patients with low serpinc1. In addition, patients with high expression of serpinc1 generally have a better tumor immune microenvironment, accompanied by changes in multiple immune cells and mediators. In particular, tumor-promoting M2 macrophages are negatively correlated with serpinc1 expression and the prognosis of HCC patients. In vitro experiments further show that overexpression of serpinc1 inhibits the growth of HCC cells (HepG2 and SMMC7721) by inducing apoptosis. Accordingly, cell co-culture experiments reveal the direct role of serpinc1-overexpressed HCC cells in inhibiting the formation of M2 macrophages. Subsequent unbiased quantitative proteomic and ubiquitinome analysis identify that multiple poly-ubiquitination of proteins involved in signal pathways (such as autophagy, apoptosis, lactate metabolism, and VEGF signaling) are regulated by serpinc1. Overall, these findings establish a serpinc1-dependent ubiquitin-proteasome system to control apoptosis and anti-tumor immunity.

### Sample Protocol
1 cell treatments  HepG2 cells were randomly seeded in 60 mm dishes for 24 h, and then transducted with control or serpinc1 over-expression lentivirus (MOI=100). Fresh media was replaced appropriately after transfection for 12 h and selected stabled expression cells by 1µg/mL puromycin after 48 h transduction. The stabled expression cells were collected for LC-MS.  2 Protein extraction  Samples were sonicated three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, 50μM  PR-619). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the supernatant was collected and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions.  3 Trypsin digestion  For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 200 mM TEAB to urea concentration less than 2M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion.  4  Affinity enrichment of ubiqutin peptides Pan antibody-based PTM enrichment: To enrich modified peptides, tryptic peptides dissolved in NETN buffer (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0) were incubated with pre-washed antibody beads (Lot number 2942831572974455024, PTM Bio) at 4°C overnight with gentle shaking. Then the beads were washed four times with NETN buffer and twice with H2O. The bound peptides were eluted from the beads with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. Finally, the eluted fractions were combined and vacuum-dried. For LC-MS/MS analysis, the resulting peptides were desalted with C18 ZipTips (Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Bio-material-based PTM enrichment.  5 LC-MS/MS analysis The tryptic peptides were dissolved in solvent A (0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile in water), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (25-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). Peptides were separated with a gradient from 9% to 25% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 90% acetonitrile) over 36 min, 25% to 35% in 18min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 500 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1200 UPLC system . The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM HF-X (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.2 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1600 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 15,000. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4 ions/s. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
For Database Search, the resulting MS/MS data were analyzed using MaxQuant search engine (v1.6.15.0). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the Homo_sapiens_9606_SP_20201214.fasta (20395 sequences) concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The minimum length of peptide segment is set to 7 amino acid residues and the maximum modification number of peptide segment is set to 5. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 4.5 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification, and acetylation on protein N-terminal, oxidation on Met, and ubiqutin on Lys were specified as variable modifications. The quantitative method was label free, FDR of protein identification and PSM identification was adjusted to < 1%. Motif analysis was carried out by MoMo (v5.0.2, http://meme-suite.org/tools/momo). Additionally, the annotations of GO and Domain were performed via InterProScan (v.5.14-53.0, http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/), and KEGG annotation were performed by KAAS (v.2.0, http://www.genome.jp/kaas-bin/kaas_main) and KEGG Mapper (V2.5, http://www.kegg.jp/kegg/mapper.html). Subcellular localization was predicted by Wolfsort (v.0.2, http://www.genscript.com/psort/wolf_psort.html) and CELLO (v.2.5, http://cello.life.nctu.edu.tw/). Enrichment analysis was carried through the Perl module (v.1.31, https://metacpan.org/pod/Text::NSP::Measures::2D::Fisher). The heatmap of enrichment was predicted via R Package pheatmap (v.2.0.3, https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/cluster/). Besides, the interaction of protein was analyzed by R package networkD3 (v.0.4, https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/networkD3/).

### Publication Abstract
Serpinc1 is a serine protease inhibitor in the coagulation cascade, but its role in tumor biology remains obscure. Here, we report an unexpected role of serpinc1 in suppression of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). In HCC patients, the mRNA and protein expression of serpinc1 is upregulated, which is negatively correlated with tumor grade, and has a better prognosis than patients with low serpinc1. In addition, patients with high expression of serpinc1 generally have a better tumor immune microenvironment, accompanied by changes in multiple immune cells and mediators. In particular, tumor-promoting M2 macrophages are negatively correlated with serpinc1 expression and the prognosis of HCC patients. <i>In vitro</i> experiments further show that overexpression of serpinc1 inhibits the growth of HCC cells (HepG2 and SMMC7721) by inducing apoptosis. Accordingly, cell co-culture experiments reveal the direct role of serpinc1-overexpressed HCC cells in inhibiting the formation of M2 macrophages. Subsequent unbiased quantitative proteomic and ubiquitinome analyses identify that multiple poly-ubiquitination of proteins involved in signal pathways (such as autophagy, apoptosis, lactate metabolism, and VEGF signaling) are regulated by serpinc1. Overall, these findings establish a serpinc1-dependent ubiquitin-proteasome system to control apoptosis and antitumor immunity.

### Keywords
Serpinc1; apoptosis; liver cancer; macrophage; ubiquitination

### Affiliations
Guangzhou Institute of Pediatrics, Guangzhou Women and Children’s Medical Center, Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, 510623, China
Guangzhou women and children' medical center

### Submitter
Xu Dacai

### Lab Head
Dr Dacai Xu
Guangzhou Institute of Pediatrics, Guangzhou Women and Children’s Medical Center, Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, 510623, China


