### Accession
PXD042840

### Title
human rhabdomyosarcoma cells LC-MSMS

### Description
Label-free quantitative proteomics was performed to analysis the changes of protein expression between control group and PZH treated group after EV-A71 infection.

### Sample Protocol
RD cells were infected with EV-A71 (MOI=0.01) for 1 h. After 1 h of infection, the culture media was replaced with DMEM supplemented with 2% FBS and 20 μg/mL PZH or PBS for 24 h. Then the media was removed and RD cells were washed with PBS. The cells were lysed with 8M urea by sonication. The lysate was centrifuged at 12000 g for 20min at 4 ℃ and the supernatant was collected. The protein concentration was determined by Bradford assay. Diphtheria-tetanus toxoid (DTT) was added to the protein (final concentration 5 mM) and was incubated at 37 ℃ for 1 h. Then iodoacetamide was added to reach the final concentration 10 mM and was incubated in the dark at room temperature for 45 min. The samples were diluted with 4 volumes of 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution, trypsin was added in a ratio of 1 to 50 and was incubated overnight at 37 ℃. The protein was desalted using C18 columns.   The LC-MS/MS was performed on RIGOL L-3000 HPLC system coupled to Thermo Q-Exactive HFX mass spectrometry with Nanospray Flex™ (NSI) ion source (2.4 kV nebulizing gas flow, 275 ℃). The mobile phase A (water and 0.1% formic acid) and phase B (80% acetone and 0.1% formic acid) was prepared. The sample was dissolved in phase A and eluted from a 12 cm x 150 μm ID C18 column at a flow rate of 600 nL/min. The data-dependent acquisition mode was selected with full scan ranging from m/z 350 to 1500. The resolution of MS1 was 120000 (200 m/z) and the automatic gain control (AGC) target value was 3×106. The top 40 parent ions with high ionic strength were fragmented by Higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) at a collision energy of 27%, with resolution of 15000 (200 m/z) and an AGC target value of 5×104 for MS2.

### Data Protocol
The result data was processed by Proteome Discoverer 2.4 and protein database was from Uniprot. The search parameters are set as follows: Enzyme (Trypsin), Static Modification (Carbamidomethyl(C)), Dynamic Modification (M Oxidation（15.995Da）；Acetyl (Protein N-terminal)), Precursor ion mass tolerance (± 15ppm), Fragment ion mass tolerance (± 0.02Da) and Max Missed Cleavages (2).

### Publication Abstract
Hand, foot, and mouth disease (HFMD) caused by enterovirus A71 (EV-A71) infection, currently lacks specific preventive and therapeutic interventions. Here, we demonstrated that Pien Tze Huang (PZH) could dose-dependently inhibit EV-A71 replication at the cellular level, resulting in significant reductions in EV-A71 virus protein 1 (VP1) expression and viral yields in Vero and human rhabdomyosarcoma cells. More importantly, we confirmed that PZH could protect mice from EV-A71 infection for the first time, with Ribavirin serving as a positive control. PZH treatment reduced EV-A71 VP1 protein expression, viral yields in infected muscles, and improved muscle pathology. Additionally, we conducted a preliminary mechanism study using quantitative proteomics. The results suggested that the suppression of the PI3K/AKT/mTOR and NF-&#x3ba;B signaling pathways may contribute to the anti-EV-A71 activity of PZH. These findings provide strong evidence supporting the potential therapeutic application of PZH for EV-A71 infection management.

### Keywords
Human rhabdomyosarcoma cells, Lc-msms

### Affiliations
Institute of Medical Biotechnology,Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences
Institute of Medicinal Biotechnology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, 1 Tiantan xili, Beijing 100050, China

### Submitter
Fenbei Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Wang yanxiang
Institute of Medicinal Biotechnology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, 1 Tiantan xili, Beijing 100050, China


