### Accession
PXD002894

### Title
Phosphoproteome analysis

### Description
The phosphatase activirty and dephosphorylation site are determined by using the recombinant protein. After treatment, the level of specific phosphorylation site is decreased. Also, the biological importance is evaluated through a serial of experiments including immunoprecipitation, western blotting, etc,. Based on this workflow, it is possible to determine the tyrosine phosphorylation since the sample complexity is reduced. This finding suggested this phosphatase play a key role in phosphoregulation.

### Sample Protocol
The recombinant and novel phosphatase is used for dephosphorylation. After dephosphorylation, its substrate is pull down and digested with trypsin. Then, the phosphopeptide is enriched with Fe-IMAC and analysed by LC-MS/MS. The label free quantification function is activated under MaxQuant software.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant free software is used for both phoshopeptide identification and quantification. The default parameter is used for orbitrap detection mode.

### Publication Abstract
Regulation of Shp2, a tyrosine phosphatase, critically influences the development of various diseases. Its role in epithelial lumenogenesis is not clear. Here we show that oncogenic Shp2 dephosphorylates Tuba to decrease Cdc42 activation, leading to the abnormal multi-lumen formation of epithelial cells. HDAC6 suppression reverses oncogenic Shp2-induced multiple apical domains and spindle mis-orientation during division in cysts to acquire normal lumenogenesis. Intriguingly, Cdc42 activity is not restored in this rescued process. We present evidence that simultaneous reduction in myosin II and ERK1/2 activity by HDAC6 inhibition is responsible for the reversion. In HER2-positive breast cancer cells, Shp2 also mediates Cdc42 repression, and HDAC6 inhibition or co-suppression of ERK/myosin II promotes normal epithelial lumen phenotype without increasing Cdc42 activity. Our data suggest a mechanism of epithelial disorganization by Shp2 deregulation, and reveal the cellular context where HDAC6 suppression is capable of establishing normal epithelial lumenogenesis independent of Cdc42.

### Keywords
Tyrosine phosphorylation, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Institute of Chemistry, Academia Sinica
Department of Microbiology, College of Medicine, National Taiwan Unversity

### Submitter
Miao-Hsia Lin

### Lab Head
Dr miao-hsia lin
Institute of Chemistry, Academia Sinica


