### Accession
PXD026019

### Title
Protein composition of photosystem II supercomplexes from Arabidopsis

### Description
The goal of the project is to identify the protein composition (and their relative abundance) of selected photosystem II supercomplexes separated using mild CN-PAGE from thylakoid membranes of Arabidopsis plants lacking proteins i) Lhcb6, ii) Lhcb3, iii) Lhcb3 and Lhcb6. These proteomic data will be compared with single-particle EM data obtained in the separated photosystem II supercomplexes.

### Sample Protocol
Photosystem II supercomplexes were manually excised from CN-PAGE gels and after washing procedures each band was subjected to protein reduction (10mM DTT in 25mM NaHCO3, 45 min, 56°C, 750 rpm) and alkylation (55mM IAA in 25mM NaHCO3; 30 min, RT, 750 rpm) step. After further washing by 50% ACN/NaHCO3 and pure ACN, the gel pieces were incubated with 125 ng trypsin (sequencing grade; Promega) in 50mM NaHCO3. The digestion was performed for 2 h at 40 °C in a thermomixer (Eppendorf ThermoMixer® C, 750 rpm). Tryptic peptides were extracted into LC-MS vials by 2.5% formic acid (FA) in 50% ACN with addition of polyethylene glycol (20,000; final concentration 0.001%) (Stejskal et al 2013) and concentrated in a SpeedVac concentrator (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  LC-MS/MS analyses of all peptides were done using RSLCnano system (UltiMate™ 3000, Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected to Orbitrap Q Exactive HF-X spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Prior to LC separation, tryptic digests were online concentrated and desalted using trapping column (Acclaim™ PepMap™ 100 C18, dimensions 300 μm × 5 mm, 5 μm particles; Thermo Fisher Scientific, part number 160454). After washing of trapping column with 0.1% FA, the peptides were eluted in backflush mode (flow 300 nl.min-1) from the trapping column onto an analytical column (Acclaim™ PepMap™ 100 C18, 3 μm particles, 75 μm × 500 mm; Thermo Fisher Scientific, part number 164570) by 50 min gradient program (3-80% of mobile phase B; mobile phase A: 0.1% FA in water; mobile phase B: 0.1% FA in 80% ACN). Equilibration of the trapping and analytical column was done prior to sample injection to sample loop. The analytical column outlet was directly connected to the Digital PicoView 550 (New Objective) ion source with sheath gas option and SilicaTip emitter (New Objective; FS360-20-15-N-20-C12) utilization. ABIRD (Active Background Ion Reduction Device, ESI Source Solutions) was installed.  MS data were acquired in a data-dependent strategy selecting up to top 15 precursors based on precursor abundance in the survey scan (m/z 350–2,000). The resolution of the survey scan was 120,000 (at m/z 200) with a target value of 3×106 ions and maximum injection time of 250 ms. MS/MS spectra were acquired with a target value of 50,000 and resolution of 15,000 (at m/z 200). The maximum injection time for MS/MS was 250 ms. Dynamic exclusion was enabled for 30 s after one MS/MS spectra acquisition. The isolation window for MS/MS fragmentation was set to 1.2 m/z.

### Data Protocol
For data evaluation, we used MaxQuant software (v1.6.17) (Cox J, Mann M. 2008) with inbuild Andromeda search engine (Cox J et al 2011). Searches for samples of thylakoid membranes and photosystem II supercomplexes were done separately. Both against protein databases of Arabidopsis thaliana (27,500 protein sequences, version from 12-08-2020, downloaded from ftp://ftp.uniprot.org/pub/databases/uniprot/current_release/knowledgebase/reference_proteomes/Eukaryota/UP000006548_3702.fasta.gz) and cRAP contaminants (112 sequences, version from 22-11-2018, downloaded from http://www.thegpm.org/crap). Modifications for all database searches were set as follows: oxidation (M), deamidation (N, Q), and acetylation (Protein N-term) as variable modifications, with carbamidomethylation (C) as a fixed modification. Enzyme specificity was tryptic with two permissible miscleavages. Only peptides and proteins with false discovery rate threshold under 0.01 were considered. Relative protein abundance was assessed using protein intensities calculated by MaxQuant. Intensities of reported proteins were further evaluated using software container environment (https://github.com/OmicsWorkflows/KNIME_docker_vnc; version 4.1.3a). Processing workflow is available upon request: it covers decoy hits and removal of contaminant protein groups (cRAP), protein group intensities log2 transformation and normalization (median). For the purpose of this article, protein groups reported by MaxQuant are referred to as proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Supercomplexes, Lhcb6, Arabidopsis, Lhcb3, Proteome, Photosystem ii

### Affiliations
Central European Institute of Technology, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic
Masaryk University

### Submitter
Pavel Roudnický

### Lab Head
Dr Zbyněk Zdráhal
Central European Institute of Technology, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic


