### Accession
PXD009756

### Title
The cochaperone CHIP marks Hsp70- and Hsp90-bound substrates for degradation through a very flexible mechanism

### Description
Some molecular chaperones are involved not only in assisting the folding of proteins but also, given appropriate conditions, in their degradation. This is the case of Hsp70 and Hsp90, which  direct their bound substrate to degradation through ubiquitination in concert with the cochaperone CHIP –an E3 ligase.  We have generated complexes between the chaperone (Hsp70 or Hsp90), the cochaperone CHIP and, as substrate, a p53 variant containing the GST protein (p53-TMGST). The two ternary complexes (Hsp70:p53-TMGST:CHIP and Hsp90:p53-TMGST:CHIP) ubiquitinate the substrate, and this is done with a higher efficiency than in the absence of the chaperones. The 3D structures of the two complexes, obtained using a combination of cryoelectron microscopy and crosslinking mass spectrometry, show the substrate located between the chaperone and the cochaperone, which suggests an ubiquitination mechanism. Both complexes are extremely flexible, which is crucial for the ubiquitination process.

### Sample Protocol
Protein complexes were incubated in incubation buffer (100 mM KCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 20 mM HEPES pH 7.4) with nucleotide (when p53-TMGST was present) at various molar ratios. The mixture was loaded onto a Superdex 200 Increase 10/300 GL column (GE Healthcare) equilibrated with the same buffer (room temperature).  The protein composition of each fraction was determined by SDS-PAGE followed by Coomassie blue staining. Proteins were incubated in conditions as for gel filtration analysis (40 min, room temperature) and then loaded on Superdex 200 Increase 10/300 GL.  The complex was detected by SDS-PAGE and selected fractions were crosslinked by adding fresh 3,3'-dithiobis sulfosuccinimidyl propionate (DTSSP) or disuccinimidyl sulfoxide (DSSO) (both from Thermo Scientific; 2 mM final concentration) and incubated (30 min, room temperature). DSSO samples were further fractionated after tryptic digestion by strong cation exchange chromatography (SCX; Empore cation-SR, 3M) in a procedure adapted from Rappsilber et al. (2007).  The peptides were eluted with six C2H7NO2 concentrations (40, 80, 120, 160, 200, 500 mM). Each fraction was desalted on a MicroSpin C18 before to LC-MS/MS analysis.  Unfractionated samples (1 µg) and 30% of each SCX fraction were analysed in an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer coupled to an EasyLC nano-HPLC (Proxeon). Peptides were loaded directly onto the analytical column and separated by reverse-phase chromatography on a 50-cm column (inner diameter of 75 µm) packed with 2 µm C18 particles. Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid and solvent B was 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. Chromatography was carried out at a flow rate of 300 nl/min starting with 5% buffer B and gradually increasing to 30% buffer B in 52 min and to 40% buffer B in 8 min. After each analysis, the column was washed for 10 min with 5% buffer A and 95% buffer B. The mass spectrometer was operated in DDAdata-dependent mode and full MS scans withwere acquired in the Orbitrap readoutmass analyzer at a resolution of 60,000 were acquired over a mass range of m/z 375-1500. Auto gain control (AGC) was set to 4E5 and dynamic exclusion to 30 seconds. In each cycle of DDA analysis, the most intense ions with charges 3 to 8 above a threshold ion count of 1Ee4 were selected for CID fragmentation at normalized collision energy of 25% with detection in the Orbitrap. Subsequently, mass-difference-dependent HCD-MS3 acquisitions were triggered if a unique mass difference of 31.9721Da was observed in the CID-MS2 spectrum. In the MS3 the HCD normalized collision energy was set at 30% and the detection was carried out in the linear iIon trap. All data were acquired with Xcalibur software v3.0.63.. The mass spectrometer was controlled with Xcalibur software (v3.0.63; Thermo Fisher).

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer software suite (v2.2, Thermo Fisher Scientific), Mascot search engine (v2.5, Matrix Science; Perkins wet al., 1999)) and XlinkX (v2.2; Liu et al., 2015; 2017) were used for peptide identification. Samples were searched against a SwissProt database containing entries corresponding to Human (# entries 20.810), a list of common contaminants and all the corresponding decoy entries. Trypsin was chosen as enzyme and a maximum of three miscleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation (C) was set as a fixed modification, whereas oxidation (M), acetylation (N-terminal) and DSSO modifications (K) (monolink ammonia and water quench, intra-peptide and inter-peptide crosslink) were used as variable modifications. Searches were performed using a peptide tolerance of 7 ppm, and a product ion tolerance of 20 mmu. Crosslinked peptides were filtered at an FDR < 1% and an XlinkX score > 80 and all the MS2 spectra of the resulting peptides were manually revised.

### Publication Abstract
Some molecular chaperones are involved not only in assisting the folding of proteins but also, given appropriate conditions, in their degradation. This is the case for Hsp70 and Hsp90 which, in concert with the cochaperone CHIP, direct their bound substrate to degradation through ubiquitination. We generated complexes between the chaperones (Hsp70 or Hsp90), the cochaperone CHIP and, as substrate, a p53 variant containing the GST protein (p53-TMGST). Both ternary complexes (Hsp70:p53-TMGST:CHIP and Hsp90:p53-TMGST:CHIP) ubiquitinated the substrate at a higher efficiency than in the absence of the chaperones. The 3D structures of the two complexes, obtained using a combination of cryoelectron microscopy and crosslinking mass spectrometry, showed the substrate located between the chaperone and the cochaperone, suggesting a ubiquitination mechanism in which the chaperone-bound substrate is presented to CHIP. These complexes are inherently flexible, which is important for the ubiquitination process.

### Keywords
Shotgun, Crosslinking, Dsso

### Affiliations
Centre de Regulació Genòmica
CRG/UPF Proteomics Unit, Center for Genomics Regulation, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, 08003 Barcelona, Spain.

### Submitter
Eduard Sabidó

### Lab Head
Dr Eduard Sabidó
CRG/UPF Proteomics Unit, Center for Genomics Regulation, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, 08003 Barcelona, Spain.


