### Accession
PXD037797

### Title
PARK15/FBXO7 is dispensable for PINK1/Parkin mitophagy in iNeurons and HeLa cell systems

### Description
The protein kinase PINK1 and ubiquitin ligase Parkin promote removal of damaged mitochondria via a feed-forward mechanism involving ubiquitin (Ub) phosphorylation (pUb), Parkin activation, and ubiquitylation of mitochondrial outer membrane proteins to support recruitment of mitophagy receptors. The ubiquitin ligase substrate receptor FBXO7/PARK15 is mutated in an early-onset parkinsonian-pyramidal syndrome. Previous studies have proposed a role for FBXO7 in promoting Parkin-dependent mitophagy. Here, we systematically examine the involvement of FBXO7 in depolarization and mtUPR-dependent mitophagy in the well-established HeLa and induced-neurons cell systems. We find that FBXO7-/- cells have no demonstrable defect in: 1) kinetics of pUb accumulation, 2) pUb puncta on mitochondria by super-resolution imaging, 3) recruitment of Parkin and autophagy machinery to damaged mitochondria, 4) mitophagic flux, and 5) mitochondrial clearance as quantified by global proteomics. Moreover, global proteomics of neurogenesis in the absence of FBXO7 reveals no obvious alterations in mitochondria or other organelles. These results argue against a general role for FBXO7 in Parkin-dependent mitophagy and point to the need for additional studies to define how FBXO7 mutations promote parkinsonian-pyramidal syndrome.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics – general sample preparation Sample preparation of proteomic analysis of whole-cell extract from HeLa, hESC, NPC and iNeurons was performed according to previously published studies (Ordureau et al., 2020 & 2021). Cells were harvested on ice and plates were washed twice with 1x PBS and detached in 1x PBS using cell scraper. After pelleting at 2000 rpm for 5 min at 4°C, cells were washed 2x with 1x PBS and resuspended in 8 M urea buffer (composition stated above). After sonification for 10 seconds, resuspended cells were pelleted for 10 min at 13000 rpm. Protein concentration was determined using BCA kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 23227).  Unless otherwise noted, proteomics and data analysis was performed as described (Ordureau et al., 2021; Ordureau et al., 2020). Briefly, protein extracts (100 g) were subjected to disulfide bond reduction with 5 mM TCEP (room temperature, 10 min) and alkylation with 25 mM chloroacetamide (room temperature, 20 min). Methanol–chloroform precipitation was performed prior to protease digestion. In brief, four parts of neat methanol were added to each sample and vortexed, one part chloroform was then added to the sample and vortexed, and finally three parts water was added to the sample and vortexed. The sample was centrifuged at 6,000 rpm for 2 min at room temperature and subsequently washed twice with 100% methanol. Samples were resuspended in 100 mM EPPS pH8.5 containing 0.1% RapiGest and digested at 37 °C for 8h with Trypsin at a 100:1 protein-to-protease ratio. Samples were acidified with 1% Formic Acid for 15 min and subjected to C18 solid-phase extraction (SPE) (Sep-Pak, Waters).   Proteomics – quantitative proteomics using TMT Tandem mass tag labeling of each sample (50 mg peptide input) was performed by adding 5 uL of the 25 ng/mL stock of TMTpro reagent along with acetonitrile to achieve a final acetonitrile concentration of approximately 30% (v/v). Following incubation at room temperature for 1 h, the reaction was quenched with hydroxylamine to a final concentration of 0.5% (v/v) for 15 min. The TMTpro- labeled samples were pooled together at a 1:1 ratio. The sample was vacuum centrifuged to near dryness, and following reconstitution in 1% FA, samples were desalted using C18 solid-phase extraction (SPE) (50 mg, Sep-Pak, Waters), according to manufacturer protocol.  Dried TMTpro-labeled peptides (~300 ug) were resuspended in 10 mM NH4HCO3 pH 8.0 and fractionated using basic pH reverse phase HPLC (Wang et al., 2011). Briefly, samples were offline fractionated over a 90 min run, into 96 fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC (Agilent LC1260) through an Aeris peptide xb-c18 column (Phenomenex; 250 mm x 3.6 mm) with mobile phase A containing 5 % acetonitrile and 10 mM NH4HCO3 in LC-MS grade H2O, and mobile phase B containing 90 % acetonitrile and 10 mM NH4HCO3 in LC-MS grade H2O (both pH 8.0). The 96 resulting fractions were then pooled in a non-continuous manner into 24 fractions (as outlined in Figure S5 of (Paulo et al., 2016a)) and sets of 12 fractions (even or odd numbers) were used for subsequent mass spectrometry analysis. Fractions were vacuum centrifuged to near dryness. Each consolidated fraction was desalted via StageTip, dried again via vacuum centrifugation, and reconstituted in 5 % acetonitrile, 1  % formic acid for LC-MS/MS processing.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics Data Analysis  Mass spectrometry raw data were converted to mzXML and monoisotopic peaks were reassigned using Monocle (Rad et al, 2021). Mass spectra were database searched using Sequest algorithm (2019.01 rev. 5; (Eng et al, 1994)) against the Human Reference Proteome Uniprot database (2019-01 SwissProt entries only; UniProt Constortium, 2015) appended with sequences of common contaminates and reverse sequences of proteins as decoys, for target-decoy competition (Elias & Gygi, 2007). Sequest search parameters include: 50 ppm precursor tolerance, 0.9 Da product ion tolerance, trypsin endopeptidase specificity (C-terminal to [KR], 2 max missed cleavages), static modifications on peptide N-terminus and lysines with TMTpro tags (+304.207 Da) and carbamidomethylation on cysteines (57.021 Da), and variable modification of oxidation on methionines (+15.995 Da). Peptide-spectrum matches were filtered at 2% false discovery rate (FDR) using linear discriminant analysis (Huttlin et al, 2010), based on XCorr, DeltaCn, missed cleavages, peptide length, precursor mass accurracy, fraction of matched product ions, charge state, and number of modifications per peptide (additionally restricting PSM Xcorr >1 and peptide length>6). Following a 2% protein FDR filter (Savitski et al, 2015), PSMs reporter ion intensities were quantified (most intense centroid within 0.003 Da of theoretical TMT reporter mass), filtered based on a precursor isolation specificity > 0.5, and filtered by a summed signal-to-noise across TMT channels > 100.  Protein quantification was performed via the summation (weighted average) of its constituent PSMs’ reporter intensities and TMT channels were normalized for protein input to total TMT channel intensity across all quantified PSMs (adjusted to median total TMT intensity for the TMT channels) (Plubell et al, 2017). Log2 normalized summed protein reporter intensities were compared using a Student’s t-test and p-values were corrected for multiple hypotheses using the Benjamini-Hochberg adjustment (Benjamini and Hochberg 1995). Resultant q-values and mean log2 fold changes between conditions were used to generate volcano plots. Hotelling T2 analysis was performed using the normalized summed protein reporter ion intensities and the timecourse (v. 1.66.0; Tai 2022) package in R.  The annotation list for the subcellular localization of organellar protein markers was derived from previously published high confidence HeLa dataset (Itzhak et al., 2016; “high” & “very high” confidence) and additional manual entries (Ordureau et al., 2021). MitoCharta 3.0 (Rath et al, 2021) was used for mitochondrial annotation, whereas annotations for ribosome and autophagy components were used from previous studies (An et al, 2020). Transcription factor and neuronal development markers were based on previously published databases and publications (Lambert et al, 2018; Ordureau et al., 2021). Figures were generated using a combination of Excel, R (v.4.2.0) in RStudio (2022.07.01 Build 554), Perseus (v1.6.5 (Tyanova & Cox, 2018)), GraphPad Prism (v9.1.0), and Adobe Illustrator (26.2.1).

### Publication Abstract
The protein kinase PINK1 and ubiquitin ligase Parkin promote removal of damaged mitochondria via a feed-forward mechanism involving ubiquitin (Ub) phosphorylation (pUb), Parkin activation, and ubiquitylation of mitochondrial outer membrane proteins to support the recruitment of mitophagy receptors. The ubiquitin ligase substrate receptor FBXO7/PARK15 is mutated in an early-onset parkinsonian-pyramidal syndrome. Previous studies have proposed a role for FBXO7 in promoting Parkin-dependent mitophagy. Here, we systematically examine the involvement of FBXO7 in depolarization and <sup>mt</sup> UPR-dependent mitophagy in the well-established HeLa and induced-neurons cell systems. We find that FBXO7<sup>-/-</sup> cells have no demonstrable defect in: (i) kinetics of pUb accumulation, (ii) pUb puncta on mitochondria by super-resolution imaging, (iii) recruitment of Parkin and autophagy machinery to damaged mitochondria, (iv) mitophagic flux, and (v) mitochondrial clearance as quantified by global proteomics. Moreover, global proteomics of neurogenesis in the absence of FBXO7 reveals no obvious alterations in mitochondria or other organelles. These results argue against a general role for FBXO7 in Parkin-dependent mitophagy and point to the need for additional studies to define how FBXO7 mutations promote parkinsonian-pyramidal syndrome.

### Keywords
Ineurons, Proteomics, Mitophagy, Fbxo7

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical Sschool
Department of Cell Biology, Blavatnik Institute, Harvard Medical School, 240 Longwood Ave, Boston MA 02115, USA  Aligning Science Across Parkinson’s (ASAP) Collaborative Research Network, Chevy Chase, MD 20815, USA

### Submitter
Felix Kraus

### Lab Head
Dr J. Wade Harper
Department of Cell Biology, Blavatnik Institute, Harvard Medical School, 240 Longwood Ave, Boston MA 02115, USA  Aligning Science Across Parkinson’s (ASAP) Collaborative Research Network, Chevy Chase, MD 20815, USA


