### Accession
PXD030952

### Title
Statin therapy inhibits Fatty Acid Synthase via dynamic protein modifications

### Description
Recent discoveries revealed HMG-CoA is a reactive metabolite that can non-enzymatically modify proteins and impact their activity. Therefore, we predicted that inhibition of HMGCR by statins might increase HMG-CoA levels and protein modifications. Upon statin treatment, we observed a strong increase in HMG-CoA levels, and only a single protein was modified. Mass spectrometry revealed fatty acid synthase (FAS) was modified on active site residues and, importantly, the modification is located on non-lysine side-chains.

### Sample Protocol
Statins are a class of drug widely prescribed for the prevention of cardiovascular disease, with pleiotropic cellular effects. Statins inhibit HMG-CoA reductase (HMGCR), which converts the metabolite HMG-CoA into mevalonate. Recent discoveries revealed HMG-CoA is a reactive metabolite that can non-enzymatically modify proteins and impact their activity. Therefore, we predicted that inhibition of HMGCR by statins might increase HMG-CoA levels and protein modifications. Upon statin treatment, we observed a strong increase in HMG-CoA levels, and only a single protein was modified. Mass spectrometry revealed fatty acid synthase (FAS) was modified on active site residues and, importantly, the modification is located on non-lysine side-chains. The dynamic modifications occur only on a sub-pool of FAS that is located near HMGCR and alters cellular signaling around the ER and Golgi. These results uncover communication between cholesterol and lipid biosynthesis by the substrate of one pathway inhibiting another in a rapid and reversible manner.

### Data Protocol
Data was processed by Proteome discover. Only raw files are attached.

### Publication Abstract
Statins are a class of drug widely prescribed for the prevention of cardiovascular disease, with pleiotropic cellular effects. Statins inhibit HMG-CoA reductase (HMGCR), which converts the metabolite HMG-CoA into mevalonate. Recent discoveries have shown HMG-CoA is a reactive metabolite that can non-enzymatically modify proteins and impact their activity. Therefore, we predicted that inhibition of HMGCR by statins might increase HMG-CoA levels and protein modifications. Upon statin treatment, we observe a strong increase in HMG-CoA levels and modification of only a single protein. Mass spectrometry identifies this protein as fatty acid synthase (FAS), which is modified on active site residues and, importantly, on non-lysine side-chains. The dynamic modifications occur only on a sub-pool of FAS that is located near HMGCR and alters cellular signaling around the ER and Golgi. These results uncover communication between cholesterol and lipid biosynthesis by the substrate of one pathway inhibiting another in a rapid and reversible manner.

### Keywords
Fatty acid synthase, Statin, Hmgylation

### Affiliations
Duke University Dept of Medicine
Duke University

### Submitter
Alec Trub

### Lab Head
Dr Matthew D Hirschey
Duke University Dept of Medicine


