### Accession
PXD030429

### Title
MiniTurbo-based interactomics of two plasma membrane-localized SNARE proteins in Marchantia polymorpha

### Description
• Marchantia polymorpha is a model liverwort and its overall low genetic redundancy is advantageous for dissecting complex pathways. Proximity-dependent in vivo biotin-labelling methods have emerged as powerful interactomics tools in recent years. However, interactomics studies applying proximity labelling are currently limited to angiosperm species in plants.  • Here, we established and evaluated a miniTurbo-based interactomics method in M. polymorpha using MpSYP12A and MpSYP13B, two plasma membrane-localized SNARE proteins, as baits. • We show that our method yields a manifold of potential interactors of MpSYP12A and MpSYP13B compared to a co-immunoprecipitation approach. Our method could capture specific candidates for each SNARE.  • We conclude that a miniTurbo-based method is a feasible tool for interactomics in M. polymorpha, potentially applicable to other model bryophytes. Our interactome dataset on MpSYP12A and MpSYP13B will be a useful resource to elucidate the evolution of SNARE functions.

### Sample Protocol
Pulldown of biotinylated proteins. Biotinylated proteins were pulled-down using streptavidin-agarose beads (Thermo; 20353). Per sample, 100 µL of a 50 % slurry were used. The beads were washed and equilibrated in binding buffer (0.1 M phosphate, 0.15 M NaCl, 0.5 % SDS, pH 7.2). Next, the biotin-depleted samples were added to the beads and pulldown was performed overnight at 22−25 °C while mixing. The beads were washed once with 6 mL PBS buffer containing 2 % SDS and then 3 times with 10 mL PBS buffer (0.1 M phosphate, 0.15 M NaCl, pH 7.2). Biotinylated proteins were subjected to on-bead digestion for MS analysis. For Myc-IP and streptavidin-pulldown samples, 25 µL Myc-Trap beads or 100 µL streptavidin-agarose beads were resuspended in 25 μL digest buffer 1 (50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 2 M Urea, 1 mM DTT, 5 µg µL-1 trypsin) and incubated at 30 °C for 30 minutes while shaking at 400 rpm. The supernatant was separated from the beads and transferred to a fresh tube. The beads were then mixed with 50 µL digest buffer 2 (50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 2 M Urea, 5 mM CAA), the supernatant was separated from the beads and combined with the supernatant from the previous step. The samples in digestion mix were then incubated overnight at 32 °C while shaking at 400 rpm. Trypsin was inactivated by acidification with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), and the peptide samples were subsequently desalted using stage tips.  Dried peptides from filter-aided digestion were re-dissolved in A* buffer (2 % ACN, 0.1 % TFA) and adjusted to a final peptide concentration of 0.1 µg µL-1 for analysis. The peptide samples from streptavidin- and Myc-Trap pulldowns were dissolved in 10 µL buffer A* and measured without dilution.   PL samples were analysed using an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher) coupled to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). The peptides were separated on 16 cm frit-less silica emitters (New Objective, 75 µm inner diameter), packed in-house with reversed-phase ReproSil-Pur C18 AQ 1.9 µm resin (Dr. Maisch). The peptides were loaded on the column and eluted for 50 minutes using a segmented linear gradient of 5 % to 95 % solvent B (0 minutes: 5 % B; 0−5 minutes -> 5 % B; 5−25 minutes -> 20 % B; 25−35 minutes -> 35 % B; 35−40 minutes -> 95 % B; 40−50 minutes -> 95 % B) (solvent A: 0 % ACN, 0.1 % FA; solvent B: 80 % ACN, 0.1 % FA) at a flow rate of 300 nL per minute. Mass spectra were acquired in DDA mode with a TOP10 method. MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap analyser with a mass range of 300−1500 m/z at a resolution of 70,000 FWHM and a target value of 3×106 ions. Precursors were selected with an isolation window of 1.3 m/z. HCD fragmentation was performed at a normalized collision energy of 25. MS/MS spectra were acquired with a target value of 5x105 ions at a resolution of 17,500 FWHM, a maximum injection time of 85 milliseconds and a fixed first mass of m/z 100. Peptides with a charge of 1, greater than 6, or with unassigned charge state were excluded from fragmentation for MS2, dynamic exclusion for 20 seconds prevented repeated selection of precursors.  Myc-IP and whole proteome samples were analysed using an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher) coupled to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). The peptides were separated on 16 cm frit-less silica emitters (New Objective, 75 µm inner diameter), packed in-house with reversed-phase ReproSil-Pur C18 AQ 1.9 µm resin (Dr. Maisch). Peptides (0.5 µg) were loaded on the column and eluted for 115 minutes using a segmented linear gradient of 5 % to 95 % solvent B (0 minutes: 5 % B; 0−5 minutes -> 5 % B; 5−65 minutes -> 20 % B; 65−90 minutes -> 35 % B; 90−100 minutes -> 55 % B; 100−105 minutes -> 95 % B, 105−115 minutes -> 95 % B) (solvent A: 0 % ACN, 0.1 % FA; solvent B: 80 % ACN, 0.1 % FA) at a flow rate of 300 nL per minute. Mass spectra were acquired in DDA mode with a TOP15 method. MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap analyser with a mass range of 300–1750 m/z at a resolution of 70,000 FWHM and a target value of 3×106 ions. Precursors were selected with an isolation window of 2.0 m/z. HCD fragmentation was performed at a normalized collision energy of 25. MS/MS spectra were acquired with a target value of 105 ions at a resolution of 17,500 FWHM, a maximum injection time of 55 milliseconds and a fixed first mass of m/z 100. Peptides with a charge of 1, greater than 6, or with unassigned charge state were excluded from fragmentation for MS2, dynamic exclusion for 30 seconds prevented repeated selection of precursors.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis.  Raw data were processed using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.3.4, http://www.maxquant.org/) (Cox et al., 2008) with label-free quantification (LFQ) and intensity based absolute quantification (iBAQ) enabled (Cox et al., 2016). For PL data, normalization was skipped for the LFQ quantification. MS/MS spectra were searched by the Andromeda search engine against a combined database containing the sequences from M. polymorpha(MpTak1v5.1_r1_primary_transcripts_proteinV2; http://marchantia.info/, Montgomery et al., 2020) and sequences of 248 common contaminant proteins and decoy sequences and the sequence of miniTurbo. Trypsin specificity was required and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages allowed. Minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as fixed, oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. Peptide-spectrum-matches and proteins were retained if below a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1 %. For PL data, the non-normalized MaxLFQ values of all replicates (4 per condition) were pre-processed in Perseus (version 1.5.8.5, http://www.maxquant.org/) and submitted for normalization analysis using the Normalyzer tool (http://normalyzer.immunoprot.lth.se/, Levander et. al., 2014) The output was analysed for outliers and 1 replicate per condition was removed. The final data analysis was carried out in MaxQuant as described above on the reduced raw dataset. Statistical analysis of the MaxLFQ values was carried out using Perseus (version 1.5.8.5, http://www.maxquant.org/). Quantified proteins were filtered for reverse hits and hits “identified by site” and MaxLFQ values were log2 transformed. For PL data, transformed MaxLFQ values were normalized by subtraction of the median per column. After grouping samples by condition only those proteins were retained for subsequent analysis that had 3 or 2 valid values in one of the conditions for PL data or Myc-IP data, respectively. Two-sample t-tests were performed using a permutation-based FDR of 5 %. For the generation of volcano plots, missing values were imputed from a normal distribution using the default settings in Perseus (1.8 downshift, separately for each column) for data with 3 valid values in one of the conditions Volcano plots were generated in Perseus using an FDR of 5 % and an S0 = 1. The Perseus output was exported and further processed using Microsoft Excel and RStudio (version 1.4.1103, https://www.rstudio.com/), based on R (version x64 4.0.3, https://cran.r-project.org/). The data was processed in RStudio using tidyverse (version 1.3.0), rio (version 0.5.16) and zoo (version 1.8-8) packages. Relative iBAQ values were calculated per column from MaxQuant output, scaled by factor 106 and log10 transformed. The median value of 3 replicates per condition was used to generate volcano plots including relative iBAQ values. Volcano pots were generated in RStudio using the ggplot2 (version 3.3.3), ggrepel (version 0.9.1) and ggsci (version 2.9) packages.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Miniturbo, Interactomics, Proximity labelling, Membrane-trafficking, Marchantia polymorpha, Snare protein

### Affiliations
Plant Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry Group
Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research
Carl-von-Linné Weg 10
50829 Cologne
Basic Immune System of Plants / Protein Mass Spectrometry Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research Carl-von-Linne-Weg 10, 50829 Cologne, Germany

### Submitter
Sara Christina Stolze

### Lab Head
Dr Hirofumi Nakagami
Basic Immune System of Plants / Protein Mass Spectrometry Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research Carl-von-Linne-Weg 10, 50829 Cologne, Germany


