### Accession
PXD035444

### Title
The endocytic TPLATE complex internalizes ubiquitinated plasma membrane cargo

### Description
Endocytosis controls the perception of stimuli by modulating protein abundance at the plasma membrane. In plants, clathrin-mediated endocytosis is the most prominent internalization pathway and relies on two multimeric adaptor complexes, the AP-2 and the TPLATE complex (TPC). Ubiquitination is a well-established modification triggering endocytosis of cargo proteins, but how this modification is recognized to initiate the endocytic event remains elusive. Here, we show that TASH3, one of the large subunits of TPC, recognizes ubiquitinated cargo at the plasma membrane via its SH3 domain-containing appendage. TASH3 lacking this evolutionary specific appendage modification allows TPC formation, but the plants show severely reduced endocytic densities, which correlates with reduced endocytic flux. Moreover, comparative plasma membrane proteomics identified differential accumulation of multiple ubiquitinated cargo proteins for which we confirm altered trafficking. Our findings position TPC as a key player for ubiquitinated cargo internalization, allowing future identification of target proteins under specific stress conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Plasma membrane protein proteomics Arabidopsis seedlings were grown on ½ strength MS medium without sucrose at 21°C in continuous light for 5 days. The tissue samples were flash-frozen and crushed using a liquid cooled mortar and pestle and the crushed material was used to extract plasma membrane fraction using Minute™ Plasma Membrane Protein Isolation and Cell Fractionation Kit (Invent Biotechnologies) based on manufacturer’s manual. For LC-MS/MS analysis samples were prepared based on Mini Urea protocol, using 90 µg of plasma membrane proteins, as described in Dahhan et al, 2022. Purified peptides were re-dissolved in 25 µl loading solvent A (0.1% TFA in water/ACN (98:2, v/v)) and 5 µl was injected for LC-MS/MS analysis on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano LC (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) in-line connected to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Trapping was performed at 10 ?l/min for 4 min in loading solvent A on a 20 mm trapping column (made in-house, 100 ?m internal diameter (I.D.), 5 ?m beads, C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch, Germany) and the sample was loaded on a 200 mm analytical column (made in-house, 75 µm I.D., 1.9 µm beads C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch). Peptides were eluted by a non-linear gradient from 5 to 55% MS solvent B (0.1% FA in water/acetonitrile (2:8, v/v)) over 145 minutes at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min, reaching 99% MS solvent B after 150 minutes, followed by a 10 minute wash with 99% MS solvent B and re-equilibration with MS solvent A (0.1% FA in water). The column temperature was kept constant at 45°C in a column oven (Butterfly, Phoenix S&T). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 16 most abundant ion peaks per MS spectrum. Full-scan MS spectra (375-1500 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 in the orbitrap analyzer after accumulation to a target value of 3E6. The 16 most intense ions above a threshold value of 2.0E4 were isolated for fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 28% after filling the trap at a target value of 1E5 for maximum 50 ms. MS/MS spectra (200-2000 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 15,000 in the orbitrap analyzer. GFP Pull down Samples were prepared as described by Wendrich et al., 2017. Peptides were re-dissolved in 20 µl loading solvent A (0.1% TFA in water/ACN (98:2, v/v)) of which 5 µl was injected for LC-MS/MS analysis on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano LC (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) in-line connected to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides were first loaded on a trapping column made in-house, 100 ?m internal diameter (I.D.) × 20 mm, 5 ?m beads C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) and after flushing from the trapping column the peptides were separated on a 50 cm µPAC™ column with C18-endcapped functionality (Pharmafluidics, Belgium) kept at a constant temperature of 50°C. Peptides were eluted by a linear gradient from 99% solvent A’ (0.1% formic acid in water) to 55% solvent B? (0.1% formic acid in water/acetonitrile, 20/80 (v/v)) in 30 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min, followed by a 5 min wash reaching 95% solvent B’. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent, positive ionization mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 5 most abundant peaks in a given MS spectrum. One MS1 scan (m/z 400?2,000, AGC target 3 × 106 ions, maximum ion injection time 80 ms), acquired at a resolution of 70,000 (at 200 m/z), was followed by up to 5 tandem MS scans (resolution 17,500 at 200 m/z) of the most intense ions fulfilling predefined selection criteria (AGC target 5 × 104 ions, maximum ion injection time 80 ms, isolation window 2 m/z, fixed first mass 140 m/z, spectrum data type: centroid, intensity threshold 1.3xE4, exclusion of unassigned, 1, 5-8, >8 positively charged precursors, peptide match preferred, exclude isotopes on, dynamic exclusion time 12 s).

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed by MaxQuant (version 1.6.10.43) with default settings, including a false discovery rate set at 1% on both the peptide and protein level. Spectra were searched against the Araport11plus database (version 2019 for PM proteomics and version 2020 for GFP PD). Proteins were quantified by the MaxLFQ algorithm integrated in the MaxQuant software. Only proteins with at least one unique peptide were retained for identification.  Differential analysis for the Plasma membrane protein proteomics was performed with the Perseus software (version 1.6.7.0) after loading the proteingroups.txt file from MaxQuant, with reverse and contaminant hits removed. LFQ intensities were log2 transformed and biological replicate samples were grouped together. Proteins with less than two valid values in at least one group were removed and missing values were imputed from a normal distribution around the detection limit. On the quantified proteins, a t-test was performed for pairwise comparison of the samples. Correction for multiple testing was done by permutation based FDR, with thresholds FDR=0.05, S0=0.5 or S0=0.1. Differential analysis for the GFP pull downs was performed with the Perseus software (version 1.6.15.0) with the largely the same workflow as described for the plasma membrane proteins. Except now, proteins with less than three valid values in at least one group were removed, and thresholds FDR=0.01, S0=1 were applied.

### Publication Abstract
Endocytosis controls the perception of stimuli by modulating protein abundance at the plasma membrane. In plants, clathrin-mediated endocytosis is the most prominent internalization pathway and relies on two multimeric adaptor complexes, the AP-2 and the TPLATE complex (TPC). Ubiquitination is a well-established modification triggering endocytosis of cargo proteins, but how this modification is recognized to initiate the endocytic event remains elusive. Here we show that TASH3, one of the large subunits of TPC, recognizes ubiquitinated cargo at the plasma membrane via its SH3 domain-containing appendage. TASH3 lacking this evolutionary specific appendage modification allows TPC formation but the plants show severely reduced endocytic densities, which correlates with reduced endocytic flux. Moreover, comparative plasma membrane proteomics identified differential accumulation of multiple ubiquitinated cargo proteins for which we confirm altered trafficking. Our findings position TPC as a key player for ubiquitinated cargo internalization, allowing future identification of target proteins under specific stress conditions.

### Keywords
Endocytosis, Ap-ms, Tplate complex, Arabidopsis

### Affiliations
Ghent University, Department of Plant Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, Technologiepark 71, 9052 Ghent, Belgium VIB Center for Plant Systems Biology, Technologiepark 71, 9052 Ghent, Belgium
Department of Plant Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, Ghent University, Ghent, B-9052, Belgium
VIB Center for Plant Systems Biology, Ghent, B-9052, Belgium


### Submitter
Dominique Eeckhout

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel Van Damme
Ghent University, Department of Plant Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, Technologiepark 71, 9052 Ghent, Belgium VIB Center for Plant Systems Biology, Technologiepark 71, 9052 Ghent, Belgium


