### Accession
PXD036074

### Title
The human host response to monkeypox infection: a proteomic case series study

### Description
The rapid rise of Monkeypox (MPX) cases outside previously endemic areas prompt for a better understanding of the disease. We studied the plasma proteome of a group of MPX patients with a similar infection history and clinical manifestation typical for the current outbreak. We report that MPX is associated with a strong plasma proteomic response among nutritional and acute phase response proteins. Moreover, we report a correlation between plasma proteins and disease severity. Contrasting the MPX host response with that of COVID-19, we find a range of similarities, but also important differences. For instance, CFHR1 is induced in COVID-19, but suppressed in MPX, reflecting the different role of the complement system in the two infectious diseases. The partial overlap in response proteins, however, allowed us to explore repurposing of a COVID-19 biomarker panel assay, which resulted in successful patient classification. Hence, our results provide a first proteomic characterization of the MPX human host response, and we reveal a thus far untapped potential for accelerating the response to disease outbreaks through the repurposing of biomarker assays.

### Sample Protocol
Plasma samples were diluted 1:10 in RIPA buffer and heated at 95 °C for 10 min. After cooling to room temperature (RT), 15 µl (~100 µg protein) of each sample were transferred to a 96-well ultrafiltration plate mounted onto a collection plate (96-well LoBind plate). Liquid was removed by centrifugation (30 min, 1800 × rcf, 20 °C). Samples were denatured and reduced in 50 µl TUA buffer (8 M urea, 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 5 mM TCEP) for 30 min at room temperature without shaking. Following thiol alkylation (addition of 10 µl CA buffer (50 mM 2-chloroacetamide, 20 mM ABC) and incubation in the dark at RT for 30 min), the plate was centrifuged (30 min, 1800 × rcf, 20 °C). Samples were washed twice (30 min, 1800 × rcf, 20 °C) with 100 µl 20 mM ABC. Following an additional centrifugation to remove residual liquid (60 min, 1800 × rcf, 20 °C), the filter plate was moved to a fresh collection plate. To each well 50 µl 20 mM ABC containing 1 µg of trypsin/LysC mix was added, the plate was sealed with an adhesive PCR sealing foil sheet and incubated at 37 °C for 15 h. Peptides were collected by centrifugation (30 min, 1800 × rcf, 20 °C). Following the addition of 70 µl of HPLC-grade water to each well, the plate was centrifuged once more. The collection plate was then placed in a SpeedVac and samples were evaporated to complete dryness. Peptides were reconstituted in formic acid (30 µl, 0.1% v/v). Peptide concentration was determined using the Pierce quantitative fluorometric peptide assay.  For discovery proteomics, all samples (QCs, monkeypox, COVID-19, and healthy controls) were diluted to 200 ng/µl. The stable isotopic labeled reference peptides (PQ500 Reference Peptides) stock was prepared as described in the vendor’s protocol), and diluted 1:10 in 50/50 v/v ACN:H2O. 2 µl of diluted PQ500 stock solution were spiked into 18 µl of the 200 ng/µl sample before transfer to vials for injection.   Discovery proteomics using Zeno SWATH MS Tryptic digests were analyzed on a 7600 ZenoTOF mass spectrometer system (SCIEX), coupled to an ACQUITY UPLC M-Class system (Waters). 2 µl of each sample (360 ng sample + 0.02 µl PQ500, Biognosys) were loaded on a HSS T3 column (300 µm × 150 mm, 1.8 µm, Waters) heated to 35 °C, then chromatographically separated with a 20-min gradient using a flow rate of 5 µl/min. A Zeno SWATH acquisition scheme with 85 variable-size windows and 11-ms accumulation time was used (Wang et al 2022, biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2022.04.14.488299v1) for MS detection.

### Data Protocol
The Zeno SWATH raw proteomics data was processed using DIA-NN 1.8.1 beta 20 (PMID: 31768060, https://github.com/vdemichev/DiaNN). The MS2 and MS1 mass accuracies were set to 20 and 12 ppm, and the scan window to 7. For the discovery approach, we used a publicly available spectral library for human plasma (PMID: 30948622) and replaced spectra and RT information with DIA-NN in-silico prediction. Protein inference was switched off and the match-between-runs (MBR) option was enabled.

### Publication Abstract
The rapid rise of monkeypox (MPX) cases outside previously endemic areas prompts for a better understanding of the disease. We studied the plasma proteome of a group of MPX patients with a similar infection history and clinical manifestation typical for the current outbreak. We report that MPX in this case series is associated with a strong plasma proteomic response among nutritional and acute phase response proteins. Moreover, we report a correlation between plasma proteins and disease severity. Contrasting the MPX host response with that of COVID-19, we find a range of similarities, but also important differences. For instance, CFHR1 is induced in COVID-19, but suppressed in MPX, reflecting the different roles of the complement system in the two infectious diseases. Of note, the spatial overlap in response proteins suggested that a COVID-19 biomarker panel assay could be repurposed for MPX. Applying a targeted protein panel assay provided encouraging results and distinguished MPX cases from healthy controls. Hence, our results provide a first proteomic characterization of the MPX human host response and encourage further research on protein-panel assays in emerging infectious diseases.

### Keywords
Host response, Zeno swath, Monkeypox virus, Proteomics, Viral infection

### Affiliations
Core  Facility -High-Throughput  Mass  Spectrometry,  Charité -Universitätsmedizin Berlin,  corporate  member  of  Freie  Universität  Berlin,  Humboldt-Universität  zu  Berlin and Berlin Institute of Health (BIH), Berlin, Germany
Department of Biochemistry, Charité – Universitätsmedizin Berlin, corporate member of Freie Universität Berlin, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Berlin Institute of Health, Berlin, Germany 

### Submitter
Michael Mülleder

### Lab Head
Dr Markus Ralser
Department of Biochemistry, Charité – Universitätsmedizin Berlin, corporate member of Freie Universität Berlin, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Berlin Institute of Health, Berlin, Germany 


