### Accession
PXD003677

### Title
The metacaspase Mca1p restricts O-glycosylation during farnesol-induced apoptosis in Candida albicans

### Description
Protein glycolysation is an essential posttranslational modification in eukaryotic cells. In pathogenic yeasts, it is involved in a large number of biological processes, such as protein folding quality control, cell viability and host/pathogen relationships. A link between protein glycosylation and apoptosis was established by the analysis of the phenotypes of oligosaccharyltransferase mutants in budding yeast. However, little is known about the contribution of glycosylation modifications to the adaptive response to apoptosis inducers. The cysteine protease metacaspase Mca1p plays a key role in the apoptotic response in Candida albicans triggered by the quorum sensing molecule farnesol. We subjected wild-type and mca1-deletion strains to farnesol stress and then studied the early phase of apoptosis release in quantitative glycoproteomics and glycomics experiments on cell-free extracts essentially devoid of cell walls. We identified and characterized 62 new glycosylated peptides with their glycan composition: 17 N-glycosylated, 45 O-glycosylated, and 81 additional sites of N-glycosylation. The glycosylated proteins were predicted as located mostly in the “membrane” and “cell wall” compartments, but they were also related to the “nucleus” and the “mitochondrial” compartments. They were found to be involved in the control of protein folding, cell wall integrity and cell cycle regulation. We showed a general increase in the O-glycosylation of proteins in the mca1 deletion strain after farnesol challenge. We identified 44 new putative protein substrates of the metacaspase in the glycoprotein fraction enriched on concanavalin A. Most of these substrates are involved in protein folding or protein resolubilization and in mitochondrial functions. We show here that key Mca1p substrates, such as Cdc48p or Ssb1p, involved in degrading misfolded glycoproteins and in the protein quality control system, are themselves differentially glycosylated. We found putative substrates, such as Bgl2p, Srb1p or Ugp1p, that are involved in the biogenesis of glycans. We validated as a substrate of Mca1p the endo-beta-1,3-glucanase Bgl2p which is involved in the incorporation of newly synthetized mannoproteins in the cell wall. Our findings highlight a new role of the metacaspase in amplifying cell death processes by affecting several critical protein quality control systems through the alteration of the protein glycosylation machinery.

### Sample Protocol
*Enrichment in glycoproteins and glycopeptides by lectin-based affinity chromatography. We used cell extracts (500 µg of protein) from each set of conditions directly for glycoprotein(/peptide) enrichment with ConA A magnetic beads from the Pierce Glycosylation Isolation kit with ConA. We also digested 500 µg of cell protein from the various cell conditions overnight at 37°C with sequencing-grade trypsin (12.5 μg/ml; Promega) in 200 μl of 25 mmol/L NH4HCO3. The resulting peptides were loaded onto a ConA column and processed as described above to enrich the samples in glycopeptides. As a control, peptides from trypsin digests of crude samples were analyzed directly for protein quantification and glycopeptide identification. We obtained three fractions: (i) crude sample without enrichment, (ii) fraction corresponding to proteins eluted from the ConA column and (iii) fractions corresponding to peptides eluted from the ConA column. The proteins eluted from the ConA column were also digested in solution, according to the same digestion protocol. Equal amounts of sample were used for the analysis of fraction (i), whereas similar volumes of eluate were analyzed for fractions (ii) and (iii). *LC-MS/MS acquisition of peptide samples. We analyzed 2 µg of protein digests from crude samples and equal volumes of eluted proteins and peptides eluted from ConA columns from the different cell conditions in triplicate with an Orbitrap Fusion coupled to a Nano-LC Proxeon. Peptides were separated by chromatography with the following parameters: Acclaim PepMap100 C18 pre-column (2 cm, 75 μm i.d.), Pepmap-RSLC Proxeon C18 column (50 cm, 75 μm i.d.), 300 nl/min flow rate, gradient from 95 % solvent A (water, 0.1% formic acid) to 35% solvent B (100 % acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) over a period of 97 minutes, followed by column regeneration for 23 min, giving a total run time of 2 hours. Peptides were analyzed in the Orbitrap cell, at a resolution of 120,000 (at m/z 200), with a mass range of m/z 350-1550 (except for samples of isolated peptides from ConA columns with a mass range of 350-4000). Fragments were obtained by HCD activation with a collisional energy of 30 %, and a quadrupole isolation window of 1.6 Da. MS/MS data were acquired in the Orbitrap cell in top-speed mode, with a total cycle of 3 seconds at a resolution of 30,000. Precursor priority was highest charge state, followed by most intense. Peptides with charge states from 2 to 8 were selected for MS/MS acquisition.*Determination of N-glycosylation sites after treatment with the endoglycosidase H. We digested 20 µg of crude protein samples from the different conditions (WT, WT-farnesol, mca1Δ/Δ and mca1Δ/Δ-farnesol) by the Endo H (2500 U for 20 µg; Promega) overnight at pH7.8 in 20 µl of a 50 mM NH4HCO3 buffer. Then deglycosylated proteins were digested by trypsin overnight. Peptides obtained were analyzed in LC-MS/MS with an Orbitrap Fusion coupled to a Nano-LC Proxeon 1000. *Quantitative analysis of the released glycans by TMT-labeling. Glycan release and labeling with TMT reporters were performed in accordance with the general instructions for the aminoxy-TMT sixplex kit (Thermo Scientific). We digested 1 mg of sample from each set of conditions with trypsin in 100 µl of 20 mM TEAB buffer overnight at 37°C. We added 5 µl of the glycosidase PNGase F (Prozyme) and the samples were incubated for 16 hours at 37°C. A conditioned Oasis (Waters) column was then used to separate peptides from the released glycans. Glycan fractions for the WT, WT-F, mca1Δ/Δ and mca1Δ/Δ-F conditions were labeled with 126 (monoisotopic m/z = 126.12773), 127 (m/z = 127.1248 Da), 128 (128.1344 Da) and 129 (m/z = 129.1315 Da) labeling reagents, respectively. Labeled glycans were washed in 95 % methanol, in 10 % acetone and then combined in a 1:1 by volume ratio. A new Oasis column was used to discard excess aminoxy-TMT reagents. The released glycans were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer coupled to a Nano-LC Proxeon 1000. Peptides were separated by chromatography with the following parameters: Accucore Amide HILIC column (15 cm, 75 μm i.d., 2.6 μm, 150 Å), 300 nl/min flow rate, gradient from 95% solvent B (100 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid) to 40 % solvent A (water, 0.1 % formic acid) over 100 minutes followed by column regeneration for 20 min, giving a total run time of 2 hours. Peptides were analyzed in two independent experiments, depending on the acquisition mass range (mass ranges of m/z 270-1000 and m/z 850-4000). In both cases, the instrument parameters were: full ion scan mode in the Orbitrap cell, at a resolution of 60,000 (at m/z 200) in positive mode. Fragments were obtained by HCD activation. MS/MS data were acquired in the Orbitrap cell, with a total cycle of 3 seconds, a resolution of 15,000, Precursor priority for MS/MS was highest charge state followed by most intense. Glycans with charge states from 1 to 8 were selected for MS/MS acquisition.

### Data Protocol
Quantitative analysis, in label-free experiments, of proteins and peptides from the different datasets. All MS and MS/MS data for protein samples were processed with Progenesis QI 2.0 (Nonlinear Dynamics, Newcastle, UK) for label-free quantification and with the Byonic search engine (Protein Metrics, version 2.3.5) (28). The abundances of the peptides obtained by the trypsin digestion of crude sample were normalized with Progenesis software, a procedure not directly applicable to samples obtained by ConA chromatography because the amount of bound material varied to the sample origin. The mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 20 ppm for fragments. The peptide identifications obtained with the search engine Byonic were validated if the two-dimensional Post Error Probabilities which include PSM FDR and protein FDR (2D PEP) (29) were lower than 0.01 (|log 2D PEP|>2). The following variable modifications were allowed: oxidation (M), phosphorylation (ST), acetylation (K) (2 by peptide maximum in the parameter rare modifications). An additional glycan database was used, containing the N-glycosylations (N) and O-glycosylations (ST) described in yeast and making it possible to investigate 12 O-glycosylation subtypes (from 1 to 12 mannose residues) and 14 N-glycosylation subtypes (1 N-acetylhexosamine or 2 N-acetylhexosamine with 0 to 12 mannose residues) simultaneously in the various datasets (one modification by peptide maximum in common modifications). The maximum number of missed cleavages was limited to two for all the proteases used. MS/MS data were used to search a C. albicans ORF database (# 6221) retrieved from the Candida Genome Database website (30) (http://www.candidagenome.org/). Between-subject analyses were carried out on the various datasets. Non-normalized abundances of the proteins eluted form ConA columns and normalized abundances of proteins from trypsin digests of crude sample with similar normalized abundance variations (ANOVA p-value < 0.05) were classified together by the AutoClass Bayesian clustering system (webserver Autoclass@IJM, http://ytat2.ijm.univ-paris-diderot.fr/) (31) and visualized with Javatreeview (http://jtreeview.sourceforge.net/). Proteins were considered to be putatively glycosylated if they were more abundant in the ConA column eluate than in the crude sample. Gene Ontology analyses were performed on each cluster in which putative glycosylated proteins were overrepresented and more abundant in mca1Δ/Δ-F conditions than in other conditions. These Gene Ontology analyses were carried out with the GO Slim mapper tool from the Candida Genome Database website. Similar GO analyses were performed for all the glycosylated proteins found in the various datasets. *Search for new potential substrates of Mca1p. We digested 10 µg of proteins after glycopeptide enrichment by ConA chromatography, for each set of conditions, with the GluC protease (12.5 µg/ml; Sigma Aldrich) overnight at 37°C in 20 µl of 20 mM phosphate buffer pH7.8. MS/MS data were processed with the Byonic search engine and Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Scientific), using the same parameters as above, except for the enzyme parameter which was set to GluC and semi-specific. Peptides identified exclusively in WT-F conditions, in at least two of three replicates, were selected for further analysis. For substrate validation, label-free, between-subject approaches were applied to the GluC dataset, with Progenesis QI. The Mca1p-specific cleavage products identified were considered validated if more abundant in WT-F conditions than in the other conditions. ANOVA p-values below 0.05 after label-free analysis were used as a criterion for the selection of the best potential substrates. GO analyses were performed on the list of potential substrates with the GO Slim Mapper tool from the Candida Genome Database website. Variation probabilities were calculated with R software for each GO term.  *Quantitative analysis of the released glycans by TMT-labeling. Glycans were quantified and identified manually.

### Publication Abstract
Protein glycolysation is an essential posttranslational modification in eukaryotic cells. In pathogenic yeasts, it is involved in a large number of biological processes, such as protein folding quality control, cell viability and host/pathogen relationships. A link between protein glycosylation and apoptosis was established by the analysis of the phenotypes of oligosaccharyltransferase mutants in budding yeast. However, little is known about the contribution of glycosylation modifications to the adaptive response to apoptosis inducers. The cysteine protease metacaspase Mca1p plays a key role in the apoptotic response in Candida albicans triggered by the quorum sensing molecule farnesol. We subjected wild-type and mca1-deletion strains to farnesol stress and then studied the early phase of apoptosis release in quantitative glycoproteomics and glycomics experiments on cell-free extracts essentially devoid of cell walls. We identified and characterized 62 new glycosylated peptides with their glycan composition: 17 N-glycosylated, 45 O-glycosylated, and 81 additional sites of N-glycosylation. They were found to be involved in the control of protein folding, cell wall integrity and cell cycle regulation. We showed a general increase in the O-glycosylation of proteins in the mca1 deletion strain after farnesol challenge. We identified 44 new putative protein substrates of the metacaspase in the glycoprotein fraction enriched on concanavalin A. Most of these substrates are involved in protein folding or protein resolubilization and in mitochondrial functions. We show here that key Mca1p substrates, such as Cdc48p or Ssb1p, involved in degrading misfolded glycoproteins and in the protein quality control system, are themselves differentially glycosylated. We found putative substrates, such as Bgl2p (validated by immunoblot), Srb1p or Ugp1p, that are involved in the biogenesis of glycans. Our findings highlight a new role of the metacaspase in amplifying cell death processes by affecting several critical protein quality control systems through the alteration of the protein glycosylation machinery.Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD003677.

### Keywords
Candida albicans, Glycomics, Orbitrap fusion., Ssb1, O-glycosylation, N-glycosylation, Erad, Glycoproteomics, Aminoxytmt, Bgl2, Glycans quantification, Farnesol, Cdc48, Pdi1, Metacaspase, Apoptosis

### Affiliations
Mass Spectrometry Laboratory, Institut Jacques Monod, UMR 7592, Univ Paris Diderot, CNRS, Sorbonne Paris Cité, F-75205 Paris, France
Institut Jacques Monod

### Submitter
Thibaut Léger

### Lab Head
Dr Jean-Michel Camadro
Mass Spectrometry Laboratory, Institut Jacques Monod, UMR 7592, Univ Paris Diderot, CNRS, Sorbonne Paris Cité, F-75205 Paris, France


