### Accession
PXD009410

### Title
ECM characterization of aortas from Adamts5+/+ and Adamts5∆cat AngII-treated mice by LC-MS/MS

### Description
Objective - Thoracic aortic aneurysm (TAA), a degenerative disease of the aortic wall, is accompanied by changes in the structure and composition of the aortic extracellular matrix (ECM). The ADAMTS (a disintegrin and metalloproteinase with thrombospondin motifs) family has recently been implicated in TAA formation. This study aimed to investigate the contribution of ADAMTS-5 to TAA development. Approach and Results - A model of aortic dilatation by angiotensin II (AngII) infusion was adopted in mice lacking the catalytic domain of ADAMTS-5 (Adamts5Δcat). Adamts5Δcat mice showed an attenuated rise in blood pressure whilst displaying increased dilatation of the ascending aorta. Interestingly, a comparison of the aortic ECM from AngII-treated wildtype and Adamts5Δcat mice revealed versican as the most up-regulated ECM protein in Adamts5Δcat mice. This was accompanied by a marked reduction of ADAMTS-specific versican cleavage products (versikine) and a decrease of low-density lipoprotein-related protein 1 (LRP1). Silencing LRP1 expression in human aortic smooth muscle cells reduced the expression of ADAMTS5, attenuated the generation of versikine but increased soluble ADAMTS-1. A similar increase in ADAMTS-1 was observed in aortas of AngII-treated Adamts5Δcat mice, but was not sufficient to maintain versican processing and prevent aortic dilatation. Conclusions - Our results support the emerging role of ADAMTS proteases in TAA. ADAMTS-5 rather than ADAMTS-1 is the key protease for versican regulation in murine aortas. Further studies are needed to define the ECM substrates of the different ADAMTS proteases and their contribution to TAA formation.

### Sample Protocol
Animal experiments: Osmotic mini-pumps (Alzet, model 1004) containing AngII (1.44 mg/g/d dissolved in saline) were implanted in 10 to 12-week-old male Adamts5Δcat (n=5) and Adamts5+/+ (n=6) mice derived from littermates of heterozygous breeders. Animals were sacrificed after 4 weeks and the entire aorta was excised and immediately washed in sterile phosphate buffer saline (PBS). The entire aorta was snap-frozen at -80C° for subsequent proteomic analysis. Protein enrichment: ECM proteins were enriched using a three-step extraction method, as previously developed in our laboratory and published. In essence, the diced samples were initially washed 5 times with cold PBS supplemented with protease inhibitors and 25mM EDTA to ensure inhibition of metalloproteinases. Then proteins were extracted in 0.5M NaCl buffer supplemented with 10mM Tris at pH 7.5, 1:100 (v:v) of a proteinase inhibitor cocktail and 25mM EDTA. The volume of the buffer was adjusted to 5:1 (v:w). Samples were mildly vortexed for 2hrs at room temperature (RT) to solubilize loosely bound ECM and ECM-associated proteins, after which the NaCl buffer was collected. Next, tissues were incubated in 0.08% SDS buffer supplemented with proteinase inhibitor cocktail and 25mM EDTA (same ratios as for NaCl buffer above). Samples were mildly vortexed for 2hrs at RT to achieve removal of cellular components. SDS extracts were then collected and tissue samples were washed briefly with water. Eventually, the proteins were extracted in 4M GuHCl buffer, pH 5.8, supplemented with 50mM sodium acetate at pH 5.8, 1:100 (v:v) of a proteinase inhibitor cocktail and 25mM EDTA.  The volume of the buffer was adjusted to 5:1 (v:w) and the incubation was performed for 48hrs at RT. This GuHCl extract was used for LC-MS/MS analysis.  Protein deglycosylation: Next, 15µg of protein of each GuHCl sample were mixed with 100% ethanol and incubated at -20 °C overnight to remove guanidine. Precipitated proteins were pelleted by centrifugation and upon removal of ethanol the pellets were dried using a vacuum centrifuge. Then proteins were re-suspended in deglycosylation buffer (0.2mol/L Tris, 0.2mol/L sodium acetate, 0.1mol/L EDTA, 0.05mol/L sodium phosphate, pH 6.8) and deglycosylated using the following deglycosylation enzymes (chondroitinase ABC (1:100), keratinase (1:500), heparinase II (1:500), α2-3,6,8,9-neuraminidase (1:200), ß-N-acetylglucosaminidase (1:200) and O-glycosidase (1:200)). After an initial incubation of 1h at 25°C followed by incubation at 37 °C for 24hrs, the samples were speed-vac dried and PNGase F (1:200) was added together with 18O water to identify N-linked glycosylation sites by isotopic mass-differences in the MS analysis. Samples were incubated for further 48hrs.  In-solution digest: Deglycosylated proteins were denatured with 6M urea and 2M thiourea in each sample, reduced with DTT (final conc. 10mM) for 1h at 37°C and alkylated with IAA (final conc. 50mM) for 1h at RT in the dark. Proteins were precipitated with ice-cold acetone (8x reaction volume) overnight at -20 °C. Protein pellets were speed-vac dried, resuspendend in 0.1M TEAB buffer, pH 8.2, containing trypsin at a trypsin:protein ratio of 1:50. After overnight digestion at 37 °C in agitation, 10% TFA was added to stop the reaction.  Peptide clean-up using C18: Resulting tryptic peptides were purified using a 96-well C18 spin plate (Harvard Apparatus) according to standard protocols. In brief: resin was activated using methanol, this was followed by wash steps (80% acetonitrile and 0.1% TFA) and equilibrating steps (1% acetonitrile and 0.1% TFA), always using 200µl of volume for each well. After sample loading and further 3 wash steps, samples were eluted with 50% acetonitrile and 0.1% TFA twice. Eluted samples were dried and re-suspended in 2% acetonitrile, 0.05% TFA for LC-MS/MS analysis. LC-MS/MS analysis: The resuspended peptide samples were separated on a nanoflow LC system (UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano). Samples were injected onto a nano-trap column (Acclaim® PepMap100 C18 Trap, 5mm x 300um, 5µm, 100Å), at a flow rate of 25µL/min for 3min, using 0.1% FA in H2O. The following nano LC gradient was used to separate the peptides at 0.3µL/min: 0−10min, 4-10% B; 10−75min, 10-30% B; 75-80min, 30−40% B; 80-85min, 40-99%B, 85-89.8min 99%B, 89.8-90min 99-4%B, 90-120min 4% B, where A = 0.1% FA in H2O, B = 80% ACN, 0.1% FA in H2O. The nano column (Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 50 cm x 75 µm, 3 µm, 100 Å) was kept at 40°C and coupled to a nanospray source (Picoview, New Objective, US). Spectra were collected from a Q Exactive HF (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using full MS mode (resolution of 60,000 at 200m/z) over the mass-to-charge (m/z) range 350–1600. Data-dependent MS2 scan was performed using the top 15 ions in each full MS scan (resolution of 15,000 at 200m/z) with dynamic exclusion enabled.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer (version 2.1.0.81, Thermo Scientific) was used to search raw data files against the mouse database (UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot version 2016_02, 16683 protein entries) using Mascot (version 2.3.01, Matrix Science). The mass tolerance was set at 10ppm for precursor ions and 20mmu for fragment ions. Trypsin was used as the enzyme with up to two missed cleavages being allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was chosen as a fixed modification; oxidation of methionine, lysine and proline, and deamidation of asparagine in the presence of 18O water were chosen as variable modifications. Scaffold (version 4.7.3, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS-based peptide and protein identifications with the following filters; a peptide probability of greater than 95.0% (as specified by the Peptide Prophet algorithm), a protein probability of greater than 99.0%, and at least two independent peptides per protein. The normalized total ion current (TIC) was used for quantification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ascending aorta, Protease, Aneurysm, Adamts, Lc-ms/ms, Extracellular matrix

### Affiliations
King's British Heart Foundation Centre, King's College London, London, UK
Cardiovascular Division, King's College London

### Submitter
Xiaoke Yin

### Lab Head
Dr Manuel Mayr
King's British Heart Foundation Centre, King's College London, London, UK


