### Accession
PXD033780

### Title
Evaluation of a Pooling Chemoproteomics Strategy with an FDA-approved Drug Library

### Description
Chemoproteomics is a key platform for characterizing the mode of action (MoA) for compounds, especially for targeted protein degraders such as proteolysis targeting chimerics (PROTACs) and molecular glues. With deep proteome coverage, multiplexed tandem mass tag-mass spectrometry (TMT-MS) can tackle up to 18 samples in a single experiment. Here, we present a pooling strategy to further enhance the throughput, and apply the strategy to an FDA-approved drug library (95 best-in-class compounds). The TMT-MS-based pooling strategy was evaluated in the following steps. First, we demonstrated the capability of TMT-MS by analyzing over 15,000 unique proteins (>12,000 gene products) in HEK293 cells treated with five PROTACs (two BRD/BET degraders and three degraders for FAK, ALK, and BTK kinases). We then introduced a rationalized pooling strategy to separate structurally similar compounds in different pools, and identified the proteomic response to 14 pools from the drug library. Finally, we validated the proteomic response from one pool by re-profiling the cells under individual drug treatment with sufficient replicates. Interestingly, numerous proteins were found to change upon drug treatment, including AMD1, ODC1, PRKX, PRKY, EXO1, AEN and LRRC58 by 7-Hydroxystaurosporine; C6orf64, HMGCR and RRM2 by Sorafenib; SYS1 and ALAS1 by Venetoclax; and ATF3, CLK1 and CLK4 by Palbocilib. Thus, the pooling chemoproteomics screening provides an efficient method for dissecting the molecular targets of compound libraries.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293 cells treated with compounds or vehicle were harvested and prepared for 18-plex tandem-mass-tag (TMT) labeling. The TMT labeled peptides were pooled with an equal amount of each the pooled samples were desalted and fractionated into 40 fractions on an RP-HPLC column (3.0mm x 15 cm) under basic pH conditions. Each fraction was further separated on a reverse phase columns (20 cm X 75 µm, 1.9 μm C18 resin) during a 1.5h gradient of 12-36% buffer B (buffer A: 0.2% formic acid, 3% DMSO; buffer B: buffer A plus 65% ACN) and analyzed by Q exactive HF (Thermo Scientific) with one MS scan and up to 20 data-dependent high-resolution MS/MS scans.

### Data Protocol
Acquired MS raw data were processed using the JUMP software suite to improve sensitivity and specificity, which combines the advantages of pattern matching with de novo sequencing tags to score putative peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs).  Searches were performed using 6 ppm mass tolerance for precursor ions due to JUMP’s auto mass correction function and 15ppm for fragment ions, allowing up to two missed trypsin cleavage sites. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+304.2071 Da), cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) and dynamic mass shift for oxidation (+15.99491 on Met) and three maximal dynamic modification sites. The assigned peptides are filtered by minimal peptide length, maximum miscleavages, mass-to-charge accuracy and matching scores. The peptides are then divided into groups according to peptide length, trypticity, modification, miscleavage, and charge and then further filtered by matching scores to reduce protein FDR to below 1%. Proteins were quantified by summing reporter ion counts across all matched PSMs using our in-house software.

### Publication Abstract
Chemoproteomics is a key platform for characterizing the mode of action for compounds, especially for targeted protein degraders such as proteolysis targeting chimeras (PROTACs) and molecular glues. With deep proteome coverage, multiplexed tandem mass tag-mass spectrometry (TMT-MS) can tackle up to 18 samples in a single experiment. Here, we present a pooling strategy for further enhancing the throughput and apply the strategy to an FDA-approved drug library (95 best-in-class compounds). The TMT-MS-based pooling strategy was evaluated in the following steps. First, we demonstrated the capability of TMT-MS by analyzing more than 15&#x202f;000 unique proteins (&gt; 12&#x202f;000 gene products) in HEK293 cells treated with five PROTACs (two BRD/BET degraders and three degraders for FAK, ALK, and BTK kinases). We then introduced a rationalized pooling strategy to separate structurally similar compounds in different pools and identified the proteomic response to 14 pools from the drug library. Finally, we validated the proteomic response from one pool by reprofiling the cells via treatment with individual drugs with sufficient replicates. Interestingly, numerous proteins were found to change upon drug treatment, including AMD1, ODC1, PRKX, PRKY, EXO1, AEN, and LRRC58 with 7-hydroxystaurosporine; C6orf64, HMGCR, and RRM2 with Sorafenib; SYS1 and ALAS1 with Venetoclax; and ATF3, CLK1, and CLK4 with Palbocilib. Thus, pooling chemoproteomics screening provides an efficient method for dissecting the molecular targets of compound libraries.

### Keywords
Mass spectrometry; proteomics; chemoproteomics; tandem mass tag; pooling strategy; protac; molecular glue; targeted protein degeneration; fda library

### Affiliations
St.Jude Children's Research Hospital
St.jude children's research hospital

### Submitter
huan sun

### Lab Head
Dr Junmin Peng
St.jude children's research hospital


