### Accession
PXD012609

### Title
Label free quantitative proteomics of EZH2 knocked down-tamoxifen resistant MCF-7 cells unravels novel targets for regaining sensitivity towards Tamoxifen

### Description
Resistance to tamoxifen is a major challenge in the treatment of estrogen receptor positive breast cancer. Acquired resistance to drug involves multilayered genetic and epigenetic regulation . The oncogene EZH2 plays significant role in the development of resistance against tamoxifen, widely used in the treatment of breast cancer. Inhibition of EZH2 has proven to reverse the tamoxifen resistance breast cancer cells back to the sensitive state. The molecular mechanism through which EZH2 inhibition triggers its effects are not known.This study was conducted to understand the global change in proteome profile of tamoxifen resistant MCF-7 breast cancer cells as a result of effect of EZH2 knockdown. Label Free Quantitative proteomics revealed a large number of proteins altered in acquired tamoxifen resistant cells compared to the sensitive cells. A total of 286 proteins were identified with normalized RT for each m/z out of which 86 proteins were upregulated by more than 1.3 fold and 98 proteins were down regulated by more than 1.3 fold in MCF-7 tamoxifen resistant breast cancer cells in comparison to the sensitive breast cancer cells. Upon EZH2 knockdown in tamoxifen resistant cells, a total of 115 proteins were found to be altered with 20 proteins upregulated by more than 1.3 fold and 49 proteins down regulated by more than 1.3 fold. Among the top upregulated proteins were L-lactate dehydrogenase A chain, Alpha and Gamma-enolase, Calreticulin, heat shock protein HSP-90-beta, Alpha-actinin-4, Elongation factor 1-alpha, Vimentin, Protein S100A6, Putative protein FAM10A5, Heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein A1 and Keratin 1. In addition, 15 proteins were found to be down regulated in EZH2si transfected tamoxifen sensitive cells which otherwise were highlyup regulated in resistant cells in the presence of normal level of EZH2. This indicates a possible regulation of these molecules by EZH2 leading to loss of resistance. Our data unveils important molecular players downstream to EZH2 knockdown leading to regain of sensitivity to tamoxifen in acquired tamoxifen resistance.Thus, EZH2 seems to exert its effects through regulation of metabolism, epithelial to mesenchymal transition and protein synthesis & folding. Hence, targeting EZH2 or the molecules down the cascade might be helpful in reacquiring sensitivity to tamoxifen intamoxifen-resistant cells.

### Sample Protocol
For extraction of protein from MTR and MTS cells, cells were harvested in protein lysis buffer (0.025 M Tris, 0.15 M NaCl, 0.001 M EDTA, 1% NP-40, 5% glycerol, pH 7.4) supplemented with a protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Invitrogen). The homogenate was centrifuged at 14,000 rpm for 30 minutes at 4ºC and the supernatant was collected. Protein quantification was done by Bradford assay (Sigma). Protein samples (500µg) were precipitated with 30% TCA at 4ºC for 16 hr. After centrifugation at 14,000 g at 4ºC for 30 minutes, the supernatant was discarded, and the pellet was air dried. The protein pellet was re-suspended in 50 µl of 6 M urea. Protein (30 µg) was denatured by incubating at 60ºC for 1 hour with 2 µl of triflouroethanol and then reduced by diothiothretol (DTT); cysteines were alkylated by iodoacetamide. Next, the samples were digested overnight at 37°C in a final concentration of 2 M urea with 100 mM Tris- HCl (pH 8.5), containing trypsin enzyme/substrate (1:20; (Promega)). The reaction was further quenched by addition of 90% formic acid (4%). Digested samples were stored at –80°C until mass spectrometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data were analyzed using MaxQuant software version 1.5.2.8 and searched against UniProt human database. The search engine was set to perform at precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm and MS/MS tolerance of .05 Da. For protein identification, all proteins identified with at least 1 unique peptide were kept in analysis and the false discovery rate (FDR) was set to <1%. The enzyme specificity was set to trypsin with the maximum number of 1 missed cleavage. The search included variable modifications of protein as N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation and fixed modification of carbamidomethylation of cysteine.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Breast cancer, Tamoxifen, Ezh2

### Affiliations
National Dairy Research Institute

### Submitter
Syed Azmal Ali

### Lab Head
Dr Syed Azmal Ali
National Dairy Research Institute


