### Accession
PXD025431

### Title
Atopic dermatitis epidermis PCT-DIA

### Description
Atopic Dermatitis (AD) is the most common inflammatory skin disease and characterized by a deficient epidermal barrier and cutaneous inflammation. Genetic studies suggest a key role of keratinocytes in AD pathogenesis, but the alterations in the proteome that occur in the entire epidermis have not been defined. Employing a pressure-cycling technology-data-independent acquisition (PCT-DIA) approach, we performed quantitative proteomics of epidermis from healthy volunteers and lesional and non-lesional skin of AD patients. Results were validated by targeted proteomics using parallel reaction monitoring mass spectrometry or by immunofluorescence staining. The identified proteins reflect the strong inflammation in lesional skin and the defect in keratinocyte differentiation and epidermal stratification. Most importantly, they reveal impaired activation of the NRF2-antioxidant pathway and reduced abundance of mitochondrial proteins involved in key metabolic pathways in the epidermis. These results provide insight into the molecular alterations in the epidermis of AD patients and identify novel targets for pharmaceutical intervention.

### Sample Protocol
Skin samples were harvested from individuals as 5-6 mm punch biopsies using a standard biopsy punch. Biopsies were incubated for 1 min in 60°C PBS under swirling and immediately cooled down for 1 min in 4°C PBS. The dermis was peeled off from the epidermis using forceps, and both specimens were snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80 °C until further use. For PCT, in average ˜2 mg of epidermal tissue was placed into PCT MicroTubes (C/N: MT-96; Pressure BioSciences Inc. (PBI, South Easton, Easton, MA). After adding 30 µl of freshly prepared lysis buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 1x complete protease inhibitors, EDTA-free), tubes were sealed using a PCT microPestle (C/N: MTWS-MP96-B; PBI). Pressure assisted protein extraction and tandem digestion were performed as originally described (Guo et al., 2015) with the exception that Lys-C was used at 1:50 and trypsin at 1:40 w/w enzyme to substrate ratio. The resulting C18-cleaned peptides were diluted to 0.3 A280 U/ml using 3% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid (FA) and mixed with iRT peptides (P/N: Ki-3002; Biognosys, Schlieren, Switzerland) at a ratio of 1/20 (v/v).

### Data Protocol
Data-independent acquisition (DIA) proteomics Peptide samples were analyzed in DIA mode on a hybrid quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive HF, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA) equipped with a Digital PicoView source (New Objective, Woburn, MA) and operated in line with a nano UPLC system (nanoACQUITY, Waters Inc., Milford, MA). For each sample, 2 µl of purified peptide mixture were trapped on a nanoEase M/Z Symmetry C18 trap column (5 μm, 180 μm X 20 mm, Waters Inc.) and separated on a nanoEase M/Z HSS T3 C18 Column (100 Å, 1.8 μm, 75 × 150 mm, Waters Inc.) at a flow rate of 300 nl min-1 using a gradient from 1 % solvent B (0.1 % formic acid in acetonitrile, Romil, Cambridge, UK) / 99 % solvent A (0.1 % formic acid in water, Romil) to 35 % solvent B / 65 % solvent A within 90 min. Mass spectra were recorded at a resolution of 30000 (@ 200 m/z) in profile mode using positive polarity. MS1 scans covering 350-1500 m/z were acquired using an AGC target of 3e6 and a maximum IT of 41 ms. Each MS1 scan was followed by 32 multiplexed fragment ion scans (MS2) tiling the m/z range of 350 to 1500 in 25 Da windows. The maximum injection time per MS2 scan was selected automatically by the instrument software to assure acquisition at a fixed scan rate of 12 Hz. Accordingly, the instrument cycle time was around 2.4 s at a chromatographic peak width of 20-30 s. The AGC target for MS2 scans was set to 3e6 and isolated precursors were fragmented using HCD at a NCE of 28.  Data analysis of DIA proteomics experiments Raw MS data were analyzed with Spectronaut 14.10.201222.47784 (Biognosys) (Bruderer et al., 2015) using a hybrid spectral library compiled from recorded DIA runs and shotgun MS from pooled lesional, NL and control samples searched against the Biognosys human Uniprot-Reference database uniprot_sprot_2020-01-01_HUMAN (20’367 entries) with default parameters. For analysis, default ‘BGS Factory Settings’ were applied.

### Publication Abstract
Atopic dermatitis is the most common inflammatory skin disease and is characterized by a deficient epidermal barrier and cutaneous inflammation. Genetic studies suggest a key role of keratinocytes in atopic dermatitis pathogenesis, but the alterations in the proteome that occur in the full epidermis have not been defined. Using a pressure-cycling technology and data-independent acquisition approach, we performed quantitative proteomics of epidermis from healthy volunteers and lesional and nonlesional patient skin. Results were validated by targeted proteomics using parallel reaction monitoring mass spectrometry and immunofluorescence staining. Proteins that were differentially abundant in the epidermis of patients with atopic dermatitis versus in healthy control reflect the strong inflammation in lesional skin and the defect in keratinocyte differentiation and epidermal stratification that already characterizes nonlesional skin. Most importantly, they reveal impaired activation of the NRF2-antioxidant pathway and reduced abundance of mitochondrial proteins involved in key metabolic pathways in the affected epidermis. Analysis of primary human keratinocytes with small interfering RNA&#x2012;mediated NRF2 knockdown revealed that the impaired NRF2 activation and mitochondrial abnormalities are partially interlinked. These results provide insight into the molecular alterations in the epidermis of patients with atopic dermatitis and identify potential targets for pharmaceutical intervention.

### Keywords
Pressure cycling technology, Atopic dermatitis, Epidermis, Data-independent acquisition

### Affiliations
Technical University of Denmark, Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine ETH Zurich, Department of Biology
Technical University of Denmark

### Submitter
Ulrich auf dem Keller

### Lab Head
Dr Ulrich auf dem Keller
Technical University of Denmark, Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine ETH Zurich, Department of Biology


