### Accession
PXD031458

### Title
Novel Targeted Proteomic Profiling of Potential Biomarkers in Postural Orthostatic Tachycardia Syndrome (POTS)

### Description
Postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome (POTS) is a cardiovascular autonomic disorder leading to debilitating symptoms and the therapeutic alternatives are limited. Proteomics is a large-scale study of proteins that enables a systematic unbiased view on disease and health, allowing stratification on patients based on their protein background. We aimed to explore proteins that may be related with the putative etiology of POTS compared with healthy controls using a highly powerful targeted proteomic mass spectrometry technique. We aimed to explore proteins that may be related with the putative etiology of POTS compared with healthy controls using a highly powerful targeted proteomic mass spectrometry technique.

### Sample Protocol
We performed an explorative, age- and sex-matched, case-control study in 65 POTS patients and 65 healthy controls recruited at the study site in Malmö, Sweden, with a mean age 30±9.8 years (51.4% women) and 31±9.8 years (48.6% women), respectively. We analyzed plasma proteins in double-blinded blood samples using data-independent acquisition (DIA) mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
DIA data were analyzed by using Spectronaut with the directDIA workflow. The data was extracted based on maximum intensity for both precursors and fragment ions. The default settings were applied for the peptides and proteins identification and quantification. In brief, precursor posterior error probability (PEP) cutoff of 0.2 and estimation of False Discovery Rate (FDRs) by using Q value as 0.01 for both precursors and proteins were performed for identification. The p-value was calculated by kernel-density estimator.  For the quantification, interference correction was activated and a minimum of 3 fragment ions and 2 precursor ions were kept. The area of MS2 level was used for quantitation. Peptide (stripped sequence) quantity was measured by the mean of 1–3 most intensive precursors, and protein quantity was calculated accordingly by the mean of 1–3 best peptides. Data was filtered by q-value and automatic strategy was used for the cross-run normalization. The protein Quant report was exported from Spectronaut and downstream statistical analysis was performed with Perseus 1.6.14.0. Label-free quantification (LFQ) DIA data was log2-transformed and normalized to median value of each sample.  Statistical analyses were performed in IBM SPSS Statistics 27 (IBM Corporation, Armonk, NY, USA), two-sample test was performed within the Perseus Software, and data were plotted with GraphPad Prism 9 and RStudio.

### Publication Abstract
Postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome (POTS) is a cardiovascular autonomic disorder characterized by excessive heart rate increase on standing, leading to debilitating symptoms with limited therapeutic possibilities. Proteomics is a large-scale study of proteins that enables a systematic unbiased view on disease and health, allowing stratification of patients based on their protein background. The aim of the present study was to determine plasma protein biomarkers of POTS and to reveal proteomic pathways differentially regulated in POTS. We performed an age- and sex-matched, case-control study in 130 individuals (case-control ratio 1:1) including POTS and healthy controls. Mean age in POTS was 30&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;9.8&#xa0;years (84.6% women) versus controls 31&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;9.8&#xa0;years (80.0% women). We analyzed plasma proteins using data-independent acquisition (DIA) mass spectrometry. Pathway analysis of significantly differently expressed proteins was executed using a cutoff log2 fold change set to 1.2 and false discovery rate (p-value) of&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.05. A total of 393 differential plasma proteins were identified. Label-free quantification of DIA-data identified 30 differentially expressed proteins in POTS compared with healthy controls. Pathway analysis identified the strongest network interactions particularly for proteins involved in thrombogenicity and enhanced platelet activity, but also inflammation, cardiac contractility and hypertrophy, and increased adrenergic activity. Our observations generated by the first use a label-free unbiased quantification reveal the proteomic footprint of POTS in terms of a hypercoagulable state, proinflammatory state, enhanced cardiac contractility and hypertrophy, skeletal muscle expression, and adrenergic activity. These findings support the hypothesis that POTS may be an autoimmune, inflammatory and hyperadrenergic disorder.

### Keywords
Postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome, Lc-msms, Proteomics, Pots, Biomarkers

### Affiliations
Dept. of Oncology, Clinical Sciences, Lund University, 221 85 Lund, Sweden
Department of Clinical Sciences, Lund University, Malmö,  Sweden

### Submitter
Charlotte Welinder

### Lab Head
Dr Madeleine Johansson
Department of Clinical Sciences, Lund University, Malmö,  Sweden


