### Accession
PXD027042

### Title
Expanding the Family of Extracellular Chaperones: Identification of Plasma Proteins with Chaperone Activity

### Description
Proteostasis, the balance of protein synthesis, folding and degradation, is essential to maintain cellular function and viability, and the many known intracellular chaperones are recognised as playing key roles in sustaining life. In contrast, the identity of constitutively secreted extracellular chaperones (ECs) and their physiological roles in extracellular proteostasis is less completely understood. In the current study we designed and implemented a novel strategy to discover new ECs present in human blood. This strategy was based on the well-known propensity of chaperones to bind to regions of hydrophobicity exposed on misfolding proteins. We attached a destabilised protein that misfolds at 37 oC to magnetic beads, and used this as "bait" to bind to potential EC proteins. The bait-bearing beads were incubated in human serum for 2 h at either 37 oC or 4 oC (the latter serving as a control, not expected to induce bait protein misfolding).  Proteins eluted from the beads were analysed by mass spectrometry to identify individual proteins and their relative abundance in eluates from beads incubated at 37 oC versus 4 oC.  A group of proteins significantly more abundant in the eluate from the beads incubated at 37 oC were selected for in vitro analysis of chaperone activity. It was shown that vitronectin and plasminogen activator-3 inhibited both the in vitro aggregation of the Alzheimer's  peptide (Aβ1-42) to form fibrillar amyloid, and the aggregation of citrate synthase to form unstructured (amorphous) aggregates. In contrast, prothrombin, C1r, and C1s inhibited the aggregation of Aβ1-42 but did not inhibit citrate synthase aggregation. This study thus identified five novel and abundant putative ECs which may play important roles in the maintenance of extracellular proteostasis, and which apparently have differing abilities to inhibit the amorphous and amyloid-forming protein aggregation pathways.

### Sample Protocol
SDS PAGE and preparation of excised gel pieces. 25 µl of eluted samples containing bound serum proteins (or not) (as described above) were supplemented with 8 µl of 4X SDS loading buffer (200 mM Tris-HCl, 400 mM DTT, 8% SDS (w/v), 6 mM bromophenol blue, 4.3M glycerol), reduced with the addition of 1 l β-mercaptoethanol, boiled for 5 min, and then separated by 10% SDS-PAGE and stained with Imperial protein stain (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Australia). SDS PAGE was terminated when the loading dye had just migrated off the bottom of the gel. The gel was then fixed in 5% (v/v) acetic acid, before excising horizontal sections of lanes cut into 1-2 mm lengths, and incubating these in 100 l of 100 mM NH4HCO3, pH 8.0, for 10 min. Subsequently, gel pieces were incubated for 20 min in 100 l of 50 mM NH4HCO3 / 50% (v/v) acetonitrile with occasional vortexing to remove the protein stain, and finally placed in 100 l of 100% (v/v) acetonitrile and dried by vacuum centrifugation. The gel pieces were then rehydrated and chemically reduced by incubating them for 30 min at 50 oC in 50 l of 10 mM DTT in 100 mM NH4HCO3. Subsequently, excess DTT buffer was removed, and then to alkylate proteins, 50 l of 20 mM iodoacetamide in 100 mM NH4HCO3 was added to the gel pieces, which were then incubated in the dark at room temperature for 40 min before transferring the gel pieces to 100% acetonitrile and vacuum centrifugation as described above.   In-gel tryptic digestion. The gel pieces prepared as described above, were then digested overnight at 37 °C with trypsin (12.5 ng/µl; V5111, Promega, WI, USA) in a sufficient volume of 100 mM NH4HCO3 to cover the gel pieces. The digestion was terminated with the addition of 2 μL of formic acid. Tryptic peptides were extracted twice with 50% acetonitrile/2% formic acid and dried under vacuum centrifugation. The peptides were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid and desalted on a pre-equilibrated C18 Omix Tip (Agilent, CA, USA), eluted in 50 % (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid, and dried under vacuum centrifugation.    Reverse phase C18 liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (RP-LC-MS/MS)  Lyophilised peptides were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid and bath sonicated for 20 minutes. The resuspended peptides were then centrifuged at 14,000 x g for 15 min to remove any insoluble debris, and the clarified peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS. The peptides were separated on an Ultimate 3000 nanoLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Australia) fitted with the Acclaim PepMap RSLC column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Australia), making use of a 60 min gradient (2–75% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid) running at a flow rate of 300 nl/min.  Peptides eluted from the nano LC column were subsequently ionized into the Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Australia). The electrospray source is fitted with a 10 μm emitter tip (New Objective, Woburn, MA) and maintained at a 1.6 kV electrospray voltage. The temperature of the capillary was set to 250 °C. Precursor ions were selected for MS/MS fragmentation using a data-dependent “Top 10” method operating in Fourier transformation acquisition mode with higher energy collision fragmentation. FT-MS analysis on the Q Exactive Plus was carried out at 70,000 resolution and an AGC target of 1x106 ions in full MS. MS/MS scans were carried out at 17,500 resolution with an AGC target of 2x104 ions. Maximum injection times were set to 30 and 50 ms respectively. The ion selection threshold for triggering MS/MS fragmentation was set to 25,000 counts and an isolation width of 2.0 Da was used to perform HCD fragmentation with normalised collision energy of 27.

### Data Protocol
Raw spectra files were processed using the Proteome Discoverer software 2.4 (Thermo) incorporating the Sequest search algorithm. Peptide identifications were determined using a 20-ppm precursor ion tolerance and a 0.1 Da MS/MS fragment ion tolerance for FT-MS and HCD fragmentation. Carbamidomethylation modification of cysteines was considered a static modification while oxidation of methionine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, and acetyl modification on N-terminal residues were set as variable modifications allowing for a maximum of two missed cleavages. The data was processed through Percolator for estimation of false discovery rates. Protein identifications were validated employing a q-value of 0.01. The relative abundance of proteins within each sample was calculated by label-free quantitation using normalised spectral abundance factors as described in 26.

### Publication Abstract
Proteostasis, the balance of protein synthesis, folding and degradation, is essential to maintain cellular function and viability, and the many known intracellular chaperones are recognized as playing key roles in sustaining life. In contrast, the identity of constitutively secreted extracellular chaperones (ECs) and their physiological roles in extracellular proteostasis is less completely understood. We designed and implemented a novel strategy, based on the well-known propensity of chaperones to bind to regions of hydrophobicity exposed on misfolding proteins, to discover new ECs present in human blood. We used a destabilized protein that misfolds at 37&#xb0;C as "bait" to bind to potential ECs in human serum and captured the complexes formed on magnetic beads. Proteins eluted from the beads were identified by mass spectrometry and a group of seven abundant serum proteins was selected for in vitro analysis of chaperone activity. Five of these proteins were shown to specifically inhibit protein aggregation. Vitronectin and plasminogen activator-3 inhibited both the in vitro aggregation of the Alzheimer's &#x3b2; peptide (A&#x3b2;<sup>1-42</sup> ) to form fibrillar amyloid, and the aggregation of citrate synthase (CS) to form unstructured (amorphous) aggregates. In contrast, prothrombin, C1r, and C1s inhibited the aggregation of A&#x3b2;<sup>1-42</sup> but did not inhibit CS aggregation. This study thus identified five novel and abundant putative ECs which may play important roles in the maintenance of extracellular proteostasis, and which apparently have differing abilities to inhibit the amorphous and amyloid-forming protein aggregation pathways.

### Keywords
Proteostasis, Plasminogen activator inhibitor 3, C1s, C1r, Extracellular chaperones, Prothrombin, Vitronectin

### Affiliations
Macquarie University
Illawarra Health and Medical Research Institute. Northfields Avenue, Wollongong. NSW. 2522. Australia.

### Submitter
Albert Lee

### Lab Head
Dr Mark Wilson
Illawarra Health and Medical Research Institute. Northfields Avenue, Wollongong. NSW. 2522. Australia.


