### Accession
PXD048115

### Title
Ub E2 enzyme UBE2E1+ pepetide(KEGYES)_HDX-MS

### Description
The ubiquitin E2 enzyme UBE2E1 is able to catalyse ubiquitination modification of KEGYES/KEGYEE sequence-containing proteins in a manner that does not require an E3 enzyme. Here, we investigate the binding hotspot regions of UBE2E1 with the sequence KEGYES by hydrogen-deuterium exchange mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
UBE2E1 at a final concentration of 100 μM was incubated with 5-fold equivalents hexapeptide（KEGYES）at 4°C. This mixture was then diluted 10 times with D2O solution (50 mM HEPES, pD 7.5 150 mM NaCl, 99% D2O) to initiate the deuterium exchange. At time points (0.5, 1.5, 5 min) , hydrogen/deuterium exchange reaction was quenched by the addition of buffer (4 M Gn-HCl, 200 mM citric acid, 500 mM TCEP, pH 1.8 ) and then subjected to digestion by pepsin for 3 min. Next, the peptides were separated and analyzed using a Thermo Scientific Q Exactive connected to a Thermo-Dionex Ultimate 3000 HPLC system.

### Data Protocol
HDX-MS data were processed and analyzed using HDExaminer (v.PD1.4, ThermoFisher Scientific).

### Publication Abstract
Ubiquitination, catalyzed usually by a three-enzyme cascade (E1, E2, E3), regulates various eukaryotic cellular processes. E3 ligases are the most critical components of this catalytic cascade, determining both substrate specificity and polyubiquitination linkage specificity. Here, we reveal the mechanism of a naturally occurring E3-independent ubiquitination reaction of a unique human E2 enzyme UBE2E1 by solving the structure of UBE2E1 in complex with substrate SETDB1-derived peptide. Guided by this peptide sequence-dependent ubiquitination mechanism, we developed an E3-free enzymatic strategy SUE1 (sequence-dependent ubiquitination using UBE2E1) to efficiently generate ubiquitinated proteins with customized ubiquitinated sites, ubiquitin chain linkages and lengths. Notably, this strategy can also be used to generate site-specific branched ubiquitin chains or even NEDD8-modified proteins. Our work not only deepens the understanding of how an E3-free substrate ubiquitination reaction occurs in human cells, but also provides a practical approach for obtaining ubiquitinated proteins to dissect the biochemical functions of ubiquitination.

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Hdx-ms, Ub e2 enzyme

### Affiliations
New Cornerstone Science Laboratory, Tsinghua-Peking Joint Center for Life Sciences, MOE Key Laboratory of Bioorganic Phosphorus Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Center for Synthetic and Systems Biology, Department of Chemistry, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China.

### Submitter
Xiangwei Wu

### Lab Head
Mr Xiangwei Wu
New Cornerstone Science Laboratory, Tsinghua-Peking Joint Center for Life Sciences, MOE Key Laboratory of Bioorganic Phosphorus Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Center for Synthetic and Systems Biology, Department of Chemistry, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China.


