### Accession
PXD003054

### Title
Bovine protein glycation sites in different milk products

### Description
Here we studied the glycation of bovine milk proteins by lactose as dominant sugar in milk and hexoses using tandem mass spectrometry (CID and ETD mode). In a bottom-up proteomics approach after enriching glycated peptides by boronate affinity chromatography, first we could identify 260 lactosylated peptides corresponding to 124 lactosylation sites in 28 bovine milk proteins in raw milk, raw colostrum, three brands of pasteurized milk, three brands of UHT milk, and five brands of infant formula. The same regular and additionally two lactose-free milk products (pasteurized and UHT milk) where lactose is enzymatically cleaved into the more reactive hexoses were analyzed in terms of hexosylation sites that resulted in identification of 124 hexosylated tryptic peptides corresponding to 86 glycation sites in 17 bovine milk proteins. In quantitative terms glycation increased from raw milk to pasteurized milk to UHT milk and infant formula, i.e., with the harsher processing conditions. Lactose-free milk contained significantly higher hexosylation degrees than the corresponding regular milk product.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were precipitated from three aliquots of each milk sample using Folch extraction (methanol/chloroform/water). The organic and aqueous phases were discarded, the remaining protein pellets were immediately dried under vacuum, and reconstituted in lysis buffer (200 µL; 50 mmol/L Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 7 mol/L urea, 2 mol/L thiourea, 2% w/v CHAPS). Protein quantities were determined by a colorimetric Bradford assay using BSA as standard and the relative protein contents confirmed by SDS-PAGE. Proteins were reduced with DTT, alkylated with IAA, and digested with trypsin overnight. The desalted tryptic digest (100 µg protein) was loaded on the m-aminophenylboronic acid-agarose column and washed before the glycated peptides were eluted first with 0.1 mol/L  and then with 0.2 mol/L aqueous acetic acid at 37°C. The desalted boronate affinity enriched tryptic peptides were dissolved in aqueous acetonitrile (3% v/v) containing formic acid (0.1% v/v) and separated on a nano-Acquity UPLC (Waters GmbH, Eschborn, Germany) coupled on-line to an LTQ Orbitrap XL (ETD) mass spectrometer  equipped with a nano-ESI source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) (PMID: 26210590). Tandem mass spectra were acquired in CID or ETD mode using data dependent acquisition (DDA) for the six most intense signals and all potentially glycated peptides were targeted in a subsequent analysis using the ETD-mode to confirm their identification in different milk samples.

### Data Protocol
Data processing Acquired datasets were analyzed with the Proteome Discoverer software (Thermo Fischer Scientific) using Sequest (Thermo Fischer Scientific) to search against the SwissProt database. The parameter settings were cysteine carbamidomethylation, methionine oxidation, lactosylation (324.10 Da) and hexose glycation (162.05 Da) as variable modifications, precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance of 0.8 Da, trypsin as proteolytic enzyme, and up to three missed cleavage sites. Database searches of modified peptides used higher confidence levels to reduce the number of false positives, i.e. only sequences ranked on position 1 with charge-dependent scores (PMID: 26210590) were considered. Additionally, the identified glycated peptides were confirmed by visually checking the assigned signals of each spectrum. Finally, all confirmed glycated peptides were relatively quantified by integrating the XICs (m/z ± 0.02) at specific retention times.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lactose-free milk, Nrpc-esi-ms/ms, Electron transfer dissociation (etd), Boronate affinity chromatography (bac), Maillard reaction, Non-enzymatic glycosylation, Infant formula

### Affiliations
Institute of Bioanalytical Chemistry, Faculty of Chemistry and Mineralogy, and Center for Biotechnology and Biomedicine, Universität Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany

### Submitter
Sanja Milkovska-Stamenova

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Ralf Hoffmann
Institute of Bioanalytical Chemistry, Faculty of Chemistry and Mineralogy, and Center for Biotechnology and Biomedicine, Universität Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany


