### Accession
PXD020524

### Title
Histone H1 profiling in breast cancer samples

### Description
Epigenetic aberrations have been recognized as important contributors to cancer onset and development, and increasing evidence suggests that linker histone H1 variants may serve as biomarkers useful for patient stratification, as well as play an important role as drivers in cancer. Although traditionally histone H1 levels have been studied using antibody-based methods and RNA expression, these approaches suffer from limitations. Mass-spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics represents the ideal tool to accurately quantify relative changes in protein abundance within complex samples. We used a label-free quantification approach to simultaneously analyze all somatic histone H1 variants in breast cancer patient samples (different areas laser-microdissected from the same tumor sections, and triple negative samples with/without relapse 3 years after chemotherapy.

### Sample Protocol
Whole tissue extracts were run on a gel and a large band (20-45 KDa) around the size of histone H1 variants was excised for in-gel digestion with trypsin.

### Data Protocol
The MS analysis was performed on a 50 cm EASY-Spray column (Thermo Fisher Scientic) connected online to a Q Exactive HF instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific) through an EASY-Spray™ Ion Sources (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid (FA) in ddH2O and solvent B was 80% ACN plus 0.1% FA. Peptides were injected in an aqueous 1% trifluoroacetic Acid (TFA) solution at a flow rate of 500 nL/min and were separated with a 95 min 3%–60% gradient of solvent B (80 min 3-30%, 10 min 30-40%, 5 min 40-60%), at a flow rate of 250 nL/min.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Breast cancer, Histone h1

### Affiliations
Istituto Europeo di Oncologia
European Institute of Oncology, Milan

### Submitter
Roberta Noberini

### Lab Head
Dr Tiziana Bonaldi
European Institute of Oncology, Milan


