### Accession
PXD015137

### Title
hnRNP M and HSP 90α as Potential Biomarkers in Early Stage Cutaneous Head and Neck Melanoma Tissue

### Description
Background: Timely diagnosis is important for successful treatment of cutaneous melanoma. Currently, Breslow tumor thickness and mitotic rate are used for malignant melanoma classification and prognosis, but these parameters can assess disease progression risk only to a certain degree. Therefore, there is a need for new melanoma protein biomarkers that would aid early and accurate diagnosis and prediction of their metastatic potential.   Methodology and Findings: This retrospective case control study is based on proteomic profiling of formalin-fixed archival tissues of 31 early-stage head and neck cutaneous malignant melanoma samples using liquid chromatography / mass spectrometry. A melanoma proteomic profile was identified and protein expression levels were compared to the proteome profile of melanocytic naevi and correlated to established prognostic factors and disease-specific survival. In accordance with the American Joint Committee on Cancer guidelines, recursive partitioning multivariate analysis was used to identify potential biomarkers associated with metastatic potential of early-melanoma. Heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein M and heat shock protein 90 alpha were profiled as independent prognostic factors. Their elevated expression was clinically relevant for predicting an exceedingly high metastatic hazard ratio. These proteins were superior in estimating disease progression risk when compared to Breslow thickness and mitotic rate. Conclusions and Significance: Identification of biomarkers in early stage cutaneous head and neck melanoma is an important step towards predicting metastatic potential and prognosis of the disease. Clinical confirmation and further validation of the proteins identified in this study would provide a novel tool for identifying patients at risk for developing metastatic disease.

### Sample Protocol
Experimental design: The stage of 31 CNHM tissue samples was determined according to AJCC criteria. The patients were postoperatively monitored and their oncological status was updated for a minimum of 60 months. Six pooled complex melanocytic nevi tissue samples from patients without malignant melanoma were used as a control sample. Proteins were extracted from FFPE tissues using a commercial kit (FFPE-FASP kit, Expedeon) according to manufacturers’ instructions. Protein concentration was determined using RC DC Protein Assay Kit II (Biorad). Digested peptides were purified using a 30 kDa cut-off Spin Filter centrifuge column and concentrated using Stage Tips. Peptides were separated on a C18 column by liquid chromatography (Easy-nLC, Proxeon Biosystems) and analyzed by mass spectrometry (LTQ Orbitrap Discovery, Thermo Scientific). Automated mass spectrometric measurement cycles consisted of full MS scanning and MS/MS scanning of up to twenty most intense ions. Full MS scans ranging from m/z 300 to 2,000, were obtained in the Orbitrap analyzer at a resolution of 100,000, with internal calibration of the instrument using the lock mass setting.  MaxQuant software version 1.5.1.2. (Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry) was used to process the raw data and quantify the detected proteins using intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) algorithm. Trypsin was selected for in silico digestion, carbamidomethylation, N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were used as variable peptide modifications. No fixed modifications were specified. False discovery rate at the peptide spectrum level and at the protein detection level was set at 1%. Minimum peptide length for protein identification was seven amino acids. The main search peptide mass tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm. Common laboratory contaminants were excluded from the analysis. Proteins were quantified using intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) a continuous intensity value of protein expression in individual samples (i.e. the ratio of the sum of the experimentally determined intensities of all peptides and the intensity of the individual detected peptide). Experimental data was compared with the set of human proteins available in the UniProt database (http://www.uniprot.org). Samples were analyzed in technical triplicates and proteins identified with at least two peptides in all samples were considered relevant for statistical analysis.

### Data Protocol
Statistical rationale: iBAQ values were used as proportionality ratios of patient vs. control sample. To determine possible association between protein expression and patient survival, recursive partitioning (RP) was implemented as rpart module within the programming language R (R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria URL https://www.R-project.org/ and SPSS (Version 22.0 released in 2013 IBM SPSS Statistics for Windows, Armonk, NY: IBM Corp.). RP-based programs clarify complex and non-linear interactions, and enable robust conclusions in high-dimensional data sets. They are increasingly explored in oncology for extracting risk factors, developing prognostic indexes, and optimizing diagnostic procedures and treatments. The result of recursive partitioning is presented as a survival tree, which begins with a starting node. All patients are included in the starting node, and their hazard ratio (HR) is 1. Using different cut-off values the starting patient group is partitioned in subgroups in one or more decision steps. The final nodes (leaves) correspond to subgroups with maximal difference in HR identified. It is important to note that their HR is expressed in comparison to starting node. The comparison of final nodes (leafs) was done using Kaplan-Meier survival curves and log-rank test. All statistical tests were two-sided. The p values ≤ 0.05 were considered statistically significant. Data processing was performed using the program R.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Melanoma; early stage; proteomics; tissue; biomarkers; hnrnp m; hsp 90α

### Affiliations
School of Medicine, University of Zagreb
Department for Proteomics, Center for Translational and Clinical Research, School of Medicine, University of Zagreb Department of Anatomy “Drago Perović”, School of Medicine, University of Zagreb

### Submitter
Ruđer Novak

### Lab Head
Dr Lovorka Grgurević
Department for Proteomics, Center for Translational and Clinical Research, School of Medicine, University of Zagreb Department of Anatomy “Drago Perović”, School of Medicine, University of Zagreb


