### Accession
PXD013602

### Title
Prochlorococcus extracellular vesicles: molecular composition and adsorption to diverse microbes

### Description
Extracellular vesicles are small (50-200 nm diameter) membrane-bound structures released by cells from all domains of life. Vesicles have been implicated in numerous microbial processes, including gene transfer, signaling, pathogenesis, and defense. While vesicles are abundant in the oceans, little is known about their contents or whether they interact with cells in this dilute environment. Here we show that extracellular vesicles contain a remarkable diversity of organic carbon compounds and likely mediate a complex network of export, transport and exchange within marine microbial communities. We report that vesicles from selected strains of Prochlorococcus, the most abundant cyanobacterium in the sea, and other bacteria can interact with cells of various marine microbes, including the numerically abundant heterotroph Pelagibacter. Through a combination of lipidomic, metabolomic and proteomic analyses, we show that two strains of Prochlorococcus export an enormous array of organic and inorganic compounds – including active, biogeochemically relevant enzymes – within vesicles. Vesicles from both strains contained some materials in common as well as numerous strain-specific differences, reflecting an even greater degree of functional complexity within natural vesicle populations. These data suggest additional roles for vesicles in carrying out extracellular biogeochemical reactions, mitigating toxicity from reactive oxygen species, and mediating energy and nutrient transfers in the oceans.

### Sample Protocol
Axenic batch cultures (20L) of Prochlorococcus marinus strain MIT9313 (PROMM) and Prochlorococcus marinus strain MIT9312 (PROM9) were grown along with a media/process control of 20L of artificial seawater media (AMP1).  Cell densities were measured by flow cytometry. Vesicles were isolated from each of the 20L batch cultures and gradient purified as described elsewhere, then washed three times in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS).  One media/process control sample from the 20L of AMP1 artificial seawater media was also collected. Following vesicle isolation, cell biomass from each strain was collected by filtering approximately 150 mL onto three separate Durapore (0.22 µm) filters. Media blanks were also collected on filters to serve as controls. All samples were stored at -80 °C until extraction.  Filters from the AMP1 media blank, MIT9312 cultures, or MIT9313 cultures were thawed, cut using sterile scissors and filters were resuspended (separately) in 1 mL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AMBIC) with 5 mM ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid disodium salt dihydrate (EDTA) buffer (pH 8) in a microcentrifuge tube containing glass beads. Four vesicle samples were extracted, corresponding to the PBS buffer blank, AMP1 media blank, MIT9312 vesicles and MIT9313 vesicles. Each vesicle sample (1 mL) was thawed and then additionally suspended in 250 µL of 250 mM AMBIC with 25 mM EDTA buffer (to a final concentration of 50 mM AMBIC, 5 mM EDTA; pH 8). Each filter or vesicle suspension was subjected to bead-beating for 30 seconds at 6 m/s, frozen at -20 °C for 45 minutes, and thawed. The bead-beating and freeze-thaw cycles were repeated twice followed by a third bead-beating cycle and an overnight freeze at -20 °C.    Lysed cells or vesicles were subjected to in-solution proteolytic digestion following identical procedures and accounting for differences in cell/particle counts and sample volumes.  RapiGest SF (Waters), an acid labile surfactant, was added to help facilitate protein solubilization (0.06% w/v). Next, disulfide bonds were reduced with tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP; to a final concentration of 10 mM) for 1 hour at room temperature in the dark. Reduced samples were then alkylated with iodoacetamide (IAM; to a final concentration of 30 mM) for 1 hour at room temperature in the dark. Excess IAM was quenched by the addition of dithiolthreitol (DTT; to final concentration of 5 mM) for 1 hour at room temperature in the dark. Each protein extract was proteolytically digested with mass spectrometry-grade trypsin/lys-C mix (Promega) at an estimated substrate-to-enzyme ratio of 25 for 17 hours at 37 °C containing a final concentration of 0.05% w/v RapiGest, 50 mM AMBIC and 5 mM EDTA (pH 8).  Additionally, a subset of samples from only the cellular fraction from MIT9312 and MIT9313 were also proteolytically digested with mass spectrometry-grade Glu-C (Promega) at an estimated substrate-to-enzyme ratio of 25 for 17 hours at 37 °C. Following trypsin/Lys-C or Glu-C digestion, RapiGest was hydrolyzed by the addition of trifluoroacetic acid (0.5% final v/v, pH < 2; concurrently terminating protease activity), heated for 45 minutes at 37 °C and centrifuged at 15,000 rpm (21,130 rcf) at 4 °C for 15 minutes to precipitate the water immiscible decomposition product, dodeca-2-one. The supernatant was removed, transferred to a new protein LoBind eppendorf tube and samples were dried to near-dryness using a centrivap concentrator (Thermo Savant SPD2010 SpeedVac). Digested samples were desalted using a MacroSpin C18 column (NestGroup) following an established manufacturer protocol. Samples were eluted from the MacroSpin columns using two times 200 µL of 80% LCMS-grade acetonitrile with 20% LCMS-grade water containing 0.1% LCMS-grade formic acid. Desalted samples were concentrated using the centrivap to near dryness and were stored immediately at -80°C until resuspension on the day of analysis (within 0-5 days). Samples were resuspended in 95% LCMS-grade water with 5% LCMS-grade acetonitrile containing 0.1% LCMS-grade formic acid. The resuspension solution also contained an internal standard of synthetic peptides (Hi3 Escherichia coli Standard, Waters) at 50 fmol/µL. The resuspension of cellular protein samples was to an approximate 5.5e7 cells/µL. Due to limited biomass, vesicle samples were resuspended in the smallest possible volume of 9.5 µL to an approximate 9.4e10 particles/µL and 6.2e10 particles/µL for MIT9312 and MIT9313 cultures, respectively. Media and control samples (AMP1 and PBS buffers) were resuspended identically to corresponding cellular or vesicle samples. Prior to analysis by LCMS, iRT retention time standard (prepared according to manufacturer’s instructions; Biognosys) was spiked at a ratio of 1:20 iRT to sample.

### Data Protocol
Samples were injected onto the column of a Waters ACQUITY M-class UPLC, corresponding to on-column estimates for MIT9312 cultures of 1.05e8 cells and 1.78e11 vesicles and for MIT9313 cultures of 1.08e8 cells and 1.17e11 vesicles. Triplicate injections were conducted for cellular samples and due to limited biomass and sample volume, only one injection for vesicles samples. Peptide separation was performed by reversed-phase chromatography using a nanoACQUITY HSS T3 C18 column (1.8 µm, 75 µm x 250 mm; 45 °C) with an ACQUITY UPLC M-class Symmetry C18 trapping column (180 µm x 20 mm). The peptides were trapped at a flow rate of 5 µL/min at 99% A for 3 minutes. A flow rate of 0.3 µL/min was used over a gradient between LCMS-grade water (A) and LCMS-grade acetonitrile (B), both modified with 0.1% LCMS-grade formic acid. The total 145 minute gradient method for the separation of the peptides started at 95% A and ramped to 60% A over the course of 120 minutes. The gradient then switched to 15% A at 122 -127 minutes followed by a ramp back to starting conditions 95% A at 128-145 minutes.  The ACQUITY M-class was coupled to a Thermo QExactive HF Orbitrap high-resolution mass spectrometer (HRMS) equipped with a nano-electrospray (NSI) source made in-house following the University of Washington Proteomic Resource design. Using a MicroTee, the commercial analytical column was connected to a commercial emitter (PicoTip, Waters) and the liquid path was applied a high voltage through a platinum wire. All analyses were carried out in positive mode and a NSI spray voltage of 2.0 kV. Data was collected using data dependent acquisition using Xcalibur 4.0 data acquisition software (Thermo Fisher). The MS1 scan range was 400-2000 m/z at 60,000 resolution with a maximum injection time of 30 ms and automated gain control of 1e6.  Following each MS1 scan, data-dependent MS2 (dd-MS2) was set to perform on the top 10 ions in a data-dependent manner at 15,000 resolution with a normalized collision energy of 27 eV. Additional selection criteria for dd-MS2 were as follows: maximum injection time of 50 ms with an automated gain control of 5e4, the isolation window was 1.5 Da and dynamic exclusion was set at 20 sec.  Data processing was conducted using the software from the trans-proteomic pipeline (TPP v.5.1.0). Raw data was converted to mzML and searched using COMET against a FASTA protein database consisting of either MIT9313 (uniprot PROMM 2,830 proteins; KEGG estimated protein genes 2,850) or MIT9312 (PROMP uniprot 1,964 proteins; KEGG estimated protein genes 1,962), E.coli chaperone protein (Hi3 standard; P63284), iRT retention time standard, and was concatenated with a set of randomized sequences. For the purpose of this manuscript, we performed two different COMET searches: A first set of COMET searches (referred to as COMETa or COM4 search) included no enzyme specificity, carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues as a fixed modification (+57.0215 Da), and oxidation of methionine residues (+15.9949 Da) and clipping of N-terminal methionine as variable modifications. To aide in identifying intracellular prochlorosin precursors, a second set of COMET searches (referred to as COMETb or COMPCN search) was also performed with these same parameters using only the no enzyme specificity and with all variable modifications, including clipping of N-terminal methionine, oxidation of methionine residues (+15.9949 Da), carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021464 Da), and dehydration of serine and threonine residues (-18.010565 Da) to 2,3-didehydroalanine (Dha) and (Z)-2,3-didehydrobutyrine (Dhb), respectively.  The COMET pep.xml files from each technical triplicate (or only one technical injection for vesicle data) from each COMETa and COMETb searches were searched in PeptideProphet with greater than 90% peptide probability and further analyzed using iProphet and ProteinProphet within the TPP. The COMET pep.xml files from each technical triplicate mzML file were also grouped and searched using the same parameters in PeptideProphet and iProphet. Abacus was used to join and organize PeptideProphet and ProteinProphet data across replicates and treatment conditions. For each treatment, all total spectral counts as well as adjusted spectral counts were averaged across triplicate injections and standard deviations of these averages were calculated for error. Averaged adjusted spectral counts of proteins were further normalized to the Hi3 internal standard to account for differences in NSI ionization of peptides due to sample matrix effects and to account for the differences in number of technical injections. Normalized adjusted spectral counts were then divided by the amount of biomass injected on-column and further by cell or vesicle volumes, resulting in a semi-quantitative estimate of “normalized spectral counts per cell volume” and “normalized spectral counts per vesicle volume”.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Prochlorococcus, Extracellular vesicles, Mit9312, Shotgun proteomics, Marine cyanobacteria, Mit9313

### Affiliations
University of Washington

### Submitter
Rachel Lundeen

### Lab Head
Dr Anitra Ingalls
University of Washington


