### Accession
PXD004452

### Title
HeLa proteome of 12,250 protein-coding genes

### Description
We developed an optimized multi-shot proteomics workflow based on high-resolution offline high pH reversed-phase peptide separation of high peptide loads collecting many fractions that were in turn analyzed by short online chromatographic separations and fast peptide sequencing using orbitrap tandem mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Protein concentration was estimated by Bradford assay (Bio-Rad), and the lysates were digested with Lys-C (Wako) in an enzyme/protein ratio of 1:100 (w/w) for 1 h followed by a threefold dilution with 25 mM Tris, pH 8.5, to 2 M GndCl and further digested overnight with trypsin (Sigma Aldrich) 1:100 (w/w). For experiments using different proteases, lysates were directly diluted to 2 M GndCl before addition of proteases (Lys-C, Trypsin, Chymotrypsin (Roche) and Glu-C (Roche)). Protease activity was quenched by acidification with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of approximately 1%, and the resulting peptide mixture was concentrated using reversed-phase Sep-Pak C18 Cartridge (Waters). Peptides were eluted off the Sep-Pak with 2 mL 40v% acetonitrile (ACN) followed by 2 mL 60% ACN. The ACN was removed by vacuum centrifugation for 40 min at 60 °C and the final peptide concentration was estimated by measuring absorbance at 280 nm on a NanoDrop (NanoDrop 2000C, Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
All raw LC–MS/MS data were analyzed by MaxQuant v1.5.3.6 using the Andromeda Search engine and searched against the complete human Uniprot database including all Swiss-Prot and TrEMBL entries as well as all isoforms. Four analysis groups were made in MaxQuant, enabling one combined analysis for all proteases. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified as fixed modification for all groups. Variable modifications considered were oxidation of methionine, protein N-terminal acetylation, pyro-glutamate formation from glutamine and phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine residues. The match between run feature and the second peptide option was disabled, and everything else was set to the default values, including the false discovery rate limit of 1% on both the peptide and protein levels. For PTM analysis, the HeLa dataset was searched separately using methylation of arginines and lysines or acetylation of lysines as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
This study investigates the challenge of comprehensively cataloging the complete human proteome from a single-cell type using mass spectrometry (MS)-based shotgun proteomics. We modify a classical two-dimensional high-resolution reversed-phase peptide fractionation scheme and optimize a protocol that provides sufficient peak capacity to saturate the sequencing speed of modern MS instruments. This strategy enables the deepest proteome of a human single-cell type to date, with the HeLa proteome sequenced to a depth of &#x223c;584,000 unique peptide sequences and &#x223c;14,200 protein isoforms (&#x223c;12,200 protein-coding genes). This depth is comparable with next-generation RNA sequencing and enables the identification of post-translational modifications, including &#x223c;7,000 N-acetylation sites and &#x223c;10,000 phosphorylation sites, without the need for enrichment. We further demonstrate the general applicability and clinical potential of this proteomics strategy by comprehensively quantifying global proteome expression in several different human cancer cell lines and patient tissue samples.

### Keywords
Hela, Tissue, Cell lines, Deep proteomes, Shotgun proteomics

### Affiliations
University of Copenhagen
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, University of Copenhagen, Denmark

### Submitter
Christian Kelstrup

### Lab Head
Dr Jesper V. Olsen
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, University of Copenhagen, Denmark


