### Accession
PXD021086

### Title
Proteo-metabolomic study of olive (cv. ‘Chondrolia Chalkidikis’) drupe development and maturation

### Description
Olive (Olea europaea L.) is one of the most economically relevant tree crops in the Mediterranean basin. In this study, a comparative proteomic along with metabolomic-wide investigation was carried out on drupes of Greek olive cultivar 'Chondrolia Chalkidikis', collected across six developmental stages (S), namely seed development (S1, S2), mesocarp development (S3, S4, S5) and full maturation (S6). These stages were first characterized through the dynamics of fruit weight, dimensions and color parameters such as lightness, redness and yellowness. Combined gas chromatography–mass spectrometry and reversed–phase liquid chromatography quadrupole–time–of–flight mass spectrometry (RPLC–QToF–MS) procedures quantified 47 primary (e.g. allose, galactose, quinic acid, sorbitol, stearic acid) and 21 secondary (e.g. elenolic acid, oleacin, rutin, luteolin, hydroxytyrosol) metabolites in mesocarp samples during development. Protein analysis via nano–LC coupled to HDAM Orbitrap mass spectrometer, identified 3258 proteins from which the 350 were differentially accumulated between the final maturation stages (S5 and S6).  Olive genome-based functional annotation showed that the largest proportion of identified proteins were involved in primary metabolism [i.e. lipoxygenases (LOX1/5)], energy [i.e. ferredoxin NADP+ reductase (FNR)], signal transduction [i.e. serine/threonine kinases (SAPK2, SRK2A, STK), transcription [i.e. elongation factor 2 (EEF2)] and protein destination [i.e. serine carboxypeptidase (SCPL)]. This investigation provides a reference framework for further nutritional and breeding studies, also allowing cross comparison among other olive cultivars.

### Sample Protocol
Olive flesh tissue were isolated from olive drupes at two various developmental stages (S5 and S6). The freeze-dried samples (100 mg) were processed using 900 μL buffer solution of 100 mM Tris HCl pH 7.6, 4 % SDS and 0.1 M DTT. The samples were vortexed till homogenization and transferred for 3 min at 95 oC followed by 2 hours at sonicator. The protein extract transferred at a new eppendorf after centrifugation at 16000 g for 5 min. The resulting protein extracts of three biological replicas of each condition were processed for proteomic analysis using the sp3 mediated tryptic digestion protocol. The obtaining peptide extracts were quantified using a nanodrop instrument and analyzed in two technical replicas by nano-LC coupled to an QE Orbitrap HF-X mass spectrometer. Peptides were separated with a Acclaim Pepmap column (75umX50cm) on a Ultimate 3000 nano LC system set at 55°C. The HPLC wasperformed using a 300 nl/min flow with solvent A as 0.1% formic acid in water and solvent B as 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. For each injection, 500ng was loaded and eluted with a linear gradient from 8% to 24% buffer B over 48 min, then the gradient was ramped up to 36% buffer B over 4 min. The column was washed with 80% buffer B for 2 min and was left to equilibrate to 8% buffer B for 15min. The peptides were measured from 350-1400m/z, using a resolving power of 60k for MS1, AGC at 3e6, Injection time of 45ms, followed by 12 MS/MS of the most abundant ions using a resolving power of 15k, AGC at 1e5, Injection time of 22ms, an isolation window of 1.3m/z at 28 NCE and a dynamic exclusion of 30s.

### Data Protocol
The rawfiles were search using the Proteome Discoverer 2.4 against the Olea_europaea.gene.final.pep (27/11/2014)FASTA database containing 59879 protein sequences using the SequestHT software with the multiple peptide search (MPS) option activated. The statistical evaluation between the distinct developmental stages of the abundances was performed using the Proteome Discoverer software.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Olive drupe development, Proteomics., Primary metabolism, Secondary metabolism, Maturity

### Affiliations
Protein Analysis Laboratory
B.S.R.C. "Alexander Fleming",
Alexander Fleming Street 34
16672, Vari,
Greece
School of Agriculture Aristotle University of Thessaloniki541 24 Thessaloniki, Greece

### Submitter
Martina Samiotaki

### Lab Head
Dr Athanassios Molassiotis
School of Agriculture Aristotle University of Thessaloniki541 24 Thessaloniki, Greece


