### Accession
PXD033129

### Title
Ion mobility fractionation coupled to PASEF for enhanced proteome coverage

### Description
Data provided report the use of trapped ion mobility spectrometry (TIMS) to fractionate ions in the gas phase based on their ion mobility (V⋅s/cm2) followed by parallel accumulation serial fragmentation (PASEF) in a quadrupole time-of-flight instrument. TIMS fractionation coupled to DDA-PASEF allowed for the detection of approximately 7,000 proteins and over 70,000 peptides per overall run from 200ng of human (HeLa) cell lysate per injection using a commercial UPLC column with a 90-minute gradient. This project also explored the utility of TIMS fractionation to generate a DDA library for downstream DIA analysis using shorter LC gradients (20 minutes) as well as lower sample input. Using a 20min gradient, we identified 4,092 and 6,654 proteins on average per run, respectively, from 10ng and 200ng of human (HeLa) cell lysate input based on a TIMS-fractionated library consisting of 82,214 peptides derived from 7,615 proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Commercially available HeLa peptides were loaded on a NanoElute coupled to a timsTOF pro. Ion mobility ranges were optimized from 0.6-1.6 1/K0 [V⋅s/cm²] as seen in most literature to more narrow and fractionated ranges to gain better insight into the most dense ion regions: 2 ranges at 0.7-1.1 1/K0 [V⋅s/cm2] and 1.0-1.4 1/K0 [V⋅s/cm²]; 3 ranges at 0.7-1.0 1/K0 [V⋅s/cm²], 0.9-1.2 1/K0 [V⋅s/cm²], and 1.1-1.4 1/K0 [V⋅s/cm²]; and 4 ranges at 0.7-0.95 1/K0 [V⋅s/cm²], 0.85-1.1 1/K0 [V⋅s/cm²], 1.0-1.25 1/K0 [V⋅s/cm²], and 1.15-1.4 1/K0 [V⋅s/cm²]. Additionally, a further optimized 2 range method (0.8-1.05 1/K0 [V⋅s/cm²] and 1.0-1.25 1/K0 [V⋅s/cm²]) using a longer gradient was used to generate a library for a short gradient DIA run.

### Data Protocol
MSFragger (v. 3.2) within FragPipe (v.15.0) was implemented to search raw data against the Uniprot Homo sapiens database (UP000005640, 75,777 entries).  Default parameters were utilized for label-free quantification (LFQ) via IonQuant within FragPipe with and without match-between-runs (MBR) except minimum ion count was set to 1. DIA raw data were searched in DIA-NN (v. 1.8) against generated libraries from IM-fractionated DDA data which were built with EasyPQP within FragPipe.

### Publication Abstract
Trapped ion-mobility spectrometry (TIMS) was used to fractionate ions in the gas phase based on their ion mobility (V s/cm<sup>2</sup>), followed by parallel accumulation-serial fragmentation (PASEF) using a quadrupole time-of-flight instrument to determine the effect on the depth of proteome coverage. TIMS fractionation (up to four gas-phase fractions) coupled to data-dependent acquisition (DDA)-PASEF resulted in the detection of &#x223c;7000 proteins and over 70,000 peptides overall from 200 ng of human (HeLa) cell lysate per injection using a commercial 25 cm ultra high performance liquid chromatography (UHPLC) column with a 90 min gradient. This result corresponded to &#x223c;19 and 30% increases in protein and peptide identifications, respectively, when compared to a default, single-range TIMS DDA-PASEF analysis. Quantitation precision was not affected by TIMS fractionation as demonstrated by the average and median coefficient of variation values that were less than 4% upon label-free quantitation of technical replicates. TIMS fractionation was utilized to generate a DDA-based spectral library for downstream data-independent acquisition (DIA) analysis of lower sample input using a shorter LC gradient. The TIMS-fractionated library, consisting of over 7600 proteins and 82,000 peptides, enabled the identification of &#x223c;4000 and 6600 proteins from 10 and 200 ng of human (HeLa) cell lysate input, respectively, with a 20 min gradient, single-shot DIA analysis. Data are available in ProteomeXchange: identifier PXD033129.

### Keywords
Dda, Fractionation, Timstof pro, Optimized, Ion mobility, Pasef, Segmented, Deep coverage, Tims fractionation, Dia

### Affiliations
University of South Florida, Dept. CMMB
University of South Florida

### Submitter
Stanley Stevens

### Lab Head
Dr Stanley Stevens, Ph.D.
University of South Florida, Dept. CMMB


