### Accession
PXD001435

### Title
Cervicovaginal dysbiosis is associated with significant changes in the cervicovaginal proteome related to immune activation and increased cell death

### Description
Cervicovaginal microbiome dysbiosis is associated with increased prevalence and incidence of sexually transmitted infections including HIV. We compared the cervicovaginal proteome as characterised by mass-spectrometry of four groups of African female sex workers (total N=50) grouped by microbiome composition as characterised by 16S rDNA microarray.  Group 1 had a Lactobacillus crispatus-dominated microbiome, group 2 a L. iners-dominated microbiome, and groups 3 and 4 had a microbiome containing multiple genera of anaerobic bacteria, with group 3 representing transition to or from dysbiosis and group 4 full dysbiosis. 82 human proteins were differentially abundant among the groups, either showing an increasing or decreasing trend from microbiome groups 1 to 4. Proteins that increased included proteasome subunits and other proteins involved in catabolic metabolism, actin organising proteins and proteins involved in the immune response. Proteins that decreased included antiproteases, keratins, and cornified envelope proteins. We also compared the abundance of pre-defined proteins of interest among microbiome groups: markers of cell type, inflammation, and cell death, and mucins. The dysbiotic groups had increased abundance of proteins unique to lymphocytes and macrophages, pro-inflammatory cytokines, cell death markers, and MUC5B. We conclude that the cervicovaginal human proteome is associated with the cervicovaginal microbiome in a dose-response manner. The changes are likely caused by a pro-inflammatory influx of immune cells and an increase of cell death in dysbiosis. Dysbiosis-associated immune activation, breaches in epithelial integrity, altered mucin balance, and altered protease-antiprotease balance may all contribute to the increased risk of HIV transmission when cervicovaginal dysbiosis is present.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction and mass spectrometry CVL supernatants were heat inactivated for 30 minutes at 56°C before further processing. Total protein concentrations were determined using the Pierce Coomassie Plus (Bradford) Protein Assay (Thermo Scientific). Sample protein content and volume were normalised with 25mM ammonium bicarbonate. Soluble proteins were precipitated using an equal volume of ice cold 30% (w/v) TCA in acetone and incubated at -20⁰C for 2 hours. Samples were centrifuged at 12,000g for 10 minutes (4⁰C) to pellet proteins. Pellets were washed three times with ice cold acetone and allowed to air dry. Protein pellets were resuspended in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 0.1% RapiGest SF (Waters). Samples were then heated at 80°C for 10 min, reduced with 3 mM DTT (Sigma) at 60°C for 10 min, cooled, then alkylated with 9 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma) for 30 min (room temperature). Proteomic-grade trypsin (Sigma) was added at a protein:trypsin ratio of 50:1 and incubated at 37°C overnight. To remove RapiGest SF, the samples were precipitated by addition of Trifluoroacetic acid to a final concentration of 0.5% (v/v) at 37°C for 2 h and centrifuged at 12,000 g for 1 hr (4°C).. Peptide mixtures were analyzed by on-line nanoflow liquid chromatography using the nanoACQUITY-nLC system (Waters MS technologies, Manchester, UK) coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos (ThermoFisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) mass spectrometer equipped with the manufacturer’s nanospray ion source. The analytical column (nanoACQUITY UPLCTM BEH130 C18 15cm x 75µm, 1.7µm capillary column) was maintained at 35⁰C and a flow-rate of 300nl/min. The gradient consisted of 3-40% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid for 90 min then a ramp of 40-85% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid for 5min. Full scan MS spectra (m/z range 300-2000) were acquired by the Orbitrap at a resolution of 30,000. Analysis was performed in data dependant mode. The top 20 most intense ions from MS1 scan (full MS) were selected for tandem MS by collision induced dissociation (CID) and all product spectra were acquired in the LTQ ion trap.

### Data Protocol
Thermo RAW files were imported into Progenesis LC–MS (version 4.1, Nonlinear Dynamics). Runs were time aligned using default settings and using an auto selected run as reference. Peaks were picked by the software and filtered to include only peaks with a charge state of between +2 and +7. Peptide intensities were normalised against the reference run by Progenesis LC-MS. Spectral data were transformed to .mgf files with Progenesis LC–MS and exported for peptide identification using the Mascot (version 2.3.02, Matrix Science) search engine. Tandem MS data were searched against a Human database (Uniprot 2013_06 release containing 20,255 entries). Mascot search parameters were as follows; precursor mass tolerance set to 10ppm and fragment mass tolerance set to 0.6 Da. One missed tryptic cleavage was permitted. Carbamidomethylation (cysteine) was set as a fixed modification and oxidation (methionine) set as a variable modification. Mascot search results were further processed using the machine learning algorithm Percolator. The false discovery rate was < 1%. Individual ion scores > 13 indicated identity or extensive homology (p < 0.05).  Protein identification results were imported into Progenesis LC–MS as .xml files. Only proteins with > 2 unique peptides were used in further analyses.

### Publication Abstract
Vaginal microbiome (VMB) dysbiosis is associated with increased acquisition of HIV. Cervicovaginal inflammation and other changes to the mucosal barrier are thought to have important roles but human data are scarce. We compared the human cervicovaginal proteome by mass spectrometry of 50 Rwandan female sex workers who had previously been clustered into four VMB groups using a 16S phylogenetic microarray; in order of increasing bacterial diversity: Lactobacillus crispatus-dominated VMB (group 1), Lactobacillus iners-dominated VMB (group 2), moderate dysbiosis (group 3), and severe dysbiosis (group 4). We compared relative protein abundances among these VMB groups using targeted (abundance of pre-defined mucosal barrier proteins) and untargeted (differentially abundant proteins among all human proteins identified) approaches. With increasing bacterial diversity, we found: mucus alterations (increasing mucin 5B and 5AC), cytoskeleton alterations (increasing actin-organizing proteins; decreasing keratins and cornified envelope proteins), increasing lactate dehydrogenase A/B as markers of cell death, increasing proteolytic activity (increasing proteasome core complex proteins/proteases; decreasing antiproteases), altered antimicrobial peptide balance (increasing psoriasin, calprotectin, and histones; decreasing lysozyme and ubiquitin), increasing pro-inflammatory cytokines, and decreasing immunoglobulins immunoglobulin G1/2. Although temporal relationships cannot be derived, our findings support the hypothesis that dysbiosis causes cervicovaginal inflammation and other detrimental changes to the mucosal barrier.

### Keywords
Bacterial vaginosis/ cervicovaginal microbiome/ cervicovaginal proteome/ hiv/ lactobacillus crispatus/ mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Institute of Infection and Global Health, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK
Infection Biology

### Submitter
Stuart Armstrong

### Lab Head
Dr Jonathan M. Wastling
Institute of Infection and Global Health, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK


