### Accession
PXD012178

### Title
Identification of novel CSF biomarkers in GRN-associated frontotemporal dementia by proteomics

### Description
Frontotemporal dementia is the second most common form of presenile dementia and autosomal dominant inheritance is present in 20-30% of cases, with mutations in granulin (GRN) as a major cause. The exact pathophysiological mechanism by which GRN mutations lead to neurodegeneration is poorly understood. We aimed to identify novel cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) biomarkers in GRN-associated frontotemporal dementia using shotgun proteomics. We included CSF from presymptomatic and symptomatic GRN mutation carriers and healthy non-carriers (controls). We validated our discovery proteomics results in a large international cohort of GRN-mutation carriers and other forms of genetic FTD (C9orf72- and MAPT-mutation carriers) by parallel reaction monitoring.

### Sample Protocol
Fifty µL of each CSF sample was depleted of serum albumin and immunoglobulin G using depletion spin columns (Pierce, PN 85162) according manufacturers recommendations.  Samples were subsequently reduced (5 mM DTT), alkylated (15 mM IAA), dried (SpeedVac concentrator), then reconstituted in 50 µl 0.1% RapiGest and digested overnight by addition of 500 ng trypsin (trypsin gold, Promega, Madison, WI) and incubation at 37°C  and gentle shaking. Digest were stopped and detergent (RapiGest) removed by acidification with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to pH < 2 followed by incubation (45’ at 37°C) and centrifugation (10’ at 10,000 g). Samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS in a randomized order using an Ultimate 3000 nano RSLC system (Thermo Fischer Scientific, Germering, Germany) coupled online to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Twelve microliter of each digest was loaded onto a C18 trap column (C18 PepMap, 300 µm ID x 5 mm, 5 µm, 100 Å) and desalted for 10’ using 0.1% TFA in water at a flow rate of 20 µl/min. Then the trap column was switched in-line with the analytical column (PepMap C18, 75 µm ID x 250 mm, 2 µm, 100 Å) and peptides were eluted using a binary gradient increasing solvent B from 4% to 38% over 90 minutes, whereby solvent A was 0.1% formic acid and solvent B 80% acetonitrile and 0.08% formic acid. The column flow rate was set to 300 nL/min and column oven temperature to 40°C.  For electrospray ionization, a nano ESI emitter (New Objective) was used and a spray voltage of 1.7 kV applied. For MS/MS analysis a data dependent acquisition method was used with a high resolution survey scan from 375 - 1500 m/z at 120,000 resolution (AGC target 400,000) performed in the Orbitrap, followed by consecutively isolation, fragmentation (HCD, 35% NCE) and detection (ion trap, AGC 10,000) of the peptide precursors detected in the survey scan until a duty cycle time of 3” was exceeded (‘Top Speed’ method). Precursor masses that were selected once for MS/MS were excluded for subsequent MS/MS fragmentation for 60 seconds.

### Data Protocol
For peptide and protein identification, MS/MS spectra were extracted using ProteoWizard software (version 3.0.9248) and analyzed with the database search engine Mascot (Matrix Science, UK) against the Uniprot database (release v151112; taxonomy: Homo sapiens; 20,194 human sequences) using following parameters: Carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.021 Da) as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine (+ 15.995 Da) as variable modification, allowing 2 missed cleavages, precursor mass tolerance of +/-10 ppm and fragment ions of +/- 0.5 Da. Next we combined the search results of the individual samples, applied scoring of hits (local false discovery rate, LFDR) and conducted protein grouping using the software package Scaffold. For label-free quantitation MS raw data was processed with Progenesis QI (version 2.0, Waters) and linked with identification results to finally determine peptide and protein abundances. Abundances were normalized to the total ion current to compensate for experimental variations using an algorithm available in the analysis software. Subsequently, the data were exported in Excel format and analyzed using Excel, R and SPSS statistical software.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Progranulin, Proteomics, Biomarkers, Frontotemporal dementia, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Head of Laboratory of Neuro-Oncology, Neurology, Clinical & Cancer Proteomics
Erasmus MC Rotterdam
Department of Neurology

### Submitter
Christoph Stingl

### Lab Head
Dr Theo M. Luider
Head of Laboratory of Neuro-Oncology, Neurology, Clinical & Cancer Proteomics


