### Accession
PXD016208

### Title
Identification of changes in posttranslational modifications of EGFR and in EGFR-binding partners in headand neck cancer cells upon treatment with EGF or the EGFR antibody mixture Sym004

### Description
This study aimed at determining the proteins that interact with EGFR and the changes in post-translational modifications within them.

### Sample Protocol
UM-SCC-47 cells, either stimulated with EGF or Sym004 (2 concentrations), were lysed. The lysates were immunoprecipitated with α-EGFR antibody (or normal mouse IgG). The proteins were eluted using Sample Loading Buffer and run into a 1D precast SDS-PAGE gel before undergoing tryptic digestion for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Peptide mixtures were analysed by data dependent acquisition on the Q-Exactive Plus coupled to nLC. Data was searched by MaxQuant against the human UniProt database and proteins were filtered at a 1% false discovery rate.

### Publication Abstract
Antibody combinations targeting cell surface receptors are a new modality of cancer therapy. The trafficking and signalling mechanisms regulated by such therapeutics are not fully understood but could underlie differential tumour responses. We explored EGFR trafficking upon treatment with the antibody combination Sym004 which has shown promise clinically. Sym004 promoted EGFR endocytosis distinctly from EGF: it was asynchronous, not accompanied by canonical signalling events and involved EGFR clustering within detergent-insoluble plasma mebrane-associated tubules. Sym004 induced lysosomal degradation independently of EGFR ubiquitylation but dependent upon Hrs/Tsg101 that are required for the formation of intraluminal vesicles (ILVs) within late endosomes. We propose Sym004 cross-links EGFR physically triggering EGFR endocytosis and incorporation onto ILVs and so Sym004 sensitivity correlates with EGFR numbers available for binding, rather than specific signalling events. Consistently Sym004 efficacy and potentiation of cisplatin responses correlated with EGFR surface expression in head and neck cancer cells. These findings will have implications in understanding the mode of action of this new class of cancer therapeutics.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms/ms, Egfr

### Affiliations
Proteomics Research Translational Technology Platform, Cancer Research UK-UCL Centre, UCL Cancer Institute, University College London, UK ( lab head )
UCL

### Submitter
Silvia Surinova

### Lab Head
Dr Silvia Surinova
Proteomics Research Translational Technology Platform, Cancer Research UK-UCL Centre, UCL Cancer Institute, University College London, UK ( lab head )


