### Accession
PXD003431

### Title
Multiparameter functional diversity of human C2H2 zinc finger proteins

### Description
We have identified protein protein interactions of 118 C2H2 zinc finger proteins by AP-MS using GFP-tagged constructs in order to understand their role in transcription regulation.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293 cells expressing GFP tagged C2H2-ZNFs were generated as previously described (Najafabadi et al., 2015).  ~20 million were grown in two batches representing two biological replicates and harvested 24 hours following induction of protein expression with doxycyline.  WCE (Whole Cell Extract) preparation was done as previously described (Marcon et al., 2014).  GFP-tagged C2H2-ZNFs were immunoprecipitated with anti-GFP antibody (G10362, Life Technologies) overnight followed by a 2 hour incubation with Protein G Dynabeads (Invitrogen). Following 3 washes with low salt buffer (10mM TRIS-HCl, pH7.9, 420mM NaCl, 0.1% NP-40) and two washes with low salt no detergent buffer (10mM TRIS-HCl, pH7.9, 420mM NaCl) immunoprecipitated proteins were eluted with ammonium hydroxide and then lyophilized. Proteins were prepared for MS by in solution trypsin digestion.  Briefly, protein pellet was resuspended in 44ul of 50mM ammonium bicarbonate, reduced with 100mM TCEP-HCL, alkylated with 500mM iodoacetamide, and then digested with 1ug of trypsin overnight at 37°C.  The samples were then desalted using ZipTip Pipette tips (EMD Millipore) through standard procedures. Desalted samples were then analyzed with LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) as previously descibed (Marcon et al., 2014).

### Data Protocol
the data was searched using X!Tandem to calculate statistical confidence (expectation values) for all of the individual spectrum-to-sequence assignments

### Publication Abstract
C2H2 zinc finger proteins represent the largest and most enigmatic class of human transcription factors. Their C2H2-ZF arrays are highly variable, indicating that most will have unique DNA binding motifs. However, most of the binding motifs have not been directly determined. In addition, little is known about whether or how these proteins regulate transcription. Most of the &#x223c;700 human C2H2-ZF proteins also contain at least one KRAB, SCAN, BTB, or SET domain, suggesting that they may have common interacting partners and/or effector functions. Here, we report a multifaceted functional analysis of 131 human C2H2-ZF proteins, encompassing DNA binding sites, interacting proteins, and transcriptional response to genetic perturbation. We confirm the expected diversity in DNA binding motifs and genomic binding sites, and provide motif models for 78 previously uncharacterized C2H2-ZF proteins, most of which are unique. Surprisingly, the diversity in protein-protein interactions is nearly as high as diversity in DNA binding motifs: Most C2H2-ZF proteins interact with a unique spectrum of co-activators and co-repressors. Thus, multiparameter diversification likely underlies the evolutionary success of this large class of human proteins.

### Keywords
Transcription factors, C2h2 zinc finger proteins, Regulation of transcription, Protein protein interaction

### Affiliations
Donnelly Centre for Cellular and Biomolecular Research, University of Toronto, Toronto ON M5S 3E1, Canada; Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto ON M5S 1A8, Canada
University of Toronto

### Submitter
Sadhna Phanse

### Lab Head
Dr Jack Greenblatt
Donnelly Centre for Cellular and Biomolecular Research, University of Toronto, Toronto ON M5S 3E1, Canada; Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto ON M5S 1A8, Canada


