### Accession
PXD035723

### Title
Molecular basis for differential activation of p101 and p84 complexes of PI3Kg by Ras and GPCRs

### Description
Using hydrogen deuterium exchange mass spectrometry, we reveal molecular differences between the two p110g-p84 and p110g-p101 complexes that explain their differential activation.

### Sample Protocol
Hydrogen Deuterium eXchange Mass Spectrometry- Activators :  Exchange reactions were carried out at 18°C in 12 µL volumes with final concentrations of 1.5  µM, 3 µM, 3µM for p110γ-p84, HRas (G12V) and G respectively. A total of five conditions were assessed: p110-p84, p110-p84 + HRas (G12V), p110-p84 + Gβγ, and p110-p84 + HRas (G12V) + Gβγ. All conditions were in the presence of PM mimic membranes [5% phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PI(4,5)P2), 20% phosphatidylserine (PS), 10% phosphatidylcholine (PC), 35% phosphatidylethanolamine (PE), 25% cholesterol, 5% sphingomyelin (SM)] at a final concentration of 0.42 mg/ml. Mixtures of lipid vesicles and activators (HRas(G12V)/Gβγ) were prepared by combining 1 µL of lipid vesicles or vesicle buffer (25mM HEPES 7.0, 100mM NaCl, 10% glycerol) with 0.85 µL of HRas(G12V) or HRas buffer (20mM HEPES pH 7.7, 100mM NaCl, 10mM CHAPS, 2mM TCEP), and 0.63 µL of G or G buffer (20mM HEPES pH 7.7, 100mM NaCl, 8mM CHAPS, 2mM TCEP). Prior to the addition of D2O, 1.2 µL of p110-p84 was added to the lipid-activator mixture, and the solution was left to incubate at 18°C for 2 mins. The hydrogen-deuterium exchange reaction was initiated by the addition of 8.32 µL D2O buffer (94.3% D2O, 100 mM NaCl, 20 mM HEPES pH 7.5) to the 3.68 µL protein or protein-lipid solutions for a final D2O concentration of 65.5%. Exchange was carried out over four time points (3s, 30s, 300s, 3000s) and terminated by the addition of 60 µL ice-cold acidic quench buffer (0.6 M guanidine-HCl, 0.9% formic acid final).   Hydrogen Deuterium eXchange Mass Spectrometry- Regulators : Exchange reactions were carried out at 18°C in 50 µL volumes with final concentrations of 0.4 µM, human p110γ/mouse p84 or human p110γ/porcine p101. The hydrogen-deuterium exchange reaction was initiated by the addition of 48.6 µL D2O buffer (94.3% D2O, 100 mM NaCl, 20 mM HEPES pH 7.5) to the 1.4 µL protein solutions for a final D2O concentration of 91.7% Exchange was carried out over five time points (3s, 30s, 300s, 3000s at 18°C and 3s at 4°C) and terminated by the addition of 20 µL ice-cold acidic quench buffer (0.6 M guanidine-HCl, 0.9% formic acid final).    Hydrogen Deuterium eXchange Mass Spectrometry- human regulators : Exchange reactions were carried out at 18°C in either 6ul (high concentration) or 50 µL(low concentration) volumes with final concentrations of 1.5 µM(high) or 0.175uM (low) human p110γ/mouse p84 or human p110γ/porcine p101. The hydrogen-deuterium exchange reaction was initiated by the addition of 3 µL or 25 µL D2O buffer (94.3% D2O, 100 mM NaCl, 20 mM HEPES pH 7.5) to the 3µL or 25 µL protein solutions for a final D2O concentration of 47.2% Exchange was carried out over two time points (30s, 300s at 18°C) and terminated by the addition of 64 µL or 20 µL ice-cold acidic quench buffer (0.6 M guanidine-HCl, 0.9% formic acid final).   Protein Digestion and MS/MS Data Collection: Protein samples were rapidly thawed and injected onto an integrated fluidics system containing a HDx-3 PAL liquid handling robot and climate-controlled chromatography system (LEAP Technologies), a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system, as well as an Impact HD QTOF Mass spectrometer (Bruker). The protein was run over two immobilized pepsin columns (Applied Biosystems; Poroszyme™ Immobilized Pepsin Cartridge, 2.1 mm x 30 mm; Thermo-Fisher 2‐3131‐00; at 10°C and 2°C respectively),or for the high low human regulator HDX over one immobilized Nepenthesin-2 column from affipro (AP-PC-004),  at 200 μL/min for 3 minutes. The resulting peptides were collected and desalted on a C18 trap column [Acquity UPLC BEH C18 1.7 mm column (2.1 x 5 mm); Waters 186003975]. The trap was subsequently eluted in line with an ACQUITY 1.7 µm particle, 100 x 1 mm2 C18 UPLC column (Waters 186002352), using a gradient of 3-35% B (buffer A, 0.1% formic acid; buffer B, 100% acetonitrile) over 11 min immediately followed by a gradient of 35-80% B over 5 minutes. MS experiments acquired over a mass range from 150 to 2200 mass/charge ratio (m/z) using an electrospray ionization source operated at a temperature of 200°C and a spray voltage of 4.5 kV.

### Data Protocol
Peptide Identification: Peptides were identified using data-dependent acquisition following tandem MS/MS experiments (0.5 s precursor scan from 150‐2000 m/z; twelve 0.25 s fragment scans from 150-2000 m/z). MS/MS datasets were analyzed using PEAKS7 (PEAKS), and a false discovery rate was set at 0.1% using a database of purified proteins and known contaminants (61).   Mass Analysis of Peptide Centroids and Measurement of Deuterium Incorporation: HD‐Examiner Software (Sierra Analytics) was used to automatically calculate the level of deuterium incorporation into each peptide. All peptides were manually inspected for correct charge state, correct retention time, and appropriate selection of isotopic distribution. Deuteration levels were calculated using the centroid of the experimental isotope clusters. HDX-MS results are presented with no correction for back exchange shown in the Source data, with the only correction being applied correcting for the deuterium oxide percentage of the buffer used in the exchange. Changes in any peptide at any time point greater than specified cut-offs (5% and 0.3 Da, or 7% and 0.5Da for human regulator HDX) and with an unpaired, two-tailed t-test value of p<0.01 was considered significant. The search parameters were set with a precursor tolerance of 20 parts per million, fragment mass error 0.02 Da, and charge states from 1 to 8.

### Publication Abstract
Class IB phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K&#x3b3;) is activated in immune cells and can form two distinct complexes (p110&#x3b3;-p84 and p110&#x3b3;-p101), which are differentially activated by G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) and Ras. Using a combination of X-ray crystallography, hydrogen deuterium exchange mass spectrometry (HDX-MS), electron microscopy, molecular modeling, single-molecule imaging, and activity assays, we identify molecular differences between p110&#x3b3;-p84 and p110&#x3b3;-p101 that explain their differential membrane recruitment and activation by Ras and GPCRs. The p110&#x3b3;-p84 complex is dynamic compared with p110&#x3b3;-p101. While p110&#x3b3;-p101 is robustly recruited by G&#x3b2;&#x3b3; subunits, p110&#x3b3;-p84 is weakly recruited to membranes by G&#x3b2;&#x3b3; subunits alone and requires recruitment by Ras to allow for G&#x3b2;&#x3b3; activation. We mapped two distinct G&#x3b2;&#x3b3; interfaces on p101 and the p110&#x3b3; helical domain, with differences in the C-terminal domain of p84 and p101 conferring sensitivity of p110&#x3b3;-p101 to G&#x3b2;&#x3b3; activation. Overall, our work provides key insight into the molecular basis for how PI3K&#x3b3; complexes are activated.

### Keywords
Pi3kg, Hdx-ms, Ras, P101, P110g, Hdx, Gby

### Affiliations
University of Victoria

### Submitter
John Burke

### Lab Head
Dr John Burke
University of Victoria


