### Accession
PXD040914

### Title
Polymorphic Histidine-rich Glycoprotein  LC-MS/MS

### Description
Histidine-rich glycoprotein (HRG) HRG is a liver-produced protein circulating in human plasma serum at high concentrations of around 125 ug/mL. HRG belongs to the family of type-3 cystatins and has been implicated in a plethora of biological processes, albeit its precise function is still not well understood. Human HRG is a highly polymorphic protein, with at least 5 variants with minor allele frequencies (MAF) of more than 10%, variable in populations from different parts of the world. Considering these 5 mutations we can expect already 35 = 243 possible possibly genetic HRG variants in the population. Here, we purified HRG from serum of 44 individual donors and investigated by proteomics the occurrence of different allotypes, each being either homozygote or heterozygote for each of the 5 mutation sites. We observed that some mutational combinations in HRG were highly favored, while others were apparently missing, although they ought to be present based on the stochastic independent assembly of these 5 mutation sites. To further explore this behavior, we extracted data from the 1000 genome project (n ~ 2500 genomes) and assessed the frequency of different HRG mutants in this larger dataset, observing a prevailing agreement with our proteomics data. From all the proteogenomic data we conclude that the 5 different (frequent) mutations sites in HRG are not occurring independently, but some mutational variants at different sites are fully mutually exclusive, whereas other are highly intwined. Specific mutations also affect HRG abundance and its glycosylation. As the levels of HRG have been suggested as a protein biomarker in a variety of biological processes (e.g., aging, COVID-19 severity, severity of bacterial infections), we here conclude that the highly polymorphic nature of the protein needs to be considered in such evaluations, as these mutations affect HRG’s abundance, structure, post-translational modifications, and function.

### Sample Protocol
Making use of its histidine-rich sequence domain, HRG was isolated from human serum using immobilized metal affinity chromatography (IMAC) using a cobalt-loaded resin (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, America). Briefly, cobalt slurries were washed with binding buffer. A volume of 50 uL of beads was incubated on a tube revolver with 100 uL serum diluted with 1000uL binding buffer for 3 hrs at 4 °C. Then the beads were subsequently washed with washing buffer. The purified HRG protein was eluted with eluting buffer twice. The supernatant was combined and vacuum-dried. Imidazole, which were used for the buffer, was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (Steinheim, Germany).  In-solution digestion   Purified HRG was resuspended in 100 mM Tris-HCl and then mixed with digestion buffer containing 200mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5), 2% w/v sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 10mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and 60mM chloroacetamide (CAA). The sample was denatured at 95 °C for 10 min and then incubated at dark for 45 min. The resulting peptide mixtures were further digested overnight at 37°C by trypsin (1:30; w/w). The next day, SDC was removed by acid precipitation (0.5% trifluoroacetic acid) (TFA). The peptides were desalted by using an Oasis PRiME HLB plate (Waters, Wexford, Ireland) then dried and stored at -80°C. Tris-HCl, TCEP, CAA, SDC, TFA, and trypsin were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (Steinheim, Germany).      Bottom-up proteomics    Shotgun LC-MS2 was performed by using an UltiMate 3000 HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled to a Orbitrap Exploris Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). About 250 ng of the digested peptides were loaded onto a 2cm trap column (in-house packed with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 3um) (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) coupled to a 50um inner diameter 50cm analytical column (in-house packed with Poroshell 120 EC-C18, 2.7um) (Agilent Technologies, Amstelveen, The Netherlands). As for gradient separation, 0.1% formic acid (v/v) was used as the mobile phase A, while 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (v/v) was mobile phase B. At the first stage, the mobile phase increased from 9% B to 13% for 1 min, from 13% to 44% in the next 40 min, from 44% to 99% for 3 min, after which it was maintained at 99% for 4 min. Afterwards, B decreased to 9% in 1 min and was maintained at 9% for 10 min. The flow rate was set as 300 nL/min. Peptides were ionized using a spray voltage of 2 kV in combination with the ion transfer capillary that was heated to 275°C. The mass spectrometer was set to acquire full-scan MS spectra (m/z 350-2000) for a maximum injection time of 50ms at a mass resolution of 120,000. Up to 15 of the most intense precursor ions were selected for tandem mass spectrometry (MS2). Higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) MS2 (m/z 120-4000) acquisition was performed in the HCD cell, with the readout in the Orbitrap mass analyzer at a resolution of 60,000 and a maximum injection time of 50ms with a normalized collision energy of 29%. For the HCD-product-dependent-stepping-HCD fragmentation, the collision energy was 10%, 25% and 40%.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics database search and data analysis   As we expected both non-modified as well as glycopeptides, we analyzed the raw files using Byonic v4.3.4 (PMi). MS/MS spectra were searched against Human database(Swiss-Prot database, release date July 2021, 20,398 entries), as well as all HRG mutants with the five dominant MAFs. The search parameters were set as follows: fixed modification of cysteine residues (+57 Da), variable modification of methionine oxidation (+16 Da) and full trypsin cleavage, at most 6 missed tryptic cleavages, 10 ppm error tolerance in MS and 20 ppm error tolerance in MS/MS. False discovery rates were < 1%. We allowed all HRG mutations in the database search.

### Publication Abstract
Histidine-rich glycoprotein (HRG) is a liver-produced protein circulating in human serum at high concentrations of around 125&#xa0;&#x3bc;g/ml. HRG belongs to the family of type-3 cystatins and has been implicated in a plethora of biological processes, albeit that its precise function is still not well understood. Human HRG is a highly polymorphic protein, with at least five variants with minor allele frequencies of more than 10%, variable in populations from different parts of the world. Considering these five mutations we can theoretically expect 3<sup>5</sup>&#xa0;= 243 possible genetic HRG variants in the population. Here, we purified HRG from serum of 44 individual donors and investigated by proteomics the occurrence of different allotypes, each being either homozygote or heterozygote for each of the five mutation sites. We observed that some mutational combinations in HRG were highly favored, while others were apparently missing, although they ought to be present based on the independent assembly of these five mutation sites. To further explore this behavior, we extracted data from the 1000 genome project (n &#x223c; 2500 genomes) and assessed the frequency of different HRG mutants in this larger dataset, observing a prevailing agreement with our proteomics data. From all the proteogenomic data we conclude that the five different mutation sites in HRG are not occurring independently, but several mutations at different sites are fully mutually exclusive, whereas others are highly intwined. Specific mutations do also affect HRG glycosylation. As the levels of HRG have been suggested as a protein biomarker in a variety of biological processes (e.g., aging, COVID-19 severity, severity of bacterial infections), we here conclude that the highly polymorphic nature of the protein needs to be considered in such proteomics evaluations, as these mutations may affect HRG's abundance, structure, posttranslational modifications, and function.

### Keywords
Serum proteomics; histidine-rich glycoprotein (hrg); plasma proteomics; protein biomarker; proteogenomics; 1000-genome

### Affiliations
1 Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Utrecht, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, the Netherlands  2 Netherlands Proteomics Center, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, the Netherlands
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Yang Zou

### Lab Head
Dr Albert J.R. Heck
1 Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Utrecht, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, the Netherlands  2 Netherlands Proteomics Center, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, the Netherlands


