### Accession
PXD009524

### Title
DNA mismatch repair activity of MutLα is regulated by CK2-dependent phosphorylation of MLH1 (S477)

### Description
MutLα, a heterodimer consisting of MLH1 and PMS2, is a key player of DNA mismatch repair (MMR), yet little is known about its regulation. In this study, we used mass spectrometry to identify phosphorylated residues within MLH1 and PMS2. The most frequently detected phosphorylated amino acid was serine 477 of MLH1. Isolation of nuclear and cytoplasmic fractions showed that p-MLH1S477 remains predominantly in the cytoplasm. Pharmacological treatment indicates‎ that Casein Kinase II (CK2) could be responsible for the phosphorylation of MLH1 at serine 477 in vivo. In vitro kinase assay verified MLH1 as a substrate of CK2. Most importantly, using in vitro MMR assay we could demonstrate that p-MLH1S477 lost MMR activity while the activity of MLH1S477A, which could not be phosphorylated at position S477, was not modified. In summary, we identified that post-translational phosphorylation of MLH1 by CK2 at amino acid position 477 can switch off MMR activity in vitro. Since CK2 is overexpressed in many tumors and is able to inactivate MMR by phosphorylation of MLH1, the new mechanism here described could have an important impact on tumors overactive in CK2.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitated MLH1 and PMS2 samples were separated by SDS-PAGE and visualized by staining with Coomassie Brilliant Blue. Then, distinct MLH1 and PMS2 bands were cut out of the gel.  For NanoLC-ESI-MS/MS gel pieces were reduced with dithiothreitol and alkylated with iodoaceamide (both Sigma-Aldrich, Munich, Germany) and digested in-gel with trypsin (SERVA Electrophoresis GmbH, Heidelberg, Germany) in the presence of 0.1% RapiGest over night at 37°C. Phospho-peptides were then enriched by TiO2 chromatography (GL Sciences Inc., Tokyo, Japan) as described by Larsen et al. (Larsen et al., 2005) followed by NanoLC-ESI-MS/MS analysis as described by Oellerich et al. (Oellerich et al., 2009).  Larsen, M.R., T.E. Thingholm, O.N. Jensen, P. Roepstorff, and T.J. Jorgensen. 2005. Highly selective enrichment of phosphorylated peptides from peptide mixtures using titanium dioxide microcolumns. Mol Cell Proteomics. 4:873-86.  Oellerich, T., M. Gronborg, K. Neumann, H.H. Hsiao, H. Urlaub, and J. Wienands. 2009. SLP-65 phosphorylation dynamics reveals a functional basis for signal integration by receptor-proximal adaptor proteins. Mol Cell Proteomics. 8:1738-50.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was carried out as described by Oellerich et al. (Oellerich et al., 2009).  Oellerich, T., M. Gronborg, K. Neumann, H.H. Hsiao, H. Urlaub, and J. Wienands. 2009. SLP-65 phosphorylation dynamics reveals a functional basis for signal integration by receptor-proximal adaptor proteins. Mol Cell Proteomics. 8:1738-50.

### Publication Abstract
MutL&#x3b1;, a heterodimer consisting of MLH1 and PMS2, is a key player of DNA mismatch repair (MMR), yet little is known about its regulation. In this study, we used mass spectrometry to identify phosphorylated residues within MLH1 and PMS2. The most frequently detected phosphorylated amino acid was serine 477 of MLH1. Pharmacological treatment indicates&#x200e; that Casein kinase II (CK2) could be responsible for the phosphorylation of MLH1 at serine 477 in vivo. In vitro kinase assay verified MLH1 as a substrate of CK2. Most importantly, using in vitro MMR assay we could demonstrate that p-MLH1<sup>S477</sup> lost MMR activity. Moreover, we found that levels of p-MLH1<sup>S477</sup> varied during the cell cycle. In summary, we identified that phosphorylation of MLH1 by CK2 at amino acid position 477 can switch off MMR activity in vitro. Since CK2 is overexpressed in many tumors and is able to inactivate MMR, the new mechanism here described could have an important impact on tumors overactive in CK2.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Mutlα, Dna mismatch repair, Ck2, Mlh1, Lynch syndrome

### Affiliations
University Clinic of Frankfurt
Medical Clinic I
Biomedical Research Laboratory
University Clinic of Frankfurt Medical Clinic I Biomedical Research Laboratory Germany

### Submitter
Angela Brieger

### Lab Head
Dr Angela Brieger
University Clinic of Frankfurt Medical Clinic I Biomedical Research Laboratory Germany


