### Accession
PXD044168

### Title
Comparative proteomic analysis of eggs and ovarian fluid in Siberian sturgeon: Insights into composition and functional significance

### Description
Sturgeon species, considered living fossils, exhibit unique reproductive characteristics, making it crucial to comprehend the molecular processes governing the formation and quality of their eggs. However, there is a notable lack of comprehensive data concerning the protein composition analysis of sturgeon eggs and ovarian fluid (OF) and their functional significance. To address this knowledge gap, this study aimed to conduct a comprehensive comparative proteomic analysis of Siberian sturgeon eggs and OF using liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). A total of 566 proteins were identified in eggs, while 617 proteins were identified in OF, with 772 proteins showing differential abundance. Among the differentially abundant proteins, 407 were more abundant in eggs, while 365 showed higher abundance in OF. Furthermore, we identified 288 proteins specific to eggs and 339 proteins specific to OF, along with the top ten most abundant proteins in each. Functional annotation analysis unveiled enriched metabolic pathways, such as oxidative phosphorylation and fatty acid metabolism, as well as protein ubiquitination and translation, in eggs. Conversely, ovarian fluid proteins primarily associated with immune system processes, including the complement and coagulation cascade, neutrophil and leukocyte-mediated immunity, cholesterol metabolism, and regulation of actin cytoskeleton. This study presents the first comprehensive characterization of the protein composition of sturgeon ovarian fluid and eggs, shedding light on their distinct functional roles. The findings not only advance our understanding of sturgeon reproduction but also shed light on egg-OF signaling and origin of the OF proteins. Moreover the identified proteins offer potential biomarkers for predicting egg quality contributing to the development of effective breeding strategies for sturgeon species.

### Sample Protocol
70 µg of protein from each sample was digested according to FASP protocol [1]. Cysteine groups were reduced by 1 hour incubation with 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) at 37oC on vortex. Protein solutions were transferred onto Vivacon 30 kDa molecular weight cut-off filter (Sartorius Stedim). Filters were spun at 14 500 g for 15 min and washed with 200 µl urea solution (8 M urea in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate). Cysteines were alkylated by 10 min incubation at room temperature with 25 mM methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS). Filters were washed three times with urea solution and with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, respectively. After each addition, samples were centrifuged until the cut-off filter was dry. Digestion was carried out overnight using 2 µg of trypsin (Promega) at 37 oC (enzyme:protein ratio 1:35). Peptides were eluted from spin filters by two 50 µl additions of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate and one of 500 mM NaCl solution. The Speedvac dried samples were resuspended in 100 µl of 0.1% formic acid (FA) in water. Peptide concentrations were determined using using Pierce™ Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific).Samples were analysed using LC-MS system composed of Evosep One HPLC System (Evosep Biosystems) coupled to an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). 1 µg of peptide solutions were loaded onto Evotips C18 disposable trap columns as described [2]. Peptides were fractionated using 88 min (15 samples per day) predefined Evosep gradient at a flow rate of 220 nl/min on an analytical column (Dr Maisch C18 AQ, 1.9 µm beads, 150 µm ID, 15 cm long, Evosep Biosystems). Data-dependent acquisition parameters were as follows: top 40 precursors selected for MS2 analysis, collisional induced fragmentation NCE 30%, spray voltage 2.1 kV, funnel RF level 40, heated capillary temperature 275 oC. Full MS scans covering the mass range of 300–1600 m/z with a resolution of 60000, a maximum injection time set to Auto and a normalized AGC target to 300%. MS2 scans were acquired with a resolution of 15000, an Auto maximum injection time and a Standard AGC target. Ion isolation window was set to 1.6 m/z, a dynamic exclusion to 20 s and a minimum intensity threshold at 5e3.

### Data Protocol
The raw data files were pre-processed with Mascot Distiller (version 2.7, Matrixscience) and searched against the Acipenser protein database derived from NCBI (version from 2021.12.12, 78.501 sequences) supplemented with popular contaminants (CRAP database, 115 sequences). Mass tolarance was set individually after offline mass recalibration (typical values for peptide mass tolerance: 5 ppm, for fragment – 0.01 Da). Other parameters were as follows: enzyme – Trypsin, Fixed modifications – Methylthio (C), variable modifications – Oxidation (M), missed cleavages – 1.  Subsequently, data were incorporated into in-house data analysis software Mscan (http://proteom.ibb.waw.pl/mscan/). FDR was calculated with target/decoy strategy and kept under 1%. To estimate the protein abundance, emPAI was calculated using unique precursors and normalized by total abundance.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ovarian fluid, Proteome, Acipenser baerii, Mass spectrometry, Eggs

### Affiliations
IBB PAS
Department of Gamete and Embryo Biology, Institute of Animal Reproduction and Food Research, Polish Academy of Sciences, Olsztyn, Poland

### Submitter
Agata Malinowska

### Lab Head
Dr Mariola A. Dietrich
Department of Gamete and Embryo Biology, Institute of Animal Reproduction and Food Research, Polish Academy of Sciences, Olsztyn, Poland


