### Accession
PXD035111

### Title
Validation and application of a novel KLK6 activity based probe (IMP2352)

### Description
Pancreatic cancer has the lowest survival rate of all common cancers due to late diagnosis and limited treatment options. Serine hydrolases are known to mediate cancer progression and metastasis through initiation of signaling cascades and cleavage of extracellular matrix proteins, and the kallikrein-related peptidase (KLK) family of secreted serine proteases have emerging roles in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC). However, the lack of reliable activity-based probes (ABP) to profile KLK activity has hindered progress in validation of these enzymes as potential targets or biomarkers. Here, we developed potent and selective ABPs for KLK6 by using a positional scanning combinatorial substrate library and characterized their binding mode and interactions by X-ray crystallography. The optimized KLK6 probe IMP-2352 (kobs/I = 11,000 M-1 s-1) enabled selective detection of KLK6 activity in a variety of PDAC cell lines, and we observed that KLK6 inhibition reduced the invasiveness of PDAC cells that secrete active KLK6. KLK6 inhibitors were combined with N-terminomics to identify potential secreted protein substrates of KLK6 in PDAC cells, providing insights into KLK6-mediated invasion pathways. These novel KLK6 ABPs offer a new toolset to validate KLK6 and associated signaling partners as targets or biomarkers across a range of diseases.

### Sample Protocol
Activity-based protein profiling: LZ113/LZ120 (Fig S1, Fig 3F) Concentrated conditioned media from Capan-2 cells were incubated with DMSO or activity-based probe for 2 h, followed by precipitation to remove excess reagent. The biotinylated proteins were enriched using streptavidin resin, reduced, alkylated and digested on-bead using trypsin. Tryptic peptides were desalting via Stage-tipping and analysed using a Nano-LC Q-Exactive system.   N-terminal enrichment: LZ179 (Fig 5B-E) Concentrated conditioned media pre-treated with IMP2352 or DMSO were reduced and alkylated, followed by precipitation to remove excess reagents. IMP2352-treated proteins were dimethylated with heavy formaldehyde, while DMSO treated proteins were dimethylated with light formaldehyde. Excess formaldehyde was removed via precipitation and the proteins were digested via trypsin. Heavy and light samples were combined and 5% of the sample was taken for whole proteome analysis  (raw files labelled with WP). Peptides bearing tryptic N-termini were removed via the HUNTER protocol, involving diundecanylation and negative enrichment using a C18 solid-phase extraction (SPE) column. This leaves behind native N-termini and neo-N-termini formed by endogenous proteases for analysis (raw files labelled with HUNTER). All samples were desalted via Stage-tipping and analysed using a Nano-LC Q-Exactive system.

### Data Protocol
Proteomic data analysis using label free quantification (LZ113/LZ120): The MS raw files were loaded into MaxQuant (Version 1.6.10.43). The spectral data was searched against the human fasta file (Uniprot, taxonomy 9606, accessed 3/12/2020). Trypsin/P was used as the digestion method, with three maximum missed cleavages. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification for all searches. For activity-based probe selectivity experiments, the probe adduct, along with methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. For N-terminomics samples, heavy/light dimethylation, Gln/Glu to PyroGlu, methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Match between runs was switched on. LFQ intensity values or dimethylation efficiencies were processed using Perseus.  Proteomic data analysis using dimethyl labelling (LZ179): The MS raw files were loaded into MaxQuant (Version 1.6.10.43). The spectral data was searched against the human fasta file (Uniprot, taxonomy 9606, accessed 3/12/2020). Trypsin/P was used as the digestion method, with three maximum missed cleavages. Heavy (34.06311 Da) or light (28.0313 Da) dimethylations (on N-terminus or Lys) were set as labels. Heavy/light dimethylation, Gln/Glu to PyroGlu, methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Requantify and match between runs were switched on.   Pulldown volcano plots using Perseus (LZ113/LZ120): The ProteinGroups text file generated from the MaxQuant search was imported to Perseus. The LFQ intensity values were chosen for quantification and the protein list was filtered against only ID by site, reverse and potential contaminants. The intensity values were transformed to log2. The mean values within each replicate were substracted, followed by the subtraction each condition by the median. Volcano plots were made using a t-test to compare the DMSO conditions and the probe treated conditions (n = 3, FDR = 0.05, s0 = 0.1).  Dimethylation efficiency and % N-terminal peptide checks using Perseus (LZ179): Evidence and Peptide text files generated from the MaxQuant search was imported into Perseus. The variable modifications were extracted from the evidence file and matched with the corresponding peptides in the peptide file using the peptide ID column. Dimethylation efficiency was calculated by the sum of the heavy and light lysine dimethylation counts divided by the total lysine count. The percentage of N-terminal peptides was also calculated by the percentage of peptides in the dataset that have starting positions 1 or 2.   HUNTER quantification using Perseus (LZ179): The “ratio H/L normalised” values were extracted from the Peptide text file from the MaxQuant Search into Perseus. The rows were filtered against reverse and potential contaminants. Rows with two or more NaN’s were filtered away. The ratio values were transformed to log2. The columns were subtracted by median and rows were annotated as one condition. A one sample t-test was performed to isolate the significant hits (p = 0.05). The t-test positive hits that had log2 values lower than -0.5 or higher than 0.5 were kept. These hits were further filtered by searching for the P4-P2 cleavage positions of each N-terminal peptide and comparing it with the substrate specificity data of KLK6 (Fig S1). For peptides with negative ratios, the P4-P2 positions of the N-terminus was analysed. Hits with P2 or P3 amino acids that were not tolerated by KLK6 were filtered out. This analysis was not performed for peptides with positive ratios because the exact cleavage site of these hits are uncertain.

### Publication Abstract
Pancreatic cancer has the lowest survival rate of all common cancers due to late diagnosis and limited treatment options. Serine hydrolases are known to mediate cancer progression and metastasis through initiation of signaling cascades and cleavage of extracellular matrix proteins, and the kallikrein-related peptidase (KLK) family of secreted serine proteases have emerging roles in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC). However, the lack of reliable activity-based probes (ABPs) to profile KLK activity has hindered progress in validation of these enzymes as potential targets or biomarkers. Here, we developed potent and selective ABPs for KLK6 by using a positional scanning combinatorial substrate library and characterized their binding mode and interactions by X-ray crystallography. The optimized KLK6 probe IMP-2352 (<i>k</i><sub>obs</sub>/<i>I</i> = 11,000 M<sup>-1</sup> s<sup>-1</sup>) enabled selective detection of KLK6 activity in a variety of PDAC cell lines, and we observed that KLK6 inhibition reduced the invasiveness of PDAC cells that secrete active KLK6. KLK6 inhibitors were combined with N-terminomics to identify potential secreted protein substrates of KLK6 in PDAC cells, providing insights into KLK6-mediated invasion pathways. These novel KLK6 ABPs offer a toolset to validate KLK6 and associated signaling partners as targets or biomarkers across a range of diseases.

### Keywords
Activity-based probe, N-terminomics, Klk, Abpp, Kallikrein-related peptidase

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry, Molecular Sciences Research Hub, Imperial College London, London W12 0BZ, U.K.
LGC

### Submitter
Leran Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Edward W Tate
Department of Chemistry, Molecular Sciences Research Hub, Imperial College London, London W12 0BZ, U.K.


