### Accession
PXD001728

### Title
Medicago truncatula drought stress recovery

### Description
Molecular Elasticity and Adjustment of Drought Recovery Dynamics of 14N- and 15N-fertilized Legume Medicago truncatula. Climate change in conjunction with population growth necessitates a systems biology approach to characterize plant drought response and a more thorough understanding of the underlying molecular mechanisms. During drought stress and recovery, the metabolome and proteome regulate and are regulated through diverse mechanisms including synthesis and degradation. In order to study this complex regulation network, a front-end multilevel analysis is presented for the first time, investigating protein turnover, regulatory classes of proteins and metabolites as well as post translational ubiquitination of a target set of proteins during a severe stress and recovery scenario in the model legume Medicago truncatula. Evidence for enhanced translational proteome regulation was observed during drought recovery and functional clusters of differentially dynamic phases during the course of recovery were defined. The data give novel insights into molecular elasticity that enable recovery of drought stressed plants. Additionally, these results offer putative targets and metabolic pathways for future plant-bioengineering towards enhanced drought stress tolerance.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction for shotgun LC-MS/MS analysis: Three biological replicates were used for protein extraction. Shoot and root (200 mg of liquid nitrogen frozen fresh weight material) were extracted differentially. Frozen shoot tissue was homogenized in 1 ml of urea buffer containing 50 mM HEPES, pH 7.8 and 8 M Urea using a glass homogenizer. After centrifugation (10,000 g, 10 min, 4°C) the urea soluble proteins in the supernatant were precipitated overnight in five volumes of -20°C cold acetone containing 0.5% ß-mercaptoethanol. The precipitate was pelleted at 4,000 g, 4°C for 15 min. The resulting pellet was washed with -20°C cold methanol containing 0.5% ß-mercaptoethanol and again centrifuged (4,000 g, 10 min, 4°C). Root tissue was TCA-phenol extracted following the protocol of (Wang et al, 2006). Air-dried protein pellets were dissolved in 500-800 µl of urea buffer (described above) and protein concentration was determined by Bradford assay using BSA as a standard. In-solution protein digestion: In-solution digestion was performed using 100 µg of protein. Initially the endoproteinase LysC (Roche, Mannheim, Germany) was used for a first digestion (1: 100 vol/vol, 5 h, 30°C). For the second digestion step, samples were diluted with trypsin buffer (10% ACN, 50 mM AmBic, 2 mM CaCl2) to a final concentration of 2 M Urea and incubated overnight at 37°C with Poroszyme immobilized trypsin beads (1:30, v/w; Applied Biosystems, Darmstadt, Germany). The digest was desalted with C18-SPEC 96- well plates (Varian, Darmstadt, Germany) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The eluted peptides were vacuum-dried. nanoESI LC-MS/MS for protein analyses: Peptide digests (1 µg each) were randomly applied to a Peptide ES-18 column (15 cm x 0.1 mm, 2.7 µm; Sigma-Aldrich) coupled to a one-dimensional nano-flow LC system (UltiMate 3000, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria), separated during a 90 min gradient ranging from 95% solvent A (0.1% FA in water) to 80% solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% FA in water) and a flow rate of 0.4 µL per minute. For each treatment three biological and two technical replicates were randomly analysed. MS analyses were performed on a LTQ-Orbitrap XL (Thermo FisherScientific, Bremen, Germany). For the database dependent spectral count analysis (Wienkoop, 2011), a top 7 MS analysis setting was used with the full scan range from 350 to 1,800 m/z. Dynamic exclusion settings were as described in Hoehenwarter and Wienkoop (2010). Briefly, repeat count was set to 1, repeat duration 20 s, exclusion list size 500, exclusion duration 60 s and exclusion mass width 10 ppm. Charge state screening was enabled with rejection of unassigned and 1+ charge states. Minimum signal threshold counts were set to 1,000. Notably, for better performance of the 15N-labelling analysis the resolution was set to 60,000. Replicates per treatment (3 biological, 2 technical) were randomly injected to discriminate technical from biological variation.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and relative quantification: We used the SEQUEST algorithm and the Proteome Discoverer (v 1.3, Thermo Scientific) to search MS data against a composite protein-fasta-file, which was created by fusing the following three databases: 1. Uniprot UniRef100 Medicago, origin: www.uniprot.org, Uniprot advanced-search M. truncatula [3880], UniRef100. The search was performed on May 7th 2013 and resulted in 54246 entries. 2. IMGA, origin: http://medicago.org/genome/IMGAG/. 64123 entries. 3. DCFI origin (no available any longer): http://compbio.dfci.harvard.edu/tgi/cgi-bin/tgi/gimain.pl?gudb=medicago. 412908  ? 68818 entries. From the nucleotide database, a protein-fasta-file was translated using Emboss (resulting in 412908 entries).Thereof only the longest ORF per accession number was selected using an unpublished in-house Python script (resulting in 68818 entries). The three fasta files described above were combined, producing a new non-redundant fasta containing 130824 entries.  In-silico peptide lists were generated with the following settings: trypsin as the digestion enzyme, a maximum of three missed cleavages and methionine oxidation as dynamic modification. Mass tolerance was set to 5ppm for precursor ions and 0.8 Da for fragment ions. Additionally, a decoy database containing reversed sequences was used to estimate the false discovery rate (FDR). Only high confidence (FDR = 0.01%) peptide identifications with a minimum XCorr of 2 and proteins with at least two distinct peptides were considered. For the identification of ubiquitinated proteins/peptides a dynamic modification search for di-Gly lysine (K +114.043 Da) with semi-tryptic digestion was applied. Protein relative quantification is based on database dependent spectral counting as described previously (Staudinger et al, 2012). The protein (µg) normalized samples were further normalized by DW (see metabolite data) and by total scan number. All the K-GG modified peptides identified are listed in Supplemental Table 4. Quantitative evaluation of ubiquitinated to non-ubiquitinated RuBisCO peptides was carried out using the Summed Intensity Count of ProtMAX (Egelhofer et al, 2013) (Supplemental Table 4). A Mapman mapping file was created on the basis of the in house fasta file using Mercator (Lohse et al, 2014).

### Publication Abstract
Climate change in conjunction with population growth necessitates a systems biology approach to characterize plant drought acclimation as well as a more thorough understanding of the molecular mechanisms of stress recovery. Plants are exposed to a continuously changing environment. Extremes such as several weeks of drought are followed by rain. This requires a molecular plasticity of the plant enabling drought acclimation and the necessity of deacclimation processes for recovery and continuous growth.During drought stress and subsequent recovery, the metabolome and proteome are regulated through a sequence of molecular processes including synthesis and degradation and molecular interaction networks are part of this regulatory process. In order to study this complex regulatory network, a comprehensive analysis is presented for the first time, investigating protein turnover and regulatory classes of proteins and metabolites during a stress recovery scenario in the model legume Medicago truncatula The data give novel insights into the molecular capacity and differential processes required for acclimation and deacclimation of severe drought stressed plants.Functional cluster and network analyses unraveled independent regulatory mechanisms for stress and recovery with different dynamic phases that during the course of recovery define the plants deacclimation from stress. The combination of relative abundance levels and turnover analysis revealed an early transition phase that seems key for recovery initiation through water resupply and is independent from renutrition. Thus, a first indication for a metabolite and protein-based load capacity was observed necessary for the recovery from drought, an important but thus far ignored possible feature toward tolerance. The data indicate that apart from the plants molecular stress response mechanisms, plasticity may be related to the nutritional status of the plant prior to stress initiation. A new perspective and possible new targets as well as metabolic mechanisms for future plant-bioengineering toward enhanced drought stress tolerance are presented.

### Keywords
Drought recovery, Medicago truncatula, Roots, Time series, Drought stress, Molecular systems biology, Shoots, Non-nodulated, Selpex

### Affiliations
Ecogenomics and Systems Biology
Department for Ecogenomics and Systems Biology, University of Vienna, Austria

### Submitter
David Lyon

### Lab Head
Dr Stefanie Wienkoop
Department for Ecogenomics and Systems Biology, University of Vienna, Austria


