### Accession
PXD013894

### Title
The ER protein translocation channel subunit Sbh1 controls virulence of Cryptococcus neoformans

### Description
C. neoformans is an opportunistic human pathogen whose polysaccharide capsule anchored to the cell wall is critical for virulence. Biogenesis of both cell wall and capsule relies on the secretory pathway. Protein secretion begins with protein translocation across the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane through a highly conserved channel formed by three proteins, Sec61, Sbh1, and Sss1. Sbh1 is most divergent and contains multiple phosphorylation sites which may allow it to control entry into the secretory pathway in a regulated, species- and protein-specific manner. We show here that in contrast to S. cerevisiae, C. neoformans lacking SBH1 are barely temperature-sensitive, but that absence of SBH1 causes a cell-wall defect in both species. Comparison of the proteomes of wildtype and Δsbh1 C. neoformans revealed a small set of secretory and transmembrane proteins whose expression under infection-like conditions was upregulated in wildtype, but not in the Δsbh1 mutant. These proteins are mostly involved in cell-wall biogenesis. We found that adhesion to macrophages was compromised in the Δsbh1 strain and in mice, the C. neoformans Δsbh1 mutant was virtually avirulent. We conclude that upon contact with the host Sbh1 controls entry of virulencefactors into the secretory pathway of Cryptococcus neoformans.

### Sample Protocol
C. neoformans WT and sbh1mutant strains were grown in quadruplicate as described above. For total cellular proteome analysis, cell pellets were collected by centrifugation at 3,500 rpm for10 min, pellets were washed twice with cold PBS, and subjected to acetone precipitation and enzymatic digestion (Geddes et al., 2016). Briefly, cell pellets were resuspended in 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5 with proteinase inhibitor capsule (PIC) and probe sonicated in an ice bath at1610% power for 3 cycles of 30s on/off. Samples were spun down and 2% (final) sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS) was added, followed by reduction with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT)at 95°C for 10 min at 800 rpm, alkylation with 55 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) at room temperature in the dark for 20 min, and acetone precipitation (80% final) at -20°C overnight. Precipitated proteins were pelleted at 13,500 rpm for 10 min, washed twice with 80% acetone and air-dried, prior to solubilizing the pellet in 8 M Urea and 40 mM HEPES. LysC was added at 1:100 μg protein for 3 h at room temperature, followed by addition of 50 mM ammonium biocarbonate and 1:100 μg protein of trypsin overnight at room temperature. Protein concentration was determined by BSA tryptophan assay (Wisniewski & Gaugaz,2015). For secretome analysis, supernatant from C. neoformans WT and sbh1mutant cell cultures were collected and filtered using 0.22 μM syringe filter and subjected to in-solution trypsin digestion (Kugadas et al., 2017). Briefly, one-third the total volume of 8 M Urea and 40 mMHEPES was added to the supernatant, followed by sonication in a water bath at 4°C for 15min (30 s on/off). Samples were reduced, alkylated, and digested as described above. Following digestion, samples were stopped by addition of 10% v/v Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA)and the acidified peptides were loaded onto to desalt and purify according to the standard protocol (Rappsilber et al., 2007). Approx. 50 μg of sample was loaded onto StageTips and stored at 4°C until LC-MS/MS measurement. Samples were eluted from StageTips with buffer B (80% acetonitrile (ACN) and 0.5% acetic acid), the organic solvent was removed in a SpeedVac concentrator, and peptides were resuspended in Buffer A (2% ACN and 0.1% TFA). Each sample was analyzed by nanoflow liquid chromatography on an EASY-nLC 1200 system (ThermoFisher Scientific) on-line coupled to a Q Exactive HF-X quadrupole orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). An in-line 75 μm x 50 cm PepMap RSLC EASY-Spray column filled with 2 μm C18 beads (ThermoFisher Scientific) separated peptides by a linear gradient from 3% to 20% Buffer B (80% acetonitrile) over 18 min, from 20% to 35% Buffer B over 31 minutes, followed by a steep 2 min ramp to 100% Buffer B for 9 min in 0.1% Formic acid at a constant flow of 250 nl/min. The QExactive HF-X was operated in a data-dependent mode, switching automatically between one full-scan and subsequent MS/MS scans of the 30 most abundant peaks, with full-scans (m/z 400–1600) acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer with a resolution of 60,000 at 400g m/z.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed together using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.0.26) (Cox & Mann, 2008). The derived peak list was searched with the built-in Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011) against the reference C. neoformans H99 proteome downloaded from Uniprot (http://www.uniprot.org/) (Aug. 18, 2018; 7,430 sequences). The parameters were as follows: strict trypsin specificity was required with cleavage at the C-terminal after K or R, allowing for up to two missed cleavages. The minimum required peptide length was set to seven amino acids and 2 minimum peptides were required for protein group identification. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification; N-acetylation of proteins N termini and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications. PSM (peptide-to spectrum match) and protein identifications were filtered using a target-decoy approach at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%. ‘Match between runs’ was enabled with a match time window of 0.7 min and an alignment time window of 20 min. Relative, label-free quantification of proteins was done using the MaxLFQ algorithm (Cox et al., 2014) integrated into MaxQuant using a minimum ratio count of 2.  Statistical analysis of the MaxQuant-processed data was performed using the Perseus software environment (version 1.6.2.2) (Tyanova et al., 2016). The “proteingroups.txt” file was loaded into Perseus. Proteins mapping to the reverse database, contaminants, and proteins only identified by were removed. LFQ intensities were converted to a log scale (log2), and only those proteins which were present in triplicate within at least one sample set were used for further statistical analysis (valid-value filter of 3 in at least one group). Missing values were imputed from a normal distribution (downshift of 1.8 standard deviations and a width of 0.3 standard deviations). The total matrix was imputed using these values, enabling statistical analysis. A Student’s t-test was performed to identify proteins with a significant differential expression (p-value < 0.05) (S0 = 1) between samples employing a 5% permutation-based FDR filter.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cryptococcus neoformans, Secretion, Proteomics, Er

### Affiliations
Molecular and Cellular Biology Department, University of Guelph, Guelph, Ontario, Canada, N1G 2W1
University of Guelph

### Submitter
Jennifer Geddes-McAlister

### Lab Head
Dr Jennifer Geddes-McAlister
Molecular and Cellular Biology Department, University of Guelph, Guelph, Ontario, Canada, N1G 2W1


