### Accession
PXD015124

### Title
Human brain global proteome and succinylome analyses

### Description
This is about the global proteome and global succinylome of human brain tissues.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were labeled by TMT10plex for global proteome. The succinylome was acheived by enrichemnt of succinylated peptides followed by LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
All raw data files were processed by Proteme Discoverer 2.2 software tool for both global proteome and succinylome.

### Publication Abstract
Metabolic changes that correlate to cognitive changes are well-known in Alzheimer's disease (AD). Metabolism is often linked to functional changes in proteins by post-translational modifications. The importance of the regulation of transcription by acetylation is well documented. Advanced mass spectrometry reveals hundreds of acetylated proteins in multiple tissues, but the acetylome of human brain, its functional significance, and the changes with disease are unknown. Filling this gap is critical for understanding the pathophysiology and development of therapies. To fill this gap, we assessed the human brain acetylome in human brain and its changes with AD. More than 5% of the 4,442 proteins from the human brain global proteome were acetylated. Acetylated proteins were primarily found in the cytosol (148), mitochondria (100), nucleus (91), and plasma membrane (58). The comparison of the brain acetylome in controls to that of patients with AD revealed striking and selective differences in terms of its abundances of acetylated peptides/sites. Acetylation of 18 mitochondrial proteins decreased, while acetylation of two cytosolic proteins, tau and GFAP, increased. Our experiments demonstrate that acetylation at some specific lysine sites alters enzyme function. The results indicate that general activation of de-acetylases (i.e., sirtuins) is not an appropriate therapeutic approach for AD.

### Keywords
Human, Brain, Succinylation

### Affiliations
Proteomics Facility, Institute of Biotechnology, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA
Cornell University

### Submitter
Sheng Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Sheng Zhang
Proteomics Facility, Institute of Biotechnology, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA


