### Accession
PXD009227

### Title
High-throughput and high-sensitivity phosphoproteomics with the EasyPhos platform

### Description
Mass spectrometry has transformed the field of cell signalling by enabling global studies of dynamic protein phosphorylation (‘phosphoproteomics’). Recent developments are enabling increasingly sophisticated phosphoproteomics studies, but practical challenges remain. The EasyPhos workflow addresses these, and is sufficiently streamlined to enable analysis of hundreds of phosphoproteomes at a depth of >10,000 quantified phosphorylation sites. Here we present a detailed and updated protocol that further ensures high performance in sample-limited conditions, while also reducing sample preparation time. By eliminating protein precipitation steps and performing the entire protocol including digestion in a single 96-well plate, we now greatly minimize opportunities for sample loss and variability. This results in very high reproducibility and low sample requirements of 200 μg of protein starting material or less. After cell culture or tissue collection, the protocol takes 1 d, whereas mass spectrometry measurements require 1 h per sample. Applied to glioblastoma cells acutely treated with EGF, EasyPhos quantified 20,132 distinct phosphopeptides from 200 μg protein in less than one day of measurement time, revealing thousands of EGF-regulated phosphorylation events.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysates were processed using the EasyPhos platform. Detailed protocols are provided in the associated manuscript.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry RAW data were processed using MaxQuant, and analysed using Perseus. Detailed settings are provided in the associated manuscript.

### Publication Abstract
Mass spectrometry has transformed the field of cell signaling by enabling global studies of dynamic protein phosphorylation ('phosphoproteomics'). Recent developments are enabling increasingly sophisticated phosphoproteomics studies, but practical challenges remain. The EasyPhos workflow addresses these and is sufficiently streamlined to enable the analysis of hundreds of phosphoproteomes at a depth of &gt;10,000 quantified phosphorylation sites. Here we present a detailed and updated workflow that further ensures high performance in sample-limited conditions while also reducing sample preparation time. By eliminating protein precipitation steps and performing the entire protocol, including digestion, in a single 96-well plate, we now greatly minimize opportunities for sample loss and variability. This results in very high reproducibility and a small sample size requirement (&#x2264;200 &#x3bc;g of protein starting material). After cell culture or tissue collection, the protocol takes 1 d, whereas mass spectrometry measurements require ~1 h per sample. Applied to glioblastoma cells acutely treated with epidermal growth factor (EGF), EasyPhos quantified 20,132 distinct phosphopeptides from 200 &#x3bc;g of protein in less than 1 d of measurement time, revealing thousands of EGF-regulated phosphorylation events.

### Keywords
Post-translational modification, Signal transduction, Phosphorylation, Phosphoproteomics, Egf, Glioblastoma, Proteomics, Mass spectrometry, Cancer

### Affiliations
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry
Proteomics

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry


