### Accession
PXD038951

### Title
Targeting N-linked Glycosylation for the Therapy 1 of Aggressive Lymphomas

### Description
Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is an aggressive cancer with two major biological subtypes, activated B-cell like (ABC) and germinal center B-cell-like (GCB) DLCBL.  Self-antigen engagement of B-cell receptors (BCRs) in ABC tumors promotes their clustering in the plasma membrane, thereby initiating chronic active signaling and downstream activation of the pro-survival NF-kB and PI3 kinase pathways.  The potential of therapeutics targeting chronic active BCR signaling in ABC DLBCL is highlighted by the frequent response of these tumors to inhibitors of BTK, a kinase that links BCR signaling to NF-kB activation.  Here we used genome-wide CRISPR-Cas9 screens to identify regulators of the IRF4, a direct NF-kB target and essential transcription factor in ABC cells.  Unexpectedly, inactivation of the oligosaccharyltransferase (OST) complex, which mediates N-linked protein glycosylation, reduced IRF4 expression and NF-kB activity in ABC cells, resulting in cell death.  Using functional glycoproteogenomics we linked this phenomenon to defective BCR glycosylation.  Pharmacologic inhibition of OST reduced the size and abundance of BCR microclusters in the plasma membrane and blocked their internalization.  These reorganized BCRs associated with the inhibitory coreceptor CD22, which attenuated proximal BCR signaling, thereby reducing NF-kB and PI3 kinase activation.  OST inhibition also blocked the trafficking of TLR9 to the endolysosomal compartment, preventing its association with the BCR in the My-T-BCR signaling complex that activates NF-kB in ABC cells.  In GCB DLBCL, OST inhibition also attenuated constitutive BCR signaling, reducing PI3 kinase signaling and triggering cell death.  Our data highlight the therapeutic potential of OST inhibitors for the treatment of diverse B cell malignancies in which constitutive BCR signaling is essential.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were processed as follows: (i) lysis of cells in the presence of SDS, (ii) protein extraction, (iii) protein concentration and endoproteolytic digestion using protein aggregation capture (PAC)17, 18, (iv) multiplex TMT labeling, (v) N-glycopeptide enrichment by zwitterionic HILIC (ZIC-HILIC) followed by (vi) basic reverse phase (bRP) prefractionation, and (vii) LC-MS3 analysis using Glyco-SPS-MS3, which generates high resolution MS2 and MS3 product ion scans.

### Data Protocol
All raw files were processed by GlycoBinder. Main parameters used for GlycoBinder include fully specific trypsin digestion with maximal two missed cleavage and mass tolerance for precursors and fragment ions of 10 and 20 ppm, respectively. Cysteine carbamidomethylation and TMT16 on peptide N-termini and lysine residues were set as fixed modifications and methionine oxidation,lysine CAMthiopropanoyl were set as a variable modification. The reviewed human protein database was downloaded from Swiss-Prot (October 2020, human, 20,370 entries).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dlbcl, Lc-ms/ms, Glycosylation

### Affiliations
Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Group, Max Planck Institute for Multidisciplinary Sciences, 37077 Göttingen, Germany.
Max-Planck-Institute for Multidisciplinary Sciences

### Submitter
Yanlong Ji

### Lab Head
Dr Henning Urlaub
Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Group, Max Planck Institute for Multidisciplinary Sciences, 37077 Göttingen, Germany.


