### Accession
PXD023973

### Title
Label-free shotgun proteomics of tmRNA substrates enriched by immunoprecipitation

### Description
We used a combination of genetic and proteomic approaches to characterize tmRNA (ssrA) activity in the genome-reduced bacterium Mycoplasma pneumoniae. For this, we generated tmRNA mutants encoding a tag resistant to proteolysis. Endogenous protein tagging by the mutant tmRNA gene (ssrAmk) was then examined by immunoprecipitation (IP) enrichment followed by LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Mutant cells expressing the ssrAmk gene variant (mutant sample) or wild-type ssrA gene (control sample) were grown in duplicate 20 ml cultures containing Haylfick medium. In a first IP enrichment experiment (samples 160725_S_RBLS_01_01 and 160725_S_RBLS_02_01, respectively) cells were washed twice with cold PBSx1 and lysed directly into the flask by scraping off the cells in a PBSx1 buffer containing 0.1% SDS plus protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche). Cell extracts were passed several times through a syringe with a 25-gauge needle and incubated at 4°C on a rotating platform for 30 min before being subjected to centrifugation at 18,000 x g for 10 min. Supernatants were then incubated overnight with purified anti-ssrAmk antibodies at 4°C on a rotating platform in four independent binding reactions per sample, containing each 250 µg of protein and 3 µg of antibody. Antibody-protein complexes were captured by incubating the supernatants with Protein G Dynabeads (Invitrogen), which were previously washed twice with PBSx1 containing 0.05% Tween 20. After 4h of incubation with rotation at  4°C, Dynabeads complexes were washed thrice with PBSx1 containing 0.05% Tween 20 and transferred to a clean microtube. After removing the supernatant, Dynabeads complexes were resuspended in a buffer containing (50mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4; 1% SDS), and incubated at 65°C during 10 min. Finally, supernatants were recovered and pooled for mass spectrometry analysis. A second IP enrichment experiment was performed using more stringent conditions (samples 160926_S_RBLS_01_02 [control], 160926_S_RBLS_02_02 [mutant], 160926_S_RBLS_03_02 [mutant]). Briefly, cells were lysed with RIPA buffer from Sigma (150 mM NaCl, 1.0% IGEPAL® CA-630, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS, 50 mM Tris, pH 8.0) followed by mild sonication using a Bioruptor sonication system (Diagenode) with an On/Off interval time of 30/30 sec at medium frequency for 90 seconds. Cell extracts were then centrifuged at 18,000 x g for 10 min, and subjected to a pre-clearing step (2h in rotation at 4°C) employing Protein G Dynabeads (Invitrogen). Binding reactions of supernatants with anti-ssrAmk antibodies and Protein G Dynabeads were performed as described above, except that Dynabeads complexes were washed five times with PBSx1 containing 0.1% Tween 20.  IP samples were reduced with dithiothreitol (100 mM, 37 ºC, 60 min) and alkylated in the dark with iodoacetamide (5 µmol, 25 ºC, 20 min). The resulting protein extract was wash with 2M urea with 100 mM Tris-HCl and then with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate for digestion with endoproteinase LysC (1:10 w:w, 37ºC, o/n, Wako Pure Chemical) and then for trypsin digestion (1:10 w:w, 37ºC, 8h, Promega). After digestion, peptide mix was acidified with formic acid and desalted with a MicroSpin C18 column (The Nest Group, Inc) prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. Samples were analyzed using a LTQ-Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific (Proxeon), Odense, Denmark). Peptides were loaded directly onto the analytical column and were separated by reverse-phase chromatography using a 50-cm column with an inner diameter of 75 μm, packed with 2 μm C18 particles spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA). Chromatographic gradients started at 95% buffer A and 5% buffer B with a flow rate of 300 nl/min and gradually increased to 35% buffer B and 65% A in 60 min. After each analysis, the column was washed for 10 min with 10% buffer A and 90% buffer B. Buffer A: 0.1% formic acid in water. Buffer B: 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ionization mode with nanospray voltage set at 2.4 kV and source temperature at 275°C. The acquisition was performed in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode with full MS scans detected in the Orbitrap mass analyzer at a resolution of 120,000. In each cycle of data-dependent acquisition analysis, following each survey scan, the most intense ions above a threshold ion count of 10000 were selected for fragmentation. The number of selected precursor ions for fragmentation was determined by the “Top Speed” acquisition algorithm and a dynamic exclusion of 60 seconds. Fragment ion spectra were produced via high-energy collision dissociation (HCD) at normalized collision energy of 28% and they were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer. Digested bovine serum albumin (New England Biolabs) was analyzed between each sample to avoid carryover and assess the instrument performance.

### Data Protocol
To identify tmRNA-tagged peptides we used two complementary analyses. In a first analysis, acquired spectra were analyzed with the denovo and the database search algorithms included in PEAKS Studio software suite (v7.0, Bioinformatics Solutions Inc). For data interpretation we used a customized protein database including a list of common contaminants, all possible M. pneumoniae ORFs longer than 19 aa and the ssrAmk tag sequence (87,052 entries). The precursor ion mass tolerance was set to 7 ppm, trypsin was set as enzyme, and up to three missed cleavages were allowed. The fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.02 Da for MS2 spectra, and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation were used as variable modifications, whereas carbamidomethylation on cysteines was set as a fixed modification. False discovery rate (FDR) in peptide identification was set to a maximum of 1%. In a second analysis, acquired spectra were analyzed using the Proteome Discoverer software suite (v2.3, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the Mascot search engine v2.5 Matrix Science (48). The data were searched against a home-made database consisting of all possible truncated proteins containing a ssrAmk tag inserted in each possible position (a total of 239,666 entries, including also the CAT protein, and the ssrA and ssrAmk tag sequences). This database was combined with a list of common contaminants and all possible M. pneumoniae ORFs >19aa (87,051 entries). For peptide identification a precursor ion mass tolerance of 7 ppm was used for MS1 level, trypsin was chosen as enzyme and up to three missed cleavages were allowed. The fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da for MS2 spectra. Oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation were used as variable modifications whereas carbamidomethylation on cysteines was set as a fixed modification. False discovery rate (FDR) in peptide identification was set to a maximum of 5%, and only unique tagged peptides with an ion score >20 were considered.   We also performed a comparative and enrichment analysis after immunoprecipitation under stringent conditions. For this, acquired spectra were analyzed as described above using the Proteome Discoverer software suite (v2.0, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the Mascot search engine v2.5 Matrix Science (48). In this case, the data were searched against the database containing the list of common contaminants and all possible M. pneumoniae ORFs >19 aa (87,051 entries) plus the ssrA and ssrAmk tag sequences. Peptide quantification data were retrieved from the “Precursor ion area detector” node from Proteome Discoverer (v2.0) using 2 ppm mass tolerance for the peptide extracted ion current (XIC).

### Publication Abstract
Trans-translation is a ubiquitous bacterial mechanism of ribosome rescue mediated by a transfer-messenger RNA (tmRNA) that adds a degradation tag to the truncated nascent polypeptide. Here, we characterize this quality control system in a genome-reduced bacterium, <i>Mycoplasma pneumoniae</i> (MPN), and perform a comparative analysis of protein quality control components in slow and fast-growing prokaryotes. We show <i>in&#xa0;vivo</i> that in MPN the sole quality control cytoplasmic protease (Lon) degrades efficiently tmRNA-tagged proteins. Analysis of tmRNA-mutants encoding a tag resistant to proteolysis reveals extensive tagging activity under normal growth. Unlike knockout strains, these mutants are viable demonstrating the requirement of tmRNA-mediated ribosome recycling. Chaperone and Lon steady-state levels maintain proteostasis in these mutants suggesting a model in which co-evolution of Lon and their substrates offer simple mechanisms of regulation without specialized degradation machineries. Finally, comparative analysis shows relative increase in Lon/Chaperone levels in slow-growing bacteria suggesting physiological adaptation to growth demand.

### Keywords
Protein degradation, Mycoplasma pneumoniae, Trans-translation, Tmrna, Ribosome stalling

### Affiliations
Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), The Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology, Dr. Aiguader 88, Barcelona 08003, Spain
Centre for Genomic Regulation

### Submitter
Marc Weber

### Lab Head
Dr Luis Serrano
Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), The Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology, Dr. Aiguader 88, Barcelona 08003, Spain


