### Accession
PXD023502

### Title
GTPase driven maturation of the human mitoribosomal peptidyl transferase center

### Description
We combine genetic perturbation with cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) to establish the mechanism of PTC maturation during human mitoribosome biogenesis. Cryo-EM structures of large mitoribosomal subunit (mtLSU) assembly intermediates purified from GTPBP6-deficient cells reveal that GTPBP5 acts in concert with the methyltransferase domain of the NSUN4-MTERF4 complex to facilitate PTC folding. Addition of recombinant GTPBP6 to these assembly intermediates provides the structural basis for subsequent GTPBP6-mediated late PTC maturation and suggests a sequential order of mtLSU biogenesis. Finally, cryo-EM analysis of 55S mitoribosomes treated with GTPBP6 explains how this protein can adopt a dual role in ribosome biogenesis and recycling. Taken together, these results provide the molecular basis for PTC maturation and establish a hierarchical model for late mitoribosome biogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were separated by polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis on a 4-12% gradient gel (NuPAGE, Invitrogen). After Coomassie staining, lanes were cut into 12 slices and proteins were reduced by dithiothreitol, alkylated by iodoacetamide, and digested with trypsin in-gel. Extracted peptides were vacuum-dried and subsequently resuspended in 2% acetonitrile (ACN, v/v)/0.05% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, v/v). Peptides were measured on a QExactive HF Mass Spectrometer coupled to a Dionex UltiMate 3000 UHPLC system (both Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with an in house-packed C18 column (ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 µm pore size, 75 µm inner diameter, 30 cm length, Dr. Maisch GmbH). Peptides were separated applying the following gradient: mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid (FA, v/v), mobile phase B of 80% ACN/0.08% FA (v/v). The gradient started at 5% B, increasing to 10% B within 3 min, followed by a continuous increase to 46% B within 45 min, and then keeping B constant at 90% for 8 min. After each gradient the column was again equilibrated to 5% B for 2 min. The flow rate was set to 300 nL/min. MS1 full scans were acquired with a resolution of 60,000, an injection time (IT) of 50 ms and an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 1×10^6. Dynamic exclusion (DE) was set to 30 s. MS2 spectra were acquired of the 30 most abundant precursor ions; the resolution was set to 15,000; the IT was set to 60 ms and the AGC target to 1×10^5. Fragmentation was enforced by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) at 28% NCE.

### Data Protocol
Acquired raw data were analyzed by MaxQuant (Cox and Mann, 2008) (v. 1.6.0.1) applying default settings and enabled ‘match between runs’ option. Proteins were quantified based on their iBAQ value.

### Publication Abstract
Ribosome biogenesis requires auxiliary factors to promote folding and assembly of ribosomal proteins and RNA. Particularly, maturation of the peptidyl transferase center (PTC) is mediated by conserved GTPases, but the molecular basis is poorly understood. Here, we define the mechanism of GTPase-driven maturation of the human mitochondrial large ribosomal subunit (mtLSU) using endogenous complex purification, in vitro reconstitution and cryo-EM. Structures of transient native mtLSU assembly intermediates that accumulate in GTPBP6-deficient cells reveal how the biogenesis factors GTPBP5, MTERF4 and NSUN4 facilitate PTC folding. Addition of recombinant GTPBP6 reconstitutes late mtLSU biogenesis in vitro and shows that GTPBP6 triggers a molecular switch and progression to a near-mature PTC state. Additionally, cryo-EM analysis of GTPBP6-treated mature mitochondrial ribosomes reveals the structural basis for the dual-role of GTPBP6 in ribosome biogenesis and recycling. Together, these results provide a framework for understanding step-wise PTC folding as a critical conserved quality control checkpoint.

### Keywords
Ribosome assembly, Mitochondrial ribosome, Mterf4-nsun4, Ptc maturation, Obg-hflx superfamily, Gtpbp6, Gtpbp5, Ribosome recycling, Mitoribosome

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry and University Medical Center
Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry and
Clinical Chemistry, University Medical Center Göttingen

### Submitter
Andreas Linden

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Henning Urlaub
Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry and University Medical Center


