### Accession
PXD032357

### Title
Comprehensive proteometics identifies FBXL6 substrates involved in liver cancer

### Description
FBXL6 is frequently over-expressed in human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). However, it is still unknown the underlying mechanisms by which FBXL6 promotes HCC.  In this study, we compared ubiquitinated protein profiles among a panel of liver tissue samples (including HCC, adjacent tissues and normal tissues) from Fbxl6LSL-fl/+; Alb-cre mice and Alb-cre mice by proteomics and ubiquitomics analysis. There are many proteins with ubiquitination in FBXL6 overexpressed HCC, suggesting ubiquitination may play a critical role in FBXL6-mediated HCC.   A1--- normal tissue 1 A2--- normal tissue 2  B1--- Adjacent tissue 1 B2--- Adjacent tissue 2  C1--- HCC tissue 1 C2--- HCC tissue 2

### Sample Protocol
The sample was grinded with liquid nitrogen into cell powder and then transferred to a 5-mL centrifuge tube. After that, four volumes of lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% protease inhibitor cocktail) was added to the cell powder, followed by sonication three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz). (Note: For PTM experiments, inhibitors were also added to the lysis buffer, e.g. 3 μM TSA and 50 mM NAM for acetylation, 1% phosphatase inhibitor for phosphorylation). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the supernatant was collected and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

### Data Protocol
The tryptic peptides were dissolved in solvent A (0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile/ in water), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (25-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). Peptides were separated with a gradient from 5% to 25% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 90% acetonitrile) over 60 min, 25% to 35% in 22 min and climbing to 80% in 4 min then holding at 80% for the last 4 min, all at a constant flowrate of 450 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1200 UPLC system (ThermoFisher Scientific). The separated peptides were analyzed in Orbitrap Fusion (ThermoFisher Scientific) with a nano-electrospray ion source. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The full MS scan resolution was set to 60,000 for a scan range of 350–1600 m/z. Up to 20 most abundant precursors were then selected for further MS/MS analyses with 30 s dynamic exclusion. The HCD fragmentation was performed at a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 28%. The fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 30,000. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z. Automatic gain control (AGC) target was set at 1E5, with an intensity threshold of 3.3E4 and a maximum injection time of 60 ms.  The resulting MS/MS data were processed using MaxQuant search engine (v.1.6.15.0). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the human SwissProt database (20422 entries) concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in first search and 5 ppm in main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification, and acetylation on protein N-terminal and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Metastatic hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the most lethal malignancy and lacks effective treatment. FBXL6 is overexpressed in human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), but whether this change drives liver tumorigenesis and lung metastasis in vivo remains unknown. In this study, we aimed to identify FBXL6 (F-Box and Leucine Rich Repeat Protein 6) as a key driver of HCC metastasis and to provide a new paradigm for HCC therapy. We found that elevated FBXL6 expression in hepatocytes drove HCC lung metastasis and was a much stronger driver than Kras mutation (Kras<sup>G12D/+</sup>;Alb-Cre), p53 haploinsufficiency (p53<sup>+/-</sup>) or Tsc1 loss (Tsc1<sup>fl/fl</sup>;Alb-Cre). Mechanistically, VRK2 promoted Thr287 phosphorylation of TKT and then recruited FBXL6 to promote TKT ubiquitination and activation. Activated TKT further increased PD-L1 and VRK2 expression via the ROS-mTOR axis, leading to immune evasion and HCC metastasis. Targeting or knockdown of TKT significantly blocked FBXL6-driven immune evasion and HCC metastasis in vitro and in vivo. Notably, the level of active TKT (p-Thr287 TKT) was increased and was positively correlated with the FBXL6 and VRK2 expression levels in HCC patients. Our work provides novel mechanistic insights into FBXL6-driven HCC metastasis and suggests that targeting the TKT-ROS-mTOR-PD-L1/VRK2 axis is a new paradigm for treating patients with metastatic HCC with high FBXL6 expression.

### Keywords
Hcc, Mice, Fbxl6

### Affiliations
Third Military Medical University

### Submitter
Chuanming Xie

### Lab Head
Dr Chuanming Xie
Third Military Medical University


