### Accession
PXD029086

### Title
Proteomic analysis of Marinesco-Sjogren syndrome fibroblasts indicates pro-survival metabolic adaptation to SIL1 loss

### Description
Marinesco-Sjogren syndrome (MSS) is a rare multisystem pediatric disorder, caused by loss of function of the endoplasmic reticulum cochaperone SIL1 in about 60% of the patients. SIL1 acts as a nucleotide exchange factor for BiP, which plays a central role in secretory protein folding. SIL1-deficient cells have reduced BiP-assisted protein folding, cannot fulfil their protein needs and experience chronic activation of the unfolded protein response (UPR). Maladaptive UPR may explain the cerebellar and skeletal muscle degeneration re-sponsible for the ataxia and muscle weakness typical of MSS. However, the cause of other, more variable, clinical manifestations, such as mild to severe mental retardation, hypogonadism, short stature and skeletal deformities, are less clear. To gain insights into the pathogenic mechanisms of MSS, we carried out cell bio-logical and proteomic investigations in skin fibroblasts derived from a young patient carrying the SIL1 ... mutation. Despite fibroblasts are not overtly affected in MSS we found morphological and biochemical changes consistent with UPR and metabolic alterations. All the cell machineries involved in RNA splicing and translation were strongly downregulated, while protein degradation via lysosome-based structures was boosted, consistent with an attempt of the cell to reduce the workload of the endoplasmic reticulum and dis-pose misfolded proteins. Cell metabolism was extensively affected as we observed a reduction in lipid syn-thesis, an increase in beta oxidation and an enhancement of the tricarboxylic acid cycle, with upregulation of eight of its enzymes. Finally, the catabolic pathways of various amino acids, including valine, leucine, isoleu-cine, tryptophane, lysine, aspartate and phenylalanine, were enhanced, while the biosynthetic pathways of arginine, serine, glycine and cysteine were reduced. These results indicate profound metabolic alterations in MSS cells in addition to UPR activation and increased protein degradation, which may contribute to make them resistant to SIL1 loss.

### Sample Protocol
4.2 Cell culture Primary Human Dermal Fibroblast (NDHF PromoCell #FB60C12350) supplied by Carlo Erba were used as Control cell line and compared with primary Dermal fibroblast from a young Marinesco Sjögren syndrome patient, supplied by Telethon Network of Genetic Biobanks - TNGB. Cells were cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium + GlutaMAX (GIBCO, 61965-026), supplemented with 10% of Fetal Bovine Serum (FBS) and 1% penicillin/streptomycin PenStrep (GIBCO, 15070-063.Cells were maintained at 37°C, 5% CO2 and detached by Trypsin-EDTA 0.5% (GIBCO, 15400-054).  4.3 Fluorescence immunostaining and confocal microscopy Cells were plated on cover slips to 70% density and the day after fixed in 4% para-formaldehyde (Electron Microscopy Science) for 10 min at room temperature. Subse-quently incubated for non-specific site blocking and permeabilization in blocking solu-tion [0.05% saponin, 0.5% bovine serum albumin and 50mM NH4Cl in PBS] for 30 min at room temperature. Primary antibody incubation has been performed over night at +4°C. The day after, fluorescent conjugated anti-IgG secondary antibody AlexaFluor were incubated for 40 min at room temperature together with Hoechst, in order to counterstain nuclei. Signal was than detected with a confocal microscope (Zeiss LSM 800) and images have been post-processed and analyzed by Zen 2.3 software. 4.4 Western blot analysis Cells were lysed in RIPA buffer [50 mM tris HCl (pH 7.6), 140 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA, 0,1% SDS, 1% NP40, 100 mMNaF, 0,1% Sodiumdeoxycholate] supplemented with protease (cOmpleteTM Tablets, Roche) and phosphatase (PhosSTOP tablets, Roche) inhibitors. Protein concentration was assessed by Bradford protein assay (Bio-Rad). Equal amounts of proteins were than resuspended in 4x Laemmli buffer [15% b-mercaptoethenol, 0,25M Tris-HCl pH 6.8, 40% Glycerol, 8% SDS, 0,02% Blu Bromophenol], separated by SDS- PAGE and transferred onto nitrocellulose membrane. Filters were blocked for 1 hour at room temperature with either 5% Non-Fat dried milk or 5% BSA, than primary antibodies incubation was performed over night at +4°C. Secondary antibody α-rabbit and α-mouse were incubated the day after for 1 hour at room temperature and signal was detected by GE Amersham ECL.    4.5 Proliferation assay Cell proliferation was monitored using Click-iT Edu Proliferation assay kit (#C10499, Invitrogen).About 10.000 cells/well were plated in a 96 well plate the day before the experiment, then manufacturing instructions have been followed. 4.6 Label Free Proteomics Analysis  HF- MSS cells were grown to subconfluency, incubated in serum-free medium for 24h, washed, lysed in proteomic buffer [ UREA 6M, Tris Base 100mM, CHAPS 2%, Tri-tonX 1%, DTT 50mM]  and treated by Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) method. Protein concentration was evaluated through Bradford assay (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA) in order to digest 25 µg of proteins by trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MI, USA). For protein label free identification and quantification, tryptic peptides from each sample were analyzed in triplicate with LC-MS/MS using the UltiMateTM 3000 UPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc) chromatographic system coupled to the Orbitrap FusionTM TribridTM (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc) mass spectrometer. Peptides were loaded on the Trap Cartridge C18 (0.3 mm ID, 5 mm L, 5 μm PS, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and then separated on an EASY-spray AcclaimTM PepMapTM C18 (75 μm ID, 25 cm L, 2 μm PS, Thermo Fisher Scientific) nanoscale chromatographic column. Mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid in H2O and mobile phase B was 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. The flow rate was set at 300 nL/min, with a total run time of 125 minutes using a chromatographic gradient from 2% to 90% of phase B. Proteomics data were acquired in positive-ion polarity with Data Dependent Acquisition (DDA) mode to trigger precursor isolation and MS2 sequence using N2 as collision gas for HCD fragmentation. Positive ion voltage was set at 1700 V and the ion transfer tube at 275 °C for desolvation. MS1 scans were performed in the Orbitrap analyzer covering a m/z range of 375-1500 with 240,000 of resolution. A standard automatic gain control (AGC) target and an automatic maximum injection time (MIT) were used. The signal intensity threshold was set to 1.0x104 and the MS2 spectra were acquired using a Top Speed method of 3s. In particular, precursor ions with charges of +2 to +5 were used for MS2 sequencing and scanned in the ion trap by setting the following parameters: MS2 isolation window of 1.6 Da, AGC target of 1x104, dynamic exclusion time of 60s and mass tolerance of ±10 ppm were used covering a m/z range of 300-1200. We performed a HCD fragmentation with a fixed collision energy of 30% and a MIT of 70ms.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics raw data were processed using a free computational platform, Max-Quant version 1.6.6.0 (Max-Planck Institute for Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany). Peak lists, generated in MaxQuant, were searched using Andromeda peptide search engine against the UniProt database (released 2018_04, taxonomy Homo sapiens, 20,874 entries) supplemented with frequently observed contaminants and containing forward and reverse sequences. As reported previously carbamidomethylation of cysteines (C) was defined as fixed modification, while oxidation of methionines (M), deamidation of asparagines (N) and glutamines (Q) were set as variable modifications (Ref). False discovery rate (FDR) both at the protein level and at peptide level were set at 1%. LFQ Intensity was used to quantify protein abundance in each sample. Bioinformatics analysis was performed with Perseus version 1.6.10.50 (Max-Planck Institute for Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany). LFQ intensities were log2 transformed to facilitate the calculation of the protein expression. Site only, reverse and contaminant peptides were removed from the dataset. The minimum number of valid values accepted was set at 2 in at least one group. In this way we evaluated not only the different protein expression, but also the presence or absence of proteins between the two treatment conditions. Moreover, an univariate statistical analysis was performed with a p-value threshold of 0.05 in order to define the significantly differential proteins between HF-MSS cells and HF-CT  through Volcano Plot visualization (FDR = 0.01 and S0 = 0.05).  At last, a selection of significantly modulated proteins (p-value <0,05) was uploaded into Ingenuity Pathway Analysis tool (IPA, Qiagen,  Hilden,  Germany) with the respective parameters of: “protein ratio” (HF-MSS/HF-CT), “p-value” and “protein ID ”. A Core Analysis of this specific dataset was than run without setting further cut-offs. IPA  is able to map statistically the modulated proteins for their functional annotations, such as Canonical Pathways, Upstream Regulators Analysis (URA) and downstream effects networks, through Gene Ontology and pathway analysis. In this way, it is possible to identify the metabolic pathways and the secondary genes/proteins inhibited (z-score ≤ -2.00) and/or activated (z-score ≥ 2.00) for a specific phenotype and consequently classify potential effectors molecules and/or a pharmacological target.

### Publication Abstract
Marinesco-Sjogren syndrome (MSS) is a rare multisystem pediatric disorder, caused by loss-of-function mutations in the gene encoding the endoplasmic reticulum cochaperone SIL1. SIL1 acts as a nucleotide exchange factor for BiP, which plays a central role in secretory protein folding. SIL1 mutant cells have reduced BiP-assisted protein folding, cannot fulfil their protein needs, and experience chronic activation of the unfolded protein response (UPR). Maladaptive UPR may explain the cerebellar and skeletal muscle degeneration responsible for the ataxia and muscle weakness typical of MSS. However, the cause of other more variable, clinical manifestations, such as mild to severe mental retardation, hypogonadism, short stature, and skeletal deformities, is less clear. To gain insights into the pathogenic mechanisms and/or adaptive responses to SIL1 loss, we carried out cell biological and proteomic investigations in skin fibroblasts derived from a young patient carrying the SIL1 R111X mutation. Despite fibroblasts not being overtly affected in MSS, we found morphological and biochemical changes indicative of UPR activation and altered cell metabolism. All the cell machineries involved in RNA splicing and translation were strongly downregulated, while protein degradation via lysosome-based structures was boosted, consistent with an attempt of the cell to reduce the workload of the endoplasmic reticulum and dispose of misfolded proteins. Cell metabolism was extensively affected as we observed a reduction in lipid synthesis, an increase in beta oxidation, and an enhancement of the tricarboxylic acid cycle, with upregulation of eight of its enzymes. Finally, the catabolic pathways of various amino acids, including valine, leucine, isoleucine, tryptophan, lysine, aspartate, and phenylalanine, were enhanced, while the biosynthetic pathways of arginine, serine, glycine, and cysteine were reduced. These results indicate that, in addition to UPR activation and increased protein degradation, MSS fibroblasts have profound metabolic alterations, which may help them cope with the absence of SIL1.

### Keywords
Pathway analysis, Protein folding, Bip, Neurodegenerative disease, Autophagosome, Fibroblast, Unfolded protein response

### Affiliations
University "G. d'Annunzio" of Chieti
Department Of Pharmacy

### Submitter
Maria Concetta Cufaro

### Lab Head
Dr Piero Del Boccio
Department Of Pharmacy


