### Accession
PXD029435

### Title
Proteome and phosphoproteome analysis of autophagy deficient ATG5flox:CamKII-Cre and ATG5flox:VGAT-Cre conditional knockout mice

### Description
The experiment was performed to find selective targets of autophagy in different subtypes of neurons. Therefore, brain tissue of conditional knockout mice lacking autophagy protein ATG5 in inhibitory or excitatory neurons was used. Cortices (ATG5flox:CamKII-Cre) / striata (ATG5flox:VGAT-Cre) of mice were mixed with lys6 labeled brain lysates as internal controls between the samples. Samples were measured by LC-MS/MS and resulting H/L ratios were used to quantify proteomic and phosphoproteomic changes.

### Sample Protocol
Samples and Lys6 labeled reference samples were homogenized in a tissue grinder, sonicated and subsequently cleared by centrifugation. Protein concentration was determined for each lysate and each sample lysate was mixed in a 1:1 ration with the Lys6 labeled reference lysate. Each sample mix was incubated with 10mM DTT for 30min and 55mM IAA for 45min, protected from light. Afterwards, samples were digested with LysC (1:50 enzyme to substrate ratio) for two hours at room temperature. Finally, each sample was diluted 1:4 with 50mM ammonium bicarbonate and digested again with LysC (1:100 enzyme to substrate ratio) over night at room temperature. On the upcoming day, samples were acidified, desalted and phosphopeptides were enriched using commercially available TiO2 spin tips. Phosphopeptides and proteomes were measured on Thermo Orbitrap Eclipse with a FAIMS Pro interface coupled to a Thermo EASY-nLC system. Samples were measured in 90min gradients with two FAIMS CVs (-45 V and -65V).

### Data Protocol
Raw files were demultiplexed for different FAIMS CVs using the Coons lab tool "FAIMs to Mzxml generator". Mzxml files were analyzed with MaxQuant 1.6.14.0 using a Uniprot mouse protein database (release july 3, 2020). Default settings were used plus: Multiplicity set to 2, label: lys6, enzyme: LysC/P, p(STY) enabled as variable modification, match between runs were enabled, unmodified counterpart peptides were not discarded. The resulting MaxQuant output was further analyzed in Perseus 1.6.14.0 and InstantClue 0.10.10.

### Publication Abstract
Autophagy provides nutrients during starvation and eliminates detrimental cellular components. However, accumulating evidence indicates that autophagy is not merely a housekeeping process. Here, by combining mouse models of neuron-specific ATG5 deficiency in either excitatory or inhibitory neurons with quantitative proteomics, high-content microscopy, and live-imaging approaches, we show that autophagy protein ATG5 functions in neurons to regulate cAMP-dependent protein kinase A (PKA)-mediated phosphorylation of a synapse-confined proteome. This function of ATG5 is independent of bulk turnover of synaptic proteins and requires the targeting of PKA inhibitory R1 subunits to autophagosomes. Neuronal loss of ATG5 causes synaptic accumulation of PKA-R1, which sequesters the PKA catalytic subunit and diminishes cAMP/PKA-dependent phosphorylation of postsynaptic cytoskeletal proteins that mediate AMPAR trafficking. Furthermore, ATG5 deletion in glutamatergic neurons augments AMPAR-dependent excitatory neurotransmission and causes the appearance of spontaneous recurrent seizures in mice. Our findings identify a novel role of autophagy in regulating PKA signaling at glutamatergic synapses and suggest the PKA as a target for restoration of synaptic function in neurodegenerative conditions with autophagy dysfunction.

### Keywords
Brain, Neurons, Autophagy, Atg5

### Affiliations
CECAD Excellence Center & Center for Physiology, Medical Faculty, University of Cologne, Germany
University of Cologne, Department of Biology, Institute for Genetics

### Submitter
Frederik Tellkamp

### Lab Head
Dr Natalia L Kononenko
CECAD Excellence Center & Center for Physiology, Medical Faculty, University of Cologne, Germany


