### Accession
PXD030180

### Title
Proteomics of KRAS mutated and non-transformed pancreas cells treated with ethanol

### Description
The goal for this study was to determine the effects of ethanol on pancreas cells and examine how ethanol influences protein expression in non-transformed and mutant KRAS cells. We performed TMT-labeled proteomics of non-transformed (hTERT-HPNE E6/E7) and KRAS mutated (hTERT-HPNE E6/E7/K-RasG12D) human pancreas cell lines following 6 months of 100 mM ethanol treatment.

### Sample Protocol
Peptides generated by trypsin digestion were analyzed by LC-MS/MS system, with Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano System (ThermoFisher Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). The samples were first injected onto a trap column (Acclaim PepMap™ 100, 75 µm × 2 cm, ThermoFisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 4 µL/min before switching in line with the main column. Separation was performed on a C18 nano column (EASY-Spray™, 2 µm 75 µm x 500 mm, ThermoFisher Scientific) at 300 nL/min with a linear gradient from 0-45% over 120 min. The LC aqueous mobile phase contained 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water and the organic mobile phase contained 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in 80% (v/v) acetonitrile. Mass spectra for the eluted peptides were acquired on a Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer in data-dependent mode using a mass range of m/z 375–1500, resolution 120,000, AGC target: standard, maximum injection time: 150 ms. Data-dependent MS2 spectra were acquired by CID, collision energy: 35%, AGC target: standard, maximum injection time: auto, isolation window: 2 m/z.   MS3 spectra were acquired with HCD activation, HCD collision energy: 65%, Orbitrap resolution: 50,000, normalized AGC target: 200%.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectra were extracted using Proteome Discoverer (2.1.1.21). All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Sequest HT (). Sequest HT was set up to search the SwissProt database (SwissProt TaxID=9606 v2017-10-25, 42,252 entries) assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin allowing for up to 2 missed protease cleavage sites. Sequest HT was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.60 Da and a parent ion tolerance of up to 10.0 PPM. TMT6plex/ +229.163 Da (on any N-Terminus), and carbamidomethyl of cysteine were specified as a fixed modifications. Oxidation of methionine and TMT6plex/ +229.163 Da of Lysine were specified as variable modifications. False discovery rates were determined by searching the decoy database.

### Publication Abstract
Pancreatic Ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is an aggressive cancer commonly exhibiting KRAS-activating mutations. Alcohol contributes to the risk of developing PDAC in humans, and murine models have shown alcohol consumption in the context of KRAS mutation in the pancreas promotes the development of PDAC. The molecular signatures in pancreas cells altered by alcohol exposure in the context of mutant KRAS could identify pathways related to the etiology of PDAC. In this study, we evaluated the combined effects of alcohol exposure and KRAS mutation status on the transcriptome and proteome of pancreatic HPNE cell models. These analyses identified alterations in transcription and translational processes in mutant KRAS cells exposed to alcohol. In addition, multi-omics analysis suggests an increase in the correlation between mRNA transcript and protein abundance in cells exposed to alcohol with an underlying KRAS mutation. Through differential co-expression, SERPINE1 was found to be influential for PDAC development in the context of mutant KRAS and ethanol. In terms of PDAC subtypes, alcohol conditioning of HPNE cells expressing mutant KRAS decreases the Inflammatory subtype signature and increases the Proliferative and Metabolic signatures, as we previously observed in patient samples. The alterations in molecular subtypes were associated with an increased sensitivity to chemotherapeutic agents gemcitabine, irinotecan, and oxaliplatin. These results provide a framework for distinguishing the molecular dysregulation associated with combined alcohol and mutant KRAS in a pancreatic cell line model.

### Keywords
Ethanol, Tmt, Kras, Pancreas

### Affiliations
University of Nebraska Medical Center
UNMC

### Submitter
Emalie Clement

### Lab Head
Dr Nicholas T. Woods
University of Nebraska Medical Center


