### Accession
PXD000981

### Title
Heparin_sepharose_A.thaliana -  The peptide microarray "ChloroPhos1

### Description
Heparin sepharose CL-6B enrichment of lysed Arabidopsis thaliana chloroplasts was done. Elution was performed with 1M  (NH4)2SO4. This elution fraction contained plastid casein kinase II activity. Their presence is proven by this multiplex MS data.

### Sample Protocol
A. thaliana chloroplasts were isolated and there protein solubilized. Kinase enrichment was done with heparin sepharose, proteins were precipitated and tryptic digested for multiplex MS analysis

### Data Protocol
Synapt G2S MS raw data were processed by Protein Lynx Global Server ( Waters) as well as database search against TAIR10 containing common lab contaminations.

### Publication Abstract
We report the development of a peptide microarray based on previously determined phosphorylation sites in chloroplast proteins. Altogether, 905 peptides were spotted as 15mers in nine replicates onto glass slides. We used the microarray for in vitro phosphorylation experiments and specifically assessed the peptide substrate spectrum of chloroplast casein kinase II (pCKII). To this end, native pCKII from Arabidopsis thaliana and Sinapis alba chloroplasts was enriched by Heparin-Sepharose chromatography and its activity on the microarray was compared to the activity of a recombinant Arabidopsis pCKII. All three kinase preparations phosphorylated a similar set of peptides that were clearly distinct from those phosphorylated by bovine heart protein kinase A (PKA) in control experiments. The majority of the pCKII phosphorylation targets are involved in plastid gene expression, supporting the earlier denomination of pCKII as plastid transcription kinase (PTK). In addition we identified Alb3 as pCKII substrate that is essential for the integration of light-harvesting complex subunits (LHC) into the thylakoid membrane. Plastid CKII phosphorylation activity was characterized in greater detail in vitro with recombinant wildtype Alb3 and phosphorylation site mutants as substrates, establishing S424 as the pCKII phosphorylation site. Our data show that the peptide microarray ChloroPhos1.0 is a suitable tool for the identification of new kinase downstream targets in vitro that can be validated subsequently by in vivo experiments.

### Keywords
A thaliana, Ck ii, Heparin sepharose

### Affiliations
Martin Luther University Halle- Wittenberg
Institut fuer Biochemie und Biotechnologie

### Submitter
Sacha Baginsky

### Lab Head
Dr Sacha Baginsky
Martin Luther University Halle- Wittenberg


