### Accession
PXD019046

### Title
Hotspot SF3B1 mutations determine response to PARP inhibitors

### Description
Hotspot mutations in the spliceosomal component gene SF3B1 underpin a number of cancers and have a neomorphic function leading to global disruption of canonical splicing and aberrant splicing of hundreds of transcripts. However, the functional consequences of this misplicing and resultant genetic vulnerabilities imposed by these events are poorly understood. Through a synthetic-lethal approach we identify that SF3B1 mutant cells are selectively sensitive to PARP inhibitors. This vulnerability is preserved across multiple cell line and patent derived tumour models, independent of SF3B1 hotspot mutation and is manifested both in vitro and in vivo. These data provide the pre-clinical and mechanistic rationale for assessing SF3B1 mutations as a biomarker of single-agent PARP inhibitor response in a new patient population and may extend the clinical utility of these agents beyond BRCA mutated cancers.​

### Sample Protocol
Cell lines were treated with DMSO or the PARPi Talazoparib at 50nM concentration for 48 hours or synchronised with 2 rounds of nocodazole. Cell pellets were lysed in 5% SDS/ 100 mM TEAB buffer with probe sonication and heating at 95⁰C. Protein concentration was measured by Pierce 660 nm Protein Assay and 57 µg of protein were taken for each sample. Proteins were reduced with TCEP and alkylated by iodoacetamide followed by TCA (trichloroacetic acid) precipitation. Trypsin (MS grade, Thermo Fisher) was added at 1:25 (trypsin:proteins) for overnight digestion at 37⁰C. peptides were TMT labelled as instructed by the manufacturer then mixed, SpeedVac dried then fractionated on a BEH XBridge C18 column (2.1 mm i.d. x 150 mm) with a 35 min gradient from 5 – 35% CH3CN/NH4OH at pH 10. A total of 36 fractions were collected and SpeedVac dried, then resuspended in 0.5%FA/H2O and 50% was injected for LC-MS/MS analysis on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos coupled with an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano System.   Samples were loaded on a nanotrap (100 µm id x 2 cm) (PepMap C18, 5 µ) at 10 µL/min with 0.1% formic acid and then separated on an analytical column (75 µm id x 50 cm) (PepMap C18, 2µ) over at 300 nL/min.  The gradient was a 90 min gradient of 4 – 30.4% CH3CN/0.1% formic acid/ 120 min cycle time per fraction. The Orbitrap Fusion Lumos was operated in the Top Speed mode at 2.5 s per cycle. The survey scans (m/z 375-1500) were acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000 (AGC 4x105 and maximum injection time 50 ms). The multiply charged ions (2-6) with counts above 5000 were subjected to CID fragmentation with a collision energy (CE) at 35% and isolation width 0.7 Th. MS/MS spectra were acquired in the ion trap (AGC 1x104 and maximum injection time 35 ms).  The dynamic exclusion width for MS2 was set at ± 10 ppm for 40 s.  Following each MS2, the 5-notch MS3 was performed on the top 5 most abundant fragments isolated by Synchronous Precursor Selection (SPS), and ions were fragmented by HCD at 65% CE then detected in Orbitrap (AGC 1.5x105, 86 ms) at m/z 100-500 with 50,000 resolution to for peptide quantification data.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were processed with Proteome Discoverer 2.3 (Thermo Fisher) and searched using both SequestHT and Mascot (V2.3 MatrixSxcience) against UniProt Human Reference Proteome database (January 2018) concatenated with the cRAP contaminate sequences.  The precursor mass tolerance was set at 30 ppm and the fragment ion mass tolerance was set at 0.5 Da. Spectra were searched for fully tryptic peptides with maximum 2 miss-cleavages. Carbamidomethyl (C) and TMT6plex (Peptide N-terminus) were set as static modifications, and the dynamic modifications included Deamidation (N, Q), Oxidation (M), Acetylation (Protein N-terminal), TMT6plex (K, K-GG). Peptides were validated by Percolator with q value set at 0.05 for the Decoy database search.  The search result was filtered by the Consensus step where the protein FDR was set at 0.01 (strict) and 0.05 (relaxed). The TMT10plex reporter ion quantifier used 20 ppm integration tolerance on the most confident centroid peak at the MS3 level. Only unique peptides with average reported S/N>3 were used for quantification. Only master proteins were reported.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Parp inhibitors, Tmt, Ms3, Sf3b1, Cancer

### Affiliations
The Institute of Cancer Research

### Submitter
James Wright

### Lab Head
Dr Jyoti Choudhary
The Institute of Cancer Research


