### Accession
PXD044784

### Title
Comprehensive proteomic analysis of JC polyomavirus-infected human astrocytes and their extracellular vesicles

### Description
JC polyomavirus (JCPyV) is the causative agent of progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML), a devastating demyelinating disease of the central nervous system that results in the widespread formation of lesions across the brain parenchyma. The virus is opportunistic and remains in a benign state in the kidneys and lymphoid organs of more than half of the global human adult population. However, in rare cases of severe or selective immune suppression, JCPyV can establish a lytic infection of glial cells in the brain. While PML has traditionally been characterized as a lytic infection of oligodendrocytes, more recent findings suggest an important role for astrocytes during the initial stages of disease. Because of the exceptional species and tissue specificity of the virus, appropriate models of JCPyV infection in the brain are lacking, thus hampering progress towards the development of novel antiviral strategies and biomarkers of disease activity. Towards the aim of biomarker development extracellular vesicles (EVs) were isolated from JCPyV-infected and mock-infected human iPSC-derived astrocytes and analyzed by LC-MS/MS. As a inflammatory control, EVs were also isolated from cytokine-stimulated iPSC-derived astrocytes. We demonstrate that the proteomic signature associated with EVs from JCPyV-infected astrocytes reflect what was observed on a cellular level for infected astrocytes while being strikingly different from that of EVs generated under inflammatory conditions.

### Sample Protocol
EV aliquots (10 µg) were lysed at a 1:1 ratio with 5 M Guanidine in 50 mM HEPES, pH 8.5 and analyzed by LC-MS/MS. Reduction of the samples were done using 10mM TCEP, followed by alkylation of the cysteines using 40 mM CAA for 45 min at 37°C. Samples were diluted with 200 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8, to 1 M guanidine, followed by digestion at room temperature for 2 h with Endoproteinase Lys-C at a 1:50 protease/protein ratio. Samples were further diluted with 200 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8, to 0.5 M guanidine. Trypsin Gold was added at a 1:50 protease/protein ratio, followed by overnight incubation at 37°C. The reaction was quenched with 5% formic acid (FA). Peptides were desalted on SDB-RPS StageTips and dried by vacuum centrifugation. Each individual fraction was resuspended in 2% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid and nano-flow separations were performed on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano UPLC system on-line connected with a Lumos Fusion Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer. A capillary pre-column (Acclaim Pepmap C18; 3 μm-100 Å; 2cm x 75 μM ID) was used for sample trapping and cleaning. Analytical separations were performed at 250 nl/min over a 150 min biphasic gradient on a 50 cm long in-house packed capillary column (75 μm ID; ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 μm silica beads; Dr. Maisch). Acquisitions were performed through Top Speed Data-Dependent acquisition mode using 1s cycle time. The first MS scans were acquired at a resolution of 240’000 (at 200 m/z) and the most intense parent ions were selected and fragmented by High energy Collision Dissociation (HCD) with a Normalised Collision Energy (NCE) of 30% using an isolation window of 0.7 m/z. Fragmented ions scans Fragmented ion scans were acquired in the ion trap using a fix maximum injection time of 20ms and selected ions were then excluded for the following 20s.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using MaxQuant (v1.6.10.43) against a concatenated database consisting of the Uniprot Homo Sapiens Reference proteome database (77027 protein sequences Release2021_02) and the Uniprot JC Polyomavirus Reference proteome database (8 protein sequences Release2021_01), Carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification, whereas oxidation (M), phosphorylation (S, T, Y), acetylation (Protein N-term) and glutamine to pyroglutamate were considered as variable modifications. A maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed and “Match between runs” option was enabled. A minimum of 2 peptides was required for protein identification and the FDR cutoff was set to 0.01 for both peptides and proteins. Label-free quantification and normalization was performed by Maxquant using the MaxLFQ algorithm, with the standard settings. The statistical analyses of the label-free data were performed using Perseus (v1.6.15.0) from the MaxQuant tool suite. Reverse proteins, potential contaminants and proteins only identified by sites were filtered out. Protein groups containing at least 60% or 3 valid values in at least one group were conserved for further analysis. Empty values were imputed with random numbers from a normal distribution. A two-sample t-test with permutation-based FDR statistics (250 permutations, FDR = 0,5; S0 = 1) was performed to determine significant differentially abundant candidates.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Astrocytes, Jcpyv, Hipsc, Model, Extracellular vesicles, Pml

### Affiliations
Lausanne University Hospital and University of Lausanne
Laboratory of Neuroimmunology, Neuroscience Research Centre, Department of Clinical Neurosciences, Lausanne University Hospital (CHUV) and University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland  Service of Neurology, Department of Clinical Neurosciences, Lausanne University Hospital (CHUV) and University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland

### Submitter
Larise Oberholster

### Lab Head
Dr Renaud A. Du Pasquier
Laboratory of Neuroimmunology, Neuroscience Research Centre, Department of Clinical Neurosciences, Lausanne University Hospital (CHUV) and University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland  Service of Neurology, Department of Clinical Neurosciences, Lausanne University Hospital (CHUV) and University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland


