### Accession
PXD017590

### Title
A novel model of Amyloid-beta pathology in C. elegans reveals critically vulnerable neurons as seeds of pathogenicity

### Description
A novel model of amyloid-beta pathology in C. elegans has been generated which allows for substoichiometric fluorescent labeling of amyloid-beta species in living nematodes. By microscopy, FLIM, physiological and biochemical studies, the progress of neurodegeneration and general pathogenicity of amyloidogenic peptides is confirmed. Notably, a single set of neurons was shown to be most vulnerable to Amyloid-beta overexpression and putatively act as a seed for systemic pathogeny. A muscular version of the amyloid-beta reporter strain was used to perform proteomics analysis from worm lysates after enrichment by immunoprecipitation, using anti-amyloid-beta antibodies.

### Sample Protocol
For immunoprecipitation followed by MS-MS, worm lysates of the muscular amyloid-beta reporter strain were obtained, adjusted to the same protein concentration and incubated with 10 µL of 6E10 antibody (BioLegend) in triplicates overnight. Strains expressing wrmScarlet, but not Abeta1-42, were used as control under the same conditions. All samples were then mixed with Protein A/G magnetic beads (Pierce), which had been washed with TBST. After agitating the lysate for 2 hours, beads were washed with TBST 3 times. Elution of sample was carried out by SDS-sample buffer at 97 °C for at least 10 minutes. Samples were further reduced at 55 °C for 30 minutes before alkylation by 15 mM chloroacetamide and separation by SDS-Page. Prior to MS-MS analysis, samples were separated by SDS-PAGE until they had migrated into the separation gel for approximately 2 cm. The individual lanes were excised (excluding the stacking gel and the loading-dye front) and protein digestion from gel bands was carried out using trypsin at an enzyme-to-protein ration of 1:20 (w/w) at 37 °C overnight. LC/MS analysis was performed using an UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano LC system coupled on-line to an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientifc). Reversed-phase separation was performed using a 50 cm analytical column (in-house packed with Poroshell 120 EC-C18, 2.7µm, Agilent Technologies) with a 120 min gradient. MS1 scans were performed in the orbitrap using 60,000 resolution; MS2 scans were acquired in the ion trap with an AGC target of 5E3 and maximum injection time of 50 ms.

### Data Protocol
Label free quantification was performed as previously published (Cox et al., 2014). Data analysis including label free quantification was performed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.1.0) using the following parameters: MS ion mass tolerance: 4.5 ppm; MS2 ion mass tolerance: 0.5 Da; variable modification: Cys carbamidomethyl, Met oxidation, Propionamide; allowed number of mis-cleavage: 2, database: SwissProt database of C. elegans whole proteome (10/2016 27944 sequences and 12832868 residues searched); label free quantification and match between runs were enabled. Results were reported at 1% FDR at the protein level.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Amyloid beta; neurodegeneration; protein homeostasis; c. elegans

### Affiliations
University of Bremen, Faculty 2 Biology / Chemistry
FMP Berlin

### Submitter
Manuel Iburg

### Lab Head
Dr Janine Kirstein
University of Bremen, Faculty 2 Biology / Chemistry


