### Accession
PXD003309

### Title
Systems-wide analysis of manganese deficiency-induced changes in gene activity of Arabidopsis roots

### Description
In this study, we undertook a comprehensive quantitative proteomic profiling of Arabidopsis roots from plants grown on Mn-deplete media, aiming at dissecting and cataloging the responses of Arabidopsis roots to Mn deficiency. We used LC-Q Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer to compile a near complete inventory of the Arabidopsis root proteome. We identified several novel components of cellular Mn homeostasis and show that many putatively important changes in response to Mn deficiency are only evident at one of the omics levels under investigation.

### Sample Protocol
Roots from Mn-sufficient plants and Mn-deficient plants (14-day-old) were ground in liquid nitrogen and suspended in 10× volume of precooled acetone (−20°C) containing 10% (v/v) TCA and 0.07% (v/v) 2-mercaptoethanol. Proteins were then precipitated for 2 hr at −20°C after thorough mixing. Precipitated proteins were collected by centrifuging at 35,000 g (JA-20 108 rotor; Beckman J2-HS) at 4°C for 30 min. The supernatant was carefully removed, and the protein pellets were washed twice with cold acetone containing 0.07% (v/v) 2-mercaptoethanol and a third time with cold acetone. Protein pellets were dried and stored at −80°C or immediately dissolved using protein extraction buffer composed of 8 M urea, 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.5 for 1 h at 6°C under constant shaking. Protein extracts were centrifuged at 19,000 g for 20 min at 10°C. The supernatant was then collected, and the protein concentration was determined using a protein assay kit (Pierce).

### Data Protocol
Two search algorithms, Mascot (version 2.4, Matrix Science) and SEQUEST, which is integrated in Proteome Discoverer software (version 1.4, Thermo Scientific), were used to simultaneously identify and quantify proteins. Searches were made against the Arabidopsis protein database (TAIR10 20110103, 27416 sequences; ftp://ftp.arabidopsis.org/home/tair/Sequences/blast_datasets/TAIR10_blastsets/ TAIR10 pep 20110103 representative gene model) concatenated with a decoy database containing the reversed sequences of the original database. The protein sequences in the database were searched with full trypsin digestion and two missed cleavages allowed, fixed modifications of carbamidomethylation at Cys, iTRAQ 4plex at N-terminus and Lys, variable modifications of oxidation at Met and iTRAQ 4plex at Tyr; peptide tolerance was set at 10 ppm, and MS/MS tolerance was set at 0.05 Da. iTRAQ 114 and 115 reporter ions were chosen for quantification during the search simultaneously. The search results were passed through additional filters, peptide confidence more than 95% (P < 0.05), before exporting the data. For protein quantitation, only unique peptides were used to quantify proteins. These filters resulted in a false discovery rate of less than 5% after decoy database searches were performed. For each of the three biological repeats, spectra were combined into one file and searched.

### Publication Abstract
Manganese (Mn) is pivotal for plant growth and development, but little information is available regarding the strategies that evolved to improve Mn acquisition and cellular homeostasis of Mn. Using an integrated RNA-based transcriptomic and high-throughput shotgun proteomics approach, we generated a comprehensive inventory of transcripts and proteins that showed altered abundance in response to Mn deficiency in roots of the model plant Arabidopsis. A suite of 22,385 transcripts was consistently detected in three RNA-seq runs; LC-MS/MS-based iTRAQ proteomics allowed the unambiguous determination of 11,606 proteins. While high concordance between mRNA and protein expression (R&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.87) was observed for transcript/protein pairs in which both gene products accumulated differentially upon Mn deficiency, only approximately 10% of the total alterations in the abundance of proteins could be attributed to transcription, indicating a large impact of protein-level regulation. Differentially expressed genes spanned a wide range of biological functions, including the maturation, translation, and transport of mRNAs, as well as primary and secondary metabolic processes. Metabolic analysis by UPLC-qTOF-MS revealed that the steady-state levels of several major glucosinolates were significantly altered upon Mn deficiency in both roots and leaves, possibly as a compensation for increased pathogen susceptibility under conditions of Mn deficiency.

### Keywords
Systems biology, Transcriptomics, Proteomics, Post-transcriptional regulation, Manganese deficiency

### Affiliations
Institute of Plant and Microbial Biology, Academia Sinica, Taiwan

### Submitter
Tuan-Nan Wen

### Lab Head
Dr Wolfgang Schmidt
Institute of Plant and Microbial Biology, Academia Sinica, Taiwan


