### Accession
PXD012974

### Title
comparative proteomic analysis without a label based on the technology of tandem HPLC - MS/MS

### Description
The relative differences between post-translational modifications (PTM) of proteins in blood plasma samples of patients with cerebral ischemia (CI) and healthy people were investigated on the basis of the method of comparative proteomic analysis without a label based on the technology of tandem HPLC - MS/MS. For the detection of PTM, we used multiple search MS / MS in the database Mascot installed variable PTM and Progenesis LS-MS software. In the CI plasma, we observed an increase in the share of posttranslation modified peptides. Such PTM proteins as phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine, acetylation of lysine and N-terminal protein, ubiquitination of lysine and deamidation of glutamine related to clinically significant processes were revealed.

### Sample Protocol
Material studies were samples of blood plasma with EDTA, obtained by venipuncture in the morning on an empty stomach. Blood samples were immediately transferred to ice and centrifuged at 1500 g for 10 minutes at 4 ° C. The resulting plasma is placed in a sterile tube and store at 80 ° C until further proteomic studies. Immunoaffine depletion of plasma (removal of albumin and IgG) occurs with the help of the microgranule "ProteoPrep Immunoaffine set for reducing the level of albumin and IgG" ("Sigma_Aldrich") according to the manufacturer's protocol.

### Data Protocol
For the detection of PTM, we used multiple search MS / MS in the database Mascot installed variable PTM and Progenesis LS-MS software.

### Publication Abstract
The relative differences between post-translational modifications (PTM) of proteins in blood plasma samples of patients with cerebral ischemia (CI) and healthy people were investigated using of the method of label-free comparative proteomic analysis based on the technology of tandem HPLC-MS/MS. For PTM detection we used multiple MS/MS search in the database Mascot for variable PTM and Progenesis LS-MS software. In the CI plasma samples, we observed an increase in the proportion of peptides with such PTM as phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine, acetylation of lysine and protein N-term, ubiquitination of lysine and deamidation of glutamine related to clinically significant processes were revealed.

### Keywords
Cerebral ischemia, Blood plasma proteome, Post-translational modifications of proteins, Liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry, Orbitrap

### Affiliations
Institute of  Biomedical Chemistry
IBMC

### Submitter
Ekaterina Ilgisonis

### Lab Head
Dr Irina Karuzina
Institute of  Biomedical Chemistry


