### Accession
PXD032049

### Title
Proteomes of uropathogenic Escherichia coli growing in human urine and in J82 urinary bladder cell.

### Description
Uropathogenic Escherichia coli (UPEC) are the most common cause of urinary tract infection (UTI). UPEC normally reside in the intestine, and during establishment of UTI, it undergoes metabolic adaptations, first to urine and then upon tissue invasion to the bladder cell interior. In order to understand these adaptations, we used quantitative proteomic profiling to characterize protein expression of UPEC strain UTI89 growing in human urine and when inside J82 bladder cells. In order to facilitate detection of UPEC proteins over the excess amount of eukaryotic proteins in bladder cells, we developed a method where proteins from UTI89 grown in MOPS and urine was spiked-in to enhance detection of bacterial proteins. More than 2000 E. coli proteins were detected. During growth in urine, proteins associated with iron acquisition and several amino acid uptake and biosynthesis systems, in particular arginine metabolism, were significantly upregulated. During growth in J82 cells, proteins related to iron uptake and arginine metabolisms were upregulated together with proteins involved in sulphur compound turnover. Results suggested that UPEC experience a richer environment in bladder cells compared to urine. There was no direct correlation between upregulated proteins and proteins reported to be essential for infections, showing that upregulation during growth does not signify that the proteins are essential for growth under a condition.

### Sample Protocol
E. coli UTI89 was used in this study. The cells were grown in either in fresh human urine, MOPS media with and without 0.2% glucose and also were isolated from laboratory infected human carcinoma epithelial bladder cell line (J82). Bacteria were lysed in 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 20 mM DTT, 0.5% n-octyl-beta-D-glucopyranoside (SIGMA-Aldrich), proteins digested with Lysyl endopeptidase and trypsin. RP purified peptides were labelled with TMT isobaric tags. Labelled peptides were further fractionated by HLIC.

### Data Protocol
Peptide fractions were redissolved in 0.1% formic acid (Solvent A), loaded on an in-house prepared trap column (C18), RP separated on an in-house made 18 cm long, 75 µm ID analytical column packed with 3 µm C18 material (Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) using 110 min long gradient of increasing concentration of Solvent B (90% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid). Peptides were fragmented and detected in Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The MS settings: Full MS: Resolution at 120000, AGC target 3x106, Maximum IT 100 ms. Scan range: 400-1600 m/z.  MS2:  15 MSMS events (HCD fragmentation) at 60000 resolution, AGC target 1e5, Maximum IT 150 ms, isolation window 1.2 m/z, NCE: 31, Intensity threshold 6.7e3. The first mass of MS2 spectrum was fixed at 110 m/z. Raw data were processed, and proteins identified using ProteomeDiscoverer software v1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The Mascot search engine (v2.4) was used to search the raw data against SwissProt/Proteobacteria, SwissProt/ Human and custom E. coli databases. Mass tolerance was set to 5 ppm for MS and 0.02 Da for MS2. Trypsin cleavage with maximum 2 missed cleavages was applied. Carbamidomethyl was set as a fixed modification on Cys, and TMT6plex on N-terminus and Lys, Oxidation of Met, Deamidation of Asn and Gln, Gln -> pyro-Glu (N-term Gln) and Glu -> pyro-Glu (N-term Glu) were set as variable modifications. Peptide confidence was set to high, Peptide Rank (maximum rank: 1), Mascot ion score set to minimum 20 and Search Engine Rank (maximum rank: 1) was applied.

### Publication Abstract
Uropathogenic <i>Escherichia coli</i> (UPEC) are the most common cause of urinary tract infection (UTI). UPEC normally reside in the intestine, and during establishment of UTI, they undergo metabolic adaptations, first to urine and then upon tissue invasion to the bladder cell interior. To understand these adaptations, we used quantitative proteomic profiling to characterize protein expression of the UPEC strain UTI89 growing in human urine and when inside J82 bladder cells. In order to facilitate detection of UPEC proteins over the excess amount of eukaryotic proteins in bladder cells, we developed a method where proteins from UTI89 grown in MOPS and urine was spiked-in to enhance detection of bacterial proteins. More than 2000 <i>E. coli</i> proteins were detected. During growth in urine, proteins associated with iron acquisition and several amino acid uptake and biosynthesis systems, most prominently arginine metabolism, were significantly upregulated. During growth in J82 cells, proteins related to iron uptake and arginine metabolisms were likewise upregulated together with proteins involved in sulfur compound turnover. Ribosomal proteins were downregulated relative to growth in MOPS in this environment. There was no direct correlation between upregulated proteins and proteins reported to be essential for infections, showing that upregulation during growth does not signify that the proteins are essential for growth under a condition.

### Keywords
Upec, Proteome, Urinary tract infections, Metabolism

### Affiliations
Institut of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark
University of Southern Denmark, Odense

### Submitter
Arkadiusz Nawrocki

### Lab Head
Dr Jakob Møller-Jensen
Institut of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark


