### Accession
PXD027248

### Title
Prior Signal Acquisition Software Versions For Orbitrap Underestimate Low Isobaric Mass Tag Intensities, Without Detriment to Differential Abundance Experiments

### Description
Tandem mass tags (TMT) enable simple and accurate quantitative proteomics for multiplexed samples by relative quantification of tag reporter ions. Orbitrap™ quantification of reporter ions has been associated with a characteristic notch region in intensity distribution, within which few reporter intensities are recorded. This has been resolved with updated instrument acquisition software, however, 53 % of Orbitrap submissions to PRIDE were generated using the prior software versions. To quantify the impact of the notch on existing quantitative proteomics data, we generate a mixed species benchmark and acquired quantitative data using the outdated software version. Sub-notch intensities are systemically underestimated, leading to over-estimation of the true differences in intensities between samples. However, when summarising reporter ion intensities to higher level features, such as peptides and proteins, few features are significantly affected. The analysis of benchmark dataset indicates that the targeted removal of spectra with reporter ion intensities below the notch is not beneficial for differential peptide or protein testing. Overall, we find the systematic quantification bias associated with the notch is not detrimental for typical proteomics experiments

### Sample Protocol
TMT labelled samples were analysed using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nanoUPLC system online with an Orbitrap Lumos mass spectrometer, data was taken with both Tune 2.1 and 3.4 version. Peptides were loaded onto a trap-column and separation of peptides was performed by C18 reverse-phase chromatography at a flow rate of 300 nL/min and a Thermo Scientific reverse-phase nano Easy-spray column. All samples were acquired in a 120 min run applying data acquisition using synchronous precursor selection MS3 (SPS-MS3). Analytical chromatography consisted of Buffer A (HPLC H2O, 0.1% formic acid) and Buffer B (80% ACN, 0.1% formic acid). 0-3 min at 2% buffer B, 3-93 min linear gradient 2% to 40% buffer B, 93-100 min linear gradient 40% to 90% buffer B, 100-104 min at 90% buffer B, 104-105 min linear gradient 90% to 2% buffer B and 105-120 min at 5% buffer B. All m/z values of eluting peptide ions were measured in an Orbitrap mass analyzer, set at a resolution of 120,000 and were scanned between m/z 380-1500 Da. Data dependent MS/MS scans (3 second duty cycle time) were employed to automatically isolate and fragment precursor ions using Collisional-Induced Dissociation (CID) (Normalised Collision Energy of 35%). Only precursors with charge between 2 to 7 were selected for fragmentation, with an AGC target of 10,000 and maximum accumulation time of 50 ms. Precursor isolation was performed by the quadrupole with 0.7 m/z transmission window. MS2 fragments were measured with the Ion Trap analyser. Dynamic exclusion window was set to 70 seconds. SPS ions were all selected within the 400–1,200 m/z range. AGC targets and maximum accumulation times were set to 50,000 and 120 ms respectively. Ten co-selected precursors for SPS-MS3 underwent Higher energy Collisional-induced Dissociation (HCD) fragmentation with 65% normalized collision energy and were analysed in the Orbitrap with nominal resolution of 50 000.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were viewed in Xcalibur v3.0.63 and data processing was performed in Proteome Discovered v2.4. Reference Homo Sapiens and Saccharomyces cerevisiae fasta databases containing all review UniProt/Swiss-Prot entries were downloaded from www.uniprot.org on April 2018 and June 2020, respectively. The raw files were submitted to a database search using PD with Sequest HF algorithm using the concatenated reference databases and the Common contaminant database. The peptide and fragment mass tolerances were set to 10 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. Static modification carbamidomethyl on cysteine was applied as well as TMT-6plex tagging of lysines and peptide N terminus. Oxidation of methionine and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine were included as variable modifications and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Percolator node was used for false discovery rate estimation and only rank one peptides identifications of high confidence (FDR < 1%) were accepted.   Previously published data was downloaded from pride accessions PXD011254 and PXD007683 in raw format. Raw data was re-analysed as indicated above, except that the reference proteomes for H.sapiens (UP000005640) and Saccharomyces cerevisiae (UP000002311) were downloaded in fasta format on 17 January 2020 and used for database searching with Mascot server (version 2.4, Matrix Science)

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Notch, Tmt, Orbitrap, Tune

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, UK
University of Cambridge

### Submitter
Rayner Queiroz

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Kathryn Lilley
Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, UK


