### Accession
PXD019702

### Title
Co-IP of fHERV-K env protein and interactors

### Description
This project seeks to identify protein-protein interactions with human endogenous retrovirus K envelope protein. A flag-tagged HERV-K env construct (fHERV-K env) was expressed in HEK293 cells. An anti-flag MAb was immobilized on magnetic protein G beads was used to capture fHERV-K env and interactors.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitated samples were processed using an on-bead digestion (OBD) protocol that yields 4 fractions per sample based on proteolysis under increasingly vigorous conditions. Briefly, proteins immobilized on magnetic beads were resuspended in 200 µL 0.1M NH4HCO3, pH 8.0. Disulfide bonds were reduced by addition 1.0 µL 1M dithiothreitol (DTT, final concentration = 5 mM) and incubating at 50C for 30 min. The supernatant was decanted from the beads and transferred to a 1.5 mL microfuge tube (fraction 1) and a fresh aliquot of 200 µL 0.1M NH4HCO3, pH 8.0 was added to the magnetic beads. Thiol moieties were alkylated by addition of 9.0 µL 0.29 M iodoacetamide (IAM, final concentration = 12.5 mM) to both fraction 1 and the resuspended magnetic beads and incubating at room temp for 30 min in the dark. Proteins were digested by adding 10 µL trypsin (10 ng/µL) and incubating at 50C for 4 hr. The supernatant was decanted from the magnetic beads and transferred to a 1.5 mL microfuge tube (fraction 2). The magnetic beads resuspended in 200 µL 2M urea, 0.1M NH4HCO3, pH 8.0. Proteins were further digested by adding 10 µL trypsin (10 ng/µL) to fractions 1, 2, and the magnetic beads, and incubating at 37C overnight. The supernatant was decanted from the magnetic beads and transferred to a 1.5 mL microfuge tube (fraction 3). The magnetic beads were resuspended in 200 µL 80% CH3CN, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and sonicated for 30 min. The supernatant was decanted from the magnetic beads and transferred to a 1.5 mL microfuge tube (fraction 4) and dried in a vacuum centrifuge. Fractions 1 – 3 were acidified by the addition of 1.0 µL TFA, while fraction 4 was resolubilized in 200 µL 5% CH3CN, 0.1% TFA. All fractions were desalted by solid phase extraction using Targa C18 microspin columns (PN: SEM SS18R; The Nest Group, Inc., Southborough, MA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were analyzed using the PEAKS Studio 8.5 (Bioinformatics Solutions, Inc.) bioinformatics environment. MS/MS spectra were searched against a custom database constructed from the SwissProt portion of the UniProt database (release 2017_04). The database included all HUMAN sequences in SwissProt (20,210 sequences) and was augmented with reagent protein sequences (ASPN_PSEFR, CLOS_CLOHI, CTRA_BOVIN, CTRB_BOVIN, CTRC_BOVIN, LYSC_PSEAE, PNGF_ELIMR, and TRYP_PIG, SPA_STAA8, SPA_STAAU, SPG1_STRSG, SPG2_STRSG, GST26_SCHJA, 3Xflag peptide). Relevant search database parameters were: enzyme = trypsin/P, maximum missed cleavages = 2, fixed modifications = carbamidomethyl-Cys (C), variable modifications = N-acetyl (Protein), pyro-Glu (Q), and oxidation (M), precursor ion mass tolerance = ± 10 ppm, product ion mass tolerance = 0.6 Da, mass values = monoisotopic. Only high confidence peptide sequence assignments were accepted. Peptide validation False Discovery Rate < 1%. Protein Identifications were based on a two peptide minimum.

### Publication Abstract
Stem cells are capable of unlimited proliferation but can be induced to form brain cells. Factors that specifically regulate human development are poorly understood. We found that human stem cells expressed high levels of the envelope protein of an endogenized human-specific retrovirus (HERV-K, HML-2) from loci in chromosomes 12 and 19. The envelope protein was expressed on the cell membrane of the stem cells and was critical in maintaining the stemness via interactions with CD98HC, leading to triggering of human-specific signaling pathways involving mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) and lysophosphatidylcholine acyltransferase (LPCAT1)-mediated epigenetic changes. Down-regulation or epigenetic silencing of HML-2 <i>env</i> resulted in dissociation of the stem cell colonies and enhanced differentiation along neuronal pathways. Thus HML-2 regulation is critical for human embryonic and neurodevelopment, while it's dysregulation may play a role in tumorigenesis and neurodegeneration.

### Keywords
Human endogenous retrovirus, Ap-ms, On-bead digestion, Co-ip

### Affiliations
NINDS Clinical Proteomics Unit
NINDS Clinical Proteomics Unit National Institutes of Health

### Submitter
Jeffrey Kowalak

### Lab Head
Dr Jeffrey A Kowalak
NINDS Clinical Proteomics Unit National Institutes of Health


