### Accession
PXD024608

### Title
Transcriptional landscape of Candida parapsilosis cells assimilating hydroxyaromatic substrates

### Description
The pathogenic yeast Candida parapsilosis can utilize a wide range of hydroxyaromatic substrates as sole carbon sources through the 3-oxoadipate pathway (3-OAP) and the gentisate pathway (GP). It was previously established that the genes coding for the components of these pathways are arranged in two metabolic gene clusters. In this study we investigated the transcriptional regulation of these gene clusters, as well as the changes in major metabolic pathways in cells assimilating hydroxyaromates. First, using second and third generation sequencing technologies we determined the genomic sequence of the C. parapsilosis CLIB214 strain. This was then used as a platform to a transcriptomic and proteomic analysis of CLIB214 cells utilizing different substrates of the 3-OAP and the GP. Our results show that the activation of both pathways leads to upregulation of genes related to β-oxidation of fatty acids, glyoxylate cycle, metabolism of amino acids and the biogenesis of peroxisomes. In spite of the similar overall response, we identified quite the difference in gene expression between cells assimilating individual aromatic substrates and surprisingly, not only when comparing the substrates of the 3OAP with the GP substrates, but also between substrates channelled through the same pathway. Moreover, with the phenotype analysis of knockout mutants, we showed evidence that transcription factors Otf1 and Gtf1 function as transcriptional activators of genes coding for core components of the 3-OAP and GP, respectively.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extracts were prepared in triplicates from C. parapsilosis CLIB214 cells pre-cultivated overnight at 28 °C in an S3OH medium, inoculated (5×106 cells/ml) to S3OH and S4OH media and grown at 28 °C till ~ 10E7 cells/ml. The cells were harvested by centrifugation (5 min, 2,100 g at 4 °C), resuspended in 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.8), 1 mM EDTA (pH 8.0) and homogenised using FastPrep-24 (MP Biomedicals). Cell debris was removed by centrifugation (15 min, 16,000 g at 4 °C) and protein concentration was determined using Bradford`s method. For LC-MS/MS analysis, protein aliquots (50 µg) were diluted in 100 µl of 25 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.8), 0.1 mM CaCl2, treated using 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 60°C and alkylated in 40 mM chloroacetamide for 1 hour at 37 °C. The proteins were digested overnight by trypsin (1:30 w/w) at 37 °C. Acidified (0.5% trifluoroacetic acid) peptide solution was clarified by centrifugation and purified on a microtip C18 SPE. The concentration of eluted peptides was determined by Pierce Quantitative Fluorometric Peptide Assay (Thermo Scientific). The peptides were dissolved in 0.1% TFA and 2% ACN, loaded (500 ng per run) onto a trap column (PepMap100 C18, 300 μm x 5 mm, Dionex, CA, USA) and separated with an EASY-Spray C18 column (75 µm x 500 mm, Thermo Scientific) on Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Dionex) in a 120-minute gradient (3-43% B), curve 7, and flow-rate 250 nl/min. The two mobile phases were used; 0.1% formic acid (v/v) (A) and 80% ACN (v/v) with 0.1% formic acid (B). Eluted peptides were sprayed directly into Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, MA, USA) and spectral datasets were collected in the data dependent mode using Top15 strategy for the selection of precursor ions for the HCD fragmentation. Each of the three experimental replicates was analysed in technical triplicates.

### Data Protocol
Obtained datasets were processed by MaxQuant, version 1.6.17.0 with built-in Andromeda search engine using carbamidomethylation (C) as permanent and oxidation (M) and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications, with engaged ‘match between the runs’ feature and label-free quantification (LFQ). The search was performed against C. parapsilosis CLIB214 protein database containing 5856 entries.

### Publication Abstract
Many fungal species utilize hydroxyderivatives of benzene and benzoic acid as carbon sources. The yeast Candida parapsilosis metabolizes these compounds via the 3-oxoadipate and gentisate pathways, whose components are encoded by two metabolic gene clusters. In this study, we determine the chromosome level assembly of the C. parapsilosis strain CLIB214 and use it for transcriptomic and proteomic investigation of cells cultivated on hydroxyaromatic substrates. We demonstrate that the genes coding for enzymes and plasma membrane transporters involved in the 3-oxoadipate and gentisate pathways are highly upregulated and their expression is controlled in a substrate-specific manner. However, regulatory proteins involved in this process are not known. Using the knockout mutants, we show that putative transcriptional factors encoded by the genes OTF1 and GTF1 located within these gene clusters function as transcriptional activators of the 3-oxoadipate and gentisate pathway, respectively. We also show that the activation of both pathways is accompanied by upregulation of genes for the enzymes involved in &#x3b2;-oxidation of fatty acids, glyoxylate cycle, amino acid metabolism, and peroxisome biogenesis. Transcriptome and proteome profiles of the cells grown on 4-hydroxybenzoate and 3-hydroxybenzoate, which are metabolized via the 3-oxoadipate and gentisate pathway, respectively, reflect their different connection to central metabolism. Yet we find that the expression profiles differ also in the cells assimilating 4-hydroxybenzoate and hydroquinone, which are both metabolized in the same pathway. This finding is consistent with the phenotype of the Otf1p-lacking mutant, which exhibits impaired growth on hydroxybenzoates, but still utilizes hydroxybenzenes, thus indicating that additional, yet unidentified transcription factor could be involved in the 3-oxoadipate pathway regulation. Moreover, we propose that bicarbonate ions resulting from decarboxylation of hydroxybenzoates also contribute to differences in the cell responses to hydroxybenzoates and hydroxybenzenes. Finally, our phylogenetic analysis highlights evolutionary paths leading to metabolic adaptations of yeast cells assimilating hydroxyaromatic substrates.

### Keywords
Yeast, Biochemical pathway evolution, Hydroxybenzene, Transcription activator, Peroxisome, Catabolism, Metabolic gene cluster, Hydroxybenzoate

### Affiliations
Institute of Chemistry, Slovak Academy of Sciences
Department of Glycobiology, Institute of Chemistry, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia

### Submitter
Peter Barath

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Barath
Department of Glycobiology, Institute of Chemistry, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia


