### Accession
PXD006301

### Title
Expression of the phycobiliprotein antenna of the cryptophyte alga Guillardia theta

### Description
Plants and algae have developed various light harvesting mechanisms for optimal delivery of excitation energy to the photosystems. The cryptophyte algae have evolved a novel soluble light-harvesting antenna utilizing phycobilin pigments to complement the membrane-intrinsic Chl a/c-binding LHC antenna. This new antenna consists of the plastid-encoded beta-subunit, a relict of the ancestral phycobilisome, and a novel nuclear-encoded -subunit unique to cryptophytes. Together, these proteins form the active tetramer, which consists of one alpha 1 and one alpha 2 and two beta susbunits. In all cryptophyte algae investigated so far, the alpha-subunits have duplicated and diversified into a large gene family. Although there is transcriptional evidence for expression of all these genes, the x-ray structures determined to date suggest that only two of the -subunit genes might be significantly expressed at protein level. Using proteomics, we show that phycoerythrin 545 (PE545) of Guillardia theta, the only cryptophyte with a sequenced genome, all 20 alpha-subunits are expressed when the algae grow under white light. Their relative expression levels depend on the intensity of the growth light, but there is no evidence for a specific light-dependent regulation of individual members of the alpha-subunit family under the growth conditions applied. Subunit GtcpeA10 seems to be a special member of the alpha-subunit family, because it consists of two similar N- and C-terminal domains, which likely are the result of a partial gene duplication.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation: the sample set included five biological replicates of extracts containing soluble proteins from G. theta grown at LL, SL and HL, of which in turn three technical replicates were analyzed. The extracts of soluble proteins were prepared by harvesting the cells in late exponential phase: after 14 days of growth in low light, 7 days of growth in standard light and 4 days of growth in high light. A variable volume of culture containing the same number of cells (4.5x10e8) was harvested for each biological replicate and each culture condition. The pelleted cells were resuspended in 1 ml precooled breaking buffer (0.25 M Sorbitol, 20 mM HEPES, 0.4 mM Na2EDTA, pH 7.5), transferred to 2 ml screw cap tubes containing 1 ml glass beads, frozen in liquid nitrogen and kept at -80ᵒC until further analysis. Cells were thawed then broken on ice in darkness in a Bead beater (Glen Mills, Clifton, New Jersey) in 3 cycles of 1 min with pauses of 3 min in between. Glass beads and whole cell debris were removed by centrifugation at 600 x g for 3 min. The green supernatant was centrifuged again at 21000 x g for 10-15 min to remove fragments of thylakoid membranes, giving a clear dark pink supernatant containing the phycobiliproteins as one of the major components.  The sample preparation was performed with the supernatants. DTT was added to a final concentration of 5 mM and the cysteine residues were reduced for 20 min at 56 °C. Subsequently the thiol groups were blocked in the presence of 15 mM fresh iodoacetamide for 15 min in the dark. Next, the proteins were desalted using Zeba spin 0.5 ml columns that were equilibrated using 50 mM Hepes pH 8.0, and the protein concentration was determined according to the method of Lowry as described by Peterson (1977). To minimize disturbance through the absorbance of the phycobiliproteins, the protein concentrations were measured at 750 nm.  Of each sample, an aliquot containing a theoretical amount of 50 µg protein in 100 µl of 50 mM Hepes pH 8.0 was prepared, and the proteins were digested for three hours at 37 °C in the presence of 18 ng/µl of sequencing grade trypsin (Promega Biotech AB, Nacka, Sweden). The digestion was stopped by adding 10% formic acid to a final concentration of 0.5%, and the samples were stored in -80 °C.  Mass spectrometry analysis: Automated Data Dependent Acquisition (DDA) spectra were acquired using a Synapt G2 si mass spectrometer linked on-line to an Acquity M nano UPLC (Waters AB, Sollentuna, Sweden). The data acquisition was performed in the positive ion mode using continuum data format and lock mass calibration. In the MS mode spectra were acquired over the range of 350 to 2000, and in the MS/MS mode spectra acquisition was performed over the range 50-2000 using charge state recognition up to four charges and eight MS/MS channels. In both the MS and MS/MS mode, a scan time was 0.4 sec and an interscan scan time of 0.015 sec was used. The settings for the cone voltage was 40 V. Fragmentation in the MS/MS mode was performed using MS Trap collision energy profiles ranging from 20 to 25 V in the low mas range and from 30 to 45 V in the high mass range. Data were acquired in the time window from 10 to 68 min. Nano liquid chromatography separation of peptides was performed at a flow rate of 280 nl/min and 35°C using a combination of a Trap V/M Symmetry C18 column (100 Å, 5 µm 180 µm x 20 mm) and HSS T3 C18 analytical column (1.8 µm, 75 µm x 250 mm) (Waters AB, Sollentuna, Sweden). The gradient was generated using 75% acetonitrile, 25% isopropanol in 0.1% formic acid (solvent B) and included the following steps: 0.5 min, 5% B; 1 min 5% B, 37 min, 41% B, 41 min, 95% B, 53 min 95% B, 57 min, 5% B. The total run time of the LC method was 69 minutes.   The experimental samples are named as follows:  Cultures grown under growth light with high intensity: HL Cultures grown under standard growth light: NL Cultures grown under growth light with low intensity: LL  Examples: 2016_06_29_G_theta_HL1_1 is a dataset of the first technical replicate of the biological sample one of the five cultures grown under light with intensity.   2016_07_12_G_theta_LL3_2 is a dataset of the second technical replicate of the biological sample three of the five cultures grown under low light.  2016_11_22_HL1_S1_to_S3_merged.PKL is a peaklist file, in which the peaklists of the three technical replicates of the biological sample HL1 are merged.  Reference: Peterson GL. A simplification of the protein assay method of Lowry et al. which is more generally applicable. Anal Biochem. 83: 346-56, 1977.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis: processing of the DDA data was performed using the ProteinLynx Global Server 3.0 software (Waters) and the recommended settings for High Definition Data Direct Analysis (HD-DDA), including lockspray calibration and fast deisotoping in both the MS and MS/MS mode. Database searches using the peak-lists of the processed mass spectra were performed using the Mascot search engine (version 2.5) in a set of databases, which included a homemade database of the gene models of the phycobiliproteins of G. theta, a database of the JGI gene models of G. theta without the phycoerythrins, the Mascot database of contaminants and a database containing Glu-1-fibrinopeptide B. The search parameters permitted a mass error of 5 ppm (MS mode) and 0.05 Da respectively (MS/MS mode) and tryptic cleavage with one missed cleavage site. Modifications included variable oxidation of methionine, and variable deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, and fixed modification of cysteine residues by carbamidomethylation. For a database search for a single biological sample, the peak-lists of the three technical replicates were merged. All Mascot database searches were performed with Percolator on and no cutoffs were applied to the percolated Mascot scores. The exported results have 95% confidence and a false discovery rate of 1% or lower.  To detect N-terminal peptides of the mature phycobiliproteins, the databases searches were also performed using semi-tryptic cleavage, and the spectra of detected semitryptic peptides were inspected manually. In addition, a semi-quantitative analysis of the relative expression of each individual alpha- and beta-subunit under white light of different intensities was performed by spectra counting according to Dowle et al. (2016).   Reference: - Dowle AA, Wilson J, Thomas JR. Comparing the Diagnostic Classification Accuracy of iTRAQ, Peak-Area, Spectral-Counting, and emPAI Methods for Relative Quantification in Expression Proteomics. J Proteome Res. 15:3550-3562, 2016. DOI: 10.1021/acs.jproteome.6b00308

### Publication Abstract
Plants and algae have developed various light-harvesting mechanisms for optimal delivery of excitation energy to the photosystems. Cryptophyte algae have evolved a novel soluble light-harvesting antenna utilizing phycobilin pigments to complement the membrane-intrinsic Chl a/c-binding LHC antenna. This new antenna consists of the plastid-encoded &#x3b2;-subunit, a relic of the ancestral phycobilisome, and a novel nuclear-encoded &#x3b1;-subunit unique to cryptophytes. Together, these proteins form the active &#x3b1;<sub>1</sub>&#x3b2;&#xb7;&#x3b1;<sub>2</sub>&#x3b2;-tetramer. In all cryptophyte algae investigated so far, the &#x3b1;-subunits have duplicated and diversified into a large gene family. Although there is transcriptional evidence for expression of all these genes, the X-ray structures determined to date suggest that only two of the &#x3b1;-subunit genes might be significantly expressed at the protein level. Using proteomics, we show that in phycoerythrin 545 (PE545) of Guillardia theta, the only cryptophyte with a sequenced genome, all 20 &#x3b1;-subunits are expressed when the algae grow under white light. The expression level of each protein depends on the intensity of the growth light, but there is no evidence for a specific light-dependent regulation of individual members of the &#x3b1;-subunit family under the growth conditions applied. GtcpeA10 seems to be a special member of the &#x3b1;-subunit family, because it consists of two similar N- and C-terminal domains, which likely are the result of a partial tandem gene duplication. The proteomics data of this study have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium and have the dataset identifiers PXD006301 and 10.6019/PXD006301.

### Keywords
Plant, Cryptophyte, Lc_ms/ms, Proteomics, Phycobiliprotein, Gulillarida theta

### Affiliations
Umea University, Dept. of Chemistry
Umea University, Department of Chemistry, 90187 Umea, Sweden

### Submitter
Thomas Kieselbach

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Kieselbach
Umea University, Department of Chemistry, 90187 Umea, Sweden


