### Accession
PXD022717

### Title
SMC Complexes Are Guarded by the SUMO Protease Ulp2 Against SUMO-Chain-Mediated Turnover

### Description
Structural maintenance of chromosomes (SMC) complexes, cohesin, condensin and Smc5/6, are essential for viability and participate in multiple processes, including sister chromatid cohesion, chromosome condensation, and DNA repair. Here we show that SUMO chains target all three SMC complexes and are antagonized by the SUMO protease Ulp2 to prevent their turnover. We uncover that the essential role of the cohesin-associated subunit Pds5 is to counteract SUMO chains jointly with Ulp2. Importantly, fusion of Ulp2 to kleisin Scc1 supports viability of PDS5 null cells and protects cohesin from proteasomal degradation mediated by the SUMO-targeted ubiquitin ligase Slx5/Slx8. The lethality of PDS5 deleted cells can also be bypassed by simultaneous loss of the PCNA unloader, Elg1, and the cohesin releaser, Wpl1, but only when Ulp2 is functional. Condensin and Smc5/6 complex are similarly guarded by Ulp2 against unscheduled SUMO-chain assembly, which we propose to time the availability of SMC complexes on chromatin.

### Sample Protocol
For the detection of degradation-prone SUMO conjugates decreased in abundance in ulp2Δ cim3-1 mutant cells specifically in a SUMO-chain-dependent manner, SILAC-based mass spectrometry protocol was used. Yeast ulp2Δ cim3-1 mutant cells deficient in biosynthesis of lysine and arginine (lys1Δ and arg4Δ) expressing either wild-type His-tagged SUMO (HisSUMO) or its lysine-less variant (KRall) that cannot form lysine-linked polySUMO chains were grown for at least ten divisions in synthetic complete media supplemented either with unlabeled (Lys0 and Arg0; light) or heavy isotope-labeled amino acids (Lys8 and Arg10; heavy) from Cambridge Isotope Laboratories. Exponentially dividing HisSUMO ulp2Δ cim3-1 cells grown in heavy media were harvested, combined with equal amount of KRall ulp2Δ cim3-1 cells grown in light media, and SUMO conjugates were isolated by using denaturing Ni-NTA pull-down. Proteins isolated following denaturing Ni-NTA pull-downs of HisSUMO conjugates were separated on 4-12% Bis-Tris gel. The whole lane was excised in slices and proteins were digested with trypsin. Extracted peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using the Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer and identified using MaxQuant software.

### Data Protocol
Spectra have been analyzed by MaxQuant, proteins are considered as identified if the have at least 2 peptides and 1 unique peptides, and quantified with at least 2 ratio measurements.

### Publication Abstract
Structural maintenance of chromosomes (SMCs) complexes, cohesin, condensin, and Smc5/6, are essential for viability and participate in multiple processes, including sister chromatid cohesion, chromosome condensation, and DNA repair. Here we show that SUMO chains target&#xa0;all three SMC complexes and are antagonized by the SUMO protease Ulp2 to prevent their turnover. We uncover that the essential role of the cohesin-associated subunit Pds5 is to counteract SUMO chains jointly with Ulp2. Importantly, fusion of Ulp2 to kleisin Scc1 supports viability of PDS5 null cells and protects cohesin from proteasomal degradation mediated by the SUMO-targeted ubiquitin ligase Slx5/Slx8. The lethality of PDS5-deleted cells can also be bypassed by simultaneous loss of the proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) unloader, Elg1, and the cohesin releaser, Wpl1, but only when Ulp2 is functional. Condensin and Smc5/6 complex are similarly guarded by Ulp2 against unscheduled SUMO chain assembly, which we propose to time the availability of SMC complexes on chromatin.

### Keywords
Senp/ulp proteases, Stubl-mediated proteasomal degradation, Smc5/6, Sumo, Pds5, Sumo chains, Slx5/8, Smc complexes, Cohesin, Condensin

### Affiliations
IFOM
IFOM Foundation - The FIRC Institute of Molecular Oncology Foundation Via Adamello, 16 20139 Milan, Italy Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche-IGM Via Abbiategrasso,207, 27100 Pavia

### Submitter
Ivan Psakhye

### Lab Head
Dr Dana Branzei
IFOM Foundation - The FIRC Institute of Molecular Oncology Foundation Via Adamello, 16 20139 Milan, Italy Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche-IGM Via Abbiategrasso,207, 27100 Pavia


