### Accession
PXD039662

### Title
Protein profiling of left ventricular tissue of patients with aortic valve disease

### Description
We aimed to disclose specific LV myocardial protein signatures possibly contributing to differential disease progression after aortic valve surgery in patients with chronic aortic stenosis and patients with chronic aortic regurgitation.

### Sample Protocol
Protein was extracted from tissue by bead mill (2min, 2600 rpm), reconstituted in 8 M urea/ 2 M thiourea and collected by centrifugation (16.000 g, 1h, 20OC).  Five µg of total protein from each sample were reduced (2.5 mM DTT) and alkylated (10 mM iodacetamide). Proteolysis was performed using LysC (1:100 for 3 h at 37 °C), followed by tryptic digestion overnight at 37 °C (both from Promega). The tryptic digestion was stopped by adding acetic acid (final concentration 1%) followed by desalting using ZipTip-µC18 tips (Merck Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany). Eluted peptides were concentrated by evaporation under vacuum and subsequently resolved in 0.1% acetic acid, 2% acetonitrile (ACN).  Mass spectrometric data was recorded on an Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron). Before MS data acquisition tryptic peptides were separated on an Ultimate 3000 nano-LC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were eluted in a linear 60-min gradient at a constant temperature of 40 °C and a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The detection was carried out in DIA mode with 65 isolation windows of 13 m/z with 2 m/z overlap.

### Data Protocol
Spectronaut software (Biognosys) was used for the analysis of mass spectrometric raw data. For peptide and protein identification, the Direct DIA approach based on UniProt database (2020_07) limited to human entries was applied. The search included carbamidomethylation at cysteine as fixed modification and oxidation at methionine and acetylation at protein N-termini as variable modifications. A protein Q-value cut-off of 0.01 and a precursor Q-value cut-off of 0.001 were applied.

### Publication Abstract
Left ventricular (LV) reverse remodeling after aortic valve (AV) surgery is less predictable in chronic aortic regurgitation (AR) than in aortic stenosis (AS). We aimed to disclose specific LV myocardial protein signatures possibly contributing to differential disease progression. Global protein profiling of LV myocardial samples excised from the subaortic interventricular septum in patients with isolated AR or AS undergoing AV surgery was performed using liquid chromatography-electrospray ionization-tandem mass spectrometry. Based on label-free quantitation protein intensities, a logistic regression model was calculated and adjusted for age, sex and protein concentration. Web-based functional enrichment analyses of phenotype-associated proteins were performed utilizing g:Profiler and STRING. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD039662. Lysates from 38 patients, including 25 AR and 13 AS samples, were analyzed. AR patients presented with significantly larger LV diameters and volumes (end-diastolic diameter: 61 (12) vs. 48 (13) mm, <i>p</i> &lt; 0.001; end-diastolic volume: 180.0 (74.6) vs. 92.3 (78.4), <i>p</i> = 0.001). A total of 171 proteins were associated with patient phenotype: 117 were positively associated with AR and the enrichment of intracellular compartment proteins (i.e., assigned to carbohydrate and nucleotide metabolism, protein biosynthesis and the proteasome) was detected. Additionally, 54 were positively associated with AS and the enrichment of extracellular compartment proteins (i.e., assigned to the immune and hematopoietic system) was observed. In summary, functional enrichment analysis revealed specific AR- and AS-associated signatures of LV myocardial proteins.

### Keywords
Human, Left ventricular tissue, Lc-ms/ms, Aortic valve disease, Dia

### Affiliations
Department of Functional Genomics Felix-Hausdorff-Str. 8 17489 Greifswald
Dept. of Functional Genomics

### Submitter
Elke Hammer

### Lab Head
Dr Elke Hammer
Department of Functional Genomics Felix-Hausdorff-Str. 8 17489 Greifswald


