### Accession
PXD027997

### Title
Systemic effects of hemorrhagic snake venom metalloproteinases: untargeted peptidomics to explore the pathodegradome of plasma proteins

### Description
In this study we investigated the proteolysis of human plasma proteins by HF3, an hemorrhagic metalloproteinase from B. jararaca venom. For this purpose, approaches for the depletion of the most abundant proteins and for the enrichment of low abundant proteins of human plasma were used to minimize the dynamic range of protein concentration, in order to assess the proteolytic activity of HF3 on a wide spectrum of proteins, and to detect the degradation products by mass spectrometry by untargeted peptidomics.

### Sample Protocol
• Proteolytic activity of HF3 on human plasma: Four types of human plasma preparations were used: i) whole plasma [P(W)], ii) plasma depleted of albumin [P(Alb-D)], iii) plasma depleted of 20 most abundant proteins [P(20-MAP-D)], and iv) plasma enriched of low-abundance proteins [P(LAP-E)]. For each type of degradation experiment, three biological replicates were performed. For each experiment, (P(Alb-D), P(20-MAP-D), and P(LAP-E); 50 μg) were separately incubated with 0.5 μg HF3 (1:100; (w/w) in 250 mM ammonium acetate containing CaCl2 1 mM, for 2 h, at 37 °C. P(W) (200 μg) was incubated with 2 μg HF3 under the same conditions. Samples of P(Alb-D), P(20MAP-D), P(LAP-E), and P(W) were incubated without HF3, as a control, under identical conditions.  • LC-MS/MS: Previously to LC-MS/MS analysis, plasma peptide fractions containing hydrolysis products resulting from the proteolytic activity of HF3 were subjected to removal of traces of detergent using Macro Spin Columns (Harvard Apparatus). Samples were then desalted with Sep-Pak Light C18 (Waters) cartridges, vacuum dried and resuspended in 20 μL of 0.1% formic acid. All LC-MS/MS analyses were performed in an EASY II-nanoLC system coupled to a LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide samples were separated by RP-HPLC on an EASY-nLC II (Thermo Scientific) using a column (75 μm i.d. × 10 cm) packed with 5 μm C18 beads.

### Data Protocol
Two strategies were employed for the identification of peptides originated from HF3 cleavage of plasma proteins. In the first, we used the Mascot program, and validated the results using the PeptideProphet and ProteinProphet tools of the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline (TPP) platform (Mascot/TPP). In the second, de novo sequencing, searching the database and validating the results were carried out using the Peaks Studio 7 program (Peaks).

### Publication Abstract
Hemorrhage induced by snake venom metalloproteinases (SVMPs) is a complex phenomenon that involves capillary disruption and blood extravasation. HF3 (hemorrhagic factor 3) is an extremely hemorrhagic SVMP of <i>Bothrops jararaca</i> venom. Studies using proteomic approaches revealed targets of HF3 among intracellular and extracellular proteins. However, the role of the cleavage of plasma proteins in the context of the hemorrhage remains not fully understood. The main goal of this study was to analyze the degradome of HF3 in human plasma. For this purpose, approaches for the depletion of the most abundant proteins, and for the enrichment of low abundant proteins of human plasma, were used to minimize the dynamic range of protein concentration, in order to assess the proteolytic activity of HF3 on a wide spectrum of proteins, and to detect the degradation products using mass spectrometry-based untargeted peptidomics. The results revealed the hydrolysis products generated by HF3 and allowed the identification of cleavage sites. A total of 61 plasma proteins were identified as cleaved by HF3. Some of these proteins corroborate previous studies, and others are new HF3 targets, including proteins of the coagulation cascade, of the complement system, proteins acting on the modulation of inflammation, and plasma proteinase inhibitors. Overall, the data indicate that HF3 escapes inhibition and sculpts the plasma proteome by degrading key proteins and generating peptides that may act synergistically in the hemorrhagic process.

### Keywords
Bothrops; snake venom; hemorrhagic factor 3 (hf3); human plasma; degradome

### Affiliations
Laboratório de Toxinologia Aplicada Center of Toxins, Immune-Response and Cell Signaling (CeTICS) Instituto Butantan - Brazil
Instituto Butantan

### Submitter
Alison Chaves

### Lab Head
Dr Solange Maria de Toledo Serrano
Laboratório de Toxinologia Aplicada Center of Toxins, Immune-Response and Cell Signaling (CeTICS) Instituto Butantan - Brazil


