### Accession
PXD010290

### Title
Deciphering the roles of N-glycans on collagen-platelet interactions

### Description
Collagen is a potent agonist for platelet activation, presenting itself as a key contributor to coagulation via interactions with platelet glycoproteins. The fine-details dictating platelet-collagen interactions are poorly understood. In particular, glycosylation could be a key determinant in the platelet-collagen interaction. Here we report an affinity purification coupled to mass spectrometry-based approach to elucidate the function of N-glycans in dictating platelet-collagen interactions. By integrative proteomic and glycoproteomic analysis of collagen-platelet interactive proteins with N-glycan manipulation, we demonstrate that the interaction of platelet adhesive receptors with collagen are highly N-glycan regulated, with glycans on many receptors playing positive roles on collagen binding, with glycans on other  platelet glycoproteins exhibiting inhibitory roles on the binding to collagen. Our results significantly enhance our understanding of the details of glycans influencing the platelet-collagen interaction.

### Sample Protocol
The samples include several sets incorporating an isobaric tandem mass tag (TMT) and several sets of intact glycopeptides. The samples were prepared from platelets isolated from platelet-rich plasma (human) or from bovine fetuin proteins. The samples were enriched using affinity purification methods using either immobilized collagen or sambucus nigra agglutinin. The trypsin digested peptides were seperated into 24-fractions using basic reverse phase fractionation. Orbitrap MS1 spectra (AGC 4 × 105) were collected from 350-1800 m/z at an Orbitrap resolution of 120 K followed by data-dependent higher-energy collisional dissociation tandem mass spectrometry (HCD MS/MS) (resolution 60 K, collisional energy 35%, activation time 0.1 ms) of the 20 most abundant ions using an isolation width of 2.0 Da. Charge states were screened to reject both singly charged and unassigned ions; only charges between 2-6 were enabled. A dynamic exclusion window of 15 s was used to discriminate between previously selected ions.

### Data Protocol
Data generated using either the Thermo Fusion or Q Exactive were searched using Sequest with Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Scientific) against the Human Swiss-Prot database. Spectra were searched with trypsin enzyme, allowing maximum of two missed cleavages. Search parameters used were 10 ppm precursor tolerance for precursor mass and 0.06 Da fragment ion tolerance, static modification of, carbamidomethylation at cysteine and variable modifications of oxidation at methionine and TMT reagent modifications at lysine and/or the N-terminus. Filters used for data analysis included peptide rank 1, 2 peptides per protein, and 1% FDR threshold. For glycopeptide identification, raw MS files were converted to mzML form using MSConvert from Proteowizard and searched against peptide and glycan database using GPQuest 3.0. Parameters for database search included: For N-glycopeptide identification, mammalian N-glycan database and N-glycosite containing peptide database were used. Minimum of two oxonium ions were required for spectra of glycopeptides. Oxonium ion containing spectra were extracted using HexNAc (204.087 Da) and at least one other oxonium ion (138.055 Da, 163.061 Da, 168.066 Da, 274.093 Da, 292.103 Da, and 366.140 Da) within a 5 ppm window as the selection criteria.

### Publication Abstract
Collagen is a potent agonist for platelet activation, presenting itself as a key contributor to coagulation via interactions with platelet glycoproteins. The fine details dictating platelet-collagen interactions are poorly understood. In particular, glycosylation could be a key determinant in the platelet-collagen interaction. Here, we report an affinity purification coupled to a mass spectrometry-based approach to elucidate the function of N-glycans in dictating platelet-collagen interactions. By integrative proteomic and glycoproteomic analysis of collagen-platelet interactive proteins with N-glycan manipulation, we demonstrate that the interaction of platelet adhesive receptors with collagen is highly N-glycan regulated, with glycans on many receptors playing positive roles in collagen binding, with glycans on other platelet glycoproteins exhibiting inhibitory roles on the binding to collagen. Our results significantly enhance our understanding of the details of glycans influencing the platelet-collagen interaction.

### Keywords
Collagen, Glycans, Platelets, Protein interactions

### Affiliations
Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, United States of America
University of Minnesota

### Submitter
Christian Toonstra

### Lab Head
Dr Hui Zhang
Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, United States of America


