### Accession
PXD036519

### Title
CDK4/6 inhibitor-mediated cell overgrowth triggers an osmotic stress response

### Description
Cell size and the cell cycle are intrinsically coupled and abnormal increases in cell size are associated with senescence and permanent cell cycle arrest. The mechanism by which overgrowth primes cells to withdraw from the cell cycle remains unknown. We investigate this here using CDK4/6 inhibitors that arrest cell cycle progression during G0/G1 and are used in the clinic to treat ER+/HER2- metastatic breast cancer.  We demonstrate that CDK4/6 inhibition promotes cellular overgrowth during G0/G1, causing p38MAPK-p53-p21-dependent cell cycle withdrawal. We find that cell cycle withdrawal is triggered by two waves of p21 induction. First, overgrowth during a long-term G0/G1 arrest induces an osmotic stress response. This stress response produces the first wave of p21 induction. Second, when CDK4/6 inhibitors are removed, a fraction of cells escape long term G0/G1 arrest and enter S-phase where overgrowth-driven replication stress results in a second wave of p21 induction that causes cell cycle withdrawal from G2, or the subsequent G1. We propose a model whereby both waves of p21 induction contribute to promote permanent cell cycle arrest. This model could explain why cellular hypertrophy is associated with senescence and why CDK4/6 inhibitors have long-lasting effects in patients.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were scraped in 2% SDS lysis buffer containing phosphatase inhibitors (PhosStop, Roche) and protease inhibitors (Complete EDTA-free, Roche). Extracts were heated to 95 °C, cooled to room temperature, and treated with benzonase (Millipore, 70664) for 30 min at 37 °C. The benzonase treatment was repeated until the extract was free flowing. The protein concentration was determined and 50 µg protein aliquots were precipitated using acetone-ethanol. Precipitated protein was then digested with trypsin (1:100), once for 16 hours before another aliquot of trypsin is added (1:100) and incubated for an additional 4 hours. Peptides were then desalted using SepPak cartridges (Waters).   Peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using a data-independent acquisition (DIA) approach implemented on a RSLCnano HPLC (Dionex) coupled to an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo) using a DIA windows reported previously. Peptides were separated on a 50-cm (2-µm particle size) EASY-Spray column (Thermo Fisher Scientific), which was assembled on an EASY-Spray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and operated constantly at 50 °C. Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in LC–MS-grade water and mobile phase B consisted of 80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were loaded on to the column at a flow rate of 0.3 μl min−1 and eluted at a flow rate of 0.25 μl min−1 according to the following gradient: 2–40% mobile phase B in 120 min and then to 95% in 11 min. Mobile phase B was retained at 95% for 5 min and returned back to 2% a minute after until the end of the run (160 min in total).   The spray voltage was set at 2.2 kV and the ion capillary temperature at 280 °C. Survey scans were performed at 15,000 resolution, with a scan range of 350–1,500 m/z, maximum injection time 50 ms and AGC target 4.5 × 105. MS/MS DIA was performed in the orbitrap at 30,000 resolution with a scan range of 200–2,000 m/z. The mass range was set to ‘normal’, the maximum injection time to 54 ms and the AGC target to 2.0 × 105. An inclusion mass list with the corresponding isolation windows was used as previously reported. Data for both survey and MS/MS scans were acquired in profile mode. A blank sample (0.1% TFA, 80% MeCN, 1:1 v:v) was run between each sample to avoid carryover.

### Data Protocol
MS raw data files were processed using Spectronaught v.14.7.201007.47784 with a human reference FASTA sequence from UniProt, using default search parameters. The resulting protein-level data were analyzed using R v.3.5.0. Protein abundances are expressed as parts-per-million (ppm) and protein copies. To calculate ppm, protein intensities were divided by the total protein intensity and therefore reflect a concentration. To calculate protein copies, protein intensities were divided by the sum of histone intensities.

### Publication Abstract
Abnormal increases in cell size are associated with senescence and cell cycle exit. The mechanisms by which overgrowth primes cells to withdraw from the cell cycle remain unknown. We address this question using CDK4/6 inhibitors, which arrest cells in G0/G1 and are licensed to treat advanced HR+/HER2- breast cancer. We demonstrate that CDK4/6-inhibited cells overgrow during G0/G1, causing p38/p53/p21-dependent cell cycle withdrawal. Cell cycle withdrawal is triggered by biphasic p21 induction. The first p21 wave is caused by osmotic stress, leading to p38- and size-dependent accumulation of p21. CDK4/6 inhibitor washout results in some cells entering S-phase. Overgrown cells experience replication stress, resulting in a second p21 wave that promotes cell cycle withdrawal from G2 or the subsequent G1. We propose that the levels of p21 integrate signals from overgrowth-triggered stresses to determine cell fate. This model explains how hypertrophy can drive senescence and why CDK4/6 inhibitors have long-lasting effects in patients.

### Keywords
Cell growth, Cell cycle, Lc-ms/ms, Dia

### Affiliations
Centre for Gene Regulation and Expression University of Dundee
University of Dundee

### Submitter
Tony Ly

### Lab Head
Dr Tony Ly
Centre for Gene Regulation and Expression University of Dundee


