### Accession
PXD038783

### Title
A Universal GlycoDesign for Lysosomal Replacement Enzymes to Improve Circulation Time and Biodistribution

### Description
Currently available enzyme replacement therapies for lysosomal storage diseases are limited in their effectiveness due in part to short circulation times and suboptimal biodistribution of the therapeutic enzymes. We previously engineered Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells to produce -galactosidase A (GLA) with various N-glycan structures and demonstrated that elimination of mannose-6-phosphate (M6P) and conversion to homogeneous sialylated N-glycans prolonged circulation time and improved biodistribution of the enzyme following a single-dose infusion into Fabry mice. Here, we confirmed these findings using repeated infusions of the glycoengineered GLA into Fabry mice and further tested whether this glycoengineering approach, Long-Acting-GlycoDesign (LAGD), could be implemented on other lysosomal enzymes. LAGD-engineered CHO cells stably expressing a panel of lysosomal enzymes [aspartylglucosamine (AGA), beta-glucuronsidase (GUSB), catepsin D (CTSD), tripeptidyl peptidase (TPP1), alpha-glucosidase (GAA) or iduronate 2-sulfatase (IDS)] successfully converted all M6P-containing N-glycans to complex sialylated N-glycans. The resulting homogenous glycodesigns enabled glycoprotein profiling by native mass spectrometry. Notably, LAGD extended the plasma half-life of all three enzymes tested (GLA, GUSB, AGA) in wildtype mice. LAGD may be widely applicable to lysosomal replacement enzymes to improve their circulatory stability and therapeutic efficacy.

### Sample Protocol
25 µg of purified AGA, GUSB CTSD, and GAA were dissolved in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AmBic) buffer (pH 7.4) and further reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 60°C for 45 min on shaker, followed by alkylation with 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) at 25°C for 30 min in darkness. AGA, GUSB, CTSD were subjected to proteolytic digestion with chymotrypsin (1:40 enzyme-substrate ratio), while GAA was digested with trypsin (1:25 enzyme-substrate ratio). The reaction was quenched with 1 µl Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and the digested sample was desalted by custom-made modified StageTip colums with three layers of C18 and two layers of C8 membrane (3M Empore disks, Sigma-Aldrich). Samples were eluted with two steps of 50 µl 50% methanol in 0.1% formic acid. Final sample was aliqoted in two equal parts. The first aliquot was placed into a glass insert (Agilent), dried completely in SpeedVac (Eppendorf) and further re-dissolved in 50 µl 0.1% formic acid (FA) and submitted for nLC-MS analysis. The second aliqout was placed inside an Eppendorf tube, dried completely using SpeedVac, and then re-dissolved in 50 µl of 50 mM AmBic buffer (pH 7.4) and incubated with PNGase F (1U per sample) for 12 h with shaking at 37°C. Samples treated with PNGase F were desalted and dried using the same methods mentioned above for the first aliqout and submitted for nLC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
N-glycan and N-glycopeptide site specific Compositional Analysis Glycopeptide compositional analysis was performed from m/z features using in-house written SysBioWare software [45]. For m/z feature recognition from full MS scans Minora Feature Detector Node of the Proteome discoverer 2.3 (ThermoFisher Scientific) was used. A list of precursor ions (m/z, charge and retention time) was imported as ASCII data into SysBioWare and compositional assignment within 5 ppm mass tolerance was performed. The main building blocks used for the compositional analysis were: NeuAc, Hex, HexNAc, dHex and phosphate. The most prominent peptides corresponding to each potential glycosite were determined experimentally by comparing the yield of deamidated peptides before and after PNGase F treatment. The peptide sequence was determined by HCD MS/MS and the abundance level was calculated from PD 2.3. For N-glycopeptide compositional analysis the corresponding peptides were also added as a building blocks.  A list of potential glycan and glycopeptides for each glycosite was generated and the top 10-15 of the most abundant candidates were selected for targeted MS/MS analysis to confirm the proposed structure. Each targeted MS/MS spectrum was subjected to manual interpretation. Since the same N-glycan composition may represent various isobaric structures, the final glycan structures were proposed according literature data, predicted enzyme functions of the targeted genes, along with information in MS/MS fragments.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Glycoproteomics, Therapeutics, Orbitrap

### Affiliations
Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine
Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Copenhagen

### Submitter
Sergey Vakhrushev

### Lab Head
Dr Sergey Vakhrushev
Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Copenhagen


