### Accession
PXD007622

### Title
Pseudomonas aeruginosa BONCAT biofilms - rpoS vs. trc

### Description
Cell-selective BONCAT analysis of proteins synthesized by two P. aeruginosa biofilm subpopulations.

### Sample Protocol
Biofilms were grown at 37 °C with a constant flow rate of 0.03 ml/min. For proteomic analyses, biofilms were grown in silicone rubber tubing (10 mm interior diameter, 20 cm long) (McMaster-Carr) at 37 °C with a constant flow rate of 0.5 ml/min. Flow was stopped and tubing was clamped. FAB medium with 0.05 g/L glucose and 1 mM Anl was injected by syringe and biofilms were incubated for 1.5 h at 37 °C. For ciprofloxacin treated samples, 60 µg/mL ciprofloxacin was included in the labeling medium. Loosely adherent biofilm cells were extracted by collecting media within each tube and flushing with 0.9% NaCl. Tubing was cut into 1 cm pieces and vortexed in 0.9% NaCl to remove remaining cells. All cells were combined. For proteomic analysis, cells were collected from tubing as described, pelleted, and frozen at -80 °C.  All samples were lysed by resuspension in lysis buffer (100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8, 4% SDS). Lysates were sonicated with a microtip probe for 30 s at setting 20% (Qsonica). For all enrichments, cysteines were reduced by addition of 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 20 min at room temperature and free thiols alkylated by addition of 100 mM chloroacetamide for 30 min in the dark.  For the comparison between PrpoS:nll-mc and Ptrc:nll-mc biofilms, 0.5 mg of protein lysate per sample was treated with 12 μM DBCO-sulfo-biotin (Click Chemistry Tools) in 0.5 mL phosphate buffered saline (PBS; 137 mM NaCl, 2.7 mM KCl, 10 mM Na2HPO4, 1.8 mM KH2PO4)  for 15 min at room temperature. Proteins were precipitated with acetone at -20 °C and resuspended in PBS, 0.3% SDS. Streptavidin UltraLink Resin (Pierce Biotechnology) was washed twice with PBS, added to biotinylated lysates, and incubated overnight at 4 °C. Resin was transferred to microfuge spin columns (Pierce Biotechnology) and washed twice with 1% SDS in PBS and once with 0.1% SDS in PBS. Proteins were eluted by incubation with 1 mM biotin at 65 °C for 20 min. Eluted proteins were separated via SDS-PAGE and subjected to GeLCMS.  Gel lanes were cut into 8 pieces each and destained by alternating washes with 50 μl each of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AB) and 1:1 50 mM AB:acetonitrile. Proteins were reduced by incubation with 6.7 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) in 50 μl 50 mM AB at 50 °C for 30 min and alkylated by incubation with 37 mM iodoacetamide in 50 μl 50 mM AB at room temperature for 20 min. Gel pieces were washed with 50 μl each of 100 mM AB and acetonitrile. Proteins were digested first by addition of 300 ng endoproteinase LysC in 50 μl 100 mM Tris-HCl at 37 °C for 4 h and then by addition of 150 ng trypsin for 16 h at 37 ºC. Peptides were extracted by sequential washing with: 50 μl each of 1% formic acid/2% acetonitrile, 1:1 acetonitrile:water, and 1% formic acid in acetonitrile. Peptides were desalted with C18 ZipTips (EMD Millipore).  The rpoS vs. trc experiments were performed on a nanoflow LC system, EASY-nLC 1000 coupled to a hybrid linear ion trap Orbitrap Classic mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with the following modifications: For the EASY- nLC 1000 system, solvent A consisted of 97.8% H2O, 2% ACN, and 0.2% formic acid and solvent B consisted of 19.8% H2O, 80% ACN, and 0.2% formic acid. For the LC-MS/MS experiments, digested peptides were directly loaded at a flow rate of 500 nl/min onto a 16-cm analytical HPLC column (75 μm ID) packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18AQ 3 μm resin (120 Å pore size, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany). The column was enclosed in a column heater operating at 45 °C. After 30 min of loading time, the peptides were separated in a solvent gradient at a flow rate of 350 nl/min. The gradient was as follows: 0–30% B (50 min), and 100% B (10 min). The Orbitrap was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode to automatically alternate between a full scan (m/z=400–1600) in the Orbitrap and subsequent 10 CID MS/MS scans (Top 15 method) in the linear ion trap. CID was performed with helium as collision gas at a normalized collision energy of 35% and 30 ms of activation time.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were searched using MaxQuant against the P. aeruginosa PA14 UniProt entries (5,886 sequences) and a contaminant database (246 sequences). Trypsin was specified as the digestion enzyme with up to two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification and protein N- terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were variable modifications. Protein abundances were estimated with MaxLFQ, and for each experiment, peptides were matched between runs. LFQ values were normalized and used to calculate abundance ratios between samples and to estimate variance using the limma package in R version 3.2.2. P-values were adjusted for false discovery by the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure.

### Publication Abstract
Biofilm infections exhibit high tolerance against antibiotic treatment. The study of biofilms is complicated by phenotypic heterogeneity; biofilm subpopulations differ in their metabolic activities and their responses to antibiotics. Here, we describe the use of the bio-orthogonal noncanonical amino acid tagging (BONCAT) method to enable selective proteomic analysis of a <i>Pseudomonas aeruginosa</i> biofilm subpopulation. Through controlled expression of a mutant methionyl-tRNA synthetase, we targeted BONCAT labeling to cells in the regions of biofilm microcolonies that showed increased tolerance to antibiotics. We enriched and identified proteins synthesized by cells in these regions. Compared to the entire biofilm proteome, the labeled subpopulation was characterized by a lower abundance of ribosomal proteins and was enriched in proteins of unknown function. We performed a pulse-labeling experiment to determine the dynamic proteomic response of the tolerant subpopulation to supra-MIC treatment with the fluoroquinolone antibiotic ciprofloxacin. The adaptive response included the upregulation of proteins required for sensing and repairing DNA damage and substantial changes in the expression of enzymes involved in central carbon metabolism. We differentiated the immediate proteomic response, characterized by an increase in flagellar motility, from the long-term adaptive strategy, which included the upregulation of purine synthesis. This targeted, selective analysis of a bacterial subpopulation demonstrates how the study of proteome dynamics can enhance our understanding of biofilm heterogeneity and antibiotic tolerance.<b>IMPORTANCE</b> Bacterial growth is frequently characterized by behavioral heterogeneity at the single-cell level. Heterogeneity is especially evident in the physiology of biofilms, in which distinct cellular subpopulations can respond differently to stresses, including subpopulations of pathogenic biofilms that are more tolerant to antibiotics. Global proteomic analysis affords insights into cellular physiology but cannot identify proteins expressed in a particular subpopulation of interest. Here, we report a chemical biology method to selectively label, enrich, and identify proteins expressed by cells within distinct regions of biofilm microcolonies. We used this approach to study changes in protein synthesis by the subpopulation of antibiotic-tolerant cells throughout a course of treatment. We found substantial differences between the initial response and the long-term adaptive strategy that biofilm cells use to cope with antibiotic stress. The method we describe is readily applicable to investigations of bacterial heterogeneity in diverse contexts.

### Keywords
Biofilms, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Boncat

### Affiliations
Stanford University
Division of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering California Institute of Technology

### Submitter
Brett Babin

### Lab Head
Dr David A. Tirrell
Division of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering California Institute of Technology


