### Accession
PXD033537

### Title
Venomics of the Central-European Myrmicine Ants Myrmica rubra and Myrmica ruginodis

### Description
Animal venoms are a rich source of novel biomolecules with tremendous potential in medicine and agriculture. Ants represent one of the most species-rich lineages of venomous animals. However, only a fraction of their biodiversity has been studied so far. Here, we investigated the venom compositions from Myrmica rubra and Myrmica ruginodis, two members of the Myrmicinae subfamily of ants. We applied a proteo-transcriptomics based venomics workflow. Our analysis revealed that venoms of both species are composed of several protein classes, such as venom serine protease, cysteine-rich secretory proteins, antigen 5 and pathogenesis-related 1 proteins (CAP), Kunitz-type serine protease inhibitors or venom acid phosphatase. Several protein classes identified are known venom allergens, and for the first time we detected phospholipase A1 in the venom of M. ruginodis. We also identified two novel toxins of the epidermal growth factor (EGF) family in its venom proteome and an array of additional EGF-like toxins in venom gland transcriptomes of both species. They display similarity to known toxins from the related myrmecine Manica rubida and the Australian red bulldog ant Myrmecia gullosa of the Myrmeciinae subfamily and may serve as nociceptive weapons in defensive scenarios. Our work suggests that the venoms of M. rubra and M. ruginodis contain many high molecular proteins and enzymes with putatively cell damaging functions. Nevertheless, the presence of EGF-like toxins underpins that myrmicine ants also recruited smaller peptide components into their venom arsenal. Although little is known about the bioactivity and function of these EGF-like toxins, their presence in Myrmecinae and Myrmeciinae suggests that they play an important role for the venom systems of Formicoidea. Our work adds to the emerging picture of ant venoms as a source for novel biomolecules. This underlines the importance to incorporate such taxa in future venom bioprospecting programs.

### Sample Protocol
Specimens from two colonies of M. rubra and M. ruginodis were collected in Giessen (Hesse, Germany). Collected ants were kept in plastic containers measuring 18 cm x 14 cm x 12 cm filled with soil at ca. 23 °C, 40% relative humidity and a 16 h photoperiod. They were fed weekly with mealworms (Tenebrio molitor) and 20% sucrose solution.  We developed a non-invasive protocol for the sampling of venom. Briefly, ants were gently grabbed on their thorax with a watchmaker forceps. Their abdomen was submerged in 500 µl methanol in a 1.5 mL Eppendorf tube. This induced the animals to sting into the solvent, releasing their venom. The ants were kept in this position for 30 s and then placed in a small plastic container in which they were kept henceforth. After venom collection was completed, we dissected their venom glands under a light microscope and stored the venom glands and remaining body tissue separately in TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) until further use. We collected specimen from two colonies each of M. rubra and M. ruginodis. From each colony, 27 individuals were sampled and the venom and tissue samples obtained were pooled within each colony and stored at -80 °C until further processing.

### Data Protocol
We used Xcalibur v4.3.73.11 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) and Proteome Discoverer v2.4.0.305 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) for data acquisition and analysis. Protein identification was performed in Mascot v2.6.2 searching against the sequenced transcriptomes with the following settings: Precursor ion mass tolerance of 10 ppm, carbamidomethylation as global modification, methionine oxidation as variable modification and one missed cleavage allowed. Fragment ion mass tolerance in linear ion trap MS2 detection was set to 0.8 Da and the false discovery rate was limited to 0.01 using a decoy database. For the qualitative analysis, we only considered proteins that were identified with a Mascot score of at least 30 and at least two verified peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Animal venoms are a rich source of novel biomolecules with potential applications in medicine and agriculture. Ants are one of the most species-rich lineages of venomous animals. However, only a fraction of their biodiversity has been studied so far. Here, we investigated the venom components of two myrmicine (subfamily Myrmicinae) ants: <i>Myrmica rubra</i> and <i>Myrmica ruginodis</i>. We applied a venomics workflow based on proteotranscriptomics and found that the venoms of both species are composed of several protein classes, including venom serine proteases, cysteine-rich secretory protein, antigen 5 and pathogenesis-related 1 (CAP) superfamily proteins, Kunitz-type serine protease inhibitors and venom acid phosphatases. Several of these protein classes are known venom allergens, and for the first time we detected phospholipase A1 in the venom of <i>M. ruginodis</i>. We also identified two novel epidermal growth factor (EGF) family toxins in the <i>M. ruginodis</i> venom proteome and an array of additional EGF-like toxins in the venom gland transcriptomes of both species. These are similar to known toxins from the related myrmicine ant, <i>Manica rubida</i>, and the myrmecine (subfamily Myrmeciinae) Australian red bulldog ant <i>Myrmecia gullosa</i>, and are possibly deployed as weapons in defensive scenarios or to subdue prey. Our work suggests that <i>M.</i><i>rubra</i> and <i>M. ruginodis</i> venoms contain many enzymes and other high-molecular-weight proteins that cause cell damage. Nevertheless, the presence of EGF-like toxins suggests that myrmicine ants have also recruited smaller peptide components into their venom arsenal. Although little is known about the bioactivity and function of EGF-like toxins, their presence in myrmicine and myrmecine ants suggests they play a key role in the venom systems of the superfamily Formicoidea. Our work adds to the emerging picture of ant venoms as a source of novel bioactive molecules and highlights the need to incorporate such taxa in future venom bioprospecting programs.

### Keywords
Venomics, Ants, Proteo-transcriptomics, Proteomics, Insect venom

### Affiliations
Institute of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, University Giessen, Friedrichstrasse 24, 35392 Giessen, Germany
Protein Analytics,  Institute of Biiochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, University Giessen, Friedrichstrasse 24, 35392 Giessen

### Submitter
Günter Lochnit

### Lab Head
Dr Lochnit, Guenter
Institute of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, University Giessen, Friedrichstrasse 24, 35392 Giessen, Germany


