### Accession
PXD037737

### Title
Proteomics reveals virulence adaptation of Pseudomonas aeruginosa phospholipase mutant with altered membrane phospholipid composition

### Description
Membrane protein and phospholipid (PL) compositions change in response to environmental cues and during infections. Covalent modification (e.g., unsaturation and cyclopropanation) and remodeling the acyl chain length of PLs is an important bacterial adaptation mechanism. However, little is known about which bacterial pathways are regulated in response to the alteration of PL composition. Here, we show that P. aeruginosa PlaF, which modulates membrane PL composition, is important for biofilm biogenesis, and we performed whole-cell quantitative proteomics of P. aeruginosa wild-type and ∆plaF biofilms to identify pathways regulated by PlaF. The results revealed profound alterations in the abundance of 14 two-component systems (TCS), including the PprA-PprB, which controls the transition to biofilm. Activation of PprA-the PprB system observed by proteomics was confirmed by mRNA quantification. Furthermore, we have observed a unique phosphorylation pattern of transcriptional regulators, transporters and metabolic enzymes, and differential production of nine proteases in ∆plaF, indicating that PlaF-mediated virulence adaptation involves complex transcriptional and post-transcriptional regulation. Moreover, proteomics revealed that the pyoverdin-mediated iron uptake pathway proteins were depleted in ∆plaF, which agrees with decreased concentrations of extracellular pyoverdine and intracellular iron in ∆plaF and is likely responsible for its prolonged lag phase due to reduced iron uptake. Conversely, the accumulation of proteins from alternative iron-uptake systems in ∆plaF suggests that PlaF may function as a switch between different iron-acquisition pathways. The observation that ∆plaF accumulates PL-acyl chain modifying enzymes and PlsX, an initiator of de novo PL synthesis, reveals novel insights into the relationship between degradation, covalent modification and biosynthesis of PLs for membrane homeostasis. Although the precise mechanism by which PlaF simultaneously affects multiple pathways remains to be elucidated, we suggest that PlaF-catalyzed degradation of PLs is a signal which is amplified by proteins of TCS, phosphorylation and proteolytic degradation systems to elicit the global adaptive response in P. aeruginosa.

### Sample Protocol
Five cultures of P. aeruginosa PAO1 (wild-type) and ΔplaF (mutant) were harvested by centrifugation and pellets resuspended in in lysis buffer (0.03 M Tris-HCl, 2 M thiourea, 7 M urea, pH 8.5). Protein lysates were prepared for MS analysis by in-gel digestion essentially as described in PMID 29322779.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometric raw files were processed either within the proteome discoverer framework (version 1.4) using MS Amanda as search engine and subsequently Progenesis IQ for proteomics (version 2.0.5387) based precursor ion quantification or with MaxQuant version 1.6.1.0 for semitryptic and phosphosite specific searches enabling both peptide and protein identification and quantification. 5582 P. aeruginosa PAO1 protein sequences P were obtained from Pseudomonas Genome Database (fasta file provided).

### Publication Abstract
Membrane protein and phospholipid (PL) composition changes in response to environmental cues and during infections. To achieve these, bacteria use adaptation mechanisms involving covalent modification and remodelling of the acyl chain length of PLs. However, little is known about bacterial pathways regulated by PLs. Here, we investigated proteomic changes in the biofilm of P. aeruginosa phospholipase mutant (&#x2206;plaF) with altered membrane PL composition. The results revealed profound alterations in the abundance of many biofilm-related two-component systems (TCSs), including accumulation of PprAB, a key regulator of the transition to biofilm. Furthermore, a unique phosphorylation pattern of transcriptional regulators, transporters and metabolic enzymes, as well as differential production of several proteases, in &#x2206;plaF, indicate that PlaF-mediated virulence adaptation involves complex transcriptional and posttranscriptional response. Moreover, proteomics and biochemical assays revealed the depletion of pyoverdine-mediated iron uptake pathway proteins in &#x2206;plaF, while proteins from alternative iron-uptake systems were accumulated. These suggest that PlaF may function as a switch between different iron-acquisition pathways. The observation that PL-acyl chain modifying and PL synthesis enzymes were overproduced in &#x2206;plaF reveals the interconnection of degradation, synthesis and modification of PLs for proper membrane homeostasis. Although the precise mechanism by which PlaF simultaneously affects multiple pathways remains to be elucidated, we suggest that alteration of PL composition in &#x2206;plaF plays a role for the global adaptive response in P. aeruginosa mediated by TCSs and proteases. Our study revealed the global regulation of virulence and biofilm by PlaF and suggests that targeting this enzyme may have therapeutic potential.

### Keywords
Iron homeostasis, Proteases, Biofilm, Phospholipids, Physiology, Two-component systems, Pathogen

### Affiliations
Proteome Research (AG Stühler) Institute of Molecular Medicine Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf 40225 Düsseldorf Germany
Molecular Proteomics Laboratory

### Submitter
Gereon Poschmann

### Lab Head
Dr Gereon Poschmann
Proteome Research (AG Stühler) Institute of Molecular Medicine Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf 40225 Düsseldorf Germany


