### Accession
PXD019012

### Title
Genome-wide effects of the antimicrobial peptide apidaecin on translation termination

### Description
Proline-rich antimicrobial peptide apidaecin (Api) inhibits bacterial protein synthesis in a distinctive way. In vitro biochemical and structural studies showed that Api binds in the nascent peptide exit tunnel of the ribosome that has completed translation of the gene and has released the newly-synthesized protein. Once in the tunnel, Api traps the release factors on the post-termination ribosome leading to cessation of translation. The mode of Api action in the bacterial cell, however, had remained unknow. By analyzing distribution of ribosomes on mRNAs in Api-treated cells using Ribo-seq approach we uncovered a range of effects that stem from the unique mechanism of Api action. Exposure of bacterial cells to Api results in arrest of translation at stop codons, likely in a post-release state, due to the immediate Api action, as well as in a pre-release state due to the depletion of available release factors. In addition, arrest of translation at the end of the open reading frame (ORF) leads to a pronounced queuing of the translating ribosomes behind the one arrested at the stop codon. One of the major consequences of the Api action is a dramatically increased stop codon bypass by the ribosomes paused in a pre-release state, leading to accumulation of proteins with C-terminal extensions, as confirmed by whole-cell proteomics analysis. Stop codon bypass, that occurs either in 0-frame, by misincorporation of a near-cognate aminoacyl-tRNA at the stop codon, or via frameshifting allows for a fraction of the translating ribosomes to reach the 3’ ends of mRNA transcripts. The pervasive stalling of pre-release ribosomes at the stop codons and at the RNA transcripts ends triggers activation of the cellular ribosome rescue systems which, likely due to Api action as well, remain ineffective. While major Api effects are directed towards the ribosome at the end of the ORFs, cells exposed to Api show a somewhat increased ribosome occupancy of the start codons.  Understanding the unique mode of Api to inhibit translation termination in the cell can help envisioning the development of treatments for genetic diseases and research tools for genome exploration.

### Sample Protocol
E. coli BL21 ∆tolC cells were grown overnight and diluted 1:200 in 20mL MOPS media, then grown to density A600 0.4. The cells were treated with either, nothing, Apidaecin at 0.5x MIC (0.39 µM) or 4x MIC (3.125 µM). The control, the 0.5x Api and 4x Api samples are then lysed and purified. Proteins are digested overnight using trypsin at 1:100 (w/w) ratio. High pH reverse phase fractionation was performed to increase sequence converage for low abundant peptides. Peptides are separated by C18 capillary column using nLC with 5%-85% ACN in water with a Ultimate 3000 HPLC system. Data was acquired by QE-HF spectrometery equipped with nanospray ESI source.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was converted using in-house converter to MSn or MSconvert to mzml. Data was searched by ProluCID and MSFragger. Resutls were filtered by DTASelect2. Data analysis was performed using custom scripts.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Apidaecin, Translation termination, Peptide, E. coli

### Affiliations
University of Illinois at Chicago
University of Illinois at Chicago Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences

### Submitter
Yu Gao

### Lab Head
Dr Yu Gao
University of Illinois at Chicago Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences


