### Accession
PXD020724

### Title
Neurospora crassa eisosome LC-MS

### Description
To identify proteins that localize to MCC/eisosomes in N. crassa, we isolated proteins that co-purified with the core MCC/eisosome protein LSP-1, which was tagged with GFP.  Proteins that co-fractionated with LSP-1::GFP were then identified by mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
A 50µl fraction purified by sucrose density gradient centrifugation and 25µl of the eluate after GST pulldown experiment were prepared as described by Knittelfelder etal [Anal Chem, 90(16) 9868-9878 (2018), doi/10.1021/acs.analchem.8b02004]. Briefly, proteins were reduced in-solution by dithiotreithol (DTT), alkylated by iodaocetomide (IAA), precipitated and washed twice with isopropanol and digested without presolubilization overnight by trypsin. 200fmol of Bovine Serum Albumin (BSA) was spiked into samples as internal standard prior to preparation. The resulting peptide mixtures were dried down and stores at -20°C. Then the samples were reconstituted in 25µl of 5% formic acid containing 5 fmol/μL retention time standard peptides (Pierce, Rockford, IL) and 5µl were taken for LC-MS/MS analysis.  LC-MS/MS analysis was performed by MS Facility at the MPI-CBG Dresden, Germany, on a nano-UPLC Ultimate 3000 interfaced on-line to a Velos LTQ Orbitrap hybrid mass spectrometer (both Thermo Fischer Scientific, Bremen). The UPLC system was equipped with Acclam PepMaptm 100 75 µm x 2cm trapping column and 75µm x 50cm separating column packed with 3 µm C18 particles (Thermo Fischer Scientific, Bremen) which was heated to 50°C. Peptides were separated using 280 and 180min linear gradients 0% to 65% of acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid for sucrose gradient fraction and GST pulldown respectively (solvent A – 0.1% formic acid in water, solvent B – 0.1% formic acid in neat acetonitrile). Spectra were acquired using Top20 data-dependent acquisition method, normalized collision energy was set on 35, precursor m/z range was 350-1600 and dynamic exclusion time was 20s. The lock-mass function was set to recalibrate MS1 scans using the background ion (Si(CH3)2O)6 at m/z 445.12. To avoid cross-contamination, three blank runs of void sample were performed prior each run.

### Data Protocol
Acquired spectra were converted into .mgf format and searched against N.crassa OR74A sequences in FungiDB (www.fungidb.org, Release 38, June 2018) using MASCOT software (version 2.2.04). Mass tolerance was set on 5ppm and 0.5Da for precursor and fragment ions respectively; enzyme specificity – trypsin; number of miscleavages was set on two; variable modification – Cysteine carbamidomethyl and propionamide, Methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetyl. The results of the database search were evaluated by Scaffold software v.4.7.5 (Proteome Software, Portland). Protein hits were accepted if matched with two peptides under 99% and 95% probability thresholds for peptides and proteins respectively. Proteins and spectra False Discovery Rates (FDR, function of the Scaffold software) were calculated below 1%.

### Publication Abstract
MCC/eisosomes are protein-organized domains in the plasma membrane of fungi and algae. However, the composition and function(s) of MCC/eisosomes in the filamentous fungus <i>Neurospora crassa</i> were previously unknown. To identify proteins that localize to MCC/eisosomes in <i>N. crassa</i>, we isolated proteins that co-purified with the core MCC/eisosome protein LSP-1, which was tagged with GFP. Proteins that co-fractionated with LSP-1:GFP were then identified by mass spectrometry. Eighteen proteins were GFP-tagged and used to identify six proteins that highly colocalized with the MCC/eisosome marker LSP-1:RFP, while five other proteins showed partial overlap with MCC/eisosomes. Seven of these proteins showed amino acid sequence homology with proteins known to localize to MCC/eisosomes in the yeast <i>Saccharomyces cerevisiae</i>. However, homologs of three proteins known to localize to MCC/eisosomes in <i>S. cerevisiae</i> (Can1, Pkh1/2, and Fhn1) were not found to colocalize with MCC/eisosome proteins in <i>N. crassa</i> by fluorescence microscopy. Interestingly, one new eisosome protein (glutamine-fructose-6-phosphate aminotransferase, gene ID: NCU07366) was detected in our studies. These findings demonstrate that there are interspecies differences of the protein composition of MCC/eisosomes. To gain further insight, molecular modeling and bioinformatics analysis of the identified proteins were used to propose the organization of MCC/eisosomes in <i>N. crassa</i>. A model will be discussed for how the broad range of functions predicted for the proteins localized to MCC/eisosomes, including cell wall synthesis, response and signaling, transmembrane transport, and actin organization, suggests that MCC/eisosomes act as organizing centers in the plasma membrane.

### Keywords
Ms, Eisosome, Neurospora crassa

### Affiliations
Department of Botanical Genetics and Molecular Biology Botanical Institute and Botanic Gardens, Germamy
Kiel University

### Submitter
Qin Yang

### Lab Head
Dr Frank Kempken
Department of Botanical Genetics and Molecular Biology Botanical Institute and Botanic Gardens, Germamy


