### Accession
PXD020775

### Title
An integrated multi-omics protocol for swine feces reveals congruent longitudinal dynamics in microbiome structure and function.

### Description
Today, swine is regarded as promising biomedical model, however, its gastrointestinal microbiome dynamics have been less investigated than that of humans or murine models . The aim of this study was to establish a high-throughput  multi-omics pipeline to investigate the healthy fecal microbiome of swine and its temporal dynamics as basis for future infection studies. To this end, a homogenization  protocol based on deep-frozen feces followed by integrated sample preparation for different meta-omics analyses was developed. Subsequent data integration linked microbiome composition with function, i.e. expressed proteins and secreted metabolites.

### Sample Protocol
As a starting point the deep-frozen samples were cut with a sterile scalpel to approximately 1 g pieces and placed in the middle of a Covaris® Tissue Tube™ TT1. To keep the fecal samples deep-frozen the tissue tube was then placed into liquid nitrogen for 60 seconds (sec). The Covaris® CP02 CryoPrep™ instrument (Covaris Ltd., Brighton, UK) was set to impact level 5 and the loaded tissue tube was treated two times with liquid nitrogen for 30 sec. The resulting fecal powder was then used as starting point for the three different omics-analyses described below.1 ml TRIzol Reagent (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) was added to 100 mg of the homogenized fecal sample and mixed 3 x 30 sec on a vortexer for resuspension. Afterwards, the manufacturer's protocol based on Chomczynski, P. was performed, which comprises the following steps: incubation for 5 minutes (min), addition of 0.2 ml chloroform, incubation for 3 min followed by centrifugation for 15 min at 12000 g and 4 °C. Subsequently, the aqueous phase was removed, 0.3 ml ethanol was added and the samples were inverted several times, incubated for another 3 min and centrifuged for 5 min at 2000 g and 4 °C. The resulting phenol-ethanol supernatant was transferred in new tubes and 1.5 ml isopropanol was added. The mixture was incubated for 10 min, centrifuged for 10 min at 12000 g and 4 °C to pellet the proteins. The supernatant was discarded. Afterward, the pellets were washed in 0.2 mL of 0.3 M guanidine hydrochloride buffer in 95 % (v/v) ethanol, incubated for 20 min, and centrifuged for 5 min at 7500 g and 4 °C. The supernatant was discarded. Washing steps were repeated 3 times. 2 ml ethanol was added to the protein pellets and mixed by vortexing, followed by incubation for 20 min, and centrifugation for 5 min at 7500 g and 4 °C. The supernatant was discarded and the pellets were air-dried. To solve the pellet 200 µl of 1 % (v/v) SDS buffer was added. To ensure complete resuspension, the pellet was incubated for 3 min at 50 °C, and finally centrifuged for 10 min at 10000 g and 4 °C. The resulting protein extract was transferred to a new tube. Protein concentration was measured by Pierce BCA Protein Assay. 30 µg of the protein extract was separated on a 4 – 20 % Criterion TGX precast Gel (BioRad, Hercules, CA, USA) and stained with Colloidal Coomassie Brilliant Blue G-250 as published by Neuhoff et al. Afterwards, each lane was cut in 10 pieces. Each piece was sliced into smaller blocks for tryptic digestion. To this end, gel blocks were destained using a washing solution containing 200 mM ammonium bicarbonate in 30 % (v/v) acetonitrile, incubated in a thermo shaker for 15 min, at 900 rpm and 37 °C. The washing solution was discarded from the tube and the washing step repeated two times. Following destaining, the gel pieces were shrunk to dryness using a vacuum centrifuge. 100 µl of a 2 µg/µl trypsin stock solution (Promega, Fitchburg, WI, USA) was added to the dried gel-pieces and incubated for 15 min at RT. Excess trypsin solution was removed and samples incubated overnight at 37 °C. Subsequently, the gel blocks were covered with A. bidest and incubated in an ultrasonic bath for 15 min to elute the peptides from the gel blocks. The peptide containing supernatant was transferred to new pre-lubricated reaction tubes and desalted using ZipTip purification (C18, Merck Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA) according to the manufacturer's protocol. Afterwards, the peptide mixture was eluted in glass vials, vacuum centrifuged to dryness, resuspended 10 µl in 0,1 % (v/v) formic acid and stored at -20 °C.The peptide containing solution was applied to an Easy-nLC 1000 with self- packed RP C18 separation column (100 µm i.d x 200 mm length) for reversed-phase chromatography (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Peptides were eluted by a binary gradient of buffers A (0.1 % (v/v)) acetic acid and B (99,9 % (v/v) ACN, 0,1 % (v/v) acetic acid) over a time of 100 min at 300 nl/min, after loading and desalting them on the column. During analysis injection of the peptide mixture was kept constant. Measurements were performed with an LTQ-Orbitrap-Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source coupled on-line to the chromatographic system. Samples were measured in data-dependent manner with repeated cycles of overview scans in the Orbitrap (r 30,000) with the lock-mass option enabled, followed by MS/MS acquisition of the 20 most intensive precursor ions in the linear ion trap. Dynamic exclusion was enabled.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification, a specific swine database was constructed, based on phylogenetic data from 16S rRNA sequencing data (described above). To this end, the taxonomic entries of the identified families were downloaded from Uniprot (version 19.11.18). To remove full-length sequence redundancy, the fasta toolkit (fastatk, Fuchs S., version 3.0.1, https://gitlab.com/s.fuchs/fastatk) was used. The final database contained 29,366,730 non-redundant protein entries. For protein identification raw files were searched against the specific database using the Mascot Daemon version 2.6.0 (Matrix Science Ltd, London, UK) with the following search parameters: enzyme: trypsin; variable modifications, methionine oxidation (+15.99 Da); maximal missed cleavages: 2; peptide charge: 2+, 3+ and 4+; peptide tolerance 10 ppm; MS/MS tolerance 0.5 Da. To validated the data, all .dat files were applied to Scaffold software version 4.8.7 (Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) with the LFDR scoring system and standard protein grouping. Furthermore, X!Tandem was used with a variable modification of methionine (+15.99 Da). Afterwards, a protein threshold of 95 % and 1 peptide per protein were applied to the data. Proteins were considered as identified if they were present in at least two out of three biological replicates. If identical peptides accrue in a protein and the protein could not be discriminated by the MS/MS analysis they were assigned in one group.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Metaproteomics, Microbiome

### Affiliations
University of Greifswald, Institute of Microbiology
University of Greifswald, Institute of Microbiology, Department of Microbial Physiology and Molecular Biology

### Submitter
Daniela Zuehlke

### Lab Head
Dr Katharina Riedel
University of Greifswald, Institute of Microbiology, Department of Microbial Physiology and Molecular Biology


