### Accession
PXD024022

### Title
High mannose N-glycans on red blood cells as phagocytic ligands, mediating both sickle cell anaemia and resistance to malaria

### Description
In both sickle cell disease and malaria, red blood cells (RBCs) are phagocytosed in the spleen, but receptor-ligand pairs mediating uptake have not been identified. Here, we report that patches of high mannose N-glycans, expressed on diseased or oxidized RBC surfaces, bind the mannose receptor (CD206) on phagocytes to mediate clearance. We found that extravascular haemolysis in sickle cell disease correlates with high mannose glycan levels on RBCs. Furthermore, Plasmodium falciparum-infected RBCs expose surface mannose N-glycans, which occur at significantly higher levels on infected RBCs from sickle cell trait subjects compared to those lacking haemoglobin S. This proteomics analysis is to prove the identify of high molecular weight complexes and protease-resistant, lower molecular weight fragments containing spectrin.

### Sample Protocol
SDS-PAGE part: RBC ghost membranes were subjected to SDS-PAGE (10% Bis-Tris gel with MOPS running buffer). SDS-gel bands a were excised, sliced into small pieces, and destained with 200 μl of 1:1 v:v acetonitrile:ammonium bicarbonate (50 mM, pH 8.4; AMBIC). Destained gel pieces were then reduced by treatment with 10 mM DTT in AMBIC at 56 °C for 30 min, carboxymethylated in 55 mM iodoacetic acid in AMBIC in the dark at room temperature, and then subjected to overnight sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega V5111) digestion in AMBIC at 37 °C. After enzyme inactivation (100 °C water bath, 3 min), the digested peptides were extracted twice from the gel pieces by incubating sequentially (15 min with vortexing) with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and 100% acetonitrile. Finally, the volume was reduced with a Speed Vac. MS part: Eluted peptides were analysed by LC–MS using a NanoAcquity UPLCTM system coupled to a SynaptTM G2-S mass spectrometer (Waters) in positive ion mode. 5 μL of sample was injected onto the analytical column (Waters, HSS T3, 75 μm × 150 mm, 1.8 μm). Peptides were eluted according to the following linear gradient program (A: 0.1% v/v formic acid in water, B: 0.1% v/v formic acid in acetonitrile): 0-90 min, 3-50% of B. For the 260 KDa band, MS data were acquired on the Synapt G2-S using a data-dependent acquisition (DDA) program, calibrated using Leu-Enkephalin peptide standard. The top 20 components were selected for MS/MS acquisition. The F40 band was analysed with MSe with 10-40% of B. MSe is a feature of the Waters Q-TOF mass spectrometer acquisition control allowing alternating generation of total fragment ion data from the ion beam, switching between high and low collision energies, without the prior individual mass selection of DDA.

### Data Protocol
Identification of the eluted peptides was performed using ProteinLynx Global SERVERTM v3.03 (Waters) using human porcine trypsin database (Uniprot 1.0). The following were set as workflow parameters on PLGS: fixed carboxymethyl modification for cysteine, variable deamidation and oxidation modifications for glutamine and methionine respectively.

### Publication Abstract
In both sickle cell disease and malaria, red blood cells (RBCs) are phagocytosed in the spleen, but receptor-ligand pairs mediating uptake have not been identified. Here, we report that patches of high mannose N-glycans (Man<sub>5-9</sub>GlcNAc<sub>2</sub>), expressed on diseased or oxidized RBC surfaces, bind the mannose receptor (CD206) on phagocytes to mediate clearance. We find that extravascular hemolysis in sickle cell disease correlates with high mannose glycan levels on RBCs. Furthermore, Plasmodium falciparum-infected RBCs expose surface mannose N-glycans, which occur at significantly higher levels on infected RBCs from sickle cell trait subjects compared to those lacking hemoglobin S. The glycans are associated with high molecular weight complexes and protease-resistant, lower molecular weight fragments containing spectrin. Recognition of surface N-linked high mannose glycans as a response to cellular stress is a molecular mechanism common to both the pathogenesis of sickle cell disease and resistance to severe malaria in sickle cell trait.

### Keywords
Sickle cells, Red blood cells, Malaria

### Affiliations
Imperial College London
South Kensington Campus
Department of Life Sciences
Imperial College London, Department of Life Sciences, UK

### Submitter
Aristotelis Antonopoulos

### Lab Head
Dr Anne Dell
Imperial College London, Department of Life Sciences, UK


