### Accession
PXD010124

### Title
Human BAF complex (HA-DPF2 pulldown and SS18-Flag pulldown)

### Description
Mammalian SWI/SNF (mSWI/SNF) ATP-dependent chromatin remodeling complexes are large, multisubunit molecular machines that play vital roles in regulating genomic architecture and are frequently disrupted in human cancer and developmental disorders.Using affinity purification of endogenous complexes from mammalian and Drosophila cells coupled with cross linking-mass spectrometry, we uncover three distinct and evolutionarily conserved modules, their organization, and the temporal incorporation of these modules into each complete mSWI/SNF complex class.

### Sample Protocol
Purified protein complexes in 25mM HEPES pH 7.6, 150 mM KCl, 1mM EDTA, 1mM MgCl2, 1mM DTT, 1mM PMSF and 10% Glycerol, were crosslinked by addition of BS3 (Thermo Scientific; freshly prepared as 100 mM in pure water) to 2 mM for 2hrs at 25º C. The protein amounts used were HA-DPF2: 70 ug; Flag-SS18: 52ug. The reactions were quenched by addition of 10 uL of 1M ammonium bicarbonate.An equal volume of trifluoroethanol (TFE) was added and the samples were incubated at 60º C for 30 minutes to denature the proteins.  Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP) was added to a final concentration of 5 mM. The samples were alkylated by addition of iodoacetamide (IAA) to 10 mM.  After incubating at 37º C for 2 hrs in the dark, the samples were diluted 10-fold with 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate and digested with trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) at a ratio of 20:1 (protein:trypsin) overnight at 37º C. All peptide samples were desalted by passage over C18 cartridges (The Nest group, Southborough, MA),  and dried by Speed-Vac. The peptides were resuspended in 50 L Buffer A (25 mM ammonium formate, 20% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid, pH 2.8). 1 ug of each sample was reserved for direct MS analysis and the remaining sample was fractionated using an in-house prepared microcapillary strong cation exchange column (200 mm X 20 cm; 5 m, 200 Å partisphere SCX, Whatman or Proteomix SCX 3um, Sepax Technologies). We used a binary HPLC pump with split flow with microcapillary flowrate at 2-3 uL/min.  Peptides were loaded onto the microcapillary column equilibrated in Buffer A and washed with Buffer A. Bound peptides were eluted with 20 μl of Buffer A containing 30%, 50%, 70%, and 100% Buffer B (800 mM ammonium formate, 20% acetonitrile, pH 2.8), followed by 50 μl elutions with Buffer B containing 5%, or 10% Buffer D (0.5 M ammonium acetate, 30% acetonitrile),or just 20 μl of Buffer D. All fractions were dried in a Speed-vac, and resuspended in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), 2% acetonitrile.

### Data Protocol
The RAW files were converted to mzXML files by Rawconverter (He et al., 2015, PMID: 26499134). For crosslinked peptide searches, we used two different crosslink database searching algorithms: pLink (Yang et al, 2012, PMID: 22772728) and an in-house designed Nexus.  After performing the pLink and Nexus analyses, the search results were combined and each spectrum was manually evaluated for the quality of the match to each peptide using the COMET/Lorikeet Spectrum Viewer (TPP). Crosslinked peptides are considered confidently identified if at least 4 consecutive b or y ions for each peptide are observed and the majority of the observed ions are accounted for. Search results that did not meet these criteria were removed. Intralinks involving a crosslink between identical residues were only kept if the spectral evidence strongly supported the identification; that is, the major fragment ions correspond to the intralinked peptide sequence and no/few other fragment ions were observed. The percentage of spectra deleted after manual examination was: for DPF2 (11% for interlinks, 5.1% for intralinks), SS18 (30% for interlinks, 5.6% for intralinks).

### Publication Abstract
Mammalian SWI/SNF (mSWI/SNF) ATP-dependent chromatin remodeling complexes are multi-subunit molecular machines that play vital roles in regulating genomic architecture and are frequently disrupted in human cancer and developmental disorders. To date, the modular organization and pathways of assembly of these chromatin regulators remain unknown, presenting a major barrier to structural and functional determination. Here, we elucidate the architecture and assembly pathway across three classes of mSWI/SNF complexes-canonical BRG1/BRM-associated factor (BAF), polybromo-associated BAF (PBAF), and newly defined ncBAF complexes-and define the requirement of each subunit for complex formation and stability. Using affinity purification of endogenous complexes from mammalian and Drosophila cells coupled with cross-linking mass spectrometry (CX-MS) and mutagenesis, we uncover three distinct and evolutionarily conserved modules, their organization, and the temporal incorporation of these modules into each complete mSWI/SNF complex class. Finally, we map human disease-associated mutations within subunits and modules, defining specific topological regions that are affected upon subunit perturbation.

### Keywords
Bs3 crosslinking, Hswi/snf, Baf complex

### Affiliations
Institute for Systems Biology

### Submitter
Jie Luo

### Lab Head
Dr Jeff Ranish
Institute for Systems Biology


