### Accession
PXD021077

### Title
A proteomics-based assessment of inflammation signatures in endotoxemia

### Description
The circulating proteome offers insight into the stage and severity of the immune response. To characterise the release kinetics and cellular source of plasma protein changes, serial samples were obtained from healthy volunteers (n=10, 3 time-points) injected with low-dose endotoxin (LPS) and analysed using date-independent acquisition (DIA) MS. The systemic and vascular inflammatory responses were compared using LPS-induced endotoxemia models in mice.

### Sample Protocol
Human plasma was depleted using High-SelectTM top14 abundant protein depletion columns (Thermo Fisher), while mouse plasma was depleted of the top7 abundant proteins using Seppro spin columns (Merck), following manufacturer’s instructions. Protein Samples were denatured by the addition of a final concentration of 6 M urea and 2 M thiourea and reduced by the addition of a final concentration of 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) followed by incubation at 37°C for 1 h, 240 rpm. The samples were then cooled down to room temperature before being alkylated by the addition of a final concentration of 50 mM iodoacetamide followed by incubation in the dark for 30 minutes. Pre-chilled (-20°C) acetone (10x volume) was used to precipitate the samples overnight at -20°C. Samples were centrifuged at 14,000 x g for 40 minutes at 4°C and the supernatant subsequently discarded. Protein pellets were dried using a speed vac (Thermo Scientific, Savant SPD131DDA), resuspended in 0.1 M TEAB buffer, pH 8.0, containing 0.02% ProteaseMax surfactant and mass spectrometry grade Trypsin/Lys-C (Promega Cooperation) (1:25 enzyme: protein) and digested overnight at 37 °C, 240 rpm. An aliquot of peptide digest was taken for tandem-mass tag (TMT)-labelling, while the digestion was stopped for label-free DIA analyses by acidification with TFA. Peptides were then purified robotically, using C18 cartridges (Bravo AssayMAP, Agilent Technologies). Plasma and tissue peptide samples were TMT-10plex-labelled according to manufacturer’s instructions. Samples and pool were then grouped in equal amounts, ensuring randomisation, and dried using a speed vac (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Savant SPD131DDA). Grouped TMT samples were then reconstituted with 0.1% TFA in H2O, for peptide fractionation using high pH reversed-phase spin columns, following manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo Fisher). The dried peptide samples for TMT analyses were reconstituted with 0.05% TFA in 2% ACN and separated by a nanoflow LC system (Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano). Samples were injected onto a nano-trap column (Acclaim® PepMap100 C18 Trap, 5 mm x 300 µm, 5 µm, 100 Å), at a flow rate of 25 µL/min for 3 minutes, using 0.1% FA in H2O. The following nano-LC gradient was then run at 0.25 µL/min to separate the peptides: 0–10min, 4–10% B; 10–75min, 10–30% B; 75−80min, 30−40% B; 80–85min, 40–99% B; 85–89.8min, 99% B; 89.8–90min, 99–4% B; 90–120min, 4% B; where A = 0.1% FA in H2O, and B = 80% ACN, 0.1% FA in H2O. The nano column (EASY-Spray PepMap® RSLC C18, 2μm 100 Å, 75 µm x 50 cm), set at 40°C was connected to an EASY-Spray ion source (Thermo Scientific). Spectra were collected from an Orbitrap mass analyser (Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos Tribrid, Thermo Scientific) using full MS mode (resolution of 120,000 at 400 m/z) over the mass-to-charge (m/z) range 375–1500. Data-dependent MS2 scan was performed using Quadrupole isolation in Top Speed mode using CID activation and ion trap detection in each full MS scan with dynamic exclusion enabled. TMT reporter ion quantification was conducted using the Multi-Notch MS3 method; the top5 most abundant MS2 fragment ions with an MS isolation window (m/z) of 0.7 were isolated, following HCD activation and detection using the Orbitrap at a resolution of 60,000, generating an MS3 spectrum. DIA-MS was conducted on a Q-Exactive HF (Thermo Scientific), using the above nanoflow-LC setup. All DIA samples were spiked with iRT peptide standards (Biognosys AB, Schlieren, Switzerland), to enable retention time alignment. A precursor MS1 scan was conducted through the mass range of 400-1000m/z and MS2 spectra were collected in 25m/z, non-overlapping, isolation windows, in a step-wise manner throughout the mass range at a resolution of 30,000 (at 200m/z).

### Data Protocol
DIA data was analysed in Spectronaut v11 (Biognosys AB, Schlieren, Switzerland) with a spectral library generated from DDA analyses searched in Thermo Scientific Proteome Discoverer software (version 2.2.0.388). Precursor and protein q-value cut-off was set to 0.01. Quantification was conducted at an MS2 level.

### Publication Abstract
We have previously shown that multimers of plasma pentraxin-3 (PTX3) were predictive of survival in patients with sepsis. To characterize the release kinetics and cellular source of plasma protein changes in sepsis, serial samples were obtained from healthy volunteers (n&#xa0;= 10; three time points) injected with low-dose endotoxin (lipopolysaccharide [LPS]) and analyzed using data-independent acquisition MS. The human plasma proteome response was compared with an LPS-induced endotoxemia model in mice. Proteomic analysis of human plasma revealed a rapid neutrophil degranulation signature, followed by a rise in acute phase proteins. Changes in circulating PTX3 correlated with increases in neutrophil-derived proteins following LPS injection. Time course analysis of the plasma proteome in mice showed a time-dependent increase in multimeric PTX3, alongside increases in neutrophil-derived myeloperoxidase (MPO) upon LPS treatment. The mechanisms of oxidation-induced multimerization of PTX3 were explored in two genetic mouse models: MPO global knock-out (KO) mice and LysM Cre Nox2 KO mice, in which NADPH oxidase 2 (Nox2) is only deficient in myeloid cells. Nox2 is the enzyme responsible for the oxidative burst in neutrophils. Increases in plasma multimeric PTX3 were not significantly different between wildtype and MPO or LysM Cre Nox2 KO mice. Thus, PTX3 may already be stored and released in a multimeric form. Through in&#xa0;vivo neutrophil depletion and multiplexed vascular proteomics, PTX3 multimer deposition within the aorta was confirmed to be neutrophil dependent. Proteomic analysis of aortas from LPS-injected mice returned PTX3 as the most upregulated protein, where multimeric PTX3 was deposited as early as 2&#xa0;h post-LPS along with other neutrophil-derived proteins. In conclusion, the rise in multimeric PTX3 upon LPS injection correlates with neutrophil-related protein changes in plasma and aortas. MPO and myeloid Nox2 are not required for the multimerization of PTX3; instead, neutrophil extravasation is responsible for the LPS-induced deposition of multimeric PTX3 in the aorta.

### Keywords
Human, Plasma, Mouse, Aorta, Tmt, Dia, Lps, Endotoxemia

### Affiliations
King's College London
King's College London British Heart Foundation Centre, School of Cardiovascular Medicine and Sciences, London, UK

### Submitter
Sean Burnap

### Lab Head
Dr Manuel Mayr
King's College London British Heart Foundation Centre, School of Cardiovascular Medicine and Sciences, London, UK


