### Accession
PXD025432

### Title
Metaproteomics of Human Breast Milk and Formula-fed Neonatal Piglets

### Description
The benefits of breastfeeding infants are well characterized, including those on the immune system. However, determining the mechanism by which human breast milk (HBM) elicits effects on immune response requires investigation in an appropriate animal model. In the current study we used neonatal piglets and compared their gut microbiome using mass spectrometry based metaproteomics

### Sample Protocol
Piglets wererandomly assigned to consume HBM (n = 11) or an isocaloric dairy milk–based formula (MF; n = 11)fpr 21 days. Organs and tissues, including spleen, colon, small intestine, cecum, and prostate, were collected and weighed. In this study cecum content was used.  Soluble protein extraction Briefly, 500 µl of PBS with protease inhibitor cocktail was added to the 100 mg of the frozen cecal content and vortexed vigorously for 5 min followed by sonication for 5 min. The supernatant (soluble proteins) was collected and protein concentration was determined using a BCA assay. The reproducibility of the extraction was evaluated by total de novo peptides identified and matched using online metaproteomics tool Unipept (Mesuere et al., 2015). Bacterial‐to‐host proteins ratio was used as an extraction/sample quality criteria. 20 µg of protein for each sample was resolved on 4%–20% Tris‐Gly gel. The gels lanes were then cut in 24 pieces, in‐gel digested, and analyzed on a Thermo Scientific Orbitrap‐Tribrid‐Fusion instrument using the standard protocol at the UAMS Proteomics Core.

### Data Protocol
or peptide identification and protein inference, a multi‐step database search strategy was used in PEAKS Studio to arrive at the final list of identified proteins. Files that were acquired on the Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer in “.raw” format, were submitted to the de novo sequencing using PEAKS Studio v. 8 (Bioinformatics Solutions, Waterloo, ON, Canada). Preliminary taxonomy analysis De novo peptides identified by PEAKS were filtered using the average local confidence score (ALC%), and the peptides with ALC% above 80 were submitted to the online metaproteomics tool Unipept (Mesuere et al., 2015). In the Unipept/metaproteomics analysis tab the following parameters were set: Equate I and L ‐ checked, Filter duplicate peptides – unchecked, Advanced missed cleavage handling – checked. The taxonomy information was visualized using a tree diagram provided by Unipept.  For protein quantification, Scaffold v. 4 with a quantitation module (Proteome Software) was used. Data and the custom FASTA database were exported from PEAKS into Scaffold as mzIdentML and mascot generic format files. To analyze proteins: the total spectral counts for each protein were converted to NSAF values

### Publication Abstract
The metaproteome profiling of cecal contents collected from neonatal piglets fed pasteurized human milk (HM) or a dairy-based infant formula (MF) from postnatal day (PND) 2 to 21 were assessed. At PND 21, a subset of piglets from each group (<i>n</i> = 11/group) were euthanized, and cecal contents were collected for further metaproteome analysis. Cecal microbiota composition showed predominantly more Firmicutes phyla and <i>Lachnospiraceae</i> family in the lumen of cecum of HM-fed piglets in comparison to the MF-fed group. <i>Ruminococcus</i>&amp;nbsp;<i>gnavus</i> was the most abundant species from the Firmicutes phyla in the cecal contents of the HM-fed piglets at 21 days of age. A greater number of expressed proteins were identified in the cecal contents of the HM-fed piglets relative to the MF-fed piglets. Greater abundances of proteins potentially expressed by <i>Bacteroides</i> spp. such as glycoside enzymes were noted in the cecal lumen of HM-fed piglets relative to the MF. Additionally, lyases associated with <i>Lachnospiraceae</i> family were abundant in the cecum of the HM group relative to the MF group. Overall, our findings indicate that neonatal diet impacts the gut bacterial taxa and microbial proteins prior to weaning. The metaproteomics data were deposited into PRIDE, PXD025432 and 10.6019/PXD025432.

### Keywords
Microbiome-host interactions, Metaproteomics, Gut microbiome

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology

### Submitter
Boris Zybailov

### Lab Head
Dr Boris Zybailov
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences


