### Accession
PXD010455

### Title
Protein and metabolite composition of the Arabidopsis stress granules.

### Description
Stress granules are evolutionary conserved aggregates of proteins and untranslated mRNAs formed in response to stress. Herein, we report protein composition of the Arabidopsis SGs supporting their role in plant response to stress.  Moreover, and to our knowledge for the first time, we provide evidence for not only mRNAs and proteins, but also phospholipids and amino-acids accumulation in the SGs. A quarter of the identified proteins constituted known or predicted SGs components, supporting evolutionary conserved mechanism of SGs assembly and dynamics.  Intriguingly, remaining proteins were enriched in key enzymes and regulators mediating plant response to stress, such as cyclin dependent kinase A (CDKA), pointing to the important role of SGs in moderating plant response to stress by selective storage and temporary inactivation of the proteins. We hypothesize that phospholipid sequestration into SGs may serve partly analogous role providing protection from the phospholipase mediated degradation occurring upon combination of heat and dark stress.

### Sample Protocol
For the SGs isolation: Dynabeads were solubilized in 100 µl of urea buffer (6 M urea, 2 M thiourea in 40 mM ammonium bicarbonate). For the TAP protocol and input samples from the SGs isolation: protein pellets were resuspended in the urea buffer (6 M urea, 2 M thiourea in 40 mM ammonium bicarbonate). Less than 100 µg of total protein was used for protein digestion. Reduction of cysteines by addition of 5 µl of 100 µM DTT for 30 min at RT was followed by alkylation with 5 µl of 300 mM iodoacetamide for 20 min in dark, and enzymatic digestion of proteins using LysC/Trypsin Mix (Promega) according to the latter's technical manual. For the SGs isolation: Peptides were desalted using C18 SepPack columns and dried to approximately 4 µl using a centrifugal evaporator. Samples were stored at -80°C until measurement. For the TAP protocol: peptides were desalted using C18 Empore® extraction discs (3M, Maplewood, MN) STAGE tips 46. Dried peptides were solubilized in loading buffer (2 % ACN, 0.2 % TFA) and an equivalent of 0.8–1.0 µg of peptides was separated using reversed-phase column and analyzed on a Q-Exactive Plus or Q-Exactive HF spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were resuspended in 40 μl of resuspension buffer (3% v/v acetonitrile, 0,1% v/v formic acid). Measurements were executed on a Q Exactive HF coupled to an Easy nLC1000 HPLC (Thermo Scientific). 6 μl of the samples were loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap RSLC reversed-phase column (75 μm inner diameter, 15 cm length, 2 µm bead size (Thermo Scientific) at a flow rate of 0.6 μl min-1. The column was previously equilibrated with buffer A (0,1% formic acid in water). Peptide elution was performed by increasing the buffer B  (100% acetonitrile, 0,1% formic acid) gradient from 0% to 30% [v/v] over 63 min, from 30% to 50% for the next 18 min, from 50% to 80% for the last 10 min at a flow rate of 0.25 μl/min. The column was then washed with 80% [v/v] acetonitrile for 5 min and for the last 4 min column was equilibrated with buffer A. Peptide ions were detected in a full scan from mass-to-charge ratio 150 to 1600 at resolution of 120 000 (AGC target of 3e6. MS/MS scans were performed for the 15 peptides with the highest MS signal (ddMS2 resolution of 30 000, AGC target 2e5, isolation width mass-to-charge ratio 3 m/z, relative collision energy 30). Peptides for which MS/MS spectra had been recorded were excluded from further MS/MS scans for 20 seconds. Dynamic exclusion of 20 s was used and apex trigger (- to 9 s) was enabled.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed using MaxQuant software version 1.6.0.16 for protein identification and quantification (Cox and Mann, 2008, Cox, J. et al. 2011). The annotation of proteins was obtained using Arabidopsis thaliana TAIR10 protein sequences (35,386 entries) by the Andromeda. The common contaminant database was also included in the search. The settings used for a search: 10 ppm peptide mass tolerance; 0.8 Da MS/MS tolerance; maximum of two missed cleavages allowed, threshold for validation of peptides set to 0.01 using a decoy database, carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine was set as variable modification. The “label-free quantification” and “match between runs” options were selected. The minimum peptide length of six amino acids was used. Contaminants and decoy hits were removed from each dataset. Furthermore, at least two unique peptides were required per protein group. Label free quantification (LFQ) intensities were used in all analysis performed in this manuscript.

### Publication Abstract
Stress granules (SGs) are evolutionary conserved aggregates of proteins and untranslated mRNAs formed in response to stress. Despite their importance for stress adaptation, no complete proteome composition has been reported for plant SGs. In this study, we addressed the existing gap. Importantly, we also provide evidence for metabolite sequestration within the SGs. To isolate SGs we used Arabidopsis seedlings expressing green fluorescent protein (GFP) fusion of the SGs marker protein, Rbp47b, and an experimental protocol combining differential centrifugation with affinity purification (AP). SGs isolates were analysed using mass spectrometry-based proteomics and metabolomics. A quarter of the identified proteins constituted known or predicted SG components. Intriguingly, the remaining proteins were enriched in key enzymes and regulators, such as cyclin-dependent kinase A (CDKA), that mediate plant responses to stress. In addition to proteins, nucleotides, amino acids and phospholipids also accumulated in SGs. Taken together, our results indicated the presence of a preexisting SG protein interaction network; an evolutionary conservation of the proteins involved in SG assembly and dynamics; an important role for SGs in moderation of stress responses by selective storage of proteins and metabolites.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Ap-ms, Metabolite, Lc-ms/ms, Stress granules, Protein

### Affiliations
Department Willmitzer | Small-Molecule Signaling Max-Planck-Institut für Molekulare Pflanzenphysiologie Wissenschaftspark Golm Am Mühlenberg 1 14476 Potsdam
Max Planck Institute for Molecular Plant Physiology | Celon Pharma

### Submitter
Michal Gorka

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Aleksandra Skirycz
Department Willmitzer | Small-Molecule Signaling Max-Planck-Institut für Molekulare Pflanzenphysiologie Wissenschaftspark Golm Am Mühlenberg 1 14476 Potsdam


