### Accession
PXD005649

### Title
C. elegans - starvation and UV

### Description
DNA damage comprises a causal factor for aging and aging-associated diseases. Defects in genome maintenance pathways give rise to a variety of human congenital syndromes that are characterized by growth retardation, cancer susceptibility, and accelerated aging. The specific consequences of unrepaired DNA damage in human diseases are particularly apparent in syndromes caused by distinct nucleotide excision repair (NER) defects, however, with yet poorly understood genotype-phenotype correlations and highly complex disease phenotypes. We have established that the equivalent mutations in the simple metazoan Caenorhabditis elegans reflect the distinct outcomes of DNA repair defects and allow investigating the consequences of persistent DNA damage during animal development and aging. Here, we employed proteome, lipidome, and phosphoproteome analysis of NER-deficient animals in response to UV treatment in order to gain comprehensive insights into the full range of physiological adaptations to the presence of unrepaired DNA damage. We derive metabolic changes indicative of a tissue maintenance program and implicate an autophagy-mediated protoestatic response. We assign central roles for the IIS regulator DAF-2 and the EGF-signalling pathway in orchestrating this adaptive response to DNA damage. Our results provide new insights into the DNA damage responses in the organismal context.

### Sample Protocol
Experimental approach. Large population of aged-synchronized xpc-1;csb-1 double mutants adult worms were bleached. Eggs were allowed to hatch overnight in M9 buffer. A fraction of the starved arrested L1 larvae was put onto NGM plates seeded with an overnight culture of OP50 and fed for 3 hours at 20 °C. In the meantime, worms undergoing starvation were kept rolling in M9. Fed L1 larvae were UV-irradiated (310 nm) with indicated doses, using a UV6 bulb (Phillips) in a Waldmann UV236B irradiation device or were mock-treated. (Irradiance was measured using a UVX digital radiometer and a UVX-31 probe from UVP).  Starved and UV-treated worms were kept at 20 °C for 6 hours before they were collected in M9 buffer. Worms were concentrated by centrifugation and washed using an Extraction buffer (50mM HEPES KOH pH 7.5, 300mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1% (v/v) Triton X, 0.1% (w/v) Sodium deoxycholate, 10% (v/v) glycerol and complete protease inhibitor cocktail; Roche Diagnostics). The pellet was immediately flash frozen in liquid nitrogen.  Worms pellets were resuspended in one volume of Extraction buffer (compatible with the Pierce 660nm Protein assay requirements) and homogenised in tubes with zirconia beads (4 cycles, 6000 x 2; 20 sec) using the Precellys24 Homogenizer with the Cryolys Cooling Unit. The supernatant containing the proteins was collected after 15 min of centrifugation at 4 °C. The total protein concentration was measured using the Pierce 660nm Protein assay (Thermo Scientific). In-solution digestion. Pellets were re-suspended in 6M Urea, 2M Thio-Urea in 10 mM Hepes buffer using a Bioruptor instrument. Clarification of lysate was done by centrifugation (14,000 rpm, 10 min). Supernatant was collected and proteins were reduced by Dithiothreitol (10 mM, room temperature, 45 min) and alkylated by Iodacetamide (55 mM, room temperature in the dark, 45 min). Lys-C was added at a 1 to 100 (enzyme to substrate) ratio and pre-digestion was performed for at least 2h at room temperature. Urea concentration was diluted to 2M using 50 mM Ammonium bicarbonate and Trypsin was added at a 1 to 100 ratio. Digestion was performed overnight at room temperature and was stopped by acidification. Peptides were desalted by C18 Water Cartridges and 50 µg peptides were used for proteome analysis while the remaining peptides were subjected for phosphopeptide enrichment. Phosphopeptide enrichment. Eluted peptides were acidified to 6 % TFA and the final Acetonitrile concentration was 60 %. In total 5 extraction steps were performed at a beads to peptide ratio of 3:1. In detail, beads were dissolved in 60 % ACN, 6 % TFA, added to peptide mixture and incubated on a rotating wheel for 20 min at room temperature.  This step was repeated five times and fractions were washed in 60 % ACN, 1 % TFA. Beads were transferred on C8 stage tips, pooling the last two fractions, and washed three times with each 300 µL of 60 % ACN, 1 % TFA. Then, beads were washed using 40 % ACN, 0.5 % CH3COOH. Phosphorylated peptides were eluted by 3 x 30 µL of 40 % ACN, 3.75 % NH4OH, dried in a speed vac and re-suspended in 2.5 % ACN, 5 % formic acid.  Peptide analysis by Liquid Chromatography and Mass Spectrometry. Peptides were eluted from C18 tips with 30 µL of 0.1% formic acid in 60 % acetonitrile (ACN), concentrated in a speed vac to complete dryness and re-suspended in 10 µL buffer A(0.1 % formic acid). The Liquid Chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) equipment consisted out of an EASY nLC 1000 coupled via a nano-spray electroionization source to the quadrupole based QExactive Plus instrument (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated on an in-house packed 50 cm column (1.9 µm C18 beads, Dr. Maisch) using a binary buffer system: A) 0.1% formic acid and B) 0.1 % formic acid in acetonitrile as described previously.  The content of buffer B was raised from 7 % to 23 % within 220 min and followed by an increase to 45 % within 10 min. Then, the column was washed by 85 % B for 5 min and re-equilibrated to 5 % B within. Total gradient time was 240 min. A similar gradient shape was applied for phosphor-proteome analysis but shorten to a total gradient time of 120 min. Eluting peptides were ionized by an applied voltage of approx.. 2.2 kV. MS1 spectra were acquired using a resolution of 70,000 (at 200 m/z), an Automatic Gain Control (AGC) target of 3e6 and a maximum injection time of 20 ms in a scan range of 300-1750 Th. In a data dependent mode, the 10 most intense peaks were selected for isolation and fragmentation in the HCD cell using a normalized collision energy of 25 and an isolation window of 2.0 Th for proteome and 1.8 for phosphor-proteome analysis. Dynamic exclusion was enabled and set to 20 s. The MS/MS scan properties were: 17.500 resolution at 200 m/z, an AGC target of 5e5 (for phosphor proteome anaylsis: 1e6) and a maximum injection time of 50 ms.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant and bioinformatics. All raw files were subjected to MaxQuant 1.5.2.8 analysis using the implemented Andromeda search engine. Acquired MS/MS spectra were compared to the Uniprot reference proteome database of C. elegans. Using the implemented revert-algorithm, we used a FDR cutoff at the peptide-spectrum-match, protein and modif. site level of 1%. For first and main MS/MS searches the peptide mass tolerance was set to 20 and 4.5 ppm, respectively. Phosphorylation (STY), Acetylation at protein N-term, and oxidation of methionine residues were defined as variable modification, while Carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification. The minimal score for modified peptides was 40. Re-Quantify, label-free-quantification and match-between-runs options were enabled using default settings. BLAST searches were performed using desktop version 2.2.31 by comparing C. elegans and human reference proteomes of the Uniport consortium (downloaded Jan. 2015). BLAST results were accompanied by E-values and Bitscores, as well as the alignment length. An e value cutoff of 1E-4 was used. Please note that the e value is highly dependent on the search space and varies between different databases. Gene Ontology annotations for both species were imported based on Uniprot entries using Perseus. Heatmaps were done in statistical software package Rstudio (version 0.99.489, 2009-2015) using the gplots package. Network analysis was performed in Cytoscape using Wormbase as the reference network. The colour gradient of the nodes indicates the grades of up or down-regulation at the proteome level while the three different shapes indicate the phosphorylation status of these proteins. Proteomics light label free quantification data (not SILAC data) from Walther et al. Cell 2016 were imported based on first Uniprot identifier and correlated to our dataset. Ratios were also calculated based on these values meaning that the calculated ratio might differ from the SILAC based ratio presented in the study.

### Publication Abstract
DNA damage causally contributes to aging and age-related diseases. Mutations in nucleotide excision repair (NER) genes cause highly complex congenital syndromes characterized by growth retardation, cancer susceptibility, and accelerated aging in humans. Orthologous mutations in Caenorhabditis elegans lead to growth delay, genome instability, and accelerated functional decline, thus allowing investigation of the consequences of persistent DNA damage during development and aging in&#xa0;a&#xa0;simple metazoan model. Here, we conducted proteome, lipidome, and phosphoproteome analysis of NER-deficient animals in response to UV treatment to gain comprehensive insights into the full range of&#xa0;physiological adaptations to unrepaired DNA damage. We derive metabolic changes indicative of a tissue maintenance program and implicate an autophagy-mediated proteostatic response. We assign central roles for the insulin-, EGF-, and AMPK-like signaling pathways in orchestrating the adaptive response to DNA damage. Our results provide insights into the DNA damage responses in the organismal context.

### Keywords
Uv, Starvation, C. elegans, Phosphorpteomics and proteomics

### Affiliations
Institute for Genetics and Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases (CECAD)
CECAD Institut - University of Cologne Joseph-Stelzmann-Strasse 26 50931 Cologne Germany

### Submitter
Hendrik Nolte

### Lab Head
Dr Marcus Krüger
CECAD Institut - University of Cologne Joseph-Stelzmann-Strasse 26 50931 Cologne Germany


