### Accession
PXD011642

### Title
Competition between microbes during anaerobic oxidation of methane: Bioreactor metaproteomics

### Description
In this study, we investigated Mn3+-cycling microbial populations enriched from Lake Matano, Indonesia using metagenomics and metaproteomics. Lake Matano contains an active Mn cycle that links the oxic-anoxic interface with anoxic deep waters that are enriched in iron and manganese, and depleted in sulfate, phosphate, and oxidized nitrogen (Crowe et al., 2008; Jones et al., 2011). Sediments were incubated with sequential transfers for ~1 year with Mn3+ as the sole electron acceptor and methane as organic carbon until achieving sediment-free conditions. Here we investigate this novel species of Dechloromonas (Betaproteobacteria), “Candidatus Dechloromonas occultata,” which was the dominant population in enrichment cultures with active Mn3+ reduction. “Ca. D. occultata” expressed electron conduits related to those involved in Fe2+ oxidation (Mto-like), as well as a novel cytochrome c-rich gene cluster putatively involved in extracellular electron transfer, and an atypical nitrous oxide reductase.  According to ribosomal counts, Dechloromonas outnumber Geobacter. In terms of functional genes, Dechloromonas expresses a wider variety and number of genes. Dechloromonas therefore seems to have a (selective?) advantage over Geobacter. Previous experiments revealed that Dechloromonas express nitrogen regulators, reductases and scavenging genes, as well as many carbon central metabolic pathways, and aromatic carbon degradation pathways. Dechloromonas is a beta proteobacteria, and these are "experts" in nitrogen metabolism. Geobacter, on the other hand, is well known for carbon degradation. Our previous experiments lead to our hypothesis that Dechloromonas is more active because they are more successful at acquiring nitrogen, a limiting nutrient for Geobacter. This would further suggest that carbon is not the limiting nutrient. We will test 2 hypotheses with the next suite of experiments 1) pyrophosphate supports the community, by allowing carbon fixation , 2)Dechloromonas has a (selective?) advantage over Geobacter. To test this hypothesis, bioreactors will be used to grow biotriplicate cultures of (1)- CH4 vs. pyrophosphate and (2)-CH4 vs. Mn(III) pyrophosphate. Here we have analyzed whole cell pellets using gas phase fractionations on the Q Exactive. Are Dechloromonas capable of out-competing Geobacter when grown in media with methane as the only carbon source bioreactors because they are capable of acquiring more nitrogen?  Source of inoculum. Lake Matano is a metal-rich, ancient ocean analog (Crowe et al. 2011, Jones et al. 2011). Organic carbon in Lake Matano is mostly mineralized via methanogenesis before reaching the iron-rich sediments, limiting organic matter bioavailability for metal-reducers (Kuntz et al. 2015). A 15-cm sediment core from 200 m water depth in Lake Matano, Sulawesi Island, Indonesia (02°26′27.1′′S, 121°15′12.3′′E; in situ sediment temperature ~27°C) was sampled in November 2014 and sub-sampled at 5 cm increments. Sediments were sealed in gas-tight Mylar bags with no headspace (Hansen et al. 2000) and stored at 4°C until incubations began in December 2015.

### Sample Protocol
Samples of bacteria were collected from lake bottom sediments. Cultures were enriched in controlled bioreactors containing CH4-N2-Mn(III) (Sz9), CH4-N2-Mn(III)(Sz10), N2-Mn(III)(Sz11), N2-Mn(III)(Sz12),  no Mn (Sz13), no Mn(Sz14). This resulted in experimental duplicates: 9-10, 11-12, and 13-14. Source of inoculum. Lake Matano is a metal-rich, ancient ocean analog (Crowe et al. 2011, Jones et al. 2011). Organic carbon in Lake Matano is mostly mineralized via methanogenesis before reaching the iron-rich sediments, limiting organic matter bioavailability for metal-reducers (Kuntz et al. 2015). A 15-cm sediment core from 200 m water depth in Lake Matano, Sulawesi Island, Indonesia (02°26′27.1′′S, 121°15′12.3′′E; in situ sediment temperature ~27°C) was sampled in November 2014 and sub-sampled at 5 cm increments. Sediments were sealed in gas-tight Mylar bags with no headspace (Hansen et al. 2000) and stored at 4°C until incubations began in December 2015.    Inoculation of enrichment cultures. Mylar bags containing sediment samples were opened in an anoxic chamber (97% N2 and 3% H2; Coy Laboratory Products, Grass Lake, MI, USA). Sediments from 0-3 cm were transferred to 160 mL serum bottles, diluted 1:2 with minimal media and pre-incubated for 45 days at 30°C in 100% N2 headspace to deplete endogenous organic carbon, electron donors, and electron acceptors. The culture was subsequently transferred to defined media at a 1:5 dilution (1[Symbol] enrichment), and further transferred into fresh medium at 1:10 dilutions (2[Symbol], 3[Symbol] and 4[Symbol] enrichment), incubated at 30°C in the dark for a total of 395 days. By day 210, enrichments appeared to be sediment-free. Defined medium consisted of modified artificial freshwater medium lacking nitrate and sulfate, developed based on the pore water composition of Lake Matano sediments as described in prior work (Bray et al., 2017). Protein digestion and desalting. Samples for metaproteomic sequencing were taken on day 349 after visual confirmation of active Mn3+ reduction in the enrichment bottles (pink to clear color change). Bacteria cultures were pelleted by centrifugation (10,000 x g, 30 min, 4°C). To solubilize oxidized metal precipitants and precipitate proteins, 100 uL of 20% trichloroacetic acid (4°C) was added to each sample and incubated on ice for 1 hour.  Bacterial cells and soluble proteins were pelleted at 10,000 x g (1 hr, 4°C). Cells were then resuspended in 100 uL of 6 M urea in 50 mM NH4HCO3 and lysed using a sonicating probe (3 watts; 15 s, 5 times), alternating in dry ice in ethanol to keep the sample cold.  Sonication, digestion, and desalting proceeded as previously described (Nunn et al. 2015).  Briefly, after sonication and protein quantification using the Bradford assay (ref), tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) was added to reduce samples (1 hr, 37°C), and iodoacetamide was used as the alkylating agent (1hr, in dark, RT). NH4HCO3 and HPLC-grade methanol were added to each sample to dilute the urea to allow the trypsin digestion to proceed. Trypsin was added in a 1:20 ratio and incubated overnight at RT. The digestion was stopped by adding small aliquots of 10% formic acid till a pH of <2 was achieved.  Prior to desalting the peptides, samples were dried down and reconstituted in 5% acetonitrile with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. Desalting was carried out with MicroSpin C18 columns following the manufacturer’s instructions (The Nest Group). LC-MS/MS. The mass spectrometry analysis was performed on a QExactive at the University of Washington Proteomics Resource (Seattle, WA). Samples were separated and introduced into the mass spectrometer (MS) by reverse-phase chromatography using a Manufactured PicoTip fused silica capillary column (30 cm long, 75 μm i.d.) packed with C18 particles (Dr. Maisch ReproSil-Pur; C18-Aq, 120 Å, 3 m) fitted with a 3 cm long, 100 μm i.d. precolumn (Dr. Maisch ReproSil-Pur; C18-Aq, 120 Å, 3um). Peptides were eluted using an acidified (formic acid, 0.1% v/v) water-acetonitrile gradient (5–35% acetonitrile in 90 min) and mass spectrometry was performed on a Thermo Fisher (San Jose, CA) QExactive (QE). The top 20 most intense ions were selected for MS2 acquisition from precursor ion scans of 400–1200 m z−1. Centroid full MS resolution data was collected at 70,000 with AGC target of 1E6 and centroid MS2 data was collected at resolution of 35,000 with AGC target of 5E4. Dynamic exclusion was set to 15 seconds and +2, +3, +4 ions were selected for MS2 using data dependent acquisition mode (DDA).  Quality control (QC) peptide mixtures were analyzed every fifth injection to monitor chromatography and MS sensitivity. Skyline was used to determine that QC standards did not deviate >10% through all analyses

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and data analyses. Peptide identifications from mass spectrometry data were completed using Comet (Eng et al., 2013). The protein database used for correlating spectra with protein identifications was generated from the metagenome by Prokka (ref), and from each individual bin using RAST (ref).  This was then combined with 50 common contaminants and the QC peptides. Comet parameters included: reverse concatenated sequence database search, trypsin enzyme specificity, cysteine modification of 57 Da (resulting from the iodoacetamide) and modifications on methionine of 15.999 Da (oxidation).Concatenated target–decoy databases searches were completed and minimum protein and peptide thresholds were set at P > 0.95 on proteinprophet and P>0.99 on peptideprophet (Nesvizhskii et al. 2003). Protein identifications from the whole-cell lysates were accepted by proteinprophet if the above mentioned thresholds were passed, two or more peptides were identified (peptideprophet), and at least one terminus was tryptic (Keller et al., 2002). Calculated FDR rates were <0.01.   The lake metagenome-derived proteome (included here with 19,726 proteins+ contaminants) is provided.

### Publication Abstract
Soluble ligand-bound Mn(III) can support anaerobic microbial respiration in diverse aquatic environments. Thus far, Mn(III) reduction has only been associated with certain Gammaproteobacteria. Here, we characterized microbial communities enriched from Mn-replete sediments of Lake Matano, Indonesia. Our results provide the first evidence for the biological reduction of soluble Mn(III) outside the Gammaproteobacteria. Metagenome assembly and binning revealed a novel betaproteobacterium, which we designate 'Candidatus Dechloromonas occultata.' This organism dominated the enrichment and expressed a porin-cytochrome c complex typically associated with iron-oxidizing Betaproteobacteria and a novel cytochrome c-rich protein cluster (Occ), including an undecaheme putatively involved in extracellular electron transfer. This occ gene cluster was also detected in diverse aquatic bacteria, including uncultivated Betaproteobacteria from the deep subsurface. These observations provide new insight into the taxonomic and functional diversity of microbially driven Mn(III) reduction in natural environments.

### Keywords
Bioreactor, Dechloromonas, Lake sediment

### Affiliations
University of Washington Department of Genome Sciences
University of Washington

### Submitter
Brook Nunn

### Lab Head
Dr Brook L. Nunn
University of Washington Department of Genome Sciences


