### Accession
PXD007710

### Title
ALS Associated Mutations in Matrin 3 Alter Protein-Protein Interactions and Impede mRNA Nuclear Export

### Description
Mutations in Matrin 3 have recently been linked to ALS, though the mechanism of disease in these patients is still unknown. To define the protein interactome of wild-type and ALS-linked MATR3 mutations, we performed immunoprecipitation followed by mass spectrometry experiments in NSC-34 cells expressing human wild-type or mutant Matrin 3. Gene ontology analysis identified a novel role for Matrin in mRNA transport centered around proteins in the TRanscription and EXport (TREX) complex, known to function in mRNA biogenesis and nuclear export. ALS-linked mutations in Matrin 3 led to its re-distribution within the nucleus, decreased co-localization with endogenous Matrin 3 and increased co-localization with TREX components. Expression of disease-causing Matrin 3 mutations led to nuclear mRNA export defects of both global mRNA and the mRNA of ALS linked proteins TDP-43 and FUS.  Our findings demonstrate the first pathogenic mechanism attributable to MATR3 mutations and further link cellular transport defects to ALS.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitation and Western Blot  Flag immunoprecipitations (IP) were performed using NSC-34 cells stably expressing 3x Flag Matrin 3 wild-type or ALS-associated mutant, endogenous IPs were performed in untransfected NSC-34 cells. Immunoprecipitations were performed on nuclear fractions (400µg of total protein), isolated using a Nuclear Complex Co-IP Kit (Active Motif) with minor modifications, and either Flag M2 affinity gel (Sigma-Aldrich) or antibodies against Ddx39b, Aly or Matrin 3. After eluting proteins, the mixture was separated using gel electrophoresis on NuPage 4-12% Bis-Tris gels (Thermo Fisher) and either transferred to Immobilon FL polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF) membranes (Millipore) or stained with Coomassie blue (BioRad) for mass spectrometry analysis. For IP followed by western blot (IP-WB) membranes were blocked in Odyssey blocking buffer (LiCor) and probed with the indicated primary antibody overnight followed by the appropriate secondary antibody (LiCor). Both WB and Coomassie stained membranes were imaged on an Odyssey CLx imager (LiCor).  Mass Spectrometry  In-gel digestion                  After IP followed by electrophoresis (see above) lanes were excised into individual bands, excluding heavy and light IgG chains observed at 52kDA and 25kDa respectively. Bands were cut into 1-2mm3 cubes and processed using published methods. Briefly, resulting fractions were reduced with 10mM DTT (6˚C for 30 min), alkylated with 55mM iodoacetamide (room temperature for 30 min, in the dark) and digested using 20 ng/mL of Trypsin Gold (Promega) (37°C, overnight). Finally, peptides were extracted, vacuum dried and stored at -20°C until LC-MS analysis.LC-MS analysis  Individual fractions were reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid and analyzed using online liquid chromatography on a Waters nanoAcquity UPLC coupled to a Thermo LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer. Chromatography solvents A and B were 0.1% formic acid in water or acetonitrile, respectively. Peptides were first trapped on a 30 mm × 100 μm diameter fused silica column packed with 3 µm 120 Å ReproSil-Pur C18 AQ resin (Dr Maisch GMBH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) at 7.5 μl/min and 5% solvent B, before separation at 500 nl/min on a 100 mm × 100 μm analytical column (same solid phase as trap column) in a 3–40% solvent B gradient for 17 min, followed by 40-90% in 0.6 min, then 90% B for 2 min and final re-equilibration for 10.5 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode using a spray voltage of 1.8 kV, and a capillary temperature of 200°C. Data were acquired in top-15, data-dependent acquisition mode using a collision voltage of 30 V.

### Data Protocol
Protein Identification:                  The raw mass spectra were deconvoluted using Proteome Discoverer v1.4.1.14 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). The spectra were searched against Mus Musculus (Swissprot, January 2015) supplemented with human Matrin-3 using Mascot v2.4.1 (Matrix Science, London, UK) with the following variable modifications: oxidation (Met) and carbamidomethyl (Cys). Mass tolerances for precursor ions were set at ±10 ppm, for fragment ions at ±0.8 Da. A maximum of 2 missed cleavages was allowed. Data were processed for label-free quantitation using Scaffold v4.5.1 (Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) and X!Tandem (The GPM, v2010.12.01.1) to further improve confidence in protein identification. At least 2 peptides were required for protein identification, with 0.1% peptide FDR and 1% protein FDR. Only exclusive spectral counts were used for prediction of protein-protein interactions.  Bioinformatics and Pathway Analysis:                  Probabilistic scoring of protein-protein interaction (PPI) combined with manual thresholding analysis of interactants to wild-type and mutant forms of Matrin-3 was performed using SAINTexpress. Using SAINTexpress, average probability (AvgP), fold change and a Bayesian False Discovery Rate (BFDR) were computed for each interaction pair. Fold-changes were calculated using average exclusive spectral counts against the empty vector as a background control for non-specific binding. PPIs were filtered by presence in at least 2 out of 3 replicates, fold change ≥2.5 and AvgP ≥0.7. For manual analysis, Matrin-3 interactors were filtered by presence in at least 2 out of 3 replicates and a fold change ≥2.5 based on maximum spectral counts.  Gene Ontology  Gene ontology assessments were performed using ToppGene Suite (ToppFun). Medium confidence lists of proteins were utilized (identified in at least 2 replicates with a fold change of at least 2.5 over controls, and AvgP>0 using the SAINTexpress program) for this analysis. Calculations were made using GO: Biological Processes with a FDR p-value cutoff of 0.01. The top ten results for each group are shown in order along with p-values and the number of proteins identified in each biological process.  To create a visual network of overlapping and unique GO terms across the Matrin-3 mutant samples, ClueGO v2.3.2 was utilized through Cytoscape v3.3.0. The proteins were aligned to GO:Bbiological Processes using the mouse proteome. GO term fusion was implemented merging parent-child terms with shared proteins. All other default ClueGO parameters were used. Proteins shared between identified GO terms were selected for display on the network map.

### Publication Abstract
Mutations in Matrin 3 have recently been linked to ALS, though the mechanism that induces disease in these patients is unknown. To define the protein interactome of wild-type and ALS-linked MATR3 mutations, we performed immunoprecipitation followed by mass spectrometry using NSC-34 cells expressing human wild-type or mutant Matrin 3. Gene ontology analysis identified a novel role for Matrin 3 in mRNA transport centered on proteins in the TRanscription and EXport (TREX) complex, known to function in mRNA biogenesis and nuclear export. ALS-linked mutations in Matrin 3 led to its re-distribution within the nucleus, decreased co-localization with endogenous Matrin 3 and increased co-localization with specific TREX components. Expression of disease-causing Matrin 3 mutations led to nuclear mRNA export defects of both global mRNA and more specifically the mRNA of TDP-43 and FUS. Our findings identify a potential pathogenic mechanism attributable to MATR3 mutations and further link cellular transport defects to ALS.

### Keywords
Trex, Als, Matrin-3, Lc/ms-ms

### Affiliations
2Collaborative Center for Translational Mass Spectrometry, Translational Genomics Research Institute, Phoenix, AZ, USA
TGen

### Submitter
Krystine Mansfield

### Lab Head
Dr Patrick Pirrotte
2Collaborative Center for Translational Mass Spectrometry, Translational Genomics Research Institute, Phoenix, AZ, USA


