### Accession
PXD025957

### Title
Liver proteome upon in vivo N-acetylgalactosamine-conjugated antisense oligonucleotide silencing of ceramide synthase 2

### Description
Mouse liver proteome was investigated upon in vivo mouse treatment with a N-acetylgalactosamine-conjugated antisense oligonucleotide engineered to silence ceramide synthase 2 specifically in hepatocytes in vivo. The data is a part of a study on the involvement of ceramide enzymatic machinery in cardiovasular disorders and its potential as a target for the disease treatment.

### Sample Protocol
Mice were treated with a specifically designed GalNAc-conjugated antisence oligonucleotide targeting CerS2 protein by intravenous injection. For the experiment, 5 mice were treated with the antisence oligonucleotide and 5 mice were treated by saline solution. Liver tissue was excised and frozen in liquid nitrogen. Pieces of liver tissue were put into a tube with a boiling lysis buffer containing 1%SDC as a detergent and immediately cut by a microturrex. The tissue was further homogenized in a Bioruptor UCD-200 (Diadenode). Proteins were reduced and alkylated by 10 min heating with 10mM TCEP and 40 mM CAA. Protein digestion was done by LysC 1/50for 3 h , followed by trypsin 1/100 w/w overnight at 37oC. Peptide samples were cleand up in HLB cartridges and labelled with TMT 10-plex mix (ThermoScientific). The TMT sample mix was fractionated by off-line high PH RP chromatography into 10 fractions. Each fraction was analyzed by LC-MS in 2h gradient separation by nano-LC.

### Data Protocol
The raw data was analyzed in MaxQuant to obtain identifications and quantitative TMT reporter intensities. Statistical analysis of proteomics data was performed with moderated unpaired t-test using the eBayes module in the limma R package (Smyth, 2004). The resulting p-values are corrected for multiple hypothesis testing by calculating q-values to estimate the false discovery rate. A q-value less than 0.05 is considered statistically significant. Differentially expressed proteins were categorized based on Gene Ontology (GO) terms using the DAVID bioinformatics resources (Huang da et al., 2009) (version 6.8) with all detected proteins as background and considering only GO terms with a p-value less than 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Emerging clinical data show that three ceramide molecules, Cer d18:1/16:0, Cer d18:1/24:1, and Cer d18:1/24:0, are biomarkers of a fatal outcome in patients with cardiovascular disease. This finding raises basic questions about their metabolic origin, their contribution to disease pathogenesis, and the utility of targeting the underlying enzymatic machinery for treatment of cardiometabolic disorders. Here, we outline the development of a potent N-acetylgalactosamine-conjugated antisense oligonucleotide engineered to silence ceramide synthase 2 specifically in hepatocytes in&#xa0;vivo. We demonstrate that this compound reduces the ceramide synthase 2 mRNA level and that this translates into efficient lowering of protein expression and activity as well as Cer d18:1/24:1 and Cer d18:1/24:0 levels in liver. Intriguingly, we discover that the hepatocyte-specific antisense oligonucleotide also triggers a parallel modulation of blood plasma ceramides, revealing that the biomarkers predictive of cardiovascular death are governed by ceramide biosynthesis in hepatocytes. Our work showcases a generic therapeutic framework for targeting components of the ceramide enzymatic machinery to disentangle their roles in disease causality and to explore their utility for treatment of cardiometabolic disorders.

### Keywords
Mouse, Liver, Ceramide synthase 2, Proteome, Silencing

### Affiliations
Syddansk University, Odense, Denmark Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry, Moscow, Russia
Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute   of Bioorganic Chemistry, Moscow, RAS

### Submitter
Sergey Kovalchuk

### Lab Head
Dr Sergey Igorevich Kovalchuk
Syddansk University, Odense, Denmark Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry, Moscow, Russia


