### Accession
PXD005581

### Title
Tracking the embryonic stem cell transition from ground state pluripotency

### Description
Mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells are locked into self-renewal by shielding from inductive cues. Release from this ground state in minimal conditions offers a system for delineating developmental progression from naive pluripotency. Here we examined the initial transition process. The ES cell population behaves asynchronously. We therefore exploited a short-half-life Rex1::GFP reporter to isolate cells either side of exit from naive status. Differentiation of Rex1-GFPd2 ES cells was initiated by withdrawing 2i (Kalkan et al., 2016). Undifferentiated 2i-cells and post-2i withdrawal differentiating populations (16h, 25h-Rex1-High, 25h-Rex1-Low) were subjected to proteomic analysis by Mass Spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were resuspended in ice-cold fractionation buffer [0.25 M sucrose, 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.9, 5 mM EDTA, 10 mM DTT, PhosSTOP Phosphatase Inhibitor Tablet (Roche), EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Tablet (Roche)] at 1x107 cells ml-1 , transferred into a pre-chilled cell disruption bomb (Parr, model 4639), incubated at 175 psi for 10 min on ice and adiabatically decompressed via drop wise release from the vessel. Nuclei enriched fractions (S1) were obtained by centrifugation at 600 g for 10 min. The remaining cell material (S2) was incubated with RIPA lysis buffer [10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.9, 30 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA, 0.2% NP-40, 0.2% sodium deoxycholate, 0.2% sodium dodecylsulfate (SDS), EDTA-free protease inhibitor tablet and PhosSTOP Phosphatase inhibitor tablet (Roche)], for 10 min on ice before spinning at 2800 g and 4°C for 10 min to pellet cell debris. The supernatants were transferred to a new tube and proteins precipitated with 4 x volumes of ice-cold 80% acetone at -20°C overnight. S1 samples were thawed on ice and membranes disrupted by addition of 2x RIPA lysis buffer in volumes of 0.5 – 1 ml. Lysed S1 fractions were sonicated and proteins precipitated as described before. Protein pellets of S1 and S2 samples were washed with ice-cold water by vortexing rigorously followed by centrifugation at either 4000 g for S2 or maximum speed of a benchtop centrifuge for S1 for 30 min. The washing step was repeated once more and proteins from both fractions resolubilised in typically 50 μl of 8M Urea containing 500 mM TEAB. Extracted proteomes were mixed at a 1:1 ratio with the Arg6/Lys6 labelled ESC standard. Proteins were reduced with DTT (20 mM final) for 35 min at room temperature followed by alkylation with IAA (40 mM final) for another 35 min at room temperature in the dark. Samples were diluted 1:10 with water (0.8 M Urea, 50 mM TEAB) and trypsin (Worthington) digestion performed at an enzyme/substrate ratio of 1:40. Trypsin was added three times: first for 1 h, then overnight before another 1 h digest the next day, all at 37°C. Samples were checked for 1:1 SILAC pair formation by mass spectrometry and snap frozen on dry ice/ethanol before lypholisation. Freeze-dried peptides were separated by high pH reverse phase chromatography using a UPLC reverse-phase column (Waters, BEH C18, 2.1 x 150 mm, 1.7 mm) on a Waters nanoACQUITY UPLC system. 20mM ammonium-formate (pH10) was used as the hydrophilic mobile phase (solvent A) and 20mM ammonium formate/80% acetonitrile was the organic mobile phase (solvent B). A gradient was developed consisting of 10 min at 100% solvent A, 50 min gradient to 70% solvent B, 7 min at 100% B, 7 min at 100% A. After the initial loading peptides fractions (20) were collected every two minutes at a flow rate of 0.244 ml/min. Eluting peptides were lyphilised and stored at -80°C. Lyophilised peptides were re-suspended in 100 μl of 10% formic acid (FA), vortexed and centrifuged at 13000 rpm for 5 minutes. The supernatant was diluted 10 fold and 2 μl were then taken for mass spectrometric analysis. All LC-MS/MS experiments were performed using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC  nanoUPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc, Waltham, MA, USA) system and a QExactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc, Waltham, MA, USA). Separation of peptides was performed by reverse-phase chromatography at a flow rate of 300 nL min-1 and a Thermo Scientific reverse-phase nano Easy-spray column (Thermo Scientific PepMap C18, 2 μm particle size, 100A pore size, 75 μm i.d. x 50cm length). Peptides were loaded onto a pre-column (Thermo Scientific PepMap 100 C18, 5 μm particle size, 100A pore size, 300 μm i.d. x 5mm length) from the Ultimate 3000 autosampler with 0.1% FA for 3 min at a flow rate of 10 μL/min. After this period, the column valve was switched to allow elution of peptides from the pre-column onto the analytical column. Solvent A was 0.1% FA and solvent B was 80% acetonitrile/0.1% FA. The linear gradient employed was 2-40% B in 30 min (total run time including high organic wash and re-equilibration was 60 minutes). The LC eluant was sprayed into the mass spectrometer by means of an Easy-spray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.). All m/z values of eluting ions were measured in an Orbitrap mass analyzer, set at a resolution of 70000. Data dependent scans (Top 20) were employed to automatically isolate and generate fragment ions by higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) in the quadrupole mass analyser and measurement of the resulting fragment ions was performed in the Orbitrap analyser, set at a resolution of 17500. Peptide ions with charge states of 2+ and above were selected for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were analyzed with MaxQuant version 1.3.0.3. Spectra were searched against Uniprot Mus musculus database (March 2013). A list of common contaminants provided by MaxQuant was added to the database. Oxidation of methionines, n-terminal acetylation and appropriate SILAC labels (Arg6/Lys6) were used as variable modifications. Carbamidomethyl was set as fixed modification. False discovery rate was set to 0.01 on peptide and protein levels.

### Publication Abstract
Mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells are locked into self-renewal by shielding from inductive cues. Release from this ground state in minimal conditions offers a system for delineating developmental progression from na&#xef;ve pluripotency. Here, we examine the initial transition process. The ES cell population behaves asynchronously. We therefore exploited a short-half-life <i>Rex1::GFP</i> reporter to isolate cells either side of exit from na&#xef;ve status. Extinction of ES cell identity in single cells is acute. It occurs only after near-complete elimination of na&#xef;ve pluripotency factors, but precedes appearance of lineage specification markers. Cells newly departed from the ES cell state display features of early post-implantation epiblast and are distinct from primed epiblast. They also exhibit a genome-wide increase in DNA methylation, intermediate between early and late epiblast. These findings are consistent with the proposition that na&#xef;ve cells transition to a distinct formative phase of pluripotency preparatory to lineage priming.

### Keywords
Epiblast, Es cell, Rex1, Pluripotency

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge
University of Cambridge

### Submitter
Kathryn Lilley

### Lab Head
Dr Kathryn Lilley
Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge


