### Accession
PXD014770

### Title
Quantitative analysis of in vivo methionine oxidation of the human proteome

### Description
A novel stable isotope labelling stategy was developed to quantify methionine oxidation in an unstressed human proteome.  Cell extracts were oxidized with 18O labelled hydrogen peroxide following cell lysis in order to convert all unoxidized methionine residues to an oxidized version with a heavy label.  The heavy labelled peptides were used to generate a custom search and quantification of the relative ratios between heavy and light labelled methionine sulfoxide containing peptides.  Where the light labelled peptides were in vivo oxidized

### Sample Protocol
Wildtype human epidermal fibroblasts (MJT) cells were grown to confluency in Dulbecco's Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM) supplemented with 15% Fetal Bovine Serum (FBS) and 1% penicillin-streptomycin (Invitrogen) and harvested by trypsinization.  Cells were lysed in 50mM Triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) (Fischer Scientific) and 5% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) by high energy sonication and clarified of cell debris by centrifugation at 16,000xg for 10 minutes.  Following lysis, protein concentration was quantified by Bicinchoninic Acid (BCA) assay and immediately diluted (1:1) to a final protein concentration of 0.5 mg/mL with either 18O heavy (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories) or 16O light (Fisher) H2O2 to a final H2O2 concentration of 1.25%. The oxidation reaction was allowed to continue for 1 hour at room temperature. Disulfide bonds were reduced by adding 2mM Dithiothreitol (DTT) (Fisher) and protein alkylation was performed with 10 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) (Sigma). Samples were acidified by adding phosphoric acid to a final concentration of 1.2% and subsequently diluted 7-fold with 90% methanol in 100mM TEAB. The samples were added to an S-trap column (Protofi) and the column was washed twice with 90% methanol in 100mM TEAB. Trypsin (Pierce) was added to the S-trap column at a ratio of 1:25 (trypsin:protein) and the digest reaction was allowed to continue overnight at 37 oC. Peptides were eluted in 80 L of 50 mM TEAB followed by 80 L of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) (Pierce) in water and 80 L of 50/50 acetonitrile/water in 0.1% TFA.  Titration experiments were prepared by mixing light (16O) and heavy (18O) labeled proteomes in the specified ratio to a final protein amount of 50 g. To increase proteome coverage, high-pH fractionation was conducted on extracts prior to LC-MS/MS. Extracts were fractionated using homemade C18 spin columns. Eight different elution buffers were made in 100 mM ammonium formate (pH 10) with 5%, 7.5%, 10%, 12.5%, 15%, 17.5%, 20%, and 50% acetonitrile added. All fractions were then lyophilized and re-suspended in 25 l of 0.1% TFA.

### Data Protocol
Fractionated peptides were injected onto a homemade 30 cm C18 column with 1.8 m beads (Sepax), with an Easy nLC-1200 HPLC (Thermo Fisher), connected to a Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher).  Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid in water, while solvent B was 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile.  Ions were introduced to the mass spectrometer using a Nanospray Flex source operating at 2 kV. The gradient began at 3% B and held for 2 minutes, increased to 10% B over 5 minutes, increased to 38% B over 68 minutes, then ramped up to 90% B in 3 minutes and was held for 3 minutes, before returning to starting conditions in 2 minutes and re-equilibrating for 7 minutes, for a total run time of 90 minutes.  The Fusion Lumos was operated in data-dependent mode, with MS1 scans acquired in the Orbitrap, and MS2 scans acquired in the ion trap. The cycle time was set to 1.5 seconds to ensure there were enough scans across the peak. Monoisotopic Precursor Selection (MIPS) was set to Peptide. The full scan was collected over a range of 375-1400 m/z, with a resolution of 120,000 at m/z of 200, an AGC target of 4e5, and a maximum injection time of 50 ms.  Peptides with charge states between 2-5 were selected for fragmentation. Precursor ions were fragmented by collision-induced dissociation (CID) using a collision energy of 30% with an isolation width of 1.1 m/z. The ion trap scan rate was set to Rapid, with a maximum injection time of 35 ms, and an AGC target of 1e4. Dynamic exclusion was set to 20 seconds

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human cell line, Unstressed proteome, Methionine oxidation

### Affiliations
University of Rochester
University of Rochester Biology Department

### Submitter
John Bettinger

### Lab Head
Dr Sina Ghaemmaghami
University of Rochester Biology Department


