### Accession
PXD036535

### Title
Integrated microRNA and secretome analysis of human endometrial organoid reveal the miR-3194-5p/Aquaporin/S100A9 module in regulating trophoblast functions

### Description
Successful placentation requires delicate communication between endometrium and trophoblasts. The invasion and integration of trophoblasts into the endometrium during early pregnancy is crucial to placentation. Dysregulation of these functions is associated with various pregnancy complications such as miscarriage and preeclampsia. The endometrial microenvironment exerts an important influence on trophoblast cell functions. We hypothesized that the hormonal environment regulates the miRNA profile and secretome of the human endometrial gland, which subsequently modulates trophoblast functions during early pregnancy. By establishing the first secretome profiles and miRNA atlas of these endometrial organoids to the hormonal changes followed by trophoblast functional assays, we demonstrated that sex steroid hormones modulate aquaporins (AQP)1/9 and S100A9 secretions through miR-3194 activation in endometrial epithelial cells, which in turn enhanced trophoblast migration and invasion during early pregnancy.

### Sample Protocol
Human endometrial tissues were obtained from endometrial biopsies with written consent. Endometrial organoids were established in matrix gel with a defined culture condition. They were treated with hormones mimicking the environment of the proliferative phase (Estrogen, E2), secretory phase (E2+Progesterone, P4), and early pregnancy (E2+P4+Human Chorionic Gonadotropin, hCG). miRNA-seq were performed on the treated organoid. Organoid secretions were also collected for mass spectrometric analysis. The ProteoMiner kit (Bio-Rad, CA, USA) with the hexapeptide ligand library was applied to reduce the influence of the high-abundance protein according to the manufacturer’s instruction. Dithiothreitol (DTT, 0281-100G, Amresco, USA) with the final concentration of 10mM was added to the samples and allowed further incubation at 56°C for 1h. Iodoacetamide (IG125-10G, IAM, Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA) with a final concentration of 55mM was added to the samples and were placed in the darkroom for 45min. The samples were precipitated by 5 volumes of cold acetone at -20°C for 2h or overnight. The samples were centrifuged at 25,000g for 15min at 4°C and the supernatants were discarded. The samples were air-dried, mixed with protein lysis buffer without SDS, and sonicated in an ice bath. The samples were centrifuged at 25,000g for 15min at 4°C to collect the supernatant. The protein concentration was determined by the Bradford method. Protein samples (100µg) were digested with 1:20 trypsin (Hualishi Scientific, Beijing, China) at 37°C for 2h. The digested peptide solution was desalinated by reversed-phase (strata TM-X 33μM Polymeric Reversed-Phase Phenomenex, Torrance, CA, USA) chromatography.

### Data Protocol
The peptide samples were first solubilized in 50μL isopropanol and centrifuged at low speed after vortex shaking. The peptide samples were dissolved with 0.5M TEAB and labelled with corresponding iTRAQ label reagent for 2 h. Liquid phase separations of samples were conducted by Shimazu lc-20ab liquid phase system (Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan) on 5µm, 4.6x250 mm Gemini C18 column (Phenomenex, Torrance, CA, USA). The elution peak was monitored at an absorbance of 214nm and one component was collected every minute. The components were combined with the chromatographic elution peak chart and were freeze-dried. The drained peptide samples were re-dissolved with mobile phase A (2% Acetonitrile, ACN; 0.1% Formic acid, FA) and the separation was performed by UltiMate 3000 ultra-high performance liquid chromatography, UHPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA). The samples were first entered trap column for enrichment and desalination, and then were connected in series with a self-assembled C18 column (75μm internal diameter, 3μm column > particle size, 25μm column length), which were further separated by effective gradient at a flow rate of 300nL/min. The peptides separated in the liquid phase were ionized by nano-Electron Spray Ionization and then entered the Q-Exactive HF X series mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) for data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode detection. Protein identification and quantification analysis were done in BGI using their pipeline. Briefly, raw LC-MS data were firstly converted into an MGF file. MGF files were used to do protein identification by database searching using a local Mascot server. Databases used included NCBInr, SwissProt, and UniProt. After that, protein quantification was done by published pipeline IQuant [61] including steps like protein identification, tag impurity correction, data normalization, missing value imputation, protein ratio calculation, statistical analysis and results in presentation. Proteins were identified with FDR<0.01.

### Publication Abstract
Successful placentation requires delicate communication between the endometrium and trophoblasts. The invasion and integration of trophoblasts into the endometrium during early pregnancy are crucial to placentation. Dysregulation of these functions is associated with various pregnancy complications, such as miscarriage and preeclampsia. The endometrial microenvironment has an important influence on trophoblast cell functions. The precise effect of the endometrial gland secretome on trophoblast functions remains uncertain. We hypothesized that the hormonal environment regulates the miRNA profile and secretome of the human endometrial gland, which subsequently modulates trophoblast functions during early pregnancy. Human endometrial tissues were obtained from endometrial biopsies with written consent. Endometrial organoids were established in matrix gel under defined culture conditions. They were treated with hormones mimicking the environment of the proliferative phase (Estrogen, E2), secretory phase (E2+Progesterone, P4), and early pregnancy (E2+P4+Human Chorionic Gonadotropin, hCG). miRNA-seq was performed on the treated organoids. Organoid secretions were also collected for mass spectrometric analysis. The viability and invasion/migration of the trophoblasts after treatment with the organoid secretome were determined by cytotoxicity assay and transwell assay, respectively. Endometrial organoids with the ability to respond to sex steroid hormones were successfully developed from human endometrial glands. By establishing the first secretome profiles and miRNA atlas of these endometrial organoids to the hormonal changes followed by trophoblast functional assays, we demonstrated that sex steroid hormones modulate aquaporin (AQP)1/9 and S100A9 secretions through miR-3194 activation in endometrial epithelial cells, which in turn enhanced trophoblast migration and invasion during early pregnancy. By using a human endometrial organoid model, we demonstrated for the first time that the hormonal regulation of the endometrial gland secretome is crucial to regulating the functions of human trophoblasts during early pregnancy. The study provides the basis for understanding the regulation of early placental development in humans.

### Keywords
Secretome; human endometrial organoid; itraq; lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
The University of Hong Kong
the University of Hong Kong

### Submitter
Jianlin Li

### Lab Head
Dr Philip C.N. Chiu
The University of Hong Kong


