### Accession
PXD009590

### Title
Proteogenomics of adenosine-to-inosine RNA editing in fruit fly

### Description
This dataset is a part of a bigger work on RNA editing in D. melanogaster brain. We present Orbitrap spectra searched against a customized database of Drosophila proteome with introduction of variants provided by RNA editing. Three files reflect 3 technical replicates.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen flies D. melanogaster of Canton S line were dissected in PBS and 200 brains were collected for the further lysis. Brain pellet was resuspended in 100 µL lysis solution containing 0.1 % (w/v) Protease MAX Surfactant (Promega, USA), 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and 10% (v/v) acetonitrile. The cell lysate was stirred for 60 min at 550 rpm at room temperature. The mixture was then subjected to sonication by Bandelin Sonopuls HD2070 ultrasonic homogenizer (Bandelin Electronic, Germany) at 30% amplitude using short pulses for 5 min. The supernatant was collected after centrifugation at 15,700 g for 10 min at 20°C. After that, 2 µL of 500 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in 50 mM TEABC were added to the sample to the final IAA concentration of 10 mM. The mixture was incubated in the darkness at room temperature for 30 min. The total resultant protein content was digested with trypsin (Trypsin Gold; Promega, USA). The enzyme was added at the ratio of 1:40 (w/w) to the total protein content and the mixture was incubated overnight at 37°C. Enzymatic digestion was terminated by addition of acetic acid (5% w/v). After the reaction was stopped, the sample was stirred (500 rpm) for 30 min at 45°C followed by centrifugation at 15,700 g for 10 min at 20°C. The supernatant was then added to the filter unit (10 kDa; Millipore, USA) and centrifuged at 13,400 g for 20 min at 20°C in the same centrifuge. After that, 100 µL of 50% formic acid were added to the filter unit and the sample was centrifuged at 13,400 g for 20 min at 20°CSample was dried up using a vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf, Germany) at 45°C. Dried peptides were stored at - 80°C until the LC-MS/MS analysis. Mass spectrometry  Chromatographic separation of peptides was achieved using homemade C18 column, 25 cm (Silica Tip 360µm OD, 75µm ID, New Objective, USA) connected to an UltimateTM 3000 RSLCnano chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). Peptides were eluted at 300 nL/min flow rate for 240 min at a linear gradient from 2% to 26% ACN in 0.1% formic acid. Eluted peptides were ionized with electrospray ionization and analyzed on Orbitrap QExactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). The survey MS spectrum was acquired at the resolution of 60,000 in the range of m/z 200-2000. MS/MS data for 20 most intense precursors were obtained with a higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) for ions with charge z>1 at a resolution of 15,000. Dynamic exclusion of up to 500 precursors for 60 seconds was used to avoid repeated analysis of the same peptides.

### Data Protocol
Data Processing Protocol The RAW files produced by the mass spectrometer were converted to mgf using MS Convert v3.0.8990 from the ProteoWizard package. Then the spectra were searched against three customized data bases containing RNA-editing sites with different tiers of confidence with MSGF+ v2017.01.13The search parameters were the following: mass tolerance: 10 ppm for precursor, 0.01 Da for fragments; 1 missed cleavage allowed, carbamidomethylation (C) as the fixed and oxidation (M) and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications; minimum peptide length of 6 aa and the maximum 30 aa; minimum precursor charge of 2 and the maximum 4. The mass analyzer type was specified according as QExactive.

### Publication Abstract
Adenosine-to-inosine RNA editing is one of the most common types of RNA editing, a posttranscriptional modification made by special enzymes. We present a proteomic study on this phenomenon for Drosophila melanogaster. Three proteome data sets were used in the study: two taken from public repository and the third one obtained here. A customized protein sequence database was generated using results of genome-wide adenosine-to-inosine RNA studies and applied for identifying the edited proteins. The total number of 68 edited peptides belonging to 59 proteins was identified in all data sets. Eight of them being shared between the whole insect, head, and brain proteomes. Seven edited sites belonging to synaptic vesicle and membrane trafficking proteins were selected for validation by orthogonal analysis by Multiple Reaction Monitoring. Five editing events in cpx, Syx1A, Cadps, CG4587, and EndoA were validated in fruit fly brain tissue at the proteome level using isotopically labeled standards. Ratios of unedited-to-edited proteoforms varied from 35:1 ( Syx1A) to 1:2 ( EndoA). Lys-137 to Glu editing of endophilin A may have functional consequences for its interaction to membrane. The work demonstrates the feasibility to identify the RNA editing event at the proteome level using shotgun proteomics and customized edited protein database.

### Keywords
Proteogenomics, Rna editing, Drosophila melanogaster

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Medical Proteomics, Department of Personalized Medicine, Institute of Biomedical Chemistry (lab head)
IBMC

### Submitter
Irina Ilina

### Lab Head
Dr Sergei Moshkovskii
Laboratory of Medical Proteomics, Department of Personalized Medicine, Institute of Biomedical Chemistry (lab head)


