### Accession
PXD040359

### Title
A Chemical Proteomic Strategy Reveals Inhibitors of Lipoate Salvage in Bacteria and Parasites

### Description
The development of safe anti-infectives requires strategies focusing on pathways solely present in pathogens. Following this principle, we here developed inhibitors of lipoic acid (LA) salvage which is crucial for the survival of LA auxotroph bacteria and parasites but non-essential in human cells. An LA based probe was effectively transferred on substrate proteins via lipoate protein ligase (LPL) and hence, their binding sites determined by mass-spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
After growing the desired amount of bacterial strain to stationary phase, cultures were harvested and washed with PBS. After resuspension of the pellet to a final OD600 = 40 in PBS, 1 mL of bacterial suspension was incubated for 2h at 37 °C, 800 rpm with 10 µL probe (5 mM or 10 mM (100× DMSO-stock); 50 µM or 100 µM final concentration) or 10 µL DMSO as control or 10 µL Lipoic acid (LA) or 8-Bromoctanoic acid (BrO) (50 mM DMSO stock, 500 µM final concentration) in case of a competition experiment. For competition experiments, samples that were pre-treated with LA or BrO (final concentration: 500 µM, 10-fold excess) were additionally incubated with 10 µL probe (5 mM DMSO-stock, 50 µM final concentration) for 2h at 37 °C, 800 rpm. All samples were prepared in four replicates. The labeled cultures were harvested by centrifugation and the bacterial pellets were washed with PBS and resuspended in 1 mL 0.4% (w/v) SDS in PBS for lysis by sonification. The lysates were cleared by centrifugation and the protein concentrations of the supernatants were measured using the BCA assay kit to adjust their concentration to 1 mg/mL in 500 µL 0.4% (w/v) SDS-PBS. The concentration adjusted samples were subjected to click-reaction for 1h at rt using 3 µL azide-PEG3-biotin (10 mM in DMSO), 10 µL TCEP (52 mM in ddH2O), 30 µL 1× TBTA ligand (1.67 mM in 80% tBuOH and 20% DMSO) and 10 µL CuSO4 per 500 µL sample. Next, proteins were precipitated with ice-cold acetone at -20 °C for 1h, centrifuged and washed twice with ice-cold methanol. Resuspension between the washing steps was achieved by sonification, and the protein pellets were frozen overnight at -20°C before they were solubilized by sonification in 500 µL 0.4% (w/v) SDS in PBS to perform enrichment on avidin agarose beads. The solubilized protein samples were centrifuged and the supernatants were added quantitatively to 50 µL bead slurry per sample. After incubation with agitation for 1h at rt, the slurry was transferred to columns in order to rinse the beads as follows: 0.4% (w/v) SDS in PBS, 6 M urea, PBS. Using 200 µL denaturation-buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea in 20 mM HEPES, pH 7.5), the beads were resuspended prior to reduction with 2 µL TCEP (500 mM). Subsequent alkylation was performed with 4 µL 2-iodoacetamide (500 mM). The reaction was stopped by adding 4 µL dithiothreitol (500 mM). Next, the samples were digested by Lys-C, diluted with 600 µL TEAB (50 mM) and further digested by trypsin before the reaction was stopped by acidification using 10 µL formic acid (FA). The samples were centrifuged and the supernatant was loaded onto equilibrated (0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid, TFA) SepPak C18 columns. After washing the trapped peptides (3×1 mL 0.1% (v/v) TFA, 1×0.5 µL 0.5% (v/v) FA), they were eluted (3×250 µL elution buffer; 80% (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN), 0.5% (v/v) FA) into 2 mL LoBind Eppendorf tubes, lyophilized and dissolved in 25 µL 1% (v/v) FA by sonification. Next, the samples were filtered through 0.22 µm filter units by centrifugation which were equilibrated with 300 µL 1% (v/v) FA. Finally, the filtrate was transferred into MS-vials and stored at -20 °C until the MS-measurements were performed. MS-measurement of peptide samples was performed on a Q-Exactive Plus instrument equipped with a Nanospray Flex ion source (ES071, Thermo Fisher) coupled to an Ultimate 3000 Nano-HPLC (Thermo Fisher). 1 µL of samples were loaded on an Acclaim C18 PepMap100 trap column (75 µm inner diameter × 2 cm, Acclaim, PN164535) with 0.1% (v/v) TFA and separation of peptides was performed on an Aurora series AUR2-25075C18A column (75 µm inner diameter × 25 cm, Serial No. IO257504282) constantly heated to 40 °C. The gradient was run from 5-32% (v/v) acetonitrile with 0.1% (v/v) FA during a 152 min method (7 min 5%, in 105 min to 22%, in 10 min to 32%, in 10 min to 90%, 10 min wash at 90%, then to 5% in 0.1 min and hold for 9.9 min) at a flow rate of 400 nL min-1. MS data on the Q-Exactive Plus instrument was acquired with the following parameters: survey scans (300-1,500 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 140,000 and the maximum injection time was set to 80 ms (AGC target value 3e6). Data-dependent HCD fragmentation scans of the 12 most intense ions of the survey scans were acquired in a scan range of 200-2,000 m/z at a resolution of 17,500, maximum injection time was set to 100 ms (AGC target value 1e5). The isolation window was set to 1.6 m/z. Unassigned and singly charged ions were excluded for measurement and the dynamic exclusion of peptides was enabled for 60 s. The lock-mass ion 445,12002 from ambient air was used for real-time mass calibration on the Q-Exactive Plus. For binding site identification, please find the protocol in the publication itself.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (version 1.6.5.0) was used to analyze the obtained raw files of the label-free quantification with Andromeda using the following settings: variable modifications: oxidation (methionine), acetylation (N-terminus); fixed modifications: carbamidomethylation (cysteine); proteolytic enzyme: trypsin/P; missed cleavages: 2; 'No fractions', 'LFQ', 'Requantify', 'Match between runs' and 'Second Peptide' were enabled. Other default settings were not changed. Searches were performed against the following FASTA files from UniProtKB: E. coli K12 (taxon identifier: 83333, downloaded: 20 July 2021), L. monocytogenes EGD-e (taxon identifier: 169963, downloaded: 19 October 2021). Perseus (version 1.6.2.3) was used for statistical analysis. The following protocol was used to filter data: (1) log2 transformation of LFQ intensities. (2) Annotation of rows into groups - DMSO (control), probe treatments with respective concentrations and competition samples (LA, BrO). (3) Removal of potential contaminants. (4) Removal of peptides 'only identified by site'. (5) Removal of reverse peptides. (6) Filtration of rows for at least 3 valid values in each group. (7) Imputation of missing values from normal distribution over the total matrix. (8) Addition of annotations derived from data banks. (9) A two-sided two-sample Student's t-test with FDR = 0.05 (95%) was performed to apply cut-off criteria for hits with P values bigger or equal to 0.05 (-log10 (P value) = 1.3) and an enrichment factor of 4 (log2(x) = 2) as indicated in the volcano plots. For binding site identification, please find the protocol in the publication itself.

### Publication Abstract
The development of novel anti-infectives requires unprecedented strategies targeting pathways which are solely present in pathogens but absent in humans. Following this principle, we developed inhibitors of lipoic acid (LA) salvage, a crucial pathway for the survival of LA auxotrophic bacteria and parasites but non-essential in human cells. An LA-based probe was selectively transferred onto substrate proteins via lipoate protein ligase (LPL) in intact cells, and their binding sites were determined by mass spectrometry. Probe labeling served as a proxy of LPL activity, enabling in situ screenings for cell-permeable LPL inhibitors. Profiling a focused compound library revealed two substrate analogs (LAMe and C3) as inhibitors, which were further validated by binding studies and co-crystallography. Importantly, LAMe exhibited low toxicity in human cells and achieved killing of Plasmodium falciparum in erythrocytes with an EC<sub>50</sub> value of 15&#x2005;&#x3bc;M, making it the most effective LPL inhibitor reported to date.

### Keywords
Lipoic acid, Lipoylation, Probe, Cofactor

### Affiliations
Technical University of Munich, Germany; TUM School of Natural Sciences, Department of Bioscience; Center for Functional Protein Assemblies (CPA)

### Submitter
Jan-Niklas Dienemann

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Stephan A. Sieber
Technical University of Munich, Germany; TUM School of Natural Sciences, Department of Bioscience; Center for Functional Protein Assemblies (CPA)


