### Accession
PXD007885

### Title
Analysis of secreted S. aureus proteins after isolation of phagosomes from infected human epithelial cells

### Description
Bacteria such as Staphylococcus aureus are generally engulfed by the host with a membrane when internalized by non-professional phagocytic host cells. These vacuoles then mature to phagosomes which can fuse with lysosomes enabling killing and digestion of the pathogen. Former proteome approaches enriching S. aureus from lysed host cells after infection did not cover secreted virulence factors. However, secreted S. aureus proteins should be trapped within the phagosomes and, hence, these compartments were enriched from human bronchial epithelial S9 cells infected with S. aureus HG001 to also explore the virulence factor repertoire of S. aureus following internalization by host cells. Using shotgun mass spectrometry we monitored 92 phagosomal proteins over time unraveling a heterogeneous composition of phagosomal proteins in regard to maturation stages. Furthermore, we quantified 36 bacterial proteins within the phagosomes during the first 6.5 h post infection by applying targeted single reaction monitoring. Among them were secreted bacterial virulence factors like lipases, hemolysins, and secreted adhesins which are usually hard to detect from infected sample material by proteomics approaches due to low abundance. Thus, we provide insight into the fate and early adaptation of S. aureus HG001 after internalization by epithelial cells by simultaneous analysis of the phagosomal environment and virulence factors of S. aureus.

### Sample Protocol
Internalization and isolation of bacteria containing phagosomes Confluent S9 cells grown in eMEM were infected with exponentially growing S. aureus HG001 pMV158GFP at OD600 0.4 in pMEM diluted in eMEM to a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 25 and buffered with 2.2 g/L NaHCO3 (PAN Biotech, Aidenbach, Germany). After 1 h incubation at 37°C and 5% CO2 in a humid atmosphere, medium was removed and replaced by eMEM containing 10 µg/mL lysostaphin which killed non-internalized bacteria. Each 2.5 h and 6.5 h p.i. medium was removed, and cell layers were washed twice with phosphate buffered saline (PBS). Cells were scraped and resuspended in sucrose buffer consisting of 8.55% sucrose, 20 mM Hepes pH 6.5 in HPLC grade water containing protease inhibitor 1:20 (Complete EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail Tablets, Roche, Berlin, Germany; one tablet dissolved in 50 mL extraction solution according to instructions, aliquots were frozen at −20°C until usage). All steps of the isolation of phagosomes were carried out on ice. All cells of one point in time were pooled and centrifuged at 4°C, 2,000 xg for 10 min. The cell pellet was resuspended in 500 µL 8.55% sucrose buffer and lysed using a 21 gauge syringe needle (10 times up and down). Lysed cells were centrifuged at 4°C, 500 xg for 7 min. Supernatant was transferred into a clean vial, and the remaining pellet was resuspended again in 500 µL 8.55% sucrose buffer. Lysis was repeated as before with a 20 gauge syringe needle. After centrifugation, both supernatants were combined and centrifuged twice (4°C, 500 xg for 7 min). In between, the sample was mixed thoroughly to increase extraction and homogenization. One mL homogenized sample in 8.55% sucrose buffer was loaded very carefully on top of a sucrose gradient consisting of 1 mL 50% sucrose in 20 mM Hepes solution, pH 6.5 at the bottom and 1 mL 12% sucrose in 20 mM Hepes solution, pH 6.5 on top in a 15 mL reaction tube. Using a swing-out rotor samples were centrifuged at 4°C and 800 xg for 45 min and stopped without activated brakes. Subsequently, three phases were visible. They were carefully separated from each other by pipetting into fresh vials. Suspensions were centrifuged at 4°C and 2,000 xg for 15 min. Supernatant was removed and pellets of the 12% sucrose interphase were stored at −80°C until preparation for mass spectrometry as described below. Five independent biological replicates were prepared and analyzed.  Sample preparation for shotgun mass spectrometry (MS) Pellets of the isolated bacteria-containing phagosomes were reconstituted in buffer containing 8 mol/L urea and 2 mol/L thiourea, and were disrupted for protein extraction by five cycles of freezing in liquid nitrogen and thawing at 30°C under vigorous shaking for 10 min and subsequent ultrasonication three times for 3 s and 50% power (SonoPuls, Bandelin electronic, Berlin, Germany). Protein concentrations of supernatants from centrifugation at 16,000 xg for 45 min were quantified using a Bradford assay (Biorad, München, Germany). Four µg of protein for each sample were reduced with 2.5 mmol/L dithiothreitol (DTT) at 60°C for 1 h, alkylated with 10 mmol/L iodoacetamide (IAA) at 37°C for 30 min and subsequently digested with trypsin in a mass ratio of 1:25 for 37°C overnight. Digestion was stopped by adjusting a final concentration of 1% acetic acid, and the peptide solution was purified using ZipTipµC18 columns (Merck Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA). Samples were dried by lyophilization and reconstituted in 20 µL buffer containing 2% acetonitrile (ACN) and 0.1% acetic acid in HLPC-grade water (Baker).  Data acquisition for shotgun MS  Peptide separation was performed on a NanoAcquity BEH130 C18 column (10 cm length, 100 µM inner diameter, and 1.7 µm particle size from Waters Corporation, Manchester, UK) using a nanoAcquity UPLC with a flow rate of 400 nL/min and applying a nonlinear gradient ranging from 1% to 99% buffer B (ACN with 0.1% acetic acid). Afterwards, peptides were ionized using electro spray and analyzed in an LTQ-Orbitrap-Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron, Bremen, Germany) in data dependent mode to switch automatically between Orbitrap-MS and LTQ MS/MS acquisition. Survey full scan MS data were acquired in the Orbitrap with resolution R=30,000 at m/z 400. Up to 20 most intense ions were sequentially isolated for collision induced dissociation (CID) in the linear ion trap. Selected target ions were dynamically excluded for the next 60 s.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis from shotgun MS Acquired raw MS data were processed with Mascot 2.5.1 (Matrix Science Inc., Boston, MA, USA) and the Genedata Refiner MS Software version 9.1 (Genedata, Basel, Switzerland). Applying an iterative search strategy, spectra were first searched against the human database (UniProt, release 2014, 20,211 sequences) via Mascot. Second, remaining spectra that were not assigned to human peptides (Mascot score <20) were researched against the S. aureus database (UniProt limited to S. aureus strain NCTC8325, release 2014, 2,892 sequences). For quantification, Genedata Refiner MS was used employing the Hi3 strategy summing up the three highest ion intensities per peptide and intensities of peptides per protein, meaning quantification by using the three most intense peptides per protein. Data were median normalized using Genedata Analyst 9.1 (Genedata). For the human and staphylococcal dataset the fold changes between the two sampling points were calculated per protein and biological replicate. Afterwards, average values were determined per protein among the replicates. As human cells replicate much slower than bacteria (generation time of human cells about 24 h, generation time of internalized bacteria about 2 h), human proteins were already considered regulated when the proteins intensities varied between 6.5 h and 2.5 h with an absolute fold change of 1.2. For bacterial proteins an absolute fold change of 1.5 was defined as limit for significant regulation over time. Proteins were regarded as regulated between the two points in time when the fold change exceeded the defined limits and when not more than one single replicate showed a different pattern than the other replicates. Furthermore, trends towards the same direction were assigned when fold change values below the defined limits but pointing in the same direction of change were observed in at least four out of five biological replicates.

### Publication Abstract
Staphylococcus aureus, an opportunistic pathogen is able to invade into and persist inside non-professional phagocytic cells. To do so, this bacterium possesses a wide range of secreted virulence factors which enable attachment to the host as well as intracellular survival. Hence, a monitoring of virulence factors specifically produced upon internalization might reveal targets for prevention or therapy of S. aureus infections. However, previous proteome approaches enriching S. aureus from lysed host cells after infection did not cover secreted virulence factors. Therefore, we used density gradient centrifugation and mass spectrometry to identify S. aureus HG001 proteins which were secreted into compartments of infected human bronchial epithelial S9 cells. Because shotgun mass spectrometry revealed only few bacterial proteins amongst 1905&#x202f;host proteins, we used highly sensitive and selective single reaction monitoring mass spectrometry as an alternative approach and quantified 37 bacterial proteins within the S. aureus containing host cell compartment 2.5&#x202f;h and 6.5&#x202f;h post infection. Among them were secreted bacterial virulence factors like lipases, pore forming toxins, and secreted adhesins which are usually hard to detect from infected sample material by proteomics approaches due to their low abundance. S. aureus adapted its proteome to improve its response to oxidative and cell wall stress occurring inside the host, but also, increased the amounts of some adhesins and pore-forming toxins, required for attachment and host cell lysis.

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, Virulence factors, Host-pathogen-interaction, Phagosomes, Single reaction monitoring (srm), Staphylococcus aureus

### Affiliations
Functional Genomics, University Medicine Greifswald, Germany
University Medicine Greifswald

### Submitter
Kristin Surmann

### Lab Head
Dr Frank Schmidt
Functional Genomics, University Medicine Greifswald, Germany


