### Accession
PXD022432

### Title
Nucleolin rescues TDP-43 toxicity in yeast and human cell models

### Description
TDP-43 is a nuclear protein involved in pivotal processes, extensively studied for its implication in neurodegenerative disorders. TDP-43 cytosolic inclusions are a common neuropathologic hallmark in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and related diseases, and it is now established that TDP-43 misfolding and aggregation play a key role in their etiopathology. TDP-43 neurotoxic mechanisms are not yet clariﬁed, but the identification of proteins able to modulate TDP-43-mediated damage may be promising therapeutic targets for TDP-43 proteinopathies. Here we show by the use of refined yeast models that the nucleolar protein nucleolin (NCL) acts as a potent suppressor of TDP-43 toxicity, restoring cell viability. We provide evidence that NCL co-expression is able to alleviate TDP-43-induced damage also in human cells, further supporting its beneficial effects in a more consistent pathophysiological context. Presented data suggest that NCL could promote TDP-43 nuclear retention, reducing the formation of toxic cytosolic TDP-43 aggregates.

### Sample Protocol
For tandem mass tag (TMT)-based quantitative proteomic analysis, protein extracts (50 μg) from three biological replicates of parental CENPK and TDP 1C yeast strains were processed according to the filter-aided sample preparation method, using filters with 10,000 Da as molecular weight cut-off (Sartorius). Briefly, filters were washed four times with 8 M urea and 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) buﬀer (Sigma-Aldrich) and then treated in 100 mM TEAB containing 25 mM dithiothreitol (45 min, 55 °C) to reduce disulphide bonds, and then in the same buffer (100 mM TEAB) containing 55 mM iodoacetamide (45 min in the dark, RT) to block reduced cysteine residues. Finally, filters were washed twice using 100 mM TEAB and, afterwards, protein digestion was performed by adding 100 μL of sequencing grade modified trypsin (20 μg/mL-1 in 100 mM TEAB, pH 8.0) to each filter (18 h, 37 °C). After digestion, filters were subjected to two subsequent centrifugation step (14,000 × g, 10 min) adding 50 μL of 100 mM TEAB for peptide recovery. Peptide mixtures were then labelled using 6-plex TMT reagents (Thermo Scientiﬁc), and subjected to fractionation by strong cation exchange (SCX) fractionation. Prior to sample injection to LC-HRMS/MS, SCX fractions were loaded in C18 macro spin columns to remove salts. The three biological replicates of CENPK samples were labelled with the 126.1 Th, 127.1 Th and 128.1 Th TMT mass tags, respectively, while the three TDP 1C samples were labelled with the 129.1 Th, 130.1 Th and 131.1 Th TMT mass tags, respectively. After labelling, the six samples were mixed in equal total protein amounts and subjected to a desalting step by means of pre-activated and pre-equilibrated C18 BioPure spin columns (The Nest Group). To reduce sample complexity, TMT-labelled peptides were fractionated by strong cation exchange fractionation (SCX) before liquid chromatography (LC) and MS. Briefly, labelled samples were diluted with 4 volumes of 0.1% formic acid and then applied to the SCX macro spin columns (The Nest Group). After two washings, retained peptides were stepwise eluted in 5 fractions containing increasing concentrations of ammonium formate (i.e., 100, 200, 300, 400, 500 mM). Prior to sample injection into the high-performance liquid chromatography-high resolution tandem mass spectrometry (HPLC‐HRMS/MS) workstation, each fraction was desalted by means of the C18 BioPure spin columns. The five labelled fractions of each peptide extract were finally dried using a stream of nitrogen (RT) and suspended in 100 μL of 0.1% formic acid for the subsequent untargeted LC-HRMS/MS analysis. Differentially expressed proteins were then confirmed by targeted proteomics using Parallel Reaction Monitoring (PRM). The targeted MS-based parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) analysis was carried out in WT CENPK, and TDP-43 1C and 2C strains expressing, or not, NCL. To this end, 50 μg of yeast lysates from nine different cultures for WT CENPK and for each of the 4 different TDP-43 clones (for a total 45 samples) were prepared and processed according to the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method as described above. After digestion, peptide mixtures were acidified (pH <3) by adding formic acid and desalted using BioPure C18 spin columns (The Nest Group), following manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, samples were loaded in pre-activated C18 spin columns, that were washed twice with 200 μL of 0.5% formic acid (v/v), and then peptides were eluted using 75% ACN containing 0.1% formic acid (v/v). Peptide extracts were dried under a stream of nitrogen and, immediately before HPLC-HRMS/MS analyses, dissolved in a solution (100 µL) containing 5% (v/v) ACN and 0.1% (v/v) formic acid to obtain a final concentration of 0.5 µg µL-1 of protein digest. Confirmatory analyses were performed using the same HPLC-HRMS/MS apparatus described above operating in the PRM mode. Peptides were separated using the same chromatographic gradient described above. The scheduled PRM method was developed by recording and selecting the most intense charge state of the considered peptides and 4 diagnostic precursor-to-product ion transitions in serial injections of a representative yeast digest sample. The same was done for glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH), which was chosen as housekeeping protein. Two proteotypic peptides were selected for each protein included in the PRM analysis.

### Data Protocol
Relative quantification of yeast proteins was achieved using a hybrid quadrupole-orbitrap Q‐Exactive (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer, coupled to a UHPLC system Ultimate 3000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Each SCX fraction was separated on a reverse-phase analytical column (Aeris peptide C18, 150 mm × 2.1 mm, 2.6 μm, Phenomenex) kept at 30 °C. Raw files derived from HPLC‐HRMS/MS runs were analysed with a MudPIT protocol using the Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) interfaced to a SEQUEST HT search engine (Thermo Fisher Scientific). All MS/MS data were searched against the UniProt S. cerevisiae database (3AUP000002311). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin, and a maximum of one missed cleavage was allowed. The precursor and product ion mass tolerances were set to 10 ppm and 0.2 Da, respectively. Oxidation of methionine was selected as variable modification, while 6‐plex TMT at N‐termini and at lysine residues, and carbamidomethylation of cysteines were set as fixed modification. Relative quantification was performed directly by the Proteome Discoverer software and only unique peptides were considered for quantification purposes. Based on the Percolator algorithm, proteins were considered as correctly identified if at least 2 unique peptides were quantified with an individual q-value <0.05. Proteins were then grouped according to the principle of maximum parsimony. For quantification, the reporter mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm. The software detected the reporter ions (126.1, 127.1, 128.1, 129.1, 130.1, 131.1 Th), and performed the quantification of relative peptide abundance normalizing the intensity of each reporter ion to that of CENPK  1 sample (126.1 Th). Normalized intensity values of proteins derived from Proteome Discoverer were exported in an Excel spreadsheet, and the matrix was arranged for further analysis. The final fold-change of a given protein was calculated as the mean value of the normalized ratios (TDP 1C/CENPK) of the three replicates. Finally, a two-tailed t-test was performed, and only proteins with a ratio >1.33 or <0.77, and a p-value <0.05, were considered over-expressed or under-expressed, respectively. Targeted PRM analysis: to ensure that no instrumental drift occurred during PRM analysis, a pooled sample prepared by mixing together equal amounts of peptide digests was injected and analysed at the beginning and at the end of the analytical sequence. The Skyline software (version 3.5.0.9191) was used to assess the relative abundance of each peptide by calculating the total peak area under the curve (AUC) of the chromatographic peaks deriving from four precursor-to-product ion transitions recorded for target peptides. Each AUC value in the different samples was normalized to the AUC of the corresponding peptide calculated in the pooled sample. Protein abundance was then calculated by averaging the normalized peptide values calculated for the two monitored peptides. Then protein abundance values were further normalized to the GAPDH abundance calculated for each sample to obtain relative protein abundance values to be compared between WT CENPK and the different TDP-43 yeast strains (with or without NCL).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-hrms/ms, Nucleo-cytoplasmic transport, Ftd, Als, Tmt, Nucleolin, Tdp-43 proteinopathies, Neurodegenerative disorders

### Affiliations
Istituto Zooprofilattico Sperimentale delle Venezie
Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Padova, Italy CNR-Neuroscience Institute, Italy Padova Neuroscience center, University of Padova, Italy

### Submitter
Roberto Stella

### Lab Head
Dr Alessandro Bertoli
Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Padova, Italy CNR-Neuroscience Institute, Italy Padova Neuroscience center, University of Padova, Italy


