### Accession
PXD025369

### Title
Comparison of human primordial oocyte follicles to ovarian somatic cells

### Description
Analysis primordial follicle compared to ovarian somatic cells proteome in humans.

### Sample Protocol
Human primordial follicles and ovarian somatic cells were collected from two individuals who underwent ovarian surgery. Samples were dissolved in 6M Guanidine hydrochloride (GuaCl) pH 8.5, diluted to 2M GuaCl and digested with LysC (10 ng/µl) overnight. Samples were further diluted down to 0.5M GuaCl and digested with LysC (10 ng/µl) and Trypsin (5 ng/µl) for 8 hours at 37ºC. Samples were acidified by 5% formic acid and de-salted with home-made C18 columns. Samples were acquired in data-dependent adquisition (DDA) and full MS were detected in the Orbitrap. In each cycle of data-dependent acquisition analysis, the most intense ions were selected for fragmentation. Fragment ion spectra were produced via high-energy collision dissociation (HCD) at normalized collision energy of 28% and they were acquired in the ion trap mass analyzer.

### Data Protocol
Acquired spectra were analyzed using the Proteome Discoverer software suite (v2.3, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the Mascot search engine (v2.6, Matrix Science). Data were searched against SwissProt Human database. False discovery rate (FDR) in peptide identification was set to a maximum of 5%. Peptide quantification were retrieved from the “Precursor ion area detector” node. The obtained values were used to calculate an estimation of protein amount with the top3 area. Samples were normalized to COX4I1.

### Publication Abstract
Oocytes form before birth and remain viable for several decades before fertilization<sup>1</sup>. Although poor oocyte quality accounts for most female fertility problems, little is known about how oocytes maintain cellular fitness, or why their&#xa0;quality eventually declines with age<sup>2</sup>. Reactive oxygen species (ROS) produced as by-products of mitochondrial activity are associated with lower rates of fertilization and embryo survival<sup>3-5</sup>. Yet, how healthy oocytes balance essential mitochondrial activity with the production of ROS is unknown. Here we show that oocytes evade ROS by remodelling the mitochondrial electron transport chain through elimination of complex I. Combining live-cell imaging and proteomics in human and Xenopus oocytes, we find that early oocytes exhibit greatly reduced levels of complex I. This is accompanied by a highly active mitochondrial unfolded protein response, which is indicative of an imbalanced electron transport chain. Biochemical and functional assays confirm that complex I is neither assembled nor active in early oocytes. Thus, we report a physiological cell type without complex I in animals. Our findings also clarify why patients with complex-I-related hereditary mitochondrial diseases do not experience subfertility. Complex I suppression represents an evolutionarily conserved strategy that allows longevity while maintaining biological activity in long-lived oocytes.

### Keywords
Human, Mitochondria, Oocyte

### Affiliations
Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), The Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology, Barcelona, Spain. Universitat Pompeu Fabra (UPF), Barcelona, Spain.
Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), The Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology, Barcelona, Spain.

### Submitter
Aida Rodriguez-Nuevo

### Lab Head
Dr Elvan Boke
Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), The Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology, Barcelona, Spain. Universitat Pompeu Fabra (UPF), Barcelona, Spain.


