### Accession
PXD006486

### Title
Identification of differentially expressed splice variants by the proteogenomic pipeline SPLICIFY

### Description
Proteogenomics, i.e. comprehensive integration of genomics and proteomics data, is a powerful approach identifying novel protein biomarkers. This is especially the case for proteins that differ structurally between disease and control conditions. As tumor development is associated with aberrant splicing, we focus on this rich source of cancer specific biomarkers. To this end, we developed a proteogenomic pipeline, SPLICIFY, which is able to detect differentially expressed protein isoforms. SPLICIFY is based on integrating RNA massive parallel sequencing data and tandem mass spectrometry proteomics data to identify protein isoforms resulting from differential splicing between two conditions. Proof of concept was obtained by applying SPLICIFY to RNA sequencing and mass spectrometry data obtained from colorectal cancer cell line SW480, before and after siRNA-mediated down-modulation of the splicing factors SF3B1 and SRSF1. These analyses revealed 2172 and 149 differentially expressed isoforms, respectively, with peptide confirmation upon knock-down of SF3B1 and SRSF1 compared to their controls. Splice variants identified included RAC1, OSBPL3, MKI67 and SYK.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture SW480 cells cultured in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (DMEM; Invitrogen, Bleiswijk, The Netherlands) containing 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS; Perbio Science, Etten-Leur, The Netherlands) were maintained in a humidified 5% CO2 atmosphere at 37 °C. 24 hours after seeding, cells were transfected in duplo with small interfering RNA (siRNA) pools against SF3B1 (siGENOME SF3B1 SMARTpool, M-020061-02; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA) and SRSF1 (siGENOME SRSF1 SMARTpool, M-018672-01), according to manufacturer’s recommendations.  Cell lysis and digestion Proteins were isolated at the same time points as RNA extraction. After thorough washing with PBS, cells were lysed in reducing sample buffer (NuPAGE LDS sample buffer, NP0008, ThermoScientific; 65% Milli-Q, 25% 4*LDS, 10% 1M DTT) to obtain an approximate protein concentration of 1 μg/μl. Cells were scraped and transferred to eppendorf tubes. After heating for 5-10 minutes at 99°C and centrifugation for 1 minute at 14000 rpm aliquots of the samples were stored at -80°C until further use. Approximately 35 µg protein from the supernatant was loaded on a NuPAGE Novex 4-12% Bis-Tris Protein Gel, 1.5mm, 10-well (NP0335BOX; Thermo Fisher Scientific). Proteins were resolved at 150V for 1 hour in 200 ml NuPAGE MES SDS Running buffer (NP0002; Thermo Fisher Scientific) supplemented with 0.5 ml NuPAGE antioxidant (NP0005; Thermo Fisher Scientific). The gel was placed in a container with fixing solution (50% ethanol, 46.5% Milli-Q and 3.5% phosphoric acid) for 15 minutes and stained with colloïdal Coomassie (48.4% Milli-Q, 34% methanol, 15% ammonium sulfate, 2.5% phosphoric acid, 0.1% Coomassie Brilliant Blue G-250 (20279; Thermo Fisher Scientific)) overnight and destained with multiple changes of Milli-Q water. Each gel lane was sliced in 10 slices. The in-gel digestion procedure was done as described previously (Piersma, S. R et.al. (2013) Proteome science 11, 17) with the following changes: gel pieces were dried in a centrifugal evaporator (SpeedVac) for approximately 30 minutes and peptides were extracted with 100 μl 1% formic acid and two times 150 μl 5% formic acid/50% acetonitrile. Concentrated extracts were transferred to Millipore filters (Millex-HV Syringe driven filter unit, 0.45 μm, SLHVR04NL, Millipore), placed on autosampler vials and centrifuged for 5 minutes LC-MS/MS Peptides were separated by an Ultimate 3000 nanoLC-MS/MS system (Dionex LC-Packings, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) equipped with a 40 cm × 75 μm ID fused silica column custom packed with 1.9 μm 120 Å ReproSil Pur C18 aqua (Dr Maisch GMBH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). After injection, peptides were trapped at 10 μl/min on a 10 mm × 100 μm ID trap column packed with 5 μm 120 Å ReproSil Pur C18 aqua at 2% buffer B (buffer A: 0.5% acetic acid in MQ; buffer B: 80% ACN + 0.5% acetic acid in MQ) and separated at 300 nl/min in a 10–40% buffer B gradient in 60 min (90 min inject-to-inject). The nanoLC column was maintained at 50°C using a column heater (Phoenix S&T, Chester, PA). Eluting peptides were ionized at a potential of +2 kVa into a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany). Intact masses were measured at resolution 70.000 (at m/z 200) in the orbitrap using an AGC target value of 3E6 charges. The top 10 peptide signals (charge-states 2+ and higher) were submitted to MS/MS in the HCD (higher-energy collision) cell (1.6 m/z isolation width, 25% normalized collision energy). MS/MS spectra were acquired at resolution 17.500 (at m/z 200) in the orbitrap using an AGC target value of 1E6 charges and an underfill ratio of 0.5%. Dynamic exclusion was applied with a repeat count of 1 and an exclusion time of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification Nucleotide acid sequences of splicing regions (upstream and downstream exons with and without spliced fragment) were obtained and translated in forward frame to amino acid sequences. In this way a database was obtained with protein sequences of potential splice variants that were added to the human reference proteome database (Uniprot, release January 2014, no fragments, canonical & isoform, 42104 entries) forming an enriched human protein database. Peptide identification was performed by MaxQuant 1.5.3.8 (37) with the use of the enriched human protein database. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Cysteine carboxamidomethylation was treated as fixed modification and methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. Peptide precursor ions were searched with a maximum mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and fragment ions with a maximum mass deviation of 20 ppm. Peptide and protein identifications were filtered at an FDR of 1% using the decoy database strategy. Evidence and peptides files were taken along for further analysis. Peptides specific for splice variants were extracted. Additionally, human database of canonical proteins (Swissprot, canonical, 20197 entries) was used to detect which of the splice variants represented non-canonical isoforms. Peptide intensities were normalized to the average of the samples’ medians and log 10 transformed. Imputation was performed on the normalized and transformed matrix, where missing values were imputed from the normal distribution of mean equal to minimal intensity observed and standard deviation equal to mean of standard deviations calculated for each peptide. Differential peptide expression analysis was performed with a Bioconductor package limma and log2 fold changes and p-values were obtained. SPLICIFY is available at (https://github.com/NKI-TGO/SPLICIFY).

### Publication Abstract
Proteogenomics, <i>i.e.</i> comprehensive integration of genomics and proteomics data, is a powerful approach identifying novel protein biomarkers. This is especially the case for proteins that differ structurally between disease and control conditions. As tumor development is associated with aberrant splicing, we focus on this rich source of cancer specific biomarkers. To this end, we developed a proteogenomic pipeline, Splicify, which can detect differentially expressed protein isoforms. Splicify is based on integrating RNA massive parallel sequencing data and tandem mass spectrometry proteomics data to identify protein isoforms resulting from differential splicing between two conditions. Proof of concept was obtained by applying Splicify to RNA sequencing and mass spectrometry data obtained from colorectal cancer cell line SW480, before and after siRNA-mediated downmodulation of the splicing factors SF3B1 and SRSF1. These analyses revealed 2172 and 149 differentially expressed isoforms, respectively, with peptide confirmation upon knock-down of SF3B1 and SRSF1 compared with their controls. Splice variants identified included RAC1, OSBPL3, MKI67, and SYK. One additional sample was analyzed by PacBio Iso-Seq full-length transcript sequencing after SF3B1 downmodulation. This analysis verified the alternative splicing identified by Splicify and in addition identified novel splicing events that were not represented in the human reference genome annotation. Therefore, Splicify offers a validated proteogenomic data analysis pipeline for identification of disease specific protein biomarkers resulting from mRNA alternative splicing. Splicify is publicly available on GitHub (https://github.com/NKI-TGO/SPLICIFY) and suitable to address basic research questions using pre-clinical model systems as well as translational research questions using patient-derived samples, <i>e.g.</i> allowing to identify clinically relevant biomarkers.

### Keywords
Human, Proteogenomics, Splicing, Crc, Colorectal cancer, Label-free

### Affiliations
OncoProteomics Laboratory, Dept of Medical Oncology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
OncoProteomics Laboratory, dept of Medical Oncology, VUmc Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Sander Piersma

### Lab Head
Dr Connie Ramona Jimenez
OncoProteomics Laboratory, Dept of Medical Oncology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands


