### Accession
PXD009152

### Title
Phosphotyrosine profiling of human cerebrospinal fluid

### Description
Cerebrospinal Fluid (CSF) surrounds the brain and provides it protection inside the skull. It is also used clinically for diagnosis of neurological disorders as well as to monitor disease progression. Neurodegeneration in the brain is known to be associated with altered phosphorylation of proteins expressed in the brain.  Most studies have focused on serine/threonine phosphorylation although identification of abnormally tyrosine phosphorylated proteins in CSF can similarly reveal additional biomarkers for neurodegenerative diseases. To achieve this goal, we carried out phosphotyrosine profiling of CSF using phosphotyrosine antibody-based enrichment and high resolution mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
CSF samples were concentrated 10 times using 3 kDa cutoff spin columns (Microcon Ultracel YM-3, Millipore), reduced and alkylated. CSF samples were subjected to digestion with TPCK treated trypsin (Worthington Biochemical Corp, Lakewood, NJ) for 12-16 h at room temperature. Protein digests were acidified by 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), desalted using C18 Sep-Pak cartridge (Waters, Cat#WAT051910) and lyophilized. The lyophilized peptide mixtures were dissolved in immunoaffinity purification (IAP) buffer containing 50 mM MOPS pH 7.2, 10 mM sodium phosphate and 50 mM NaCl. The peptide mixtures were then incubated with P-Tyr-1000 beads for 30 min with gentle rotation. To remove non-specifically bound peptides, the beads were washed thrice with ice cold IAP buffer. Elution of enriched peptides from beads was carried out at room temperature using 0.15 % TFA. This step was repeated twice and followed by cleanup of the samples using C18 Stage tips.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS database searches were carried out using SEQUEST search algorithm against RefSeq human protein database (release 73) using Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The workflow included spectrum selector, SEQUEST search nodes, peptide validator and phosphoRS nodes. Oxidation of methionine, phosphorylation at serine, threonine and tyrosine (+79.966 Da) were set as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification. MS and MS/MS mass tolerances were set to 10 ppm and 0.05 Da, respectively. Trypsin was specified as the protease and a maximum of one missed cleavage was allowed. Target-decoy database searches were used for calculation of false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide identification which was set at 1%. Phosphopeptides with >75% localization probability were considered for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Brain, Csf, Phosphotyrosine, Cerebrospinal fluid

### Affiliations
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905
733 N. Broadway Miller Research Building room 527 Johns Hopkins University Baltimore, MD 21205

### Submitter
Akhilesh Pandey

### Lab Head
Dr Akhilesh Pandey
733 N. Broadway Miller Research Building room 527 Johns Hopkins University Baltimore, MD 21205


