### Accession
PXD007527

### Title
Mining the secretome of C2C12 muscle cells

### Description
Secretome analysis faces several challenges, including detection of low abundant proteins and the discrimination of bona fide secreted proteins from false-positive identifications stemming from cell leakage or serum. Here, we developed a two-step secretomics approach and applied it for the analysis of secreted proteins of C2C12 skeletal muscle cells as the skeletal muscle has been identified as an important endocrine organ secreting myokines as active signaling molecules. First, we compared culture supernatants and corresponding cell lysates by high-resolution MS-based proteomics and label-free quantification. We found 672 protein groups as candidate secreted proteins, as they showed a higher abundance in the secretome. By Brefeldin A mediated blocking of classical secretory processes, we estimate a sensitivity of > 80% for the detection of classical secreted proteins by our experimental approach. In the second step, peptide level information was integrated with UniProt based protein information by the bioinformatics tool “lysate and secretome peptide feature plotter” (LSPFP) to detect proteolytic protein processing events which might occur during secretion e.g. As a proof on concept, we identified truncations of the cytoplasmic part of the protein Plexin-B2. Our workflow provides an efficient combination of experimental workflow and data analysis to identify putative secreted and proteolytic processed proteins.

### Sample Protocol
For mass spectrometric analysis both cells and culture supernatant were prepared: 10 ml conditioned medium was centrifuged at 4 °C, 5 min at 1000 g and the supernatant sterile-filtered to remove cell debris and death cells. The proteins in the conditioned medium were precipitated for 1 h at 0 °C by 50% (w/v) trichloroacetic acid and 0.1% sodium [dodecanoyl(methyl)amino]acetate in water, sedimented by centrifugation and washed with ice-cold acetone. After repeated centrifugation, the protein pellet was shortly air-dried at room temperature, and resolved in 50 µL lysis buffer (30 mM tris(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane, 2 M thiourea, 7 M urea and 4% (w/v) 3-[(3-cholamidopropyl)dimethylammonio]-1-propanesulfonate, pH 8.5).  Cellular proteomes were prepared form cells differentiated into myotubes. After harvesting cells by scraping them in phosphate buffered saline and its removal by centrifugation, lysis buffer in combination with a beadmill was used to extract proteins. Briefly, homogenates were sonicated and supernatants were collected after centrifugation. 5 µg protein per sample was loaded onto a 4-12% Bis-Tris sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS)-polyacrylamide gel and run for about 10 minutes for one shot analysis and about an hour for the analysis of 15 different gel slices per lane. After silver staining, protein bands were cut out and processed further. Briefly, bands were destained and washed, proteins reduced by 10 mM dithiothreitol and alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide. Subsequently, proteins were digested for 16 h at 37 °C with 0.1 µg trypsin (Serva, Heidelberg, Germany) in 100 mM ammonium hydrogen carbonate in water. Tryptic peptides were extracted twice with 1:1 (v/v) solution of acetonitrile and 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid, and after acetonitrile removal resuspended in 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid.

### Data Protocol
Peptides and proteins were identified and quantified using the MaxQuant environment (version 1.5.5.1, MPI for Biochemistry, Planegg, Germany) if not otherwise stated with standard parameters. As samples from mouse were analyzed, searches were conducted using the mouse proteome dataset (UP000000589, downloaded 2nd November 2016, 49838 entries) from the UniProt Knowledgebase using tryptic specificity (cleavage behind R and K) with a maximum of two missed cleavages sites. In one analysis, also a search with semispecific cleavage specificity was performed. Carbamidomethylation at cysteines was considered as fixed, and methionine oxidation and acetylation at protein N-termini were set as variable modification. A first search was performed with 20 ppm precursor mass tolerance and after mass recalibration the main search was conducted with a precursor mass tolerance of 4.5 ppm. For fragment spectra the mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm. Peptides and proteins were accepted with a false discovery rate set to 1%

### Publication Abstract
Secretome analysis faces several challenges including detection of low abundant proteins and the discrimination of bona fide secreted proteins from false-positive identifications stemming from cell leakage or serum. Here, we developed a two-step secretomics approach and applied it to the analysis of secreted proteins of C2C12 skeletal muscle cells since the skeletal muscle has been identified as an important endocrine organ secreting myokines as signaling molecules. First, we compared culture supernatants with corresponding cell lysates by mass spectrometry-based proteomics and label-free quantification. We identified 672 protein groups as candidate secreted proteins due to their higher abundance in the secretome. On the basis of Brefeldin A mediated blocking of classical secretory processes, we estimated a sensitivity of &gt;80% for the detection of classical secreted proteins for our experimental approach. In the second step, the peptide level information was integrated with UniProt based protein information employing the newly developed bioinformatics tool "Lysate and Secretome Peptide Feature Plotter" (LSPFP) to detect proteolytic protein processing events that might occur during secretion. Concerning the proof of concept, we identified truncations of the cytoplasmic part of the protein Plexin-B2. Our workflow provides an efficient combination of experimental workflow and data analysis to identify putative secreted and proteolytic processed proteins.

### Keywords
Esi-lc-ms/ms, Lspfp, Secretome, Skeletal muscle cells, Proteolytic processing, Plexin-b2

### Affiliations
Molecular Proteomics Laboratory (MPL) Biologisch-Medizinisches Forschungszentrum (BMFZ) Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf Universitätsstraße 1 40225 Düsseldorf Germany
Molecular Proteomics Laboratory

### Submitter
Gereon Poschmann

### Lab Head
Dr Gereon Poschmann
Molecular Proteomics Laboratory (MPL) Biologisch-Medizinisches Forschungszentrum (BMFZ) Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf Universitätsstraße 1 40225 Düsseldorf Germany


