### Accession
PXD024952

### Title
The distinctive flagellar proteome of Euglena gracilis

### Description
The eukaryotic flagellum is a prominent organelle with conserved structure and diverse functions. Here we present a proteomic study of the flagella and pellicle of Euglena gracilis, a photosynthetic and highly adaptable protist, which employs its flagella for both locomotion and environmental sensing. The biochemically distinct flagella of this euglenozoan yields 1,684 protein groups, which challenges previous estimates on the protein composition of motile flagella across the eukaryotes.

### Sample Protocol
Cultures of Euglena gracilis strain Z1 were grown at room temperature, under constant illumination from a 60 W incandescent filament bulb (PMID: 30732613). Cells were cultivated in Hutner’s medium and cell density was measured using a haemocytometer. Harvesting of cells was carried out at a density of approximately 5 x 106 cells ml-1 from 500 ml cultures (2.5 x 109 cells) by centrifugation at 1500 g for 10 min at 4°C. Cell pellets were re-suspended in 50 ml of ice cold 12% ethanol (v/v) in 25 mM sodium acetate, pH 7.0, including protease inhibitor complete cocktail (Roche). The suspension was incubated on ice for 10 min and once completely resuspended, centrifuged at 1,500 g at 4°C for 15 min. The supernatant containing released flagella was removed and stored on ice. The cell pellet was resuspended once again in 50 ml of ice cold 12% ethanol buffer, kept for 10 min on ice, centrifuged as before and the supernatant removed and stored on ice. The pooled supernatant fractions were centrifuged a further three times under the same conditions, each time removing the pellet of any whole cells present (indicated by the intense green colour of E. gracilis cells). The flagellar fraction was then centrifuged at 45,000 g in a 70 Ti rotor (Beckman Coulter) for 30 min at 4°C and flagellar pellets were resuspended in a small volume of 100 mM sodium phosphate buffer (SPB), pH 7.0, centrifuged and resuspended twice more to wash the flagella. Isolation of a pellicle fraction: The deflagellated cell pellet was resuspended in 50 ml of ice cold 100 M SPB, pH 7.0, including two protease inhibitor cocktail tablets (Roche). The suspension was divided into two 25 ml fractions and each was subjected to sonication using a probe sonicator with 10 bursts each of 15 s (1 min pause). Cell disruption was monitored between sonications by light microscopy until approximately ~75% of cells were broken. The sonicates were then centrifuged at 1,000 g for 15 min at 4°C. The resultant pellets contained a lower whitish section which represents the pellicle and an upper green section, the chloroplast. The chloroplast fraction was removed and the pellicle fractions pooled and resuspended in 20 ml of ice cold 100 mM SPB, including protease inhibitor cocktail tablets (Roche). Centrifugation under the same conditions was carried out twice more, each time removing residual chloroplasts before resuspension. The pellicle fraction was homogenized in a potter homogenizer and then sonicated once more with 5 bursts of 5 s while on ice and then loaded on top of a 75% sucrose cushion and centrifuged at 2,000 g for 1 hr at 4°C (Eppendorf 5417C). The resultant supernatant was discarded and the sucrose pellet was loaded onto a 75 - 100% (w/v) discontinuous sucrose gradient (75, 85, 90, 95 and 100%). Gradients were centrifuged at 50,000 g overnight at 4°C in a SW41Ti rotor (Beckman). The resultant gradients had 4 bands at varying densities and the band at the 95-100% sucrose interface was removed and diluted 10x using ice cold 100 mM SPB, pH7.0. Centrifugation at 48,000 g for 1 hr at 4°C pelleted the pellicle, which was resuspended and centrifuged twice more. Production of whole cell lysate: To accurately determine the enrichment for specific proteins in either the pellicle or flagellar fractions, a whole cell lysate was prepared and analysed. Cultures at a cell density of 5 x 106 cells ml-1 were centrifuged and cell pellets were resuspended in 1.5 ml of ice cold 100 mM SPB, pH 7.0, including one protease inhibitor cocktail tablet (Roche) per 20 ml. Suspensions were then sonicated for 10 short bursts of 5 s each, with 1 min rest while held on ice throughout. Centrifugation at 18,000 g formed pellets of chloroplast and pellicular material. Supernatants were combined and 50 µl added to 50 µl of NuPAGE LDS sample buffer before heating at 90°C for 10 min. The pelleted chloroplast and pellicles were resuspended as before and centrifuged again at 18,000 g to pellet once more. For proteomics, the samples were supplemented with NuPAGE LDS sample buffer, sonicated (five 1 s pulses) and migrated approximately 13 mm into a NuPAGE Bis-Tris 4-12% mini gradient polyacrylamide gel under reducing conditions (PMID: 32221947). The respective gel areas were cut and subjected to tryptic digest and reductive alkylation. Liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry was performed in house at the University of Dundee, UK. Samples were analyzed on a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano System coupled to an Orbitrap VelosPro mass spectrometer (Thermo) at the University of Dundee FingerPrints Proteomics facility . Sample layout: Whole cell fraction (3replicates, Experiment ): C1, C2, C3; Fagellum fraction (3replicates, Experiment 31-33): F1, F2, F3; Pellicle fraction (3replicates, Experiment 41-43): P1, P2, P3

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were analyzed using MaxQuant version 1.5 (PMID: 19029910) searching the predicted E. gracilis proteome, using the predicted translated transcriptome (PMID: 30732613) as search database. Minimum peptide length was set at 6 amino acids, isoleucine and leucine were considered indistinguishable and false discovery rates (FDR) of 0.01 were calculated at the levels of peptides, proteins and modification sites based on the number of hits against a reversed sequence database. Ratios were calculated from label-free quantification intensities using only peptides that could be uniquely mapped to a given protein. If the identified peptide sequence set of one protein contained the peptide set of another protein, these two proteins were assigned to the same protein group.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Euglena, Cilium, Flagellum, Pellicle

### Affiliations
Professor of Cell Biology and Parasitology Division of Biological Chemistry and Drug Discovery School of Life Sciences University of Dundee DUNDEE DD1 5EH UK
Division of Biological Chemistry & Drug Discovery
School of Life Sciences
University of Dundee
Dundee DD1 5EH

### Submitter
Martin Zoltner

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Mark C. Field
Professor of Cell Biology and Parasitology Division of Biological Chemistry and Drug Discovery School of Life Sciences University of Dundee DUNDEE DD1 5EH UK


