### Accession
PXD034913

### Title
Proteomic analysis of a targeted functional genomic screen in human skeletal muscle organoids

### Description
To begin to validate potential causal regulators of muscle function, we targeted genes containing novel skeletal muscle pQTLs and molecular/phenotypic associations, and performed a functional genomic screen in human skeletal muscle organoids (PMID: 30527761). We focused on proteins with negative associations to lean mass, grip strength or other metabolic associations, and generated a total of 27 individual rAAV6:shRNAs. Organoids were grown around contraction posts to monitor contractile force production during electrical stimulation, and transduced following differentiation and maturation to limit effects on the myogenic program (Figure 3A). Electrical stimulation was performed to induce either a tetanic contraction for assessment of maximum force production or stimulated with sustained lower frequency for assessment of fatigue. Following the protocol, organoids were analysed by proteomics which quantified 17/27 targets with 13 targets significantly reduced in abundance by rAAV6:shRNA.

### Sample Protocol
Skeletal muscle organoids were lysed in 4% sodium deoxycholate in 100mM Tris pH 8.5 containing 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine and 40 mM 2-chloroacetamide by tip-probe sonication. The lysate was heated at 95°C for 5 min and centrifuged at 18,000 x g for 10 min at 4°C. Protein was digested with 0.2 µg of sequencing grade trypsin and 0.2 µg of sequencing grade LysC overnight at 37°C. Peptides were first diluted with 100% isopropanol, mixed and then acidified with TFA to a final concentration of 50% isopropanol, 0.1% TFA. Peptides were desalted with SDB-RPS microcolumns, washed with 99% isopropanol containing 1% TFA and eluted with 80% acetonitrile containing 2% ammonium hydroxide followed by vacuum concentration. Peptides were resuspended in 2% acetonitrile containing 0.1% TFA and a 5% aliquot of each sample pooled and fractionated into 12 fractions as described above to generate a spectral library.

### Data Protocol
Peptides from skeletal muscle organoids were resuspended in 2% acetonitrile containing 0.1% TFA and analysed on a Dionex ultra-high pressure liquid chromatography system coupled to an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer. Briefly, peptides were separated on 40 cm x 75 µm column containing 1.9 um C18AQ Reprosil particles on a linear gradient of 2-30% acetonitrile over 70 min. Electrospray ionisation was performed at 1.9 kV with 40% RF lens and positively charged peptides detected via a full scan MS (350-950 m/z, 1e6 AGC, 60K resolution, 50 ms injection time) followed data-indedependent MS/MS analysis performed with HCD of 28% normalised collision energy (NCE) (16 m/z isolation, 38 windows with 1 m/z overlap, 1e6 AGC, 30K resolution, auto injection time). The pooled and fractionated samples were used to generate a spectral library using data-dependent acquisition acquired in the same batch using the identical liquid chromatography and column. Each of the 12 fractions were injected twice using two-step gas-phase fraction to generate a spectral library. A full scan MS from 350-651 m/z or 650-950  m/z was performed for each of the two injections (1e6 AGC, 60K resolution, 50 ms injection time) followed data-dependent MS/MS analysis performed with HCD of 28% NCE (1.2 m/z isolation, 5e4 AGC, 15K resolution, auto injection time). Data were processed with Spectronaut v15.0.210615.50606 and the DDA data were searched against the Human UniProt database (June 2021) using Pulsar. The minimum peptide length set to 7 amino acids with specific trypsin cleavage and search criteria included oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation set as variable modifications, and carbamidomethylation set as a fixed modification. Data were filtered to 1% FDR at the peptide and protein level (Qvalue cut-off < 0.01). The DIA data were searched within Spectronaut using the project specific library and peptide quantification was performed at MS2 level using 3-6 fragment ions which included automated interference fragment ion removal as previously described [PMID: 25724911]. Dynamic mass MS1 and MS2 mass tolerance was enabled and local (non-linear) regression was performed for retention time calibration. A dynamic extracted ion chromatogram window size was performed and protein quantification performed with weighted peptide average values.

### Publication Abstract
Improving muscle function has great potential to improve the quality of life. To identify novel regulators of skeletal muscle metabolism and function, we performed a proteomic analysis of gastrocnemius muscle from 73 genetically distinct inbred mouse strains, and integrated the data with previously acquired genomics and &gt;300 molecular/phenotypic traits via quantitative trait loci mapping and correlation network analysis. These data identified thousands of associations between protein abundance and phenotypes and can be accessed online (https://muscle.coffeeprot.com/) to identify regulators of muscle function. We used this resource to prioritize targets for a functional genomic screen in human bioengineered skeletal muscle. This identified several negative regulators of muscle function including UFC1, an E2 ligase for protein UFMylation. We show UFMylation is up-regulated in a mouse model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, a disease that involves muscle atrophy. Furthermore, in vivo knockdown of UFMylation increased contraction force, implicating its role as a negative regulator of skeletal muscle function.

### Keywords
Organoids, Proteomics, Muscle

### Affiliations
The University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Benjamin Parker

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin Parker
The University of Melbourne


