### Accession
PXD003552

### Title
HCC progression -  Quantitative proteome analysis reveals the correlation between endocytosis-associated proteins and hepatocellular carcinoma dedifferentiation

### Description
Endocytosis is a cellular function which is likely to take part in HCC development due to its important role in regulating the abundances of vital signaling receptors. In this study, we aimed to investigate the expression of endocytosis-associated proteins in HCCs with various differentiation grades. Therefore, we analyzed 36 tissue specimens from HCC patients via label-free LC-MS/MS including 19 HCC tissue samples with different degrees of histological grades and 17 corresponding non-tumorous tissue controls.  Following label-free analysis the abundances of SCAMP3 and CLTC were immunohistochemically examined in tissue sections of 84 HCC patients. We demonstrate the novel association of several endocytosis-associated proteins, in particular SCAMP3 with HCC progression.

### Sample Protocol
HCC and adjacent non-tumorous tissue samples were obtained from primary liver cancer patients following hepatic resection or liver transplantation. Following tissue lysis, 10µg of the extracted protein were then run into an 18% Tris-glycine polyacrylamide gel (Anamed Elektrophorese, Germany) before overnight in-gel tryptic digestion (37 °C). Following peptide extraction the concentration of the resulted peptides was determined by quantitative amino acid analysis. The label-free analysis was performed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system coupled to an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). 350 ng of peptides were delivered to a trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 300 μm × 5 mm, C18, 5 μm, 100 Å) at 30 μL/min (0.1%TFA). Following 7 min washing, the peptides were transferred to the analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, 75 μm × 5 cm, nano Viper, C18, 2 μm, 100 Å).  The peptides were then eluted using ACN gradient from 5% to 40% over 98 min.

### Data Protocol
Protein and peptide identification were performed via Proteome Discoverer 1.3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA) and Mascot 2.3.2 (Matrix Science Ltd., London, UK). The database search was done against UniprotKB/SwissProt (2013_05) which contained 20,330 sequences of Homo sapiens. Propionamide (C) and oxidation (M) were set as dynamic modifications. One missed cleavage was considered and the mass tolerance was set to 5 ppm and 0.4 Da for precursor and fragment ion, respectively. Only peptides which passed a false discovery rate (FDR) < 1% were considered. The label-free data were then quantified based on ion intensity using Progenesis LC-MS software

### Publication Abstract
The majority of poorly differentiated hepatocellular carcinomas (HCCs) develop from well-differentiated tumors. Endocytosis is a cellular function which is likely to take part in this development due to its important role in regulating the abundances of vital signaling receptors. Here, we aimed to investigate the abundance of endocytosis-associated proteins in HCCs with various differentiation grades. Therefore, we analyzed 36 tissue specimens from HCC patients via LC-MS/MS-based label-free quantitative proteomics including 19 HCC tissue samples with different degrees of histological grades and corresponding non-tumorous tissue controls. As a result, 277 proteins were differentially regulated between well-differentiated tumors and controls. In moderately and poorly differentiated tumors, 278 and 1181 proteins, respectively, were significantly differentially regulated compared to non-tumorous tissue. We explored the regulated proteins based on their functions and identified thirty endocytosis-associated proteins, mostly overexpressed in poorly differentiated tumors. These included proteins that have been shown to be up-regulated in HCC like clathrin heavy chain-1 (CLTC) as well as unknown proteins, such as secretory carrier-associated membrane protein 3 (SCAMP3). The abundances of SCAMP3 and CLTC were immunohistochemically examined in tissue sections of 84 HCC patients. We demonstrate the novel association of several endocytosis-associated proteins, in particular, SCAMP3 with HCC progression.

### Keywords
Endocytosis, Liver., Cltc, Hepatocellular carcinoma, Scamp3, Label-free proteomics

### Affiliations
MPC
Medizinisches Proteom-Center, Ruhr-Universität Bochum, 44801 Bochum, Germany

### Submitter
Wael Naboulsi

### Lab Head
Dr Barbara Sitek
Medizinisches Proteom-Center, Ruhr-Universität Bochum, 44801 Bochum, Germany


