### Accession
PXD038041

### Title
Identify proteins secreted from mouse brown adipocytes

### Description
Immortalized mouse brown preadipocytes were differentiated. Conditioned medium was collected and concentrated. Proteins present in the conditioned medium were analyzed by LC-MS/MS

### Sample Protocol
Differentiated immortalized brown adipocytes were cultured in serum-free medium for 24 hr. Conditioned medium was collected and concentrated with a 3-kDa cut-off centrifugal filter (Millipore). 10 μg protein was processed by 5 cm SDS-PAGE using a 10% Bis-Tris Novex mini-gel (Invitrogen) and the MOPS buffer system. The <40 kDa region was excised into ten equally sized bands, each of these was processed by in-gel digestion using a robot (ProGest, DigiLab) with the following protocol: (1) Washed with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate followed by acetonitrile. (2) Reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol at 60°C followed by alkylation with 50 mM iodoacetamide at RT. (3) Digested with trypsin (Promega) at 37°C for 4 hr. (4) Quenched with formic acid and the supernatant was analyzed directly without further processing.  The digested sample was analyzed by nano LC-MS/MS with a Waters NanoAcquity HPLC system interfaced to a ThermoFisher Q Exactive. Peptides were loaded on a trapping column and eluted over a 75μm analytical column at 350nL/min; both columns were packed with Jupiter Proteo resin (Phenomenex). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, with the Orbitrap operating at 60,000 FWHM and 17,500 FWHM for MS and MS/MS respectively. The fifteen most abundant ions were selected for MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched using a local copy of Mascot with the following parameters: Enzyme: Trypsin/P Database: SwissProt Mouse (concatenated forward and reverse plus common potential contaminants). Fixed modification: Carbamidomethyl (C) Variable modifications: Oxidation (M), Acetyl (N-term), Pyro-Glu (N-term Q), Deamidation (N/Q) Mass values: Monoisotopic Peptide Mass Tolerance: 10 ppm Fragment Mass Tolerance: 0.02 Da Max Missed Cleavages: 2 Mascot DAT files were parsed into the Scaffold algorithm for validation, filtering and to create a nonredundant list per sample. Data were filtered using at 1% protein and peptide FDR and requiring at least two unique peptides per protein. Data were searched using a local copy of Mascot with the following parameters: Enzyme: Trypsin/P Database: SwissProt Mouse (concatenated forward and reverse plus common potential contaminants). Fixed modification: Carbamidomethyl (C) Variable modifications: Oxidation (M), Acetyl (N-term), Pyro-Glu (N-term Q), Deamidation (N/Q) Mass values: Monoisotopic Peptide Mass Tolerance: 10 ppm Fragment Mass Tolerance: 0.02 Da Max Missed Cleavages: 2 Mascot DAT files were parsed into the Scaffold algorithm for validation, filtering and to create a nonredundant list per sample. Data were filtered using at 1% protein and peptide FDR and requiring at least two unique peptides per protein.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse, Brown adipocyte, Lc-ms/ms, Adipokine

### Affiliations
UMass Chan Medical School

### Submitter
Kai Hu

### Lab Head
Dr Yong-Xu Wang
UMass Chan Medical School


