### Accession
PXD018514

### Title
The Staphylococcus aureus Host Cell Genetic Adhesion Network

### Description
Adhesion of Staphylococcus aureus to the host’s skin and mucosae enables asymptomatic colonization and the establishment of infections. This process is facilitated by cell wall-anchored (CWA) adhesins that are covalently attached to the bacterial cell wall and exhibit affinity for host ligands. To gain insight into the cellular factors contributing to adhesion, we developed a sensitive and robust assay to enable the large-scale profiling of S. aureus adhesion to host ligands. Using this assay, we profiled a sequence defined transposon mutant library of the community-associated methicillin-resistant S. aureus (CA-MRSA) isolate USA300, to identify mutant strains with attenuated adhesion to human derived keratin, fibronectin and fibrinogen. Overall, we identified 21 adhesion defective mutants and we used this information to construct ‘The S. aureus Genetic Adhesion Network’. Importantly, we identified a core gene set involved in adhesion to all three host ligands and we delineated unique genetic signatures. In addition, we demonstrate a central requirement for autolysin-mediated daughter cell separation in S. aureus CWA protein-mediated adhesion to host ligands, which contributes to virulence in murine skin and soft tissue infection. This comprehensive study will inform strategies to inhibit S. aureus host cell adhesion, potentially enabling the development of anti-adhesive therapeutics to complement traditional antibacterial chemotherapy.

### Sample Protocol
S. aureus surface protein enrichment for proteomic analysis was achieved using trypsin shaving of live S. aureus cells (three biological replicates) as previously described, with minor modifications. Saturated overnight cultures of MRSA USA300 JE2 and the isogenic atl::Tn mutant were used to inoculate 100 mL TSB (1:100) and the bacteria were propagated at 37°C to an OD600nm of 0.6 in Erlenmeyer flasks. The flasks were chilled on ice for 10 min to halt bacterial growth and the cells were harvested by centrifugation (4000 x g, 4°C) and washed three times in ice-cold 50 mM NH4HCO3. Using the same buffer, the cells were adjusted to 4 x 108 bacteria/mL, as confirmed by viable counting. 4 mL of the adjusted cells were shaved with 4 ug Trypsin Gold (Promega) for 1 h at 37°C with agitation (220 rpm). The bacterial cells were removed by centrifugation (4000 x g, 4°C) and the supernatants containing the surface enriched proteomes were filtered (0.22 um), freeze-dried and stored at -80°C.   The resulting peptides were reconstituted in 400 uL 50 mM NH4HCO3 and quantified using the Bicinchoninic protein assay according to the manufacturer’s suggested guidelines (Pierce Rapid Gold BCA Assay Kit). BSA (Pierce) was included as an internal standard at a ratio (w/w) of 1:50 BSA:protein. The protein samples were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 30 min at 56°C and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. The iodoacetamide was inactivated with DTT (final concentration of 40 mM) in the dark for 10 min. The samples were then diluted 5-fold with 50 mM NH4HCO3 and digested a second time with Trypsin Gold using a final protease:protein ratio of 1:100 (w/w) and incubation at 37°C for 15 h. The peptides were desalted using Sep-Pak tC18 cartridges (Waters) according to the manufacturer’s recommendations. Briefly, the cartridges were first equilibrated with 65% MeOH + 0.1% formic acid (FA) (v/v), followed by 2% MeOH + 0.1% FA. The samples were acidified with 0.1% FA and slowly applied to the cartridges, washed with 2% MeOH + 0.1% FA and eluted with 60% acetonitrile + 0.1% FA. The peptides were freeze-dried and stored at -80°C.  Each sample was reconstituted in 100 uL of 0.1% FA and quantified by measurement of the Abs280nm using a NanoDrop spectrophotometer. Equal volumes (5 uL) of the samples were analyzed using nanoflow liquid chromatography on an EASY-nanoLC 1200 system (ThermoFisher Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap FusionTM LumosTM Tribrid mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) with a nanoelectrospray flex-ion source (ThermoFisher Scientific). The peptides were separated using an EASY-SprayTM C18 50 cm column with a 75 μm inner diameter, at a constant flow rate of 250 nl/min. The following conditions were used: a linear gradient from 2.5% to 80% acetonitrile + 0.5% FA over 60 min, respectively, which was followed by a washout with 80% acetonitrile to clean the column for the next run. The FusionTM LumosTM was operated in a data-dependent mode, switching automatically between one full-scan and subsequent MS/MS scans of the fifteen most abundant peaks (Top15 method), with full-scans (m/z 375–1500) acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer with a resolution of 120,000 at 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
The MS results were searched in Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and fragment lists were searched against the Staphylococcus aureus Uniprot reference database (March 8, 2018; 46,056 sequences). The parameters were as follows: the parent and fragment mass tolerances were set to 10 ppm and 0.6 Da, respectively. Only complete tryptic peptides with a maximum of two missed cleavages were accepted. Methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation, and deamidation were included as variable modifications, which cysteine carbamidomethylation were considered fixed modifications. Search results were filtered through Percolator at the peptide spectral match (PSM) level using a strict false discovery rate q value of 0.01 and relaxed FDR q value of 0.05. Further analysis of the processed data was performed using Perseus (version 1.6.2.2). Hits to the reverse database, contaminants, and proteins only identified with modified peptides were eliminated. Label-free quantification (LFQ) intensities were normalized between the sample sets against BSA spiked into each sample. LFQ intensities were converted to a log scale (log2), and only those proteins present in duplicate within at least one sample set were used for further statistical processing (valid-value filter of 2 in at least one group). Missing values were imputed from a normal distribution (downshift of 1.8 standard deviations and a width of 0.3 standard deviations). A Student’s t-test identified proteins with significant changes in abundance (P-value ≤0.05) with multiple hypothesis testing correction using the Benjamini-Hochberg FDR cut off at 0.05. A principal component analysis was also performed.

### Publication Abstract
Efflux pumps are a serious challenge for the development of antibacterial agents. Overcoming efflux requires an in-depth understanding of efflux pump functions, specificities and the development of inhibitors. However, the complexities of efflux networks have limited such studies. To address these challenges, we generated Efflux KnockOut-35 (EKO-35), a highly susceptible Escherichia coli strain lacking 35 efflux pumps. We demonstrate the use of this strain by constructing an efflux platform comprising EKO-35 strains individually producing efflux pumps forming tripartite complexes with TolC. This platform was profiled against a curated diverse compound collection, which enabled us to define physicochemical properties that contribute to transport. We also show the E. coli drug efflux network is conditionally essential for growth, and that the platform can be used to investigate efflux pump inhibitor specificities and efflux pump interplay. We believe EKO-35 and the efflux platform will have widespread application for the study of drug efflux.

### Keywords
Anti-adhesives; anti-virulence; staphylococcus aureus; mrsa; antibiotic resistance; cell wall-anchored proteins; autolysin; adhesome

### Affiliations
University of Guelph
Molecular and Cellular Biology Department, University of Guelph, 50 Stone Rd. E., Guelph, ON, N1H 2W1

### Submitter
Jennifer Geddes-McAlister

### Lab Head
Dr Jennifer Geddes-McAlister
Molecular and Cellular Biology Department, University of Guelph, 50 Stone Rd. E., Guelph, ON, N1H 2W1


