### Accession
PXD025286

### Title
Synaptic protein S-palmitoylation as a novel mechanism underlying sex-dependent differences in neuronal plasticity

### Description
Although sex differences in the brain are prevalent, the knowledge about mechanisms underlying sex-related effects on normal and pathological brain functioning is rather poor. It is known that female and male brains differ in size and connectivity. Moreover, those differences are related to neuronal morphology and activity, synapse molecular organization, synaptic plasticity, and molecular signalling pathways. Among different processes assuring proper synapse function are posttranslational modifications, and among them, S-palmitoylation emerges as a crucial mechanism underlying synaptic integrity. Protein S-palmitoylation (S-PALM) refers to the covalent attachment of palmitic acid (C16:0) to cysteine residue(s) via the formation of a thioester bond. Protein S-PALM is governed by a family of PATs, also known as DHHC proteins.  Here we focused on the sex-related functional importance of DHHC7 acyltransferase. Under physiological conditions, DHHC7 emerges of particular interest because it palmitoylates various synaptic proteins involved in the regulation of cellular polarity and proliferation as well as in stress and anxiety-related pathology. Moreover, DHHC7 is responsible for S-PALM of sex steroid receptors. Functionally, S-PALM of these receptors regulates their trafficking to the plasma membrane as well as their rapid responses to sex steroid hormones.  Using mass spectrometry-based method PANIMoni we identified sex-dependent differences in the S-palmitoylation of synaptic proteins, potentially involved in the regulation of passive membrane properties and excitability (e.g. potassium voltage-gated channels), synaptic transmission (e.g. subunits of glutamate or kainate receptors, voltage-dependent calcium channels) as well as signalling proteins involved in structural plasticity of dendritic spines (e.g. G-proteins and Rab GTPase). Furthermore, to determine a mechanistic source for sex-dependent changes in protein S-palmitoylation we used synaptoneurosomes from DHHC-7 knock-out -/- (DHHC7 KO) female and male mice. Our data showed sex-dependent action of DHHC-7 acyltransferase. Such discovery will facilitate the development of novel and targeted treatments congruous with biological sex.

### Sample Protocol
Synaptoneurosomes were prepared from the brains of WT and DHHC7 KO (males and females) as previously described. Briefly, euthanasia by cervical dislocation, the mice were decapitated. Brains were dissected and homogenized with Dounce homogenizer in 3 ml of buffer A (5 mM HEPES (pH 7.4), 0.32 M sucrose, 0.2 mM ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA), 50 mM N-ethylmaleimide (NEM), and protease inhibitor cocktail Nuclei and cell debris were pelleted by 5 min centrifugation at 2,500 X g. Supernatant was then centrifuged at 12,000 x g for 5 min. The pellet fraction was layered over a discontinuous Ficoll (Sigma Aldrich) gradient (4%, 6%, and 13%), and centrifuged at 70,000 x g for 45 min. The synaptoneurosomal fraction was collected in buffer A and centrifuged at 20,000 X g for 20 min. The pellet corresponded to the synaptoneurosomes fraction. The purified synaptoneurosomes were used in all experiments. Acyl-biotin exchange  To analyse the changes in the S-PALM of proteins, acyl-biotin exchange (ABE) were used. S-PALM cysteines were selectively converted into biotinylated cysteines. The thioester bond between SH and palmitic acid were decomposed using the selective agent 1 M hydroxylamine, and newly formed thiols were blocked with cysteine-specific biotin-HPDP. Next, biotinylated proteins were purified by avidin-affinity chromatography. The ABE technique combined with immunoblotting analysis were used for S-PALM pattern analysis. PANIMoni  The biotin labelling of S-palmitoylated proteins in lysates were performed based on ABE procedure. Protein fractions that contained biotinylated proteins were digested using sequencing-grade modified trypsin (Promega V 5111) for 16 h at 37 °C. Digestion were terminated using a protease inhibitor cocktail. The tryptic peptide mixture were incubated with 100 μl of NeutrAvidin beads at room temperature for 1 h. The NeutrAvidin beads were washed five times in 1 ml of wash buffer. Neutravidin-bound peptides were eluted with 150 μl of elution buffer and 5 mM TCEP and concentrated in a SpeedVac. Trifluoroacetic acid will be added to the peptide solution to achieve a final concentration of 0.1%. The samples will be analysed by nanoLC-MS and nanoLC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
The S-PALM or all proteins peptide mixture (20 µl) was applied to the nanoACQUITY UPLC Trapping Column (Waters) using water containing 0.1% formic acid as the mobile phase and transferred to the nanoACQUITY UPLC BEH C18 Column (Waters, 75 µm inner diameter; 250-mm long) using an acetonitrile gradient in the presence of 0.1% formic acid with a flow rate of 250 nl/min. The column outlet was directly coupled to the ion source of the Thermo Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) working in the regime of data-dependent MS to MS/MS switch. HCD fragmentation was used.  All MS runs were separated by blank runs to reduce the carry-over of peptides from previous samples. Results of meseaurments were processed using Mascot- Distiller 2.7.1 software (MatrixScience).The Mascot search engine(version 2.7.1) was used to survey data against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database (Swissprot 2020_02; 16,905 sequences). The search parameters were set to the following: taxonomy (Mus musculus), variable modifications (cysteine carbamidomethylation or N-malemideidation, methionine oxidation, peptide tolerance (5 ppm), fragment mass tolerance (5 ppm). Enzyme specificity: trypsin with one missed or nonspecific cleavages permitted. The mass calibration and data filtering described above were also carried out.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Palmitoylation, Dhhc7, Sex-dependent

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Cell Biophysics Nencki Institute of Experimental Biology PAS Warsaw, Poland
Laboratory of Cell Biophysics, Nencki Institute of Experimental Biology, PAS

### Submitter
Monika Zareba-Koziol

### Lab Head
Dr Jakub Włodarczyk
Laboratory of Cell Biophysics Nencki Institute of Experimental Biology PAS Warsaw, Poland


