### Accession
PXD003641

### Title
E. coli EcAmb278 treated with tetracycline

### Description
Drug profiling exeriment to elucidate protein regulation upon treatment of a multi-drug resistant E.coli strain with tetracycline.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen glycerol stocks of E. coli EcAmb278 were seeded onto MacConkey agar and trypticase soy agar plates sequentially, and grown for 18h, at 37ºC. Single colonies of the E. coli EcAmb278 were pre-inoculated in 5ml of Brain Heart infusion broth that was then used to inoculate 250ml of the same medium, in covered 500ml Erlenmeyer flasks at 37 °C, with rotary aeration at 180rpm. For three out of the six experiments, tetracycline (Sigma-Aldrich) was added to the culture in a final concentration of 10 mg/L, while the three remaining replicates were cultured without exposure to antibiotics. The cells were then harvested during the exponential phase, when OD640nm= 0.6 (approximately 2 × 109 cells/ml).   2.3. Extraction of soluble proteins and protein quantification Proteins were isolated using a protein extraction method for soluble proteins. Briefly, the bacterial cells were harvested at 10,000 g for 5 min at 4 °C. The pellet was then completely resuspended in MES-NaOH 20 mM pH 8.0 and centrifuged three times using the conditions above mentioned. After centrifugation, bacterial pellets were resuspended in 10ml for each 2.5 g of cells in MES-NaOH 20 mM pH 8.0, DTT 1 mM, with addition of bacterial protease inhibitor cocktail at 1:20 (Sigma-Aldrich), and disrupted by ultrasonic treatment as previously described (Mendonça et al., 2008).  The protein concentration was estimated by using the BCA protein assay kit (Pierce, Rockford, IL), according to the manufacturer’s instructions and stored at −20 °C until further analyses.

### Data Protocol
Preprocessing of MS data All Q-Exactive data were calibrated using polycyclodi-methylsiloxane (PCMs—outgassed material from semiconductors) present in the ambient air and Bis (2-Ethylhexyl)(Phthalate) (DEHP—from plastic) (Schlosser and Volkmer-Engert, 2003;Olsen et al., 2005) modular VEMS (Matthiesen, 2013b). VEMS further allows alternative parent ion annotations for each MS/MS spectrum which is needed if two peptide elution profiles overlap in the m/z and retention time dimension. By allowing alternative parent ion annotation for each MS/MS spectrum, provides a space efficient data format. Furthermore these alternative parent ion annotations were taken into account during the database dependent search.  MS database dependent search Customized sequence databases were constructed which included all common contaminants (Bunkenborg et al., 2010) and permutated protein sequences keeping Arg and Lys in place.  All data were searched with VEMS (Matthiesen, 2013a;Carvalho et al., 2014). Mass accuracy was set to 5 ppm for peptides and 10 mDa for peptide fragments. Gaussian weight for fragment ions was set to 5 and the six most intense fragment ions per 100 Da was used for scoring fragment ions. Four missed cleavages were specified. The data was first searched against two databases all bacterial protein sequences in NCBI and all bacterial protein sequences in UniProtKB/TrEMBL (Release 2015_02). These searches confirmed that most of the peptide spectra assignments were on bacterial proteins from E. coli. The search was therefore repeated only against E. coli proteins in UniProtKB (Figure S1).  The three databases included permutated protein sequences, leaving Lys and Arg in place, together with common contaminants such as human keratins and proteases (Bunkenborg et al., 2010).  Fixed modification of carbamidomethyl cysteine was included in the search parameters. A list of 5 variable modifications (Figure S3) was considered for all data against the full protein database. Protein N-terminal Met-loss is not specified for VEMS searches since VEMS by default checks N-terminal Met-loss. The false discovery rate (FDR) for protein identification was set to 1% for peptide and protein identifications. No restriction was applied for minimal peptide length. Identified proteins were divided into evidence groups as defined by Matthiesen et al (Matthiesen et al., 2012).  Quantitative proteome analysis Proteins were quantified by spectral counting (Matthiesen and Carvalho, 2013) and mziXIC (Matthiesen, 2013b) followed by iBAQ (Mann and Edsinger, 2014) estimation. No imputation for missing values was used. This leads less significant proteins than if imputation was performed. However, we can be more confident on the proteins we actually identify as statistical significant.  The quantitative values were added one and log two transformed. The quantitative values were next normalized using quantile normalization and statistical calculation of p values was performed by the R package limma (Figure S2). Correction for multiple testing was done by the FDR method (Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Shotgun, Label free, E. coli, Tetracycline

### Affiliations
Computational and Experimental Biology Group, CEDOC

NOVA MEDICAL SCHOOL / FACULDADE DE CIÊNCIAS MÉDICAS

UNIVERSIDADE NOVA DE LISBOA

Rua Câmara Pestana, 6-6A | 1150-082 Lisboa

Portugal
Computational and Experimental Biology Group, National Institute of Health Dr. Ricardo Jorge, Lisbon, Portugal

### Submitter
Rune Matthiesen

### Lab Head
Dr Rune Matthiesen
Computational and Experimental Biology Group, National Institute of Health Dr. Ricardo Jorge, Lisbon, Portugal


