### Accession
PXD027174

### Title
Systems analysis of plasma IgG intact N-glycopeptides from pa-tients with chronic kidney diseases via combined electron-transfer/higher-energy collisional dissociation and stepped colli-sion energy/higher-energy collisional dissociation mass spectrom-etry within half an hour

### Description
Immunoglobulin G (IgG) molecules modulate an immune response. However, site-specific N-glycosylation signatures of plasma IgG in patients with chronic kidney disease (CKD) remain unclear. This study aimed to propose a novel method to explore the N-glycosylation pattern of IgG and to compare it with reported methods. We separated human plasma IgG from 58 healthy controls (HC) and 111 patients with CKD. Purified IgG molecules were digested by trypsin. Tryptic peptides with-out enrichment were analyzed using a combination of electron-transfer/higher-energy collisional dissociation (EThcD) and stepped collision energy/higher-energy collisional dissociation (sceHCD) mass spectrometry (EThcD-sceHCD-MS/MS). This resulted in higher spectral quality, more informative fragment ions, higher Byonic score, and nearly twice the depth of intact N-glycopeptide identification than sceHCD or EThcD alone. Site-specific N-glycosylation mapping revealed that intact N-glycopeptides were differentially expressed in HC and CKD patients; thus, it can be a diagnostic tool. This study provides a method for the determination of glycosylation patterns in CKD and a framework for understanding the role of IgG in the pathophysiology of CKD.

### Sample Protocol
Human IgG molecules (20 μg) were heated for 10 min at 95 °C. Reduction and alkylation of the protein were performed with 20 mM DTT for 30 min at 56 °C and subsequently with 50 mM IAA for 30 min at 25 °C in the dark. The mixture was then loaded into a 30 kDa ultrafiltration tube (Millipore Corporation, Billerica, MA). Subse-quently, these agents were replaced with 50 mM NH4HCO3 buffer (pH8.5). Approximately 500 ng of trypsin was added and incubated for 1 h at 37 °C. The digests were collected by centrifugation, and their concentrations were measured using a quantitative colorimetric peptide assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 480 nm. Finally, the peptides were dried using the SpeedVac for further analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were searched against the human IgG database using the Byonic software (version 3.10, Protein Metrics, Inc.), with the mass tolerance for precursors and fragment ions set at ±6 ppm and ±20 ppm, respectively. The cleavage sites for trypsin were lysine (Lys, K) and arginine (Arg, R). Two missed cleavage sites were allowed to be digested. The fixed modification was carbamidome-thyl (C), while the variable modifications included oxidation (M) and acetyl (protein N-term). In addition, 182 human N-glycans were specified as N-glycan modifications. All other parameters were set at default values. Protein groups were filtered to a 1% false discovery rate based on the number of hits obtained in searches against these databases. Stricter quality control methods for intact N-glycopeptides and peptide identification were implemented, requir-ing a score of not less than 200 and identification of at least six amino acids. Furthermore, all peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) and glycopeptide-spectrum matches (GPSMs) were examined manually. The Student’s t-test and ANOVA were performed using Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS, Inc. version 19.0). Raw data and search results were deposited to the Proteome Xchange Consor-tium via the Proteomics IDEntifications database (PRIDE)26 partner repository with their dataset identifier.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Immunoglobulin g, Lc-ms/ms, Glycosylation, Chronic kidney disease

### Affiliations
West China Hospital, Sichuan University
Sichuan University

### Submitter
Yong Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Yong Zhang
West China Hospital, Sichuan University


