### Accession
PXD000712

### Title
Small proteome in trypanosomes

### Description
Although technical advances in genomics and proteomics research have yielded a better understanding of the coding capacity of a genome, one major challenge remaining is the identification of all expressed proteins, especially those less than 100 amino acids in length. Such information can be particularly relevant to human pathogens, like Trypanosoma brucei, the causative agent of African trypanosomiasis, since it will provide further insight into the parasite biology and life cycle.

### Sample Protocol
Procyclic form trypanosomes (MiTat 1.4) were lyzed in 50 mM Tris, pH 7,3 with 4% SDS. To decrease sample complexity, the samples were filtered directly using different (3 kDa, 10 kDa, 30 kDa and 50 kD MWCO) Amicon Ultracel centrifugal filter units (Millipore) and under strong denaturing conditions with 8 M urea (3 kDa, 10 kDa, 30 kDa MWCO). The filtrate was precipitated using 4 volumes of ethanol and subsequently resuspended in 20 µl 8 M urea. The samples were reduced with 1 mM DTT and alkylated using 5 mM iodoacetamide, prior to digestions with 0.2 µg Lys-C (Wako) for 3 hours followed by digestion with 0.2 µg trypsin (Promega) overnight. The peptides were desalted using a StageTip (Rappsilber et al., Nat Prot 2007). For mass spectrometric analysis, peptides were separated by a nanoflow liquid chromatography EASY-nLC system on a capillary packed with Reprosil-C18 (Dr. Maisch) with an acetonitrile gradient from 2 to 60 percent at a flow rate of 200 nl/min for 200 min. The Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent acquisition mode performing Top10 MS/MS per full cycle.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was done with MaxQuant version 1.2.0.18 (Cox and Mann, 2008, Nat Biotech) using a concatenated database of TREU 927 v.2.3 (10533 entries, tritrypDB.org) and the hits generated by the RNA-seq analysis (additional 987 entries).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Trypanosomes

### Affiliations
MPI for Biochemistry
Quantitative Proteomics
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB)

### Submitter
F Butter

### Lab Head
Dr Mann  
MPI for Biochemistry


