### Accession
PXD012176

### Title
S. aureus drives expansion of low density neutrophils in the diabetic host

### Description
Abstract S. aureus is a major opportunistic pathogen infecting patients with diabetes.  Increased mortality was observed following IV S. aureus infection in diabetic mice compared to non-diabetic controls, correlating with increased numbers of low density neutrophils (LDNs) and neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs).  LDN development is dependent on TGFβ, which was more activated in the diabetic host.  Neutralization of TGFβ, or the integrin responsible for its activation α5β8, reduced numbers of LDNs and improved survival.  Comparison of high and low density neutrophils identified PTEN signaling as a central regulator of LDN NET release.  Inhibition of PTEN improved survival and decreased NET production in infected diabetic mice.  MEDI4893*, a monoclonal antibody that neutralizes alpha toxin (AT) in development for prevention of S. aureus infection, was able to block TGFβ activation, reduce LDNs and NETs, and significantly improve survival.  Our data identify a population of neutrophils in infected diabetic mice which correlated with decreased survival and increased NET production.  Targeting a single virulence factor of S. aureus prevented emergence of the LDN population and improved survival, supporting potential use of pathogen specific antibodies for treating diabetic infections.

### Sample Protocol
Membrane proteins isolated a Sorvall™ MTX 150 Microultracentrifuge at 100,000 x g for 96 min at 4°C. Six samples comprised of three high density neutrophils and three low density neutrophils were randomized and labeled with six different TMT reagents. TMT labeled samples were then combined and fractionated on an Oasis plate under basic conditions. Initially 20 different elutions were collected by using step gradient of acetonitrile containing 10mM TEABC. Two distant fractions were then pooled to generate 10 final samples for mass spectrometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data was analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) software with search engines Mascot (version 2.6.0). Data was searched using latest Uniprot Mus musculus 2017 protein database with common laboratory contaminants included. Unfragmented precursor and TMT reporter ions were removed using non-fragment filter in the PD 2.2 workflow. Search parameters included 3 missed cleavages for trypsin, oxidation (M) and deamidation (N, Q) as variable modifications. Tandem label (229.163Da) at N-terminus and lysine residue and carbamidomethylation on cysteine residue were set as fixed modifications. The mass tolerances on precursor and fragment masses were set at 20 ppm and 0.05 Da, respectively for MS2 analysis. For MS3 analysis, precursor and fragment masses were set at 20 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
Diabetic individuals are at considerable risk for invasive infection by Staphylococcus aureus, however, the mechanisms underlying this enhanced susceptibility to infection are unclear. We observed increased mortality following i.v. S. aureus infection in diabetic mice compared with nondiabetic controls, correlating with increased numbers of low-density neutrophils (LDNs) and neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs). LDNs have been implicated in the inflammatory pathology of diseases such as lupus, given their release of large amounts of NETs. Our goal was to describe what drives LDN increases during S. aureus infection in the diabetic host and mechanisms that promote increased NET production by LDNs. LDN development is dependent on TGF-&#x3b2;, which we found to be more activated in the diabetic host. Neutralization of TGF-&#x3b2;, or the TGF-&#x3b2;-activating integrin &#x3b1;v&#x3b2;8, reduced LDN numbers and improved survival during S. aureus infection. Targeting S. aureus directly with MEDI4893*, an &#x3b1; toxin-neutralizing monoclonal antibody, blocked TGF-&#x3b2; activation, reduced LDNs and NETs, and significantly improved survival. A comparison of gene and protein expression in high-density neutrophils and LDNs identified increased GPCRs and elevated phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) in the LDN subset. Inhibition of PTEN improved the survival of infected diabetic mice. Our data identify a population of neutrophils in infected diabetic mice that correlated with decreased survival and increased NET production and describe 3 therapeutic targets, a bacterial target and 2 host proteins, that prevented NET production and improved survival.

### Keywords
Neutrophils, Hcd, Tandem mass tags, Ms3, S.aureus, Ms2

### Affiliations
Medimmune LLC
MedImmune

### Submitter
Raghothama Chaerkady

### Lab Head
Dr Sonja Hess
Medimmune LLC


