### Accession
PXD013884

### Title
Desumoylation of the RNA polymerase III lies at the core of the Sumo-Stress Response

### Description
Posttranslational modification by the small ubiquitin-like modifier Sumo regulates many cellular processes including the adaptive response to various types of stress, which has been referred to as Sumo Stress Response (SSR). However, it remains unclear whether the SSR involves a common set of core proteins regardless of the type of stress, or whether each particular type of stress induces a stress-specific SSR that targets a unique, largely non-overlapping set of Sumo substrates. In this study we used mass spectrometry to identify differentially sumoylated proteins during heat shock, hyperosmotic stress, oxidative stress, nitrogen starvation and DNA alkylation in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Our results show that each stress triggers a specific SSR signature centered on proteins involved in transcription, translation, and chromatin regulation. Strikingly, while the various stress-specific SSRs were largely non-overlapping, all types of stresses tested here resulted in desumoylation of subunits of RNA polymerase III, which correlated with a decrease in tRNA synthesis. We conclude that desumoylation and subsequent inhibition of RNA polymerase III constitutes the core of all stress-specific SSRs.

### Sample Protocol
SUMO pull downs were precipitated in 55% TCA, centrifuged (16000 x g, 15 min) and protein pellets were washed with -20 °C acetone before proceeding to proteolytic digestion. Protein pellets were solubilised in 50 mM NH4HCO3 containing 2% rapigest surfactant, reduced using DTT (5 mM, 45 min, 56°C) and digested overnight at 37ᵒC with trypsin (Promega). Rapigest was removed by acidification (0.5-1% trifluoroacetic acid), and peptide samples were de-salted using c18 StageTips prior to MS analysis. Tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analyses were performed using an Easy nLC1000 LC system (Thermo Electron) connected to a quadrupole Orbitrap (QExactivePlus) mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron) and involved a nanoelectrospray ion source (EasySpray; Thermo Electron). An EasySpray analytical column (C18, 2 µm beads, 100 Å, 75 μm inner diameter; Thermo) was used for peptide separation, with a flow rate of 0.3 μL/min, and solvent gradient of 2% to 30% (v/v) ACN in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid for 120 minutes, after which columns were washed using 90% (v/v) ACN in 0.1% (v/v) FA for 20 minutes. All LC-MS/MS analyses involved data-dependent acquisition (DDA) where selected peptides were fragmented using high-energy collision dissociation. Ions selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data were searched for protein identification using the MaxQuant software. Only tryptic peptides were considered. A maximum of two missed cleavages were permitted, with a first search peptide tolerance of 20 p.p.m and a main search peptide tolerance of 6 p.p.m. No fixed modifications were searched. Methionine oxidation, N-acetylation and phosphorylation were set as variable modifications. Additionally, EQIGG-modified lysines (resulting from tryptic cleavage of SUMO) was included as a variable modification. The minimum number of unique peptides required for protein identification was 1, and the FDR cut-off for peptide and protein identifications was 0.01. The Uniprot Saccharomyces cerevisiae database was used. Label-free quantitative analyses were performed in the Perseus software using log2-transformed LFQ intensities. For analysis of desumoylation events, proteins that were not significantly enriched in the SUMO pull downs in mid-logarithmic phase compared to non-tagged SUMO controls were removed. For analysis of increased sumoylation events, proteins that were not significantly enriched in SUMO pull downs under a stress condition compared to non-tagged SUMO controls were removed. Comparisons were then performed between each SUMO pull down under a stress condition and the SUMO pull down in mid-logarithmic phase. Samples were compared using a Student’s T-test method (permutation-based FDR correction (250 randomisations); FDR cut-off=0.05; S0=0.1). For display purposes, samples were compared using Volcano plots as performed in Perseus. Proteins were considered significantly reduced or increased under a specific stress condition if they passed the Student’s T-test significance threshold across two biological repeat experiments.

### Publication Abstract
Post-translational modification by small ubiquitin-like modifier (Sumo) regulates many cellular processes, including the adaptive response to various types of stress, referred to as the Sumo stress response (SSR). However, it remains unclear whether the SSR involves a common set of core proteins regardless of the type of stress or whether each particular type of stress induces a stress-specific SSR that targets a unique, largely nonoverlapping set of Sumo substrates. In this study, we used MS and a Gene Ontology approach to identify differentially sumoylated proteins during heat stress, hyperosmotic stress, oxidative stress, nitrogen starvation, and DNA alkylation in <i>Saccharomyces cerevisiae</i> cells. Our results indicate that each stress triggers a specific SSR signature centered on proteins involved in transcription, translation, and chromatin regulation. Strikingly, whereas the various stress-specific SSRs were largely nonoverlapping, all types of stress tested here resulted in desumoylation of subunits of RNA polymerase III, which correlated with a decrease in tRNA synthesis. We conclude that desumoylation and subsequent inhibition of RNA polymerase III constitutes the core of all stress-specific SSRs in yeast.

### Keywords
Small ubiquitin‐like modifier (sumo), Rna polymerase iii, Transfer rna (trna), Stress response, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Transcription regulation

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Institute for Cancer Research, The Norwegian Radium Hospital, Montebello, N-0379 Oslo, Norway
University of Oslo

### Submitter
Tuula Nyman

### Lab Head
Dr Jorrit Enserink
Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Institute for Cancer Research, The Norwegian Radium Hospital, Montebello, N-0379 Oslo, Norway


