### Accession
PXD013319

### Title
Thermal proteome profiling of darobactin in Escherichia coli

### Description
We performed two dimensional thermal proteome profiling (2D-TPP) of darobactin to study its impact in Escherichia coli.

### Sample Protocol
After heating, lysing and extraction of remaining soluble protein fraction (with a modified thermal proteome profiling protocol - Savitski et al., Science (2014), samples were processed with a modified SP3 protocol, digested using trypsin and labeled with TMT. Shotgun proteomics using a Q-Exactive Orbitrap was then performed.

### Data Protocol
TMT quantification was used, by using the isobarquant python package (Franken et al., Nat Protoc (2015)), and Mascot 2.4 was used for protein identification. Search parameters: trypsin, missed cleavages 3, peptide tolerance 10ppm, 0.02Da for MS/MS tolerance. Fixed modifications were carbamidomethyl on cysteines and TMT10plex on lysine. Variable modifications included acetylation on protein N-terminus, oxidation of methionine and TMT10plex on peptide N-termini. The R programming language was used to analyze the output data.

### Publication Abstract
The current need for novel antibiotics is especially acute for drug-resistant Gram-negative pathogens<sup>1,2</sup>. These microorganisms have a highly restrictive permeability barrier, which limits the penetration of most compounds<sup>3,4</sup>. As a result, the last class of antibiotics that acted against Gram-negative bacteria was developed in the 1960s<sup>2</sup>. We reason that useful compounds can be found in bacteria that share similar requirements for antibiotics with humans, and focus on Photorhabdus symbionts of entomopathogenic nematode microbiomes. Here we report a new antibiotic that we name darobactin, which was obtained using a screen of Photorhabdus isolates. Darobactin is coded by a silent operon with little production under laboratory conditions, and is ribosomally synthesized. Darobactin has an unusual structure with two fused rings that form post-translationally. The compound is active against important Gram-negative pathogens both in vitro and in animal models of infection. Mutants that are resistant to darobactin map to BamA, an essential chaperone and translocator that folds outer membrane proteins. Our study suggests that bacterial symbionts of animals contain antibiotics that are particularly suitable for development into therapeutics.

### Keywords
Drugs, Thermal proteome profiling, Darobactin, Escherichia coli, Target engagement

### Affiliations
European Molecular Biology Laboratory

### Submitter
Andre Mateus

### Lab Head
Dr Mikhail M. Savitski
European Molecular Biology Laboratory


