### Accession
PXD037502

### Title
Workingtitle HLA-B*57:01 CBZ EPX impact

### Description
Impact of CBZ and EPX treatment on a with HLA-B*57:01 tranduced cell line compared to the parental cell line

### Sample Protocol
50 μg of lysate  were heated at 95 °C for 5 min and alkylated at room temperature by adding 1 μl of 40 % acrylamide for 30 min and separated on 4-20 % precast gels (BioRad, USA). Gels were fixed and stained with Page Blue Protein staining solution (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) and each lane was sliced into 5 bands, which were manually cut into small cubes. In-gel digestion was done as described [13]. Briefly, gel pieces were destained with 50 % ACN/50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) followed by dehydration with 100 % ACN and vacuum centrifugation. Gel pieces were rehydrated on ice for 60 min with 10 % ACN/20 mM ABC containing 10 ng/μl trypsin and incubated over night at 37 °C and 350 rpm. Protein digestion was stopped by adding 200 μl 50 % ACN/0.5 % TFA for 10 min followed by peptide extraction with 100 μl 50 % ACN/0.2 % TFA and 100 μl 100 % ACN for 30 min. Supernatants were pooled and extracted peptides were dried via vacuum centrifugation and stored at -20°C.

### Data Protocol
Modifications: Oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein N-term),Deamidation (NQ),Propionamide (C) Protein-FDR: 1%; Peptide-FDR: 1%, max. missed cleavage: 2, MQ version: 2.0.1.0, Perseus-Version: 1.6.2.3.

### Publication Abstract
Measure of drug-mediated immune reactions that are dependent on the patient's genotype determine individual medication protocols. Despite extensive clinical trials prior to the license of a specific drug, certain patient-specific immune reactions cannot be reliably predicted. The need for acknowledgement of the actual proteomic state for selected individuals under drug administration becomes obvious. The well-established association between certain HLA molecules and drugs or their metabolites has been analyzed in recent years, yet the polymorphic nature of HLA makes a broad prediction unfeasible. Dependent on the patient's genotype, carbamazepine (CBZ) hypersensitivities can cause diverse disease symptoms as maculopapular exanthema, drug reaction with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms or the more severe diseases Stevens-Johnson-Syndrome or toxic epidermal necrolysis. Not only the association between HLA-B*15:02 or HLA-A*31:01 but also between HLA-B*57:01 and CBZ administration could be demonstrated. This study aimed to illuminate the mechanism of HLA-B*57:01-mediated CBZ hypersensitivity by full proteome analysis. The main CBZ metabolite EPX introduced drastic proteomic alterations as the induction of inflammatory processes through the upstream kinase ERBB2 and the upregulation of NF&#x3ba;B and JAK/STAT pathway implying a pro-apoptotic, pro-necrotic shift in the cellular response. Anti-inflammatory pathways and associated effector proteins were downregulated. This disequilibrium of pro- and anti-inflammatory processes clearly explain fatal immune reactions following CBZ administration.

### Keywords
Hla-b*57:01 human hla cbz epx

### Affiliations
MHH - Toxicology
Institute of Transfusion Medicine and Transplant Engineering,Hannover Medical School (MHH), Germany

### Submitter
Florian Stieglitz

### Lab Head
Dr Christina Bade-Döding
Institute of Transfusion Medicine and Transplant Engineering,Hannover Medical School (MHH), Germany


