### Accession
PXD011347

### Title
LC-MS/MS analyses of human PDAC cell lines after treatment with a new SUMO inhibitor

### Description
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) still carries a dismal prognosis with overall five-year survival of 8%. Conventional combination chemotherapies are a clear advance in the treatment of PDAC, however subtypes of the disease exist, which exhibit extensive resistance to such therapies. Genomic MYC amplifications represent a distinct subset of PDAC with an aggressive tumor biology. It is clear that hyperactivation of MYC generates dependencies that can be exploited therapeutically. To find MYC-associated dependencies we analyzed human PDAC expression datasets. We observed that MYC is connected to the SUMOylation machinery in PDAC. Components of the SUMO pathway mark a PDAC subtype with worse prognosis and we provide evidence that hyperactivation of MYC is connected to an increased sensitivity to a novel SUMO inhibitor with a potential for further clinical development.

### Sample Protocol
Human PDAC cell lines PATU-8988T and PSN1 were treated with 500 nM of SUMOi for 48h in triplicates. Cells were lysed in 2% SDS lysis buffer, shortly heated to 95 °C, then sonicated and centrifuged at 16000 g for 5 minutes. In the following, protein content was determined using the DC Protein Assay Kit from BioRad. For in-solution digest, 20 µg of each sample was precipitated using 4 volumes of acetone for 1 hour at -20 °C. After centrifugation a wash step with 90% acetone was included. The precipitated pellet was shortly dried at room temperature and then resuspended in 6M urea/2M thiourea. Proteins were reduced with DTT, following an alkylation step using chloroacetamide. Digestion was performed in only 2M urea with the endopeptidase Lys-C (Wako) in combination with trypsin (sequence grade, Promega) overnight at 37 °C. Digestion was stopped by acidifying. Finally, peptides were desalted and concentrated by the STAGE tipping technique.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw files were processed in one single run using the MaxQuant software (version 1.5.8.0) and its implemented Andromeda search engine. Assignment of proteins was achieved by correlation of electrospray ionization-tandem mass spectrometry (ESI-MS/MS) fragmentation spectra with the Uniprot human database (version 2017), additionally including a list of common contaminants. All searches were performed using default settings for mass tolerances for MS and MS/MS spectra. Tryptic specifications were chosen. Carbamidomethyl at cysteine residues was set as fixed modification whereas oxidation at methionine and acetylation at the N-terminus were chosen as variable modifications. Further, the false discovery rate for proteins and peptide-spectrum matches was set to 1% as default and the minimal peptide length was defined to be seven amino acids. Proteins were quantified using the integrated MaxLFQ algorithm, allowing only unique peptides for quantification and retaining unmodified counterpart peptides. The minimum LFQ ratio count was set to 2, FastLFQ was enabled and the number of minimal unique peptides was set to 1 for identification. Furthermore the match-between-run feature was used with a time window set to 0.7 minutes. The Perseus software (version 1.5.8.5) was used for downstream analysis of the data. Using the filter option, contaminants, reverse entries and proteins only identified by a modified peptide were removed. In the following, LFQ intensities were logarithmized and normal distribution of the LFQ values was ensured by visual histogram analysis. Correlation of triplicates was checked by multiscatter plot analysis. For statistical analysis, triplicates were grouped into one group and the significant difference of two sample groups was tested using the student’s t-test as a two-sample test. Visualization of proteome data was performed using R-studio software (version 0.99.893).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sumo, Pancreatic cancer, Myc, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Goethe University, Medical School, Institute of Biochemistry II, Frankfurt am Main
III. Medical Clinic Technical University Munich Ismaninger Straße 22 81675 Munich Germany

### Submitter
Kathrin Schunck

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Ulrich Keller
III. Medical Clinic Technical University Munich Ismaninger Straße 22 81675 Munich Germany


