### Accession
PXD003947

### Title
Quest for missing proteins in the human spermatozoa: an update

### Description
Here, we report work as part of C-HPP initiatives on chromosomes 14 (France) and 2 (Switzerland) aiming to identify missing proteins in ejaculated human spermatozoa using multiple MS-based and antibodies-based validation approaches

### Sample Protocol
Different protocols based on different protein extraction procedure were used: - Total cell lysate + 1D SDS-PAGE separation (23 gel slices), nanoLC-MS/MS analysis of each gel band with a nanoAcquity LC-system (Waters) coupled to a Q-Exactive Plus Orbitrap (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer (90-minutes gradient) - Cell fractionation into Triton X-100 soluble and insoluble fractions + 1D SDS-PAGE separation (20 gel slices), nanoLC-MS/MS of each gel band with a nanoAcquity LC-system (Waters) coupled to a QExactive Plus Orbitrap (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer (70-minutes gradient) - Total cell lysate + long gradient runs, nanoLC-MS/MS analysis of the total peptide extract with an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Dionex) coupled to a Q-Exactive Plus Orbitrap (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer (300 or 480-minutes gradient) - Total cell lysate + high pH reversed phase peptide fractionation (10 peptide fractions), nanoLC-MS/MS analysis of each peptide fraction with an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Dionex) coupled to a Q-Exactive Plus Orbitrap (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer (105-minutes gradient)

### Data Protocol
Protein database: UniProt-Swissprot (release 2015-12-02, 84 362 protein coding genes sequences (canonical and isoforms))  Software:  Mascot Distiller, Mascot v.2.5.1 (Matrix Science), Proline software (http://proline.profiproteomics.fr/; contact: christophe.bruley@cea.fr) Maximum missed cleavages: 1 Mass tolerance for parent ion: 5 ppm. Mass tolerance for fragment ion: 25 mmu Fixed modification: Carbamidomethyl (C) Variable modifications: Acetyl(Protein N-term), Oxydation (M) Validation was performed through the target-decoy approach, using the Proline software (http://proline.profiproteomics.fr/), by adjusting the FDR at 1%, at peptide- and protein-level. At peptide level, only the PSM with the best Mascot score was conserved for each given peptide sequence.

### Publication Abstract
The Chromosome-Centric Human Proteome Project (C-HPP) aims to identify "missing" proteins in the neXtProt knowledgebase. We present an in-depth proteomics analysis of the human sperm proteome to identify testis-enriched missing proteins. Using protein extraction procedures and LC-MS/MS analysis, we detected 235 proteins (PE2-PE4) for which no previous evidence of protein expression was annotated. Through LC-MS/MS and LC-PRM analysis, data mining, and immunohistochemistry, we confirmed the expression of 206 missing proteins (PE2-PE4) in line with current HPP guidelines (version 2.0). Parallel reaction monitoring acquisition and sythetic heavy labeled peptides targeted 36 &#x226a;one-hit wonder&#x226b; candidates selected based on prior peptide spectrum match assessment. 24 were validated with additional predicted and specifically targeted peptides. Evidence was found for 16 more missing proteins using immunohistochemistry on human testis sections. The expression pattern for some of these proteins was specific to the testis, and they could possibly be valuable markers with fertility assessment applications. Strong evidence was also found of four "uncertain" proteins (PE5); their status should be re-examined. We show how using a range of sample preparation techniques combined with MS-based analysis, expert knowledge, and complementary antibody-based techniques can produce data of interest to the community. All MS/MS data are available via ProteomeXchange under identifier PXD003947. In addition to contributing to the C-HPP, we hope these data will stimulate continued exploration of the sperm proteome.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-srm, Fractionation, Sperm, Ihc, Missing proteins, Hpp

### Affiliations
CEA - Life Science Division
CEA, BIG, BGE lab, EDyP team, Grenoble, FR

### Submitter
Yves Vandenbrouck

### Lab Head
Dr Christophe Bruley
CEA, BIG, BGE lab, EDyP team, Grenoble, FR


