### Accession
PXD041004

### Title
ABCB5+ limbal epithelial stem cells inhibit developmental, but promote inflammatory (lymph)angiogenesis while preventing corneal inflammation

### Description
ABCB5 is marker for Limbal epithilal stem cells.  A comparison between  ABCB5+ versus ABCB5- cultured human limbal epithelial cells was carried out to evaluate the properties of the limbal stem cell ABCB5+ with a special focus on their role in inflammation and  angiogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
Sample Preparation by SP3 Cell pellets from FACS-sorted cells were lysed in 50 µl SDS in PBS using a SONOPULS mini20 sonifier (Bandelin). Protein content was measured with the Pierce BCS protein assay and 20 µg were used for protein digestion according to the single-pot solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation (Hughes 2019). LCMS Data Independent Acquisition Used system Samples were analyzed on a Q Exactive Exploris 480 (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer equipped with a FAIMSpro differential ion mobility device that was coupled to an UltiMate 3000 nLC (all Thermo Scientific). Samples were loaded onto a 5 µm PepMap Trap cartridge precolumn (Thermo Scientific) and reverse-flushed onto an in-house packed analytical pulled-tip column (30 cm — 75 µm I.D., filled with 2.7 µm Poroshell EC120 C18, Agilent). Peptides were chromatographically separated at a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min and the following gradient: initial 2% B (0.1% formic acid in 80 % acetonitrile), up to 6& in 1 min, up to 32% B in 72 min, up to 55% B within 7.0 min and up to 95% solvent B within 2.0 min, followed by a 6 min column wash with 95% solvent B. The FAIMS pro was operated at -50 compensation voltage and electrode temperatures of 99.5 °C for the inner and 85 °C for the outer electrode. Data independent acquisition of samples MS1 scans were acquired from 390 m/z to 1010 m/z at 15k resolution. Maximum injection time was set to 22 ms and the AGC target to 100%. MS2 scans ranged from 300 m/z to 1500 m/z and were acquired at 15k resolution with a maximum injection time of 22 msec and an AGC target of 100%.  DIA scans covering the precursor range from 400 - 1000 m/z and were acquired in 75 x 8 m/z staggered windows resulting in 150 nominal 4 m/z windows after demultiplexing. All scans were stored as centroid.

### Data Protocol
Thermo raw files were demultiplexed and transformed to mzML files using the msconvert module in Proteowizard. A Human canonical Swissprot fasta file (downloaded 26.6.2020) was converted to a Prosit upload file with the convert tool in encyclopedia 0.9.0 (Searle 2018) using default settings: Trypsin, up to 1 missed cleavage, range 396 m/z – 1004 m/z, charge states 2+ and 3+, default charge state 3 and NCE 33. The csv file was uploaded to the Prosit webserver and converted to a spectrum library in generic text format (Gessulat 2019). The resulting library (20374 protein isoforms, 28307 protein groups and 1626266 precursors) was used in DIA-NN 1.7.16 (Demichev 2020) to create a library directly from acquired sample data using the MBR function. The applied settings were: Output will be filtered at 0.01 FDR, N-terminal methionine excision enabled, maximum number of missed cleavages set to 1, min peptide length set to 7, max peptide length set to 30, min precursor m/z set to 400, Max precursor m/z set to 1000, cysteine carbamidomethylation enabled as a fixed modification, double pass search enabled.

### Publication Abstract
The limbus, the vascularized junction between the cornea and conjunctiva, is thought to function as a barrier against corneal neovascularization. However, the exact mechanisms regulating this remain unknown. In this study, the limbal epithelial stem cell (LESC) marker ABCB5 was used to investigate the role of LESCs in corneal neovascularization. In an ABCB5KO model, a mild but significant increase of limbal lymphatic and blood vascular network complexity was observed in developing mice (4 weeks) but not in adult mice. Conversely, when using a cornea suture model, the WT animals exhibited a mild but significant increase in the number of lymphatic vessel sprouts compared to the ABCB5KO, suggesting a contextual anti-lymphangiogenic effect of ABCB5 on the limbal vasculature during development, but a pro-lymphangiogenic effect under inflammatory challenge in adulthood. In addition, conditioned media from ABCB5-positive cultured human limbal epithelial cells (ABCB5+) stimulated human blood and lymphatic endothelial cell proliferation and migration. Finally, a proteomic analysis demonstrated ABCB5+ cells have a pro(lymph)angiogenic as well as an anti-inflammatory profile. These data suggest a novel dual, context-dependent role of ABCB5+ LESCs, inhibiting developmental but promoting inflammatory (lymph)angiogenesis in adulthood and exerting anti-inflammatory effects. These findings are of high clinical relevance in relation to LESC therapy against blindness.

### Keywords
Cornea, (lymph)angiogenesis, Abcb5, Limbal epithelial stem cells

### Affiliations
1. Dept. of Ophthalmology, University of Cologne 2. Institute for Genome Stability in Ageing and Disease, CECAD Research Center, Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 26, 50931, Cologne, Germany
CECAD Research Center

### Submitter
Prerana Wagle

### Lab Head
Dr Maria Notara
1. Dept. of Ophthalmology, University of Cologne 2. Institute for Genome Stability in Ageing and Disease, CECAD Research Center, Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 26, 50931, Cologne, Germany


