### Accession
PXD036803

### Title
Integrated omic analysis reveals multilevel control of renal and systemic metabolism by the renal tubular circadian clock

### Description
Circadian rhythmicity in renal function suggests a requirement for circadian adaptations in renal metabolism. We studied circadian changes in renal metabolic pathways using integrated transcriptomic, proteomic and metabolomic analysis performed on control mice and mice deficient in the circadian clock gene Bmal1 in the renal tubule (cKOt mice).  Proteins were extracted from whole kidneys of 60 mice. Of these, 30 were conditional knockouts of Arntl (Bmal1) and 30 were of control genotype. They were housed under 12-hours light/12-hours dark cycles and were sacrificed at six different time points: zeitgeber time ZT 0, ZT 4, ZT 8, ZT 12, ZT 16, ZT 20 ( ZT 0 being the time of light on and ZT 12 the time of light off).  Five replicates per genotype and time point were analysed.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue extraction  Frozen kidney tissue samples were homogenized first in cold 80% (v/v) methanol using a Fastprep system for 2x 30s. After removal of the solvent supernatant, ground tissue was re-homogenized in  miST buffer (1% sodium deoxycholate, 30 mM Tris pH 8.6, 10 mM DTT ) in the FastPrep as for the previous step.  Crude homogenates were heated at 95C.  Samples were frozen in aliquots of 100 ug, adjusted at 2ug/ul with miST buffer. SILAC mouse tissues were handled in the same manner up to storage at -80C. An equimolar pool of tissues from SILAC mouse at ZT=0 and ZT=12h was prepared following the same procedure and used as heavy isotope reference.  Digestion 100ug of each sample were thawed, mixed 1:1 with the heavy SILAC reference and alkylated  with chloroacetamide (final 40 mM) at RT for 45min. Samples were digested with Trypsin/LysC (Promega , Prod.Nr. V5072) at a final ratio of 1:50 in two steps (1+2h) at 37C.   Cleanup and fractionation  100ug of each digest were processed further supplemented with 2 volumes of 1%TFA in 100% isopropanol and loaded onto a conditioned Oasis MCX SPE microplate (Waters Corp., Milford, MA, prod.#186001830BA). After washing, samples were eluted in three fractions,  with i) 75mM Ammonium acetate in 50% MeCN (pH 4), ii) 150 mM Ammonium acetate in 50% MeCN (pH 5.6) and iii)  1% NH3 in 80% MeCN/19%water (pH>10), respectively.  LC-MS Dried fractions were resuspended in 60ul of 2% MeCN, 0.05% TFA. 5ul of each sample were analysed on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) interfaced through a nano-electrospray ion source to an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on a reversed-phase custom packed 40 cm C18 column (75 μm ID, 100Å, Reprosil Pur 1.9 μm particles) with a 4-76% (v/v) acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (140 minutes gradient). Full MS survey scans were performed at 120'000 resolution. A data-dependent acquisition (DDA) method, controlled by Xcalibur software, was used to select precursors in “top speed” mode with a cycle time of 0.6 second. Masses were isolated with a window of 1.6 m/z, fragmentation done in HCD mode with 32% energy, and fragments analysed in the ion trap. Peptides selected for MS/MS were excluded from further fragmentation during 60 seconds.  References   Wisniewski, J.R., Gaugaz, F.Z. (2015) Fast and Sensitive Total Protein and Peptide Assays for Proteomic Analysis. Anal. Chem. 87(8): 4110-4116. Kulak, N. A., Pichler, G., Paron, I., Nagaraj, N., & Mann, M. (2014). Minimal, encapsulated proteomic-sample processing applied to copy-number estimation in eukaryotic cells. Nature Methods, 11(3), 319–24.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis Raw MS data were processed by the MaxQuant software (version 1.6.14.0) integrating the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al 2008, 2011) . The SWISSPROT mouse proteome database of September 19th, 2020 including validated splice variants was used (25’321 sequences), with sequences of common contaminants added. False discovery rate filtering of both peptide spectrum matches (PSM) and protein identifications was fixed at 1%. Search parameters allowed for 2 missed cleavages and protease specificity was set to trypsin (K, R) with cleavage after prolines included. Carbamidomethyl on cysteines was set as fixed modification, and acetyl at the protein N-terminal and oxidation on methionines as variable modification. SILAC labelling was specified for 13C6-Lys (“Lys6”). Initial mass precursor tolerance was 20 ppm and was then dynamically adjusted to 5-6 ppm by MaxQuant after recalibration, and fragment mass tolerance was fixed at 0.5 Da.  The MaxQuant output file proteinGroups.txt was further processed with the Perseus software (Tyanova et al.) to remove proteins only identified by modified peptides, reverse hits and known contaminants. All SILAC ratios were log2 transformed.    References Cox, J., & Mann, M. (2008). MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nature Biotechnology, 26(12), 1367–72.  Cox, J., Neuhauser, N., Michalski, A., Scheltema, R. A., Olsen, J. V, & Mann, M. (2011). Andromeda: a peptide search engine integrated into the MaxQuant environment. Journal of Proteome Research, 10(4), 1794–805.  Tyanova, S., Temu, T., Sinitcyn, P., et al. (2016) The Perseus computational platform for comprehensive analysis of (prote)omics data. Nat Methods 13(9):731–740.

### Publication Abstract
Circadian rhythmicity in renal function suggests rhythmic adaptations in renal metabolism. To decipher the role of the circadian clock in renal metabolism, we studied diurnal changes in renal metabolic pathways using integrated transcriptomic, proteomic, and metabolomic analysis performed on control mice and mice with an inducible deletion of the circadian clock regulator Bmal1 in the renal tubule (cKOt). With this unique resource, we demonstrated that approximately 30% of RNAs, approximately 20% of proteins, and approximately 20% of metabolites are rhythmic in the kidneys of control mice. Several key metabolic pathways, including NAD+ biosynthesis, fatty acid transport, carnitine shuttle, and &#x3b2;-oxidation, displayed impairments in kidneys of cKOt mice, resulting in perturbed mitochondrial activity. Carnitine reabsorption from primary urine was one of the most affected processes with an approximately 50% reduction in plasma carnitine levels and a parallel systemic decrease in tissue carnitine content. This suggests that the circadian clock in the renal tubule controls both kidney and systemic physiology.

### Keywords
Mouse kidney; control mice; mice ko for arntl in the renal tubule; renal circadian proteome

### Affiliations
University of Lausanne
Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Lausanne,Lausanne, Switzerland

### Submitter
Manfredo Quadroni

### Lab Head
Dr Dmitri Firsov
Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Lausanne,Lausanne, Switzerland


