### Accession
PXD005343

### Title
Proteome of Tcte1 deficient mouse sperm

### Description
Sperm motility is one of the most important determinants of male fertility. Elucidating the different expression proteins of nomal and asthenospermia spermatozoa should advance our understanding of the underlying molecular mechanisms. Tcte1 null mouse sperm reduced motility and failed to display the forward progressive motile. With tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling and mass spectrometry analysis， 3697 proteins were quantified from Widetype and Tcte1 deficient mouse  spermatozoa. Of these proteins, 447 were found to be different expression proteins (DEPs), including 398 proteins down regulated (DDEPs, 89%) and only 49 proteins up regulated.

### Sample Protocol
Epididymal sperm were lysed by protein extraction buffer consisting of 8 M urea, 75 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris, pH 8.2, 1% (v/v) EDTA-free protease inhibitor, 1 mM NaF, 1 mM β-glycerophosphate, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 10 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM PMSF. Lysates were then diluted to 1.6M urea with 25 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.2. CaCl2 was added to a concentration of 1mM, and digested overnight at 37°C with trypsin in a 1:200 enzyme:protein ratio. Following digestion, samples were acidified by TFA(0.4% vol/vol) (Sigma-Aldrich) and subsequently desalted using a OASIS HLB 1cc Vac cartridge (Waters) and then lyophilized.For TMT labeling, purified peptides were reconstituted in 200 mM TEAB. 22ul of TMT reagent (Pierce) was added to 45ug peptides measured by 280 and allowed to react for 1 hour at room temperature. WT samples were labeled with the 126, 128, and 130 labels and the KO with the 127, 129, and 131 labels.The reaction was quenched for 15 min by addition of 5% hydroxylamine. After TMT labeling, all 6 samples were combined and purified using a OASIS HLB 1cc Vac cartridge (Waters) and then lyophilized. Peptide mixture was resuspended in 90ul Buffer A（10 mM ammonium acetate, pH 10）and loaded onto a XBridgeTM BEH130 C18 column (2.1×150 mm, 3.5 μm; Waters) with the UltiMate® 3000 HPLC systems at a flow rate of 200 μl/min. 120 fractions were collected with a 60 min gradient of 0%–7% buffer B (90% ACN/10 mMammoniumacetate, pH 10) for 3 min, 7%–42%B for40 min, 42%–70% B for 12 min, followed by 5 min at 70% B, monitored at 214 nm based on the UV-light trace. These 120 fractions were then pooled to generate the final 30 fractions using the nonadjacent pooling scheme, such as 1,31,61,91 were combined.The fractions were then dried in vacuum. For MS analyses, peptides were resuspended in 0.1% FA and analyzed using a LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Finnigan, San Jose, CA) coupled on line to a Proxeon Easy-nLC 1000. Peptides were first loaded onto a trap column(75μm×2cm, Acclaim® PepMap100 C18 column, 3μm, 100 Å; DIONEX, Sunnyvale, CA) at a flow rate of 10 μl/min, and then transferred to a reverse-phase microcapillary column (75μm×25cm, Acclaim® PepMap RSLC C18 column, 2μm, 100 Å; DIONEX, Sunnyvale, CA) at a flow rate of 300nl/min. The HPLC solvent A was 0.1% FA, and the solvent B was 100% ACN, 0.1% FA.The following linear gradient(3% to 8% buffer B for 3 min, 8% to 29% buffer B for 176min , 29% to 41% buffer B for 15 min, 41% to 100% buffer B for 1 min, 100% buffer B for 10min) was used.  Peptide analysis was performed on a LTQ Orbitrap Velos in data-dependent acquisition mode. An MS survey scan was obtained for the m/z range 400-1800 at a resolution of 60,000, and a low-energy MS/MS scan of every precursor in the linear ion trap (collision induced dissociation, CID) followed by a higher energy MS/MS scan in the octopole collision cell (higher energy collision dissociation, HCD) was acquired from the survey scan for the eight most intense ions (as determined by X-calibur mass spectrometer software in real time). Dynamic mass exclusion windows of 60 s were used, and siloxane (m/z 445.120025) was used as a lock mass.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were processed with MaxQuant software (version 1.2.2.5) using the UniProt mouse proteome database (version 2014_08). The reverse strategy was used to estimate the false discovery rate. Trypsin/P was set as proteolytic enzyme and, a maximum of two missed cleavage sites was permitted. A minimum peptide length of six was required. Except for TMT labels, carbamidomethyl (C) was set as fixed modification. Variable modifications were oxidation (M) and acetyl (protein N-term). The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set to 20 ppm at the first search as applied in MaxQuant for initial mass recalibration. For the main search, the mass tolerance for precursor ions was set to 6 ppm. The mass tolerance for MS/MS fragment ions was set to 0.5 Da. Protein quantification was calculated by combining MaxQuant identification results according to Libra algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
Flagella and cilia are critical cellular organelles that provide a means for cells to sense and progress through their environment. The central component of flagella and cilia is the axoneme, which comprises the "9+2" microtubule arrangement, dynein arms, radial spokes, and the nexin-dynein regulatory complex (<i>N</i>-DRC). Failure to properly assemble components of the axoneme leads to defective flagella and in humans leads to a collection of diseases referred to as ciliopathies. Ciliopathies can manifest as severe syndromic diseases that affect lung and kidney function, central nervous system development, bone formation, visceral organ organization, and reproduction. T-Complex-Associated-Testis-Expressed 1 (TCTE1) is an evolutionarily conserved axonemal protein present from <i>Chlamydomonas</i> (DRC5) to mammals that localizes to the <i>N</i>-DRC. Here, we show that mouse TCTE1 is testis-enriched in its expression, with its mRNA appearing in early round spermatids and protein localized to the flagellum. TCTE1 is 498 aa in length with a leucine rich repeat domain at the C terminus and is present in eukaryotes containing a flagellum. Knockout of <i>Tcte1</i> results in male sterility because <i>Tcte1</i>-null spermatozoa show aberrant motility. Although the axoneme is structurally normal in <i>Tcte1</i> mutant spermatozoa, <i>Tcte1</i>-null sperm demonstrate a significant decrease of ATP, which is used by dynein motors to generate the bending force of the flagellum. These data provide a link to defining the molecular intricacies required for axoneme function, sperm motility, and male fertility.

### Keywords
Mouse, Sperm, Tmt6, Tcte1

### Affiliations
Central Laboratory, Wuxi Maternity and Child Health Care Hospital Affiliated to Nanjing Medical University
State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Nanjing Medical University

### Submitter
Tao Zhou

### Lab Head
Dr Jiahao Sha
State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Nanjing Medical University


