### Accession
PXD021216

### Title
Alkaloids modify the poison frog proteome

### Description
Poison frogs sequester chemical defenses from their diet of leaf litter arthropods for defense against predation. Little is known about the physiological adaptations that confer this unusual bioaccumulation ability. We conducted an alkaloid-feeding experiment with the Diablito poison frog (Oophaga sylvatica) to determine how quickly alkaloids are accumulated and how toxins modify frog physiology using quantitative proteomics. Diablito frogs rapidly accumulated the alkaloid decahydroquinoline within four days, and dietary alkaloid exposure modified protein abundance in the intestines, liver, and skin. Many proteins that increased in abundance with toxin accumulation are plasma glycoproteins, including the complement system and the toxin-binding protein saxiphilin. Other protein classes that change in abundance with toxin accumulation are membrane proteins involved in small molecule transport and metabolism. Overall, this work shows poison frogs can rapidly accumulate alkaloids, which alter carrier protein abundance, initiate an immune response, and alter small molecule transport and metabolism dynamics across tissues

### Sample Protocol
Flash frozen tissues were crushed to a powder in liquid nitrogen using a mortar and pestle. Tissue powder was  resuspended in a lysis buffer with protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich) at 4°C for 15 min rotating and then centrifuged for 20,000 x g for 10 min at 4°C to pellet cell debris. Lysate equivalent to 300 μg of protein from each tissue type was transferred to a chilled microfuge tube and the protein precipitated, resuspended in 8M urea in 100mM EPPS pH 8.5, reduced with 5 mM tris-(2-carboxyethyl)-phosphine (TCEP), at room temperature for 25 min, and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 30 min in the dark. Excess iodoacetamide was quenched with 15 mM dithiothreitol at room temperature for 15 min in the dark before again precipitating the proteins. Protein disks were resuspended in 10ul of 8M urea, 200mM EPPS pH 8.5 with gentle vortexing followed by the addition of 90ul 200mM EPPS pH 8.5 to reach 100 µl and dilute to 0.8M urea. Proteins were then digested at room temperature with gentle agitation for 12 hrs with LysC protease at a 100:1 protein-to-protease ratio. Then, trypsin was added at a 100:1 protein-to-protease ratio and the reaction temperature raised to 37°C for 6hrs. Digests were spun at 10,000 g for 10 min and the supernatant transferred to a new tube. Peptide concentrations were measured using the Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide assay kit (Thermo Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Following quantification, 50 µg of peptides from each sample were labelled with 5 µl of Tandem Mass Tag 10-plex (TMT, Thermo Scientific) reagent (0.02mg/µl) in 200mM EPPS pH8.5 at 30% acetonitrile (v/v) for 1 hour before quenching the reaction with 10 µl of  5% hydroxylamine. A pool of each control sample was labelled collectively to create a bridge in an additional channel.The TMT-labelled samples from each tissue from a given collection were then pooled in equimolar ratios, as verified by an MS2-only ratio check of an aliquot. The pooled sample was vacuum centrifuged to near dryness before resuspension in bicarbonate buffer, and separation by basic pH RP HPLC on an Agilent 1100 pump equipped with a degasser and a photodiode array (PDA) detector measuring at 220 and 280 nm wavelengths (Thermo Fisher Scientific - Waltham, MA). Peptides were subjected to a 50 min linear gradient from 8% to 80% acetonitrile in 10mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8 at a flow rate of 0.6 mL/min over an Agilent 300Extend C18 column for 75 minutes (3.5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID and 250 mm in length) to produce 96 equal volume fractions. The fractions were re-pooled down to 24 fractions, and vacuum centrifuged to reduce volume. The pooled fractions were acidified and then desalted via StageTip, vacuum centrifuged to near dryness, and reconstituted in 5% acetonitrile, 5% formic acid for injection into an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos.  Twelve fractions per sample. Each sample was separated along were analyzed following a three hour gradient separation using a 4-40% isocratic gradient over 3 hours, eluting into electrospray for analysis by mass spectrometry using a TOP10 method,  where each FTMS1 scan was used to select up to 10 MS2 precursors for CID-MS2 followed by measurement in the ion trap.  Each MS2 was used to select precursors (SPS ions) for the MS3 scan which measured reporter ion abundance for the 10 samples simultaneously (McAlister et al., 2014). Instrument parameter settings included an FTMS1 resolution  of 120,000, ITMS2 isolation window  of 0.4 m/z,120 ms ITMS2 max ion time, ITMS2 AGC set to 2E4, ITMS2 CID energy of 35%, SPS ion count allowing up to 10 precursors, FTMS3 isolation window of 1.2 m/z, 150 ms FTMS3 max ion time, FTMS3 AGC set to 1.5E5, and FTMS3 resolution of 50,000.

### Data Protocol
Samples were searched with the Sequest algorithm (Ver. 28) against a custom O. sylvatica proteome database. There are no high quality genomes available for poison frogs and thus we are limited to transcriptome-based references. We confirm this transcriptome-based method was the best approach by comparing the number of unique peptides that matched the O. sylvatica transcriptome-derived proteome compared to Xenopus and human reference proteomes (Supp Figure S2). All analyses were performed with a database generated from a O. sylvatica transcriptome (Caty et al., 2019) using the PHROG workflow (proteomic reference with heterogeneous RNA omitting the genome; (Wühr et al. 2014)), which was concatenated with their reversed sequences as decoys for FDR determination. Common contaminant sequences were similarly included. For searches we restricted the precursor ion tolerance to 50 ppm, and set the product ion tolerance window to 0.9 m/z, allowed up to two missed cleavages, included static medication of lysine residues and peptide N-termini with TMT tags (+229.163 Da), static carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da), and variable oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da). The search results were combined and filtered to a 1% FDR at the peptide and protein levels using linear discriminant analysis and the target-decoy strategy (Elias and Gygi, 2010; Huttlin et al., 2010). MS3 spectra were processed as signal-to-noise ratios for each reporter ion based on noise levels within a 25 Th window. Proteins quantitation was the result of summing reporter ion intensities across all matching PSMs. PSMs with isolation specificity below 0.7, MS3 spectra with more than eight TMT reporter ion channels missing, or MS3 spectra with a TMT reporter ion summed signal to noise ratio that is less than 200 were removed before analysis. Overall, several thousand proteins were detected in each tissue type (5328 in the intestines, 5837 in the liver, and 5987 in the skin).

### Publication Abstract
Poison frogs sequester chemical defenses from their diet of leaf litter arthropods for defense against predation. Little is known about the physiological adaptations that confer this unusual bioaccumulation ability. We conducted an alkaloid-feeding experiment with the Diablito poison frog (<i>Oophaga sylvatica</i>) to determine how quickly alkaloids are accumulated and how toxins modify frog physiology using quantitative proteomics. Diablito frogs rapidly accumulated the alkaloid decahydroquinoline within 4 days, and dietary alkaloid exposure altered protein abundance in the intestines, liver and skin. Many proteins that increased in abundance with decahydroquinoline accumulation are plasma glycoproteins, including the complement system and the toxin-binding protein saxiphilin. Other protein classes that change in abundance with decahydroquinoline accumulation are membrane proteins involved in small molecule transport and metabolism. Overall, this work shows that poison frogs can rapidly accumulate alkaloids, which alter carrier protein abundance, initiate an immune response, and alter small molecule transport and metabolism dynamics across tissues.

### Keywords
Toxin, Poison dart frog, Liver, Gut, Complement system, Skin, Saxiphilin, Cytochrome p450s

### Affiliations
Department of Biology Stanford University 371 Jane Stanford Way Stanford, CA 94305
Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Jeremy OConnell

### Lab Head
Dr Lauren A. O’Connell
Department of Biology Stanford University 371 Jane Stanford Way Stanford, CA 94305


