### Accession
PXD027759

### Title
Identification of proximal SUMO-dependent interactors using SUMO-ID

### Description
Proximity-dependent labelling methods are based on promiscuous labeling enzymes that produce reactive molecules that covalently bind neighbor proteins. Labeled proteins can be then purified and identified using affinity-purification coupled to mass spectrometry methods23. Proximity-dependent biotin identification (BioID)24 uses a promiscuously active Escherichia coli biotin ligase (BirA*) generated by a point mutation (R118G) to biotinylate lysines in nearby proteins within an estimated range of 10 nm25. By fusing BirA* to specific proteins, BioID efficiently identifies interactors at physiological levels in living cells26. It has been extensively used in the Ub field, for instance, to identify substrates of E3 ligases27,28. Recently, a more efficient version of BioID, termed TurboID, has been developed29, being this more suitable for transient protein-protein interaction (PPI) detection. Several studies have developed split-versions and applied “protein fragment complementation” to BioID and TurboID, where proximal biotinylation is dependent on the proximity of the fusion partners, opening new opportunities for spatial and temporal identification of complex-dependent interactomes30,31.  To study how SUMOylation and SUMO-SIM interactions can lead to other roles and fates for particular substrates poses particular challenges. SUMOylation occurs transiently and often in a small percentage of a given substrate. Modified proteins can be readily deSUMOylated and SUMO can be recycled and passed to other substrates. SUMO-SIM interactions are also difficult to analyze due to their weak affinity (Kd 1-100 μM). To overcome those technical issues, we developed SUMO-ID, a new strategy based on Split-TurboID to identify interactors of specific substrates dependent on SUMO conjugation or interaction. Using PML as a model, we demonstrate that SUMO-ID can enrich for factors that depend on PML-SUMO interaction. Importantly, the identified proteins are represented among proximal interactors of PML identified using full-length TurboID. We also applied SUMO-ID to a less-characterized SUMO substrate, Spalt Like Transcription Factor 1 (SALL1), and identified both known and novel interactors that depend on intact SUMOylation sites in SALL1. SUMO-ID is thus a powerful tool to study transient and dynamic SUMO-dependent interaction events. The developed methodology is generic and therefore widely applicable in the Ub and UbL field to identify readers of these modifications for individual target proteins to improve our insight in non-covalent signal transduction by Ub and UbL.

### Sample Protocol
Samples eluted from the NeutrAvidin beads were separated in SDS-PAGE (50% loaded) and stained with Sypro Ruby (Invitrogen) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Gel lanes were sliced into 3 pieces as accurately as possible to guarantee reproducibility. The slices were subsequently washed in milli-Q water. Reduction and alkylation were performed using dithiothreitol (10 mM DTT in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate) at 56°C for 20 min, followed by iodoacetamide (50 mM chloroacetamide in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate) for another 20 minutes in the dark. Gel pieces were dried and incubated with trypsin (12.5 μg/ml in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate) for 20 minutes on ice. After rehydration, the trypsin supernatant was discarded. Gel pieces were hydrated with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and incubated overnight at 37°C. After digestion, acidic peptides were cleaned with TFA 0.1% and dried out in a RVC2 25 speedvac concentrator (Christ). Peptides were resuspended in 10 μl 0.1% formic acid (FA) and sonicated for 5 min prior to analysis.

### Data Protocol
Label-free quantitation was performed by MaxQuant 1.6.17. Two-sample T-test comparisons were performed by Perseus 1.6.5

### Publication Abstract
The fast dynamics and reversibility of posttranslational modifications by the ubiquitin family pose significant challenges for research. Here we present SUMO-ID, a technology that merges proximity biotinylation by TurboID and protein-fragment complementation to find SUMO-dependent interactors of proteins of interest. We develop an optimized split-TurboID version and show SUMO interaction-dependent labelling of proteins proximal to PML and RANGAP1. SUMO-dependent interactors of PML are involved in transcription, DNA damage, stress response and SUMO modification and are highly enriched in SUMO Interacting Motifs, but may only represent a subset of the total PML proximal proteome. Likewise, SUMO-ID also allow us to identify interactors of SUMOylated SALL1, a less characterized SUMO substrate. Furthermore, using TP53 as a substrate, we identify SUMO1, SUMO2 and Ubiquitin preferential interactors. Thus, SUMO-ID is a powerful tool that allows to study the consequences of SUMO-dependent interactions, and may further unravel the complexity of the ubiquitin code.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Lcms

### Affiliations
Proteomics Platform CIC bioGUNE, Bizkaia Tec. Park. Build. 800. Derio 48160 Spain
Proteomics Platform

### Submitter
Felix Elortza

### Lab Head
Dr Felix Elortza
Proteomics Platform CIC bioGUNE, Bizkaia Tec. Park. Build. 800. Derio 48160 Spain


