### Accession
PXD017145

### Title
Predictive protein biomarker signatures and the corresponding transcriptional cell state changes in human lung fibrosis

### Description
Single cell genomics enables characterization of disease specific cell states, while improvements in mass spectrometry workflows bring the clinical use of body fluid proteomics within sight. However, the correspondence of peripheral protein signatures with cell state changes in diseased organs is currently unknown. Here, we use single cell RNA-seq and proteomics from large patient cohorts of pulmonary fibrosis and establish that predictive protein signatures in body fluids correspond to specific cellular changes in the lung. We determined transcriptional changes in 45 cell types across three patient cohorts and quantified bronchoalveolar lavage fluid and plasma proteins to discover protein signatures and associated cell state changes that were linked to diagnosis, lung function, smoking and injury status. Altered expression of the novel marker of lung health CRTAC1 in alveolar epithelium is robustly reported in patient plasma. With further improvements of this concept and deeper coverage of plasma proteomes, we envision future longitudinal profiling of body fluid signatures coupled to deep learning for non-invasive prediction and monitoring of pathological cell state changes in patient organs.

### Sample Protocol
The BAL fluid depleted from cells was subjected to mass spectrometry analysis. Proteins were precipitated from 300µl BAL fluid using 80% ice cold acetone, followed by reduction and alkylation of proteins and overnight digestion into peptides using Trypsin and LysC proteases (1:100) as previously described (Schiller et al, MSB 2015). Peptides were purified using stage-tips containing a Poly-styrene-divinylbenzene copolymer modified with sulfonic acid groups (SDB-RPS) material (3M, St. Paul, MN 55144-1000, USA) as previously described (Kulak et al, 2014). Approximately 2 μg of peptides were separated in four hour gradients on a 50-cm long (75-μm inner diameter) column packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 μm resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH). Reverse-phase chromatography was performed with an EASY-nLC 1000 ultra-high pressure system (Thermo Fisher Scientific), which was coupled to a Q-Exactive Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded with buffer A (0.1% (v/v) formic acid) and eluted with a nonlinear 240-min gradient of 5–60% buffer B (0.1% (v/v) formic acid, 80% (v/v) acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. After each gradient, the column was washed with 95% buffer B and re-equilibrated with buffer A. Column temperature was kept at 50 °C by an in-house designed oven with a Peltier element (Thakur et al, 2011) and operational parameters were monitored in real time by the SprayQC software (Scheltema & Mann, 2012). MS data were acquired with a shotgun proteomics method, where in each cycle a full scan, providing an overview of the full complement of isotope patterns visible at that particular time point, is follow by up-to ten data-dependent MS/MS scans on the most abundant not yet sequenced isotopes (top10 method) (Michalski et al, 2011a). Target value for the full scan MS spectra was 3 × 106 charges in the 300−1,650 m/z range with a maximum injection time of 20 ms and a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 400. The resulting mass spectra were processed using the MaxQuant software (Cox and Mann, 2008), which enabled label free protein quantification (Tyanova et al., 2016).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry raw files were processed using the MaxQuant software58 (version 1.5.3.34). As previously described49, peak lists were searched against the human Uniprot FASTA database (November 2016), and a common contaminants database (247 entries) by the Andromeda search engine59. Pearson correlation analysis, t-test statistics, ANOVA tests, or Fisher’s exact test were performed using the GraphPad Prism 5 software. Protein expression was corrected for age in the following manner. Age was regressed out from the protein expression data using the R function aov(). The residuals from this model were used in subsequent analysis. All other statistical and bioinformatics operations (such as normalization, data integration, annotation enrichment analysis, correlation analysis, hierarchical clustering, principal component analysis, and multiple-hypothesis testing corrections), were run with the Perseus software package (version 1.5.3.0 and 1.6.1.1.) (Tyanova et al, 2016).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Biomarker, Systems medicine, Data integration, Proteomics, Fibrosis, Single cell rna-seq

### Affiliations
Helmholtz Zentrum München, Institute of Lung Biology and Disease, Group Systems Medicine of Chronic Lung Disease, Member of the German Center for Lung Research (DZL), Munich, Germany
CPC/ILBD HemholtzZentrum München

### Submitter
Christoph Mayr

### Lab Head
Dr Herbert B. Schiller
Helmholtz Zentrum München, Institute of Lung Biology and Disease, Group Systems Medicine of Chronic Lung Disease, Member of the German Center for Lung Research (DZL), Munich, Germany


