### Accession
PXD001045

### Title
Biocathode metaproteomics -  A previously uncharacterized, non-photosynthetic member of the Chromatiaceae is the primary CO2 fixing constituent in a self-regenerating biocathode

### Description
This project focust on proteogenomic characterization of a robust low complexity biocathode community which was enriched from, and cultivated on, the cathode of a microbial solar cell (MSC). This consortium forms a multi-cell layer thick biofilm on the poised electrode surface (+310 mV SHE) and can directly use electrical current as an electron donor to fix CO2 and reduce O2.

### Sample Protocol
Biofilms from either graphite blocks or cloths were extracted by several extractions methods to decrease the protein extraction bias on biological interpretation Methods for protein extraction and analysis were adapted from from previously developed methods {Leary, 2013; Leary, 2012}

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were extracted by AB Sciex MS Data Converter (version 2.0) then searched by Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.4.1) and X! Tandem (The GPM, thegpm.org; version CYCLONE (2010.12.01.1)). Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.2.1, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications.

### Publication Abstract
Biocathode extracellular electron transfer (EET) may be exploited for biotechnology applications, including microbially mediated O2 reduction in microbial fuel cells and microbial electrosynthesis. However, biocathode mechanistic studies needed to improve or engineer functionality have been limited to a few select species that form sparse, homogeneous biofilms characterized by little or no growth. Attempts to cultivate isolates from biocathode environmental enrichments often fail due to a lack of some advantage provided by life in a consortium, highlighting the need to study and understand biocathode consortia in situ. Here, we present metagenomic and metaproteomic characterization of a previously described biocathode biofilm (+310 mV versus a standard hydrogen electrode [SHE]) enriched from seawater, reducing O2, and presumably fixing CO2 for biomass generation. Metagenomics identified 16 distinct cluster genomes, 15 of which could be assigned at the family or genus level and whose abundance was roughly divided between Alpha- and Gammaproteobacteria. A total of 644 proteins were identified from shotgun metaproteomics and have been deposited in the the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD001045. Cluster genomes were used to assign the taxonomic identities of 599 proteins, with Marinobacter, Chromatiaceae, and Labrenzia the most represented. RubisCO and phosphoribulokinase, along with 9 other Calvin-Benson-Bassham cycle proteins, were identified from Chromatiaceae. In addition, proteins similar to those predicted for iron oxidation pathways of known iron-oxidizing bacteria were observed for Chromatiaceae. These findings represent the first description of putative EET and CO2 fixation mechanisms for a self-regenerating, self-sustaining multispecies biocathode, providing potential targets for functional engineering, as well as new insights into biocathode EET pathways using proteomics.

### Keywords
Metaproteomics, Autotrophic, Biofilm, Microbial fuel cell

### Affiliations
Naval Research Laboratory
Naval Research Laboratory Washington, DC

### Submitter
Dasha Leary

### Lab Head
Dr Dasha Leary
Naval Research Laboratory Washington, DC


