### Accession
PXD020564

### Title
Protein phosphorylation in depolarized synaptosomes

### Description
Rat brain synaptosomes were used to study effects of calcium and synaptic vesicle cycling on protein phosphorylation following potassium chloride-induced depolarization.

### Sample Protocol
Synaptosomes prepared from the brains of 5-6 weeks old Whistar rats were pre-incubated with 1.3 mM calcium chloride and treated with C.botulinum cell culture supernatants (strains A and D or C and B). Afterwards, synaptosomes were depolarized for 2 min using potassium chloride. Alternatively, synaptosomes were pre-incubated with 1.3 mM calcium chloride or 0.5 mM EGTA before depolarization. Synaptosomes were lysed and the synaptosomal proteins were extracted and digested with trypsin. Afterwards, phosphopeptides were enriched using TiO2-resin. Phosphopeptides were TMT6-labeled and pre-fractionated using C18-reversed-phase chromatography operated under basic pH (bRP). In parallel, unbound fraction (non-phosphorylated peptides) was collected, TMT6-labeled and pre-fractionated using bRP. bRP-fractions were injected onto a C18 PepMap100 µ-Precolumn (0.3 x 5 mm, 5 µm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected to an in-house packed C18 column (75 µm x 300 mm; Reprosil-Pur 120C18 AQ, 1.9 µm, Dr. Maisch GmbH). For the analysis of phosphorylated peptides, the column was equilibrated at 98% buffer A (0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water) 2% buffer B (80% (v/v) acetonitrile 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water). Peptides were separated using a linear elution gradient ranging from 10% to 25% of buffer B over 60 min followed by a linear increase to 45% of buffer B over 10 min and a washing step at 90% buffer B for 5 min. For the analysis of non-phosphorylated peptides, the column was equilibrated at 95% buffer A and 5% buffer B. Peptides were separated using a linear elution gradient ranging from 10% to 45% of buffer B over 60 min followed by a linear increase to 60% of buffer B over 10 min and a washing step at 90% buffer B for 5 min. Enriched phosphorylated peptide samples were acquired using QExactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) operated in the data-dependent mode. MS1 resolution was set to 120000, 3e6 automatic gain control target and 50 ms maximum injection time. Peptide precursors with a charge state ranging from 2+ to 6+ were isolated using a 0.8 m/z isolation window and fragmented with a normalized collision energy of 33%. Fragment spectra were acquired at a resolution of 30000, 1e5 AGC target, and 130 ms maximum injection time. Non-phosphorylated peptides were acquired using Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Following parameters were set differently: 60000 MS1 resolution, 300% normalized AGC target, 15000 MS2 resolution, 50% normalized AGC target, 54 ms maximum injection time.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed using MaxQuant version 1.6.10.2 using default parameters with some exceptions: 1) fixed modifications: carbamidomethylation; 2) variable modifications: methionine oxidation, acetylation of protein N-termini, phospho(S,T,Y) (only for enriched phosphorylated peptide samples); 3) 5 variable modifications were allowed per peptide; 4) digestion: trypsin, specific, up to two missed cleavage sites; 5) maximal peptide mass: 6000. 6) quantification: reporter ions in MS2 (TMT6plex), minimal parent ion fraction of 0.75. Canonical protein sequences of Rattus norvegicus proteins, Uniprot, February 2019, 29951 entries were used for the search. Additionally, canonical protein sequences in the reference proteome of C. botulinum (strain Hall / ATCC 3502 / NCTC 13319 / Type A), Uniprot, January 2020, 3590 entries, supplemented with sequences of botulinum toxins B, C, and D (strain Okra / Type B1, C. botulinum C phage, C. botulinum D phage, respectively) were used to search unbound peptide fraction (non-phosphorylated).

### Publication Abstract
Synaptic transmission is mediated by the regulated exocytosis of synaptic vesicles. When the presynaptic membrane is depolarized by an incoming action potential, voltage-gated calcium channels open, resulting in the influx of calcium ions that triggers the fusion of synaptic vesicles (SVs) with the plasma membrane. SVs are recycled by endocytosis. Phosphorylation of synaptic proteins plays a major role in these processes, and several studies have shown that the synaptic phosphoproteome changes rapidly in response to depolarization. However, it is unclear which of these changes are directly linked to SV cycling and which might regulate other presynaptic functions that are also controlled by calcium-dependent kinases and phosphatases. To address this question, we analyzed changes in the phosphoproteome using rat synaptosomes in which exocytosis was blocked with botulinum neurotoxins (BoNTs) while depolarization-induced calcium influx remained unchanged. BoNT-treatment significantly alters the response of the synaptic phoshoproteome to depolarization and results in reduced phosphorylation levels when compared with stimulation of synaptosomes by depolarization with KCl alone. We dissect the primary Ca<sup>2+</sup>-dependent phosphorylation from SV-cycling-dependent phosphorylation and confirm an effect of such SV-cycling-dependent phosphorylation events on syntaxin-1a-T21/T23, synaptobrevin-S75, and cannabinoid receptor-1-S314/T322 on exo- and endocytosis in cultured hippocampal neurons.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation; synapse; synaptosomes; botulinum

### Affiliations
MPI Biophysical Chemistry
Institute of Clinical Chemistry, University Medical Center Goettingen, 37075 Goettingen, Germany; Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Group, Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, 37077 Goettingen, Germany

### Submitter
Ivan Silbern

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Henning Urlaub
Institute of Clinical Chemistry, University Medical Center Goettingen, 37075 Goettingen, Germany; Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Group, Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, 37077 Goettingen, Germany


