### Accession
PXD021306

### Title
PI3Kalpha Immunocomplex Identification

### Description
Mass Spectrometry Analysis of PI3Ka Immunocomplex via immunoprecipitation and SDS-PAGE separation

### Sample Protocol
Cal51 cell growing in 25 cm culture plates were lysed in lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl [pH 7.4], 150 mM NaCl, 0.5% Triton-X100, 1 mM EDTA, 10 mM NaF and 5 mM Na3VO4) containing protease inhibitors tablets (Roche). Cells were incubated in lysis buffer for 2-3 hrs in rotator at 4°C. After centrifuging at 12,000 rpm for 15 minutes, the clear cell lysates were used to immunoprecipitate PI3Ka using the combination of rabbit p110a (#4249, Cell Signaling) and rabbit p85a antibody (#4292, Cell Signaling) by incubating overnight in the rotator at 4°C. The immunocomplex of PI3Ka were isolated using protein A Sepharose beads, eluted by 2x sample buffer and separated through 8% SDS-PAGE gel. The gel was stained with Coomassie stain and the distinct band above 170 kDa present in PI3Ka immunoprecipitate but absent in the control IgG was cut and analyzed at mass spectrometry facility at UW-Madison Biotech Center. In gel digestion was performed followed by nanoLC-MS/MS analysis on Orbitrap Elite.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS/MS data were converted to mgf file format using MSConvert (ProteoWizard: Open Source Software for Rapid Proteomics Tools Development) for downstream analysis. Resulting mgf files were used to search against Uniprot Homo sapiens amino acid sequence database with a decoy reverse entries and a list of common contaminants (134,181 total entries) using in-house Mascot search engine 2.2.07 [Matrix Science] with variable Methionine oxidation with Asparagine and Glutamine deamidation plus fixed cysteine Carbamidomethylation. Peptide mass tolerance was set at 15 ppm and fragment mass at 0.6 Da. Protein annotations, significance of identification and spectral based quantification was done with help of Scaffold software (version 4.3.2, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR). Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability within 1% False Discovery Rate and contained at least 2 identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii, AI Anal Chem. 2003 Sep 1;75(17):4646-58). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.

### Publication Abstract
The canonical model of agonist-stimulated phosphatidylinositol-3-OH kinase (PI3K)-Akt signalling proposes that PI3K is activated at the plasma membrane, where receptors are activated and phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate is concentrated. Here we show that phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-trisphosphate generation and activated Akt are instead largely confined to intracellular membranes upon receptor tyrosine kinase activation. Microtubule-associated protein 4 (MAP4) interacts with and controls localization of membrane vesicle-associated PI3K&#x3b1; to microtubules. The microtubule-binding domain of MAP4 binds directly to the C2 domain of the p110&#x3b1; catalytic subunit. MAP4 controls the interaction of PI3K&#x3b1; with activated receptors at endosomal compartments along microtubules. Loss of MAP4 results in the loss of PI3K&#x3b1; targeting and loss of PI3K-Akt signalling downstream of multiple agonists. The MAP4-PI3K&#x3b1; assembly defines a mechanism for spatial control of agonist-stimulated PI3K-Akt signalling at internal membrane compartments linked to the microtubule network.

### Keywords
Pi3kalpha, Immunoprecipitation, Map4 protein, P85alpha antibody

### Affiliations
University of Wisconsin
University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health

### Submitter
Greg Sabat

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Richard A. Anderson
University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health


