### Accession
PXD004417

### Title
N-glycoproteomic analysis of rice germinating embryo

### Description
N-glycoproteomic analysis of rice germinating embryo at 24 hours after inhibition

### Sample Protocol
Dehusked seeds of Nipponbare (Oryza sativa L. ssp japonica) were immersed in distilled water at 28℃ for 24 hours. Germinating embryos were manually dissected from the seeds by blades and immediately kept in liquid nitrogen for future use.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data was processed using MaxQuant software with integrated Andromeda search engine (v.1.4.1.2) against Uniprot oyrza sativa database (http://www.uniprot.org/). Deamidation 18O on Asn, acetylation on protein N-terminal, oxidation on Met and deamidation on Asn and Gln were specified as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation on Cys was specified as fixed modification. 5 modifications per peptide and 5 charges, up to 2 missing cleavages on trypsin/P were allowed. Besides, mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. The thresholds of false discovery rate (FDR) in MaxQuant for peptide, protein and modification site were set at 1% and minimum peptide length was set at 7. The rest of parameters in MaxQuant were set to default values. The probability required for a glycosylation site considered as localized was higher than 75%.

### Publication Abstract
Germination is a key event in the angiosperm life cycle. N-glycosylation of proteins is one of the most common post-translational modifications, and has been recognized to be an important regulator of the proteome of the germinating embryo. Here, we report the first N-linked glycosites mapping of rice embryos during germination by using a hydrophilic interaction chromatography (HILIC) glycopeptides enrichment strategy associated with high accuracy mass spectrometry identification. A total of 242 glycosites from 191 unique proteins was discovered. Inspection of the motifs and sequence structures involved suggested that all the glycosites were concentrated within [NxS/T] motif, while 82.3% of them were in a coil structure. N-glycosylation preferentially occurred on proteins with glycoside hydrolase activities, which were significantly enriched in the starch and sucrose metabolism pathway, suggesting that N-glycosylation is involved in embryo germination by regulating carbohydrate metabolism. Notably, protein-protein interaction analysis revealed a network with several Brassinosteroids signaling proteins, including XIAO and other BR-responsive proteins, implying that glycosylation-mediated Brassinosteroids signaling may be a key mechanism regulating rice embryo germination. In summary, this study expanded our knowledge of protein glycosylation in rice, and provided novel insight into the PTM regulation in rice seed germination.

### Keywords
Embryo, Lc-msms, Rice (oryza sativa l.), Germination, Proteome, Glycosylation

### Affiliations
China national rice research institute

### Submitter
Jian Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Jian Zhang
China national rice research institute


