### Accession
PXD020392

### Title
Methodologies comparison of porcine lung tissue

### Description
Mechanistic study of H2S interference on swine, we used TMT-based comparative proteomics of lung tissues from control and hydrogen sulfide (H2S) breathing swines as a test case for evaluation of MS2, SPS MS3 and RTS-MS3 acquisition methods in both Orbitrap Fusion and Orbitrap Eclipse.

### Sample Protocol
Protein were extracted by boiling with lysis buffer for 5 min and centrifuged at 20,000 g for 15 min, then the supernatants were collected.  Lysis buffer consists of 100 mM HEPES, 150 mM NaCl, 2% SDS, 1% NP-40, 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), 1 mM PMSF, 1× Roche complete mini protease inhibitor cocktail (pH 7.4 ). Protein quantitation was done using a BCA assay, and in gel quantitation was done  by running on a precast NOVEX 10% Bis/Tris mini-gel (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) along with various amounts of E. coli lysates (2.5, 5, 10, 15 µg/lane) used as an standard curve.

### Data Protocol
All raw mass spectra from each set of TMT 11-plex experiments were processed and searched using Sequest HT software within the Proteome Discoverer 2.3 (PD 2.3) in which Sus Scrofa NCBI database was used for database searching. The default search settings used for TMT quantitative processing and protein identification in PD 2.3 software.

### Publication Abstract
Tandem mass tags (TMTs) have increasingly become an attractive technique for global proteomics. However, its effectiveness for multiplexed quantitation by traditional tandem mass spectrometry (MS<sup>2</sup>) suffers from ratio distortion. Synchronous precursor selection (SPS) MS<sup>3</sup> has been widely accepted for improved quantitation accuracy, but concurrently decreased proteome coverage. Recently, a Real-Time Search algorithm has been integrated with the SPS MS<sup>3</sup> pipeline (RTS MS<sup>3</sup>) to provide accurate quantitation and improved depth of coverage. In this mechanistic study of the impact of exposure to hydrogen sulfide (H<sub>2</sub>S) on the respiration of swine, we used TMT-based comparative proteomics of lung tissues from control and H<sub>2</sub>S-treated subjects as a test case to evaluate traditional MS<sup>2</sup>, SPS MS<sup>3</sup>, and RTS MS<sup>3</sup> acquisition methods on both the Orbitrap Fusion and Orbitrap Eclipse platforms. Comparison of the results obtained by the MS<sup>2</sup> with those of SPS MS<sup>3</sup> and RTS MS<sup>3</sup> methods suggests that the MS<sup>3</sup>-driven quantitative strategies provided a more accurate global-scale quantitation; however, only RTS MS<sup>3</sup> provided proteomic coverage that rivaled that of traditional MS<sup>2</sup> analysis. RTS MS<sup>3</sup> not only yields more productive MS<sup>3</sup> spectra than SPS MS<sup>3</sup> but also appears to focus the analysis more effectively on unique peptides. Furthermore, pathway enrichment analyses of the H<sub>2</sub>S-altered proteins demonstrated that an additional apoptosis pathway was discovered exclusively by RTS MS<sup>3</sup>. This finding was verified by RT-qPCR, western blotting, and TUNEL staining experiments. We conclude that RTS MS<sup>3</sup> workflow enables simultaneous improvement of quantitative accuracy and proteome coverage over alternative approaches (MS<sup>2</sup> and SPS MS<sup>3</sup>). Graphical abstract.

### Keywords
Synchronous precursor selection, Quantitative proteomics, Isobaric tandem mass tags, Lung tissues, Real-time search, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Cornell University

### Submitter
Sheng Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Qin Fu
Cornell University


