### Accession
PXD014573

### Title
1-deoxydihydroceramide causes anoxic death by impairing chaperonin-mediated protein folding

### Description
Ischemic heart disease and stroke are the most common causes of death world-wide. In both pathologies anoxia, the lack of oxygen, triggers profound metabolic and cellular changes. Sphingolipids have been implicated in anoxia injury, but the pathomechanism is unknown. Here we show that injury is caused by the accumulation of the non-canonical sphingolipid, 1-deoxydihydroceramide (DoxDHCer). We found that anoxia causes an imbalance between serine and alanine resulting in a switch from normal serine-derived sphinganine biosynthesis to non-canonical alanine-derived 1-deoxysphinganine. 1-deoxysphinganine is incorporated into DoxDHCer which impairs actin folding via the cytosolic chaperonin TRiC/CCT, leading to growth arrest in yeast and increased cell death upon ischemia-reperfusion injury in worms and mouse hearts. Prevention of DoxDHCer accumulation in worms and in mouse hearts resulted in decreased anoxia-induced injury. These findings unravel key metabolic changes during oxygen deprivation and point to novel strategies to avoid tissue damage and death.

### Sample Protocol
Ornithine amino transferase mutant oatr-1(tm5454) strain was grown on NGM plates without peptone seeded with SLE1 bacteria grown in M63 medium containing 80 µg/ml L-proline as well as either 40 µg/ml each of light L-lysine and L-arginine or 41.44 µg/ml heavy 13C6, 15N2 L-lysine (CNLM-291 Cambridge Isotope Laboratories, Andover, MA, USA) and 41.88 µg/ml heavy 13C6, 15N4 L-arginine (CNLM-539 Cambridge Isotope Laboratories, Andover, MA, USA). After four generations heavy isotope labelled worms showed heavy/light incorporations of more than 99%. For each condition two biological replicates of worms each of heavy and light cultures were grown to young adulthood and either harvested directly or exposed to 24 hours of anoxia. Worms were harvested in double-distilled water and washed with 10 mM NH4HCO3, worm pellets were frozen. Lysates were prepared in 10 mM NH4HCO3 using the cryolysis and zirconium beads. Protein concentration was determined using the Bradford assay (Bio-rad) and then, light and heavy proteome were mixed together at a 1:1 ratio.  Proteomes (40 µg) were denatured with 6 M urea in 50 mM NH4HCO3, reduced with 10 mM TCEP for 30 min. and alkylated with 25 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min. in the dark. Samples were diluted to 2 M Urea with 50 mM NH4HCO3 and digested with trypsin (Thermo Scientific, 2 μL of 0.5 μg/μL) in the presence of 1 mM CaCl2 for 12 hours at 37 °C. Samples were acidified to a final concentration of 5% acetic acid, desalted over a self-packed C18 spin column and dried. Peptides were resuspended in water with 0.1% formic acid (FA) and analyzed using Proxeon EASY-nLC 1000 nano-UHPLC coupled to QExactive Plus Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The chromatography column consisted of a 30 cm long, 75 μm i.d. microcapillary capped by a 5 μm tip and packed with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 2.4 μm beads (Dr. Maisch GmbH). LC solvents were 0.1% TFA in water (Buffer A) and 0.1% TFA in acetonitrile (Buffer B). Peptides were eluted into the mass spectrometer at a flow rate of 300 nL/min over a 240 minute linear gradient (3-35% Buffer B) at 65 °C. Data was acquired in data-dependent mode (top-20, NCE 30, R = 17’500) after full MS scan (R = 70’000, m/z 400-1’300). Dynamic exclusion was set to 10 s, peptide match to prefer and isotope exclusion was enabled.

### Data Protocol
The MS data was analyzed with MaxQuant1 (V1.5.2.8) and searched against the Caenorhabditis elegans proteome (UniProt) and a common list of contaminants (included in MaxQuant). The first peptide search tolerance was set to 20 ppm, 10 ppm was used for the main peptide search and fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. The false discovery rate for peptides, proteins and sites identification was set to 1%. The minimum peptide length was set to 6 amino acids and peptide re-quantification, label-free quantification (MaxLFQ) and “match between runs” were enabled. The minimal number of peptides per protein was set to two. L-lysine and L-arginine were set as light isotope labels and 13C6, 15N2 L-lysine and 13C6, 15N4 L-arginine were set as heavy isotope labels. Oxidized methionine was searched as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation of cysteines was searched as a fixed modification. 1270 proteins were identified, of those 1197 proteins were found at least once in both forward (light anoxia versus heavy normoxia) and reverse (heavy anoxia versus light normoxia) labelling. 867 proteins with a coefficient of variation below 25% between forward and reverse labelling were selected and Gene Ontology (GO) terms were searched with Generic Gene Ontology (GO) Term Finder (https://go.princeton.edu).

### Publication Abstract
Ischaemic heart disease and stroke are the most common causes of death worldwide. Anoxia, defined as the lack of oxygen, is commonly seen in both these pathologies and triggers profound metabolic and cellular changes. Sphingolipids have been implicated in anoxia injury, but the pathomechanism is unknown. Here we show that anoxia-associated injury causes accumulation of the non-canonical sphingolipid 1-deoxydihydroceramide (DoxDHCer). Anoxia causes an imbalance between serine and alanine resulting in a switch from normal serine-derived sphinganine biosynthesis to non-canonical alanine-derived 1-deoxysphinganine. 1-Deoxysphinganine is incorporated into DoxDHCer, which impairs actin folding via the cytosolic chaperonin TRiC, leading to growth arrest in yeast, increased cell death upon anoxia-reoxygenation in worms and ischaemia-reperfusion injury in mouse hearts. Prevention of DoxDHCer accumulation in worms and in mouse hearts resulted in decreased anoxia-induced injury. These findings unravel key metabolic changes during oxygen deprivation and point to novel strategies to avoid tissue damage and death.

### Keywords
Qexactive plus, C. elegans, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
The Scripps Research Institute
Department of Chemistry, The Scripps Research Institute, Jupiter, FL 33458, USA

### Submitter
Daniel Abegg

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Adibekian
Department of Chemistry, The Scripps Research Institute, Jupiter, FL 33458, USA


