### Accession
PXD001003

### Title
Comparative analysis of the adaptation of Staphylococcus aureus to internalization by different types of human non-professional phagocytic host cells

### Description
We comparatively analyzed survival and physiological adaptation of S. aureus HG001 to two human lung epithelial cell lines (S9 and A549), and human embryonic kidney cells (HEK 293). Combining enrichment of bacteria from host-pathogen assays by cell sorting and quantitation of the pathogen´s proteome by mass spectrometry we characterized S. aureus adaptation during the initial phase between 2.5 h and 6.5 h post-infection.

### Sample Protocol
separation of peptides with a Dionex UltiMate 3000 nano-LC system (Dionex/Thermo Fisher Scientific, Idstein, Germany), Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) coupled to a TriVersa NanoMate (Advion, Ltd., Harlow, UK). Peptides were separated on a 25 cm analytical column packed with 2 μm C18 particles (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, Thermo Scientific) with the help of a linear gradient ranging from 2% to 25% buffer (0.1% (v/v) acetic acid in acetonitrile). MS data were acquired with a MS scan resolution of 70000, and the 10 most abundant isotope patterns with charge state ≥2 from the survey scan were subjected to MS/MS analysis with a resolution of 17500. Fragmentation was achieved using higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD).

### Data Protocol
Q Exactive MS/MS data; Resulting raw data files were converted to mzML format using msconvert, then the mzML files were searched using COMET and SpectraST and processed using Trans-Proteomic Pipeline. COMET: Parent mass error +-50 ppm. Variable modifications N-terminal protein acetylation and methionine oxidation. Maximum number of missed cleavage sites 2. Number of enzyme termini 1. SPECTRAST: Parent mass error +-1.0 Daltons. The spectra library was constructed from previous Q Exactive runs which were searched using COMET with the same parameters using a S. aureus protein database only [Michalik et al., unpublished data]. Peptides identified with iProphet probability >= 0.9 were used to construct the spectral library (Shteynberg et al., 2011). The PeptideProphet outputs from both search engines were combined using iProphet. RESPECT: The reSpect algorithm was applied to identify and attenuate the peaks in the MS/MS spectra that were excluded by the first pass search. A second round search was performed on the reSpect processed spectra, with a mass tolerance matching the selection window of the mass spectrometer and using possible charge states of 1 through 5, which allowed the identification of novel distinct peptide sequences not seen a single pass analysis. The reSpect searches were analyzed separately from the first pass searches, and also using PeptideProphet and iProphet to establish accurate error rates. Only peptides with a probability > 0.8 (~ FDR < 0.01) and without missed cleavages were considered for further relative quantitation on protein level (MSstats R package for statistical relative quantitation of proteins and peptides implemented in Skyline package v2.5 (Schilling et al., 2012)). The areas under the curve (AUC) of peptides were summed to obtain single protein intensities. Mean values from three biological replicates were used which were median normalized to the values of non-adherent bacteria control.

### Publication Abstract
Staphylococcus aureus is a human pathogen that can cause a wide range of diseases. Although formerly regarded as extracellular pathogen, it has been shown that S. aureus can also be internalized by host cells and persist within these cells. In the present study, we comparatively analyzed survival and physiological adaptation of S. aureus HG001 after internalization by two human lung epithelial cell lines (S9 and A549), and human embryonic kidney cells (HEK 293). Combining enrichment of bacteria from host-pathogen assays by cell sorting and quantitation of the pathogen's proteome by mass spectrometry we characterized S. aureus adaptation during the initial phase between 2.5 h and 6.5 h post-infection. Starting with about 2 &#xd7; 10(6) bacteria, roughly 1450 S. aureus proteins, including virulence factors and metabolic enzymes were identified by spectral comparison and classical database searches. Most of the bacterial adaptation reactions, such as decreased levels of ribosomal proteins and metabolic enzymes or increased amounts of proteins involved in arginine and lysine biosynthesis, enzymes coding for terminal oxidases and stress responsive proteins or activation of the sigma factor SigB were observed after internalization into any of the three cell lines studied. However, differences were noted in central carbon metabolism including regulation of fermentation and threonine degradation. Since these differences coincided with different intracellular growth behavior, complementary profiling of the metabolome of the different non-infected host cell types was performed. This revealed similar levels of intracellular glucose but host cell specific differences in the amounts of amino acids such as glycine, threonine or glutamate. With this comparative study we provide an impression of the common and specific features of the adaptation of S. aureus HG001 to specific host cell environments as a starting point for follow-up studies with different strain isolates and regulatory mutants.

### Keywords
Staphylococcus aureus hg001, Cell culture infection model, Q exactive, Bacterial adaptation to internalization in host cells

### Affiliations
University Medicine Greifswald Interfaculty Institute for Genetics and Functional Genomics Department of Functional Genomics ZIK-FunGene Junior Research Group Applied Proteomics Friedrich-Ludwig-Jahn-Str. 15a D-17487 Greifswald Germany Phone: +49-3834-865887 Fax: +49-3834-86795887
Department of Functional Genomics

### Submitter
Maren Depke

### Lab Head
Dr Frank Schmidt
University Medicine Greifswald Interfaculty Institute for Genetics and Functional Genomics Department of Functional Genomics ZIK-FunGene Junior Research Group Applied Proteomics Friedrich-Ludwig-Jahn-Str. 15a D-17487 Greifswald Germany Phone: +49-3834-865887 Fax: +49-3834-86795887


