### Accession
PXD022814

### Title
Functionally Integrated Top-down Proteomics for Standardized Assessment of Human Induced Pluripotent Stem Cell-derived Engineered Cardiac Tissues

### Description
3-dimensional (3D) human induced pluripotent stem cell-derived engineered cardiac tissues (hiPSC-ECTs) have emerged as a promising alternative to 2-dimensional hiPSC-cardiomyocyte monolayer systems because hiPSC-ECTs are a closer representation of endogenous cardiac tissues and more faithfully reflect the relevant cardiac pathophysiology. The ability to perform functional and molecular assessments using the same hiPSC-ECT construct would allow for more reliable correlation between observed functional performance and underlying molecular events, and thus is critically needed. Herein, for the first time, we have established an integrated method that permits sequential assessment of functional properties and top-down proteomics from the same single hiPSC-ECT construct. We quantitatively determined the differences in isometric twitch force and the sarcomeric proteoforms between two groups of hiPSC-ECTs that differed in the duration of time of 3D-ECT culture. Importantly, by using this integrated method we discovered a new and strong correlation between the measured contractile parameters and the phosphorylation levels of alpha-tropomyosin between the two groups of hiPSC-ECTs. The integration of functional assessments together with molecular characterization by top-down proteomics in the same hiPSC-ECT construct enables a holistic analysis of hiPSC-ECTs to accelerate their applications in disease modeling, cardiotoxicity, and drug discovery.

### Sample Protocol
In this case, we chose to study two groups of hiPSC-ECTs which spent 23 and 51 days in 3D-ECT culture respectively. Lactate purified hiPSC-CMs and low passage isogenic hiPSC-CFs were used in a 10:1 ratio in hiPSC-ECT constructs. Cells were mixed with fibrinogen and thrombin and seeded into molds to form hiPSC-ECTs. The hiPSC-ECTs of the same batch were then cultured and randomly selected at Day 23 and Day 51 for sequential functional assessments followed by top-down proteomic characterization.

### Data Protocol
All data was processed using Bruker DataAnalysis 4.3 and MASH Explorer (V2)

### Publication Abstract
Three-dimensional (3D) human induced pluripotent stem cell-derived engineered cardiac tissues (hiPSC-ECTs) have emerged as a promising alternative to two-dimensional hiPSC-cardiomyocyte monolayer systems because hiPSC-ECTs are a closer representation of endogenous cardiac tissues and more faithfully reflect the relevant cardiac pathophysiology. The ability to perform functional and molecular assessments using the same hiPSC-ECT construct would allow for more reliable correlation between observed functional performance and underlying molecular events, and thus is critically needed. Herein, for the first time, we have established an integrated method that permits sequential assessment of functional properties and top-down proteomics from the same single hiPSC-ECT construct. We quantitatively determined the differences in isometric twitch force and the sarcomeric proteoforms between two groups of hiPSC-ECTs that differed in the duration of time of 3D-ECT culture. Importantly, by using this integrated method we discovered a new and strong correlation between the measured contractile parameters and the phosphorylation levels of alpha-tropomyosin between the two groups of hiPSC-ECTs. The integration of functional assessments together with molecular characterization by top-down proteomics in the same hiPSC-ECT construct enables a holistic analysis of hiPSC-ECTs to accelerate their applications in disease modeling, cardiotoxicity, and drug discovery. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD022814.

### Keywords
Proteoform, Human pluripotent stem cell, Cardiac function, Top-down proteomics, Engineered cardiac tissue

### Affiliations
University of Wisconsin-Madison

### Submitter
Jake Melby

### Lab Head
Dr Ying Ge
University of Wisconsin-Madison


