### Accession
PXD001447

### Title
AP-MS analysis of sirtuin-4 interactions in human fibroblasts

### Description
Sirtuins (SIRTs) form a critical family of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD)-dependent enzymes that govern genome regulation, metabolism, and aging. Despite conserved deacetylase domains, SIRTs4-7 have little to no deacetylase activity, and a robust catalytic activity for mitochondrial SIRT4 has remained elusive. Moreover, in vitro characterization of SIRT4 has been hampered by difficulty in maintaining soluble and active recombinant protein. Therefore, to investigate potential cellular substrates of SIRT4, we used proteomics to define its mitochondrial protein interactions in human fibroblasts.

### Sample Protocol
SIRT4 immunoisolates were reduced with 50 mM dithiothreitol, alkylated with 100 mM iodoacetamide, and resolved by 4-12% BisTris SDS-PAGE. A total of six individual gel bands (∼3 mm each) were excised and subjected to in-gel digestion with 125 ng trypsin in 50 mm ABC for 6 h at 37 °C. Peptides were extracted using 0.5% formic acid, concentrated by vacuum centrifugation, and desalted on Stage Tips using Empore C18 extraction discs (3M Analytical Biotechnologies, cat. #2215). Eluted peptides were analyzed by nLC-MS/MS using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC coupled directly to an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos ETD mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). Peptides were separated by reverse phase chromatography using Acclaim PepMap RSLC, 1.8 μm, 75 μm × 25 cm (Dionex, cat. # 164536) at a flow rate of 250 nl/min using a 90-min discontinuous gradient of ACN as follows: 4% to 16% B over 60 min, 16% to 40% B over 30 min (Mobile phase A: 0.1% formic acid in water, Mobile phase B: 0.1% formic acid in 97% ACN). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode with FT preview scan disabled and predictive AGC and dynamic exclusion enabled (repeat count: 1, exclusion duration: 70 s). A single acquisition cycle comprised a single full-scan mass spectrum (m/z = 350–1700) in the orbitrap (resolution = 30,000 at m/z = 400), followed by collision-induced dissociation (CID) fragmentation of the top 20 most intense precursor ions (min signal = 1E3) in the dual-pressure linear ion trap. FT full scan MS and IT MS2 target values were 1E6 and 5E3, and maximum ion times were set at 300 and 100 ms, respectively. CID fragmentation was performed at an isolation width of 2.0 Th, normalized collision energy of 30, and activation time of 10 ms.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were extracted, filtered, and searched by Proteome Discoverer/SEQUEST (v1.3 ThermoFisher Scientific) against a human protein sequence database (UniProt-SwissProt, 2010-11) appended with common contaminants (21,570 entries), which were automatically reversed and concatenated to the forward sequences. Spectra were searched with the following criteria: full enzyme specificity; 2 missed cleavages; precursor mass tolerance: 10 ppm; fragment mass tolerance: 0.5 Da; static modification of carbamidomethylcysteine (+57 Da), variable modifications of methionine oxidation (+16 Da), phosphoserine, threonine, and tyrosine (+80 Da), and acetyl-lysine (+42 Da). For comparative proteomic analyses, SEQUEST search results were analyzed by Scaffold (v3.3.1; Proteome Software) and a refinement search using X!Tandem (Beavis Informatics). Probabilities for peptide spectral matches were calculated using PeptideProphet in Scaffold. Probability filters were selected empirically to reduce the global peptide and protein false discovery rate to less than 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Sirtuins (SIRTs) are critical enzymes that govern genome regulation, metabolism, and aging. Despite conserved deacetylase domains, mitochondrial SIRT4 and SIRT5 have little to no deacetylase activity, and a robust catalytic activity for SIRT4 has been elusive. Here, we establish SIRT4 as a cellular lipoamidase that regulates the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (PDH). Importantly, SIRT4 catalytic efficiency for lipoyl- and biotinyl-lysine modifications is superior to its deacetylation activity. PDH, which converts pyruvate to acetyl-CoA, has been known to be primarily regulated by phosphorylation of its E1 component. We determine that SIRT4 enzymatically hydrolyzes the lipoamide cofactors from the E2 component dihydrolipoyllysine acetyltransferase (DLAT), diminishing PDH activity. We demonstrate SIRT4-mediated regulation of DLAT lipoyl levels and PDH activity in cells and in&#xa0;vivo, in mouse liver. Furthermore, metabolic flux switching via glutamine stimulation induces SIRT4 lipoamidase activity to inhibit PDH, highlighting SIRT4 as a guardian of cellular metabolism.

### Keywords
Pdh, Protein interactions, Sirtuin, Sirt4

### Affiliations
Molecular Biology, Princeton University
Princeton University, Dept. of Molecular Biology, Princeton, NJ USA

### Submitter
Todd Greco

### Lab Head
Dr Ileana Cristea
Princeton University, Dept. of Molecular Biology, Princeton, NJ USA


