### Accession
PXD012886

### Title
The dual prey-inactivation strategy of spiders - In-depth venomic analysis of Cupiennius salei

### Description
Most knowledge on spider venoms concerns neurotoxins acting on ion channels, whereas proteins and their significance for the envenomation process are neglected. The comprehensive analysis presented here of the venom gland transcriptome and proteome of Cupiennius salei with a focus on proteins and cysteine-containing peptides offers new insight into the structure and function of spider venom, presented here as dual prey-inactivation strategy. After venom injection, many enzymes and proteins, dominated by α-amylase, angiotensin-converting enzyme, and cysteine-rich secretory proteins, interact with main metabolic pathways, leading to major disturbance of the cellular homeostasis. Hyaluronidase and cytolytic peptides destroy tissue and membranes, thus supporting the spread of other venom compounds. We detected 81 transcripts of neurotoxins from 13 peptide families, whereof two families comprise 93.7% of all cysteine-containing peptides. This raises the question of the importance of the other low-expressed peptide families. The identification of a venom gland-specific defensin-like peptide and an aga-toxin-like peptide in the hemocytes offers an important clue on the recruitment and neofunctionalization of body proteins and peptides as the origin of toxins.

### Sample Protocol
We analyzed the venom proteome of C. salei combining bottom-up and top-down proteomics. To reduce sample complexity for further LC-MS2 analyses, 50 µl venom was separated into seven fractions by size exclusion chromatography on a Superdex 75 Increase HR 10 / 300 column (GE Healthcare) using 50 mM NH4OAc pH 5.0 supplemented with 500 mM NaCl as liquid phase. All fractions were desalted by RP-HPLC and analyzed by bottom-up proteomics. Peptide-containing fractions (2–7) were additionally analyzed with a top-down proteomic approach. For top-down proteomics, 250 ng of reduced and alkylated protein was analyzed by LC-MS2 on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) with a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano-UPLC system (Thermo Fischer, Bremen, Germany). Proteins digests were loaded onto a precolumn (PepMap C18, 5 µm, 100 Å, 300 µm x 5 mm) at a flow rate of 50 µl / min with loading solvent (0.05% TFA in water / acetonitrile 98:2). After loading, peptides were eluted in backflush mode onto the analytical nanocolumn (C18, 3 µm, 155 Å, 0.075 mm i.d. x 150 mm length, Nikkyo Technos, Tokyo, Japan) using an acetonitrile gradient of 5% to 20% solvent B (0.1% FA in water / acetonitrile 4.9:95) in 15 min and then to 60% within 30 min at a flow rate of 400 nl / min. The column effluent was directly coupled with the mass spectrometer via a nanoflex electrospray source (Thermo Fischer, Bremen; Germany). Precursor and fragment spectra were both recorded in profile mode with the orbitrap detector using a resolution of 120,000 (at m/z = 200). The MS1 full scan range was 500–2,000 m/z, the AGC was at 5e5, and the maximum injection time was 50 ms, using a declustering potential of 15 V at the source. Data-dependent fragment spectra on the top three most intense precursor ions were produced by Electron-transfer dissociation (ETD) fragmentation using a supplemental relative collisional activation of 15% (EThcD). All charge states bigger than 6 were included with an isolation width of 3 Da, and no dynamic exclusion was applied except for isotopes of the same charge state within ±1.5 m/z. ETD reaction time was set to 10 ms with a target of 7e5 anions and a maximum injection time of 200 ms. Fragment spectra were recorded within 200–2,000 m/z, an AGC of 1e6, and a maximum injection time of 250 ms by combining 5 microscans.

### Data Protocol
Top-down data were analyzed using the TopPIC suite [1]. First, Thermo RAW files were converted to centroided mzXML files using MSConvert ([2], version 3.0.11781). The resulting files were used for deconvolution with TopFD (version 1.1.2) applying the following settings: maximum charge, 15; maximum monoisotopic mass, 15,000 Da; error tolerance, 0.01 m/z; signal/noise ratio, 1; precursor window size, 3 m/z. The output files were used for identification of proteoforms with TopPIC (version 1.1.0) by searching the spectra against a database containing the sequences of all peptides and proteins identified in the transcriptome of C. salei supplemented with all C. salei venom peptides on UniprotKB (August, 27, 2018). We used the program’s default settings with the following exceptions: error tolerance, 10 ppm; N-terminal form, NONE; fixed modification, carbamidomethylation of Cys (unimod: 4); and variable modification, oxidation of Met (unimod: 35), and Gly-loss+Amide (unimod: 822). Protein spectrum matches were filtered applying a false discovery rate cut-off of 1%.   1. Kou, Q., L. Xun, and X. Liu, TopPIC: a software tool for top-down mass spectrometry-based proteoform identification and characterization. Bioinformatics, 2016. 32(22): p. 3495-3497. 2. Chambers, M.C., et al., A cross-platform toolkit for mass spectrometry and proteomics. Nat Biotechnol, 2012. 30(10): p. 918-20.

### Publication Abstract
Most knowledge of spider venom concerns neurotoxins acting on ion channels, whereas proteins and their significance for the envenomation process are neglected. The here presented comprehensive analysis of the venom gland transcriptome and proteome of <i>Cupiennius salei</i> focusses on proteins and cysteine-containing peptides and offers new insight into the structure and function of spider venom, here described as the dual prey-inactivation strategy. After venom injection, many enzymes and proteins, dominated by &#x3b1;-amylase, angiotensin-converting enzyme, and cysteine-rich secretory proteins, interact with main metabolic pathways, leading to a major disturbance of the cellular homeostasis. Hyaluronidase and cytolytic peptides destroy tissue and membranes, thus supporting the spread of other venom compounds. We detected 81 transcripts of neurotoxins from 13 peptide families, whereof two families comprise 93.7% of all cysteine-containing peptides. This raises the question of the importance of the other low-expressed peptide families. The identification of a venom gland-specific defensin-like peptide and an aga-toxin-like peptide in the hemocytes offers an important clue on the recruitment and neofunctionalization of body proteins and peptides as the origin of toxins.

### Keywords
Cupiennius salei spider venom

### Affiliations
Institute of Ecology and Evolution, University of Bern, Switzerland
Institute of Ecology and Evolution, University of Bern, Baltzerstrasse 6, CH-3012 Bern, Switzerland

### Submitter
Nicolas Langenegger

### Lab Head
Dr Lucia Kuhn-Nentwig
Institute of Ecology and Evolution, University of Bern, Baltzerstrasse 6, CH-3012 Bern, Switzerland


