### Accession
PXD036746

### Title
Function of the Rh5 complex in invasion of human erythrocytes

### Description
The most severe form of malaria is caused by Plasmodium falciparum. These parasites invade human erythrocytes and an essential step in this process involves the ligand PfRh5, which forms a complex with CyRPA and PfRipr (RCR complex) and binds basigin on the host cell. We identified a heteromeric disulphide-linked complex consisting of PfPTRAMP and PfCSS and have shown it binds RCR to form a pentameric complex PCRCR. Using P. falciparum lines with conditional knockouts and invasion inhibitory nanobodies to both PfPTRAMP and PfCSS we utilised lattice light-sheet microscopy and show they are essential for merozoite invasion. The PCRCR complex functions to anchor the contact between merozoite and erythrocyte membranes brought together by strong parasite deformations. We solved the structure of nanobody/PfCSS complexes to identify an inhibitory epitope. Our results define the function of the PCRCR complex and identify invasion neutralising epitopes providing a roadmap for structure-guided development of these proteins for a blood stage malaria vaccine.

### Sample Protocol
Parasites used for anti-HA antibody immunoprecipitation with and without cross-linking, were synchronised, allowed to develop to schizonts, followed by saponin lysis to remove uninfected erythrocytes and solubilised in 1% Triton X-100. For crosslinking protein complexes, 2 mM (final) of the thiol-cleavable crosslinker dithiobis(succinimidyl propionate)  (DSP), was added to saponin-lysed pellets for 30 min at room temperature. In all cases proteins were immunoprecipitated with anti-HA antibody beads. The reaction was quenched with 20 mM Tris, pH 7.4, before proteins were extracted with 9 pellet volumes of TNET (1% TX100, 150 mM NaCl, 10 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris, pH7.4). Protein extracts were incubated with agarose-bound anti-HA antibodies (Roche) and immunoprecipitants eluted with hot 0.5% SDS at 56°C for 5 min.  Eluates of HA-captured proteins derived from each biological replicate were prepared for mass spectrometry analysis using the FASP (filter aided sample preparation) method 44, with the following modifications. Proteins were reduced with 10 mM Tris-(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP), alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide, then digested with 1 μg sequence-grade modified trypsin gold (Promega) in 50 mM NH4HCO3 and incubated overnight at 37°C. Peptides were eluted with 50 mM NH4HCO3 in two 40 μl sequential washes and acidified in 1% formic acid (FA, final concentration).  The extracted peptide solutions from immunoprecipitation experiments were acidified (0.1% formic acid) and concentrated by centrifugal lyophilisation using a SpeedVac AES 1010 (Savant). For the HA-tagged PfCSS samples, peptides were reconstituted in 80 μl 2% ACN/0.1% FA and 3 μl separated by reverse-phase chromatography on a C18 fused silica column (inner diameter 75 µm, OD 360 µm × 25 cm length, 1.6 µm C18 beads) packed into an emitter tip (IonOpticks, Australia), using a nano-flow HPLC (M-class, Waters). The HPLC was coupled to a timsTOF Pro (Bruker) equipped with a CaptiveSpray source. Peptides were loaded directly onto the column at a constant flow rate of 400 nl/min with buffer A (99.9% Milli-Q water, 0.1% FA) and eluted with a 90-min linear gradient from 2 to 34% buffer B (99.9% ACN, 0.1% FA). The timsTOF Pro was operated in PASEF mode using Compass Hystar 5.1. Settings for the 11 samples per day method were as follows: Mass Range 100 to 1700 m/z, 1/K0 Start 0.6 V·s/cm2 End 1.6 V·s/cm2, Ramp time 110.1 ms, Lock Duty Cycle to 100%, Capillary Voltage 1600V, Dry Gas 3 l/min, Dry Temp 180°C, PASEF settings: 10 MS/MS scans (total cycle time 1.27sec), charge range 0-5, active exclusion for 0.4 min, Scheduling Target intensity 10000, Intensity threshold 2500, CID collision energy 42 eV.   For the HA-tagged CyRPA, PfRipr, and PfRh5 samples, peptides were reconstituted in 80 μl 2% ACN/0.1% FA and 2 μl subjected to nanoflow reversed-phase liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LCMS/MS) on an Easy-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Q-Exactive HF (QE-HF) mass spectrometer equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source and in-source column heater (Sonation) at 40 °C for automated MS/MS (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide mixtures were loaded in buffer A (0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile, Milli-Q water), and separated by reverse-phase chromatography using C18 fused silica column (packed emitter, internal diameter 75 μm, outer diameter 360 μm × 25 cm length, IonOpticks, Australia) using flow rates and data-dependent methods as previously described.

### Data Protocol
For the HA-tagged PfCSS samples, raw files consisting of high-resolution tandem mass spectrometry spectra were processed with MaxQuant (version 1.6.17) for feature detection and protein identification using the Andromeda search engine. Extracted peak lists were searched against the P. falciparum 3D7 database and a separate reverse decoy database to empirically assess the FDR using a strict trypsin specificity allowing up to two missed cleavages. The minimum required peptide length was set to seven amino acids. The modifications included: carbamidomethylation of Cys was set as a fixed modification, whereas N-acetylation of proteins, the oxidation of Met was set as variable modifications. The ‘match between runs’ option in MaxQuant was used to transfer the identifications made between runs based on matching precursors with high mass accuracy. LFQ quantification was selected, with a minimum ratio count of 2. Peptide-spectrum match (PSM) and protein identifications were filtered using a target-decoy approach at an FDR of 1%. In the main search, precursor mass tolerance was 0.006 Da and fragment mass tolerance was 40 ppm. For the HA-tagged CyRPA, PfRipr, and PfRh5 samples, raw files were processed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.8.3) as described above, with the following differences: The mass tolerance for precursor ions and fragment ions was 20 p.p.m. and 0.5 Da, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
The most severe form of malaria is caused by Plasmodium falciparum. These parasites invade human erythrocytes, and an essential step in this process involves the ligand PfRh5, which forms a complex with cysteine-rich protective antigen (CyRPA) and PfRh5-interacting protein (PfRipr) (RCR complex) and binds basigin on the host cell. We identified a heteromeric disulfide-linked complex consisting of P. falciparum Plasmodium thrombospondin-related apical merozoite protein (PfPTRAMP) and P. falciparum cysteine-rich small secreted protein (PfCSS) and have shown that it binds RCR to form a pentameric complex, PCRCR. Using P. falciparum lines with conditional knockouts, invasion inhibitory nanobodies to both PfPTRAMP and PfCSS, and lattice light-sheet microscopy, we show that they are essential for merozoite invasion. The PCRCR complex functions to anchor the contact between merozoite and erythrocyte membranes brought together by strong parasite deformations. We solved the structure of nanobody-PfCSS complexes to identify an inhibitory epitope. Our results define the function of the PCRCR complex and identify invasion neutralizing epitopes providing a roadmap for structure-guided development of these proteins for a blood stage malaria vaccine.

### Keywords
Basigin, Human erythrocytes, Invasion complex, Css, Malaria, P. falciparum, Pfripr, Ptramp, Pfrh5

### Affiliations
WEHI
Deputy Director – Science Strategy The Walter and Eliza Hall institute of Medical Research Professor, Department of Medical Biology Faculty of Medicine, Dentistry and Health The University of Melbourne Australia

### Submitter
Laura Dagley

### Lab Head
Dr Alan Cowman
Deputy Director – Science Strategy The Walter and Eliza Hall institute of Medical Research Professor, Department of Medical Biology Faculty of Medicine, Dentistry and Health The University of Melbourne Australia


