### Accession
PXD009648

### Title
Cross-linking/mass spectrometry analysis of the AOC complex

### Description
As a part of a study on how kinetochors are assembled at the centromeres of the chromosomes, cross-linking/mass spectrometry has been applied to investigate interactions between Okp1/ Ame1 heterodimer, which is part of the COMA complex,  and CENP-A from Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

### Sample Protocol
The purified Ame1/Okp1/Cse4N complex at a concentration of 1.2 mg/ml was crosslinked with 150 μM BS3 (bis(sulfosuccinimidyl) suberate) in 50 mM HEPES, pH 7.5, 200 mM NaCl and 1 mM DTT and incubated for 2 h on ice. The reaction was stopped with 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, and proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE electrophoresis. A gel band corresponding to the monomeric cross-linked Ame1/Okp1/Cse4N complex was excised from the gel and digested with trypsin (Pierce, Germany) (Shevchenko et al., 2006). The resulting tryptic peptides were extracted from the gel de-salted using C18 StageTips (Rappsilber et al., 2003).  LC-MS/MS analysis was conducted in triplicates, performed on an Orbitrap FusionTM LumosTM TribridTM mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany) coupled on-line to Ultimate 3000 RSLCano Systems (Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany). The eluted peptides are ionized by an EASY-Spray source (Thermo Scientific). Mobile phase A consists of water, 0.1% v/v formic acid and mobile phase B consists of 80% v/v acetonitrile and 0.1% v/v formic acid. For CLMS analysis, peptides are loaded at a flow-rate of 0.3 μL/min and eluted at 0.2 μL/min using a linear gradient going from 2% mobile phase B to 40% mobile phase B over 139 min, followed by a linear increase from 45% to 95% mobile phase B in twelve min. The MS data is acquired in the data-dependent mode with the top-speed option. For each three-second acquisition cycle, the full scan mass spectrum was recorded in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 120,000. The ions with a precursor charge state between 3+ and 7+ were isolated and fragmented. Each cross-linked sample was analysed with two LC-MS/MS acquisitions, in one acquisition, peptides were fragmented using Higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with 30% collision energy. The fragmentation spectra were then recorded in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 30000. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with single repeat count and 60-second exclusion duration.

### Data Protocol
The MS2 peak lists were generated from the raw mass spectrometric data files using msConvert (version 3.0.11729) (Chamber MC et al, 2012) with default settings. The precursor m/z was recalibrated based on high confidence (<1% FDR) linear peptide identifications, using an in-house script. The recalibrated peak lists were searched against the sequences and the reversed sequences (as decoys) of cross-linked proteins using Xi software (https://github.com/Rappsilber-Laboratory/XiSearch) for identification of cross-linked peptides. The following parameters were applied for the search: MS accuracy = 6 ppm; MS2 accuracy = 20 ppm; enzyme = trypsin (with full tryptic specificity); allowed number of missed cleavages = four; cross-linker = BS3 the reaction specificity for BS3 was assumed to be for lysine, serine, threonine, tyrosine and protein N termini); fixed modifications = carbamidomethylation on cysteine; variable modifications = oxidation on methionine, modifications by BS3 that are hydrolyzed or reacted with Tris on the end. All identified cross-linked peptides passed auto-validated by Xi with an estimated FDR<1.1%.

### Publication Abstract
Kinetochores are supramolecular assemblies that link centromeres to microtubules for sister chromatid segregation in mitosis. For this, the inner kinetochore CCAN/Ctf19 complex binds to centromeric chromatin containing the histone variant CENP-A, but whether the interaction of kinetochore components to centromeric nucleosomes is regulated by posttranslational modifications is unknown. Here, we investigated how methylation of arginine 37 (R37Me) and acetylation of lysine 49 (K49Ac) on the CENP-A homolog Cse4 from <i>Saccharomyces cerevisiae</i> regulate molecular interactions at the inner kinetochore. Importantly, we found that the Cse4 N-terminus binds with high affinity to the Ctf19 complex subassembly Okp1/Ame1 (CENP-Q/CENP-U in higher eukaryotes), and that this interaction is inhibited by R37Me and K49Ac modification on Cse4. <i>In vivo</i> defects in <i>cse4-R37A</i> were suppressed by mutations in <i>OKP1</i> and <i>AME1</i>, and biochemical analysis of a mutant version of Okp1 showed increased affinity for Cse4. Altogether, our results demonstrate that the Okp1/Ame1 heterodimer is a reader module for posttranslational modifications on Cse4, thereby targeting the yeast CCAN complex to centromeric chromatin.

### Keywords
Centromere, Ame1, Okp1, Cross-linking/mass spectrometry, Protein interaction, Cenp-a

### Affiliations
Technischen Universität Berlin wellcome trust centre for cell biology, University of Edinburgh
Technischen Universität Berlin

### Submitter
Zhuo Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Juri Rappsilber
Technischen Universität Berlin wellcome trust centre for cell biology, University of Edinburgh


