### Accession
PXD035835

### Title
Integrated proteomics and metabolomics analysis of rice leaves in response to rice straw return

### Description
Straw return is crucial for the sustainable development of rice planting. To investigate the response of rice leaves to rice straw return, we analyzed the physiological index of rice leaves and measured differentially expressed protein (DEPs) and differentially expressed metabolites (DEMs) levels in rice leaves by the use of proteomics and metabolomics approaches. The results showed that, compared with no rice straw return, rice straw return significantly decreased the dry weight of rice plants and nonstructural carbohydrate contents and destroyed the chloroplast ultrastructure. In rice leaves under rice straw return, 329 DEPs were upregulated, 303 DEPs were downregulated, 44 DEMs were upregulated, and 71 DEMs were downregulated. These DEPs and DEMs were mainly involved in various molecular processes, including photosynthesis, carbon fixation in photosynthetic organisms, glycolysis, and the citric acid cycle. Rice straw return promoted the accumulation of osmotic adjustment substances, such as organic acids, amino acids, and other substances, and reduced the material supply and energy production of carbon metabolism, thus inhibiting the growth of rice.

### Sample Protocol
The fully expanded leaves from the upper part of rice plants were collected, rinsed with phosphate-buffered solution, drained and wrapped in aluminum foil. Rice tissues were ground in liquid nitrogen. We used the phenol extraction method. Afterward, using the bicinchoninic Acid Assay (BCA) protein assay, the protein concentration of the supernatant was determined, and then 100 μg of protein per condition was transferred into a new tube, after which the final volume was brought to 100 μL. Then, 5 μL of 200 mM DTT was added, and the sample was incubated at 50°C for 1 h. Next, 5 μL of 700 mM iodoacetamide was added to the sample and incubated for 30 min in the dark at room temperature. The proteins were digested with sequence-grade modified trypsin. The protein concentration of the supernatant was determined with the BCA protein assay. After the peptide solution was freeze dried and dissolved in 100 μL of ultrapure water, the final concentration of triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) was approximately 100 mM. The TMT labeling reagent was subsequently equilibrated at room temperature. The labeling reagent was added to the corresponding peptide solution according to the labeling information table, and different samples were labeled with isotopes of different sizes. The labeled samples were mixed into one sample, desalted using a C18 SPE column (Sep-Pak C18, Waters, Milford, MA), and, then, vacuum freeze dried. Mobile phase A consisted of 10 mM ammonium formate in water (pH 10.0), adjusted with ammonium hydroxide, and mobile phase B consisted of 10 mM ammonium formate in 90% acetonitrile (ACN) (pH 10.0) and adjusted with ammonium hydroxide. Analytes were separated by using an Acauity high-performance liquid chromatography (UPLC) system (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA) connected to a reversed-phase column (BEH C18 column, 2.1 mm x 150 mm, 1.7 μm, 300 Å; Waters Corporation, Milford, MA), and the loading amount was 50 µL. The flow rate was 250 μL min-1, and UV detection was performed at 215 nm. According to the chromatographic peak pattern, 12 fractions were collected and vacuum freeze dried for the next step. The composition of liquid C was water and 0.1% formic acid (FA); the composition of D was ACN and 0.1% FA. The fractions were separated with nano-LC, the chromatographic column type was C18, and the flow rate was 300 nL min-1. Each fraction was dissolved in 40 µL of liquid C, and the loading amount was 4 µL; the samples were analyzed via liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS). An Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer was used for each sample, with data-dependent mode automatically switched between MS and MS/MS. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode, and the primary scanning range was 350-1550 Da, with a mass resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200. The secondary scanning range was automatically selected depending on the mass-to-charge ratio of the primary precursor ions. The capillary temperature was 300°C, the ion tube voltage was 2000 V, and the fragmentation mode was higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD).

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were extracted by Proteome Discoverer software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, version 1.4.0.288). Charge state deconvolution and deisotoping were not performed. All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.3). Mascot was set up to search the Uniprot database (Taxonomy: Oryza sativa (Rice), 215207 entries) assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin. Mascot was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.050 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 PPM. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine and TMT 6plex of lysine and the n-terminus were specified in Mascot as fixed modifications. Oxidation of methionine was specified in Mascot as a variable modification. Use the percolator algorithm to control peptide level false discovery rates (FDR) lower than 1%. Only unique peptides were used for protein quantification, protein contains at least two unique peptides, and the method of normalization on protein median was used to correct experimental bias, the minimum number of proteins that must be observed to allow was set to 1000.

### Publication Abstract
Straw return is crucial for the sustainable development of rice planting, but no consistent results were observed for the effect of straw return on rice growth. To investigate the response of rice leaves to rice straw return in Northeast China, two treatments were set, no straw return (S0) and rice straw return (SR). We analyzed the physiological index of rice leaves and measured differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) and differentially expressed metabolites (DEMs) levels in rice leaves by the use of proteomics and metabolomics approaches. The results showed that, compared with the S0 treatment, the SR treatment significantly decreased the dry weight of rice plants and non-structural carbohydrate contents and destroyed the chloroplast ultrastructure. In rice leaves of SR treatment, 329 DEPs were upregulated, 303 DEPs were downregulated, 44 DEMs were upregulated, and 71 DEMs were downregulated. These DEPs were mainly involved in photosynthesis and oxidative phosphorylation, and DEMs were mainly involved in alpha-linolenic acid metabolism, galactose metabolism, glycerophospholipid metabolism, pentose and gluconic acid metabolism, and other metabolic pathways. Rice straw return promoted the accumulation of scavenging substances of active oxygen and osmotic adjustment substances, such as glutathione, organic acids, amino acids, and other substances. The SR treatment reduced the photosynthetic capacity and energy production of carbon metabolism, inhibiting the growth of rice plants, while the increase of metabolites involved in defense against abiotic stress enhanced the adaptability of rice plants to straw return stress.

### Keywords
Metabolomics, Plant growth, Proteomics, Rice straw return, Leaf, Rice

### Affiliations
Northeast Agricultural University

### Submitter
Chao Yan

### Lab Head
Dr Chao Yan
Northeast Agricultural University


