### Accession
PXD018833

### Title
Overexpression of sedoheptulose-1,7-bisphosphatase enhances photosynthesis in Chlamydomonas reinhardtii and has no effect on the abundance of other Calvin-Benson cycle enzymes

### Description
The productivity of plants and microalgae needs to be increased to feed the growing world population and to promote the development of a low-carbon economy. This goal can be achieved by improving photosynthesis via genetic engineering. In this study, we have employed the Modular Cloning strategy to overexpress the Calvin-Benson cycle (CBC) enzyme sedoheptulose-1,7 bisphosphatase (SBP1) up to 3-fold in the unicellular green alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii. The protein derived from the nuclear transgene represented ~0.3% of total cell protein. Photosynthetic rate and growth were significantly increased in SBP1-overexpressing lines under high-light and high-CO2 conditions. Absolute quantification of the abundance of all other CBC enzymes by the QconCAT approach revealed no consistent differences between SBP1-overexpressing lines and the recipient strain. This analysis also revealed that the eleven CBC enzymes represent 11.9% of total cell protein in Chlamydomonas. Here the range of concentrations of CBC enzymes turned out to be much larger than estimated earlier, with a 128-fold difference between the most abundant CBC protein (rbcL) and the least abundant (triose phosphate isomerase). Accordingly, the concentrations of the CBC intermediates are often but not always higher than the binding site concentrations of the enzymes for which they act as substrates. The enzymes with highest substrate to binding site ratios might represent good candidates for overexpression in subsequent engineering steps.

### Sample Protocol
QconCAT protein expression and purification  The coding sequence for the Calvin-Benson cycle QconCAT protein (CBC-Qprot) was codon-optimized for E. coli, synthesized by Biocat (Heidelberg) harboring BamHI/HindIII restriction sites, cloned into the pET-21b expression vector (Novagen), and transformed into E. coli ER2566 cells (New England Biolabs). Expression of CBC-Qprot as a 15N-labeled protein and purification via Co-NTA affinity chromatography and electroelution was performed as described previously for the photosynthesis QconCAT protein (PS-Qprot) (Hammel et al., 2018). The eluted protein was concentrated, and the buffer changed to 6 M urea using Amicon ultra-15 centrifugal filter units with 10,000 MWCO (Merck). The protein concentration was determined spectroscopically at 280 nm on a NanoDrop™ spectrophotometer based on the Lambert-Beer’s law assuming a molecular weight of the CBC-Qprot of 47921 Da and an extinction coefficient of 37,400 M-1 cm-1. The protein concentration was adjusted to 1 μg/μl and the protein was stored at -20°C.  In solution tryptic digest and LC-MS/MS analysis  Twenty micrograms of total Chlamydomonas protein, as determined by the Lowry assay (Lowry et al., 1951), were mixed with 12.5, 25, 50, and 100 ng CBC- and PS-Qprot for replicates 1-3, and with 25, 50, 100, and 200 ng CBC- and PS-Qprot for replicates 4-6. Proteins were then precipitated with ice-cold 80% acetone overnight, digested tryptically, and analyzed by LC-MS/MS (Eksigent nanoLC 425 coupled to a TripleTOF 6600, ABSciex) as described previously (Hammel et al., 2018).

### Data Protocol
Extraction and quantification of peak areas of ion chromatograms of heavy Q-peptides and light native peptides was performed using the QConQuantifier software (available at: https://github.com/ZimmerD/QConQuantifier).

### Publication Abstract
The productivity of plants and microalgae needs to be increased to feed the growing world population and to promote the development of a low-carbon economy. This goal can be achieved by improving photosynthesis via genetic engineering. In this study, we have employed the Modular Cloning strategy to overexpress the Calvin-Benson cycle (CBC) enzyme sedoheptulose-1,7-bisphosphatase (SBP1) up to threefold in the unicellular green alga <i>Chlamydomonas reinhardtii</i>. The protein derived from the nuclear transgene represented &#x223c;0.3% of total cell protein. Photosynthetic rate and growth were significantly increased in SBP1-overexpressing lines under high-light and elevated CO<sub>2</sub> conditions. Absolute quantification of the abundance of all other CBC enzymes by the QconCAT approach revealed no consistent differences between SBP1-overexpressing lines and the recipient strain. This analysis also revealed that the 11 CBC enzymes represent 11.9% of total cell protein in <i>Chlamydomonas</i>. Here, the range of concentrations of CBC enzymes turned out to be much larger than estimated earlier, with a 128-fold difference between the most abundant CBC protein (rbcL) and the least abundant (triose phosphate isomerase). Accordingly, the concentrations of the CBC intermediates are often but not always higher than the binding site concentrations of the enzymes for which they act as substrates. The enzymes with highest substrate to binding site ratios might represent good candidates for overexpression in subsequent engineering steps.

### Keywords
Proteotypic peptide, Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, Synthetic biology, Photosynthesis, Mass spectrometry, Qconcat, Modular cloning

### Affiliations
Molekulare Biotechnologie und Systembiologie, Technische Universität Kaiserslautern, Kaiserslautern, Germany
TU KL - CSB

### Submitter
David Zimmer

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Schroda
Molekulare Biotechnologie und Systembiologie, Technische Universität Kaiserslautern, Kaiserslautern, Germany


