### Accession
PXD005142

### Title
TORC1 shapes the SUMO proteome to control RNA Polymerase III activity

### Description
Loss of nutrient supply elicits alterations of the SUMO proteome and sumoylation is crucial to various cellular processes including transcription. However, the physiological significance of sumoylation of transcriptional regulators is unclear. To begin clarifying this, we mapped the SUMO proteome under nitrogen-limiting conditions in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Interestingly, several RNA polymerase III (RNAPIII) components are major SUMO targets under normal growth conditions, including Rpc53, Rpc82, and Ret1, and nutrient starvation results in rapid desumoylation of these proteins. These findings are supported by ChIP-seq experiments that show that SUMO is highly enriched at tDNA genes. Furthermore, RNA-seq experiments revealed that preventing sumoylation results in significantly decreased tRNA transcription. TORC1 inhibition resulted in the same effect, and our data indicate that the SUMO and TORC1 pathways are both required for robust tDNA expression. Importantly, tRNA transcription was strongly reduced in cells expressing a non-sumoylatable Rpc82-4KR mutant, which correlated with a misassembled RNAPIII transcriptional complex. Our data suggest that in addition to TORC1 activity, sumoylation of RNAPIII is key to reaching full translational capacity under optimal growth conditions.

### Sample Protocol
SUMO pull-downs were precipitated in TCA and resolubilised in 50mM NH4HCO3 containing 2% rapigest surfactant. Samples were reduced using DTT and digested with trypsin. Rpc82 immunoprecipitations were proteolytically digested on-bead. Following immunoprecipitation, washed agarose beads were incubated in 50mM NH4HCO3 containing 0.05% (w/v) ProteaseMax surfactant. Samples were then reduced using DTT and digested using 3 μg sequencing-grade modified trypsin . All digested samples were acidified to 0.5-1% trifluoroacetic acid, de-salted using c18 StageTips and eluted in 80% acetonitrile/0.1 % formic acid (FA) before drying down in a Speedivac to <10 μl for MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were submitted to MaxQuant software version 1.5.3.8 for protein identification. Only tryptic peptides were considered. A maximum of two missed cleavages were permitted, with a first search peptide tolerance of 20 p.p.m and a main search peptide tolerance of 5 p.p.m. No fixed modifications were searched, while protein N-acetylation and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications (additionally, for SUMO pull-down analyses, the EQIGG tag on lysine residues that results from tryptic cleavage of SUMO was included as a variable modification). The minimum number of unique peptides for protein identification was set to 1, and the FDR cut-off was 0.01 (1%) for both peptide and protein identifications. The Uniprot human database was used (June 2015). Generation of reversed sequences was selected to assign FDR rates. Quantitative data were analysed using the Perseus software version 1.5.3.0. Identifications from contaminant and reversed sequences were removed from the protein lists. Protein intensities were transformed to log2 for further analysis and zero intensity values were replaced by noise values of the normal distribution of each sample. Samples were compared using a Student’s T-test method.

### Publication Abstract
Maintaining cellular homeostasis under changing nutrient conditions is essential for the growth and development of all organisms. The mechanisms that maintain homeostasis upon loss of nutrient supply are not well understood. By mapping the SUMO proteome in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, we discovered a specific set of differentially sumoylated proteins mainly involved in transcription. RNA polymerase III (RNAPIII) components, including Rpc53, Rpc82, and Ret1, are particularly prominent nutrient-dependent SUMO targets. Nitrogen starvation, as well as direct inhibition of the master nutrient response regulator target of rapamycin complex 1 (TORC1), results in rapid desumoylation of these proteins, which is reflected by loss of SUMO at tRNA genes. TORC1-dependent sumoylation of Rpc82 in particular is required for robust tRNA transcription. Mechanistically, sumoylation of Rpc82 is important for assembly of the RNAPIII holoenzyme and recruitment of Rpc82 to tRNA genes. In conclusion, our data show that TORC1-dependent sumoylation of Rpc82 bolsters the transcriptional capacity of RNAPIII under optimal growth conditions.

### Keywords
Rna polymerase, Transcription, Sumoylation, Lc-ms/ms, Chip-seq, Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Affiliations
Oslo University Hospital
Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Institute for Cancer Research, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway

### Submitter
Joseph Robertson

### Lab Head
Dr Jorrit Enserink
Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Institute for Cancer Research, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway


