### Accession
PXD015896

### Title
Heart ventricles proteomic profile in pulmonary arterial hypertension

### Description
Arterial pulmonary hypertension is a rare disease, with little knowledge regarding its etiology, and high mortality. Development of right and later on also left ventricular heart insufficiency, secondary to pulmonary hypertension, is a negative predictive factor. Genetic and molecular processes underlying left heart ventricle remodeling over the course of pulmonary hypertension remain unknown. In particular, there is no knowledge regarding the mechanisms of left heart ventricle atrophy which was completely avoided by researchers until recently.The aim of this study was to assess changes in protein abundance in left and right heart ventricle free wall of rats in monocrotaline model of PAH.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen samples of left (LVFW) and right (RVFW) ventricle free wall collected from 32 non-inflammatory animals were subjected to proteomic analysis; Group I (study group): n=16 (endpoint 1, n=8; endpoint 2, n=8), Group II (control group): n=16 (endpoint 1: n=8; endpoint 2: n=8). Each sample was homogenized and lysed in a buffer containing 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 2% sodium dodecyl sulfate and 50 mM dithiothreitol at 96 °C for 10 min. 70 μg of protein content was digested using the multiple enzyme digestion filter aided a sample preparation (MED FASP) method. Next, the samples were labeled with iTRAQ reagent (n = 4 samples per group, 2 pooled samples per one iTRAQ reagent) and HpH-fractionated on C18 spin columns (Harvard Apparatus, USA). Peptides were separated in 90 min 7-55% B phase linear gradient (A phase – 2% ACN and 0.1% FA; B phase – 80% ACN and 0.1% FA) with a flow rate of 300 nl/min by UltiMate 3000 HPLC system and applied to a Velos Pro mass spectrometer. Spectra were collected in a full scan mode (400 – 1500 Da), followed by 10 HCD (Higher energy Collisional Dissociation) MS/MS scans of ten most intense ions from the preceding survey full scan under dynamic exclusion criteria.

### Data Protocol
These spectra were analyzed by the X!Tandem (The GPM Organization) and Comet search algorithms and validated with Peptide Prophet and iProphet under Trans-Proteomic Pipeline (TPP) software (Institute for Systems Biology, USA). Search parameters were following: taxonomy: rat (UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot); enzyme: trypsin; missed cleavage sites allowed: 2; fixed modification: Methylthio(C); variable modifications: Methionine oxidation(M); iTRAQ8plex(K), iTRAQ8plex(N-term), iTRAQ8plex(Y); parent mass error – 1.5 to + 3.0 Da and peptide fragment mass tolerance: 0.7 Da. Quantitative information was extracted by Libra software under TPP. Peptide False Discovery Rate (FDR) was estimated by Mayu (TPP) and peptide identifications with FDR below 1% were considered as correct matches. DanteR software was used for statistical analysis of iTRAQ-labeled peptides. Briefly, data was log2 transformed and normalized using linear regression. ANOVA was performed at peptide level and the Benjamini &amp; Hochberg False Discovery Rate (FDR) correction was used to adjust p-values.

### Publication Abstract
Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) is a rare, fatal, and incurable disorder. Although advances in the understanding of the PAH pathobiology have been seen in recent years, molecular processes underlying heart remodelling over the course of PAH are still insufficiently understood. Therefore, the aim of this study was to investigate myocardial proteomic profile of rats at different stages of monocrotaline-induced PAH. Samples of left and right ventricle (LV and RV) free wall collected from 32 Wistar rats were subjected to proteomic analysis using an isobaric tag for relative quantitation method. Hemodynamic parameters indicated development of mild elevation of pulmonary artery pressure in the early PAH group (27.00&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;4.93&#xa0;mmHg) and severe elevation in the end-stage PAH group (50.50&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;11.56&#xa0;mmHg). In early PAH LV myocardium proteins that may be linked to an increase in inflammatory response, apoptosis, glycolytic process and decrease in myocardial structural proteins were differentially expressed compared to controls. During end-stage PAH an increase in proteins associated with apoptosis, fibrosis and cardiomyocyte Ca<sup>2+</sup> currents as well as decrease in myocardial structural proteins were observed in LV. In RV during early PAH, especially proteins associated with myocardial structural components and fatty acid beta-oxidation pathway were upregulated. During end-stage PAH significant changes in RV proteins abundance related to the increased myocardial structural components, intensified fibrosis and glycolytic processes as well as decreased proteins related to cardiomyocyte Ca<sup>2+</sup> currents were observed. At both PAH stages changes in RV proteins linked to apoptosis inhibition were observed. In conclusion, we identified changes of the levels of several proteins and thus of the metabolic pathways linked to the early and late remodelling of the left and right ventricle over the course of monocrotaline-induced PAH to delineate potential therapeutic targets for the treatment of this severe disease.

### Keywords
Heart, Monicrotaline, Ventricle, Itraq, Pulmonary hypertension

### Affiliations
Chair of Pharmacology Faculty of Medicine Jagiellonian University Medical College 16 Grzegorzecka Street 31-531 Krakow, Poland tel: +48 12 4211168 fax: +48 12 4217217
Chair of Pharmacology

### Submitter
Maciej Suski

### Lab Head
Dr Rafał Olszanecki
Chair of Pharmacology Faculty of Medicine Jagiellonian University Medical College 16 Grzegorzecka Street 31-531 Krakow, Poland tel: +48 12 4211168 fax: +48 12 4217217


