### Accession
PXD028600

### Title
Proteome of C. elegans upon NCL-1 or TIF-IA KD during aging

### Description
Anabolic activities such as ribosome biogenesis and protein synthesis are linked to aging. Ribosomal RNA (rRNA) synthesis is the limiting step of ribosome biogenesis, thus dictating the number of ribosomes in cells and, consequently, the capacity for mRNA translation. Knockdown of the rRNA synthesis repressor, NCL-1, accelerated aging, whereas knocking down the transcription initiation factor C36E8.1 promoted longevity. This suggested that rRNA synthesis has a negative correlation with lifespan. To investigate the metabolic changes upon manipulation of rRNA synthesis the proteome of NCL-1 KD and C36E8.1 KD were analyzed at young, middle, and old age (AD2, AD6, AD12).

### Sample Protocol
For proteomics analysis, ca 800 worms were harvested for each sample and transferred to Precellys CKMix Lysing Kits tubes (Precellys ®, Bertin Technologies, France, 1.4 mm and 2.8 mm ceramic beads inside). After harvesting and before homogenization, 25 uL of 10 x lysis buffer (fc 4% SDS, 100 mM HEPES, pH 8.5, 50 mM DTT ) were added. The tissues were lysed and homogenized using a Precellys 24 (Precellys ®, Bertin Technologies, France) for 3 cycles of 20 sec on at 6000 rpm followed by 30 sec interval. After bead beating, samples were sonicated (Bioruptor Plus, Diagenode, Belgium) for 10 cycles (30 sec ON/60 sec OFF) at high setting, at 20 °C, followed by boiling at 95°C for 5 min. Reduction was followed by alkylation with 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA, final concentration 15 mM) for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Protein amounts were estimated, following an SDS-PAGE gel of 10 µL of each sample against an in-house cell lysate of known quantity. 30 µg of each sample was taken along for digestion. Proteins were precipitated overnight at -20 °C after addition of 4x volume of ice-cold acetone. The following day, the samples were centrifuged at 20800x g for 30 min at 4 °C and the supernatant carefully removed (Eppendorf 5810R, Eppendorf AG, Germany). Pellets were washed twice with 300 µL ice-cold 80% (v/v) acetone in water then centrifuged at 20800x g at 4 °C for 10 min. After removing the acetone, pellet were air-dried before addition of 25 µL of digestion buffer (1M Guanidine, 100 mM HEPES, pH 8). Samples were resuspended with sonication as explained above, then LysC (Wako) was added at 1:100 (w/w) enzyme:protein ratio and digestion proceeded for 4 h at 37 °C under shaking (1000 rpm for 1 h, then 650 rpm). Samples were then diluted 1:1 with MilliQ water and trypsin (Promega) added at at 1:100 (w/w) enzyme:protein ratio. Samples were further digested overnight at 37 °C under shaking (650 rpm). The day after, digests were acidified by the addition of TFA to a final concentration of 10% (v/v), heated at 37 °C and then desalted with Waters Oasis® HLB µElution Plate 30 µm (Waters Corporation, MA, USA) under a soft vacuum following the manufacturer instruction. Briefly, the columns were conditioned with 3x100 µL solvent B (80% (v/v) acetonitrile; 0.05% (v/v) formic acid) and equilibrated with 3x100 µL solvent A (0.05% (v/v) formic acid in Milli-Q water). The samples were loaded, washed 3 times with 100 µL solvent A, and then eluted into 0.2 mL PCR tubes with 50 µL solvent B. The eluates were dried down using a speed vacuum centrifuge (Eppendorf Concentrator Plus, Eppendorf AG, Germany) and redissolved at a concentration of 1 µg/µL in reconstitution buffer (5% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in Milli-Q water).

### Data Protocol
Reconstituted peptides were spiked with retention time iRT kit (Biognosys, Switzerland) and separated in trap/elute mode using the nanoAcquity MClass Ultra-High Performance Liquid Chromatography system (Waters, Waters Corporation, Milford, MA,USA ) equipped with a trapping (nanoAcquity Symmetry C18, 5 μm, 180 μm × 20 mm) and an analytical column (nanoAcquity BEH C18, 1.7 μm, 75 μm × 250 mm). The outlet of the analytical column was coupled directly to an Orbitrap Q exactive HF-X (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) mass spectrometer using the Proxeon nanospray source. Solvent A was water and 0.1% formic acid, and solvent B was acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. The samples (∼1 μg) were loaded with a constant flow of solvent A at 5 μl/min onto the trapping column. Trapping time was 6 min. Peptides were eluted via the analytical column with a constant flow of 0.3 μl/min. During the elution step, the percentage of solvent B increased in a nonlinear fashion from 0–40% in 120 min. Total run time was 145 min. The peptides were introduced into the mass spectrometer via a Pico-Tip Emitter 360-μm outer diameter × 20-μm inner diameter, 10-μm tip (New Objective) heated at 300 °C, and a spray voltage of 2.2 kV was applied. The capillary temperature was set at 300°C. The radio frequency ion funnel was set to 40%. For DIA data acquisition, full scan mass spectrometry (MS) spectra with mass range 350–1650 m/z were acquired in profile mode in the Orbitrap with resolution of 120,000 FWHM. The default charge state was set to 3+. The filling time was set at maximum of 60 ms with limitation of 3 × 106 ions. DIA scans were acquired with 40 mass window segments of differing widths across the MS1 mass range. Higher collisional dissociation fragmentation (stepped normalized collision energy; 25.5, 27, and 30%) was applied and MS/MS spectra were acquired with a resolution of 30,000 FWHM with a fixed first mass of 200 m/z after accumulation of 3 × 106 ions or after filling time of 35 ms (whichever occurred first). Data were acquired in profile mode. For data acquisition and processing of the raw data, Xcalibur 4.0 (Thermo Fisher) and Tune version 2.9 were used. DIA raw data were analyzed using the directDIA pipeline in Spectronaut (v.13, Biognosysis, Switzerland). The data were searched against a species specific (C.elegans, 26.677 entried]s) Swissprot database. The data were searched with the following modifications: Carbamidomethyl (C) (Fixed) and Oxidation (M)/ Acetyl (Protein N-term) (Variable). A maximum of 2 missed cleavages for trypsin were allowed. The identifications were filtered to satisfy FDR of 1 % on peptide and protein level. Relative quantification was performed in Spectronaut for each paired and unpaired comparison using the replicate samples from each condition. The data (candidate table) and data reports (protein quantities) were then exported and further data analyses and visualization were performed with Rstudio using in-house pipelines and scripts. Differently regulated proteins were analyzed for biological functions using the  IPA  (Ingenuity Pathway Analysis) software (QIAGEN  Inc., https://www.qiagenbioinformatics.com/products/ingenuity-pathway-analysis).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rna polymerase i, Rdna, Ribo-aging, Rrna synthesis, Proteomics, Rrna gene transcription

### Affiliations
Leibniz Institute on Ageing Fritz Lipmann Institute Jena
Institut für Biochemie und Biophysik Friedrich-Schiller-Universität Hans-Knöll-Str. 2, D-07745 Jena

### Submitter
Emilio Cirri

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Holger
Institut für Biochemie und Biophysik Friedrich-Schiller-Universität Hans-Knöll-Str. 2, D-07745 Jena


