### Accession
PXD026214

### Title
Consequences of sEH deletion in the polyoma middle T (PyMT) breast cancer tumor proteome

### Description
The aim of this investigation was to study the consequences of interfering with soluble epoxide hydrolase (sEH) expression on tumor growth and metastasis in genetically modified animals that spontaneously generate tumors without the exogenous application of high concentrations of epoxide mediators or inhibitors. Therefore, breast cancer development was studied in mice expressing the polyoma middle T oncogene (PyMT) under the control of the mouse mammary tumor virus promoter, to induce spontaneous mammary tumors. To facilitate the study of endogenous sEH activity in tumor growth, PyMT mice were then crossed with sEH-/- mice to generate sEH-deficient mice that spontaneously generate breast tumors (so called PyMTsEH mice). For these analyses, primary tumors were removed from 20 week old mice.

### Sample Protocol
Primary tumors were solubilized in 10% SDS (w/v), 150 mmol/L NaCl, 100 mmol/L HEPES pH 7.8. Samples were sonicated for 5 seconds, heated for 5 minutes at 95°C and centrifuged to remove insoluble material. Total protein amount of 100 μg of each sample was diluted in (4% (w/v) SDS, 100 mmol/L HEPES, pH 7.6, 150 mmol/L NaCl, 0.1 M DTT, mixed with 200 μL 8 mol/L urea, 50 mmol/L Tris/HCl, pH 8.5 and loaded to spin filters with a 30 kDa cut off (Microcon, Merck, Darmstadt, Germany). The filter aided sample preparation protocol (FASP) was followed as described in Wiśniewski (2017).  Proteins were digested overnight with trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega, Mannheim, Germany). Acidified peptides (final concentration 0.1% v/v trifluoroacetic acid) were fractionated on multi-stop-and-go tips (StageTips) containing C18 and strong cation exchange (SCX) tips (Empore, St. Paul, USA),. The C18 translution fraction was combined with the first SXC fraction. All six fractions of each sample were eluted in wells of microtiter plates. Peptides were dried and resolved in 1% acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid. Liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry (LC/MS) was performed on Thermo Scientific™ Q Exactive Plus equipped with an ultra-high performance liquid chromatography unit (Thermo Scientific Dionex Ultimate 3000) and a Nanospray Flex Ion-Source (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded on a C18 reversed-phase precolumn (Thermo Scientific) followed by separation on a 2.4 μm Reprosil C18 resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH) in-house packed picotip emitter tip (diameter 100 μm, 30 cm long from New Objectives) using a gradient from mobile phase A (4% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) to 30 % mobile phase B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) for 110 minutes following a second gradient to 60% B for another 45 minutes with a flow rate of 200 nl/minute. MS data were recorded by data dependent acquisition method selecting ten most abundant precursor ions in positive mode for HCD fragmentation. Lock mass option [Olsen et al., 2005 ], was enabled to ensure high mass accuracy during many following runs. The Full MS scan range was 300 to 2000 m/z with resolution of 70000, and an automatic gain control (AGC) value of 3xE6 total ion counts with a maximal ion injection time of 160 ms. Higher charged ions (2+) were selected for MS/MS scans with a resolution of 17500, an isolation window of 2 m/z and an automatic gain control value set to E5 ions with a maximal ion injection time of 150 ms. Selected ions for MS/MS were excluded in a time frame of 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
X calibur Raw files were analyzed by proteomics software Max Quant (1.6.4.0) [Cox et al, 2008]. The enzyme specificity was set to trypsin, missed cleavages were limited to 2. Acetylation of Nterminus (+42.01) and oxidation of methionine (+15.99) were selected for variable modification, carbamidomethylation (+57.02) on cysteines was set as fixed modification. The mouse proteome set from Uniprot (Download February 2018, 52538 entries) was used to identify peptides and proteins with a false discovery rate of 1%. Label free quantification values were obtained from at least one identified peptide.   Rappsilber J et al. (2007)  Protocol for micro-purification, enrichment, pre-fractionation and storage of peptides for proteomics using StageTips. Nature Protocols 2:1896–1906. Wiśniewski JR (2017) Filter-Aided Sample Preparation: The Versatile and Efficient Method for Proteomic Analysis. Methods Enzymol.585:15-27.  Olsen JV, et al. (2005) Parts per million mass accuracy on an Orbitrap mass spectrometer via lock mass injection into a C-trap. Mol Cell Proteomics 4:2010- 2021. Cox J, Mann M. (2008) MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat Biotechnol. 26:1367-72.

### Publication Abstract
Epoxides and diols of polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) are bioactive and can influence processes such as tumor cell proliferation and angiogenesis. Studies with inhibitors of the soluble epoxide hydrolase (sEH) in animals overexpressing cytochrome P450 enzymes or following the systemic administration of specific epoxides revealed a markedly increased incidence of tumor metastases. To determine whether PUFA epoxides increased metastases in a model of spontaneous breast cancer, sEH<sup>-/-</sup> mice were crossed onto the polyoma middle T oncogene (PyMT) background. We found that the deletion of the sEH accelerated the growth of primary tumors and increased both the tumor macrophage count and angiogenesis. There were small differences in the epoxide/diol content of tumors, particularly in epoxyoctadecamonoenic acid versus dihydroxyoctadecenoic acid, and marked changes in the expression of proteins linked with cell proliferation and metabolism. However, there was no consequence of sEH inhibition on the formation of metastases in the lymph node or lung. Taken together, our results confirm previous reports of increased tumor growth in animals lacking sEH but fail to substantiate reports of enhanced lymph node or pulmonary metastases.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Breast cancer, Metastasis, Lymphangiogenesis, Macrophage

### Affiliations
Functional Proteomics, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main , Germany
Institute for Vascular Signalling, Centre for Molecular Medicine, Goethe-Universität, Frankfurt am Main, Germany

### Submitter
Ilka Wittig

### Lab Head
Dr Ingrid Fleming
Institute for Vascular Signalling, Centre for Molecular Medicine, Goethe-Universität, Frankfurt am Main, Germany


