### Accession
PXD017722

### Title
A strain-specific genomic island encodes regulatory proteins to activate type VI secretion system expression in the squid symbiont Vibrio fischeri.

### Description
We used the bioluminescent squid symbiont, Vibrio fischeri, to identify essential regulatory factors that control expression and function of a strain-specific T6SS encoded within a genomic island. Random transposon mutagenesis revealed that three genes located on the T6SS2-encoding genomic island are necessary to activate expression of a T6SS reporter. We used a proteomics approach to identify proteins that were differentially abundant in mutant strains compared to the wild type when cells were grown in a high-viscosity media.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction and digestion was performed as described in Speare et al. (2020, mBio 11(1) pii:e03060-19). We added 60 µL of SDT-lysis buffer (4% (w/v) SDS, 100 mM Tris-HCl, 0.1 M DTT) to each cell pellet and then incubated the samples at 95°C for 10 min for cell lysis. Tryptic digests of protein extracts were prepared following the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol described by Wisniewski et al. (2009) and added of minor modifications as described in Kleiner et al. (2017, Nat. Comm. 8(1558)). We loaded the whole lysate on to the filter units used for the FASP procedure. Centrifugation times were reduced to 20 minutes as compared to Kleiner et al. (2017, Nat. Comm. 8(1558)). Peptide concentrations were determined with the Pierce Micro BCA assay (Thermo Scientific) using an Epoch2 microplate reader (Biotek) following the manufacturer’s instructions. All samples were analyzed by 1D-LC-MS/MS as described in Speare et al. (2020, mBio 11(1) pii:e03060-19). For each sample run 400 ng peptide were loaded with an UltiMateTM 3000 RSLCnano Liquid Chromatograph (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in loading solvent A (2 % acetonitrile, 0.05 % trifluoroacetic acid) onto a 5 mm, 300 µm ID C18 Acclaim® PepMap100 pre-column (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Separation of peptides on the analytical column (75 cm x 75 µm analytical EASY-Spray column packed with PepMap RSLC C18, 2 µm material, Thermo Fisher Scientific) was achieved at a flow rate of 300 nl  min‑1 using a 140 min gradient going from 95 % buffer A (0.1 % formic acid) to 31 % buffer B (0.1 % formic acid, 80 % acetonitrile) in 102 min, then to 50 % B in 18 min, to 99 % B in 1 min and ending with 99 % B. The analytical column was heated to 60 °C and was connected to a Q Exactive HF hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) via an Easy-Spray source. Eluting peptides were ionized via electrospray ionization (ESI). Carryover was reduced by one wash run (injection of 20 µl acetonitrile, 99 % eluent B) between samples. Full scans were acquired in the Orbitrap at 60,000 resolution. The 15 most abundant precursor ions were selected for fragmentation and MS/MS scans were acquired at 15,000 resolution. The mass (m/z) 445.12003 was used as lock mass. Ions with charge state +1 were excluded from MS/MS analysis. Dynamic exclusion was set to 18 s. Roughly 135,000 MS/MS spectra were acquired per sample.

### Data Protocol
A database containing protein sequences from Aliivibrio fischeri (SRJG00000000.1) downloaded from NCBI was used. Sequences of common laboratory contaminants were included by appending the cRAP protein sequence database (http://www.thegpm.org/crap/). The final database contained 3,925 protein sequences. Searches of the MS/MS spectra against this database were performed with the Sequest HT node in Proteome Discoverer version 2.2.0.388 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) as described previously (Petersen et al. 2016, Nat. Microb. 2(16195)). Only proteins identified with medium or high confidence were retained resulting in an overall false discovery rate of <5%. For protein quantification, normalized spectral abundance factors (NSAFs, Zybailov et al. 2006, J Proteome Res 5:2339–2347) were calculated and multiplied with 100 to obtain relative protein abundance in %.

### Publication Abstract
Bacteria have evolved diverse strategies to compete for a niche, including the type VI secretion system (T6SS), a contact-dependent killing mechanism. T6SSs are common in bacterial pathogens, commensals, and beneficial symbionts, where they affect the diversity and spatial structure of host-associated microbial communities. Although T6SS gene clusters are often located on genomic islands (GIs), which may be transferred as a unit, the regulatory strategies that promote gene expression once the T6SS genes are transferred into a new cell are not known. We used the squid symbiont Vibrio fischeri to identify essential regulatory factors that control expression of a strain-specific T6SS encoded on a GI. We found that a transcriptional reporter for this T6SS is active only in strains that contain the T6SS-encoding GI, suggesting the GI encodes at least one essential regulator. A transposon screen identified seven mutants that could not activate the reporter. These mutations mapped exclusively to three genes on the T6SS-containing GI that encode two essential structural proteins (a TssA-like protein and TssM) and a transcriptional regulator (TasR). Using T6SS reporters, reverse transcription-PCR (RT-PCR), competition assays, and differential proteomics, we found that all three genes are required for expression of many T6SS components, except for the TssA-like protein and TssM, which are constitutively expressed. Based on these findings, we propose a model whereby T6SS expression requires conserved structural proteins, in addition to the essential regulator TasR, and this ability to self-regulate may be a strategy to activate T6SS expression upon transfer of T6SS-encoding elements into a new bacterial host. <b>IMPORTANCE</b> Interbacterial weapons like the T6SS are often located on mobile genetic elements, and their expression is highly regulated. We found that two conserved structural proteins are required for T6SS expression in Vibrio fischeri. These structural proteins also contain predicted GTPase and GTP binding domains, suggesting their role in promoting T6SS expression may involve sensing the energetic state of the cell. Such a mechanism would provide a direct link between T6SS activation and cellular energy levels, providing a "checkpoint" to ensure the cell has sufficient energy to build such a costly weapon. Because these regulatory factors are encoded within the T6SS gene cluster, they are predicted to move with the genetic element to activate T6SS expression in a new host cell.

### Keywords
Symbiosis, Vibrio fischeri, Aliivibrio fischeri, Genomic island, 1d-lc-ms/ms, Squid-vibrio symbiosis, Type vi secretion system

### Affiliations
North Carolina State University

### Submitter
Fernanda Salvato

### Lab Head
Dr Manuel Kleiner
North Carolina State University


