### Accession
PXD015578

### Title
Alzheimer stage proteomics study

### Description
This project aims to study the pathological role of Extracellular vesicles (EVs) in human brain and the correlation between EVs secretion with whole brain proteome. EVs are extracted from human brain tissue of Alzheimer dementia (AD) patients, VaD patients and age matched healthy controls using PROSPR method. Alzheimer patients includes stage3 (AD3), stage4 (AD4), stage5 (AD5) and stage6 (AD6). Whole brain proteome are performed simultaneously. Proteins associated with pre-symptomatic AD, AD progression and other pathological ways are analysed. The potential targets are further validated with MRM approach

### Sample Protocol
EVs are extracted from human brain tissue of Alzheimer dementia (AD) patients, VaD and age matched healthy controls using PROSPR method. Alzheimer patients includes stage3 (AD3), stage4 (AD4), stage5 (AD5) and stage6 (AD6). PROSPR method are applied for EVs extraction and purification. EVs sample are performed UREA assisted in solution digestion. EVs sample are reduced with DTT and alkylated with IAA and finally trypsin digested overnight. Tryptic peptides are injected triplicate into Q Exactive. Whole proteome are processed with SDS assisted TMT6 labelling method. Samples are reduced with DTT and alkylated with IAA and finally trypsin digested overnight. Tryptic peptides are labelled with TMT6 isobaric tags and pooled sample was injected triplicate into Q Exactive. MRM validation was applied for EVs label free sample. The 4-6 most intense fragmentation ions (transitions) were selected for MRM verification. The instrument method was build based on parameters derived from transitions and precursor m/z ratio. For each study group, label free EVs sample at specific fraction was determined to assayed in triplicate in a TSQ Vantage triple quadrupole mass spectrometer coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 nanoflow UHPLC system (Thermo Scientific Inc., Bremen, Germany).

### Data Protocol
Label free CNS-EVs protein database search was carried out using an in-house Mascot server (version 2.3.02, Matrix Science, MA) with precursor ion tolerance of 30 ppm and fragment ion tolerance of 0.02 Da. The UniProt human database was used for the protein database search. Deamidation of N and Q, Oxidation of M was set as the variable modification while cabarmydomethyl of C was set as fixed modification. Raw data files from three technical replicates of TMT 6 labeling data were searched in Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo Fisher, MA, USA) together with the Mascot search engines. User defined parameters are configured as follows: (i) Protein Database, uni_protein_i; (ii) enzyme name, Trypsin; (iii) precursor mass tolerance, 10ppm; (iv) modification group, TMT6 plex; (v) dynamic modification, oxidation (M), deamidation (NQ), 4Trioxidation (CMWY), Citrullination (R), Carbamy (R), phosoph (ST), Ubi (K) and carbamydomethyl (C); (vi) reporter ion integration toleration: 20ppm; (vii) mass analyzer, FTMS. The false discovery rate (FDR) for each search was less than 1%. Search result were exported in the format of Microsoft Excel for three technical replicates. A 1.5-fold increase was considered as upregulation. The correlation between whole brain proteome and label free EVs were performed deeper statistics study with graph prism. The raw MRM data generated from TSQ vantage were processed with open-access software Skyline v4.1. The corresponding spectral library was created from label free EVs proteomics MS/MS search result to provide the reliability test for candidate peptides. At least four of the selected transitions co-eluted within the isolation windows was considered as positive verification of peptide

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
['Human', 'Brain']

### Affiliations
['Nanyang Technological University', 'NTU']

### Submitter
['Xue Guo']

### Lab Head
[{'title': 'Dr', 'affiliation': 'Nanyang Technological University', 'email': 'sksze@ntu.edu.sg', 'country': '', 'orcid': '', 'name': 'Sze Siu Kwan', 'id': '160880100'}]

### SDRF
Characteristics[organism]: ['Homo sapiens']
Characteristics[organism part]: ['brain extracellular vesicles']
Characteristics[disease]: ['not available']
Characteristics[cell type]: ['not applicable']
comment[label]: ['AC=MS:1002038;NT=label free sample']
comment[instrument]: ['NT=TSQ Vantage;AC=MS:1001510']
comment[modification parameters]: ['NT=Oxidation;AC=UNIMOD:35;MT=Variable;TA=M']
comment[modification parameters].1: ['NT=Carbamidomethyl;AC=UNIMOD:4;TA=C;MT=Fixed']
comment[modification parameters].2: ['NT=Deamidated;AC=UNIMOD:7;MT=Variable;TA=N,Q']

