### Accession
PXD036298

### Title
Global Stability Profling of Colorectal Cancer Chemoresistance

### Description
Almost half of the patients with advanced colorectal cancer (CRC) are resistant to oxaliplatin based therapy, the first line treatment for CRC. Therefore, predicting and understanding oxaliplatin resistance is important to improve CRC patient survival. Investigated here is the use of proteomic folding stability measurements to differentiate oxaliplatin resistant and sensitive CRCs using patient-derived  CRC cell lines and patient-derived xenografts (PDXs).  Three protein stability profiling techniques (including the Stability of Proteins from Rates of Oxidation (SPROX), the Thermal Protein Profiling (TPP), and Limited Proteolysis (LiP) approaches) were employed to identify differentially stabilized proteins in 6 patient-derived CRC cell lines with different oxaliplatin sensitivities and 8 CRC PDXs derived from 2 of the patient derived cell lines with different oxaliplatin sensitivity.  A total of 23 proteins were found in at least 2 techniques to be differentially stabilized in both the cell line and PDX studies of oxaliplatin resistance.  These 23 differentially stabilized proteins included 9 proteins that have been previously connected to cancer chemoresistance. Over-representation analysis (ORA) of all the differentially stabilized proteins identified here, revealed novel pathways related to oxaliplatin resistance. Compared to conventional protein expression level analyses, which were also performed on the cell lines and PDXs, the stability profiling techniques identified novel proteins and pathways and provided new insight on the molecular basis of oxaliplatin resistance. Our results suggest that protein stability profiling techniques are complementary to expression level analyses for identifying biomarkers and understanding molecular mechanisms associated with oxaliplatin chemoresistance in CRC and disease phenotypes in general.

### Sample Protocol
SPROX, TPP, and LiP are conducted in the previously described protocols. LC-MS/MS protocol: The samples were reconstituted with 1% TFA and 2% ACN such that the final peptide concentration was around 1 mg/mL. The LC-MS/MS analysis was performed with Thermo Exploris 480 with a Thermo easy-nLC 1200. 1 μg of the sample were loaded to an Acclaim PepMap 100 loading column (NanoViper 2Pk, C18, 2 μm, 100 Å, 75 μm x 2 cm) and the samples were analyzed with a PepMap PSLC C18 analytical column (2 μm, 100 Å, 75 μm x 25 cm). The samples were analyzed in a gradient going from 3.2% to 28% ACN in 90 min, 28% to 32% ACN in 5 min, and 32% to 80% ACN in 5 min before the column was washed with 80% ACN for 5 min. The MS1 acquisition was performed with 120000 resolution, 375-1500 m/z range, and 300% normalized AGC target. The acquisition window between two MS1 scans was 2.5 s and the isolation window was set as 1.2 m/z for selecting precursor ions for DDA. The high-energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) was performed with 36% HCD normalized collision energy, and the MS2 scan was performed with a resolution of 45000, 300% normalized AGC target, and 105 ms of maximum ion injection time.

### Data Protocol
The raw data acquired from LC-MS/MS analysis was searched using Thermo Proteome Discoverer 2.3 against human proteome from UniprotKB (Uniprot proteome ID: UP000005640) for the cell line samples. Specifically, for the PDX samples, the data was searched against both human and mouse proteome (Uniprot proteome ID: UP000005640 and UP000000589), and the peptides that matched to both human and mouse proteins were removed from the protein grouping and further analysis to prevent the influence on quantitation caused by mouse proteins. The searched data was processed using a previously described procedure. Briefly, the quantified TMT intensities output from PD were normalized by the average intensities of total proteins/peptides for each channel, except for one-pot SPROX data, where the TMT intensities were normalized by the average intensities of all the non-methionine containing peptides for each channel. For the expression level analysis, the pair-wised two-tail Student t-test was applied on the normalized data to generate p-values for each protein. For a protein to be considered as differentially expressed between resistant and sensitive cell lines or PDXs, the p-value generated from the t-test has to be lower than 0.01. For the one-pot TPP, one-pot SPROX, and the STEPP-LiP samples, similar t-test and hit selection criteria were utilized except that the protein/peptide intensities were normalized by the corresponding expression level data before the t-test to eliminate the difference caused by the different expression level between cell lines and PDXs.

### Publication Abstract
Reported here is the application of three protein folding stability profiling techniques (including the stability of proteins from rates of oxidation, thermal protein profiling, and limited proteolysis approaches) to identify differentially stabilized proteins in six patient-derived colorectal cancer (CRC) cell lines with different oxaliplatin sensitivities and eight CRC patient-derived xenografts (PDXs) derived from two of the patient derived cell lines with different oxaliplatin sensitivities. Compared to conventional protein expression level analyses, which were also performed here, the stability profiling techniques identified both unique and novel proteins and cellular components that differentiated the sensitive and resistant samples including 36 proteins that were differentially stabilized in at least two techniques in both the cell line and PDX studies of oxaliplatin resistance. These 36 differentially stabilized proteins included 10 proteins previously connected to cancer chemoresistance. Two differentially stabilized proteins, fatty acid synthase and elongation factor 2, were functionally validated <i>in vitro</i> and found to be druggable protein targets with biological functions that can be modulated to improve the efficacy of CRC chemotherapy. These results add to our understanding of CRC oxaliplatin resistance, suggest biomarker candidates for predicting oxaliplatin sensitivity in CRC, and inform new strategies for overcoming chemoresistance in CRC.

### Keywords
Lip, Oxaliplatin, Tpp, Colorectal cancer, Sprox

### Affiliations
Professor of Chemistry Department of Chemistry  Duke University
Duke University

### Submitter
Baiyi Quan

### Lab Head
Dr Michael C. Fitzgerald
Professor of Chemistry Department of Chemistry  Duke University


