### Accession
PXD041265

### Title
The regulatory roles of Ezh2 in response to lipopolysaccharide (LPS) in macrophages and mice with conditional Ezh2 deletion with LysM-Cre system

### Description
The responses of macrophages to lipopolysaccharide (LPS) might determine the direction of clinical manifestations of sepsis, which is the immune response against severe infection. Meanwhile, the enhancer of zeste homologue 2 (Ezh2), a histone lysine methyltransferase of epigenetic regulation, might interfere with LPS response. With a single LPS stimulation, Ezh2 null(Ezh2flox/flox; LysM-Crecre/−) macrophages demonstrated lower supernatant TNF-α than Ezh2 control (Ezh2fl/fl; LysM-Cre−/−), perhaps due to an upregulation of Socs3, which is a suppressor of cytokine signaling 3, due to the loss of the Ezh2 gene. In LPS tolerance, Ezh2 null macrophages indicated higher supernatant TNF-α and IL-6 than the control, supporting an impact of the loss of the Ezh2 inhibitory gene. In parallel, Ezh2 null mice demonstrated lower serum TNF-α and IL-6 than the control mice after an LPS injection, indicating a less severe LPS-induced hyper-inflammation in Ezh2 null mice. In conclusion, an absence of Ezh2 in macrophages resulted in less severe LPS-induced inflammation, as indicated by low serum cytokines, with less severe LPS tolerance, as demonstrated by higher cytokine production, partly through the upregulated Socs3.

### Sample Protocol
Macrophages were differentiated from the bone-marrow femurs of Ezhflox/flox; LysM-Cre—/— and Ezhflox/flox; LysM-CreCre/— mice using completed Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s Medium (DMEM) supplemented with recombinant mouse M-CSF (BioLegend, CA, USA) for 7 days in 5% CO2 incubator at 37oC. Subsequently, each well of 2,000,000 cells of macrophages were cultured with completed DMEM in 5% CO2 incubator at 37oC for 24 h before being stimulated by LPS at the final concentration of 100 µg/mL. To protect interference of any proteins, macrophages were cultured in DMEM without fetal bovine serum and horse serum and activated with various conditions containing i) single LPS stimulation (LPS), ii) double LPS stimulation (LPS/LPS), and iii) no stimulation (control). Culture medium was harvested, centrifuged to remove intact cells, concentrated using Amicon 3K, and followed by buffer exchange with 8 M urea lysis buffer. For proteome analysis, cells were washed with PBS and lysed with 8 M urea lysis buffer. Protein concentration measurement was performed by BCA assay. Proteins from both cells and culture medium were subjected to in-solution digestion. Then, the peptides from N/N, N/LPS and LPS/LPS were labeled with light reagents (CH2O and NaBH3CN), medium reagents (CD2O and NaBH3CN), and heavy reagents (13CD2O and NaBD3CN), respectively. The pooled peptides were fractionated using a high pH reversed-phase peptide fractionation kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, United States). Eluates of each fraction were dried in a SpeedVac centrifuge before LC-MS/MS analysis. The fractionated samples were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid and then analyzed via an EASY-nLC1000 system (Thermo) coupled to a Q-Exactive Orbitrap Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo) equipped with a nano-electrospray ion source (Thermo). The peptides were eluted in 5–40% acetonitrile in 0.1% FA for 60 min followed by 40–95% acetonitrile in 0.1% FA for 30 min at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The MS methods included a full MS scan at a resolution of 70,000 followed by 10 data-dependent MS2 scans at a resolution of 17,500. The normalized collision energy of HCD fragmentation was set at 32%. An MS scan range of 350 to 1400 m/z was selected and precursor ions with unassigned charge states, a charge state of +1, or a charge state of greater than +8 were excluded. A dynamic exclusion of 30 s was used.

### Data Protocol
The peaklist-generating software used in this study was Proteome Discoverer™ Software 2.1 (Thermo). The SEQUEST-HT search engine was employed in data processing. MS raw data files were searched against the Mouse Swiss-Prot Database(17,138 proteins, November 2022) and a list of common protein contaminants (www.thegpm.org/crap/). The following parameters were set for the search: (1) digestion enzyme: trypsin; (2) maximum allowance for missed cleavages: 2; (3) maximum of modifications: 4; (4) fixed modifications: carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.02146 Da), as well as light, medium, and heavy dimethylation of N termini and lysine (+28.031300, +32.056407, and +36.075670 Da); (5) variable modifications: oxidation of methionine (+15.99491 Da). The mass tolerances for precursor and fragment ions were set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively. Known contaminant ions were excluded. The Proteome Discoverer decoy database together with the Percolator algorithm were used to calculate the false positive discovery rate of the identified peptides based on Q-values which were set to 1%. The Precursor Ions Quantifier node in Proteome Discoverer™ Software was employed to quantify the relative MS signal intensities of dimethyl labeled-peptides. The control channels were used as denominators to generate abundance ratios of N_LPS/N_N and LPS_LPS/N_N. Log2 of the normalized ratio was used to calculate the mean and standard deviation of fold change across all three biological replicates. When these ratios were not found in one experiment, the relevant proteins were excluded. Significantly differentially regulated proteins were determined by unpaired t-tests with p value < 0.05 considered significant.

### Publication Abstract
The O6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase (MGMT) is a DNA suicide repair enzyme that might be important during sepsis but has never been explored. Then, the proteomic analysis of lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-stimulated wild-type (WT) macrophages increased proteasome proteins and reduced oxidative phosphorylation proteins compared with control, possibly related to cell injury. With LPS stimulation, <i>mgmt</i> null (<i>mgmt</i><sup>flox/flox</sup>; LysM-Cre<sup>cre/-</sup>) macrophages demonstrated less profound inflammation; supernatant cytokines (TNF-&#x3b1;, IL-6, and IL-10) and pro-inflammatory genes (<i>iNOS</i> and <i>IL-1&#x3b2;</i>), with higher DNA break (phosphohistone H2AX) and cell-free DNA, but not malondialdehyde (the oxidative stress), compared with the littermate control (<i>mgmt</i><sup>flox/flox</sup>; LysM-Cre<sup>-/-</sup>). In parallel, <i>mgmt</i> null mice (MGMT loss only in the myeloid cells) demonstrated less severe sepsis in the cecal ligation and puncture (CLP) model (with antibiotics), as indicated by survival and other parameters compared with sepsis in the littermate control. The <i>mgmt</i> null protective effect was lost in CLP mice without antibiotics, highlighting the importance of microbial control during sepsis immune modulation. However, an MGMT inhibitor in CLP with antibiotics in WT mice attenuated serum cytokines but not mortality, requiring further studies. In conclusion, an absence of <i>mgmt</i> in macrophages resulted in less severe CLP sepsis, implying a possible influence of guanine DNA methylation and repair in macrophages during sepsis.

### Keywords
Lipopolysaccharide, Epigenetics, Sepsis, Ezh2, Macrophage

### Affiliations
Center of Excellence on Translational Research in Inflammation and Immunology (CETRII), Department of Microbiology, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok 10330, Thailand
Center of Excellence in Systems Biology, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok 10330

### Submitter
Jiradej Makjaroen

### Lab Head
Dr Asada Leelahavanichkul
Center of Excellence on Translational Research in Inflammation and Immunology (CETRII), Department of Microbiology, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok 10330, Thailand


