### Accession
PXD003459

### Title
The interactome of the human RNA Pol II

### Description
We aim to describe the proteins interacting with the human RNA polymerase II

### Sample Protocol
Cells were seeded at subconfluent density, harvested by trypsination, washed three times with PBS, resuspended in lysis buffer for 20 min (50 mM Tris–HCl (pH 8.0), 1% NP-40, 150 mM NaCl, protease inhibitors, phosphatase inhibitors) and sonicated. After centrifugation, protein G beads (incubated with antibodies for at least 1 h, washed twice after incubation) were incubated with the supernatant over night at 4°C. Beads were washed five times with lysis buffer (lacking phosphatase- and protease inhibitor) and resuspended in SDS-loading buffer/lysis buffer.  Proteins were separated by gel electrophoresis, stained with Coomassie and bands were excised and digested as described before (Shevchenko et al., 2000; Wilm et al., 1996) with minor modifications.  Wilm, M., Shevchenko, A., Houthaeve, T., Breit, S. et al., Femtomole sequencing of proteins from polyacrylamide gels by nano-electrospray mass spectrometry. Nature 1996, 379, 466–469. Shevchenko, A., Chernushevich, I., Wilm, M., Mann, M. De Novo peptide sequencing by nanoelectrospray tandem mass spectrometry using triple quadrupole and quadrupole/time-of-flight instruments. Methods Mol. Biol. 2000, 146, 1–16.

### Data Protocol
Maxquant 1.3.0.5 was used to identify proteins and quantify by iBAQ. Maxquant conditions were: Database, ipi.HUMANv3.68; MS tol, 10ppm; MS/MS tol, 0.5 Da; Peptide FDR, 0.1; Protein FDR, 0.01 Min. peptide Length, 5; Variable modifications, Oxidation (M); Fixed modifications, Carbamidomethyl (C); Peptides for protein quantitation, razor and unique; Min. peptides, 1; Min. ratio count, 2. IBAQ values were log2 transformed, missing values substituted by a constant value (14), and ANOVA performed in the DANTE R package under R x64 2.15.3.

### Publication Abstract
Dynamic phosphorylation of Tyr1-Ser2-Pro3-Thr4-Ser5-Pro6-Ser7 heptad-repeats in the C-terminal domain (CTD) of the large subunit coordinates progression of RNA polymerase (Pol) II through the transcription cycle. Here, we describe an M phase-specific form of Pol II phosphorylated at Thr4, but not at Tyr1, Ser2, Ser5, and Ser7 residues. Thr4 phosphorylated Pol II binds to centrosomes and midbody and interacts with the Thr4-specific Polo-like kinase 1. Binding of Pol II to centrosomes does not require the CTD but may involve subunits of the non-canonical R2TP-Prefoldin-like complex, which bind to and co-localize with Pol II at centrosomes. CTD Thr4 mutants, but not Ser2 and Ser5 mutants, display severe mitosis and cytokinesis defects characterized by multipolar spindles and polyploid cells. We conclude that proper M phase progression of cells requires binding of Pol II to centrosomes to facilitate regulation of mitosis and cytokinesis in a CTD Thr4-P dependent manner.

### Keywords
Interactome, Homo sapiens, Rna pol ii

### Affiliations
Biomedical Center-LMU
Zentrallabor für Proteinanalytik LS Molekularbiologie BioMedical Center  Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität Großhadernerstr. 9 82152 Planegg-Martinsried

### Submitter
Ignasi Forne

### Lab Head
Dr Axel Imhof
Zentrallabor für Proteinanalytik LS Molekularbiologie BioMedical Center  Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität Großhadernerstr. 9 82152 Planegg-Martinsried


