### Accession
PXD016651

### Title
Potential regulatory proteins in pancreatitis were screened by proteomics using pancreatic tissues of PRSS1 AP mice

### Description
Humanized PRSS1 transgenic mice were constructed and treated with caerulein to mimic the development of human AP and CP. Potential regulatory proteins in pancreatitis were screened by proteomics using pancreatic tissues of PRSS1 AP mice.

### Sample Protocol
PRSS1 mice were treated with caerulein or saline for 8 hours, the pancreatic tissues were harvested for proteomic analysis. The pancreatic tissue of mice was determined by DIA quantitative techinique; the measurement results are classified into DDA10 components, and 6 samples are scanned separately by DIA.

### Data Protocol
In proteomics, tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) data were usually collected for peptide identification through automated data-dependent acquisition (DDA). Using DDA, mass information on intact peptides in a full-scan mass spectrum (MS1) was used to determine which subset of mass signals should be targeted for the further acquisition of fragmentation (MS/MS) spectra to identify peptide sequences.

### Publication Abstract
Treatment of acute pancreatitis (AP) and chronic pancreatitis (CP) remains problematic due to a lack of knowledge about disease-specific regulatory targets and mechanisms. The purpose of this study was to screen proteins related to endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and apoptosis pathways that may play a role in pancreatitis. Human pancreatic tissues including AP, CP, and healthy volunteers were collected during surgery. Humanized PRSS1 (protease serine 1) transgenic (PRSS1<sup>Tg</sup>) mice were constructed and treated with caerulein to mimic the development of human AP and CP. Potential regulatory proteins in pancreatitis were identified by proteomic screen using pancreatic tissues of PRSS1<sup>Tg</sup> AP mice. Adenoviral shRNA-mediated knockdown of identified proteins, followed by functional assays was performed to validate their roles. Functional analyses included transmission electron microscopy for ultrastructural analysis; qRT-PCR, western blotting, co-immunoprecipitation, immunohistochemistry, and immunofluorescence for assessment of gene or protein expression, and TUNEL assays for assessment of acinar cell apoptosis. Humanized PRSS1<sup>Tg</sup> mice could mimic the development of human pancreatic inflammatory diseases. EMC6 and APAF1 were identified as potential regulatory molecules in AP and CP models by proteomic analysis. Both EMC6 and APAF1 regulated apoptosis and inflammatory injury in pancreatic inflammatory diseases. Moreover, APAF1 was regulated by EMC6, induced apoptosis to injure acinar cells and promoted inflammation. In the progression of pancreatitis, EMC6 was activated and then upregulated APAF1 to induce acinar cell apoptosis and inflammatory injury. These findings suggest that EMC6 may be a new therapeutic target for the treatment of pancreatic inflammatory diseases.

### Keywords
Prss1, Mouse, Pancreatitis, Dia

### Affiliations
Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, China
SMU

### Submitter
Zhang guowei

### Lab Head
Dr Guowei Zhang
Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, China


