### Accession
PXD002686

### Title
Short Term Immune Response to IL6 inhibition (Tocilizumab)

### Description
we examined the effects of IL6 inhibition treatment on biologic molecular pathways in a 59 year old patient well diagnosed with RA with inadequate response to DMARD thus treated with tocilizumab. To assess the immunological outcome we used quantitative proteome analysis to evaluate changes in the proteome profile of different biologic pathways in leukocyte cell populations important to RA pathogenesis isolated by positive enrichment of CD14, CD4, CD8, CD19, and CD56.

### Sample Protocol
Peripheral Blood Mononuclear Cells (PBMCs) were extracted through standard phlebotomy into EDTA containers.  Extracted PBMCs were resuspended into a total volume of 1mL binding buffer (0.1% BSA, 2mM EDTA in Ca2+ and Mg2+ free PBS), and mixed with prepared dynabeads as described by the manufacturer. Incubation time was modified to 30min, which was used for extraction of CD14+, CD4+, CD8+, and CD19+ cells using corresponding conjugated dynabeads in subsequent order. CD56+ was extracted using CD56 primary antibodies, and Goat-anti-mouse dynabeads as described by the manufacturer. Separated cells were washed twice in Ca2+ and Mg2+ free PBS, and lysed in 350µL Denaturation and Solubilization buffer (5% SDC, 100mM DTT, 10mM TEAB.). The total sample extraction, separation, and preservation of live cells never exceeded 7 hours. Separated cells was processed through a modified filter-aided sample preparation. Cell lysates were transferred to YM-10kDa spinfilter (Millipore) and centrifuged at 11.000 g for 15 min at 4°C. The proteins were then subjected to alkylation and reduction with 12mM Tris (2-Carboxyethyl) phosphine for 30 min. at 37°C and 40mM iodoactamide for 20 min. at 37 °C in darkness. Samples were centrifuged at 11.000g for 15 min. at 4 °C after each step. In preparation for digestion, the buffer was exchanged by addition 0.5% SDC in 50 mM TEAB buffer and centrifuged for 15 min. at 4°C, followed by overnight trypsin digestion. The peptides were retrieved with 50 mM TEAB buffer and a phase separation performed in 3:1 (v/v) ethyl acetate:sample acidified by addition of formic acid to a final concentration of 0.5 %. Total phase separation was achieved by 2 min agitation and centrifugation at 11.000g for 2min at 4°C. The aqueous phase was collected and dried in vacuum in preparation for resuspension in LC-buffer. The samples were analyzed using a UPLC-nanoESI MS/MS setup with an Dionex RSLC nanopump (Dionex/Thermo Scientific, Waltham, USA). The system was coupled online with an emitter for nanospray ionization (New objective picotip 360-20-10) to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, USA). The peptide material was loaded onto a C18 reversed phase column (Dionex Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18, 2 μm, 100 Å, 75 μm x 2 cm) and separated using a C18 reversed phase column (Dionex Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18, 2 μm, 75 Å, 75 μm x 50 cm) at 40°C. The sample was eluted with a gradient of 96% solvent A (0.1% FA) and 4% solvent B (0.1% FA in ACN), which was increased to 8% solvent B on a 5 minutes ramp gradient and subsequently to 30% solvent B on a 225 minutes ramp gradient, at a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive mode, selecting up to 12 precursor ions based on highest intensity for HCD fragmenting.

### Data Protocol
The raw data-files were searched using MaxQuant 1.5.1.2 against all reviewed Homo sapiens (9606) Uniprot proteins (November, 2014). Standard settings were employed with carbamidomethyl (C) as a static modification and protein N-terminal acetylation, deamidation (NQ) and citrullination (R), and phosphorylation (STY) were included as variable modifications. All proteins and peptides are reported below a 1% FDR cutoff, to ensure only high-confidence protein identifications. Label-free quantification and annotation was performed using Perseus (v1.5.0.31).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Il6, Tocilizumab, Rheumatoid arthritis

### Affiliations
Aalborg University Denmark
Aalborg University

### Submitter
Allan Stensballe

### Lab Head
Dr Allan Stensballe
Aalborg University Denmark


