### Accession
PXD015087

### Title
High-flow chromatography for reproducible and high-throughput quantification of proteomes

### Description
This study evaluates liquid-chromatography operated at 50 ul/min using 1 mm diameter columns coupled online to tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) for proteome analysis. Data from >1,000 human cell line, tissue, body fluid, affinity- and phospho-proteomes demonstrate excellent chromatographic (<0.3 % CV) and quantitative (<7.5% CV) reproducibility. Combined with sample multiplexing by tandem mass tags, the system allows profiling of 11 proteomes in 16 hours to a depth of 8,000 proteins.

### Sample Protocol
A Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano System was coupled online to a Q Exactive HF-X or an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The results reported in this study were all obtained on a commercially available Thermo Fisher Scientific Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 LC column (2 um particle size, 1 mm ID x 150 mm; catalog number 164711). The final LC conditions we recommend for the high-flow LC system described in this study are: for unlabeled protein digests: solvent A: 0.1% FA, 3% DMSO in water; solvent B: 0.1% FA, 3% DMSO in ACN; direct sample injection using solvent A, linear gradient of 3%-28% B for all gradient lengths. A linear gradient of 3%-28% B in 15 min was used for all the pulldown samples, including kinobeads, AP and BioID pulldowns. A linear gradient of 1%-25% B in 60 min was used for enriched phosphopeptides. The linear gradients of 7%-32% B in 15 min, 6%-33% B in 25 min were used for the fractionated TMT labeled peptides. With this setup we generated > 2300 raw files by analyzing label free HeLa, urine, CSF, plasma, placenta, phoshopeptides, kinobeads pulldown, affinity purification and BioID pulldown samples, and TMT11 labeled peptides. For the full proteome analysis, HeLa cells, human pancreatic cell lines and placenta tissues samples were lysed with urea buffer, urine and plasma samples were denatured in urea buffer, urea buffer was not used for the CSF sample, two-step trypsin digestion were performed overnight. Kinobeads, BioID and (affinity purification) AP pulldown samples were prepared with standard protocol as described in the manuscript. TMT11 plex labelling, off-line basic pH reversed phase peptide fractionation, phosphopeptide enrichment were described in the manuscript.

### Data Protocol
1) Mass spectrometry raw files were processed with MaxQuant (1.6.2.3 or 1.6.0.1) using default parameters, detailed settings were specified in the manuscript. 2) The raw files of the AP and BioID pulldown samples were also processed with ProHits software, and the high confident interactions were determined using the SAINT tool.

### Publication Abstract
Nano-flow liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (nano-flow LC-MS/MS) is the mainstay in proteome research because of its excellent sensitivity but often comes at the expense of robustness. Here we show that micro-flow LC-MS/MS using a 1&#x2009;&#xd7;&#x2009;150&#x2009;mm column shows excellent reproducibility of chromatographic retention time (&lt;0.3% coefficient of variation, CV) and protein quantification (&lt;7.5% CV) using data from &gt;2000 samples of human cell lines, tissues and body fluids. Deep proteome analysis identifies &gt;9000 proteins and &gt;120,000 peptides in 16&#x2009;h and sample multiplexing using tandem mass tags increases throughput to 11 proteomes in 16&#x2009;h. The system identifies &gt;30,000 phosphopeptides in 12&#x2009;h and protein-protein or protein-drug interaction experiments can be analyzed in 20&#x2009;min per sample. We show that the same column can be used to analyze &gt;7500 samples without apparent loss of performance. This study demonstrates that micro-flow LC-MS/MS is suitable for a broad range of proteomic applications.

### Keywords
Body fluids, High-flow lc, Proteomics, Kinobeads, Chromatography

### Affiliations
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technical University of Munich

### Submitter
Yangyang  Bian

### Lab Head
Dr Bernhard Kuster
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technical University of Munich


