### Accession
PXD016337

### Title
Tetraponera aethiops venom peptidome

### Description
In the mutualisms involving certain pseudomyrmicine ants and different myrmecophytes (i.e., plants sheltering colonies of specialized “plant-ant” species in hollow structures), the ant venom contributes to the host plant biotic defenses by inducing the rapid paralysis of defoliating insects and causing intense pain to browsing mammals. Using integrated transcriptomic and proteomic approaches, we identified the venom peptidome of the plant-ant Tetraponera aethiops (Pseudomyrmecinae). The transcriptomic analysis of its venom glands revealed that 40 % of the assembled contigs encoded only seven peptide precursors related to the ant venom peptides from the A-superfamily. Among the 12 peptide masses detected by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS), nine mature peptide sequences were characterized and confirmed through proteomic analysis. These venom peptides, called pseudomyrmecitoxins (PSDTX), share amino acid sequence homologies with myrmeciitoxins known for their dual offensive and defensive functions on both insects and mammals. Furthermore, we demonstrated through reduction/alkylation of the crude venom that four PSDTXs were homo- and heterodimeric. Thus, we provide the first indication that the defensive venom composition of the ant genus Tetraponera is a streamlined peptidome. We provide the first insights into the defensive venom composition of the ant genus Tetraponera indicative of a streamlined peptidome.

### Sample Protocol
Crude venom was re-suspended in water and then desalted using ZipTip® C18 (Merck Millipore, Burlington, VT, USA) after adding trifluoroacetic acid at a final concentration of 0.5%. Then, the venom sample was subjected to de novo sequencing using a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer coupled to a Nano-LC Proxeon 1000 (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Peptides were separated through chromatography with the following parameters: Acclaim PepMap100 C18 pre-column (2 cm, 75 μm i.d., 3 μm, 100 Å), Pepmap-RSLC Proxeon C18 column (50 cm, 75 μm i.d., 2 μm, 100 Å), 300 nL.min−1 flow rate, a 98 min gradient from 95% solvent A (water, 0.1% formic acid) to 35% solvent B (99,9% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) for a total time of 2 hours. Peptides were analyzed in the Orbitrap cell, at a resolution of 120,000, with a mass range of m/z 350-1550. Fragments were obtained through high collision-induced dissociation (HCD) activation with a collisional energy of 27%.

### Data Protocol
Data were acquired in the Orbitrap cell in a Top20 mode, at a resolution of 17,500. For the identification step, all MS and MS/MS data were processed with an in-house Peaks software (BSI, version 6.0) to perform de novo sequencing. The mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragments. The following modifications were allowed: oxidation (Met) and pyroglutamic acid (Glu). De novo peptide sequences with Average Local Confidence (ALC) higher than 60% were used for peptide identifications.

### Publication Abstract
In the mutualisms involving certain pseudomyrmicine ants and different myrmecophytes (i.e., plants sheltering colonies of specialized "plant-ant" species in hollow structures), the ant venom contributes to the host plant biotic defenses by inducing the rapid paralysis of defoliating insects and causing intense pain to browsing mammals. Using integrated transcriptomic and proteomic approaches, we identified the venom peptidome of the plant-ant <i>Tetraponera aethiops</i> (Pseudomyrmecinae). The transcriptomic analysis of its venom glands revealed that 40% of the expressed contigs encoded only seven peptide precursors related to the ant venom peptides from the A-superfamily. Among the 12 peptide masses detected by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS), nine mature peptide sequences were characterized and confirmed through proteomic analysis. These venom peptides, called pseudomyrmecitoxins (PSDTX), share amino acid sequence identities with myrmeciitoxins known for their dual offensive and defensive functions on both insects and mammals. Furthermore, we demonstrated through reduction/alkylation of the crude venom that four PSDTXs were homo- and heterodimeric. Thus, we provide the first insights into the defensive venom composition of the ant genus <i>Tetraponera</i> indicative of a streamlined peptidome.

### Keywords
Dimeric toxin, Venom, Ant, Peptide

### Affiliations
EA-7417, Institut National Universitaire Champollion, Place de Verdun, 81012 Albi, France
Institut National Universitaire de Champollion

### Submitter
Axel Touchard

### Lab Head
Dr Treilhou Michel
EA-7417, Institut National Universitaire Champollion, Place de Verdun, 81012 Albi, France


