### Accession
PXD009523

### Title
JEV and ZIKV NS5 interactome

### Description
Among the flaviviral proteins, NS5 is the largest and most conserved. NS5 contains major enzymatic components of the viral replication complex. Disruption of the common key NS5-host protein-protein interactions critical for viral replication could aid in the development of broad-spectrum anti-flaviviral therapeutics.  To this end, we investigated the JEV- and ZIKV-NS5 interactomes in human cells using GFP pull-downs with mass spectrometry analysis in a label-free fashion. A total of 138  cellular proteins interacting with NS5 from JEV, ZIKV, or both were identified as   Protein classification analysis of identified cellular targets revealed the enrichment of RNA binding, processing and splicing including spliceosomal and spliceosome-associated proteins in both datasets. Comparison of our data with literature not only revealed several cellular NS5 interacting proteins shared among flaviviruses, but also identified proteins that have no known function in flavivirus biology such as RNA polymerase II-associated Paf1 complex, protein phosphatase 6, and s-adenosylmethionine synthetase.  Our study generates the first landscape of the JEV and ZIKV NS5 interactome in human cells and identifies cellular proteins that are potentially targetable for broad-spectrum anti-flaviviral therapy.

### Sample Protocol
NS5 interacting proteins were enriched by performing EGFP pull-downs using cell lysates from HEK293T/17 cells overexpressing EGFP-JEV-NS5 or EGFP-ZIKV-NS5. Control pull-down was performed using cell lysate from HEK293T/17 cells overexpressing EGFP. Three biological replicates of each EGFP-NS5 and control pull-down were performed. In addition, each biological replicate was injected twice and combined before protein identification by MaxQuant to increase identifications.

### Data Protocol
1% FDR at peptide and protein level, which are the standard database search statistics were used. Lable-free quantification was performed by MaxQuant. In total, each pull-down dataset was consisted of three data points. Based on the assumption of normal distribution, Student’s t-test was used to compare each NS5 pull-down with control pull-down datasets. A protein was considered to be specifically enriched by NS5 if it was statistically significant (p ≤ 0.05) with the mean enrichment ratio ≥ 2.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Zikv, Ns5, Jev

### Affiliations
Mahidol University
Institute of Molecular Biosciences, Mahidol University, Thailand

### Submitter
Duangnapa Kovanich

### Lab Head
Dr Duangnapa Kovanich
Institute of Molecular Biosciences, Mahidol University, Thailand


