### Accession
PXD007965

### Title
Mapping in vivo target interaction profiles of covalent inhibitors using chemical proteomics with label-free quantification

### Description
Activity-based protein profiling (ABPP) has emerged as a valuable chemical proteomics method to guide the therapeutic development of covalent drugs by assessing their on-target engagement and off-target activity. Recently, we reported on the establishment, by ABPP, of the serine hydrolase interaction landscape of the experimental drug BIA 10-2474, thereby providing a potential explanation for the adverse side effects observed with this compound. ABPP allows mapping of protein interaction landscapes of inhibitors in cells, tissues and animal models. Here, we describe a protocol for identifying the in vivo selectivity profile of covalent inhibitors using ABPP with label-free quantitative proteomics as exemplified by experimental data on the diacylglycerol lipase inhibitor DH376 in mouse brain, liver, kidney and testes. The protocol has been optimized using label-free quantification methods to have high proteome coverage and to allow the simultaneous comparison of multiple biological samples. The stages of the protocol include tissue lysis, probe incubation, enrichment, sample preparation, liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry measurement, processing and data analysis. The results include evidence of target engagement in a native proteome and the identification of potential off-targets for the inhibitor under investigation. The entire protocol takes at least four days (depending on the number of samples).

### Sample Protocol
Mice were treated with vehicle or serine hydrolase inhibitor (DH376),brain, kidney, liver and testes were harvested, homogenated and separated in membrane and cytosol fractions. The homogenates were incubated with an ABP cocktail of THL-biotin and FP-biotin, excess probe was removed by chloroform/methanol precipitation of proteins, redisolved in 6M urea, reduced with 10 mM DTT, alkylated with 40 mM iodoacetamide, biotinylated species were enriched by Avidin-agarose beads affinity purification, on bead digested with trypsin, peptides desalted by stage-tips and analysed by UDMSE on a nanoacquity-synapt G2Si platform.

### Data Protocol
raw files were recorded with MassLynx and can be processed in Progenesis or PLGS (Waters)

### Publication Abstract
Activity-based protein profiling (ABPP) has emerged as a valuable chemical proteomics method to guide the therapeutic development of covalent drugs by assessing their on-target engagement and off-target activity. We recently used ABPP to determine the serine hydrolase interaction landscape of the experimental drug BIA 10-2474, thereby providing a potential explanation for the adverse side effects observed with this compound. ABPP allows mapping of protein interaction landscapes of inhibitors in cells, tissues and animal models. Whereas our previous protocol described quantification of proteasome activity using stable-isotope labeling, this protocol describes the procedures for identifying the in vivo selectivity profile of covalent inhibitors with label-free quantitative proteomics. The optimization of our protocol for label-free quantification methods results in high proteome coverage and allows the comparison of multiple biological samples. We demonstrate our protocol by assessing the protein interaction landscape of the diacylglycerol lipase inhibitor DH376 in mouse brain, liver, kidney and testes. The stages of the protocol include tissue lysis, probe incubation, target enrichment, sample preparation, liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) measurement, data processing and analysis. This approach can be used to study target engagement in a native proteome and to identify potential off targets for the inhibitor under investigation. The entire protocol takes at least 4 d, depending on the number of samples.

### Keywords
Activity-based protein profiling; covalent inhibitors; chemical proteomics; label-free quantification; target engagement

### Affiliations
Leiden Institute for Chemistry
Department of Molecular Physiology, Leiden Institute of Chemistry, Leiden University, Einsteinweg 55, 2333 CC, Leiden, Netherlands.

### Submitter
Bogdan Florea

### Lab Head
Dr Mario van der Stelt
Department of Molecular Physiology, Leiden Institute of Chemistry, Leiden University, Einsteinweg 55, 2333 CC, Leiden, Netherlands.


