### Accession
PXD005383

### Title
Mouse sciatic nerve LC-MSMS -  Delaying histone deacetylase response to injury accelerates conversion into repair Schwann cells and nerve regeneration

### Description
The peripheral nervous system (PNS) regenerates after injury. However regeneration is often compromised in case of large lesions, the speed of axon reconnection to their target being critical for successful functional recovery. After injury, mature Schwann cells (SCs) convert into repair cells that foster axonal regrowth, and redifferentiate to rebuild myelin. These processes require the regulation of several transcription factors, but the driving mechanisms remain partially understood. Here, we identify an early response to injury controlled by histone deacetylase (HDAC)2, which coordinates the action of other chromatin-remodeling enzymes to induce the upregulation of Oct6, a key transcription factor for Schwann cell development. Inactivating this mechanism using mouse genetics allows earlier conversion into repair cells and leads to faster axonal regrowth, but impairs remyelination. Consistently, short-term HDAC1/2 inhibitor treatment early after lesion accelerates functional recovery and enhances regeneration, thereby identifying a new therapeutic strategy to improve PNS regeneration after lesion.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins from agarose pull-downs were in-solution digested with 100 ng sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) for 6 hours at 37°C after the following treatment: the dry beads were suspended in 30 µl of 8 M urea in 50 mM Tris/HCl, pH 8.0, followed by reduction of the proteins with 3 µl 0.1 M DTT for 30 min at 37°C and alkylation by addition of 3 µl 0.5 M iodoacetamide for 30 min at 37°C in the dark, and urea dilution to 2 M by addition of 20 mM Tris/HCl pH 8.0 containing 2 mM CaCl2. Digestion was stopped by adding 1/20 of volume of 20% (v/v) TFA. An aliquot of 5 µl of each digest was analyzed by LC-MS/MS on an EASY-nLC1000 chromatograph connected to a QExactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using three replicate injections in case of the in-solution digests. Peptides were trapped on a Pepmap100 Trap C18 300 µm x 5 mm (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated by backflush onto the analytical column (C18, 3 µm, 100 Å, 75 µm × 150 mm) with a 40 min gradient from 5% to 40% solution B (95% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Full MS (resolution 60000, automatic gain control target of 1e6, maximum injection time of 50 ms) and top15 MS/MS (resolution 15000, target of 1e5, 110 ms) scans were recorded alternatively in the range of 400 to 1400 m/z, with an inclusion window of 1.6 m/z, relative collision energy of 27, and dynamic exclusion for 20 s.

### Data Protocol
The raw mass spectrometry data was processed with MaxQuant/Andromeda version 1.5.0.0 (MQ) searching against the forward and reversed UniprotKB SwissProt mouse protein database (Release 2013_05) with the following parameters: parent mass error tolerance of 10 ppm, trypsin cleavage mode with 2 missed cleavages, static carbamidomethylation on Cys, variable oxidation on Met and acetylation on Lys. Based on reversed database peptide spectrum matches, a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) was set for acceptance of target database matches.

### Publication Abstract
The peripheral nervous system (PNS) regenerates after injury. However, regeneration is often compromised in the case of large lesions, and the speed of axon reconnection to their target is critical for successful functional recovery. After injury, mature Schwann cells (SCs) convert into repair cells that foster axonal regrowth, and redifferentiate to rebuild myelin. These processes require the regulation of several transcription factors, but the driving mechanisms remain partially understood. Here we identify an early response to nerve injury controlled by histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2), which coordinates the action of other chromatin-remodelling enzymes to induce the upregulation of Oct6, a key transcription factor for SC development. Inactivating this mechanism using mouse genetics allows earlier conversion into repair cells and leads to faster axonal regrowth, but impairs remyelination. Consistently, short-term HDAC1/2 inhibitor treatment early after lesion accelerates functional recovery and enhances regeneration, thereby identifying a new therapeutic strategy to improve PNS regeneration after lesion.

### Keywords
Mouse sciatic nerve lc-msms

### Affiliations
University of Bern
Department of Biology University of Fribourg Chemin du Musée 10 Room 1.302 CH-1700 Fribourg Switzerland

### Submitter
Manfred Heller

### Lab Head
Dr Claire Jacob
Department of Biology University of Fribourg Chemin du Musée 10 Room 1.302 CH-1700 Fribourg Switzerland


