### Accession
PXD003920

### Title
Shotgun Proteomics of Tomato Fruits: Evaluation and Optimization of Sample Preparation Methods and Mass Spectrometric Parameters

### Description
Optimization of sample preparation protocols and mass spectrometric parameters is essential for adequate proteome coverage. Though several protocols are available for 2D electrophoresis-based proteome profiling, very few protocols exist for sample preparation for shotgun proteomics and optimization of mass spectrometric parameters using plant tissues. Here, we report an optimized protocol for shotgun proteomics of tomato fruit, which is a recalcitrant tissue comprising of low concentration of proteins and high percentage of sugars and secondary metabolites

### Sample Protocol
With buffer saturated Phenol:1 g of frozen tissue was homogenized, suspended in 7 mL of extraction buffer containing 0.7 M Sucrose, 0.1 M KCl, 0.5 M Tris, pH 7.5, 50 mM EDTA, 50 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), 1 mM phenyl methyl sulfonyl fluoride (PMSF), and 25 μL of protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich). To this, an equal volume of Tris-saturated phenol was added, and the sample was mixed by shaking at 4°C for 30 min. The mixture was centrifugedat 20,000 g for 30 min at 4°C. The upper phenolic phase was collected and re-extracted twiceas described above. The protein in the phenolic phase was precipitated at −80°C by adding 5 volumes of 0.1 M ammonium acetate containing 50 mM DTT. The protein was pelleted by centrifugation at 26,200 g for 30 min at 4°C. The protein pellet was washed twice with methanol containing 10 mM DTT followed by wash with acetone containing 10 mM DTT.The pellet was stored at -80°C until further use. In-gel digestion: SDS-PAGE (GeLCMS) Protein (100 g) obtained after phenol and TCA extraction were dissolved in 2D lysis buffer and then separated on SDS- PAGE according to Laemmli [46]. After destaining, the gel was cut into 36 slices and six slices were pooled in a single fraction (total 6 fractions were obtained). The proteins were reduced with 10 mM DTT, alkylated with 55 mM IAA and subjected to trypsin digestion (1: 25, enzyme: protein) for 16 h at 37°C. Peptides from each fraction were separately extracted by addition of 60% (v/v) ACN containing 0.1% (v/v) formic acid and sonicated in ice for 30 min. This step was repeated thrice and peptidesobtained from each extraction step were pooled. The pooled peptides for each fraction were then concentrated using speed vacuum concentrator (Thermo Scientific), desalted using C18 spin columns and then subjected to LCMS analysis.  In-solution digestion: Phenol extracted proteins (100 g) was dissolved in 2D lysis buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4% (w/v) CHAPS), reduced with 10 mM DTT, alkylated with 40 mM IAA. Urea concentration in the solution was reduced to 2 M by addition of 50 mM ABC. This solutionwas then subjected to trypsin digestion (added in the ratio of 1: 50, enzyme: protein) at 37 Cfor 16 h.Peptides were concentrated using speed vacuum concentrator, desalted using C18 spin columns prior to LCMS analysis.Other protein extraction methods and peptide fractionation methods were performed as described in methods section in the manuscript.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was done using Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4, Thermo Scientific). S.lycopersicum iTAG2.3 proteome sequence(ftp://ftp.solgenomics.net/tomato_genome/annotation/ITAG2.3_release/ITAG2.3_proteins.fasta, downloaded on February 5, 2013, 26705 sequences and 9322189 residues) was used as the database against which the searches were done. Peptide mass tolerance and fragment mass tolerance were set to 5 ppm and 0.8 Da respectively. Sequest was used as the search engine with the following search parameters- trypsin as the protease, a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed, carbamidomethylation of cysteine and oxidation of methionine were selected as fixed and variable modifications respectively. Peptides were filtered for high confidence and these were used for assigning protein IDs. Percolator tool was used to assess peptide confidence; peptides with q value ≤ 0.05 were selected (false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%), which was estimated based on the number of decoy hits. Proteins that passed the criteria of high confidence with XCorr threshold greater than 2.0 and minimum number of two matched peptides were considered. Information regarding the number of MS and MS/MS scans, fill times were obtained from RawMeat version 2.1.  For Scaffold:  Conversation opened. 1 read message.  Skip to content Using Gmail with screen readers himabindu Move to Inbox   More  9 of 306   BRPLC, SCX and label free quantification methods himabindu vasuki <h.vasuki2@gmail.com>   Attachments25 Mar (5 days ago)    to Dr Thanks K Himabindu, C/o Dr.Y.Sreelakshmi, RTGR (Tomato) building, University of Hyderabad, Gachibowli, Hyderabad 500046. Attachments area Preview attachment BRPLC and SCX 2 .docx [Word]   Click here to Reply or Forward 4.91 GB (32%) of 15 GB used Manage Terms - Privacy Last account activity: 3 minutes ago Open in 1 other location  Details      Dr Y Sreelakshmi syellamaraju@gmail.com Recent photos View photo in message View photo in message View photo in message Show details Page 1 of 2  Strong Cation Exchange (SCX)  SCX was carried out on phenol extracted protein (1 mg) as the protocol described by  Renuse et al. 2014. Peptides were fractionated on HPLC system (Shimadzu) and a total of 50  fractions were collecte . The fractions obtained were completely dried, reconstituted in 40 µl of  60 % ACN and 0.2 % FA, pooled into 20 fractions, desalted, dried and injected into LCMS.  Basic pH reverse phase liquid chromatography (bRPLC)  bRPLC was carried out on phenol extracted protein (1mg) after trypsin digestion as per  the protocol described in Renuse et al. 2014.Peptides were fractionated using Accela UHPLC  system (Thermo scientific). The peptide fractions were collected in 40 individual tubes  containing 10 µl of 20 % FA and were completely dried. Peptides were then reconstituted in 60  % ACN and 0.2 % FA, pooled into 20 fractions, desalted, dried and subjected to LC MS  analysis.  Label free quantitation  Data analysis was done using Scaffold software (version 4.4.8, Proteome Software) with S.lycopersicum iTAG2.3 proteome sequence (ftp://ftp.solgenomics.net/tomato_genome/annotation/ITAG2.3_release/ITAG2.3_proteins.fasta,downloaded on February 5, 2013, 26705 sequences and 9322189 residues) as custom database. A peptide mass tolerance of 5 ppm and fragment mass tolerance of 0.8 Da were set for all searches.Sequest was used as the search engine with the following search parameters- trypsin as the protease, a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed, Carbamidomethylation of cysteine and oxidation of methionine were selected as fixed and variable modifications respectively.Peptides were filtered for high confidence (95 % protein and peptide probabilities, assigned through Protein prophet algorithm, Nesvizhskii et al, 2003) and these were used for assigning protein IDs. A FDR cut off of 1% which was estimated through a local FDR database was used to filter the peptides on the basis of number of decoy hits. Label free quantification was performed by Spectral counting method in scaffold. The protein abundances were calculated through Normalized spectral abundance factor (NSAF, which divides the weighted spectrum count for each protein by the length of the same protein and the results are then normalized across all samples, Zybailov et al, 2006). Fisher’s exact test was applied on the proteins that consist of minimum two peptides and FDR of 0.1% to identify the statistically significant proteins based on their P values.The proteins which have passed the criteria of minimum two peptides, two fold up or down regulation and a P Value of less than 0.05 were considered as significantly different between AC and AV.

### Publication Abstract
An optimized protocol was developed for shotgun proteomics of tomato fruit, which is a recalcitrant tissue due to a high percentage of sugars and secondary metabolites. A number of protein extraction and fractionation techniques were examined for optimal protein extraction from tomato fruits followed by peptide separation on nanoLCMS. Of all evaluated extraction agents, buffer saturated phenol was the most efficient. In-gel digestion [SDS-PAGE followed by separation on LCMS (GeLCMS)] of phenol-extracted sample yielded a maximal number of proteins. For in-solution digested samples, fractionation by strong anion exchange chromatography (SAX) also gave similar high proteome coverage. For shotgun proteomic profiling, optimization of mass spectrometry parameters such as automatic gain control targets (5E+05 for MS, 1E+04 for MS/MS); ion injection times (500 ms for MS, 100 ms for MS/MS); resolution of 30,000; signal threshold of 500; top N-value of 20 and fragmentation by collision-induced dissociation yielded the highest number of proteins. Validation of the above protocol in two tomato cultivars demonstrated its reproducibility, consistency, and robustness with a CV of &lt; 10%. The protocol facilitated the detection of five-fold higher number of proteins compared to published reports in tomato fruits. The protocol outlined would be useful for high-throughput proteome analysis from tomato fruits and can be applied to other recalcitrant tissues.

### Keywords
Fractionation, Label free quantification, Sample preparation, Spectral counting, Shotgun proteomics, Proteome coverage, Tomato fruit

### Affiliations
Associate Professor at University of Hyderabad
Assistant Professor, RTGR (Tomato building), Department of Plant Sciences, School of Life Sciences, University of Hyderabad, Gachibowli, Hyderabad, 500046.

### Submitter
Yellamaraju Sreelakshmi

### Lab Head
Dr Yellamaraju Sreelakshmi
Assistant Professor, RTGR (Tomato building), Department of Plant Sciences, School of Life Sciences, University of Hyderabad, Gachibowli, Hyderabad, 500046.


