### Accession
PXD022079

### Title
Magnetic field induced changes in the proteomic analysis in barley (Hordeum vulgare)

### Description
Geomagnetic field (GMF) has been present since the beginning of plant evolution. Recently, some researchers have focused their efforts on employing magnetic fields (MF) higher than GMF to improve the seed germination, growth and harvest of agriculturally important crop plants, as MFs are inexpensive and environment friendly technique. In this study, we have employed different treatments considering MF of 7 mT (milliTesla) for different time point of the exposure including 1, 3, and 6 h as treatment, following longest exposure for 5 consecutive days, 6h per day in barely seeds. The results showed a positive impact of MF on growth characteristics for 5 days old seedlings including seed germination rate, root and shoot length and biomass weight, however, significant effects observed in long exposure. Moreover, ~5 day’s delay of flowering in pretreated plants was observed. We have used a shotgun proteomics approach to identify changes in the protein signatures of root and shoot tissues under MF effects. In total, we identified 2896 proteins. Thirty eight proteins in shoot and 15 proteins in root showed significant changes under MF effect. Proteins involved in primary metabolic pathways were increased in contrast to the proteins with metal ion binding function, proteins contain iron ion in their structure and proteins involved in electron transfer chain were decreased significantly in treated tissues. The prevalent biological processes of the up-regulated proteins were carbohydrate metabolic process, oxidation-reduction process and cell redox homeostasis, while down regulated processes include translation and protein refolding. In general, shoot response was more significant to MF effect compared with root tissue leading to the identification of 41 shoot specific proteins. This study provides a comprehensive view of proteome regulation in response to MF during early stage of growth and development in barley.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction, pre-fractionation, digestion, and LC–MS/MS analysis was performed according to previous studies (Chaturvedi et al., 2013;Valledor and Weckwerth, 2014). Root and shoot tissues were harvested and grinded with mortar and pestle The homogenized samples were suspended in 200 μl of protein extraction buffer (100 mM Tris–HCl, pH 8.0; 5% SDS, 10% glycerol; 10 mM DTT; 1% plant protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma P9599) and incubated at room temperature for 5 min followed by incubation for 2.5 min at 95 °C and centrifugation at 21,000 ×g for 5 min at room temperature. The supernatant was transferred carefully in a new tube. Two hundred microliters of 1.4 M sucrose was added to the supernatant and proteins were extracted twice with 200 μl TE buffer equilibrated phenol followed by counter extraction with 200 μl of 1.4M sucrose and 200 μl distilled water. Phenol phases were combined and subsequently mixed with 2.5 volumes of 0.1 M ammonium acetate in methanol for precipitation of proteins. After 16 h of incubation at −20 °C, samples were centrifuged for 5 min at 5000 ×g. The pellet was washed twice with 0.1 M ammonium acetate, one time with acetone and air dried at room temperature. The pellet was re-dissolved in 6 M Urea and 5% SDS and protein concentration was determined using the bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA method). Pre-fractionation of proteins was carried out by SDS-PAGE (Jegadeesan et al. 2018; Paul et al. 2016). Forty micrograms of total protein was loaded onto a gel and run for 1.5 cm. Gels were fixed and stained within Methanol: Acetic Acid: Water: Coomassie Brilliant Blue R-250 (40:10:50:0.001), distained in methanol: water (40:60) and then each lane was divided into two fractions. Gel pieces were distained, equilibrated and digested with trypsin, desalted and concentrated. Prior to mass spectrometric measurement, the tryptic peptide pellets were dissolved in 4% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid.  One μg of each sample (-three--biological replicates samples) was loaded on a C18  reverse phase column (Thermo scientific, EASY-Spray 500 mm, 2 μm particle size). Separation was achieved with a 90 min gradient from 98% solution A (0.1% formic acid) and 2% solution B (90% ACN and 0.1% formic acid) at 0 min to 40% solution B (90% ACN and 0.1% formic acid) at 90 min with a flow rate of 300 nL min-1. nESI-MS/MS measurements were performed on Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) with the following settings: Full scan range 350–1800 m/z resolution 120000 max. 20 MS2 scans (activation type CID), repeat count 1, repeat duration 30 sec, exclusion list size 500, exclusion duration 30 sec, charge state screening enabled with the rejection of unassigned and +1 charge states, minimum signal threshold 500.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed with Max Quant 1.6 (http://www.maxquant.org) and the Andromeda search algorithm (Tyanova et al., 2015) on the barley UniProt database (http://uniprot.org). Peptide identification was performed using the following settings: mass tolerance for precursors was set to 5 ppm and for fragment masses up to 0.8 Da. The maximum FDR was set to 0.01%. Three missed cleavages were allowed. The dynamic modifications allowed were: methionine oxidation (M) and protein N-terminal acetylation. The fixed modification allowed was carbamidomethyl (C). Label-free quantification (LFQ) was done at the MS1 level with at least two peptides per protein. PTXQC was used to assess data quality (Roustan et al., 2018). All the identified proteins were blasted for the closest Arabidopsis (Tair 10) and wheat orthologs using stand-alone BLAST v2.2.28+ (using the default matrix) in conjunction with an unpublished Python script used for the following homology searches. The top three hits with an e-value below the threshold of 10-3 were selected from the results for further comparison

### Publication Abstract
The geomagnetic field (GMF) has been present since the beginning of plant evolution. Recently, some researchers have focused their efforts on employing magnetic fields (MFs) higher than GMF to improve the seed germination, growth, and harvest of agriculturally important crop plants, as the use of MFs is an inexpensive and environment-friendly technique. In this study, we have employed different treatments of MF at 7 mT (milliTesla) at different time points of exposure, including 1, 3, and 6 h. The extended exposure was followed by five consecutive days at 6 h per day in barley seeds. The results showed a positive impact of MF on growth characteristics for 5-day-old seedlings, including seed germination rate, root and shoot length, and biomass weight. Furthermore, ~5 days of delay of flowering in pre-treated plants was also observed. We used a shotgun proteomics approach to identify changes in the protein signatures of root and shoot tissues under MF effects. In total, we have identified 2,896 proteins. Thirty-eight proteins in the shoot and 15 proteins in the root showed significant changes under the MF effect. Proteins involved in primary metabolic pathways were increased in contrast to proteins with a metal ion binding function, proteins that contain iron ions in their structure, and proteins involved in electron transfer chain, which were all decreased significantly in the treated tissues. The upregulated proteins' overall biological processes included carbohydrate metabolic process, oxidation-reduction process, and cell redox homeostasis, while down-regulated processes included translation and protein refolding. In general, shoot response was more affected by MF effect than root tissue, leading to the identification of 41 shoot specific proteins. This study provides an initial insight into the proteome regulation response to MF during barley's seedling stage.

### Keywords
Barley, Hordeum vulgare, Proteomics, Geomagnetic field, Growth stimulation, Magnetic field

### Affiliations
Molecular and Systems Biology Lab (MOSYS), University of Vienna, Althanstrasse 14, 1090, Austria
University of Vienna

### Submitter
Palak Chaturvedi

### Lab Head
Dr Palak Chaturvedi
Molecular and Systems Biology Lab (MOSYS), University of Vienna, Althanstrasse 14, 1090, Austria


