### Accession
PXD023011

### Title
Lysine lactylation critically regulated energy metabolism of the protozoan parasite Trypanosoma brucei

### Description
Lysine lactylation, a new post-translational modification identified on histones of human and mouse cells, stimulates gene transcription from chromatin directly. However, very little is known in the scope and cellular distribution of lactylated proteins. In the present study, we conducted the first proteome-wide survey of lactylated sites in Trypanosoma brucei, a unicellular parasite causing human African sleeping sickness and livestock nagana disease, using LC-MS/MS to identify peptides enriched by immuno-purification with an anti-lactyllysine antibody. Overall, we identified 387 unique lysine lactylated sites in 257 lactylated proteins with diverse cellular localizations and biological functions. Lactylated proteins are involved in a wide variety of cellular functions such as metabolism and gene regulation. Further, we demonstrate that the lactate-derived lactylation in trypanosome is regulated by glucose metabolism. Collectively, our findings provide the first comprehensive view of the lactylome of T. brucei and suggest that lysine lactylation in trypanosomes involves a diverse array of cellular functions.

### Sample Protocol
Parasite cultivation and purification T. brucei were maintained in vivo using BALB/c mice, and the trypanosomes were inoculated intraperitoneally into healthy mice for serial passage. Trypanosomes were purified from the blood of infected mice over DEAE-cellulose (Sigma) when the parasitemia level reached 1×108 cells per ml. The trypanosomes were extracted from cellular blood elements of the suspension using a previously described method (Lanham and Godfrey, 1970). Protein extraction Parasites were incubated with a phenol extraction buffer (4-fold more buffer compared with parasite suspension) containing 10 mM dithiothreitol (Sigma), 1% protease inhibitors (Millipore), 1% phosphatase inhibitor (Millipore), 50 μM PR-619 (Selleck), 3 μM TSA (Selleck), 50 mM NAM (Sigma) and 2 mM EDTA; the mixture was ultrasonically treated. Next, an equal volume of Tris balance of phenol (Solarbio) was added and the mixture was centrifuged at 5,500 g for 10 min at 4°C. The supernatant was subsequently extracted and 5 times the volume of 0.1 M ammonium acetate/methanol was added to perform an overnight extraction; the precipitated protein was washed with methanol and acetone. Finally, 8 M urea was precipitated for redissolution, and protein concentration was determined using the BCA kit (Beyotime). Trypsin digestion Dithiothreitol was added to the protein solution to a final concentration of 5 mM and reduced at 56°C for 30 min. Then, this mixture was alkylated with iodoacetamide (Sigma) to 11 mM for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. Finally, the urea concentration of the sample was diluted to less than 2 M by adding 100 mM NH4HCO. Finally, trypsin (Promega) was added at a 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion which was performed overnight at 37°C; a second 4 h-digestion was performed using a 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio. HPLC Fractionation The tryptic peptides (20 mg) were separated into fractions using high pH reverse-phase HPLC (Thermo Betasil C18 column, 5-μm particles, 10-mm i.d., 250-mm length). Briefly, peptides were first separated with a gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile (pH 9.0) over 60 min into 60 fractions. Then, the peptides were combined into 4 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifugation. Affinity Enrichment Tryptic peptides dissolved in NETN buffer (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0) were incubated with pre-washed antibody beads (PTM Bio) at 4°C overnight with gentle shaking. Then the beads were washed four times with NETN buffer and twice with H2O. The bound peptides were eluted from the beads with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. Finally, the eluted fractions were combined and vacuum-dried. For LC-MS/MS analysis, the resulting peptides were desalted with C18 ZipTips (Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. LC-MS/MS Analysis The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 6% to 23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 26 min, 23% to 35% in 8 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Database Search The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the UniProtKB database Trypanosoma brucei brucei (strain 927/4 GUTat10.1, 8,587 sequences, release time 2017.10) concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 4 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification and lactylation and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1% and minimum score for modified peptides was set > 40. Protein annotation and functional enrichment GO annotation was derived from the UniProt-GOA database. For the proteins which were not annotated by the UniProt-GOA database, the InterProScan software was used to annotate each protein’s GO function based on protein sequence alignment. Domain functional description was annotated by Interproscan, and the InterPro domain database was used. The KEGG online service tool KAAS was use to annotate the KEGG database description for proteins, and the annotation result was mapped on the KEGG pathway database using the KEGG service tool KEGG Mapper. Wolfpsort was used to predict subcellular localization. All functional enrichment was performed using a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test. For further hierarchical clustering based on different protein functional classification, all of the categories generated after enrichment along with their p values were collated; we subsequently filtered for those categories which were at least enriched in one of the clusters with a p value <0.05. This filtered p value matrix was transformed by the function x = −log10 (p value). Finally, these x values were z-transformed for each functional category. These z scores were then clustered by one-way hierarchical clustering (Euclidean distance, average linkage clustering) in Genesis. Cluster membership was visualized by a heat map using the “heatmap.2” function from the “gplots” R-package. Motif Analysis Soft MoMo (motif-x algorithm) was used to analysis the model of sequences constituted with amino acids in specific positions of modify-21-mers (10 amino acids upstream and downstream of the site, but phosphorylation with modify-13-mers that 6 amino acids upstream and downstream of the site) in all protein sequences. And all the database protein sequences were used as background database parameter. Minimum number of occurrences was set to 20. Emulate original motif-x was ticked, and other parameters with default. Enrichment-based Clustering For further hierarchical clustering based on differentially modified protein functional classification (such as: GO, Domain, Pathway, Complex). We first collated all the categories obtained after enrichment along with their P values, and then filtered for those categories which were at least enriched in one of the clusters with P value <0.05. This filtered P value matrix was transformed by the function x = −log10 (P value). Finally, these x values were z-transformed for each functional category. These z scores were then clustered by one-way hierarchical clustering (Euclidean distance, average linkage clustering) in Genesis. Cluster membership were visualized by a heat map using the “heatmap.2” function from the “gplots” R-package.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lysine lactylation; trypanosoma brucei; energy metabolism; glycolysis

### Affiliations
Shenyang Agricultural University
Key Laboratory of Livestock Infectious Diseases in Northeast China, Ministry of Education, Key Laboratory of Zoonosis, College of Animal Science and Veterinary Medicine, Shenyang Agricultural University, 120 Dongling Road, Shenyang 110866, China. 2 The Research Unit for Pathogenic Mechanisms of Zoonotic Parasites, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, 120 Dongling Road, Shenyang 110866, China.

### Submitter
Naiwen Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Qijun Chen
Key Laboratory of Livestock Infectious Diseases in Northeast China, Ministry of Education, Key Laboratory of Zoonosis, College of Animal Science and Veterinary Medicine, Shenyang Agricultural University, 120 Dongling Road, Shenyang 110866, China. 2 The Research Unit for Pathogenic Mechanisms of Zoonotic Parasites, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, 120 Dongling Road, Shenyang 110866, China.


