### Accession
PXD007513

### Title
Histone interaction landscapes visualized by crosslinking mass spectrometry in intact cell nuclei

### Description
Cells organize their actions partly through tightly controlled protein-protein interactions – collectively termed the interactome. Here we use crosslinking mass spectrometry (XL-MS) to chart the interactome of intact human nuclei. We overall identified ~8700 crosslinks, of which 2/3 represent links connecting distinct proteins. From this data we constructed an overview of the nuclear interactome. We observed that the histone proteins on the nucleosomes expose well-defined crosslinking hot-spots. For several nucleosome-interacting proteins, such as USF3 and Ran GTPase, the data allowed us to build models of their binding mode to the nucleosome. For HMGN2 the data guided the construction of a refined model of the interaction with the nucleosome, based on complementary NMR, XL-MS and modeling. Excitingly, several isoform-specific interactors seem to exist for distinct histone H1 variants and the analysis of crosslinks carrying post-translational modifications allowed us to extract how specific modifications influence the nucleosome interactome. Overall, our data depository will support future structural and functional analysis of cell nuclei, including the nucleoprotein assemblies they harbor.

### Sample Protocol
Intact nuclei were isolated from U2OS cells through gentle mechanical lysis and soft centrifugation. The crosslinking of the nuclei was performed with the MS-cleavable crosslinker DSSO. The labeled nuclei were separated with sequential detergent fractionation and then digested using sequentially Lys-C and Trypsin. Crosslinked peptides were enriched through strong cation exchange (SCX) chromatography. The late SCX fractions were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using Agilent 1290 Infinity System (Agilent Technologies) in combination with an Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Scientific), and the crosslinked peptides acquired through sequential collision-induced dissociation (CID) and electron transfer dissociation (ETD) in MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (beta, version 2.2.0.196) was used for data analysis with the XlinkX (beta, version 0.1.3) nodes integrated. The processing workflow was set up with the following nodes. The built-in nodes ‘Spectrum Files’ and ‘Spectrum Selector’ were used to extract the MS2 scans together with a precise precursor m/z and charge. To extract precursor intensity information we added the built-in node ‘Minora feature detection’. The following crosslinking workflow consists of the following nodes. The ‘XlinkX Detect’ node performs diagnostic peak detection specific for the used labile crosslinker DSSO. The following ‘XlinkX Filter’ nodes only filters out all MS2 scans for which no diagnostic peak set was detected. The remaining MS2 scans were identified with the dedicated crosslink peptide search engine ‘XlinkX Search’ node, for which the following settings were used: Uniprot human protein database from January 2016 containing 42150 proteins, protease Trypsin (Full), 2 allowed missed cleavages, precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance of 20 ppm, carbamidomethyl on C as static modification, oxidation on M as variable modification, where appropriate acetylation or ubiquitination on K were also set as variable modification. The results from the search were FDR corrected to 1% using the ‘XlinkX Validator’ node, which utilizes a specific set of crosslink peptide spectral features and machine learning to define the cutoff as developed for peptide spectral matches in Percolator. Finally, in the ‘Crosslink Consensus’ node the individual crosslink spectral matches were grouped in those cases where they represent the same peptide sequence and modification state.

### Publication Abstract
Cells organize their actions partly through tightly controlled protein-protein interactions-collectively termed the interactome. Here we use crosslinking mass spectrometry (XL-MS) to chart the protein-protein interactions in intact human nuclei. Overall, we identified &#x223c;8,700 crosslinks, of which 2/3 represent links connecting distinct proteins. From these data, we gain insights on interactions involving histone proteins. We observed that core histones on the nucleosomes expose well-defined interaction hot spots. For several nucleosome-interacting proteins, such as USF3 and Ran GTPase, the data allowed us to build low-resolution models of their binding mode to the nucleosome. For HMGN2, the data guided the construction of a refined model of the interaction with the nucleosome, based on complementary NMR, XL-MS, and modeling. Excitingly, the analysis of crosslinks carrying posttranslational modifications allowed us to extract how specific modifications influence nucleosome interactions. Overall, our data depository will support future structural and functional analysis of cell nuclei, including the nucleoprotein assemblies they harbor.

### Keywords
Histone variant specific interactions, Histone interaction network – ptm interplay, Nuclear interactome, Nuclear protein-protein interactions, Crosslinking mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Domenico Fasci

### Lab Head
Dr Albert J.R. Heck
Utrecht University


