### Accession
PXD034186

### Title
Understanding Global Changes of the Mouse Brain Proteome after HSV-2 Infection Using a Label-free Shotgun Approach

### Description
Herpes simplex virus type 2 (HSV-2) is a common human pathogen that establishes lifelong latency in neurons of the nervous system. The number of severe central nervous system infections caused by the virus has increased recently. However, the pathogenesis of HSV-2 infection in the nervous system is not fully understood. Here, we demonstrated global proteomic changes in the brain tissue in BALB/c mice vaginally infected with HSV-2.

### Sample Protocol
To induce an acute infection, BALB/c mice were inoculated via a vaginal instillation of 5×104 plaque-forming units (PFUs) of HSV-2, with sterile phosphate buffered saline (PBS, pH 7.4) acting as control.  There were fifteen mice in each group, of which 3 mice were euthanized and dissected for Label-free protein quantitative analysis.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrum data generated by QE was retrieved with Protein Discover (V2.2). The Percolator database retrieval algorithm was used with the mouse proteome reference Uniprot database (UniProt Mouse 20180428. fasta). Search parameters were as follows: Scan Event: Msaa Analyzer (FTMS), MS Order (MS2), Activation Type (HCD), scan typr (full); Sequest HT: Enzyme (Trypsin full), Dynamic Modification (Oxidation, Acetyl, Carbonadomethyl). The search results were screened based on the criteria of the Maximum Delta Cn and Maximum Rank of PSM with a card value of ≥0.05. Entries and contaminating proteins present in the anti-database were deleted, and the remaining identification information was used for subsequent analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Herpes simplex virus type 2 (HSV-2) is a common human pathogen that establishes lifelong latency in neurons of the nervous system. The number of severe central nervous system infections caused by the virus has increased recently. However, the pathogenesis of HSV-2 infection in the nervous system is not fully understood. Here, we demonstrated global proteomic changes in the brain tissue in BALB/c mice vaginally infected with HSV-2. Data are available <i>via</i> ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD034186. A total of 249 differentially expressed proteins were identified in infected brain tissue. The GO and KEGG enrichment analysis of these proteins indicated that they were mainly involved in the regulation of synapse formation and synaptic excitability. In addition, genes affecting autophagy, the development of other neurodegenerative diseases, and signaling pathways relevant to other neurologic diseases were identified. Additional experiments, comparing the brain tissue of asymptomatic and symptomatic mice showed a differential expression of proteins involved in synapse formation and synaptic transmission. Others were involved in autophagy, addiction, and signaling pathways of other neurologic diseases. These results suggest that changes in synaptic structure and function, as well as autophagy, may be related to the development of neurologic abnormalities that follow HSV-2 infection. We also identified a protein GluN2A encoded by Grin2a was continuously expressed at high levels after infection. We propose that GluN2A may be a key molecule in the pathogenesis of HSV-2-induced neurologic diseases.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Brain, Mouse

### Affiliations
Institute of Neuroscience, Animal Zoology Department, Kunming Medical University,China
Kunming Medical University

### Submitter
继帅 程

### Lab Head
Dr Jishuai Cheng
Institute of Neuroscience, Animal Zoology Department, Kunming Medical University,China


