### Accession
PXD040499

### Title
Architecture of the MKK6-p38α complex defines the basis of MAPK specificity and activation

### Description
The MAP kinase p38α is a central component of signalling in inflammation and the immune response, and is therefore an important drug target. Little is known about the molecular mechanism of its activation by double-phosphorylation from MAP2Ks, due to the challenge of trapping a transient and dynamic hetero-kinase complex. Here, we applied a multidisciplinary approach to generate the first structure of p38α in complex with its MAP2K MKK6 and understand the activation mechanism. Integrating cryo-EM with MD simulations and in cellulo experiments, we demonstrate a dynamic, multi-step, phosphorylation mechanism, reveal new catalytically relevant interactions, and show that MAP2K disordered N-termini determine pathway specificity. Our work captures, for the first time, a fundamental step of cell signalling: a kinase phosphorylating its downstream target kinase

### Sample Protocol
HDX reactions were done in 50 l volumes with a final protein concentration of 5.4 μM of MKK6. Briefly, 272 picomoles of protein were pre-incubated with 815 picomoles of p38 or corresponding buffer in 5  µl final volume for 5 min at 22 °C before initiating the reaction.  Deuterium exchange reaction was initiated by adding 45 µl of D2O exchange buffer (20 mM Hepes pH 7.5 / 200 mM NaCl / 10 mM MgCl2 / 500 nM TCEP / 2 mM AlCl3 / 1 mM NH4F / 1 mM AMP-CP supplemented with 6 M of p38 or equivalent buffer ) to the protein mixture. Reactions were carried-out at room temperature for 3 incubation times in triplicates (3 s, 30 s, 300 s) and terminated by the sequential addition of 20 μl of ice-cold quench buffer 1 (4 M  Gdn-HCl / 1 M NaCl / 0.1 M NaH2PO4 pH 2.5 / 1 % Formic Acid (FA) / 200 mM TCEP in D2O). Samples were immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80 °C for up to two weeks.  To quantify deuterium uptake into the protein, samples were thawed and injected in a UPLC system immersed on ice with 0.1 % FA as liquid phase. The protein was digested via two immobilized pepsin columns (Thermo #23131), and peptides were collected onto a VanGuard precolumn trap (Waters). The trap was subsequently eluted, and peptides separated with a C18, 300Å, 1.7 μm particle size Fortis Bio 100 x 2.1 mm column over a gradient of 8 – 30 % buffer C over 20 min at 150 l/min (Buffer B: 0.1 % formic acid; buffer C: 100 % acetonitrile). Mass spectra were acquired on an Orbitrap Velos Pro (Thermo), for ions from 400 to 2200 m/z using an electrospray ionization source operated at 300 °C, 5 kV of ion spray voltage. Peptides were identified by data-dependent acquisition of a non-deuterated sample after MS/MS and data were analyzed by Mascot.

### Data Protocol
Deuterium incorporation levels were quantified using HD examiner software (Sierra Analytics), and quality of every peptide was checked manually. Results are presented as percentage of maximal deuteration compared to theoretical maximal deuteration. Changes in deuteration level between two states were considered significant if >15% and >1.5 Da and p< 0.01 (unpaired t-test).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hdx-ms, Cryo-em, Molecular dynamics, Mapk, Kinases, Mkk6

### Affiliations
Faculty of Medicine, Platform of services, Protein expression and purification, University of Geneva, 1211 Geneva, Switzerland
University of Geneva, Faculty of Medicine

### Submitter
Oscar Vadas

### Lab Head
Dr Oscar Vadas
Faculty of Medicine, Platform of services, Protein expression and purification, University of Geneva, 1211 Geneva, Switzerland


