### Accession
PXD030212

### Title
Mediator Kinase Complexes Regulates ATOH1-Dependent  Intestinal Differentiation

### Description
Cyclin Dependent Kinases CDK8 and CDK19 (Mediator kinase) are regulatory components of the Mediator complex, a highly conserved complex that fine tunes transcriptional output. While Mediator kinase has been implicated in the transcriptional control of key pathways necessary for development and growth, its function in vivo has not been well described. Herein, we report the consequences of complete ablation of both Cdk8/19 on tissue homeostasis. We show that intestinal epithelial specific deletion of Mediator kinase leads to a distinct defect in secretory progenitor differentiation with broad loss of the intestinal secretory cell types. Using a phospho-proteogenomic approach, we show that the Cdk8/19 kinase module interacts with and phosphorylates components of the chromatin remodeling complex Swi/Snf in intestinal epithelial cells. Genomic localisation of Swi/Snf and Mediator shows Cdk8/19-dependent genomic binding at distinct super-enhancer loci within key lineage specification genes, including the master regulator of secretory differentiation ATOH1. Using CRISPRi/CRISPRa, we identify a distinct Mediator- Swi/Snf bound enhancer element that is necessary and sufficient for ATOH1 expression in a Mediator-kinase dependent manner. As such, these studies uncover a newly described transcriptional mechanism of ATOH1-dependent intestinal cell specification that is dependent on the coordinated interaction of the chromatin remodeling complex Swi/Snf and Mediator complex.

### Sample Protocol
Organoids were lysed in NTEN lysis buffer (250 mM NaCl, 5mM EDTA, 50 mM HEPES, 0.5% NP-40) freshly supplemented with Halt TM Protease and Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail (78441, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and protein concentration was determined with Pierce BSA Protein Assay Kit (23225, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Either 500 µg or 1 mg of protein was used for IP with 1 µg of MED1 (A700-037, Bethyl Laboratories), MED12 (A300-774, Bethyl Laboratories), Arid1a (sc32761, Santa Cruz) or rabbit and mouse IgG isotype controls (#31235 and #31903, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and incubated overnight at 4°C on a rotating wheel. Dynabeads Protein A (for rabbit AB) and G (for mouse AB) were washed twice in the NTEN buffer and incubated with antibody-lysates for four hours at 4°C on a rotating wheel. The samples were washed five times in NTEN lysis buffer before proceeding with isobaric labelling or elution from Dynabeads with 1x Laemmli buffer.

### Data Protocol
Buffer conditions for IPs subjected to isobaric labelling and quantitative proteomics were changed by washing twice with 100 mM TEAB buffer before following TMT TM sixplex Isobaric Mass Tagging Kit (90064, Thermo Fisher Scientific) manufacturer&#39;s instructions. Acetone precipitation was omitted and trypsin digested peptides were separated from beads immediately before peptide labelling. Labelled peptides were purified using Pierce TM C18 Spin columns (89870, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and dried in a Speed Vac. LC-MS/MS Analysis Samples were analyzed using an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled with an Easy-nLC 1200 (Thermo Scientific), Nanospray Flex ion source (Thermo Scientific), and column oven heater (Sonation). One μL of the sample was directly loaded onto the column. Peptides were eluted with a linear gradient (EasyNanoLC 1200, Thermo Fisher Scientific) ranging from 6%–30% Solvent B (0.1%FA in 90% ACN) over 84 min, 30%–90% B over 9 min and held at 90% B for 5 min at 200 nl/min. MS/MS were acquired on a Thermo Orbitrap Exploris 480 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in data- dependent acquisition.LC-MS/MS data were analyzed using Peaks X plus (BSI) database search against mouse proteome (UniProt) with the following search parameters: parent mass error tolerance for parent and fragment mass was set to 20 ppm and 0.02 Da respectively; digestion mode was set to tryptic, with TMT- 6plex and carbamidomethylation (C) as fixed modification and Oxidation(M), Deamidation (N,Q)Acetylation (N-term and K), Phosphorylation (S) as variable modifications (a maximum of 2 per sequence) with False Discovery Rate (FDR) of 1%. To enable assignment of MS2 reporter ion data to respective samples, PeaksQ. quantitation was used with a tight quantification mass tolerance of 5.0 ppm utilising peptides that matched the FDR threshold of 1%. Hits were filtered for Log2FC &lt;-1 and a p-value of 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Initiation and maintenance of transcriptional states are critical for controlling normal tissue homeostasis and differentiation. The cyclin dependent kinases CDK8 and CDK19 (Mediator kinases) are regulatory components of Mediator, a highly conserved complex that orchestrates enhancer-mediated transcriptional output. While Mediator kinases have been implicated in the transcription of genes necessary for development and growth, its function in mammals has not been well defined. Using genetically defined models and pharmacological inhibitors, we showed that CDK8 and CDK19 function in a redundant manner to regulate intestinal lineage specification in humans and mice. The Mediator kinase module bound and phosphorylated key components of the chromatin remodeling complex switch/sucrose non-fermentable (SWI/SNF) in intestinal epithelial cells. Concomitantly, SWI/SNF and MED12-Mediator colocalized at distinct lineage-specifying enhancers in a CDK8/19-dependent manner. Thus, these studies reveal a transcriptional mechanism of intestinal cell specification, coordinated by the interaction between the chromatin remodeling complex SWI/SNF and Mediator kinase.

### Keywords
Phosphoproetomics. cdk8, Cdk19

### Affiliations
Monash University
Head, Translational Antigen Discovery Lab   Department of Medicine/ School of Clinical Sciences at Monash Health Monash University Level 7, TRF Building, Monash Medical Centre 246 Clayton Road Clayton VIC 3168 Australia M: +61 415126562

### Submitter
Pouya Faridi

### Lab Head
Dr Pouya Faridi
Head, Translational Antigen Discovery Lab   Department of Medicine/ School of Clinical Sciences at Monash Health Monash University Level 7, TRF Building, Monash Medical Centre 246 Clayton Road Clayton VIC 3168 Australia M: +61 415126562


