### Accession
PXD040042

### Title
Proteome analysis of WT and Borcs5 phagosomes from Raw264.7 macrophages

### Description
Hyperactive TLR7 signaling has long been appreciated as a driver of autoimmune disease in mouse models by breaking tolerance to self-nucleic acids1-5. Recently, the first monogenic mutations within TLR7 or its associated regulator Unc93b16,7 have been identified as causative agents of human lupus. The unifying feature of these mutations is TLR7 gain-of-function resulting from increased ligand binding. TLR7 is an intracellular transmembrane receptor, localized to late endosomes, that senses RNA breakdown products within these hydrolytic compartments8,9. Hence, its function depends on a complex interplay between specialized organelles, transport mechanisms and membrane interactions. Whether perturbations of any of these endosome-related processes can give rise to TLR7 gain-of-function and facilitate self-reactivity has not been investigated. Here we show that a dysregulated endosomal compartment can result in TLR7 gain-of-function and lupus disease in humans. Mechanistically, the late endosomal protein complex BORC-Arl8b controls TLR7 protein levels by mediating the receptor's final sorting step towards lysosomal degradation. A direct interaction between Arl8b and Unc93b1 is required to regulate the turnover of TLR7. We identified an amino acid insertion in Unc93b1 in a patient with childhood-onset lupus, which results in loss of interaction with the BORC-Arl8b complex and an accumulation of functional TLR7. Our results highlight the importance of an intact endomembrane system to prevent autoimmune disease. Disrupting the proper progression of TLR7 through its endocytic life cycle is sufficient to break immunological tolerance to nucleic acids. Our work expands the repertoire of cellular mechanisms important to restrict pathological TLR7 activity. Identifying and stratifying lupus patients based on a TLR7-driven pathology opens the way for precision medicine specifically targeting TLR7.

### Sample Protocol
Bead-containing intact phagosomes were pelleted, washed 4x in cold 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (NH₄HCO₃), and snap-frozen.  100 µl of fresh lysis buffer was added and digested as mentioned in the section Proteomics Sample Preparation with LFQ. Peptide desalting was performed on self-prepared C18 Tips. Samples were acidified (final formic acid concentration of 2 %), shortly vortexed, and centrifuged. The tubes were placed on a magnetic rack and the supernatant was loaded on the activated and equilibrated C18 columns. The flow through was loaded again once, the column was washed with 0.1% formic acid and peptides were eluted with 60% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in water. 10% of eluates were first dried in a SpeedVac and, then loaded onto Evotips Pure (Evosep, Odense, Denmark) tips according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Peptide separation was carried out by nanoflow reverse phase liquid chromatography (Evosep One, Evosep) using the Endurance column (15 cm x 150 µm ID, with Reprosil-Pur C18 1.9 µm beads #EV1106, Evosep) with the 30 samples a day method (30SPD). The LC system was online coupled to a timsTOF SCP mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) applying the data-independent acquisition (DIA) with parallel accumulation serial fragmentation (PASEF) method.

### Data Protocol
MS data were processed with Dia-NN (v1.8) and searched against an in silico predicted mouse spectra library. The “match between run” feature was used. A t-test with Benjamini-Hochberg correction was performed by Perseus (v1.6.15.0) on normalized protein values to identify significant regulations between KO and controls.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Borcs5, Phagosomes

### Affiliations
Mass Spectrometry Facility MPIMG
Max Planck Institute for Infection Biology, Berlin, Germany

### Submitter
David Meierhofer

### Lab Head
Dr Olivia Majer
Max Planck Institute for Infection Biology, Berlin, Germany


