### Accession
PXD023985

### Title
Proteome-wide identification of Lysine Methylation on non-histone of tomato (Solanum Lycopersicum) during ripening

### Description
Post-translational modification of proteins through methylation plays important regulatory role in biological processes. Lysine methylation on histone proteins is known to play important role in chromatin structure and function. However, non-histone protein substrates of this modification remain largely unknown. Herein, we use high resolution mass spectrometry to global screening methylated substrates and lysine- methylation sites in tomato (Solanum Lycopersicum). A total of 241 sites of lysine methylation (mono-, di-, tri-methylation) in 176 proteins with diverse biological functions and subcellular localized were identified in mix tomato with different maturity. Two putative methylation motifs were detected. KEGG pathway category enrichment analysis indicated that methylated proteins are implicated in the regulation of diverse metabolic processes, including arbon fixation in photosynthetic organisms, pentose phosphate pathway, fructose and mannose metabolism, and cysteine and methionine metabolism. Three representative proteins were selected to analyze the effect of methylated modification on protein function. In addition, quantitative RT-PCR further validated the gene expression level of some key methylated proteins during fruit ripening, which are involved in oxidation reduction process, stimulus and stress, energy metabolism, signaling transduction, fruit ripening and senescence. These data represent the first report of methylation proteomic and supply abundant resources for exploring the functions of lysine methylation in tomato and other plants.

### Sample Protocol
2. Materials and Methods 2.1 Sample collection and protein extraction Tomatoes (S. lycopersicum) cv. were grown in a greenhouse at a 16-h day/8-h night cycle, at 22-28°C. The sample of similar quantities of green ripening, broken color and red ripen was obtained and mixed. The mixture was grinded by liquid nitrogen into cell powder and was added with four volumes of phenol extraction buffer containing 10 mM dithiothreitol and 1% protease inhibitor cocktail to supersonic lysates. An equal volume of Tris-saturated phenol (pH 8.0) was added; then, the mixture was further vortexed for 5 min. After centrifugation (4°C, 10 min, 5 500 g), the upper phenol phase was transferred to a new centrifuge tube. Proteins were precipitated by adding five volumes of ammonium sulfate-saturated methanol and incubated at -20 °C for more than 12 h. After centrifugation at 4 °C for 10 min, the supernatant was discarded. The remaining precipitate was washed with ice-cold methanol once, followed by ice-cold acetone for three times. The protein was redissolved in 8 M urea and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions.  2.2 Trypsin Digestion and HPLC Fractionation For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM DTT for 30 min at 56°C, and alkylated with 11 mM IAA for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. After that, the protein sample was diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to decrease the urea concentration to less than 2 M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio overnight for the first digestion and then at 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion. The peptide solution thus obtained was desalted with Sep-Pak SPE column and lyophilized to dryness. To enhance the accuracy and throughput of protein identification, the tryptic peptides were fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Thermo Betasil C18 column (5 μm particles, 10 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, peptides were first separated with a gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile (pH 9.0) over 60 min into 60 fractions. Then, the peptides were combined into four fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging.  2.3 Affinity enrichment of lysine methylated peptides To enrich methylated modified peptides, tryptic peptides dissolved in NETN buffer (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0) were incubated with pre-washed non-, double-, tri-methylated resin antibody beads (Jingjie PTM Biotechnology Co., Hangzhou) at 4°C overnight with gentle shaking. Then the beads were washed four times with NETN buffer and twice with H2O. The bound peptides were eluted from the beads with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid for three times. Finally, the eluted fractions were combined and vacuum-dried. For LC-MS/MS analysis, the resulting peptides were desalted with C18 ZipTips (Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.  2.4 LC-MS/MS analysis The tryptic peptides were dissolved in aqueous solution containing 0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile (solvent A), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 5% to 20% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 90% acetonitrile) from 0 to 20 min, 20% to 35% solvent B from 20 to 32 min; 35% to 80% solvent B from 32 to 36 min; climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 500 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The peptides were subjected to nanospray ionization (NSI) source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The scan range was 350 to 1800 m/z for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15 s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
2.5 Database search and motif analysis The resulting MS/MS data were processed using MaxQuant along with the integrated Andromeda search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the Solanum lycopersicum database in the uniprot database (34,640 sequences, https://www.uniprot.org/) and concatenated with reverse decoy database. During the MaxQuant database searches, trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 4 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1% and minimum score for modified peptides was set > 40.  Soft MoMo (motif-x algorithm, http://meme-suite.org/tools/momo) was used to analysis the model of sequences constituted with amino acids in specific positions of modify-21-mers (10 amino acids upstream and downstream of the site) in all protein sequences. And all the database protein sequences were used as background database parameter. Minimum number of occurrences was set to 20.   2.6 Bioinformatics analysis Protein Annotation. Gene Ontology (GO) annotation of the proteome was done using the UniProt-GOA database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/). When a single peptide was found to match two or more different proteins, manual inspection of the data was performed to determine the protein from which the peptide was likely derived. For each category of GO annotation, a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test was employed to test the enrichment of the identitfied modified protein against all proteins of the species database. The GO with a corrected p-value < 0.05 is considered significant. KEGG Pathway Annotation. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database was used to annotate the protein pathway. First, a KEGG online service tool, KAAS, was used to annotate the protein’s KEGG database description (Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes; http://www.genome.jp/kegg/). Subsequently, the annotation result was mapped on the KEGG pathway database by using KEGG mapper. Wolf PSORT software was employed to predict subcellular localization (http://wolfpsort.seq.cbrc.jp/).  GO/KEGG Pathway Functional Enrichment Analysis. For enrichment or depletion (right-tailed test) of specific annotation terms among the members of resulting protein clusters, Fisher’s exact test was used to obtain the p values. In all of the clusters, any terms with p values below 0.05 were treated as significant.  2.7 Site-directed mutagenesis, purification of recombinant proteins and activity analysis The site-directed mutagenesis in GST-T1, TRX, NOX were performed with a QuikChange site-directed mutagenesis kit (Stratagene, La Jolla, CA, USA). We mutated the lysine and arginine sites, which were prone to be methylated, to alanine to simulate locking to methylation modification. The mutations were as follows: GST-T1-mut (K228A, R230A), NOX-mut (R161A), TRX-mut (K19, 21A). The cDNA fragment encoding the proteins of GST-T1, TRX, NOX and their mutations were inserted into the pET-28a vector (Novagen). His- fusion proteins were induced and expressed in E.coli BL21 (DE3) strain. The recombinant proteins were then purified with nickel-nitrilotriacetic acid agarose (Qiagen), following the manufacturer's instructions. The protein activity was determined using corresponding assay kits (Comin Biotechnology Co., Ltd., Suzhou, China) in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions.  2.8 Quantitative Real-time PCR Analysis DNA-free RNA was reverse-transcribed for first-strand cDNA synthesis. The gene-specific oligonucleotide primers were used for qRT-PCR analysis (Table 1). The qRT-PCR reactions for genes were carried out in the ABI 7500 Real-Time PCR System (Applied Biosystems, Carlsbad, CA, USA) with SYBR Green Real-Time PCR Master Mix (TOYOBO Co., Ltd.). In accordance with the manufacturer's instructions under the following conditions: 30 s at 95 °C, 40 cycles of 5 s at 95 °C and 34 s at 58 °C. SlActin (Solyc03g078400) was selected as the reference gene. qRT-PCR reactions were normalized using the Ct value corresponding to that of the reference gene. The relative expression levels of target genes were calculated using the formula 2−ΔΔCT. Three independent biological replicates were performed in the analysis.  2.9 Statistical Analysis Data were expressed as the mean ±SD. Differences among different treatments were compared using SPSS v.7.5 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA). a, b, c of each data point represent a mean ± standard deviation (n=3). The values with different letters are significantly different (P < 0.05).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lysine; methylation; post-translational modification; tomato

### Affiliations
South China Botentical Garden, Chinese Academy of sciences
south china botentical garden,Chinese Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Lu Xiao

### Lab Head
Dr Lu Xiao
South China Botentical Garden, Chinese Academy of sciences


