### Accession
PXD004109

### Title
Comparative iTRAQ analysis of proteomic expression in human sinoatrial node and working cardiomyocytes

### Description
The goal of this study was to assess the changes in protein expression in the human sinoatrial node (SAN) compared with working cardiomyocytes in order to identify specific SAN protein signatures. Four pair of samples (the SAN and working cardiomyocytes) were obtained post-mortem from four healthy human donors.

### Sample Protocol
We performed protein identification and quantitation using two-dimensional chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry method with isobaric peptide labeling (iTRAQ).

### Data Protocol
Collected data were analysed by the X!Tandem search engine and statistically validated with PeptideProphet under the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline. PeptideProphet results were combined with iProphet and validated by Mayu algorithm to calculate peptide and protein FDR. Protein quantitation, based on iTRAQ reporter intensities was performed by DanteR ANOVA at peptide level.

### Publication Abstract
Our objective was to assess the changes in protein abundance in the human sinoatrial node (SAN) compared with working cardiomyocytes to identify SAN-specific protein signatures. Four pairs of samples (the SAN and working cardiomyocytes) were obtained postmortem from four human donors with no evidence of cardiovascular disease. We performed protein identification and quantitation using two-dimensional chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry with isobaric peptide labeling (iTRAQ). We identified 451 different proteins expressed in both the SAN and working cardiomyocytes, 166 of which were differentially regulated (110 were upregulated in the SAN and 56 in the working cardiomyocytes). We identified sarcomere structural proteins in both tissues, although they were differently distributed among the tested samples. For example, myosin light chain 4, myosin regulatory light chain 2-atrial isoform, and tropomyosin alpha-3 chain levels were twofold higher in the SAN than in working cardiomyocytes, and myosin light chain 3 and myosin regulatory light chain 2-ventricular/cardiac muscle isoform levels were twofold higher in the ventricle tissue than in SAN. We identified many mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation, &#x3b2;-oxidation, and tricarboxylic acid cycle proteins that were predominantly associated with working cardiomyocytes tissue. We detected upregulation of the fatty acid omega activation pathway proteins in the SAN samples. Some proteins specific for smooth muscle tissue were highly upregulated in the SAN (e.g. transgelin), which indicates that the SAN tissue might act as the bridge between the working myocardium and the smooth muscle. Our results show possible implementation of proteomic strategies to identify in-depth functional differences between various heart sub-structures.

### Keywords
Heart embryology, Electrical cardiac conduction system, Smooth muscle, Omega-oxidation

### Affiliations
Center for Medical Genomics OMICRON, Faculty of Medicine, Jagiellonian University Maedical College, Cracow, Poland
Chair of Pharmacology

### Submitter
Maciej Suski

### Lab Head
Dr Paweł Wołkow
Center for Medical Genomics OMICRON, Faculty of Medicine, Jagiellonian University Maedical College, Cracow, Poland


