### Accession
PXD006678

### Title
Extracellular ATP elicits DORN1-mediated RBOHD phosphorylation to regulate stomatal aperture

### Description
A multibillion dollar pharmaceutical industry targets purinergic signaling pathways in humans. However, in contrast, little is known about purinergic signaling in plants. Extracellular adenosine-5’-triphosphate (eATP) acts as a damage-associated molecular pattern (DAMP) in both animals and plants. The first plant eATP receptor, DORN1, was identified in Arabidopsis, defining a new kinase family (P2K) of purinoceptors. Stomates are leaf pores that control gas exchange and, therefore, impact critical functions such as photosynthesis and drought tolerance. Stomates are also the prefer entry point for leaf pathogens. The addition of ATP led to the rapid closure of Arabidopsis leaf stomates resulting in enhanced resistance to the bacterial pathogen Psuedomonas syringae. The data indicate that this response is mediated by eATP recognition by DORN1 followed by direct phosphorylation of the NADPH oxidase RBOHD, resulting in elevated production of reactive oxygen species and stomatal closure. Mutation of the DORN1 phosphorylation sites on RBOHD eliminated the ability of eATP to induce stomatal closure. To date, in contrast to work in animals, purinergic signaling in plants has been viewed as a curiosity without any direct, mechanistic connection to key plant processes. The data presented clearly demonstrates eATP as an important signal controlling stomatal aperture with important implications for the control of plant photosynthesis, water homeostasis, pathogen resistance and ultimately yield.

### Sample Protocol
All Arabidopsis plants used in this study utilized an aequorin-expressing transgenic line (Col-0 background), including dorn1-3 (Salk_042209), rbohd (Torres et al., 2002), dorn1-1 and dorn1-2 (Choi et al., 2014). Plants were grown in soil or 1/2 MS medium containing 1% sucrose at 21-23℃, 60-70% humidity and under long-day (16 h light/8 h dark) conditions.   Full-length DORN1 (At5g60300) or RBOHD (AT5g47910), as well as sub-genic fragments DORN1-KD (kinase domain) or RBOHD-N (N-terminal region, 1-1128 bp), were amplified using gene-specific primers (Table S1) with cDNA derived from wild-type plants. The PCR products were then cloned into pDONR-Zeo or pGEM-T Easy vectors. Full-length clones of the kinase-dead dorn1-1 and dorn1-2 mutants were amplified from genomic DNA. The RBOHD-S22A, S22D, T24A, T24D, S22AT24A mutant clones were generated by site-directed mutagenesis.  Mapping of the DORN1 autophosphorylation sites was done using a bottom-up proteomics approach. The purified, recombinant DORN1 kinase was phosphorylated in vitro in the presence of 5 mM MgCl2, MnCl2 and/or both MgCl2 and MnCl2 with or without ATP. Proteins were subsequently digested in-solution with trypsin. The tryptic peptides were fragmented by using either collision induced dissociation (CID) or by using a “decision tree” method, which utilizes both CID and ETD during a single sample analysisCID and analyzed by using a LTQ XL Orbitrap high-resolution mass spectrometr LTQ Orbitrap XL ETD mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, San Jose, CA).  The KiC assay was performed as previously described (Ahsan et al., 2013). A library of more than 2100 peptides (Supplementary Table x ) developed from identified phosphorylation sites taken from a number of studies was incubated with the purified, recombinant GST-DORN1-KD kinase domain in the presence of ATP. The peptide mixture was then analyzed by quantitative mass spectrometry analyzed using a Finnigan Surveyor liquid chromatography (LC) system attached to a LTQ Orbitrap XL ETD mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
For analysis of KiC assay results, raw MS files were searched against a decoy database consisting of the random complement of the sequences comprising the peptide library, using SEQUEST (Proteome Discoverer, v. 1.0.3, Thermo Fisher). The instrument and detailed search parameters were described previously (Ahsan et al., 2013). Identification data were evaluated using the XCorr function of SEQUEST, and phosphorylation-site localization was accomplished using phosphoRS (Proteome Discoverer, v. 1.0.3, Thermo Fisher).  The XCorr values for each charge state were set to default, and no decoy hits were allowed.  For final validation, each spectrum was inspected manually and accepted only when the phosphopeptide had the highest pRS site probability, pRS score, XCorr value, and site-determining fragment ions allowed unambiguous localization of the phosphorylation site.  Phosphopeptides with a pRS score ≥15 and/or a pRS site probability of ≥50% were accepted. Two sets of empty vectors (GST and MBP) and two kinase-dead proteins, GST-DORN1-1 (D572N) and GST-DORN1-2 (D525N), were used as negative controls.

### Publication Abstract
In addition to acting as a cellular energy source, ATP can also act as a damage-associated molecular pattern in both animals and plants. Stomata are leaf pores that control gas exchange and, therefore, impact critical functions such as photosynthesis, drought tolerance, and also are the preferred entry point for pathogens. Here we show the addition of ATP leads to the rapid closure of leaf stomata and enhanced resistance to the bacterial pathogen Psuedomonas syringae. This response is mediated by ATP recognition by the receptor DORN1, followed by direct phosphorylation of the NADPH oxidase RBOHD, resulting in elevated production of reactive oxygen species and stomatal closure. Mutation of DORN1 phosphorylation sites on RBOHD eliminates the ability of ATP to induce stomatal closure. The data implicate purinergic signaling via DORN1 in the control of stomatal aperture with important implications for the control of plant photosynthesis, water homeostasis, pathogen resistance, and ultimately yield.

### Keywords
Purinoceptors kinase, Plant, Phosphorylation, Purinergic signaling

### Affiliations
Assistant professor Division of Biology and Medicine,  Brown University, Providence, RI 02903, USA Center for Cancer Research Development, Proteomics Core Facility,  Rhode Island Hospital, Providence, RI 02903, USA
Brown University

### Submitter
Nagib Ahsan

### Lab Head
Dr Nagib Ahsan
Assistant professor Division of Biology and Medicine,  Brown University, Providence, RI 02903, USA Center for Cancer Research Development, Proteomics Core Facility,  Rhode Island Hospital, Providence, RI 02903, USA


