### Accession
PXD000119

### Title
Nano HPLC Chip Ion Trap MS/MS of human pancreatic cancer cells

### Description
Proteins extracted from Panc1 cells (untreated or treated with ACPA or GW), were analyzed by 2-DE. Modulated proteins were identified by nanoHPLC Chip Ion trap. Bioinformatics pipeline: Mascot search was applied using the MS/MS ion search of Mascot against human entries of the non-redundant NCBI database, with propionamide formation of cysteines as fixed modification and oxidized methionine, acetylated protein N terminus, and phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine as variable modifications. Trypsin was specified as the proteolytic enzyme and one missed cleavage was allowed. The mass tolerance of the precursor and fragment ions was set to +- 0.9 Da.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
The pancreatic adenocarcinoma cell line Panc1 was treated with cannabinoid receptor ligands (arachidonylcyclopropylamide or GW405833) in order to elucidate the molecular mechanism of their anticancer effect. A proteomic approach was used to analyze the protein and phosphoprotein profiles. Western blot and functional data mining were also employed in order to validate results, classify proteins, and explore their potential relationships. We demonstrated that the two cannabinoids act through a widely common mechanism involving up- and down-regulation of proteins related to energetic metabolism and cell growth regulation. Overall, the results reported might contribute to the development of a therapy based on cannabinoids for pancreatic adenocarcinoma.

### Keywords
Human, Lc ms/ms, Panc1 cells

### Affiliations
Department of Biotechnology

### Submitter
Daniela Cecconi

### Lab Head


