### Accession
PXD013773

### Title
Amphora coffeaeformis adhesive trail proteomics

### Description
Throughout all kingdoms of life, a large number of adhesive biomolecules have evolved to allow organisms to adhere to surfaces underwater. Proteins play an important role in the adhesion of numerous marine invertebrates (e.g. mussels, sea stars, sea urchins) whereas much less is known about the biological adhesives from marine plants, including the diatoms. Diatoms are unicellular microalgae that together with bacteria dominate marine biofilms in sunlit habitats. In this study we present the first proteomics analyses of the diatom adhesive material isolated from the tenacious fouling species Amphora coffeaeformis. We identified 21 proteins, of which 13 are diatom specific. Ten of these proteins share a conserved C-terminal domain, termed GDPH domain, which is widespread yet not ubiquitously present in all diatom classes. Immunofluorescence localization of a GDPH domain bearing protein (Ac629) as well as two other proteins identified in this study (Ac1442, Ac9617) demonstrated that these are components of the adhesive trails that are secreted by cells that glide on surfaces.

### Sample Protocol
Diatom adhesive purification. The A. coffeaeformis adhesive material was isolated according to an established method [2] and concentrated by lyophilization. Prior to gel filtration the adhesive material was solubilized for 4 h at 45 C using 2 M hydroxylamine (Sigma-Aldrich) in 100 mM Borate Buffer pH 8.5. Following solubilization, the adhesive material was directly loaded onto a Superdex peptide gel filtration column (10/300 GL, GE Healthcare Life Sciences, Freiburg, Germany) and separated in 1 M ammonium acetate at 250 µL min-1 flow rate. The elution of the adhesive components was monitored at 226 and 280 nm. Anhydrous HF treatment. Freeze dried crude adhesive material or the purified HMW component were mixed with freshly condensed anhydrous HF and incubated on ice for 1 h. The HF was evaporated using a gentle stream of nitrogen followed by a final drying step in a rotary evaporator (1 h, RT). The dry samples were immediately resuspended in an appropriate volume of 100 mM ammonium acetate buffer and when necessary the pH was adjusted with ammonium hydroxide until it was neutral.  Proteomics analysis. Protein extracts from the HF-treated crude adhesive (2 independent samples), HF-treated purified HMW component (3 independent samples), and native HMW component (2 independent samples) were separated by SDS-PAGE until the dye front ran about 5 cm into the gel. Then, the entire gel lanes were cut into 4-10 slabs and the protein content of each slab was in-gel digested overnight with trypsin (Shevchenko et al. 2007). The recovered peptides were dissolved in 20 µL of 5% aqueous formic acid and a 5 µL aliquot was analyzed by GeLC–MS/MS on an Ultimate3000 nanoLC system (Dionex, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) interfaced on-line to a LTQ Orbitrap Velos hybrid tandem mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany) applying a 180 min elution program for the native HMW component samples #1& #2; HMW component, HF treated sample #3; crude adhesive HF treated samples #1 & #2 or an ImpactHD QTOF mass spectrometer (Bruker, Bremen, Germany) applying a 60 min elution program for the HMW component, HF treated samples #1 & #2. Sample files names: Ac15042014 HMW component, HF treated #1  Ac30042014 HMW component, HF treated #2 20160617-Ni2-2 native HMW component #2 20160509-Ni1 native HMW component #1 20160711-Nicole-ni2-5 HMW component, HF treated #3 20160509-Ni2 crude adhesive HF treated #1 20160509-Ni3 crude adhesive HF treated #2

### Data Protocol
Database searching. Charge state deconvolution and deisotoping were not performed. All MS/MS samples were analyzed using the Mascot software (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.2.04). Mascot was set up to search the protd_Amphora_transcriptome database (125463 entries) assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin. Mascot was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.100 Da ("HMW component, HF treated #1 " and "HMW component, HF treated #2") and 0.50 Da ("native HMW component #2", " native HMW component #1", " HMW component, HF treated #3", " crude adhesive HF treated #1" and " crude adhesive HF treated #2") and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 PPM (only samples " native HMW component #2", " native HMW component #1", " HMW component, HF treated #3", " crude adhesive HF treated #1" and " crude adhesive HF treated #2") and 20 PPM (only samples " HMW component, HF treated #1" and " HMW component, HF treated #2"). Oxidation of lysine, methionine and proline (only samples " HMW component, HF treated #1" and " HMW component, HF treated #2"), oxidation of methionine and proline (only samples " native HMW component #2", " native HMW component #1", " HMW component, HF treated #3", " crude adhesive HF treated #1" and " crude adhesive HF treated #2"), dioxidation of proline, acetyl of the n-terminus (only samples " HMW component, HF treated #1" and " HMW component, HF treated #2"), carbamidomethyl of cysteine and propionamide of cysteine were specified in Mascot as variable modifications.  Criteria for protein identification. Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.5.3, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability by the Peptide Prophet algorithm [3] with Scaffold delta-mass correction. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides in at least 3 of the samples. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm [4]. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.

### Publication Abstract
Throughout all kingdoms of life, a large number of adhesive biomolecules have evolved to allow organisms to adhere to surfaces underwater. Proteins play an important role in the adhesion of numerous marine invertebrates (e.g. mussels, sea stars, sea urchins) whereas much less is known about the biological adhesives from marine plants, including the diatoms. Diatoms are unicellular microalgae that together with bacteria dominate marine biofilms in sunlit habitats. In this study we present the first proteomics analyses of the diatom adhesive material isolated from the tenacious fouling species Amphora coffeaeformis. We identified 21 proteins, of which 13 are diatom-specific. Ten of these proteins share a conserved C-terminal domain, termed GDPH domain, which is widespread yet not ubiquitously present in all diatom classes. Immunofluorescence localization of a GDPH domain bearing protein (Ac629) as well as two other proteins identified in this study (Ac1442, Ac9617) demonstrated that these are components of the adhesive trails that are secreted by cells that glide on surfaces. This article is part of the theme issue 'Transdisciplinary approaches to the study of adhesion and adhesives in biological systems'.

### Keywords
Diatom, Adhesive

### Affiliations
B CUBE, Technical University, Dresden, Germany
TU Dresden

### Submitter
Nicole Poulsen

### Lab Head
Dr Nils Kroger
B CUBE, Technical University, Dresden, Germany


