### Accession
PXD018226

### Title
Determination of a tumor-promoting microenvironment in recurrent medulloblastoma: a multi-omics study of cerebrospinal fluid

### Description
Molecular characterization of medulloblastoma (MB) cell origin and properties is the basis for a well-defined classification system. However, limited data is available regarding the MB tumor microenvironment. Here we present a mass spectrometry-based multi-omics study of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) from recurrent MB patients. A group of age-matched patients without a neoplastic disease was used as control cohort. Proteome profiling identified several characteristic tumor markers and revealed a strong prevalence of anti-inflammatory and tumor-promoting proteins characteristic for alternatively polarized myeloid cells in MB samples. The up-regulation of ADAMTS1, GAP43 and GPR37 indicated hypoxia in CSF of MB patients. This notion was independently supported by metabolomics, demonstrating up-regulation of tryptophan, methionine, serine and lysine, all of which have been described to be induced upon hypoxia in CSF. The beta-oxidation promoting lipid hormone 12,13-DiHOME was found strongly upregulated, potentially promoting a metabolic shift supporting drug resistance and stem cell properties of MB cells.

### Sample Protocol
Subjects and samples CSF samples were obtained from 8 patients diagnosed with recurrent MB at the Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Medical University of Vienna. CSFs were sampled during routine clinical procedures from Ommaya reservoirs. In addition, 7 CSF samples from age-matched patients without a neoplastic disease were analyzed for reference purposes. CSF samples were snap-frozen without further processing and stored at -80 °C until sample preparation. The study was approved by the institutional review board of the Medical University of Vienna (EK 1244/2016).  Protein Sample Preparation 500 µL of sample were diluted in 2.5 mL absolute ethanol (AustroAlco) in 15 mL tubes (Falcon) and stored over night at -20 °C. Samples were then centrifuged for 30 min at 4536 g and 4 °C. The obtained protein pellets were used for an enzymatic digest using a modified filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol as previously described [2]. Briefly, 20 µg of protein were loaded onto a 10 kD molecular weight cut-off filter (Merck). After reduction with dithiothreitol (Gerbu) and alkylation with iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) the protein digestion was achieved by applying Trypsin/Lys-C Mix (MS grade; Promega) twice for 16 and 4 hours, respectively. The eluted peptide solution was dried via vacuum centrifugation and stored at -20 °C until further analysis.   LC-MS/MS analyses Upon analysis, dried peptide samples were thawed and redissolved in 5 µL 30% formic acid, supplemented with four synthetic peptide standards for internal quality control and further diluted with 40 µL of mobile phase A (97.9% H2O, 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid; all VWR). 1 µL was injected into the Dionex UltiMateTM 3000 RSLC nano LC system coupled to a Q ExactiveTM OrbitrapTM MS (all Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were trapped on a C18 2 cm * 100 μm precolumn and LC separation was performed on a 50 cm * 75 μm Pepmap100 analytical column (Thermo Fisher Scientific). A gradient from 7% to 40% mobile phase B (79.9% acetonitrile, 20% H2O, 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nL min-1 within 43 minutes was applied, leading to a total run time of 85 minutes including a washing and reequilibration step. Mass resolution on the MS1 level was set to 70000 (at m/z = 200) with a scan range from 400 to 1400 m/z. The top eight abundant peptide ions were chosen for fragmentation at 30% normalized collision energy, and resulting fragments were analyzed in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17500 (at m/z = 200).

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria) running Mascot 2.4 (Matrix Science, UK) was used for protein identification searching against the SwissProt Database (version 01/2018 with 20 258 entries) allowing a mass tolerance of 50ppm for MS spectra and 100mmu for MS/MS spectra, a FDR < 0.01 and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Furthermore, search criteria included carbamidomethylation on cysteins as fixed modification and methionine oxidation as well as N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Molecular classification of medulloblastoma (MB) is well-established and reflects the cell origin and biological properties of tumor cells. However, limited data is available regarding the MB tumor microenvironment. Here, we present a mass spectrometry-based multi-omics pilot study of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) from recurrent MB patients. A group of age-matched patients without a neoplastic disease was used as control cohort. Proteome profiling identified characteristic tumor markers, including FSTL5, ART3, and FMOD, and revealed a strong prevalence of anti-inflammatory and tumor-promoting proteins characteristic for alternatively polarized myeloid cells in MB samples. The up-regulation of ADAMTS1, GAP43 and GPR37 indicated hypoxic conditions in the CSF of MB patients. This notion was independently supported by metabolomics, demonstrating the up-regulation of tryptophan, methionine, serine and lysine, which have all been described to be induced upon hypoxia in CSF. While cyclooxygenase products were hardly detectable, the epoxygenase product and beta-oxidation promoting lipid hormone 12,13-DiHOME was found to be strongly up-regulated. Taken together, the data suggest a vicious cycle driven by autophagy, the formation of 12,13-DiHOME and increased beta-oxidation, thus promoting a metabolic shift supporting the formation of drug resistance and stem cell properties of MB cells. In conclusion, the different omics-techniques clearly synergized and mutually supported a novel model for a specific pathomechanism.

### Keywords
12, Metabolomics, 13-dihome, Eicosanoids, Lipidomics, Cerebrospinal fluid, Multi-omics, Medulloblastoma, Proteomics, Hypoxia, Mass spectrometry, Polarized macrophages, High performance liquid chromatography

### Affiliations
University of Vienna
University of Vienna, Faculty of Chemistry, Department of Analytical Chemistry

### Submitter
Christopher Gerner

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher Gerner
University of Vienna, Faculty of Chemistry, Department of Analytical Chemistry


