### Accession
PXD008744

### Title
Streptococcus agalactiae Panproteome

### Description
Streptococcus agalactiae (Lancefield’s group B Streptococcus, GBS) is a major bacterial species of genus Streptococcus and has medical and veterinary importance by affecting mainly humans (Maione et al., 2005; Johri et al., 2006), cattle (Keefe, 1997) and fish (Mian et al., 2009). The GBS is the most important pathogen for the Nile tilapia, a global commodity of the aquaculture sector, causing outbreaks of septicemia and meningoencephalitis (Hernández et al., 2009; Mian et al., 2009). This study aimed to evaluate the global abundancy of proteins among the main genotypes of GBS isolated from fish identified in Brazil using a label free shotgun liquid chromatography-ultra definition mass spectrometry (LC-UDMSE) approach and to compare the differential expression of proteins identified between isolates from fish and human.

### Sample Protocol
Three biological replicates for each strain were submitted to extraction of whole bacterial lysates. The bacteria cells were harvested by centrifuged at 16,100 x g for 20 min at 4 ºC. The bacterial pellets were washed three times with 10 mL of 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5) and centrifuged under the same condition between each washing. Then, the bacterial pellets were resuspended in 1 mL of lysis buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4 % (w/v) CHAPS, 12.5 mM Tris-HCl and 1.5 % (w/v) dithiothreitol (DTT)) plus 10 µL of protease inhibitor mix (GE HealthCare, Pittsburgh, USA). Afterwards, the bacterial cells were sonicated on ice using cell ultrasonic disruptor (Unique, Indaiatuba, Brazil) for 20 min, worked for 1 min in maximum power (495 W) and stopped for 1 min in a cycle. The lysates were then centrifuged at 21,900 x g for 40 min at 4 ºC and supernatants were collected and submitted to five cycles of centrifugation at 15,000 x g for 30 min at 20 ºC using Vivaspin 500 centrifugal concentrator (GE HealthCare) with a threshold of 3 kDa. Between each cycle was performed the exchange of the lysis buffer for 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.5) to remove detergents from the samples. The extracted proteins were quantified with Qubit 2.0 fluorometer (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, USA) using Qubit protein assay kit (Molecular Probes, Oregon, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

### Data Protocol
Bidimensional nanoESI-HDMSE experiments were conducted using both a 1-h reverse-phase (RP) gradient from 7 % to 40 % (v/v) acetonitrile (0.1 % v/v formic acid) with a simulated 1D analysis and a delivery of 500 nL.min-1 nanoACQUITY UPLC 2D Technology system (Waters). A nanoACQUITY UPLC High Strength Silica T3 1.8 μm, 100 μm × 10 cm column (pH 3) was used in combination with a RP Acquity UPLC Nano Ease XBridge BEH130 C18 5 μm, 300 μm × 50 mm nanoflow column (pH 10). Typical on-column sample loads were 500 ng of total protein digests for each of the 5 fractions (500 ng per fraction/load). The mass spectrometer was operated in resolution mode with a typical m/z resolving power of at least 25,000 Full Width at Half Maximum (FWHM) and an ion mobility cell that was filled with helium gas and a cross-section resolving power at least 40 Ω/Δ Ω. The effective resolution with the conjoined ion mobility was 25,000 FWHM. Analyses were performed using nano-electrospray ionization in positive ion mode nanoESI (+) and a NanoLock-Spray (both from Waters) ionization source. The lock mass channel was sampled every 30 sec. The mass spectrometer was calibrated with an MS/MS spectrum of [Glu1]-Fibrinopeptide B human (Glu-Fib) solution (100 fmol.μL-1) that was delivered through the reference sprayer of the NanoLock-Spray source. The double-charged ion ([M + 2H]2+ = 785.8426) was used for initial single-point calibration, and MS/MS fragment ions of Glu-Fib were used to obtain the final instrument calibration. The multiplexed data-independent acquisition (DIA) scanning with added specificity and selectivity of a non-linear ‘T-wave’ ion mobility (HDMSE) device was performed with a Synapt G2-Si HDMS mass spectrometer (Waters), which was automatically planned to switch between standard MS (3 eV) and elevated collision energies HDMSE (19–45 eV) applied to the transfer ‘T-wave’ collision-induced dissociation cell with nitrogen gas; the trap collision cell was adjusted to 1 eV, using a millisecond scan time that was previously adjusted based on the linear velocity of the chromatographic peak that was delivered through nanoACQUITY UPLC (Waters) to generate a minimum of 20 scan points for each single peak, both in low-energy and high-energy transmission at an orthogonal acceleration time-of-flight (oa-TOF) and a mass range from 50 to 2,000 m/z. Mass spectrometric analysis of tryptic peptides was performed using a mass spectrometer equipped with a T-Wave-IMS device (Waters) in MSE and UDMSE modes following the method previously described (Distler et al., 2014). Stoichiometric measurements based on scouting runs of the integrated total ion account prior to analysis were performed to ensure standardized molar values across all samples. Therefore, the tryptic peptides of each strain were injected with the same amount on the column. The radio frequency offset (MS profile) was adjusted such that the nanoESI-UDMSE data were effectively acquired from 400 to 2,000 m/z by MassLynx v.4.1 software (Waters), ensuring that any masses that were observed in the high energy spectra with less than 400 m/z arose from dissociations in the collision cell.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sa81, Sa16, Gbs, Sa20, Sa53, Sa95, Panproteome

### Affiliations
National Reference Laboratory for Aquatic Animals Diseases Federal University of Minas Gerais Brazil
National Reference Laboratory for Aquatic Animal Diseases
Federal University of Minas Gerais

### Submitter
Henrique César Pereira Figueiredo

### Lab Head
Dr Henrique Cesar Pereira Figueiredo
National Reference Laboratory for Aquatic Animals Diseases Federal University of Minas Gerais Brazil


