### Accession
PXD043141

### Title
Quantitative proteomic analysis and verification identify global protein profiling dynamics in pig saliva during the estrus cycle

### Description
The current estrus detection method is generally time-consuming and has low accuracy. As such, a deeper understanding of the physiological processes during the estrus cycle accelerates the development of estrus detection efficiency and accuracy. This study used label-free acquisition mass spectrometry to explore salivary proteome profiles during the estrus cycle (day −3, day 0, day 3, and day 8) in pigs. A total of 1155 proteins were identified in the label-free analysis, of which 115 were identified as differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) among different groups (P ≤ 0.05). Functional annotation revealed that the DEPs were clustered in calcium ion binding, actin cytoskeleton, and lyase activity. Parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) was applied to verify the relative profiles of protein expression, in which PHB domain-containing protein, growth factor receptor-bound protein 2, elongation factor Tu, carboxypeptidase D, carbonic anhydrase, and trefoil factor 3 were confirmed to be consistent in both label-free and PRM approaches. Comparative proteomic assays on saliva would increase our knowledge of the estrus cycle in sows and provide potential methods for estrus detection.

### Sample Protocol
Saliva, representing four stages of the estrus cycle, was collected every morning before feeding, including ED-3 (proestrus, n=3): 3 days before estrus; ED0 (estrus, n=3): the day of estrus; ED3 (metestrus, n=3): 3 days after estrus; and ED8 (diestrus, n=3): 8 days after estrus. Pigs were curious and chewed the hanging cotton bags wrapping up with absorbent cotton balls. Saliva infiltrated the absorbent cotton ball was squeezed out, released into the sample bag, and then transferred into clean tubes. The samples were subsequently centrifugated at 4000 × g for 5 min at 4°C and the supernatant was mixed with Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Sigma) before storage at −80°C until quantitative proteomics assay.

### Data Protocol
The relative expression levels of proteins among different comparisons were represented by fold changes by comparing the abundance of proteins during the estrus cycle. The data were analyzed using the t test. Statistical significance was set at P < 0.05. Graphics were generated using the GraphPad Prism, version 8.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sow; estrus detection; saliva; quantitative proteomics; differentially expressed proteins; reproduction efficiency;

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Swine and Poultry Breeding Industry/Guangdong Key Laboratory of Animal Breeding and Nutrition/Institute of Animal Science/Guangdong Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Guangzhou 510640, China;
The State Key Laboratory of Livestock and Poultry Breeding/Guangdong Key Laboratory of Animal Breeding and Nutrition/Institute of Animal Science/Guangdong Academy of Agricultural Sciences

### Submitter
Haiyun Xin

### Lab Head
Dr Jianhao Li
State Key Laboratory of Swine and Poultry Breeding Industry/Guangdong Key Laboratory of Animal Breeding and Nutrition/Institute of Animal Science/Guangdong Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Guangzhou 510640, China;


