### Accession
PXD024905

### Title
Pull-down assay to identify proteins interacting with the small protein AtpΘ (Norf1) in Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803

### Description
Small proteins in prokaryotes are usually defined as polypeptides that are shorter than 80 amino acids. In the model cyanobacterium Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 (Synechocystis 6803), the existence of several small proteins was verified previously. Among them, Norf1 (renamed to AtpΘ afterwards) is a small protein that is highly accumulated in darkness or stationary phase. To clarify the functions of AtpΘ, co-immunoprecipitation was performed to identify its interaction partners using FLAG-tagged AtpΘ protein as bait and FLAG-tagged sfGFP as negative control in three biological replicates each.

### Sample Protocol
The reading frames of genes atpT and sfgfp were expressed under the control of the PatpT or PpetJ promoter, respectively, from conjugative vector pVZ322 in the Synechocystis strain PCC 6803-M. Cultures were grown in 800 mL BG11 medium in 1 L Erlenmeyer flasks at an illumination of about 50 µmol photons m-2 s-1 supplemented with respective antibiotics (5 µg/mL gentamicin for the strain expressing AtpΘ and 10 µg/mL kanamycin for the strain expressing sfGFP); for culturing the strain overexpressing sfGFP, an additional 2 µM Cu2+ was supplemented to inhibit the expression of the PpetJ promoter. The expression of AtpΘ-3*FLAG and GFP-3*FLAG was induced by darkness incubation for 12 h (PatpT-atpT construct) or removal of Cu2+ by centrifugation and further cultivation for 12 h (PpetJ-gfp construct). For each pull-down assay, 800 mL of Synechocystis 6803 cells at OD750=1.0 overexpressing recombinant proteins were collected by centrifugation (4000 g, 10 min, room temperature), washed twice with FLAG buffer (50 mM Hepes/NaOH pH 7.0, 5 mM MgCl2, 25 mM CaCl2, 150 mM NaCl, 10 % glycerol) supplemented with Roche cOmplete™ Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, resuspended with 2 mL of the same buffer and lysed using a Precellys 24 homogenizer. The membrane fraction was solubilized by adding n-dodecyl-beta-D-maltoside to a final concentration of 2% (v/v), followed by incubation at 4°C for 1 h. Non-soluble components were removed by centrifugation (20000 g, 30 min, 4 °C) and the supernatant was transferred to a fresh tube. FLAG fusion proteins were purified using ANTI-FLAG M2 Magnetic Beads (Sigma-Aldrich) according to the manufacturer’s instructions (70 μL beads per assay). The enriched proteins were eluted by adding 50 μL of 2×sample buffer (125 mM Tris/HCl pH 6.8, 4% SDS, 20% glycerol, and 0.004% bromophenol blue) to the beads, and heating for 30 min at 50°C. 20 μL of the resulting eluates were loaded on a glycine SDS-PAGE, which was subsequently stained with Coomassie. Then, each gel lane was cut into pieces, destained, desiccated and rehydrated in trypsin as previously described [Bonn et al., Anal. Chem. 2014, 86, 7421–7427]. In gel-digest was incubated at 37 °C overnight and peptides were eluted with water by sonication for 15 min. Samples were loaded on an EASY-nLC II system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with an in-house built 20 cm column (inner diameter 100 µm, outer diameter 360 µm) filled with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ reversed-phase material (3 µm particles, Dr. Maisch GmbH). Elution of peptides was achieved with a nonlinear 77 min gradient from 1 to 99% solvent B (0.1% (v/v) acetic acid in acetonitrile) with a flow rate of 300 nl/min and injected online into an LTQ Orbitrap XL (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The survey scan at a resolution of R=30,000 and 1 x 106 automatic gain control target in the Orbitrap with activated lock mass correction was followed by selection of the five most abundant precursor ions for fragmentation. Singly charged ions as well as ions without detected charge states were excluded from MS/MS analysis. Fragmented ions were dynamically excluded from fragmentation for 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Database search with Sorcerer-SEQUEST 4 (Sage-N Research, Milpitas, USA) was performed against a Synechocystis 6803 database downloaded from Uniprot (Proteome-ID UP000001425) on 11/12/20, which was supplemented with common laboratory contaminants and the sequences of AtpΘ-3*FLAG and GFP-3*FLAG. After adding reverse entries the final database contained 7,102 entries. Database searches were based on a strict trypsin digestion with two missed cleavages permitted. No fixed modifications were considered and oxidation of methionine was considered as variable modification. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set to 10 ppm and the mass tolerance for fragment ions to 0.5 Da. Validation of MS/MS-based peptide and protein identification was performed with Scaffold V4.8.7 (Proteome Software, Portland, USA), and peptide identifications were accepted if they exhibited at least deltaCn scores of greater than 0.1 and XCorr scores of greater than 2.2, 3.3 and 3.75 for doubly, triply and all higher charged peptides, respectively. Protein identifications were accepted if at least 2 unique peptides were identified.

### Publication Abstract
Biological processes in all living cells are powered by ATP, a nearly universal molecule of energy transfer. ATP synthases produce ATP utilizing proton gradients that are usually generated by either respiration or photosynthesis. However, cyanobacteria are unique in combining photosynthetic and respiratory electron transport chains in the same membrane system, the thylakoids. How cyanobacteria prevent the futile reverse operation of ATP synthase under unfavorable conditions pumping protons while hydrolyzing ATP is mostly unclear. Here, we provide evidence that the small protein Atp&#x398;, which is widely conserved in cyanobacteria, is mainly fulfilling this task. The expression of Atp&#x398; becomes induced under conditions such as darkness or heat shock, which can lead to a weakening of the proton gradient. Translational fusions of Atp&#x398; to the green fluorescent protein revealed targeting to the thylakoid membrane. Immunoprecipitation assays followed by mass spectrometry and far western blots identified subunits of ATP synthase as interacting partners of Atp&#x398;. ATP hydrolysis assays with isolated membrane fractions, as well as purified ATP synthase complexes, demonstrated that Atp&#x398; inhibits ATPase activity in a dose-dependent manner similar to the F<sub>0</sub>F<sub>1</sub>-ATP synthase inhibitor N,N-dicyclohexylcarbodimide. The results show that, even in a well-investigated process, crucial new players can be discovered if small proteins are taken into consideration and indicate that ATP synthase activity can be controlled in surprisingly different ways.

### Keywords
Protein pull-down; small protein atpθ; f0f1 atp synthase; synechocystis sp. pcc 6803

### Affiliations
University of Greifswald,
Department for Microbial Proteomics
University of Greifswald, Institute of Microbiology, Department of Microbial Proteomics, Felix-Hausdorff-Str. 8, 17489 Greifswald, Germany

### Submitter
Sandra Maass

### Lab Head
Dr Dörte Becher
University of Greifswald, Institute of Microbiology, Department of Microbial Proteomics, Felix-Hausdorff-Str. 8, 17489 Greifswald, Germany


