### Accession
PXD033535

### Title
Functional characterization of microbial communities from glacial ecosystems

### Description
Glaciers are populated by a large number of microorganisms including bacteria, archaea and microeukaryotes. Several factors such as solar radiation, nutrient availability and water content greatly determine the diversity and abundance of these microbial populations, the type of metabolism and the biogeochemical cycles. In order to study their metabolic potentials, samples of glacial ice were taken from several glacial ecosystems. Microorganisms were analyzed by a polyphasic approach that combines a set of -omic techniques: 16S rRNA sequencing, culturomics and metaproteomics. This combination provides key information about diversity and functions of microbial populations, especially in rare habitats. Several whole essential proteins and enzymes related to metabolism and energy production, recombination and translation were found that demonstrate the existence of cellular activity at subzero temperatures.

### Sample Protocol
Ice cores were soaked in ice-cold 95% ethanol, followed by rinsing with sterile MilliQ water. Then, they were thawed in a sterile container at 4ºC. The meltwater was directly used for cultures. All procedures were performed in a UV-irradiated laminar flow hood using ethanol-sterilized tools and sterilized gloves. To control for laboratory contamination, 1 liter of MilliQ rinse water was subjected to identical analytical procedures. Broth cultures (100 mL) were grown with agitation in Erlenmeyer flasks. The best cultures, in addition to three other uncultivated direct samples, were analyzed by proteomics. The cells were centrifuged (10,000 x g, 15 min), rinsed in PBS and stored at -20ºC. The cultured cells were centrifuged,  lysed and separated by 2-DE electrophoresis. Protein spots from the Coomassie stained 2-DE gels were digested and analyzed by MALDI-TOF/TOF. Spectral data were analyzed to search the NCBIprot database using the Mascot database search algorithm. Combined peptide mass fingerprint and MS/MS ion search modes were used. Given that we are searching for environmental microorganisms, some precautions have been taken to check the results from protein identifications. Only peptides and proteins with confidence scores of at least 66% (p<0.05) were considered positive identifications. We have also considered other main features of proteins in 2D gels such as their molecular weight and isoelectric point to better confirm their identity. Mascot search parameters were tryptic peptides with one missed cleavage, using 80 ppm and 0.3 Da for precursor and fragment tolerances, respectively. Theoretical molecular weight and isoelectric point were calculated for each protein with the Compute pI/MW tool (ExPASy, Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Switzerland).

### Data Protocol
Spectral data were analyzed to search the NCBIprot database using the Mascot database search algorithm. Combined peptide mass fingerprint and MS/MS ion search modes were used.  Theoretical molecular weight and isoelectric point were calculated for each protein with the Compute pI/MW tool (ExPASy, Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Switzerland).

### Publication Abstract
Over the last years, perennial ice deposits located within caves have awakened interest as places to study microbial communities since they represent unique cryospheric archives of climate change. Since the beginning of the twentieth century, the temperature has gradually increased, and it is estimated that by the end of this century the increase in average temperature could be around 4.0&#xb0;C. In this context of global warming the ice deposits of the Pyrenean caves are undergoing a significant regression. Among this type of caves, that on the Cotiella Massif in the Southern Pyrenees is one of the southernmost studied in Europe. These types of caves house microbial communities which have so far been barely explored, and therefore their study is necessary. In this work, the microbial communities of the Pyrenean ice cave A294 were identified using metabarcoding techniques. In addition, research work was carried out to analyze how the age and composition of the ice affect the composition of the bacterial and microeukaryotic populations. Finally, the <i>in vivo</i> effect of climate change on the cellular machinery that allow microorganisms to live with increasing temperatures has been studied using proteomic techniques.

### Keywords
2de, Metaproteomics, Maldi-tof ms, 2-dige, Culturomics

### Affiliations
Microbial Evolution Laboratory, Centro de Astrobiologia (CSIC-INTA), 28850 Torrejón de Ardoz, Madrid, Spain
ES (+34) 915206455

### Submitter
Eva Garcia

### Lab Head
Dr Cristina Cid Sachez
Microbial Evolution Laboratory, Centro de Astrobiologia (CSIC-INTA), 28850 Torrejón de Ardoz, Madrid, Spain


