### Accession
PXD011358

### Title
Secretomics of the Staphylococcus aureus Type VII protein secretion system

### Description
The type VII protein secretion system (T7SS) is conserved across Staphylococcus aureus strains and plays important roles in virulence and interbacterial competition. To date only one T7SS substrate protein, encoded in a subset of strains, has been functionally characterized. Here, using an unbiased proteomic approach, we identify TspA as a further T7SS substrate.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of culture supernatants for proteomic analysis. S. aureus strains were grown overnight in 2ml TSB after which cells were harvested, washed three times with 10ml of RPMI medium, resuspended in 2ml of RPMI and used to inoculate 200 ml RPMI in 2L baffled flasks. Cultures were grown at 37°C with vigorous agitation until an OD600 of 1.0 was reached, after which cultures were cooled to 4°C, cells pelleted and supernatant proteins precipitated with 6% trichloroacetic acid (TCA) on ice overnight. The precipitated protein samples were harvested by centrifugation (15 min at 18000 g) re-suspended in 80% acetone (-20oC) and washed twice with 80% acetone. Pellets were air dried at room temperature and transferred to the mass-spectrometry facility for proteomic analysis.  Mass spectrometry data analysis and label-free quantitation Sample preparation and mass spectrometry analysis was performed similar to previously described work60, 61, 62.  Precipitated proteins were re-dissolved in 1% sodium 3-[(2-methyl-2-undecyl-1,3-dioxolan-4-yl)methoxy]-1-propanesulfonate (commercially available as RapiGest, Waters), 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 1 mM TCEP. Cysteines were alkylated by addition of 20 mM Iodoacetamide and incubation for 20 min at 25°C in the dark and the reaction quenched by addition of 20 mM DTT. Samples were diluted to 0.1% Rapigest with 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0 and Trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega) was added at a 1:50 ratio. Proteins were digested overnight at 37°C under constant shaking.  Samples from four biological replicates (0.5 μg of digest for the secretome analyses) were injected in an interleaved manner onto a 2 cm x 100 μm trap column and separated on a 50 cm x 75 μm EasySpray Pepmap C18 reversed-phase column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) on a Dionex 3000 Ultimate RSLC. Peptides were eluted by a linear 3-hour gradient of 95% A/5% B to 35% B (A: H2O, 0.1% Formic acid (FA); B: 80% ACN, 0.08% FA) at 300 nl/min into a LTQ Orbitrap Velos (Thermo-Fisher Scientific). Data was acquired using a data-dependent “top 20” method, dynamically choosing the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan (400-1600 Th, 60,000 resolution, AGC target value 106). Precursors above the threshold of 2000 counts were isolated within a 2 Th window and fragmented by CID in the LTQ Velos using normalised collision energy of 35 and an activation time of 10 ms. Dynamic exclusion was defined by a list size of 500 features and exclusion duration of 60 s. Lock mass was used and set to 445.120025 for ions of polydimethylcyclosiloxane (PCM).

### Data Protocol
Label-free quantitation was performed using MaxQuant 1.5.7.4. Data were searched against the Uniprot database of S. aureus NCTC8325 (downloaded on 29.03.17) containing 2,889 sequences and a list of common contaminants in proteomics experiments using the following settings: enzyme Trypsin/P, allowing for 2 missed cleavage, fixed modifications were carbamidomethyl (C), variable modifications were set to Acetyl (Protein N-term), Deamidation (NQ) and Oxidation (M). MS/MS tolerance was set to 0.5 Da, precursor tolerance was set to 6 ppm. Peptide and Protein FDR was set to 0.01, minimal peptide length was 7, and one unique peptide was required. Re-quantify and retention time alignment (2 min) were enabled. If no intensities were detected in one condition and the other condition had intensities in at least in 3 out of 4 replicates, values were imputed in Perseus v1.5.1.1 using default parameters65. A student’s t-test (two-tailed, homoscedastic) was performed on the LFQ intensities and only proteins with p<0.05 and a fold-change >2-fold were considered significant.

### Publication Abstract
The type VII protein secretion system (T7SS) is conserved across <i>Staphylococcus aureus</i> strains and plays important roles in virulence and interbacterial competition. To date, only one T7SS substrate protein, encoded in a subset of <i>S. aureus</i> genomes, has been functionally characterized. Here, using an unbiased proteomic approach, we identify TspA as a further T7SS substrate. TspA is encoded distantly from the T7SS gene cluster and is found across all <i>S. aureus</i> strains as well as in <i>Listeria</i> and Enterococci. Heterologous expression of TspA from <i>S. aureus</i> strain RN6390 indicates its C-terminal domain is toxic when targeted to the <i>Escherichia coli</i> periplasm and that it depolarizes the cytoplasmic membrane. The membrane-depolarizing activity is alleviated by coproduction of the membrane-bound TsaI immunity protein, which is encoded adjacent to <i>tspA</i> on the <i>S. aureus</i> chromosome. Using a zebrafish hindbrain ventricle infection model, we demonstrate that the T7SS of strain RN6390 promotes bacterial replication in vivo, and deletion of <i>tspA</i> leads to increased bacterial clearance. The toxin domain of TspA is highly polymorphic and <i>S. aureus</i> strains encode multiple <i>tsaI</i> homologs at the <i>tspA</i> locus, suggestive of additional roles in intraspecies competition. In agreement, we demonstrate TspA-dependent growth inhibition of RN6390 by strain COL in the zebrafish infection model that is alleviated by the presence of TsaI homologs.

### Keywords
T7ss, Secretion, Secretome, Staphylococcus aureus

### Affiliations
Prof Matthias Trost Chair of Proteomics Newcastle University Faculty of Medical Sciences Institute for Cell and Molecular Biosciences Framlington Place Newcastle-upon-Tyne NE2 4HH, UK  Tel. ++44 (0) 191 2087009 Email: matthias.trost@ncl.ac.uk http://www.trostlab.org
Newcastle University

### Submitter
Matthias Trost

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Trost
Prof Matthias Trost Chair of Proteomics Newcastle University Faculty of Medical Sciences Institute for Cell and Molecular Biosciences Framlington Place Newcastle-upon-Tyne NE2 4HH, UK  Tel. ++44 (0) 191 2087009 Email: matthias.trost@ncl.ac.uk http://www.trostlab.org


