### Accession
PXD034456

### Title
Serum metabolomics and proteomics to study the antihyperten-2 sive effect of Tenebrio molitor extracts

### Description
This study aimed at integrating metabolomics and proteomics data for a comprehensive view of the molecular targets of intervention of protein extracts from Tenebrio molitor in treating hypertension. Serum samples from spontaneously hypertensive rats and Wistar Kyoto rats were analyzed using a quantitative metabolomics and label-free proteomics approach based on liquid chromatography coupled with high resolution mass spectrometry (LC-HRMS). Among deregulated metabolites and proteins in hypertensive rats, we found 15 metabolites and 17 proteins that were restored by supplementation with Tenebrio molitor protein extract. The combination of metabolomics and proteomics provided useful data to uncover the molecular targets of intervention and the underlying functional mechanism of Tenebrio molitor protein extract in an animal model such as spontaneously hypertensive rats. The results suggested that Tenebrio molitor supplementation could effectively treat hypertension, partially by regulating proteins and molecules mainly involved in biological pathways associated to angiotensinogen-angiotensin, Serin protease inhibitors, kallikrein–kinin, reactive oxygen scavenging, and lipid peroxidation.

### Sample Protocol
Serum samples were thawed on ice-cold water and then the total protein content was calculated with the Lowry assay. Removal of albumin was achieved by using TCA/acetone precipitation. An aliquot containing 500 µg of total proteins was diluted by adding a suitable amount of water to a final volume of 50 µL. Subsequently, 8 volumes (i.e. 400 µL) of ice-cold TCA/acetone (10%, v/v), were added to the diluted serum samples for albumin removal. Samples were vortexed and incubated at -20°C over-night. Samples were then centrifuged at 16,000 × g for 5 min at 4°C to achieve precipitation of highly abundant proteins and the supernatant was discarded. The protein pellet was washed by adding 1 mL of ice-cold acetone, and then samples were vortexed and centrifuged again at 16,000 × g for 5 min at 4°C. The supernatant was discarded and the pellet was dissolved in 60 µL of 8 M urea containing 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8. Reduction of disulfide bonds was carried out by adding 20 µL of 100 mM DTT and incubating samples for 1 h at room temperature (DTT final concentration equal to 25 mM). Alkylation of reduced cysteines was achieved by adding 20 µL of 275 mM IAA and incubating samples for 45 min at room temperature in the dark (IAA final concentration equal to 55 mM). Then, 375 µL of 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8 were added to each sample and protein digestion was performed by adding 2.5 μg of sequencing grade modified trypsin and incubating samples at 37°C over-night. After protein digestion, samples were acidified by adding formic acid to a final concentration of 1% to stop the reaction. Peptides were loaded on a BioPure C18 spin column to eliminate salts. After activation with 400 µL of acetonitrile, columns were equilibrated twice with 400 µL of water containing 0.1% formic acid (v/v) and then peptides were loaded. After two washing steps with water containing 0.1% formic acid (v/v), digested peptides were eluted twice with 100 μL of 75% ACN in water (v/v) containing 0.1% formic acid (v/v). Purified digested peptides were dried, suspended with 50 μL of 5% ACN in water (v/v) containing 0.1% formic acid (v/v) and transferred to an autosampler vial for the LC-HRMS/MS analysis in DDA acquisition mode. Serum digests were analyzed by means of an untargeted proteomics approach based on LC-HRMS/MS and label free quantification. The chromatographic separation was achieved using a reversed phase C18 column (150 × 2.1 mm, 2.6 μm) kept at 30°C. Mobile phases were water (A) and ACN (B), both containing 0.1% formic acid (v/v). The chromatographic gradient was: 0–1 min, 2.5% B; 1–20 min, 2.5–30% B; 20–24 min, 30–50% B; 24–26 min, 50–95% B; 26–30 min, 95% B; 30–30.5 min, 95–2.5% B; 30.5–35 min, 2.5% B. Injection volume was 5 μL and flow rate was 0.2 mL/min. Data were acquired in full-scan data-dependent mode. Full scan spectra were ac-quired at a resolving power of 70,000 full width at half maximum (FWHM) at 200 m/z.  Mass range was between 300 and 2000 m/z, automatic gain control target was set to 3×10^6 ions and inject time was set to 250 ms. Data-dependent fragmentation spectra of the four most intense ions were acquired at a resolution of 17,500, using an isolation window of 1.6 m/z, automatic gain control target was set to 2×10^5, inject time was set to 120 ms, normalized collision energy set to 27, and dynamic exclusion of 30 sec. Source parameters were as follows: sheath gas flow rate was 25 arbitrary units, auxiliary gas flow rate was 10 arbitrary units. Capillary temperature and heater temperature were set to 325°C. The capillary voltage was 3.0 kV in positive polarity electrospray, and the S-lens RF level was 55 V.

### Data Protocol
LC-HRMS/MS data were processed using Proteome Discoverer software (version 2.1) and analyzed with SEQUEST. Protein identification settings were: enzyme speci-ficity set to trypsin with up to 2 allowed missed cleavages, peptide mass tolerance set to 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance set to 0.05 Da. Oxidation of methionine and acetylation of N-terminus were set as variable modifications, while carbamidomethyl-ation of cysteines was set as fixed modification. Searches were done using the Rattus norvegicus database (UP000002494) and Per-colator was used to assess the confidence of peptide and protein identification. Pep-tides were considered identified with a maximum allowed false discovery rate of 5%, and proteins were considered identified when at least two independent peptides with a confidence level of 95% were present. According to the principle of maximum parsi-mony, proteins were grouped into protein families. Label-free quantification was achieved using the precursor area detector function and only unique peptides were used for relative quantification. Protein area values were exported into an Excel spreadsheet for ANOVA.

### Publication Abstract
Hypertension is the leading risk factor for premature death worldwide and significantly contributes to the development of all major cardiovascular disease events. The management of high blood pressure includes lifestyle changes and treatment with antihypertensive drugs. Recently, it was demonstrated that a diet supplemented with <i>Tenebrio molitor</i> (TM) extracts is useful in the management of numerous pathologies, including hypertension. This study is aimed at unveiling the underlying mechanism and the molecular targets of intervention of TM dietary supplementation in hypertension treatment by means of proteomics and metabolomics techniques based on liquid chromatography coupled with high-resolution mass spectrometry. We demonstrate that serum proteome and metabolome of spontaneously hypertensive rats are severely altered with respect to their normotensive counterparts. Additionally, our results reveal that a diet enriched with TM extracts restores the expression of 15 metabolites and 17 proteins mainly involved in biological pathways associated with blood pressure maintenance, such as the renin-angiotensin and kallikrein-kinin systems, serin protease inhibitors, reactive oxygen scavenging, and lipid peroxidation. This study provides novel insights into the molecular pathways that may underlie the beneficial effects of TM, thus corroborating that TM could be proposed as a helpful functional food supplement in the treatment of hypertension.

### Keywords
Functional food; multi-omics; blood pressure; shr rats; insect protein supplementation

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular and Developmental Medicine, University of Siena, Italy
Istituto Zooprofilattico Sperimentale delle Venezie

### Submitter
Roberto Stella

### Lab Head
Dr Federica Pessina
Department of Molecular and Developmental Medicine, University of Siena, Italy


