### Accession
PXD024873

### Title
Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803(iron and/or copper starvation)-LC MS/MS

### Description
The protein abundance of Synechocystis in response to the given copper-iron combination was examined, then followed by comparative proteomic analyses to reveal the proteins associated with copper and iron stress. These data would provide a theoretical basis for understanding the relationship between copper and iron in cyanobacteria at the protein level and shed light on the role of these two metal elements in energy metabolism and biomass accumulation of cyanobacteria.

### Sample Protocol
To deplete the stored copper and iron in the cells to meet the set concentration gradients, the Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 were cultured in BG11 medium (with copper sulfate and ferric ammonium citrate removed from the normal recipe) lacking Fe and Cu for 5 days under normal conditions as mentioned below: light intensity = 50 μmol photons m-2 s-1, light/dark period = 12 h/12 h, and supply of filtered air bubbled at 30°C. The method of determining the abundance of copper and iron refers to other reports. Then the strain was transferred to normal BG11 medium supplemented with 4 different combinations of copper and iron concentrations for adaptation and maintained in exponential growth phase for 3 days: control group (337.5 nM copper and 18.75 μM iron); Fe-starvation group (0 nM iron and 337.5 nM copper); Cu-starvation group (0 nM copper and 18.75 μM iron) and Cu-Fe dual starvation group (0 nM copper and 0 nM copper). Three replicates were performed for each group. Proteins were extracted from cyanobacteria using the SDT [4% w/v sodium dodecul sulfate (SDS), 100 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.6, 0.1 M dithiothreitol (DTT)] cleavage method, and total protein levels were quantified using the bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA) method. Each sample was trypsinized using the filter-aided proteome preparation (FASP) method and the peptides were quantified (OD280). The peptides (100 μg) of each sample were labeled according to the instructions of the TMT labeling kit (Thermo, USA). The TMT-labeled peptides of each group were mixed in equal amounts and fractionated using the high pH reverse phase peptide fractionation kit (Thermo, USA). Each fractionated sample was separated using high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) (Thermo scientific, USA). Buffer A consisted of 0.1% formic acid solution and buffer B contained 0.1% formic acid-84% acetonitrile solution. The column was equilibrated with 95% buffer A. Samples were separated using a loading column (nanoViper C18, Thermo Scientific Acclaim PepMap100, 100 μm × 2 cm,) and an analytical column (Thermo scientific EASY column, 10cm, ID75μm, 3μm, C18-A2). The flow rate was set to 300 nL/min. The separated samples were analyzed using Q-Exactive MS under positive ion mode. The scanning range of the precursor ion was 3001800 m/z, AGC (automatic gain control) target was 1×10-6, maximum IT was 50 ms, and dynamic exclusion time was 60.0 s. Several 20 fragment maps (MS2 scan, MS2 activation type: HCD) were collected after each full scan. The isolation window was set to 2 m/z. Normalized collision energy was 30eV and underfill was 0.1%.

### Data Protocol
The MS data was identified and quantitatively analyzed using Mascot ver. 2.2 (Matrix Science) and Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo, USA). The maximum missed cleavage was set to 2; peptide mass tolerance and fragment mass tolerance was set to ± 20 ppm and 0.1 Da, respectively. Peptide false discovery rate (FDR) was set at < 0.01. Protein quantification was performed based on the median of only the unique peptides of the protein. Differentially expressed proteins were filtered using a fold change ≥ 1.2 and ≤ 0.83, and P value < 0.05 (paired t-test or one-way ANOVA). Blast2GO ver. 5.2 (BioBam, Spain) was used to annotate Gene Ontology (GO) function entries for all identified proteins, and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) Automatic Annotation Server (KAAS) was used to allocate the differentially expressed proteins to the biological pathways. GO function and each KEGG pathway protein were analyzed for the significance of enrichment using Fisher’s exact test. The paired t-tests were performed on the corrected ratios (the intensity of the fragmented tag in a sample to the intensity of the fragmented tag in the control sample) to identify the proteins and their proteomic associations after Fe or Cu starvations. The Cochran-Mantel-Haenszel tests for repeated 2×2 tests of independence were performed to identify the proteins under the conditional association of copper and iron. All tests were performed and verified using SPSS ver. 19.0.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Starvation, Synechocystis sp. pcc 6803, Proteome, Iron, Copper

### Affiliations
Yantai Institute of Coastal Zone Research, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Yantai, 264003, Shandong, China

### Submitter
Zhang-he Zhen

### Lab Head
Dr Zhang-He Zhen
Yantai Institute of Coastal Zone Research, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Yantai, 264003, Shandong, China


