### Accession
PXD040018

### Title
Interactome of activated BAX in Senescent Cells.

### Description
We aimed to identify the interactome of activated BAX in the mitochondria of senescent cells. Our goal was to understand which factors can directly mediate the formation of BAX pores in senescent cells.

### Sample Protocol
Determination of activated BAX interactome in mitochondria from senescent cells Preparation of tissue cultures and mitochondria isolation: Cellular senescence was induced with 200 nM doxorubicin for 24 hours and developed for 9 days. A small fraction of proliferative and senescent cells was pelleted and kept for mass spectrometry analysis (total cell control samples). The remaining cells were resuspended in mitochondria isolation buffer (MIB: 20 mM HEPES pH 7.6, 220 mM mannitol, 70 mM sucrose, 1 mM EDTA) and homogenized with Dounce homogenizer followed by centrifugation at 850 × g for 5 min, 4°C. Crude mitochondria were pelleted at 10 000 × g for 5 min at 4°C and washed once more. 50 µg of mitochondria were kept for further mass spectrometry analysis (crude mitochondria control samples).   Co-immunoprecipitation of activated BAX interactors. 400 µg of mitochondria were resuspended in ice-cold co-IP buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 7.6, 220 mM mannitol, 70 mM sucrose, 1 mM EDTA, 1% CHAPS (w/v), protease inhibitor cocktail), lysed on ice for 30 min and cleared from insoluble material at 10 000 x g, 30 min, 4°C. 1 µg of anti-BAX6A7 antibody (NBP1-28566, Novus Biologicals) was immobilized on Protein G-coupled DynabeadsTM (Invitrogen). Beads were washed twice with co-IP buffer and combined with cleared mitochondrial extracts. Activated BAX complexes were immunoprecipitated overnight at 4°C with gentle rocking. Beads were washed three times with ice-cold co-IP buffer and twice with CHAPS-free co-IP buffer.  On beads protein digestion: Beads were resuspended in the 2M urea, 5 mM dithiothreitol, 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate, 50 ng Trypsin (Promega) and incubated for 30 min at room temperature with gentle agitation. Samples were mixed with 40 mM chloroacetamide and incubated for 30 min at room temperature with gentle agitation. Supernatants with eluted proteins were collected. 50 ng of LysC (Promega) was added to protein eluates and supplemented with 100 ng of Trypsin. Proteins were digested overnight at 37°C with vigorous shaking. Peptides were desalted on the Affinisep SPE-Disks-C18 and separated by liquid chromatography.   Processing of the control samples: Cell and mitochondrial pellets were resuspended in 8M Urea, 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate, protease inhibitor cocktail. Chromatin was degraded in a water bath sonicator (10 min, cycle 30/30 sec), followed by benzonase HC nuclease treatment. Insoluble material was removed by centrifugation at 20 000 x g, 4°C. 50 µg of proteins was reduced for 1h in 5 mM dithiothreitol and incubated with 40 mM chloroacetamide for 30 min. Samples were subjected to sequential LysC and Trypsin digestion (1:75 enzyme to substrate ratio, overnight, 37°C). Peptides were desalted on the Affinisep SPE-Disks-C18 and separated by liquid chromatography.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry and sample analysis: The measurements were performed at the Proteomic Core Facility of IMol Polish Academy of Sciences using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 nano-LC system coupled to a Q-Exactive HF-X via an EASY-Spray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The data were processed with MaxQuant v.1.617.0, and the peptides were identified from the MS/MS spectra searched against Human Reference Proteome UP00000564  using the built-in Andromeda search engine. No quantification method has been applied. Interactor candidates have been further curated accordingly to the defined criteria.

### Publication Abstract
Senescent cells drive age-related tissue dysfunction partially through the induction of a chronic senescence-associated secretory phenotype (SASP)<sup>1</sup>. Mitochondria are major regulators of the SASP; however, the underlying mechanisms have not been elucidated<sup>2</sup>. Mitochondria are often essential for apoptosis, a cell fate distinct from cellular senescence. During apoptosis, widespread mitochondrial outer membrane permeabilization (MOMP) commits a cell to die<sup>3</sup>. Here we find that MOMP occurring in a subset of mitochondria is a feature of cellular senescence. This process, called minority MOMP (miMOMP), requires BAX and BAK macropores enabling the release of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) into the cytosol. Cytosolic mtDNA in turn activates the cGAS-STING pathway, a major regulator of the SASP. We find that inhibition of MOMP in vivo decreases inflammatory markers and improves healthspan in aged mice. Our results reveal that apoptosis and senescence are regulated by similar mitochondria-dependent mechanisms and that sublethal mitochondrial apoptotic stress is a major driver of the SASP. We provide proof-of-concept that inhibition of miMOMP-induced inflammation may be a therapeutic route to improve healthspan.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Mtdna, Cellular senescence, Bax

### Affiliations
Institute of Mitochondrial Disease and Ageing, Medical Faculty, University of Cologne
IMol Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland

### Submitter
Karolina Szczepanowska

### Lab Head
Dr Karolina Szczepanowska
IMol Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland


