### Accession
PXD041001

### Title
Arabidopsis thaliana polyQ - interactors

### Description
We've demonstrated that plants are resistant to the overexpression of polyglutamine (polyQ) extended proteins that cause protein aggregation and Huntington's disease in human cells. To investigate which proteins, maintain polyQ proteins correctly folded and  avoid polyQ aggregates in plant cells. Our goal is to identify therapeutic candidate proteins that can potentially be used to treat Huntington's disease in human cell models.

### Sample Protocol
For label-free quantitative proteomics, 7-day-old Q28 and Q69 seedlings were used. Seedlings were lysed in lysis buffer (1% Triton X-100, 50 mM Tris–HCl pH 8.0) supplemented with 1X plant protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma) and 25 mM N-ethylmaleimide. Samples were homogenized by vortexing and centrifuged at 13,000 x g for 10 min at 4 oC. Then the protein lysates were incubated for 1 hour with anti-GFP antibody (ImmunoKontakt (Amsbio), TP401, 1:500). As a co-immunoprecipitation control, the same amount of protein lysates was incubated with IgG (Abcam, ab46540) in parallel. After antibody incubation, samples were incubated with 50 μl of μMACS Micro Beads for 1 hour at 4 °C with overhead shaking. Then, samples were loaded to pre-cleared μMACS column (#130-042-701). After loading samples, beads were washed three times with washing buffer 1 (50 mM Tris (pH 7.5) buffer containing 150 mM NaCl, 5% glycerol and 0.05% Triton) and then washed five times with washing buffer 2 (50 mM Tris (pH 7.5) and 150 mM NaCl). Then, in-column trypsin digestion was performed with trypsin digestion solution (7.5 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 2 M urea, 1 mM DTT and 5 ng ml−1 trypsin). Trypsinazed samples were eluted with two times 50 μl of elution buffer (2 M urea, 7.5 mM Ambic, and 10 mM chloroacetamide). Then, samples were incubated overnight at room temperature with shaking in the dark. Samples were stage-tipped the next day for label-free quantitative proteomics.

### Data Protocol
All samples were analyzed on a Q-Exactive Plus (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer coupled to an EASY nLC 1200 UPLC (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded with solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) onto an in-house packed analytical column (50 cm × 75 μm I.D., filled with 2.7 μm Poroshell EC120 C18 (Agilent)). Peptides were chromatographically separated at a constant flow rate of 250 nl min−1  (solvent A: 0.1% formic acid) using the 60-min method: 3–5% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile) within 1 min, 5–30% solvent B within 40 min, 30–50% solvent B within 8 min and 50–95% solvent B within 1 min, followed by washing and column equilibration. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode. The MS1 scan was acquired from 300 to 1,750 m/z at a resolution of 70,000 with a maximum injection time of 20 ms. The top 10 most abundant peptides were isolated with 1.8 Th and subjected to higher collisional dissociation fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 27.  Automatic gain control target was set to 5 × 105 charges. Product ions were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 35,000 with maximum injection time 110 ms.  All mass spectrometric raw data were processed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.8) using default parameters as described above. LFQ was performed using the LFQ mode and MaxQuant default settings. Match between run between replicates was activated.  MS2 spectra were searched against the Arabidopsis thaliana Uniprot database, including a list of common contaminants. False discovery rates (FDRs) on protein and peptide–spectrum match (PSM) level were estimated by the target-decoy approach to 0.01% (Protein FDR) and 0.01% (PSM FDR) respectively. The minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and carbamidomethylation at cysteine residues was considered as a fixed modification. Oxidation (M) and Acetyl (Protein N-term) were included as variable modifications. All downstream analyses were carried out on LFQ values with Perseus (version 1.6.1.1) as follows protein groups flagged as “reverse”, “potential contaminant” or “only identified by site” were removed from the Id list. LFQ values were log2 transformed. Missing values were replaced using an imputation-based approach (random sampling from a normal distribution using a down shift of 1.8 and a width of 0.3). Significant differences between the groups were assessed using Student’s t-test. A permutation-based FDR approach was applied to correct for multiple testing. Data visualization was done with Instant Clue.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Polyq-extended proteins, Huntington's disease

### Affiliations
CECAD Research Center
CECAD Forschungszentrum, Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 26, 50931 Köln

### Submitter
Prerana Wagle

### Lab Head
Dr David Vilchez
CECAD Forschungszentrum, Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 26, 50931 Köln


