### Accession
PXD028071

### Title
Deamidation drives molecular aging of the SARS-CoV-2 spike receptor-binding motif

### Description
The spike is the main protein component of the SARS-CoV-2 virion surface. The spike receptor-binding motif mediates recognition of the hACE2 receptor, a critical infection step, and is the preferential target for spike-neutralizing antibodies. Post-translational modifications of the spike receptor-binding motif can modulate viral infectivity and immune response. We studied the spike protein searching for asparagine deamidation, a spontaneous event that leads to the appearance of aspartic and isoaspartic residues, affecting both the protein backbone and its charge. We used computational prediction and biochemical experiments to identify five deamidation hotspots in the SARS-CoV-2 spike. Asparagine residues 481 and 501 from the receptor-binding motif deamidate with a half-time of 16.5 and 123 days at 37 °C, respectively. Deamidation is significantly slowed down at 4 °C, pointing at a strong dependence of spike molecular aging on the environmental conditions. We demonstrate that topological constraints drive the conservation of deamidation hotspots among Sarbecoviruses spike proteins. Deamidation of the spike receptor-binding motif decreases the equilibrium constant for binding to the hACE2 receptor more than 3.5-fold, yet its high conservation pattern suggests some positive effect on viral fitness. We propose a model for deamidation of the full SARS-CoV-2 virion that illustrates how deamidation of the spike receptor-binding motif leads to the accumulation on the virion surface of a non-negligible chemically diverse spike population in a timescale of days. Our findings provide a mechanism for molecular aging of the spike, with significant consequences for understanding virus infectivity and vaccine development.

### Sample Protocol
Purified RBD sample were diluted to 1 mg/ml in buffer 50 mM Tris-HCl, 150 mM NaCl and 5% v/v glycerol, pH 7.4, filtered with a pore size of 0.22 μm for minimizing bacterial growth and added in sealed SafeSel vials that were further sealed with parafilm. Samples were incubated at 4 and 37°C. Independent aliquots were taken at different times for deamidation quantitation. Digestion was done at pH 5.7 to avoid extensive deamidation during sample processing. Protein samples were diluted 1:10 in 100mM ammonium acetate (Fluka), pH 5.7, containing 10% v/v acetonitrile (Fisher Scientific). Disulfide bonds were reduced with 1 mM DTT (Sigma) and 1 mM TCEP (Invitrogen) for 30 min at 37°C. Proteins were first digested with trypsin (Promega) for 1 h at 37°C (sample to enzyme ratio 1:20) and then with GluC (Promega) (1:40 ratio) for additional 3h at 37°C. The peptides were cleaned up using an OASIS HLB μElution Plate (Waters). An UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano LC system (Dionex) fitted with a trapping cartridge (μ-Precolumn C18 PepMap 100, 5μm, 300 μm i.d. x 5 mm, 100 Å) and an analytical column (nanoEase™ M/Z HSS T3 column 75 μm x 250 mm C18, 1.8 μm, 100 Å, Waters) was used, coupled directly to an Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo). Peptide samples were loaded onto the pre-column with a constant flow rate of 30 μl/min for 6 minusing 0.05% v/v trifluoroacetic acid in water. Subsequently, peptides were eluted via the analytical column (Solvent A: 0.1% formic acid in water) with a constant flow of 0.3 μl/min, with increasing percentage of solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile). The peptides were introduced into the Fusion Lumos via a Pico-Tip Emitter 360 μm OD x 20 μm ID; 10 μm tip (New Objective) and an applied spray voltage of 2.4 kV. The capillary temperature was set to 275°C. Full mass scan (MS1) was acquired with a mass range of 375-2000 m/z in profile mode in the orbitrap with resolution of 120000. The filling time was set at a maximum of 50 ms. Data dependent acquisition (DDA) was performed with the resolution of the Orbitrap set to 30000, with a fill time of 86 ms. A normalized collision energy of 34 was applied. MS2 data were acquired in profile mode.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were searched against the Uniprot human (75,069 entries, June 2020) and the SARS-CoV-2 (14 entries, June 2020) reference proteome using MaxQuant 1.6.14.0. The default parameters were used with the following adjustments: Deamidation of Asn and Gln, ammonia-loss at Asn were set as variable modifications, as well as oxidation of Met and acetylation of protein N-termini. The minimum peptide length was adjusted to 6 and the maximum peptide mass to 8000 Da. For digestion Trypsin/P and GluC were enabled and the missed cleavages were set to 3. Label-free quantification was enabled, with Fast LFQ disabled. IBAQ calculations were enabled. The minimum number of unique peptides was set to 1.The Maxquant output msms.txt was imported into Skyline 20.2.0.286. Precursor ion chromatograms were extracted and the values of the peak areas were exported for further calculations. MS1 spectra were inspected manually using Thermo Xcalibur Qual browser 4.2.28.14.

### Publication Abstract
The spike protein is the main protein component of the SARS-CoV-2 virion surface. The spike receptor-binding motif mediates recognition of the human angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 receptor, a critical step in infection, and is the preferential target for spike-neutralizing antibodies. Posttranslational modifications of the spike receptor-binding motif have been shown to modulate viral infectivity and host immune response, but these modifications are still being explored. Here we studied asparagine deamidation of the spike protein, a spontaneous event that leads to the appearance of aspartic and isoaspartic residues, which affect both the protein backbone and its charge. We used computational prediction and biochemical experiments to identify five deamidation hotspots in the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein. Asparagine residues 481 and 501 in the receptor-binding motif deamidate with a half-life of 16.5 and 123&#xa0;days at 37 &#xb0;C, respectively. Deamidation is significantly slowed at 4 &#xb0;C, indicating a strong dependence of spike protein molecular aging on environmental conditions. Deamidation of the spike receptor-binding motif decreases the equilibrium constant for binding to the human angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 receptor more than 3.5-fold, yet its high conservation pattern suggests some positive effect on viral fitness. We propose a model for deamidation of the full SARS-CoV-2 virion illustrating how deamidation of the spike receptor-binding motif could lead to the accumulation on the virion surface of a nonnegligible chemically diverse spike population in a timescale of days. Our findings provide a potential mechanism for molecular aging of the spike protein with significant consequences for understanding virus infectivity and vaccine development.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Rbd, Deamidation, Molecular aging

### Affiliations
Instituto de Nanobiotecnologıa (NANOBIOTEC), UBA-CONICET-Universidad de Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina
European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Heidelberg, Meyerhofstraße 1, 69117 Heidelberg, Germany

### Submitter
Jennifer Schwarz

### Lab Head
Dr Leonardo G.Alonso
Instituto de Nanobiotecnologıa (NANOBIOTEC), UBA-CONICET-Universidad de Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina


