### Accession
PXD038551

### Title
De novo BCR-ABL linear kinase motifs revealed by phosphoproteomics in yeast

### Description
Protein tyrosine phosphorylation (pY) is central to many cellular signaling pathways. Deregulation of pY can lead to malignancies such as leukemia. Thus, assigning kinase-substrate relations is imperative to understand disease alterations. However, such efforts are complicated by kinase redundancy, overlapping specificity and magnitude differences in enzymatic activity. BCR/ABL, the predominant oncogene in leukemia, drives malignant transformation by deregulated tyrosine kinase activity.  In this study, phosphorylation activity and specificity of human ABL1 and BCR/ABL have been examined in yeast by state-of-the-art phosphoproteomics. Linear sequence motif scores were generated and used for cross-kingdom (fungi to metazoa) phosphorylation analysis. Phosphoproteomic analysis of ABL1 and BCR/ABL yielded a high-confidence pY-dataset of 1186 peptides covering 1127 sites on 821 proteins. Motif scores generated from this dataset allow for examination of ABL1 and BCR/ABL kinase activity in human cell lines, and clearly identified BCR/ABL p210 in the chronic myeloid leukemia cell line K562. This cross-kingdom approach offers valuable insights into the human phosphoproteome.

### Sample Protocol
Kinase coding-sequences were cloned into yeast expression vectors (Gateway) and transformed into Saccharomyces cerevisiae L40ccU2 via lithium acetate method. Yeast was cultured in large volume (5L) for 6h before kinase expression induction and grown for 20 more hours before harvest. Cultures were centrifuged. Cell pellets were lysed (urea buffer) and proteins subjected to tryptic digest before immune-affinity purification for phosphotyrosine-peptides.  Lyophilized peptides were reconstituted and subjected to LC-MS/MS on a timsTOF pro (Bruker) and run in positive ion mode with TIMS, DDA and PASEF. MS raw files were analyzed using MaxQuant.

### Data Protocol
Mass Spec raw files (.d) were analyzed with MaxQuant (v1.6.15.0). MaxQuant was set to default parameters with the following changes. In the section “group-specific parameters” the option “label-free quantification” (LFQ) was enabled. Trypsin was selected as the sole protease and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57.021464 Da) was assigned a fixed modification due to the alkylation step. Variable modifications were methionine oxidation (+15.994915 Da), N-terminal acetylation (+42.010565 Da) and tyrosine phosphorylation (+79.966330 Da). FDR was set to 1% and decoy peptides were generated by reversing the theoretical spectra from the FASTA file. Minimal peptide length was set to 7. The reference FASTA file was the UniProt complete S. cerevisiae proteome (reviewed, release October 2020, 6721 entries) with select human FASTA sequences added for human ABL1, BCR/ABL p190 and BCR/ABL p210. Analysis of MaxQuant output was performed using bioinformatics program packages including R and custom-made tools in Perl or SQL.

### Publication Abstract
BCR-ABL is the oncogenic fusion product of tyrosine kinase ABL1 and a highly frequent driver of acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL) and chronic myeloid leukemia (CML). The kinase activity of BCR-ABL is strongly elevated; however, changes of substrate specificity in comparison to wild-type ABL1 kinase are less well characterized. Here, we heterologously expressed full-length BCR-ABL kinases in yeast. We exploited the proteome of living yeast as an <i>in vivo</i> phospho-tyrosine substrate for assaying human kinase specificity. Phospho-proteomic analysis of ABL1 and BCR-ABL isoforms p190 and p210 yielded a high-confidence data set of 1127 phospho-tyrosine sites on 821 yeast proteins. We used this data set to generate linear phosphorylation site motifs for ABL1 and the oncogenic ABL1 fusion proteins. The oncogenic kinases yielded a substantially different linear motif when compared to ABL1. Kinase set enrichment analysis with human pY-sites that have high linear motif scores well-recalled BCR-ABL driven cancer cell lines from human phospho-proteome data sets.

### Keywords
Linear sequence motif, Phosphoproteomics, Protein tyrosine phosphorylation, Ksea, Bcr-abl, Abl

### Affiliations
Network pharmacology, Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Graz, Austria
University of Graz

### Submitter
Ulrich Stelzl

### Lab Head
Dr Ulrich Stelzl
Network pharmacology, Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Graz, Austria


