### Accession
PXD034875

### Title
Structure of the human FERRY Rab5 effector complex

### Description
Long-range mRNA transport is crucial for the spatio-temporal regulation of gene expression, and its malfunction is linked to neurological disorders. The pentameric FERRY Rab5 effector complex is the molecular link between mRNA and the early endosome in mRNA intracellular distribution. Here, we determine the cryo-EM structure of the human FERRY complex, composed of Fy-1 to Fy-5. The structure reveals a clamp-like architecture, in which two arm-like appendages, each consisting of Fy-2 and a Fy-5 dimer, protrude from the central Fy-4 dimer. We demonstrate that the coiled-coil domains of Fy-2 are flexible and project into opposite directions from the FERRY complex core. While the C-terminal coiled-coil acts as binding region for Fy-1/3 and Rab5, both coiled-coils together with Fy-5 bind mRNA. Thus, Fy-2 serves as binding hub that connects not only all five complex subunits, but also mediates the binding to mRNA and to the early endosome via Rab5. The FERRY structure provides novel mechanistic insight into long-distance mRNA transport.

### Sample Protocol
UV-light induced protein-RNA crosslinking The purified FERRY complex was reconstituted with mrpl41 mRNA in equimolar amounts at 37 °C for 1 h in 20 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 250 mM NaCl, 20 mM KCl, 20 mM MgCl2. For reconstitution, the RNA/FERRY complex concentration was adjusted to 400 nM. Aliquots containing 125 pmol of the complex were UV-irradiated (λ = 254 nm) on ice for 10 min in an in-house built crosslinking apparatus following ethanol-precipitation (Kramer et al., 2014). Further sample processing was performed as described with minor modifications (Kramer et al., 2014). Briefly, the protein-RNA pellet was dissolved in 4 M urea, 50 mM Tris/HCl, pH 7.5 by sonication. For RNA digestion, the sample was diluted to 1 M urea with 50 mM Tris/HCl, pH 7.5 and 10 μg RNase A (EN0531, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and 1kU RNase T1 (EN0531, Thermo Fisher Scientific) were added following incubation at 37 °C for 4 h. Proteins were digested over night at 37 °C with trypsin (V5111, Promega) at a 1:20 enzyme to protein mass ratio. Sample cleanup was performed using C18 columns (74-4601, Harvard Apparatus) according to the manufacturers' instructions and crosslinked peptides were enriched with TiO2 columns (in-house; Titansphere 5 μm; GL Sciences), as described (Kramer et al., 2014). Peptide-(oligo)nucleotides were dried and subjected to LC-ESI-MS/MS.  Protein-protein crosslinking For protein-protein crosslinking with EDC, purified FERRY complex was diluted to 400 nM complex concentration using buffer containing 250 mM NaCl, 20 mM KCl, 20 mM MgCl2, 20 mM HEPES pH 6.7, 2 mM EDC and 0.5 mM Sulfo-NHS were added, following incubation at 30 °C for 30 min. For quenching, 50 mM β-mercaptoethanol and 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5 were added. Samples were supplemented with 1 M urea and reduced by addition of 10 mM DTT and 30 min incubation at 37 °C, following alkylation for 30 min at 25 °C with 40 mM iodacetamide (IAA) and quenching of residual IAA by adding another 10 mM of DTT and incubation for 5 min at 37 °C. Protein digestion was accomplished by overnight incubation at 37 °C with trypsin (V5111, Promega) at a 1:20 enzyme to protein mass ratio. C18 columns (74-4601, Harvard Apparatus) were used for peptide clean-up according to the manufacturers' instructions. Crosslinked peptides were pre-fractionated by high pH reversed-phase chromatography or by peptide size exclusion chromatography.   LC-ESI-MS/MS and data analysis Fractionated EDC-crosslinked peptides or enriched peptide-(oligo)nucleotides were dissolved in 2% [v/v] CAN, 0.05% [v/v] TFA. LC-MS/MS analyses were performed on an Orbitrap Exploris 480 (Thermo Scientific) instrument coupled to a nanoflow liquid chromatography system (Thermo Scientific Dionex Ultimate 3000). Sample separation was performed over 58 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min using 0.1% [v/v] formic acid (FA) (buffer A) and 80% [v/v] CAN, 0.08% [v/v] FA (buffer B) and a linear gradient from 10% to 45% or to 46% buffer B in 44 min, for peptide-(oligo)nucleotides and EDC-crosslinked peptides, respectively. Eluting peptides were analyzed in positive mode using a data-dependent top 30 acquisition method. Resolution was set to 120,000 (MS1) and 30,000 FWHM (MS2). AGC targets were set to 1e6 (peptide-(oligo)nucleotides) or 3e6 (EDC-crosslinked peptides) for MS1 and 1e5 for MS2. Normalized collision energy was set to 28%, dynamic exclusion to 10 s (peptide-(oligo)nucleotides) or 30 s (EDC-crosslinked peptides), and maximum injection time to 60 ms (peptide-(oligo)nucleotides) or ‘auto’ (EDC-crosslinked peptides) for MS1 and 120 ms for MS2. For peptide-(oligo)nucleotide analyses, charge states 1 and ≥ 8 were excluded; for EDC-crosslinked peptide analyses, charge states 1,2 and ≥ 8 were excluded from fragmentation. Measurements of peptide-(oligo)nucleotides were performed twice for the first technical replicate and once for second and third technical replicate; measurements of EDC-crosslinked peptide fractions were performed once.

### Data Protocol
Protein-RNA crosslink MS data were analyzed and manually validated using the OpenMS pipeline RNPxl and OpenMS TOPPASViewer (https://www.openms.de/, version 2.6.0) (Kramer et al., 2014). Methionine oxidation was set as variable modification, precursor mass tolerance was set to 6 ppm, maximum missed cleavages to 2, minimum peptide length to 5 amino acids, and maximum number of nucleotides was set to 3. We note that U-H2O cannot be distinguished from C-NH3 as these RNA adducts have the same monoisotopic masses.  EDC crosslink MS raw data files were converted to mgf format using Proteome Discoverer™ software (Thermo Scientific, version 2.1.0.81; signal-to-noise ratio: 1.5; precursor mass: 350–7000 Da). Crosslink peptide spectra were analysed using pLink software (pFind group, version 1.23) choosing ‘conventional crosslinking (HCD)’ flow type and EDC-DE as linker. Oxidation of methionine was set as variable and carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm, maximum missed cleavages to 2 and minimum peptide length to 5 amino acids. Data were filtered for 1% crosslink spectrum match (CSM) FDR. Downstream analysis and crosslink visualization was performed using xiNET (https://xiview.org/xiNET_website/) (Yang et al., 2012a) and Xlink Analyzer tool (version 1.1.2beta) (Kosinski et al., 2015)  in UCSF Chimera (https://www.cgl.ucsf.edu/chimera/, version 1.16).

### Publication Abstract
The pentameric FERRY Rab5 effector complex is a molecular link between mRNA and early endosomes in mRNA intracellular distribution. Here, we determine the cryo-EM structure of human FERRY. It reveals a unique clamp-like architecture that bears no resemblance to any known structure of Rab effectors. A combination of functional and mutational studies reveals that while the Fy-2 C-terminal coiled-coil acts as binding region for Fy-1/3 and Rab5, both coiled-coils and Fy-5 concur to bind mRNA. Mutations causing truncations of Fy-2 in patients with neurological disorders impair Rab5 binding or FERRY complex assembly. Thus, Fy-2 serves as a binding hub connecting all five complex subunits and mediating the binding to mRNA and early endosomes via Rab5. Our study provides mechanistic insights into long-distance mRNA transport and demonstrates that the particular architecture of FERRY is closely linked to a previously undescribed mode of RNA binding, involving coiled-coil domains.

### Keywords
Human, Structure

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, 37077 Göttingen, Germany  Institute of Clinical Chemistry, University Medical Center Göttingen, 37075 Göttingen, Germany
Max-Planck-Institute for Biophysical Chemistry

### Submitter
Luisa Welp

### Lab Head
Dr Henning Urlaub
Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, 37077 Göttingen, Germany  Institute of Clinical Chemistry, University Medical Center Göttingen, 37075 Göttingen, Germany


