### Accession
PXD031089

### Title
metaproteomic analysis of microbiota and metabolic pathways involved in taste formation during Chinese traditional fish sauce

### Description
Complex microbial metabolism is key to taste formation in high-quality fish sauce during fermentation. To guide quality supervising and targeted regulation, we analyzed the function of microbial flora during fermentation based on a previous metagenomic database. Most of the identified genes involved in metabolic functions showed an upward trend in abundance during fermentation. In total, 571 proteins extracted from fish sauce at different fermentation stages were identified. The proteins were mainly derived from Halanaerobium, Psychrobacter, Photobacterium, and Tetragenococcus. Functional annotation showed 15 pathways related to amino acid metabolism, including alanine, aspartate, glutamate, and histidine metabolism; lysine degradation; and arginine biosynthesis.

### Sample Protocol
The filtered sample (8 mL) was centrifuged at 15,000 ×g for 5 min. After centrifugation, the supernatant was removed and purified by desalting on a PD-10 purified desalting column, and the protein component effluent was collected after purification and desalting. The protein was precipitated by adding TAC/acetone solution (30 mL) for 12 h; the pellet obtained overnight was centrifuged at 10,000 rpm for 5 min to collect the protein precipitate, which was washed with acetone, resuspended in 8 M urea lysate, and sonicated (30% power, 4 s intervals per 2 s ultrasonic treatment, 10 cycles). After ultrasonication, the solution was centrifuged at 12,000 rpm for 10 min, and the supernatant was collected as a protein solution, 60 μL of which was placed in a centrifuge tube. To this, dithiothreitol solution (5 μL; 1 M) was added, both were mixed on a shaker, and the mixture was incubated at 37 °C for 1 h in a water bath. This was followed by addition of iodoacetamide solution (20 μL; 1 M) to the mixture, which was then vortexed and allowed to stand at 25 °C for 1 h under dark conditions. All processed protein samples were transferred to an ultrafiltration tube, and the supernatants were discarded after centrifugation. Then, UA solution (100 μL; 8 M urea, 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.0) was added to the ultrafiltration tube, and the mixture was centrifuged; this was repeated twice. Ammonium bicarbonate solution (100 μL, 0.05 M) was added, the mixture was centrifuged, and the supernatant was collected. The procedure was repeated three times. After replacing the collection tube, trypsin was added to the ultrafiltration tube at a protein:enzyme ratio of 50:1, followed by enzymatic hydrolysis at 37 °C for 12–16 h.

### Data Protocol
To obtain quantitative results, the products were analyzed after trypsin digestion using liquid mass spectrometry, and three biological replicates of each sample were separated using an Easy nLC/ Ultimate 3000 liquid phase system. The mobile phase buffer A was 0.1% formic acid, and buffer B comprised 80% acetonitrile and 0.08% formic acid. The sample was loaded through an autosampler at a flow rate of 600 nL/min to a 3 μm, 100 μm × 20 mm C18 mass spectrometer precolumn. It was separated using a 1.9 μm, 50 μm × 120 mm C18 column. The gradient elution parameters of the capillary high-performance liquid chromatography system are listed in Table S1. Samples from different fermentation stages were separated using capillary high-performance liquid chromatography and analyzed using a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer.

### Publication Abstract
Complex microbial metabolism is key to taste formation in high-quality fish sauce during fermentation. To guide quality supervision and targeted regulation, we analyzed the function of microbial flora during fermentation based on a previously developed metagenomic database. The abundance of most identified genes involved in metabolic functions showed an upward trend in abundance during fermentation. In total, 571 proteins extracted from fish sauce at different fermentation stages were identified. These proteins were mainly derived from <i>Halanaerobium</i>, <i>Psychrobacter</i>, <i>Photobacterium</i>, and <i>Tetragenococcus</i>. Functional annotation revealed 15 pathways related to amino acid metabolism, including alanine, aspartate, glutamate, and histidine metabolism; lysine degradation; and arginine biosynthesis. This study demonstrated the approaches to identify microbiota functions and metabolic pathways, thereby providing a theoretical basis for taste formation mechanisms during traditional fish sauce fermentation.

### Keywords
Fish sauce, Metaproteomics, Fermentation

### Affiliations
Key Laboratory of Aquatic Product Processing, Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs, National R&D Center for Aquatic Product Processing, South China Sea Fisheries Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences
+86-20-89108313

### Submitter
Yueqi Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Yueqi Wang
Key Laboratory of Aquatic Product Processing, Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs, National R&D Center for Aquatic Product Processing, South China Sea Fisheries Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences


