### Accession
PXD029426

### Title
SARS-CoV-2 Infection Impacts Glutamate/Glutamine Metabolism in Syrian Hamster Central Nervous System

### Description
Coronaviruses belong to a well-known family of enveloped RNA viruses and the causative agent of the common cold. Although the seasonal coronaviruses do not pose a threat to human life, three members of this family, i.e., SARS-CoV, MERS-CoV and recently, SARS-CoV2, may cause severe acute respiratory syndrome that may lead to death. Unfortunately, COVID-19 has already caused more than 4,4 million deaths worldwide. Although much is better understood about the immunopathogenesis of the lung disease, important information about systemic disease is still missing, mainly concerning neurological parameters. In this context, we sought to evaluate immunometabolic changes using in vitro and in vivo models of hamsters infected with SARS-CoV2. Here show that, besides infecting and replicating in glial cells, SARS-CoV2 induces important changes in protein expression and metabolic pathways, specially involved in carbon metabolism, glycolysis, and mitochondrial respiration. Interestingly, many of the differentially expressed proteins during SARS-CoV2 infection overlapped with proteins correlated with neurological diseases, such as Parkinsons's Disease, multiple sclerosis, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and Huntington's disease. Metabolic analysis by high resolution real-time respirometry evidenced hyperactivation of glycolysis and mitochondrial respiration, which was confirmed by metabolomics. Brain infection with SARS-CoV2 was confirmed in vivo as hippocampus, cortex and olfactory bulb of infected hamsters were positive for viral genome both at 4 and 7 days post-infection. Unexpectedly, we observed that glutamine was significantly reduced in mixed glial cells infected with SARS-CoV2 and that the blockade of glutaminolysis significantly reduced viral replication and pro-inflammatory response. Altogether, our data confirms the infection of brain cells by SARS-CoV2 but, most importantly, there is an important change in overall protein expression profile, mostly of proteins related to metabolic pathways. This may suggest that some of the neurological impairments observed during COVID-19, as the brain fog and cognitive impairment, may rely on altered protein expression and unbalanced glutamine/glutamate levels, whose importance for adequate brain function is unquestionable.

### Sample Protocol
LC-MS/MS Analysis Primary mixed glial cells were resuspended in lysis buffer (100mM Tris HCL, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1% Triton X) with freshly added protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, SIGMA®). After it was performed a mechanical lysis by ultrasonication (3 cycles of 20s). Aiming to obtain a higher yield we performed the FASP protocol for subsequent analyses (Distler U., and Tenzer S., 2016).  Briefly described in washing steps to buffer exchange in a microcolumn tip with a 10kDa MW cut off, and tryptic digestion performed in column. 40 micrograms of protein amount were used to carry out the FASP protocol, where the samples were reduced, alkylated, and later digested using trypsin.  Digested peptides from each sample were resuspended in 0.1% formaldehyde. The separation of tryptic peptides was performed on an ACQUITY MClass System (Waters Corporation®). 1 μg of each digested sample has been loaded onto a Symmetry C18 5 μm, 180 μm × 20 mm precolumn (Waters Corp®) used as trapping column and subsequently separated by a 120 min reversed phase gradient at 300 nL/min (linear gradient, 3–55% ACN over 90 min) using a HSS T3 C18 1.8 μm, 75 μm × 150 mm nanoscale and LC column (Waters Corp®) maintained at 30 °C. For the gradient elution water-Formic Acid (99.9/0.1, v/v) has been used as eluent A and Acetonitrile Formic Acid (99.9/0.1, v/v) as eluent B. The Separated peptides have been analyzed by High Definition Synapt G2-Si Mass spectrometer directly coupled to the chromatographic system. Differential protein expression has been evaluated with a data-independent acquisition (DIA) of shotgun proteomics analysis by Expression configuration mode (MSe). The mass spectrometer operated in “Expression Mode” switching between low (4 eV) and high (25–60 eV) collision energies on the gas cell, using a scan time of 1.0s per function over 50–2000 m/z. All spectra have been acquired in Ion Mobility Mode by applying a wave velocity for the ion separation of 1.000m/s and a transfer wave velocity of 175m/s. The processing of low and elevated energy, added to the data of the reference lock mass ([Glu1]-Fibrinopeptide B Standard, Waters Corp®) provides a time-aligned inventory of accurate mass retention time components for both the low and elevated-energy (EMRT, exact mass retention time) Each sample was run in three technical replicates.

### Data Protocol
Continuum LC-MS data from three replicate experiments for each sample have been processed for qualitative and quantitative analysis using the software Progenesis (Waters Corp®). The qualitative identification of proteins has been obtained by searching in an unreviewed database Mesocricetus auratus (Syrian Golden hamster) UNIPROT Proteome ID UP000189706. Search parameters were set as: automatic tolerance for precursor ions and for product ions, minimum 1 fragment ions matched per peptide, minimum 3 fragment ions matched per protein, minimum 1 unique peptide matched per protein, 2 missed cleavage, carbamydomethylation of cysteines as fixed modification and oxidation of methionines as variable modifications, false discovery rate (FDR) of the identification algorithm < 1%. Label free quantitative analysis was obtained using the relative abundance intensity integrated in Progenesis software, using all peptides identified for normalization. The expression analysis was performed considering technical replicates available for each experimental condition following the hypothesis that each group is an independent variable. The protein identifications were based on the detection of more than two fragment ions per peptide, and more than two peptides measured per protein. The list of normalized proteins was screened according to the following criteria: protein identified in at least 70% of the runs from the same sample and only modulated proteins with a p< 0.05 were considered significant.

### Publication Abstract
COVID-19 causes more than million deaths worldwide. Although much is understood about the immunopathogenesis of the lung disease, a lot remains to be known on the neurological impact of COVID-19. Here, we evaluated immunometabolic changes using astrocytes in vitro and dissected brain areas of SARS-CoV-2 infected Syrian hamsters. We show that SARS-CoV-2 alters proteins of carbon metabolism, glycolysis, and synaptic transmission, many of which are altered in neurological diseases. Real-time respirometry evidenced hyperactivation of glycolysis, further confirmed by metabolomics, with intense consumption of glucose, pyruvate, glutamine, and alpha ketoglutarate. Consistent with glutamine reduction, the blockade of glutaminolysis impaired viral replication and inflammatory response in vitro. SARS-CoV-2 was detected in vivo in hippocampus, cortex, and olfactory bulb of intranasally infected animals. Our data evidence an imbalance in important metabolic molecules and neurotransmitters in infected astrocytes. We suggest this may correlate with the neurological impairment observed during COVID-19, as memory loss, confusion, and cognitive impairment.

### Keywords
Covid-19, Neuropathology, Proteomics, Sars-cov2, Glutamine

### Affiliations
Post doctor
University of Campinas - São Paulo - Brazil

### Submitter
Victor Corasolla Carregari

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel Martins-de-Souza
University of Campinas - São Paulo - Brazil


