### Accession
PXD022551

### Title
Virulence of Vibrio alginolyticus as determinants of immune outcomes in the oyster Crassostrea hongkongensis

### Description
Vibrio species distribute ubiquitously in marine and coastal environments, with implications for severe infectious diseases in human and marine animals. However, precisely what defensive strategies the host employ against Vibrio pathogens with distinct virulence remain poorly understood. Being an ecologically relevant host, the oyster Crassostrea hongkongensis serves as an excellent model for elucidating mechanisms underlying host-Vibrio interactions. In this study, we generated one mutant Vibrio alginolyticus strains (V. alginolyticus△VSCC) with attenuated virulence by knocking out the VSCC encoding gene, one of the core components of type III secretion systems (T3SSs), based on the evidence that V. alginolyticus△VSCC infection leads to a marked reduction in the apoptotic rate of hemocyte hosts, compared to V. alginolyticusWT control. In comparative proteomics, it was revealed that distinct immune responses were elicited upon encounter with V. alginolyticus strains of different virulence. Quite strikingly, the peroxisomal and apoptotic pathways are activated by V. alginolyticusWT infection, whereas phagocytosis and cell adhesion were enhanced in V. alginolyticus△VSCC infection. Collectively, we conclude that adaptation in host immune responses is determined in part by pathogen virulence, which safeguards elimination of invading bacteria in efficient and timely manners.

### Sample Protocol
Shimadzu LC-20AB liquid phase system was applied for separating samples coupled with a 5 μm 4.6×250 mm Gemini C18 separation column(Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan). Reconstitute the extracted peptide sample with 2mL mobile phase A (5%ACN pH9.8) and load the sample onto column, eluting at a flow rate of 1mL/min with gradient: 5% mobile phase B (95%CAN, pH9.8) for 10 min, 5% to 35% mobile phase B for 40 minutes, 35% to 95% mobile phase B for 1 minute, mobile phase B lasting for 3 minutes, and 5% mobile phase B was in equilibrium for 10 minutes. The elution peak was observed at a wavelength of 214 nm and one component was collected every minute. The samples were combined with the chromatographic elution peak to obtain 20 components, and then frozen and pumped.   The peptides separated in the liquid phase were ionized by the nano ESI source and then entered into the tandem mass spectrometer Q-Exactive (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) for DDA (data-dependent acquisition) mode detection. The main parameters are set as follows:The electrospray voltage applied was 1.6kV; MS scan ranged from 350 to 1600 m/z at a resolution of 70,000 and the MS/MS scan start from 100 m/z at resolution of 17,500. The 20 most abundant precursors ions with a 2+ to 7+ charge state and a peak strength greater than 10,000 were selected to conduct MS/MS scans using a high-energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) dual-scan approach. Fragment ions were detected in the Orbitrap with 15.0 s dynamic exclusion. The automatic gain control(AGC) of MS was set to 3E6 and MS/MS was 1E5. For DDA, the Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer was operated in positive mode with spray voltage of 2.3 kV and the capillary temperature was 320 °C. Full MS scans from 350 to 1500 m/z were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 (at 200 m/z) with an AGC target value of 3 × 106. From the full MS scan, a maximum number of 40 of the most abundant precursor ions were selected for higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragment analysis at a resolution of 15,000 (at 200 m/z), a maximum ion injection time of 45 ms, a normalized collision energy of 27%, an intensity threshold of 8.3 × 103, and the dynamic exclusion parameter set at 60 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw LC-MS/MS data were converted to MGF ﬁles using the ProteoWizard tool (http://proteowizard.sourceforge.net/). Proteins were identiﬁed using the Mascot search engine version 2.3.02 (Matrix Science, London, UK) against the C.hongkongensis genome from previous studies(). For the false discovery rate (FDR) calculation, an automatic decoy database search strategy was employed to estimate the FDR using the PSPEP algorithm (Proteomics System Performance Evaluation Pipeline, integrated in the ProteinPilot software).Proteins containing at least one unique set of spectra with ﬁltration of 1% FDR were used for follow-up quantiﬁcation analysis. The software IQuant (BGI, Shenzhen, China) was used to quantitatively analyze peptides labeled with IBTs. A volcanogram was drawn to show the protein expression difference between the two experimental groups and the control group more clearly.The X-axis of the figure is the multiple of protein difference (log2), and the Y-axis is the corresponding Qvalue (-log10).The significantly different proteins in a single experiment were screened under the two conditions of Fold change> 1.5 and Q-value <0.05.CV value was used to evaluate the repeatability of quantification. The lower the CV value, the better the repeatability.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Vibrio</i> species are ubiquitously distributed in marine environments, with important implications for emerging infectious diseases. However, relatively little is known about defensive strategies deployed by hosts against <i>Vibrio</i> pathogens of distinct virulence traits. Being an ecologically relevant host, the oyster <i>Crassostrea hongkongensis</i> can serve as an excellent model for elucidating mechanisms underlying host-<i>Vibrio</i> interactions. We generated a <i>Vibrio alginolyticus</i> mutant strain (<i>V. alginolyticus</i><sup>&#x25b3;</sup><i><sup>vscC</sup></i> ) with attenuated virulence by knocking out the <i>vscC</i> encoding gene, a core component of type III secretion system (T3SS), which led to starkly reduced apoptotic rates in hemocyte hosts compared to the <i>V. alginolyticus</i><sup>WT</sup> control. In comparative proteomics, it was revealed that distinct immune responses arose upon encounter with <i>V. alginolyticus</i> strains of different virulence. Quite strikingly, the peroxisomal and apoptotic pathways are activated by <i>V. alginolyticus</i><sup>WT</sup> infection, whereas phagocytosis and cell adhesion were enhanced in <i>V. alginolyticus</i><sup>&#x25b3;</sup><i><sup>vscC</sup></i> infection. Results for functional studies further show that <i>V. alginolyticus</i><sup>WT</sup> strain stimulated respiratory bursts to produce excess superoxide (O2<sup>&#x2022;-</sup>) and hydrogen peroxide (H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub>) in oysters, which induced apoptosis regulated by p53 target protein (p53tp). Simultaneously, a drop in sGC content balanced off cGMP accumulation in hemocytes and repressed the occurrence of apoptosis to a certain extent during <i>V. alginolyticus</i><sup>&#x25b3;</sup><i><sup>vscC</sup></i> infection. We have thus provided the first direct evidence for a mechanistic link between virulence of <i>Vibrio</i> spp. and its immunomodulation effects on apoptosis in the oyster. Collectively, we conclude that adaptive responses in host defenses are partially determined by pathogen virulence, in order to safeguard efficiency and timeliness in bacterial clearance.

### Keywords
Oyster, Virulence, Proteomics, Vibrio alginolyticus, Host-pathogen interactions

### Affiliations
South China sea institude of Chinese academy of science
CAS Key Laboratory of Tropical Marine Bio-resources and Ecology and Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Applied Marine Biology, South China Sea Institute of Oceanology, Chinese Academy of Science. Guangzhou, China

### Submitter
Liu Kunna

### Lab Head
Dr Yang Zhang
CAS Key Laboratory of Tropical Marine Bio-resources and Ecology and Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Applied Marine Biology, South China Sea Institute of Oceanology, Chinese Academy of Science. Guangzhou, China


