### Accession
PXD022511

### Title
Reimagining high-throughput profiling of reactive cysteines for cell-based screening of large electrophile libraries

### Description
Current methods for measuring amino-acid side-chain reactivity lack the throughput needed to screen large chemical libraries for interactions across the proteome. Here we redesigned the workflow for activity-based protein profiling of reactive cysteine residues by using a smaller desthiobiotin-based probe, sample multiplexing, reduced protein starting amounts, and software to boost data acquisition in real-time on the mass spectrometer. Our method, Streamlined Cysteine Activity-Based Protein Profiling (SLC-ABPP), achieved a 42-fold improvement in sample throughput, corresponding to profiling library members at a depth of >8,000 reactive cysteine sites in 18 min per compound. We applied it to identifying the proteome-wide targets of a covalent inhibitor of mutant KRASG12C and of ibrutinib, a covalent inhibitor of BTK. In addition, we created a resource of cysteine reactivity to 285 electrophiles in three human cell lines , which includes >20,000 cysteines in >6,000 proteins per cell line. The goal of proteome-wide profiling of cysteine reactivity across thousand-member libraries under several cellular contexts is now within reach.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for SLC-ABPP Frozen cell pellets for lysate or in cell analyses were lysed using PBS (pH 7.4). Samples were further homogenized, and DNA was sheared using sonication with a probe sonicator (20 x 0.5 second pulses) at 4°C. Total protein was determined using a BCA assay and the cell lysates were used immediately for each experiment. Depending on the experiment, 100-25 μg of total cell extract was aliquoted for each TMT channel for further downstream processing. To determine the quantitative depth that could be achieved using SLC-ABPP, each TMT channel containing 100 μg cell extract was treated with 500 μM of DBIA for 1 hour in the dark at room temperature. Excess DBIA, along with disulfide bonds were quenched and reduced using 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 30 min in the dark at room temperature. Subsequently reduced cysteine residues were alkylated using 20 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark at room temperature. To facilitate removal of quenched DBIA and incompatible reagents, proteins were precipitated using chloroform/methanol. Briefly, to 100 μL of each sample, 400 μL of methanol were added, followed by 100 μL of chloroform with thorough vortexing. Next, 300 μL of HPLC grade water were added, and the samples were mixed to facilitate precipitation. Samples were centrifuged at maximum speed (14,000 rpm) for 3 min at room temperature, and the aqueous top layer was removed, and the samples were washed additionally twice with 500 μL of methanol. Protein pellets were re-solubilized in 200 mM 4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazinepropanesulfonic acid (EPPS) at pH 8.5 and were digested overnight using LysC and trypsin (1:100, enzyme to protein ratios) overnight at 37°C using a ThermoMixer set to 1200 rpm. The next day samples were labeled with TMT reagents or stored at -80°C until further use. TMT Labeling Digested peptides containing DBIA conjugated cysteines were labeled using TMT11-plex reagents as previously described55. Briefly, to each sample, 30% anhydrous acetonitrile was added, and peptides were labeled at a 1:2 ratio (peptides to TMT reagents, 100 μg of peptides to 200 μg of TMT reagents) for 1 hr shaking at 1,000 rpm. To equalize protein loading, ~ 2 μg of each sample was aliquoted, and a 60-min quality control analysis (ratio check) was performed using SPS-MS3. Excess TMT reagent was quenched with hydroxylamine (0.3% final concentration) for 15 min at room temperature. Next, samples were mixed 1:1 across all TMT channels and the pooled sample was dried using a Speedvac to ensure all acetonitrile was removed. Cysteine peptide enrichment using streptavidin Pierce streptavidin magnetic beads were washed with PBS pH 7.4 prior to use. To each TMT labeled pooled sample, 75 μL of streptavidin bead 50% slurry were added. Samples were further topped up with 1 mL of PBS using a 2 mL Eppendorf tube. Samples and beads were allowed to mix rotating end-over-end for 4 hours at room temperature or overnight at 4°C to enrich for TMT labeled DBIA conjugated cysteine peptides. Following enrichment, the beads were placed onto a magnetic rack and allowed to equilibrate for 5 minutes. The beads were washed to remove non-specifically bound peptides using the following procedure: 4 x 1 mL of PBS pH 7.4, 3 x 1 mL of PBS with 0.1% SDS pH 7.4 and finally 5 x 1 mL HPLC grade water, beads were resuspended using a pipette between washes and placed onto the magnet between each wash. To elute cysteine containing peptides, 500 μL of 50% acetonitrile with 0.1% trifluoracetic acid (TFA) were added and the beads were mixed at 1,000 rpm for 20 min at room temperature. Eluted peptides were transferred to a new tube and the beads were additionally washed with 200 μL of 50% acetonitrile with 0.1% TFA and combined. Cysteine containing peptides were dried to completion using a Speedvac and were store at -80°C until future use

### Data Protocol
All acquired data were searched using the open-source Comet algorithm (release_2019010) using a previously described informatics pipeline68–71. Spectral searches were done using a custom FASTA-formatted database which included common contaminants, reversed sequences (Uniprot Human, 2014) and the following parameters: 50 PPM precursor tolerance, fully tryptic peptides, fragment ion tolerance of 0.9 Da and a static modification by TMT (+229.163 Da) or TMTPro (+304.2071 Da) on lysine and peptide N termini. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) was set as a static modification while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) and DBIA on cysteine residues (+239.262) was set as a variable modifications. Peptide spectral matches were filtered to a peptide false discovery rate (FDR) of less than 1% using linear discriminant analysis employing a target-decoy strategy. Resulting peptides were further filtered to obtain a 1% protein FDR at the entire dataset level (including all plexes per cell line), and proteins were collapsed into groups. Cysteine-modified peptides were further filtered for site localization using the AScore algorithm with a cutoff of 13 (p<0.05) as previously described69. Overlapping peptide sequences that were generated from different charge states, elution times and tryptic termini were grouped together into a single entry. A single quantitative value was reported, and only unique peptides were reported. Reporter ion intensities were adjusted to correct for impurities during synthesis of different TMT reagents according to the manufacturer’s specifications. For quantification of each MS3 spectrum, a total sum signal-to-noise of all reporter ions of 100 (TMT11-plex) or 160 (TMTPro) was required. Lastly, peptide quantitative values generated from the in-cell screens or whole proteome analyses were normalized so that the sum of the signal for all proteins in each channel was equal to account for sample loading differences (column normalization). This normalization was not performed for scout fragment data (Figure S3) since the total change in TMT channel intensity was expected to be large.

### Publication Abstract
Current methods used for measuring amino acid side-chain reactivity lack the throughput needed to screen large chemical libraries for interactions across the proteome. Here we redesigned the workflow for activity-based protein profiling of reactive cysteine residues by using a smaller desthiobiotin-based probe, sample multiplexing, reduced protein starting amounts and software to boost data acquisition in real time on the mass spectrometer. Our method, streamlined cysteine activity-based protein profiling (SLC-ABPP), achieved a 42-fold improvement in sample throughput, corresponding to profiling library members at a depth of &gt;8,000&#x2009;reactive cysteine sites at 18&#x2009;min per compound. We applied it to identify proteome-wide targets of covalent inhibitors to mutant Kirsten rat sarcoma (KRAS)<sup>G12C</sup> and Bruton's tyrosine kinase (BTK). In addition, we created a resource of cysteine reactivity to 285&#x2009;electrophiles in three human cell lines, which includes &gt;20,000&#x2009;cysteines from &gt;6,000&#x2009;proteins per line. The goal of proteome-wide profiling of cysteine reactivity across thousand-member libraries under several cellular contexts is now within reach.

### Keywords
Reactive cysteines, Chemical proteomics

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School
Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston MA, USA

### Submitter
Miljan Kuljanin

### Lab Head
Dr Steven P. Gygi
Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston MA, USA


