### Accession
PXD008814

### Title
SPD1590_iTRAQ -  A Novel Iron Transporter SPD_1590 in Streptococcus pneumoniae Contributing to Bacterial Virulence Properties

### Description
Streptococcus pneumoniae has three main transporters for iron acquisition: PiaABC, PiuABC, and PitABC. Our previous study had shown that the mRNA and protein levels of SPD_1590 are significantly upregulated in a piuA/piaA/pitA triple mutant, suggesting that SPD_1590 might be a novel iron transporter in S. pneumoniae. In the present work, using spd1590-deleted and -overexpressing strains and the purified SPD_1590 protein, we show that SPD_1590 can bind hemin. Furthermore, the results of iTRAQ quantitative proteomics and cell-infection studies demonstrate that, similarly to other metal-ion uptake proteins, SPD_1590 is important for bacterial virulence.

### Sample Protocol
Total proteins were extracted from WT and △spd1590 strains cultivated in THY medium at exponential growth phase. Then every 200μg total proteins of each sample were digested with trypsin (Promega, USA) at 37◦C for 16h, then lyophilized. An iTRAQ Reagent 8-plex kit (AB SCIEX, USA) was used to labeling every peptide sample according to the manufacturer’s protocol.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw data were identified and quantified via Thermo Proteome Discovery Software 2.1.1.21. The quantitative analysis parameters were set as: Enzyme: trysin; Fixed modification: carbamidomethylation(C); Variable modification: oxidation(M), acetyl(protetin N-term); FDR: FDR-concensus.pdConsensusWF. The PDresult was processed student t-test and the differently expressed proteins were those with p < 0.05 and fold > 1.2.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Streptococcus pneumoniae</i>, a Gram-positive human pathogen, has evolved three main transporters for iron acquisition from the host: PiaABC, PiuABC, and PitABC. Our previous study had shown that the mRNA and protein levels of SPD_1590 are significantly upregulated in the &#x394;<i>piuA</i>/&#x394;<i>piaA</i>/&#x394;<i>pitA</i> triple mutant, suggesting that SPD_1590 might be a novel iron transporter in <i>S. pneumoniae</i>. In the present study, using <i>spd1590</i>-knockout, -complemented, and -overexpressing strains and the purified SPD_1590 protein, we show that SPD_1590 can bind hemin, probably supplementing the function of PiuABC, to provide the iron necessary for the bacterium. Furthermore, the results of iTRAQ quantitative proteomics and cell-infection studies demonstrate that, similarly to other metal-ion uptake proteins, SPD_1590 is important for bacterial virulence properties. Overall, these results provide a better understanding of the biology of this clinically important bacterium.

### Keywords
Streptococcus pneumoniae d39, Itraq labeling, Orbitrap fusion lumos

### Affiliations
Jinan University
Key Laboratory of Functional Protein Research of Guangdong Higher Education Institutes, Institute of Life and Health Engineering, College of Life Science and Technology, Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632, China

### Submitter
Xin Yu Miao

### Lab Head
Dr Xuesong Sun
Key Laboratory of Functional Protein Research of Guangdong Higher Education Institutes, Institute of Life and Health Engineering, College of Life Science and Technology, Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632, China


