### Accession
PXD033511

### Title
Interacting partners of Trypanosoma brucei EIF4E2

### Description
Affinity purification of EIF4E2 endogenously tagged with PTP. A cell line with inducible GFP-PTP was used as negative control brucei. 3 biological replicates were used for both EIF4E2 and GFP.

### Sample Protocol
The cells were harvested by centrifugation at 3000RPM for 13min at 40C and the pellets were resuspended in 0.5 mL of lysis buffer (20 mM Tris [pH 7.5], 5 mM MgCl2, 1 mM DTT, 0.05% IGEPAL, 100 U/mL RNasin, 10 μg/mL aprotinin, and 10 μg/mL leupeptin). For releasing protein contents, the cells were passaged 20× through a 21G×1½” needle and 20× through a 27G×¾ needle using a 1 mL syringe. To pellet the cell debris, samples were centrifuged at 10,000 × g for 15 min, and the supernatant was transferred to a fresh tube. The salt concentration was then adjusted to 150 mM KCl. Magnetic beads (Dynabeads™ M-280 Tosylactivated, Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to rabbit IgG were adjusted by three sequential washes with wash buffer (20 mM Tris [pH 7.5], 5 mM MgCl2, 1 mM DTT, 0.05% IGEPAL, 100 U/mL RNasin, 150 mM KCl). Depending on the cell number, 10–100 μL of the beads were then added to each sample. To allow binding, cell lysate and beads were incubated for 1–2 h at 4°C while rotating (20 rpm). he beads were washed four times with wash buffer, after which bound proteins were released by TEV cleavage. For this, 20 μL of wash buffer and 1 μL of recombinant TEV protease (1 mg/mL) were incubated with the beads for 90 min at 20°C. For removal of His-tagged TEV, IgG magnetic beads were concentrated on one side, the supernatant was transferred to a fresh tube, and 10 μL of equalization buffer (200 mM sodium phosphate, 600 mM sodium chloride, 0.1% Tween-20, 60 mM imidazole, pH 8.5), as well as 30 μL of Ni-NTA-magnetic beads were added and incubated with the samples for 30 min at 20°C while rotating. Ni-NTA magnetic beads were retained by a magnetic stand and the supernatant was collected and stored in Laemmli buffer at -80°C. The sample eluate was run on 1.5-mm NuPAGE™ Novex™ 4–12% BisTris protein gel (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 1 cm and then stained with Coomassie Blue. The gel was distained (10% acetic acid, 50% methanol) and the gel area with the proteins cut out and analyzed by LC-MS2.

### Data Protocol
MAXQuant software version 1.5.8.3 was used for identification and quantification of raw data.  To identify the proteins, the MS raw data was blasted against T. brucei 927 annotated protein databases from TriTrypDB.  Statistical analysis was performed in Perseus version 1.6.15.0. Analysis was done using Label free quantification (LFQ) intensities. First, contaminating proteins, reverse proteins and proteins that were identified once out of the 3 replicates was excluded from analysis. After which, missing values were imputed with a normal distribution according to Perseus default imputation settings of width = 0.3 and shift = 1.8.  LFQ intensities were log2-transformed, and two sample student T test was used to detect significant changes between control and experimental groups. A protein was deemed significantly enriched if p value was < 0.05 and fold change was > 2(log2=1).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Eif4e2, Ptp

### Affiliations
ZMBH, University Heidelberg Im Neuenheimer Feld 282 69120 Heidelberg, Germany
ZMBH, Im Neuenheimer Feld 282, 69122 Heidelberg

### Submitter
Thomas Ruppert

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Ruppert
ZMBH, University Heidelberg Im Neuenheimer Feld 282 69120 Heidelberg, Germany


