### Accession
PXD038742

### Title
A deeply cA deeply conserved protease, acylamino acid-releasing enzyme (AARE), acts in ageing in Physcomitrella and Arabidopsis

### Description
Reactive oxygen species (ROS) are constant by-products of aerobic life. In excess, ROS lead to cytotoxic protein aggregates, which are a hallmark of ageing in animals and linked to age-related pathologies in humans. Acylamino acid-releasing enzymes (AARE) are bifunctional serine proteases, acting on oxidized proteins. AARE are found in all domains of life, albeit under different names, such as acylpeptide hydrolase (APEH/ACPH), acylaminoacyl peptidase (AAP), or oxidized protein hydrolase (OPH). In humans, AARE malfunction is associated with age-related pathologies, while their function in plants is less clear. Here, we provide a detailed analysis of AARE genes in the plant lineage and an in-depth analysis of AARE localization and function in the moss Physcomitrella and the angiosperm Arabidopsis. AARE loss-of-function mutants have not been described for any organism so far. We generated and analysed such mutants and describe a connection between AARE function, aggregation of oxidized proteins and plant ageing, including accelerated developmental progression and reduced life span. Our findings complement similar findings in animals and humans, and suggest a unified concept of ageing may exist in different life forms

### Sample Protocol
The test IP against PpAARE1:Citrine was performed using Dynabeeds M270 Epoxy Co-Immunoprecipitation Kit (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, USA) with a monoclonal anti-GFP antibody (Roche, REF 11 814 460 001) as described (10.1074/mcp.M115.057190) for two independent fusion lines (#2 and #28). Eluted proteins were separated via SDS-PAGE and bands (inset, red arrow) corresponding to the expected size (112 kDa) were excised and analysed by mass spectrometry. Test IP experiments against citrine-tagged PpAARE2 and PpAARE3 were performed with GFP-Trap Magnetic Particles (Chromotek) followed by an on-bead digestion with trypsin and subsequent mass spectrometry. Co-immunoprecipitation was performed using GFP-Trap Magnetic Particles M-270 (Chromotek, Planegg-Martinsried, Germany) as recommended by the manufacturer with modifications. 300 mg protonema was homogenized in a 2 mL reaction tube using a tungsten and a glass bead. For each line three biological replicates were realized. The extraction buffer was chosen according to the manufacturer’s recommendations for plant samples and contained 25 mM HEPES-KOH, pH7.5, 2 mM EDTA, 100 mM NaCl, 200 nM DTT, 0.5% Triton X-100, 1% plant protease inhibitor cocktail (PPI, P9599, Sigma Aldrich). Ground plant material was dissolved in a final volume of 2 mL ice-cold extraction buffer and incubated for 10 min in a water quench ultrasonic device. Samples were centrifuged at 4°C at 20,000xg for 30 min. For each sample 25 µL magnetic particle slurry was washed with 500 µL extraction buffer. The sample supernatant was transferred to the cleaned beads and incubated, rotating for 1 h at 6°C. Subsequently, beads were washed with 1 mL extraction buffer without Triton and PPI and again with 500 µL. Beads were then dissolved in 500 µL wash buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl, pH7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA), transferred to a new reaction tube and washed again in 500 µL wash buffer. A RapiGest solution (0.2% in 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH7.5; RapiGest SF Surfactant (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) was mixed 3:1 with 5 mM DTT in 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH7.5. 30 µL of the resulting mixture was applied to each sample. Samples were incubated at 95°C for 5 min under continuous shaking. Samples were cooled down to RT and 5 µL of a trypsin (V5117, P) solution (0.025 µg/µL in 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5) were added to each sample. Digestion on the beads was performed for 30 min at 32°C under continuous shaking. Supernatants were transferred to new reaction tubes and the remaining beads were washed twice with 50 µL 5 mM Iodoacetamide solution (in 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH7.5). The wash supernatants were combined with the trypsin-containing supernatant and incubated over night at 30°C under continuous shaking. Acid-catalysed cleavage of the RapiGest surfactant was performed as recommended by the manufacturer. Samples were purified using C18-STAGE-Tips as described136 and eluted from the Tip in 30% ACN in 0.1% FA

### Data Protocol
MS analysis was performed on an Orbitrap Q-Exactive Plus instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Dionex LC Packings/Thermo Fisher Scientific) as described (https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-021-02486-3). Raw files were processed using Mascot Distiller V2.7.10 and searched against all Physcomitrella protein models V3.3 using Mascot Server V2.7.0 (Matrix Science). Additionally each database search contained a fusion sequence of the target PpAARE isoform and Citrine. The precursor mass tolerance was 5 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance was 0.02 Da. Variable modifications were formation of pyro Glu (N term Q, −17.026549 Da), oxidation (M, +15.994915 Da), acetylation (N-term, +42.010565 Da) and deamidation (N, +0.9 84016 Da). Carbamidomethylation (C, +57. 021464 Da) was specified as fixed modification. Enzymatic specificity was set to tryptic with semi-specific free N-terminus. Search results were loaded in ScaffoldTM 5 (V5.0.1, Proteome Software) and proteins were accepted at an FDR = 1 and peptides at an FDR = 0.5.

### Publication Abstract
Reactive oxygen species (ROS) are constant by-products of aerobic life. In excess, ROS lead to cytotoxic protein aggregates, which are a hallmark of ageing in animals and linked to age-related pathologies in humans. Acylamino acid-releasing enzymes (AARE) are bifunctional serine proteases, acting on oxidized proteins. AARE are found in all domains of life, albeit under different names, such as acylpeptide hydrolase (APEH/ACPH), acylaminoacyl peptidase (AAP), or oxidized protein hydrolase (OPH). In humans, AARE malfunction is associated with age-related pathologies, while their function in plants is less clear. Here, we provide a detailed analysis of AARE genes in the plant lineage and an in-depth analysis of AARE localization and function in the moss Physcomitrella and the angiosperm Arabidopsis. AARE loss-of-function mutants have not been described for any organism so far. We generated and analysed such mutants and describe a connection between AARE function, aggregation of oxidized proteins and plant ageing, including accelerated developmental progression and reduced life span. Our findings complement similar findings in animals and humans, and suggest a unified concept of ageing may exist in different life forms.

### Keywords
Physcomitrium, Plant ageing, Protein oxidation, Ros, Aging

### Affiliations
Head, Chair Plant Biotechnology Faculty of Biology University of Freiburg Schaenzlestrasse 1 D-79104 Freiburg Germany
Faculty of Biology, University of Freiburg (Chair Plant Biotechnology), Schaenzlestr. 1, D-79104 Freiburg

### Submitter
Ralf Reski

### Lab Head
Dr Ralf Reski
Head, Chair Plant Biotechnology Faculty of Biology University of Freiburg Schaenzlestrasse 1 D-79104 Freiburg Germany


