### Accession
PXD007761

### Title
DYRK3 protein-protein interactions in human cells

### Description
Quantitative affinity purification experiment was performed to identify the protein interactors of DYRK3 kinase in human cells. An additional pull-down experiment was carried out to study the changes of DYRK3 interactors with GSK-626616 kinase inhibitor treatment.

### Sample Protocol
Double-SILAC: SILAC-labelled HEK293T cells were transiently transfected with EGFP::DYRK3 or EGFP (negative control). Triple SILAC: transfected cells were further treated with or without GSK-626616 kinase inhibitor. Cell lysates were incubated with anti-GFP agarose beads. Precipitated proteins were digested with Lys-C and trypsin. Samples were measured by the Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using MaxQuant software package (version 1.5.5.1) with built-in Andromeda search engine. Spectral data were searched against a target-decoy database containing the forward and reverse protein sequences of UniProt human proteome release 2016_06 (92,578 entries), EGFP and the default list of 245 common contaminants. False discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% for both peptide and protein identifications. The “re-quantify” function was switched on.

### Publication Abstract
Liquid-liquid phase separation has been shown to underlie the formation and disassembly of membraneless organelles in cells, but the cellular mechanisms that control this phenomenon are poorly understood. A prominent example of regulated and reversible segregation of liquid phases may occur during mitosis, when membraneless organelles disappear upon nuclear-envelope breakdown and reappear as mitosis is completed. Here we show that the dual-specificity kinase DYRK3 acts as a central dissolvase of several types of membraneless organelle during mitosis. DYRK3 kinase activity is essential to prevent the unmixing of the mitotic cytoplasm into aberrant liquid-like hybrid organelles and the over-nucleation of spindle bodies. Our work supports a mechanism in which the dilution of phase-separating proteins during nuclear-envelope breakdown and the DYRK3-dependent degree of their solubility combine to allow cells to dissolve and condense several membraneless organelles during mitosis.

### Keywords
Ap-ms, Dyrk3, Silac, Kinase inhibitor

### Affiliations
Cancer Research UK Cambridge Institute, University of Cambridge
Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine

### Submitter
Jia-Xuan Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Selbach
Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine


