### Accession
PXD013535

### Title
Epigenetic modifications associated with life cycle transitions in the brown alga Ectocarpus

### Description
In this study, we have carried out a broad census of histone PTMs in Ectocarpus chromatin and have developed a method to evaluate the genome-wide distribution of specific marks. We show that modulation of the expression of sporophyte-biased genes during the life cycle is correlated with marked changes in the pattern of three histone PTMs. In contrast, the expression patterns of gametophyte-biased genes were not correlated with modifications to the histone PTMs assayed, suggesting that gametophyte-biased and sporophyte-biased gene expression are mediated by different epigenetic processes.

### Sample Protocol
Histone proteins were extracted as described in Tirichine et al., 2014, run in a 14% SDS-polyacryamide gel. Gel bands corresponding to different histones were excised and digested overnight with trypsin / endoproteinase LysC (Promega). Peptides were analysed using a Q Exactive HF-X (Thermo Scientific) or a TripleTOFTM 6600 (ABSciex) mass spectrometer coupled to a RSLCnano system (Ultimate 3000, Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
For identification the data were searched against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot Ectocarpus database (20151019 containing 17103 entries) using MascotTM (version 2.5.1). The resulting Mascot files were further processed using myProMS (Poullet et al., 2007) where we fixed the maximum false discovery rate (FDR) calculation to 2% at the peptide level with the QVALITY algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Post translational modifications of histones, Gametophyte, Ectocarpus, Chip-seq, Sporophyte

### Affiliations
Curie Institute
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry Platform

### Submitter
Valentin SABATET

### Lab Head
Dr Damarys Loaw
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry Platform


