### Accession
PXD009164

### Title
Comparative analysis of homologous aminopeptidase PepN from Mycobacterium tuberculosis and Mycobacterium smegmatis reveals dichotomy of traits

### Description
Bacterial pathogens exploit secreted aminopeptidases to modulate host cellular functions. Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) secretes PepN, a M1 aminopeptidase with N-terminal peptidase and C-terminal ERAP1_C-like domains. In addition to being conserved across Mtb complex, PepNMtb is also homologous (78% amino acids identity) to PepN of M. smegmatis (Msmeg), a non-pathogenic mycobacterium. Despite high homogeneity, PepNMtb and PepNMsmeg exhibit opposing traits thus providing insights into their plausible bacterial/host-specific functions. Our biochemical studies show that, while both PepNs uniformly accumulate across all stages of in vitro growth, unlike Mtb, Msmeg is intolerant to over accumulation of its PepN and hence robustly proteolyzes it. Our proteomic analyses indicate Msmeg also secreting some of its excess PepN into its culture supernatant. In contrast, Mtb does not excessively secrete or proteolyse its over accumulating PepNMtb. Our fractionation studies show Mtb translocating its full length PepNMtb into its membrane and cell wall fractions. Instead, Msmeg accumulates its full length PepNMsmeg in its cytosol, and promotes its cleaved (~40 kDa) form to locate into subcellular fractions. PepNMtb is redundant for Mtb’s in vitro growth and thus Mtb is readily amenable to ΔpepN generation. Opposingly, PepNMsmeg is necessary but not sufficient for Msmeg growth in vitro. Given such disparity, co-immunoprecipitation studies on both PepNs predictably showed divergent interactomes with minimal common hits. In our in vitro infection studies, PepNMtb localizes host endoplasmic reticulum directing us to its potential host-specific role. In summary, our study provides insights into PepNs dichotomy despite them being conserved across pathogenic and non-pathogenic mycobacterial species.

### Sample Protocol
Spectral measurements were attained using the Q-Exactive Plus Orbitrap MS platform (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in the positive ion mode with an Electrospray voltage of 2.5 kV, Capillary temperature 300oC. For MS scan, at 70,000 resolution, the AGC target was set to achieve 3e6, IT-50ms, scan range 350 to 2000 m/z, Resolution-70,000 and for MS2 scan AGC was set to achieve 1e5, IT-100ms, Resolution-17,500. Samples were acquired using the TopN = 15 - DDA (Data dependent acquisition) method and MS2 fragmentation was achieved through Higher Energy Collisional Dissociation (HCD) using a NCE (Normalized Collision Energy) value of 27. Singly charged, unassigned and >8 charged species were excluded from acquisition. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 sec, intensity threshold of 1.0e4, peptide match was set to preferred and Exclude isotopes - ON. Mass accuracy during the acquisition was ensured through the lock mass option using the Polysiloxane species (m/z 445.12003). The acquisition parameters were fed into the instrument using the Thermo X-Calibur software version 4.0 through the Tune Plus software interface version 2.8.

### Data Protocol
To generate protein identities, the raw data (.Raw) files were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer (PD; software version 2.1). Briefly, reference proteome database of Mycobacterium tuberculosis (strain ATCC 25618 / H37Rv) comprising 3,993 protein sequences (UP000001584) and Mycobacterium smegmatis (strain ATCC 700084 / mc2155) comprising 6,601 protein sequences (UP000000757) were used to achieve protein identities.  Employing the processing and consensus workflow options available within the PD software, the Sequest search engine was used. Search parameters included MS tolerance: 10ppm, MS/MS tolerance: 0.02 Da, Enzyme specificity: Trypsin, Static modification: Carbamidomethylation (Cysteine), Dynamic modification: Methionine Oxidation, N-terminal acetylation, Maximum missed cleavage - 2, only those protein entries with a FDR threshold of 0.01 were considered as identified in the current study. Identified proteins were exported for further in silico-based analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) secretes proteases and peptidases to subjugate its host. Out of its sixty plus proteases, atleast three are reported to reach host macrophages. In this study, we show that Mtb also delivers a lysyl alanine aminopeptidase, PepN (Rv2467) into host macrophage cytosol. Our comparative in silico analysis shows PepNMtb highly conserved across all pathogenic mycobacteria. Non-pathogenic mycobacteria including M. smegmatis (Msm) also encode pepN. PepN protein levels in both Mtb (pathogenic) and Msm (non-pathogenic) remain uniform across all in vitro growth phases. Despite such tight maintenance of PepNs' steady state levels, upon supplementation, Mtb alone allows accumulation of any excessive PepN. In contrast, Msm does not. It not only proteolyzes, but also secretes out the excessive PepN, be it native or foreign. Interestingly, while PepNMtb is required for modulating virulence in vivo, PepNMsm is essential for Msm growth in vitro. Despite such essentiality difference, both PepNMtb and PepNMsm harbor almost identical N-terminal M1-type peptidase domains that significantly align in their amino acid sequences and overlap in their secondary structures. Their C-terminal ERAP1_C-like domains however align much more moderately. Our in vitro macrophage-based infection experiments with Mtb&#x394;pepN-expressing pepNMsm reveals PepNMsm also retaining the ability to reach host cytosol. Lastly, but notably, we determined the PepNMtb and PepNMsm interactomes and found them to barely coincide. While PepNMtb chiefly interacts with Mtb's secreted proteins, PepNMsm primarily coimmunoprecipitates with Msm's housekeeping proteins. Thus, despite high sequence homology and several common properties, our comparative analytical study reveals host-centric traits of pathogenic and bacterial-centric traits of non-pathogenic PepNs.

### Keywords
Aminopeptidase; mycobacteria; mass spectrometry; metalloenzyme; mycobacterium smegmatis; mycobacterium tuberculosis; tuberculosis; secretion; endoplasmic reticulum.

### Affiliations
Team Leader, Thermo Fisher Sci 
Assistant Professor Ramalingaswami Fellow Translational Health Science and Technology Institute NCR Biotech Science Cluster 3rd Milestone, Faridabad - Gurgaon Expressway PO box # 04 FARIDABAD 121001, India

### Submitter
Saravanan Kumar

### Lab Head
Dr Krishnamohan Atmakuri
Assistant Professor Ramalingaswami Fellow Translational Health Science and Technology Institute NCR Biotech Science Cluster 3rd Milestone, Faridabad - Gurgaon Expressway PO box # 04 FARIDABAD 121001, India


