### Accession
PXD029682

### Title
CDC-like Kinase 4 Deficiency Contributes to Pathological Cardiac Hypertrophy by Modulating NEXN Phosphorylation

### Description
Kinase-catalyzed phosphorylation plays crucial roles in numerous biological processes. CDC-like kinases (CLKs) are a group of evolutionarily conserved dual-specificity kinases that have been implicated in RNA splicing, glucose metabolism, diet-induced thermogenesis and so on. However, it is still largely unknown whether CLKs are involved in pathologic cardiac hypertrophy. This study aimed to investigate the role of CLKs in pathologic cardiac hypertrophy and the underlying mechanisms. Using small RNA interference, we discovered that defects in CLK4, but not CLK1, CLK2 or CLK3, were associated with the pathogenesis of pathological cardiomyocyte hypertrophy, while overexpression of CLK4 exerted resistance to isoproterenol-induced pathological cardiomyocyte hypertrophy. Moreover, the expression of CLK4 was significantly reduced in the failed myocardia of mice subjected to either transverse aortic constriction or isoproterenol infusion. Through the Cre/loxP system, we constructed cardiac-specific Clk4-knockout (Clk4-cKO) mice, which manifested pathological myocardial hypertrophy with progressive left ventricular systolic dysfunction and heart dilation. Phosphoproteomic analysis revealed significant changes in phosphorylation of sarcomere-related proteins in Clk4-cKO mice. Further experiments identified nexilin (NEXN), an F-actin binding protein, as the direct substrate of CLK4, and overexpression of a phosphorylation-mimic mutant of NEXN was sufficient to reverse the hypertrophic growth of cardiomyocytes induced by Clk4 knockdown. Importantly, restoring the phosphorylated NEXN significantly ameliorated the myocardial hypertrophy in Clk4-cKO mice. CLK4 phosphorylates NEXN to regulate the development of pathological cardiac hypertrophy. CLK4 may serve as a potential intervention target for the prevention and treatment of heart failure.

### Sample Protocol
Analysis of protein phosphorylation in ventricular tissues extracted from both the Clk4-cKO and MCM control groups was performed using tandem mass tags (TMTs) from Thermo Fisher Scientific. Briefly, protein from the hearts of Clk4-cKO mice and their MCM littermate controls were solubilized, digested with LysC and trypsin, labeled with TMT-6plex reagents, and mixed in batches of six to enable direct comparisons between Clk4-cKO (n=3) and MCM (n=3) mice. Phosphopeptides were enriched from the samples using titanium dioxide (TiO2) beads as previously described and then subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis using a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo) equipped with a Nanospray Flex source (Thermo).

### Data Protocol
The raw LC-MS/MS data were processed in Proteome Discoverer v2.2 (PD2.2, Thermo), and subsequent statistical analysis was performed in Microsoft Excel. The precise locations of the phosphosites were validated in PD2.2 (Thermo). Gene Ontology (GO) annotation (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/) was applied to determine the protein categories that were enriched. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway mapping of the phosphoproteins was performed using the KEGG Automatic Annotation Server (KAAS), a KEGG online tool. Only categories with a Fisher's corrected p value < 0.05 were considered significantly enriched.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cdc-like kinase 4, Phosphorylation, Nexn, Pathologic cardiac hypertrophy

### Affiliations
Department of Cardiology, Shanghai East Hospital, Tongji University School of Medicine, Shanghai
Department of Cardiology, Shanghai East Hospital, Tongji University School of Medicine, No. 150 Jimo Road, Shanghai 200120, China.

### Submitter
Jian Huang

### Lab Head
Dr Yi-Han Chen
Department of Cardiology, Shanghai East Hospital, Tongji University School of Medicine, No. 150 Jimo Road, Shanghai 200120, China.


