### Accession
PXD033848

### Title
Cx32 wt vs mutant purified proteins

### Description
An analysis of purified Cx32 wt, W3S and R22G mutations. The three different proteins were expressed, digested and measured in DIA.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were digested using ProtiFi S-Traps according to the manufacturer's protocol. They were separated on a C18 column with a gradient length of 60 min and measured in DIA on a Thermo Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed with Spectronaut v. 15.7 in directDIA mode. Imputation, cross-run normalization and iRT calibration were switched off and single hits were excluded. The data was further analyzed in R using the R packages tidyverse and protti.

### Publication Abstract
In myelinating Schwann cells, connection between myelin layers is mediated by gap junction channels (GJCs) formed by docked connexin 32 (Cx32) hemichannels (HCs). Mutations in Cx32 cause the X-linked Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT1X), a degenerative neuropathy without a cure. A molecular link between Cx32 dysfunction and CMT1X pathogenesis is still missing. Here, we describe the high-resolution cryo-electron cryo-myography (cryo-EM) structures of the Cx32 GJC and HC, along with two CMT1X-linked mutants, W3S and R22G. While the structures of wild-type and mutant GJCs are virtually identical, the HCs show a major difference: In the W3S and R22G mutant HCs, the amino-terminal gating helix partially occludes the pore, consistent with a diminished HC activity. Our results suggest that HC dysfunction may be involved in the pathogenesis of CMT1X.

### Keywords
Purified protein, Lc-msms

### Affiliations
ETH Zurich
Institute of Molecular Biology and Biophysics, Department of Biology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland  Laboratory of Biomolecular Research, Division of Biology and Chemistry, Paul Scherrer Institute, Villigen, Switzerland

### Submitter
Dina Schuster

### Lab Head
Dr Volodymyr Korkhov
Institute of Molecular Biology and Biophysics, Department of Biology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland  Laboratory of Biomolecular Research, Division of Biology and Chemistry, Paul Scherrer Institute, Villigen, Switzerland


