### Accession
PXD012835

### Title
Qualitative and Quantitative proteomic analyses of Schistosoma japonicum Eggs and Egg-derived Secretory-Excretory proteins

### Description
Schistosome parasites lay up to a thousand eggs per day inside the veins of their mammalian hosts.  The immature eggs deposited by females against endothelia of venules will embryonate within days.  Approximately 30% of the eggs will migrate to the lumen of the intestine to continue the parasite life cycle. Many eggs, however, are trapped in the liver and intestine causing the main pathology associated with schistosomiasis mansoni and japonica, the liver granulomatous response. Excretory/Secretory egg proteins drive much of egg-induced pathogenesis of schistosomiasis mansoni, and Schistosoma japonicum induce a markedly distinct granulomatous response to that of S. mansoni.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomic analysis - In-gel fractionation Triplicate samples (20 µg) of proteins extracted from S. japonicum liver eggs and ESP, were resolved in 12% one-dimension (1DE) SDS-PAGE gels. After gel fixation, the proteins were stained with EZBlue G-250 colloidal Coommassie Stain (Sigma), and each line was fractionated into 12 gel bands. In-gel trypsin digestion was performed [31], and the mixture of peptides was then collected, dried in speed vacuum and frozen at -20°C.  Proteomic analysis - Filter Aided Sample Preparation Method (FASP) The total proteins from mSj and iSj were processed by the FASP method.  Briefly, triplicate samples of 30 µg of protein were reduced (final concentration of 20 mM DTT), at 95°C, 10 min) and alkylated (final concentration of 40 mM iodoacetamide, at room temperature for 30 min in the dark). The proteins were then transferred into a 10K Millipore Amicon filter (Merck Millipore) and washed first with 8M urea in 100 mM TEAB and then 50nM TEAB. Trypsin was added into the samples (ratio 1:50) and tryptic digestion was performed at 37°C for 18 hours. The peptides were recovered in 50 mM TEAB, dried in speed vacuum, and frozen at -20°C. Mass Spectrometry (MS) analyses - Information Dependent Acquisition (IDA) The peptide fractions from the S. japonicum liver eggs and ESP were suspended in 0.1% TFA and desalted on ZipTip C18 pipette tips, 5 µg (Millipore). The C18 tips were activated with 70% ACN/ 0.1% TFA and then equilibrated with 0.1% TFA before loading the peptides. Loaded peptides were washed with 0.1% TFA and eluted with 80% ACN/ 0.1% TFA before drying in speed vacuum, resuspended in 20 µL of 0.2% ACN/ 0.1% TFA complemented with iRT calibrant (Biognosys, Zurich, Switzerland) [33], and analyzed by reverse phase chromatography with an Eksigent nanoflex cHiPLC coupled to a TripleTOF 5600 mass spectrometer (ABSCIEX, Canada) equipped with a nano-electrospray ion source. The peptides were separated on the eksigent analytical cHiPLC column (3 μm, ChromXP C18CL, 120 Å, 15 cm x 200 µm) with a method using three consecutive linear gradients: 5-10% solvent B (acetonitrile / 0.1% formic acid) over 2 min; 10-40% solvent B over 58 min; 40-50% solvent B over 5 min, at a 500 nL / min flow rate. Eluted peptides were acquired in positive mode by electrospray (voltage 2300V) using IDA method, and those ions exceeding a threshold of 50 counts and possessing a charge state of +2 to +4, were set to trigger the acquisition of product ion spectra for the 10 the most intense ions with 10 second exclusion after one occurrence. MS - Sequential window acquisition of all theoretical fragment ion spectra (SWATH)  Peptides from mSj and iSj samples (triplicates), obtained from FASP resuspended in 0.1% TFA, normalized and desalted on ZipTip C18 pipette tips, 5 µg (Millipore) as described above, dried in speed vacuum and resuspended in 30 µL of 2% ACN/0.1% FA complemented by iRT calibrant (Biognosys, Zurich, Switzerland) [33]. The peptides were separated on an Eksigent analytical cHiPLC column (3 m, ChromXP C18CL, 120 Å, 15 cm x 200 µm) using three linear gradients: 5-10% solvent B (ACN/0.1% formic acid) over 2 min, 10-40% solvent B over 58 min and 40-50% solvent B over 5 min at a 300 nL/min flow rate, and then directly introduced into a TripleTOF 5600 mass spectrometer (ABSCIEX, Canada), as previously described. A rolling collision energy method was used to fragment all ions in a set of 26 sequential overlapping windows of 25 AMU over a mass range coverage of 350-1,000 (m/z). An accumulation time of 100 ms was used for each fragment ion scan resulting in a total cycle time of 2.9s. Data were acquired and processed using Analyst TF 1.7 software (AB SCIEX). MS - Sequential window acquisition of all theoretical fragment ion spectra (SWATH)  Peptides from mSj and iSj samples (triplicates), obtained from FASP resuspended in 0.1% TFA, normalized and desalted on ZipTip C18 pipette tips, 5 µg (Millipore) as described above, dried in speed vacuum and resuspended in 30 µL of 2% ACN/0.1% FA complemented by iRT calibrant (Biognosys, Zurich, Switzerland) [33]. The peptides were separated on an Eksigent analytical cHiPLC column (3 m, ChromXP C18CL, 120 Å, 15 cm x 200 µm) using three linear gradients: 5-10% solvent B (ACN/0.1% formic acid) over 2 min, 10-40% solvent B over 58 min and 40-50% solvent B over 5 min at a 300 nL/min flow rate, and then directly introduced into a TripleTOF 5600 mass spectrometer (ABSCIEX, Canada), as previously described. A rolling collision energy method was used to fragment all ions in a set of 26 sequential overlapping windows of 25 AMU over a mass range coverage of 350-1,000 (m/z). An accumulation time of 100 ms was used for each fragment ion scan resulting in a total cycle time of 2.9s. Data were acquired and processed using Analyst TF 1.7 software (AB SCIEX).

### Data Protocol
The detected protein threshold was set as 0.1 and the false-discovery rate (FDR) was calculated using searches against a decoy database comprised of reversed sequences. All searches were conducted against Schistosoma sp. specific protein databases downloaded from WormBase Parasite (http://www.ebi.ac.uk), UniProt (http://www.uniprot.org), and Scientific Data Sharing Information Bioinformation (http://lifecenter.sgst.cn/protein). The set comprised a total of 39768 non-redundant protein sequences. X! Tandem Jackhammer TPP (2013.06.15.1) was used to search all IDA files (in triplicate for each sample) against a target/decoy version of the Schistosoma databases reference proteome set additionally containing a reversed version of each sequence and the iRT sequences. The spectral library was generated accordingly following Schubert et al; results were assessed for statistical validity in the Trans Proteomic Pipeline (TPP) using PeptideProphet and iProphet, and the false discovery rate was estimated using Mayu. SpectraST (version 5.0) in the TPP was used to normalize the retention time and generate a consensus library, while the OpenSWATH was used to build a target/decoy spectral library. The final lists of proteins were generated based on the results of the triplicates, and included all proteins identified with at least two unique peptides. For SWATH analysis, ProteoWizard msconvert was used to convert the files to mzML format, and then searches against the spectral library were performed using OpenSWATH with a FDR <0.1%. Feature alignment was performed using the TRansition of Identification Confidence (TRIC) algorithm (https://pypi.python.org/pypi/msproteomicstools). Next, the R package SWATH2stats was used to filter low scoring peak groups and remove proteins with less than two associated peptides. Then, the data were normalized (‘equalizeMedians’ method), summarized (Tukey’s median polish’ parameter estimation method), and finally differential expression analysis was performed with MSstats. Differential expression values with an adjusted p-value ≤ 0.05 were considered significant.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Schistosomiasis, Esp, Schistosoma japonicum, Mass spectrometry, Swath analysis., Eggs

### Affiliations
Queen's University Belfast
School of Veterinary Science, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia

### Submitter
Carolina De Marco Verissimo

### Lab Head
Dr Malcolm K. Jones
School of Veterinary Science, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia


