### Accession
PXD026886

### Title
Median Based Absolute Quantification using Fully Unlabelled Generic Internal Standard

### Description
By reporting molar abundances of proteins, absolute quantification determines their stoichiometry in complexes, pathways or networks and also relates them to abundances of non-protein biomolecules. Typically, absolute quantification relies either on protein- specific isotopically labelled peptide standards or on a semi-empirical calibration against the average abundance of peptides chosen from arbitrary selected standard proteins. Here we developed a generic protein standard FUGIS (Fully unlabelled Generic Internal Standard) that requires no isotopic labelling, synthesis of standards or external calibration and is applicable to proteins of any organismal origin. FUGIS is co-digested with analysed proteins and enables their absolute quantification in the same LC-MS/MS run. By using FUGIS, median based absolute quantification (MBAQ) workflow provides similar quantification accuracy compared to isotopically-labelled peptide standards and outperforms methods based on external calibration or selection of best ionized reporter peptides (Top3 quantification) with a median quantification error less than 15%

### Sample Protocol
HeLa Kyoto cells were cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum and 1% penicillin-streptomycin (Gibco™ Life Technologies). HeLa cells were trypsinized, counted and washed 2x with PBS, before 1 ×106 cells were lysed 30 mins on ice in either 1 mL or 0.5 mL RIPA buffer containing CLAAP protease inhibitors cocktail (10 μg/ml Aprotinin, 10 μg/ml Leupetin, 10 μg/ml Pepstatin, 10 μg/ml Antipain and 0.4 mM Phenylmethylsulfonyl Fluoride (PMSF)). Subsequently, cells were further lysed by passing them 10 times through a 25g syringe. A post-nuclear supernatant was obtained from a 15 mins centrifugation at 14.000 x g in an Eppendorf 5804R centrifuge. The supernatant was then used for the further analysis by GeLC-MS/MS workflow

### Data Protocol
GlobeQuant software was developed as a stand-alone Java script based application using in-memory SQL database (ref: https://github.com/agershun/alasql) for fast access and search in the CSV file. GlobeQuant runs on a Windows 7 workstation with 16 GB RAM and 4-cores processor. The .csv output from the Progenesis LC-MS v.4.1 (Nonlinear Dynamics, UK) with peptide ID’s and their respective raw XIC peak areas were used by GlobeQuant software. A list of FUGIS peptides were provided as an input to the software. The software first calculates the molar amount of the FUGIS standard by using the scrambled-native BSA peptide pair. Then the median peak area for the FUGIS peptides were calculated by extracting the XIC peak areas of the FUGIS peptides. The calculated molar amount of the FUGIS standard is equated to the median peak area and used as a single point calibrant.  The molar amount of the target proteins was calculated using the BestN strategy. The BestN peptide were chosen from a pool of Top3 peptides by calculating the coefficient of variation of all possible combination of Best2 and Best3 by default.  If a protein does not contain Top3 peptides the Top2 peptides are considered as Best N peptides. Proteins identified with one peptide are excluded from quantification. The BestN combination with the lowest coefficient of variation (<20%) is taken and averaged to provide the molar amounts of the protein.

### Publication Abstract
By reporting the molar abundance of proteins, absolute quantification determines their stoichiometry in complexes, pathways, or networks. Typically, absolute quantification relies either on protein-specific isotopically labeled peptide standards or on a semiempirical calibration against the average abundance of peptides chosen from arbitrarily selected proteins. In contrast, a generic protein standard FUGIS (fully unlabeled generic internal standard) requires no isotopic labeling, chemical synthesis, or external calibration and is applicable to quantifying proteins of any organismal origin. The median intensity of the peptide peaks produced by the tryptic digestion of FUGIS is used as a single-point calibrant to determine the molar abundance of any codigested protein. Powered by FUGIS, median-based absolute quantification (MBAQ) outperformed other methods of untargeted proteome-wide absolute quantification.

### Keywords
Absolute quantification

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute of Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics
Max Planck Institute of Molecular Cell Biology and Genetic

### Submitter
Bharath Kumar Raghuraman

### Lab Head
Dr Andrej Shevchenko
Max Planck Institute of Molecular Cell Biology and Genetic


