### Accession
PXD024819

### Title
Investigation of protein allocation and utilization in the versatile chemolithoautotroph Cupriavidus necator

### Description
The aim of this study was to understand how autotrophic (CO2-fixing) bacteria balance the different needs for substrate assimilation, growth functions, and resilience in order to thrive in their environment.To this end, the proteome of the model chemolithoautotroph Ralstonia eutropha a.k.a. Cupriavidus necator was studied in different environmental conditions (four limiting substrates, and five different growth rates). Cupriavidus was cultivated in substrate-limited chemostats with fructose, formate, succinate and ammonium limitation to obtain steady state cell samples. The dilution rate/growth rate was increased step-wise from 0.05 to 0.25 1/h in 0.05 steps. Protein quantity was determined by LC-MS, and enzyme utilization was investigated by resource balance analysis modeling.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen cell pellets were resuspended in 125 µL solubilization buffer (200 mM TEAB, 8 M Urea, protease inhibitor). 100 µL glass beads (100 µm diameter) were added to the cell suspension and cells were lysed by bead beating in a Qiagen TissueLyzer II (5 min, f = 30/s, precooled cassettes). Cell debris was removed by centrifugation at 14,000 xg, 30 min, 4°C, and supernatant was transferred to a new tube. Protein concentration was determined using the Bradford assay (Bio-Rad). For reduction and alkylation of proteins, 2.5 µL 200 mM DTT (5 mM final) and 5 µL 200 mM CAA (10 mM final) were added, respectively, and samples incubated for 60 min at RT in the dark. Samples were diluted 8x with 700 µL 200 µM TEAB. For digestion, Lys-C was added in a ratio of 1:75 w/w to protein concentration, and samples were incubated at 37°C and 600 RPM for 12 h. Trypsin was added (1:75 w/w) and samples incubated for 24 h at the same conditions. Samples were acidified with 100 µL 10% formic acid (FA) and insoluble compounds were removed by centrifugation (14,000 xg, 15 min, RT). Peptide samples were then cleaned up using a solid phase extraction (SPE) protocol in 96-well plate format (Tecan Resolvex A200) according to the manufacturer's recommendations. Briefly, the 96-well plate with SPE inserts was equilibrated with 200 µL acetonitrile (ACN) and 2x200 µL 0.6% acetic acid. A lysate volume corresponding to 40 µg protein was loaded on the plate and washed twice with 200 µL 0.6% acetic acid. Peptides were eluted from the column in 100 µL elution buffer (0.6% acetic acid, 80% ACN) and dried in a speedvac for 2 h, 37°C. Dried peptides were frozen at -80°C and dissolved in 10% FA to a final concentration of 1 µg/µL before MS measurement.

### Data Protocol
Thermo raw spectra files were converted to the mzML standard using Proteowizard’s MSConvert tool. Peptide identification and label-free quantification were performed using OpenMS 2.4.0 in KNIME [Röst et al., 2016]. The KNIME pipeline for MS data processing was deposited on https://github.com/m-jahn/openMS-workflows (labelfree_MSGFplus_Percolator_FFI.knwf). MS/MS spectra were subjected to sequence database searching using the OpenMS implementation of MS-GF+ and Percolator [Granholm et al., 2014] with the Cupriavidus necator H16 reference proteome as database (NCBI assembly GCA_000009285.2, downloaded 07 January 2019). Carbamidomethylation was considered as a fixed modification on cysteine and oxidation as a variable modification on methionine. The precursor ion mass window tolerance was set to 10 ppm. The PeptideIndexer module was used to annotate peptide hits with their corresponding target or decoy status, PSMFeatureExtractor was used to annotate additional characteristics to features, PercolatorAdapter was used to estimate the false discovery rate (FDR), and IDFilter was used to keep only peptides with q-values lower than 0.01 (1% FDR). The quantification pipeline is based on the FeatureFinderIdentification workflow allowing feature propagation between different runs [Weisser et al., 2017]. MzML files were retention time corrected using MapRTTransformer, and identifications (idXML files) were combined using the IDMerger module. FeatureFinderIdentification was then used to generate featureXML files based on all identifications combined from different runs. Individual feature maps were combined to a consensus feature map using FeatureLinkerUnlabelledKD, and global intensity was normalized using ConsensusMapNormalizer (by median). Protein quantity was determined by summing up the intensities of all unique peptides per protein. Abundance of ambiguous peptides (peptides mapping to two different proteins) were shared between proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Bacteria must balance the different needs for substrate assimilation, growth functions, and resilience in order to thrive in their environment. Of all cellular macromolecules, the bacterial proteome is by far the most important resource and its size is limited. Here, we investigated how the highly versatile 'knallgas' bacterium <i>Cupriavidus necator</i> reallocates protein resources when grown on different limiting substrates and with different growth rates. We determined protein quantity by mass spectrometry and estimated enzyme utilization by resource balance analysis modeling. We found that <i>C. necator</i> invests a large fraction of its proteome in functions that are hardly utilized. Of the enzymes that are utilized, many are present in excess abundance. One prominent example is the strong expression of CBB cycle genes such as Rubisco during growth on fructose. Modeling and mutant competition experiments suggest that CO<sub>2</sub>-reassimilation through Rubisco does not provide a fitness benefit for heterotrophic growth, but is rather an investment in readiness for autotrophy.

### Keywords
['Cupriavidus necator', 'Cellular economy', 'Resource balance', 'Ralstonia eutropha', 'Data-dependent acquisition', 'Msgf+', 'Substrate limitation', 'Resource allocation', 'Openms', 'Shotgun proteomics']

### Affiliations
['Science for Life Laboratory Stockholm', '1-Department of protein Science, KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden, 2-Science for Life Laboratory, Stockholm, Sweden']

### Submitter
['Michael Jahn']

### Lab Head
[{'title': 'Dr', 'affiliation': '1-Department of protein Science, KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden, 2-Science for Life Laboratory, Stockholm, Sweden', 'email': 'paul.hudson@scilifelab.se', 'country': '', 'orcid': '', 'name': 'Paul Hudson', 'id': '2229921'}]

### SDRF
characteristics[organism]: ['Cupriavidus necator H16']
characteristics[organism part]: ['whole cell']
characteristics[cell type]: ['bacterial cell']
characteristics[disease]: ['not available']
comment[label]: ['NT=label free sample']
comment[instrument]: ['NT=Q Exactive;AC=MS:1001911']
comment[modification parameters]: ['NT=Carbamidomethyl;AC=UNIMOD:4;TA=C;MT=Fixed']
comment[modification parameters].1: ['NT=Oxidation;MT=Variable;TA=M;AC=UNIMOD:35']

