### Accession
PXD019597

### Title
Phosphorylation of GABAAR α2 subunit

### Description
γ-aminobutyric acid type A receptors (GABAARs) mediate fast synaptic inhibition. Phosphorylation governs GABAARs function and trafficking in α4, β and γ subunits. However, phosphorylation of other subunits has not been demonstrated. Here we show that the α2 subunit is phosphorylated on S359.

### Sample Protocol
To identify phosphorylation sites on GABAAR α2 subunit, we used a previously studied myc/pHluorin tagged GABAAR α2 subunit (pHα2) knock-in mice (10.1074/jbc.M116.724443). pHα2 was immunoprecipitated from brain lysates with GFP-Trap, run on a SDS-PAGE gel, and the ~80kDa band corresponding to pHα2 was exised and sent to Taplin MS Facility (Harvard) for trypsin/chymotrypsin digestion and analysis.

### Data Protocol
Analysis was performed using ReAdW.exe (ver4.3.1), SEQUEST (ver. 28, rev 13). Peptides were required to be tryptic. Fixed modifications considered were 57.0215 Da on cysteine. Variable modifications considered: methionine oxidation and phosphorylation on serine, threonine and tyrosine. Mass tolerance was set to 2 Da for precursor ions and 1 Da for fragment ions. Ascore was used to determine the confidence of a given phosphorylation site.

### Publication Abstract
GABA type A receptors (GABA<sub>A</sub>Rs) mediate fast synaptic inhibition and are trafficked to functionally diverse synapses. However, the precise molecular mechanisms that regulate the synaptic targeting of these receptors are unclear. Whereas it has been previously shown that phosphorylation events in &#x3b1;4, &#x3b2;, and &#x3b3; subunits of GABA<sub>A</sub>Rs govern their function and trafficking, phosphorylation of other subunits has not yet been demonstrated. Here, we show that the &#x3b1;2 subunit of GABA<sub>A</sub>Rs is phosphorylated at Ser-359 and enables dynamic regulation of GABA<sub>A</sub>R binding to the scaffolding proteins gephyrin and collybistin. We initially identified Ser-359 phosphorylation by MS analysis, and additional experiments revealed that it is regulated by the activities of cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA) and the protein phosphatase 1 (PP1) and/or PP2A. GST-based pulldowns and coimmunoprecipitation experiments demonstrate preferential binding of both gephyrin and collybistin to WT and an S359A phosphonull variant, but not to an S359D phosphomimetic variant. Furthermore, the decreased capacity of the &#x3b1;2 S359D variant to bind collybistin and gephyrin decreased the density of synaptic &#x3b1;2-containing GABA<sub>A</sub>R clusters and caused an absence of &#x3b1;2 enrichment in the axon initial segment. These results suggest that PKA-mediated phosphorylation and PP1/PP2A-dependent dephosphorylation of the &#x3b1;2 subunit play a role in the dynamic regulation of GABA<sub>A</sub>R accumulation at inhibitory synapses, thereby regulating the strength of synaptic inhibition. The MS data have been deposited to ProteomeXchange, with the data set identifier PXD019597.

### Keywords
Α2, Phosphorylation, Gabaar

### Affiliations
University of Bristol
Professor of Neuroscience Tufts University USA

### Submitter
Yasuko Nakamura

### Lab Head
Dr Stephen James Moss
Professor of Neuroscience Tufts University USA


