### Accession
PXD008314

### Title
Identification of Novel Protein Targets of Dimethyl Fumarate Modification in Neurons and Astrocytes Reveal Actions Independent of Keap1 Activation

### Description
The fumarate ester dimethyl fumarate (DMF) has been introduced recently for the treatment of relapsing remitting multiple sclerosis (RRMS), a chronic inflammatory condition resulting in neuronal demyelination and axonal loss. The complete mechanism of DMF action is unknown, but involves the depletion of intracellular glutathione and modification of thiols on Kelch-like ECH-associated protein 1 (Keap1), which in turn induces the expression of antioxidant response element genes. Previous work by our laboratory has shown that DMF reacts with a wide range of protein thiols in adipocytes, detected following ester hydrolysis by an antibody recognizing succinated proteins. We proposed that other intracellular thiol residues may also be irreversibly modified by DMF in neurons and astrocytes. DMF treatment of primary rodent neurons and astrocytes, as well as differentiated N1E-115 cells, resulted in the modification of 24 novel target proteins by mass spectrometry. Using this approach, we confirmed the identification and site of modification of the identified proteins, which include cofilin-1, tubulin and collapsin response mediator protein 2 (CRMP2). An in vitro functional assay that measures the ability of cofilin-1 to sever the actin cytoskeleton demonstrated that DMF-modified cofilin-1 loses activity and generates less monomeric actin, potentially inhibiting cofilin’s cytoskeletal remodeling activity; an effect that could be beneficial in the modulation of myelination during RRMS. DMF modification of tubulin did not significantly impact axonal lysosomal trafficking. The oxygen consumption rate of N1E-115 neurons and the levels of proteins related to mitochondrial energy production were only slightly affected by the highest doses of DMF, confirming that DMF treatment does not impair cellular respiratory function. In summary, we demonstrate that in addition to the stimulation of the antioxidant response, DMF resulted in electrophilic modification of novel protein targets that provide new insight on the mechanisms supporting the neuroprotective and re-myelination benefits associated with DMF treatment.

### Sample Protocol
To identify the sites of fumarate ester modification, 60 µg of protein from primary neurons, 200 µg of protein from primary astrocytes or 120 µg of protein from differentiated N1E-115 neurons were resolved by SDS-PAGE, and the gels were stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue. After destaining, all protein bands were excised from the gels and subjected to in-gel digestion with trypsin. Briefly, proteins were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol and alkylated with 170 mM 4-vinylpyridine. Trypsin digestion was carried out overnight at 37°C in the presence of 1.5 ng sequence grade modified trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. After gel extraction, the peptides were re-suspended in 1% acetic acid and analyzed on a Dionex Ultimate 3000-LC system (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL) coupled to a Velos Pro Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The LC solvents were 2 % acetonitrile/0.1 % formic acid (Solvent A) and 80 % acetonitrile/0.1 % formic acid (Solvent B). At 4 min the trap column, a 2 cm Acclaim PepMap-100 column (Thermo Scientific) was put in line with the analytical column, a 75 μm C18 stationary-phase LC PicoChip Nanospray column (New Objective, Inc., Woburn, MA). The peptides were eluted with a gradient from 98%A:2%B to 40%A:60%B over 30 min, followed by a 5 min ramp to 10%A:90%B that was held for 10 min. The Orbitrap was operated in data-dependent MS/MS analysis mode and excluded all ions below 200 counts. Following a survey scan 8 precursor ions were selected for further MS/MS. The data-dependent acquisition (DDA) data were analyzed using Proteome Discover 1.4 software with SEQUEST algorithm against the uniprot_ref_mouse database (2014-10-03 version, 52,474 proteins) or uniprot_ref_rat database (2011-5-11 version, 39765 proteins) with XCorr validation >2 (+2) or >2.5 (+3). An allowance for 2 missed cleavages was provided and a minimum of 8 unique peptides was reported for all proteins identified (maximum 106 peptides). For all identifications the spectra were manually inspected to confirm identity and incorrect identifications were discarded. To specifically confirm the modified proteins that were identified in DDA mode, multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) was used to monitor select modified peptide masses of interest for CID-MS/MS analysis at a resolution of 7500. The CID-MS/MS data was manually sequenced using Thermo Xcalibur 2.2 software to confirm the modified peptides. Details of the variable modifications considered are described below.

### Data Protocol
The data-dependent acquisition (DDA) data were analyzed using Proteome Discover 1.4 software with SEQUEST algorithm against the uniprot_ref_mouse database (2014-10-03 version, 52,474 proteins) or uniprot_ref_rat database (2011-5-11 version, 39765 proteins) with XCorr validation >2 (+2) or >2.5 (+3). An allowance for 2 missed cleavages was provided and a minimum of 8 unique peptides was reported for all proteins identified (maximum 106 peptides). For all identifications the spectra were manually inspected to confirm identity and incorrect identifications were discarded. To specifically confirm the modified proteins that were identified in DDA mode, multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) was used to monitor select modified peptide masses of interest for CID-MS/MS analysis at a resolution of 7500. The CID-MS/MS data was manually sequenced using Thermo Xcalibur 2.2 software to confirm the modified peptides. No fixed modifications were considered. The variable modifications of methionine oxidation (MOX), proline hydroxylation (Pox), cysteine pyridylethylation (PE, 105.058) or cysteine succination by fumarate (2SC, 116.011), cysteine modification by monomethyl fumarate (MMF, 130.026) or cysteine modification by dimethyl fumarate (DMF, 144.042) were considered with a mass tolerance of 15 ppm for precursor ions and a mass tolerance of 10 ppm for fragment ions.

### Publication Abstract
The fumarate ester dimethyl fumarate (DMF) has been introduced recently as a treatment for relapsing remitting multiple sclerosis (RRMS), a chronic inflammatory condition that results in neuronal demyelination and axonal loss. DMF is known to act by depleting intracellular glutathione and modifying thiols on Keap1 protein, resulting in the stabilization of the transcription factor Nrf2, which in turn induces the expression of antioxidant response element genes. We have previously shown that DMF reacts with a wide range of protein thiols, suggesting that the complete mechanisms of action of DMF are unknown. Here, we investigated other intracellular thiol residues that may also be irreversibly modified by DMF in neurons and astrocytes. Using mass spectrometry, we identified 24 novel proteins that were modified by DMF in neurons and astrocytes, including cofilin-1, tubulin and collapsin response mediator protein 2 (CRMP2). Using an <i>in vitro</i> functional assay, we demonstrated that DMF-modified cofilin-1 loses its activity and generates less monomeric actin, potentially inhibiting its cytoskeletal remodeling activity, which could be beneficial in the modulation of myelination during RRMS. DMF modification of tubulin did not significantly impact axonal lysosomal trafficking. We found that the oxygen consumption rate of N1E-115 neurons and the levels of proteins related to mitochondrial energy production were only slightly affected by the highest doses of DMF, confirming that DMF treatment does not impair cellular respiratory function. In summary, our work provides new insights into the mechanisms supporting the neuroprotective and remyelination benefits associated with DMF treatment in addition to the antioxidant response by Nrf2.

### Keywords
Chemical modification, Astrocytes, Neurons, Dimethyl fumarate

### Affiliations
Department of Pharmacology, Physiology & Neuroscience School of Medicine University of South Carolina Columbia, South Carolina, 29209 USA
University of South CAROLINA

### Submitter
Norma Frizzell

### Lab Head
Dr Norma Frizzell
Department of Pharmacology, Physiology & Neuroscience School of Medicine University of South Carolina Columbia, South Carolina, 29209 USA


