### Accession
PXD032729

### Title
Proteomic analysis of skeletal muscle from the Hybryid Mouse Diversity Panel

### Description
To begin to understand how variations in the genome drive changes in the skeletal muscle proteome, we performed a proteomic analysis of Gastrocnemius muscle from 73 inbred mouse strains of the Hybrid Mouse Diversity Panel (HMDP) that were fed a chow diet and housed under identical environmental conditions (n=2-4; 162 mice). These data were integrated with genomic and various molecular/phenotypic data via systems genetic analysis which is a powerful forward genetics approach to identify potential new regulators of complex traits. Proteomics was performed with eighteen 10-plex tandem mass tags (TMT) experiments each consisting of 9 strains plus a pooled common internal reference. Peptides were analysed by 2D-liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (2D-LC-MS/MS) resulting in the quantification of 5,350 proteins with 4,027 quantified in >50 mice and 2,069 proteins quantified in all 162 animals.

### Sample Protocol
Muscle tissue was lysed in 6 M guanidine HCL (Sigma; #G4505), 100 mM Tris pH 8.5 containing 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (Sigma; #75259) and 40 mM 2-chloroacetamide (Sigma; #22790) by tip-probe sonication. The lysate was heated at 95°C for 5 min and centrifuged at 20,000 x g for 10 min at 4°C. The supernatant was diluted 1:1 with water and precipitated overnight with 5 volumes of acetone at -20°C. The lysate was centrifuged at 4,000 x g for 5 min at 4°C and the protein pellet was washed with 80% acetone. The lysate was centrifuged at 4,000 x g for 5 min at 4°C and the protein pellet was resuspended in Digestion Buffer (10% 2,2,2-Trifluoroethanol (Sigma; #96924)) in 100 mM HEPEs pH 8.5). Protein was quantified with BCA (ThermoFisher Scientific) and normalized in Digestion Buffer to a final concentration of 2 µg/µl. Protein was digested with sequencing grade trypsin (Sigma; #T6567) and sequencing grade LysC (Wako; #129-02541) at a 1:50 enzyme:substrate ratio overnight at 37°C with shaking at 2000 x rpm. Eight micrograms of peptide was directly labelled with 32 µg of 10-plex TMT (lot #QB211242) in 20 µl at a final concentration of 50% acetonitrile for 1.5 h at room temperature. The reaction was de-acylated with a final concentration of 0.3% (w/v) hydroxylamine and quenched with a final concentration of 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Each 10-plex experiment contained 9 different strains with a tenth reference label (131 isobaric label) made up of the same peptide digest from pooled mix of C57BL/6J muscles. The sample identity and labelling channels have been uploaded as a table with the .raw proteomic data to the PRIDE ProteomeXchange (see Data Availability section). Following labelling, the peptides from each of the 18 TMT 10-plex batches were pooled and purified directly by Styrene Divinylbenzene - Reversed-Phase Sulfonate (SDB-RPS) microcolumns and eluted with 80% acetonitrile in 2% ammonium hydroxide followed by vacuum concentration. Thirty micrograms of peptide was fractionated on an in-house fabricated 25 cm x 320 µm column packed with C18BEH particles (3 µm, Waters). Peptides were separated on a gradient of 0 – 30% acetonitrile containing 10 mM ammonium formate (pH 7.9) over 60 min at 6 µl/min using an Agilent 1260 HPLC and detection at 210 nm with a total of 48 fractions collected and concatenated down to 12 fractions.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were resuspended in 2% acetonitrile containing 0.1% TFA and  analysed on a Dionex ultra-high pressure liquid chromatography system coupled to an Orbitrap Lumos mass spectrometer. Briefly, peptides were separated on 40 cm x 75 µm column containing 1.9 um C18AQ Reprosil particles on a linear gradient of 2- 30% acetonitrile over 2 h. Electrospray ionisation was performed at 2.3 kV with 40% RF lens and positively charged peptides detected via a full scan MS (350-1550 m/z, 1e6 AGC, 60K resolution, 50 ms injection time) followed data-dependent MS/MS analysis performed with CID of 35% normalised collision energy (NCE) (rapid scan rate, 2e4 AGC, 50 ms injection time, 10 ms activation time, 0.7 m/z isolation) of the top 10 most abundant peptides. Synchronous-precursor selection with MS3 (SPS-MS3) analysis was enabled with HCD of 60 NCE (100-500 m/z, 50K resolution, 1e5 AGC, 105 ms injection time) [PMID: 24927332]. Dynamic exclusion was enabled for 60 s. Data were processed with Proteome Discoverer v2.3  and searched against the Mouse UniProt database (November 2018) using SEQUEST [PMID: 24226387]. The precursor MS tolerance were set to 20 ppm and the MS/MS tolerance was set to 0.8 Da with a maximum of 2 miss-cleavage. The peptides were searched with oxidation of methionine set as variable modification, and TMT tags on peptide N-terminus / lysine and carbamidomethylation of cysteine set as a fixed modification. All data was searched as a single batch and the peptide spectral matches (PSMs) of each database search filtered to 1% FDR using a target/decoy approach with Percolator [PMID: 17952086]. The filtered PSMs from each database search were grouped and q-values generated at the peptide level with the Qvality algorithm [PMID: 19193729]. Finally, the grouped peptide data was further filtered to 1% protein FDR using Protein Validator. Quantification was performed with the reporter ion quantification node for TMT quantification in Proteome Discoverer. TMT precision was set to 20 ppm and corrected for isotopic impurities. Only spectra with <50% co-isolation interference were used for quantification with an average signal-to-noise filter of >10.

### Publication Abstract
Improving muscle function has great potential to improve the quality of life. To identify novel regulators of skeletal muscle metabolism and function, we performed a proteomic analysis of gastrocnemius muscle from 73 genetically distinct inbred mouse strains, and integrated the data with previously acquired genomics and &gt;300 molecular/phenotypic traits via quantitative trait loci mapping and correlation network analysis. These data identified thousands of associations between protein abundance and phenotypes and can be accessed online (https://muscle.coffeeprot.com/) to identify regulators of muscle function. We used this resource to prioritize targets for a functional genomic screen in human bioengineered skeletal muscle. This identified several negative regulators of muscle function including UFC1, an E2 ligase for protein UFMylation. We show UFMylation is up-regulated in a mouse model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, a disease that involves muscle atrophy. Furthermore, in vivo knockdown of UFMylation increased contraction force, implicating its role as a negative regulator of skeletal muscle function.

### Keywords
Hybrid mouse diversity panel, Skeletal muscle

### Affiliations
The University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Benjamin Parker

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin Parker
The University of Melbourne


