### Accession
PXD008207

### Title
Proteomic comparison of breast, leg, and thigh meat from turkey (Meleagris gallopavo)

### Description
The proteomes of breast, leg, and thigh meat from turkey were compared using label-free methods.

### Sample Protocol
A turkey (6.1 kg) purchased at a local grocery store was thawed (4 °C, 3 days), at which time the plastic wrapping was removed and tissues were taken from the breast, thigh and leg regions (approximately 5 gms each).  The tissue isolates then were stored at -80˚C until further processing.  The isolates were thawed on ice and rinsed thoroughly with ice cold phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). Samples were homogenized in 4 ml cell lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 1 mM EDTA, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% (w/v) SDS, 0.5% (w/v) sodium deoxycholate, 1% (w/v) NP-40).  After homogenization, samples for protein analysis were subjected to three rounds of freeze/thaw (liquid nitrogen / 37˚C).  The homogenization solution for all samples was then separated from remaining chunks and the solutions stored at -80˚C.  Protein concentrations were determined by tryptophan fluorescence  using a standard solution of bovine serum albumin to generate a standard curve. Aliquots of the samples for protein analysis containing 100 g protein were treated with 1 ml methanol and stored over night at -80˚C to precipitate protein.  Precipitated protein was recovered by centrifugation at room temperature for 15 minutes at 11000 x g.  Protein pellets were rinsed twice with 1 ml cold methanol.  The protein was then resuspended in freshly prepared 8 M urea containing 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AmBic) at a concentration of 0.5 mg/mL.  Disulfide bonds were reduced by incubation at 37˚C for 1 hour in the presence of 4.5 mM DTT.  Free sulhydryls were then alkylated by incubation in the dark for 30 minutes in the presence of 10 mM iodoacetamide (IAA).  Unreacted IAA was quenched by the addition of 10 mM DTT.  Urea concentration was brought to 1.6 M by the addition of 100 mM AmBic, 5 µg trypsin was added and the digestion was carried out over night at 37˚C.  Digestions were desalted using Oasis HLB 1 cc 10 mg extraction cartridges (Waters).  Desalted peptides were dried using a vacuum concentrator and resuspended in 50 µl water containing 0.2% (v/v) formic acid. Peptides were all analyzed using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos equipped with an Easy-nLC 1200 UPLC, and an Easy Spray nanospray source (Thermo Scientific).  The column utilized for peptide separation was a PepMap RSLC C18 2 m 100 A 50 µm x 15 cm (Thermo Scientific) in line with an Acclaim PepMap 100 trapping column (100 µm x 2 cm).  Analysis utilized a 110 minute gradient from 4 to 50% solvent B where A is 0.2% (v/v) formic acid in water and B is 20:80 water:acetonitrile containing 0.2% (v/v) formic acid. Column temperature was maintained at 55˚C and the ion transfer tube at 275˚C.  Other analysis conditions for were as follows:  2 µl injection, 300 nl/min flow rate, 2300 V ion spray voltage, sweep gas at 7, MS scans utilizing the orbitrap at 60,000 resolution for m/z 300-1350, an AGC target of 1e6 with 50 ms max inject time, profile, positive, MSMS targets chosen using MIPS looking for peptide-like isotopic distribution with a z=2-6 and a minimum intensity of 2e3, dynamic exclusion for 5 sec, priority given to the most intense with a max cycle time of 2 sec (Top Speed mode), MSMS isolation window of 0.7 m/z, HCD at 30, ion trap turbo scan detection for m/z 200-1200, AGC target of 4e4 with a max inject time of 15 ms, centroid.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 2.2.0.388 (Thermo).  Masses were first recalibrated by the Spectrum Files RC node using a quick search followed by a thorough search using Sequest HT of Version 5.0 of the turkey proteome available for download at the NCBI FTP website.  To minimize missing values, identified peptide peaks were matched among runs with unidentified peaks using a combination of the Minora Feature Detector, Feature Mapper and Precursor Ions Quantifier nodes.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Turkey, Thigh, Breast, Proteome, Meleagris gallopavo, Leg

### Affiliations
Virginia Tech Mass Spectrometry Incubator, Department of Biochemistry, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA, USA
Virginia Tech

### Submitter
Keith Ray

### Lab Head
Dr Rich F. Helm
Virginia Tech Mass Spectrometry Incubator, Department of Biochemistry, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA, USA


