### Accession
PXD009027

### Title
A crude-MS strategy for in-depth proteome analysis of the methane-oxidizing Methylocystis sp. strain SC2

### Description
Using recent developments in sample preparation strategies and improvements in mass spectrometry (MS), an optimized procedure was developed to characterize the proteome of Methylocystis sp. strain SC2, a type II methanotroph. It represents one of the ecologically important groups of methane-oxidizing bacteria. The major challenge for developing an efficient analytical proteomics workflow for methanotrophic bacteria is the high amount of membrane-associated proteins that need to be efficiently solubilized and digested for downstream analysis. Therefore, each step of the workflow, including cell lysis, protein solubilization and digestion, and MS peptide quantification, was assessed and optimized. Our novel crude-lysate-MS approach proved to increase protein quantification accuracy and the proteome coverage of strain SC2. It captured 62% of predicted SC2 proteome, with 10-fold increase in membrane-associated proteins relative to less effective conditions. Use of crude cell lysate for downstream analysis showed not only to be highly efficient for strain SC2 but also for other members of the Methylocystaceae family. To validate the efficiency of our newly developed workflow, we analyzed the SC2 proteome under two contrasting nitrogen conditions, with a focus on the differential expression of proteins involved in methane and nitrogen metabolisms.

### Sample Protocol
For protein solubilization, the frozen cell pellets were resuspended and sonicated (Hielscher Ultrasound Technology) in 2 % SLS, 2 % SDC, 2 % SDS or 8 M urea (all in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer (following referred to as ABC buffer)) in the presence of 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP). All urea-containing samples were incubated at 37 °C, whereas all other samples were incubated at 95 °C. To determine the optimal incubation time for protein solubilization, aliquots of 50 µL were collected from each sample after 15, 30, 60 and 90 min of incubation. The remaining samples were additionally sonicated after each aliquot collection step. After 90 min of incubation, crude lysates were divided into two subsamples of equal volume. The first subsample was used to produce cleared lysate, by centrifuging for 10 min at 21000 x g. The second subsample was maintained as crude lysate containing the cell debris. All protein samples were allowed to cool and were incubated with 10 mM iodoacetamide at 25 °C for 30 min. The concentration of proteins in each sample was measured with BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) following manufacturer’s instructions.For protein digestion step, 50 μg of total solubilized protein from each sample was used (modified from Glatter et al. (50)). For in-solution digestion (ISD), the samples were diluted to 0.5 % concentration of solibilizing (SDC, SLS) agent. The dilution was made using 100 mM ABC buffer. For FASP digestion, protein samples were mixed with 100 mM ABC buffer and transferred into the preconditioned spin filters (Microcon YM-30, Millipore). Following two additional wash/centrifugation cycles, protein samples were finally suspended in 100 mM ABC for further digestion. LysC (0.5 µg) was added directly to the protein extract and incubated for 4 h at 30 °C, followed by trypsin (1 μg) digestion overnight at 30 °C. Subsequently, the peptides were eluted by centrifugation of the spin filters. The filters were further washed twice with 15% acetonitrile. All eluates were collected into the same tube and diluted to an acetonitrile concentration of 1 %. Before LC-MS analysis, traces of SDC or SLS were precipitated using 2 % trifluoroacetic acid, and all protein digests were desalted using C18 microspin columns (Harvard Apparatus) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.LC-MS/MS analysis of protein digests was performed on Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer connected to an electrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide separation was carried out using Ultimate 3000 nanoLC-system (Thermo Fisher Scientific), equipped with packed in-house with C18 resin column (Magic C18 AQ 2.4 µm, Dr. Maisch). A gradient was applied at a flow rate of 300 nL/ min from 98 % solvent A (0.15 % formic acid) and 2 % solvent B (99.85 % acetonitrile, 0.15 % formic acid) to 25 % solvent B over 105 min continued from 25 % to 35 % of solvent B up to 135 min. The data acquisition mode for the initial LFQ study was set to obtain one high-resolution MS scan at a resolution of 70 000 (m/z 200) with scanning range from 375 to 1500 m/z followed by MS/MS scans of the 10 most intense ions. To increase the efficiency of MS/MS shots, the charged state screening modus was adjusted to exclude unassigned and singly charged ions. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 30 sec. The ion accumulation time was set to 50 ms (both MS and MS/MS). The automatic gain control (AGC) was set to 3 × 106 for MS survey scans and 1 × 105 for MS/MS scans.

### Data Protocol
LFQ was done using Progenesis QI software (Nonlinear Dynamics, version 2.0), which is discovery analysis software for LC-MS data.  MS raw files were imported into Progensis and the output data (MS/MS spectra) were exported in mgf format. MS/MS spectra were then searched using MASCOT against a decoy database of the predicted proteomes from Methylocystis sp. strain SC2 and E. coli strain K-12 downloaded from UniProt database. The search criteria were set as follows: full tryptic specificity was required (cleavage after lysine or arginine residues); two missed cleavages were allowed; carbamidomethylation (C) was set as a fixed modification; and oxidation (M) was set as a variable modification. The mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions for HCD (high energy-collision dissociation). The peptide false discovery rate (q-value) was set to 1 % on the peptide level and validated using the number of reverse protein sequence hits in the data sets. Results from the database search were imported back to Progenesis, mapping peptide identifications to MS1 features. The peak heights of all MS1 features annotated with the same peptide sequence were summed, and protein abundance was calculated per LC-MS run.  Next, the data obtained from Progenesis were evaluated and q-values and intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) values were calculated using SafeQuant R-package version 2.2.2 (50).

### Publication Abstract
Methylocystis sp. strain SC2 is a representative of the alphaproteobacterial methane oxidizers or type IIa methanotrophs. These microorganisms play a crucial role in methane cycling. Here, we developed an efficient analytical proteomics workflow for strain SC2. It tackles the major challenges related to the high amount of integral membrane proteins that need to be efficiently solubilized and digested for downstream analysis. Each step of the workflow, including cell lysis, protein solubilization and digestion, and MS peptide quantification, was assessed and optimized. Our new crude-lysate-MS approach proved to increase protein quantification accuracy and proteome coverage of strain SC2. It captured 62% of the predicted SC2 proteome, with up to 10-fold increase in membrane-associated proteins relative to less effective conditions. The use of crude cell lysate for downstream analysis showed to be highly efficient for SC2 and other members of the family Methylocystaceae. Using two contrasting nitrogen conditions, we further validated our workflow efficiency by analyzing the SC2 proteome for differentially expressed proteins involved in methane and nitrogen metabolism. Our crude-MS approach may be applied to a variety of proteomic workflows incorporating cell types with challenging solubilization properties. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD009027.

### Keywords
Sample preparation, Methane oxidation, Bacterial proteomics, Label-free quantification

### Affiliations
Max-Planck Institute for terrestrial Microbiology
MPI Marburg

### Submitter
Timo Glatter

### Lab Head
Dr Timo Glatter
Max-Planck Institute for terrestrial Microbiology


