### Accession
PXD005848

### Title
Scanning Quadruople  DIA - aspergillus fumigatus

### Description
Qualitative and Quantitative Characterization of a Novel DIA Method for Omics Analysis and its Application to Biomedical Analyses

### Sample Protocol
Quadrupole time of flight (Q-ToF) MS is a well-established tool for both discovery and quantitative applications. In discovery, Q-ToFs are generally operated in two distinct modes of operation, that is data-dependent acquisition (DDA) and data independent acquisition (DIA). In DIA methods, such as MSE and ion mobility (IM) enabled MSe (HDMSe), the quadrupole mass filter operates in wide pass mode. Other DIA methods use ion traps or stepped quadrupoles with resolving DCs having transmission windows typically in the range of 1-20Da.  Here we describe a mode of DIA operation whereby a resolving quadrupole is scanned repetitively over alternating low and elevated energy scans. This produces data in a similar format to IM enabled acquisitions.

### Data Protocol
The quadrupole mass filter of a Xevo G2XS Q-ToF was tuned and characterised to allow various transmission windows to be alternately employed. The overall m/z range of the quadrupole, typically 400 – 900 m/z for peptide samples, was continuously and repetitively scanned with MS data acquired using a repurposed ToF acquisition system originally developed for IM-ToF and capable of delivering up to 2000 ToF spectra per second. Alternate scans in the MS data contain low collision energy data for precursor and elevated energy data for fragment ion information. The resulting 2D data format can be processed using both commercial (PLGS, UNIFI) and open source (Skyline, OpenMS) software for establishing identification/quantitative results and Driftscope is used to visualise the multidimensional data.

### Publication Abstract
Calcineurin is a critical cell-signaling protein that orchestrates growth, stress response, virulence, and antifungal drug resistance in several fungal pathogens. Blocking calcineurin signaling increases the efficacy of several currently available antifungals and suppresses drug resistance. We demonstrate the application of a novel scanning quadrupole DIA method for the analysis of changes in the proteins coimmunoprecipitated with calcineurin during therapeutic antifungal drug treatments of the deadly human fungal pathogen Aspergillus fumigatus. Our experimental design afforded an assessment of the precision of the method as demonstrated by peptide- and protein-centric analysis from eight replicates of the study pool QC samples. Two distinct classes of clinically relevant antifungal drugs that are guideline recommended for the treatment of invasive "aspergillosis" caused by Aspergillus fumigatus, the azoles (voriconazole) and the echinocandins (caspofungin and micafungin), which specifically target the fungal plasma membrane and the fungal cell wall, respectively, were chosen to distinguish variations occurring in the proteins coimmunoprecipitated with calcineurin. Novel potential interactors were identified in response to the different drug treatments that are indicative of the possible role for calcineurin in regulating these effectors. Notably, treatment with voriconazole showed increased immunoprecipitation of key proteins involved in membrane ergosterol biosynthesis with calcineurin. In contrast, echinocandin (caspofungin or micafungin) treatments caused increased immunoprecipitation of proteins involved in cell-wall biosynthesis and septation. Furthermore, abundant coimmunoprecipitation of ribosomal proteins with calcineurin occurred exclusively in echinocandins treatment, indicating reprogramming of cellular growth mechanisms during different antifungal drug treatments. While variations in the observed calcineurin immunoprecipitated proteins may also be due to changes in their expression levels under different drug treatments, this study suggests an important role for calcineurin-dependent cellular mechanisms in response to antifungal treatment of A. fumigatus that warrants future studies.

### Keywords
Aspergillus fumigatus

### Affiliations
Waters Corporation

### Submitter
Hans Vissers

### Lab Head
Dr JPC Vissers
Waters Corporation


