### Accession
PXD009551

### Title
Global Interactome of ZIKV (FSS13025) viral proteins.

### Description
To identify the global cellular interactome of each ZIKV proteins, individual HA-tagged ZIKV proteins (FSS13025 Asian strain) were expressed in the neuroblastoma cell line SK-N-BE2 using lentivirus-mediated delivery. Cellular lysates were subjected to Affinity purification (AP) using HA-agarose beads, and eluates digested with Trypsin and LysC before analysis via LC-MS/MS using an Orbitrap instrument.

### Sample Protocol
For the determination of the ZIKV interactome, four independent affinity purifications were performed for each ZIKV HA-tagged viral protein. SK-N-BE2 cells were transduced with an MOI of 3 of each lentivirus (8x10^6 cells/dish) and 72 hours later cells were scraped in 1 ml of Lysis Buffer (50 mM Tris pH=8, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5% NP-40, cOmplete protease inhibitor cocktail, Roche) and HA-affinity purifications performed following standard procedure. Briefly, clarified cell lysates were incubate with anti-HA-specific beads for 3h at 4°C, and non-specifically bound proteins removed by three washes with Lysis buffer and 5 washes with Washing Buffer (50 mM Tris pH=8, 150 mM NaCl).  Bound proteins were denatured by incubation in 20 µl Guanidinium Chloride buffer (600 mM GdmCl, 1mM TCEP, 4mM CAA, 100 mM Tris/HCl pH 8). After digestion with 1 µg LysC (WAKO Chemicals USA) at room temperature for 3 h, the suspension was diluted in 100 mM Tris/HCl (pH 8), and the protein solution was digested with trypsin (Promega) overnight at room temperature. Peptides were purified on stage tips with three C18 Empore filter discs (3M) and analyzed by mass spectrometry as described previously (Hubner NC et al. JCB 2010 doi: 10.1083/jcb.200911091). Briefly, peptides were eluted from stage tips and separated on a C18 reversed-phase column (Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 3 µM, 150×0.075 mm; Dr. Maisch) by applying a 5% to 30% acetonitrile gradient in 0.5% acetic acid at a flow rate of 250 nl/min over a period of 120 min, using an EASY-nanoLC system (Proxeon Biosystems). The nanoLC system was directly coupled to the electrospray ion source of an LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) operated in a data dependent mode with a full scan in the Orbitrap cell at a resolution of 60,000 with concomitant isolation and fragmentation of the ten most abundant ions in the linear ion trap.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass-spectrometry data were processed with MaxQuant (software version 1.5.3) using the built-in Andromeda search engine to search against the human proteome (UniprotKB release 2015_08 including isoforms and unreviewed sequences) containing forward and reverse sequences plus ZIKV virus polyprotein (ZIKV strain FSS13025, Asian lineage3 NCBI GenBank KU955593.1 with individual viral cleavage products manually annotated), Gaussia luciferase (Q9BLZ2), NS4B of Hepatitis C virus (E7ELX2) sequences, and the label-free quantitation algorithm as described previously. In MaxQuant, carbamidomethylation was set as fixed and methionine oxidation and N-acetylation as variable modifications, using an initial mass tolerance of 6 ppm for the precursor ion and 0.5 Da for the fragment ions. Search results were filtered with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 for peptide and protein identifications.Protein tables were filtered to eliminate the identifications from the reverse database and common contaminants. In analyzing mass spectrometry data, only proteins identified on the basis of at least one peptide and a minimum of three quantitation events in at least one experimental group were considered.

### Publication Abstract
Zika virus (ZIKV) has recently emerged as a global health concern owing to its widespread diffusion and its association with severe neurological symptoms and microcephaly in newborns<sup>1</sup>. However, the molecular mechanisms that are responsible for the pathogenicity of ZIKV remain largely unknown. Here we use human neural progenitor cells and the neuronal cell line SK-N-BE2 in an integrated proteomics approach to characterize the cellular responses to viral infection at the proteome and phosphoproteome level, and use affinity proteomics to identify cellular targets of ZIKV proteins. Using this approach, we identify 386 ZIKV-interacting proteins, ZIKV-specific and pan-flaviviral activities as well as host factors with known functions in neuronal development, retinal defects and infertility. Moreover, our analysis identified 1,216 phosphorylation sites that are specifically up- or downregulated after ZIKV infection, indicating profound modulation of fundamental signalling pathways such as AKT, MAPK-ERK and ATM-ATR and thereby providing mechanistic insights into the proliferation arrest elicited by ZIKV infection. Functionally, our integrative study identifies ZIKV host-dependency factors and provides a comprehensive framework for a system-level understanding of ZIKV-induced perturbations at the levels of proteins and cellular pathways.

### Keywords
Zikv, Asian strain fss13025, Interactome, Zika virus

### Affiliations
Immunopathology of Virus Infections Institute of Virology Technical University of Munich Munich, Germany
Systems Arbovirology, Leibniz Institute of Virology

### Submitter
Pietro Scaturro

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Pichlmair
Immunopathology of Virus Infections Institute of Virology Technical University of Munich Munich, Germany


