### Accession
PXD003661

### Title
Proteomics analysis of Methanothermobacter species adapted to growth on carbon monoxide

### Description
Conversion of biomass-derived syngas (gaseous mixture of mainly H2, CO and CO2) to methane might be a sustainable alternative for the biofuel industry. Via the syngas route more methane can be produced from biomass than via conventional anaerobic digestion. Methanogenic archaea are key players in syngas conversion, but only a few are known to utilize CO (or syngas). Methanothermobacter thermoautotrophicus is one of the few hydrogenotrophic methanogens which has been observed to grow on CO. However, carboxydotrophic growth is slow and is reported to be readily inhibited above 50 kPa CO. The aim of this work was to get more insight of the CO metabolism in hydrogenotrophic archaea and to assess the potential toxic effects of CO towards these microorganisms. Archaeal genomic databases were searched for putative homologues of the Methanothermobacter thermoautotrophicus CODH alpha subunit (containing the catalytic site): the highest scores were for the CODH subunits of Methamothermobacter marburgensis (93% identity) and Methanococcus maripaludis (71%). M. thermoautotrophicus and the other two potential carboxydotrophic strains were incubated with CO and CO + H2 as sole substrates. In addition to M. thermoautotrophicus, M. marburgensis was able to grow methanogenically on CO alone and on CO + H2. In contrast to M. thermoautotrophicus, M. marburgensis was not as strongly inhibited when grown in presence of CO alone and was able to adapt its metabolism, shifting its lag phase from ~500 to ~100 hours. It was observed for both strains that presence of hydrogen stimulates the carbon monoxide metabolism. To gain further insight, the proteome of M. marburgensis culture grown on H2 + CO2 and H2 + CO2 + CO were analysed. Cultures grown with H2 + CO showed relative higher abundance of enzymes involved in CODH/ACS associated reactions and reactions involved in redox metabolism. Overall, the data suggests the strong reducing capacity of CO inhibits the hydrogenotrophic methanogen, making growth on CO as a sole substrate difficult for these organisms.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction for LC-MS/MS analysis For protein extraction, cells were cultured in duplo in 1 litre anaerobic bottles containing 500 ml medium and harvested at late exponential phase. Cultures were centrifuged and the pellet was resuspended in TE buffer (10 mM Tris-Cl, pH 7.5; 1 mM EDTA) containing phenylmethanesulfonylfluoride, and passed through a French pressure cell operated at 138 MPa. Proteins were stabilized by addition of 8M of urea in a proportion of 1:1 and samples were concentrated using a 3.5 kDa MWCO filter.   Proteomic analysis Samples were subjected to in-solution tryptic digestion as described elsewhere. Briefly, proteins were reduced by incubating the sample in 10mM DTT for 30 minutes at room temperature. Reduced cysteines were alkylated by addition of 50mM chloroacetamide and incubation for 30 minutes at room temperature in the dark. A pre-digestion was performed using LysC in a 1:50 LysC:protein ratio for 3 hours at room temperature. Next, the sample was diluted 1:3 with 50mM ammonium bicarbonate and trypsin was subsequently added in a 1:50 trypsin:protein ratio. Digestion was performed overnight at 37°C. After digestion, all samples were centrifuged to spin down all droplets and 2% trifluoroacetic acid was added 1:1 to the samples. Each sample was applied to a conditioned C18 Omix tip (Agilent technologies) for additional desalting and clean-up and eluted in 20 µl 0.1% formic acid. All samples were stored at -20°C until analysis.  Each sample was analyzed twice by C18 reversed phase liquid chromatography with online tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Measurements were performed using a nanoflow ultra-high pressure liquid chromatograph (nano-Advance; Bruker Daltonics) coupled online to an orthogonal quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometer (maXis 4G ETD, otofControl v3.4 build 14; Bruker Daltonics) via an axial desolvation vacuum assisted electrospray ionization source (Captive sprayer; Bruker Daltonics). Five microliters of tryptic digest were loaded onto the trapping column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 75µm x 2 cm, nanoViper, 3µm 100Å C18 particles; Thermo Scientific) using 0.1% FA at a flow rate of 9000 nl/min for 3 minutes at room temperature. Next, peptides were separated on a C18 reversed phase 15 cm length x 75 µm internal diameter analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, 75µm x 15 cm, nanoViper, 2µm 100Å C18 particles; Thermo scientific) at 40°C using a linear gradient of 3-35% ACN 0.1% FA in 120 minutes at a flow rate of 600 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode and was tuned for optimal ion transmission in the range of m/z 300-1400. Electrospray ionization conditions were 3L/min 180°C N2 drying gas, 1400V capillary voltage and 0.4 Bar N2 for gas phase supercharging (nanobooster) using acetonitrile as dopant. Parameters for optimal ion transmission were funnel RF: 400Vpp, multipole RF: 400 Vpp, quadrupole ion energy: 5.0 eV, quadrupole low mass: 300 m/z, collision cell energy: 9.0 eV, collision cell RF: 3500 Vpp, ion cooler transfer time: 64 µs, ion cooler RF: 250 Vpp, pre-pule storage: 22 µs. Data dependent acquisition of MS/MS spectra (AutoMSn) was performed using a 3 second duty cycle at 2 Hz acquisition rate for full MS spectra and a variable number of MS/MS experiments at precursor intensity scaled spectra rate (3Hz MS/MS spectra rate @ 2000 counts, 20Hz MS/MS spectra rate @ 100.000 counts). Precursor ions within the range of 400-1400 m/z with chargestate z = 2+ or higher (preferred charge state range of z = 2+ to z = 4+) were selected for MS/MS analysis with active exclusion enabled (excluded after 1 spectrum, released after 0.5min, reconsidered precursor if current intensity/previous intensity >= 4, smart exclusion disabled). Spectra were saved as line spectra only and were calculated from profile spectra as the sum of intensities across a mass spectral peak (5 counts absolute threshold, peak summation width 7 points).

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and relative quantitation was performed using the MaxQuant software (v.1.5.0.0)  using the build-in Andromeda database search algorithm. Extracted MS/MS spectra were searched against the SWISS-PROT Methanothermobacter marburgensis  protein sequence database. Amino acid sequences of known contaminant proteins (e.g. skin and hair proteins, Trypsin, LysC) were added to the database. The following settings were used for peptide and protein identification: carbamidomethyl (Cys) as fixed modification, oxidation (Met) and deamidation (NQ) as variable modifications, predefined MS and MS/MS settings for TOF instruments, minimal peptide length 6 amino acids and a maximum allowed false discovery rate of 1% at both the peptide and protein level. Label free quantitation (LFQ) was performed with the match between runs and re-quantify options using at least 2 razor + unique peptides. Retention time alignment was performed with a time alignment window of 20 minutes and a retention time match window of 0.5 minutes. Label-free quantitation (LFQ) values were used for subsequent data analysis. Proteins quantified in at least 3 out of 4 measurements for either growth condition were analyzed by student T-tests to identify differentially expressed proteins with p < 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Hydrogenotrophic methanogenic archaea are efficient H2 utilizers, but only a few are known to be able to utilize CO. Methanothermobacter thermoautotrophicus is one of the hydrogenotrophic methanogens able to grow on CO, albeit about 100 times slower than on H2 + CO2. In this study, we show that the hydrogenotrophic methanogen Methanothermobacter marburgensis, is able to perform methanogenic growth on H2/CO2/CO and on CO as a sole substrate. To gain further insight in its carboxydotrophic metabolism, the proteome of M. marburgensis, grown on H2/CO2 and H2/CO2/CO, was analyzed. Cultures grown with H2/CO2/CO showed relative higher abundance of enzymes involved in the reductive acetyl-CoA pathway and proteins involved in redox metabolism. The data suggest that the strong reducing capacity of CO negatively affects hydrogenotrophic methanogenesis, making growth on CO as a sole substrate difficult for this type of methanogens. M. marburgensis appears to partly deal with this by up-regulating co-factor regenerating reactions and activating additional pathways allowing for formation of other products, like acetate.

### Keywords
Methanothermobacter, Bruker daltonics maxis 4g etd

### Affiliations
Radboudumc
Radboud Proteomics Center, Translational Metabolic Laboratory, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Radboudumc

### Submitter
Hans Wessels

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Alain van Gool
Radboud Proteomics Center, Translational Metabolic Laboratory, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Radboudumc


