### Accession
PXD023018

### Title
Glycosaminoglycan domain mapping of proteoglycans

### Description
We have developed a strategy for the detailed structural characterization of complex proteoglycan-derived glycosaminoglycans. Chondroitin/dermatan sulfate isolated from rat INS-1 832/13 insulinoma cells known to produce primarily one proteoglycan was used to evaluate and demonstrate the efficacy of the strategy.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were prepared from culture media from rat insulinoma cells, INS-1 832/13. Proteins were digested using pronase, followed by GAG purification using strong anion-exchange chromatography and subsequent digestions with benzonase and hyaluronidase prior to GAG depolymerization. Samples were analyzed using reversed-phase dibutylamine ion-pairing chromatography negative mode higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) MS/MS on an LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer. Detailed description can be found in Persson et al., submitted.

### Data Protocol
The nLC-MS/MS data were processed using the Xcalibur software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The MS2 data were analyzed manually, and the results were used to generate lists containing the theoretical monoisotopic masses of possible GAG products. LC-MS features were detected and quantified using the Minora Feature Detection node within Proteome Discoverer version 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and exported as tables containing data on the monoisotopic precursor ion m/z with charge state, chromatographic retention time and precursor ion intensity for each LC-MS feature. Using an in-house Python script and a mass error tolerance of 15 ppm, the monoisotopic masses of the LC-MS features were matched against the theoretical monoisotopic masses within the assembled lists. The intensities of co-eluting precursor ions that had the same glycan composition but differed by the charge states, number of DBA adducts and sulfate losses were added together. All hits were verified manually by retention times and MS2 characteristics.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteoglycan, Chondoritin sulfate, Dermatan sulfate, Glycosaminoglycan, Gag

### Affiliations
Professor, Department of Laboratory Medicine,University of Gothenburg, Sweden
Proteomics Core Facility, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden

### Submitter
Egor Vorontsov

### Lab Head
Dr Göran Larson
Professor, Department of Laboratory Medicine,University of Gothenburg, Sweden


