### Accession
PXD026072

### Title
Caught in the act: multiphoton microscopy reveals host extracellular matrix remodeling by a human cancer-avatar model

### Description
: Cancer cells facilitate tumor growth by creating favorable tumor micro-environments (TME), altering homeostasis and immune response in the extracellular matrix (ECM) of surrounding tissue. A potential factor that contributes to TME generation and ECM remodeling is the cytoskeleton-associated human death-associated protein kinase 1 (DAPK1). Increased tumor cell motility and de-adhesion (thus, promoting metastasis), as well as upregulated plasminogen-signaling are shown when functionally analyzing the DAPK1 ko related proteome. However, the systematic investigation how tumor cells actively modulate the ECM at the tissue level is experimentally challenging, since animal models do not allow direct experimental access while artificial in vitro scaffolds cannot simulate the entire complexity of tissue systems. Here, we used the chorioallantoic membrane (CAM) assay as a natural, collagen-rich tissue model in combination with an all-optical experimental access by multiphoton microscopy (MPM) in order to study the ECM remodeling potential of colorectal tumor cells with and without DAPK1 in situ and even in vivo. This approach demonstrates the suitability of the CAM assay in combination with multiphoton microscopy for studying collagen remodeling during tumor growth. Our results indicate the high ECM remodeling potential of DAPK1 ko tumor cells at the tissue level and support our findings from proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
Protein Digestion Cell pellets were lysed in 100 mM TEAB containing 2% SDC and boiled at 95°C for 5 min. Protein concentration was determined using BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, USA), and 20 µg of protein per sample was used for MS sample preparation. Cysteins were reduced with 5mM final concentration of TCEP (60 °C for 60 min) and blocked with 10 mM final concentration of MMTS (10 min Room Temperature). Samples were digested with trypsin (trypsin/protein ration 1/30) at 37 °C overnight. After digestion, samples were acidified with TFA to 1% final concentration. SDC was removed by extraction to ethylacetate, and peptides were desalted using in-house made stage tips packed with C18 disks (Empore, 3M, Maplewood, USA) as described previously [21]. nLC-MS 2° Analysis Nano Reversed phase columns (EASY-Spray column, 50 cm x 75 µm ID, PepMap C18, 2 µm particles, 100 Å pore size, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, USA) were used for LC/MS analysis. Mobile phase buffer A was composed of water and 0.1% formic acid. Mobile phase B was composed of acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Samples were loaded onto the trap column (C18 PepMap100, 5 μm particle size, 300 μm x 5 mm, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, USA) for 4 min at 18 µL/min loading buffer composed of water, 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. Peptides were eluted with mobile phase B gradient from 4% to 35% B in 120 min. Eluting peptide cations were converted to gas-phase ions by electrospray ionization and analyzed on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion (Q-OT-qIT, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, USA). Survey scans of peptide precursors from 350 to 1400 m/z were performed in Orbitrap at 120 K resolution (at 200 m/z) with a 5 × 105 ion count target. Tandem MS was performed by isolation at 1.5 Th with the quadrupole, HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 30, and rapid scan MS analysis in the ion trap. The MS2 ion count target was set to 104 and the maximum injection time was 35 ms. Only those precursors with charge state 2–6 were sampled for MS2. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 45 s with a 10 ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. Monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on. The instrument was run in top speed mode with 2 s cycles. Mass spectrometric analysis for proteomics For proteomics analysis, 20 µg of protein from each cell lysate was used for MS sample preparation. Samples were digested with trypsine, separated on Nano Reversed phase columns, and used for LC/MS analysis. Eluting peptides were analyzed on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion (Q-OT-qIT, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, USA). All data were analyzed with the MaxQuant software (version 1.6.3.4) and quantified with the label-free algorithm in MaxQuant [22,23]. Data analysis was performed using Perseus 1.6.1.3 software [24]. All data were analyzed and quantified with the MaxQuant software (version 1.6.3.4) [22]. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% for both proteins and peptides, and we specified a minimum peptide length of seven amino acids. The Andromeda search engine was used for the MS/MS spectra search against the Human database (downloaded from Uniprot on July 2019, containing 20,444 entries). Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to Arg and Lys, also allowing cleavage at proline bonds and a maximum of two missed cleavages. Dithiomethylation of cysteine was selected as fixed modification, and N- terminal protein acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. The “match between runs” feature of MaxQuant was used to transfer identifications to other LC-MS/MS runs based on their masses and retention time (maximum deviation 0.7 min), and this was also used in quantification experiments. Quantifications were performed with the label-free algorithm in MaxQuant [23]. Data analysis was performed using Perseus 1.6.1.3 software [24]. Missing data were replaced by values taken from normal distribution with the mean = 16 and standard deviation = 0.5. The mean 16 corresponds the minimum value minus 2, which is the quantification limit. Standard deviation = 0.5 represents the average standard deviation for our replicates. We used this setup to stress the difference between low expressed and none-expressed proteins. This is in agreement with recommendations by the data processing software (http://coxdocs.org/doku.php?id=perseus:start).

### Data Protocol
The presented GO term association network of significantly dysregulated proteins after the loss of DAPK1 in the HCT116 ko-clone 21/9 was generated as following. First, a GO term subset including 9 GO terms related to the interaction with the ECM and cell motility (GO:0030199, GO:0032963, GO:1903053, GO:0048870, GO:0043062, GO:0034330, GO:0007155, GO:0007166 and GO:0009991) was generated. To split the specific GO terms of all significantly dysregulated proteins (p < 0.05) (in addition to the manually added DAPK1 protein) into functional groups related to the GO term subset of interest the open-source GOnet web-application was used (accessed at http://tools.dice-database.org/GOnet/ on 24.06.2020) [25]. The following analysis parameters were used: Species: Homo sapiens (9606); Input proteins: 299 + 1 (DAPK1); GO namespace: biological_process; Analysis type: GO term annotation; GO subset: Custom GO terms (n=9); Output type: Interactive network. Visual style of the resulting network was then refined using the Cytoscape 3.7.2 software [26]. All statistical analysis was performed using GraphPad Prism Version 8.00 for Windows. Statistical significance was calculated by 2-way ANOVA followed by Dunnett's multiple comparisons test, Kruskal-Wallis test (Figure 2d), and Mann–Whitney test (Figure 2d). P-values of *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01 and ***p < 0.001 were considered as statistically significant, very significant and highly significant, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
Cancer cells facilitate tumor growth by creating favorable tumor micro-environments (TME), altering homeostasis and immune response in the extracellular matrix (ECM) of surrounding tissue. A potential factor that contributes to TME generation and ECM remodeling is the cytoskeleton-associated human death-associated protein kinase 1 (DAPK1). Increased tumor cell motility and de-adhesion (thus, promoting metastasis), as well as upregulated plasminogen-signaling, are shown when functionally analyzing the DAPK1 ko-related proteome. However, the systematic investigation of how tumor cells actively modulate the ECM at the tissue level is experimentally challenging since animal models do not allow direct experimental access while artificial in vitro scaffolds cannot simulate the entire complexity of tissue systems. Here, we used the chorioallantoic membrane (CAM) assay as a natural, collagen-rich tissue model in combination with all-optical experimental access by multiphoton microscopy (MPM) to study the ECM remodeling potential of colorectal tumor cells with and without DAPK1 in situ and even in vivo. This approach demonstrates the suitability of the CAM assay in combination with multiphoton microscopy for studying collagen remodeling during tumor growth. Our results indicate the high ECM remodeling potential of DAPK1 ko tumor cells at the tissue level and support our findings from proteomics.

### Keywords
Crc, Collagen, Ecm remodeling, Cam, Multiphoton microscopy

### Affiliations
Charles University
Experimental Tumor Pathology, Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Erlangen, Friedrich‐Alexander University Erlangen‐Nürnberg (FAU), Erlangen 91054, Germany

### Submitter
Karel Harant

### Lab Head
Dr Regine Schneider-Stock
Experimental Tumor Pathology, Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Erlangen, Friedrich‐Alexander University Erlangen‐Nürnberg (FAU), Erlangen 91054, Germany


