### Accession
PXD043169

### Title
Rosa Damascena Stem Cell-derived Exosome

### Description
Analysis of Rosa Damascena Stem Cell-derived Exosome

### Sample Protocol
protein extracted to boiling for 10mins at 100 ℃ by added lysis buffer final concentration SDS. Protein concentration was determined by the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) method. Protein samples (20 μg) were separated by 12 % SDS-PAGE and in-gel digestion was conducted. Gels were fractionated into five parts according to molecular weight. in-gel digestion war performed described previously gels ware divided and sliced into seven fractions according to molecular weight. sliced gels were washed and distained with a 30% methanol and distaning solution (10 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 50% acetonitrile). After drying, gels were reduction with 10 mM dithiothreitol and alkylation of cysteines with 55 mM iodoacetamide. After the gels were washed with distilled water, tryptic digestion was performed in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate at 37°C for 12–16 h. Tryptic peptides was dried then extraction with a extraction solution [50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 50% acetonitrile containing 5% trifluoroacetyl acid (TFA)].

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS was conducted according to a previous procedure. Tryptic digestide sample were dissolved with 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid prior to further analysis. A 5 μL disolved sample were onto an 100 μm × 2 cm nanoviper trap column and 15 cm × 75 μm nanoviper analysis column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min and were eluted with a gradient of 5%–40% acetonitrile over 95 min. All MS and MS/MS spectra captured by the Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) were acquired in data-dependent top 12 mode. The MS/MS data were analyzed by using MASCOT 2.7, with a  parameter corresponding to a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rose-exosome, Exosome, Stem cell, Rosa damascena

### Affiliations
ExoCoBio Exosome Institute
ExoCoBio

### Submitter
Yujin Won

### Lab Head
Dr Yu Jin Won
ExoCoBio Exosome Institute


