### Accession
PXD027391

### Title
Proteomic analysis of the thylakoid membrane in Arabidopsis in the lab versus the field

### Description
The plant chloroplast thylakoid membrane must respond to environmental variations in light intensity to maximise the efficiency of photosynthesis and minimise photo-oxidative stress. Plants respond to changing light intensity in the short-term (seconds to minutes) through altered regulation of the structure and function of existing thylakoid components, whereas long-term acclimation (hours to days) involves changes in gene expression, protein synthesis and degradation, which modulate the composition of the thylakoid membrane. Here we have investigated the long-term changes in the thylakoid membrane composition in Arabidopsis thaliana plants acclimated to a controlled laboratory environment to those acclimated to the field using quantitative label-free proteomics in combination with biochemical and structural analyses.

### Sample Protocol
Thylakoid membranes were solubilised in 1% sodium laurate and centrifuged to remove starch granules. In triplicate, 50 µg of solubilised protein was reduced with 1.5 µl 100 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine-HCl and incubated at 37 ˚C for 30 min, then alkylated by the addition of 1.5 µl 200 mM iodoacetamide and incubation at ambient temperature for 30 min. Proteolytic digestion was performed in 1% sodium laurate, 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate pH 8.5, with 2 µg pre-mixed trypsin/endoproteinase Lys-C (Promega), for 3 h at 37 ˚C. Following digestion, sodium laurate was extracted by addition of an equal volume of ethyl acetate and acidification with 10 µl 10% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid. Samples were vortexed for 1 min and centrifuged at 15,700 x g for 5 min and the lower phase was isolated. Peptides were dried by vacuum centrifugation, resuspended in 50 µl 0.5% (v/v) TFA, 3% (v/v) acetonitrile and desalted using C18 spin columns (Thermo Scientific). Peptide samples in 0.5% (v/v) TFA, 3% (v/v) acetonitrile amounting to 400 ng were analysed in triplicate by nanoLC-MS/MS using an EASY-Spray PepMap RSLC C18 column (Thermo Scientific, 50 cm x 75 μm ID, 2 μm, 40 °C) and a Q Exactive HF hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using MaxQuant v. 1.6.3.4 and the Arabidopsis thaliana reference proteome database (www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000006548, downloaded on 10 December 2018) with iBAQ enabled. Search parameters were: carbamidomethyl-Cys (fixed modification), Met oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation, Lys acetylation and Gln to pyro-Glu conversion (variable modifications) with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages.

### Publication Abstract
Compared to controlled laboratory conditions, plant growth in the field is rarely optimal since it is frequently challenged by large fluctuations in light and temperature which lower the efficiency of photosynthesis and lead to photo-oxidative stress. Plants grown under natural conditions therefore place an increased onus on the regulatory mechanisms that protect and repair the delicate photosynthetic machinery. Yet, the exact changes in thylakoid proteome composition which allow plants to acclimate to the natural environment remain largely unexplored. Here, we use quantitative label-free proteomics to demonstrate that field-grown Arabidopsis plants incorporate aspects of both the low and high light acclimation strategies previously observed in laboratory-grown plants. Field plants showed increases in the relative abundance of ATP synthase, cytochrome <i>b</i> <sub>6</sub> <i>f</i>, ferredoxin-NADP<sup>+</sup> reductases (FNR1 and FNR2) and their membrane tethers TIC62 and TROL, thylakoid architecture proteins CURT1A, CURT1B, RIQ1, and RIQ2, the minor monomeric antenna complex CP29.3, rapidly-relaxing non-photochemical quenching (qE)-related proteins PSBS and VDE, the photosystem II (PSII) repair machinery and the cyclic electron transfer complexes NDH, PGRL1B, and PGR5, in addition to decreases in the amounts of LHCII trimers composed of LHCB1.1, LHCB1.2, LHCB1.4, and LHCB2 proteins and CP29.2, all features typical of a laboratory high light acclimation response. Conversely, field plants also showed increases in the abundance of light harvesting proteins LHCB1.3 and CP29.1, zeaxanthin epoxidase (ZEP) and the slowly-relaxing non-photochemical quenching (qI)-related protein LCNP, changes previously associated with a laboratory low light acclimation response. Field plants also showed distinct changes to the proteome including the appearance of stress-related proteins ELIP1 and ELIP2 and changes to proteins that are largely invariant under laboratory conditions such as state transition related proteins STN7 and TAP38. We discuss the significance of these alterations in the thylakoid proteome considering the unique set of challenges faced by plants growing under natural conditions.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Arabidopsis, Q exactive hf, Thylakoid

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, University of Sheffield
University of Sheffield

### Submitter
Sarah Flannery

### Lab Head
Dr Matthew Johnson
Department of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, University of Sheffield


