### Accession
PXD015203

### Title
Quantitative Proteome Responses to Oncolytic Reovirus in GM-CSF and M-CSF-Differentiated Bone Marrow-Derived Cells

### Description
To explore reovirus-macrophage interactions, we performed tandem mass tag (TMT)-based quantitative temporal proteomics on mouse bone marrow-derived macrophages (BMMs) generated with 2 cytokines, M-CSF and GM-CSF, representing anti- and pro-inflammatory macrophages, respectively. We quantified 6,863 proteins across five time points in duplicate, comparing M-CSF (M-BMM) and GM-CSF (GM-BMM) in response to OV. We find that GM-BMMs have lower expression of key intrinsic proteins that facilitate an anti-viral immune response, express higher levels of reovirus receptor protein JAM-A and are more susceptible to oncolytic reovirus infection compared to M-BMMs. Interestingly, although M-BMMs are less susceptible to reovirus infection and subsequent cell death, they initiate an anti-reovirus adaptive T cell immune response comparable to that of GM-BMMs. Taken together, these data describe distinct proteome differences between these two macrophage populations in terms of their ability to mount anti-viral immune responses.

### Sample Protocol
Bone marrow cells were isolated from the femur and tibia bones, and briefly treated with Red blood cell-lysing ammonium chloride potassiumprior to being cultured in RPMI-1640 complete mediumCultures were then supplemented with either GM-CSF (20ng/ml) or M-CSF (100ng/ml) for 7 days to generate M1 and M2 macrophages, respectively. Macrophages were washed in phosphate buffered saline (PBS) and removed from plates by gentle scraping in 1mL of lysis buffer (2% SDS, 150mM NaCl, 5mM DTT, and 50mM Tris (pH 8.5)) and 1 protease inhibitor tablet (Sigma). Immediately following, cell samples were homogenized using a Tissue Ruptor (Qiagen, Germany) proceeded by brief sonication. Samples were then heated to 60 ºC for 30 minutes, cooled, and supplemented with iodoacetamide (14 mM) to alkylate cysteine residues before being subjected to methanol-chloroform precipitation and dried down using a vacuum centrifuge (Thermo Scientific). Next, samples were resuspended in 2 mL urea buffer (8 M Urea, 50 mM Tris, pH 8.8) by gentle drilling, followed by brief sonication, and kept on ice. Total protein content was measured using a BCA assay (Thermo Scientific). An aliquot of 100 ug of protein was diluted to 1.5 M urea, and digested in sequence grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) overnight at 37 ºC at a ratio of 1:100 trypsin: protein. The digest (peptides) was adjusted to < 3 pH using formic acid, was desalted using 60 mg solid phase 3 cc extraction cartridges (Waters, Milford, MA) and dried down. Dried peptides were resuspended in 100 mM HEPES, 30% acetonitrile and 10 mL of TMT10 reagents (Thermo Scientific) pre-aliquoted at a concentration of 20 mg/mL in anhydrous acetonitrile. The reaction was quenched with 0.5% hydroxylamine (Sigma), mixed equally, desalted using a 60 mg solid phase 3 cc extraction cartridge (Waters, Milford, MA), and dried down. Peptides were fractionated using an Agilent 300-Extend, 4.6 mm x 250 mm, 5 mm particle size C18 column (Agilent). A gradient of 5 to 40% acetonitrile (10 mM ammonium formate, pH 8) was applied at a flow rate of 800 mL/min using an Agilent 1100 pump. Fractions were collected every 0.38 min, beginning at 10 min; then, every 11th fraction was combined to a single sample to create 11 fractions, which were then desalted using home-made Stage-tips packed with Empore C18 extraction material (Sigma), then dried down and subjected to LC-SPS-MS3.  Each basic reverse phase fraction was resuspended in 0.1% formic acid and analyzed on a Thermo Fisher Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer with online chromatography using a Thermo Fisher EASY nLC. Peptides were separated on a 75 μm x 30 cm column packed with 0.5 cm of Magic C4 resin (Michrom Bioresources #PM5/64100/00) and 28 cm of C18 Accucore 120 resin (Thermo Fisher #16126-000). Peptides were separated at a flow rate of 300 nL/min using a gradient of 8%–26% acetonitrile (0.125% formic acid over 120 min followed by 10 min at 100% acetonitrile). Spectra were acquired using a synchronous precursor selection (SPS)-MS3 method on the mass spectrometer (McAlister et al., 2014). In this method, MS1 scans were acquired over 400-1400 m/z, 120,000 resolution, 2e5 AGC target, 100 msec maximum injection time. The 10 most abundant MS1 ions from charge states 2-6 were selected for fragmentation using an isolation window of 0.5 Th, CID activation at 35% energy, rapid scan rate, 4000 AGC target, 30 s dynamic exclusion, and 150 msec maximum injection time. MS3 scans were acquired using SPS of 10 isolation notches, 100-1000 m/z, 60 000 resolution, 5e4 AGC, HCD activation at 55% energy, 250 msec maximum injection time.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data files were converted to mzXML using a modified version of ReadW.exe. MS2 spectra were searched against a concatenated mouse-reovirus database using Sequest (Ver28) (Eng et al., 1994) with TMT as a fixed modification (+229.162932) on lysine residues and peptide N-termini, and carbamidomethylation (15.99492) as a fixed modification on cysteine. The allowable precursor mass tolerance was 10 ppm and product ion mass tolerance was 1 Da. False positive rates were controlled using the target-decoy approach (Elias and Gygi, 2007) with a concatenated reversed database employing linear discriminant analysis to distinguish correct and incorrect peptide identifications based on XCorr, ΔCN, peptide length, and charge state. Peptides were grouped into proteins and their multiplied linear discriminant analysis probabilities were used to sort proteins and filter to a 1% maximum false discovery rate. The sum of all reporter ion summed signal to noise (S/N) values for peptides matching each protein was used for protein quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
The efficacy of oncolytic viruses (OVs), such as reovirus, is dictated by host immune responses, including those mediated by the pro- versus anti-inflammatory macrophages. As such, a detailed understanding of the interaction between reovirus and different macrophage types is critical for therapeutic efficacy. To explore reovirus-macrophage interactions, we performed tandem mass tag (TMT)-based quantitative temporal proteomics on mouse bone marrow-derived macrophages (BMMs) generated with two cytokines, macrophage colony stimulating factor (M-CSF) and granulocytic-macrophage colony stimulating factor (GM-CSF), representing anti- and proinflammatory macrophages, respectively. We quantified 6863 proteins across five time points in duplicate, comparing M-CSF (M-BMM) and GM-CSF (GM-BMM) in response to OV. We find that GM-BMMs have lower expression of key intrinsic proteins that facilitate an antiviral immune response, express higher levels of reovirus receptor protein JAM-A, and are more susceptible to oncolytic reovirus infection compared to M-BMMs. Interestingly, although M-BMMs are less susceptible to reovirus infection and subsequent cell death, they initiate an antireovirus adaptive T cell immune response comparable to that of GM-BMMs. Taken together, these data describe distinct proteome differences between these two macrophage populations in terms of their ability to mount antiviral immune responses.

### Keywords
Oncolytic viruses, Quantitative proteomics, Antigen presentation/processing, Anti-viral immune response, Cell differentiation, Macrophages, Viral defense, Reovirus

### Affiliations
Department of Pathology, Gujar Lab, Dalhousie University, Canada
Dalhousie University

### Submitter
Michael Giacomantonio

### Lab Head
Dr Shashi A Gujar
Department of Pathology, Gujar Lab, Dalhousie University, Canada


