### Accession
PXD019608

### Title
The evolution of the Puf superfamily of proteins across the tree of eukaryotes.

### Description
Eukaryotic gene expression is controlled by a number of RNA-binding proteins (RBP), such as the proteins from the Puf (Pumilio and FBF) superfamily (PufSF). These proteins bind to RNA via multiple Puf repeat domains, each of which specifically recognizes a single RNA base. Recently, three diversified PufSF proteins have been described in model organisms, each of which are responsible for the maturation of ribosomal RNA or the translational regulation of mRNAs, however, less is known about the role of these proteins across eukaryotic diversity.Here, we investigated the distribution and function of Puf superfamily RBPs in the tree of eukaryotes. We determined that the following PufSF proteins are universally conserved across eukaryotes and can be broadly classified into three groups: (i) Nop9 orthologues, which participate in the nucleolar processing of immature 18S rRNA; (ii) ‘classical’ Pufs which control the translation of mRNA and; (iii) PUM3 orthologues, which are involved in the maturation of 7S rRNA. In nearly all eukaryotes, the rRNA maturation proteins, Nop9 and PUM3, are retained as a single copy, while mRNA effectors (‘classical’ Pufs) underwent multiple lineage-specific expansions. We propose that the variation in number of ‘classical’ Pufs relates to the size of the transcriptome and thus the potential mRNA targets. We further distinguished full set of PufSF proteins in divergent metamonad Giardia intestinalis and initiated their cellular and biochemical characterization

### Sample Protocol
G. intestinalis cells were grown in TYI-S-33 medium enriched with 50 µM biotin for 24 h before harvesting. The cells were lysed by sonication and the cell lysate (25 mg of total protein) was used for the protein isolation. The sample was diluted to final protein concentration of 3 mg/ml in PBS (pH 7.4) and supplemented with protease inhibitors (Roche). Crosslinker DSP (dithiobis [succinimidyl propionate]; Thermo Scientific) was added to the final concentration of 200 µM and the sample was incubated 1 h on ice. The reaction was stopped by adding 50mM final concentration of Tris (pH 8.0) for 15 min at room temperature. The sample was diluted 5 times with the boiling buffer (50 mM Tris, 1 mM EDTA, 1 % SDS, pH 7.4), incubated at 80 °C for 10 min and collected by centrifugation at 30,000 × g, for 10 min at room temperature. Supernatant was diluted 1:10 in the binding buffer (50 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA, 1% Triton X-100, pH 7.4). Meanwhile, 100 µl of streptavidin-coupled magnetic beads (Dynabeads MyOne Streptavidin C1, Invitrogen) were washed 3 times in the binding buffer using a magnetic stand (according to the instructions of the manufacturer). The beads were mixed with the supernatant and the sample was incubated for 16 h at 4 °C with gentle rotation. The magnetic beads were washed 3 times in the binding buffer with 0,1 % sodium deoxycholate (SDC) for 5 min, once in boiling buffer for 5 min, once in washing buffer (60 mM Tris, 2% SDC, 10% glycerol) for 5 min and finally twice in 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) with 0.1 % SDC for 5 min. Beads with bound proteins were submitted to mass spectrometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
The beads were incubated at 5mM tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP) at 60°C for 1 h to reduce the disulfide bridges and blocked with 10 mM final concentration of methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS) for 10 min at 37°C. Samples were cleaved on the beads with 1 µg of trypsin at 37°C for 16 h. After digestion, samples were centrifuged, and supernatants were collected and acidified with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA at a final concentration of 1%). SDC was removed by extraction with ethylacetate. Peptides were desalted on Michrom C18 column. Nano Reversed phase column (EASY-Spray column, 50 cm x 75 µm ID, PepMap C18, 2 µm particles, 100 Å pore size) was used for LC/MS analysis. Mobile phase buffer A was composed of water and 0.1% formic acid. Mobile phase B was composed of 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. Samples were loaded onto the trap column (Acclaim PepMap300, C18, 5 µm, 300 Å Wide Pore, 300 µm x 5 mm, 5 Cartridges) for 4 min at 15 μl/min. Loading buffer was composed of water, 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% TFA. Peptides were eluted with Mobile phase B gradient from 4% to 35% B in1 h. Eluting peptide cations were converted to gas-phase ions by electrospray ionization and analysed on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion (Q-OT- qIT, Thermo). Survey scans of peptide precursors from 400 to 1600 m/z were performed at 120K resolution (at 200 m/z) with a 5 × 105 ion count target. Tandem MS was performed by isolation at 1.5 Th with the quadrupole, HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 30, and rapid scan MS analysis in the ion trap. The MS 2 ion count target was set to 104 and the max injection time was 35 ms. Only those precursors with charge state 2–6 were sampled for MS 2. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 45 s with a 10 ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. Monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on. The instrument was run in top speed mode with 2 s cycles. All data were analysed and quantified with the MaxQuant software (version 1.5.3.8). The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% for both proteins and peptides and we specified a minimum length of seven amino acids. The Andromeda search engine was used for the MS/MS spectra search against the G. intestinalis database. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to Arg and Lys, also allowing cleavage at proline bonds and a maximum of two missed cleavages. Dithiomethylation of cysteine was selected as fixed modification and N-terminal protein acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. The “match between runs” feature of MaxQuant was used to transfer identifications to other LC-MS/MS runs based on their masses and retention time (maximum deviation 0.7 min) and this was also used in quantification experiments. Quantifications were performed with the label-free algorithms described recently. Data analysis was performed using Perseus 1.5.2.4 software.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Leca, Giardia intestinalis, Rna processing, Rna-binding protein, Puf superfamily proteins

### Affiliations
Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Science, Charles University, BIOCEV, Průmyslová 595, 252 50, Vestec, Czech Republic

### Submitter
Vladimira Najdrova

### Lab Head
Dr Pavel Doležal
Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Science, Charles University, BIOCEV, Průmyslová 595, 252 50, Vestec, Czech Republic


