### Accession
PXD019583

### Title
Large-scale discovery proteomics - Nitrospira moscoviensis

### Description
A large-scale discovery proteomics experiment was performed on biomass of Nitrospira moscoviensis (Lab head, Dr. Sebastian Lücker, RU, NL). The soluble protein fraction was analysed following high pH reverse-phase peptide fractionation. The insoluble membrane fraction was solubilised by an optimised protocol and analysed following cleavage using different proteolytic enzymes to maximise proteome coverage.

### Sample Protocol
1. Biomass was harvested from 2 L of culture grown in a bioreactor by centrifugation and analysed for either soluble proteins or for the membrane protein fraction. a) Soluble protein fraction. Cell lysis was performed using glass beads beating in TEAP/B-PER buffer.  Following centrifugation and protein precipitation using TCA, the protein fraction was solubilised in ammonium bicarbonate buffer containing 6M Urea. Disulphide bonds were reduced using DTT and alkylated using iodoacetamide. The protein solution was diluted with ammonium bicarbonate buffer to below 1M Urea. Proteolytic digested was performed using Trypsin (Promega). Oasis HLB solid phase extraction. One aliquot was solid phase extraction purified using Oasis HLB well plates (Waters), according to the manufactures protocol. The peptide fraction was speed vac dried. High pH Reversed-Phase fractionation. One aliquot was subjected to high pH reversed-phase fractionation using the Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation kit according to the manufacturers protocol (with minor modifications) starting from approx. 30 µg protein digest. 8 fractions were collected and speed vac dried. b) Membrane protein fraction. Cell pellets were resuspended in TEAB buffer / B-PER reagent, containing 1% sodium deoxycholate, pH 8. Cells were lysed by passages through a French press. Cell debris were pelleted from the sample by centrifugation and the membrane fraction was prepared using ultracentrifugation. Finally, the membrane pellet was resuspended in ammonium bicarbonate containing 1% DDM, overnight under shaking. Urea was added to a final concentration of 6 M. Disulphides were reduced using DTT and alkylated using iodoacetamide. The protein sample was further diluted using ammonium bicarbonate and split into 5 equal aliquots. Every aliquot was digested using a different protease (combination): (1) LysC; (2) Trypsin; (3) Chymotrypsin; (4) LysC followed by Trypsin and (5) Trypsin followed by Chymotrypsin. Oasis HLB solid phase extraction. Individual digests were solid phase extraction purified using Oasis HLB well plates (Waters), according to the manufactures protocol. Peptide fractions were speed vac dried. 2. Shotgun proteomic analysis. All dried peptide fractions were resuspended in H2O containing 3% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. An aliquot of every sample corresponding to approx. 100-200 ng protein digest was analysed in duplicates using an one-dimensional shot-gun proteomics approach. Briefly, 1 µL of sample was injected to a nano-liquid-chromatography system consisting of an ESAY nano LC 1200, equipped with an Acclaim PepMap RSLC RP C18 separation column (50 µm x 150 mm, 2µm and 100A), and an QE plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo). The flow rate was maintained at 300 nL/min over a linear gradient using H2O containing 0.1% formic acid as solvent A, 80% acetonitrile in H2O and 0.1% formic acid as solvent B. The soluble protein extract fractions were analysed using a gradient from 5% to 30% solvent B over 90 minutes, and finally to 75% solvent B over 25 minutes. The solubilized membrane protein fractions were analysed using a shorter gradient from 4 to 30% solvent B over 32.5 minutes followed by a second step to 65% solvent B over 12.5 minutes. Data were acquired in total over 50 minutes. In either case, the Orbitrap was operated in data-depended acquisition mode acquiring peptide signals form 350 - 1400 m/z at 70K resolution, where the top 10 signals were isolated at a window of 2.0 m/z and fragmented using a NCE of 30. The AGC target was set to 1e5, at a max IT of 54 ms and 17.5K resolution.

### Data Protocol
Raw shot-gun proteomics data from membrane proteins and soluble protein extract fractions were analysed and combined using PEAKS Studio 8.5 (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., http://www.bioinfor.com). Database search was performed allowing 20 ppm parent ion and 0.02 Da fragment mass error tolerance. Search conditions further considered 3 missed cleavages for the respective enzymes used, carbamidomethylation as fixed and methionine oxidation and N/Q deamidation as variable modifications. Peptide spectra were matched against a N. moscoviensis sequence database (Uniprot TrEMBL, June 2018, Tax ID 42253), which was modified by filtering out duplicated entries. Database search included the GPM crap contaminant database (https://www.thegpm.org/crap/) and a decoy fusion for determining false discovery rates. Peptide spectrum matches were filtered against 1% false discovery rate (FDR) and protein identifications with 2 or more unique peptides were considered as significant hit. For the pre-fractionated whole cell proteome, proteins were counted if they were significantly identified in at least one of the sub-fractions. For completeness, protein IDs corresponding to 1 unique peptide match were included into reports.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Shot-gun proteomics, Nitrospira moscoviensis, Qe plus

### Affiliations
TUD
Department of Biotechnology, Delft University of Technology, The Netherlands.

### Submitter
Martin Pabst

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Martin Pabst
Department of Biotechnology, Delft University of Technology, The Netherlands.


