### Accession
PXD015194

### Title
Quantitative proteomics of Uukuniemi virus - host cell interactions reveals GBF1 as proviral host factor for phleboviruses

### Description
Novel tick-borne phleboviruses in the Phenuiviridae family, which are highly pathogenic in humans and all closely related to Uukuniemi virus (UUKV), have recently emerged on different continents. How phleboviruses assemble, bud, and exit cells remains largely elusive. Here, we performed high-resolution, label-free mass spectrometry analysis of UUKV immuno-precipitated from cell lysates and identified 39 cellular partners interacting with the viral envelope glycoproteins. Hit validation by a subsequent RNA interference screen revealed Golgi-specific brefeldin A-resistance guanine nucleotide exchange factor 1 (GBF1), a guanine nucleotide exchange factor resident in the Golgi, as a critical host factor required for the UUKV life cycle. An inhibitor of GBF1, Golgicide A, confirmed the role of the cellular factor in UUKV infection. We could pinpoint the GBF1 requirement to UUKV replication and particle assembly. When the  investigation was extended to viruses from various positive and negative RNA viral families, we found that not only phleboviruses rely on GBF1 for infection, but also Flavi-, Corona-, Rhabdo-, and Togaviridae. In contrast, silencing or blocking GBF1 did not abrogate infection by the human adenovirus serotype 5 and immunodeficiency retrovirus type 1, the replication of both occurs in the nucleus. Together our results indicate that UUKV relies on GBF1 for viral replication, assembly and egress. This study also highlights the proviral activity of GBF1 in the infection by a broad range of important zoonotic RNA viruses.

### Sample Protocol
For MS analysis, protein samples were reduced, alkylated and tryptically digested as described in (40). In brief, protein samples were reduced with 10 mM dithiotreitol for 30 min at RT followed by alkylation with 55 mM iodoacetamide for 20 min at RT in the dark. Remaining iodoacetamide was quenched with 100 mM thiourea. Proteins were digested with 1 μg LysC (Wako Chemicals) at RT for 3 h and 1 μg trypsin (Sigma) at RT overnight. Protein digestion was stopped with 0.6 % (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid and 2 % (v/v) acetonitrile before peptides were loaded onto reversed phase C18 StageTips (3MTM EmporeTM, IVA Analysentechnik). Peptides were desalted using 0.5 % (v/v) acetic acid and subsequently eluted from the C18 StageTips with 50 μL80 % (v/v) acetonitrile in 0.5 % (v/v) acetic acid. After concentrating and drying in a SpeedVac (Thermo Scientific), peptides were resuspended in 10 μL 2 % (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1 % (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid in 0.5 % (v/v) acetic acid and stored at -20°C until mass spectrometric analysis.

### Data Protocol
Mass Spectrometric Analysis including Database Search Parameters and Acceptance Criteria for Identifications Peptide mixtures were analyzed in a single-run liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) format as described in (35). In brief, peptides were separated using a nanoflow UHPLC instrument (EASY-nLC 1200, Thermo Scientific). Separated peptides were analyzed on a benchtopquadrupole-Orbitrap instrument (Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer, Thermo Scientific) with a nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Scientific), which was coupled on-line to the liquid chromatography instrument. MS data were acquired as described previously using the Xcalibur software (Thermo Scientific). Protein identification and quantification from MS raw files was performed using the computational proteomics platform MaxQuant (software version 1.5.5.2). Match-between runs  was enabled and additional GN/GC co-IP samples from HeLacells incubated with purified UUKV or mock supernatants were acquired, which served as peptide matching reference.The MS/MS spectra were searched against the human UniProtKB FASTA database (92,013 forward entries including isoforms; version from December 2015) and a common contaminant database (247 entries) by the implemented Andromeda search engine with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1 % at peptide and protein level (41,42). To identify the UUKV viral proteins L, N, GN and GC in the peptide mixtures, the MS/MS spectra were additionally searched against the corresponding FASTA files for these four viral proteins.Additionally, hits were checked against the Crapomecontaminant repository (43). The protease configuration in the Andromeda search engine was set to “Trypsin/P” allowing cleavage at the carboxyl side of the amino acids lysine or arginine (also if a proline follows) with a maximum of twomissed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification and acetylation (N terminus) as well asmethionine oxidation were set as variable modifications. Initial precursor mass deviation of up to 4.6 ppm and fragment mass deviation up to 20 ppm were allowed. Inclusion criteria were set to at least one unique or razor peptide with a minimum length of 7 amino acids per protein group. Protein identification required at least one razor peptide and proteins that could not be discriminated on the basis of unique peptides were grouped into protein groups. For protein quantification, MaxLFQ algorithms were used (44).

### Publication Abstract
Novel tick-borne phleboviruses in the <i>Phenuiviridae</i> family, which are highly pathogenic in humans and all closely related to Uukuniemi virus (UUKV), have recently emerged on different continents. How phleboviruses assemble, bud, and exit cells remains largely elusive. Here, we performed high-resolution, label-free mass spectrometry analysis of UUKV immunoprecipitated from cell lysates and identified 39 cellular partners interacting with the viral envelope glycoproteins. The importance of these host factors for UUKV infection was validated by silencing each host factor by RNA interference. This revealed Golgi-specific brefeldin A-resistance guanine nucleotide exchange factor 1 (GBF1), a guanine nucleotide exchange factor resident in the Golgi, as a critical host factor required for the UUKV life cycle. An inhibitor of GBF1, Golgicide A, confirmed the role of the cellular factor in UUKV infection. We could pinpoint the GBF1 requirement to UUKV replication and particle assembly. When the investigation was extended to viruses from various positive and negative RNA viral families, we found that not only phleboviruses rely on GBF1 for infection, but also <i>Flavi</i>-, <i>Corona</i>-, <i>Rhabdo</i>-, and <i>Togaviridae</i> In contrast, silencing or blocking GBF1 did not abrogate infection by the human adenovirus serotype 5 and immunodeficiency retrovirus type 1, the replication of both requires nuclear steps. Together our results indicate that UUKV relies on GBF1 for viral replication, assembly and egress. This study also highlights the proviral activity of GBF1 in the infection by a broad range of important zoonotic RNA viruses.

### Keywords
Viral glycoprotein interactions, Quantitative proteomics, Phenuiviridae, Adenovirus, Gbf1, Flavivirus, Retrovirus, Coronavirus, Viral assembly, Viral egress, Alphavirus, Rhabdovirus, Viral replication, Hepacivirus, Phlebovirus, Uukuniemi

### Affiliations
Proteomics
Experimental Systems Immunology,  Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Felix Meissner
Experimental Systems Immunology,  Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry


