### Accession
PXD039649

### Title
Activity-based profiling of cullin-RING ligase networks by conformation-specific probes

### Description
The cullin-RING E3 ligase (CRL) network comprises over 300 unique complexes that switch from inactive to activated conformations upon site-specific cullin modification by the ubiquitin-like protein NEDD8. Assessing cellular repertoires of activated CRL complexes is critical for understanding eukaryotic regulation. However, probes surveying networks controlled by site-specific ubiquitin-like protein modifications are lacking. We report development of a synthetic antibody recognizing the active conformation of a NEDD8-linked cullin. We established a pipeline probing cellular networks of activated CUL1-, CUL2-, CUL3- and CUL4-containing CRLs, revealing the CRL complexes responding to stimuli. Profiling several cell types showed their baseline neddylated CRL repertoires vary, prime efficiency of targeted protein degradation, and are differentially rewired across distinct primary cell activation pathways. Thus, conformation-specific probes can permit nonenzymatic activity-based profiling across a system of numerous multiprotein complexes, which in the case of neddylated CRLs reveals widespread regulation and could facilitate development of degrader drugs.

### Sample Protocol
Synthetic antigen-binding fragments (Fabs) specifically recognizing active cullin-RING ubiquitin E3 ligases were used for AP-MS experiments. To preserve the active CRL repertoire of cells for immunoprecipitation cells were exposed to a N8-block treatment (3 min treatment with 1 µM MLN4924 and 1 µM CSN5i-3 in media) during harvesting. Around 75 µL of compacted cells were lysed in 400 µl lysis buffer (25 mM Hepes pH 7.4, 100 mM NaCl, 0.5 % IGEPAL CA-63, 5 % glycerol, 1x protease inhibitor, 1 µM MLN4924, 1 µM CSN5i-3), briefly sonicated (10s, 1s on/off, 10% amplitude , Bandelin Sonopuls HD 4200, TS 103), and cleared by centrifugation at ~20,000xg for 3 min at 4˚C and by filtration using 0.22 µm spin filters. High Capacity Magne® Streptavidin Beads (Promega) were coated with indicated biotinylated Fabs following manufacturer's instructions. The equivalent of 6 µl of bead slurry of the Fab coated beads was added to the cleared cell lysates and incubated for 45 min at 4˚C while rotating. Beads were then washed 2x with lysis buffer, 2x with wash buffer (lysis buffer without IGEPAL CA-63) and 2 x with HBS (25mM Hepes pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl). After removing as much of the liquid as possible beads were resuspended 45 µL denaturing lysis buffer (100 mM Tris pH 8.5, 1% SDC) and boiled for 5 min at 98˚C. CAA (2-Chloroacetamide) and TCEP (tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine) were added to final concentrations of 40 mM and 10 mM, respectively and samples incubated at 45˚C for 5 min. Trypsin and LysC were added at 1:100 w/w and samples digested overnight at 37˚C with agitation (1200 rpm). For sample clean up digested samples were loaded onto SDB-RPS StageTips after addition of 4x sample volume of  1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) in isopropanol. StageTips were washed 1x with 200 µL 1% TFA in isopropanol and 2x with 200 µL in 0.2% TFA/ 2% acetonitrile (ACN) before being eluted with 60 µL of 1.25% ammonium hydroxide in 80% ACN and dried using a SpeedVac centrifuge. Samples were then resuspended in buffer A* (0.2% TFA. 2% ACN), peptide concentrations estimated by measuring absorbance at 280 nm and normalized to 0.1 mg/ml before LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptides were fractionated using an EASY-nLC 1200 system directly coupled with an Orbitrap Exploris 480. 200ng of peptide material was loaded onto a 50 cm reverse-phase column (75 µm inner diameter, packed in house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 µm resin).

### Data Protocol
DIA raw files were processed using Spectronaut using default settings for directDIA. For data analysis the Perseus software package (version 1.6.7.0) was used. Protein intensities were log2-transformed and data sets filtered to contain minimally 50% valid values in at least one experimental condition with missing values being imputed based on normal distribution with a width of 0.3 and a downshift of 1.8. Intensities for CUL1-4, their adapter proteins and known SBMs, as well as other proteins known to associate with CRLs were extracted and when indicated filtered for an average coefficient of variation within experimental conditions of 15%.

### Publication Abstract
The cullin-RING ubiquitin ligase (CRL) network comprises over 300 unique complexes that switch from inactive to activated conformations upon site-specific cullin modification by the ubiquitin-like protein NEDD8. Assessing cellular repertoires of activated CRL complexes is critical for understanding eukaryotic regulation. However, probes surveying networks controlled by site-specific ubiquitin-like protein modifications are lacking. We developed a synthetic antibody recognizing the active conformation of NEDD8-linked cullins. Implementing the probe to profile cellular networks of activated CUL1-, CUL2-, CUL3- and CUL4-containing E3s revealed the complexes responding to stimuli. Profiling several cell types showed their baseline neddylated CRL repertoires vary, and prime efficiency of targeted protein degradation. Our probe also unveiled differential rewiring of CRL networks across distinct primary cell activation pathways. Thus, conformation-specific probes can permit nonenzymatic activity-based profiling across a system of numerous multiprotein complexes, which in the case of neddylated CRLs reveals widespread regulation and could facilitate the development of degrader drugs.

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Ligase, Ring, Nedd8, E3, Cullin

### Affiliations
Dept. Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max-Planck Institute of Biochemistry
Proteomics

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Dept. Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max-Planck Institute of Biochemistry


