### Accession
PXD031339

### Title
In vivo and in vitro characterization and structural analysis of human DPCD protein in complex with RUVBL1/RUVBL2 AAA-ATPases

### Description
DPCD is a protein that may play a role in cilia formation and whose absence leads to primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD), a rare disease caused by impairment of ciliated cells. Except for high-throughput studies that identified DPCD as a possible RUVBL1 (R1) and RUVBL2 (R2) partner, no in-depth  cellular, biochemical, and structural investigations involving DPCD have been reported so far. R1 and R2 proteins are ubiquitous highly conserved AAA+ family ATPases that assemble and mature a plethora of macromolecular complexes and are pivotal in numerous cellular processes, especially by guaranteeing a co-chaperoning function within R2TP or R2TP-like machineries. In the present study, we identified DPCD as a new R1R2 partner in vivo. We show that DPCD interacts directly with R1 and R2 in vitro and in cells. We characterized the physico-chemical properties of DPCD in solution and built 3D structural models of DPCD alone and in complex with R1R2 validated by experimental data combining Small-Angle X-ray Scattering and Cross-linking Mass Spectrometry, among others. Interestingly, DPCD disrupts the dodecameric state of R1R2 complex upon binding and this interaction occurs mainly via the DII domains of R1R2.

### Sample Protocol
Cross-linking reactions were conducted with 1.75 mg/mL protein solution. Freshly prepared 10 mM stock solution of disuccinimidyl dibutyric urea (DSBU) was added 100-fold molar excess. The reaction lasted 45 min at room temperature. The reaction was quenched for 20 min using NH4HCO3 to reach a final concentration of 20 mM. Disulfide was reduced by incubating the cross-linked complex solution with 5 mM DTT for 30 min at 37°C. Alkylation was performed with 15 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 60 min in the dark. Trypsin/Lys-C mix (Promega, Madison, USA) was then added to reach a 1:50 enzyme: substrate ratio. Samples were incubated overnight at 37°C. Digestion was quenched with 1% TFA. Peptides were cleaned up using SPE cartridges and samples were concentrated in a SpeedVac concentrator to a volume of 20 µL before LC/MS/MS analysis. NanoLC-MS/MS analysis was performed using a nanoAcquity Ultra-Performance-LC (Waters, Milford, USA) coupled to the Q-Exactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) with a nanoSpray source. Samples were trapped on a nanoACQUITY UPLC precolumn (C18, 180 µm x 20 mm, 5 µm particle size), and the peptides were separated on a nanoACQUITY UPLC column (C18, 75 µm x 250 mm with 1.7 µm particle size, Waters, Milford, USA) maintained at 60°C. Mobile phase A was 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water, and mobile phase B was 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in acetonitrile. The sample were first injected with a 105 min gradient (1-3% B for 2 min, 3-35% B for 77 min, 35-90% B for 1 min, 90% B for 5 min, 90-1% B for 2 min and maintained 1% B for 2 min) at a flow rate of 400 nL/min. The Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap source temperature was set to 250°C and the spray voltage to 1.8 kV. Full scan MS spectra (300-1,800 m/z) were acquired in positive mode at a resolution of 140,000, a maximum injection time of 50 ms and an AGC target value of 3.106 charges, with the lock-mass option enabled (polysiloxane ion from ambient air at 445.12 m/z). The 10 most intense multiple charged peptides per full scan (charge states ˃ 2) were isolated using a 2 m/z window and fragmented using HCD (30 normalized collision energy, ± 3%). MS/MS spectra were acquired with a resolution of 35,000, a maximum injection time of 100 ms, an AGC target value of 1.105, and dynamic exclusion set to 60 s. The system was fully controlled by XCalibur software v3.0.63, 2013 (Thermo Scientific) and a NanoACQUITY UPLC console v1.51.3347 (Waters). Raw data collected were processed and converted into .mgf format.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS data were analyzed using MeroX software v2.0.1.4 (Götze et al., 2015). Mass tolerances of 5 ppm for precursor ions and of 10 ppm for product ions were applied. A 5% FDR cut-off and a signal-to-noise ≥ 2 were applied. Lys and Arg residues were considered as protease sites with a maximum of three missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as static modification and oxidation of methionine as variable modification (max. mod. 2). Primary amino groups (Lys side chains and N-termini) as well as primary hydroxyl groups (Ser, Thr and Tyr side chains) were considered as cross-linking sites. The cRap database was used in combination with the reporter ion scan event (RISEUP) mode with a maximum missing ion of 1. Cross-links composed of consecutive amino acid sequences were ignored. Each cross-linked product automatically annotated with MeroX was manually validated. Three different experiments were performed, and cross-linked peptides were validated when seen in 2 out of 3 experiments .

### Publication Abstract
DPCD is a protein that may play a role in cilia formation and whose absence leads to primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD), a rare disease caused by impairment of ciliated cells. Except for high-throughput studies that identified DPCD as a possible RUVBL1 (R1) and RUVBL2 (R2) partner, no in-depth cellular, biochemical, and structural investigation involving DPCD have been reported so far. R1 and R2 proteins are ubiquitous highly conserved AAA&#xa0;+&#xa0;family ATPases that assemble and mature a plethora of macromolecular complexes and are pivotal in numerous cellular processes, especially by guaranteeing a co-chaperoning function within R2TP or R2TP-like machineries. In the present study, we identified DPCD as a new R1R2 partner in vivo. We show that DPCD interacts directly with R1 and R2 in vitro and in cells. We characterized the physico-chemical properties of DPCD in solution and built a 3D model of DPCD. In addition, we used a variety of orthogonal biophysical techniques including small-angle X-ray scattering, structural mass spectrometry and electron microscopy to assess the molecular determinants of DPCD interaction with R1R2. Interestingly, DPCD disrupts the dodecameric state of R1R2 complex upon binding and this interaction occurs mainly via the DII domains of R1R2.

### Keywords
Pcd, Lumier-ip, Ruvbl2, Ruvbl1, Nmr, Xl-ms, Em, Itc, Silac, Structural ms., Dpcd, Saxs

### Affiliations
CNRS, IPHC, LSMBO
IPHC, LSMBO, CNRS

### Submitter
Marie LEY

### Lab Head
Dr Marie Ley
IPHC, LSMBO, CNRS


