### Accession
PXD031455

### Title
Comprehensive comparison between azacytidine and decitabine treatment in an acute myeloid leukemia cell line

### Description
Azacytidine (AzaC) and decitabine (AzadC) are cytosine analogs that covalently trap DNA methyltransferases, which place the important epigenetic mark 5-methyl-2’-deoxycytidine by methylating 2’-deoxycytidine (dC) at the C5 position. AzaC and AzadC are used in the clinic as antimetabolites to treat myelodysplastic syndrome and acute myeloid leukemia and are explored against other types of cancer. Although their principal mechanism of action is known, the downstream effects of AzaC and AzadC treatment are not well understood and the cellular prerequisites that determine sensitivity towards AzaC and AzadC remain elusive. Here, we investigated the effects and phenotype of AzaC and AzadC exposure on the acute myeloid leukemia cell line MOLM-13. We found that while AzaC and AzadC share many effects on the cellular level, including decreased global DNA methylation, increased formation of DNA double strand breaks, transcriptional downregulation of important oncogenes and similar changes on the proteome level, AzaC failed in contrast to AzadC to induce apoptosis in MOLM-13. The only cellular marker that correlated with this clear phenotypical outcome was the level of hydroxy-methyl-dC, an additional epigenetic mark that is placed by TET enzymes and repressed in cancer cells. Whereas AzadC increased hmdC substantially in MOLM-13, AzaC treatment did not result in any increase at all. This suggests that hmdC levels in cancer cells should be monitored as a response towards AzaC and AzadC and considered as a biomarker to judge whether AzaC or AzadC lead to cell death in leukemic cells.

### Sample Protocol
MOLM-13 cells were incubated for 72 h with 0.5 μM AzadC, 1 μM or 2.5 μM AzaC in 4 replicates each. Untreated cells (n = 4) served as a control. The cells were harvested and washed twice with PBS. Sample preparation followed in principle a previously published protocol using filter assisted sample preparation (FASP).  Lysis was achieved by adding 1 mL 100 mM TRIS/HCl pH 8.5, 8 M urea, incubation at 95 °C for 5 min and subsequent sonication at 20 % intensity for 20 s using a rod sonicator. The suspension was centrifuged at 14000 × g for 5 min and the resulting supernatant was transferred into a new reaction tube. A BCA assay was conducted to determine the protein concentration, before a defined volume (e.g. 700 μL) was taken from each sample and mixed with TCEP (10 mM final concentration) and 2-chloroacetamide (40 mM final concentration) before incubation at 95 °C for 5 min. 30 μg of each sample was filled up to 150 μL with 100 mM TRIS/HCl pH 8.5, 8 M urea and transferred onto a 30 kDa molecular weight cut-off column (Microcon-30, Merck Millipore). 150 μL 100 mM TRIS/HCl pH 8.5, 8 M urea was added to the column before centrifugation at 14000 × g for 15 min. The flow-through was discarded and the columns were washed twice by addition of 100 μL 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and subsequent centrifugation at 14000 × g for 10 min. The filter units were then placed into a new collection tube before addition of 100 μL 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate containing trypsin (1:100 trypsin:protein) and incubation at 37 °C overnight. Next, the samples were centrifuged at 14000 × g for 15 min followed by washing the column twice with 40 μL 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and centrifugation at 14000 × g for 10 min. The eluate was acidified with 5 % formic acid to a pH of 1-2 and purified using C18 cartridges (Sep-Pak tC18 1 cc, 50 mg, Waters) and a vacuum manifold. For this, the cartridges were washed with 1 mL MeCN, 1 mL 80 % MeCN, 0.5 % formic acid and thrice with 1 mL 0.5 % formic acid, applying vacuum after each step. Then, the acidified samples were loaded onto the cartridges without application of vacuum following three washing steps using 1 mL 0.5 % formic acid. Clean collection tubes were inserted into the vacuum manifold and the peptides were eluted by addition of 250 μL 80 % MeCN, 0.5 % formic acid without applying vacuum before another 250 μL of this buffer was added while applying vacuum. Finally, the solvent was evaporated and the purified peptides were resuspended in 2 % MeCN, 0.1 % formic acid.  2 μg of each sample was submitted to a LC-MS analysis using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano UHPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with the FAIMS Pro interface attached. First, the peptides were separated by reverse-phase chromatography using a pre-concentration setup. For this, the samples were bound to a precolumn (Acclaim C18 PepMap100, 300 μm i.d., 5 mm length; Thermo Fisher Scientific) and then eluted onto the analytical column (SilicaTip Emitter, 75 µm i.d., 8 µm tip, 15 cm length; New Objective; packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 µm, 120 Å; Dr. Maisch GmbH), which was heated to 40 °C using a column oven by Sonation. The separation was achieved at a flow rate of 0.3 μL/min and application of a gradient between solvent A (0.1 % formic acid in H2O) and solvent B (0.1 % formic acid in MeCN) going from 7 % to 24.8 % B in 99 min and from 24.8 % to 35.2 % B in 21 min. The ionization was carried out by applying a voltage of 2.0 kV to the column.  The eluting peptides were analysed at alternating FAIMS CV voltages of -50 V and -70 V in Standard Resolution mode with the total carrier gas flow set to static and 3.5 L/min. To take peptide charge-state distributions into account, the data dependent acquisition at -50 V was run for 1.7 s, while the corresponding cycle time at -70 V was shortened to 1.3 s. The rest of the parameters were kept identical for the two CV values, starting with a full mass orbitrap scan in profile mode at a resolution of 240000 using a mass range of 375 to 1500 m/z and a RF lens level of 30 %. The AGC target was set to Standard and the maximum injection time was set to 50 ms. Following this scan, multiple data dependent MS2 scans were carried out for the cycle time specified above using the filters MIPS (Peptide), Intensity (intensity threshold: 1.0e4), Charge State (include charge states 2-6, don’t include undetermined charge states) and Dynamic Exclusion (exclude for 40 s after one selection with a window of ±10 ppm, also exclude isotopes and other charge states). The most intense ions were individually selected using an isolation window of 1,2 m/z, subjected to fragmentation at a normalized HCD energy of 30 % and analysed in the ion trap at Rapid scan rate with a Normal mass range, the AGC target set to Standard and a maximum injection time of 50 ms.

### Data Protocol
Identification and label-free quantification (LFQ) of peptides and proteins was accomplished using the MaxQuant software version 2.0.3.0. To prepare the .RAW-files for analysis, they were split into two files containing either the spectra obtained at a CV of -50 V or -70 V. This was accomplished by the FAIMS MzXML Generator software developed by the Coon lab. During the MaxQuant analysis, these two files were handled like fractions. Next, a database containing the human proteome was chosen. As protease, Trypsin was chosen and a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of C was set as static modification while oxidation of M and phosphorylation of YST was set as dynamic modification. Peptide mass deviations were set to 20 ppm in the first search and 4.5 ppm in the second search, respectively. The minimal peptide length was set to 6 and the PSM and protein FDRs were both set to 0.01. A reverse of the database was chosen as decoy database. The LFQ option was checked and the minimum ratio count was set to 2. The feature “match between runs” was checked and a match time window of 0.7 min as well as an alignment time window of 20 min was defined. Max-Quant results were analyzed using Perseus (v 1.6.14).

### Publication Abstract
Azacytidine (AzaC) and decitabine (AzadC) are cytosine analogs that covalently trap DNA methyltransferases, which place the important epigenetic mark 5-methyl-2'-deoxycytidine by methylating 2'-deoxycytidine (dC) at the C5 position. AzaC and AzadC are used in the clinic as antimetabolites to treat myelodysplastic syndrome and acute myeloid leukemia and are explored against other types of cancer. Although their principal mechanism of action is known, the downstream effects of AzaC and AzadC treatment are not well understood and the cellular prerequisites that determine sensitivity toward AzaC and AzadC remain elusive. Here, we investigated the effects and phenotype of AzaC and AzadC exposure on the acute myeloid leukemia cell line MOLM-13. We found that while AzaC and AzadC share many effects on the cellular level, including decreased global DNA methylation, increased formation of DNA double-strand breaks, transcriptional downregulation of important oncogenes and similar changes on the proteome level, AzaC failed in contrast to AzadC to induce apoptosis efficiently in MOLM-13. The only cellular marker that correlated with this clear phenotypical outcome was the level of hydroxy-methyl-dC, an additional epigenetic mark that is placed by TET enzymes and repressed in cancer cells. Whereas AzadC increased hmdC substantially in MOLM-13, AzaC treatment did not result in any increase at all. This suggests that hmdC levels in cancer cells should be monitored as a response toward AzaC and AzadC and considered as a biomarker to judge whether AzaC or AzadC treatment leads to cell death in leukemic cells.

### Keywords
['Dna hypomethylation', 'Epigenetics', 'Dna damage', '5-aza-cytidine', "5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine", 'Cancer']

### Affiliations
['LMU Munich - Department Chemie', 'Institute for Chemical Epigenetics Department of Chemistry LMU München Würmtalstr. 201 81375 Munich Germany']

### Submitter
['Franziska Traube']

### Lab Head
[{'title': 'Dr', 'affiliation': 'Institute for Chemical Epigenetics Department of Chemistry LMU München Würmtalstr. 201 81375 Munich Germany', 'email': 'franziska.traube@cup.lmu.de', 'country': '', 'orcid': '', 'name': 'Franziska Traube', 'id': '2353920'}]

