### Accession
PXD039463

### Title
Breast cancer stem cell-derived tumors escape from γδ T cell immunosurveillance in vivo by modulating γδ T cell ligands

### Description
Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) lacks targeted therapy options. TNBC is enriched in breast cancer stem cells (BCSCs), which play a key role in metastasis, chemoresistance, relapse and mortality. γδ T cells hold great potential in immunotherapy against cancer, and might be an alternative to target TNBC. γδ T cells are commonly observed to infiltrate solid tumors and have an extensive repertoire of tumor sensing, recognizing stress-induced molecules and phosphoantigens (pAgs) on transformed cells. We show that patient derived triple negative BCSCs are efficiently recognized and killed by ex vivo expanded γδ T cells from healthy donors. Orthotopically xenografted BCSCs, however, were refractory to γδ T cell immunotherapy. Mechanistically, we unraveled concerted differentiation and immune escape: xenografted BCSCs lost stemness, expression of γδ T cell ligands, adhesion molecules and pAgs, thereby evading immune recognition by γδ T cells. Indeed, neither pro-migratory engineered γδ T cells, nor anti-PD 1 checkpoint blockade significantly prolonged overall survival of tumor-bearing mice. BCSC immune escape was independent of the immune pressure exerted by the γδ T cells, and could be pharmacologically reverted by Zoledronate or IFN-α treatment. These results pave the way for novel combinatorial immunotherapies for TNBC.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation. Proteomic studies were performed following previously published protocols (85). BCSC5 culture cells and xenograft derived tumor cells were washed with PBS, pelleted, frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C until further processing. Cell pellets were lysed in 400 µl lysis buffer (4% sodium dodecyl sulfate, 50 mM tetraethylammonium bromide (pH 8.5) and 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride). Lysates were boiled for 5 min and then sonicated for 15 min at high intensity (30 sec on /30 sec off). After sonication, DNA and RNA were degraded using Benzonase endonuclease (Merck Millipore). The protein concentration was measured with EZQ Protein Quantitation Kit (Thermo Scientific). Lysates were alkylated in the dark with 20 mM iodoacetamide for 1h at RT. For protein clean-up, 200 µg SP3 paramagnetic beads were added to the lysates, and proteins were bound to the beads by adding acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid. Beads were washed in 70% ethanol and 100% acetonitrile before elution in digest buffer (0.1% sodium dodecyl sulfate, 50 mM tetraethylammonium bromide (pH 8.5) and 1 mM CaCl2) and digested sequentially with LysC (Wako), then Trypsin (Promega), each at a 1:100 w/w (enzyme:protein) ratio. Peptide clean up was performed according to the SP3 protocol. Tandem mass tag (TMT) labelling and basic C18 reverse phase (bRP) chromatography fractionation. Each sample (200 μg of peptides each) was resuspended in 100 µl of 100 mM tetraethylammonium bromide buffer. TMT 10plex (Thermo) labelling was performed according to manufacturer’s protocol. To ensure complete labelling, 1 µg of labelled samples from each channel was analysed by LC-MS/MS prior to pooling. The mixture of TMT 10plex sample was desalted with Sep Pak C18 cartridge (Waters), and then fractionated by basic C18 reverse phase chromatography as described (Roth et al 2020 10.1016/j.chembiol.2020.06.012)  Liquid chromatography electrospray tandem mass spectrometry analysis (LC MS/MS analysis). The LC separations were performed as described (Roth et al) with a Thermo Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC Nano liquid chromatography instrument. Approximately 1 µg of concentrated peptides (quantified by NanoDrop) from each fraction were separated over an EASY Spray column (C18, 2 µm, 75 µm × 50 cm) with an integrated nano electrospray emitter at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Peptides were separated with a 180 min segmented gradient. Eluted peptides were analysed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Fisher) mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
All the acquired LC-MS data were analysed using Proteome Discoverer software v.2.2 (Thermo Fisher) with Mascot search engine. A maximum missed cleavages for trypsin digestion was set to 2. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm. Fragment ion tolerance was set to 0.6 Da. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine and TMT 10plex tags on N termini as well as lysine (+229.163 Da) were set as static modifications. Variable modifications were set as oxidation on methionine (+15.995 Da) and phosphorylation on serine, threonine, and tyrosine (+79.966 Da). Data were searched against a complete UniProt Human (Reviewed 20,143 entries downloaded Nov 2018). Peptide spectral match (PSM) error rates with a 1% FDR were determined using the target-decoy strategy coupled to Percolator modelling of true and false matches. Both unique and razor peptides were used for quantitation. Signal-to-noise (S/N) values were used to represent the reporter ion abundance with a co-isolation threshold of 50% and an average reporter S/N threshold of 10 and above required for quantitation from each MS3 spectra to be used. The summed abundance of quantified peptides were used for protein quantitation. The total peptide amount was used for the normalisation. Protein ratios were calculated from medians of summed sample abundances of replicate groups. Standard deviation was calculated from all biological replicate values. The standard deviation of all biological replicates lower than 25% was used for further analyses.  Differentially regulated proteins were identified using a linear-based model (limma) (86) on the normalized log2 protein abundance. P value < 0.05 threshold was used as significance threshold. The Generally Applicable Gene-set Enrichment (GAGE) was used to retrieve the enriched processes (87). Several databases from MSigDB were used including Hallmark, Reactome, GO and immunologic signatures gene-sets. P-value <0.05 was used as significance threshold (88).

### Publication Abstract
There are no targeted therapies for patients with triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC). TNBC is enriched in breast cancer stem cells (BCSC), which play a key role in metastasis, chemoresistance, relapse, and mortality. &#x3b3;&#x3b4; T cells hold great potential in immunotherapy against cancer and might provide an approach to therapeutically target TNBC. &#x3b3;&#x3b4; T cells are commonly observed to infiltrate solid tumors and have an extensive repertoire of tumor-sensing mechanisms, recognizing stress-induced molecules and phosphoantigens (pAgs) on transformed cells. Herein, we show that patient-derived triple-negative BCSCs are efficiently recognized and killed by ex vivo expanded &#x3b3;&#x3b4; T cells from healthy donors. Orthotopically xenografted BCSCs, however, were refractory to &#x3b3;&#x3b4; T-cell immunotherapy. We unraveled concerted differentiation and immune escape mechanisms: xenografted BCSCs lost stemness, expression of &#x3b3;&#x3b4; T-cell ligands, adhesion molecules, and pAgs, thereby evading immune recognition by &#x3b3;&#x3b4; T cells. Indeed, neither promigratory engineered &#x3b3;&#x3b4; T cells, nor anti-PD-1 checkpoint blockade, significantly prolonged overall survival of tumor-bearing mice. BCSC immune escape was independent of the immune pressure exerted by the &#x3b3;&#x3b4; T cells and could be pharmacologically reverted by zoledronate or IFN&#x3b1; treatment. These results pave the way for novel combinatorial immunotherapies for TNBC.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Phosphoantigens, Immunotherapy, Γδ t cells, Proteomics, Tmt, Quantitation, Breast cancer stem cells, Triple negative breast cancer, Immune-escape

### Affiliations
Medical Research Council Protein Phosphorylation and Ubiquitylation Unit (MRC-PPU), School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee, UK
MRC-PPU, University of Dundee

### Submitter
Renata Soares

### Lab Head
Dr Mahima Swamy
Medical Research Council Protein Phosphorylation and Ubiquitylation Unit (MRC-PPU), School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee, UK


