### Accession
PXD004694

### Title
Chronic iron limitation induces resistance to ROS

### Description
Diatoms are single celled photosynthetic bloom-forming algae that are responsible for at least 20% of global primary production. Nevertheless, more than 30% of the oceans are considered “ocean deserts” due to iron limitation. We used the diatom Phaeodactylum tricornutum as a model system to explore diatom’s response to iron limitation and its interplay with susceptibility to oxidative stress. By analyzing physiological parameters and proteome profiling, we defined two distinct phases: short-term (< 3 days, phase I) and chronic (> 5 days, phase II) iron limitation. While at phase I no changes in physiological parameters were observed, molecular markers for iron starvation, such as ISIP and flavodoxin, were highly upregulated. At phase II, down regulation of numerous iron-containing proteins was detected in parallel to reduction in growth rate, chlorophyll content, photosynthetic activity, respiration rate and antioxidant capacity. Intriguingly, while application of oxidative stress to phase I and II iron limited cells similarly oxidized the GSH pool, phase II iron limitation exhibited transient resistance to oxidative stress, despite the down regulation of many antioxidant proteins. By comparing proteomic profiles of P. tricornutum under iron limitation and metatranscriptomic data of an iron enrichment experiment conducted in the Pacific Ocean, we propose that iron limited cells in the natural environment resemble the phase II metabolic state. These results provide insights into the trade-off between maximal growth rate and susceptibility to oxidative stress as a possible key determinant in the response of diatoms to iron quota in the marine environment.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from P. tricornutum cells at day 3 of replete and day 3 and 5 of iron limitation, using 10% TCA-acetone. For protein precipitation, cells were collected by centrifugation of 250 ml cultures (10 minutes, 4000 g, 4 oC) and resuspended in 500 µl of 10% TCA-acetone. Then, cells were sonicated gently and kept at -20 oC for 1 hour. After centrifugation (10 minutes, 10000 g) the supernatant was discarded and the pellet was washed twice with 5% TCA-acetone and stored at -20 oC for 1 hour. Precipitated proteins were collected by centrifugation (10 minutes, 10000 g, 4 oC) and the pellet was dried under nitrogen flow. Pellets were solubilized using 8 M urea (Sigma). Samples were then diluted to 1.6 M urea and proteins reduced using 5 mM dithiothreitol (Sigma) for 30 minutes in 56 °C. This was followed by alkylation using 10mM iodoacetamide for 30 minutes in the dark at room temperature. Trypsin was then added at a ratio of 50:1 (protein:trypsin) at 37 °C overnight. Digestion was stopped using 1% formic acid. Samples were desalted using Oasis HLB (Waters). Samples were frozen in -80 °C until mass spectrometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
Quantification of protein expression was conducted using MS1 intensity based label-free quantification as described in (Levin et al., 2011). Raw data were imported into Rosetta Elucidator System version 3.3 (Rosetta Biosoftware, Seattle WA USA). Elucidator was used for retention time alignment and extraction of MS1 feature intensities. In parallel, database searching was performed using ProteinLynx Global Server (IdentityE) version 2.5. Database searching was carried out using the Ion Accounting algorithm described by Li et al., 2009. Trypsin was set as the protease, one missed cleavage was allowed and fixed modification was set to carbamidomethylation of cysteines. Variable modifications included oxidation of methionine.  Data were searched against a P. tricornutum protein database which was built by combining three publically available protein databases: The National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI, http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/protein/?term=tricornutum), Doe Joint Genome Institute (JGI, http://genome.jgi.doe.gov/Phatr2/Phatr2.download.html) and TrEMBL (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/uniprot/database/download.html) as in Rosenwasser et al., 2014. A target-decoy strategy was performed using reversed sequences. The criteria for protein identification were set to minimum of three fragments per peptide, five fragments per protein and minimum peptide score of 6.7, which corresponds to the false identification rate (FDR) of 1%. The approach for setting the minimum identification score is based on reports by Keller et al, and termed Peptide Prophet (Keller et al., 2002; Nesvizhskii et al., 2003). Identifications were imported automatically into Elucidator for annotation of features, applying a ‘match between runs’ approach of propagating identifications between samples. Protein quantification inference was conducted using the Hi-3 method (Silva et al., 2005). A Student’s T Test was used for statistical evaluation after logarithmic transformation of protein intensities. Fold changes were determined by dividing the arithmetic mean of the three biological replicates in each group. When a protein was detected only in one of the condition a fold change value of +/-1000 was assigned

### Publication Abstract
Diatoms are single-celled, photosynthetic, bloom-forming algae that are responsible for at least 20% of global primary production. Nevertheless, more than 30% of the oceans are considered "ocean deserts" due to iron limitation. We used the diatom Phaeodactylum tricornutum as a model system to explore diatom's response to iron limitation and its interplay with susceptibility to oxidative stress. By analyzing physiological parameters and proteome profiling, we defined two distinct phases: short-term (&lt;3 d, phase I) and chronic (&gt;5 d, phase II) iron limitation. While at phase I no significant changes in physiological parameters were observed, molecular markers for iron starvation, such as Iron Starvation Induced Protein and flavodoxin, were highly up-regulated. At phase II, down-regulation of numerous iron-containing proteins was detected in parallel to reduction in growth rate, chlorophyll content, photosynthetic activity, respiration rate, and antioxidant capacity. Intriguingly, while application of oxidative stress to phase I and II iron-limited cells similarly oxidized the reduced glutathione (GSH) pool, phase II iron limitation exhibited transient resistance to oxidative stress, despite the down regulation of many antioxidant proteins. By comparing proteomic profiles of P. tricornutum under iron limitation and metatranscriptomic data of an iron enrichment experiment conducted in the Pacific Ocean, we propose that iron-limited cells in the natural environment resemble the phase II metabolic state. These results provide insights into the trade-off between optimal growth rate and susceptibility to oxidative stress in the response of diatoms to iron quota in the marine environment.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Diatom

### Affiliations
Weizmann Institute of Science
Weizmann Institute of Science, Israel

### Submitter
Yishai Levin

### Lab Head
Dr Assaf Vardi
Weizmann Institute of Science


