### Accession
PXD024835

### Title
An integrated strategy reveals complex glycosylation of erythropoi-etin using top-down and bottom-up mass spectrometry

### Description
The characterization of therapeutic glycoproteins is challenging due to the structural micro- and macro-heterogeneity of the protein glycosylation. This study presents an in-depth strategy for glycosylation analysis using first-generation erythropoietin (epoetin beta), including a developed top-down mass spectrometric workflow for N-glycan analysis, bottom-up mass spectrometric methods for site-specific N-glycosylation and a LC-MS approach for O-glycan identi-fication. Permethylated N-glycans, peptides and enriched glycopeptides of erythropoietin were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS and de-N-glycosylated erythropoietin was measured by LC-MS, enabling the qualitative and quantitative analysis of glycosylation and different glycan modifications (e.g., phosphorylation and O-acetylation). Extending the coverage of our newly developed Python script to phosphorylated N-glycans enabled the identification of 140 N-glycan compositions (237 N-glycan structures) from erythropoietin. The site-specificity of N-glycans was revealed at glycopeptide level by pGlyco software using different proteases. In total, 215 N-glycan compositions were identified from N-glycan and glycopeptide analysis. Moreover, LC-MS analysis of de-N-glycosylated erythropoietin species identified two different O-glycan compositions, based on the mass shifts between non-O-glycosylated and O-glycosylated species. This integrated strategy allows the in-depth glycosylation analysis of a therapeutic glycoprotein to understand its pharmacological properties and improving the manufacturing processes.

### Sample Protocol
N-glycan release, purification, reduction and per-methylation N-glycan cleavage, purification, reduction and per-methylation were performed as described in previous studies.24,25 EPO was denatured using 6 M urea, reduced by 20 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 56℃ for 30 min and alkylated by 40 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) at room tem-perature for 30 min in dark, in which DTT and IAA were prepared in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) buffer. Next, buffers were exchanged to 100 mM ABC buffer using 3 kDa cut-off centrifugal filter. Thirty unit of PNGase F was added and incubated at 37°C for 24 h, followed by the addition of trypsin (1/100, w/w) for another 20 h. N-glycans and tryptic peptides were separated using a RP-SPE C18 cartridge. Briefly, the C18 cartridge was conditioned with 5 mL methanol and equilibrated with 10 mL 5% acetic acid respectively. After loading digested samples, N-glycans were eluted with 5 mL 5% acetic acid and evaporated using a SpeedVacTM vacuum concentrator. The A2F N-glycan standards, containing Neu5Ac2HexNAc3Hex5Fuc1Red-HexNAc1 at a purity of more than 90%, is collected from porcine thyroglobulin by hydrazinolysis using a combination of HPLC and glycosidase digestion. EPO derived N-glycans and A2F N-glycan standards were reduced by borane-ammonia complex, followed by sol-id-phase permethylation with iodomethane. Briefly, 10 µg/µL borane-ammonia complex was used to reduce N-glycans at 60℃ for 1 h and then removed by evapora-tion with three additions of 300 µL methanol. Reduced N-glycans were resuspended in 110 µL water/DMSO (10/100, v/v) solution and 100 µL iodomethane was added, which was transferred to the glass vial contain-ing sodium hydroxide beads (200 mg). Afterwards, samples were incubated in a Thermomixer compact (Eppendorf AG, Hamburg, Germany) using a rotation speed of 1,300 rpm for 10 min. The solution containing permethylated N-glycans was transferred to a new vial, followed by the addition of 200 µL 5% acetic acid and 400 µL chloroform. Chloroform-water extraction was performed to purify permethylated N-glycans, which was dried by a SpeedVacTM vacuum concentrator and stored at -20°C until further use. Tryptic and chymotryptic digestion of EPO EPO samples were denatured, reduced and alkylated as described above. Buffers were exchanged to 100 mM ABC buffer using 3 kDa cut-off centrifugal filters. Samples were digested using trypsin (1/100, w/w) or chymotrypsin (1/100, w/w) at 37℃ for 20 h, respective-ly. Resulting peptides were divided into two aliquots for peptide analysis and glycopeptide enrichment, which were concentrated by a SpeedVacTM vacuum concentrator and stored at -20℃ until further use.  Glycopeptide enrichment by zwitterionic hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography Digested EPO, by trypsin or chymotrypsin, was resus-pended in 80% ACN with 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and enriched using self-packed zwitterionic hydro-philic interaction liquid chromatography (ZIC-HILIC) columns.29 Micro-columns were packed with 30 mg ZIC-HILIC materials obtained from a HILIC column (SeQuant ZIC-cHILIC, 4.6×250 mm, 3µm, 100Å, Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany) on top of a C8 RP chroma-tographic materials (3M, Eagan, MN, USA). The column was equilibrated with 600 μL of 1% TFA in 80% ACN. After sample loading, low-hydrophilic peptides were removed using 600 µL of 1% TFA in 80% ACN. Glyco-peptides were eluted by 600 µL 0.1% TFA, concentrat-ed by a SpeedVacTM vacuum concentrator and stored at -20℃ until further use. Sample preparation and analysis of de-N-glycosylated EPO EPO was denatured, reduced, alkylated and digested by PNGase F as mentioned above. De-N-glycosylated EPO samples were injected into a LC system (Waters ACQUITY, Miford, MA, USA), coupled with a hybrid quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometer. Solvent A was 0.1% FA and solvent B was 0.1% FA in ACN. Using a RP monolithic column (ProSwift™ RP-4H, 1×250 mm, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany), solvent B started with 5% for a duration of 2 min, increasing to 25% in 7 min and to 60% in 34 min at a flow rate of 0.2 mL/min. Detailed MS instrument parameters are de-scribed in Supporting Information.

### Data Protocol
Identification and statistical analysis of permethylat-ed N-glycans For N-glycan identification, permethylated Neu5Gc, Neu5Ac, N-acetylhexosamine (HexNAc), Hexose (Hex), Fucose (Fuc) and reduced N-acetylhexosamine (Red-HexNAc) are utilized as the building blocks to match experimental masses with theoretical N-glycan compo-sitions using a newly designed Python script glycoin-formatics algorithm. With upgrading the previous R-scripts we have developed (https://github.com/guan181992/Glyco-informatics),24 which matched one precursor to at most one possible N-glycan composition within a predefined deviation, the newly designed Python script can provide all the possible N-glycan compositions for one precursor without N-glycan libraries, especially solving the prob-lems derived from isobaric compositions like Neu5Ac1Hex1 and Neu5Gc1Fuc1 (Figure S1). It further extends to the N-glycans assembled with phosphory-lated Man residues (P-Hex), considering the HexNAc1Hex3Red-HexNAc1 (trimannosylchitobiose core) (Figure S2). Mass spectrometric raw data was processed using the MaxQuant software in the version 1.6.2.3 (http://www.maxquant.org). As MaxQuant was exclusively used for mass value extraction, no database was included and all settings were chosen as automati-cally recommended for mass spectra.27 All the masses, in the resulting “allPeptides.txt” file, were input into Python script and matched with possible N-glycan compositions with a deviation threshold of 2.5 p.p.m. at MS1 level. From the result table, the masses, matched to N-glycan compositions, were further matched with mo-noisotopic m/z in the MS raw data. Finally, the positive-ly matched masses were characterized as a preferred N-glycan structure with the assistance of GlycoWork-bench in the version 2.1 build 146 (https://download.cnet.com/GlycoWorkbench-64-bit/3000-2383_4-75758804.html).  To perform quantitative analysis of N-glycans from different batches of EPO samples, EPO-3 and EPO-4, peak area of each identified N-glycan composition was integrated using Skyline in the version 19.1 (http://skyline.maccosslab.org). N-glycan compositions and Total Area MS1 (abundance of each N-glycan composition) were uploaded to Perseus in the version 1.6.2.1 (http://www.perseus-framework.org) for statisti-cal analysis. Log2 transformation, normalization and two-sample student’s T-test at a false discovery rate (FDR) less than 0.05 were performed to identify signifi-cantly differential abundant N-glycans between the compared groups. Only N-glycans, showing a mean dif-ference higher than 1.5- or 2-fold change (FC) between different EPO batches, were considered in further anal-ysis. Tryptic and chymotryptic digestion of EPO EPO samples were denatured, reduced and alkylated as described above. Buffers were exchanged to 100 mM ABC buffer using 3 kDa cut-off centrifugal filters. Samples were digested using trypsin (1/100, w/w) or chymotrypsin (1/100, w/w) at 37℃ for 20 h, respective-ly. Resulting peptides were divided into two aliquots for peptide analysis and glycopeptide enrichment, which were concentrated by a SpeedVacTM vacuum concentrator and stored at -20℃ until further use.  The peptide identification was performed using the pFind software in the version 3.1.6 (http://pfind.ict.ac.cn/software/pFind3/),28 with the FASTA database containing amino acid sequence of epoetin beta (https://www.drugbank.ca/drugs/DB00016). For peptide identification, up to 3 missed cleavages were tolerated; peptides identified at FDR less than 0.01 with a mini-mum length of 6 amino acids and a maximum length of 100 were considered; the precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 p.p.m.; the mass tolerance at MS2 was set to 20 p.p.m.; the oxidation of methionine residues was in-cluded as a variable modification; carbamidomethyla-tion of cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification. Glycopeptides were identified by pGlyco software in the version 2.2.0 (http://pfind.ict.ac.cn/software/pGlyco/index.html) with the total N-glycan entries of 7,884.30 By pGlyco identi-fication, the amino acid sequence of epoetin beta was used as a FASTA database. The parameters were set as following: the precursor tolerance was 5 p.p.m.; the fragment mass tolerance was 20 p.p.m.; the oxidation of methionine was set as a variable modification and car-bamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification.

### Publication Abstract
The characterization of therapeutic glycoproteins is challenging due to the structural heterogeneity of the therapeutic protein glycosylation. This study presents an in-depth analytical strategy for glycosylation of first-generation erythropoietin (epoetin beta), including a developed mass spectrometric workflow for N-glycan analysis, bottom-up mass spectrometric methods for site-specific N-glycosylation, and a LC-MS approach for O-glycan identification. Permethylated N-glycans, peptides, and enriched glycopeptides of erythropoietin were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS, and de-N-glycosylated erythropoietin was measured by LC-MS, enabling the qualitative and quantitative analysis of glycosylation and different glycan modifications (e.g., phosphorylation and O-acetylation). The newly developed Python scripts enabled the identification of 140 N-glycan compositions (237 N-glycan structures) from erythropoietin, especially including 8 phosphorylated N-glycan species. The site-specificity of N-glycans was revealed at the glycopeptide level by pGlyco software using different proteases. In total, 114 N-glycan compositions were identified from glycopeptide analysis. Moreover, LC-MS analysis of de-N-glycosylated erythropoietin species identified two O-glycan compositions based on the mass shifts between non-O-glycosylated and O-glycosylated species. Finally, this integrated strategy was proved to realize the in-depth glycosylation analysis of a therapeutic glycoprotein to understand its pharmacological properties and improving the manufacturing processes.

### Keywords
Erythropoietin, Top-down, Bottom-up, Glycosylation, Python scripts, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Southern University of Science and Technology
Institute of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg 20246, Germany

### Submitter
Yudong Guan

### Lab Head
Dr Hartmut Schlüter
Institute of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg 20246, Germany


