### Accession
PXD000876

### Title
Proteomic analysis of three Borrelia burgdorferi sensu lato species and disseminating clones: relevance for Lyme vaccine design.

### Description
Lyme borreliosis is first characterized by a cutaneous inflammation, the erythema migrans, and if dissemination occurs after an infected tick bite cutaneous, nervous and articular manifestations appear. Although antibiotic treatments are efficient in the early stage of the infection, a significant number of patients develop disseminated manifestations due to unnoticed or absence of erythema migrans, or to inappropriate treatment. Vaccine could be an efficient approach to decrease Lyme disease incidence. We have developed a proteomic approach based on a Ge-LC-MS/MS strategy to identify new vaccine candidates. We analyzed a disseminating clone and the associated wild type strain for each major pathogenic Borrelia species: B. burgdorferi sensu stricto, B. garinii and B. afzelii. We managed to identify proteins specific and common to the disseminating clones of the 3 main species. In parallel, we used a spectral counting strategy in order to identify up-regulated proteins common to the clones. Thus, we identified 40 proteins that are potentially involved in bacterial virulence and could be of interest in the development of a new vaccine.

### Sample Protocol
For each strain and its corresponding clone, proteins were extracted by Laemmli sample buffer. After sonication and centrifugation, the protein content of the supernatant was determined. Proteins (75 µg) were electrophoresed onto 12% SDS-PAGE and stained overnight with colloidal Coomassie Brilliant Blue. Gel bands of 2 mm were excised manually. In-gel digestion was carried out as previously described, and the tryptic peptides were extracted by the addition of 35 µL of 60% (v/v) ACN and 0.1% (v/v) HCO2H. NanoLC-MS/MS was performed using a nanoLC-Chip/MS (Agilent Technologies, Palo Alto, CA) hyphenated to an ion trap amaZon (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany). The chip contained a Zorbax 300SB-C18 column (150 mm x 75 μm, 5 μm particle size) and a Zorbax 300SB-C18 enrichment column (40 nL, 5 μm particle size). The solvent system consisted of 2% ACN, 0.1% HCO2H in water (solvent A) and 2% water, 0.1% HCO2H in ACN (solvent B). One μL of peptide extract (1/20 of the total volume) was loaded in duplicate into the enrichment column at a flow rate set to 3.75 μL/min with A. Elution was performed at a flow rate of 300 nL/min with a 8-40% linear gradient (solvent B) in 30 min followed by a 4 min stage at 70% of B before reconditioning the column at 8% of B. The MS instrument was operated with the following settings: source temperature was set to 145 °C while cone gas flow was at 4 L/min. The nano-electrospray voltage was set to -1 900 V. The MS spectra were acquired in the positive ion mode on the mass range 250 to 1 500 m/z using the standard enhanced resolution mode at a scan rate of 8 100 m/z/s. The Ion Charge Control was fixed at 200 000 with a maximum accumulation time of 200 ms and the number of averages was set to 2. For tandem MS experiments, the system was operated with automatic switching between MS and MS/MS modes. The 8 most abundant peptides were selected on each MS spectrum for further isolation and fragmentation with a preference for doubly charged ions (absolute threshold of 100 000). Fragmentation was performed using argon as the collision gas. Ions were excluded after the acquisition of one MS/MS spectra and the exclusion was released after 0.60 min. The Smart Parameters Setting option was used for the selected precursor ions. The MS/MS spectra were acquired on the mass range 100 to 2 000 m/z. The Ion Charge Control was fixed at 400 000 and 5 scans were averaged to obtain a MS/MS spectrum. The complete system was fully controlled by HyStar 3.2 (Bruker Daltonics) software.

### Data Protocol
Mass data collected during nanoLC-MS/MS were processed, converted into “.mgf” files with DataAnalysis 4.0 (Bruker Daltonics) and interpreted using the MASCOT 2.4.3 (Matrix Science, London, UK) and the OMSSA 2.1.7 (Open Mass Spectrometry Search Algorithm, Maryland, USA) algorithms. Searches were performed without any molecular weight, or isoelectric point restrictions against 3 in house generated protein databases composed of protein sequences of B. burgdorferi B31, B. garinii PBi and B. afzelii PKo downloaded from National Center for Biotechnology Information non redundant database (NCBInr, August 16, 2012). Known contaminant proteins such as human keratins and trypsin, were added to each database and concatenated with reversed copies of all sequences (B. burgdorferi B31: 1758 entries; B. garinii PBi: 1720 entries; B. afzelii PKo: 2157 entries). The databases for B. burgdorferi B31 and B. afzelii PKo strains were used as respectively the B. burgdorferi 297 and B. afzelii 163 strains have not been sequenced yet. Trypsin was selected as enzyme and for MS/MS data, a parent and fragment mass tolerance of 0.5 Da. A maximum of 2 missed cleavages was allowed and some modifications were taken into account: carbamidomethyl (C), acetyl N-terminus of protein, oxidation (M). The Mascot and OMSSA results were independently loaded into the Scaffold software (Proteome Software, Portland, OR). The target-decoy database search allowed us to control the false positive identification rate which was set to 1% with a minimum of one peptide per protein.  Duplicate trials were performed for each condition. Spectral counts for each replicate were determined from the number of MS/MS spectra identified from validated proteins by both search engines. The beta binomial test implemented in R was used to determine significantly up-regulated proteins (p value < 0.05) in each virulent clone compared to the wild type strain.  The test was performed independently for both search engines because the spectral identifications are algorithm dependent. We focused on up-regulated proteins that overlap between both search algorithms. All the identifications for each clone in each species can be found in the Supporting Information.

### Publication Abstract
Lyme borreliosis is the most important vector-borne disease in the Northern hemisphere. It is caused by Borrelia burgdorferi sensu lato bacteria transmitted to humans by the bite of hard ticks, Ixodes spp. Although antibiotic treatments are efficient in the early stage of the infection, a significant number of patients develop disseminated manifestations (articular, neurological, and cutaneous) due to unnoticed or absence of erythema migrans, or to inappropriate treatment. Vaccine could be an efficient approach to decrease Lyme disease incidence. We have developed a proteomic approach based on a one dimensional gel electrophoresis followed by LC-MS/MS strategy to identify new vaccine candidates. We analyzed a disseminating clone and the associated wild-type strain for each major pathogenic Borrelia species: B. burgdorferi sensu stricto, B. garinii, and B. afzelii. We identified specific proteins and common proteins to the disseminating clones of the three main species. In parallel, we used a spectral counting strategy to identify upregulated proteins common to the clones. Finally, 40 proteins were found that could potentially be involved in bacterial virulence and of interest in the development of a new vaccine. We selected the three proteins specifically detected in the disseminating clones of the three Borrelia species and checked by RT-PCR whether they are expressed in mouse skin upon B. burgdorferi ss inoculation. Interestingly, BB0566 appears as a potential vaccine candidate. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD000876 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD000876).

### Keywords
Lyme borreliosis / virulence / comparative proteomics / spectral counting

### Affiliations
IPHC
IPHC-DSA-LSMBO-UMR7178 Strasbourg

### Submitter
Schnell Gilles

### Lab Head
Dr Laurence Sabatier
IPHC-DSA-LSMBO-UMR7178 Strasbourg


