### Accession
PXD034174

### Title
Physiological constraints dictate toxin spatial heterogeneity in snake venom glands

### Description
Venoms are ecological innovations that have evolved numerous times, on each occasion accompanied by the co-evolution of specialised morphological and behavioural characters for venom production and delivery. The close evolutionary interdependence between these characters is exemplified by animals that control the composition of their secreted venom. This ability depends in part on the production of different toxins in different locations of the venom gland, which was recently documented in venomous snakes. Here, we test the hypothesis that the distinct spatial distributions of toxins in snake venom glands is an adaptation that enables the secretion of venoms with distinct ecological functions.

### Sample Protocol
MSI: Venom glands were dissected from a single individual of N. nigricollis (Tanzania) and C. rhodostoma (captive bred) following euthanasia via an overdose of injectable pentobarbital sodium (PentoJectⓇ). Following dissection, one venom gland from each individual was venom glands were fixed in RCL2, dehydrated through 70%, 90% and 100% ethanol (vol/vol), cleared with xylene, and embedded in paraffin. Sections were cut at 7 µm thickness from cold paraffin block using a microtome, placed directly onto an indium-tin oxide (ITO) glass slide, attached to the section by heating to 57 °C, and allowed to cool before the paraffin was removed using xylene. We then used an ImagePrep vibrational vaporization-deposition system (Bruker) to apply matrix onto the slide (105 mg α-Cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid (CHCA), 8 mL acetonitrile, 7 mL water, 30 µL trifluoroacetic acid) using the standard Bruker ImagePrep CHCA application method. MSI data were acquired using Flex Imaging 4.1 and Flex Control 3.4 to operate a MALDI-TOF/TOF (Bruker Ultraflex III, Bruker, Bremen, Germany) in linear positive mode. Scans were acquired over a mass range of m/z 1000–15000 at 200 Hz, 50 µm spatial resolution, 600 shots, and using a medium laser size.   fMSI: To examine the distribution of enzymatic PLA2 activity across N. nigricollis venom gland, we followed the protocol for functional MSI (fMSI) recently described by Hamilton et al., using the same venom gland and section preparation as for our conventional MSI analyses. As substrate we used the glycerophospholipid phosphatidylcholine (PC) 16:0/22:6 (Avanti Polar Lipids, Alabaster, AL, USA). Enzymatic hydrolysis of this PC at the sn-2 position by PLA2 produces the lyso-phosphatidylcholine (LPC) 16:0. The substrate was prepared by diluting 50 μL of 100 μM PC in 4 mL 50% methanol and sprayed onto the tissue section for 60 cycles, where each cycle included 2 s spray, 30 s incubation and 20 s drying time, using an ImagePrep. fMSI data were acquired as per conventional MSI, except that the mass spectrometer was operated in reflectron mode over a mass range of m/z 160 – 1400.

### Data Protocol
MSI: Data was analysed post-acquisition using Flex Imaging 4.1 and SCILs Lab MVS premium (Bruker Daltonics).   fMSI: Data were analysed post-acquisition using Flex Imaging 4.1 and SCILs LAB, using the ratio of LPC16:0 (m/z 496.6) to PC16:0/22:6 (m/z 805.5) to indicate PLA2 activity.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Venom, Mass spectrometry imaging, Venom gland, Evolution

### Affiliations
University of Oslo, Department of Biosciences
University of Queensland

### Submitter
Eivind Undheim

### Lab Head
Dr Eivind A. B. Undheim
University of Oslo, Department of Biosciences


