### Accession
PXD018943

### Title
Chromosome-level de novo assembly and annotation of pig-tailed (macaca nemestrina) macaque genome

### Description
Macaque species share over 93% genome homology with humans and develop many disease phenotypes similar to those of humans, making them valuable animal models for the study of human diseases (e.g.,HIV and neurodegenerative diseases). However, the quality of genome assembly and annotation for several macaque species lags behind the human genome effort. To close this gap and enhance functional genomics approaches, we employed a combination of de novo linked-read assembly and scaffolding using proximity ligation assay (HiC) to assemble the pig-tailed macaque (Macaca nemestrina) genome. This combinatorial method yielded large scaffolds at chromosome-level with a scaffold N50 of 127.5 Mb; the 23 largest scaffolds covered 90% of the entire genome. This assembly revealed large-scale rearrangements between pig-tailed macaque chromosomes 7, 12, and 13 and human chromosomes 2, 14, and 15. We subsequently annotated the genome using transcriptome and proteomics data from personalized induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) derived from the same animal. Reconstruction of the evolutionary tree using whole genome annotation and orthologous comparisons among three macaque species, human and mouse genomes revealed extensive homology between human and pig-tailed macaques with regards to both pluripotent stem cell genes and innate immune gene pathways. Our results confirm that rhesus and cynomolgus macaques exhibit a closer evolutionary distance to each other than either species exhibits to humans or pig-tailed macaques. These findings demonstrate that pig-tailed macaques can serve as an excellent animal model for the study of many human diseases particularly with regards to pluripotency and innate immune pathways.

### Sample Protocol
Cells pellets were lysed in 100ul 6M GdmCl, 10mM TCEP, 40mM CAA and 100 mM Tris pH 8.5 buffer. Lysates were incubated at 95 °C for 5 min and briefly sonicated. Samples were boiled for 5min at 95°C and vortexed every 1min, then spinned 5mins + 10mins + 10mins, 12000g, taking supernatant for each step to continue. Protein concentration was measured using the BCA method. Trypsin (modified, from Promega, Madison, WI) was added at a protein to enzyme ratio of 50:1. Samples were incubated overnight at 37 °C. Peptide were added TFA to 1% then cleaned up using an Oasis HLB cartridge (1cc/10mg, Waters). Samples were dried by speed vac and dissolved in 100mM TEAB. Peptides were labeled with TMT 10plex reagent (Thermo Fisher) and combined at equal amounts, then vacuum spun till dry. Waters 2D liquid chromatography (Waters MClass 2DnLC) was used for peptide separation by reverse phase chromatography at high pH in the first dimension followed by an orthogonal separation at low pH in the second dimension. In the first dimension, the mobile phases were buffer A (20mM ammonium formate at pH10) and buffer B (Acetonitrile). Peptides were separated on an Xbridge 300µm x 5 cm C18 5.0µm column (Waters) using 15 discontinuous step gradients at 2 µl/min. In the second dimension, peptides were loaded to an in-house packed 100µm ID/15µm tip ID x 28cm C18-AQ 1.8µm resin column with buffer A (0.1% formic acid in water). Peptides were separated with a linear gradient from 5% to 40% buffer B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min in 112min, 170min and 180 min. The LC system was directly coupled in-line with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) via a Thermo nanoelectrospray source. The machine was operated at 1.8-2.2 kV to optimize the nanospray with the ion transfer tube at 275 °C. The mass spectrometer was run in a data dependent mode. The full MS scan was acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer with resolution 120,000 at m/z 375-1500 followed by top 20 MS/MS in ion trap. For all sequencing events dynamic exclusion was enabled to fragment peptide once and excluded for 60s.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were then processed with the software Proteome Discoverer (Thermofisher Scientific Inc.). Mass tolerance of 10ppm was used for precursor ion and 0.6 Dalton for fragment ions for the database search. The search included cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification. Acetylation at protein N-terminus and methionine oxidation were used as variable modifications. Up to two missed cleavages were allowed for trypsin digestion. Only unique peptides with a minimum length of 6 amino acids were considered for protein identification. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set as less than 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pig-tailed macaque, Assembly. proteomics, Genome

### Affiliations
Stanford University, Department of Genetics 
Professor and Chair, Stanford Department of Genetics

### Submitter
Morteza Roodgar

### Lab Head
Dr Michael P. Snyder
Professor and Chair, Stanford Department of Genetics


