### Accession
PXD008855

### Title
Proteoglycan sequencing -  Deep sequencing of complex proteoglycans: a novel strategy for high coverage and site-specific identification of glycosaminoglycan-linked peptides

### Description
Proteoglycans are distributed in all animal tissues and play critical, multifaceted, physiological roles.  Expressed in a spatially- and temporally-regulated manner, these molecules regulate interactions among growth factors and cell surface receptors and play key roles in basement membranes and other extracellular matrices.  Due to the high degree of glycosylation by glycosaminoglycan (GAG), N-glycan and mucin-type O-glycan classes, the peptide sequence coverage of complex proteoglycans is revealed poorly by standard mass spectrometry-based proteomics methods. As a result, there is little information concerning how proteoglycan site specific glycosylation changes during normal and pathological processes.  Here, we developed a workflow to improve sequence coverage and identification of glycosylated peptides in proteoglycans. We applied this workflow to the small leucine-rich proteoglycan decorin and the hyalectan proteoglycans; neurocan, brevican, and aggrecan.

### Sample Protocol
Proteoglycans were dissolved in water and protein concentration was measured using a BCA kit.  For decorin, brevican and neurocan, proteolytic digestion was carried out using 1:50 enzyme:protein ratio trypsin and Lys-C mixture (Promega Corporation, Madison, WI) and 100 µg proteoglycan in 100 µL 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate with 0.025% ProteaseMax surfactant (Promega) at 37⁰C overnight.   To increase peptide coverage for aggrecan, Glu-C digestion was performed following trypsin/Lys-C digestion. All digestions were performed on a Thermo mixer with 30 sec shaking after 15 min.  Enzymes were inactivated by heating at 98⁰C for 5 min.  Proteolytic digests were loaded on a 0.5 mL 10 KDa molecular weight cutoff filter (Millipore Burlington, MA), and centrifuged at 14000Xg for 20 min. A 25 µL volume of 0.5 M NaCl was added to the retentate and the filter was centrifuged at 14000Xg for 10 min.  A 50 µL volume of water was added to the retentate and the filter was centrifuged at 14000Xg for 10 min.  GAG-linked peptides were retained by the 10 kDa molecular weight cutoff filter.  Chondroitinase ABC (5 mU) was added to the retentate and incubated at 37⁰C overnight.  The solutions were filtered through a 10 kDa molecular weight cutoff filter as above.  Fractions were analyzed using reversed phase LC-MS as described below.  Plots of the extracted ion chromatograms for the ΔHexAHexNAc oxonium ion at m/z 362.1 showed that fraction retained by the 10 kDa contained the linker-peptides. :  Enriched digests were cleaned with Omix C-18 tips (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA) and 100 ng quantities were loaded on a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA) equipped with an Advion NanoMate nanoESI source, coupled to a Waters nanoAcquity nanoLC system. A Water Xbridge reversed-phase column (150 μm × 100 mm) with 1.7 μm BEH C18 resin and a Waters trap column (180 μm × 20 mm) packed with 5 μm Symmetry™ C18 stationary phase were used for online desalting and separation of the proteomics samples as previously described (31). The mass spectrometer was programmed to acquire data-dependent tandem MS using the top 20 most abundant multiply charged precursor ions and three microscans per spectrum for both MS and tandem MS.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS data files were searched using Peaks Studio ver. 8.5 (Bioinformatics Solutions, Inc., Waterloo, ON, Canada) with 15 ppm precursor and 0.02 Da product ion error tolerance, 1% false discovery rate and at least 2 unique peptides for protein identification.  Carbamidomethyl cysteine was a fixed modification.  A maximum of 3 variable modifications were allowed for hydroxyl proline: 15.99; HexNAc: 203.08; HexHexNAc: 365.13; ubiquitination-K: 114.04; hydroxyl lysine: 15.99; hydroxyl lysine-Hex: 178.05; hydroxyl lysine-Hex-Hex: 340.10;   phosphorylation: 79.97.  For decorin, brevican and neurocan, trypsin was specified with up to 3 missed cleavages and 1 non-specific cleavage.  For aggrecan, trypsin plus endoproteinase Glu-C were specified with up to 3 missed cleavages and 1 non-specific cleavage.   We de-isotoped and charge state deconvoluted MS1 and MS2 scans for each sample using an averagine model of C 10.93 H 15.75 N 1.6577 O 6.477 S 0.02 for MS1 and C 4.938 H 7.758 N 1.357 O 1.477 S 0.0417 respectively in GlycReSoft ver 0.3.1 (available at www.bumc.bu.edu/cbms). MS1 scans were averaged with the MS1 scan immediately preceding and proceeding it to boost signal and stabilize isotopic pattern consistency. We constructed a glycomics search space that included N-, mucin type O-, and linker-saccharides.  We used a combinatorial search space for N-glycans (Hex0-3, HexNAc2-8, Fuc0-4, NeuAc0-4; HexNAc > Fuc; HexNAc>NeuAc; sulfate = HexNAc – 2).  We manually curated a list of 148 human mucin-type O-glycans with NeuAc and 427 bovine with NeuAc or NeuGc. We manually curated a list of 20 saccharides that corresponded to the linker tetrasaccharides plus ΔHexA-HexNAc disaccharide plus 0-3 sulfate, 0-1 Fuc, 0-1 phosphate, 0-1 NeuAc.  For human proteoglycans, the search space contained only NeuAc (a total of 3025 compositions).  For bovine proteoglycans, both NeuAc and NeuGc were allowed (a total of 8791 compositions).  We constructed a glycopeptide search space for each sample using the mzIdentML file containing proteomics search results for that file, using all identified peptides as well as all theoretical peptides produced by an in-silico digest of those proteins with one glycosylation site.  In order to build a search space for bi-glycosylated glycopeptides, we used results from the search for singly glycosylated peptides.   We carried out glycopeptide identification by searching the preprocessed mass spectra against the associated databases using a 10 parts-per-million (ppm) error tolerance for the precursor mass and a 10 ppm error tolerance for product ions. We aggregated identified glycopeptides with a spectrum-level FDR of 5%. Our final result set contains only those identified in the search of the two glycosylation site database.

### Publication Abstract
Proteoglycans are distributed in all animal tissues and play critical, multifaceted, physiological roles. Expressed in a spatially and temporally regulated manner, these molecules regulate interactions among growth factors and cell surface receptors and play key roles in basement membranes and other extracellular matrices. Because of the high degree of glycosylation by glycosaminoglycan (GAG), <i>N</i>-glycan and mucin-type <i>O</i>-glycan classes, the peptide sequence coverage of complex proteoglycans is revealed poorly by standard mass spectrometry-based proteomics methods. As a result, there is little information concerning how proteoglycan site specific glycosylation changes during normal and pathological processes. Here, we developed a workflow to improve sequence coverage and identification of glycosylated peptides in proteoglycans. We applied this workflow to the small leucine-rich proteoglycan decorin and three hyalectan proteoglycans: neurocan, brevican, and aggrecan.We characterized glycosylation of these proteoglycans using LC-MS methods easily implemented on instruments widely used in proteomics laboratories. For decorin, we assigned the linker-glycosite and three <i>N</i>-glycosylation sites. For neurocan and brevican, we identified densely glycosylated mucin-like regions in the extended domains. For aggrecan, we identified 50 linker-glycosites and mucin-type <i>O</i>-glycosites in the extended region and <i>N</i>-glycosites in the globular domains, many of which are novel and have not been observed previously. Most importantly, we demonstrate an LC-MS and bioinformatics approach that will enable routine analysis of proteoglycan glycosylation from biological samples to assess their role in pathophysiology.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Decorin, Brevican, Neurocan, Aggrecan

### Affiliations
Boston University
Boston University, Dept. of Biochemistry

### Submitter
Joseph Zaia

### Lab Head
Dr Joseph Zaia
Boston University, Dept. of Biochemistry


