### Accession
PXD036667

### Title
AGP nLC-MS/MS and nLC-FAIMS-MS/MS

### Description
Bottom-up nLC-MS/MS glycoprotein mass spectrometry workflows rely on the generation of a mixture of unmodified and glycosylated peptides via proteolysis. Such methods are challenged by suppression of hydrophilic glycopeptide ions by more abundant, hydrophobic, and readily ionizable unmodified peptides. Commercially available high-field asymmetric waveform ion mobility spectrometry (FAIMS) devices have recently been introduced and present an opportunity for orthogonal separation following chromatic graphic separation and prior to MS/MS analysis, with potential benefits for glycoproteomic workflows. However, knowledge is lacking regarding the optimal FAIMS conditions for glycopeptide analysis. Here, we document optimal FAIMS compensation voltages for the transmission and analysis of human alpha-1-acid glycoprotein (AGP) tryptic N-glycopeptide ions. Further, we evaluate the effect of FAIMS on AGP glycopeptide assignments by comparing the number of assignments at different confidence intervals using a standard nLC-MS/MS method to an identical method with FAIMS.

### Sample Protocol
Alpha-1-acid glycoprotein was dissolved in 50 nM ammonium bicarbonate, trypsin was added at a ration of 1:50, and digests were performed overnight at 37 degrees Celsius with periodic mixing. The resulting proteolytic products were dried, resuspended, and desalted using Pierce C18 tips. Peptides were eluted in 50% acetonitrile/50% water and 0.1% formic acid.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed using Proteome Discoverer with an integrated Byonic (Protein Metrics) node. For all searches, human AGP isoforms 1 and 2 isoforms were downloaded from UniProt (Release 2022_03), and a Byonic database consisting of 309 mammalian glycans was used, considering carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification, and 1 N-glycan per peptide. For PD/Byonic searcher, a false discovery rate of 1% was applied, and additionally, only glycopeptide assignments with a Byonic score greater than or equal to 200 were considered high confidence.

### Publication Abstract
Bottom-up nLC-MS/MS-based glycoprotein mass spectrometry workflows rely on the generation of a mixture of non-glycosylated and glycosylated peptides via proteolysis&#xa0;of glycoproteins. Such methods are challenged by suppression of hydrophilic glycopeptide ions by more abundant, hydrophobic, and readily ionizable non-glycosylated peptides. Commercially available high-field asymmetric waveform ion mobility spectrometry (FAIMS) devices have recently been introduced and present a potential benefit for glycoproteomic workflows by enabling orthogonal separation of non-glycosylated peptides and glycopeptides following chromatographic separation, and prior to MS/MS analysis. However, knowledge is lacking regarding optimal FAIMS conditions for glycopeptide analyses. Here, we document optimal FAIMS compensation voltages for the transmission and analysis of human alpha-1-acid glycoprotein (AGP) tryptic N-glycopeptide ions. Further, we evaluate the effect of FAIMS on AGP glycopeptide assignment confidence by comparing the number of assigned glycopeptides at different confidence levels using a standard nLC-MS/MS method or an otherwise identical method employing FAIMS. Optimized methods will potentiate glycoproteomic analyses by increasing the number of unique glycopeptide identifications and the confidence of glycopeptide assignments. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD036667. Analysis of alpha-1-acid glycoprotein (AGP) tryptic digests via nLC-FAIMS-MS/MS (top) led to the establishment of ideal FAIMS voltages for the analysis of AGP N-glycopeptides (bottom), suggesting that FAIMS can improve the depth of glycoproteome characterization. Pairs of CV magnitudes are shown along the x-axis.

### Keywords
Glycoproteomics, N-glycopeptide, Alpha-1-acid glycoprotein, High-field asymmetric waveform ion mobility spectrometry, Agp, Faims

### Affiliations
Florida International University Translational Glycobiology Institute Dept. of Translational Medicine Herbert Wertheim College of Medicine 11200 SW 8th St, Miami, FL USA
Florida International University

### Submitter
Kevin Chandler

### Lab Head
Dr Kevin B Chandler
Florida International University Translational Glycobiology Institute Dept. of Translational Medicine Herbert Wertheim College of Medicine 11200 SW 8th St, Miami, FL USA


