### Accession
PXD023772

### Title
Transcriptome and proteome analysis of the human corneal endothelium and aqueous humor reveal endothelial cell dysfunction markers

### Description
Background: The underlying mechanism as well as diagnostic molecular biomarkers for corneal endothelial cell dysfunction (CECD) remain elusive. This study aimed to elucidate molecular mechanism of CECD via proteomic and transcriptomic approaches and identify novel biomarkers in aqueous humor (AH) directly associated with changes in CECs.  Methods: We carried out an in-depth proteomic analysis of patient-derived AH as well as transcriptomic analysis of CECs from the same patients with bullous keratopathy (BK) resulting from CECD. Selected candidate proteins were further verified by individual data-independent acquisition and immunoassay using further AH samples from CECD patients. Findings: Using integrated multi-omics analysis, systematic alterations of proteins in AH and mRNA in CECs were mainly associated with the immune mechanism during BK development. Through individual proteomic verification via DIA analysis, three AH proteins were determined as potential predictive markers including TIMP1, FCGBP, and ANGPTL7. Finally, we confirmed these biomarkers using immunoassay in individual AH samples of CECD. Interpretation: Our multi-omics analysis may provide valuable insights into the disease-specific process as well as possibility of biofluid biomarkers in CECD. Further investigation with large scale is required to determine whether AH biomarkers are useful as liquid biopsy targets for the assessment of CEC function

### Sample Protocol
Five pooled AH protein samples from control and CECD groups were used for global profiling with LFQ. An additional seven AH samples from each group were subjected to DIA verification. For each AH protein sample, we eliminated highly abundant proteins using Seppro IgY spin columns (Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA), which tend to obscure the detection of potential marker proteins presented at low abundance in AH. Samples of 100 μg total protein were digested into peptides by in-solution digestion. Briefly, 10 M urea in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate was mixed with each sample (v/v, 1:1), resulting in a final concentration of at least 5 M, and the mixture was incubated for 30 min at room temperature for denaturation. Approximately, 10 mM dithiothreitol for reduction and 30 mM iodoacetamide for alkylation were used to denature proteins. Trypsin was added at a 50:1 (w/w) protein-to-protease ratio and incubated at 37˚C overnight. The activated trypsin reaction was quenched with 0.4% trifluoroacetic acid, and peptides were desalted with a C18 Harvard macro spin column. The resultant peptides were dried and stored at -80˚C.

### Data Protocol
Database search and quantitative analysis For data-dependent analysis profiling, the MS2 spectra were searched with the MaxQuant (v. 1.5.7.4) against the Uniprot human database (released in 2017_06, 20,205). Carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification and N-acetylation and oxidation of methionine as variable modifications were used for each search. An FDR cutoff of 1% was applied at the peptide spectrum match (PSM) and protein levels. An initial precursor mass deviation of up to 4.5 ppm and a fragment mass deviation of up to 20 ppm were allowed. Protein identification required at least one peptide using the “razor plus unique peptides” setting in MaxQuant. Proteins were quantified using the XIC-based LFQ algorithm in MaxQuant. The “match between runs” option was used for nonlinear retention time alignment. The match time window was 0.7 min, and the alignment time window was 20 min. Before loading LFQ intensity data, hits to the reverse database, contaminants, and proteins only identified by site were eliminated. After loading the data, all triplicate data were grouped separately. All LFQ intensities were transformed to log2 values. Proteins that did not display all values in at least one group were filtered out. Additionally, in cases with a missing value, missing values were replaced by imputation based on the normal distribution (using a width of 0.3 and a downshift of 1.8).   The DIA data were analyzed with Spectronaut Pulsar (version 11.0.15038.4.29119, Biognosys) using a search archive spectral library, and the default settings were used for targeted analysis. In brief, a dynamic window for the XIC extraction window and a non-linear iRT calibration strategy were used. Mass calibration was set to local mass calibration. Interference correction on the MS1 and MS2 levels was enabled, removing fragments/isotopes from quantification based on the presence of interfering signals but keeping at least three for quantification. The FDR was set to 1% at the peptide precursor level and 1% at the protein level.

### Publication Abstract
Earlier studies have reported that elevated protein levels in the aqueous humor (AH) are associated with corneal endothelial cell dysfunction (CECD), but the details of the underlying mechanism as well as specific biomarkers for CECD remain elusive. In the present study, we aimed to identify protein markers in AH directly associated with changes to corneal endothelial cells (CECs), as AH can be easily obtained for analysis. We carried out an in-depth proteomic analysis of patient-derived AH as well as transcriptomic analysis of CECs from the same patients with bullous keratopathy (BK) resulting from CECD. We first determined differentially expressed genes (DEGs) and differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) from CECs and AH in CECD, respectively. By combining transcriptomic and proteomic analyses, 13 shared upregulated markers and 22 shared downregulated markers were observed between DEGs and DEPs. Among these 35 candidates from biomarker profiling, three upregulated markers were finally verified via data-independent acquisition (DIA) proteomic analysis using additional individual AH samples, namely metallopeptidase inhibitor 1 (TIMP1), Fc fragment of IgG binding protein (FCGBP), and angiopoietin-related protein 7 (ANGPTL7). Furthermore, we confirmed these AH biomarkers for CECD using individual immunoassay validation. Conclusively, our findings may provide valuable insights into the disease process and identify biofluid markers for the assessment of CEC function during BK development.

### Keywords
Biomarker, Bullous keratopathy, Transcriptomics, Proteomics, Aqueous humor, Corneal endothelial cell dysfunction

### Affiliations
KHU
Yonsei university

### Submitter
Jae Hun Jung

### Lab Head
Dr Jae Hun Jung
Yonsei university


