### Accession
PXD003124

### Title
Dog tear film proteome in-depth analysis

### Description
In this study, mass spectrometry was used to explore the canine tear proteome. Tear samples were obtained from six healthy dogs, and one-dimensional sodium dodecyl sulphate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (1D SDS-PAGE) was used as a first step to separate intact proteins into 17 bands. Each fraction was then trypsin digested and analysed by matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight tandem mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF-MS/MS) to characterize the protein components in each fraction. In total, 125 tear proteins were identified, with MCA (Major Canine Allergen), Serum albumin, UPF0557 protein C10orf119 homolog, Collagen alpha-2(I) chain, Tyrosine -protein kinase Fer, Keratine type II cytoskeletal, Beta-crystallin B2, Interleukin-6 and Desmin occuring as the most confident ones with the highest scores. The results showed that the proteomic strategy used in this study was successful in the analysis of the dog tear proteome. To the best of our knowledge, this study is the first to report the comprehensive proteome profile of tears from healthy dogs by 1D SDS PAGE and MALDI-TOF.

### Sample Protocol
Tear samples were collected from 6 healthy dogs using a special standard Schirmer’s strip without local anaesthesia. Dogs of various breeds (2 German Shepherds, 1 Doberman, 1 Labrador and 2 mongrels) with ages ranging from 2 to 6 years were enrolled during routine admissions to clinics of the Faculty of Veterinary Medicine at the University of Life Sciences in Lublin. Informed consent was obtained from the owners prior to the clinical investigations and sample collection. The studies were reviewed and approved by the Ethics Committee of the University of Life Sciences in Lublin (Poland) No 80/2010. Every animal used in this study was submitted to a comprehensive ophthalmic examination (anterior segment and fundus evaluation with introcular pressure measurement). Animals included in the study did not exhibit any ocular signs of disease. The exclusion criteria included the presence or history of any systemic or ocular disorder or condition (including ocular surgery, trauma, and disease) that could possibly interfere with the interpretation of the results. The current or recent use of topical ophthalmic or systemic medications that could affect tear status was also grounds for exclusion from this study. The results from blood-cell counts, sera biochemistry and urinalyses oscillated within the normal range. After collection, the Schirmer’s strips were placed in elution buffer consisting of 50 mM phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) with protease inhibitors at 4°C for a maximum of 20 h. The total protein concentration was determined by Bradford’s method at a wavelength of 280 nm (Picodrop, Cambridge, UK). The resulting protein solution was concentrated using SpeedVac at -4°C to a final protein concentration of 60 µg/10 µl.

### Data Protocol
All spectra were systematically processed as follows: smoothing was performed by the Savitsky-Golay method; baseline subtraction was performed by the Top Hat baseline algorithm; peak geometry was characterized by the Stanford Network Analysis Platform (SNAP) algorithm; and all peaks with a signal ratio above 4 were qualified for further analysis. The parameters for the Mascot database search were as follows: errors in both MS and MS/MS mode at 0.3 Da [19]; global modification of carbamidomethyl (C); possible modification and oxidation (M) [20]; partials at 1; and trypsin enzyme.

### Publication Abstract
In this study, mass spectrometry was used to explore the canine tear proteome. Tear samples were obtained from six healthy dogs, and one-dimensional sodium dodecyl sulphate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (1D SDS-PAGE) was used as a first step to separate intact proteins into 17 bands. Each fraction was then trypsin digested and analysed by matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight tandem mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF-MS/MS) to characterize the protein components in each fraction. In total, 125 tear proteins were identified, with MCA (Major Canine Allergen), Serum albumin, UPF0557 protein C10orf119 homolog, Collagen alpha-2(I) chain, Tyrosine -protein kinase Fer, Keratine type II cytoskeletal, Beta-crystallin B2, Interleukin-6 and Desmin occurring as the most confident ones with the highest scores. The results showed that the proteomic strategy used in this study was successful in the analysis of the dog tear proteome. To the best of our knowledge, this study is the first to report the comprehensive proteome profile of tears from healthy dogs by 1D SDS PAGE and MALDI-TOF. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD003124.

### Keywords
Tear fluid, Sds-page, Maldi, Proteome, Dog

### Affiliations
University of Life Sciences in Lublin
Department of Epizootiology and Clinic of Infectious Diseases, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine

### Submitter
Tomasz Paweł Banach

### Lab Head
Dr prof. Stanisław Winiarczyk
Department of Epizootiology and Clinic of Infectious Diseases, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine


