### Accession
PXD020478

### Title
RNF43 truncations trap CK1 to drive niche-independent self-renewal in cancer

### Description
Wnt/b-catenin signaling is a primary pathway for stem cell maintenance during tissue renewal and a frequent target for mutations in cancer. Impaired Wnt receptor endocytosis due to loss of the ubiquitin ligase RNF43 gives rise to Wnt-hypersensitive tumors that are susceptible to anti-Wnt-based therapy. Contrary to this paradigm, we identify a class of RNF43 truncating cancer mutations that induce b-catenin-mediated transcription, despite exhibiting retained Wnt receptor downregulation. These mutations interfere with an ubiquitin-independent suppressor role of the RNF43 cytosolic tail that involves casein kinase-1 (CK1) binding and phosphorylation. Mechanistically, truncated RNF43 variants trap CK1 at the plasma membrane, thereby preventing b-catenin turnover and propelling ligandindependent target gene transcription. Gene editing of human colon stem cells shows that RNF43 truncations cooperate with p53 loss to drive a niche-independent program for self-renewal and proliferation. Moreover, these RNF43 variants confer decreased sensitivity to anti-Wnt-based therapy. Our data demonstrate the relevance of studying patient-derived mutations for understanding disease mechanisms and improved applications of precision medicine.

### Sample Protocol
BioID for RNF43 interacting proteins For the identification of RNF43 binding proteins a previously described protocol was used (Roux, Kim, Raida, Burke, 2012). Briefly, pcDNA4-TO-RNF43-BirA*-HA was obtained by cloning RNF43 into pcDNA3.1 MCS-BirA(R118G)-HA (a gift from Kyle Roux; Addgene # 36047), which was subcloned into pcDNA4-TO. pcDNA4-TO-RNF43-BirA*-HA was transfected into T-REx™-293 cells and selected with 200 μg/ml of zeocin to obtain a stable RNF43 TetON -REx™-293 BioID cell line. Ten days after transfection, single cells were plated in 96-wells and grown in the presence of 100 μg/ml zeocin and 5 μg/ml of blasticidin. For validation the selected clones were analyzed by Western blot and immunofluorescence for tetracycline (1 μg/mL, Santa Cruz Biotechnology) induced expression of RNF43-BirA*-HA fusion protein and enzyme activity of BirA* by biotin supplementation (50 μM, Santa Cruz Biotechnology). To identify RNF43 interacting proteins, TetON -REx™-293 BioID cells were seeded in 15 cm dishes and were treated o/n with tetracycline and biotin. Non-induced cells were used as a negative control. Cells were lysed in 2 mL of lysis buffer containing 2% TX-100, 500 mM NaCl, 0.2% SDS, 50 mM Tris, pH 7.4 supplemented with protease inhibitors (Roche), phosphatase inhibitors (Calbiochem), 1 mM DTT and PIC (Roche). Lysates were collected, sonicated and cleared by centrifugation at 16.500 × g for 15 min at 4 °C. Streptavidin beads (Streptavidin Sepharose High Performance, GE Healthcare) were added to the lysates and incubated for 16 h tumbling at 4 °C. Subsequently, beads were washed four times with lysis buffer and two times with 50 mM Tris HCl pH 7.4. Next, beads were washed with ammonium bicarbonate buffer and proteins were reduced with DTT and alkylated with iodacetamide. Trypsin digestion on beads was performed o/n at 37 °C. Resulting peptides were transferred into LC-MS vials and concentrated to 15 μL. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on an RSLCnano coupled to an Orbitrap-Elite system.  Identification of phosphorylation sites by mass spectrometry Briefly, cells were seeded in 15 cm dishes and transfected at 80% of confluency with the indicated plasmids using PEI. Per dish, cells were lysed in 2 ml of lysis buffer containing 1% NP-40, 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris, pH 7.5 supplemented with protease inhibitors (Roche), phosphatase inhibitors (Calbiochem), 1 mM DTT and 10 mM NEM (N-ethylmaleimide) (Sigma-Aldrich). Then lysates were collected, sonicated and cleared by centrifugation at 16.100 × g for 20 min at 4 °C. Next, 2 μg HA-11 antibody (MMS-101R, Covance) was added and samples were incubated for 1 h tumbling at 4 °C. Then 45 μL of equilibrated G protein sepharose beads (GE Healthcare,) was added to the sample and incubated 16 h tumbling at 4 °C. Subsequently, beads were washed six times with lysis buffer, mixed with 50 μL of 2X Laemmli buffer, boiled for 5 min and loaded on 8% SDS-PAGE gels and separated. Gels were fixed with 50% methanol, 10% acetic acid, stained with 0.1% Coomassie brilliant blue (Sigma-Aldrich) in 20% methanol, 10% acetic acid for 2 hours and destained using fixation solution. Next, corresponding 1-D bands were excised and processed for mass spectrometry analysis. Protein in gel pieces were alkylated, digested by trypsin and subsequently cleaved by chymotrypsin. Digested peptides were extracted from gels. 1/10 of the peptide mixture was directly analysed and the rest of the sample was used for TiO2 phosphopeptide enrichment. Both peptide mixtures were separately analysed on LC-MS/MS system (RSLCnano connected to Orbitrap Elite; Thermo Fisher Scientific). MS data were acquired in a data-dependent strategy selecting up to top 10 precursors based on precursor abundance in the survey scan (350-2000 m/z). High resolution HCD MS/MS spectra were acquired in Orbitrap analyzer.

### Data Protocol
BioID for RNF43 interacting proteins MS/MS data processing was performed using Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4). Hits are classified as proteins with a minimum of two unique peptides present in at least two out of three replicates. Proteins were filtered using the cRAP contaminant database and proteins interacting with the BirA* tag or present in the negative control were subtracted. For volcano plot analysis, only proteins identified in at least all three replicates of either the control or the BioID sample were considered. By using Perseus 1.5.5.353 with default settings, missing values were imputed from a semi-random normal distribution around the lower detection limit of all detected proteins. False discovery rates (FDR) are calculated by a modified t-test (in Perseus) followed by Benjamini-Hochberg FDR adjustment.  Identification of phosphorylation sites by mass spectrometry The analysis of the mass spectrometric RAW data files was carried out using the Proteome Discoverer software (ThermoFisher Scientific; version 1.4) with in-house Mascot (Matrixscience, London, UK; version 2.4.1) search engine utilisation. The phosphoRS feature was used for phosphorylation localisation and manually confirmed. Peptides with Mascot score > 20, rank 1 and with at least 6 amino acids were considered. Quantitative information assessment was done in Skyline software. Normalisation of the data was performed using the set of phosphopeptide standards (added to the sample prior phosphoenrichment step; MS PhosphoMix 1, 2, 3 Light, Sigma) and by nonphosphorylated peptides identified in direct analyses. Clusters were analysed by Orbitrap Script 2.0.

### Publication Abstract
Wnt/&#x3b2;-catenin signaling is a primary pathway for stem cell maintenance during tissue renewal and a frequent target for mutations in cancer. Impaired Wnt receptor endocytosis due to loss of the ubiquitin ligase RNF43 gives rise to Wnt-hypersensitive tumors that are susceptible to anti-Wnt-based therapy. Contrary to this paradigm, we identify a class of RNF43 truncating cancer mutations that induce &#x3b2;-catenin-mediated transcription, despite exhibiting retained Wnt receptor downregulation. These mutations interfere with a ubiquitin-independent suppressor role of the RNF43 cytosolic tail that involves Casein kinase 1 (CK1) binding and phosphorylation. Mechanistically, truncated RNF43 variants trap CK1 at the plasma membrane, thereby preventing &#x3b2;-catenin turnover and propelling ligand-independent target gene transcription. Gene editing of human colon stem cells shows that RNF43 truncations cooperate with p53 loss to drive a niche-independent program for self-renewal and proliferation. Moreover, these RNF43 variants confer decreased sensitivity to anti-Wnt-based therapy. Our data demonstrate the relevance of studying patient-derived mutations for understanding disease mechanisms and improved applications of precision medicine.

### Keywords
Porcn inhibitors, Wnt signaling, Cancer mutations, Lc-ms/ms, Human colon organoids, Rnf 43

### Affiliations
CEITEC—Central European Institute of Technology, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic
CEITEC MU

### Submitter
Katerina Hanakova

### Lab Head
Dr Zbynek Zdrahal
CEITEC—Central European Institute of Technology, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic


