### Accession
PXD042292

### Title
Evaluation of Protein Extraction Methods to Improve Meta-Proteomics Analysis of Treated Wastewater Biofilms

### Description
Metaproteomics can be used to study functionally active biofilm-based bacterial populations in reclaimed water distribution systems, which in turn result in bacterial regrowth that impacts the water quality. However, existing protein extraction methods have differences in their protein recovery and have not been evaluated for their efficacies in reclaimed water biofilm samples. In this study, we first evaluated six different protein extraction methods with diverse chemical and physical properties on a mixture of bacterial cell culture. Based on a weighting scores-based evaluation, the extraction protocols in order of decreasing performance are listed as B-PER > RIPA > PreOmics > SDS > AllPrep > Urea. The highest four optimal methods on cell culture were further tested against treated wastewater non-chlorinated and chlorinated effluent biofilms. In terms of protein yield, our findings showed that RIPA performed the best; however, the highest number of proteins were extracted from SDS and PreOmics. Furthermore, SDS and PreOmics worked best to rupture gram-positive and gram-negative bacterial cell walls. Considering the five evaluation factors, PreOmics obtained highest weighted score, indicating its potential effectiveness in extracting proteins from biofilms. This study provides the first insight into evaluating protein extraction methods to facilitate metaproteomics for complex reclaimed water matrices.

### Sample Protocol
The cell pellets are resuspended in lysis buffer, incubated at 99 °C for 15 min, and then centrifuged to remove cell debris. 100% v/v trichloroacetic acid (TCA) was added to the whole-cell lysates at the ratio of 1:4 by solution volume, and the proteins were left at 4 °C overnight to allow precipitation. The lysates were centrifuged at 15,000 x g for 10 min at 4 ºC, supernatants were removed, and the precipitated protein pellets were washed three times with chilled acetone. The washed protein pellets were dried at room temperature, and then resuspended in resuspension buffer (8 M Urea, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate-buffer, pH 8). Approximately 50-100 µg of proteins derived from each evaluated method per sample were digested using tryptic digestion (Pierce™ Trypsin Protease, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and processed following the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method (Wiśniewski et al., 2009), desalted using Sep-Pak C18 cartridge (Waters, MA), and then dried in a SpeedVac. The pellets were dissolved in 0.2% Formic Acid and ready for LC-MS measurements on a Q-Exactive HF nano-liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (NanoLC-MS/MS) (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled with an UltiMate™ 3000 UHPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Briefly, 2 μL of each sample was injected into an Acclaim PepMapTM C18 column (75 um I.D. X 25 cm, 2 μm particle sizes, 100 Å pore sizes) with a flow rate of 300 nL/min. A 98-minute gradient was established using mobile phase A (0.1% FA) and mobile phase B (0.1% FA in 99.9% ACN): 4–35% B for 58 min, 15-min ramping to 90% B, 90% B for 5 min, and 2% B for 10-minute column conditioning. Samples were introduced into mass spectrometer through a Nanospray Flex (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with an electrospray potential of 2.5 kV. The ion transfer tube temperature was set at 160 °C. The Q-Exactive was set to perform data acquisition in DDA mode. A full MS scan (200-2000 m/z range) was acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 60,000 (at 200 m/z) in a profile mode, with a maximum ion accumulation time of 50 ms. Charge state screening for precursor ions was activated. The twenty most intense ions above a 1x106 threshold and carrying multiple charges were selected for fragmentation using higher energy collision dissociation (HCD). The resolution was set as 15,000. Dynamic exclusion for HCD fragmentation was 30 s. Another setting for fragment ions included a maximum ion accumulation time of 60 ms, a target value of 2.50×103, normalized collision energy at 28%, and an isolation width of 1.6 m/z.

### Data Protocol
The MS .RAW files from Q-Exactive HF were converted to .mgf files using ProteoWizard MS covert GUI 64-bit and analyzed using Mascot (Version 2.8, Matrix Science, London, UK) against the reviewed SwissProt/UniProt bacterial protein databases. The search parameters were set on the following settings: full tryptic cleavage with a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed; fixed modification for Carbamidomethyl (cysteine), Acetyl (Protein N-term), Deamidated (asparagine and glutamine), and Oxidation (methionine). For the bacterial cell culture, the data were analyzed against combined proteome databases of the four bacteria consist of a total of 13,871 sequences (Downloaded on August 6, 2022). For the biofilms samples which contain complex of unknown species, the bacterial Swiss-Prot reviewed protein sequence was applied as the protein database. The database contains 335,515 sequences of all the entire taxonomy entries (Downloaded on August 29, 2022).  Negative controls were measured in the absence of cells for all the methods, and data were normalized accordingly.   Data expressed as mean ± standard deviation was analyzed using one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA), and post-hoc analysis consisted of paired t-tests with Bonferroni correction to compare the statistical significance between groups. p-values less than 0.05 were considered statistically significant.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Biofilms; metaproteomic; methods evaluation; protein extraction; treated wastewater

### Affiliations
Professor. Biological and Environmental Science and Engineering Division, King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Thuwal 23955-6900, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
PhD student

### Submitter
Fatimah Almulhim

### Lab Head
Dr Pei-Ying Hong
Professor. Biological and Environmental Science and Engineering Division, King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Thuwal 23955-6900, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia


