### Accession
PXD015214

### Title
Absolute quantification of proteins and histone modifications in Drosophila embryos reveals stoichiometric relationships in chromatin regulation

### Description
Gene transcription in eukaryotes is regulated through dynamic interactions of a variety of different proteins with DNA in the context of chromatin. Here, we used mass spectrometry for absolute quantification of the nuclear proteome during two stages of Drosophila embryogenesis. Before proteomics analysis, we counted the absolute amount of genomic copies and used a standard range of proteins (UPS2 standard) for absolute quantification of protein copy numbers per 1C genome. These analyses provide comprehensive information about the absolute copy number of several thousand proteins and reveal unexpected relationships between the abundance of histone-modifying and -binding proteins and the chromatin landscape that they generate and interact with. These data provide a foundation towards a quantitative understanding of gene regulation in Drosophila.

### Sample Protocol
Intensity based absolute quantification was performed as described before (Smits et al., 2014). For every replicate, 3.3 μg Universal Proteomics Standard-2 (UPS2; Sigma) was added to lysates of 5.1 million or 9.3 million nuclei purified from embryos collected between 2 – 4 hr or 14 – 16 hr post-fertilization, respectively. Protein samples were digested by using the filter- aided separation protocol (FASP; (Wiśniewski et al., 2009)). In short, nuclei were lysed in 4% SDS and 100 mM DTT and denatured with 8M urea buffer. Denatured proteins were trapped on 30 kDa filters followed by washing with urea buffer. 50 mM iodoacetic acid in urea buffer was applied to alkylate the proteins. After three washes with urea buffer and three washes with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer, the proteins were digested with trypsin (Promega Cat#V5113) and tryptic peptides were collected in ammonium bicarbonate buffer. Peptides were acidified with trifluoroacetic acid and desalted on C18 (Empore) StageTips. For each sample, peptides were separated on an online Easy-nLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific) using a 214 min gradient of acetonitrile (7% to 30%) followed by washes at 60% followed by 95% acetonitrile for 240 min of total data collection. Mass spectra were collected on a LTQ-Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) in data-dependent top-speed mode with dynamic exclusion set at 60 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analyzed with MaxQuant 1.5.1.0 (Cox and Mann, 2008) with default settings and the algorithms 'match-between-runs', 'iBAQ' and 'LFQ' enabled. The mass spectra were searched against the D. Melanogaster UniProt protein database downloaded in December 2015. A protein database for the UPS2 proteins was supplied by the manufacturer.

### Publication Abstract
Gene transcription in eukaryotes is regulated through dynamic interactions of a variety of different proteins with DNA in the context of chromatin. Here, we used mass spectrometry for absolute quantification of the nuclear proteome and methyl marks on selected lysine residues in histone H3 during two stages of Drosophila embryogenesis. These analyses provide comprehensive information about the absolute copy number of several thousand proteins and reveal unexpected relationships between the abundance of histone-modifying and -binding proteins and the chromatin landscape that they generate and interact with. For some histone modifications, the levels in Drosophila embryos are substantially different from those previously reported in tissue culture cells. Genome-wide profiling of H3K27 methylation during developmental progression and in animals with reduced PRC2 levels illustrates how mass spectrometry can be used for quantitatively describing and comparing chromatin states. Together, these data provide a foundation toward a quantitative understanding of gene regulation in Drosophila.

### Keywords
H3k27 methylation, Absolute proteome quantification/ histone modification quantification, Drosophila, Prc2

### Affiliations
Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences
Max-Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Laboratory of Chromatin Biology, Martinsried, Germany

### Submitter
Rik Lindeboom

### Lab Head
Dr Jürg Müller
Max-Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Laboratory of Chromatin Biology, Martinsried, Germany


