### Accession
PXD024947

### Title
Comparative proteomic profiling: cellular metabolisms are mainly affected in Senecavirus A-inoculated cells at an early stage of infection

### Description
Senecavirus A (SVA) belongs to the genus Senecavirus in the family Picornaviridae. It is increasingly used for proteomic research that tandem mass tag-labeled liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry is combined with the parallel reaction monitoring technique. In this study, this combined method was used to uncover separately proteomic profiles of SVA- and non-infected BSR-T7/5 cells. Further, both proteomic profiles were compared with each other. The proteomic profiling showed that a total of 361 differentially expressed proteins were identified, out of which, 305 and 56 were upregulated and downregulated in SVA-infected cells at 12 h post-inoculation, respectively. GO (Gene Ontology) and KEGG (Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes) enrichment analyses showed that cellular metabolisms were mainly affected in SVA-inoculated cells at an early stage of infection.

### Sample Protocol
BSR-T7/5 cells were seeded into several T175 flasks for culture at 37 °C. Cell monolayers at 90% confluency were separately inoculated with the P5 SVA (MOI = 2.5), and the others served as non-infected controls. There were three SVA-infected samples (S1, S2 and S3) and three non-infected controls (C1, C2 and C3). At 12 h post-inoculation (hpi), all cell monolayers were digested with trypsin. Cell suspensions were collected into sterile 50-mL centrifuge tubes after neutralization with FBS, and then were treated thrice by gentle washing and centrifuging. Cell pellets were suspended in 300 μL of SDT-lysis buffer (4% SDS, 100 mM DTT, 150 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0), followed by boiling for 5 min, ultrasonic treatment for 2 min, and boiling for another 5 min. Undissolved cellular debris was removed by centrifugation at 15,000 g for 20 min. The supernatants were collected and quantified with the BCA Protein Assay Kit (Bio-Rad, Richmond, USA), followed by SDS-PAGE analysis. Digestion of protein (200 μg for each sample) was performed according to the FASP procedure described by Wisniewski, Zougman et al. Finally，The peptide concentration was determined with OD280 by Nanodrop device. Peptides were labeled with TMT reagents according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo Fisher Scientific). TMT-labeled peptides mixture was fractionated with high-pH reversed-phase HPLC. The fractions were dried for nano LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The TMT-labeled proteome data were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 2.4 software and the phosphoproteome data were imported into MaxQuant software (version 1.6.0.16) for data interpretation and protein identification against the Cricetulus griseus database from Uniprot (downloaded on 12/07/2020, and including 56565 protein sequences), which is sourced from the protein database at https://www.uniprot.org/uniprot/?query=taxonomy:10029. MS spectra were searched with 10 ppm mass tolerance for precursor ions and 20 ppm mass tolerance for fragment ions, fully Tryptic restriction and maximal two missed cleavage sites. The modifications were fixed carbamidomethylation (+57.0215) of cystenine (C), fixed TMT6plex modifications (+229.162932) on lysine (K) and N terminus, and variable oxidation (+15.9949) on methionine (M) , Deamidation (0.984016) on asparagine (N) or glutamine (Q), and acetylation (+42.010565) on protein N terminus. For peptide and protein identification, false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1%. TMT reporter ion intensity were used for quantification.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Senecavirus</i> A (SVA), also known as Seneca Valley virus, belongs to the genus <i>Senecavirus</i> in the family <i>Picornaviridae</i>. SVA can cause vesicular disease and epidemic transient neonatal losses in pigs. This virus efficiently propagates in some non-pig-derived cells, like the baby hamster kidney (BHK) cell line and its derivate (BSR-T7/5). Conventionally, a few proteins or only one protein is selected for exploiting a given mechanism concerning cellular regulation after SVA infection in vitro. Proteomics plays a vital role in the analysis of protein profiling, protein-protein interactions, and protein-directed metabolisms, among others. Tandem mass tag-labeled liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry combined with the parallel reaction monitoring technique is increasingly used for proteomic research. In this study, this combined method was used to uncover separately proteomic profiles of SVA- and non-infected BSR-T7/5 cells. Furthermore, both proteomic profiles were compared with each other. The proteomic profiling showed that a total of 361 differentially expressed proteins were identified, out of which, 305 and 56 were upregulated and downregulated in SVA-infected cells at 12 h post-inoculation, respectively. GO (Gene Ontology) and KEGG (Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes) enrichment analyses showed that cellular metabolisms were affected mainly in SVA-inoculated cells at an early stage of infection. Therefore, an integrated metabolic atlas remains to be explored via metabolomic methods.

### Keywords
Differentially expressed protein, Senecavirus a, Proteomics, Pathway., Enrichment analysis, Metabolism

### Affiliations
College of Veterinary Medicine, Qingdao Agricultural University, Qingdao, 266109, China
Hunan Normal University

### Submitter
Guolin Li

### Lab Head
Dr Fuxiao Liu
College of Veterinary Medicine, Qingdao Agricultural University, Qingdao, 266109, China


