### Accession
PXD016110

### Title
293T Flag-Aurora-A Co-IP LC-MSMS

### Description
To explore the potential targets of Aurora-A in glycolytic regulation

### Sample Protocol
Flag-Aurora A was ectopically expressed in 293T cells. Proteins were isolated by IP, eluted using 200μg/ml of flag peptide, and were subjected to SDS-PAGE. The gel was stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue. Visualized bands were excised, destained with ammonium bicarbonate buffer, and dehydrated in 75% acetonitrile. Following rehydration (with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate), the gel slices were crushed and subjected to overnight digestion with trypsin or chymotrypsin. The peptides were extracted with acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid and vacuum dried. Proteolytic peptides were reconstituted with mobile phase A (2% acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid) and then separated on an on-line C18 column (75 μm inner diameter, 360 μm outer diameter, 10 cm, 3 μm C18). Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in 2% acetonitrile and mobile phase B was 0.1% formic acid in 84% acetonitrile. A linear gradient from 3 to 100% B over 75 minutes at a flow rate of 350 nL/min was applied. Mass spectrometry analysis was carried out on a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, SJ) operated in data dependent scan mode. Survey scan (m/z 375–1300) was performed at a resolution of 60,000 followed by MS2 scans to fragment the 50 most abundant precursors with collision induced dissociation. The activation time was set at 30 ms, the isolation width was 1.5 amu, the normalized activation energy was 35%, and the activation q was 0.25.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry raw file was searched by Proteome Discovery version 1.3 using MASCOT search engine with percolator against the human ref-sequence protein database (updated on 07-04-2016). The mass tolerance was set to be 20 ppm for precursor and 0.5 Da for product ion. Missed cleavages were no more than two for each peptide.

### Publication Abstract
Overexpressed Aurora-A kinase promotes tumor growth through various pathways, but whether Aurora-A is also involved in metabolic reprogramming-mediated cancer progression remains unknown. Here, we report that Aurora-A directly interacts with and phosphorylates lactate dehydrogenase B (LDHB), a subunit of the tetrameric enzyme LDH that catalyzes the interconversion between pyruvate and lactate. Aurora-A-mediated phosphorylation of LDHB serine&#xa0;162 significantly increases its activity in reducing pyruvate to lactate, which efficiently promotes NAD<sup>+</sup> regeneration, glycolytic flux, lactate production and bio-synthesis with glycolytic intermediates. Mechanistically, LDHB serine 162 phosphorylation relieves its substrate inhibition effect by pyruvate, resulting in remarkable elevation in the conversions of pyruvate and NADH to lactate and NAD<sup>+</sup>. Blocking S162 phosphorylation by expression of a LDHB-S162A mutant inhibited glycolysis and tumor growth in cancer cells and xenograft models. This study uncovers a function of Aurora-A in glycolytic modulation and a mechanism through which LDHB directly contributes to the Warburg effect.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-msms, Flag-aurora-a co-ip, 293t

### Affiliations
university of science and technology of China
Hefei National Laboratory for Physical Sciences at Microscale, CAS key Laboratory of Innate Immunity and Chronic Disease, Division of Life Sciences and Medicine, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China.

### Submitter
Aoxing Cheng

### Lab Head
Dr zhenye yang
Hefei National Laboratory for Physical Sciences at Microscale, CAS key Laboratory of Innate Immunity and Chronic Disease, Division of Life Sciences and Medicine, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China.


