### Accession
PXD039966

### Title
Drosophila embryo extract assisted in vitro chromatin assembly in presence of foldamer

### Description
Drosophila preblastoderm embryo extract assisted chromatin assembly with or without 16mer DNA mimic. Pull down of chromatin fiber to reveal chromatin binders in the system.

### Sample Protocol
Assembled chromatin and foldamer pulldowns were subjected to mass spectrometry analysis. The beads-bound fraction was separated by a magnet from the supernatant and washed three times with EX100 and 4 times with fresh 50 mM NH4HCO3 to remove detergents and unspecific binders. Tryptic digestion was performed on beads by incubating with 100 µl of 10 ng/µL trypsin (Promega, Ref: V511) in 1 M urea 50 mM NH4HCO3 for 30min at 25 °C. Beads were separated by a magnet, the supernatant was transferred into a fresh tube, beads were washed twice with 50 mM NH4HCO3, and supernatants pooled into the same tube. Supernatant pool was adjusted to final concentration of 1 mM DTT by addition of DTT and digestion was completed overnight at 25 °C. Next, the tryptic peptide mixture sample was incubated for 30 min in the dark at 25 °C with iodoacetamide at a final concentration of 35 mM to carbamidomethylate sulfhydryl groups of free cysteine. Subsequently, DTT was added to a final concentration of 50 mM and sample was left to incubate for 10 min at 25 °C. Then, the sample was acidified using trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), followed by desalting using SDB-RPS (Styrenedivinylbenzene - Reversed Phase Sulfonate, 3M Empore) before mass spectrometry analyses, and redissolved in 15µl MS loading buffer (Preomics) and stored at -20°C until further processing.  For LC-MS purposes, desalted peptides were injected in an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo) and separated in a 25-cm analytical column (75µm ID, 1.6µm C18, IonOpticks) with a 50-min gradient from 2 to 37% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. The effluent from the HPLC was directly electrosprayed into a Qexactive HF (Thermo) or an Orbitrap Exploris 480 (Thermo) both operated in data-dependent mode to automatically switch between full scan MS and MS/MS acquisition. For Qexactive HF measurements, survey full scan MS spectra (from m/z 375–1600) were acquired with resolution R=60,000 at m/z 400 (AGC target of 3x106). The 10 most intense peptide ions with charge states between 2 and 5 were sequentially isolated to a target value of 1x105 ,and fragmented at 27% normalized collision energy. Typical mass spectrometric conditions were: spray voltage, 1.5 kV; no sheath and auxiliary gas flow; heated capillary temperature, 250ºC; ion selection threshold, 33.000 counts. For Orbitrap Exploris 480 measurements, survey full scan MS spectra (from m/z 350 to 1,200) were acquired with resolution R = 60,000 at m/z 400 (AGC target of 3 × 106). The 20 most intense peptide ions with charge states between 2 and 5 were sequentially isolated to a target value of 1 × 105 and fragmented at 30% normalized collision energy. Typical mass spectrometric conditions were as follows: spray voltage, 1.5 kV; heated capillary temperature, 275°C; ion selection threshold, 33.000 counts.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant 1.6.1.5.0 (for chromatin binders dataset)was used to identify proteins and quantify by label free quantification (LFQ) with the following parameters: uniprot_UP000000803_Dmelanogaster_canonical_isoforms_20200825.fasta (for chromatin binders dataset)MS tol, 10 ppm; MS/MS tol, 20 ppm Da; Peptide FDR, 0.1; Protein FDR, 0.01 min; Peptide Length, 7; Variable modifications, Oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein N-term); Fixed modifications, Carbamidomethyl (C); Peptides for protein quantitation, razor and unique; Min. peptides, 1; Min. ratio count, 2.Data were handled with Perseus software (version 1.6.7.0.) (37) and R Studio (version 4.0.3). For analysis in Perseus, the output protein_groups.txt file from MaxQuant processing was imported, then protein hits associated with the reversed database, only identified by site and common contaminants were filtered out.

### Publication Abstract
The use of synthetic chemicals to selectively interfere with chromatin and the chromatin-bound proteome represents a great opportunity for pharmacological intervention. Recently, synthetic foldamers that mimic the charge surface of double-stranded DNA have been shown to interfere with selected protein-DNA interactions. However, to better understand their pharmacological potential and to improve their specificity and selectivity, the effect of these molecules on complex chromatin needs to be investigated. We therefore systematically studied the influence of the DNA mimic foldamers on the chromatin-bound proteome using an in vitro chromatin assembly extract. Our studies show that the foldamer efficiently interferes with the chromatin-association of the origin recognition complex in vitro and in vivo, which leads to a disturbance of cell cycle in cells treated with foldamers. This effect is mediated by a strong direct interaction between the foldamers and the origin recognition complex and results in a failure of the complex to organise chromatin around replication origins. Foldamers that mimic double-stranded nucleic acids thus emerge as a powerful tool with designable features to alter chromatin assembly and selectively interfere with biological mechanisms.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, In vitro chromatin assembly, Qexactive hf, Drosophila embryo extract (drex), Dna mimcs

### Affiliations
BioMedical Center
Department of Molecular Biology, Biomedical Center Munich, Ludwig-Maximilians University, Großhaderner Strasse 9, 82152 Planegg-Martinsried, Germany

### Submitter
Axel Imhof

### Lab Head
Dr Axel Imhof
Department of Molecular Biology, Biomedical Center Munich, Ludwig-Maximilians University, Großhaderner Strasse 9, 82152 Planegg-Martinsried, Germany


