### Accession
PXD001866

### Title
Yeast inter-species comparative proteomics

### Description
Different yeast species in distinct clades within Saccharomycetaceae family are interesting model organisms for inter-species comparative proteomics, in regard to different metabolic properties and genomic architectures. The aim in this analysis is revealing conserved and diverse expression profile of proteome under different culture conditions, including fermentative and non-fermentative growth. Our label-free quantitative proteomics analysis not only uncovered species-specific characters of metabolic proteins expression pattern and also provide intriguing insight into optimized protein cost allocation and evolutionary role for duplicated genes.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extracts from cultured yeast were digested into peptides with trypsin, followed by separation into 24 fractions using OFFGELL fractionator system (Agilent technologies). Tryptic peptides in each fraction were subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis with LTQ-Orbitrap XL (Thermo Fisher scientific) mass spectrometry in a data dependent mode.

### Data Protocol
Raw data of acquired MS/MS spectra were subjected to database search toward protein sequence fasta file containing ORF of S. mikatae from Saccharomyces Genome Database (http://www.yeastgenome.org/) plus trypsin and keratin sequence as contaminants. Mass range from 800 to 4500 and up to 2 missed cleavages on tryptic peptide was considered for calculation of theoretical peptide mass. Mass tolerances for precursor and fragment ions were allowed at 10 ppm and 1 Da, respectively. Mass shift dependent on modifications were set as follows; carbamidomethylation (+57.021) of cysteine as static modification and oxidation (+15.995) of methionine as dynamic modifications. Resultant peptide spectra matches (PSMs) of each fraction that fulfill false discovery rate with less than 1% were considered as identification list for peptides and proteins. Total of 24 files derived from each fraction were merged to generated PSMs count for yeast proteins, followed by calculation of protein abundance as relative copy on the basis of spectral counting.

### Publication Abstract
Omics analysis is a versatile approach for understanding the conservation and diversity of molecular systems across multiple taxa. In this study, we compared the proteome expression profiles of four yeast species (Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Saccharomyces mikatae, Kluyveromyces waltii, and Kluyveromyces lactis) grown on glucose- or glycerol-containing media. Conserved expression changes across all species were observed only for a small proportion of all proteins differentially expressed between the two growth conditions. Two Kluyveromyces species, both of which exhibited a high growth rate on glycerol, a nonfermentative carbon source, showed distinct species-specific expression profiles. In K. waltii grown on glycerol, proteins involved in the glyoxylate cycle and gluconeogenesis were expressed in high abundance. In K. lactis grown on glycerol, the expression of glycolytic and ethanol metabolic enzymes was unexpectedly low, whereas proteins involved in cytoplasmic translation, including ribosomal proteins and elongation factors, were highly expressed. These marked differences in the types of predominantly expressed proteins suggest that K. lactis optimizes the balance of proteome resource allocation between metabolism and protein synthesis giving priority to cellular growth. In S. cerevisiae, about 450 duplicate gene pairs were retained after whole-genome duplication. Intriguingly, we found that in the case of duplicates with conserved sequences, the total abundance of proteins encoded by a duplicate pair in S. cerevisiae was similar to that of protein encoded by nonduplicated ortholog in Kluyveromyces yeast. Given the frequency of haploinsufficiency, this observation suggests that conserved duplicate genes, even though minor cases of retained duplicates, do not exhibit a dosage effect in yeast, except for ribosomal proteins. Thus, comparative proteomic analyses across multiple species may reveal not only species-specific characteristics of metabolic processes under nonoptimal culture conditions but also provide valuable insights into intriguing biological principles, including the balance of proteome resource allocation and the role of gene duplication in evolutionary history.

### Keywords
Yeast, Saccharomycetaceae family, Comparative proteomics

### Affiliations
School of Agriculture, Meiji University
Meiji University

### Submitter
Keiji Kito

### Lab Head
Dr Keiji Kito
School of Agriculture, Meiji University


