### Accession
PXD043444

### Title
Therapeutic targeting nudix hydrolase 1 creates a MYC-driven metabolic vulnerability

### Description
Tumor cells must rewire nucleotide synthesis to satisfy the demands of unbridled proliferation. Meanwhile, they exhibit augmented reactive oxygen species (ROS) production which paradoxically damages DNA and free dNTPs. How these metabolic processes are integrated to fuel tumorigenesis remains to be investigated. MYC family oncoproteins are central regulators that coordinate nucleotide synthesis and ROS generation to drive the development of numerous human cancers. We herein performed a CRISPR-based functional screen targeting metabolic genes and identified nudix hydrolase 1 (NUDT1) as a MYC-driven metabolic dependency. Mechanistically, MYC orchestrated the balance of two metabolic pathways that act in parallel, the NOX4-ROS pathway and the PLK1-NUDT1 nucleotide-sanitizing pathway. We describe LC-1-40 as the first-in-class degrader that potently and selectively depletes NUDT1 in vivo. Administration of LC-1-40 disrupted MYC-controlled metabolic homeostasis, resulting in excessive nucleotide oxidation, cytotoxicity and therapeutic responses in patient-derived xenografts. Thus, pharmacological targeting of NUDT1 represents an actionable MYC-driven metabolic liability.

### Sample Protocol
1.Total protein extraction from SHEP MYCN-ER cells stably expressing Flag-tagged NUDT1 was subjected to immunoprecipitation using Flag antibody. Immunoprecipitated proteins were washed with IP buffer three times and then eluted with 0.2 M glycine pH 2.0. Eluted proteins were precipitated with four volumes of acetone and then re-solubilized in urea prior to trypsin (Promega) digestion at 37°C for 20 h. Digested peptides were desalted using the C18 Stage tips (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and loaded onto an EASY-nLC system for LC-MS/MS analysis by Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer equipped with the FAIMS Pro interface (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Mass spectrometry resolutions were set to 60,000 at m/z 200 and mass range was set to 350–1500. 2.SF188 cells were treated with DMSO or 100 nM LC-1-40 in biological duplicates for 6 h and harvested by centrifugation at 4 °C, 1000g. Cells were then washed twice with cold PBS, and lysed in buffer (20 mM HEPES, 300 mM NaCl, 1M Urea, 1% NP-40 Substitute, 10 mM MgCl2, 1 mM DTT) on ice for 30 min, followed by centrifugation at 12,000g for 15 min. Collected supernatant was quantified by BCA kit, and 100 µg of protein from each sample were used for digestion and TMT labeling. Quantitative proteomics were performed using Deng’s method36. Equal amounts of protein were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol and alkylated with 13 mM iodoacetamide. Proteins were digested overnight at 37˚C by trypsin overnight, and the resulting peptides were desalted using C18 stage tips, dried by a speedvac (Thermo Fischer Scientific) and reconstituted in 100 mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEAB). Tandem mass tag (TMT) label reagents (Thermo Fischer Scientific) dissolved in acetonitrile were added to the peptide solutions and incubated at room temperature for 1 h. The reaction was quenched by the addition of 5% hydroxylamine for 15 minutes. Desalted samples were separated by EASY-nLC System coupled to an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
1.Raw data were processed with Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific).Processing of the original table data: Set the abundance value to 0 if there is no abundance value; The number of peptide is set to greater than 3; Fold change was calculated by the median protein abundance；P value was calculated using the protein abundance of 6 samples by T-Test. 2.Collected signals were analyzed by Proteome Discovery v.2.4. The number of peptide is set to greater than or equal to 3.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cancer，protac, Plk1, Myc, Nudt1

### Affiliations
Department of Urology,Zhongnan Hospital of Wuhan University,Wuhan 430071,China. Frontier Science Center for Immunology and Metabolism,Medical Research Institute,Wuhan University,Wuhan 430071,China.
wuhan university

### Submitter
minhui ye

### Lab Head
Dr Guoliang Qing
Department of Urology,Zhongnan Hospital of Wuhan University,Wuhan 430071,China. Frontier Science Center for Immunology and Metabolism,Medical Research Institute,Wuhan University,Wuhan 430071,China.


