### Accession
PXD031996

### Title
Proteomic analysis of follicular fluid of Patients with Polycystic Ovary Syndrome

### Description
Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is a common disorder encompassing reproductive, metabolic, and endocrine abnormalities, affecting 5 to 10% of women of reproductive age.To reveal the differences in proteomic profiles of follicular fluid between patients with and without PCOS and explore possible mechanisms underlying PCOS.Follicular fluid samples were collected from 9 infertile patients with PCOS and 9 infertile patients without PCOS. Quantitative proteomics analysis based on mass spectrometry was used to measure the protein levels and understand the protein networks. The tandem mass tag (TMT) based proteomics technology and bioinformatics analysis were used to determine the differentially expressed proteins(DEPs). : In this study, we have identified a total of 1216 proteins,these included 70 DEPs, in which 32 proteins were upregulated, and 38 proteins were downregulated. The bioinformatics analyses revealed multiple biological functions associated with these DEPs, some DEPs were enriched in the immune and metabolic-related biological processes in PCOS patients.

### Sample Protocol
Follicular fluid samples for proteomic analysis were collected from 9 patients with PCOS and 9 controls. Gonadotropin-releasing hormone antagonist protocol was used for ovarian stimulation. Then 34-36 hours ﻿after human chorionic gonadotropin administration, follicular fluid was ﻿collected by transvaginal ﻿ultrasound-guided aspiration. Only macroscopically clear fluids, indicating lack of contamination, were collected. After oocyte isolation, follicular fluid samples were centrifuged at 1000 g for 10 min at 4 °C to remove cellular components and debris. Then, the supernatants were stored at -80°C before further processing.Thawed FF samples underwent centrifuging at 12,000 g for 10 minutes at 4°C to remove any possible cellular debris again. High-abundance proteins were removed by the Proteo Miner Protein Enrichment Kit (BIO-RAD, California, USA). Finally, according to the manufacturer's instructions, protein concentrations were determined with a BCA kit (Beyotime, Jiangsu, China).Take an equal amount of each sample protein for enzymatic hydrolysis, add an appropriate amount of standard protein, adjust the volume to the same with the lysis buffer, and then add dithiothreitol (DTT) to make the final concentration 5 mM, and reduce for 30 min at 56°C. Then alkylate with 11 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) at room temperature in darkness for 15 min. To dilute the sample by adding100 mM tetraethylammonium tetra hydroborate (TEAB) to urea concentration less than 2M. Trypsin was added at 1:50 (trypsin: protein) overnight for the first digestion and 1:100 (trypsin: protein) for subsequent second digestion lasting 4h.When treated with trypsin digestion, we desalted the peptide by a Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex, California, USA) and vacuum-dried. Peptides were reconstituted with 0.5 M TEAB and labeled by the TMT kit (Thermo Fisher, Massachusetts, USA). In short, reconstituted the thawed TMT reagent in acetonitrile. To incubate the peptide mixtures for 2 hours at room temperature, then combined, desalted, and dried by vacuum centrifugation. The tryptic peptides were then fractionated by high-pH reverse-phase HPLC using an Agilent 300Extend C18 column (250 mm length,5 μm particles, 10 mm ID).Tryptic peptides were dissolved in the solvent A (aqueous solution with 0.1% formic acid and 90% acetonitrile) of liquid chromatography and then separated by the EASY-nLC 1200 UPLC system. The peptides were subjected to NSI iron source based on the UPLC system and then analyzed by HF-X mass spectrometry. The data acquisition mode uses the data-dependent scanning (DDA) program. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4. The signal threshold was set to 2.5E5ions/s, the maximum injection time was set to 50 ms, and the dynamic rejection time of the tandem mass spectrometry scan was set to 30 s to avoid precursor ions. Repeated scans.

### Data Protocol
Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8) was used to search the resulting MS/MS data. The human UniProt database was applied to search for tandem mass spectra. We adjusted the FDR to < 1%, and the minimum score for modified peptides was set to> 40. Differentially expressed protein (DEP) was identified as having a cut-off value of more than 1.3- or <1/1.3-fold change.

### Publication Abstract
<b>Objectives:</b> Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is a common endocrine and metabolic disorder with heterogeneous manifestations and complex etiology. We used quantitative proteomics analysis based on mass spectrometry to identify the differences in proteomics profiles for follicular fluid obtained from patients with or without PCOS and explore possible mechanisms underlying PCOS. <b>Methods:</b> Follicular fluid samples were collected from infertile patients with (n = 9) or without (n = 9) PCOS. Total protein was extracted, quantitatively labeled with a tandem mass tag (TMT), and analyzed using liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS). TMT-based proteomics and bioinformatics analysis were used to determine the differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) and understand the protein networks. The analysis included protein annotation, unsupervised hierarchical clustering, functional classification, functional enrichment and clustering, and protein-protein interaction analysis. Selected DEPs were confirmed by ELISA, and correlation analysis was performed between these DEPs and the clinical characteristics. <b>Results:</b> In this study, we have identified 1,216 proteins, including 70 DEPs (32 upregulated proteins, 38 downregulated proteins). Bioinformatics analysis revealed that the inflammatory response, complement and coagulation cascades, activation of the immune response, lipid transport, and regulation of protein metabolic processes were co-enriched in patients with PCOS. Based on ELISA results, insulin-like growth factor binding protein 1 (IGFBP1) and apolipoprotein C2 (APOC2) were differentially expressed between patients with and without PCOS. Follicular IGFBP1 showed a positive correlation with the serum levels of high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C) (r = 0.3046, <i>p</i> = 0.0419), but negatively correlated with the serum levels of anti-M&#xfc;llerian hormone (AMH) (r = -0.2924, <i>p</i> = 0.0354) and triglycerides (r = -0.3177, <i>p</i> = 0.0246). Follicular APOC2 was negatively correlated with the serum apolipoprotein A1 (APOA1) levels (r = 0.4509, <i>p</i> = 0.0002). <b>Conclusion:</b> Our study identified DEPs in the follicular fluid of patients with PCOS. Inflammatory response, complement and coagulation cascades, activation of the immune response, lipid transport, and regulation of protein metabolic process were deregulated in PCOS, which may play essential roles in the pathogenesis of PCOS.

### Keywords
Polycystic ovary syndrome, Tandem mass tag, Proteomics, Follicular fluid

### Affiliations
shandong university
Center for Reproductive Medicine, Cheeloo College of Medicine, Shandong University, Jinan, China

### Submitter
wenqi  wang

### Lab Head
Dr Daimin Wei
Center for Reproductive Medicine, Cheeloo College of Medicine, Shandong University, Jinan, China


