### Accession
PXD017966

### Title
Carbon source dependent reprograming of anaerobic metabolism in Staphylococcus aureus

### Description
To be a successful pathogen, S. aureus has to adapt its metabolism to the typically oxygen- and glucose-limited environment of the host. Under fermenting conditions and in the presence of glucose S. aureus uses glycolysis in order to generate ATP via substrate level phosphorylation and mainly lactic acid fermentation to maintain redox balance by oxidizing NADH equivalents. However, it is unclear how S. aureus proceeds under anoxic conditions when also glucose is limited, likely representing the bona-fide situation in the host. Using a combination of proteome, transcription and metabolome analyses, we show that in the absence of glucose and oxygen, pyruvate as being a model metabolite for a non-glycolytic carbon source is channeled towards the production of acetyl-CoA (AcCoA) in a pyruvate formate-lyase (PflB)-dependent reaction to produce ATP and acetate. This process critically depends on inactivation of the catabolite control protein A (CcpA), leading to upregulation of pflB transcription. Thus, we describe a switch prioritizing acetate over lactate fermentation when glucose is absent. Under these conditions also ethanol production via the alcohol dehydrogenases AdhE and Adh1 is repressed in order to prevent wasteful consumption of AcCoA. Taken together, our study provides insights into the metabolic framework underlying the adaption of S. aureus to adverse host conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Samples for analyses of cytoplasmic proteins were taken at exponential phase (OD500nm= 0.5) and 3 h after shifting to anaerobic conditions. Therefore 50 ml bacterial cell culture were centrifuged (4 °C, 8,500 rpm, 10 min) and cells were washed twice with 1 mL TE buffer (10 mM Tris, 1 mM EDTA, pH 7.5). Cell pellets were resuspended in 1 ml TE buffer and transferred in a 2 ml screw cap micro tube filled with 500 µl glass beads (0.10-0.11 mm diameter, Sartorius AG). Subsequently, cells were disrupted mechanically using a Precellys 24 homogenizator (PeqLab; 3 × 30 sec at 6,800 rpm). To separate cell debris and glass beads from the proteins the suspension was centrifuged twice for 15 min at 4 °C at 15,000 rpm. Protein concentration was determined by Roti®-Nanoquant protein quantitation assay (Carl Roth, Germany). Afterwards 200 µg protein were digested with trypsin, desalted and analyzed by mass spectrometry, as described by Zühlke et al. (2016), for absolute quantification. The nanoACQUITY™ UPLC™ system (Waters, USA) was used to separate the peptide mixture and to introduce the samples into the mass spectrometer. The peptide mixture was directly loaded on an analytical column (nanoACQUITY™ UPLC™ column, BEH300 C18, 1.7 mm, 75 mm_200 mm, Waters). Separation of peptides for IMSE (MSE with ion mobility separation) was done with a 90 min gradient from 5% buffer B to 40% buffer B. All MSE analyses were performed as previously described3. The only modification was, that the collision energy was alternated between 4 eV in the precursor ion trace and a ramp 25–45 eV for fragment ion trace. Wave velocity was ramped from 1,000–800 m/s, wave height was set to 40 V.

### Data Protocol
LC-IMSE data were processed using PLGS v3.1. Processing parameter were set as follows: Chromatographic peak width and MS TOF resolution were set to automatic, lock mass charge 2 set to 785.8426 Da/e with a lock mass window of 0.25 Da, low energy threshold 200.0 counts, elevated energy threshold 20.0 counts, intensity threshold 750 counts. The data were searched against a randomized Uniprot S. aureus COL database (version January 2011) with added laboratory contaminants and yeast ADH1 sequence (5,446 entries). For positive protein identification the following criteria had to be met: 1 fragment ion matched per peptide, 5 fragment ions matched per protein, 1 peptide matched per protein; 2 missed cleavages allowed, primary digest reagent: trypsin, fixed modification: carbamidomethylation C (+57.0215), variable modifications: deamidation N, Q (+0.9840), oxidation M (+15.9949), pyrrolidonecarboxylacid N-TERM (−27.9949). The protein false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 5%. For the final analysis only identifications based on at least two peptides were considered. A protein had to be identified in at least two out of three technical replicates per biological replicate. In addition, for the final analysis protein had to be present in two out of three biological replicates per time point.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
S. aureus, Fermentation, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
University of Greifswald, Institute of Microbiology
Universisty of Greifswald, Institute of Microbiology, Department for Microbial Physiology and Molecular Biology

### Submitter
Daniela Zuehlke

### Lab Head
Dr Katharina Riedel
Universisty of Greifswald, Institute of Microbiology, Department for Microbial Physiology and Molecular Biology


