### Accession
PXD008122

### Title
Structural insights into the assembly and polyA signal recognition mechanism of the human CPSF complex

### Description
Structural study of the polyA signal recognition by the human CPSF using X-ray crystallography, cross-linking MS, pull-downs and fluorescence polarisation assays.

### Sample Protocol
Chemical cross-linking was performed following previously described procedures (Leitner et al., Nat. Protoc., 2014). Samples were digested using endoproteinase Lys-C and trypsin, digests were fractionated by size-exclusion chromatography and SEC fractions were analyzed by data-dependent LC-MS/MS spectrometry on a Thermo Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer. Additional details are provided in the accompanying publication.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched using xQuest (Walzthoeni et al., Nat. Methods, 2012), version 2.1.5, against the sequences of target proteins and identified contaminants and corresponding decoy sequences. Additional search settings were as follows: Enzyme = trypsin, maximum number of missed cleavages = 2, MS mass tolerance = -10 to +10 ppm, MS/MS mass tolerance = 0.2 Da for “common”-type fragment ions and 0.3 Da for “xlink”-type fragment ions.

### Publication Abstract
3' polyadenylation is a key step in eukaryotic mRNA biogenesis. In mammalian cells, this process is dependent on the recognition of the hexanucleotide AAUAAA motif in the pre-mRNA polyadenylation signal by the cleavage and polyadenylation specificity factor (CPSF) complex. A core CPSF complex comprising CPSF160, WDR33, CPSF30 and Fip1 is sufficient for AAUAAA motif recognition, yet the molecular interactions underpinning its assembly and mechanism of PAS recognition are not understood. Based on cross-linking-coupled mass spectrometry, crystal structure of the CPSF160-WDR33 subcomplex and biochemical assays, we define the molecular architecture of the core human CPSF complex, identifying specific domains involved in inter-subunit interactions. In addition to zinc finger domains in CPSF30, we identify using quantitative RNA-binding assays an N-terminal lysine/arginine-rich motif in WDR33 as a critical determinant of specific AAUAAA motif recognition. Together, these results shed light on the function of CPSF in mediating PAS-dependent RNA cleavage and polyadenylation.

### Keywords
Chemical cross-linking, Structural proteomics, Rna, Dss, Polya

### Affiliations
ETH Zurich
Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich, CH-8093, Zurich, Switzerland

### Submitter
Marco Faini

### Lab Head
Dr Ruedi Aebersold
Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich, CH-8093, Zurich, Switzerland


