### Accession
PXD008230

### Title
Determination of GPI structure of human CD59 in various KO CHO cells

### Description
To determine GPI structure of human CD59 in PGAP4-KO, PGAP3-KO, PGAP5-KO, and PGAP2-KO CHO cells.

### Sample Protocol
CHO cells expressing His-FLAG-GST-FLAG tagged human CD59 (HFGF-CD59) were treated with 1 unit/ml PI-PLC in 10 ml Opti-MEM containing 10 mM HEPES-NaOH (pH 7.4), 1m M EDTA, and 0.1% BSA at 37C for 2 h. Supernatant was loaded to a column of 500 µl of Glutathione Sepharose 4B at 4 C. After washing with 10 ml PBS, HFGF-CD59 was eluted by elution-buffer (adjust to pH7.4, PBS containing 30 mM HEPES-NaOH (pH 7.4) and 20 mM reduced glutathione). Eluted sample was precipitated by TCA. Pellet was resolved in 1 x sample buffer with 5% -mercaptoethanol and boiled at 95C for 5 min. Samples were run on SDS-PAGE gel and stained by Imperial Protein Stain. For the analysis of CD59 from PGAP2-KO cells, 200 ml culture medium were loaded to a column of 500 µl of Glutathione Sepharose 4B followed by the same procedures described above.

### Data Protocol
Xcalibur Software was used for analysis of mass data. In the MS/MS profiles, those that contain characteristic fragments derived from GPI anchors, such as fragment ions of m/z 422+ and 477+, were selected, and fragments in the selected profiles were assigned to determine the GPI structures.

### Publication Abstract
Many eukaryotic proteins are anchored to the cell surface via the glycolipid glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI). Mammalian GPIs have a conserved core but exhibit diverse N-acetylgalactosamine (GalNAc) modifications, which are added via a yet unresolved process. Here we identify the Golgi-resident GPI-GalNAc transferase PGAP4 and show by mass spectrometry that PGAP4 knockout cells lose GPI-GalNAc structures. Furthermore, we demonstrate that PGAP4, in contrast to known Golgi glycosyltransferases, is not a single-pass membrane protein but contains three transmembrane domains, including a tandem transmembrane domain insertion into its glycosyltransferase-A fold as indicated by comparative modeling. Mutational analysis reveals a catalytic site, a DXD-like motif for UDP-GalNAc donor binding, and several residues potentially involved in acceptor binding. We suggest that a juxtamembrane region of PGAP4 accommodates various GPI-anchored proteins, presenting their acceptor residue toward the catalytic center. In summary, we present insights into the structure of PGAP4 and elucidate the initial step of GPI-GalNAc biosynthesis.

### Keywords
Gpi, Lc-msms, Pgap5, Pgap4, Cd59, Pgap3, Pgap2, Cho cells

### Affiliations
Research Institute for Microbial Diseases
NIPS

### Submitter
Tetsuya Hirata

### Lab Head
Dr Taroh Kinoshita
Research Institute for Microbial Diseases


