### Accession
PXD027163

### Title
The inflammation repressor TNIP1 is degraded by selective autophagy in a LIR-dependent manner upon TLR3 activation

### Description
In the project « The inflammation repressor TNIP1 is degraded by selective autophagy in a LIR-dependent manner upon TLR3 activation » Jianwen Zhou, Nikoline Lander Rasmussen, Vyacheslav Akimov, Blagoy Blagoev, Trond Lamark, Terje Johansen and Jörn Dengjel performed MS-based proteomics to study the function of TNIP1. Three set of SILAC experiments were performed (classical double-triple labeling): (1) Global analysis of ubiquitination events using the UbiSite approach. Three biological replicates were performed using following SILAC labeling (1) Protein-protein interactions of TNIP1 performing HA-TNIP1 AP-MS analyses. Three biological replicates were performed using following SILAC labeling  (3) Expression proteomics comparing WT and different TNIP1 ko clones. Six biological replicates were performed using following SILAC labeling

### Sample Protocol
Samples were processed by classical bottom-up proteomics protocols. Proteins were reduced with DTT and alkylated with IAA, followed with SDS-PAGE fractionation and trypsin in-gel digestion. Tryptic peptides were desalted by STAGE-tip.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were analyzed using MaxQuant software version 1.6.2.10, data were searched against UniProt full-length homo sapiens database (21.033 entries, released March, 2016). Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification, protein aminoterminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications. Ubiquitination of lysine was set as a variable modification and digestion was specific to trypsin/P for Ubisite experiment.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Lc-msms, Inflammation, Silac

### Affiliations
Dr. Jörn Dengjel Department of Biology, University of Fribourg  Chemin du Musée 10, 1700 Fribourg, Switzerland  T  +41 26 300 8631                 E     joern.dengjel@unifr.ch
University of Fribourg

### Submitter
Joern Dengjel

### Lab Head
Dr Joern Dengjel
Dr. Jörn Dengjel Department of Biology, University of Fribourg  Chemin du Musée 10, 1700 Fribourg, Switzerland  T  +41 26 300 8631                 E     joern.dengjel@unifr.ch


