### Accession
PXD002782

### Title
SCOPE 4 proteomics -  Dual targeting of p53 and c-MYC selectively eliminates leukaemic stem cells

### Description
BaF3 were transfected with Jak2 V617F, Jak2 K539L or Mpl W515L, shotgun proteomic analysis with iTRAQ was performed

### Sample Protocol
Cytoplasmic enrichment, tryptic digestion, offline basic reverse phase, online acidic reverse phase separation, mass spectrometry data was performed using a QStar Elite.

### Data Protocol
Proteinpilot analysis of data was performed including FDR analysis using reversed peptide sequences

### Publication Abstract
Chronic myeloid leukaemia (CML) arises after transformation of a haemopoietic stem cell (HSC) by the protein-tyrosine kinase BCR-ABL. Direct inhibition of BCR-ABL kinase has revolutionized disease management, but fails to eradicate leukaemic stem cells (LSCs), which maintain CML. LSCs are independent of BCR-ABL for survival, providing a rationale for identifying and targeting kinase-independent pathways. Here we show--using proteomics, transcriptomics and network analyses--that in human LSCs, aberrantly expressed proteins, in both imatinib-responder and non-responder patients, are modulated in concert with p53 (also known as TP53) and c-MYC regulation. Perturbation of both p53 and c-MYC, and not BCR-ABL itself, leads to synergistic cell kill, differentiation, and near elimination of transplantable human LSCs in mice, while sparing normal HSCs. This unbiased systems approach targeting connected nodes exemplifies a novel precision medicine strategy providing evidence that LSCs can be eradicated.

### Keywords
Baf3 cell line transfected with a variety oncogenic linked mutations

### Affiliations
Thermo Fisher Scientific
Faculty of medical and human sciences, institute cancer studies

### Submitter
Andrew Williamson

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Tony Whetton
Faculty of medical and human sciences, institute cancer studies


