### Accession
PXD017501

### Title
Proteomics of of SLC25A1 and SLC25A4 null cells using TMT

### Description
Faundez TMT 12 samples - 2 batches with 24 fractions each

### Sample Protocol
TMT labeling was performed according to the manufacturer's protocol. Briefly, the reagents were allowed to equilibrate to room temperature. Dried peptide samples (70 μg each) were resuspended in 100 μl of 100 mm TEAB buffer (supplied with the kit). Anhydrous acetonitrile (41 μl) was added to each labeling reagent tube and the peptide solutions were transferred into their respective channel tubes. The reaction was incubated for 1 h and quenched for 15 min afterward with 8 μl of 5% hydroxylamine. All samples were combined and dried down. Peptides were resuspended in 100 μl of 90% acetonitrile and 0.01% acetic acid. The entire sample was loaded onto an high-pH fractionation HPLC system and 96 fractions were collected over a time of 40 min. The fractions were combined into 24 and dried down. Dried peptide fractions were resuspended in 30 μl of peptide loading buffer (0.1% formic acid, 0.03% trifluoroacetic acid, 1% acetonitrile).

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched against a Uniprot curated human database with Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (ThermoFisher Scientific). Methionine oxidation (+15.9949 Da), asparagine, and glutamine deamidation (+0.9840 Da) and protein N-terminal acetylation (+42.0106 Da) were variable modifications (up to 3 allowed per peptide); static modifications included cysteine carbamidomethyl (+57.0215 Da), peptide n terminus TMT (+229.16293 Da), and lysine TMT (+229.16293 Da). Only fully tryptic peptides were considered with up to two miscleavages in the database search. A precursor mass tolerance of ±20 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.6 Da were applied. Spectra matches were filtered by Percolator to a peptide-spectrum matches false discovery rate of <1%. Only razor and unique peptides were used for abundance calculations. Ratio of sample over the GIS of normalized channel abundances were used for comparison across all samples.

### Publication Abstract
Mitochondria influence cellular function through both cell-autonomous and non-cell autonomous mechanisms, such as production of paracrine and endocrine factors. Here, we demonstrate that mitochondrial regulation of the secretome is more extensive than previously appreciated, as both genetic and pharmacological disruption of the electron transport chain caused upregulation of the Alzheimer's disease risk factor apolipoprotein E (APOE) and other secretome components. Indirect disruption of the electron transport chain by gene editing of SLC25A mitochondrial membrane transporters as well as direct genetic and pharmacological disruption of either complexes I, III, or the copper-containing complex IV of the electron transport chain elicited upregulation of APOE transcript, protein, and secretion, up to 49-fold. These APOE phenotypes were robustly expressed in diverse cell types and iPSC-derived human astrocytes as part of an inflammatory gene expression program. Moreover, age- and genotype-dependent decline in brain levels of respiratory complex I preceded an increase in APOE in the 5xFAD mouse model. We propose that mitochondria act as novel upstream regulators of APOE-dependent cellular processes in health and disease.

### Keywords
Human tmt

### Affiliations
Cell Biology - Emory University
Center of Neurodegenerative Diseases

### Submitter
Duc Duong

### Lab Head
Dr Victor Faundez
Cell Biology - Emory University


