### Accession
PXD022712

### Title
Integrative analysis of two russeted and non-russeted closely related apple varieties during fruit development provides new insights about the cuticle/suberin interplay

### Description
Apple russeting is characterized by the deposition of suberin in the inner part of the epidermal cell walls. It develops at the fruit surface when the integrity of the cuticle has been lost.  Cutin and wax composition (including triterpene profile) is also affected in russeted skin. In the present work, the fruit growth kinetic of two closely related apple varieties, ‘Canada Gris’ and ‘Canada Blanc’, which display russeted and waxy skin phenotypes, respectively, was investigated. We used a combination of transcriptomic, proteomic, and metabolomic approaches to better understand the molecular events associated with cuticle failure and suberization. A particular interest was also given to the triterpene specifically found in russeted skins and their synthesis. Our results indicate that the decreased synthesis of cutin and wax, observed in russeted skin throughout fruit development, is a determining factor for russeting. We identified a lipid transfer protein (LTP-3) as a potential key player in cuticle formation. Metabolomics highlighted a large diversity of triterpene-hydroxycinnamates in russeted tissues whose accumulation was highly correlated with suberin-related genes, including some enzymes belonging to the BAHD (HXXXD-motif) acyltransferase family. This study shed light for the first time on the crosstalk between triterpene and suberin pathways.

### Sample Protocol
Total soluble proteins were extracted by trichloroacetic acid (TCA)/acetone precipitation method as described in Renaut et al. (2004). Protein concentration determined, 10 μg total proteins were loaded in a 1D gel. Proteins were reduced, alkylated and de-stained separately then digested by trypsin enzyme. The extracted peptides were desalted and separated according the method described in Chabi et al (2017), injected into NanoLCTM 2D system coupled to the TripleTOF 5600+ MS with a Nanospray III source. The peptides were loaded and separated using a C18 reverse phase column using a linear binary gradient. The 20 most intense product ion scans were fragmented in the high sensitivity mode using the automatically adjusted system of rolling collision energy voltage. Each sample was processed in three technical replicates.

### Data Protocol
CID spectra were processed by Mascot (version 2.4.2, Matrix Science Ltd, London, UK) using Mascot Daemon (version 2.4.2, Matrix Science) by searching against the Malus x domestica transcriptome V1.0. The searches were performed with the following parameters: enzyme: trypsin, 2 missed cleavages, mass accuracy precursor: 20 ppm, mass accuracy fragments: 0.3 Da, fixed modifications: carbamidomethyl (C), dynamic modifications: Oxidation (M), Acetyl (protein N-term). On the protein family report of Mascot results, supplemental filters were applied: peptide confidence (p-value < 0.05), a minimum of five spectra per peptide and a minimum of two or more significant peptides per protein. Only features, displaying spectra in at least two replicates were retained.  The proteins accepted were selected from the following filters: an average number of the spectral counts of a protein across technical repeats within a biological sample was done by Mascot Daemon; a protein's abundance was considered significantly different if its p-value was <0.05. Abundance Relative abundance was calculated using NSAF. Proteins displaying less than 50% increase or decrease when comparing abundance between CG and CB were excluded from the dataset. In order to highlight the most altered functional categories, a pie chart was built from results obtained using Mapman (Thimm et al., 2004). Proteins were classified in the different bins according to the mapping file resulting from the Malus x domestica genome draft V1.0.

### Publication Abstract
Apple russeting develops on the fruit surface when skin integrity has been lost. It induces a modification of fruit wax composition, including its triterpene profile. In the present work, we studied two closely related apple varieties, 'Reinette grise du Canada' and 'Reinette blanche du Canada', which display russeted and non-russeted skin phenotypes, respectively, during fruit development. To better understand the molecular events associated with russeting and the differential triterpene composition, metabolomics data were generated using liquid chromatography coupled to high-resolution mass spectrometry (LC-HRMS) and combined with proteomic and transcriptomic data. Our results indicated lower expression of genes linked to cuticle biosynthesis (cutin and wax) in russet apple throughout fruit development, along with an alteration of the specialized metabolism pathways, including triterpene and phenylpropanoid. We identified a lipid transfer protein (LTP3) as a novel player in cuticle formation, possibly involved in the transport of both cutin and wax components in apple skin. Metabolomic data highlighted for the first time a large diversity of triterpene-hydroxycinnamates in russeted tissues, accumulation of which was highly correlated with suberin-related genes, including some enzymes belonging to the BAHD (HXXXD-motif) acyltransferase family. Overall, this study increases our understanding about the crosstalk between triterpene and suberin pathways.

### Keywords
Integrative analysis, Metabolomics, Conjugated triterpene, Suberin, Apple skin., Lc-ms/ms, : russeting

### Affiliations
LIST-ERIN-ERTP-Green Tech platform Belvaux, LUXEMBOURG
LIST-ERIN-ERTP-BEAP-HAU platform

### Submitter
Céline LECLERCQ

### Lab Head
Dr Céline LECLERCQ
LIST-ERIN-ERTP-Green Tech platform Belvaux, LUXEMBOURG


