### Accession
PXD021864

### Title
AP-MS analysis of human FUBIeS30/FAU WT and non-cleavable G73,4A and G74V mutants

### Description
To discover candidate FUBIeS30 proteases, we performed affinity purification from human cell lysates expressing tandem Strep II-hemagglutinin (StHA)-tagged WT or mutant (G73,74A or G74V) FUBIeS30-StHA constructs. Subsequent analysis of the co-purified proteins by mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) identified differentially interacting factors. We found that two deubiquitinases, USP10 and USP36, were enriched on the non-cleavable mutants compared to WT and subsequently confirmed that USP36 is involved in FUBIeS30 processing in vivo.

### Sample Protocol
Before StrepTactin affinity purification was performed as described previously (Wyler et al., 2011), expression of the bait protein was induced with tetracycline (WT: 0.5 µg/ml; AA, GV: 25 ng/ml) in HEK293 Flp-In T-REx (Invitrogen) cell lines for 24 h. After harvesting of the cells by centrifugation (900 g, 5 min, 4°C), cells were lysed in lysis buffer containing 10 mM Tris pH 7.5, 100 mM KCl, 2 mM MgCl2, 1 mM DTT, 0.5% NP-40, 2 µM avidin, and protease and phosphatase inhibitors using a dounce homogenizer. Lysates were cleared by centrifugation (4500 g, 12 min, 4°C) before incubation with preequilibrated StrepTactin sepharose beads (IBA, cat#2-1201-025) for 30 min at 4°C while rotating. Beads were then washed six times with 10 mM Tris pH 7.5, 100 mM KCl, 2 mM MgCl2, containing phosphatase inhibitors and eluted by incubation in the same buffer supplemented with 2 mM biotin for 4 min on ice. Eluted proteins were then precipitated with trichloroacetic acid, denatured with 6 M urea, reduced with 12 mM DTT for 30 min at 32°C, and alkylated with 40 mM iodoacetamide for 45 min at 25°C in the dark. The sample was diluted 1:7 with 0.1 M NH4HCO3 before overnight digestion of proteins with trypsin (Promega, cat#V5113) at 37°C. Digestion was stopped by the addition of 2% (v/v) formic acid before peptides were cleaned up using Pierce C18 spin columns (Thermo Fisher Scientific, cat#89870) according to the manufacturer’s protocol.

### Data Protocol
LC-MSMS data was acquired on a Thermo Q Exactive Plus in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. The raw files were converted to mzXML with msconvert and searched with Comet against a SwissProt-only human database complemented with the sequences of the WT or mutant FUBIeS30-StHA proteins. The FDR was calculated by peptideProphet. The protein spectral counts were submitted to SAINT to yield the list of significant interactors for each dataset.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dda, Dub, Ap-ms, Fau, Fubies30

### Affiliations
Department of Biology, Institute of Biochemistry, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
ETH Zurich

### Submitter
Ludovic Gillet

### Lab Head
Dr Ulrike Kutay
Department of Biology, Institute of Biochemistry, ETH Zurich, Switzerland


