### Accession
PXD028958

### Title
Unravelling the initial triggers of Botrytis cinerea infections. Botrytis cinerea surfactome

### Description
Botrytis cinerea, the causal agent of the gray mold, is one of the most important phytopathogenic fungi due to its ability to affect more than 1400 cultivable vegetal species. Signal transduction cascades mediate the dialogue between the environment, the plant and the fungus, which is essential in the infection process of B. cinerea. In this context, surface proteins (surfactome) have an important role as the first receptors in the signaling cascades, connecting the fungus response to the environment changes. Moreover, the relevant role of surfactome in infection process of pathogenic microorganism has been described, but nothing has been reported in B. cinerea. Therefore, in order to unravel new proteins and to complete the whole view of signal transduction cascades during infection of B. cinerea, surfactome of this fungus has been analyzed under two plant-based elicitors previously validated by the research group: glucose (GLU) as a constitutive stage and deproteinized tomato cell wall (TCW) as a virulence inductor. To identify the B. cinerea surfactome, the trypsin shaving of intact living cells approach has been optimized. Subsequently, all the peptide mixture obtained in surfactome isolation was analyzed using LC-MS/MS to identify their components. Our results shows that none of the used protocols disturbs the hyphae integrity, obtaining the best when PBS buffer plus 30% sucrose was used.   In conclusion, in this work it has been carried out for the first time the optimization of a surface protein extraction protocol in Botrytis cinerea giving rise to a new subproteome; the surfactome. Integration of surfactome data inside the previous proteomics data collected by the research group has improved the complete view of signal transduction cascades during infection of B. cinerea, helping to unravel key points in the regulation of this process and therefore to further develop new and better discriminatory fungicides from a molecular approach.

### Sample Protocol
Liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry analysis (LC-ESI-MS/MS) Digested samples were cleaned-up/desalted using Stage-Tips with Empore 3M C18 disks (Sigma-Aldrich) [1]. After desalting, peptide concentration was carried out by Qubit™ Fluorometric Quantitation (Thermo Fisher Scientific). A 500 ng aliquot of each digested sample was subjected to 1D-nano LC ESI-MS/MS (Liquid Chromatography Electrospray Ionization Tandem Mass Spectrometric) analysis using an Ultimate 3000 nano HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled online to a Orbitrap Exploris 240 equipped with FAIMS  Pro ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were eluted onto a 50 cm × 75 μm Easy‐spray PepMap C18 analytical column at 45°C and were separated at a flow rate of 300 nL/min using a 60 min gradient ranging from 2 % to 95 % mobile phase B (mobile phase A: 0.1% formic acid (FA); mobile phase B: 100 % acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1 % FA). The loading solvent was 2 % ACN) in 0.1 % FA and injection volume was 5 µl.  Data acquisition was performed using a data-dependent top-20 method, in full scan positive mode, scanning 350 to 1200 m/z. Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 200, with Normalized Automatic Gain Control (AGC) target (%) of 300 and a maximum injection time (IT) of 40 ms. The top 20 most intense ions from each MS1 scan were selected and fragmented via Higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD). Resolution for HCD spectra was set to 45,000 at m/z 200, with AGC target of 200 and maximum ion injection time of 120 ms. Isolation of precursors was performed with a window of 1 m/z, exclusion duration (s) of 45 and the HCD collision energy was 32. Precursor ions with single, unassigned, or six and higher charge states from fragmentation selection were excluded.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics data analysis and sequence search Raw instrument files were processed using Proteome Discoverer (PD) version 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). MS2 spectra were searched using Mascot Server v2.7.0 (Matrix Science, London, UK) and a target/decoy database built from sequences in the Botrytis cinerea proteome at Uniprot Knowledgebase (20190307) respectively. All searches were configured with dynamic modifications for pyrrolidone from Q (-17.027 Da) and oxidation of methionine residues (+15.9949 Da) and static modification as carbamidomethyl (+57.021 Da) on cysteine, monoisotopic masses, and trypsin cleavage (max 2 missed cleavages). The peptide precursor mass tolerance was 10 ppm, and MS/MS tolerance was 0.02 Da. The false discovery rate (FDR) for proteins, peptides, and peptide spectral matches (PSMs) peptides were kept at 1%.  [1] Ciordia S, Alvarez-Sola G, Rullán M, Urman JM, Ávila MA, Corrales FJ. Digging deeper into bile proteome. J Proteomics. 2021 Jan 6;230:103984. doi: 10.1016/j.jprot.2020.103984.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Botrytis cinerea</i> is a critically important phytopathogenic fungus, causing devastating crop losses; signal transduction cascades mediate the "dialogue" among the fungus, plant, and environment. Surface proteins play important roles as front-line receptors. We report the first description of the surfactome of a filamentous fungus. To obtain a complete view of these cascades during infection of <i>B. cinerea</i>, its surfactome has been described by optimization of the "shaving" process and LC-MS/MS at two different infection stages, and with both rapid and late responses to environmental changes. The best results were obtained using PBS buffer in the "shaving" protocol. The surfactome obtained comprises 1010 identified proteins. These have been categorized by gene ontology and protein-protein interactions to reveal new potential pathogenicity/virulence factors. From these data, the percentage of total proteins predicted for the genome of the fungus represented by proteins identified in this and other proteomics studies is calculated at 54%, a big increase over the previous 12%. The new data may be crucial for understanding better its biological activity and pathogenicity. Given its extensive exposure to plants and environmental conditions, the surfactome presents innumerable opportunities for interactions between the fungus and external elements, which should offer the best targets for fungicide development.

### Keywords
Virulence factor and pathogenicity factor, Shaving, Botrytis cinerea, Proteome, Surfactome

### Affiliations
Microbiology Laboratory, Institute of Viticulture and Agri-food Research (IVAGRO), University of Cádiz, Pol. Río San Pedro s/n, Puerto Real, Cádiz, Spain
Spanish National Center for Biotechnology

### Submitter
Sergio Ciordia

### Lab Head
Dr Francisco Javier Fernández Acero
Microbiology Laboratory, Institute of Viticulture and Agri-food Research (IVAGRO), University of Cádiz, Pol. Río San Pedro s/n, Puerto Real, Cádiz, Spain


