### Accession
PXD018163

### Title
Cell wall and secretome of Candida albicans WT, hir1delta/delta strain, and HIR1 complemented mutant

### Description
Cell wall and secretome of Candida albicans WT, hir1delta/delta strain, and HIR1 complemented mutant using SWATH MS.

### Sample Protocol
Cell wall sample preparation Yeast were grown in 100 mL SC medium in an orbital shaker at 30 °C and 150-200 rpm, harvested at mid-log phase (OD600nm ~ 1.2) by centrifugation, and frozen at -20 °C. Proteins covalently linked to the polysaccharide cell wall were prepared following previously published protocols [1, 2] with the following minor modifications in the cell lysis procedure. Briefly, for efficient cell lysis, frozen pellets were resuspended in 200l ice-cold Buffer A (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5-8.0, 1X PICs (Roche), 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM benzamidine) and thawed at 37 °C and immediately frozen in ethanol and dry ice three consecutive times before bead beating for 10 cycles (cycles of 1 minute bead beating (half-fast speed), alternating with 2 minutes rest at 4 °C). Proteins were denatured, reduced, and alkylated (with acrylamide), and digested with trypsin. Peptides were desalted using C18 ZipTips (Millipore) prior to analysis by LC-ESI-MS/MS.   Secretome sample preparation  Strains were grown in 50 mL SC medium in an orbital shaker at 30 °C and 150-200 rpm for 3 days, and harvested by centrifugation. The top 35 ml of supernatant was transferred to a new tube, 1 mM benzamidine and 1 mM EDTA were added as protease inhibitors, and the supernatants were re-centrifuged. The top 25 ml of supernatant were transferred to 3 kDa Amicon columns (Amicon Ultra-15 Centrifugal Filter Unit, UFC 900324) and concentrated following manufacturer recommendations. 100 l of the concentrated sample were precipitated overnight in 4 volumes of methanol:acetone in a LoBind Eppendorf tube, as previously described [3, 4]. The supernatant was eliminated after high speed centrifugation, and air-dried proteins were resuspended in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer supplemented with 10 mM DTT and 1 g of trypsin. After an overnight incubation at 37 °C, peptides were desalted using C18 ZipTips (Millipore) and analysed by LC-ESI-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification was performed using ProteinPilot 5.0.1 (SCIEX), searching a FASTA file containing the Candida albicans proteome (downloaded from UniProt (http://uniprot.org) on 23 March 2020; Proteome ID UP000000559, with 6035 proteins) merged with a common contaminants database, using standard settings: sample type, identification; cysteine alkylation, acrylamide; instrument, TripleTof 5600; species: none selected; ID focus, biological modifications; enzyme, trypsin; Search effort, thorough ID. False discovery rate analysis using ProteinPilot was performed on all searches with limits of 99% identification confidence and 1% local false discovery rate. The ProteinPilot search results were used as ion libraries for SWATH analyses, using as input the number of proteins reported from ProteinPilot as identified with 1% global FDR (253 for cell wall and 290 for secretome). Peptide abundance was measured with Peakview v2.2 (SCIEX) using the following settings: shared peptides imported; 6 transitions/peptide; 99% peptide confidence threshold; 1% FDR; 6 min XIC extraction window; and 75 ppm XIC width. The output from Peakview was re-processed using an in-house developed script to eliminate the value of peptides measured with a FDR > 0.01, as previously described, and analysed using MSStats in R.

### Publication Abstract
Adaptation to changing environments and immune evasion is pivotal for fitness of pathogens. Yet, the underlying mechanisms remain largely unknown. Adaptation is governed by dynamic transcriptional re-programming, which is tightly connected to chromatin architecture. Here, we report a pivotal role for the HIR histone chaperone complex in modulating virulence of the human fungal pathogen Candida albicans. Genetic ablation of HIR function alters chromatin accessibility linked to aberrant transcriptional responses to protein as nitrogen source. This accelerates metabolic adaptation and increases the release of extracellular proteases, which enables scavenging of alternative nitrogen sources. Furthermore, HIR controls fungal virulence, as HIR1 deletion leads to differential recognition by immune cells and hypervirulence in a mouse model of systemic infection. This work provides mechanistic insights into chromatin-coupled regulatory mechanisms that fine-tune pathogen gene expression and virulence. Furthermore, the data point toward the requirement of refined screening approaches to exploit chromatin modifications as antifungal strategies.

### Keywords
Candida albicans, Swath, Secretome, Cell wall

### Affiliations
The University of Queensland
Centre for Biopharmaceutical Innovation The Australian Institute for Bioengineering and Nanotechnology The University of Queensland

### Submitter
Lucia Zacchi

### Lab Head
Dr Lucia Florencia Zacchi
Centre for Biopharmaceutical Innovation The Australian Institute for Bioengineering and Nanotechnology The University of Queensland


