### Accession
PXD035303

### Title
Global Extracellular Vesicle Proteome Changes Across Time Upon Intraarticular Treatment of Mesenchymal Stromal Cells in an In Vivo model of Equine Osteoarthritis

### Description
Equine Osteoarthritis (OA) is a heterogeneous, degenerative disease of the musculoskeletal system with multifactorial causation, characterised by joint metabolic imbalance. Mesenchymal stromal cell therapy (MSC) is a form of regenerative medicine that utilises MSC properties to repair damaged tissues. MSCs have been described as acting via the paracrine signalling of secreted factors. Despite its wide use in veterinary clinical practices, the exact mechanism of action of MSCs has not been fully characterised.  Here, we have characterised synovial fluid extracellular vesicles (EVs) from control, osteoarthritic and MSC treated animals in order to gain insights into this mechanism. An in vivo, carpal osteochondral fragment model of equine OA was used for this study. Six horses underwent surgical intervention. All horses enrolled in the study were female trotter horses between the ages of 4 and 7. The contralateral limb of each horse served as a sham control. 69 synovial fluid samples were collected via aseptic arthrocentesis at day 0, 18, 21, 28, 35, and 70. Allogenic mesenchymal stromal cell therapy from male donors was injected into the OA afflicted joint after day 18. Synovial fluid (200µl) was Hyalaronidase treated (1µg/ml) and EVs were isolated using differential ultracentrifugation. EVs were characterised in collaboration with Nanoview Biosciences, whereby the Exoview human tetraspanin assay was used. EV concentration, surface marker identification, fluorescent microscopy and tetraspanin colocalization analysis was performed using pooled samples reflecting experimental groups - control, OA and OA including MSCs - across time.

### Sample Protocol
EV pellets were suspended in 200µl of urea lysis buffer (6M urea, 1M ammonium bicarbonate and 0.5% sodium deoxycholate). A pool of the samples (~100µg) was reduced, alkylated and digested with 4µg trypsin/LysC for 3h at 37°C, the concentration of urea was reduced to 1M with water, and incubation was continued overnight at 37°C. The peptides were then subjected to strong cation exchange chromatography on a Polysulfoethyl A column (PolyLC) and 40 x 2ml fractions were collected. The 20 fractions containing peptides were desalted using a C18 High-Recovery reversed phase cartridge (Agilent) and were used to generate a spectral library. An equal quantity of each of the 20 fractions (as determined by the mAU peak area during desalting) was loaded onto a trap column (nanoACQUITY UPLC Symmetry C18 Trap Column (Waters)) installed on an Eksigent NanoLC 415 (Sciex) and washed for 10 minutes with 2% ACN/0.1% formic acid. The peptides were then separated on a bioZEN 2.6 µm Peptide XB-C18 (FS) nano column (250 mm x 75 µm, Phenomenex) using a gradient from 2−50% ACN/0.1% formic acid (v/v) over 120 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Data-dependent acquisition was performed on a Triple TOF 6600 (Sciex) in positive ion mode using 25 MS/MS per cycle (2.8s cycle time), a precursor mass range of 400-1500 and a product ion mass range of 100-1650, a mass tolerance of 50ppm and dynamic exclusion for 20 seconds.  Individual EV samples were reduced, iodoacetylated and bound to a 1:1 mixture of hydrophilic and hydrophobic magnetic carboxylate SpeedBeads (Cytiva) (12 µL beads in total) in the presence of 50% ethanol for 1h at 24oC and 1000rpm. The samples were digested with 2.4µg trypsin/LysC in 100mM ammonium bicarbonate overnight at 37°C and 1000rpm. Aliquots of 5 L containing equal quantities of peptide (as determined by the mAU peak area during desalting) were delivered into a TripleTOF 6600 as described above and the same 2h gradient was applied. SWATH acquisitions were performed using 100 windows of variable effective isolation width to cover a precursor m/z range of 400-1500 and a product ion m/z range of 100-1650. Scan times were 50ms for TOF-MS and 32.8ms for each SWATH window, giving a total cycle time of 3.4 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Data from the spectral library were searched using ProteinPilot 5.0 (SCIEX) and the Paragon algorithm (SCIEX) against the horse proteome (UniProt Equus cabullus reference proteome, 9796, May 2021, 20,865 entries). Carbamidomethyl was set as a fixed modification of cysteine residues and biological modifications were allowed. The data were also searched against a reversed decoy database and proteins lying within a 1% (2225 proteins) or 5% (2456 proteins) global false discovery rate (FDR) were included in the spectral library. For retention time alignment of SWATH data, the library was regenerated with no biological modifications allowed. Retention time alignment and peptide/protein quantification were performed by Data-Independent Acquisition by Neural Networks (DIA-NN) 1.8, using the same reference horse proteome as above to reannotate the library, a precursor FDR of 1% and with match between runs, unrelated runs and retention time-dependent cross-run normalisation selected. Missing values were imputed as follows: for the 34 control samples, up to 3 missing values were imputed by inserting the mean of the control values for that particular protein; for the 23 OA+MSC  samples, up to 3 missing values were imputed by inserting the mean of the OA+MSC values for that particular protein; finally, for the 12 OA samples, up to 2 missing values were imputed by inserting the mean of the OA values for that particular protein. This resulted in the quantification of 466 proteins in the controls, 551 proteins in the OA+MSC and 549 proteins in the OA samples. Once any missing values from all of these combined had been removed, there were 442 proteins remaining. Two-way ANOVA was performed on uncorrected data with horse and sample time as variables using Partek Genomics Suite 7.18 (Partek Inc.).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Synovial fluid, Horse, Extracellular vesicles, Osteoarthritis

### Affiliations
University of Liverpool
CDSS Bioanalytical Facility, Dept Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Institute of Systems, Molecular and Integrative Biology, University of Liverpool

### Submitter
Rosalind Jenkins

### Lab Head
Dr Roz Jenkins
CDSS Bioanalytical Facility, Dept Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Institute of Systems, Molecular and Integrative Biology, University of Liverpool


