### Accession
PXD008110

### Title
Efficiency of the purification protocols on complex matrices: biofilm, mouse liver and soil

### Description
In gel-free experimental workflows, protein purification often starts with a precipitation stage using trichloroacetic acid (TCA). In presence of TCA, proteins precipitate in a stable molten globule state making the pellet difficultto solubilize in aqueous buffer for proteolytic digestion and MS analysis. In this context, the objective of this work was to study the suitability of a novel agent, ethanol/HCl, for the washing of TCA-precipitated proteins. This method optimized the recovery of proteins in aqueous buffer (50 to 96 %) while current organic solvents led to losses of material (up to 75 % of loss). Following a mechanistic study, the effect of ethanol/HCl on the conformation of TCA-precipitated proteins was investigated. It was shown that the reagent triggered the unfolding of TCA-stabilized molten globule into a reversible intermediate, characterized by a specific Raman signature, which favored protein subsequent resolubilization. Finally, the efficiency of ethanol/HCl for the washing of TCA-precipitated proteins extracted from biofilm, soil or mouse liver was demonstrated. Being versatile and simple, it could be of great interest to include an ethanol/HCl wash-step in mass spectrometry-based proteomics workflows to produce high-quality protein extracts.

### Sample Protocol
Three published protocols, Chourey et al. (Chourey et al., 2010), Huang et al. (Huang et al., 2014) and Song et al. (Song et al., 2016), were applied to extract and purify proteins from soil, biofilm and mouse liver, respectively. These procedures were selected because they were compatible with gel-free MS-based analysis. Proteins extraction was performed on 500 mg of soil, 10 mg of biofilm and 15 mg of mouse liver as starting material. The crude extracts wereseparated into two equal fractions. Each was subjected to purification following either the designed approach or the protocol detailed in the published study. The final protein samples were dissolved in 50 mM of ammonium bicarbonatecontaining 10 mM of Tris (pH 8.5-8.6), diluted in a ratio of 1:3 using the same buffer and subjected to trypsin digestion overnight (addition of 50 µL of a 0.1 µg.µL-1 trypsin solution to be in large excess). LC-HRMS analyses were performed with two quaternary Accela LC pumps (600 and 1250) working together and interfaced with a Q-Exactive Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer equipped of an ESI source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The Accela 600 pump provided the loading of the sample on the trap unit, while the 1250 pump controlled the backflush and analytical separation of analytes. Before injection, samples were stored at 4 °C using a Stack cooler CW (CTC Analytics AG, Zwingen, Switzerland). MS functions and HPLC solvent gradients were controlled by the Xcalibur data system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) (Fig. 2). 2.6.2. Dual trap unit Two trapping columns were placed in series: a Hypersil Gold aQ (20 x 2.1 mm, 12 µm, 175 Å; Thermo Fisher Scientific) and a Hypercarb (20 x 2.1 mm, 7 µm, 250 Å; Thermo Fisher Scientific). They were connected to the analytical column (Hypersil Gold Q C18 (50 x 2.1 mm ID, 1.9 µm, 175 Å; Thermo Fisher Scientific) via a Cheminert 6-port switching valve (VICI AG International, Schenkon, Switzerland).  Before injection, the analytical unit was decoupled. The PAL HTC auto sampler injected 1000 µL of sample in the preparative loop. During this time, the trap columns were conditioned with water - 0.1 % formic acid, and the analytical unit equilibrated at the initial elution conditions. The 6-port preconcentration valve was then switched and compounds transferred to the dual trap at 500 µL.min-1 for 2 min. Once the loading completed, analytes were backflushed for 2 min to the analytical unit at 500 µL.min-1. During this time, trap and analytical columns were connected in series and eluted. The dual trap was further decoupled and reconditioned for 4 min with water - 0.1 % formic acid at 500 μL.min-1. The mobile phase was carried exclusively to the analytical column until the end of the elution gradient. 2.6.3. Analytical LC unit The sample was loaded by an Accela quaternary 1250 pump onto the analytical column (i.e. Hypersil Gold Q C18; Thermo Fisher Scientific), kept at 40 °C using a column oven 300 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The mobile phase consisted of acetonitrile-0.1 % formic acid (buffer A) and water-0.1 % formic acid (buffer B). Elution was performed at a constant flow rate of 500 µL.min-1. It started with 5 % buffer A and 95 % buffer B during 1 min and reached 65 % buffer A and 35 % buffer B in 12 min. A second linear gradient was employed to attain 90 % buffer A and 10 % buffer B in 1 min. The column was finally reconditioned at the initial conditions (5 % buffer A and 95 % buffer B) for 2 min. 2.6.4. High Resolution Mass Spectrometry The analysis was carried out on a Q-Exactive hybrid mass spectrometer. Mass detection was acquired in positive ion mode. The settings of the ESI source were as follows: electrospray voltage at 4.0 kV, capillary and heater temperatures at 275 °C and 300 °C, respectively. The sheath, sweep and auxiliary gas (nitrogen) flow rates were set at 35, 10 and 20 (arbitrary units). Multiplexed MS analysis was performed in full scan followed by data dependent MS2 scans. Precursor ions selected for MS2 were excluded for subsequent MS2 scans for 30 seconds. The resolution for the full scan mode was set as 70,000 FWHM and scan ranges were set as 200 - 3000 m/z. The AGC target at 1e6 with a maximum injection time (IT) of 200 ms. The parameters of data-dependent MS2 were as follows: resolution, 35,000 FWHM; msx count, 2; loop count, 2; isolation window, 2 m/z; collision energy, 35; AGC target, 5e4; max IT, 50 ms; under fill ratio, 1%; intensity threshold 1.0e4, exclude isotopes “on” and dynamic exclusion 10 s.

### Data Protocol
A relative quantification of the top 4 and top 5 identified proteins in biofilm and liver sample matrices was then performed. It was based on MS/MS chromatograms (Egertson et al., 2015). It was carried out using Skyline software (version 3.7.0.10940) by comparing the sum of extracted peak areas of the fragment ions to generate peptide areas (MacLean et al., 2010). Exported areas of fragment ions were normalized as percentage of total for each peptide species across all replicates (Matafora et al., 2017).  MS/MS spectra were searched against Swiss-Prot databases, using the Mascot Distiller Search engine (v. 2.6.0). The following settings for Mascot search program were used:  allow up to two missed cleavages for tryptic digestion, carbamidomethyl cysteine set for fixed modifications, mass tolerance of 5 ppm for precursor ions and 0.3 Da for fragment ions. Proteins having Mascot ion scores greater than 67 were considered as significant (Perkins et al., 1999). Their cellular location was obtained from Swiss-Prot databases. Protein grand average of hydropathicity (GRAVY) scores were obtained through www.gravycalculator.de/.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse liver, Biofilm, Soil, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Institut de Chimie des Milieux et des Matériaux de Poitiers (IC2MP), Université de Poitiers, CNRS, Equipe Eaux,Biomarqueurs, Contaminants Organiques, Milieux, (E-BiCOM), 4 rue Michel Brunet, TSA 51106, F-86073 Poitiers, France.
University of Poitiers

### Submitter
Balkis EDDHIF

### Lab Head
Dr Pauline Poinot
Institut de Chimie des Milieux et des Matériaux de Poitiers (IC2MP), Université de Poitiers, CNRS, Equipe Eaux,Biomarqueurs, Contaminants Organiques, Milieux, (E-BiCOM), 4 rue Michel Brunet, TSA 51106, F-86073 Poitiers, France.


