### Accession
PXD029076

### Title
Antioxidant, Immunomodulatory and Potential Anticancer Capacity of Polysaccharides (Glucans) from Euglena gracilis G.A. Klebs

### Description
The present study was carried out to determine the bioactivity of polysaccharides extracted from Euglena gracilis (EgPs). These were characterized by FT-IR and GC-MS. Cytotoxicity analyses (MTT) were performed on healthy human gingival fibroblast cell lines (HGF-1), obtaining an IC50 of 228.66 µg mL-1, and cell lines with anticancer activity for colon cancer (HCT-116), breast cancer (MCF-7), human leukemia (U-937, HL-60) and lung cancer (NCl-H460), showing that EgPs have anticancer activity, mainly in HTC-116 cells (IC50 = 26.1 µg mL-1). The immunological assay determined the immunomodulatory capacity of polysaccharides for the production of proinflammatory cytokines IL-6 and TNF-α in murine macrophages (RAW 264.7) and TNF-α in human monocytes (THP-1). It was observed that the EgPs had a stimulating capacity in the synthesis of these interleukins. The antioxidant capacity of polysaccharides and their biomass were analyzed using the ABTS method (18.30 ± 0.14% and (5.40 ± 0.56%, respectively, and the DPPH method for biomass (17.79 ± 0.57%). We quantitatively profiled HGF-1 proteins by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry analysis, coupled with 2-plex tandem mass tag labelling, in normal cells. In total, 1346 proteins were identified and quantified with high confidence, of which five were considered to be overexpressed. The data is available through ProteomeXchange, under identifier PXD029076.

### Sample Protocol
Cell treatment and protein extraction: HGF-1 cells were cultured in DMEM without fetal bovine serum and treated with 320 μg mL-1 of polysaccharides from E. gracilis for 24 h, the highest concentration that did produce no cytotoxic effect on cells. After treatments, cells were washed with ice-cold phosphate-buffered saline and solubilized in 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEAB)-10% SDS containing Pierce universal nuclease (Thermo Scientific, MA). Then, cells were sonicated, centrifuged at 16,000 x g for 10 minutes at 4ºC, and the supernatant was carefully separated.  In-solution tryptic digestion and 2-plex Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) labeling: The protein concentrations of samples were determined by the bicinchoninic acid protein assay and normalized to the same concentration (1ug/μL). For reduction and alkylation, 5 μL de 200 mM Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine was added and incubated at 55˚C for 1 h. Proteins were alkylated with 60 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 30 min protected from light. Samples were subjected to acetone precipitation to purify proteins by incubating with 6 volumes of ice-cold acetone at −20˚C for 4 h. Precipitated proteins were centrifuged at 8,000 × g for 10 min at 4˚C and the pellet redissolved in 100 μL of 50 mM TEAB (pH 8.5). Proteins were digested by trypsin (Pierce trypsin protease, Thermo Scientific, MA) at a ratio of 1:50 (trypsin:protein, w/w) by incubating overnight at 37˚C. For quantitative proteomics, each digested protein sample was labeled with an appropriate TMT2plex Isobaric Label Reagent (Thermo Scientific, MA) according to the protocol supplied by the manufacturer. Briefly, the control and treated peptide samples were labeled with reagents TMT-126 and TMT-127, respectively. To quench the TMT reaction, 8 μL of 5% hydroxylamine was added to each sample and incubated for 15 min at room temperature. All the labeled peptides were combined in equal amounts and dried using a speed vacuum system.  Liquid Chromatography High-Resolution Mass Spectrometry: The peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid and analyzed using a Q-Exactive HF-X Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, MA) connected to an Easy-nLC 1200 UHPLC (Thermo Scientific, MA). Solvent A and solvent B were 0.1% formic acid in water and 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile, respectively. Peptide separation was performed using a trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 75 μm x 2 cm, C18, 3 μm, 100 A, Thermo Scientific) at a flow rate of 20 μL/min and eluted onto a 50 cm analytical column (PepMap RSLC C18, 2 μm, 100 A, 75 μm x 50 cm, Thermo Scientific) with a linear gradient of 2% to 20% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile) for 240 min, followed by a 30 min gradient from 20% to 35% solvent B and finally, to 95% solvent B for 15 min before re-equilibration to 2% solvent B at a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min. The peptides were positively ionized using a nanospray ion source and mass spectrometry was conducted in top 20 data-dependent mode with the following settings: 2.2 kV ion spray voltage; 320˚C ion capillary temperature, 350–1500 mass scan range for full MS and 350–1,500 scan range for MS/MS; MS resolution 120,000 for full MS and 30,000 for data-dependent MS/MS; collision energy 32 with high-energy collisional dissociation mode; MS/MS isolation window 0.7 m/z; and dynamic exclusion 20 s.

### Data Protocol
The peptides and proteins were identified and quantified using Proteome DiscovererTM 2.4 (Thermo Scientific, MA) platform. Sequest HT® was utilized as the search engine (Eng et al, 1994), and the Swiss-Prot part of UniProt for Homo sapiens was used as the database. The search parameters were set as follows: two missed tryptic cleavage site was allowed; full MS and MS/MS tolerances were 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively; fixed modification of carbamidomethylation on Cys, variable modification of oxidation on Met, and N-terminal acetylation on protein were specified; proteins required a minimum of two peptides. Peptide spectral matches and consecutive protein assignments were validated using the Percolator® algorithm (Käll et al., 2007) by imposing a strict cut-off of 1% false dicovery rate. To calculate the ratio of TMT-labeled proteins between treated and control cells, abundances were based on precursor intensities. Normalization was performed based on total peptide amount, and samples were scaled on all average (for every protein and peptide the average of all samples is 100). Three technical replicates of each sample were carried out. The normalized and scaled relative abundance of every protein was expressed as mean ± standard deviation of four biological replicates. Protein ratios were directly calculated from the grouped protein abundances. Abundance ratio p-values were calculated by ANOVA based on the abundance of individual proteins. Only proteins with ANOVA p < 0.05 and Log2 fold change > 0.4 were considered as significantly deregulated.

### Publication Abstract
The present study was carried out to determine the bioactivity of polysaccharides extracted from <i>Euglena gracilis</i> (EgPs). These were characterized by FT-IR and GC-MS. Cytotoxicity analyses (MTT) were performed on healthy human gingival fibroblast cell lines (HGF-1), obtaining an IC<sub>50</sub> of 228.66 &#xb5;g mL<sup>-1</sup>, and cell lines with anticancer activity for colon cancer (HCT-116), breast cancer (MCF-7), human leukemia (U-937, HL-60) and lung cancer (NCl-H460), showing that EgPs have anticancer activity, mainly in HTC-116 cells (IC<sub>50</sub> = 26.1 &#xb5;g mL<sup>-1</sup>). The immunological assay determined the immunomodulatory capacity of polysaccharides for the production of proinflammatory cytokines IL-6 and TNF-&#x3b1; in murine macrophages (RAW 264.7) and TNF-&#x3b1; in human monocytes (THP-1). It was observed that the EgPs had a stimulating capacity in the synthesis of these interleukins. The antioxidant capacity of polysaccharides and their biomass were analyzed using the ABTS method (18.30 &#xb1; 0.14% and (5.40 &#xb1; 0.56%, respectively, and the DPPH method for biomass (17.79 &#xb1; 0.57%). We quantitatively profiled HGF-1 proteins by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry analysis, coupled with 2-plex tandem mass tag labelling, in normal cells. In total, 1346 proteins were identified and quantified with high confidence, of which five were considered to be overexpressed. The data is available through ProteomeXchange, under identifier PXD029076.

### Keywords
Tmt-2plex., Euglena gracilis, Antioxidant activity, Immunomodulatory capacity, Sulfated polysaccharides, Anticancer capacity, Nutraceuticals

### Affiliations
University of Malaga, Faculty of Sciences, Department of Ecology, Malaga, Spain.
University of Malaga

### Submitter
Casimiro Cardenas

### Lab Head
Dr Roberto Abdala Diaz
University of Malaga, Faculty of Sciences, Department of Ecology, Malaga, Spain.


