### Accession
PXD003002

### Title
Morpheus Spectral Counter -  Morpheus spectral counter: a computational tool for label-free quantitative mass spectrometry using the morpheus search engine

### Description
Label-free quantitative mass spectrometry (MS) based on the Normalized Spectral Abundance Factor (NSAF) has emerged as a simple and reasonably robust method to determine the relative abundance of individual proteins within complex mixtures.  Here, we describe Morpheus Spectral Counter (MSpC) as the first computational tool that directly calculates NSAF values from output obtained from Morpheus, a fast, open-source, peptide-MS/MS matching engine compatible with high-resolution mass instruments.  NSAF has distinct advantages over other MS-based quantification methods, including a higher dynamic range as compared to isobaric tags, no requirement to align and re-extract MS1 peaks, and increased speed.  MSpC features an easy to use graphic user interface that additionally calculates both distributed and unique NSAF values to permit analyses of both protein families and isoforms/proteoforms.  MSpC determinations of protein concentration were linear over several orders of magnitude based on the analysis of several high-mass accuracy datasets either obtained from the Proteomics Identifications Repository or generated de novo with total cell extracts spiked with purified Arabidopsis 20S proteasomes.  The MSpC software was developed in C# and is open sourced under a permissive license with the code made available at http://dcgemperline.github.io/Morpheus_SpC/.

### Sample Protocol
Sample Preparation All chemicals were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich unless otherwise stated.  20S proteasomes were obtained as described previously (15) from Arabidopsis thaliana Col-0 ecotype seedlings in which the 20S proteasome subunit PAG1 (α7) was genetically replaced with a FLAG-tagged variant, with the minor modification of switching to a more stable HEPES buffer during purification.  The FLAG peptide used for elution was removed by filtering through an Amicon Ultra 4 10K filter with the elution buffer also exchanged into 8 M urea.  Total protein was quantified by the bicinchoninic acid protein assay (ThermoScientific) using bovine serum albumin as the standard.  Approximately 70 µg of proteasomes were digested overnight at 37 °C using a 1:30 trypsin/sample ratio.  Peptides were acidified to a final concentration of 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), desalted on a Waters C18 Sep-Pak containing 50 mg sorbent material, and lyophilized.  Total Escherichia coli lysates were obtained from Bio-Rad (Cat. 163-2110) with 200 µg digested as above.  Both proteasome and E. coli peptides were dissolved in 5% acetonitrile, 95% water, and 0.1% formic acid (FA).  Each MS analysis, performed in triplicate, used 5 µL volumes prepared with 3, 2, 1.5, 1, 0.5, 0.25, 0.1, or 0.05 µg of digested proteasomes mixed with 0.5 µg of digested E. coli proteins.  This mixtures reflected proteasome/E. coli ratios of ~0.091, 0.167, 0.333, 0.500, 0.667, 0.750 0.800, and 0.857, respectively.  Liquid Chromatography and High-Resolution Mass Spectrometry Samples were analyzed by ultra-high performance liquid chromatography (UPLC) (nanoAcquity, Waters Corporation) connected online to an electrospray ionization LTQ Velos Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).  Separation employed a 100 x 365 µm fused silica capillary micro-column packed with 20 cm of 1.7 µm-diameter, 130-Å pore size, C18 beads (Waters BEH), with an emitter tip pulled to approximately 1 µm using a laser puller (Sutter Instruments).  Peptides were loaded at a flow-rate of 400 nL/min for 30 min and then eluted over 120 min at a flow-rate of 300 nL/min with a 2% to 30% acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% formic acid.  Full-mass scans were performed in the FT Orbitrap with a mass range of 300-1500 m/z at a resolution of 60,000, followed by ten MS/MS high energy C-trap dissociation scans of the ten highest intensity parent ions at 42% normalized collision energy and 7,500 resolution, with a mass range starting at 100 m/z.  Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a repeat count of two over the duration of 30 sec and an exclusion window of 120 sec.

### Data Protocol
Protein identifications were determined using the Morpheus search engine (14).  Raw data was searched with the Thermo module of Morpheus revision 151 downloaded and compiled from source code available at: http://sourceforge.net/projects/morpheus-ms/ using Microsoft Visual Studio 2013 professional edition.  The following parameters were used to search all databases: unknown precursor charge states - +2, +3, +4; maximum number of MS/MS peaks = 400; assign charge states - enabled; de-isotope - disabled; generate target decoy database on the fly; protease trypsin (no proline rule); maximum missed cleavages = 2; initiator methionine behavior - variable; fixed modification of carbamidomethylation of cysteine; variable modification of oxidation of methionine; maximum variable modification isoforms per peptide = 1024; precursor mass tolerance = +/- 2.1 Da monoisotopic (recommended parameters to account for neutral loss); precursor monoisotopic peak correction - disabled; product mass tolerance = +/- 0.025 Da monoisotopic; consider modified forms as unique peptides - false; maximum threads = 8; minimize memory usage - false.    MSpC quantification of Universal Proteome Standard 2 (UPS2) protein sequences exploited the MS/MS analysis of individual USP2 proteins (Sigma-Aldrich) mixed at various concentrations with egg or embryo extracts from the Xenopus laevis available in the PRoteomics IDEntifications (PRIDE) repository (PXD000902) proteomics database (pita_v1.71.protein.name.fa).  For our analysis, both the raw MS/MS data and resulting Fasta files for the USP2 and egg and embryo proteomes were obtained from PRIDE.  The database used for searching the MS/MS data of Arabidopsis proteasomes spiked into total E. coli peptides was generated by combining Uniprot K12 E. coli reference proteome UP000000625 with a common contaminant database, and then mixing the merged dataset with Fasta sequences for all proteoforms of all known proteasome subunits and associated proteins (15) obtained from the TAIR10_pep_20101214 Fasta database available within The Arabidopsis Information Resource (TAIR) version 10.  All Fasta files are available for download in the Supporting Information.  The datasets were analyzed by MSpC with a 1% PSM false discovery rate (FDR) and a 1% protein group FDR to determine NSAF, dNSAF, and uNSAF values for each protein group.  NSAF values were calculated according to formulas 1a, 2a, and 3a from Figure 1 of Zhang, Y., et al. Anal Chem 2010

### Publication Abstract
Label-free quantitative MS based on the Normalized Spectral Abundance Factor (NSAF) has emerged as a straightforward and robust method to determine the relative abundance of individual proteins within complex mixtures. Here, we present Morpheus Spectral Counter (MSpC) as the first computational tool that directly calculates NSAF values from output obtained from Morpheus, a fast, open-source, peptide-MS/MS matching engine compatible with high-resolution accurate-mass instruments. NSAF has distinct advantages over other MS-based quantification methods, including a greater dynamic range as compared to isobaric tags, no requirement to align and re-extract MS1 peaks, and increased speed. MSpC features an easy-to-use graphic user interface that additionally calculates both distributed and unique NSAF values to permit analyses of both protein families and isoforms/proteoforms. MSpC determinations of protein concentration were linear over several orders of magnitude based on the analysis of several high-mass accuracy datasets either obtained from PRIDE or generated with total cell extracts spiked with purified Arabidopsis 20S proteasomes. The MSpC software was developed in C# and is open sourced under a permissive license with the code made available at http://dcgemperline.github.io/Morpheus_SpC/.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Morpheus, Software, Spectral count, Bioinformatics, Label-free quantification

### Affiliations
UW Madison
Department of Biology, Washington University-St. Louis St. Louis, Missouri 63130 USA

### Submitter
David C Gemperline

### Lab Head
Dr Richard D. Vierstra
Department of Biology, Washington University-St. Louis St. Louis, Missouri 63130 USA


