### Accession
PXD033575

### Title
JEV Infected BV2 Cells with Proteomics

### Description
We sought to paint a panoramic picture of JEV-infected BV2 cells. High depth TMT labelling for quantitative proteomics was used to assess JEV infection with BV2 and compared immune response profiles at 6h, 12h, and 24h post-infection (hpi).According to gene ontology and KEGG enrichment analysis, immune response-related proteins were enriched among the elevated proteins.

### Sample Protocol
1% protease inhibitor was added into four groups (BV2_6, BV2_12h, BV2_24h, and mock groups) of cells, the samples were lysed via ultrasonic lysis 5s on and then 5s off for 10 min in an ultrasonic lysis machine, centrifuged at 12000 g for 10 min. The supernatant was transferred to a new centrifugal tube, all these steps were carried out at 4 ℃. Protein concentration was determined using BCA kit. After proteolytic hydrolysis, trypsin was added at a ratio of 1:50 (protease: protein, m/m) to obtain the peptide fragment. Dithiothreitol (DTT) was added and the concentration adjusted to 5 mM and placed at 56°C for 30 minutes. Iodoacetamide (IAA) was added to give a final concentration of 11 mM and incubated in the dark at room temperature for 15 minutes

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS data were processed using Skyline (v.3.6). Peptide settings: enzyme was set at Trypsin [KR/P], Max missed cleavage set at 2. The peptide length was set at 8-25, Variable modification was set at Carbamidomethyl on Cys and oxidation on Met, and max variable modifications was set at 3. Transition settings: precursor charges were set at 2, 3, ion charges were set at 1, 2, ion types were set as b, y, p. The product ions were set as from ion 3 to last ion, the ion match tolerance was set as 0.02 Da. InterProScan software was used to annotate the function of the proteins by Gene Ontology (GO, http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/) according to the protein sequence alignment method. Then, the proteins were classified based on the three GO annotation categories: biological process, cellular component and molecular function. Furthermore, functional enrichment analysis was performed on the basis of the GO and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG, http://www.genome.jp/kaas-bin/kaas_main) pathway analyses, and the corresponding functions and pathways with p < 0.05 (two-tailed Fisher’s exact test) were considered statistically significant.

### Publication Abstract
Thousands of people die each year from Japanese encephalitis (JE) caused by the Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV), probably due to exacerbation of the inflammatory response that impairs the course of the disease. Microglia are mononuclear phagocytic cells located within the parenchyma of the central nervous system; these play a key role in the innate immune response against JEV infections. However, the involvement of toll-like receptor 2 (TLR2) in the inflammatory response during the early stages of JEV infection in BV2 cells remains. Here, we evaluated protein profiles and determined the role of TLR2 in the inflammatory response of JEV-infected BV2 cells. High-depth tandem mass tags labeling for quantitative proteomics was used to assess JEV infected-BV2 cells and compare immune response profiles at 6, 12, and 24 h post-infection (hpi). In total, 212 upregulated proteins were detected at 6 hpi, 754 at 12 h, and 191 at 24 h. According to GO and KEGG enrichment analysis, the upregulated proteins showed enrichment for proteins related to the immune response. Parallel reaction monitoring tests, western blotting, and qPCR results showed that the adaptor protein MyD88 was not activated. The expression levels of key proteins downstream of MyD88, such as IRAK1, IRAK4, and TRAF6 did not increase; however, the expression levels of PI3K-AKT did increase. By inhibiting key proteins (TLR2, PI3K, and AKT) we confirmed that JEV activated TLR2, thus resulting in a robust inflammatory response. Consequently, the TLR2-PI3K-AKT signaling axis was proven to play a critical in the early stages of the JEV infection-induced inflammatory response in microglia.

### Keywords
Jev;mouse;proteomics

### Affiliations
Jilin University
Changchun Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, and Jilin University

### Submitter
Guanyu Zhao

### Lab Head
Dr Guanyu Zhao
Changchun Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, and Jilin University


