### Accession
PXD024352

### Title
Deletion of the transcription factors Hsf1, Msn2 and Msn4 in yeast uncovers transcriptional reprogramming in response to proteotoxic stress

### Description
The heat shock response is an ancient and ubiquitous program allowing organisms to survive adverse environmental conditions. In S. cerevisiae, three transcription factors, Hsf1, Msn2 and Msn4, are thought to regulate the stress response. While Msn2/4 can be deleted, Hsf1 is essential. By combining the depletion of Hsf1 with the deletion of Msn2 and Msn4, we were able to switch off the central stress response. We show that the transcription factors Hsf1 and Msn2/4 follow different strategies and regimes: Whereas Msn2/4 are responsible for a broad metabolic response, Hsf1  triggers a direct chaperone response to stabilize and repair unfolded proteins. Exposure of cells lacking Msn2/4 and Hsf1 to thermal stress resulted in massive protein aggregation. Comparison with wildtype yeast revealed that among the proteins rescued by the stress response are many essential proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysis and soluble/insoluble fractionation were performed as described elsewhere (Mühlhofer et al., 2019, Wallace et al., 2015). The pellets (50 ml culture) were washed once in 1 ml ice-cold buffer S0 (20 mM HEPES/KOH, pH 7.4, 120 mM KCl, 2 mM EDTA; 30 s at 5,000 x g and 4 °C) and frozen in 2 ml Eppendorf tubes in liquid nitrogen. To lyse the cells, the thawed pellets were resuspended in 150 μl buffer S (20 mM HEPES/KOH, pH 7.4, 120 mM KCl, 2 mM EDTA, 0.5 mM DTT, 1:100 protease inhibitor MixFY (Serva), 1 mM PMSF). For the total protein sample (T), 75 µl of the cell suspension were taken off and 500 μl buffer T (20 mM HEPES/NaOH, pH 7.4, 150 mM KCl, 5 mM EDTA, 3 % (m/v) SDS, 2 mM DTT, 1:1,000 protease inhibitor MixFY (Serva), 10 µM PMSF) were added. The cells were lysed for 20 min at 95 °C and 1,000 rpm in a thermomixer. The suspensions were cleared by centrifugation (1 min at 5,500 x g) and the supernatant was flash frozen. The second aliquot of the cell suspension in buffer S was also flash frozen in liquid nitrogen and lysed in a mixer mill with 9 mm stainless steel balls (4 x 90 s at 30 Hz; Cole-Parmer) that were prechilled in liquid nitrogen. The tubes were cooled in liquid nitrogen between the cycles. Before the lysate was cleared for 30 s at 3,000 x g and 4 °C, 400 μl ice-cold buffer S were added. The cleared supernatant was then transferred into a 1.5 ml ultracentrifuge tube (Beckman Coulter) and the insoluble fraction was separated from the soluble fraction by ultracentrifugation for 25 min at 41,000 rpm and 4 °C. The soluble fraction was transferred into a fresh, precooled tube (S) and the pellet was washed once with 500 µl buffer S (41,000 rpm for 25 min at 4 °C). The remaining pellet was dissolved in 500 μl buffer P (8 M urea, 20 mM HEPES/NaOH, pH 7.4, 150 mM KCl, 2 mM EDTA, 2 % (m/v) SDS, 2 mM DTT, 1:1,000 protease inhibitor MixFY (Serva), 10 µM PMSF) by vigorous vortexing in a thermal shaker for 30 min at RT. Finally, the solution was spun down for 5 min at 20,000 x g and RT and the aqueous phase was taken as the pellet (P) fraction. 250 µg protein were precipitated to get rid of detergents and inhibitors (Wessel and Flugge, 1984). The precipitated proteins were dissolved in 8 M urea, 50 mM Tris (pH 7.5), 4 mM DTT. 20 µg protein were transferred into a fresh Eppendorf tube and diluted with 50 mM Tris to a final volume of 25 µl. The proteins were digested with sequencing grade Trypsin (5 ng/µl; Promega) for 2 h at RT. The peptides were alkylated (50 mM Tris/HCl, pH 7.5, 2 M urea, 5 mM IAA) in the dark at RT over night at 500 rpm in a thermomixer. The tryptic digest was quenced with 1.5 µl formic acid (FA). The samples were desalted with double C18 layer stage tips (Rappsilber et al., 2007). To this end, the tips were equilibrated with 70 µl methanol and washed three times with 70 µl 0.5 % FA by applying mild centrifugation steps (960 x g). The peptides were loaded onto the tips, washed three times with 70 µl 0.5 % FA and eluted with two times 30 µl 80 % ACN, 0.5 % FA (960 x g). The samples were dried in a speed vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf). For the MS/MS measurement, the peptides were dissolved in 23 µl 1 % (v/v) FA and incubated for 15 min in an ultrasonic bath at RT. The peptide solutions were filtered with centrifugal filters (0.22 µM; Merck; 2 min at 10,000 x g) and transferred into Chromacol vials (ThermoFisher Scientific). MS/MS measurements were performed on an Orbitrap Fusion coupled to an Ultimate3000 Nano-HPLC via an electrospray easy source (all ThermoFisher Scientific). After loading the peptides on a 2 cm PepMap RSLC C18 trap column (particles 3 µm, 100 Å, inner diameter 75 µm, ThermoFisher Scientific) with 0.1 % TFA, they were separated on a 50 cm PepMap RSLC C18 column (particles 2 µm, 100 Å, inner diameter 75 µm, ThermoFisher Scientific) constantly held at 40 °C. The peptides were eluted with a gradient from 5 to 32 % ACN, 0.1 % FA during 152 min at a flow rate of 0.3 µl/min (7 min 5 % ACN, 105 min to 22 % ACN, 10 min to 32 % ACN, 10 min to 90 % ACN, 10 min wash at 90 % ACN, 10 min equilibration at 5 % ACN). Survey scans (m/z 300 - 1,500) with a resolution of 120,000 were acquired. The automatic gain control (AGC) target value was set to 2.0*e5 with a maximum injection time of 50 ms. For fragmentation with high-energy collisional dissociation, the most intense ions of charge states 2-7 were selected. The collision energy was set to 30 %. In the ion trap, the maximum injection time was also set to 50 ms and the AGC target value was reduced to 1.0*e4. Inject ions for all available parallelizable time was allowed. Dynamic exclusion of sequenced peptides was set to 60 s. Internally generated fluoroanthene ions were used for real-time mass calibration. Data were acquired using Xcalibur software version 3.0sp2 (ThermoFisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data analysis   The MS data were analyzed with MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.6) (Cox et al., 2014, Cox and Mann, 2008). The S. cerevisiae proteome database downloaded from UniprotDB was used for protein identification. The same fraction was set for all files of one experimental setup. Only tryptic peptides were searched and cleavage sites before proline were included. Peptides with up to two missed cleavage sites were included in the analysis and a peptide tolerance of 4.5 ppm was applied. N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were selected as variable modifications. As fixed modification, carbamidomethylation was selected. Not more than five modifications per peptide were allowed. For the primary search in MaxQuant the min. ratio count was set to 1 and Label min. ratio count was also set to 1. Furthermore, unique + razor peptides were taken into account. Otherwise, the preset orbitrap instrument settings of MaxQuant were applied. The minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids, the maximal length was 25 amino acids. Match between runs was applied (match time window: 0.7 min; align window: 20 min). The identification parameters were left preset with a protein false discovery rate (FDR) of 1 %. The peptides were also searched against a decoy database (reverse database) generated by MaxQuant. The protein groups table that was generated by MaxQuant was further evaluated in Perseus (version 1.6.2.1) (Tyanova et al., 2016). First, the table was filtered by potential contaminant hits, hits from the reverse (decoy) database and hits that were only identified by side. After log2 transformation of the LFQ intensities, the associated replicates were grouped into categories. Then, the rows were filtered on three valid values in at least one group. The missing values were calculated from the Gaussian distribution (width: 0.3; downshift: 1.8). To analyze the fold changes, Volcano plots were plotted and a two-sided t-test was applied (Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995) in Perseus. A protein was considered to be significantly up- or downregulated if |log2 fc| > 1 and p-value < 5 %.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hsf1, Msn4, Heat shock response, Msn2

### Affiliations
Dept. Chemie
Lichtenbergstraße 4
85748 Garching

Technische Universität München Lichtenbergstraße 4 85748 Garching Deutschland

### Submitter
Moritz Mühlhofer

### Lab Head
Dr Johannes Buchner
Technische Universität München Lichtenbergstraße 4 85748 Garching Deutschland


