### Accession
PXD043002

### Title
Global phosphoproteome of Leishmania mexicana developmental stages

### Description
Using a combination of phosphoproteome enrichment and tandem mass tag (TMT) labelling-based quantitative proteomic mass spectrometry (MS), we robustly identified and quantified 1,833 phosphorylated proteins across three life cycle stages of Leishmania mexicana (L. mexicana) parasite. Protein kinase domain was the most enriched protein domain in the L. mexicana phosphoproteome. Additionally, this study systematically characterised the perturbing effect of HSP90 inhibition on the global phosphoproteome of the  L. mexicana across its life cycle stages and showed that the inhibition causes substantially distinct molecular effects in the promastigotes and the amastigotes. While tanespimycin treatment decreased the phosphorylation of HSP90 and its co-chaperon HSP70 in the amastigotes, the opposite effect was observed in the promastigotes. Additionally, our results show that while kinase activity and microtubule motor activity are highly represented in the negatively affected phosphoproteins of the promastigotes, ribosomal proteins, protein folding, and proton channel activity are preferentially enriched in the perturbed amastigote phosphoproteome. Our results also show that RNA helicase domain was distinctively enriched among the positively affected RNA-binding amastigote phosphoproteome. This study reveals the dramatically different ways the HSP90 inhibition stress modulates the phosphoproteome of the pathogenic amastigotes and provides in-depth insight into the scope of selective molecular targeting in the therapeutically relevant amastigotes.

### Sample Protocol
LC-MS/MS analyses of TMT-labelled peptides were performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled with a Thermo Scientific Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Desalted and TMT-labelled tryptic peptides dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (FA) were first loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 trap column (5 µm particle size, 100 µm id X 20 mm, TF164564) heated to 45 oC using 0.1% FA/H2O with a flow rate of 10 µL/min, then separated on an Acclaim PepMap 100 NanoViper C18 column (2 µm particle size, 75 µm id X 50 cm, TF164942) with a 5% to 38% ACN gradient in 0.1% FA over 125 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The full MS spectra (m/z 375 to 1,500) were acquired in Orbitrap at 120,000 resolution with an AGC target value of 4e5 for a maximum injection time of 50 ms. High-resolution HCD MS2 spectra were generated in positive ion mode using a normalised collision energy of 38% within a 0.7 m/z isolation window using quadrupole isolation. The AGC target value was set to 10e4, and the dynamic exclusion was set to 45 s. The MS2 spectra were acquired in Orbitrap with a maximum injection time of 54 ms at a resolution of 30,000 with an instrument determined scan range beginning at m/z 100. To ensure quality peptide fragmentation a number of filters were utilised, including peptide monoisotopic precursor selection, minimum intensity exclusion of 10e3 and exclusion of precursor ions with unassigned charge state as well as charge state of +1 or superior to +7 from fragmentation selection. To prevent repeat sampling, a dynamic exclusion with exclusion count of 1, exclusion duration of 30 s, mass tolerance window of +/- 7 ppm and isotope exclusion were used.

### Data Protocol
All raw LC-MS/MS data were processed using MaxQuant software version 1.6.3.4 with integrated Andromeda database search engine. The MS/MS spectra were queried against L. mexicana sequences from UniProt KB (8,559 sequences). The following search parameters were used: reporter ion MS2 with multiplicity 6plex TMT, trypsin digestion with maximum 2 missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification, oxidation of methionine, acetylation of protein N-termini and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine residues as variable modifications, minimum peptide length of 6, maximum number of modifications per peptide set at 5, and protein false discovery rate (FDR) 0.01. Appropriate correction factors for the individual TMT channels for both lysine side-chain labelling and peptide N-terminal labelling as per the TMT-6plex kits used (Thermo Fisher Scientific) were configured into the database search. The proteinGroups.txt files from the MaxQuant search outputs were processed using Perseus software version 1.6.2.3. Sequences only identified by site, reverse sequences, and potential contaminants were filtered out. A requirement of six non-zero valid value were set across the eighteen reporter intensity corrected main columns of the three life cycle stages. The reporter intensities were normalised by Z-score and transformed to log2 scale. Proteins identified with fewer than 2 unique peptides were discarded and a modified t test with permutation-based FDR statistics (250 permutations) was applied  to compare the different life cycle stages and tanespimycin-treated and non-treated groups.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Leishmania, Tmt labelling, Phosphoproteome

### Affiliations
Teesside University
School of Health and Life Sciences, Teesside University, UK

### Submitter
Karunakaran Kalesh

### Lab Head
Dr Kalesh Karunakaran
School of Health and Life Sciences, Teesside University, UK


