### Accession
PXD017709

### Title
Anaerobic sulfur oxidation underlies adaptation of a chemosynthetic symbiont to oxic-anoxic interfaces

### Description
Chemosynthetic symbioses between bacteria and invertebrates occur worldwide in a wide range of marine habitats. Although they have been intensively investigated, molecular physiological studies of chemoautotrophic bacteria colonizing the surface of animals (ectosymbioses) are scarce. Stilbonematinae nematodes are the only known invertebrates capable of cultivating monocultures of thiotrophic Gammaproteobacteria on their surface. Crucially, as these nematodes migrate through the redox zone of marine sediments, the ectosymbionts directly experience drastic variations in oxygen concentration. Here, by applying an array of omics, Raman microspectroscopy and stable isotope labeling-based techniques, we investigated the effect of varying concentrations of dissolved oxygen on physiology and metabolism of Candidatus Thiosymbion oneisti, the longitudinally dividing ectosymbiont of Laxus oneistus. We show that, unexpectedly, sulfur oxidation genes were upregulated in anoxic relative to oxic conditions, and that carbon fixation genes and incorporation of 13C-labeled bicarbonate were not. Instead, several genes involved in carbon fixation in addition to genes responsible for assimilating organic carbon compounds and polyhydroxyalkanoate (PHA) biosynthesis, as well as nitrogen fixation and urea utilization genes were upregulated in oxic versus anoxic conditions. Furthermore, in the presence of oxygen, stress-related genes were upregulated together with vitamin and cofactor biosynthesis genes likely necessary to withstand its deleterious effects.  Based on this first global physiological study of an uncultured, chemosynthetic ectosymbiont, we propose that, in anoxic pore water, it proliferates by utilizing nitrate to oxidize reduced sulfur compounds, whereas, when exposed to oxygen, it exploits aerobic respiration to facilitate energetically costly assimilation of carbon and nitrogen to survive oxidative stress. Both anaerobic sulfur oxidation and its decoupling from carbon fixation represent unprecedented adaptations among chemosynthetic symbionts. We postulate that Ca. T. oneisti originated from an obligate anaerobic, denitrifying sulfur-oxidizer, which, while transitioning from the free-living to the symbiotic lifestyle, evolved mechanisms to survive the oxidative stress inherent to a life attached to an animal.

### Sample Protocol
Laxus oneistus individuals were collected on multiple field trips (2016-2019) at approximately 1 m depth from sand bars off the Smithsonian Field Station, Carrie Bow Cay in Belize (16°48′11.01″N, 88°4′54.42″W). The nematodes were extracted from the sediment by gently stirring the sand and pouring the supernatant seawater through a 63 μm mesh sieve. The retained meiofauna was collected in a petri dish, and single worms were handpicked with the aid of forceps (Dumont 3, Fine Science Tools, Canada), under a dissecting microscope. Right after collection, symbiotic Laxus oneistus were exposed to either oxic or anoxic conditions. For this purpose, 500 worms were incubated for 24 h in 13 ml of 0.2 µm filtered seawater in exetainers either in the presence of oxygen (180 µM O2 after 24 h) or in anoxic conditions (no O2 measured after 24 h, no sulfide added). After the incubations, the ectosymbionts were dissociated from the nematodes by dipping the nematodes into ddH2O for 1 min, then transferring them to 0.2 µM-filtered seawater for 5 min. The bacterial suspensions derived from the same conditions were pooled and collected by centrifugation. The seawater was removed and symbiont and aposymbiotic nematode pellets were flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at  80°C until further processing. Only the processing of symbiont samples is described below, and only symbiont proteome data are shown in this study. Proteome data of the host will be published separately. Symbiont proteins were extracted as described by Hinzke et al., 2019 (protocols.io dx.doi.org/10.17504/protocols.io.kg6ctze). Briefly, frozen symbiont cell pellets from oxic and anoxic incubations were resuspended in lysis buffer ((1% (w/v) sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 4% (w/v) sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) in 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEAB)), boiled (95°C, 5 min, 600 rpm) and incubated in an ultrasonic bath (5 min, RT). After removal of cell debris by centrifugation (10 min, RT, 14,000 x g), protein concentrations in the supernatants were determined using the Pierce BCA (bicinchoninic acid) assay (Thermo Scientific Pierce) according to the manufacturer’s instructions in a Tecan microtiter plate reader. For gel-based proteomic analysis (as previously described by Ponnudurai et al., 2017), 25 µg of protein per sample were mixed with loading buffer (2 % (w/v) SDS, 10 % glycerol, 12.5 mM DTT, 0.001 % (w/v) bromophenol blue in 0.06 M Tris-HCl) and separated in precast 4 – 20 % SDS mini gels (BioRad TGX). Per sample, three replicates (3 x 25 µg protein) were separated. After staining (Coomassie Brilliant Blue), protein-containing gel lanes were excised and subdivided into 10 equal-sized pieces each, which were destained (600 rpm, 37 °C, 200 mM NH4HCO3 in 30 % acetonitrile) and overnight-digested with trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega, 37 °C), before peptides were eluted in an ultrasonic bath and subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis.  Peptides were analyzed as described previously (Ponnudurai et al. 2017): Tryptic digests were seprated by liquid chromatography on an EASYnLC with self-packed columns and measued in an LTQ Velos Orbitrap mass spectrometer, which was coupled online to the LC.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification, a database was constructed, containing 18,364 Laxus oneistus host protein sequences (derived from a de novo assembled transcriptome; to be published separately), 5,169 Ca. T. oneisti protein sequences (JAAEFD000000000) and a set of 42 common laboratory contaminants. All sequences were reversed and appended to the database as decoys to allow for false-discovery rate (FDR) assessment. Mass spectra were searched against this target-decoy database using the Sorcerer SEQUEST algorithm (Sage-N Research) and filtered using Scaffold (version 4.8.4, http://www.proteomesoftware.com) applying the following thresholds: i) protein FDR and peptide FDR were set to 1% and ii) at least two unique peptides were required for a protein or protein group to be identified. Proteins were considered to be expressed if they were detected in at least two out of the three replicates in at least one condition. This way, 1,137 symbiont proteins were identified in total. Relative abundance of identified proteins was calculated from total spectrum counts as normalized spectral abundance factor (%NSAF) values – giving the percentage of each protein relative to all proteins in the respective sample (Florens et al., 2006), and as %OrgNSAF, giving a protein’s percentage relative to all symbiont proteins in the respective sample (Mueller et al., 2010). As symbiont protein identification rates varied substantially between oxic and anoxic samples, which may negatively affect comparability of relative abundances between samples, we included only such proteins in the final quantitation, which were detected under both conditions (824 proteins).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Symbionts, Oxic, Thiotrophy, Nematodes, Anoxic

### Affiliations
Universität Greifswald Institut für Pharmazie, AG Pharmazeutische Biotechnologie Greifswald, Germany
University of Greifswald

### Submitter
Stephanie Markert

### Lab Head
Dr Stephanie Markert
Universität Greifswald Institut für Pharmazie, AG Pharmazeutische Biotechnologie Greifswald, Germany


