### Accession
PXD021314

### Title
Multiplex analyses of mitochondria in colorectal cancer patients uncover novel diagnostic and therapeutic opportunities

### Description
Background: Multi-omics analyses are profitable for discovering novel biomarkers and drug targets, but such integrated examinations on mitochondria of colorectal cancer (CRC) patients are lacking.  Methods: We investigated global structural variants, DNA methylation, chromatin accessibility, proteome, and phosphoproteome on human CRC (n = 6-8). The alterations of mitochondria on these levels and potential upstream regulatory genes were described. Furthermore, combining with the mRNA datasets of 538 CRC and 91 colitis patients from the public databases, we identified independent prognostic factors (IPFs).  Findings: Revealed by the proteogenomic analyses in our study, mitochondria altered the most among all organelles in CRC, which were also associated with patient prognosis the most. We found that the mRNA of one nuclear-coding mitochondrial gene (NCMG), HIGD1A, decreased in colitis, two subtypes of adenoma, and six subtypes of CRC, subsequently was identified as a favorable IPF for CRC. Besides, the comprehensive analyses of mitochondria by multi-omics uncovered unique proteogenomic alterations on six survival-related NCMGs. Key transcriptional factors potentially regulating the mitochondria were also unveiled, such as GLIS1, JUN, CREB1, and YAP1. Finally, p38 was highlighted as one possible central kinase involving in the modulation of mitochondrial activity in CRC patients. Interpretation: Our study presents a multilayer and molecular picture of mitochondria of CRC patients, recognizes HIGD1A as a potential prognostic biomarker, and provides new candidate genes as therapeutic targets.

### Sample Protocol
The tissues of CRC patients were collected following a predetermined method. In short, tumor tissues of CRC patients were collected within 1 hour after surgery. Both tumor and normal adjacent tissues were obtained from the colon segment. The normal adjacent colorectal mucosa was obtained at a distance of 5 cm from the tumor. Samples were placed in liquid nitrogen for more than 3 hours and then stored at −80 °C. The samples were ground by liquid nitrogen into cell powder and mixed by four volumes of lysis buffer (8 M urea and 1% protease inhibitor cocktaiIII (Merck Millipore, 156 535140)). The mixture was sonicated three times on ice with a high-intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) and then the debris was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the supernatant was collected and the protein concentration was determined with a BCA kit (Beyotime, P0011-1) according to the manufacturer's instructions. The protein was then incubated with 5 mM dithiothreitol at 56 °C for 30 min and mixed with 11 mM iodoacetamide, and stayed at room temperature in darkness for another 15 min. Then the protein was added with 100 mM TEAB to urea concentration (less than 2 M), incubated with trypsin at 1:50 ratio over 12 h for the first-round digestion and 1:100 ratio 4 h for the second-round digestion.  The LC-MS/MS analyses were following a standard protocol. The timsTOF Pro, a quadrupole time of flight mass spectrometer with a modified nano-electrospray ion source (Bruker Daltonics) was used in the experiment and runned in parallel accumulation serial fragmentation (PASEF) mode. The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d. for the proteomic analyses and 25-cm length, 100 μm i.d. for the phosphoproteomic analyses). For the first 70 min, the gradient was composed of an elevation from 6% to 24% solvent B (98% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid), and then 24% to 35% for 14 min and increased to 80% for 3 min, finally kept at 80% for 3 min (in the phosphoproteomic experiment, it was 2% to 22% solvent B (acetonitrile with 0.1%) for 50 min, 22% to 35% for 2 min and rising up to 90% for another 3 min, finally kept at 90% for 5 min). All the steps were at a constant flow rate of 450 nL/min by a nonoElute UPLC system (Bruker Daltonics). Next, the peptides were subjected to the Capillary source and processed through the timsTOF Pro mass spectrometry. The electrospray voltage applied was 1.6 kV. The precursors and fragments were both measured and analyzed by the TOF detector, with a MS/MS scan ranging from 100 to 1700 m/z. The precursors with charge states 0 to 5 were selected for fragmentation, and 10 PASEF-MS/MS scans were acquired per cycle. The dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS data was analyzed using Maxquant (v1.6.6.0). The database Homo_sapiens_9606_SP_20191115 (20380 sequences) was used and a reverse library was added to calculate the false positive rate (FDR) caused by random matching. In addition, common contamination libraries were put into the database to eliminate the influence of contaminated proteins in results. The method of enzyme digestion was set as Trypsin/P and the number of missing bits was 2. The minimum length of peptide was set to 7 amino acid residues and maximum modification number of peptides was 5. The mass tolerance for precursor ions in the first search and main search was set to 20 PPM, and for fragment ions was 0.02 Da. The alkylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification and the variable modification was methionine oxidation (for the phosphoproteomic analyses, Carbamidomethyl on Cys was set as the fixed modification. Oxidation on Met and acetylation on the N-terminal of protein and phosphorylation on Ser, Thr, Tyr were regarded as the variable modifications). Finally, the FDR and PSM was set to 1%. The UniProt-GOA database was used for GO annotation, assisted with InterProScan (an algorithm based on protein sequences). For KEGG annotation, identified proteins were primarily annotated by KAAS v.2.0 (KEGG online service tool). KEGG mapper V2.5 was used to match the proteins into KEGG pathways. Finally, the subcellular enrichment was performed by the software Wolfpsort v.0.2.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mitochondria; multi-omics; colorectal cancer; prognosis; drug targets

### Affiliations
Shenzhen People’s Hospital
Shenzhen People's Hospital

### Submitter
Wei Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Yong Dai
Shenzhen People’s Hospital


