### Accession
PXD038768

### Title
Structural basis of calmodulin modulation of the rod cyclic nucleotide-gated channel (LiP-MS)

### Description
The aim of the project was to characterize structural changes that occur on the rod cyclic nucleotide-gated channel upon interaction with calmodulin (CaM) directly in the native membrane.

### Sample Protocol
Rod outer segments were prepared as described previously (Barret et al, Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol., 2022) and resuspended in LiP-buffer (100 mM HEPES-KOH pH 7.4, 150 mM KCl, 1 mM MgCl2, 1 mM CaCl2). The sample was diluted to a protein concentration of 2 mg/mL. Each experiment was conducted in quadruplicates. The samples were incubated with increasing amounts of CaM (0-3 ug) in 50 uL membrane suspension and briefly (5 min) digested with proteinase K (LiP samples, LiP) or treated with water (trypsin controls, TC). The reaction was quenched by boiling the samples for 5 minutes, cooling them down to 4°C and an addition of sodium deoxycholate. Disulfide bonds were reduced with Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine and free cysteines were alkylated with iodoacetamide. The samples were diluted with ammonium bicarbonate and proteins were digested overnight with trypsin and Lys-C. Peptides were desalted via C-18 cleanup and dried in a vacuum centrifuge.  The samples were reconstituted in 5% ACN, 0.1% FA with addition of iRT peptides (Biognosys). Peptides were separated on an Easy-nLC 1200 (Thermo Scientific) on an in-house packed C18 column (40 cm x 0.75 um i.d.; 3 um Dr. Maisch ProntoSIL-200 C18-AQ beads) at 50°C. Linear gradient was from 3-35% B (A: 0.1% FA, B: 95% ACN, 0.1% FA) over 120 min. Measurements were acquired on an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). All samples were measured with a 41 variable window DIA method (1 m/z overlap) ovr a mass range from 350-1150 m/z. MS1 Orbitrap resolution was set to 120,000, MS2 Obitrap resolution was set to 30,000. Maximum injection time was 264 ms with a normalized AGC target of 200%. Pooled samples of each condition were additionally measured in DDA for spectral library generation.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was analyzed in Spectronaut (v.15) and searched against a contaminant FASTA file, as well as the bovine proteome (reviewed and unreviewed entries). Single hits were excluded, minimum peptide length was set to 5 amino acids, imputation was switched off. For the analysis of limited-proteolysis samples, the protease specificity was changed to semi-specific. For quantification, peptides were grouped by their modified sequences. Further data analysis was carried out in R, using mainly the R package protti (Quast & Schuster, Bio. Adv., 2022).

### Publication Abstract
Calmodulin (CaM) regulates many ion channels to control calcium entry into cells, and mutations that alter this interaction are linked to fatal diseases. The structural basis of CaM regulation remains largely unexplored. In retinal photoreceptors, CaM binds to the CNGB subunit of cyclic nucleotide-gated (CNG) channels and, thereby, adjusts the channel's Cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP) sensitivity in response to changes in ambient light conditions. Here, we provide the structural characterization for CaM regulation of a CNG channel by using a combination of single-particle cryo-electron microscopy and structural proteomics. CaM connects the CNGA and CNGB subunits, resulting in structural changes both in the cytosolic and transmembrane regions of the channel. Cross-linking and limited proteolysis-coupled mass spectrometry mapped the conformational changes induced by CaM in&#xa0;vitro and in the native membrane. We propose that CaM is a constitutive subunit of the rod channel to ensure high sensitivity in dim light. Our mass spectrometry-based approach is generally relevant for studying the effect of CaM on ion channels in tissues of medical interest, where only minute quantities are available.

### Keywords
Structural proteomics, Limited proteolysis coupled mass spectrometry, Lip-ms

### Affiliations
ETH Zurich
Laboratory of Biomolecular Research, Paul Scherrer Institute, Villigen, Switzerland. Institute of Molecular Biology and Biophysics, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland

### Submitter
Dina Schuster

### Lab Head
Dr Volodymyr M. Korkhov
Laboratory of Biomolecular Research, Paul Scherrer Institute, Villigen, Switzerland. Institute of Molecular Biology and Biophysics, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland


