### Accession
PXD014710

### Title
Towards middle-up analysis of polyclonal antibodies: subclass-specific N-glycosylation profiling of murine immunoglobulin G (IgG) by means of HPLC-MS

### Description
Advanced analytical strategies including top-down and middle-up HPLC-MS approaches have become powerful alternatives to classical bottom-up analysis for the characterization of therapeutic monoclonal antibodies. Here, we assess feasibility of middle-up analysis of polyclonal IgGs posing additional challenges due to extensive sequence variability. The presented workflow is based on Fc/2 portions as conserved subunits of IgGs and enables global profiling of subclasses and their glycosylation patterns, both of which influence IgG effector functions. To obtain subunits of murine IgGs, we established digestion with the bacterial protease SpeB. The resulting Fc/2 portions characteristic of different subclasses were subsequently analysed by ion-pair reversed-phase HPLC hyphenated to high-resolution mass spectrometry allowing relative quantification of IgG subclasses and their N-glycosylation variants. In order to assess method capabilities in an immunological context, we applied the analytical workflow to polyclonal antibodies obtained from BALB/c mice immunized with the grass pollen allergen Phl p 6. This analysis simultaneously revealed a shift in IgG subclasses and Fc-glycosylation patterns in total and antigen-specific IgGs from different mouse cohorts. Eventually, Fc/2 characterization may reveal other protein modifications including oxidation, amino acid exchanges, and C-terminal lysine as demonstrated for monoclonal IgGs, which may be implemented for quality control of functional antibodies.

### Sample Protocol
For SpeB proteolysis, monoclonal or polyclonal IgGs were diluted in 175 mmol.L-1 ammonium acetate to a concentration of 0.3 mg.mL-1 and supplemented with 50 mmol.L-1 L-cysteine. Digestion with SpeB was performed at an enzyme to substrate ratio of 2 U.µg-1 for 3.0 h at 37 °C while shaking at 850 rpm. Samples were subjected to HPLC-MS analysis without further purification. For analysis of tryptic peptides, protein G-purified polyclonal IgGs from BALB/c were reduced with 5 mmol.L-1 TCEP for 15 min at 60 °C in 175 mmol.L-1 ammonium acetate at 0.1 mg.mL-1 and alkylated with 20 mmol.L-1 IAA for 30 min at 22 °C in the dark. Tryptic digestion was performed at a substrate to enzyme ratio of 50:1 (w/w) for 3.0 h at 37 °C. Chromatographic separation was carried out on a capillary HPLC instrument (UltiMate™ U3000 RSLC, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germering, Germany). SpeB digests were separated on an AdvanceBio Diphenyl column featuring superficially porous particles (150 x 2.1 mm i.d., 3.5 μm particle size, 450 Å pore size, Agilent, Santa Clara, CA, USA) at a flow rate of 200 µL.min-1 and a column oven temperature of 80 °C. Ten microliters of sample [0.3 mg.mL-1] were injected using in-line split-loop mode. A linear gradient of mobile phase solutions A (H2O + 0.050% TFA) and B (ACN + 0.050% TFA) was applied as follows: 20.0% B for 5.0 min, 27.5%–40.0% B in 30 min, 80.0% B for 5.0 min, and 20.0% B for 20 min. UV-detection was carried out at 214 nm using a 1.4 µl flow cell. Tryptic peptides were analysed using a Hypersil GOLD aQ C18 column (100 x 1.0 mm i.d., 1.9 µm particle size, 175 Å pore size, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) at a flow rate of 100 μL.min−1 and a column oven temperature of 50 °C applying the following gradient: mobile phase A (H2O + 0.10% FA), mobile phase B (acetonitrile + 0.10% FA); 2.0% B for 5 min, 2.0−12.0% B in 5 min, 12.0−45.0% B in 40 min, 80% B for 5 min, and 2.0% B for 25 min. Ten microliters of sample [0.1 mg.mL-1] were injected using in-line split-loop mode. SpeB digests were analysed on a Thermo Scientific™ QExactive™ benchtop quadrupole-OrbitrapTM mass spectrometer equipped with an Ion Max™ source with a heated electrospray ionization (HESI) probe, both from Thermo Fisher Scientific (Bremen, Germany), and an MXT715-000 - MX Series II Switching Valve (IDEX Health & Science LLC, Oak Harbor, WA, USA). Mass spectrometric data were acquired with the following instrument settings: source heater temperature of 250 °C, spray voltage of 3.5 kV, sheath gas flow of 30 arbitrary units, auxiliary gas flow of 10 arbitrary units, capillary temperature of 320 °C, in-source collision-induced dissociation (IS-CID) of 0.0 eV, S-lens RF level of 80.0, AGC target of 3e6 at m/z of 1500–3000 with a maximum injection time of 200 ms, resolution of 140,000 at 200 m/z, and averaging of 10 microscans. MS/MS was carried out in three runs applying all ion fragmentation (AIF) in the higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) cell at normalized collision energy (NCE) settings of 18.0, 20.0, and 22.0, respectively, within a scan range of m/z 500–3,000 (corresponding to 63, 70, and 77 eV collision energy for a singly charged ion at m/z 2,000), and a resolution setting of 140,000 at m/z 200. MS analysis of tryptic peptides was performed on a Thermo ScientificTM Q ExactiveTM Plus benchtop quadrupole-OrbitrapTM mass spectrometer equipped with an Ion MaxTM source with a HESI probe, both from Thermo Fisher Scientific (Bremen, Germany). Instrument settings were as follows: source heater temperature of 100 °C, spray voltage of 3.5 kV, sheath gas flow of 10 arbitrary units, auxiliary gas flow of 5 arbitrary units, capillary temperature of 300 °C, S-lens RF level of 60.0. Each scan cycle consisted of a full scan at a scan range of m/z 350-2,000 with an AGC target of 1e6, a maximum injection time of 150 ms and a resolution setting of 70,000, followed by 5 data-dependent HCD scans at 28 NCE (corresponding to 27.5 eV for the selected peptide) with an AGC target of 5e5, a maximum injection time of 150 ms and a resolution setting of 17,500. Both instruments were mass calibrated using Pierce™ LTQ Velos ESI Positive Ion Calibration Solution from Life Technologies (Vienna, Austria) and AHFP.

### Data Protocol
Isotopically resolved mass spectra were deconvoluted using the Xtract algorithm implemented in the Xcalibur™ software version 3.0.63 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Annotation of glycoforms and other PTMs was conducted using MoFi v1.0.59 Fc/2 amino acid sequences were derived from constant heavy chain entries in the Uniprot database (Supplementary Fig. S-2). MoFi-assisted peak assignment was based on monoisotopic masses with a mass tolerance of ±50 ppm assuming intrachain disulphide bridges to be intact and interchain disulphide bonds to be reduced (see amino acid sequences Supplementary Fig. S-2). A library containing the six most common N-glycan structures reported for murine IgGs and their afucosylated counterparts was used (Supplementary Table S-2). For relative quantification of Fc/2 N-glycoforms, extracted ion current chromatograms (XICCs) were generated and evaluated using the Chromeleon™ Chromatography Data System, version 7.2 SR3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA), as previously described10: XICC ranges were determined based on a simulated isotopic distribution for the atomic composition of Fc/2 plus the respective glycan taking into account the ten most abundant isotope peaks. Spectra were simulated using the Xcalibur™ software. XICCs were then generated for charge states 10+ to 15+ for relative quantification of subclasses and Fc/2 glycoforms based on integrated peak areas of these XICCs. Fc/2 masses were calculated using the software tool GPMAW 9.51 rel. 0314 (Lighthouse Data, Odense, Denmark).60 AIF data were evaluated using the software ProSight Lite v1.4 Build 1.4.6 provided by the Kelleher Research Group (Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, U.S.A.)61; mass tolerance for annotation of b- and y- fragments was set to 25 ppm. For statistical evaluation and plotting of data we used GraphPad Prism® version 5.01. Principal component analysis was performed with Simca® 13.0.3 (Umetrics, Sartorius Stedim Biotech, Göttingen, Germany) using unit variances and mean centering for data pre-processing.

### Publication Abstract
In recent years, advanced HPLC-MS strategies based on intact protein ("top-down") or protein subunit ("middle-up/middle-down") analysis have been implemented for the characterization of therapeutic monoclonal antibodies. Here, we assess feasibility of middle-up/middle-down analysis for polyclonal IgGs exhibiting extensive sequence variability. Specifically, we addressed IgGs from mouse, representing an important model system in immunological investigations. To obtain Fc/2 portions as conserved subunits of IgGs, we made use of the bacterial protease SpeB. For this purpose, we initially determined SpeB cleavage sites in murine IgGs. The resulting Fc/2 portions characteristic of different subclasses were subsequently analysed by ion-pair reversed-phase HPLC hyphenated to high-resolution mass spectrometry. This enabled simultaneous relative quantification of IgG subclasses and their N-glycosylation variants, both of which influence IgG effector functions. To assess method capabilities in an immunological context, we applied the analytical workflow to polyclonal antibodies obtained from BALB/c mice immunized with the grass pollen allergen Phl p 6. The study revealed a shift in IgG subclasses and Fc-glycosylation patterns in total and antigen-specific IgGs from different mouse cohorts, respectively. Eventually, Fc/2 characterization may reveal other protein modifications including oxidation, amino acid exchanges, and C-terminal lysine, and may thus be implemented for quality control of functional antibodies.

### Keywords
Murine igg subclass quantification, Speb, N-glycosylation, Phl p 6 vaccination

### Affiliations
Department of Biosciences, University of Salzburg

### Submitter
Constantin Blöchl

### Lab Head
Dr Christian G. Huber
Department of Biosciences, University of Salzburg


