### Accession
PXD010809

### Title
Effect of salinity stress on stomata guard cells in spinach and sugar beet

### Description
Spinach and sugar beet plants were grown under either control or salinity stress conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Guard cell enriched samples were prepared essentially as described in Jalakas et al (www.bio-protocol.org/e2447)using an ice-chilled blender and nylon mesh to separate epidermal fragments from mesophyll and other vascular cells. Enrichment of guard cell-containing fragments was verified using light microscopy. Proteins were extracted using TCA/acetone and sample quality verified by SDS-PAGE, followed by sample reduction, alkylation and trypsin digestion using co-precipitation of 100ug of protein with proteomics grade trypsin.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data was acquired using a Q-Exactive HF and Ultimate 3000 RSLC, and processed using MaxQuant to search the data against the Sugar Beet NCBI database (txid3555 62,283 entries) or Spinach NCBI database (txid3562 58,426 entries).

### Publication Abstract
Soil salinity is a major environmental constraint affecting crop growth and threatening global food security. Plants adapt to salinity by optimizing the performance of stomata. Stomata are formed by two guard cells (GCs) that are morphologically and functionally distinct from the other leaf cells. These microscopic sphincters inserted into the wax-covered epidermis of the shoot balance CO<sub>2</sub> intake for photosynthetic carbon gain and concomitant water loss. In order to better understand the molecular mechanisms underlying stomatal function under saline conditions, we used proteomics approach to study isolated GCs from the salt-tolerant sugar beet species. Of the 2088 proteins identified in sugar beet GCs, 82 were differentially regulated by salt treatment. According to bioinformatics analysis (GO enrichment analysis and protein classification), these proteins were involved in lipid metabolism, cell wall modification, ATP biosynthesis, and signaling. Among the significant differentially abundant proteins, several proteins classified as "stress proteins" were upregulated, including non-specific lipid transfer protein, chaperone proteins, heat shock proteins, inorganic pyrophosphatase 2, responsible for energized vacuole membrane for ion transportation. Moreover, several antioxidant enzymes (peroxide, superoxidase dismutase) were highly upregulated. Furthermore, cell wall proteins detected in GCs provided some evidence that GC walls were more flexible in response to salt stress. Proteins such as L-ascorbate oxidase that were constitutively high under both control and high salinity conditions may contribute to the ability of sugar beet GCs to adapt to salinity by mitigating salinity-induced oxidative stress.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Stomata, Guard cells

### Affiliations
Facility Manager, Proteomics Mass Spectrometry, Central Science Laboratory, University of Tasmania
University of Tasmania

### Submitter
Richard Wilson

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Richard Wilson
Facility Manager, Proteomics Mass Spectrometry, Central Science Laboratory, University of Tasmania


