### Accession
PXD008368

### Title
Proteome of EpoR+/+ and EpoR-/- mouse placentas

### Description
The proteomes of placentas corresponding to  EpoR+/+ and EpoR-/- mice were analyzed by label-free LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
Heterozygous erythropoietin receptor null (EpoR+/-) BALB/c mice were mated and embryos of pregnant mice were prepared at day 13.5 of gestation. Material from the embryo was used for genotyping. Placentas of embryos were split in two parts. One half was directly frozen in liquid nitrogen for RNA isolation and qRT-PCR analysis. The other half was resuspended in 100 µl of ice-cold 1x RIPA buffer (100 mM Tris pH 7.4, 300 mM NaCl, 2 mM EDTA, 2 mg/ml deoxycholate, 1 mM Na3VO4, 5 mM NaF). Samples were mashed, another 100 µl of 1x RIPA buffer were added, and samples were rotated for 30 minutes at 4°C. Whole cell lysates were sonicated and protein yield was determined by BCA assay (Thermo). Each 50 µg of protein were fractionated by 10% 1D SDS-PAGE for 120 min. Gels were stained with Coomassie (Invitrogen) and each lane was subsequently divided into five segments. In-gel digestion was performed. Samples were analyzed by liquid chromatography, nano-electrospray ionization, and tandem mass spectrometry with a Q‐Exactive Plus (Thermo).

### Data Protocol
Raw files obtained were then analyzed by MaxQuant, version 1.6.0.1, and the MaxLFQ algorithm was employed for the quantification purpose.

### Publication Abstract
Erythropoietin (Epo) ensures survival and proliferation of colony-forming unit erythroid (CFU-E) progenitor cells and their differentiation to hemoglobin-containing mature erythrocytes. A lack of Epo-induced responses causes embryonic lethality, but mechanisms regulating the dynamic communication of cellular alterations to the organismal level remain unresolved. By time-resolved transcriptomics and proteomics, we show that Epo induces in CFU-E cells a gradual transition from proliferation signature proteins to proteins indicative for differentiation, including heme-synthesis enzymes. In the absence of the Epo receptor (EpoR) in embryos, we observe a lack of hemoglobin in CFU-E cells and massive iron overload of the fetal liver pointing to a miscommunication between liver and placenta. A reduction of iron-sulfur cluster-containing proteins involved in oxidative phosphorylation in these embryos leads to a metabolic shift toward glycolysis. This link connecting erythropoiesis with the regulation of iron homeostasis and metabolic reprogramming suggests that balancing these interactions is crucial for protection from iron intoxication and for survival.

### Keywords
Placenta, Mouse, Lc-ms/ms, Erythropoietin receptor

### Affiliations
DKFZ Heidelberg
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ) Systems Biology of Signal Transduction

### Submitter
Alexander Held

### Lab Head
Dr Ursula Klingmüller
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ) Systems Biology of Signal Transduction


