### Accession
PXD026003

### Title
Metabolic responses of two pioneer wood decay fungi to diurnally cycling temperature

### Description
Decomposition of lignin-rich wood by fungi drives nutrient recycling in woodland ecosystems. Fluctuating abiotic conditions are known to promote the functioning of ecological communities and ecosystems. In the context of wood decay, fluctuating temperature increases decomposition rates. Metabolomics, in tandem with other ‘omics tools, can highlight the metabolic processes affected by experimental treatments, even in the absence of genome sequences and annotations. Globally, natural wood decay communities are dominated by the phylum Basidiomycota. We examined the metabolic responses of Mucidula mucida, a dominant constituent of pioneer communities in beech branches in British woodlands, and Exidia glandulosa, a stress-selected constituent of the same communities, in response to constant and diurnally cycling temperature.    We applied untargeted metabolomics and proteomics to beech wood blocks, colonised by M. mucida or E. glandulosa and exposed to either diurnally cycling (mean 15 ± 10°C) or constant (15°C) temperature, in a fully factorial design.  Metabolites and proteins linked to lignin breakdown, the citric acid cycle, pentose phosphate pathway, carbohydrate metabolism, fatty acid metabolism and protein biosynthesis and turnover were under-enriched in fluctuating, compared to stable temperatures, in the generalist M. mucida. Conversely E. glandulosa showed little differential response to the experimental treatments.  By demonstrating temperature dependant metabolic signatures related to nutrient acquisition in a generalist wood decay fungus, we provide new insights into how abiotic conditions can affect community-mediated decomposition and carbon turnover in forests. We show that mechanisms underpinning important biogeochemical processes can be highlighted using untargeted metabolomics and proteomics in the absence of well-annotated genomes.

### Sample Protocol
Wood blocks were chipped and 0.87g of each sample was added to 50 ml of cold phosphate buffer (50 mM potassium phosphate pH 7.5, 1 µg/ml Pepstatin A, 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride, 1mM EDTA) and agitated for 40 hrs (4°C).  The sample suspension was filtered and filtrate centrifuged at 4°C and 25,000 g for 30 min.  The supernatant was brought to 15% (v/v) trichloroacetic acid and agitated overnight (4°C). Protein precipitate was centrifuged at 1700 g for 45 min (4°C) and pellets were washed with tris-buffered acetone (20% (v/v) 50 mM tris-base and acetone) three times, followed by an acetone wash. Dried-protein pellets were re-suspended in 6 M urea, 2 M thiourea and 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0. Protein concentrations were normalised following protein quantification by Bradford assay. Urea concentration was adjusted to 1 M by addition of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Trypsin digestion of re-suspended proteins was carried out as described in (Owens et al., 2015). Proteins were prepared for LC-MS/MS analysis as in (Dolan et al., 2014; Moloney et al., 2016). For LC-MS/MS analysis, 1 µg of peptide mixtures were eluted onto a Q-Exactive quadrupole MS coupled to a Dionex RSLCnano (ThermoFisher Scientific, Paisley, UK). LC gradients from 3-45 % were run over 65 min and data collected using a Top15 method for MS/MS scans.

### Data Protocol
Spectra were analysed using the predicted protein databases of E. glandulosa HHB12029 (Nagy et al., 2016) and M. mucida CBS55879 (Barrasa, 2014) using MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.3) with integrated Andromeda for database searching (Cox & Mann, 2008). MaxQuant parameters are as described in (Owens et al., 2015). The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository (Vizcaíno et al., 2016) with the dataset identifier to be provided. Removal of irrelevant protein groups and log2 transformation of LFQ intensities were performed in Perseus (version 1.4.1.3; Tyanova et al., 2016).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Temperature, Wood decay, Diurnal cycles, Lligninolytic fungi

### Affiliations
Fungal Molecular Ecology, Biosciences, Swansea University, Swansea, Wales
Swansea University

### Submitter
Anna Rawlings

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel C Eastwood
Fungal Molecular Ecology, Biosciences, Swansea University, Swansea, Wales


