### Accession
PXD001562

### Title
DYn-2 based identification of Arabidopsis sulfenomes

### Description
Identifying the sulfenylation state (-SOH) of stressed cells. Here, we optimized an in vivo trapping method of sulfenic acids in hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) stressed plant cells. With click chemistry, the dimedone based alkyne functionalized DYn-2 probe was biotinylated for subsequent streptavidin enrichment of sulfenylated proteins. the DYn-2 modification and  DYn-2-Biotin-azide modification were unknown modifications, we therefore chose N-D-glucuronylglycine [MOD00067] and N-palmitoyl-S-(sn-1-2,3-dipalmitoyl-glycerol)cysteine [MOD00444]

### Sample Protocol
Arabidopsis thaliana cell suspensions (PSB-D) were cultured as previously described (Van Leene et al., 2007). All experiments were performed on dark-grown cells to mid-log phase. The time and dose of the stress treatment as well as DYn-2 labeling were performed as described. (i) optimization of DYn-2 labeling conditions and Affinity enrichment of DYn-2 tagged proteins.(ii) competition study with the YAP1 probe (iii) detection of the dose dependent responses of cells to H2O2 treatment (iv) mass spectrometry based identification

### Data Protocol
These peak lists were then searched with the Mascot search engine (MatrixScience, www.matrixscience.com) using the Mascot Daemon interface (version 2.4, Matrix Science). The MS/MS data were searched against the TAIR10 database. Variable modifications were set to DYn2-Biotin-azide on cysteines, oxidation of cysteines, dioxidation andof cysteines, trioxidation of cysteines, methionine oxidation, pyro-glutamate formation of amino- terminal glutamine, and acetylation of the protein N-terminus. Mass tolerance on MS precursor ions was set to 10 ppm (with Mascot’s C13 option set to 1), MS/MS toleranceand on fragment ions to at 20 mmu. The instrument setting was put on ESI-QUAD. Enzyme was set to trypsin, allowing for one missed cleavage. Only peptides that were ranked one and scored above the threshold score, set at 99% confidence, were withheld.

### Publication Abstract
Identifying the sulfenylation state of stressed cells is emerging as a strategic approach for the detection of key reactive oxygen species signaling proteins. Here, we optimized an in vivo trapping method for cysteine sulfenic acids in hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) stressed plant cells using a dimedone based DYn-2 probe. We demonstrated that DYn-2 specifically detects sulfenylation events in an H2O2 dose- and time-dependent way. With mass spectrometry, we identified 226 sulfenylated proteins after H2O2 treatment of Arabidopsis cells, residing in the cytoplasm (123); plastid (68); mitochondria (14); nucleus (10); endoplasmic reticulum, Golgi and plasma membrane (7) and peroxisomes (4). Of these, 123 sulfenylated proteins have never been reported before to undergo cysteine oxidative post-translational modifications in plants. All in all, with this DYn-2 approach, we have identified new sulfenylated proteins, and gave a first glance on the locations of the sulfenomes of Arabidopsis thaliana.

### Keywords
Dyn-2 click chemistry, Biotinylation, Arabidopsis, Ros, Sulfenome, H2o2

### Affiliations
VIB-Ugent
VIB Department of Medical Protein Research

### Submitter
Jarne Pauwels

### Lab Head
Dr Kris Gevaert
VIB Department of Medical Protein Research


