### Accession
PXD034590

### Title
Profiling of purified autophagic vesicle content and degradome in the maturing and aging brain

### Description
In four label-free proteomics studies we characterize the organellar proteome of autophagosomes isolated from mouse brains using expression proteomics as well as organelle AP-MS.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were reduced and alkylated, fractionated by SDS-PAGE and proteins in gel digested using trypsin. Peptides were eluted and purified by STAQGE tips prior LC-MS/MS analysis

### Data Protocol
The MS raw files were analyzed using MaxQuant 1.6.2.10 using LFQ.

### Publication Abstract
Autophagy disorders prominently affect the brain, entailing neurodevelopmental and neurodegenerative phenotypes in adolescence or aging, respectively. Synaptic and behavioral deficits are largely recapitulated in mouse models with ablation of autophagy genes in brain cells. Yet, the nature and temporal dynamics of brain autophagic substrates remain insufficiently characterized. Here, we immunopurified LC3-positive autophagic vesicles (LC3-pAVs) from the mouse brain and proteomically profiled their content. Moreover, we characterized the LC3-pAV content that accumulates after macroautophagy impairment, validating a brain autophagic degradome. We reveal selective pathways for aggrephagy, mitophagy, and ER-phagy via selective autophagy receptors, and the turnover of numerous synaptic substrates, under basal conditions. To gain insight into the temporal dynamics of autophagic protein turnover, we quantitatively compared adolescent, adult, and aged brains, revealing critical periods of enhanced mitophagy or degradation of synaptic substrates. Overall, this resource unbiasedly characterizes the contribution of autophagy to proteostasis in the maturing, adult, and aged brain.

### Keywords
Vesicle, Brain, Lc-msms, Mouse, Autophagosome

### Affiliations
Department of Biology, University of Fribourg  Chemin du Musée 10, 1700 Fribourg, Switzerland  T  +41 26 300 8631
University of Fribourg

### Submitter
Joern Dengjel

### Lab Head
Dr Joern Dengjel
Department of Biology, University of Fribourg  Chemin du Musée 10, 1700 Fribourg, Switzerland  T  +41 26 300 8631


