### Accession
PXD047109

### Title
Exploring the secretome of Corynebacterium glutamicum ATCC 13032

### Description
The demand for alternative sources of food proteins is increasing due to the limitations and challenges associated with conventional food production. Advances in biotechnology have enabled the production of proteins using microorganisms, thus prompting the exploration of attractive microbial hosts capable of producing functional proteins in high titers. Corynebacterium glutamicum is widely used in industry for the production of amino acids and has many advantages as a host organism for recombinant protein production. However, its performance in this area is limited by low yields of target proteins and high levels of native protein secretion. Despite representing a challenge for heterologous protein production, the C. glutamicum secretome has not been fully characterized. In this study, state-of-the-art mass spectrometry-based proteomics was used to identify and analyze the proteins secreted by C. glutamicum. Both the wild-type strain and a strain that produced and secreted a recombinant ß-lactoglobulin protein were analyzed. A total of 427 proteins were identified in the culture supernatants, with 148 predicted to possess a secretion signal peptide. The top 12 most abundant proteins accounted for almost 80% of the secretome. These are uncharacterized proteins of unknown function, resuscitation promoting factors, protein PS1, Porin B, ABC-type transporter protein and hypothetical membrane protein. The data from this study can provide valuable insight for researchers looking to improve protein secretion and optimize C. glutamicum as a host for secretory protein production.

### Sample Protocol
For protein expression of WT (no heterologous gene) and whey protein strains, an overnight culture in BHI media supplemented with 1% glucose was used. The subcultures were grown in CGXII media supplemented with BHI, and IPTG in 500 mL baffled shake flasks with a culture volume of 40 mL. The cultures were centrifuged at 5000 x g for 25 minutes at 4 C, and the supernatant was processed for subsequent use.  The extracellular proteins were extracted from the supernatant as described by (Bittel et al., 2018). To the supernatant, a complete EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail was added to prevent proteolysis and centrifuged at 7000 g for 1h at 4 C. The supernatants were filtered using 0.2 m sterivex filters (Merck Millipore). Trichloroacetic (10% w/v) acid was added to the supernatant under constant stirring and incubated overnight at 4 C to precipitate the proteins. The protein pellets were collected after spinning down for 1h, 5500 g at 4 C. The precipitated protein pellets were washed with 80 % acetone twice and 100 % acetone followed by incubation on ice for 5 minutes and centrifugation at 5500 g for 10 minutes at 4 C. The pellets were air dried and subsequently solubilized in 400 L rehydration buffer (8M urea, 50mM Tris-base, 20mM DTT, and 1% sodium deoxycholate). After measuring the final protein concentration, the samples were flash-frozen using liquid nitrogen and stored at -20 C.  In-solution tryptic digest of the samples was prepared using a filter-aided sample preparation method. A total of 100 g of protein was exchanged into UA buffer (8M urea, 100mM Tris, pH - 8.0) to remove DTT and sodium deoxycholate using 30 kDa cut-off Microcon filters (Merck Millipore) for a couple of spins centrifuged at 14000 x g for 15 minutes. Alkylation was carried out in the filters using UA buffer with 50 mM chloroacetamide and incubated in the dark for 20 minutes. Post incubation, the filters were washed with UA buffer thrice followed by additional washes with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AB buffer) twice. The proteins were then digested overnight at 37 C with trypsin (Sigma Aldrich) using AB buffer (1:50 enzyme: protein ratio). Peptides were collected by centrifugation and desalted on C18 stage tips.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were processed with the MaxQuant software (2.0.1.0) using the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011). MS/MS raw files were searched against the Uniprot C. glutamicum ATCC 13032 database (UP000000582) and the LGB protein sequence with the LFQ and iBAQ options enabled. Trypsin was set as the digestion mode with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Oxidation of Met and acetylation of protein N-termini were set as variable modifications, while carbamidomethylation of Cys residues was selected as a fixed modification. Search results were filtered by the target-decoy method with a false discovery rate (FDR) cutoff of 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
-lactoglobulin, Recombinant protein production, Corynebacterium glutamicum, Secretome analysis, -lactalbumin

### Affiliations
DTU Biosustain, Technical University of Denmark
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability, Technical University of Denmark, Kongens Lyngby, Denmark.

### Submitter
Carsten Jers

### Lab Head
Dr Ivan Mijakovic
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability, Technical University of Denmark, Kongens Lyngby, Denmark.


