### Accession
PXD039684

### Title
The Trypanosoma brucei MISP family of invariant proteins are co-expressed with BARP as triple helical bundle structures on the surface of salivary gland forms, but is dispensable for parasite development within the tsetse vector

### Description
Trypanosoma brucei spp. develop into mammalian-infectious metacyclic trypomastigotes inside tsetse salivary glands. Besides acquiring a variant surface glycoprotein (VSG) coat, little is known about the metacyclic expression of invariant surface antigens. Proteomics analyses of saliva from T. brucei-infected flies identified, in addition to VSG and Brucei Alanine-Rich Protein (BARP) peptides, a family of GPIanchored surface proteins herein named Metacyclic Invariant Surface Proteins (MISP). The MISP family is encoded by five paralog genes with >80% protein identity, which are exclusively expressed by salivary gland stages of the parasite and peak in metacyclic stage, as shown by confocal microscopy and immuno-high resolution scanning electron microscopy. Crystallographic analysis of a MISP isoform (MISP360) and a high confidence model of BARP revealed a triple helical bundle architecture commonly found in other trypanosome surface proteins. Molecular modelling combined with live fluorescent microscopy suggests that MISP N-termini are extended above the VSG coat. However, vaccination with recombinant MISP360 isoform did not protect mice against a T. brucei infectious tsetse bite. Lastly, both RNAi knock down and CRISPR-Cas9-driven knock out of all MISP paralogues suggest they are not essential for parasite development in the tsetse vector. We speculate that MISP may be relevant during trypanosome inoculation or establishment in the vertebrate’s skin.

### Sample Protocol
Culture Methods Trypanosoma brucei brucei strain AnTat 1.1 90:13 were cultured in SDM-79 medium supplemented with 10% FBS, haemin, 2 mM L-glutamine, Glutamax (Gibco), 15 g/mL G418 (InvivoGen) and 50 g/mL hygromycin B (InvivoGen), at 27°C and 5% CO2. Cells were typically passaged every 2 days. Mutant PCF cell lines were cultured in the presence of the selection marker drugs puromycin 1 g/mL or zeocin 10 g/mL (InvivoGen). Cells requiring the activation of the transgene were cultured in the presence of fresh 1g/mL doxycycline (in 70% ethanol) or the same volume of 70% ethanol for negative controls. T. b. brucei AnTat 1.1 90:13 BSF were cultured in HMI-9 medium supplemented with 10% FBS, 10% Serum Plus (Sigma) and GlutaMax (Gibco), 2.5 g/mL G418 and 4 g/mL hygromycin B at 37°C and 5% CO2. G. m. morsitans were obtained from the tsetse insectary at the Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, where they were maintained at 26 ˚C (+/-1 ˚C) and 68-78 % relative humidity. Flies were fed for 12 minutes every second day on sterile, defibrinated horse blood (TCS Biosciences) through a silicone membrane feeding system. Teneral (24h post emergence, unfed) males were infected by combining T. b. brucei TSW196-infected rat blood with fresh, sterile, defibrinated horse blood at a density of 10^6 cells/mL. Alternatively, flies were infected by mixing T. b. brucei PCF cells with washed, defibrinated horse blood at a density of 5x10^5 cells/mL. Uninfected control flies were fed on the same blood (free of trypanosomes) for the same amount of time.  Saliva samples from naïve and T. brucei-infected tsetse were lyophilized. Any experimental flies that had not fed were removed the following day. Experimental flies were maintained for 4 weeks, feeding on normal defibrinated horse blood every 2 days. Alternatively, flies infected with mutant trypanosomes requiring tetracycline activation of the transgene were fed with normal defibrinated horse blood supplemented with fresh 2 g/mL doxycycline (in 70% ethanol). Bloodmeals for control flies were supplemented with the same volume of 70% ethanol only. Flies were dissected at 28 to 30 days post infection, 72 hours after receiving the last bloodmeal. For saliva proteomics, based on normal T. b. brucei TSW196 salivary gland infection rates (~15%) and yields (~104 trypanosomes/gland pair), 1,500 naïve and ~1,500 T. b. brucei-infected tsetse were dissected. Salivary glands were collected in sterile ice-cold PBS and centrifuged at 12,000 rpm for 5 minutes at 4°C to collect the resultant saliva supernatant. SG and saliva were then separately stored at -80°C until further analyses. Mass Spectrometry Methods Following trypsinization, the resulting peptides were analyzed by nano-liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (nLC-MS/MS) using the Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano coupled to LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro MS (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Resulting MS/MS spectra from HR-MS/MS analysis of T. b. brucei and G. m. morsitans samples were searched with Proteome Discoverer (PD) 2.1.1.21 (Thermo Fisher Scientific)

### Data Protocol
Bioinformatic Processing Resulting MS/MS spectra from HR-MS/MS analysis of T. b. brucei and G. m. morsitans samples were searched with Proteome Discoverer (PD) 2.1.1.21 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and filtered with an estimated false-discovery rate (FDR) of 1%. The PD settings were as follows: HCD MS/MS; cysteine carboxyamidomethylation as fixed modification; methionine oxidation and acetylation on any amino acid as variable modifications; fully tryptic peptides only; up to two missed cleavages; parent ion mass tolerance of 10 ppm (monoisotopic); and fragment mass tolerance of 0.6 Da (in SEQUEST) and 0.02 Da (in PD 2.1.1.21) (monoisotopic). Tandem MS/MS spectra were searched against the following databases: a combined protein database of T. b. brucei, T. b. gambiense and T. b. rhodesiense (downloaded in FASTA format in October 2017 from TriTrypDB; http://www.tritrypdb.org/, 18,729 entries) and (downloaded in FASTA format in October 2017 from UniProtKB; http://www.uniprot.org/; 25,450 entries), and G. m. morsitans (downloaded in FASTA format in May 2017 from VectorBase; https://www.vectorbase.org/; 12,494 entries). Common contaminant sequences (MaxQuant) were included in this combined database. The resulting PD dataset was further processed through Scaffold Q+ 4.8.2 and perSPECtives (Proteome Software, Portland, OR). A protein threshold of 95%, peptide threshold of 95%, and a minimum number of one unique peptide was used for identification of proteins. Manual inspection of the MS/MS spectrum was always performed for identification of any protein based on a single peptide. Using BLAST2GO, proteins were BLAST searched against the non redundant NCBI protein database and mapped and categorized according to gene ontology terms (GO). Sodalis glossinidius proteins were identified using the Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine in-house MASCOT MS/MS ion search using a protein database from UniProtKB generated from the latest re-annotated coding sequences in S. glossinidius [82], using the following settings: two missed trypsin cleavages, same peptide modifications described above, peptide tolerance of 1.2 Da, MS/MS tolerance of 1.2 Da and peptide charges set to +1, +2 and +3.

### Publication Abstract
Trypanosoma brucei spp. develop into mammalian-infectious metacyclic trypomastigotes inside tsetse salivary glands. Besides acquiring a variant surface glycoprotein (VSG) coat, little is known about the metacyclic expression of invariant surface antigens. Proteomic analyses of saliva from T. brucei-infected tsetse flies identified, in addition to VSG and Brucei Alanine-Rich Protein (BARP) peptides, a family of glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)-anchored surface proteins herein named as Metacyclic Invariant Surface Proteins (MISP) because of its predominant expression on the surface of metacyclic trypomastigotes. The MISP family is encoded by five paralog genes with &gt;80% protein identity, which are exclusively expressed by salivary gland stages of the parasite and peak in metacyclic stage, as shown by confocal microscopy and immuno-high resolution scanning electron microscopy. Crystallographic analysis of a MISP isoform (MISP360) and a high confidence model of BARP revealed a triple helical bundle architecture commonly found in other trypanosome surface proteins. Molecular modelling combined with live fluorescent microscopy suggests that MISP N-termini are potentially extended above the metacyclic VSG coat, and thus could be tested as a transmission-blocking vaccine target. However, vaccination with recombinant MISP360 isoform did not protect mice against a T. brucei infectious tsetse bite. Lastly, both CRISPR-Cas9-driven knock out and RNAi knock down of all MISP paralogues suggest they are not essential for parasite development in the tsetse vector. We suggest MISP may be relevant during trypanosome transmission or establishment in the vertebrate's skin.

### Keywords
Gpi, Proteomics, Tsetse, Trypanosoma brucei, Mass spectrometry, Metacyclic, Misp, Crystal structure

### Affiliations
School of Life Sciences
Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine  Pembroke Place Liverpool  L3 5QA UK

### Submitter
Douglas Lamont

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Alvaro Acosta Serrano
Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine  Pembroke Place Liverpool  L3 5QA UK


