### Accession
PXD001556

### Title
Mouse lysosome - LC-DIA-IM-MS -  Quantitative proteome analysis of mouse liver lysosomes provides evidence for mannose 6-phosphate-independent targeting mechanisms of acid hydrolases in mucolipidosis II

### Description
Quantitative profiling of new lysosomal  proteins of unknown function. Mouse models with loss-of-function were analysed in order to identify putative substrates or to reveal impaired pathological pathways. Interaction partners were sought to elucidate the function of the non-transporter proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Mouse lysosomes were extracted and fractionated from mouse liver. 20 µg of each sample was dissolved in 0.1% (w/v) RapiGest  in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and heated at 80ºC for 45 min. The samples were reduced in the presence of 5 mM dithitreitol at 60ºC for 30 min and alkylated in the presence of 10 mM iodoacetamide at ambient temperature in the dark for another 30 min. Proteolytic digestion was initiated by adding sequencing grade TMPK-treated trypsin) at a 1:50 (w/w) ratio and incubation conducted for 4 hours at 37ºC. A further aliquot of Trypsin was added at a 1:50 (w/w) ratio and followed by incubation overnight at 37ºC. TFA was added to a final concentration of 0.5% (v/v) in order to hydrolyze the RapiGest and the solutions incubated at 37°C for 20 min before being vortexed and centrifuged for 30 min at 13,000 rpm.

### Data Protocol
ProteinLynx GlobalSERVER version 3.0.2 (Waters Corporation) was used to process all data acquired. Protein identifications were obtained by the reviewed entries of a Mus Musculus UniProt database (16,674 entries, release 2014_10). In order to detect and monitor protein and peptide identification error rates, decoy database entries were created on the fly with every search conducted by reversing the original protein amino acid sequences and concatenating them with the original database entries. Peptide and fragment ion tolerances were determined automatically, one missed cleavage site was allowed, as well as fixed modification carbamidomethylation of cysteine and variable modification oxidation of methionine. ISOQuant was applied for the integrated quantitative analysis of data derived from multiple LC-MS runs.

### Publication Abstract
The efficient receptor-mediated targeting of soluble lysosomal proteins to lysosomes requires the modification with mannose 6-phosphate (M6P) residues. Although the absence of M6P results in misrouting and hypersecretion of lysosomal enzymes in many cells, normal levels of lysosomal enzymes have been reported in liver of patients lacking the M6P-generating phosphotransferase (PT). The identity of lysosomal proteins depending on M6P has not yet been comprehensively analyzed. In this study we purified lysosomes from liver of PT-defective mice and 67 known soluble lysosomal proteins were identified that illustrated quantitative changes using an ion mobility-assisted data-independent label-free LC-MS approach. After validation of various differentially expressed lysosomal components by Western blotting and enzyme activity assays, the data revealed a small number of lysosomal proteins depending on M6P, including neuraminidase 1, cathepsin F, Npc2, and cathepsin L, whereas the majority reach lysosomes by alternative pathways. These data were compared with findings on cultured hepatocytes and liver sinusoid endothelial cells isolated from the liver of wild-type and PT-defective mice. Our findings show that the relative expression, targeting efficiency and lysosomal localization of lysosomal proteins tested in cultured hepatic cells resemble their proportion in isolated liver lysosomes. Hypersecretion of newly synthesized nonphosphorylated lysosomal proteins suggest that secretion-recapture mechanisms contribute to maintain major lysosomal functions in liver.

### Keywords
Mouse, Liver, Lysosome

### Affiliations
Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel Institute of Biochemistry Eduard-Buchner-Haus Otto-Hahn-Platz 9 D-24118 Kiel
Waters Corporation

### Submitter
Hans Vissers

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Markus Damme
Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel Institute of Biochemistry Eduard-Buchner-Haus Otto-Hahn-Platz 9 D-24118 Kiel


