### Accession
PXD004050

### Title
Boron-toxicity-induced alterations of protein profiles in roots of two citrus species differing in boron-tolerance revealed by 2-DE

### Description
After long-term different boron and aluminum treatment, 2D electrophoresis and mass spectrum were conducted to investigate different proteiomic profile in Citrus sinensis roots samples.

### Sample Protocol
Before MS/MS analysis, the protein pellet was redissolved in 0.8 μL matrix solution [5 mg/mL α-cyano-4-hydroxy-cinnamic acid diluted in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), 50% (v/v) acetonitrile]. Then the mixture was spotted onto a MALDI target plate (AB SCIEX). MS analysis of peptide was performed on an AB SCIEX 5800 TOF/TOF. The UV laser was operated at a 400 Hz repetition rate with wavelength of 355 nm. The accelerated voltage was operated at 20 kV, and mass resolution was maximized at 1600 Da. Myoglobin digested with trypsin was used to calibrate the mass instrument with internal calibration mode.

### Data Protocol
All acquired spectra of samples were processed using TOF/TOF ExplorerTM Software (AB SCIEX) in a default mode. The data were searched by GPS Explorer (Version 3.6) with the search engine MASCOT (Version 2.3, Matrix Science Inc, Boston, MA). The search parameters were as follow: viridiplantae database (1850050 sequences; 642453415 residues), trypsin digest with one missing cleavage, MS tolerance was set at 100 ppm, MS/MS tolerance was set at 0.6 Da. Protein with scores greater than 75 were considered statistically significant (P < 0.05) and accepted.

### Publication Abstract
Citrus are sensitive to boron (B)-toxicity. In China, B-toxicity occurs in some citrus orchards. So far, limited data are available on B-toxicity-responsive proteins in higher plants. Thirteen-week-old seedlings of "Sour pummelo" (<i>Citrus grandis</i>) and "Xuegan" (<i>Citrus sinensis</i>) was fertilized every other day until dripping with nutrient solution containing 10 &#x3bc;M (control) or 400 &#x3bc;M (B-toxicity) H<sub>3</sub>BO<sub>3</sub> for 15 weeks. The typical B-toxic symptom only occurred in 400 &#x3bc;M B-treated <i>C. grandis</i> leaves, and that B-toxicity decreased root dry weight more in <i>C. grandis</i> seedlings than in <i>C. sinensis</i> ones, demonstrating that <i>C. sinensis</i> was more tolerant to B-toxicity than <i>C. grandis</i>. Using a 2-dimensional electrophoresis (2-DE) based MS approach, we identified 27 up- and four down-accumulated, and 28 up- and 13 down-accumulated proteins in B-toxic <i>C. sinensis</i> and <i>C. grandis</i> roots, respectively. Most of these proteins were isolated only from B-toxic <i>C. sinensis</i> or <i>C. grandis</i> roots, only nine B-toxicity-responsive proteins were shared by the two citrus species. Great differences existed in B-toxicity-induced alterations of protein profiles between <i>C. sinensis</i> and <i>C. grandis</i> roots. More proteins related to detoxification were up-accumulated in B-toxic <i>C. grandis</i> roots than in B-toxic <i>C. sinensis</i> roots to meet the increased requirement for the detoxification of the more reactive oxygen species and other toxic compounds such as aldehydes in the former. For the first time, we demonstrated that the active methyl cycle was induced and repressed in B-toxic <i>C. sinensis</i> and <i>C. grandis</i> roots, respectively, and that <i>C. sinensis</i> roots had a better capacity to keep cell wall and cytoskeleton integrity than <i>C. grandis</i> roots in response to B-toxicity, which might be responsible for the higher B-tolerance of <i>C. sinensis</i>. In addition, proteins involved in nucleic acid metabolism, biological regulation and signal transduction might play a role in the higher B-tolerance of <i>C. sinensis</i>.

### Keywords
Boron-toxicity • citrus grandis • citrus sinensis • 2-de • proteome • roots

### Affiliations
Fujian Agricultural and Forestry University
College of Resources and Environment, Fujian Agricultural and Forestry University

### Submitter
Lin-Tong Yang

### Lab Head
Dr Lisong Chen
College of Resources and Environment, Fujian Agricultural and Forestry University


