### Accession
PXD001183

### Title
Proteomic characterisation of microtubule-dependent modulation of adhesion complexes

### Description
Investigating the effect of microtubule disruption by nocodazole treatment on isolated adhesion complexes.

### Sample Protocol
Adhesion complexes on fibronectin matrix were stabilised by DTBP cross-linking. Cells were lysed by sonication in an ammonium hydroxide buffer. Adhesion complexes were scrapped up in Laemmli reducing sample buffer, fractionated by SDS-PAGE, gel lanes cut into 30 slices and proteins were trypsin digested overnight. LC-MS/MS was carried out using a UltiMate 3000 RSLC, coupled to an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer. Peptides were concentrated on a pre-column (20 mm x 180 i.d, Waters) and separated in an analytical column (250mm x 75 um i.d 1.7 uM BEH C18 Waters).

### Data Protocol
Peak list files were searched against a modified version of IPI human database using an in-house Mascot server. Fixed modification was set for caramidomethylation of cysteine and variable modification was set for oxidation of methionine. Max missed clevages were set to 1. Mascot Daemon (v2.2) was used to process batched of RAW files by creating peak lists using extract_msn search script. Results were loaded in Scaffold 3, and peptide and protein identification threshold was set to 95% and 99% respectively.

### Publication Abstract
The microtubule network regulates the turnover of integrin-containing adhesion complexes to stimulate cell migration. Disruption of the microtubule network results in an enlargement of adhesion complex size due to increased RhoA-stimulated actomyosin contractility, and inhibition of adhesion complex turnover; however, the microtubule-dependent changes in adhesion complex composition have not been studied in a global, unbiased manner. Here we used label-free quantitative mass spectrometry-based proteomics to determine adhesion complex changes that occur upon microtubule disruption with nocodazole. Nocodazole-treated cells displayed an increased abundance of the majority of known adhesion complex components, but no change in the levels of the fibronectin-binding &#x3b1;5&#x3b2;1 integrin. Immunofluorescence analyses confirmed these findings, but revealed a change in localisation of adhesion complex components. Specifically, in untreated cells, &#x3b1;5-integrin co-localised with vinculin at peripherally located focal adhesions and with tensin at centrally located fibrillar adhesions. In nocodazole-treated cells, however, &#x3b1;5-integrin was found in both peripherally located and centrally located adhesion complexes that contained both vinculin and tensin, suggesting a switch in the maturation state of adhesion complexes to favour focal adhesions. Moreover, the switch to focal adhesions was confirmed to be force-dependent as inhibition of cell contractility with the Rho-associated protein kinase inhibitor, Y-27632, prevented the nocodazole-induced conversion. These results highlight a complex interplay between the microtubule cytoskeleton, adhesion complex maturation state and intracellular contractile force, and provide a resource for future adhesion signaling studies. The proteomics data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD001183.

### Keywords
Adhesion complexes, Nocodazole, Lc-msms

### Affiliations
The University of Manchester
Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell-Matrix Research, University of Manchester

### Submitter
Daniel Ng

### Lab Head
Dr Martin James Humphries
Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell-Matrix Research, University of Manchester


