### Accession
PXD020543

### Title
Prednisolone alters decidualization and affects decidual-trophoblast interactions

### Description
Identification of cellular proteins in human endometrial stromal fibroblasts decidualized for 13 days in vitro. Fibroblasts were cultured under normal culture conditions (5% CO2 in 2% charcoal stripped FBS) and treated with prednisolone (0.5ug/ml) or vehicle control (DMSO) every 48-72h for 13 days

### Sample Protocol
Samples (3ug) were reconstituted in 50 mM Triethyl ammonium Bicarbonate buffer (TEAB) Add TCEP or DTT to 10mM and shake for 45 min at 37 degree. You can add TCEP/DTT to the solubilization buffer if you are using a reducing agent compatible BCA assay. Add iodoacetamide to 55mM, shake for 45 min at 37 degree. SP3 protein cleanup and digestion  Precool the ThermoMixer to 24 °C.Dilute 3 μg protein to a final volume of 35 μL in 50mMTEAB solution. Add 33 μg of prepared SP3 beads and pipette-mix to homogenize the solution. This will be 1 μL of a prepared 33.33μg/μL SP3 bead stock, giving a final total volume of 50 μL of protein solution. CRITICAL STEP Ensure complete homogenization of the SP3 beads in the solution. Mixing can be achieved with gentle pipetting. Improper mixing will reduce the efficiency of protein recovery with SP3. To induce binding of the proteins to the beads, add 50 μL of ethanol to the protein mixture containing the SP3 beads. Briefly shake the tube to homogenize. Incubate the binding mixture in a ThermoMixer at 24 °C for 5 min at 1,000 r.p.m. After the binding is complete, place the tube in a magnetic rack and incubate it until the beads have migrated to the tube wall.  Remove and discard the unbound supernatant in an appropriate waste container. Remove the tube from the magnetic rack, and add 180 μL of 80% ethanol SP3 rinse solution and pipette-mix to reconstitute and rinse the beads. Place the tube on the magnetic rack and incubate until the beads have migrated to the tube wall. Remove the supernatant, taking care to not disrupt the beads. CRITICAL STEP The supernatant can be retained and analysed by another assay (e.g., SDS–PAGE) as part of a troubleshooting process to determine potential losses during rinse steps. Little to no protein should be observed in this supernatant. Repeat Steps 6–9 two further times to completely rinse the proteins bound to the SP3 beads. Remove the tube from the magnetic rack and add 100 μL of digestion solution trypsin 1:10 ratio. If available, sonicate for 30 s in a water bath to fully disaggregate the beads. If a sonicating water bath is not available, incubate the tube at 37 °C in a ThermoMixer for 10 min at 1,000 r.p.m. mixing. Pipette-mix to ensure proper reconstitution of the beads, and incubate for 18 h at 37 °C in ThermoMixer at 1,000 r.p.m. mixing. After the digestion is complete, centrifuge the tube at 20,000g at 24 °C for 1 min. Place the tube on a magnetic rack until the beads have settled onto the tube wall and remove the supernatant to a fresh tube. Proceed with MS analysis of the peptide sample.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were searched against the Human protein reference proteomes (UniProt Proteome ID: UP000005640) using MaxQuant-Andromeda (version 1.6.7.0). The false discovery rate (FDR) was set at 0.01 for both peptides and proteins. Search parameters were set as follows: variable modifications: Oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein N-term); fixed modifications: cysteine carbamidomethylation. The analysis of the samples was based on the label-free quantification (LFQ) intensities. Initial analyses and visualization of proteomics data was performed using LFQ-Analyst. The data was statistically evaluated using Perseus software (version 1.6.7.0). The protein data was filtered categorically by row for reverse identifications (false positives), contaminants, and proteins “only identified by site”. The fold changes in the protein levels were evaluated by comparing the mean LFQ intensities amid all experimental groups. A protein was considered to be differentially expressed if the difference was statistically significant (p < 0.05), the fold change >1.5 and < 0.66 was identified with a minimum of 2 peptides

### Publication Abstract
Poor pregnancy outcomes such as recurrent pregnancy loss (RPL) and preeclampsia are associated with impaired decidualization and abnormal trophoblast invasion. Emerging evidence suggests that use of corticosteroids, including prednisolone affects fertility by altering uterine function and may be associated with preeclampsia incidence. In this study, using primary and gestational-age appropriate tissue, we aimed to define the effect of prednisolone on human endometrial stromal fibroblast (hESF) decidualization and determine whether hESF decidualization in the presence of prednisolone would alter hESF regulation of trophoblast function. We found that prednisolone treatment reduced hESF cytokine expression (<i>IL6</i>, <i>IL11</i>, <i>IL18, LIF</i>, and <i>LIFR</i>) but had no effect on hESF expression or secretion of the classic markers of decidualization [prolactin (PRL) and IGFBP1]. Using proteomics we determined that prednisolone altered decidualized hESF protein production, enriching hESF proteins associated with acetylation and mitrochondria. Conditioned media from hESF decidualized in the presence of prednisolone significantly enhanced trophoblast outgrowth and trophoblast mRNA expression of cell motility gene <i>PLCG1</i> and reduced trophoblast production of <i>PGF</i>. Prednisolone treatment during the menstrual cycle and 1st trimester of pregnancy might alter decidual interactions with other cells, including invasive trophoblast.

### Keywords
Human, Label free quantification, Lcms, Prednisolone; decidualization; trophoblast; recurrent pregnancy loss; repeated implantation failure

### Affiliations
Post-doctoral fellow
Department of Obsetrics and Gynecology, The University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Swati Varshney

### Lab Head
Dr Ellen Menkhorst
Department of Obsetrics and Gynecology, The University of Melbourne


