### Accession
PXD004557

### Title
HCOV-NL63 spike protein glycopeptides

### Description
HCoV-NL63 is a coronavirus that can cause severe lower respiratory tract infections requiring hospitalization. Of great interest is understanding the HCoV-NL63 coronavirus spike glycoprotein trimer, which is the conformational machine responsible for entry into host cells and the sole target of neutralizing antibodies during infection. We utilized an electron-transfer/higher energy collision dissociation ion fragmentation scheme (Frese, C. K. et al., 2013.) in combination with cryo-electron microscopy to resolve the extensive glycan shield that obstructs the protein surface. These glycans provide a structural framework to understanding the accessibility of the protein to antibodies.

### Sample Protocol
Recombinant HCOV-NL63 spike protein from S2 insect cells was analyzed with intact glycans, or after being subjected to Endo H (NEB), subjected to Endo F3 (Millipore), or subjected to combined Endo H and Endo F3 deglycosylation overnight. HCoV-NL63 S were then incubated in a freshly prepared solution containing 100mM Tris pH 8.5, 2% sodium deoxycholate, 10mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine, and 40mM iodoacetamide at 95C for five minutes followed by 25C for thirty minutes in the dark. Denatured, reduced, and alkylated HCoV-NL63 S was then diluted into freshly made 50mM ammonium bicarbonate and incubated for 14 hours at 37C either with trypsin (Sigma Aldrich) or chymotrypsin (Sigma Aldrich). Formic acid was then added to a final concentration of 2% to precipitate the sodium deoxycholate in the samples, followed by centrifugation at 14,000 rpm for 20 minutes. The supernatant containing the (glyco)-peptides was collected and spun again at 14,000 rpm for 5 min immediately before sample analysis. Between 4 and 7 µL were run on a ThermoScientific Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer. An electron-transfer/higher energy collision dissociation ion fragmentation scheme (Frese, C. K. et al., 2013.) was used with calibrated charge dependent ETD parameters and supplemental higher energy collision dissociation energy of 0.15 for the samples with intact glycopeptides and 0.2 for the samples treated with endoglycosidases.

### Data Protocol
The data were searched against a custom database including recombinant coronavirus S glycoprotein sequences, a list of common contaminant proteins including trypsin, chymotrypsin and the endoglycosidases, as well as 998 decoy reverse yeast sequences, using trypsin or chymotrypsin as the protease, allowing up to two missed cleavages. All searches included carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine as variable modification. An initial comprehensive search for glycosylation revealed that (core-fucosylated) paucimannose and high-mannose structures were the only identified glycan species in the samples. Based on these findings, a final search was performed with COMET ( Eng, et al. 2013) on the same data using the following list of variable modifications of asparagine residues: +HexNAc(2)Hex(3), +HexNAc(2)Hex(3)dHex(1), +HexNAc(2)Hex(3)dHex(2), +HexNAc(2)Hex(4), +HexNAc(2)Hex(5), +HexNAc(2)Hex(6), +HexNAc(2)Hex(7), +HexNAc(2)Hex(8) and +HexNAc(2)Hex(9). The samples treated with endoglycosidases were searched using +HexNAc, +HexNAc(1)dHex(1) and +HexNAc(1)dHex(2) as variable modifications of asparagine. We used a precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm, 0.02 fragment bin size, including b/c/y/z fragments and using monoisotopic masses for both precursor and fragment ions.

### Publication Abstract
The threat of a major coronavirus pandemic urges the development of strategies to combat these pathogens. Human coronavirus NL63 (HCoV-NL63) is an &#x3b1;-coronavirus that can cause severe lower-respiratory-tract infections requiring hospitalization. We report here the 3.4-&#xc5;-resolution cryo-EM reconstruction of the HCoV-NL63 coronavirus spike glycoprotein trimer, which mediates entry into host cells and is the main target of neutralizing antibodies during infection. The map resolves the extensive glycan shield obstructing the protein surface and, in combination with mass spectrometry, provides a structural framework to understand the accessibility to antibodies. The structure reveals the complete architecture of the fusion machinery including the triggering loop and the C-terminal domains, which contribute to anchoring the trimer to the viral membrane. Our data further suggest that HCoV-NL63 and other coronaviruses use molecular trickery, based on epitope masking with glycans and activating conformational changes, to evade the immune system of infected hosts.

### Keywords
Virus, Glycopeptide, Ethcd

### Affiliations
Utrecht University
Department of Biochemistry, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA

### Submitter
Joost Snijder

### Lab Head
Dr David Veesler
Department of Biochemistry, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA


