### Accession
PXD006474

### Title
Proteome analsyis of Translocation phenomenon

### Description
Escherichia coli is the most widely used bacterial model organism and is the most commonly used host for the expression of recombinant proteins. Here we describe an unexpected protein translocation phenomenon in E. coli, whereby over-expression of recombinant proteins leads to high-level lysis-independent, mechanosensitive channel (MscL) dependent release of recombinant protein into the periplasmic space. Protein accumulation in the periplasm leads to protein release into the extracellular environment, independent of outer membrane vesicle formation. The translocated proteins retain their corresponding biological activity, and can be isolated directly from the extracellular medium with high purity and yield. Condition-specific metabolomic and proteomic analyses combined with statistical enrichment analysis indicate a role of both osmotic and translational stress responses in the regulation of the MscL-dependent translocation phenomenon. We suggest a model coupling translational stress to the regulation of MscL via the action of both osmotic stress and the Alternative ribosome-rescue factor A (ArfA) to explain this potentially very useful phenomenon.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for proteomics. Samples for proteomic analyses (in 5 biological replicates) were taken from BL21(DE3) shake flask cultivations carrying either pET44-eGFP or pET44-NusA and grown as described in above (Expression induction procedure section) for 16 h. Total cell extract (Ex) and periplasmic (P) samples were prepared as follows: i. Ex samples were prepared from cells harvested at 4500 g, washed in PBS buffer (twice), re-suspended in buffer 1 (10 mM Tris pH8/200 mM NaCl containing Protease inhibitor cocktail and DNAase), disrupted by sonication at 30 amp for 10 min (20'' ON 40'' OFF cycle) and centrifuged at 35,000 g for 30'. ii. P samples were prepared as described in Fractionation of E. coli. section. The samples were then incubated with GFP-Trap_A beads (ChromoTek) according to the manufactory protocol to deplete the dominant eGFP. 0.1 % SDS was added to the unbound fraction and snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at −80 °C until further processing.   LC-MS/MS analysis: Samples were prepared for mass spectrometry using a modified FASP method (Wisniewski, Zougman et al., 2009) with the following modification: samples were buffer-exchanged with 0.1% SDS in Microcon-30 kDa centrifugal filter units (Merck Millipore) at a speed of 14,000 g. After three cycles of buffer exchange with 0.1% SDS (50 µL), the protein concentration was measured using Millipore Direct Detect® spectrometer at AM3. A total of 12.5 µg of protein was added to a fresh 30-kDa filter tube for reduction (DTT), alkylation (iodoacetimide) and proteolytic digestion to be performed in the filter tubes. The SDS buffer in the samples was exchanged with 8M Urea 0.1 M Tris-HCl buffer pH8 for 2 cycles. Following reduction and alkylation, (Wisniewski et al., 2009) subsequently the proteins were concentrated and re-suspended in 6 M urea in Tris-HCl buffer pH 8. Endoproteinase Lys-C was used for the initial digestion at a ratio of 1:30 (enzyme:protein), after 3 h the urea concentration was dropped to a concentration of 1M with Tris-HCl pH 8. The proteins were then digested with trypsin at a ratio of 1:50 (enzyme:protein). After digestion, peptides were collected by centrifugation and were desalted with OLIGO™ R3 reversed-phase resin on a microplate system, and then reconstituted in 5% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Digested samples were analysed by LC-MS/MS using an UltiMate® 3000 Rapid Separation LC (RSLC, Dionex Corporation, Sunnyvale, CA) coupled to an Q Exactive™ HF Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap™ (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) mass spectrometer. Peptide mixtures were separated using a 60 minute gradient from 92% A (0.1% FA in water) and 8% B (0.1% FA in acetonitrile) to 33% B, in 44 min at 300 nL/min, using a 250 mm x 75 μm i.d. 1.7 mM BEH C18, analytical column (Waters).  Peptides were selected for fragmentation automatically by data dependant analysis.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and label-free quantification. The acquired raw files were imported into the Progenesis LC-MS software (v2.0, Nonlinear Dynamics Limited), which was used to extract peptide precursor ion intensities across all samples applying the default parameters. The proteins were identified using MASCOT against the predicted proteome from both E. coli K12 (UniProt version July 2016; narrowed to the species Eschericha coli (strain K12))

### Publication Abstract
The apparent mislocalization or excretion of cytoplasmic proteins is a commonly observed phenomenon in both bacteria and eukaryotes. However, reports on the mechanistic basis and the cellular function of this so-called "nonclassical protein secretion" are limited. Here we report that protein overexpression in recombinant cells and antibiotic-induced translation stress in wild-type <i>Escherichia coli</i> cells both lead to excretion of cytoplasmic protein (ECP). Condition-specific metabolomic and proteomic analyses, combined with genetic knockouts, indicate a role for both the large mechanosensitive channel (MscL) and the alternative ribosome rescue factor A (ArfA) in ECP. Collectively, the findings indicate that MscL-dependent protein excretion is positively regulated in response to both osmotic stress and <i>arfA</i>-mediated translational stress.<b>IMPORTANCE</b> Protein translocation is an essential feature of cellular organisms. Bacteria, like all single-cell organisms, interact with their environment by translocation of proteins across their cell membranes via dedicated secretion pathways. Proteins destined for secretion are directed toward the secretion pathways by the presence of specific signal peptides. This study demonstrates that under conditions of both osmotic stress and translation stress, <i>E.&#xa0;coli</i> cells undergo an excretion phenomenon whereby signal peptide-less proteins are translocated across both the inner and outer cell membranes into the extracellular environment. Confirming the presence of alternative translocation/excretion pathways and understanding their function and regulation are thus important for fundamental microbiology and biotechnology.

### Keywords
Translocation, Arfa, Translatinla stress, Mscl

### Affiliations
University of Manchester
MIB, Univesitry of Manchester

### Submitter
Neil Dixon

### Lab Head
Dr Neil Dixon
MIB, Univesitry of Manchester


