### Accession
PXD037527

### Title
Wide-Window Acquisition Improves Proteome Coverage and Measurement  Throughput for Label-Free Single-Cell Proteomics

### Description
The sensitivity of single-cell proteomics (SCP) has increased dramatically in recent years due to advances in experimental design, sample preparation, separations and mass spectrometry instrumentation. However, further increasing the sensitivity of SCP methods and instrumentation will enable the study of proteins within single cells that are expressed at copy numbers too small to be measured by current methods. Here we further increase SCP sensitivity by combining efficient nanoPOTS sample preparation and ultra-low-flow liquid chromatography with a newly developed data acquisition and analysis scheme termed wide window acquisition (WWA) to extend the achievable proteome coverage for single cells to >3,000 for single-cell data analyses. WWA is based on data-dependent acquisition (DDA) but employs larger precursor isolation windows to intentionally co-isolate and co-fragment additional precursors along with the selected precursor. The resulting chimeric MS2 spectra are then resolved using the CHIMERYS search engine within Proteome Discoverer 3.0. Compared to standard DDA workflows, WWA employing isolation windows of 8-12 Th increases peptide and proteome coverage by ~28% and ~39%, respectively. For a 40 min LC gradient operated at ~15 nL/min, we identified an average of 2,150 proteins per single-cell-sized aliquots of protein digest directly from MS2 spectra, which increased to an average 3,524 proteins including proteins identified with MS1-level feature matching. Reducing the active gradient to 20 min resulted in only a 10% decrease in proteome coverage. We also compared performance of WWA with DIA underperformed relative to WWA in terms of proteome coverage, especially with faster separations. Average proteome coverage for single HeLa and K562 cells was respectively 1,758 and 1,642 based on MS2 identifications with 1% false discovery rate and 3042 and 2891 with MS1 feature matching. As such, WWA combined with efficient sample preparation and rapid separations extends the depths of the proteome that can be studied at the single-cell level.

### Sample Protocol
Sample Preparation. For the screening experiment, Hela and K562 digest standard were diluted in mobile phase A to 10 ng/µL and 0.2 ng/µL. For single cell analysis, HeLa and K562 cells were cultured and harvested. Following pelleting and removal of cell media, cells were resuspended in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) to reach a concentration of ~300,000 cells/mL. The cellenONE X1 was used for single-cell isolation and reagent dispensing for nanoPOTS sample processing and dried on-chip prior to analysis. Separation. Analytical and micro-solid-phase-extraction (SPE or trap) columns were prepared in-house using Dr. Maisch ReproSil-Pur C18 media having 1.9 µm diameter and 120 Å pore size. Columns were packed in 20-µm-i.d. × 30-cm-long fused silica capillary. Trap columns were 50-µm-i.d. × 5-cm. Aliquots of bulk-prepared protein digest were analyzed from glass vials using an Ultimate 3000 nanoLC system modified with a 10-port valve. Sample was loaded onto the SPE at ~ 0.3 µL/min for 10 min at 1% mobile phase B before the valve was switched to deliver the sample onto the analytical column. The flowrate through the analytical column was ~15 nL/min. Electrospray potential (2.2 kV) was applied to the Nanovolume union upstream of the analytical column. Single cell samples were analyzed directly from nanowell chips via a custom autosampler. For 40-min active gradients, mobile phase B was increased from 1 to 2% in 1 min, 2 to 8% in 5 min, 8 to 15% in 15 min, 15 to 20% in in 9 min and 20 to 25% in 6 min, and 25 to 45% in 10 min. For column washing and regeneration, mobile phase B was increased from 45 to 80% B in 5 min, stepped to 90% for 5 min, stepped to 1% and held for 25 min. For 20-min active elution gradients, the following steps were modified: mobile phase B was ramped from 8 to 15% in 7.5 min, then to 20% in 4.5 min and to 25% in 3 min. MS Acquisition. The LC column/emitter assembly was interfaced with an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer via the Nanospray Flex Ion Source. The temperature of the ion transfer tube was set to 200 °C and the RF lens setting was 50%. For MS1, the Orbitrap resolution was set to 120,000 (m/z 200) with the normalized AGC target set to 300%. The scan range was between 375-1575 m/z and the maximum injection time was set to 118 ms. To trigger MS2 for all experiments, the precursor intensity threshold was set to 5.0E3, charge state was 2 to 4, dynamic exclusion was 20s for 20 min LC gradients and 25s 40 min gradients. The cycle time was 1.5 s. For standard DDA, the isolation window was 1.6 Th, the HCD collision energy was 30%, and the the MS2resolution was respectively set to 15,000 and 60,000 for 10 and 0.2ng HeLa/K562 protein digest standard. The maximum injection time for 10 and 0.2 ng was 22 and 118ms, respectively, and the AGC target was 200%. For WWA, a combination of settings for the isolation windows, resolution, and injection time were evaluated. The AGC target was set to the maximum 1000% for all experiments. The isolation widths were 2, 4, 8, 12, 18, 24 and 48 Th. The MS2 resolution was 30,000, 45,000, 60,000 and 120,000 with corresponding 54 ms, 86 ms,118 ms and 246 ms injection times. For single cell samples, we selected an isolation window of 8 Th for WWA with 60,000 MS2 resolution and 118 ms injection time. For DIA experiments, the precursor scanning range was from 400 to 800 m/z with a fixed window of 50 m/z increment as well as varied ones. Window overlap was 1. HCD collision energy was 30%. Resolution of 60000, injection time of 118ms and AGC target of 1000% for 0.2 ng standard and single cell experiments. For 10 ng DIA library, 30000 resolution, 54ms injection time and AGC target of 1000% were set.

### Data Protocol
Data processing protocol Data Analysis. For DDA and WWA experiments, raw files were searched using Proteome Discoverer (PD) (Thermo Scientific, version 3.0.1.13) with the CHIMERYS identification node using prediction model inferys_2.1_fragmentation as default settings. Database search included human (Uniprot version 2022-8-11) and yeast (uniport, version 2022-8-11) as well as common contaminants (PD, version 2018-10-26). Enzyme was set as Trypsin with maximum 2 missed cleavages. Other parameters included peptide lengths of 7-30 amino acids, a maximum of 3 modications, and charges between 2 and 4. Fragment mass tolerance was 20 ppm. Carbamidomethyl (C) was fixed as a static modification by the CHIMERYS software. Results were filtered with Percolator node at 1% FDR. For MBR, retention time tolerance was set at 0.25 min with a mass tolerance of 5 ppm.  For DIA experiments, FrapPipe (version 1.8) and DIA-NN (version 1.8.1) were used with default DIA_Speclib_Quant workflow. The spectral libraries were generated by FragPipe with RT calibration set to ciRT. Quantification was performed with DIA-NN with Robust LC (high precision) as quantification strategy and MBR enabled. Database search was also human (version 2022-8-11) with added decoys and common contaminants. FDR was set to 1%.

### Publication Abstract
We combined efficient sample preparation and ultra-low-flow liquid chromatography with a newly developed data acquisition and analysis scheme termed wide window acquisition (WWA) to quantify &gt;3,000 proteins from single cells in rapid label-free analyses. WWA employs large isolation windows to intentionally co-isolate and co-fragment adjacent precursors along with the selected precursor. Optimized WWA increased the number of MS2-identified proteins by &#x2248;40&#x2009;% relative to standard data-dependent acquisition. For a 40-min LC gradient operated at &#x2248;15 nL/min, we identified an average of 3,524 proteins per single-cell-sized aliquot of protein digest. Reducing the active gradient to 20&#x2005;min resulted in a modest 10&#x2009;% decrease in proteome coverage. Using this platform, we compared protein expression between single HeLa cells having an essential autophagy gene, atg9a, knocked out, with their isogenic WT parental line. Similar proteome coverage was observed, and 268 proteins were significantly up- or downregulated. Protein upregulation primarily related to innate immunity, vesicle trafficking and protein degradation.

### Keywords
Single-cell proteomics, Proteome, Wide-window acquisition, Label-free

### Affiliations
Brigham Young University
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Brigham Young University.

### Submitter
Ryan Kelly

### Lab Head
Dr Ryan T Kelly
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Brigham Young University.


