### Accession
PXD001168

### Title
29RNP kinase -  Identification and characterization of chloroplast casein kinase II from Oryza sativa (rice)

### Description
We firstly identified a chloroplast  casein kinase 2  from rice heparin sepharose enrichmen which could phosphorylate the RNP29. Then we identified the phosphorylation site of  RNP29. We also performed the phosophoproteome analysis of rice and compared the phosphorylation site between rice and arabidopsis.

### Sample Protocol
The rice leaf phosphoproteome screen was performed with rice plants grown as described above. Proteins were extracted from frozen material in a buffer containing 40 mM Tris, 4% SDS, 40 mM DTT and phosphatase inhibitors and solubilized proteins were precipitated by methanol/chloroform (Wessel and Flügge, 1984). Finally, the protein pellets were resolved in a small volume of resuspension buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.3, 3 mM EDTA, 8M Urea). For the tryptic digest, the protein solution was diluted to 1 M Urea by adding 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.3, 3 mM EDTA. Phosphopeptide enrichment was performed as described previously by combined strong cation exchange (SCX) and TiO2-affinity chromatography (Reiland et al., 2009). Dried peptides were resuspended in 5% ACN, 0.1% formic acid and analyzed on an LTQ-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFischer Scientific, Bremen, Germany) interfaced with a nano-electrospray ion source. Data acquisition and interpretation was performed as described previously (Reiland et al., 2009). The samples were acquired using internal lock mass calibration on m/z 429.088735 and 445.120025.

### Data Protocol
MS and MS/MS data were searched against the Arabidopsis database containing common contaminants using MASCOT (Matrix Science, London, UK).

### Publication Abstract
Plastid casein kinase II is an important regulator of transcription, posttranscriptional processes, and, most likely, different metabolic functions in dicotyledonous species. Here we report the identification and characterization of pCKII from the monocotyledonous species Oryza sativa. OspCKII activity was enriched from isolated rice chloroplasts using heparin-Sepharose chromatography, in which it co-elutes with the transcriptionally active chromosome (TAC) and several ribosomal proteins. Inclusion mass scanning of the kinase-active fraction identified the gene model for OspCKII. Transient expression of GFP fused to the 184 N-terminal amino acids of the OspCKII sequence in rice confirmed the chloroplastic localization of the kinase. OspCKII activity shows the characteristic features of casein kinase II, such as the utilization of GTP as phosphate donor, inhibition by low concentrations of heparin and poly-lysine, and utilization of the canonical pCKII motif E-S-E-G-E in the model substrate RNP29. Phosphoproteome analysis of a protein extract from rice leaves combined with a meta-analysis with published phosphoproteomics data revealed differences in the target protein spectrum between rice and Arabidopsis. Consistently, several pCKII phosphorylation sites in dicotyledonous plants are not conserved in monocots and algae, suggesting that details of pCKII regulation in plastids have changed during evolution.

### Keywords
Oryza sativa, Chloroplast, Casein kinase 2

### Affiliations
Ph.D
Head of key lab of photobiology, Institute of Botany, CAS

### Submitter
Qingtao Lu

### Lab Head
Dr Lu Qingtao
Head of key lab of photobiology, Institute of Botany, CAS


