### Accession
PXD009133

### Title
Screening in Human Cardiac Organoids Identifies a Critical Role for the Mevalonate Pathway in Cardiomyocyte Proliferation

### Description
Re-induction of endogenous proliferation is a promising regeneration strategy for post-mitotic organs. For heart regeneration, we recently discovered that dual inhibition of both GSK3 and MST1 is required for proliferation in mature human cardiac organoids1. However, the mechanisms of action are not yet understood. Here, we de-convolute the mitogenic response using proteomics and report that GSK3 inhibition activates a cell cycle network whereas MST1 inhibition drives the mevalonate pathway. Screening of an additional 105 compounds identified a p38 inhibitor, which activated a cell cycle network, as well as an inhibitor of TGFBR, which activated the mevalonate pathway; combinatorial treatment with these two inhibitors also resulted in synergistic cell cycle activation. The mevalonate pathway which was consistently activated under the most robust proliferative conditions, is down-regulated during in vivo maturation when cardiomyocyte regenerative capacity ceases and inhibition of the mevalonate pathway abolished the myocyte proliferative response to mitogens. Taken together, our findings suggest that the mevalonate pathway synergises with mitogenic agents to enable mature cardiomyocytes to re-enter the cell cycle. These findings have important ramifications for development of cardiac regenerative therapeutics.

### Sample Protocol
Single hCO were washed 2X in PBS and snap frozen and stored at -80°C. Tissues were lysed in by tip-probe sonication in 1% SDS containing 100 mM Tris pH 8.0, 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine, 40 mM 2-chloroacetamide and heated to 95°C for 5 min. Proteins were purified using a modified Single-Pot Solid-Phase-enhanced Sample Preparation (SP3) strategy [PMID: PMID: 2535834]. Briefly, Proteins were bound to Sera-Mag carboxylate coated paramagnetic beads in 50% acetonitrile containing 1% formic acid (v/v) (ThermoFisher Scientific). The beads were washed twice with 70% ethanol (v/v) and once with 100% acetonitrile. Proteins were digested on the beads in 100 mM Tris pH 7.5 containing 10% 2,2,2-Trifluoroethanol overnight at 37°C with 200 ng of sequencing grade LysC (Wako Chemicals) and trypsin (Sigma). Beads were removed and peptides acidified to 1% trifluoroacetic acid prior to purification by styrene divinyl benzene – reversed phase sulfonated solid phase extraction microcolumns.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were spiked with iRT peptides (Biognosys) and analysed on an Easy-nLC1200 coupled to a Q-Exactive HF in positive polarity mode. Peptides were separated using an in-house packed 75 μm x 50 cm pulled column (1.9 μm particle size, C18AQ; Dr Maisch) with a gradient of 2 – 35% acetonitrile containing 0.1% FA over 120 min at 300 nl/min at 60°C. The instrument was operated in data-independent acquisition (DIA) mode essentially as described previously [PMID: 29070702]. Briefly, an MS1 scan was acquired from 350 – 1650 m/z (120,000 resolution, 3e6 AGC, 50 ms injection time) followed by 20 MS/MS variable sized isolation windows with HCD (30,000 resolution, 3e6 AGC, 27 NCE). A spectral library was created by fractionating a pooled mix of peptides from 10 separate hCO on an inhouse packed 320 μm x 25 cm column (3 μm particle size, BEH; Waters) with a gradient of 2 – 40% acetonitrile containing 10 mM ammonium formate over 60 min at 6 μl/min using an Agilent 1260 HPLC. A total of 12 concatenated fractions were analysed using the identical LC-MS/MS conditions above except the instrument was operated in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. Briefly, an MS1 scan was acquired from 350 – 1650 m/z (60,000 resolution, 3e6 AGC, 50 ms injection time) followed by 20 MS/MS with HCD (1.4 m/z isolation, 15,000 resolution, 1e5 AGC, 27 NCE). DDA data were processed with with Andromeda in MaxQuant v1.5.8.3 against the human UniProt database (January 2016) using all default settings with peptide spectral matches and protein false discovery rate (FDR) set to 1% [PMID: 19029910]. DIA data were processed with Spectronaut v11 using all default settings with precursor and protein FDR set to 1% and quantification performed at MS2 [PMID: 25724911].

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cardiac organoids

### Affiliations
The University of Sydney
The University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Benjamin Parker

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin Parker
The University of Sydney


