### Accession
PXD013785

### Title
Dynamic transcriptome-proteome correlation networks reveal human myeloid differentiation and neutrophil-specific programming

### Description
Human neutrophilic granulocytes form the largest pool of innate immune cells for host defense against bacterial and fungal pathogens. The dynamic changes that accompany the metamorphosis from a proliferating myeloid progenitor cell in the bone marrow into a mature non-dividing polymorphonuclear blood cell have remained poorly defined. Using mass spectrometry-based quantitative proteomics combined with transcriptomic data, we report on the dynamic changes of 5 developmental stages in the bone marrow and blood. Integration of transcriptomic and proteomic unveiled highly dynamic and differential interactions between RNA and protein kinetics during human neutrophil development which could be linked to functional maturation of typical end-stage blood neutrophil killing activities.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were lysed in 30 μl of 4% SDS, 100 mM DTT, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5 supplemented with HALT protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail  and processed into tryptic peptides by means of the Filter Aided Sample Preparation method. Peptides were desalted and concentrated with Empore-C18 StageTips and eluted with 0.5% (v/v) acetic acid, 80 % (v/v) acetonitrile. Sample volume was reduced by SpeedVac and supplemented with 2 % acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA to a final volume of 12 μl. For each sample, 3 technical replicates were analyzed by injecting 3 μl of the sample. Tryptic peptides were separated by nanoscale C18 reverse chromatography coupled on line to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) via a nanoelectrospray ion source (Nanospray Flex Ion Source, Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded on a 20 cm 75–360 µm inner-outer diameter fused silica emitter (New Objective) packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 1.9 μm resin (Dr Maisch GmbH). The column was installed on a Dionex Ultimate3000 RSLC nanoSystem (Thermo Scientific) by means of a MicroTee union formatted for 360 μm outer diameter columns (IDEX) and a liquid junction. The spray voltage was set to 2.15 kV. Buffer A was composed of 0.5 % (v/v) acetic acid and buffer B of 0.5 % (v/v) acetic acid, 80% (v/v) acetonitrile. Peptides were loaded for 17 min at 300 nl/min at 5% buffer B, equilibrated for 5 minutes at 5% buffer B (17-22 min) and eluted by increasing buffer B from 5-15% (22-87 min) and 15-38% (87-147 min), followed by a 10 minute wash to 90 % and a 5 min regeneration to 5%. Survey scans of peptide precursors from 400 to 1500 m/z were performed at 120K resolution (at 200 m/z) with a 1.5 × 105 ion count target. Tandem mass spectrometry was performed by isolation with the quadrupole with isolation window 1.6, HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 30, and rapid scan mass spectrometry analysis in the ion trap. The MS2 ion count target was set to 104 and the max injection time was 35 ms. Only those precursors with charge state 2–7 were sampled for MS2. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 60 s with a 10 ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. Monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on. The instrument was run in top speed mode with 3 s cycles. All data were acquired with Xcalibur software.

### Data Protocol
The RAW mass spectrometry files were processed with the MaxQuant computational platform, 1.5.2.8. Proteins and peptides were identified with the Andromeda search engine by querying the human Uniprot database (release 2015—02, 89796 entries). Standard settings with the additional options match between runs, Label Free Quantification (LFQ), and unique peptides for quantification were selected. The generated ‘proteingroups.txt’ table was filtered for potential contaminants, reverse hits and ‘only identified by site’ by Perseus 1.5.1.6. The LFQ values were transformed in log2 scale, the three technical replicates per experimental condition grouped and averaged based on the median, and proteins were filtered for at least two valid values in one of the experimental groups. Missing values were imputed by normal distribution (width=0.3, shift = 1.8), assuming these proteins were close to the detection limit. LFQ values were transformed to estimated absolute copy numbers by means of the proteomic ruler methodology. To identify the proteins with the most prominent differences expression profiles within the different neutrophil progenitor cell subsets, we used the built-in ANOVA function in PERSEUS using an FDR of 5% and S0 of 0.4. All following analyses were performed in R/Bioconductor (versions 3.5.2/3.6). Clustering was performed with K-means with an optimal number of clusters (K) determined with gap statistics.

### Publication Abstract
Human neutrophilic granulocytes form the largest pool of innate immune cells for host defense against bacterial and fungal pathogens. The dynamic changes that accompany the metamorphosis from a proliferating myeloid progenitor cell in the bone marrow into a mature non-dividing polymorphonuclear blood cell have remained poorly defined. Using mass spectrometry-based quantitative proteomics combined with transcriptomic data, we report on the dynamic changes of five developmental stages in the bone marrow and blood. Integration of transcriptomes and proteome unveils highly dynamic and differential interactions between RNA and protein kinetics during human neutrophil development, which can be linked to functional maturation of typical end-stage blood neutrophil killing activities.

### Keywords
Transcriptomics, Proteomics, Neutriphils, Myeloid differentiation

### Affiliations
Sanquin Research
Department of Molecular and Cellular Hemostasis, Sanquin Research Amsterdam, NL

### Submitter
Maartje van den Biggelaar

### Lab Head
Dr M. van den Biggelaar
Department of Molecular and Cellular Hemostasis, Sanquin Research Amsterdam, NL


