### Accession
PXD007271

### Title
Co-immumnoprecipitation experiments to identify protein bindining partners of CSDE1

### Description
While the transcriptional network of human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) has been extensively studied, relatively little is known about how post-transcriptional modulations determine hESC function. RNA-binding proteins play central roles in RNA regulation, including translation and turnover. Here we show that the RNA-binding protein CSDE1 is highly expressed in hESCs to maintain their undifferentiated state and prevent default neural fate. Notably, loss of CSDE1 accelerates neural differentiation and potentiates neurogenesis. Conversely, ectopic expression of CSDE1 impairs neural differentiation. We find that CSDE1 post-transcriptionally modulates core components of multiple regulatory nodes of hESC identity, neuroectoderm commitment and neurogenesis. Among these key pro-neural/neuronal factors, CSDE1 binds fatty acid binding protein 7 (FABP7) and vimentin (VIM) mRNAs as well as transcripts involved in neuron projection development regulating their stability and translation. Thus, our results uncover CSDE1 as a central post-transcriptional regulator of hESC identity and neurogenesis.   This proteomics dataset contains the data from co-immunopreciptation experiments using CSDE1 antibody in hESCs

### Sample Protocol
. hESCs were lysed in modified RIPA buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4), 150 mM NaCl, 1 % IgPal, 0.25% sodium deoxycholate, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM PMSF) supplemented with protease inhibitor (Roche). Lysates were centrifuged at 10,000g for 10 min at 4°C. Then, the supernatant was collected and incubated with CSDE1 antibody (Abcam, #176584) for 30 min and subsequently with 100 µl Protein A beads (Miltenyi) for 1 h on the overhead shaker at 4°C. As a control, the same amount of protein was incubated with anti-FLAG antibody (SIGMA, F7425) in parallel. After this incubation, supernatants were subjected to magnetic column purification. Three washes were performed using wash buffer 1 (containing 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4), 150 mM NaCl, 5% glycerol and 0.05% IgPal). Next, columns were washed five times with wash buffer 2 (containing 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4), 150 mM NaCl). Then, columns were subjected to in-column tryptic digestion containing 7.5 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 2 M urea, 1 mM DTT and 5 ng ml-1 trypsin. Digested peptides were eluted using two times 50 µl of elution buffer 1 containing 2M urea, 7.5 mM Ambic, and 5 mM IAA. Digests were incubated over night at room temperature with mild shaking in the dark. Samples were stage-tipped the next day for label-free quantitative proteomics.   The liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) equipment consisted out of an EASY nLC 1000 coupled to the quadrupole based QExactive instrument (Thermo Scientific) via a nano-spray electroionization source. Peptides were separated on an in-house packed 50 cm column (1.9 µm C18 beads, Dr. Maisch) using a binary buffer system: A) 0.1% formic acid and B) 0.1 % formic acid in ACN.  The content of buffer B was raised from 7 % to 23 % within 120 min and followed by an increase to 45 % within 10 min. Then, within 5 min buffer B fraction was raised to 80 % and held for further 5 min after which it was decreased to 5 % within 2 min and held there for further 3 min before the next sample was loaded on the column. Eluting peptides were ionized by an applied voltage of 2.2 kV. The capillary temperature was 275°C and the S-lens RF level was set to 60. MS1 spectra were acquired using a resolution of 70,000 (at 200 m/z), an Automatic Gain Control (AGC) target of 3e6 and a maximum injection time of 20 ms in a scan range of 300-1750 Th. In a data dependent mode, the 10 most intense peaks were selected for isolation and fragmentation in the HCD cell using a normalized collision energy of 25 at an isolation window of 2.1 Th. Dynamic exclusion was enabled and set to 20 s. The MS/MS scan properties were: 17.500 resolution at 200 m/z, an AGC target of 5e5 and a maximum injection time of 60 ms.

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed with MaxQuant software. The downstream analyses were carried out on LFQ values with Perseus (v. 1.5.2.4).

### Publication Abstract
While the transcriptional network of human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) has been extensively studied, relatively little is known about how post-transcriptional modulations determine hESC function. RNA-binding proteins play central roles in RNA regulation, including translation and turnover. Here we show that the RNA-binding protein CSDE1 (cold shock domain containing E1) is highly expressed in hESCs to maintain their undifferentiated state and prevent default neural fate. Notably, loss of CSDE1 accelerates neural differentiation and potentiates neurogenesis. Conversely, ectopic expression of CSDE1 impairs neural differentiation. We find that CSDE1 post-transcriptionally modulates core components of multiple regulatory nodes of hESC identity, neuroectoderm commitment and neurogenesis. Among these key pro-neural/neuronal factors, CSDE1 binds fatty acid binding protein 7 (FABP7) and vimentin (VIM) mRNAs, as well as transcripts involved in neuron projection development regulating their stability and translation. Thus, our results uncover CSDE1 as a central post-transcriptional regulator of hESC identity and neurogenesis.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Hescs, Co-ip

### Affiliations
Cologne Excellence Cluster for Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases (CECAD), University of Cologne, Joseph Stelzmann Strasse 26, 50931 Cologne, Germany.
University of Cologne

### Submitter
David Vilchez

### Lab Head
Dr David Vilchez
Cologne Excellence Cluster for Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases (CECAD), University of Cologne, Joseph Stelzmann Strasse 26, 50931 Cologne, Germany.


