### Accession
PXD016425

### Title
Landscapes of post-translational modifications in Trypanosoma parasites

### Description
Proteins of all living cells undergo a myriad of posttranslational modifications (PTMs) that are critical to multifarious life processes. In this study, we describe the first comprehensive multiple PTM-omics atlas in parallel with quantitative proteome analyses of two representative species of trypanosomes, Trypanosoma brucei and T. evansi. Approximately 40,000 modified sites and 150 histone marks were identified in each species. Proteins involved in the redox system were mainly regulated in T. brucei, while proteins associated with motility were predominantly modified in T. evansi. The establishment of a database of multiple PTMs in the two parasites provides us with insight into the biological mechanisms that underpin life processes in trypanosomes with huge different life cycles.

### Sample Protocol
Parasite cultivation and purification T. brucei Lister 427 strain and T. evansi YNB strain were maintained in vivo using BALB/c mice, and the trypanosomes were inoculated intraperitoneally into healthy mice for serial passage. Trypanosomes were purified from the blood of infected mice over DEAE-cellulose (Sigma) when the parasitemia level reached 1×108 cells per ml. The trypanosomes were extracted from cellular blood elements of the suspension using a previously described method.  Protein extraction Parasites were incubated with a phenol extraction buffer (4-fold more buffer compared with parasite suspension) containing 10 mM dithiothreitol (Sigma), 1% protease inhibitors (Millipore), 1% phosphatase inhibitor (Millipore), 50 μM PR-619 (Selleck), 3 μM TSA (Selleck), 50 mM NAM (Sigma) and 2 mM EDTA; the mixture was ultrasonically treated. Next, an equal volume of Tris balance of phenol (Solarbio) was added and the mixture was centrifuged at 5500 g for 10 min at 4°C. The supernatant was subsequently extracted and 5 times the volume of 0.1 M ammonium acetate/methanol was added to perform an overnight extraction; the precipitated protein was washed with methanol and acetone. Finally, 8 M urea was precipitated for redissolution, and protein concentration was determined using the BCA kit (Beyotime).  Trypsin digestion Dithiothreitol was added to the protein solution to a final concentration of 5 mM and reduced at 56°C for 30 min. Then, this mixture was alkylated with iodoacetamide (Sigma) to 11 mM for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. Finally, the urea concentration of the sample was diluted to less than 2 M by adding 100 mM NH4HCO. Finally, trypsin (Promega) was added at a 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion which was performed overnight at 37°C; a second 4 h-digestion was performed using a 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio.  HPLC Fractionation The tryptic peptides (7.2 mg for phosphopeptides and 20 mg for others) were separated into fractions using high pH reverse-phase HPLC (Thermo Betasil C18 column, 5-μm particles, 10-mm i.d., 250-mm length). Briefly, peptides were first separated with a gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile (pH 9.0) over 60 min into 60 fractions. Then, the peptides were combined into 4 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifugation.  Affinity enrichment For phosphorylation, peptide mixtures were first incubated in an IMAC microsphere suspension with vibration in loading buffer; the loading buffer contained 50% acetonitrile (Fisher Chemical) and 6% trifluoroacetic acid (Sigma-Aldrich). The IMAC microspheres with enriched phosphopeptides were washed three times with a buffer solution containing 50% acetonitrile/6% trifluoroacetic acid and 30% acetonitrile/0.1% trifluoroacetic acid sequentially to remove nonspecifically adsorbed peptides. To isolate the enriched phosphopeptides from the IMAC microspheres, elution buffer containing 10% NH4OH was added and the enriched phosphopeptides were eluted with vibration. The supernatant containing phosphopeptides was collected and lyophilized. For N-glycosylation, peptides were dissolved in the enrichment loading buffer (80% ACN/1% TFA) and the supernatant was subsequently pipetted into a hydrophilic HILIC microcolumn. After centrifugation at 4000 g for 15 min, the HILIC tip was washed three times with loading buffer. The glycopeptide was then eluted with 10% acetonitrile. Finally, the enriched glycopeptides were eluted with 80 μL of H2O and lyophilized to dryness. For deglycosylation, 2 μL of PNGase F in 50 μL of 50 mM NH4HCO3 was added and the mixture was incubated at 37°C overnight. For acylation, ubiquitination, trimethylation, and O-GlcNAcylation, peptides were dissolved in IP buffer (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0) and the associated mixtures were incubated with pre-washed antibody beads (PTM Biolabs) at 4°C overnight with gentle shaking. Next, the beads were washed four times with IP buffer and twice with ddH2O (Fisher Chemical). The bound peptides were eluted from the beads with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. Finally, the eluted fractions were combined and vacuum-dried. For LC-MS/MS analysis, the resulting peptides were desalted with C18 ZipTips (Millipore).

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS Analysis The tryptic peptides were dissolved in solvent A (0.1% formic acid) (Fluka), separated by an EASY-nLC 1,000 UPLC system and directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). Solvent B was an aqueous solution containing 0.1% formic acid and 90% acetonitrile. For proteome analysis, the gradient was comprised of an increase from 5% to 23% solvent B over 38 min, 23% to 35% for 14 min and climbing to 35% to 80% for 4 min, then holding at 80% for the last 4 min; a constant flow rate of 800 nL/min was used. For acylation, the gradient was comprised of an increase from 10% to 25% of solvent B over 38 min, 25% to 40% for 14 min and climbing to 40% to 80% for 4 min, then holding at 80% for the last 4 min, all at a constant flow rate of 700 nL/min. For phosphorylation, the gradient was comprised of an increase from 3% to 25% solvent B over 62 min, 25% to 35% for 20 min and climbing to 35% to 85% for 4 min, then holding at 85% for the last 4 min, all at a constant flow rate of 700 nL/min. For ubiquitination, the gradient was comprised of an increase from 9% to 25% solvent B over 38 min, 25% to 40% for 14 min and climbing to 40% to 80% for 4 min and then holding at 80% for the last 4 min, all at a constant flow rate of 450 nL/min. For N- and O-glycosylation, the gradient was comprised of an increase from 8% to 23% solvent B over 38 min, 23% to 35% for 14 min and climbing to 35% to 80% for 4 min and then holding at 80% for the last 4 min, all at a constant flow rate of 450 nL/min. The peptides were subjected to a nanospray ionization (NSI) source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage that was applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1,800 for a full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using an NCE setting of 28 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0 s dynamic exclusion was employed. An automatic gain control (AGC) target of 5E4 was used. The signal threshold was set to 10000 ions/s, the maximum injection time was set to 100 ms, and the dynamic exclusion time of the tandem MS scan was set to 15 s to avoid duplicate scans of the parent ions.  Database searching All MS/MS data were processed using the Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8), and the spectra were searched against the UniProtKB database Trypanosoma brucei brucei (strain 927/4 GUTat10.1, 8,587 sequences, release time 2017.10) and NCBI database Trypanosoma evansi (14), and concatenated with a reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was selected as a cleavage enzyme allowing up to two missing cleavages per phosphorylation and four missing cleavages for other reactions. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in the First search and 5 ppm in the Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as a fixed modification, and oxidation on Met and acetylation on protein N-terminus were specified as variable modifications. Additional variable modifications were specified for phospho-peptide analyses (phosphorylation of threonine, serine, and tyrosine residues), acetyl-peptide analyses (Kac), succinyl-peptide analyses (Ksu), malonyl-peptide analyses (Kma), ubiquit-peptide analyses (Kub), 2-hydroxyisobutyryl-peptide analyses (Khib), crotonyl-peptide analyses (Kcr), acetyl-peptide analyses (Kac), trimethyl-peptide analyses (trimethylation of lysine residues and trimethylation of arginine), and glycosyl-peptide analyses (N-glycosylation of asparagine residues and O-glycosylation of threonine, serine). FDR was adjusted to <1% and the minimum score for modified peptides were set >40. Minimum peptide length was set at 7. Label free quantification (LFQ) was selected for the quantification method. All other parameters in MaxQuant were set to default values.

### Publication Abstract
Proteins of all living cells undergo a myriad of post-translational modifications (PTMs) that are critical to multifarious life processes. In this study, we describe the first comprehensive multiple PTM-omics atlas in parallel with quantitative proteome analyses of two representative species of African trypanosomes, Trypanosoma brucei and Trypanosoma evansi. Ten PTM types with approximately 40,000 modified sites and 150 histone marks with a fine map on each protein of the two African trypanosomes were accomplished. The two biologically different trypanosomal species displayed distinct PTM-omic features, regulation pathways, and networks. Modifications in the proteins involved in the redox system were mainly upregulated in T.&#xa0;brucei, whereas proteins associated with motility were predominantly modified in T.&#xa0;evansi. The establishment of a database of multiple PTMs in the two parasites provides us with a deep insight into the biological mechanisms that underpin life processes in trypanosomes with different life cycles.

### Keywords
Trypanosoma brucei; trypanosoma evansi; post-translational modification; acetylation; crotonyltion; 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation; malonylation; succinylation; ubiquitination; trimethylation; phosphorylation; n-glycosylation; o-glcnacylation

### Affiliations
Shenyang Agricultural University

### Submitter
Naiwen Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Qijun Chen
Shenyang Agricultural University


