### Accession
PXD048248

### Title
Treg cells from human blood differentiate into non-lymphoid tissue-resident effector cells upon TNFR2 costimulation

### Description
Regulatory T (Treg) cells can facilitate transplant tolerance and attenuate autoimmune- and inflammatory diseases. Therefore, it is clinically relevant to stimulate Treg cell expansion and function in vivo and to create therapeutic Treg cell products in vitro. We report that TNF receptor 2 (TNFR2) is a unique costimulus for naïve, thymus-derived (t)Treg cells from human blood that promotes their differentiation into non-lymphoid tissue (NLT)-resident effector Treg cells, without Th-like polarization. In contrast, CD28 costimulation maintains a lymphoid tissue (LT)-resident Treg cell phenotype. We base this conclusion on transcriptome and proteome analysis of TNFR2- and CD28-costimulated CD4+ Treg cells and conventional T (Tconv) cells, followed by bioinformatic comparison with published transcriptomic Treg cell signatures from NLT and LT in health and disease, including autoimmunity and cancer. These analyses illuminate that TNFR2 costimulation promotes Treg cell capacity for survival, migration, immunosuppression and tissue regeneration. Functional studies confirmed improved migratory ability of TNFR2-costimulated tTreg cells. Flow cytometry validated the presence of the TNFR2-driven Treg cell signature in effector/memory Treg cells from the human placenta as opposed to blood. Thus, TNFR2 can be exploited as driver of NLT-resident Treg cell differentiation for adoptive cell therapy or antibody-based immunomodulation in human disease.

### Sample Protocol
Naïve tTreg cells were expanded for 7 days using CD28 costimulation and were cultured for 4 additional days in absence of agonistic mAbs and in presence of IL-2. Next, 1 × 106 cells were cultured for 24 h in 24-well plates, in presence of IL-2, anti-CD3 mAb and either anti-CD28 or anti-TNFR2 mAb. Restimulated cells were washed in ice-cold PBS and lysis, digestion and tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling were performed. Lysis was performed using 5% SDS lysis buffer (100 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6) and 5 U of benzonase nuclease (Thermo Scientific) by 4 min incubation at 95°C. Protein concentration was determined using Pierce BCA Gold protein assay (Thermo Scientific). 100 g of protein of each sample was reduced with 5 mM TCEP. Reduced disulfide bonds were alkylated using 15 mM iodoacetamide. Excess iodoacetamide was quenched using 10 mM DTT. Protein lysates were precipitated using chloroform/methanol. Pellets were resolubilized in 40 mM HEPES pH 8.4 and digested using TPCK-treated trypsin (1:12.5 enzyme:protein ratio) overnight at 37°C. Peptide concentration was determined using Pierce BCA Gold protein assay.  Peptides were labeled with TMTpro Label Reagents (Thermo Scientific) in a 1:4 ratio by mass (peptides:TMT reagents), for 1 h at room temperature. Excess TMT reagent was quenched with 5 l of 6% hydroxylamine for 15 min at room temperature. Samples were pooled and lyophilized. The TMT sample set was dissolved in 1 ml of 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate and fractionated using 1cc C18 SPE cartridges (Oasis HLB, Waters) with 15%, 17.5%, 20%, 25% and 35% acetonitrile buffers in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.4. TMT-labeled peptides were dissolved in water/formic acid (100/0.1 v/v) and subsequently analyzed twice by on-line C18 nanoHPLC MS/MS with a system containing an UltiMate3000 HPLC system and an Exploris480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Fractions were injected onto a cartridge precolumn (300 m × 5 mm, C18 PepMap, 5 m, 100 A) and eluted via a homemade analytical nano-HPLC column (50 cm × 75 m, Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 m, 120 A (Dr Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany)). The gradient was run from 2% to 30% solvent B (20:80:0.1 water:acetonitrile:formic acid v/v) in 240 min. The nano-HPLC column was drawn to a tip of 10 m and acted as electrospray needle of the MS source. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent MS/MS mode with 3 s cycle time, with HCD collision energy at 36 V and recording of the MS2 spectrum in the orbitrap, with a quadrupole isolation width of 1.2 Da. In the master scan (MS1), resolution was 120,000, scan range 350-1200, and standard AGC target at maximum fill time of 50 ms. A lock mass correction on the background ion m/z=445.12 was used. Precursors were dynamically excluded after n=1 with an exclusion duration of 45 s, and with a precursor range of 20 ppm. Charge states 2-5 were included. For MS2 the first mass was set to 110 Da, and the MS2 scan resolution was 45,000 at an AGC target of 200% at maximum fill time of 60 ms.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were converted to peak lists using Proteome Discoverer software (version 2.4, Thermo Scientific), and submitted to UniProt (Homo sapiens, 20596 entries), using Mascot version 2.2.07 (www.matrixscience.com) for protein identification. Mascot searches were performed with 10 ppm and 0.02 Da deviation for precursor and fragment mass, respectively, and the enzyme trypsin was specified. Up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Methionine oxidation and acetyl on protein N-terminus were set as fixed modifications. Protein and peptide FDR were set to 1%. Normalization was on the total peptide amount. Identification of differentially expressed proteins with at least one unique peptide was performed using Proteome Discoverer. One CD28-costimulated tTreg cell sample was excluded from the analysis due to technical reasons. Differentially expressed proteins were visualized as a network using the STRING app within Cytoscape software.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Ttreg, Costimulation, Tconv, Treg, Cd28, Conventional t cell, Regulatory t cell, Thymus-derived regulatory t cell, Tnfr2

### Affiliations
Leiden University Medical Center, Proteomics group
Head Proteomics Group  Leiden University Medical Center, Center for Proteomics and Metabolomics, PO Box 9600, Postal zone P1-Q, 2300 RC  Leiden, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Rayman Tjokrodirijo

### Lab Head
Dr Peter A.
Head Proteomics Group  Leiden University Medical Center, Center for Proteomics and Metabolomics, PO Box 9600, Postal zone P1-Q, 2300 RC  Leiden, The Netherlands


