### Accession
PXD003262

### Title
LSD1 complexes -  Assembly of methylated KDM1A and CHD1 drives androgen receptor-dependent transcription and translocation

### Description
PCP-SILAC analysis of LSD1 protein complexes isolated from LNCaP cells

### Sample Protocol
Light (Lys0, Arg0) and heavy (Lys8, Lys10) labeled LNCaP cells were harvested and resuspended in nuclear isolation buffer (10mM HEPES-KOH pH 7.9, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 10 mM KCl, 0.5 mM DTT, Complete protease inhibitor cocktail, Roche), allowed to swell on ice for 10 min, vortexted for 10 seconds at low speed, and pelleted. Isolated nuclei were resuspended in nuclear disruption buffer (20 mM HEPES-KOH pH 7.9, 25% glycerol, 420 mM NaCl, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 0.2 mM EDTA, 0.5 mM DTT, Complete protease inhibitor cocktail), remained on ice for 20 min and centrifuged at 14 000 rpm. The supernatants comprising the nuclear extracts of heavy and light cells were collected, and applied to a sucrose gradient made up of 5 times 1.5 ml fractions of sucrose ranging from 25 to 40% (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 100 mM NaCl, Complete protease inhibitor cocktail, sucrose in varying concentrations). Protein complexes were separated on the gradient at 36 000 rpm for 14 h and fractions of 1 ml were collected. The Lys0-Arg0 PCP-SILAC fractions were combined and spiked in a 1:1 ratio to the respective Lys8-Arg10 PCP-SILAC fractions. The resulting fractions were resuspended in SDS loading buffer, reduced and alkylated with DTT (Sigma‐Aldrich) and iodoacetamide (Sigma‐Aldrich), respectively. The fractions were then concentrated with a 10-kDa cut-off filter. Protein mixtures were separated by SDS-PAGE (4–12% Bis-Tris gradient gel, NuPAGE; Life Technologies) and in-gel digested with trypsin (Promega) at 37°C ON. All peptide fractions were analyzed using an LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Agilent 1200 (Agilent Technologies) or an Eksigent 2D nanoflow-HPLC (AB Sciex). Two biological replicates were performed.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed with the MaxQuant software (version 1.4.1.2.)41,42. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification, methionine oxidation, protein amino-terminal acetylation and pyro-glutamate and pyro-glutamic acid formation from glutamate and glutamic acid, respectively, were set as variable modifications. We choose double SILAC as quantification mode. Two miss cleavages were allowed, enzyme specificity was trypsin-P, precursor ion mass tolerance was 20 ppm for first search, and fragment ion mass tolerance was 0.5 Da for MS/MS spectra. A false discovery rate of smaller 1% on peptide and protein level was determined by using a forward-reverse decoy database (Uniprot Human, version July 2014). We used a minimum length of seven amino acids per peptide. We used both unmodified and modified and both razor and unique peptides with a minimum ratio count of 2 for protein quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Prostate cancer evolution is driven by a combination of epigenetic and genetic alterations such as coordinated chromosomal rearrangements, termed chromoplexy. TMPRSS2-ERG gene fusions found in human prostate tumors are a hallmark of chromoplexy. TMPRSS2-ERG fusions have been linked to androgen signaling and depend on androgen receptor (AR)-coupled gene transcription. Here, we show that dimethylation of KDM1A at K114 (to form K114me2) by the histone methyltransferase EHMT2 is a key event controlling androgen-dependent gene transcription and TMPRSS2-ERG fusion. We identified CHD1 as a KDM1A K114me2 reader and characterized the KDM1A K114me2-CHD1 recognition mode by solving the cocrystal structure. Genome-wide analyses revealed chromatin colocalization of KDM1A K114me2, CHD1 and AR in prostate tumor cells. Together, our data link the assembly of methylated KDM1A and CHD1 with AR-dependent transcription and genomic translocations, thereby providing mechanistic insight into the formation of TMPRSS2-ERG gene fusions during prostate-tumor evolution.

### Keywords
Lncap cells, Lc-ms/ms, Pcp-silac, Prostate adenocarcinoma

### Affiliations
University of Fribourg
Dep. of Dermatology, Medical Center and Center for Biological Systems Analysis, University of Freiburg, Germany

### Submitter
Joern Dengjel

### Lab Head
Dr Joern Dengjel
Dep. of Dermatology, Medical Center and Center for Biological Systems Analysis, University of Freiburg, Germany


