### Accession
PXD003572

### Title
Soil Metaproteomics -  The active microbial diversity drives ecosystem multifunctionality and is physiologically related to carbon availability in Mediterranean semi-arid soils

### Description
The availability of organic carbon represents a major bottleneck for the development of soil microbial communities and the regulation of microbially-mediated ecosystem processes. However, there is still a lack of knowledge on how the lifestyle and population abundances are physiologically regulated by the availability of energy and organic carbon in soil ecosystems. To date, functional insights into the lifestyles of microbial populations have been limited by the lack of straightforward approaches to the tracking of the active microbial populations. Here, by the use of an comprehensiv metaproteomics and genomics, we reveal that C-availability modulates the lifestyles of bacterial and fungal populations in drylands and determines the compartmentalization of functional niches. This study highlights that the active diversity (evaluated by metaproteomics) but not the diversity of the whole microbial community (estimated by genome profiling) is modulated by the availability of carbon and is connected to the ecosystem functionality in drylands.

### Sample Protocol
The surveyed soils correspond to a dryland region (Mediterranean semiarid climate) in South-East Spain. A total of 60 samples were samples that correspond to 20 pristine environmental areas (n=3 replicates). For each replicate, six different sub-samples (20 cm depth) were collected and subsequently mixed. Soils were selected with the purpose of establishing a marked gradient of organic matter availability. The selected soils correspond to typical habitats in dryland regions, ranging from bare, pre-desertic soils developed in marsh substrates with intense erosion and degradation to highly productive transects with dense forest cover.

### Data Protocol
The acquired MS spectra were processed using Mascot (v2.4.1) against the NCBInr database (08/24/2014, containing 48,094,830 sequences) and precursor ion detector (for label free quantification) in Proteome Discoverer (v2.0, Thermo Scientific). One missed cleavage per peptide was allowed, and we used carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification on cysteine residues and oxidation as a variable modification on methionine residues. Searches were performed with a parent-ion mass tolerance of 10 ppm and a fragment-ion mass tolerance of 0.05 Da. Only peptides with a false discovery rate (FDR) <0.01 calculated by Percolator and peptide rank =1 were considered as identified. The “PROteomics results Pruning & Homology group ANotation Engine” (PROPHANE) (http://www.prophane.de/index.php?p=new) was applied to remove redundant protein groups and to assign proteins to their phylogenetic and functional origin. The abundance of functional proteins was retrieved attending to the area under the curve (AUC) of peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Biogeochemical processes and ecosystemic functions are mostly driven by soil microbial communities. However, most methods focus on evaluating the total microbial community and fail to discriminate its active fraction which is linked to soil functionality. Precisely, the activity of the microbial community is strongly limited by the availability of organic carbon (C) in soils under arid and semi-arid climate. Here, we provide a complementary genomic and metaproteomic approach to investigate the relationships between the diversity of the total community, the active diversity and ecosystem functionality across a dissolved organic carbon (DOC) gradient in southeast Spain. DOC correlated with the ecosystem multifunctionality index composed by soil respiration, enzyme activities (urease, alkaline phosphatase and &#x3b2;-glucosidase) and microbial biomass (phospholipid fatty acids, PLFA). This study highlights that the active diversity (determined by metaprotoemics) but not the diversity of the whole microbial community (evaluated by amplicon gene sequencing) is related to the availability of organic C and it is also connected to the ecosystem multifunctionality index. We reveal that DOC shapes the activities of bacterial and fungal populations in Mediterranean semi-arid soils and determines the compartmentalization of functional niches. For instance, Rhizobales thrived at high-DOC sites probably fuelled by metabolism of one-C compounds. Moreover, the analysis of proteins involved in the transport and metabolism of carbohydrates revealed that Ascomycota and Basidiomycota occupied different nutritional niches. The functional mechanisms for niche specialization were not constant across the DOC gradient.

### Keywords
Metaproteomics, Soil, Dryland

### Affiliations
Helmholtz-Zentrum für Umweltforschung GmbH - UFZ Department Molekulare Systembiologie Permoserstraße 15 | 04318 Leipzig
Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ

### Submitter
Nico Jehmlich

### Lab Head
Dr Nico Jehmlich
Helmholtz-Zentrum für Umweltforschung GmbH - UFZ Department Molekulare Systembiologie Permoserstraße 15 | 04318 Leipzig


