### Accession
PXD025703

### Title
Famotidine targets Toll-like receptor 3 signaling in SARS-CoV2 infection

### Description
Caco2 cells were pretreated with 100µM histamine and 50µM Famotidine for 12h followed by infection with SARS-CoV2 for 24h. After that proteome was analysed.

### Sample Protocol
. Virus infected cells were lysed in hot SDS-lysis buffer (50mM Tris, 2% SDS, 10mM TCEP, 40mM chloroacetamide, protease inhibitor cocktail). Proteins were precipitated with acetone and resuspended in 8 M urea. Isolated proteins were digested with 1:50 w/w LysC (Wako Chemicals) and 1:100 w/w trypsin (Promega, Sequencing-grade) overnight at 37 °C after dilution to a final urea concentration of 1 M. Digests were then acidified (pH 2–3) using TFA. Peptides were purified using C18 SepPak columns (Waters). Desalted peptides were dried and 25 μg of peptides were resuspended in TMT-labelling buffer (200 mM EPPS pH 8.2, 10% acetonitrile). Peptides were subjected to TMT labelling with 1:2 peptide TMT ratio (w/w) for 1 h at room temperature. The labelling reaction was quenched by addition of hydroxylamine to a final concentration of 0.5% and incubation at room temperature for an additional 15 min.  Mass spectrometric Data Acquisition Samples were pooled in equimolar ratio, and subjected to  Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation kit (ThermoFisher Scientific) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Eluted fractions were dried in SpeedVac and peptides were resuspended in 3% acetonitrile/ 0.1% TFA for liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry. All mass spectrometry data was acquired in centroid mode on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer hyphenated to an easy-nLC 1200 nano HPLC system with a nanoFlex ion source (ThermoFisher Scientific). Resuspend peptides were separated on an Easy nLC 1200 (ThermoFisher Scientific) and a 22-cm-long, 75-μm-inner-diameter fused-silica column, which had been packed in house with 1.9-μm C18 particles (ReproSil-Pur, Dr. Maisch), and kept at 45 °C using an integrated column oven (Sonation). Peptides were eluted by a nonlinear gradient from 8–60% acetonitrile over 155 min followed by an increase to 95%B in 1 minute which was held for another 10 minutes.  Full-scan MS spectra (350–1,400 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200, a maximum injection time of 100 ms and an AGC target value of 4 × 105. Up to 20 most intense precursors, with charge state in between 2-5, were isolated using a 0.7 Th window. MS/MS spectra were acquired with a maximum injection time of 50 ms, AGC target value of 1.5 × 104 and fragmented using CID with a normalised collision energy of 35%. SPS-MS3 scans were done on the 10 most intense MS2 fragment ions having an isolation window of 0.7 Th (MS) and 2 m/z (MS2). Ions were fragmented using NCE of 50% and analysed in the orbitrap with the resolution of 50,000 at m/z 200, scan range 110-500 m/z, AGC target value 1.5× 105 and a maximum injection time of 120 ms.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry data were analysed with Proteome Discoverer (v.2.4, ThermoFisher Scientific) using Sequest HT as a search engine and performing re-calibration of precursor masses by the Spectrum RC-node. Number of missed cleavages permitted was 2. Mass tolerance of precursor ions is 7ppm and mass tolerance of fragment ions is 0.5Da.  Fragment spectra were searched against the human reference proteome (‘one sequence per gene’, 20,531 sequences, version March 2020) and protein sequences SARS-CoV2 (14 sequences, version February 2020) downloaded from Uniprot in March 2020, as well as common contaminants as included in ‘contaminants.fasta’ provided with the MaxQuant software (Ref). Static modifications were TMT at the peptide N terminus and lysines as well as carbamidomethyl at cysteine residues, dynamic modifications were set as oxidation of methionine and acetylation at the protein N-terminus. Matched spectra were filtered with Percolator, applying a false discovery rate of 1% on peptide spectrum match and protein level. Reporter intensities were normalized to the total protein intensities in Proteome Discoverer, assuming equal sample loading and additionally by median normalization using the NormalyzerDE package. Statistically significant changes between samples were determined in Perseus (v.1.6.6.0, Ref). Dataset was first filtered for contaminants and biological replicates were grouped as one. Proteins were further filtered for 2 valid values present in at least one group. Missing values were imputated from normal distribution of data using default settings. Significant candidates were chosen using Two-sided t-test with error corrected p-values (0.01. FDR) and log2(fold change) value minimum of ±0.5. To avoid false positive protein identification, ≥2 unique peptides identified within a single protein were used for further analysis. Network and Gene ontology analysis was performed with statistically significant hits using the online Metascape software

### Publication Abstract
Apart from prevention using vaccinations, the management options for COVID-19 remain limited. In retrospective cohort studies, use of famotidine, a specific oral H2 receptor antagonist (antihistamine), has been associated with reduced risk of intubation and death in patients hospitalized with COVID-19. In a case series, nonhospitalized patients with COVID-19 experienced rapid symptom resolution after taking famotidine, but the molecular basis of these observations remains elusive. Here we show using biochemical, cellular, and functional assays that famotidine has no effect on viral replication or viral protease activity. However, famotidine can affect histamine-induced signaling processes in infected Caco2 cells. Specifically, famotidine treatment inhibits histamine-induced expression of Toll-like receptor 3 (TLR3) in SARS-CoV-2 infected cells and can reduce TLR3-dependent signaling processes that culminate in activation of IRF3 and the NF-&#x3ba;B pathway, subsequently controlling antiviral and inflammatory responses. SARS-CoV-2-infected cells treated with famotidine demonstrate reduced expression levels of the inflammatory mediators CCL-2 and IL6, drivers of the cytokine release syndrome that precipitates poor outcome for patients with COVID-19. Given that pharmacokinetic studies indicate that famotidine can reach concentrations in blood that suffice to antagonize histamine H2 receptors expressed in mast cells, neutrophils, and eosinophils, these observations explain how famotidine may contribute to the reduced histamine-induced inflammation and cytokine release, thereby improving the outcome for patients with COVID-19.

### Keywords
Famotidine, Histamine, Anti-viral signaling, Sars-cov2, Toll-like receptor

### Affiliations
Institue of Biochemistry 2, Buchmann institute for Molecular Life Sciences
Goethe University, Institute of Biochemistry 2, Buchmann Institute For Molecular Life Sciences

### Submitter
Anshu Bhattacharya

### Lab Head
Dr Ivan Dikic
Institue of Biochemistry 2, Buchmann institute for Molecular Life Sciences


