### Accession
PXD009582

### Title
Proteome allocation strategies under nutrient-limiting conditions in the cyanobacterium Synechocystis

### Description
The response of the model cyanobacterium Synechocystis sp. PCC6803 towards light and carbon limitation was systematically probed. To this end, Synechocystis sp. PCC6803 was cultivated in a photo-bioreactor driven in turbidostat-mode. The turbidostat is a continuous cultivation that enabled cells to adapt to a constant environment, leading to a stable and 'optimal' proteome for the respective condition. The major dataset in this project consisted of 5 different 'concentrations' for light and CO2. Changes in the proteome were determined using using liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry and it was found that carbon and light limitation induced gradual but broad responses in gene expression. With decreasing substrate concentration (increasing limitation) a decrease in growth rate and a gradually more severe response in the proteome was visible.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen cell pellets were taken up in 100 µL solubilization buffer (200 mM TEAB, 8 M Urea, protease inhibitor), and cells lysed by sonication on ice (3 x 1 min, 1 min break, 1 s pulses). Cell debris was removed by centrifugation at 14,000 xg, 30 min, 4°C, and supernatant was transferred to a new tube. Protein concentration was determined using the Bradford assay (Bio-Rad). For reduction and alkylation of proteins, 2.5 µL 200 mM DTT (5 mM final) and 5 µL 200 mM CAA (10 mM final) were added, respectively, and samples incubated for 60 min at RT in the dark. Samples were diluted 8x with 700 µL 200 µM TEAB. For digestion, Lys-C was added in a ratio of 1:75 w/w to protein concentration, and samples were incubated at 37°C and 600 RPM for 12 h. Trypsin was added (1:75 w/w) and samples incubated again at the same conditions. Samples were then acidified with 100 µL 10% formic acid and insoluble compounds were removed by centrifugation (14,000 xg, 15 min, RT). Peptide samples were then cleaned up using a solid phase extraction protocol (Sep-Pak 1cc 50mg A C18 cartridges, Waters) according to the manufacturer's recommendations. Briefly, Sep-Pak columns were equilibrated with 1 mL  acetonitrile and 2x1 mL 0.6 % acetic acid.  Samples were loaded on columns and washed twice with 1 mL 0.6 % acetic acid. Peptides were eluted from the column in 500 µL elution buffer (0.6 % acetic acid, 80% ACN) and dried in a speedvac for 2h, 37°C. Dried peptides were frozen at -80 °C and dissolved before measurement in 10 % formic acid to a final concentration of 1 µg/µL.

### Data Protocol
Raw spectra files obtained from the MS instrument were converted to the mzML standard using Proteowizard's MSConvert tool (Adusumilli & Mallick, 2017). Peptide identification and label-free quantification were performed independently and the information resulting from both was subsequently merged by means of a custom pipeline that makes use of the OpenMS tools (Röst et al., 2016) and the DeMixQ workflow (Zhang et al., 2016) briefly explained as follows. MS/MS spectra were subjected to sequence database searching using the OpenMS implementation of the MS-GF+ search engine (Kim & Pevzner, 2014) and Synechocystis sp. PCC6803 protein sequences in fasta format obtained from cyanobase (3672 sequences, April 2016). Carbamidomethylation was considered as a fixed modification on cysteines and oxidation as a potential mass shift on methionines. The precursor ion mass window tolerance was set to 10 ppm. The error rate in identification was estimated using the OpenMS tools PeptideIndexer, to annotate peptide and protein hits with their corresponding target or decoy status, FalseDiscoveryRate, to divide the number of decoy hits by the sum of the false and correct discoveries, and IDFilter, to keep only peptides with q-values lower than 0.01 (FDR 1%) in every individual run. Next, feature detection, quantification and propagation was addressed. First, FeatureFinderIdentification was used to detect MS1 features based on retention time and mass to charge coordinates provided by the FDR-filtered identification result files. Features were annotated with a peptide identification by IDMapper. Then MapAlignerIdentificationPoseClustering corrected shifts and distortions between the retention time scales in the list of files containing annotated features used as input. Finally, FeatureLinkerUnlabeledQT created a consensus feature map by finding the equivalent corresponding features across MS runs. In addition, we addressed the missing values problem using the DeMix-Q approach (Zhang et al., 2016). It involves an additional step to the feature-based peptide propagation consisting of a more sensitive recovery of extracted-ion chromatograms (XICs) at the consensus locations (tolerance window 120 sec in RT, 10 ppm in m/z ratio) using EICExtractor. This enabled missing value estimation for runs where a feature could not be found yet an XIC signal was present by employing a MS run-wise K-nearest neighbours regression (KNN, K=5) based on other feature intensities having the most similar XIC profiles. To validate this complementary ion-based propagation, a target-decoy strategy was applied to the recovered XIC signals, setting a 5 % feature-level FDR (Zhang et al., 2016). Protein quantification from peptides was performed using a customized Diffacto algorithm (Zhang et al., 2017), that discards all peptides with a covariation score lower than 0.5. For the remaining peptides, precursor ion intensities were multiplied by the Diffcato score (0.5 ≤ x ≤ 1) in order to give higher weight to better aligned peptides, and aggregated by calculating the sum.

### Publication Abstract
Cyanobacteria must balance separate demands for energy generation, carbon assimilation, and biomass synthesis. We used shotgun proteomics to investigate proteome allocation strategies in the model cyanobacterium Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 as it adapted to light and inorganic carbon (C<sub>i</sub>) limitation. When partitioning the proteome into seven functional sectors, we find that sector sizes change linearly with growth rate. The sector encompassing ribosomes is significantly smaller than in E.&#xa0;coli, which may explain the lower maximum growth rate in Synechocystis. Limitation of light dramatically affects multiple proteome sectors, whereas the effect of C<sub>i</sub> limitation is weak. Carbon assimilation proteins respond more strongly to changes in light intensity than to C<sub>i</sub>. A&#xa0;coarse-grained cell economy model generally explains proteome trends. However, deviations from model predictions suggest that the large proteome sectors for carbon and light assimilation are not optimally utilized under some growth conditions and may&#xa0;constrain the proteome space available to ribosomes.

### Keywords
Cellular economy, Carbon limitation, Data-dependent acquisition, Msgf+, Cyanobacteria, Resource allocation, Light limitation, Openms, Shotgun proteomics

### Affiliations
Science for Life Laboratory Stockholm
Science for Life Laboratory, School of Biotechnology, KTH – Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden.

### Submitter
Michael Jahn

### Lab Head
Dr Elton Paul Hudson
Science for Life Laboratory, School of Biotechnology, KTH – Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden.


