### Accession
PXD016297

### Title
HPLC-MS/MS analysis of proteins in serum samples

### Description
HPLC-MS/MS analysis of proteins in serum samples using high-resolution mass spectrometry. Dataset of 50 samples from patients with schizophrenia (Series "SCH") and 50 samples from healthy volunteers (Series "CNT") and the data analysis were carried out using shotgun ultra-high resolution mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
For alkylation, the denatured protein solution was added with a solution of 0.2% 4-vinylpyridine in 30% propan-2-ol up to a final concentration of 0.02% (V/V). Enzymatic cleavage of proteins was performed using a trypsin protease. The collected samples was dried at 30 C for 45 minutes in a vacuum. The dry residue was restored in 40 µl of 0.5% formic acid solution and transferred into vials of deactivated glass for mass spectrometry analysis.  The mass spectrometric analysis of the peptide composition of serum samples was conducted. HPLC-MS/MS registration of peptides was carried out using high resolution mass spectrometer Q Exactive (Thermo Scientific, USA) by chromatographic separation using Ultimate 3000 Nano-flow HPLC system (Thermo Scientific, USA). Mass spectrometric measurements were performed using the equipment of “Human Proteome” Core Facility of the Institute of Biomedical Chemistry (Russia, Moscow).

### Data Protocol
Registration of peptide signal was carried out in the dependent tandem scan mode in the range of 420–1250 m/z. The ions with charge state z = 2 + to 5 + were selected for tandem scanning using dynamic exclusion for the duration of one half-width of the chromatographic peak. HPLC-MS/MS spectra in the RAW format were processed in Mass Hunter version В 2.0

### Publication Abstract
Schizophrenia is a complex chronic disease. The molecular determinants and neuropathology of schizophrenia are multifaceted; an important role in the pathogenesis is played by the dysregulation of molecular and epigenetic mechanisms. However, the molecular mechanisms of the development of the disease have not yet been studied. An important task is the accumulation and systematization of "OMICS"-knowledge of the molecular profiles (transcriptome, proteome, metabolome) of blood specific to pathology. Thereby the development and improvement of mass spectrometric methods for the detection of biological molecules has become increasingly important in biomedical research. In the field of applied problems in biomedical research, the most prevalent issue involves the identification of serological protein markers associated with the development of schizophrenia, which account for the diseases that cause the a life-shortening illness, disability, decreased of functioning and quality of life and wellbeing or health status. OMICS approaches are designed to detect genes (genomics), mRNA (transcriptomics), proteins (proteomics) and metabolites (metabolomics) in a specific biological sample. We report the proteomic datasets on the serum samples from patients with schizophrenia (series "SCZ") and healthy volunteers (series "CNT"). Data were acquired using shotgun ultra-high resolution mass spectrometry.

### Keywords
Human, Plasma, Schizophrenia, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Institute of Biomedical Chemistry
IBMC

### Submitter
Anna Kaysheva

### Lab Head
Dr Anna Kaysheva
IBMC


