### Accession
PXD008324

### Title
PTMs in yeast complexes - We investigate the roles of natively present PTMs on stability of interactions in three large and essential yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae complexes: exosome, RNA polymerase II and 26S proteasome.

### Description
We investigate the roles of natively present PTMs on stability of interactions in three large and essential yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae complexes: exosome, RNA polymerase II and 26S proteasome.

### Sample Protocol
Exosome, RNA polymerase II and 26S proteasome were purified from yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae using tandem affinity purification (TAP). TAP was performed using one bait for each protein complex: YHR069C (Rrp4, exosome), YOR151C (Rpb2, RNA polymerase II) and YKL145W (Rpt1, 26S proteasome). Purified proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE. Gel lanes were cut into slices, and subjected to in-gel digestion, using two different proteolytic enzymes (trypsin and chymotrypsin), in parallel. Obtained peptides were subjected to reversed phase nLC-MS/MS analysis using an Agilent 1290 Infinity UHPLC system, coupled to a TripleTOF 5600 (AB Sciex) mass spectrometer. The UHPLC was equipped with a double frit trapping column (Agilent Zorbax SB-C18, 1.8 μm material, 0.5 cm x 100 μm) and a single frit analytical column (Agilent Zorbax SB-C18, 1.8 μm material, 40 cm x 50 μm). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode. After the initial survey scan in high resolution mode, the 20 most intense precursors were selected for subsequent HCD fragmentation using rolling collision energy, and tandem mass spectra were acquired in high sensitivity mode with a resolution of 20,000.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw files were first recalibrated based on two background ions with m/z values of 371.1012 and 445.1200, and then converted to peak lists by the AB Sciex MS Data Converter tool. Database search was performed with Mascot using Proteome Discoverer. The spectra were searched against the Saccharomyces cerevisiae SwissProt database (version 02_2012). Trypsin or chymotrypsin were set as the enzyme accordingly, and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as the fixed modification. Methionine oxidation, serine, threonine, and tyrosine phosphorylation, protein n-term acetylation, as well as lysine acetylation were set as the variable modifications. Peptide tolerance was set to 50 ppm, whereas the MS/MS tolerance was 0.15 Da. Peptides identification where filtered for: i. minimum ion score of 20, ii. position rank 1, and iii. minimum peptide length of 6 amino acids. The phosphorylation site localization of the identified phosphopeptides was performed by the phosphoRS algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Yeast, Molecular dynamics, Acetylation, Mass spectrometry, Complexes

### Affiliations
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research, Utrecht University, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands
Netherlands Proteomics Centre, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands Netherlands Proteomics Centre, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Piero Giansanti

### Lab Head
Dr Albert J. R. Heck
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands Netherlands Proteomics Centre, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands


