### Accession
PXD032935

### Title
Proteomic data for tumor pericytes with TCFA2 overexpression

### Description
This study aims to investigate differentially expressed proteins in tumor pericytes with or without TCAF2-ovexpression. Tumor pericytes were isolated from tumor of patients with colorectal cancer. Then, tumor pericytes were cultured, transfected with vector or TCAF2 overexpressing plasmid. Top ten cytokines were screened and Wnt5a was the most significant one.

### Sample Protocol
For the TCAF2 overexpression assay, TPCs derived from non-metastatic CRC patients were transfected with lentivirus expressing TCAF2 or its corresponding vector (Ubi-MCS-3FLAG-SV40-EGFP-IRES-puromycin) (Genechem, Shanghai, China) and selected by culturing in presence of puromycin (2 mg/mL) for 2 days. The surviving cells were harvested for further experiments. The experiments were repeated three times independently.

### Data Protocol
Briefly, TPCs (n = 3 each) were homogenized in SDT buffer (4%SDS, 100mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.6, 0.1M DTT) and the protein was quantified using the BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, USA). Then, 20 μg proteins from each sample was separated by SDS-PAGE and digested according to the FASP (filter-aided sample preparation) procedure. The digested peptides were labeled according to the instructions of the TMT labeling kit (Thermo Scientific), and the TMT-labeled peptides from each sample were mixed in equal amounts and fractionated using high-pH reversed-phase liquid chromatography. For proteomic analysis, the fractionated peptides were loaded onto a loading column (Thermo Scientific Acclaim PepMap100, 100 μm×2 cm, nanoViper C18) in 95% buffer A and separated using a nano-flow HPLC Easy-nLC system (Thermo Scientific,10 cm, ID 75 μm, 3 μm, C18-A2) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min [buffer A, 0.1% v/v formic acid in water; buffer B, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in acetonitrile]. The samples were analyzed using a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The mass spectrometry data were analyzed using Mascot version 2.2 and Proteome Discoverer version1.4, and searched against the UniProt database (downloaded on December 12, 2014, including 76417 sequences). For quantitative analysis, the relevant parameters and descriptions were as follows: enzyme = trypsin; max missed cleavages = 2; fixed modification = carbamidomethyl (C); variable modifications = oxidation (M); and peptide false discovery rate (FDR) ≤ 0.01. The protein ratios were calculated based only on the median of the unique peptides of the protein. Proteins with expression showing fold change > 1.2 or < 0.83 and the P value (Student’s t test) <0.05 were considered differentially expressed. Gene set enrichment analyses (GSEA) were performed using ClusterProfiler.

### Publication Abstract
Hematogenous metastasis is the main approach for colorectal cancer liver metastasis (CRCLM). However, as the gatekeepers in the tumor vessels, the role of TPCs in hematogenous metastasis remains largely unknown, which may be attributed to the lack of specific biomarkers for TPC isolation. Here, microdissection combined with a pericyte medium-based approach is developed to obtain TPCs from CRC patients. Proteomic analysis reveals that TRP channel-associated factor 2&#xa0;(TCAF2), a partner protein of the transient receptor potential cation channel subfamily M member 8 (TRPM8), is overexpressed in TPCs from patients with CRCLM. TCAF2 in TPCs is correlated with liver metastasis, short overall survival, and disease-free survival in CRC patients. Gain- and loss-of-function experiments validate that TCAF2 in TPCs promotes tumor cell motility, epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), and CRCLM, which is attenuated in pericyte-conditional Tcaf2-knockout mice. Mechanistically, TCAF2 inhibits the expression and activity of TRPM8, leading to Wnt5a secretion in TPCs, which facilitates EMT via the activation of the STAT3 signaling pathway in tumor cells. Menthol, a TRPM8 agonist, significantly suppresses Wnt5a secretion in TPCs and CRCLM. This study reveals the previously unidentified pro-metastatic effects of TPCs from the perspective of cold-sensory receptors, providing a promising diagnostic biomarker and therapeutic target for CRCLM.

### Keywords
Tcaf2, Tumor pericytes

### Affiliations
Jinan University
College of Pharmacy, Jinan University, Guangzhou, China

### Submitter
Ming Qi

### Lab Head
Dr Minfeng Chen
College of Pharmacy, Jinan University, Guangzhou, China


