### Accession
PXD026635

### Title
CNNM proteins selectively bind to the TRPM7 channel to stimulate divalent cation entry into cells

### Description
Magnesium is essential for cellular life, but how it is homeostatically controlled still remains poorly understood. Here we report that members of CNNM family, which have been controversially implicated in both cellular Mg2+ influx and efflux, selectively bind to the TRPM7 channel to stimulate divalent cation entry into cells. Co-expression of CNNMs with the channel markedly increased uptake of divalent cations, which is prevented by an inactivating mutation to the channel’s pore. Knockout of Trpm7 in cells or application of the TRPM7-channel inhibitor NS8593 also interfered with CNNM-stimulated divalent cation uptake. Conversely, knockout of CNNM3 and CNNM4 in HEK-293 cells significantly reduced TRPM7-mediated divalent cation entry, without affecting TRPM7 protein expression or its cell surface levels. Furthermore, we found that cellular overexpression of Phosphatases of Regenerating Liver (PRLs), a known CNNMs binding partner, stimulated TRPM7-dependent divalent cation entry and that CNNMs were required for this activity. Whole-cell electrophysiological recordings demonstrated that deletion of CNNM3 and CNNM4 from HEK-293 cells interfered with heterologously expressed and native TRPM7 channel function.  We conclude that CNNMs employ the TRPM7 channel to mediate divalent cation influx and that CNNMs also possess separate TRPM7-independent Mg2+ efflux activities that contribute to CNNMs’ control of cellular Mg2+ homeostasis.

### Sample Protocol
We conducted mass spectrometry analysis of TRPM7 purified from the LTRPC7 cell line, described above, grown intentionally in the absence of tetracycline to keep FLAG-TRPM7 protein levels as low as possible and at equilibrium inside the cells. A 10 cm dish of  LTRPC7 cells without tetracycline was used to isolate FLAG-TRPM7.  A 10 cm dish of HEK-293T cells were used as a negative control. The experiment under the same conditions was repeated once. Cells were lysed with 1 ml of lysis buffer lysis buffer (50mM TRIS (pH 7.4), 150 mM NaCl, and 1% Igepal 630)  and were solubilized by incubating the lysis mixture at 4C for 1 hour. LTRPC7 and control HEK-293-TR cell lysates were then subjected to immunoprecipitation overnight using 40 L of M2 FLAG-agarose. The beads were wash three times with PBS with 1% Tween-20, the bound proteins were eluted with 40 L Laemmli sample buffer. Immunoprecipitation of FLAG-TRPM7 was verified by SDS-PAGE and Western Blotting using standard procedures. For mass spectrometry analysis, the samples were resolved in a Bis-Tris polyacrylamide gel and the gel band was subjected to in-gel reduction, alkylation, tryptic digestion and peptide extraction with a standard protocol. Peptides were solubilized in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid, and analyzed by Nano LC-MS/MS with Dionex Ultimate 3000 RLSC Nano System interfaced with a Velos-LTQ-Orbitrap (ThermoFisher, CA) or a QExactive HF (Thermofisher, CA) based on instrument availability. Samples were loaded onto a self-packed 100 µm x 2 cm trap (Magic C18AQ, 5µm 200 Å; Michrom Bioresources, Inc., PA) and washed with Buffer A (0.2% formic acid) for 5 min with a flow rate of 10 µl/min. The trap was brought in-line with the analytical column (Magic C18AQ, 3 µm 200 Å, 75 µm x 50 cm; Michrom Bioresources, Inc., PA) and peptides fractionated at 300 nL/min using a segmented linear gradient 4-15% Buffer B (0.2% formic acid in acetonitrile) in 35 min, 15-25% Buffer B in 65 min, 25-50% Buffer B in 55 min. Mass spectrometry data was acquired using a data-dependent acquisition procedure with a cyclic series of a full scan acquired with a resolution of 60,000 (Velos-LTQ-Orbitrap) or 120,000 (QExactive HF) followed by MS/MS of the 20 most intense ions and a dynamic exclusion duration of 30 sec for both instruments. Proteome Discoverer was used for database search and analysis.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched against most updated SwissProt database using MASCOT (v 2.3). Precursor ion mass error tolerance was set to ±10 ppm (Velos-LTQ-Orbitrap) or +/- 7 ppm (QExactive HF) and fragment mass error tolerance to ±0.4 Da (Velos-LTQ-Orbitrap) and +/-20 ppm (QExactive HF). Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a complete modification, acetylation on N-terminus of protein, oxidation on methionine, phosphorylation on serine, threonine and tyrosine were set as variable modifications. Site localization was analyzed using PTMRS. Only spectra of high confidence (FDR were set at 0.01 for PSM) were reported. The full data sets has been submitted to an online database. Supplementary

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Trpm7 cnnm3 cnnm4 cnmm2

### Affiliations
Rutgers RWJMS

### Submitter
Loren Runnels

### Lab Head
Dr Loren Runnels
Rutgers RWJMS


