### Accession
PXD010529

### Title
Proteomes of yeast kinase knock-outs analysed by SWATH-MS

### Description
It proves so far difficult to predict the metabolome, even when genome, transcriptome or proteome of a cell are known. In order to globally map enzyme-metabolite relationships, we systematically quantified enzyme expression and metabolite concentrations in Saccharomyces cerevisiae kinase knock-out strains. Enzymes expression changes did account for a major fraction of all differentially expressed proteins, and were non-redundant, implying that kinases act generally yet specifically in metabolic regulation. Differential enzyme expression was found to affect metabolite concentrations through the redistribution of flux control, resulting in a many-to-many relationship between enzyme abundance and the metabolome. Machine learning successfully mapped these relationships, allowing the precise prediction of metabolite concentrations, as well as identifying regulatory genes. Our study reveals that hierarchical metabolic regulation acts predominantly through adjustment of broad enzyme expression patterns rather than over rate-limiting enzymes, and may account for more than half of metabolic regulation.

### Sample Protocol
Yeast strains were grown in minimal medium to exponential phase and were sampled by cold methanol quenching at OD 1.5+-0.1. Tryptic digests for the analysis by SWATH-MS were prepared by the RapiGest method​ and analysed on a Tandem Quadrupole Time-of-Flight mass spectrometer (SCIEX TripleTOF 5600) coupled to DuoSpray Ion Source (SCIEX) and Eksigent 425 HPLC system running in microflow mode. Before the injection into the mass spectrometer, total protein concentrations in each kinase mutant/sample were adjusted by dilution to make amounts of injected protein equal.

### Data Protocol
SWATH data analysis was performed in Spectronaut (Biognosys, 8.0.9600). Fragment intensities reported by Spectronaut (F.PeakArea column) were then used for further data analysis in R.

### Publication Abstract
A challenge in solving the genotype-to-phenotype relationship is to predict a cell's metabolome, believed to correlate poorly with gene expression. Using comparative quantitative proteomics, we found that differential protein expression in 97 Saccharomyces cerevisiae kinase deletion strains is non-redundant and dominated by abundance changes in metabolic enzymes. Associating differential enzyme expression landscapes to corresponding metabolomes using network models provided reasoning for poor proteome-metabolome correlations; differential protein expression redistributes flux control between many enzymes acting in concert, a mechanism not captured by one-to-one correlation statistics. Mapping these regulatory patterns using machine learning enabled the prediction of metabolite concentrations, as well as identification of candidate genes important for the regulation of metabolism. Overall, our study reveals that a large part of metabolism regulation is explained through coordinated enzyme expression changes. Our quantitative data indicate that this mechanism explains more than half of metabolism regulation and underlies the interdependency between enzyme levels and metabolism, which renders the metabolome a predictable phenotype.

### Keywords
Yeast, Kinase, Swath, High-throughput proteomics

### Affiliations
Charité – Universitätsmedizin Berlin
The Francis Crick Institute, Molecular Biology of Metabolism laboratory, London, United Kingdom; Department of Biochemistry and Cambridge Systems Biology Centre, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom; Department of Biochemistry, Charité Universitaetsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany

### Submitter
Vadim Demichev

### Lab Head
Dr Markus Ralser
The Francis Crick Institute, Molecular Biology of Metabolism laboratory, London, United Kingdom; Department of Biochemistry and Cambridge Systems Biology Centre, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom; Department of Biochemistry, Charité Universitaetsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany


