### Accession
PXD012844

### Title
Optimization of HUNTER N-termini profiling using rat brain proteome extracts

### Description
Optimization hydrophobic tagging reaction time (30 min to 2h) and evaluation of the HUNTER protocol performance with different amounts (25 ug to 400 ug) of purified rat brain proteome as starting material.

### Sample Protocol
Young adult male Wistar rats (220-250 g) were obtained from the Animal facility (ZETT) of the University of Düsseldorf. Rats were decapitated and brains were immediately dissected and frozen in pre-cooled isopentane at -40°C and stored at -80°C until use. The use of animals had been approved by the local authorities (Project O 33/16). Corresponding rat brain tissue was homogenized in 6M GuaHCl, 0.1M HEPES pH 7.4, 1 mM DTT, 5 mM EDTA and 1X Thermo Halt Protease inhibitor mix with a Kinematica Polytron PT-2500 for 2x 30s at 18 000 rpm. Proteins were processed with the HUNTER protocol as described in detail in the accompanying manuscript (Weng et al 2019). In brief, primary amines were dimethyl-labelled with 13CD2O formaldehyde on protein level before tryptic digest. The trypsin-generated peptide N termini were modified with a hydrophobic hexadecane or undecanal tag in optimization assays for tagging time (30 min to 16h) and amount of digested proteome used for tagging (25 ug to 400 ug). Subsequently the N termini were depleted by C18 solid-phase extraction, enriching previously modified, inert protein N-terminal peptides in the flow-through. Peptides were analyzed using a two-column nano-HPLC setup (ThermoFisher, Dreieich, Germany) with a binary gradient from 5-35% B (A: H2O + 0.1% FA, B: ACN + 0.1% FA) for 80 minutes coupled online to a high resolution Q-TOF mass spectrometer (Impact II, Bruker) as described (Rinschen et al., 2017).

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant was used for peptide identification from the acquired tandem mass spectra as described (Rinschen et al., JASN 2017). Subsequent peptide evaluation and annotation was performed using an in-house Perl script (muda.pl , https://muda.sourceforge.io).

### Publication Abstract
Protein N termini unambiguously identify truncated, alternatively translated or modified proteoforms with distinct functions and reveal perturbations in disease. Selective enrichment of N-terminal peptides is necessary to achieve proteome-wide coverage for unbiased identification of site-specific regulatory proteolytic processing and protease substrates. However, many proteolytic processes are strictly confined in time and space and therefore can only be analyzed in minute samples that provide insufficient starting material for current enrichment protocols. Here we present High-efficiency Undecanal-based N Termini EnRichment (HUNTER), a robust, sensitive and scalable method for the analysis of previously inaccessible microscale samples. HUNTER achieved identification of &gt;1000 N termini from as little as 2 &#x3bc;g raw HeLa cell lysate. Broad applicability is demonstrated by the first N-terminome analysis of sorted human primary immune cells and enriched mitochondrial fractions from pediatric cancer patients, as well as protease substrate identification from individual <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i> wild type and Vacuolar Processing Enzyme-deficient mutant seedlings. We further implemented the workflow on a liquid handling system and demonstrate the feasibility of clinical degradomics by automated processing of liquid biopsies from pediatric cancer patients.

### Keywords
Wistar rat hunter n-termini

### Affiliations
Forschungszentrum Juelich GmbH ZEA-3 Analytics Wilhelm-Johnen-Str D-52425 Juelich Germany
Forschungszentrum Juelich
ZEA-3 Analytics
Wilhelm-Johnen-Str
D-52425 Juelich

### Submitter
Fatih Demir

### Lab Head
Dr Pitter Florian Huesgen
Forschungszentrum Juelich GmbH ZEA-3 Analytics Wilhelm-Johnen-Str D-52425 Juelich Germany


