### Accession
PXD039411

### Title
STING signalling is terminated through ESCRT-dependent microautophagy of vesicles originating from recycling endosomes

### Description
Stimulator of interferon genes (STING) is essential for the type I interferon response against a variety of DNA pathogens. Upon emergence of cytosolic DNA, STING translocates from the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) to the Golgi where STING activates the downstream kinase TBK1, then to lysosome through recycling endosomes (REs) for its degradation. Although the molecular machinery of STING activation is extensively studied and defined, the one underlying STING degradation and inactivation has not yet been fully elucidated. Here we show that STING is degraded by the endosomal sorting complexes required for transport (ESCRT)-driven microautophagy. Airyscan super-resolution microscopy and correlative light/electron microscopy suggest that STING-positive vesicles of an RE origin are directly encapsulated into Lamp1-positive compartments. Screening of mammalian Vps genes, the yeast homologues of which regulate Golgi-to-vacuole transport, shows that ESCRT proteins are essential for the STING encapsulation into Lamp1-positive compartments. Knockdown of Tsg101 and Vps4, components of ESCRT, results in the accumulation of STING vesicles in the cytosol, leading to the sustained type I interferon response. Knockdown of Tsg101 in human primary T cells leads to an increase the expression of interferon-stimulated genes. STING undergoes K63-linked ubiquitination at lysine 288 during its transit through the Golgi/REs, and this ubiquitination is required for STING degradation. Our results reveal a molecular mechanism that prevents hyperactivation of innate immune signalling, which operates at REs.

### Sample Protocol
Cells expressing FLAG-STING were lysed with IP buffer (50 mM HEPES-NaOH (pH 7.2), 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA, 1% Triton X-100, protease inhibitors, and phosphatase inhibitors). The lysates were centrifugated at 15,000 rpm for 10 min at 4 °C, the resultant supernatants were incubated for overnight at 4 °C with anti-FLAG M2 Affinity Gel. The beads were washed four times with immunoprecipitation wash buffer (50 mM HEPES-NaOH (pH 7.2), 150 mM NaCl, 1% Triton X-100), and eluted with elution buffer [50 mM HEPES-NaOH (pH 7.2), 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA, 1% Triton X-100, 500 µg ml-1 FLAG peptide]. Eluted proteins were applied to SDS-PAGE, and the electrophoresis was stopped when the samples were moved to the top of the separation gel. The gel was stained with CBB and the protein bands at the top of separation gel were excised. The proteins were reduced and alkylated with acrylamide, followed by a tryptic digestion in gel (TPCK treated trypsin, Worthington Biochemical Corporation). The digests were separated with a reversed phase nano-spray column (NTCC-360/75-3-105, NIKKYO technos) and then applied to Q Exactiv Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). MS and MS/MS data were obtained with TOP10 method. Each sample was analyzed in triplicates.

### Data Protocol
The acquired data were processed using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with integrated Mascot (version 2.6.0, Matrix Science). The MSMS data were used to search the NCBI-nr protein database (20160711, Taxonomy: H. sapiens 326,427 sequences), using the following parameters: enzyme = trypsin; maximum missed cleavages = 3; variable modifications = Acetyl (Protein N-term), Gln- > pyro-Glu (N-term Q), Oxidation (M), Phospho (STY), Propionamide (C), Palmitoyl (C), Myristoyl (C); product mass tolerance = ± 20 ppm; product mass tolerance = ± 30 milli mass unit; instrument type = ESI-TRAP. The comparative quantification results were calculated using a label-free quantification method with a proteome discoverer.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Escrt, Sting, Microautophagy

### Affiliations
RIKEN Center for Sustainable Resource Science
Biomolecular characterization unit, Center for Sustainable Resource Science, RIKEN

### Submitter
Takehiro Suzuki

### Lab Head
Dr Naoshi Dohmae
Biomolecular characterization unit, Center for Sustainable Resource Science, RIKEN


