### Accession
PXD035147

### Title
Integrated proteome and malonylome analyses reveal the potential meaning of TLN1 and ACTB in end-stage renal disease

### Description
Purpose: End-stage renal disease (ESRD) is a condition that is characterized by the loss of kidney function. ESRD patients suffer from various endothelial dysfunctions, inflammation, and immune system defects. Lysine malonylation (Kmal) is a recently discovered post-translational modification (PTM). Although Kmal has the ability to regulate a wide range of biological processes in various organisms, its specific role in ESRD is limited. Experimental design: In this study, the affinity enrichment and liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) techniques have been used to create the first global proteome and malonyl proteome (malonylome) profiles of peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) from twenty patients with ESRD and eighty-one controls. Results: On analysis, 793 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) and 12 differentially malonylated proteins (DMPs) with 16 Kmal sites were identified. The Rap1 signaling pathway and platelet activation pathway were found to be important in the development of chronic kidney disease (CKD), as were DMPs TLN1 and ACTB, as well as one malonylated site. One conserved Kmal motif was also discovered. Conclusion: These findings provided the first report on the Kmal profile in ESRD, which could be useful in understanding the potential role of lysine malonylation modification in the development of ESRD.

### Sample Protocol
Peripheral blood samples were drawn from 20 patients with ESRD and 81 control subjects with normal kidney function between May 2020 and October 2020. According to the 2012 Kidney Disease Improving Global Outcomes Organization (KDIGO) Clinical Practice Guideline for the Evaluation and Management of Chronic Kidney Disease (30), all patients were confirmed with the diagnosis of ESRD (eGFR less than 15 mL/min/1.73 m2) and were also on RRT (hemodialysis or peritoneal dialysis) at Shenzhen People’s Hospital. The primary causes of renal failure were diabetic nephropathy (n=4), immunoglobulin A (IgA) nephropathy (n=1), and glomerulonephritis (n=15). Eighty-one control subjects without kidney disease and without administering drugs were included in the study. All participants with active infections, a history of cancer, inflammatory, autoimmune, hematologic, or allergic diseases were excluded from the study. The Shenzhen People's Hospital Medical Ethics Committee approved all experimental procedures, which were carried out in accordance with Chinese laws and regulations. Before the study, all participants signed a written informed consent form. The processes involved in this study were carried out on the basis of the Declaration of Helsinki.  EDTA anticoagulated blood (about 8 ml) was the sample used for the isolation of peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) through Ficoll-Hypaque density gradient centrifugation. Following centrifugation and isolation of the buffy coat, the PBMCs were isolated from blood by layering the diluted blood with phosphate buffered saline (PBS) (1:1 in PBS) on top of an equal volume of Ficoll (GE Healthcare). After PBMC isolation, these samples were stored at -80 ° C until further analysis was performed.  Protein extraction Once the stored PBMC samples were removed from-80°C, four volumes of lysis buffer (containing 8 mol / L of urea, 1% protease inhibitors, 3 µM TSA, and 50 mM NAM) were added to the unwashed sample, followed by ultrasonic sonication (PTM Bio, Hangzhou, China) and centrifugation (12000 ×g at 4 ° C for 10 min) to remove cell debris. Next, the supernatants were then transferred to a new microcentrifuge tube and collected for protein concentration assessment, which was determined using a BCA kit (Beyotime Biotechnology) according to the manufacturer's instructions.  Trypsin digestion Cell lysates were prepared as previously mentioned and equal amounts of protein in each sample were analyzed by SDS-PAGE. After collection, the samples were subjected to precipitation of trichloroacetic acid (TCA, Sigma-Aldrich) precipitation at a final concentration of 20% and incubated at 4 °C for 2 h, followed by centrifugation (4500 ×g, 5 min). In the next steps, the supernatant was discarded, and the remaining precipitate was washed with cold acetone about two to three times. Triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (final concentration: 200 mM TEAB, Sigma) was then added to completely dissolve the sample, and trypsin (Promega) was added at a mass ratio of 1:50 (enzyme: protein) and kept at 37°C overnight. The proteins were then reduced by adding dithiothreitol (DTT) (final concentration: 5 mM) for 30 min at 56°C, followed by the addition of iodoacetamide (IAA) to a final concentration of 11 mM and further incubated for 15 min in the dark at room temperature. Affinity enrichment of lysine malonylated peptides The peptide was dissolved in the IP buffer solution (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0), and the supernatant was transferred to the malonylated resin that was washed in advance (antibody resin item number PTM-904, Hangzhou Jingjie Biotechnology Co., Ltd., PTM Bio). The samples were placed in a rotating 4 °C shaker, gently shaken and incubated overnight. After the incubation, the resin was washed four times with IP buffer solution and twice with deionized water. Finally, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid was used to elute the resin-bound peptides; the process was repeated three times. The eluent was discarded and samples were desalinated following the instructions given with C18 ZipTips (Merck Millipore). Finally, the peptide samples were freeze dried and used for LC/MS analysis. LC-MS/MS analysis

### Data Protocol
Database search The acquired MS raw files were processed with the MaxQuant search engine (v.1.6.15.0). The MS/MS spectra were then searched against the Homo sapiens protein database (Homo_sapiens_9606_SP_20201214. with 20395 sequences) in SwissProt forward and reverse protein sequences. Trypsin/P was set, and four missed cleavage sites were allowed. The mass tolerance for precursor and fragment ions was set at 20 ppm in the first search and in the main search. The minimum peptide length was set to seven amino acids, with a maximum of five modifications per peptide. Variable modifications such as methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation, and lysine malonylation were established, while fixed modifications were established for carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues. The false discovery rate (FDR) for peptides, protein identifications, and modification sites was set to 1%. The proteins were identified by a minimum of two peptides and at least one unique peptide. These common parameters were used to analyze searches in the proteome and malonylome databases.  Bioinformatics and statistical analysis The identified DEPs were identified based on the screening conditions for proteomic data by p-value ≤ 0.05, fold change (FC) ≥ 1.5, or ≤ 1/1.5. The differentially expressed malonylated proteins were screened on the basis of the same conditions. An analysis of the GO annotation proteome was performed using the UniProt-GOA database (www. http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/). A WoLF PSORT analysis (https://wolfpsort.hgc.jp/) was also performed to predict the subcellular location of the submitted proteins. This study then used the KEGG database (http://www.genome.jp/kegg/) to identify the pathways enriched in DEPs and DMPs. This study also used Soft MoMo (http://meme-suite.org/tools/momo), a motif-x algorithm, to analyze the model of the sequences of malonylated peptides, which contain amino acids at a specific position of the malonyl 21-mer in all protein sequences (10 amino acids upstream and downstream of the malonylation site). A two‑tailed Fisher’s exact test was used to determine the enrichment of DEPs against all identified proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
End-stage renal disease (esrd), Platelet activation, Lysine malonylation (kmal), Chronic kidney disease (ckd), Post-translational modification (ptm)

### Affiliations
Clinical Medical Research Center, The Second Clinical Medical College of Jinan University (Shenzhen People’s Hospital), Shenzhen, Guangdong;Department of Nephrology, The University of Hong Kong-Shenzhen Hospital, Shenzhen, Guangdong

### Submitter
ruqi tan

### Lab Head
Dr Ruqi Tan
Clinical Medical Research Center, The Second Clinical Medical College of Jinan University (Shenzhen People’s Hospital), Shenzhen, Guangdong;Department of Nephrology, The University of Hong Kong-Shenzhen Hospital, Shenzhen, Guangdong


