### Accession
PXD001835

### Title
3D topology of the SMC2/SMC4 sub-complex from chicken condensin I revealed by cross-linking and molecular modelling

### Description
SMC proteins are essential components of three protein complexes that are important for chromosome structure and function. The cohesin complex holds replicated sister chromatids together, whereas the condensin complex has an essential role in mitotic chromosome architecture. Both are involved in interphase genome organisation. SMC-containing complexes are large (>650 kDa for condensin) and contain long anti-parallel coiled-coils. They are thus difficult subjects for conventional crystallographic and electron cryomicroscopic studies. Here we have used amino acid-selective cross-linking and mass spectrometry (CLMS) combined with structure prediction to develop a full-length molecular draft 3D-structure of the SMC2/SMC4 dimeric backbone of chicken condensin. We assembled homology-based molecular models of the globular heads and hinges with the lengthy coiled-coils modelled in fragments, using numerous high-confidence cross-links and accounting for potential irregularity. Our experiments reveal that isolated condensin complexes can exist with their coiled-coil segments closely apposed to one another along their lengths and define the relative spatial alignment of the two anti-parallel coils. The centres of the coiled-coils can also approach one another closely in situ in mitotic chromosomes. In addition to revealing structural information, our cross-linking data suggest that both H2A and H4 may have roles in condensin interactions with chromatin.

### Sample Protocol
Purification of SMC2/SMC4 sub-complex, condensin holo-complex and cohesin complex SMC2 knockout cells expressing streptavidin-binding peptide (SBP)-tagged SMC2, CAP-H knockout cells expressing SBP-CAP-H, and Scc1 knockout cells expressing 9Myc-tagged Scc1 were grown as described previously in 200 ng/ml of doxycycline for at least 48 h. When cells reached a density of 106/ml, nocodazole was added for a further 13 h to obtain a mitotic index of >80%. Cells were lysed in lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES, pH 7.5, 0.25 M NaCl, 0.5% NP-40, 30 μg/ml RNase A), supplemented with the protease inhibitors 1 mM PMSF (Sigma-Aldrich) and 1 µg/ml CLAP (chymostatin, leupeptin, antipain, pepstatin A; Sigma-Aldrich) for 45 minutes on ice. After sonication, cellular debris was removed by centrifugation at 20,000 g for 10 min at 4°C. Cell lysates (4 × 108) were incubated either with 300 μl of streptavidin-sepharose beads (Streptavidin Plus UltraLink Resin, Pierce) for 2 h at 4°C (SMC2/SMC4 and condensin) or with 200 μl of anti-c-Myc tag gel (MBL) in a column for 1 h at 4°C (cohesin) in a final volume of 10 ml on a rotary wheel. Beads were washed three times with wash buffer (50 mM HEPES, 0.5% NP-40, 0.25 M NaCl) on a rotary wheel for 5 min at 4°C and the proteins were eluted either twice in 600 μl of wash buffer containing 4 mM biotin (SMC2/SMC4 and condensin) or five times with 200 μl of c-Myc tag peptide (0.1 mg/ml) in wash buffer (cohesin) on a rotary wheel for 30 minutes at 4°C. The eluents were analyzed by SDS-PAGE and by immunoblotting. Cross-linking of SMC2/SMC4, condensin and cohesin complexes  The mixing ratio of BS3 to complexes (SMC2/SMC4, condensin, cohesin) was determined by using 1 µg protein aliquots and either a 30-, 90-, 270-, 810- or 5-, 15-, 30-, 60-, 120- or 3-, 30-, 90- fold weight excess (respectively) of BS3 cross-linker (Thermo Scientific) resuspended in DMSO at 300 µg/µl. After 2 hours, the reaction was quenched by addition of ABC to 50 mM for 30 min. The products of cross-linking were separated on a NuPAGE 4-12% Bis-Tris gel (Invitrogen) using MES running buffer and were Coomassie- or silver-stained.  36 μg of purified SMC2/SMC4 or 100 μg of condensin complex at 0.05 µg/µl in 50 mM HEPES buffer, 250 mM NaCl, 0.5% NP-40, 4 mM biotin, was cross-linked with 30 fold weight excess of BS3 for 2 hours on ice. After 30 min quenching, the cross-linked complexes were separated in 4-12% Bis-Tris gel (Invitrogen). 100 μg of cohesin complex at 0.02 µg/µl was cross-linked in the same way. Sample preparation for MS analysis Bands containing the cross-linked complexes were excised from gels and in-gel digested following standard protocols. The cross-linked peptides were extracted from gel pieces, acidified to pH 3.0 with 0.5% acetic acid and fractionated using the SCX-StageTip (51). High salt fractions were diluted 4-fold with 0.1% TFA and desalted using C18-StageTips (85) before MS analysis. Mass spectrometry  Cross-linked peptides were analyzed on LTQ-Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Scientific) on a 180 min or 240 min gradient, using CID collision energy at 35% and fragmenting the most eight intense peptide precursor ions with charge stages z = 3 or higher, per cycle. MS spectra were recorded at 100000 resolution, and MS/MS spectra at 7500 resolution, both in the Orbitrap. When analyzing scaffold samples, an inclusion list stating the m/z values of condensin and cohesin cross-linked peptides identified in the in vitro study was used to dictate the MS/MS analysis. First, the ions from the inclusion list were fragmented, and only if these were not detected, other peptides of z>2 were fragmented using dynamic exclusion.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS spectra peak lists were generated from the raw data files using the Quant module of MaxQuant version 1.0.11.2 at default parameters, except for choosing 200 as “top MS/MS peaks per 100 Da”. Cross-linked peptide spectra were searched using the software package Xi [ERI, Edinburgh] against Gallus gallus condensin and cohesin sequences uploaded from SwissProt or from the chicken IPI database (version 3.49) modified as described for analysis of chicken mitotic chromosomal protein. Search parameters: MS tolerance 6 ppm, MS/MS tolerance 20 ppm, fixed modification carbamidomethyl on cysteine, variable modifications: Oxidation (Met), DST/BS3-OH (Lys), DST/BS3-NH2 (Lys), the “Max. Missed cleavages” was set to 4. Matched spectra and cross-linked peptide candidates were returned by Xi in pairs. The highest scored matched spectra were validated manually, and to each spectral match a confidence was allocated. A high-confidence match indicates that for the longer peptide almost all and for shorter peptides a minimum of three fragments were matched and all major peaks in the spectrum were accounted for. A low-confidence match indicates that one peptide matched essentially all observed fragments and a second peptide had up to three fragments matched with most of peaks in spectrum were explained. Reverse peptide sequences were used as a decoy search. All matches had to be highest ranking and unambiguous in the target and decoy search.

### Publication Abstract
SMC proteins are essential components of three protein complexes that are important for chromosome structure and function. The cohesin complex holds replicated sister chromatids together, whereas the condensin complex has an essential role in mitotic chromosome architecture. Both are involved in interphase genome organization. SMC-containing complexes are large (more than 650 kDa for condensin) and contain long anti-parallel coiled-coils. They are thus difficult subjects for conventional crystallographic and electron cryomicroscopic studies. Here, we have used amino acid-selective cross-linking and mass spectrometry combined with structure prediction to develop a full-length molecular draft three-dimensional structure of the SMC2/SMC4 dimeric backbone of chicken condensin. We assembled homology-based molecular models of the globular heads and hinges with the lengthy coiled-coils modelled in fragments, using numerous high-confidence cross-links and accounting for potential irregularities. Our experiments reveal that isolated condensin complexes can exist with their coiled-coil segments closely apposed to one another along their lengths and define the relative spatial alignment of the two anti-parallel coils. The centres of the coiled-coils can also approach one another closely in situ in mitotic chromosomes. In addition to revealing structural information, our cross-linking data suggest that both H2A and H4 may have roles in condensin interactions with chromatin.

### Keywords
Cross-linking, Smc, Coiled-coil, Structure, Condensin, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Technischen Universität Berlin
Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell Biology, Institute of Cell Biology, University of Edinburgh Department of Bioanalytics, Institute of Biotechnology, Technische Universität Berlin

### Submitter
Zhuo Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Juri Rappsilber
Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell Biology, Institute of Cell Biology, University of Edinburgh Department of Bioanalytics, Institute of Biotechnology, Technische Universität Berlin


