### Accession
PXD001979

### Title
Whole lysate and ribosome enriched fractions analyses of the amino terminal status of Escherichia coli at the steady state and upon deformylation inhibition

### Description
A proteome-wide analysis was performed in Escherichia coli to identify the impact on protein N-termini of the antibiotic actinonin specifically inhibiting peptide deformylase (PDF). A new strategy and tool suite (SILProNaQ) was employed to provide large scale N-terminus acetylation yield quantitation. In control conditions, more than 1000 N-termini could be identified with 56 % Met removal, and additional modifications involving partial or complete N-acetylation (10%) and formyl retention (5%). Among the proteins undergoing these N-terminal modifications, some translocated membrane proteins were highlighted. The early time-course impact of actinonin was followed after the addition of bacteriostatic concentrations of the drug immediately slowing down the growth rate. Under these conditions, 25% of all proteins remain formylated after 10 min, a value reaching more than 60% of all characterized proteins after 40 min of treatment. The N-formylation rate on individual proteins increased with the same trend. Upon PDF inhibition, we finally show that two major categories of proteins retain their formyl group: a large number of inner membrane proteins and proteins involved in protein synthesis including many factors assisting the nascent chains in co-translational events.

### Sample Protocol
E. coli tolC CAG12184 cells were grown in 2YT medium at 37°C under 180 rpm agitation. Cell growth was monitored by OD measurement at 600 nm. When the OD600 reached 0.5, 1 µg/ml of actinonin (4 MIC) was added. Cells were harvested and collected by centrifugation to determine the impact of actinonin treatment. 25 µg of crude E. coli lysate and the ribosome enriched fraction for the untreated and actinonin treated cells were loaded on a 1-DE gel. After Coomassie blue staining, each lane was split in 6 gel fragments. Gel parts were reduced to smaller pieces and shrunk with 100% ACN. Gel pieces were re-swollen with 100 µl of 10 mM DTT in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate and incubated at 37°C for 1 hour. To block the reduced disulfide bridges, 100 µl of 55 mM iodoacetamide in 50 mM AmBic was added and incubated in the dark for 60 min. Liquid supernatant was discarded and gel pieces were shrunk with ACN. Then, the excess of ACN was removed using Speed-Vac for 15-30 min. Gel pieces were re-swollen with first 10 µl of 0.05 µg/µl trypsin in HCl 10-3 M then 50 µl of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate at 0°C. After liquid absorption, gel pieces were maintained at 37°C for 2h. To stop the reaction, 100 µL of 80% ACN, 1% formic acid (FA) was added and incubated for 20 min before extraction of the supernatant. Collected fractions were evaporated to dryness and resuspended in 5% ACN, 0.1% FA for LC-MS analysis using an Orbitrap Velos. Each sample was loaded onto a pre-column at a maximum pressure of 220 bars of RP-LC buffer A followed by an analytical separation using a Nikkyo Technos capillary column over a 42 min gradient at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The 20 most intense ions were subject to high collision dissociation MS (Top-20 CID) with 20 seconds exclusion time for the precursor acquired. Raw data were extracted and exported with Proteome Discoverer (Thermo Scientific, Ver. 1.4). MS/MS spectra with parent ion signal higher than 1 counts and with a signal over noise ratio higher than 1.5 are extracted and saved in *.mgf text file.

### Data Protocol
Exported *.mgf files were submitted for protein identification and co- or post-translational modification characterisation to Mascot 2.4 software. The database used was the reference proteome for E. coli K12 strain extracted from UniProtKB (Version 112). The parent and fragment mass tolerance were defined to 10 ppm and 0.7 Da respectively with carbamidomethylcysteine as fix modifications. Few variable modifications were used including Met-Ox, protein N-Fo and protein N-terminal acetylation (NTA) using trypsin/P. All data were filtered at 1% protein FDR and only peptides with score higher than 25 were retained for the final data treatment. To extract N-terminal peptides, Mascot searches were exported using XML files then submitted to an in-house script written in python. The parsing function is designed to search and to collect peptides with defined modifications such as NTA or N-Fo. If the same peptide was identified several times with the same modification, irrespectively of the peptide charge, only the peptide with the highest score was retained for further investigation and exported in a csv file.

### Publication Abstract
A proteome wide analysis was performed in Escherichia coli to identify the impact on protein N-termini of actinonin, an antibiotic specifically inhibiting peptide deformylase (PDF). A strategy and tool suite (SILProNaQ) was employed to provide large-scale quantitation of N-terminal modifications. In control conditions, more than 1000 unique N-termini were identified with 56% showing initiator methionine removal. Additional modifications corresponded to partial or complete N&#x3b1;-acetylation (10%) and N-formyl retention (5%). Among the proteins undergoing these N-terminal modifications, 140 unique N-termini from translocated membrane proteins were highlighted. The very early time-course impact of actinonin was followed after addition of bacteriostatic concentrations of the drug. Under these conditions, 26% of all proteins did not undergo deformylation any longer after 10 min, a value reaching more than 60% of all characterized proteins after 40 min of treatment. The N-formylation ratio measured on individual proteins increased with the same trend. Upon early PDF inhibition, two major categories of proteins retained their N-formyl group: a large number of inner membrane proteins and many proteins involved in protein synthesis including factors assisting the nascent chains in early cotranslational events. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifiers PXD001979, PXD002012 and PXD001983 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD001979, http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD002012 and http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD001983).

### Keywords
Formylation/post-translational modifications/actinonin/acetylation/antibiotics

### Affiliations
CNRS
Institute of Integrative Biology of the Cell (I2BC), CEA, CNRS, Université Paris-Sud, Bâtiment 23A, 1 avenue de la Terrasse, F-91198 Gif-sur-Yvette cedex, France.

### Submitter
Willy Bienvenut

### Lab Head
Dr Willy V Bienvenut
Institute of Integrative Biology of the Cell (I2BC), CEA, CNRS, Université Paris-Sud, Bâtiment 23A, 1 avenue de la Terrasse, F-91198 Gif-sur-Yvette cedex, France.


