### Accession
PXD011195

### Title
VDAC2 promotes BAX apoptotic activity

### Description
Intrinsic apoptosis is critical for normal physiology including the prevention of tumor formation. BAX and BAK, which are essential for mediating this process and for the cytotoxic action of many anti-cancer drugs, are thought to be regulated through similar mechanisms and act redundantly to drive apoptosis. Here we have established the various mitochondrial complexes that contain VDAC1, VDAC2, VDAC3 and BAX or BAK.

### Sample Protocol
For the analysis of the mitochondrial BAX/BAK complexes, mitochondria from MEFs expressing FLAG-BAK, FLAG-BAXS184L or untagged BAX or BAK as controls were solubilized in 1% digitonin and immunoprecipitated with anti-FLAG-coupled sepharose. Proteins were eluted with FLAG peptide in the presence of 1% digitonin, run on BN-PAGE, and stained using Sypro Ruby (Bio-Rad) and subsequently Coomassie G-250. Bands of interest were excised and subjected to in-gel reduction, alkylation, and trypsin digestion before mass spectrometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were analyzed using the MaxQuant software (version 1.5.2.8) and extracted peaks were searched against UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot Mus musculus database (July 2015) containing sequences for human BAK1 and human VDAC2 and human BAX.

### Publication Abstract
Intrinsic apoptosis is critical to prevent tumor formation and is engaged by many anti-cancer agents to eliminate tumor cells. BAX and BAK, the two essential mediators of apoptosis, are thought to be regulated through similar mechanisms and act redundantly to drive apoptotic cell death. From an unbiased genome-wide CRISPR/Cas9 screen, we identified VDAC2 (voltage-dependent anion channel 2) as important for BAX, but not BAK, to function. Genetic deletion of VDAC2 abrogated the association of BAX and BAK with mitochondrial complexes containing VDAC1, VDAC2, and VDAC3, but only inhibited BAX apoptotic function. Deleting VDAC2 phenocopied the loss of BAX in impairing both the killing of tumor cells by anti-cancer agents and the ability to suppress tumor formation. Together, our studies show that efficient BAX-mediated apoptosis depends on VDAC2, and reveal a striking difference in how BAX and BAK are functionally impacted by their interactions with VDAC2.

### Keywords
Bcl-2, Mitochondria, Bax, Voltage-dependent anion channel., Bak, Cancer, Apoptosis

### Affiliations
WEHI
Laboratory head, Cell Death and Cell Signalling Division, WEHI, Australia

### Submitter
Laura Dagley

### Lab Head
Dr Grant Dewson
Laboratory head, Cell Death and Cell Signalling Division, WEHI, Australia


