### Accession
PXD010152

### Title
A Novel Two-Stage Tandem Mass Spectrometry Approach and Scoring Scheme for the Identification of O-GlcNAc Modified Peptides

### Description
The modification of serine and threonine residues in proteins by a single N-acetylglucosamine (O-GlcNAc) residue is an emerging post-translational modification (PTM) with broad biological implications. However, the systematic or large-scale analysis of this PTM is hampered by several factors, including low stoichiometry and the lability of the O-glycosidic bond during tandem mass spectrometry. Using a library of 72 synthetic glycopeptides, we developed a two-stage tandem MS approach consisting of pulsed Q dissociation (PQD) for O-GlcNAc peptide detection and electron transfer dissociation (ETD) for identification and site localization. Based on a set of O-GlcNAc specific fragment ions, we further developed a score (OScore) that discriminates O-GlcNAc peptide spectra from spectra of unmodified peptides with 95% sensitivity and >99% specificity. Integrating the OScore into the two-stage LC-MS/MS approach detected O-GlcNAc peptides in the low fmol range and at 10-fold better sensitivity than a single data-dependent ETD tandem MS experiment.

### Sample Protocol
Synthetic peptides synthesized by standard solide phase Fmoc synthesis. Various LC-MS/MS approaches

### Data Protocol
Peak processing and peak picking of MS data was performed using Mascot Distiller ver. 2.2.1 (Matrix Science, London, UK).

### Publication Abstract
The modification of serine and threonine residues in proteins by a single N-acetylglucosamine (O-GlcNAc) residue is an emerging post-translational modification (PTM) with broad biological implications. However, the systematic or large-scale analysis of this PTM is hampered by several factors, including low stoichiometry and the lability of the O-glycosidic bond during tandem mass spectrometry. Using a library of 72 synthetic glycopeptides, we developed a two-stage tandem MS approach consisting of pulsed Q dissociation (PQD) for O-GlcNAc peptide detection and electron transfer dissociation (ETD) for identification and site localization. Based on a set of O-GlcNAc specific fragment ions, we further developed a score (OScore) that discriminates O-GlcNAc peptide spectra from spectra of unmodified peptides with 95% sensitivity and &gt;99% specificity. Integrating the OScore into the two-stage LC-MS/MS approach detected O-GlcNAc peptides in the low fmol range and at 10-fold better sensitivity than a single data-dependent ETD tandem MS experiment.

### Keywords
O-glcnac

### Affiliations
OmicScouts GmbH
Technische Universit채t M체nchen Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics Freising, Germany

### Submitter
Hannes Hahne

### Lab Head
Dr Bernhard Kuster
Technische Universit채t M체nchen Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics Freising, Germany


