### Accession
PXD004869

### Title
Quantitative phosphoproteomics of drought-stressed Arabidopsis thaliana Col-0 wild type as well as mutants of Clade E and Clade A (Highly ABA-Induced 1) protein phosphatase 2Cs.

### Description
I-Traq based quantitative phosphoproteomics was used to examine changes in phosphopeptide abundance over longer term drought (low water potential) treatments.  Samples were analyzed from unstressed seedlings grown on agar plates and from seedlings of the same age that had been transferred to low water potential (-1.2 MPa) for 96 h on PEG-infused agar plates.  The genotypes analyzed were wild type Col-0 and two phosphatases mutants.  One was a double mutant of two Clade E protein phosphatase 2Cs (Salk_011589 which lacks activity of AT3G05640 and Salk_048861 which lacks activity of AT5G27930).  The other was a mutant (hai1-2) of the Clade A protein phosphatase 2C Highly ABA-Induced 1 (HAI1): Salk_108282 which lacks activity of AT5G59220).  Our characterization of hai1-2 as well as detailed description of growth conditions and stress treatments has been reported in Bhaskara et al. (Plant Physiology 160:379-395, 2012).  Characterization of the Clade E protein phosphatase 2Cs have not been previously reported and we have designated these as Clade E Growth Regulating PP2Cs (EGRs) based on characterization in our laboratory.  The double mutant used for phosphoproteomic analysis has been designated egr1-1egr2-1.  Three biological replicates were performed and microarray analysis of gene expression was performed on samples collected from the same experiments.  The gene expression data sets have been deposited in Gene Expression Onmibus (GEO) under accession numbers GSE35258 (hai1-2 data) and GSE71237 (egr1-1egr2-1 data).

### Sample Protocol
Seven day old seedlings were transferred and grown on fresh MS agar plates or PEG infused agar plates to impose a low water potential stress of -1.2 MPa for 96 h.  Seedlings were collected from three independent experiments (biological replicates) and the reproducibility of the stress treatment in each biological replicate was confirmed by measuring proline content. Each experiment included all genotypes (wild type, hai1-2 and egr1-1egr2-1) and each of the three sets of I-Traq labeling reactions used samples harvested together in the same experiment.  Sample preparation generally followed previous protocols (Wu et al., 2010 ; Proteomics 10:2224-2234) with some modifications. For protein extraction, samples from each biological replicate were ground in  liquid nitrogen, further homogenized using cold trichloroacetic acid (TCA)/acetone solution  (10% TCA in acetone containing 0.07% 2-mercaptoethanol) and incubated for 1 hour at -20oC.  The homogenate was centrifuged and the protein pellet re-suspended in ice cold wash solution (0.07% 2-mercaptoethanol in acetone) and incubated at 20oC for 1 hour. The protein pellet was washed twice using 10 volumes of ice cold wash solution and dried under a nitrogen stream. The  dried protein pellets were redissolved in 3-4 ml of freshly prepared dissolution buffer (9 M Urea, 25 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0) containing phosphatase inhibitors (Sigma cocktail 2 and 3). After one hour of precipitation at 4° C the sample was again centrifuged and the supernatant collected in methanol washed precooled centrifuge tubes. Protein concentration was measured using a Pierce BCA protein assay kit.  Six mg of total protein was reduced with 10 mM DTT for 1 hour at 37o C and alkylated with 25 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 30 min in the dark. Samples were quenched using DTT (5 mM final concentration), diluted to urea concentration of 2 M using 25 mM Tris (pH 8.0), treated with benzonase (250 units per /ml; Sigma, E8263), and incubated for 2 h at room temperature. Protein digestion was performed by first treating with Lys-C endopeptidase (1:200 w/w; Mass Spectrometry Grade, Wako) for 4-5 hours at room temperature. The urea content of the sample was further diluted to less than 1 M using 25 mM Tris (pH 8.0), trypsin (1:50 w/w, Promega) added and samples incubated overnight at room temperature. The tryptic peptides were acidified using 100% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), desalted usinga Sep-Pak C18 column (Waters; 200 mg, 3 ml bed volume) and eluted with 5 ml of 0.5% acetic acid in 50% acetonitrile. The elutate was dried in a speed vac. Phosphopeptide enrichment was performed using a Pierce TiO2 phosphopeptide enrichment and clean-up kit. Phosphopeptide labeling was done using an AB Sciex iTRAQ 8-plex reagent kit following the manufacturer’s instructions. In brief, the sample was dissolved in 30 µl of labeling buffer iTRAQ reagent dissolved in 50 µl isopropanol added. Ten µl of 100% TFA was then added and the samples dried 5-10 min in a speed vac to remove isopropanol. The usage of I-Traq tags was as follows: I-Traq 113 = wild type, unstressed; I-Traq 115 = hai1-2 unstressed; I-Traq 116 = egr1-1egr2-1 unstressed; I-Traq 117 = wild type stress; I-Traq 119 = hai1-2 stress; I-Traq 121 = egr1-1egr2-1 stress.  Note that it was later found that for the hai1-2 unstressed samples (I-Traq 115), two of the biological replicates had less efficient I-Traq labeling than other reactions and thus smaller number of phosphopeptides could be quantified.  This did not affect data analysis of the other I-Traq labeled samples.  Samples (from the same experiment) labeled with the different I-Traq tags were then combined in one tube, desalted using a Pierce graphite spin column and again dried. The desalted sample was resuspended in buffer A (10 mM KH2PO4, 25% acetonitrile, pH 2.7-3.0) and fractionated on a strong cation exchange (SCX) fractionation (PolySULFOETHYL A column, 4.6 x 100 mm, 5 um, 200Å; PolyLC Inc. Columbia, MD) using an elution gradient from 0-50% buffer B (0.35 M KCl in buffer A; buffer B consisted of 7 mM KH2PO4, pH 2.65, 30% acetonitrile). Samples were eluted over 20 min and ten fractions of 0.5 ml each were collected. Each fraction was desalted using a graphite spin column and dried under vacuum before proceeding to subsequent analysis.

### Data Protocol
The SCX fractions were analyzed on a nanoUPLC system (nanoAcquity, Waters, Milford, MA) coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap Velos hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo  Scientific,Bremen, Germany). A C18 capillary column (75 μm x 250 mm, 1.7 μm, BEH130, Waters, Milford, MA) was used to separate peptides with a 90-min linear gradient from 5% to  40% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The LTQ Orbitrap Velos MS was operated in data-dependent mode with top 10 ions (charge states ≥ 2) from the MS survey scan selected for MS/MS (CID with multistage activation enabled and HCD) acquisitions. The parameters for the MS and MS/MS were set as follows: FT Orbitrap MS m/z range = 350-1600; resolving power = 60,000 with automatic gain control (AGC) target = 500,000; HCD: MSn AGC target = 50,000 with normalized collision energy (NCE) = 45%, activation time = 10 ms, resolving power = 7,500; CID: MSn AGC target = 5,000 with NCE = 35%, activation Q = 0.25, activation time = 10 ms. The CID and HCD MS/MS were performed alternately for the same m/z precursor ion and had following settings: minimum signal required = 2,000, isolation width = 2; dynamic exclusion: repeat count = 1, repeat duration = 15 sec, exclusion duration = 90 sec. Neutral loss masses of phosphopeptides for multistage activation enabled CID were set at 97.98, 48.99, 32.66, and 24.49 for various charge states of the peptides. Peptide identification, phosphorylation, and quantification were performed using Proteome Discoverer software (v1.3, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with SEQUEST and Mascot (v2.3, Matrix Science) search engines.  MS data were searched against TAIR10 protein sequence database with 27,416 sequence entries downloaded from the Arabidopsis Information Resource website (http://www.arabidopsis.org/). The parameters for database searches were set as follows: full trypsin digestion with 2 maximum missed cleavage sites, precursor mass tolerance = 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance = 0.8 Da (CID) and 50 mmu (HCD), dynamic modifications: oxidation (M) and phosphorylation (S, T, and Y), static modifications: carbamidomethyl (C), iTRAQ 8-plex (N-terminus and K). The identified peptides were validated using Percolator algorithm which automatically conducted a decoy database search and rescored peptide spectrum matches (PSM) using q-values and posterior error probabilities. All the PSMs were filtered with a q-value threshold of 0.01 (1% false discovery rate). Phosphopeptides were further validated using phosphoRS algorithm with thresholds of pRS score ≥ 50 and pRS site probability ≥ 75%. For iTRAQ quantification, the ratios of iTRAQ reporter ion intensities in MS/MS spectra from raw datasets were used to calculate the fold changes in phosphorylation between control and treatment. Only unique unambiguous phosphopeptides with pRS site probabilities greater or equal to 75% were used for phosphopeptide quantification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hai1, Phosphoproteomics, Arabidopsis, Protein phosphatase 2cs, Itraq, Drought, Tio2

### Affiliations
Institute of Plant and Microbial Biology, Academia Sinica, TAIPEI, TAIWAN
Associate Research Fellow,  Institute of Plant and Microbial Biology Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan

### Submitter
Bhaskara Govinal Badiger

### Lab Head
Dr Paul E. Verslues
Associate Research Fellow,  Institute of Plant and Microbial Biology Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan


