### Accession
PXD012563

### Title
USP8 maintains ESC stemness via deubiquitination of EPG5

### Description
The coiled-coil domain of EPG5 was synthesized as follows: Biotin-MNKNEAVSQQIHVLQKEVRQLQAE AAQ (from Beijing SciLight Biotechnology, LCC). 1 mg of this short peptide was incubated with ES cells lysates followed by immunoprecipitation with anti-biotin beads. The precipitates were extensively washed with lysis buffer then boiled with SDS loading buffer and subjected to SDS–PAGE. Total proteins were excised from the gels, then subjected to in-gel digestion and analysis by LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
The coiled-coil domain of EPG5 was synthesized as follows: Biotin-MNKNEAVSQQIHVLQKEVRQLQAE AAQ (from Beijing SciLight Biotechnology, LCC). 1 mg of this short peptide was incubated with ES cells lysates followed by immunoprecipitation with anti-biotin beads. The precipitates were extensively washed with lysis buffer then boiled with SDS loading buffer and subjected to SDS–PAGE. Total proteins were excised from the gels, then subjected to in-gel digestion and analysis by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
The coiled-coil domain of EPG5 was synthesized as follows: Biotin-MNKNEAVSQQIHVLQKEVRQLQAE AAQ (from Beijing SciLight Biotechnology, LCC). 1 mg of this short peptide was incubated with ES cells lysates followed by immunoprecipitation with anti-biotin beads. The precipitates were extensively washed with lysis buffer then boiled with SDS loading buffer and subjected to SDS–PAGE. Total proteins were excised from the gels, then subjected to in-gel digestion and analysis by LC-MS/MS.

### Publication Abstract
Embryonic stem cells (ESCs) can propagate in an undifferentiated state indefinitely in culture and retain the potential to differentiate into any somatic lineage as well as germ cells. The catabolic process autophagy has been reported to be involved in ESC identity regulation, but the underlying mechanism is still largely unknown. Here we show that EPG5, a eukaryotic-specific autophagy regulator which mediates autophagosome/lysosome fusion, is highly expressed in ESCs and contributes to ESC identity maintenance. We identify that the deubiquitinating enzyme USP8 binds to the Coiled-coil domain of EPG5. Mechanistically, USP8 directly removes non-classical K63-linked ubiquitin chains from EPG5 at Lysine 252, leading to enhanced interaction between EPG5 and LC3. We propose that deubiquitination of EPG5 by USP8 guards the autophagic flux in ESCs to maintain their stemness. This work uncovers a novel crosstalk pathway between ubiquitination and autophagy through USP8-EPG5 interaction to regulate the stemness of ESCs.

### Keywords
I.e.mouse.escs.epg5.usp8.lc-msms

### Affiliations
INSTITUTE OF ZOOLOGY, CHINESE ACADEMY OF SCIENCES
Professor of Stem Cell and Immunology State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Biology Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences Address:1 Beichen West Road, Chaoyang District, Beijing 100101, P.R.China

### Submitter
xingxing shi

### Lab Head
Dr i.e.Tongbiao Zhao
Professor of Stem Cell and Immunology State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Biology Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences Address:1 Beichen West Road, Chaoyang District, Beijing 100101, P.R.China


