### Accession
PXD030137

### Title
Analysis of endogenous immuno-purification of YAP1 in HEK293A cell lines

### Description
Analysis of endogenous immuno-purification of YAP1 in HEK293A cell lines

### Sample Protocol
HEK293A and HEK293A with genetic deletions were grown in ten 150 mm tissue culture plates at 80% confluent, harvested and the cell pellet was snap frozen. The frozen pellet was lysed in 8mL of lysis buffer: 0.5% NP40, 50 mM HEPES (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM NaF, 400 nM Na3VO4 supplemented with 1 mM PMSF and protease inhibitor cocktail (P8849, Sigma). The lysate was incubated on ice for 20 min and subjected to mild sonication (3 times 10 seconds, 35% amplitude and 80% cycle time, Hielscher-Ultrasound Technology) digestion of nucleic acids via Benzonase (Sigma) (50 U/ml). The cleared cell lysate was incubated with protein A beads coupled with antibodies overnight on a rotation shaker (~200 µg of antibody per purification). Upon washing two times with lysis buffer and three times with HNN buffer (50 mM HEPES (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM NaF), beads and bound proteins were transferred in 10 kDa molecular weight cut-off spin column (Vivaspin 500, Sartorious ), following the FASP protocol49. Briefly, beads in solution were centrifuged at 8,000 × g until dryness. Samples were denatured, reduced (8 M Urea and 5 mM TCEP in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 30 min) and alkylated (10 mM iodoacetamide, 30 min). Each sample was subsequently washed three times by flushing the filter with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate and proteolyzed with 0.5 μg of Trypsin (Promega, sequencing grade) for 16 h at 37 °C. Proteolysis was quenched by 0.1% TFA and peptides were purified with a C18 microspin column (Nest Group), dried using a speed vacuum before being resuspended in 20 μl 0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile. iRT peptides (Biognosys) were spiked to each sample (1:50) before LC-MS/MS analysis for quality control. MS ANALYSIS LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on an Orbitrap Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Acquity UPLC M-class system (Waters). Peptides were separated on ACQUITY UPLC M-Class column (15 cm length, 75 µm inner diameter) with a 60 min gradient from 2% to 37% acetonitrile at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode with the following parameters: one full FTMS scan (350-1500 m/z) at 60,000 resolution, 15 ms injection time and 3e6 AGC target, followed by twelve FTMS/MS scans at 60,000 resolution, 110 ms injection time and 5e4 AGC target. Charge states lower than two and higher than seven were rejected. Selected ions were isolated using a quadrupole mass filter of 1.2 m/z isolation window and fragmented (HCD, Normalized Collision Energy 28%). Selected ions were dynamical excluded for 30 s.

### Data Protocol
The experiment was performed with three independent biological replicates of YAP1 endogenous purified. In parallel with YAP1 purification two different control purifications (unspecific antibodies and YAP1KO) were performed in three biological independent replicates. All samples, after digestion were separated in 7 fraction with high pH fractionation kit (Thermo). Acquired spectra were searched using the MaxQuant software package version 1.5.2.8 embedded with the Andromeda search engine54 against human proteome reference dataset (http:/www.uniprot.org/, downloaded on 10.10.18) extended with reverse decoy sequences. The search parameters were set to include only full tryptic peptides, maximum one missed cleavage, carbamidomethyl as static peptide modification, oxidation (M) and phosphorylation (S, T, Y) as variable modification and “match between runs” option. The MS and MS/MS mass tolerance were set, respectively, to 4.5 ppm and 0.5 Da. False discovery rate of <1% was used at the protein level to infer the protein presence. The protein abundance was determined from the intensity of top two unique peptides for each protein. For both condition a p value (Benjamini and Hochberg method correction) with cut-off <0.05 was used to filter significant proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Endogenous apms

### Affiliations
Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland
ETH

### Submitter
Federico Uliana

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Gstaiger
Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland


