### Accession
PXD012337

### Title
In-vitro and in-vivo effects of an environmental PPARγ metabolic disruptor, triphenyl phosphate, on adipogenic differentiation and metabolic functions

### Description
Comparison of TPhP and Rosi exposure to adipocytes.

### Sample Protocol
NIH 3T3-L1 (ATCC: CL-173, RRID:CVCL_0123) cells as well as 3T3-WT and 3T3-SA (generously generated and provided by Dr. Farmer) were maintained in high-glucose DMEM with 10% calf serum, 100 U/ml penicillin, 100 μg/ml streptomycin, 0.25 μg/ml amphotericin B. “Naïve” cells were cultured in maintenance medium for the duration of the experiment. To induce adipogenesis, the medium was replaced with DMEM containing 10%  fetal bovine serum (FBS, Sigma-Aldrich), 250 nM dexamethasone, 167 nM of 1 µg/ml human insulin, 0.5 mM IBMX, 100 U/ml penicillin, and 100 μg/ml streptomycin. On days 3 and 5 of differentiation, medium was replaced with adipocyte maintenance medium (DMEM, 10% FBS, 167 nM human insulin, 100 U/ml penicillin, 100 μg/ml streptomycin), and the cultures were dosed with vehicle (0.1% DMSO), Rosi (20uM), or TPhP (20uM). On Day 7 of differentiation, medium was replaced with adipocyte medium (DMEM, 10% FBS, 100 U/ml penicillin, 100 μg/ml streptomycin) and the cultures re-dosed. On day 10, cytotoxicity was assessed by microscopic inspection. Healthy cells were harvested for analysis of proteomics, gene expression, lipid accumulation, mitochondrial biogenesis, and cellular respiration.   Sample Preparation for Proteomics Cells were re-suspended in 8M Urea/50mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), with phosphatase and protease inhibitors (Roche) then sonicated (3x10 seconds) on ice. Samples were reduced for 30 minutes with 8mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and alkylated for 15 minutes with 20mM iodoacetamide at 30°C. The 8M urea solution was diluted to 1M with 50Mm TEAB and samples were digested overnight at 37°C with 20ug sequencing grade trypsin (Pierce, Trypsin Protease, MS Grade).  Prior to TMT (Tandem Mass Tag) labeling peptides were extracted from each sample using c18 spin columns (Glygen Toptip) and peptide concentrations were normalized to 100ug in 100ul of 100mM TEAB. Peptides were labelled with 0.8mg of TMT label (TMT10plex™ Isobaric Label Reagent Set from Thermo Fisher Scientific). Labelled samples were pooled, and 95% was set aside for phospho-peptide enrichment using TiO2 (Titansphere Phos-TiO Bulk 10 um, GL Sciences) (Cantin et al. 2007). The remaining 5% of labelled peptides and the phospho-peptide enriched samples were analyzed separately by mass spectrometry.   Mass Spectrometry Samples were analyzed by a Q Exactive HFX mass spectrometer connected to Easy nLC 1200 reverse-phase chromatography system (Thermo Scientific). Mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile, mobile phase B was 0.1% formic acid and 80% acetonitrile. Peptides were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid for loading. The samples were loaded onto a nano-trap column with mobile phase A, (75μm i.d. × 2 cm, Acclaim PepMap100 C18 3μm, 100Å, Thermo Scientific) and were separated over an EASY-Spray column, (50 cm × 75 μm ID, PepMap RSLC C18, Thermo Scientific) by an increasing mobile phase B gradient over 180 minutes at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode with a capillary temperature of 300°C, and with a potential of 2100V applied to the frit. All data was acquired with the mass spectrometer operating in automatic data dependent switching mode. A high resolution (60,000) MS scan (350-1500 m/z) was performed using the Q Exactive to select the 10 most intense ions prior to MS/MS analysis using HCD (NCE 33, 45,000 resolution).

### Data Protocol
Proteomic and phosphoproteomic analyses Resulting RAW files were searched using MaxQuant (version 1.6.0; www.coxdocs.org/doku.php?id=maxquant:start) under standard settings using the UniProt mouse database (downloaded October 2018, www.uniprot.org/taxonomy/10090) allowing for two missed trypsin cleavage sites and variable modifications of N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation (Tyanova et al. 2016). Additionally, protein phosphorylation at S, T, and Y residues were included as variable modifications in the phosphoproteomics data. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was a fixed modification in the search. Candidate (phospho)peptides, proteins, and phosphorylation-site identifications were filtered based on a 1% false discovery rate threshold based on searching the reverse sequence database. Data are deposited and publicly available at the PRIDE archive. All phosphopeptide identifications in the MaxQuant evidence file had to meet a 0.7 probability cutoff.

### Publication Abstract
Triphenyl phosphate (TPhP) is an environmental PPAR&#x3b3; ligand, and growing evidence suggests that it is a metabolic disruptor. We have shown previously that the structurally similar ligand, tributyltin, does not induce brite adipocyte gene expression. Here, using in vivo and in vitro models, we tested the hypothesis that TPhP is a selective PPAR&#x3b3; ligand, which fails to induce brite adipogenesis. C57BL/6&#xa0;J male mice were fed either a low or very high-fat diet for 13&#xa0;weeks. From weeks 7-13, mice were injected intraperitoneally, daily, with vehicle, rosiglitazone (Rosi), or TPhP (10&#xa0;mg/kg). Compared to Rosi, TPhP did not induce expression of browning-related genes (e.g. Elovl3, Cidea, Acaa2, CoxIV) in mature adipocytes isolated from inguinal adipose. To determine if this resulted from an effect directly on the adipocytes, 3T3-L1 cells and primary human preadipocytes were differentiated into adipocytes in the presence of Rosi or TPhP. Rosi, but not TPhP, induced expression of brite adipocyte genes, mitochondrial biogenesis and cellular respiration. Further, Rosi and TPhP-induced distinct proteomes and phosphoproteomes; Rosi enriched more regulatory pathways related to fatty acid oxidation and mitochondrial proteins. We assessed the role of phosphorylation of PPAR&#x3b3; in these differences in 3T3-L1 cells. Only Rosi protected PPAR&#x3b3; from phosphorylation at Ser273. TPhP gained the ability to stimulate brite adipocyte gene expression in the presence of the CDK5 inhibitor and in 3T3-L1 cells expressing alanine at position 273. We conclude that TPhP is a selective PPAR&#x3b3; modulator that fails to protect PPAR&#x3b3; from phosphorylation at ser273.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Proteomics, Metabolism

### Affiliations
Center for Network Systems Biology, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, United States.
Center for Network Systems Biology, Boston University School of Medicine

### Submitter
Benjamin Blum

### Lab Head
Dr Andrew Emili
Center for Network Systems Biology, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, United States.


