### Accession
PXD034059

### Title
Induction of senescence renders cancer cells highly immunogenic

### Description
Cellular senescence is a stress response that activates innate immunity. However, the interplay between senescent cells and the adaptive immune system remains largely unexplored. Here, we show that senescent cells display enhanced MHC class I (MHC-I) antigen processing and presentation. Immunization of mice with senescent syngeneic fibroblasts generates CD8 T cells reactive against both normal and senescent fibroblasts, some of them targeting senescence-associated MHC-I-peptides. In the context of cancer, we demonstrate that senescent cancer cells trigger strong anti-tumor protection mediated by antigen-presenting cells and CD8 T cells. This response is superior to the protection elicited by cells undergoing immunogenic cell death. Finally, induction of senescence in patient-derived cancer cells exacerbates the activation of autologous tumor-reactive CD8 tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) with no effect on non-reactive TILs. Our study indicates that immunization with senescent cancer cells strongly activates anti-tumor immunity, and this can be exploited for cancer therapy.

### Sample Protocol
Up to 10 8 cells per condition were collected by trypsinization and pelleted by centrifugation. Cells were washed with PBS, thawed at -80 °C, and shipped to the CHU Sainte-Justine Research Center (Montreal) for immunopeptidomics analysis using mass spectrometry (52).  To isolate MHC class I peptides, a frozen pellet of 10 8 cells was thawed by warming the bottom of the tube with palm. The cell pellet was resuspended in 500 μL of PBS by pipetting up and down until homogenization. The volume of the cell pellet suspension was measured and transferred into a new 2 mL microcentrifuge tube. An equivalent volume of cell lysis buffer (1% CHAPS in PBS containing protease inhibitors, 1 pellet/10 mL) was added to the cell suspension (final concentration of the lysis buffer of 0.5% Chaps), followed by an incubation for 60 min at 4 °C using a rotator device (10RPM) and centrifugation at 18,000 × g for 20 min at 4 °C. The cell lysis supernatant containing the MHC-peptide complexes was transferred to a new 2 mL microcentrifuge tube and kept on ice until use for immunopurification.  Bead coupling and immunopurification of MHC class I peptides were performed as previously described (53). Briefly, 80 mg of sepharose CNBr activated beads was coupled with 2 mg of anti-mouse H2 antibody. Sepharose antibody-coupled beads were incubated with the cell lysate supernatant in a 2 mL Low binding microcentrifuge tube overnight at 4 °C with rotation (22 RPM). The next day, a Bio-Rad column was installed on a rack and pre- rinsed with 10 mL of buffer A (150 mM NaCl and 20 mM Tris-HCl –HCl pH 8). The bead- lysate mixture was transferred into a Bio-Rad column, and the bottom cap was removed to  discard the unbound cell lysate. The beads retained in the Bio-Rad column were washed sequentially with 10 mL of buffer A (150 mM NaCl and 20 mM Tris–HCl pH 8), 10 mL of buffer B (400mM NaCl and 20 mM Tris–HCl pH 8), 10 mL of buffer A, and 10 mL of buffer C (20 mM Tris–HCl pH 8.). MHC-peptide complexes were eluted from the beads by adding 300 μL of 1% TFA, pipetting up and down 4-5 times and collecting the flow-through. This step was repeated once, and the flowthroughs were collected and combined in a new 2 mL tube.  MHC class I peptides were desalted and eluted on a C18 column. First, the C18 column was pre-conditioned with 200 μL of 1) methanol, 2) 80% acetonitrile/0.1% TFA and 3) 0.1%TFA and spun at 1545 g in a fixed rotor to collect and discard the flowthroughs. Then, The MHC-peptide complexes previously collected in 600 μL of 1% TFA were loaded (3 × 200 μL) into the pre-conditioned C18 column, spun and flowthroughs were discarded. The final wash was performed with 200 μL of 0.1% TFA and spun again. Finally, the C18 column was transferred onto a 2 mL Eppendorf tube, and MHC class I peptides were eluted with 3 × 200 μL of 28%ACN 0.1%TFA. The flow-through containing the eluted peptides was stored at -20 °C for MS analysis. Prior to LC-MS/MS analysis, the purified MHC class I peptides were evaporated to dryness using a vacuum concentrator with presets of temperature 45 °C for 2 h, vacuum level:100 mTorr, and vacuum ramp:5.  Vacuum samples were resuspended in 52 μL of 4% formic acid (FA), and each biological replicate was divided into three technical replicates of 16μl each. Each replicate was loaded and separated on a homemade reversed-phase column (150 μm i.d. × 250 mm length, Jupiter 3 μm C18 300 Å) with a gradient from 10 to 30% ACN-0.2% FA and a 600- nl/min flow rate on an Easy nLC-1000 connected to an Orbitrap Eclipse (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Each full MS spectrum was acquired at a resolution of 240000, an AGC of 4E5, and an injection time of 50ms, followed by tandem-MS (MS-MS) spectra acquisition on the most abundant multiply charged precursor ions for a maximum of 3 s. Tandem-MS experiments were performed using higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) at a collision energy of 34%, a resolution of 30000, an AGC of 1.5E4, and an injection time of 300ms.

### Data Protocol
Data files were processed using PEAKS X software (Peaks Pro V10.6, Bioinformatics Solutions, Waterloo, ON, USA) using the mouse database UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot (2019_09). ‘Unspecified enzyme digestion’ was selected for the enzyme parameter and mass tolerances on precursor and fragment ions were 10ppm and 0.01 Da, respectively. All other search parameters were the default values. Final peptide lists were filtered using ALC of 80% and with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% using the Peaks software.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cancer vaccines, Antigen presentation, Senescence, Immunogenicity, Anti-tumor immunity

### Affiliations
Institute for Research in Biomedicine (IRB), Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology (BIST), Barcelona 08028, Spain; Catalan Institution for Research and Advanced Studies (ICREA), Barcelona 08010, Spain
University of Montreal, CHU Sainte-Justine Research Center

### Submitter
Kevin Kovalchik

### Lab Head
Dr Manuel Serrano
Institute for Research in Biomedicine (IRB), Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology (BIST), Barcelona 08028, Spain; Catalan Institution for Research and Advanced Studies (ICREA), Barcelona 08010, Spain


