### Accession
PXD034223

### Title
AlphaViz: Visualization and validation of critical proteomics data directly at the raw data level

### Description
Although current mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics identifies and quantifies thousands of proteins and (modified) peptides, only a minority of them are subjected to in-depth downstream analysis. With the advent of automated processing workflows, biologically or clinically important results within a study are rarely validated by visualization of the underlying raw information. Although several tools for this are in principle available, they are often not integrated into the overall analysis nor readily extendable with new approaches. To remedy this, we developed AlphaViz, an open-source Python package to superimpose output from common analysis workflows on the raw data for quick and easy visualization and validation of protein and peptide identifications. AlphaViz takes advantage of recent breakthroughs in the deep learning-assisted prediction of experimental peptide properties to allow manual assessment of the expected and measured peptide result deviation. We focused on the visualization of the 4-dimensional data cuboid provided by Bruker TimsTOF instruments, where the ion mobility dimension, besides intensity and retention time, can be predicted and used for verification. We illustrate how AlphaViz can quickly validate or invalidate peptide identifications regardless of the score given to them by automated workflows. Furthermore, we provide a ‘predict mode’ that can locate peptides present in the raw data but not reported by the search engine. This is illustrated with dilution series and the recovery of missing values from experimental replicates. Applied to phosphoproteomics of the EGF-signaling pathway, we show how key signaling nodes can be validated to enhance confidence for downstream interpretation or follow-up experiments. AlphaViz follows accepted standards for open-source software development, including extensive documentation, testing and continuous integration. It features an easy-to-install graphical user interface for end-users and a modular Python package for bioinformaticians. We hope that AlphaViz can help to make validation of critical proteomics results a standard feature in MS-based proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
To demonstrate the ‘Predict Mode’ of AlphaViz, we synthesized phosphorylation positional isomers of the Rab10 peptide FHTITTSYYR. These isomers were dissolved in solution A* (0.1% TFA/2% ACN), and 125, 250, 500, 1250, 2500, and 5000 fmol of them were spiked into 50 fmol of bovines serum albumin. We measured the samples using a dia-PASEF method optimized for phosphoproteomics and 21 minutes Evosep gradients (60 samples per day method) combined with the timsTof Pro (Bruker Daltinocs). The peptides were separated using a 8 cm x 150 µm reverse-phase column packed with 1.5 µm C18-beads (Pepsep) connected to a 10 µm ID nano-electrospray emitter (Bruker Daltonics). Our dia-PASEF method covered an m/z-range from 400 to 1400 Da and an ion mobility range from 0.6 to 1.5 Vs cm-2 with 12 dia-PASEF scans (cycle time: 1.38s). The collision energy depended on the ion mobility and changed from 60 eV at 1.5 Vs cm-2 to 54 eV at 1.17 Vs cm-2 to 25 eV at 0.85 Vs cm-2, and to 20 eV at 0.6 Vs cm-2.

### Data Protocol
For our latest manuscript, we recently developed AlphaViz, an open-source Python-based visualization tool that allows the user to superimpose the results of common proteomics analysis workflows on the raw data for quick and easy visualization and validation of protein and peptide identifications. Due to the integration of deep learning assisted prediction of retention time and ion mobility into AlphaViz, we provide a ‘predict mode’ that can locate peptides present in the raw data but not reported by the search engine. The uploaded dataset is an example for this particular case, as the synthesized positional phosphoisomers of the Rab10 peptide were analyzed by the DIA software and were not reported to be present. Although uploading only raw data does not seem to be supported by the ProteomeXchange GUI, we would still like them to be publicly available on ProteomeXchange to ensure full transparency and reproducibility of the manuscript. Any help in this matter would be greatly appreciated. For more details please see: https://github.com/MannLabs/alphaviz

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Validation, Maxquant, Data visualization, Quality control, Tof, Alphapept, Tims, Dia-nn, Open source, Python

### Affiliations
Proteomics
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany; NNF Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Matthias Mann
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany; NNF Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark


