### Accession
PXD040174

### Title
Purification of Human β and γ Actin from Budding Yeast

### Description
To facilitate biochemical studies of human cytoplasmic actins, Saccharomyces cerevisiaestrains were developed that express either human β-actin or γ-actin as their sole actin.  Actins purified from these strains have biochemical properties similar to mammalian skeletal muscle α-actin, but display differential binding to some key actin regulators. Mass-spectrometry analysis shows that the human actins made from yeast generally retain their N-terminal methionines, which are modified by acetylation.

### Sample Protocol
β and γ actins were purified from yeast via DNAseI affinity chromatography; α-actin was purified from rabbit skeletal muscle acetone powder using conventional methods. Aliquots of 15-30 ug were reduced, alkylated, and digested in-solution with trypsin. The digests were cleaned up by mixed-mode cation exchange stage tips. Approximately 500 ng of each sample was analyzed by shotgun LC-MS/MS. The LC column was 100 um fused silica packed with 1.9 um core shell C18AQ particles to 32 cm, and held at 50C. The MS was an Orbitrap Lumos, operating in data-dependent mode, with MS2 spectra being acquired in the Orbitrap using stepped collision energy and 2 microscans.

### Data Protocol
The MS data was searched using SequestHT in Proteome Discoverer (v2.4) simultaneously against three databases: S cerevisiae or rabbit, a list of common laboratory contaminant proteins, and a custom list of human β-actin, γ-actin, and rabbit α actin. Additional entries for all three actins were made with truncations of the first one, two and three N-terminal residues. Enzyme specificity for trypsin was set to semi-tryptic with up to 2 missed cleavages. Precursor and product ion mass tolerances were 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification. Methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation, peptide N-terminal arginylation and in some cases, lysine acetylation or methylation of lysine, histidine and arginine were set as variable modifications. The output was filtered using the Percolator algorithm with strict FDR set to 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
Biochemical studies of human actin and its binding partners rely heavily on abundant and easily purified &#x3b1;-actin from skeletal muscle. Therefore, muscle actin has been used to evaluate and determine the activities of most actin regulatory proteins but there is an underlying concern that these proteins perform differently from actin present in non-muscle cells. To provide easily accessible and relatively abundant sources of human &#x3b2;- or &#x3b3;-actin (i.e. cytoplasmic actins), we developed Saccharomyces cerevisiae strains that express each as their sole source of actin. Both &#x3b2;- or &#x3b3;-actin purified in this system polymerize and interact with various binding partners, including profilin, mDia1 (formin), fascin and thymosin-&#x3b2;4 (T&#x3b2;4). Notably, T&#x3b2;4 and profilin bind to &#x3b2;- or &#x3b3;-actin with higher affinity than to &#x3b1;-actin, emphasizing the value of testing actin ligands with specific actin isoforms. These reagents will make specific isoforms of actin more accessible for future studies on actin regulation.

### Keywords
Β-actin, Non-muscle actin, Γ-actin, Cytoplasmic actin

### Affiliations
SUNY Upstate Medical University
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, SUNY Upstate Medical University, Syracuse, NY, USA

### Submitter
Ebbing de Jong

### Lab Head
Dr Jessica Henty-Ridilla
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, SUNY Upstate Medical University, Syracuse, NY, USA


