### Accession
PXD029753

### Title
Host protein phosphorylation landscape in A549 cells during influenza A virus entry

### Description
Influenza A virus (IAV) is a zoonotic pathogen causing respiratory infections in humans and other mammalian species. Besides the potential to cause pandemics, seasonal IAV causes high medical and economical burden due to 3 to 5 million cases of severe respiratory illness and up to 500,000 deaths every year. Increasing resistance against clinically used anti influenza drugs and an insufficient vaccine protection urge the development of new antiviral strategies to counteract this constant threat to global health. One new approach focuses on cellular factors involved in the IAV life cycle as potential drug targets. Particularly promising are kinases and their target proteins, as kinase inhibitors comprise up to 30% of drug discovery programs in the pharmaceutical industry. In this project, we aim to find suitable candidates for the development of host factor targeted antivirals by using state-of-the-art quantitative phosphoproteomics to reveal the unique phosphoproteome dynamics that occur in the host cell within minutes of IAV infection and enable entry of the virus into its host cell. We identified 3,920 host proteins phosphorylated by infection with avian and seasonal human IAV strains. Among them are known entry factors such as the human epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and members of the phosphoinositid-3-kinase (PI3K) pathway, which validate our approach.

### Sample Protocol
In stage 1, human airway epithelia cells are serum starved for 16 h and then infected with IAV with an MOI of 25 PFU / cell. Large scale lysates are produced and in stage 2, samples are prepared with a filter aided sample preparation (FASP) procedure and proteins are digested with trypsin. Phosphopeptides are enriched using magnetic microspheres with chelated Ti4+ metal ions either manually or automated. In stage 3, peptides from total and phospho-enriched samples are analyzed by liquid chromatography tandem-mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS).

### Data Protocol
A bioinformatics pipeline is applied to analyze the data set from the LFQ-based phosphoproteomics screen with MaxQuant version 1.6.23 during stage 4 and the generated output is reanalyzed with an R script including a set of functions implemented in the R package SRMService [1,2]. In a last step, the R package Limma is applied for statistical testing [3].  References: 1. Witold Wolski, G.J., and Panse Christian. R Package for Reporting of Quantitative Mass Spectrometry Data. 2018; Available from: http://github.com/protViz/SRMService. 2.Smyth, G.K., Linear models and empirical bayes methods for assessing differential expression in microarray experiments. Stat Appl Genet Mol Biol, 2004. 3: p. Article3. 3. Ritchie, M.E., et al., limma powers differential expression analyses for RNA-sequencing and microarray studies. Nucleic Acids Research, 2015. 43(7).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Phosphoproteomics, Influenza a virus

### Affiliations
University of Zurich
Institute of Medical Virology, University of Zurich

### Submitter
Annika Hunziker

### Lab Head
Dr Silke Stertz
Institute of Medical Virology, University of Zurich


