### Accession
PXD039023

### Title
Ely study plasma proteomics analysis

### Description
The Ely study, established in 1990, is a prospective study of the aetiology of type 2 diabetes and was described in detail elsewhere. The Ely study comprises individuals of European ancestry aged 50–79 years, registered at a single medical practice in Ely, Cambridgeshire, UK and evaluated in three phases. All participants of the Ely study gave their written informed consent and the study was approved by the local ethics committee. Two hundred participants from Ely phase 3 with complete fasting and OGTT sample availability were selected for measurement (105 women / 95 men).

### Sample Protocol
5 μL of EDTA plasma sample were added into 50 μL 8 M urea, 0.1 M ABC, pH 8.0, in order to denature proteins. Proteins were then reduced using 5 μL 50 mM DTT for 1 h at 30°C and alkylated with 5 μL 100 mM IAA for 30 min in the dark. The sample was diluted with 340 μL 0.1 M ABC to 1.5 M urea. 200 μL of the solution was used for trypsinisation. The proteins were digested overnight with trypsin (12.5 μl, 0.1 μg/μL) at 37°C at a 1/40 trypsin/total protein ratio. Digestion was quenched with the addition of 25 μL 0.1% v/v FA. Peptides were cleaned up with C18 96-well plates, eluted with 50 % v/v ACN, dried by a vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf Concentrator Plus, 5305000568), and redissolved in 50 μL 0.1% v/v FA to be processed by LC-MS.  The profiles were acquired with 5-min gradients using analytical flowrate chromatography. Liquid chromatography was performed using the Agilent 1290 Infinity II system coupled to a TripleTOF 6600 mass spectrometer (SCIEX). 2 μg of peptides was separated using a C18 ZORBAX Rapid Resolution High Definition (RRHD) column (2.1 mm × 50 mm, 1.8-μm particles). A linear gradient was applied, ramping from 1% B to 40% B in 5 min (Buffer A: 0.1% v/v FA; Buffer B: ACN/0.1% v/v FA) with a flowrate of 600 μl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in high-sensitivity mode. The DIA method consisted of an MS1 scan from m/z 100 to m/z 1500 (20 ms accumulation time) and 25 MS2 scans (25 ms accumulation time) with variable precursor isolation width covering the mass range from m/z 450 to m/z 850. Ion source gas 1 (nebuliser gas), ion source gas 2 (heater gas), and curtain gas were set to 30, 15, and 25 respectively. The source temperature was set to 450°C and the ion spray voltage to 5500 V. Injections of samples took place in a random order.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analysed by DIA-NN. DIA-NN (version 1.7.12) was run in Robust LC (high precision) quantification mode, with maximum MS2 and MS1 mass tolerances set to 20 ppm and 12 ppm, respectively. The scan window size was set to 6. Raw-data processing was performed in two steps. First, the spectral library described previously was ‘refined’ based on the respective SWATH dataset, with the original information in the library such as spectra and retention times being replaced by the empirical information obtained from the SWATH data, as enabled by the functionality of DIA-NN. Subsequently, the SWATH-based ‘refined’ library was used to re-analyse the respective dataset. During all steps, precursor FDR filtering was set to 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Oral glucose tolerance, Human, Plasma, Ely, Epidemiological, Ogtt

### Affiliations
The Francis Crick Institute
Einstein Professor of Biochemistry Head, Institute of Biochemistry, Charité University Medicine, Berlin markus.ralser@charite.de  Senior Group Leader, The Francis Crick Institute, London markus.ralser@crick.ac.uk  UK 0044 743 5315249 DE 0049 30 450528141

### Submitter
Spyros Vernardis

### Lab Head
Dr Markus Ralser
Einstein Professor of Biochemistry Head, Institute of Biochemistry, Charité University Medicine, Berlin markus.ralser@charite.de  Senior Group Leader, The Francis Crick Institute, London markus.ralser@crick.ac.uk  UK 0044 743 5315249 DE 0049 30 450528141


