### Accession
PXD003704

### Title
Thermal proteome profiling of MCF-7 breast cancer cell line

### Description
Palbociclib (Ibrance, Pfizer) is a recent drug approved by the FDA for phase 3 clinical trials in treating estrogen-receptor-positive and HER2-negative breast cancer. In vitro, palbociclib, a selective inhibitor of CDK4 and CDK6, was shown to reduce cellular proliferation of breast cancer cell lines by blocking progression of cells from G1 into S phase of the cell cycle. While the primary targets of palbociclib have been deciphered, the molecular mechanisms leading to drug resistance as well as off-targets effects of palbociclib are not known. To identify new palbociclib targets we propose a quantitative mass spectrometry and a Cellular Thermal Shift Assay (CETSA) that works under the assumption that protein-drug interaction stabilises the protein thus, leading to an increase in thermostability

### Sample Protocol
Protein concentrations of the 37°C and 41°C samples were determined and used to normalize the volume corresponding to the protein quantity necessary for tandem mass tag labeling. Final concentration of 50 mM TCEP, 50 mM TEAB pH 8.0 in 10% 2,2,2 Trifluoethanol (TFE) was added  to each protein lysates and heated at 55 °C for 30 min. Proteins were then alkylated in 10 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma) and digested overnight at 37 °C by adding trypsin. Peptides were then desalted via C18 Macro SpinColumns and dried under vacuum centrifugation. Isobaric labeling of peptides was performed using the 10-plex tandem mass tag (TMT) reagents. TMT reagents (0.8 mg) were dissolved in 40 μL of acetonitrile and 20 μL was added to the corresponding fractions, previously dissolved in 100 μL of 50 mM TEAB, pH 8.0. The reaction was quenched by adding 8 μL of 5% hydroxylamine after 1 hour incubation (RT). According to the different temperature points, labelled peptides were combined, acidified with 200 μL of 0.1% TFA (pH  2) and concentrated using the C18 SPE on Sep-Pak cartridges (50 mg binding capacity).  TMT labeled peptides were subjected to hydrophilic Strong Anion Exchange (hSAX) fractionation. Labeled peptides were solubilized in 20 mM Tris-Hcl, pH 10.0) and separated on a Dionex RFIC IonPac AS24 column (IonPac series, 2 × 250 mm, 2000 Å pore size). Using a DGP-3600BM pump system equipped with a SRD-3600 degasser a 30 min gradient length from 8% to 80%  of 1M NaCl in 20 mM Tris Hcl, pH 10 (flow rate of 0.25 mL/min), separated the peptide mixtures into a total of 34 fractions. The 34 fractions were merged into 15 samples, acidified with 0.1 %TFA (pH  2), desalted via C18 Macro SpinColumns, dried under vacuum centrifugation and re-suspended in 2% ACN / 0.1% TFA for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification were performed using MaxQuant Version 1.5.1.7 with the following parameters: stable modification carbamidomethyl (C); variable modifications oxidation (M), acetylation (protein N terminus), deamidation (NQ), hydroxyproline (P), quantitation labels with 10plex TMT on N-terminal or lysine with a reporter mass tolerance of 0.01 Da and trypsin as enzyme with 2 missed cleavages. Search was conducted using the Uniprot-Trembl Human database, including common contaminants. Mass accuracy was set to 4.5 ppm for precursor ions and 0.5 Da

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, Lc-msms, Palbocilcib, Thermal proteome, Tmt, Drug discovery

### Affiliations
University of dundee
MRC Protein Phosphorylation Unit, University of Dundee, Dundee, United Kingdom

### Submitter
julien peltier

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Trost
MRC Protein Phosphorylation Unit, University of Dundee, Dundee, United Kingdom


