### Accession
PXD029323

### Title
Peptide Ancestry Informative Markers in Uterine Neoplasms from Women of European, African and Asian Ancestry

### Description
Characterization of ancestry-linked peptide variants in disease-relevant patient tissues represents a foundational step to connect patient ancestry with molecular disease pathogenesis. Nonsynonymous single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) encoding missense substitutions within tryptic peptides exhibiting high allele frequencies in European, African, and East Asian populations, termed peptide ancestry informative markers (pAIMs), were prioritized from 1000 genomes. In silico analysis shows that as few as 20 pAIMs can determine ancestry proportions similarly to >260K SNPs (R2=0.9905). Multiplexed proteomic analysis of >100 human endometrial cancer cell lines and uterine leiomyoma (ULM) tissues combined resulted in the quantitation of 62 pAIMs that correlate with self-described race and genotype-confirmed patient ancestry. Candidates include a D451E substitution in GC vitamin D-binding protein previously associated with altered vitamin D levels in African and European populations. These efforts describe a generalized set of markers for proteoancestry assessment that will further support studies investigating the impact of ancestry on the human proteome and how this relates to the pathogenesis of uterine neoplasms.

### Sample Protocol
Flash-frozen ULMs were cryopulverized and tissue sections of FFPE ULMs were collected by laser microdissection for proteomic sample preparation, Samples were resuspended in 100 mM TEAB, transferred to MicroTubes (Pressure Biosciences, Inc) and incubated at 99 ºC for 1 h. One microgram of SMART Digest Trypsin (Thermo Scientific) was added to each sample and MicroTubes were capped with MicroPestles. Pressure-assisted lysis and digestion was performed in a barocycler (2320 EXT, Pressure BioSciences, Inc) by sequentially cycling between 45 kpsi (50 s) and atmospheric pressure (10 s) for 120 cycles at 50 ºC. Cell lines were plated at equivalent densities and lysed at ~80% confluency in 1% SDS and 10mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4. Cell lysates (30 µg) were run approximately one inch into a 4-15% bis-acrylamide gel (Bio-Rad) and processed for in-gel digestion with trypsin as previously described (PMID: 25748058). Peptide digests were transferred to 0.5 mL microcentrifuge tubes, vacuum-dried, resuspended in 100 mM TEAB, pH 8.0 and the peptide concentration of each digest was determined by a BCA assay. Fifteen micrograms of peptide from each sample, along with a reference sample assembled by pooling equivalent amounts of peptide digests from individual patient samples, were aliquoted into a final volume of 100 µL of 100 mM TEAB and labeled with tandem-mass tag (TMT) isobaric labels (TMT-10 or TMT-11 Isobaric Label Reagent Set, Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Each TMT sample multiplex was pooled and fractionated by basic reversed-phase liquid chromatography (bRPLC, 1260 Infinity II liquid chromatographer, Agilent) into 96 fractions through development of a linear gradient of acetonitrile (0.69%/min). Concatenated fractions (36 total pooled samples for the endometrial cancer cell lines, FFPE ULMs, 24 total for the frozen ULMs) were generated for global LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identifications were generated as recently described (doi:10.1016/j.celrep.2020.03.066) on either a QExactive-HFX or Oribtrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer coupled with an Easy-nLC 1200 liquid chromatography system. Briefly, .RAW data files were searched with a publicly-available human proteome database appended with 1,037 full-length proteins encoding predicted pAIM substitutions of interest (doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.23.380337) using Mascot (v2.6.0, Matrix Science) and Proteome Discoverer (v2.2.0.388, Thermo Fisher Scientific) as previously described. Samples are searched using the following parameters: precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, fragment ion tolerance of 0.05 Da, a maximum of two tryptic miscleavages, dynamic modifications for oxidation (15.9949 Da) on methionine residues and TMT reporter ion tags (229.1629 Da) on peptide N-termini and lysine residues.

### Publication Abstract
Characterization of ancestry-linked peptide variants in disease-relevant patient tissues represents a foundational step to connect patient ancestry with disease pathogenesis. Nonsynonymous single-nucleotide polymorphisms encoding missense substitutions within tryptic peptides exhibiting high allele frequencies in European, African, and East Asian populations, termed peptide ancestry informative markers (pAIMs), were prioritized from 1000 genomes. <i>In silico</i> analysis identified that as few as 20&#xa0;pAIMs can determine ancestry proportions similarly to &gt;260K SNPs (R<sup>2</sup>&#xa0;= 0.99). Multiplexed proteomic analysis of &gt;100 human endometrial cancer cell lines and uterine leiomyoma tissues combined resulted in the quantitation of 62&#xa0;pAIMs that correlate with patient race and genotype-confirmed ancestry. Candidates include a D451E substitution in GC vitamin D-binding protein previously associated with altered vitamin D levels in African and European populations. pAIMs will support generalized proteoancestry assessment as well as efforts investigating the impact of ancestry on the human proteome and how this relates to the pathogenesis of uterine neoplasms.

### Keywords
Endometrial cancer cell line, Quantitative proteomics, Uterine leiomyoma, Fibroid, Tmt-10, Tmt-11

### Affiliations
Gynecologic Cancer Center of Excellence (GYN-COE), HJF, John P. Murtha Cancer Center, Walter Reed National Military Medical Center, Assistant Professor of Gynecologic Surgery and Obstetrics, Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences
Women's Health Integrated Research Center

### Submitter
Brian Hood

### Lab Head
Dr Nicholas W. Bateman, PhD
Gynecologic Cancer Center of Excellence (GYN-COE), HJF, John P. Murtha Cancer Center, Walter Reed National Military Medical Center, Assistant Professor of Gynecologic Surgery and Obstetrics, Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences


