### Accession
PXD027882

### Title
Aspirin Acetylates Thioredoxin Reductase 1 (isoform 4)

### Description
Thioredoxin Reductase 1 (isoform 4) was incubated with aspirin for 1 hour at 37 C followed by SDS PAGE. Samples were picked from SDS PAGE gel, digested with trypsin, and sent for LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
Thioredoxin Reductase 1 (isoform 4) was incubated with aspirin for 1 hour at 37 C followed by SDS PAGE. Samples were picked from SDS PAGE gel, digested with trypsin, and sent for LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Peaks Studio was used to analyse raw files to identify acetylation sites.

### Publication Abstract
Thioredoxin Reductase 1 (TrxR1) is an enzyme that protects human cells against reactive oxygen species generated during oxidative stress or in response to chemotherapies. Acetylation of TrxR1 is associated with oxidative stress, but the function of TrxR1 acetylation in oxidizing conditions is unknown. Using genetic code expansion, we produced recombinant and site-specifically acetylated variants of TrxR1 that also contain the non-canonical amino acid, selenocysteine, which is essential for TrxR1 activity. We previously showed site-specific acetylation at three different lysine residues increases TrxR1 activity by reducing the levels of linked dimers and low activity TrxR1 tetramers. Here we use enzymological studies to show that acetylated TrxR1 is resistant to both oxidative inactivation and peroxide-induced multimer formation. To compare the effect of programmed acetylation at specific lysine residues to non-specific acetylation, we produced acetylated TrxR1 using aspirin as a model non-enzymatic acetyl donor. Mass spectrometry confirmed aspirin-induced acetylation at multiple lysine residues in TrxR1. In contrast to unmodified TrxR1, the non-specifically acetylated enzyme showed no loss of activity under increasing and strongly oxidating conditions. Our data suggest that both site-specific and general acetylation of TrxR1 regulate the enzyme's ability to resist oxidative damage.

### Keywords
Aspirin, Acetylation, Thioredoxin reductase

### Affiliations
University of Western Ontario
Department of Biochemistry, Department of Chemistry, University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada

### Submitter
David Wright

### Lab Head
Dr Patrick O'Donoghue
Department of Biochemistry, Department of Chemistry, University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada


