### Accession
PXD036878

### Title
Sperm morphology and performance in relation to postmating prezygotic isolation in two recently diverged passerine species

### Description
Proteomes of female cloacal fluids in Common nightingales, Luscinia megarhynchos.

### Sample Protocol
A total of seven female fluid samples collected from four CN females were used in this analysis (three females run in duplicates and averaged, and one as a singlet). The samples were defrosted and vortexed at room temperature. Then 10 μl of each sample was transferred to new tubes to which we added 20 μl of PBS. Samples were vortexed for 1 min before being isolated with ProteoSpin detergent-free columns (Norgen Biotek). Female fluid samples were then precipitated using ice-cold acetone (1:4) and centrifuged (14 000 rcf, 10 min at 4C), followed by resuspension of the dried pellets in the digestion buffer (1% SDC, 100 mM TEAB – pH = 8.5). The protein concentration of each lysate was measured with the BCA assay kit (Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Cysteines in 20 μg of proteins were reduced and diluted to a final concentration of 5 mM TCEP (60°C for 60 min) and blocked with 10 mM MMTS (i.e., S-methyl methanethiosulfonate, 10 min at room temperature). Samples were cleaved with trypsin (1/50, trypsin/protein) at 37°C overnight and peptides were desalted on a Michrom C18 column. Finally, eluted peptide cations were converted to gas-phase ions by electrospray ionization and analysed on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion (Q-OT- qIT; Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA, USA) using the same conditions and setup as Kuntovova et al. (Kuntová, B., Stopková, R. & Stopka, P. Transcriptomic and proteomic profiling revealed high proportions of odorant binding and antimicrobial defense proteins in olfactory tissues of the House Mouse. Frontiers in Genetics 9, 26 (2018).)

### Data Protocol
See Kuntová, B., Stopková, R. & Stopka, P. Transcriptomic and proteomic profiling revealed high proportions of odorant binding and antimicrobial defense proteins in olfactory tissues of the House Mouse. Frontiers in Genetics 9, 26 (2018).

### Publication Abstract
Divergence in sperm phenotype and female reproductive environment may be a common source of postmating prezygotic (PMPZ) isolation between species. However, compared to other reproductive barriers it has received much less attention. In this study, we examined sperm morphology and velocity in two hybridizing passerine species, the common nightingale (Luscinia megarhynchos) and thrush nightingale (L. luscinia). In addition, we for the first time characterized a passerine female reproductive tract fluid proteome. We demonstrate that spermatozoa of the common nightingale have significantly longer and wider midpiece (proximal part of the flagellum containing mitochondria) and longer tail compared to spermatozoa of thrush nightingale. On the other hand, they have significantly shorter and narrower acrosome. Importantly, these differences did not have any effect on sperm velocity. Furthermore, the fluid from the reproductive tract of common nightingale females did not differentially affect velocity of conspecific and heterospecific sperm. Our results indicate that the observed changes in the flagellum and acrosome size are unlikely to contribute to PMPZ isolation through differential sperm velocity of conspecific and heterospecific sperm in the female reproductive tract. However, they could affect other postcopulatory processes, which might be involved in PMPZ isolation, such as sperm storage, longevity or sperm-egg interaction.

### Keywords
Hybridization; speciation; postcopulatory sexual selection; sperm; female reproductive tract fluid; birds

### Affiliations
Department of Zoology, Charles University, Prague
Department of Zoology, Faculty of Science, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic

### Submitter
Pavel Stopka

### Lab Head
Dr Pavel Stopka
Department of Zoology, Faculty of Science, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic


