### Accession
PXD002365

### Title
The Lipid Raft Proteome of Borrelia burgdorferi.

### Description
Eukaryotic lipid rafts are membrane microdomains rich in cholesterol that contain a selective set of proteins, and have been associated with multiple biological functions. The Lyme disease agent, Borrelia burgdorferi, is one of an increasing number of bacterial pathogens that incorporates cholesterol onto its membrane, and form cholesterol glycolipid domains that possess all the hallmarks of eukaryotic lipid rafts. In this study, we isolated lipid rafts from cultured B. burgdorferi as a detergent resistant membrane (DRM) fraction on density gradients, and characterized those molecules that partitioned exclusively or are highly enriched in these domains. Cholesterol glycolipids, the previously known raft-associated lipoproteins OspA and OpsB, and cholera toxin partitioned into the lipid rafts fraction indicating compatibility with components of the DRM. The proteome of lipid rafts was analyzed by a combination of LC-MS/MS or MudPIT. Identified proteins were analyzed in silico for parameters that included localization, isoelectric point, molecular mass and biological function. The proteome provided a consistent pattern of lipoproteins, proteases and their substrates, sensing molecules, and prokaryotic homologs of eukaryotic lipid rafts. This study provides the first analysis of a prokaryotic lipid raft and has relevance for the biology of Borrelia, other pathogenic bacteria, as well as for the evolution of these structures.

### Sample Protocol
The soluble and insoluble DRM fractions were analyzed by mass spectrometry using the MudPIT method. The DRM fractions were precipitated using TCA. Brieftly, we added TCA to the DRM fractions to a final concentration of 9% (vol/vol). The samples were vortexed, incubated in ice for 30 min and centrifugated (16000 x g) for 5 min at 4ºC. The supernatants were removed and the pellets were washed (2x) with 1ml of cold acetone. In between each wash and after the final wash the samples were centrifuged (16000xg) for 5 min at 4ºC. The resultant pellets were air dried, resuspended in 8 M urea, and diluted to 2 M urea with 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate. The proteins were reduced with 5mM DTT for 30 min. and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide for another 30 min. After the addition of two micrograms of trypsin the samples were incubated overnight at 37ºC. The digestion reaction was stopped with formic acid (5% final concentration), the peptides were purified on C18 columns (Supel-Tips C18, Supelco), and the dried peptides were resuspended in 30 µl 5% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile. The peptide mixture was pressure loaded onto a 250 µm inner diameter (i.d) fused-silica capillary packed first with 3 cm of 5 µm strong cation exchange material (Partisphere, SCX, Whatman) followed by 3 cm of 10 µm C18 reverse phase (RP) particles (Magic C18, Michrom Biosciences). Loaded and washed microcapillaries were connected via a 2 µm filtered union (UpChurch Scientific) to a 100 µm i.d column, which had been pulled to a 5 µm id tip using a P-2000 CO2 laser puller (Sutter Instruments), then packed with 13 cm of 3 µm C18 reverse phase (RP) particles (Magic C18 Michrom Biosciences) and equilibrated in 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid (Buffer A). This split column was then installed in-line with a NanoLC Eskigent HPLC pump. For the organic gradient, the flow rate of channel two was set at 300 nl/min. The flow rate of the 0.5M ammonium acetate salt buffer (Buffer C) was set to 0.5 µl/min. Fully automated 13 step chromatography runs were carried out. Three different elution buffers were used. Buffer A, 98% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid (Buffer B) and 0.5 M ammonium acetate, 2% acetonitrile, 0.1 formic acid (Buffer C). Peptides were sequentially eluted from the SCX resin to the RP resin by increasing salt steps (Buffer C), followed by organic gradients (Buffer B). The last chromatography step consists of a high salt wash with 100% Buffer C followed by an acetonitrile gradient. The eluting peptides were ionized by application of a 1.8 kV distal voltage into a LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer equipped with a nano-LC electrospray ionization source. Full MS spectra were recorded on the peptides over a 400 to 2000 m/z range by the Orbitrap, followed by five tandem (MS/MS) events sequentially generated by LTQ in a data-dependent manner on the first, second, third, fourth and fifth most intense ions selected from the full spectrum (at 35% collision energy). Mass spectrometer scan functions and HPLC solvent gradients were controlled by the Xcalibur data system (ThermoFinnigan, San Jose, CA).

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were extracted from the RAW file with ReAdW.exe (http://sourceforge.net/projects/sashimi). Charge state deconvolution and deisotoping were not performed. All MS/MS samples were analyzed using SEQUEST (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose CA, USA; version 3.0). SEQUEST was set up to search the UniProt_B.burgdorferi_12-24-2010_reversed database (12344 entries) assuming the digestion enzyme to be non-specific. SEQUEST was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 1.8 Da. Iodoacetamide derivative of cysteine was specified in SEQUEST as a fixed modification. Scaffold (version Scaffold_3_00_07, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability as specified by the Peptide Prophet algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.9% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.  Total spectra counts were normalized at the MS level to obtain a quantitative value (normalized spectra count) using Scaffold software (version 3, Portland, OR). The normalized spectral abundance factor (NSAF) value was obtained as previously described. NSAF values for each protein were compared in the insoluble fraction to those in the soluble fraction to determine which proteins were enriched in lipid rafts (insoluble fraction) using a t-test. All proteins enriched in the insoluble fraction and with a P-value less than 0.05 were included the corresponding manuscript.

### Publication Abstract
Eukaryotic lipid rafts are membrane microdomains that have significant amounts of cholesterol and a selective set of proteins that have been associated with multiple biological functions. The Lyme disease agent, Borrelia burgdorferi, is one of an increasing number of bacterial pathogens that incorporates cholesterol onto its membrane, and form cholesterol glycolipid domains that possess all the hallmarks of eukaryotic lipid rafts. In this study, we isolated lipid rafts from cultured B. burgdorferi as a detergent resistant membrane (DRM) fraction on density gradients, and characterized those molecules that partitioned exclusively or are highly enriched in these domains. Cholesterol glycolipids, the previously known raft-associated lipoproteins OspA and OpsB, and cholera toxin partitioned into the lipid rafts fraction indicating compatibility with components of the DRM. The proteome of lipid rafts was analyzed by a combination of LC-MS/MS or MudPIT. Identified proteins were analyzed in silico for parameters that included localization, isoelectric point, molecular mass and biological function. The proteome provided a consistent pattern of lipoproteins, proteases and their substrates, sensing molecules and prokaryotic homologs of eukaryotic lipid rafts. This study provides the first analysis of a prokaryotic lipid raft and has relevance for the biology of Borrelia, other pathogenic bacteria, as well as for the evolution of these structures. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD002365 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD002365).

### Keywords
Lyme disease, Lipid raft, Borrelia, Prokaryotes, Bacteria

### Affiliations
Stony Brook University

### Submitter
Alvaro Toledo

### Lab Head
Dr Jorge Benach
Stony Brook University


