### Accession
PXD036983

### Title
: Proximity proteomics identifies endothelial cell septins and PAK2 as decisive regulators of actomyosin mediated expulsion of von Willebrand factor.

### Description
A Rab27a targeted APEX2 construct was transfected into primary human umbilical endothelial cells (HUVEC) and the proximal proteins surrounding endothelial storage organelles (Weibel Palade bodies) identified by proximity proteomics in unstimulated and stimulated  conditions.  The procedure was carried out in the presence and absence of two different stimuli (10 minutes-phorbol myristate acetate or a combination of Histamine, adrenalin and 3-isobutyl-1-methylxanthine) and the data presented represents 4 independent experiments each with 2 technical replicates.

### Sample Protocol
Live endothelial cells either mock transfected or expressing APEX2-Rab27a were fed biotin phenol (30min) either unstimulated or stimulated and then exposed to hydrogen peroxide for 1min. The proximity biotinylation reaction was then quenched and biotinylated protein were pulled down with neutravidin beads. Following an on -bead trypsin digest the peptides were desalted using C18 + carbon top tips (Glygen Corporation, TT2MC18.96; Columbia, MD, USA) and eluted with 70% acetonitrile (ACN) with 0.1% formic acid. Dried peptides were dissolved in 0.1% TFA and analysed by nanoflow ultimate 3000 RSL nano instrument coupled online to a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Gradient elution was from 3% to 35% buffer B in 120 min at a flow rate 250 nL/min, with buffer A being used to balance the mobile phase (buffer A was 0.1% formic acid in water, and B was 0.1% formic acid in ACN). The mass spectrometer was controlled by Xcalibur software (version 4.0) and operated in the positive mode. The spray voltage was 1.95 kV, and the capillary temperature was set to 255°C. The Q-Exactive Plus was operated in data-dependent mode, with one survey MS scan followed by 15 MS/MS scans. The full scans were acquired in the mass analyser at 375–1,500 m/z with a resolution of 70,000, and the MS/MS scans were obtained with a resolution of 17,500.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were converted into Mascot Generic Format using Mascot Distiller (version 2.5.1) and searched against the SwissProt database (release December 2015) restricted to human entries using the Mascot search daemon (version 2.5.0) with an FDR of approximately 1%. Allowed mass windows were 10 ppm and 25 mmu for parent and fragment mass to charge values, respectively. Variable modifications included in searches were oxidation of methionine, pyro-glu (N-term), and phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine. The Mascot result (DAT) files were extracted into Excel files for further normalisation and statistical analysis.

### Publication Abstract
In response to tissue injury, within seconds the ultra-large glycoprotein von Willebrand factor (VWF) is released from endothelial storage organelles (Weibel-Palade bodies) into the lumen of the blood vasculature, where it leads to the recruitment of platelets. The marked size of VWF multimers represents an unprecedented burden on the secretory machinery of endothelial cells (ECs). ECs have evolved mechanisms to overcome this, most notably an actomyosin ring that forms, contracts, and squeezes out its unwieldy cargo. Inhibiting the formation or function of these structures represents a novel therapeutic target for thrombotic pathologies, although characterizing proteins associated with such a dynamic process has been challenging. We have combined APEX2 proximity labeling with an innovative dual loss-of-function screen to identify proteins associated with actomyosin ring function. We show that p21 activated kinase 2 (PAK2) recruits septin hetero-oligomers, a molecular interaction that forms a ring around exocytic sites. This cascade of events controls actomyosin ring function, aiding efficient exocytic release. Genetic or pharmacological inhibition of PAK2 or septins led to inefficient release of VWF and a failure to form platelet-catching strings. This new molecular mechanism offers additional therapeutic targets for the control of thrombotic disease and is highly relevant to other secretory systems that employ exocytic actomyosin machinery.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Rab27a, Apex2, Lc-ms/ms, Weibel palade bodies, Haemostasis, Pak2, Vwf secretion, Septin, Endothelial cells, Proximity proteomics

### Affiliations
Centre for Genomics and Computational Biology Barts Cancer Institute  Queen Mary, University of London John Vane Science Centre, Charterhouse Square, London EC1M 6BQ
Centre for Haemato Oncology

### Submitter
Vinothini Rajeeve

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Pedro R Cutillas
Centre for Genomics and Computational Biology Barts Cancer Institute  Queen Mary, University of London John Vane Science Centre, Charterhouse Square, London EC1M 6BQ


