### Accession
PXD035986

### Title
Proteomic evaluation of human osteoblast responses to titanium implants over time

### Description
Titanium is widely used in bone prostheses due to its excellent biocompatibility and osseointegration capacity. To understand the effect of sandblasted acid-etched (SAE) Ti implants on the biological responses of human osteoblast (HOb), their proteomic profiles were analysed using nLC-MS/MS. The cells were cultured with the implant materials, and 2544 distinct proteins were detected in samples taken after 1, 3 and 7 days. Comparative analyses of proteomic data were performed using Perseus software. The expression of proteins related to EIF2, mTOR, insulin-secretion and IGF pathways showed marked differences in cells grown with SAE-Ti in comparison with cells cultured without Ti. Moreover, the proteomic profiles obtained with SAE-Ti were compared over time. The affected proteins were related to adhesion, immunity, oxidative stress, coagulation, angiogenesis, osteogenesis and extracellular matrix formation functions. The proliferation, mineralisation and osteogenic gene expression in HObs cultured with SAE-Ti were characterised in vitro. The results showed that the osteoblasts exposed to this material increase their mineralisation rate and expression of COLI, RUNX2, SP7, CTNNB1, CAD13, IGF2, MAPK2 and mTOR. Overall, the observed proteomic profiles can explain the SAE-Ti osteogenic properties, widening our knowledge of key signalling pathways taking part in the early stages of the osseointegration process in this type of implantations.

### Sample Protocol
Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) protocol was used for sample processing and digestion. Trypsin was added at a trypsin:protein ratio of 1:50, and the mixture was incubated overnight at 37 ºC, dried in a RVC2 25 Speedvac concentrator (Christ) and resuspended in 0.1% Formic Acid (FA). The peptides obtained were desalted and resuspended in 0.1% FA using C18 stage tips (Millipore).

### Data Protocol
Proteomic analysis was performed by loading the sample (200 ng) onto an Evosep One chromatograph (Evosep Biosystems, Odense C, Denmark) coupled to a hybrid trapped ion mobility spectrometer – quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometer (timsTOF Pro with PASEF; Bruker, Billerica, MA, USA). Each sample was evaluated in quadruplicate. The mass spectrum raw dataset was examined using the MaxQuant programme (http://maxquant.org/), and the Perseus software platform (https://www.maxquant.org/perseus/) was employed for comparative analysis. To examine the effects of Ti on the osteoblast protein expression, proteomic profiles of HOb cells cultured with SAE-Ti samples were compared with those obtained for controls (C). To evaluate the alterations in protein expression over time, proteomic profiles of SAE-Ti samples at 1 day of culture were compared with the results obtained for 3 and 7 days. The protein expression was considered different at p ≤ 0.05 (Student's t-test), and the ratio of abundances for the compared conditions higher than 1.5 in either direction (UP: increased and DOWN: reduced).

### Publication Abstract
Titanium is widely used in bone prostheses due to its excellent biocompatibility and osseointegration capacity. To understand the effect of sandblasted acid-etched (SAE) Ti implants on the biological responses of human osteoblast (HOb), their proteomic profiles were analyzed using nLC-MS/MS. The cells were cultured with the implant materials, and 2544 distinct proteins were detected in samples taken after 1, 3, and 7&#x2009;days. Comparative analyses of proteomic data were performed using Perseus software. The expression of proteins related to EIF2, mTOR, insulin-secretion and IGF pathways showed marked differences in cells grown with SAE-Ti in comparison with cells cultured without Ti. Moreover, the proteomic profiles obtained with SAE-Ti were compared over time. The affected proteins were related to adhesion, immunity, oxidative stress, coagulation, angiogenesis, osteogenesis, and extracellular matrix formation functions. The proliferation, mineralization and osteogenic gene expression in HObs cultured with SAE-Ti were characterized in vitro. The results showed that the osteoblasts exposed to this material increase their mineralization rate and expression of COLI, RUNX2, SP7, CTNNB1, CAD13, IGF2, MAPK2, and mTOR. Overall, the observed proteomic profiles can explain the SAE-Ti osteogenic properties, widening our knowledge of key signaling pathways taking part in the early stages of the osseointegration process in this type of implantations.

### Keywords
Human osteoblasts, Titanium, Label free

### Affiliations
Proteomics Platform CIC bioGUNE
Proteomics Service CIC bioGUNE Bizkaia Tech. Park Build. 800 48160 Derio (Spain)

### Submitter
Mikel Azkargorta

### Lab Head
Dr Felix Elortza
Proteomics Service CIC bioGUNE Bizkaia Tech. Park Build. 800 48160 Derio (Spain)


