### Accession
PXD027772

### Title
A scalable, clinically severe pig model for Duchenne muscular dystrophy

### Description
Large animal models for Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) are indispensible for preclinical evaluation of novel diagnostic procedures and treatment strategies. To evaluate functional consequences of Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) in skeletal muscle and myocardium, we used a new genetically engineered dystrophin KO pig model displaying hallmarks of human DMD. Heart and skeletal muscle tissue samples of DMD pigs and wild-type (WT) controls at three different ages were analyzed by label-free proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen tissue samples from heart and skeletal muscle were transferred in a prechilled tubes and cryo-pulverized in a Covaris CP02 Automated Dry Pulverizer (Covaris Inc, MA, USA) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Powdered tissue was lysed in 8 M urea/0.5 M NH4HCO3 by ultrasonicating (18 cycles of 10 s) using a Sonopuls HD3200 (Bandelin, Berlin, Germany). Pierce 660 nm Protein Assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA) was used for protein quantification. 30 μg of protein was digested with Lys-C (FUJIFILM Wako Chemicals Europe GmbH, Germany) for 4 h and subsequently with modified porcine trypsin (Promega, WI, USA) for 16 h at 37 °C.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was done using Maxquant (v.1.6.7.0), using its built-in search engine Andromeda and the NCBI RefSeq Sus scrofa database (v.7-5-2020).

### Publication Abstract
Large-animal models for Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) are crucial for the evaluation of diagnostic procedures and treatment strategies. Pigs cloned from male cells lacking DMD exon 52 (DMD&#x394;52) exhibit molecular, clinical and pathological hallmarks of DMD, but die before sexual maturity and cannot be propagated by breeding. Therefore, we generated female DMD+/- carriers. A single founder animal had 11 litters with 29 DMDY/-, 34 DMD+/- as well as 36 male and 29 female wild-type offspring. Breeding with F1 and F2 DMD+/- carriers resulted in an additional 114 DMDY/- piglets. With intensive neonatal management, the majority survived for 3-4&#x2005;months, providing statistically relevant cohorts for experimental studies. Pathological investigations and proteome studies of skeletal muscles and myocardium confirmed the resemblance to human disease mechanisms. Importantly, DMDY/- pigs displayed progressive myocardial fibrosis and increased expression of connexin-43, associated with significantly reduced left ventricular ejection fraction, at 3&#x2005;months. Furthermore, behavioral tests provided evidence for impaired cognitive ability. Our breeding cohort of DMD&#x394;52 pigs and standardized tissue repositories provide important resources for studying DMD disease mechanisms and for testing novel treatment strategies.

### Keywords
Animal model, Duchenne muscular dystrophy, Proteomics, Dmd, Pig

### Affiliations
Laboratory for Functional Genome Analysis
Gene Center Munich
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität Munich (LMU)
Feodor-Lynen-Str. 25
81377 Munich
Germany
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München Genzentrum Laboratory for Functional Genome Analysis Feodor-Lynen-Str. 25 D-81377 München

### Submitter
Thomas Fröhlich

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Fröhlich
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München Genzentrum Laboratory for Functional Genome Analysis Feodor-Lynen-Str. 25 D-81377 München


