### Accession
PXD014342

### Title
A Pleistocene hominin enamel proteome from Homo antecessor

### Description
Hominin relationships and their dispersal throughout Eurasia during the Early and Middle Pleistocene are highly debated. The relationships between Early and Middle Pleistocene hominins, like Homo antecessor and Homo erectus, and hominin species that dominate the Late Pleistocene fossil record, like Homo sapiens, Neanderthals and Denisovans, are unclear. Here, we obtain enamel proteomes from Homo antecessor (Atapuerca, Spain) and Homo erectus (Dmanisi, Georgia), two key fossil assemblages that have a central role in models of Pleistocene hominin morphology, dispersal, and divergence. We recover endogenous ancient proteomes from the Atapuerca and Dmanisi hominins. In addition, our proteomic data indicates that the sampled Homo antecessor molar derives from a male hominin through amelogenin protein sexing. Our data includes preserved in vivo phosphorylation and enamel proteome proteolytic digestion.

### Sample Protocol
Ancient protein extractions took place in facilities at the Natural History Museum of Denmark dedicated to the extraction of ancient DNA and ancient proteins. These include clean rooms fitted with filtered ventilation and positive air pressure. A negative extraction blank was processed alongside the ancient extractions, with the additional inclusion of injection blanks during MS/MS analysis to monitor potential protein contamination during all stages of analysis. Enamel and dentine samples of the Atapuerca and Dmanisi hominins were removed from the molars using a sterilized drill and crushed to a rough powder. Samples were processed using a variety of extraction approaches, but principally demineralized in 1.2 M HCl or 10% TFA at 3°C, either left undigested or digested using LysC/Trypsin. Solubilized protein residues were cleaned, concentrated and immobilized on C18 Stage-Tips. Shotgun proteomic data was obtained on peptide extracts of both hominins at separate facilities at the Novo Nordisk Centre for Protein Research, University of Copenhagen (Denmark), and the Proteomics Unit, Centre for Genomic Regulation, Pompeu Fabra University (Barcelona, Spain). Briefly, samples processed in Copenhagen were suspended in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid, 5% acetonitrile, and analysed on a Q-Exactive HF or HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The HF/HF-X was operated in positive ion mode with a nanospray voltage of 2 kV and a source temperature of 275°C. All acquisition was done using data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. For Barcelona, samples were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid and analyzed on a LTQ-Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000. The mass spectrometer was operated similarly to the parameters stated for the HF/HF-X in Copenhagen, except the nanospray voltage was 2.4 kV and full MS scans with 1 micro scans were used over a mass range of m/z 350-1500. Further details on extraction chemistry and LC-MS/MS analysis can be found in the Supplementary Information of Welker et al. “A Pleistocene hominin enamel proteome from Homo antecessor”.

### Data Protocol
We constructed an initial Hominidae sequence database containing protein sequences of all the major and minor enamel proteins derived from all extant great apes, an hylobatid (Nomascus leucogenys), and a Macaque (Macaca mulatta). Raw mass spectrometry data was searched for each specimen and tissue separately in either PEAKS (v. 7.5) or MaxQuant (v. 1.5.3.30). The de novo and error-tolerant implementations of PEAKS and the dependent peptide approach implemented in MQ were used to generate possible additional single-amino acid polymorphism (SAP) variation in enamel protein sequences unique to either of the two hominins sampled. Next, these were added to a newly constructed sequence database and verified in separate searches in both PEAKS and MQ. No fixed modifications were specified in any search. For PEAKS, variable modifications were set to include proline hydroxylation, glutamine and asparagine deamidation, oxidation (M), phosphorylation (STY), carbamidomethylation (C), and pyro-glutamine and pyro-glutamic acid. For MaxQuant, the following variable PTMs were additionally included: ornithine formation (R), oxidation (W) dioxidation (MW), histidine to aspartic acid (H>D), and histidine to hydroxyglutamate. Searches were conducted with “unspecific” digestion as no digestive enzyme or chemical was used during the extraction process. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance to 0.05 Da. In PEAKS, FDR of peptide matches was set to equal ≤1.0%. For MaxQuant, PSMs and protein FDR was set to 1.0%, with a minimum score of 40 for all peptides. Protein matches were accepted with a minimum of two unique peptide matches in either the PEAKS or MaxQuant search.

### Publication Abstract
The phylogenetic relationships between hominins of the Early Pleistocene epoch in Eurasia, such as Homo antecessor, and hominins that appear later in the fossil record during the Middle Pleistocene epoch, such as Homo sapiens, are highly debated<sup>1-5</sup>. For the oldest remains, the molecular study of these relationships is hindered by the degradation of ancient DNA. However, recent research has demonstrated that the analysis of ancient proteins can address this challenge<sup>6-8</sup>. Here we present the dental enamel proteomes of H.&#xa0;antecessor from Atapuerca (Spain)<sup>9,10</sup> and Homo erectus from Dmanisi (Georgia)<sup>1</sup>, two key fossil assemblages that have a central role in models of Pleistocene hominin morphology, dispersal and divergence. We provide evidence that H.&#xa0;antecessor is a close sister lineage to subsequent Middle and Late Pleistocene hominins, including modern humans, Neanderthals and Denisovans. This placement implies that the modern-like face of H.&#xa0;antecessor-that is, similar to that of modern humans-may have a considerably deep ancestry in the genus Homo, and that the cranial morphology of Neanderthals represents a derived form. By recovering AMELY-specific peptide sequences, we also conclude that the H. antecessor molar fragment from Atapuerca that we analysed belonged to a male individual. Finally, these H.&#xa0;antecessor and H.&#xa0;erectus fossils preserve evidence of enamel proteome phosphorylation and proteolytic digestion that occurred in vivo during tooth formation. Our results provide important insights into the evolutionary relationships between H.&#xa0;antecessor and other hominin groups, and pave the way for future studies using enamel proteomes to investigate hominin biology across the existence of the genus Homo.

### Keywords
Hominins, Phosphorylation, Enamel, Lc-ms/ms, Palaeoproteomics

### Affiliations
Postdoc
Department of Biology, University of Copenhagen
University of Copenhagen

### Submitter
Frido Welker

### Lab Head
Dr Enrico Cappellini
University of Copenhagen


