### Accession
PXD011992

### Title
Proteomics and transcriptomics analyses of Methylophaga thiooxydans reveal adaptations for growth on dimethylsulfide in a marine model organism

### Description
Dimethylsulfide is a volatile organic sulfur compound that provides the largest input of biogenic sulfur from the oceans to the atmosphere, and thence back to land, constituting an important link in the global sulfur cycle. Microorganisms degrading DMS affect fluxes of DMS in the environment, but the underlying metabolic pathways are still poorly understood. Methylophaga thiooxydans is a marine methylotrophic bacterium capable of growth on DMS as sole source of carbon and energy. Using proteomics and transcriptomics we identified genes expressed during growth on dimethylsulfide and methanol to refine our knowledge of the metabolic pathways that are involved in DMS and methanol degradation in this strain. Amongst the most highly expressed genes on DMS were the two methanethiol oxidases driving the oxidation of this reactive and toxic intermediate of DMS metabolism. Growth on DMS also increased expression of the enzymes of the tetrahydrofolate linked pathway of formaldehyde oxidation, in addition to the tetrahydromethanopterin linked pathway. Key enzymes of the inorganic sulfur oxidation pathway included flavocytochrome c sulfide dehydrogenase, sulfide quinone oxidoreductase, and persulfide dioxygenases. A sulP permease was also expressed during growth on DMS. Other enzymes of organic and inorganic sulfur metabolism previously detected in cell extracts of Methylophaga have not been characterised at the genetic level yet; their expression level and regulation could not be analysed. A pan-genome analysis of six available Methylophaga genomes suggests that only two of the six investigated bacteria have the metabolic potential to utilize methanethiol, the degradation product of DMS. These results mirror phenotypic analyses and demonstrate that DMS-utilization and subsequent C1 and sulfur oxidation are not conserved across the entire genus.

### Sample Protocol
For proteomics, proteins were extracted from triplicate Methylophaga thiooxydans DMS010 cell culture pellets resuspended in PIPES buffer. The homogeneous cell suspension was centrifuged at 9855 x g for 20 minutes at 4°C. The supernatant was discarded and the pellet was resuspended in 1 mL of an ice-cooled PIPES buffer with addition of 160 µg mL-1 benzamidine and 1 µg DNase was added. The PIPES buffer with 160 µg mL-1 benzamidine was prepared by mixing 0.39 g of benzamidine hydrochloride hydrate (98%) (Sigma-Aldrich) with 5 mL water. 0.2 mL of this solution was then mixed with 100 mL PIPES buffer and cooled on ice. Another 2 mL of this PIPES buffer (160µg ml-1 benzamidine) was added and the cells were broken by three passages through a French pressure cell (American Instrument Corporation, Hartland, USA) at 1000 psi. Cell debris were removed by centrifugation at 9855 x g for 20 minutes at 4°C. The supernatant was centrifuged again at 106,934 x g for 45 minutes at 4°C. After centrifugation the supernatant was transferred into 4.5 mL tubes (soluble protein fraction). The pellet was resuspended in 4.5 mL PIPES buffer (pH 7.8) and centrifuged again at 106,934 x g for 45 minutes at 4°C. Pellet resuspension and centrifugation was repeated, the supernatant was discarded and the pellet was resuspended in 500 μL PIPES buffer (without benzamidine). These resuspended pellets were then used for a tryptic digest and analyzed by LC-MS/MS on an Orbirap Fusion mass spectrometer by the RTP Proteomics Facility at Univeristy of Warwick, UK.

### Data Protocol
.raw files were searched using Mascot and imported into Scaffold

### Publication Abstract
Dimethylsulfide is a volatile organic sulfur compound that provides the largest input of biogenic sulfur from the oceans to the atmosphere, and thence back to land, constituting an important link in the global sulfur cycle. Microorganisms degrading DMS affect fluxes of DMS in the environment, but the underlying metabolic pathways are still poorly understood. <i>Methylophaga thiooxydans</i> is a marine methylotrophic bacterium capable of growth on DMS as sole source of carbon and energy. Using proteomics and transcriptomics we identified genes expressed during growth on dimethylsulfide and methanol to refine our knowledge of the metabolic pathways that are involved in DMS and methanol degradation in this strain. Amongst the most highly expressed genes on DMS were the two methanethiol oxidases driving the oxidation of this reactive and toxic intermediate of DMS metabolism. Growth on DMS also increased expression of the enzymes of the tetrahydrofolate linked pathway of formaldehyde oxidation, in addition to the tetrahydromethanopterin linked pathway. Key enzymes of the inorganic sulfur oxidation pathway included flavocytochrome <i>c</i> sulfide dehydrogenase, sulfide quinone oxidoreductase, and persulfide dioxygenases. A <i>sulP</i> permease was also expressed during growth on DMS. Proteomics and transcriptomics also identified a number of highly expressed proteins and gene products whose function is currently not understood. As the identity of some enzymes of organic and inorganic sulfur metabolism previously detected in <i>Methylophaga</i> has not been characterized at the genetic level yet, highly expressed uncharacterized genes provide new targets for further biochemical and genetic analysis. A pan-genome analysis of six available <i>Methylophaga</i> genomes showed that only two of the six investigated strains, <i>M. thiooxydans</i> and <i>M. sulfidovorans</i> have the gene encoding methanethiol oxidase, suggesting that growth on methylated sulfur compounds of <i>M. aminisulfidivorans</i> is likely to involve different enzymes and metabolic intermediates. Hence, the pathways of DMS-utilization and subsequent C<sub>1</sub> and sulfur oxidation are not conserved across <i>Methylophaga</i> isolates that degrade methylated sulfur compounds.

### Keywords
Methylophaga thiooxydans, Dimethylsulfide

### Affiliations
School of Life Sciences, Univeristy of Warwick, Coventry, CV4 7AL, United Kingdom
University of Warwick

### Submitter
Andrew Bottrill

### Lab Head
Dr Hendrik Schaefer
School of Life Sciences, Univeristy of Warwick, Coventry, CV4 7AL, United Kingdom


