### Accession
PXD012418

### Title
Meiotic yeast SUMO - Dataset containing the raw files and search results of the meiotic yeast SUMOyalted proteome

### Description
Dataset containing the raw files and search results of the meiotic yeast SUMOyalted proteome

### Sample Protocol
Cells were collected in a synchronous meiotic time course, subjected to NaOH/TCA lysis, and resuspended in 6M Guanidine buffer. His-tagged SUMO (Smt3-I96K) was purified using HisTrapFF and digested either with LysC alone or LysC and GluC. Digests were desalted, lyophilized, resuspended in UbiScan IAP buffer (Cell Signaling Technologies) and purified with the UbiScan kit. analyzed with a Q Exactive Orbitrap tandem MS system (Thermo Scientific) with an upstream in-line Proxeon Easy-nLCII HPLC system (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were resuspended in 0.2% TFA and loaded on to a 25 mm Magic C18 RPLC column and eluted over a 90-minute acetonitrile gradient at 300 nl/min. MS1 spectra were sampled with a top-20 cutoff and 5s dynamic exclusion and subjected to high-energy collision dissociation to obtain MS2 spectra.

### Data Protocol
Samples were run on a QExactive orbitrap. Raw data were searched with MaxQuant 1.6.1. Samples from complementary digests for the same replicate were processed under the same experiment heading. Two digestion (Lys-C only and Lys-C + Glu-C) strategies were processed as separate groups. For all samples, a maximum of five missed cleavages and potential modifications were allowed per peptide. Two searches were run. Protein N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation and diglycylyl lysine were set as variable modifications for both searches. In addition, serine, threonine and tyrosine phosphorylations were included in the "Phospho" search, while lysine acetylations were included in the "Acetyl" search. The search results for the "Phospho" search are prefixed "Phospho", while those for the "Acetyl" search are prefixed "Acetyl". "*parameters.txt" files are included in "Search.zip".

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Yeast, Sumo, Lc-ms/ms, Meiosis, Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Affiliations
Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Microbiology & Molecular Genetics, University of California Davis, Davis, California, USA.
University of California Davis

### Submitter
Nikhil Bhagwat

### Lab Head
Dr Neil Hunter
Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Microbiology & Molecular Genetics, University of California Davis, Davis, California, USA.


