### Accession
PXD017314

### Title
Proteomic analysis of left ventricles containing the obscurin R4344Q mutation linked to hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and myocardia containing obscurin lacking Immunoglobulin domains 58/59 (Ig58/59)

### Description
Cardiac lysates prepared from left ventricles of 1-year-old female wild-type mice, mice carrying the obscurin R4344Q mutation, and mice carrying obscurin lacking the Ig58/59 domains (ΔIg58/59) were subjected to isobaric tandem-mass tagging, liquid chromatography, and mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Cardiac lysates were prepared in the presence of Halt Protease Inhibitor Cocktail and Halt Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail. 100 micrograms of protein lysates from each left ventricle were reduced with TCEP and alkylated with methyl methanethiosuphonate, followed by digestion using trypsin/LysC mixture. Digested peptides were then labeled with Tandem Mass Tags 10-plex Isobaric Label Reagent, and subjected to basic Reverse Phase fractionation. The fractionated peptides were analyzed by liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were analyzed with the Proteome Discoverer (PD) software (v1.4 Thermo Fisher Scientific) using 3Nodes; common PD nodes with spectra were extracted, charge state deconvoluted, and deisotoped using Xtract option. MS/MS spectra from 3Nodes were analyzed with Mascot (v2.5.1, Matrix Science, London, UK) with the RefSeq2015 Complete Database (mus musculus species, trypsin as an enzyme, mc2). Post-translational modifications were searched accounting for the tandem-mass-tags on the NH2-terminus and carbamidomethylation on cysteine as static modifications, and TMT on lysine, oxidation on methionine and deamidation on QN as variable modifications. In addition, the first search included phosphorylation on serine and threonine, and the phosphorylation sites were identified with both Mascot and PhosphoRS4.1. The second search included O-GlcNAcylation on serine and threonine, and glutathionylation on cysteine. Peptides identified from Mascot searches were processed with PD to match to corresponding proteins with 0.01% threshold of False Discover Rate based on a concatenated decoy database search to calculate protein and peptide ratios.

### Publication Abstract
Obscurin is a giant cytoskeletal protein with structural and regulatory roles encoded by the <i>OBSCN</i> gene. Recently, mutations in <i>OBSCN</i> were associated with the development of different forms of cardiomyopathies, including hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM). We previously reported that homozygous mice carrying the HCM-linked R4344Q obscurin mutation develop arrhythmia by 1-year of age under sedentary conditions characterized by increased heart rate, frequent incidents of premature ventricular contractions, and episodes of spontaneous ventricular tachycardia. In an effort to delineate the molecular mechanisms that contribute to the observed arrhythmic phenotype, we subjected protein lysates prepared from left ventricles of 1-year old R4344Q and wild-type mice to comparative proteomics analysis using tandem mass spectrometry; raw data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD017314. We found that the expression levels of proteins involved in cardiac function and disease, cytoskeletal organization, electropotential regulation, molecular transport and metabolism were significantly altered. Moreover, phospho-proteomic evaluation revealed changes in the phosphorylation profile of Ca<sup>2+</sup> cycling proteins, including sAnk1.5, a major binding partner of obscurin localized in the sarcoplasmic reticulum; notably, this is the first report indicating that sAnk1 undergoes phosphorylation. Taken together, our findings implicate obscurin in diverse cellular processes within the myocardium, which is consistent with its multiple binding partners, localization in different subcellular compartments, and disease association.

### Keywords
Mus musculus, R4344q mutation, Obscurin, Arrhythmia, Dilated cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy

### Affiliations
University of Maryland Baltimore
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Maryland Baltimore

### Submitter
Li-Yen  Hu

### Lab Head
Dr Aikaterini Kontrogianni-Konstantopoulos
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Maryland Baltimore


