### Accession
PXD004033

### Title
Metaproteomic Monitoring of Perinatal Mouse Gut Microbiota

### Description
In the presented study, in order to unravel gut microbial community multiplicity and the influence of maternal milk nutrients (i.e., IgA) on gut mucosal microbiota onset and shaping, a mouse GM (MGM) was used as newborn study model to discuss genetic background and feeding modulation on gut microbiota in term of symbiosis, dysbiosis and rebiosis maintenance during early gut microbiota onset and programming after birth. Particularly, a bottom-up shotgun metaproteomic approach, combined with a computational pipeline, has been compred with a culturomics analysis of mouse gut microbiota, obtained by MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry (MS).

### Sample Protocol
The whole intestine of mice pups sacrified at 3, 7 or 14 days of life was collected. Briefly, the intestines, were mechanically homogenized, washed and resuspended into Hanks' Balanced Salt Solution (HBSS) obtaining the enriched bacteria suspensions (EBSs).Two-hundred out of 500 μL EBSs were added to 800 μL of sample buffer (7M urea, 2M thiourea, 40mM Tris base, 4% CHAPS, 50mM DTT), pre-warmed a 37°C, sonicated 20 sec (5×) and then incubated for 1 hour at 37°C. About 100 μg of proteins were submitted to reduction with 50 mM DTT for 1 hour at 37°C, alkylation with 100 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 1 hour at RT, and finally digestion ON with 2 μL of 0.5 μg/μL of trypsine at 37°C. A monodimensional nano-HPLC approach was applied for peptide separation before data-dependent acquisition on a SCIEX Triple TOF 5600 mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed by the Mascot Distiller 2.5.1.0 version (processing Options: ABsciex 5600) performing the protein search against the NCBInr DB with bacteria (eubacteria) as taxonomic restriction for microbial protein identification. Error tolerances were set to 20 ppm and 0.05 Da for precursors and fragments respectively. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification and methionine oxidation as variable. A single miscleavage was allowed.

### Publication Abstract
At birth, contact with external stimuli, such as nutrients derived from food, is necessary to modulate the symbiotic balance between commensal and pathogenic bacteria, protect against bacterial dysbiosis, and initiate the development of the mucosal immune response. Among a variety of different feeding patterns, breastfeeding represents the best modality. In fact, the capacity of breast milk to modulate the composition of infants' gut microbiota leads to beneficial effects on their health. In this study, we used newborn mice as a model to evaluate the effect of parental genetic background (i.e., IgA-producing mice and IgA-deficient mice) and feeding modulation (i.e., maternal feeding and cross-feeding) on the onset and shaping of gut microbiota after birth. To investigate these topics, we used either a culturomic approach that employed Matrix Assisted Laser Desorption Ionization Time-of-Flight Mass Spectrometry (MS), or bottom-up Liquid Chromatography, with subsequent MSMS shotgun metaproteomic analysis that compared and assembled results of the two techniques. We found that the microbial community was enriched by lactic acid bacteria when pups were breastfed by wild-type (WT) mothers, while IgA-deficient milk led to an increase in the opportunistic bacterial pathogen (OBP) population. Cross-feeding results suggested that IgA supplementation promoted the exclusion of some OBPs and the temporary appearance of beneficial species in pups fed by WT foster mothers. Our results show that both techniques yield a picture of microbiota from different angles and with varying depths. In particular, our metaproteomic pipeline was found to be a reliable tool in the description of microbiota. Data from these studies are available via ProteomeXchange, with identifier PXD004033.

### Keywords
Metaproteomics, Mouse gut microbiota (mgm)

### Affiliations
Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital
Bambino Gesu' Children's Hospital, Rome, Italy

### Submitter
Stefano Levi Mortera

### Lab Head
Dr Lorenza Putignani
Bambino Gesu' Children's Hospital, Rome, Italy


