### Accession
PXD003618

### Title
Analyzing downstream targets of Beauveria bassiana gelsolin duing conidal development

### Description
Comparative proteomics,  between the wild type and delta BbGel1 strains grown on the surface of culture media, is performed to explore the downstream targets of Beauveria bassiana gelsolin during conidiation .

### Sample Protocol
The wild type and delta BbGel1 strains were cultured on the surface of media. The 3-day-old mycelia were ground into powder in liquid nitrogen and mixed with cold 10% trichloroacetic acid (TFA) /acetone supplemented with 50 mM DTT, 0.1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail Set IV (Calbiochem, Merck, Germany) and polyvinylpyrrolidone for 2 h at -20 °C. After centrifugation at 20,000g at 4 °C for 10 min, the precipitates were remained and rinsed with cold acetone supplemented with 50 mM DTT and 1mM PMSF for three times. The precipitates were suspended in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 2mM EDTA, 10 mM DTT and 0.1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail Set II) and sonicated three times on ice. The protein solution was collected by centrifugation at 20,000g at 4 °C for 10 min.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS data were processed by Mascot search engine (version 2.3.0) and searched against Beauveria bassiana proteome database (Uniprot Proteome ID: UP000002762) concatenated with a reverse decoy database. All the parameters for data search were set as follows: Trypsin/P was a protease with a specific cleaving site, and the missing cleavages must be less than three. Mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethyl on Cys, TMT6 amino terminus and TMT6 lysine were searched as fixed modification, but oxidation on methionine was set as variable modifications. The overall false discovery rate (FDR) for peptides must be less than the threshold of 1 %. Relative changes of the protein abundance were quantified as described (Li et al., Systematic comparison of label-free, metabolic labeling, and isobaric chemical labeling for quantitative proteomics on LTQ Orbitrap Velos. J. Proteome Res. 2012, 11 (3), 1582?1590.). Briefly, only unique proteins were adopted for protein quantification. Mascot software was used to calculate the intensity ratios of TMT reporter ion (IRRI) which indicated the protein relative abundance in each sample. Reliability of three biological repeats was analyzed by calculating the multivariate Pearson correlation coefficients. For each protein, the average IRRI values calculated from three replicates as its relative abundance in the indicated treatment. Then, Student’s test was applied to evaluate the significance of protein abundance change between the wild type and delta BbGEL1 strains, using the threshold of P<0.05. The differentially expressed proteins (DEP) were considered when the fold change is above the high range (1.50) or below the low range (0.67).

### Publication Abstract
The gelsolin superfamily includes seven protein members: gelsolin, villin, adseverin, CapG, advillin, supervillin and flightless I. The gelsolin proteins are actin-binding proteins that contain three or six gelsolin-like domains, and they play important roles in remodelling actin dynamics and cellular processes in eukaryotes. The entomopathogenic fungus Beauveria bassiana expresses a unique CapG protein (BbGEL1) that contains three gelsolin-like domains. BbGEL1p is associated with actin during mycelial growth and plays an important role in fungal morphological transitions under both aerobic and submerged conditions. The &#x394;BbGEL1 mutant displays abnormal spore-producing structures that reduce the conidial and blastospore yields by approximately 70% and 90% respectively. The virulence of the &#x394;BbGEL1 mutant is notably reduced as indicated by topical and intrahemocoel injection assays. Two comparative proteomics analyses indicated that BbGEL1 has significantly different roles in the development of conidia and blastospores, and the results revealed the potential targets of BbGEL1 in the corresponding developmental processes. Additionally, as an overlapping downstream protein of BbGEL1, the hydrophobin-like protein gene BbHyd3 is required for conidiation but has a negative role in blastospore formation. Our findings indicate that in addition to its function as an actin-interacting protein, BbGEL1 contributes to fungal morphological transitions via broad genetic pathways.

### Keywords
Beauveria bassiana, Gelsolin, Conidia

### Affiliations
Institute of Microbiology, College of Life Sciences, Zhejiang University, China
Zhejiang University

### Submitter
Sheng-hua Ying

### Lab Head
Dr Sheng-hua Ying
Institute of Microbiology, College of Life Sciences, Zhejiang University, China


