### Accession
PXD031916

### Title
Early response evaluation by single cell signaling profiling in acute myeloid leukemia

### Description
Background: A fundamental hallmark of cancer cells is their ability to sustain proliferative signaling and cell survival, reflected in a cellular chemotherapy response that is poorly understood. We questioned whether chemotherapy modulated phospho-signaling at 4 and 24 h in vivo could provide information about long-term survival in acute myeloid leukemia (AML), and if the signaling response to therapy was more informative than analysis at time of diagnosis.  Methods: Peripheral blood was collected from 32 younger AML patients (age 16-74 years), before, 4- and 24 hours after start of induction chemotherapy. Samples were analyzed by 36-dimensional mass cytometry for assessment of alterations in immunophenotypes and intracellular signaling using unsupervised and supervised machine learning approaches. Results were validated by RNA sequencing and mass spectrometry proteomics (Super SILAC). Targeted sequencing was used to characterize patient samples for recurrent AML mutations. Drug sensitivity and resistance testing ex vivo was compared to activation of relevant signal transduction pathways and mutational profile.   Findings: 5-year patient survival was accurately predicted in the leukemic cell population at 24 hours after therapy onset by phospho-proteins p-ERK1/2 (T202/Y204) and p-p38 (T180/Y182). RNA sequencing showed induction of MAPK target gene expression and the AP-1 transcription complex in patients with high p-ERK1/2. Super-SILAC proteomics confirmed an increase in the abundance of p38 prime target MAPKAPK2(MK2) 24 hours after start of induction therapy. Ex vivo drug sensitivity testing demonstrated high sensitivity to MEK inhibitors in the patient cells with high p-ERK1/2 measured at diagnosis or 24 hours after start of chemotherapy.  Interpretation: Early single cell signaling response to chemotherapy provided precise prognostic information independent of stratification by genetics. We propose that early functional measurement of chemotherapy-potentiated MAPK pathway signaling could identify non-responders to intensive chemotherapy allowing precise treatment adjustment.

### Sample Protocol
Super-SILAC proteomics sample preparation and data analysis  TCA-precipitated samples for proteomics were washed three times in cold water-saturated ether prior to proteomics sample preparation.21 Samples was then lysed in 4% sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS)/0.1 M Tris-HCl (pH 7.6), heated at 95°C for 7 min under mild shaking and sonicated (3 cycles at 30% amplitude for 30 seconds with 1 min rest between each cycle). Cell debris was removed by centrifugation (13.000rpm/14.000xg for 10 min) and the protein concentration was determined with the Pierce BCA Protein Assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were kept at -80°C until analysis. For labelled proteomics, 20 mg of each patient sample was mixed with 10 mg of a super-SILAC mix composed of five heterogenous AML cell lines labelled with Arg6 and Lys8 isotopes.81 The patient cell lysate was further processed by filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) and small-scale proteome fractionation as described by Hernandez-Valladares et al.82  Abundance and peptide identification were conducted on an Q Exactive HF Orbitrap mass spectrometer coupled to an Ultimate 3000 Rapid Separation LC system (Thermo scientific).83

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS raw files were processed with MaxQuant software version 1.5.2.8.84 The spectra were searched against the concatenated forward and reversed-decoy Swiss-Prot Homo sapiens database (version 2018_02), using the Andromeda search engine.85 The Perseus 1.6.1.1 platform was used for data analysis and statistics. MaxQuant-normalized SILAC ratios were inverted, log2 transformed and normalized again, using width adjustment.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Aml, Single cell, Erk

### Affiliations
Institute of biomedicine, University of BErgen
Centre for Cancer Biomarkers (CCBIO), Department of Clinical Science, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.  2Department of Medicine, Hematology Section, Haukeland University Hospital, Helse Bergen HF, Bergen, Norway

### Submitter
Even Birkeland

### Lab Head
Dr Bjørn Tore Gjertsen
Centre for Cancer Biomarkers (CCBIO), Department of Clinical Science, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.  2Department of Medicine, Hematology Section, Haukeland University Hospital, Helse Bergen HF, Bergen, Norway


