### Accession
PXD041015

### Title
Profiling of the Cellular Proteome and Phosphoproteome of Klebsiella pneumoniae under Zinc Limited and Zinc Replete Conditions

### Description
Klebsiella pneumoniae is a bacterial pathogen that causes nosocomial infection in humans and is acquiring antibiotic resistance at an alarming rate. This study investigates the effect of zinc limitation on the phosphoproteome of K. pneumoniae using quantitative mass spectrometry to provide insight into the cell signaling methods used to respond to nutrient limited conditions like those experienced when colonizing a host.

### Sample Protocol
The proteome and phosphoproteome of K. pneumoniae was profiled under zinc-replete and -limited conditions. K. pneumoniae was grown in quadruplicate in 5 mL Luria-Bertani (LB) at 37°C with shaking (200 rpm) overnight. Cells were collected by centrifuging 0.5 mL culture at 3,500 xg and washing twice with 0.5 mL M9 minimal media (6.78 g/L Na2HPO4, 3 g/L KH2PO4, 0.5 g/L NaCl, 1 g/L NH4Cl, 0.4% (w/v) glucose, 2 mM MgSO4, 0.1 mM CaCl2, made to 1 L using Chelex 100-treated dH2O as previously described). Cells were subcultured at 1:100 ratio in 50 mL M9 media or M9 media supplemented with zinc (ZnSO4) at 10 µM at 37°C with shaking (200 rpm). After 9 h (mid-log to early stationary) cells were pelleted at 1,372 xg and the pellet was washed twice with 5 mL PBS.  Total protein was extracted from cell pellets as previously described. Briefly, cell pellets were resuspended in 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5 with proteinase inhibitor and phosSTOP tablets and sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) was added to a final concentration of 2%. Cells were lysed using probe sonication (30 s on/ 30 s off in an ice bath, 30% power) (Thermo Fisher Scientific), dithiothreitol was added at 10 mM at 95°C for 10 min with shaking at 800 rpm to reduce proteins, followed by alkylation using 55 mM iodoacetamide for 20 min in the dark at room temperature. Proteins were precipitated overnight in acetone added to a final concentration of 80% at -20°C. Samples were centrifuged at 13,500 rpm for 10 min to pellet proteins and washed twice with 0.5 mL 80% acetone and air dried. Pellets were resuspended in 8 M urea/ 40 mM HEPES buffer and a bovine serum albumin (BSA) tryptophan assay was performed to confirm protein concentration. Samples were digested overnight at room temperature with trypsin/LysC protease mix at 1:50  enzyme to protein ratio. A 10% aliquot of sample (approx. 80 µg) was collected to be analyzed as the total proteome; the remaining sample was subjected to phosphopeptide enrichment  using TiO2 columns (Thermo Fisher Scientific; cat no A32993) following manufacturer’s instructions. Total peptides and phospho-enriched peptides were desalted and prepared for mass spectrometry analysis using STop And Go (STAGE) tips, then 3 µg of peptides were loaded onto evotips according to manufacturer’s instructions, and measured on a Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Exploris 240 mass spectrometer. Phosphopeptides were analyzed using 44-min gradient and 88-min gradient was used for total proteome to account for the increased complexity. The column was 15 cm PepSep and precursor range was set at 400-2000 m/z at 60,000 resolution with an intensity threshold of 2.5e4. Charge states 2-8 were included.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant v2.2.0.0 was used to analyze the .RAW files using default parameters (except where noted otherwise) with the Andromeda search engine against K. pneumoniae subsp. pneumoniae K52 serotype (5126 sequences; Dec. 2, 2022) from Uniprot. Variable phosphorylation modification on STYDH amino acids was included with a neutral loss of H3O4P (mass 97.9768950 Da). Phosphopeptide abundance was normalized to the total proteome. Modified and unmodified peptides were included for protein quantification using label-free quantification (LFQ) (ratio count set to 1), minimum peptide = 2 and match between runs was enabled. Perseus v2.0.7.0 was used to analyze output files. Data was filtered to remove potential contaminants, reverse peptides and peptides only identified by site. Valid value filtering was used (peptides present in 3 of 4 replicates in least one condition). Only class I phosphopeptides were retained by filtering for localization probability greater than 75%. Statistical analysis was performed with Student’s t-test, p-value < 0.05; false discovery rate = 0.05; S0=1.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Klebsiella, Pneumonia, Lc-msms, Phosphoproteome

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Guelph, Canada.
University of Guelph

### Submitter
Chelsea Reitzel

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Jennifer Geddes-McAlister
Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Guelph, Canada.


