### Accession
PXD013810

### Title
The ARFGEF IQSEC1 is a targetable scaffold controlling collective cell invasion.

### Description
The signalling pathways underpinning cell growth and migration share overlapping components but what determines whether cells grow or move, when exposed to the same extrinsic signal, is unclear. We identify that in epithelial cancer cells cultured in extracellular matrix (ECM) these molecular functions can be uncoupled when signals are transduced through alternate transcript variants of IQSEC1, an ARF GTPase Exchange Factor. IQSEC1 associates with the receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) Met and acts as an organising centre for phosphoinositide signalling, activating ARF5- and ARF6-dependent PIP5-kinase activity, and scaffolding multiple components of the mTORC2 signalling complex to control Akt activation and cell growth. Expression of IQSEC1 variants containing extended N-terminal regions switch this output from growth to collective invasion by conferring association with the endocytic co-receptor LRP1, thereby enhancing Met internalisation and trafficking. These pro-invasive IQSEC1 variants localise the Met/LRP1/IQSEC1 signalling module to the tips of invasive protrusions to induce PI(3,4,5)P3-dependent collective invasion. Chemical or genetic inhibition of these alternate signalling modules targets growth or invasion, independently. Alternate IQSEC1-ARF GTPase signalling complexes thus control RTK signal output by influencing RTK trafficking and the balance between growth or invasion in epithelial cells. Elevated expression of this IQSEC1-ARF module occurs in prostate cancer patient metastases and predicts poor outcome. IQSEC1 may therefore represent a therapeutic vulnerability in prostate cancer cells.

### Sample Protocol
GFP Trap and Immunoprecipitation Immune complexes were collected when 1mg of cell lysate was immunoprecipitated with 2μg of anti-Met antibody (CST 3127) overnight at 4oC with rotation. Anti-mouse agarose or mouse agarose (both Sigma) were added for 1 hour at 40C prior to 3 washes in Lysis Buffer. Samples were then separated by SDS–PAGE, transferred to a PVDF membrane and immunoblotted. Lysates from cells expressing GFP tagged proteins were immunoprecipitated using a GFP-Trap Kit (Chromotek) as per manufacturers instructions and immunoblotting performed as above. n=3 and quantitation is shown as mean ± s.d.  Mass Spectrometry For Mass Spectrometry analysis agarose beads were resuspended in a 2M Urea and 100mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer and stored at -20oC. On-bead digestion was performed from the supernatants. Triplicate biological replicates were digested with Lys-C (Alpha Laboratories) and trypsin (Promega) on beads as previously described (Hubner, N.C. et al., 2010).    Tryptic peptides were separated by nanoscale C18 reverse-phase liquid chromatography on a 20 cm fused silica emitter (New Objective) packed in house with reverse phase Reprosil Pur Basic 1.9 µm (Dr. Maisch GmbH). Chromatography was carried out using an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled online to an Orbitrap Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) via nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For the full scan a resolution of 60,000 at 250Th was used. The top ten most intense ions in the full MS were isolated for fragmentation with a target of 50,000 ions at a resolution of 15,000 at 250Th. MS data acquisition were performed using the XCalibur software (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The MaxQuant software version 1.5.5.1 was used to process MS Raw files and searched with Andromeda search engine, querying UniProt Homo sapiens (09/07/2016; 92,939 entries) Database was searched requiring specificity for trypsin cleavage and allowing maximum two missed cleavages. Methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were specified as variable modifications, and Cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification. The peptide, protein and site false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1%. The common reverse and contaminant hits (as defined in MaxQuant output) were removed. Only protein groups identified with at least one uniquely assigned peptide were used for the analysis. For label-free quantification, proteins quantified in all 3 replicates in at least one group, were measured according to the label-free quantification algorithm available in MaxQuant. Significantly enriched proteins were selected using a Students t-test with a 5% FDR.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Epithelial cancer cells, Iqsec1, Gfp trap, Prostate cancer, Growth and migration

### Affiliations
Proteomics
CRUK - Beatson Institute for Cancer Research - Switchback Rd, Bearsden, Glasgow G61 1BD - United Kingdom.

### Submitter
Sergio Lilla

### Lab Head
Dr Sara Rossana Zanivan
CRUK - Beatson Institute for Cancer Research - Switchback Rd, Bearsden, Glasgow G61 1BD - United Kingdom.


