### Accession
PXD013287

### Title
Primary human mesenchymal stem cells subjected to 1 Hz cyclic tensile strain, with and without 24 hour recovery

### Description
Cells resident in tissues must be resilient to the physical demands of their surroundings. Our current understanding of cellular mechano-signalling is largely based on static systems, but these models do not reproduce the dynamic nature of living tissue. Here, we examined the time-resolved response of primary human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs) to periods of cyclic tensile strain (CTS). We observed parallels between morphological changes following low-intensity strain (1 hour, 4% CTS at 1 Hz) and responses to increased substrate stiffness. However, as the strain regime was intensified (CTS at ≥ 2 Hz), we characterised a broad, structured and reversible protein-level response, even as transcription was apparently shut down. Regulation of the linker of nucleo- and cytoskeleton (LINC) complex proteins, and specifically of SUN domain-containing protein 2 (SUN2), was found to decouple mechano-transmission within the cell and hence isolate the nucleus from cellular deformation.

### Sample Protocol
Protein was extracted from cells by resuspention of cell pellets in 10% SDS, 50mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), pH 7.55. Cell lysates (in microTUBEs, 4mm thick (Covaris)) were sonicated using a Focused-ultrasonicator (LE220-plus, Covaris) at 8 W for 21 mins (sonicated for 300s, peak power 180, average power 72, duty factor 40%, cycles/burst 200, delay 15s, then repeated once). Samples were clarified using centrifugation at 13,000 x g for 8 mins. Samples were reduced by heating to 95°C for 10 mins in DTT at a final concentration of 20mM. Cysteine’s were alkylated by addition of iodoacetamide to a final concentration of 40mM and incubated at room temp in the dark for 30 mins. Samples were cleared by centrifugation at 13,000 x g for 8 mins. The lysates were then acidified using aqueous phosphoric acid to a final concentration of 1.2% phosphoric acid and mixed with S-Trap binding buffer (90% aqueous methanol, 100 mM TEAB, pH 7.1). The protein lysate solutions were loaded onto the S-TrapÔ Micro Spin Columns by centrifugation at 4,000 x g for 1 min. The bound protein was washed three times using S-Trap binding buffer and then digested on column with trypsin (6 mg/sample) (Pierce, MS grade), reconstituted in digestion buffer (50 mM TEAB), for 1 hour at 37°C. Peptides were eluted in 50 mM TEAB, then 0.2% aqueous formic acid, and finally 50% acetonitrile containing 0.2% formic acid. The fractions were pooled and quantified using a Direct Detect (Merck). Peptides were analysed using a Thermo Scientific Q Exactive Hybrid Quadruple-Orbitrap LC-MS/MS system.

### Data Protocol
MS spectra from multiple samples were aligned using Progenesis QI (Nonlinear Dynamics) and searched using Mascot (Matrix Science UK), against the SWISS-Prot and TREMBL human databases.The peptide database was modified to search for alkylated cysteine residues (monoisotopic mass change, 57.021 Da), oxidized methionine (15.995 Da), hydroxylation of asparagine, aspartic acid, proline or lysine (15.995 Da) and phosphorylation of serine, tyrosine, threonine (79.966 Da). A maximum of 2 missed cleavages was allowed. Peptide detection intensities were exported from Progenesis QI as Excel spreadsheets (Microsoft) for further processing. Proteomics datasets were analysed using code written in-house in Matlab with the bioinformatics toolbox (R2015a, The MathWorks, USA). Raw ion intensities from peptides from proteins with fewer than 3 unique peptides per protein were excluded from quantification. Peptide lists were filtered leaving only those peptides with a Mascot score corresponding to a Benjamini-Hochberg false discovery rate (BH-FDR) of < 0.2. Normalisation was performed as follows: raw peptide ion intensities were log-transformed to ensure a normal distribution and normalised within-sample by equalising sample medians (subtracting sample median). Fold-change differences in the quantity of proteins detected in different samples were calculated by fitting a linear regression model that takes into account donor variability at both the peptide and protein levels.

### Publication Abstract
Studies of cellular mechano-signaling have often utilized static models that do not fully replicate the dynamics of living tissues. Here, we examine the time-dependent response of primary human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs) to cyclic tensile strain (CTS). At low-intensity strain (1&#x2009;h, 4% CTS at 1&#x2009;Hz), cell characteristics mimic responses to increased substrate stiffness. As the strain regime is intensified (frequency increased to 5&#x2009;Hz), we characterize rapid establishment of a broad, structured and reversible protein-level response, even as transcription is apparently downregulated. Protein abundance is quantified coincident with changes to protein conformation and post-translational modification (PTM). Furthermore, we characterize changes to the linker of nucleoskeleton and cytoskeleton (LINC) complex that bridges the nuclear envelope, and specifically to levels and PTMs of Sad1/UNC-84 (SUN) domain-containing protein 2 (SUN2). The result of this regulation is to decouple mechano-transmission between the cytoskeleton and the nucleus, thus conferring protection to chromatin.

### Keywords
Cts, Nuclear decoupling, Msc

### Affiliations
Division of Cell Matrix Biology & Regenerative Medicine (L5) / Division of Cell Matrix Biology & Regenerative Medicine, University of Manchester
University of Manchester

### Submitter
Venkatesh Mallikarjun

### Lab Head
Dr Joe Swift
Division of Cell Matrix Biology & Regenerative Medicine (L5) / Division of Cell Matrix Biology & Regenerative Medicine, University of Manchester


