### Accession
PXD024149

### Title
The Anti-cancer Factor Quinolinone Inhibitors Disrupt Spindles and the Interactions between LSF and Microtubule-associated Proteins

### Description
Identification of mitotic BioLSF-interacting proteins whose association is sensitive to Factor Quinolinone Inhibitor 1 (FQI1): The dataset is comprised of two independent experimental replicates, with each biological replicate consisting of runs of 4 samples. For each set, the four protein samples were generated from cells in mitosis, in which cells lacked, expressed basal levels, or expressed induced levels of a biotinylated, tagged LSF protein (BioLSF). Finally, cells with induced BioLSF levels were treated for one hour in mitosis with either FQI1 or vehicle (DMSO). Proteins purified on streptavidin beads were analyzed by mass spectrometry. More specifically, the four runs in each set derived from: 1) DLD-1 Flp-In™ T-REx™ TIR1 parental cells treated with vehicle (Parent_DMSO) as a negative control, 2) DLD-1 Flp-In™ T-REx™ TIR1 BioLSF cells with only leaky, basal BioLSF expression (BioLSF_DMSO), 3) DLD-1 Flp-In™ T-REx™ TIR1 BioLSF cells with induced BioLSF expression (BioLSF_DOX), and 4) DLD-1 Flp-In™ T-REx™ TIR1 BioLSF cells with induced BioLSF expression that were treated with FQI1 in mitosis (BioLSF_DOX_FQI1).

### Sample Protocol
All cells were synchronized in mitosis with a single thymidine block followed by treatment with S-trityl-L-cysteine. Prior to harvesting, cells were treated for one hour with either FQI1 or vehicle (DMSO). Then cells were treated with 1% formaldehyde for 5 minutes at room temperature to capture transient protein-protein interactions, followed by addition of 125 mM glycine to quench the reaction. Lysates were prepared by resuspension of cells collected both from the media and the dishes in lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 250 mM NaCl, 50 mM NaF, 5 mM EDTA, 1% Triton X-100, 1:200 Protease Inhibitor Cocktail-Abcam ab201111), followed by sonication and centrifugation to remove particulates. BioLSF and associated proteins were isolated by binding to Dynabeads MyOne Streptavidin C1 beads (Invitrogen), washing twice with 2% sodium dodecyl sulfate, once with high salt buffer (50 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 500 mM NaCl, 50 mM NaF, 5 mM EDTA, 0.1% sodium deoxycholate, 1% Triton X-100), once with LiCl buffer (10 mM Tris-Cl pH 8, 250 mM LiCl, 1 mM EDTA, 0.5% Igepal CA-630, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate), and once in phosphate-buffered saline. Proteins were eluted from the beads using denaturation buffer (37.5 mM HEPES, 50 mM Tris-Cl, pH 7.5, 188 mM NaCl, 37.5 mM NaF, 3.8 mM EDTA, 1:267 Protease Inhibitor Cocktail-Abcam ab201111, 0.75% Triton X-100, 2% SDS, 10% glycerol, 0.01% bromophenol blue, 1.25% β-mercaptoethanol) and incubation at 100°C for 5 minutes.  Samples were electrophoresed into an acrylamide gel and digested in gel with trypsin. Resulting peptides were separated by reverse-phase EASY-nLC (Thermo) on a 60 min gradient and analyzed on a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo). Data-dependent fragmentation used collision-induced dissociation.

### Data Protocol
RAW files were searched using MaxQuant version 1.6.2.2 under standard settings; the FASTA file was the entire SwissProt human (TaxID 9606) proteome downloaded from UniprotKB on 2018-04-05. Searches allowed for two missed trypsin cleavage sites, variable modifications for N-terminal acetylation, and methionine oxidation. Ion tolerances of 20 and 4.5 ppm were set for first and second searches, respectively. Candidate peptides and protein identifications were filtered based on a 1% false discovery rate threshold based on searching of the reverse sequence database.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Fqi1, Mitosis, Tfcp2, Lsf, Protein-protein interactions

### Affiliations
Boston University
Department of Biology Boston University Boston, MA, USA

### Submitter
Ulla Hansen

### Lab Head
Dr Ulla Hansen
Department of Biology Boston University Boston, MA, USA


