### Accession
PXD033380

### Title
Antarctonemertes valida venomics

### Description
Investigation into nemertean venoms and their evolution

### Sample Protocol
To identify peptides and proteins present in the toxic defensive and predatory secretions of A. valida, we analyzed a flash frozen and a laser micro-dissected proboscis from a KINFix-fixed paraffin-embedded specimen by shotgun LC-MS/MS. A single proboscis was placed in 100 µL 10 % ACN and gently squeezed using a plastic pestle to facilitate the release of soluble toxins. The tissue was removed, the liquid centrifuged at maximum speed (> 18k rcf), the protein concentration estimated by measuring the absorbance at 280 nm using a NanoDrop 2000 (Thermo Scientific). Supernatant containing 5 µg protein was made to a final concentration of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate 10 % ACN 2 M Urea in 8 µL, reduced and alkylated as above, and digested with 30 ng/µL trypsin at 37 °C overnight. The resulting tryptic peptides were desalted using a C18 ZipTip (Thermo Scientific, USA), dried using vacuum centrifugation, dissolved in 0.5% formic acid (FA), and 2 μg analysed by LC-MS/MS on a Sciex 5600 TripleTOF equipped with a Turbo-V source heated to 550 °C. The dissolved samples were fractionated on a Shimadzu (Kyoto, Japan) Nexera UHPLC with an Agilent Zorbax stable-bond C18 column (Agilent, USA) (2.1 x 100 mm, 1.8 μm particle size, 300 Å pore size), using a flow rate of 180 μL/min and a gradient of 1–40 % solvent B (90 % AcN, 0.1 % FA) in 0.1% FA over 60 minutes.  MS1 spectra were acquired at 300–1800 m/z with an accumulation time of 250 ms, and selecting the 20 most intense ions for MS2. Precursor ions with a charge of +2 to +5 and an intensity of at least 120 counts/s were selected, with a unit mass precursor ion inclusion window of   0.7 Da, and isotopes within 2 Da were excluded. MS2 scans were acquired at 80–1400 m/z, with an accumulation time of 100 ms, and optimized for high resolution.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS spectra were then searched against the translated reference transcriptome with added common contaminants using Protein Pilot v5.0 (AB SCIEX, USA), allowing for biological modifications and amino acid substitutions in order to account for potential between-specimen toxin variance. False positives were identified using decoy-based false discovery rates (FDR) as estimated by Protein Pilot, and only protein identifications with a corresponding local FDR of < 0.5 % were considered significant.

### Publication Abstract
Ribbon worms are active predators that use an eversible proboscis to inject venom into their prey and defend themselves with toxic epidermal secretions. Previous work on nemertean venom has largely focused on just a few species and has not investigated the different predatory and defensive secretions in detail. Consequently, our understanding of the composition and evolution of ribbon worm venoms is still very limited. Here, we present a comparative study of nemertean venom combining RNA-seq differential gene expression analyses of venom-producing tissues, tandem mass spectrometry-based proteomics of toxic secretions, and mass spectrometry imaging of proboscis sections, to shed light onto the composition and evolution of predatory and defensive toxic secretions in Antarctonemertes valida. Our analyses reveal a wide diversity of putative defensive and predatory toxins with tissue-specific gene expression patterns and restricted distributions to the mucus and proboscis proteomes respectively, suggesting that ribbon worms produce distinct toxin cocktails for predation and defense. Our results also highlight the presence of numerous lineage-specific toxins, indicating that venom evolution is highly divergent across nemerteans, producing toxin cocktails that might be finely tuned to subdue different prey. Our data also suggest that the hoplonemertean proboscis is a highly specialized predatory organ that seems to be involved in a variety of biological functions besides predation, including secretion and sensory perception. Overall, our results advance our knowledge into the diversity and evolution of nemertean venoms and highlight the importance of combining different types of data to characterize toxin composition in understudied venomous organisms.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
University of Queensland
University of Oslo

### Submitter
Eivind Undheim

### Lab Head
Dr Eivind A. B. Undheim
University of Oslo


