### Accession
PXD005155

### Title
Mapping protein interactions of sodium channel NaV1.7 using epitope-tagged gene targeted mice

### Description
The voltage-gated sodium channel NaV1.7 plays a critical role in pain pathways. As well as action potential propagation, NaV1.7 regulates neurotransmitter release, integrates depolarizing inputs over long periods and regulates transcription. In order to better understand these functions, we generated an epitope-tagged NaV1.7 mouse that showed normal NaV1.7 channel activity and normal pain behavior. Analysis of NaV1.7 complexes affinity-purified under native conditions by mass spectrometry revealed 267 NaV1.7 associated proteins including known and novel interactors such as sodium channel β3 subunit (Scn3b) and collapsin response mediator protein (Crmp2). Selected NaV1.7 protein interactors, such as Crmp2, membrane-trafficking protein synapototagmin-2 (Syt2), G protein-regulated inducer of neurite outgrowth 1 (Gprin1), L-type amino acid transporter 1 (Lat1) and transmembrane P24 trafficking protein 10 (Tmed10) were validated using co-immunoprecipitation and functional assays. The information provided with this physiologically normal epitope-tagged mouse should provide useful insights into the downstream mechanisms associated with NaV1.7 channel function.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins cleaved from Ni-NTA beads after affinity purification were tryptic digested follow FASP protocol4. In brief, proteins were loaded to 30 KDa filters (Millipore), then filter units were centrifuged at 14,000g for 15 min to remove other detergents. Two hundred µl of urea buffer (10 mM dithiolthreitol 8M urea (Sigma) in 0.1 M Tris/HCl pH 8.5) were added to filter and leave at room temperature for 1 hour to reduce proteins. The filters were centrifuged to remove dithiolthreitol. Two hundred µl of 50 mM iodoacetamide in urea buffer were added to filters and leave 30 min at dark. The filters were centrifuged as before to remove IAA. Then the samples were buffer exchanged twice using 200 ul of urea buffer, and one more time using 200 µl of 50 mM NH4HCO3 in water. Forty µl of 50 ng/µl trypsin in 50 mM NH4HCO3 were added to filter, filters were vortexed briefly and proteins were digested at 37 °C for overnight. After tryptic digestion, the filters were transferred to a new collection tubes, and collect all the peptides by place filter upside down and spin. The samples were acidified with CF3COOH and desalted with C18 cartridge (Waters). The pure peptides were dried by Spedvac (Millipore) and resuspended with 20 µl of 2% ACN, 0.1% FA. Five µl of samples were injected into Orbitrap velos mass spectrometry (Thermo) coupled to a UPLC (Waters) 5.  LC-MS/MS analysis  was carried out by nano-ultra performance liquid chromatography tandem MS (nano-UPLC-MS/MS) using a 75 µm-inner diameter x 25 cm C18 nanoAcquity UPLCTM column (1.7-µm particle size, Waters) with a 180 min gradient of 3 – 40% solvent B (solvent A: 99.9% H2O, 0.1% formic acid; solvent B: 99.9% ACN, 0.1% Formic acid). The Waters nanoAcquity UPLC system (final flow rate, 250 nl/min) was coupled to a LTQ Orbitrao Velos (Thermo Scientific, USA) run in positive ion mode. The MS survey scan was performed in the FT cell recoding a window between 300 and 2000 m/z. the resolution was set to 30,000. Maximum of 20 MS/MS scans were triggered per MS scan. The lock mass option was enabled and Polysiloxane (m/z 371.10124) was used for internal recalibration of the mass spectra. CID was done with a target value of 30,000 in the linear ion trap. The samples were measured with the MS setting charge state rejection enabled and only more than 1 charges procures ions selected for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
All raw MS data were processed to generate MGF files (200 most intense peaks) using the Proteowizard v.2.1.2476 software.  The identification of proteins was performed using MGF files with the central proteomics facilities pipeline. Mus musculus (Mouse) database containing entries from UniProtKB was used in CPF Proteomics pipeline for data analysis. This pipeline combines database search results from three search engines (Mascot, OMSSA and X!tandem k-score). The search was carried out using the following parameters. Trypsin was the enzyme used for the digestion of the proteins and only one missed cleavage was allowed. The accepted tolerance for the precursor was 20 ppm and 0.5 Da for the fragment. The search encompassed 1+, 2+ and 3+ charge state, fixed modification for cysteine carbamidomethyl and variable modification for asparagine and glutamine deamidation, and methionine oxidation. All trypsin fragments were added to an exclusion list. False discovery rate was calculated by peptide/proteinprophet or estimated empirically from decoy hits, identified proteins were filtered to an estimated 1% FDR. The label-free analysis was carried out using the normalized spectral index (SINQ)

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
The voltage-gated sodium channel nav1.7, Pain, Epitope-tagged nav1.7 mouse, Lc-ms/ms, Mice, Nav1.7 complexes affinity-purification

### Affiliations
NDM, University of oxford
Mass Spectrometry Laboratory, Target Discovery Institute, University of Oxford, The Old Road Campus, Oxford, OX3 7FZ, UK

### Submitter
honglei huang

### Lab Head
Dr Benedikt Kessler
Mass Spectrometry Laboratory, Target Discovery Institute, University of Oxford, The Old Road Campus, Oxford, OX3 7FZ, UK


