### Accession
PXD022194

### Title
Immunopeptidomics by use of a microfluidics chip.

### Description
A microfluidics technology was implemented to the immunoaffinity purification process of MHC peptides in Ligandomics/Immunopeptidomics. The thus purified HLA peptides were analysed by LCMS with the nanoElute LC and TimsTOF Pro Mass Spectrometer from Bruker. The aim of the microfluidics implementation was to improve the sensitivity and robustness while also reducing antibody and other material requirements in the immunoaffinity purification protocol.

### Sample Protocol
Each dry immunopeptidome sample was dissolved in 10 μl of LCMS solvent A (0.1% formic acid), which were all injected the analytical column (Aurora C18, 25 cm long, 75 µm ID, 1.6 µm bead size, Ionopticks) of the nanoElute LC system (Bruker) constantly kept at 50℃ by a heating oven (PRSO-V2 oven, Sonation). After washing and loading sample at a constant pressure of 800 bar, the LC system started a 30 min gradient from 0 to 32% solvent B (acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid), followed by increase to 95% B in 5 min, and finally a wash of 10 min at 95% B, all at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Online LC-MS was performed using a Tims TOF Pro mass spectrometer (Bruker) with the CaptiveSpray source, capillary voltage 1500V, dry gas flow of 3L/min, dry gas temperature at 180℃. MS data reduction was enabled. Mass Spectra peak detection maximum intensity was set to 10. Mobilogram peak detection intensity threshold was set to 5000. Mass range was 300-1100 m/z, and mobility range was 0.6-1.30 V.s/cm2. MS/MS was used with 3 PASEF (Parallel Accumulation – Serial Fragmentation) scans (300ms each) per cycle with a target intensity of 20000 and intensity threshold of 1000, considering charge states 0-5. Active exclusion was used with release after 0.4 min, reconsidering precursor if current intensity is >4 fold the previous intensity, and a mass width of 0.015 m/z and a 1/k0 width of 0.015 V.s/cm2. Isolation width was defined as 2.00 m/z for mass 700 m/z and 3.00 m/z for mass 800 m/z. Collision energy was set as 10.62 eV for 1/k0 0.60 V.s/cm2 and 51.46 eV for 1/k0 1.30 V.s/cm2. Precursor ions were selected using 1 MS repetition and a cycle overlap of 1 with the default intensities/repetitions schedule.

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS spectra were searched by  PEAKS Studio X+ (v10.5 build 20191016) using a target-decoy strategy. The database used was the Swissprot Human protein database (including isoforms, 42373 entries, downloaded from uniprot.org on 20191126).  A precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm and a product mass tolerance of 0.02 Da for CID-ITMS2 were used. Enzyme was none, digest mode unspecific, and oxidation of methionine was used as variable modification, with max 3 oxidations per peptide. A false discovery rate (FDR) cut-off of 1% was employed at the peptide level.

### Publication Abstract
Identification of HLA class I ligands from the tumor surface (ligandome or immunopeptidome) is essential for designing T-cell mediated cancer therapeutic approaches. However, the sensitivity of the process for isolating MHC-I restricted tumor-specific peptides has been the major limiting factor for reliable tumor antigen characterization, making clear the need for technical improvement. Here, we describe our work from the fabrication and development of a microfluidic-based chip (PeptiCHIP) and its use to identify and characterize tumor-specific ligands on clinically relevant human samples. Specifically, we assessed the potential of immobilizing a pan-HLA antibody on solid surfaces <i>via</i> well-characterized streptavidin-biotin chemistry, overcoming the limitations of the cross-linking chemistry used to prepare the affinity matrix with the desired antibodies in the immunopeptidomics workflow. Furthermore, to address the restrictions related to the handling and the limited availability of tumor samples, we further developed the concept toward the implementation of a microfluidic through-flow system. Thus, the biotinylated pan-HLA antibody was immobilized on streptavidin-functionalized surfaces, and immune-affinity purification (IP) was carried out on customized microfluidic pillar arrays made of thiol-ene polymer. Compared to the standard methods reported in the field, our methodology reduces the amount of antibody and the time required for peptide isolation. In this work, we carefully examined the specificity and robustness of our customized technology for immunopeptidomics workflows. We tested this platform by immunopurifying HLA-I complexes from 1 &#xd7; 10<sup>6</sup> cells both in a widely studied B-cell line and in patients-derived <i>ex vivo</i> cell cultures, instead of 5 &#xd7; 10<sup>8</sup> cells as required in the current technology. After the final elution in mild acid, HLA-I-presented peptides were identified by tandem mass spectrometry and further investigated by <i>in vitro</i> methods. These results highlight the potential to exploit microfluidics-based strategies in immunopeptidomics platforms and in personalized immunopeptidome analysis from cells isolated from individual tumor biopsies to design tailored cancer therapeutic vaccines. Moreover, the possibility to integrate multiple identical units on a single chip further improves the throughput and multiplexing of these assays with a view to clinical needs.

### Keywords
Human, Immunopeptidome, Mhc-i, Ligandome, Chip, Bladder cancer, Ovarian cancer, Hla-i, Jy cell line, Rcc, Renal cell carcinoma, Patient derived organoid, Microfluidics

### Affiliations
Clinical Proteomics Unit, Dep. of Oncology-Pathology
Dept. Oncology-Pathology, Scilifelab, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden

### Submitter
Rui Branca

### Lab Head
Dr Janne Lehtio
Dept. Oncology-Pathology, Scilifelab, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden


