### Accession
PXD014514

### Title
The Arabidopsis Protein CONSERVED ONLY IN THE GREEN LINEAGE20 is Required for Plastid 50S Ribosome Biogenesis

### Description
Biogenesis of plastid ribosomes is assisted by auxiliary factors which process and modify ribosomal RNAs (rRNA) or are involved in ribosome assembly. In comparison to bacterial and mitochondrial ribosomes, plastid ribosome biogenesis is less well understood and only few auxiliary factors have been described, so far. In this study, we report the functional characterization of CGL20 (CONSERVED ONLY IN THE GREEN LINEAGE20) in Arabidopsis thaliana (AtCGL20), a small proline-rich protein targeted to mitochondria and chloroplasts. Its absence is accompanied with a general reduction in chloroplast protein content that leads to a virescent growth phenotype.

### Sample Protocol
For label-free shotgun proteomic experiments, leaf samples (100 mg, five biological replicates per genotype) were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and ground into fine powder. After resuspending in 1 mL of extraction buffer (100 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 10 mM DTT, 1% SDS, 1X Roche cOmplete™ Protease Inhibitor Cocktail), samples were sonicated with 3 cycles, 10 s ON. After removing cell debris by centrifugation, proteins were precipitated in chloroform-methanol and solubilized in 6 M guanidine hydrochloride. Protein concentration was determined by a bicinchoninic assay (BCA), and proteome aliquots of 100 μg were reduced with 10 mM DTT (30 min, 37°C) and subsequently alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide (30 min, room temperature, dark). After purification by chloroform-methanol precipitation, samples were digested with trypsin (proteome/enzyme ratio 100:1 [w/w], 37° C, overnight) and peptides were desalted with home-made C18 stage tips, vacuum dried to near dryness and stored at – 80° C. For the proteome analysis of the high-molecular mass (HMM) fraction from sucrose cushion centrifugation experiments, stroma of three biological replicates of Col-0 and atcgl20ab were isolated from 20-day-old plants by homogenizing the samples in chloroplast isolation buffer (330 mM D-Sorbit, 20 mM Tricine/NaOH pH 7.6, 10 mM NaHCO3, 0,1% BSA, 0,03% Ascorbate). The homogenate was filtered through two layers of Miracloth (Calbiochem) and centrifuged (2000 g, 5 min, 4° C). The pellet was resuspended in chloroplast lysis buffer containing 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 10 mM MgOAc, 50 mM KCl, 6 mM β-mercaptoethanol. After centrifugation (35,000 g, 30 min, 4° C), 500 µL of the supernatant (~1.5 mg total protein content) were layered onto 3 mL of a high-salt sucrose solution (10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 10 mM MgOAc, 50 mM KCl, 6 mM β-mercaptoethanol, 1 M sucrose). Samples were centrifuged for 12 h (55,000 g) in a TL100.3 fixed angle rotor centrifuge. The last fraction of the sucrose density gradient was adjusted to total protein content, and 30 µg of proteins were brought to 150 µL with chloroplast lysis buffer. Samples were then reduced, alkylated, and digested as described above. Finally, peptides were desalted with home-made C18 stage tips, stored at – 80° C.  The peptide mixtures were separated on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with an Acclaim Pepmap nano-trap column (C18, 100 Å, 100 μm × 2 cm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and an Acclaim Pepmap RSLC analytical column (C18, 100 Å, 75 μm × 50 cm, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Chromatographic separation was carried out using a 150-minute linear gradient of 5-45% acetonitrile at a flow rate of 250 nl min-1, in a column oven (50°C). An Impact II high resolution Q-TOF (Bruker Daltonics). MS1 spectra were acquired at 3 Hz with a mass range from m/z 200–2000, with the Top 18 most intense peaks selected for MS/MS analysis using an intensity dependent spectra acquisition time between 4 and 16 Hz. Dynamic exclusion duration was set to 0.5 min.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were analyzed with MaxQuant software (version 1.6.0.13) and peak lists were searched against the Arabidopsis thaliana Uniprot database (version February 2017) using the Andromeda search engine with default settings. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification, acetylation of protein N-termini and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications. Proteins were quantified across samples using the label-free quantification (LFQ) algorithm with default settings.

### Publication Abstract
Biogenesis of plastid ribosomes is facilitated by auxiliary factors that process and modify ribosomal RNAs (rRNAs) or are involved in ribosome assembly. In comparison with their bacterial and mitochondrial counterparts, the biogenesis of plastid ribosomes is less well understood, and few auxiliary factors have been described so far. In this study, we report the functional characterization of CONSERVED ONLY IN THE GREEN LINEAGE20 (CGL20) in Arabidopsis (<i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i>; AtCGL20), which is a Pro-rich, &#x223c;10-kD protein that is targeted to mitochondria and chloroplasts. In Arabidopsis, CGL20 is encoded by segmentally duplicated genes of high sequence similarity (<i>AtCGL20A</i> and <i>AtCGL20B</i>). Inactivation of these genes in the <i>atcgl20ab</i> mutant led to a visible virescent phenotype and growth arrest at low temperature. The chloroplast proteome, pigment composition, and photosynthetic performance were significantly affected in <i>atcgl20ab</i> mutants. Loss of AtCGL20 impaired plastid translation, perturbing the formation of a hidden break in the 23S rRNA and causing abnormal accumulation of 50S ribosomal subunits in the high-molecular-mass fraction of chloroplast stromal extracts. Moreover, AtCGL20A-eGFP fusion proteins comigrated with 50S ribosomal subunits in Suc density gradients, even after RNase treatment of stromal extracts. Therefore, we propose that AtCGL20 participates in the late stages of the biogenesis of 50S ribosomal subunits in plastids, a role that presumably evolved in the green lineage as a consequence of structural divergence of plastid ribosomes.

### Keywords
Plastid ribosome biogenesis, Arabidopsis, Cgl20

### Affiliations
Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich (LMU)
Department Biology I
Plant Molecular Biology (Botany)
Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich (LMU), Department Biology I, Großhaderner Str. 2, D-82152 Planegg-Martinsried, Germany

### Submitter
Giada Marino

### Lab Head
Dr Thilo Ruehle
Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich (LMU), Department Biology I, Großhaderner Str. 2, D-82152 Planegg-Martinsried, Germany


