### Accession
PXD025108

### Title
Long-term exposure of Daphnia magna to polystyrene microplastics induces changes in their proteome.

### Description
In the past years, the research focus on the effects of microplastics (MP) on aquatic organisms extended from marine systems towards freshwater systems. An important freshwater model organism in the MP field is the cladoceran Daphnia, which plays a central role in lacustrine ecosystems and has been established as a test organism in ecotoxicology. To investigate the effects of MP on Daphnia magna, we performed a chronic exposure experiment with polystyrene MP under strictly standardized conditions. Chronic exposure of D. magna to PS microparticles led to a significant reduction in body length and number of offspring. To shed light on underlying molecular mechanisms induced by microplastic ingestion in D. magna, we assessed the effects of PS-MP at the proteomic level.

### Sample Protocol
Daphnids were homogenized in 21 µl Lysis buffer (2 mol/L Thiourea, 6 mol/L Urea , one complete Ultra tablet mini per 5ml buffer (Roche, Germany)). Samples were then diluted with 4x Laemmli buffer (0.25 M Tris-HCL; pH 6.8, 40 % (v/v) Glycerol, 8 % (v/v) SDS, 0.4 % (v/v) 1 % bromphenol blue) and transferred onto a mini-PROTEAN TGX 4-20% gel (Biorad, Germany). Excised gel pieces were reduced with 10 mM DTT solution for 30 min at 56°C and subsequently alkylated with a 55 mM iodoacetamide solution in the dark. Digestion was carried out 16 h at 37°C. LC separation was performed with an Ultimate 3000 RSLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) nano-chromatography system. Separation took place at a flow rate of 250 nl min-1 using a reversed-phase column (PepMap RSLC C18, 75 µm × 50 cm, 2 µm particles, Thermo Scientific) and a 160 min gradient from 3% B to 25% B (solvent A: 0.1% FA; solvent B: ACN/0.1% FA) followed by a 10 min gradient from 25% to 40% B, and a 5 min gradient from 40% to 85%B. MS/MS analysis was performed with a Q Exactive HFX mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, U.S.A).

### Data Protocol
The protein sequences of D. magna were retrieved from UniProt and run through CD Hit (Huang et al., 2010) to remove redundant sequences. Spectral data were processed with MaxQuant (1.6.10.43) (Tyanova et al., 2016a), using the label-free quantification approach. Further data analysis was performed in Perseus (1.5.3.2) (Tyanova et al., 2016b) as described below. Label-free quantification (LFQ) intensities were log2 transformed, and false-positive identifications were removed as well as contaminants.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics, Daphnia, Microplastics, Polystyrene, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Laboratory for Functional Genome Analysis
Gene Center Munich
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität Munich (LMU)
Feodor-Lynen-Str. 25
81377 Munich
Germany
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München Genzentrum Laboratory for Functional Genome Analysis Feodor-Lynen-Str. 25 D-81377 München

### Submitter
Thomas Fröhlich

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Fröhlich
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München Genzentrum Laboratory for Functional Genome Analysis Feodor-Lynen-Str. 25 D-81377 München


