### Accession
PXD047111

### Title
Interaction proteomics of WT and disease variants of the human Creatine Transporter (SLC6A8)

### Description
Creatine is an essential metabolite for the storage and rapid supply of energy in muscle and nerve cells. In humans, the creatine deficiency syndrome (CDS) is manifested by impaired metabolism, transport, and distribution of creatine throughout the body leading to severe forms of mental disabilities. One of the common cause of CDS is mutations that impact the function of the creatine transporter (SLC6A8). This study characterized 30 missense variants of SLC6A8, which include 15 variants of unknown significance and two which were not reported before. These variants were expressed in HEK293 cells, and their subcellular localization and transport activity was assessed. Further, for the first time the interactome of SLC6A8 WT was characterized by quantitative interaction proteomics. Computational methods were then used to first assess the impact of mutations upon the thermodynamic stability of SLC6A8. This was expanded by modeling the impact of mutations upon the inward and outward facing transporter conformation. Next, identified SLC6A8 protein interactions binary complexes were modelled and used to characterize the impact of variants upon the thermodynamic stability of the complexes. This was followed up, by performing for a subset of the variants the interaction proteomics analysis to study changes upon the identified SLC6A8 WT interactome.

### Sample Protocol
For SLC6A8 WT, SLC6A8 variants (K4R, N331K, P397L, A404P and L412M) and GFP negative the same AP-MS protocol was used. The C-terminally Strep-HA tagged bait proteins were ectopically expressed in HEK293 Jump-In cells. For each replicate, 2 x 15 cm cell culture dishes were grown to 80% confluency before bait proteins were expressed for 24 h by addition of 1.3 µg/µL doxycycline. Cells were scrapped on ice and supernatant was removed. For the affinity capture of complexes, cells were lysed under native conditions (50 mM HEPES pH 8, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA, 0.5% NP-40, 1 mM PMSF supplemented with 1x Protease inhibitors, 1 ng/µL avidin and 1x Phosphatase inhibitor cocktail 2 and 3 (Sigma)). After clarification of the lysate, 150 µL of 50 % slurry of equilibrated StrepTactin Sepharose beads (IBA) were added to each sample. Bait proteins were enriched by a 2 h incubation on a wheel at 4 °C. Flow through was removed, and beads were washed 2x 1 mL pre-cooled lysis buffer, before beads were transferred in 1 mL of the lysis buffer without detergent to filter columns (Bio-Rad). Beads were washed 3x 1 mL of the lysis buffer without detergent, before complexes were eluted by the addition by elution buffer (2% SDS in 50 mM HEPES pH 8, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA). Elution commenced by incubating beads on a shaker for 15 min at 25 °C at 1000 rpm. To the eluted proteins a final concentration of 10 mM DTT was added, and samples were incubated for 1 h at 56 °C. Next IAA (final concentration 10 mM) was added, and samples were incubated in the dark for 30 min. Next, SP3 (magnetic carboxylate modified particles, GE Healthcare) beads were added to each sample, to exchange detergent containing buffer and clean up proteins. A total of 8.8 µL premixed and washed magnetic beads were added, and proteins were aggregated and bound by the addition of 70% acetonitrile (ACN). Beads were washed 2x 200 µL of 70% EtOH followed by 180 µL ACN. Finally, proteins were resuspended in 100 µL of 50 mM Tris-HCl containing 1 µg of a trypsin/Lys-C mix and incubated overnight at 37 °C at 600 rpm.  Samples were acidified (1% TFA in H2O) and loaded on active and pre-equilibrated stage tips (Empore™ SPE Disks matrix active group C18, diam. 47 mm, pk of 20, Sigma). The sample was loaded twice on the membrane, before the membrane was washed with 3x 100 µL with 0.4% formic acid and 2% TFA in water. Peptides were eluted with 2x50 µL of 60% ACN with 0.4% TFA in H2O. Dried peptides were resuspended in 32 µL MS-buffer (0.1% TFA) spiked with 16.66 fmol/µL heavy SH-quant* peptides (Wepf, et al., 2009). A detailed experimental procedure was made publicly accessible and can be found under: https://zenodo.org/records/7457416  MS data were acquired on a Q Exactive™ hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) coupled to an Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano system (ThermoFisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on a 50 cm 75 µm inner diameter analytical column packed in house with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 3 µm resin. Each sample was acquired in technical duplicates, and per duplicate 8 µL were injected. The MS was operated in positive and the ESI was set to 1.8 kV. Peptides were first loaded on a trap column (Pepmap 100 5 μm, 5 × 0.3 mm, ThermoFisher Scientific) with a flow rate of 10 µL/min of 0.1% TFA. Peptides were separated over a 120 min analytical gradient (4 to 24% of 90 % acetonitrile with 0.4 % formic acid within 24 min, 24 to 36% of 90 % acetonitrile with 0.4 % formic acid within 12 min and, 36 to 100% of 90 % acetonitrile with 0.4 % formic acid within 1 min, 100% of 90 % acetonitrile with 0.4 % formic acid for 6 min before equilibrating at 4% of 90 % acetonitrile with 0.4 % formic acid for 18 min) at a constant flow rate of 230 nL/min. The DDA method used a precursor ion window of 375 – 1650 m/z at 70’000 resolution (at 200 Da). The AGC was set to 1E6 with a max. injection time of 55 ms. The TOP10 highest intense peptides were selected for HCD based fragmentation (28% at a normalized collision energy), with an isolation window of 1.6 Da and a dynamic exclusion of 40 s. Fragment spectra were acquired at 17’500 resolution with an AGC of 1E5 and max. injection time of 110 ms. A more detailed procedure for the MS-acquisition part was made publicly accessible and can be found under: https://zenodo.org/records/7462253

### Data Protocol
Acquired MS raw files were searched with MaxQuant (Cox, et al., 2008) (version 2.0.1.0 for the SLC6A8 WT and MaxQuant version 2.4.9.0 for the mutant dataset) against the canonical human protein database (UniProtKB, 20’372 entries, downloaded on the 18.02.2022) (UniProt Consortium, 2023) which was limited to verified protein identifiers. The database was supplemented with common lab contaminants included within MaxQuant and decoy sequences by reversing protein sequences. As variable modification oxidation (M) and acetylation (Protein N-term) were set and up to 5 variable modifications were allowed per peptide sequence. As static modification, carbamidomethyl at the C-terminus was set. For the peptide identification search tryptic specific peptides was set with up to 2 missed cleavages. Protein and peptide FDR was set to 1%. Else the default parameters for the search were used.  To map the protein interactions for SLC6A8 WT, the peptide spectrum matches (PSMs)/ spectral counts for each protein identifier were used. The protein group level output of MaxQuant was pre-processed in R (version 4.3.1), and spectral counts of the bait protein and GFP controls were filtered. All protein groups with more than one unique protein identifier, contaminants and remaining decoys were removed from the dataset. To the assembled data matrix additional controls from CRAPome (Mellacheruvu et al., 2013) and a high-pH fractionated control were supplemented (Uliana et al., 2023). Scoring of bait-prey combinations was performed with SAINT (H. Choi et al., 2012). Significant interactions were assigned by employing an FDR of 0.01, a SAINT-score above 0.95 and a minimum fold change against GFP controls of 4. Interactions were further classified into 43 high-confidence interactions or 2.7 % of all possible bait-prey combinations, which were recovered with at least 10 average spectral counts, and 83 lower-confidence interactions.  For the analysis of the SLC6A8 mutant dataset the protein intensities filtered from the protein group MaxQuant table were used. Protein identifiers flagged as common contaminants and decoys (reversed sequences) were filtered from the dataset. Next, to control for different MS-performance, the precursor MS1 signal of the heavy SH-quant* (Wepf, et al. 2009) spike-in was extracted in Skyline (Pino LK, et al., 2017) (version 23.1.0.268). The extracted signal was used to scale the signal across the samples (scaling to max). Next, the LFQ intensities were log2 transformed, intensities were quantile normalized, and missing values were imputed sampling from a normal distribution around the lowest 5 % quantile of all intensity values. Next the mean log2 intensity per protein across replicates was calculated per variant. Following these pre-processing steps, the log2FC against the SLC6A8 WT for each variant was derived. Post processing of the data was performed with the statistical software R (version 4.3.1).

### Publication Abstract
Creatine is an essential metabolite for the storage and rapid supply of energy in muscle and nerve cells. In humans, impaired metabolism, transport, and distribution of creatine throughout tissues can cause varying forms of mental disability, also known as creatine deficiency syndrome (CDS). So far, 80 mutations in the creatine transporter (SLC6A8) have been associated to CDS. To better understand the effect of human genetic variants on the physiology of SLC6A8 and their possible impact on CDS, we studied 30 missense variants including 15 variants of unknown significance, two of which are reported here for the first time. We expressed these variants in HEK293 cells and explored their subcellular localization and transport activity. We also applied computational methods to predict variant effect and estimate site-specific changes in thermodynamic stability. To explore variants that might have a differential effect on the transporter's conformers along the transport cycle, we constructed homology models of the inward facing, and outward facing conformations. In addition, we used mass-spectrometry to study proteins that interact with wild type SLC6A8 and five selected variants in HEK293 cells. In silico models of the protein complexes revealed how two variants impact the interaction interface of SLC6A8 with other proteins and how pathogenic variants lead to an enrichment of ER protein partners. Overall, our integrated analysis disambiguates the pathogenicity of 15 variants of unknown significance revealing diverse mechanisms of pathogenicity, including two previously unreported variants obtained from patients suffering from the creatine deficiency syndrome.

### Keywords
Slc6a8, Pathogenic variants, Ap-ms, Protein interactions

### Affiliations
CeMM Research Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Sciences
CeMM Research Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Sciences, 1090 Vienna, Austria

### Submitter
Fabian Frommelt

### Lab Head
Dr Giulio Superti-Furga
CeMM Research Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Sciences, 1090 Vienna, Austria


