### Accession
PXD003436

### Title
FOXE3 Contributes to Peters Anomaly through Transcriptional Regulation of an Autophagy Associated Protein termed DNAJB1

### Description
FOXE3 is a lens specific transcription factor that has been associated with anterior segment ocular dysgenesis. To determine the transcriptional target(s) of FOXE3 that are indispensable for the anterior segment development, we examined the transcriptome and the proteome of cells expressing truncated FOXE3 responsible for Peters anomaly identified through linkage-coupled next-generation whole exome sequencing. We found that DNAJB1, an autophagy-associated protein, was the only candidate exhibiting differential expression in both screens. We confirmed the candidacy of DNAJB1 through chromatin immunoprecipitation and luciferase assays while knockdown of DNAJB1 in human lens epithelial cells resulted in mitotic arrest. Subsequently, we targeted dnajb1a in zebrafish through injection of a splice-blocking morpholino. The dnajb1a morphants exhibited underdeveloped cataractous lenses with persistent apoptotic nuclei. In conclusion, here we report DNAJB1 as a transcriptional target of FOXE3 in a novel pathway that is crucial for the development of the anterior segment of the eye.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293FT cells were transfected with an expression vector (pT-RexTM-DEST30) harboring either the wild type or the mutant FOXE3 (C240*) for whole proteome profiling. Three biological replicates for both the wild type and mutant FOXE3 were transfected in addition to two non-transfected replicates to estimate the background.  Transfected cells (and non-transfected controls) were washed three times with ice-cold PBS 24-hours post-transfection and lysed in 0.5% SDS containing 1 mM EDTA and 1 mM Phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF). The cells were lysed using a sonicator (Branson 250 Sonifier) that delivered three 20% pulses each for five seconds on ice. Subsequently, the lysed samples were centrifuged at 15,000 g for 10 min and protein concentration in the supernatant was measured using BCA method. The protein amounts and reproducibility of protein extraction were confirmed by SDS-PAGE gels. Equal quantities of each protein extract were proteolyzed using "Filter Assisted Sample Preparation" (FASP) method (Nat Methods. 2009, 6:359-362). Briefly, protein samples were treated with 5 mM TCEP at 37°C for 45 minutes followed by 10 mM MMTS for iTRAQ or 10 mM iodoacetamide for TMT at 25°C for 15 minutes. Subsequently, 100 g of each sample was passed three times through a 30kDa filter (UFC503096, Millipore) using 9 M urea and twice with 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEABC). Finally, proteins were proteolyzed with Trypsin (V511A, Promega Inc) for 12 hours at 37°C and dried.  The proteolyzed peptides from each sample were re-suspending in 37l of 250 mM TEABC and labeled with a unique 8-Plex iTRAQ reagent (AB Sciex) according to manufacturer instructions. The eight iTRAQ labeled peptide samples were mixed, dried to remove organic solvents and reconstituted in 10 mM t TEABC. Subsequently, the mixture of labeled peptides were fractionated on a RPLC column (XBridge BEH (Ethylene Bridged Hybrid C18 Column, 5 µm, 2.1 x 100 mm via XBridge BEH C18) Guard Column) using an Agilent 1200 HPLC system (Agilent) with a gradient of 90% acetonitrile in TEABC buffer for 80 minutes (first 40 minutes linear up to 35% acetonitrile, followed by 20 minutes linear up to 50% acetonitrile and ended with 90% acetonitrile concentration in 10 mM TEABC buffer). Peptide fractions from 96 wells were concatenated into 24 fractions, dried and re-suspended in 8 µl 3% acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis. In parallel, 100 g of proteolyzed protein sample was labeled in 100 µl of 100 mM TEABC with a unique tandem mass tag reagent (TMT, Thermofisher Scientific). The labeling reaction was stopped by adding 8 l of hydroxylamine (5%)., TMT-labeled peptides were mixed, fractionated and concatenated into 24 fractions, dried and re-suspended for LC-MS/MS analysis as described for iTRAQ labeled peptides.  Nanoflow electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry: Data dependent MS/MS analysis of the iTRAQ labeled peptides were performed on an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Scientific) interfaced with Eksigent 2D nanoflow liquid chromatography system (AB Sciex) and Agilent 1200 micro-well plate auto-sampler. Labeled peptides were trapped and separated on a 2 cm trap column, and 75 µm x 20 cm nanopore column both packed with Magic C18 AQ, 5 µm, 100Å (Michrom Bioresources, Auburn Ca) using a 2% to 90% acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% formic acid over 90 minutes. Eluting peptides were electrosprayed through a 15 µm emitter (PF3360-75-15-N-5, New Objective) at 2.0 kV spray voltage.  The LTQ Orbitrap Velos was set for full MS survey scan range of 350-1,800 m/z, data dependent HCD MS/MS analysis of top 8 precursors with a minimum signal of 2,000 counts, isolation width of 1.3 Da, 30s dynamic exclusion limit and normalized collision energy of 40 units. Precursor and the fragment ions were analyzed at resolutions of 30,000 and 7,500, respectively. In the case for TMT-labeled peptides, resolution for fragmentation ions was set at 30,000 for baseline resolution of TMT reporter ions. Protein ratios were calculated using peptides with <30% co-isolation of co-eluting peptide ions with mass differences <1.3 Da.

### Data Protocol
Precursor and fragment ion m/z values were extracted from mass spectrometry raw files using the default spectrum selector, Xtract and MS2-processor nodes in Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software (Thermo Scientific). The extracted data were searched against the RefSeq 2012 human entries using Mascot (v2.2.6, Matrix Sciences) node in Proteome Discoverer with mass tolerances on precursor and fragment masses set to 15 ppm and 0.03 Da, respectively. Peptide validator node was used for peptide validation, and 1% false discovery rate cutoff was used to filter the data. Protein ratios were normalized across all samples after excluding peptides with >30% isolation interference from the protein quantification to avoid potential interference of reporter ions from co-isolation of co-eluting peptides with similar masses (<1.3 Da difference).  The search parameters for the iTRAQ data analysis included oxidation of methionine, deamidation on asparagine/glutamine residues, 8-plex iTRAQ on tyrosine residues and methylthio group on cysteine residue as different variable modifications and iTRAQ-8plex on the N-terminus and lysine residues as fixed modifications. The search parameters for the TMT data analysis included oxidation of methionine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine residues as different variable modifications and TMT-8plex on the N-terminus and lysine residues, and carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modifications. Proteome data derived from 8-plex iTRAQ and TMT labeling analysis using the Proteome Discoverer software were imported into Partek Genomics Suite (Partek Inc. Saint Louis MO, USA) for protein annotation and further analysis. Each dataset contained three biological replicates representing cells transfected with wild-type and mutant FOXE3 contracts. Both datasets were treated independently to evaluate statistically protein levels.  One or more mass spectra are assigned to each NCBI gi identifier, which represents a single protein, and for each protein, the median of these multiple spectra values was calculated to produce a single value representing that protein. Only those spectra with a Proteome Discoverer Isolation Interference value of less than 30% were accepted for further evaluation. The values of each dataset’s six samples were quantile normalized to minimize the noise and experimental variation and subsequently converted to the log2 notation for statistical analysis.   An ANOVA using Partek’s Student’s t-test compared each protein’s relative concentration between mutant and wild-type cells and determined the statistical significance of that difference regarding its p-value. The iTRAQ platform data yielded 3,781 protein comparisons and while the TMT produced 3,315. These values were then exported for further evaluation and graphical representation to Spotfire Decision Site with Functional Genomics (TIBCO Spotfire Boston MA, USA), and all proteins’ log2 fold changes between wild-type and mutant FOXE3 expressing samples were analyzed to determine the standard deviation from their mean of 0, which represents no change. To ensure unambiguous nomenclature and ease of evaluation, all protein gi identifiers were mapped to their cognate genes in the NCBI Entrez database.

### Publication Abstract
FOXE3 is a lens-specific transcription factor that has been associated with anterior segment ocular dysgenesis. To determine the transcriptional target(s) of FOXE3 that are indispensable for the anterior segment development, we examined the transcriptome and the proteome of cells expressing truncated FOXE3 responsible for Peters anomaly identified through linkage-coupled next-generation whole-exome sequencing. We found that DNAJB1, an autophagy-associated protein, was the only candidate exhibiting differential expression in both screens. We confirmed the candidacy of DNAJB1 through chromatin immunoprecipitation and luciferase assays while knockdown of DNAJB1 in human lens epithelial cells resulted in a mitotic arrest. Subsequently, we targeted dnajb1a in zebrafish through injection of a splice-blocking morpholino. The dnajb1a morphants exhibited underdeveloped cataractous lenses with persistent apoptotic nuclei. In conclusion, here we report DNAJB1 is a transcriptional target of FOXE3 in a novel pathway that is crucial for the development of the anterior segment of the eye.

### Keywords
Foxe3, Dnajb1, Peters anomaly

### Affiliations
The Wilmer Eye Institute, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21287 USA
Johns Hopkins Wilmer Eye Institute

### Submitter
OM Genetics

### Lab Head
Dr S. Amer Riazuddin
The Wilmer Eye Institute, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21287 USA


