### Accession
PXD020324

### Title
Environment and its impact on barley grain composition

### Description
Grain samples of Hordeum vulgare L. sensu lato variety Sebastian were obtained from plants grown in the fields at four breeding stations in 2017, representing seed development under different combinations of temperature and rainfall.

Sample description:
CAS [1-4] - location n. 5 - (Caslav) - high yield, above average temperature and high rainfall.
UHO [1-4] - location n. 11 (Uhersky Ostroh) - low yield, high temperature and low rainfall.
CHA [1-4] - location n. 2 (Chrastava) - average yield, low temperature, very high rainfall.
KRU [1-4] - location n. 8 (Krasne Udoli) - average yield, low temperature, average rainfall.





### Sample Protocol
The homogenized seeds were washed with 1.5 ml acetone (4°C, 30 min).Mixture was clarified by centrifugation, washed with 10% (w/v) TCA in acetone, 10% (w/v) TCA in distilled water then 80% (v/v) acetone, resuspended in 0.8 ml SDS buffer [2% (w/v) SDS, 30% (w/v) sucrose, 5% (v/v)-mercaptoethanol, 5 mM EDTA, 100 mM Tris, pH 8.0], and protein was extracted by 0.4 ml buffer-saturated phenol. Phenolic phase was collected and protein was precipitated overnight in 1.6 ml ice-cold 100 mM CH3COONH4 in methanol (-20 °C). Protein pellets were washed with 1.0 ml 80% (v/v) acetone in distilled water, dried and dissolved in 100 mM NH4HCO3, 8 M urea. The protein concentration was estimated by the Bradford assay (Sigma-Aldrich) and 100 µg aliquotes were digested with trypsin (Promega) at 29 °C overnight. Samples were diluted with 1% TFA (1:1) and loaded onto C18 SPE (Agilent). Samples were washed with 1% TFA, eluted with 100% ACN and freeze-dried in SpeedVac. Digested and desalted peptides were analyzed by nanoflow C18 chromatography using a 15 cm Zorbax nanocolumn (0.1 mm inner diameter; Agilent) and a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano-UPLC system (Thermo). The LC was directly coupled to the Nanospray Flex (1700 V, ion transfer tube temperature 150 °C) and the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo). Peptides were eluted with up to a 120-min, 4% to 40% acetonitrile gradient. Spectra were acquired using the default settings for peptide identification in data the dependent mode with cycle time 3s. MS: resolution 60000, scan range 375-1500 m/z, maximum allowed injection time 50 ms, automatic gain control 4e5, 1 microscan; MS2: resolution 15000, automatic gain control 5e3, maximum injection time 30 ms, 1 microscan; quadrupole isolation, HCD activation (30% Collision energy), dynamic exclusion for 60 s (5 ppm tolerance).

### Data Protocol
The measured spectra were recalibrated and searched against the reference barley (Mascher et al. 2017) protein database by Proteome Discoverer 2.4, employing Sequest HT and MS Amanda 2.0 with the following parameters: Enzyme - trypsin, max two missed cleavage sites; Modifications - up to three dynamic modifications including Met oxidation, Asn/Gln deamidation, N-terminal acetylation; MS1 tolerance - 5 ppm (MS Amanda, Sequest), MS2 tolerance - 0.02 Da (MS Amanda), 0.05 Da (Sequest). Only proteins with at least two unique peptides were considered for the quantitative analysis. The quantitative differences were determined by Minora, employing precursor ion quantification followed by normalization and background-based t-test.

### Publication Abstract
To counter projected reductions in yields of the major crop barley, it is essential to elucidate the mechanisms of its resilience. To assist such efforts, we collected grains from plants grown in fields at 12 testing stations, with suitable temperature and precipitation gradients for identifying environmentally induced changes in their protein and metabolite contents. We then subjected the grains to detailed molecular analysis. The results showed that numerous metabolites and at least a quarter of the grain protein content was modulated by the environment, and provided insights into barley seed production under abiotic stress, including alterations in ribosomal proteins, heatshock protein 70 family proteins, inhibitors, storage proteins, and lipid droplet formation. Potential positive and negative markers of yield were also identified, including the phenolic compound catechin and storage protein levels, respectively. Complementary analyses of barley seedlings and Arabidopsis seeds, respectively, confirmed the role of the identified proteins in abiotic stress responses and highlighted evolutionarily conserved mechanisms. In addition, accelerated ageing experiments revealed that variations in the environment had stronger effects on seed longevity than the genotype. Finally, seeds with the highest longevity differed from the others in gibberellin contents, H2O2 metabolism, and levels of &gt;250 proteins, providing novel targets for improving resilience.

### Keywords
Barley, Temperature, Seed, Longevity, Drought

### Affiliations
Mendel University in Brno

### Submitter
Martin Cerny

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Cerny
Mendel University in Brno


