### Accession
PXD018274

### Title
Characterization of proteome dynamics in individual vascular layers at the early stage of acute sepsis

### Description
In this study we developed a stable isotope labeled of mammals (SILAM) model coupled to the application of differential systemic decellularization in vivo (DISDIVO) to evaluate the molecular dynamics of whole organism vascular beds at the initial phase of acute sepsis. Three different vascular layers where characterized at the initial stage of sepsis, glycocalyx (GC), endothelial cells (ECs) and smooth muscle cells (SMCs).

### Sample Protocol
Proteomes were lysed and proteins were reduced and alkylated before trypsin digestion. Digested samples were characterized by shotgun proteomics.

### Data Protocol
Database search was performed using PEAKS Studio v7. Carbamidomethylation was considered as fixed modification in Cys. Lys(6) was considered as variable modification. Trypsin was used as proteolytic enzyme.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lipopolysaccharide, Endothelial dysfunction, Disdivo., Vascular beds, Endothelial cells

### Affiliations
IMDEA-Food Research Institute, +Pec Proteomics, Campus of International Excellence UAM+CSIC, Old Cantoblanco Hospital, 8 Crta. Canto Blanco, Madrid, 28049, Spain.  
IMDEA-Food Research Institute, +Pec Proteomics, Campus of International Excellence UAM+CSIC, Old Cantoblanco Hospital, 8 Crta. Canto Blanco, Madrid, 28049, Spain.

### Submitter
Aida Serra

### Lab Head
Dr Aida Serra
IMDEA-Food Research Institute, +Pec Proteomics, Campus of International Excellence UAM+CSIC, Old Cantoblanco Hospital, 8 Crta. Canto Blanco, Madrid, 28049, Spain.


