### Accession
PXD016801

### Title
Microbial metaproteome data from decayed beech dead wood

### Description
Wood-decomposition in terrestrial ecosystems is a very important process with huge ecologic consequences. This decomposition process is a combination of biological respiration, leaching and fragmentation, mainly triggered by organismic activities. In order to gain a deeper insight into these microbial communities and their role in deadwood decay, we used metaproteomics. Metaproteomics is an important tool and offers the ability to characterize the protein complement of environmental microbiota at a given point in time. In this dataset, we provide data of an exemplary beech wood log and applied different extraction methods to provide the proteome profile of beech dead wood and their corresponding fungal-bacterial community.

### Sample Protocol
Study area and sampling In the Biodiversity Exploratory Hainich-Dün, Germany (for details, see [5]), we collected in spring 2017 from the beech log, dead wood chips for extraction testing as outlined previously [6]. Protein extraction and sample preparation The wood chips was roughly sliced with a cutting blade and then milled with added liquid nitrogen in the analytical mill (IKA A11 basic, IKA grinder) into fine powder. 1 g of powder were divided on eight 15 ml tube and used for testing for the different protein extraction protocols; cell lysis with sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) buffer (2% (w/v) SDS, 50 mM DTT, 50 mM EDTA, 1 mM PMSF, 100 mM Tris) or sulfobetain-14, and additional phenol extraction or trichloroacetic acid (TCA)-acetone (10% (w/v) TCA, 2-Mercaptoethanol, acetone) precipitation. Two samples were analyzed for each combination.  Cell lysis: 5 ml lysis buffer (SDS or Sulfobetain-14 buffer), 10 glass beads (2,85 – 3,45 mm diameter, CarlRoth) and 3 scoops of zirconium beads (0,1 mm diameter, Biospec.) were added to samples, shaken for 30 minutes at room temperature and disrupted by FastPrep (3x1 min, 5.5 ms-1, MP Biomedicals). After centrifugation (7,200 x g, 10 min, 4 °C), the supernatant were transferred to 50 ml tubes and the proteins were extracted. For all extraction methods, the dried pellets were proteolytic digested in gel. Therefore, the pellets were dissolved in SDS sample buffer (2% w/v SDS, 2 mM beta-mercaptoethanol, 4% v/v glycerol, 40 mM Tris–HCl pH 6.8, 0.01% (w/v) bromophenol blue), heated to 90 °C for 4 minutes and separated by SDS polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. Proteins were stained in gel with Coomassie G-250 (Merck). Then, the gel was cut into small pieces (band per samples), detained, dehydrated and proteolytically cleaved overnight at 37 °C with trypsin (Promega). The digested peptides were extracted and desalted using ZipTip-μC18 tips (Merck Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany). Following, the peptide lysates were re-suspended in 0.1% formic acid and injected to liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS).

### Data Protocol
Data resulting from LC-MS/MS experiments were analyzed using the Proteome Discoverer (v.1.4, Thermo Fischer Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) using SEQUEST HT. As database the protein-coding sequences of archaea, bacteria, fungi and viridiplantae were downloaded from UniProt_non_redundant_07_2017 (http://www.uniprot.org/), combined in one protein-coding sequence database (*.fasta). Search settings were set to trypsin (Full), max. missed cleavage: 2, precursor mass tolerance: 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance: 0.02 Da. For visualization, the principal component analysis (PCA) was analysis with R (RStudio v1.2.5019) and applied as classical means of dimensionality reduction and visualization of multivariate data. PCA was assessed of log-transformed and normalized protein abundance profiles along the time scale. Additional, Unipept (https://unipept.ugent.be/) and R (RStudio v1.2.5019) was used for taxonomic analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Wood-decomposition in terrestrial ecosystems is a very important process with huge ecologic consequences. This decomposition process is a combination of biological respiration, leaching and fragmentation, mainly triggered by organismic activities. In order to gain a deeper insight into these microbial communities and their role in deadwood decay, we used metaproteomics. Metaproteomics is an important tool and offers the ability to characterize the protein complement of environmental microbiota at a given point in time. In this dataset, we provide data of an exemplary beech wood log and applied different extraction methods to provide the proteome profile of beech dead wood and their corresponding fungal-bacterial community.

### Keywords
Metaproteomics, Dead wood decay, Fungal-bacterial community, Protein extraction

### Affiliations
Dr. Nico Jehmlich Group leader Microbiome Biology Molecular Systems Biology   Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research GmbH - UFZ Permoserstraße 15, 04318 Leipzig, Germany Phone +49 341 235 4767 nico.jehmlich@ufz.de, www.ufz.de
Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ

### Submitter
Nico Jehmlich

### Lab Head
Dr Nico Jehmlich
Dr. Nico Jehmlich Group leader Microbiome Biology Molecular Systems Biology   Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research GmbH - UFZ Permoserstraße 15, 04318 Leipzig, Germany Phone +49 341 235 4767 nico.jehmlich@ufz.de, www.ufz.de


