### Accession
PXD027104

### Title
Syntrophic coculture of Syntrophobacter fumaroxidans MPOBT and Geobacter sulfurreducens PCA

### Description
Propionate accumulation is an important bottleneck for anaerobic degradation of organic matter. We hypothesized that propionate conversion by a novel coculture of Syntrophobacter fumaroxidans and Geobacter sulfurreducens can be an alternative strategy for propionate oxidation coupled to Fe(III) reduction. In this study, we successfully cocultured S. fumaroxidans and G. sulfurreducens on propionate and Fe(III). Proteomic analyses of this coculture provided insights into the underlying mechanisms of propionate metabolism pathway and interspecies electron transfer mechanism. Our study can be further useful in understanding syntrophic propionate degradation in bioelectrochemical and anaerobic digestion systems.

### Sample Protocol
A syntrophic coculture of Syntrophobacter fumaroxidans MPOBT (SF) and Geobacter sulfurreducens PCAT (GS) growing in basal medium supplemented with propionate (10 mM) and Fe(III) citrate (80 mM) as electron acceptor.The cocultures were used for whole cell proteomic analyses. Cells from triplicate cultures were harvested at the end of the exponential growth phase by centrifugation at 16000 g for 20 min at 4°C. Cell pellets were washed twice with 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5) and stored at −80 °C until further use. For protein extraction, cell pellets were resuspended in 0.5 mL of 100 mM Tris/HCl, pH 7.5, 4% w/v sodium dodecylsulfate (SDS), SIGMAFAST™, Protease Inhibitor Cocktail Tablet (Sigma-Aldrich, Missouri), and 0.1 M dithiothreitol (DTT). Cells were lysed by sonication and 40 ug protein was loaded on a protein gel and run shortly. Cysteines were reduced (15 mM DTT) and alkylated (20 mM Iodoacetamide) and proteins were in-gel digested with trypsin. The resulting peptides were measured by nLC – LTQ-OrbitrapXL MSMS.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (1.6.3.4) with Andromeda search engine was used for identification and relative quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
We established a syntrophic coculture of <i>Syntrophobacter fumaroxidans</i> MPOB<sup>T</sup> (SF) and <i>Geobacter sulfurreducens</i> PCA<sup>T</sup> (GS) growing on propionate and Fe(III). Neither of the bacteria was capable of growth on propionate and Fe(III) in pure culture. Propionate degradation by SF provides acetate, hydrogen, and/or formate that can be used as electron donors by GS with Fe(III) citrate as electron acceptor. Proteomic analyses of the SF-GS coculture revealed propionate conversion <i>via</i> the methylmalonyl-CoA (MMC) pathway by SF. The possibility of interspecies electron transfer (IET) <i>via</i> direct (DIET) and/or hydrogen/formate transfer (HFIT) was investigated by comparing the differential abundance of associated proteins in SF-GS coculture against (i) SF coculture with <i>Methanospirillum hungatei</i> (SF-MH), which relies on HFIT, (ii) GS pure culture growing on acetate, formate, hydrogen as propionate products, and Fe(III). We noted some evidence for DIET in the SF-GS coculture, i.e., GS in the coculture showed significantly lower abundance of uptake hydrogenase (43-fold) and formate dehydrogenase (45-fold) and significantly higher abundance of proteins related to acetate metabolism (i.e., GltA; 62-fold) compared to GS pure culture. Moreover, SF in the SF-GS coculture showed significantly lower abundance of IET-related formate dehydrogenases, Fdh3 (51-fold) and Fdh5 (29-fold), and the rate of propionate conversion in SF-GS was 8-fold lower than in the SF-MH coculture. In contrast, compared to GS pure culture, we found lower abundance of pilus-associated cytochrome OmcS (2-fold) and piliA (5-fold) in the SF-GS coculture that is suggested to be necessary for DIET. Furthermore, neither visible aggregates formed in the SF-GS coculture, nor the pili-E of SF (suggested as e-pili) were detected. These findings suggest that the IET mechanism is complex in the SF-GS coculture and can be mediated by several mechanisms rather than one discrete pathway. Our study can be further useful in understanding syntrophic propionate degradation in bioelectrochemical and anaerobic digestion systems.

### Keywords
Coculture, Proteomics, Interspecies electron transfer, Propionate, Geobacter sulfurreducens, Syntrophobacter fumaroxidans

### Affiliations
Biochemistry
Wageningen University

### Submitter
Sjef Boeren

### Lab Head
Dr Sjef Boeren
Wageningen University


