### Accession
PXD001153

### Title
Quantitative Phosphoproteomics Reveals Crosstalk Between Phosphorylation and O-GlcNAc in the DNA Damage Response Pathway

### Description
The modification of intracellular proteins by monosaccharides of O-linked linked β-N-acetylglucosamine (O-GlcNAc) is thought to mediate proteins by regulating protein phosphorylation, either by modifying and modulating protein kinases or by competing with phosphorylation for hydroxyl residues. To provide molecular insight into the pathways regulated by O-GlcNAc that promote survival in basal conditions or during cellular stress, we have utilized SILAC-based quantitative proteomics to carry out comparisons of site-specific phosphorylation in OGT wild-type (WT) and Null cells. Quantitation of the phosphoproteome demonstrated that out of 5,529 serine/threonine/tyrosine phosphorylated sites, 231 phosphosites were upregulated and 133 downregulated in the absence of O-GlcNAc.  The data identified widespread changes in the phosphoproteome upon removal of O-GlcNAc, suggesting that O-GlcNAc regulates processes such as the cell cycle, genomic stability, inflammatory responses and lysosomal biogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
OGT Null (4-OHT treated) or OGT WT (ethanol treated) MEFs were lysed in lysis buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 9 M urea, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM ß-glycerophosphate, 2 µM Thiamet-G), sonicated and cleared by centrifugation at 16,000 × g at 15 ºC. Equal amounts of protein (30 mg each) from the OGT WT and Null MEFs were mixed, reduced with dithiothreitol and alkylated with iodoacetamide. For tryptic digestions, protein extracts were diluted in 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0 to a final concentration of 2 M urea and incubated with TPCK-treated trypsin at 25 ºC overnight. Protein digests were acidified by 1% v/v trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and subjected to centrifugation at 2,000 × g at 25 ºC for 5 min. The supernatant of the protein digests was cleaned by a Sep-Pak C18 column. Eluted peptides were lyophilized. After lyophilization, 60 mg of peptides were split into two portions – 48 mg and 12 mg. 48 mg of peptide mixture were subjected to anti-phosphotyrosine antibody-based immunoaffinity purification of phosphopeptides. The rest 12 mg of lyophilized peptides mixture was fractionated by SCX chromatography. A total of 96 fractions were collected. For the whole proteomic analysis, 10% of the peptides from each fraction were pooled into 12 fractions and dried using a vacuum concentrator. For the phosphoproteomic analysis, the remaining peptides (90%) in each fraction were pooled into 16 fractions, dried using a vacuum concentrator and subjected to TiO2-based phosphopeptide enrichment.

### Data Protocol
The tandem mass spectra were searched using Andromeda algorithm against a mouse UniProt database (released on February 19, 2014) through the MaxQuant platform (version 1.4.1.2). The search parameters included: 2 SILAC states with Arg10 (13C6, 15N4-Arginine) and Lys8 (13C6, 15N2-Lysine); maximally-labeled amino acids of 3; a maximum of two missed cleavages; carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification; oxidation of methionine; and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine. The monoisotopic peptide tolerance was set to 10 ppm and the first search and main search for MS/MS were set to 20 ppm and 4.5 ppm, respectively. The maximum modifications per peptide was set to 6 and the maximum charge was set at 7. The reward type of the target-decoy analysis was chosen. The peptide-spectrum match (PSM) false discovery rate (FDR), protein FDR and the site decoy fraction were set to 0.01. The minimum peptide length was set to 7. The minimal scores for unmodified and modified peptides were 0 and 40, respectively. The minimal delta score for unmodified and modified peptides were 0 and 17, respectively. The minimum of unique and razor peptides for identification was set to 1. The ratio of heavy/light for each PSM was calculated using MaxQuant. The quantitation of identified proteins was carried out using at least 1 razor/unique non-phosphopeptide. The quantitation of each identified phosphosites were carried out using the least modified peptide and normalized. The probability of phosphorylation for each Ser/Thr/Tyr site on each peptide was calculated using Andromeda (MaxQuant).

### Publication Abstract
The modification of intracellular proteins by monosaccharides of O-linked &#x3b2;-N-acetylglucosamine (O-GlcNAc) is an essential and dynamic PTM of metazoans. The addition and removal of O-GlcNAc is catalyzed by the O-GlcNAc transferase (OGT) and O-GlcNAcase, respectively. One mechanism by which O-GlcNAc is thought to mediate proteins is by regulating phosphorylation. To provide insight into the pathways regulated by O-GlcNAc, we have utilized SILAC-based quantitative proteomics to carry out comparisons of site-specific phosphorylation in OGT wild-type and Null cells. Quantitation of the phosphoproteome demonstrated that of 5529 phosphoserine, phosphothreonine, and phosphotyrosine sites, 232 phosphosites were upregulated and 133 downregulated in the absence of O-GlcNAc. Collectively, these data suggest that deletion of OGT has a profound effect on the phosphorylation of cell cycle and DNA damage response proteins. Key events were confirmed by biochemical analyses and demonstrate an increase in the activating autophosphorylation event on ATM (Ser1987) and on ATM's downstream targets p53, H2AX, and Chk2. Together, these data support widespread changes in the phosphoproteome upon removal of O-GlcNAc, suggesting that O-GlcNAc regulates processes such as the cell cycle, genomic stability, and lysosomal biogenesis. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD001153 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD001153).

### Keywords
Mouse embryonic fibroblast, Atm, Ogt knockout

### Affiliations
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905
McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland 21205 USA

### Submitter
Akhilesh Pandey

### Lab Head
Dr Akhilesh Pandey
McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland 21205 USA


