### Accession
PXD009675

### Title
Secretome dynamics of Streptomyces lividans TK24

### Description
Proteomic analysis on the secreted proteome of S.lividans TK24 growing in minimal medium (MM), minimal medium supplemented with casamino acids (MMCAS), nutrient broth medium (NB) or phage medium (Ph). Samples were taken in mid-log exponential, late-log exponential and stationary phase.

### Sample Protocol
For the sample preparation, culture medium was collected, cells were pelleted via centrifugation and solution was filtered (in 20um filters). Proteins present in medium solution were pelleted using TCA/Acetone precipitation protocol. Mass spectrometry samples were prepered either following an in-solution digestion protocol (for MM and MMCAS) or an in-gel digestion protocol (for NB and Ph). Peptides were analyzed in a Orbitrap Q-Exactive mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Thermo raw files were analyzed with MaxQuant v1.5.30 (WT in MM or MMCAS in mid-, late-, or stationary phase) or MaxQuant v1.6.0.16 (WT in MMCAS, NB or Phase medium). The analysis output as well as the database used is included in the uploaded files.

### Publication Abstract
Protein secretion is a central biological process in all organisms. Most studies dissecting bacterial secretion mechanisms have focused on Gram-negative cell envelopes such as that of <i>Escherichia coli</i> However, proteomics analyses in Gram negatives is hampered by their outer membrane. Here we studied protein secretion in the Gram-positive bacterium <i>Streptomyces lividans</i> TK24, in which most of the secretome is released in the growth medium. We monitored changes of the secretome as a function of growth phase and medium. We determined distinct protein classes of "house-keeping" secreted proteins that do not change their appearance or abundance in the various media and growth phases. These comprise mainly enzymes involved in cell wall maintenance and basic transport. In addition, we detected significant abundance and content changes to a sub-set of the proteome, as a function of growth in the different media. These did not depend on the media being minimal or rich. Transcriptional regulation but not changes in export machinery components can explain some of these changes. However, additional downstream mechanisms must be important for selective secretome funneling. These observations lay the foundations of using <i>S. lividans</i> as a model organism to study how metabolism is linked to optimal secretion and help develop rational optimization of heterologous protein production.

### Keywords
Streptomyces lividans tk24

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Molecular Bacteriology, Dpt. of Microbiology and Immunology, Rega Institute, KU Leuven, Herestraat 49, 3000, Leuven, Belgium.
-

### Submitter
Konstantinos Tsolis

### Lab Head
Dr Tassos Economou
Laboratory of Molecular Bacteriology, Dpt. of Microbiology and Immunology, Rega Institute, KU Leuven, Herestraat 49, 3000, Leuven, Belgium.


