### Accession
PXD006625

### Title
Considerations for peptide and protein error rate control in large-scale targeted DIA analyses: plasma analysis

### Description
Liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry has become the main method for high-throughput identification and quantification of peptides and the inferred proteins. Discovery proteomics commonly employs data-dependent acquisition in combination with spectrum-centric analysis. The accumulation of data generated from thousands of samples by this method has approached saturation coverage of different proteomes. Recently, as a result of technological advances, methods based on data acquisition strategies compatible with peptide-centric scoring have also reached similar proteome coverage in individual runs, and scalability. This is exemplified by SWATH-MS, which combines data-independent acquisition (DIA) with targeted data extraction of groups of transitions uniquely detecting a peptide. As the data matrices generated by these experiments continue to grow with respect to both the number of peptides identified per sample and the number of samples analyzed per study, challenges for error rate control have emerged. Here, we discuss the adaptation of statistical concepts developed for discovery proteomics based on spectrum-centric scoring to large-scale DIA experiments analyzed with peptide-centric scoring strategies, and provide some guidance on their application. We propose that, in order to increase the quality and reproducibility of published proteomic results, well-established confidence criteria should be reported at each level as we progress from spectral evidence to identified or detected peptides and inferred proteins. These confidence criteria should equally be applied to proteomic analyses based on spectrum- and peptide-centric scoring strategies.

### Sample Protocol
Liu Y, Buil A, Collins BC, et al. Quantitative variability of 342 plasma proteins in a human twin population. Molecular Systems Biology. 2015;11(2):786. doi:10.15252/msb.20145728. (PXD001064)

### Data Protocol
The combined human assay library (CAL) for the 32 fixed windows setting(PXD000954) was used to analyze the previously published plasma data set (PXD001064). The SWATH-MS data analysis was performed using OpenSWATH (OpenMS v2.0) essentially as described (Röst et al. PMID:24727770) except that the improved single executable OpenSwathWorkflow was used instead of the multi-step workflow to perform peak-picking and feature detection and the following parameters were changed: m/z extraction window = 0.05 Da, RT extraction window = 600 seconds. The following set of scores was used: xx_lda_prelim_score, intensity_score, isotope_correlation_score, isotope_overlap_score library_corr, library_rmsd, log_sn_score, massdev_score, massdev_score_weighted, norm_rt_score, xcorr_coelution, xcorr_coelution_weighted, xcorr_shape, xcorr_shape_weighted.   The OpenSWATH results were filtered to only contain proteotypic peptides. To generate the results for the plasma subset analysis, the OpenSWATH results were filtered to only contain peptides mapping to proteins that were confidently detected (confidence threshold for inclusion in original library(PXD000954)) in at least one of the eight DDA plasma runs part of the CAL. This approach is equivalent to using a subset library for data extraction by OpenSWATH.  PyProphet was executed as described previously (PXD004884 ), however the scoring model (LDA weights) of the plasma subset analysis was applied to the whole CAL analysis to ensure that the differences of the comparison originated only from the different library sizes. The analysis was conducted independently for both the parametric and the non-parametric methods.

### Publication Abstract
Liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) is the main method for high-throughput identification and quantification of peptides and inferred proteins. Within this field, data-independent acquisition (DIA) combined with peptide-centric scoring, as exemplified by the technique SWATH-MS, has emerged as a scalable method to achieve deep and consistent proteome coverage across large-scale data sets. We demonstrate that statistical concepts developed for discovery proteomics based on spectrum-centric scoring can be adapted to large-scale DIA experiments that have been analyzed with peptide-centric scoring strategies, and we provide guidance on their application. We show that optimal tradeoffs between sensitivity and specificity require careful considerations of the relationship between proteins in the samples and proteins represented in the spectral library. We propose the application of a global analyte constraint to prevent the accumulation of false positives across large-scale data sets. Furthermore, to increase the quality and reproducibility of published proteomic results, well-established confidence criteria should be reported for the detected peptide queries, peptides and inferred proteins.

### Keywords
Plasma, Swath-ms, Dia, Error rate control

### Affiliations
Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich, CH-8093 Zurich, Switzerland. Faculty of Science, University of Zurich, CH-8057 Zurich, Switzerland
ETH Zurich

### Submitter
Isabell Bludau

### Lab Head
Dr Ruedi Aebersold
Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich, CH-8093 Zurich, Switzerland. Faculty of Science, University of Zurich, CH-8057 Zurich, Switzerland


