### Accession
PXD034259

### Title
Proteomic analysis of bacterial extracellular vesicles enriched by ultracentrifugation and an ε-Poly- L-lysine-based method

### Description
Both Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacteria can release vesicle-like structures referred as bacterial extracellular vesicles (BEVs), which contain various bioactive compounds. BEVs play important roles in the microbial community interactions and host-microbe interactions. Markedly, BEVs can be delivered to host cell, thus modulating the development and function of the innate immune system. To clarify the compositions and biological functions of BEVs, these vesicles need to be collected with high purity and bioactivity. Here we propose an isolation strategy based on a broad-spectrum antimicrobial epsilon-poly-L–lysine (ε-PL) to precipitate BEVs at a relatively low centrifugal speed (10,000 × g). Compared to the standard ultracentrifugation strategy, our method can enrich BEVs from large volumes of media inexpensively and rapidly. The precipitated BEVs can be recovered by adjusting pH and ionic strength of the media, followed by ultrafiltration step to remove ε-PL and achieve buffer exchange. Protein compositions of the BEVs enriched by ultracentrifugation and ε-PL-based method are measured using LC-MS/MS. The resultant data indicate that protein compositions of the ε-PL-precipitated BEVs are comparable to those purified by ultracentrifugation.

### Sample Protocol
Bacteria were grown overnight in LB broth. The supernatant fraction was collected by centrifugation and the supernatant was filtered through PVDF 0.45-µm filter to remove any remaining cells. Bacterial extracellular vesicles were isolated by either ultracentrifugation (160,000 × g, 2h, 4 °C) or the ε-PL-based method. The isolated BEVs (10 μg) were separated by SDS-PAGE (10%). Then the gel bands were excised and subjected to in gel digestion. The peptides were extracted redissolved in 0.1% TFA solution and analyzed by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS spectra from each LC-MS/MS run were searched against the sequence from UniProt using an in-house Proteome Discoverer (Version PD1.4, Thermo-Fisher Scientific, USA). The search criteria were as follows: trypsin was set as enzyme; two missed cleavage sites were allowed; carbamidomethyl (C) was set as fixed modification; oxidation (M) was set as variable modification; precursor ion mass tolerance was set at 20 ppm for all MS acquired in an orbitrap mass analyzer; and the fragment ion mass tolerance was set at 0.02 Da for all MS2 spectra acquired. The peptide false discovery rate (FDR) was calculated using Percolator provided by PD. When the q value was smaller than 1%, the peptide spectrum match (PSM) was considered to be correct. FDR was determined based on PSMs when searched against the reverse, decoy database. Peptides only assigned to a given protein group were considered as unique. The false discovery rate (FDR) was also set to 0.01 for protein identification.

### Publication Abstract
Both Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacteria can release vesicle-like structures referred to as bacterial extracellular vesicles (BEVs), which contain various bioactive compounds. BEVs play important roles in the microbial community interactions and host-microbe interactions. Markedly, BEVs can be delivered to host cells, thus modulating the development and function of the innate immune system. To clarify the compositions and biological functions of BEVs, we need to collect these vesicles with high purity and bioactivity. Here we propose an isolation strategy based on a broad-spectrum antimicrobial epsilon-poly-L-lysine (&#x3f5;-PL) to precipitate BEVs at a relatively low centrifugal speed (10,000 &#xd7; g). Compared to the standard ultracentrifugation strategy, our method can enrich BEVs from large volumes of media inexpensively and rapidly. The precipitated BEVs can be recovered by adjusting the pH and ionic strength of the media, followed by an ultrafiltration step to remove &#x3f5;-PL and achieve buffer exchange. The morphology, size, and protein composition of the &#x3f5;-PL-precipitated BEVs are comparable to those purified by ultracentrifugation. Moreover, &#x3f5;-PL-precipitated BEVs retained the biological activity as observed by confocal microscopy studies. And THP-1 cells stimulated with these BEVs undergo marked reprogramming of their transcriptome. KEGG analysis of the differentially expressed genes showed that the signal pathways of cellular inflammatory response were significantly activated. Taken together, we provide a new method to rapidly enrich BEVs with high purity and bioactivity, which has the potential to be applied to BEVs-related immune response studies.

### Keywords
Escherichia coli, Bacterial culture media, Staphylococcus aureus

### Affiliations
Tsinghua University
School of Medicine, Tsinghua University, China

### Submitter
Shujin Wei

### Lab Head
Dr Wanli Xing
School of Medicine, Tsinghua University, China


