### Accession
PXD013907

### Title
The dynamic configuration and phosphorylation of the C-terminal HEAT domain of huntingtin modulates its function

### Description
Chemical cross-linking coupled to mass spectrometry was used to study different forms of human huntingtin (HTT). The variants included wild-type protein with poly-Q tail lengths of 23 and 78 and Ser2116 > Ala mutation of Q23- and Q78-HTT. Cross-linking was performed using the homobifunctional, lysine-reactive disuccinimidyl suberate (DSS).

### Sample Protocol
Chemical cross-linking was performed following previously described procedures (Leitner et al., Nat. Protoc., 2014; Vijayvargia et al., eLife, 2016). Samples were digested using endoproteinase Lys-C followed by trypsin and digests were fractionated by size-exclusion chromatography. SEC fractions were analyzed by data-dependent LC-MS/MS on a Thermo Orbitrap Elite instrument. Additional details are provided in the accompanying publication.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched using xQuest (Walzthoeni et al., Nat. Methods, 2012), version 2.1.4, against the sequence of the target protein.  Additional search settings were as follows: Enzyme = trypsin, maximum number of missed cleavages = 2, MS mass tolerance -5 to +5 ppm, MS/MS mass tolerance = 0.2 Da for “common”-type fragment ions and 0.3 Da for “xlink”-type fragment ions. The original scoring scheme of xQuest (Rinner et al., Nat. Methods, 2008) was used.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Chemical cross-linking; dss; structural proteomics; huntingtin

### Affiliations
ETH Zurich, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology
Department of Biological Sciences, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), Daejeon, Korea

### Submitter
Alexander Leitner

### Lab Head
Dr Ji-Joon Song
Department of Biological Sciences, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), Daejeon, Korea


