### Accession
PXD033836

### Title
The DREAM complex functions as conserved master regulator of somatic DNA repair capacities

### Description
Mutations in the DREAM complex induce germline-like gene expression patterns including the increase of multiple mechanisms of DNA repair in the soma of Caenorhabditis elegans. This confers mutants of the DREAM complex resistance to a wide range of DNA damage types during development and aging.

### Sample Protocol
5 plates with 20.000 L1 synchronized C. elegans per condition were fed for 3 hours to avoid starvation effects. Afterwards, WT (N2) worms and lin-52(n771) worms were irradiated or mock treated UVB light (0 mJ/cm2 and 60 mJ/cm2). 6 hours after treatment, worms were washed with 1x M9 buffer 5 times and the pellet was resuspended in urea buffer 8M and quick frozen. Samples received an in-solution-digest with Lys-C and Trypsin and were further processed with a SDB RP StageTip purification. LC-MS Method All samples were analyzed on a Q Exactive (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer that was coupled to an EASY nLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific). Protein digests were loaded with solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) onto an in-house packed analytical column (50 cm — 75 µm I.D. filled with 2.7 µm Poroshell EC120 C18, Agilent). Peptides were chromatographically separated at a constant flow rate of 250 nL/min and the following gradient: 3-5% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80 % acetonitrile) within 1.0 min, 5-30% solvent B within 91.0 min and 30-95% solvent B within 17.0 min, followed by a 10 min column wash with 95% solvent B. The mass spectrometer was operated in data independent acquisition mode (DIA). MS1 scans were acquired from 400 m/z to 1220 m/z at 140k. Maximum injection time was set to 120 msec and the AGC target to 5e6. 10 variable windows covering the precursor range from 450 - 1200 m/z were acquired at 30k resolution with an AGC target of 3e6 and the maximum injection time set to auto.  All scans were stored in profile mode.

### Data Protocol
Data processing A C. Elegans (TrEMBL, UP000001940) fasta file was converted to a Prosit upload csv file using the convert tool in encyclopedia 0.9.0 (Searle 2018) with default settings, except for the mass range which was set from 400 m/z to 1200 m/z. The csv file was uploaded to the Prosit webserver (Gessulat 2019) to generate a predicted spectrum library (16179 genes, 22421 proteins and 938131 precursors) for C. Elegans. DIA-NN 1.7.16 (Demichev) was used for all DIA searches. In a first round the predicted Prosit library was searched to build an experiment specific spectral library from all sample runs. Subsequent quantitative analysis were performed in a second round using the experiment specific library and the corresponding samples.  Data analysis The DIA-NN main reports were transformed to matrix format and gene level MaxLFQ values were imported into Perseus (Tyanova, 2016) for further statistical analysis. Briefly the dataset was filtered for global protein group q-value < 0.01 and at least five out of five valid values at least one biological condition. Missing values were imputed using the MinDet method (q = 0.01) from the ImputeLCMD R-plugin.  Student´s T-test was used to test for significant (FDR<0.05, S0=0.05) changes in protein abundance across the biological conditions.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dna/damage/repair/dream complex/drm complex/somatic/lin-52/caenorhabditis elegans

### Affiliations
Institute for Genome Stability in Ageing and Disease, Medical Faculty, University of Cologne, Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 26, 50931 Cologne, Germany Cologne Excellence Cluster for Cellular Stress Responses in Ageing-Associated Diseases (CECAD), Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne (CMMC), University of Cologne, Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 26, 50931 Cologne, Germany
CECAD Research Center

### Submitter
Prerana Wagle

### Lab Head
Dr Björn Schumacher
Institute for Genome Stability in Ageing and Disease, Medical Faculty, University of Cologne, Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 26, 50931 Cologne, Germany Cologne Excellence Cluster for Cellular Stress Responses in Ageing-Associated Diseases (CECAD), Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne (CMMC), University of Cologne, Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 26, 50931 Cologne, Germany


