### Accession
PXD026002

### Title
Human kidney proteomics, glomerular and tubular cellular and matrix fractions

### Description
kidney samples: 15, 29, 37, 61, 67 and 69 years of age. The glomerular and tubulointerstitial samples were processed to enrich for extracellular matrix components and the fractions analysed by mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Following SDS–PAGE, gel lanes were sliced and subjected to in-gel digestion with trypsin44 with modifications34. Peptide samples were analysed by liquid chromatography (LC)-tandem MS using a nanoACQUITY UltraPerformance LC system (Waters) coupled online to an LTQ Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) or using an UltiMate 3000 Rapid Separation LC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled online to an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were concentrated and desalted on a Symmetry C18 preparative column (20 mm × 180 μm, 5-μm particle size; Waters) and separated on a bridged ethyl hybrid C18 analytical column (250 mm × 75 μm, 1.7-μm particle size; Waters) using a 45-min linear gradient from 1% to 25% or 8%–33% (v/v) acetonitrile in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid at a flow rate of 200 nl min−1. Peptides were selected for fragmentation automatically by data-dependent analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw spectra data were acquired and analyzed using Proteome Discoverer software v.2.3.0.523 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). MS data was searched against SwissProt and TrEMBL databases (v. 2018_01; OS=Homo sapiens using SEQUEST HT and Mascot search tools.  Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine, proline and lysine, and N-terminal acetylation as dynamic modifications. Only tryptic peptides were considered, with up to one trypsin missed cleavage permitted. Mass tolerances for precursor and fragment ions were 5 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. Peptide-spectrum match, peptide and protein false discovery rates were set to 1%, and protein validation was performed using Target/Decoy strategy. Protein abundances were determined by label-free quantification based on precursor ion intensity.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Enrichment, Extracellular matrix, Mass spectrometry, Kidney

### Affiliations
Professor Rachel Lennon Wellcome Senior Research Fellow I Lead for Integrated Clinical Academic Training I Honorary Consultant Paediatric Nephrologist   I  Wellcome Centre for Cell-Matrix Research   I  Division of Cell Matrix Biology and Regenerative Medicine   I  School of Biological Sciences  I  Faculty of Biology Medicine and Health I  The University of Manchester  I  Room C.3257, Michael Smith Building I  Oxford Road  I Manchester M13 9PT
University of Manchester

### Submitter
Louise Hopkinson

### Lab Head
Dr Rachel Lennon
Professor Rachel Lennon Wellcome Senior Research Fellow I Lead for Integrated Clinical Academic Training I Honorary Consultant Paediatric Nephrologist   I  Wellcome Centre for Cell-Matrix Research   I  Division of Cell Matrix Biology and Regenerative Medicine   I  School of Biological Sciences  I  Faculty of Biology Medicine and Health I  The University of Manchester  I  Room C.3257, Michael Smith Building I  Oxford Road  I Manchester M13 9PT


