### Accession
PXD006109

### Title
BoxCar acquisition method enables single shot proteomics at a depth of 10,000 proteins in 100 minutes

### Description
Great advances have been made in sensitivity and acquisition speed on the Orbitrap mass analyzer, enabling increasingly deep proteome coverage. However, these advances have been mainly limited to the MS2 level whereas ion beam sampling for the full MS scan remains extremely inefficient. Here we report a data novel acquisition method, termed BoxCar, in which filling multiple narrow mass-to-charge segments increases the mean ion injection time more than ten-fold compared to a standard full scan. In 1 hour analyses, the method provided MS1 evidence for more than 90% of the proteome of a human cancer cell line that had previously been identified in 24 fractions, and quantified more than 6,200 proteins in ten of ten replicates. In mouse brain tissue, we achieved broad proteome coveragedetected more than 10,000 proteins in only 100 min and sensitivity extended into the low attomol range.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa cells were lysed, reduced and alkylated in SDC buffer with chloroacetamide (PreOmics GmbH, Germany) as previously described30. Briefly, the samples were boiled at 95°C for 10 min, followed by 15 min sonication at maximum power (Bioruptor, Diagenode, Belgium) to disrupt cells and shear nucleic acids. Protein digestion was performed overnight at 37°C by adding equal amounts of the proteolytic enzymes LysC and trypsin in a 1:100 (w/w) ratio to the sample. The reaction was stopped with five volumes of isopropanol/1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). All animal experiments were performed according to the institutional regulations of the Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, and approved by the government agencies of Upper Bavaria. The cerebellum was dissected from an individual male mouse (strain: C57BL/6) at postnatal day 5 and snap frozen in liquid nitrogen.  The frozen cerebellum was ground using a mortar and pistil and suspended in 100 µL SDC reduction and alkylation buffer. Further sample processing and enzymatic digestion was performed as described above. Blood sampling complied with all relevant ethical regulations, and was approved by the ethics committee of the Max Planck Society (24th February 2015, Heidelberg, Germany). Donors provided written informed consent. The human plasma samples from a single healthy donor was prepared as previously reported21. In brief, SDC reduction and alkylation buffer was added to blood plasma in 25-fold excess (v/v) and the mixture was boiled at 95°C for 10 min. The samples were digested for 1 h at 37°C with LysC/trypsin in a 1:100 ratio (w/w) before quenching the digestion with isopropanol/1% TFA. Following our previously published standard protocol (ref. 30), acidified protein digests were loaded onto a styrenedivinylbenzene-reversed phase sulfonate (SDB-RPS) sorbent. Following two consecutive purification and desalting steps with isopropanol/1% TFA and ddH2O/0.1% TFA, the peptides were eluted with 80% ACN/1% ammonia. The eluate was vacuum-centrifuged to dryness (SpeedVac, Eppendorf, Germany) and re-constituted in 2% acetonitrile/0.1% TFA in ddH2O for single run analyses or reversed-phase chromatography at basic pH.

### Data Protocol
MS Raw files were processed with MaxQuant version 1.5.3.55 or 1.6.0.15 and the extracted MS/MS spectra were matched by the Andromeda search engine against tryptic peptides (max. 2 missed cleavages) derived from human or mouse reference proteomes (Uniprot, version 2016/05) and a list of common contaminants at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% on peptide spectrum match and protein levels. The search included cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification and methionine oxidation, as well as acetylation of the protein N-terminus as variable modifications. The required minimum peptide length was 7 amino acids and the maximum peptide mass was limited to 4600 Da. Maximum mass tolerances were 4.5 ppm for precursor ions after non-linear recalibration and 20 ppm for fragment ions. MaxLFQ42 was performed separately in parameter groups with a minimum ratio count of 1. If applicable, peptide identifications were transferred between samples by ‘match between runs’ within a 0.3 min (45 min gradients) or 0.5 min (100 min gradients) window after retention time alignment. The matching type was set to ‘matching from’ for library runs and ‘matching from and to’ for single runs.

### Publication Abstract
Great advances have been made in sensitivity and acquisition speed on the Orbitrap mass analyzer, enabling increasingly deep proteome coverage. However, these advances have been mainly limited to the MS2 level, whereas ion beam sampling for the MS1 scans remains extremely inefficient. Here we report a data-acquisition method, termed BoxCar, in which filling multiple narrow mass-to-charge segments increases the mean ion injection time more than tenfold as compared to that of a standard full scan. In 1-h analyses, the method provided MS1-level evidence for more than 90% of the proteome of a human cancer cell line that had previously been identified in 24 fractions, and it quantified more than 6,200 proteins in ten of ten replicates. In mouse brain tissue, we detected more than 10,000 proteins in only 100&#x2009;min, and sensitivity extended into the low-attomolar range.

### Keywords
Cerebellum, Human, Plasma, Q exactive, Mouse, Cell lines

### Affiliations
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry
Proteomics

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry


