### Accession
PXD012943

### Title
Mapping the micro-proteome of the nuclear lamina and lamin associated domains

### Description
The nuclear lamina is a proteinaceous network of filaments that provide both structural and gene regulatory functions by tethering proteins and large domains of DNA, so-called lamin associated domains (LADs), to the periphery of the nucleus. LADs are a large fraction of the mammalian genome that are repressed, in part, by their association to the nuclear periphery.  The genesis and maintenance of LADs is poorly understood as are the proteins that participate in these functions. In an effort to identify proteins that reside at the nuclear periphery and potentially interact with LADs, we have taken a two-pronged approach. First, we have undertaken an interactome analysis of the inner nuclear membrane bound LAP2β to further characterize the nuclear lamina proteome. To accomplish this, we have leveraged the BioID system, which previously has been successfully used to characterize the nuclear lamina proteome. Second, we have established a system to identify proteins that bind to LADs by developing a chromatin directed BioID system. We combined the BioID system with the m6A-tracer system which binds to LADs in live cells to identify LAD proximal and nuclear lamina proteins.  In combining these datasets, we have further characterized the protein network at the nuclear lamina as well as identified putative LAD proximal proteins.  Our analysis identifies many heterochromatin related proteins related to H3K9 methylation processes as well as many proteins related to cell cycle regulation identifying important proteins essential for LAD function.

### Sample Protocol
The NH3T3 cells expressing LAP2β-BioID, m6A-tracer-BioID alone, m6A-tracer-BioID + DD-DAM-LMNB1 constructs were cultured overnight with 50 μM exogenous biotin.  Cells expressing m6A-tracer-BioID + DD-DAM-LMNB1 were cultured with X uM shield-1 ligand (AOBIOUS, #AOB1848) for 24 hours prior to addition of exogenous biotin for a total of 48 hours. Cells were trypsinized, washed in large volume PBS washes, than resuspended in a hypotonic lysis buffer (5 mM PIPES, 85 mM KCL, 1% NP-40, protease inhibitors) for 10 minutes to separate cytoplasmic fraction from nuclear fraction. The resulting nuclei were pelleted and protein extraction was carried out by sonication (three rounds, duty cycle 30%, 20 s pulses) in 50 mM TEABC and 8 M urea. The protein concentration of samples was measured by BCA assay. A total of 10 mg of lysate per replicate was then reduced and alkylated were by serial incubation of 10 mM DTT for 30 min and by 20 mM IAA for 30 min in the dark. Lysate was diluted to 2 M urea by adding three cell lysate volumes of 50 mM TEABC. The proteins were digested with trypsin (1:20 of trypsin to protein) at 37 °C overnight. The resulting tryptic peptides were desalted using a Sep-PAK C18 column and subsequently lyophilized. Protein G agarose beads (Millipore Sigma, #16-266) were washed twice with PBS and 100 μg of anti-biotin antibody (Bethyl Laboratories, Inc. A150-109A were coupled to 120 μL of protein G bead slurry, pre-replicate, overnight at 4 °C. Antibody-coupled beads were further washed with PBS once and BioSITe capture buffer (50 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5% Triton X-100) twice. Lyophilized peptides were dissolved in 1 mL of BioSITe capture buffer and pH solution was adjusted to neutral (7.0 to 7.5). Peptides were subsequently incubated with anti-biotin antibody-bound protein G beads for 1 h at 4 °C. The bead slurry was sequentially washed three times with BioSITe capture buffer, three times with 50 mL of Tris, and two times with ultrapure water. Biotinylated peptides were eluted with four rounds of 200 μL elution buffer (80% acetonitrile and 0.2% trifluoroacetic acid in water). The eluents was dried, desalted, and concentrated using homemade C18 reversed-phase column before LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer (v 2.2; Thermo Scientific) suite was used for quantitation and identification of peptides from LC–MS/MS runs. Spectrum selector was used to import spectrum from raw file. During MS/MS preprocessing, the top 10 peaks in each window of 100 m/z were selected for database search. The tandem mass spectrometry data were then searched using SEQUEST algorithm against protein databases (mouse NCBI RefSeq 73 (58039 entries) with the addition of fasta file entries for m6A-tracer-BioID and LAP2β-BioID constructs) with common contaminant proteins. The search parameters for identification of biotinylated peptides were as follows: (a) trypsin as a proteolytic enzyme (with up to three missed cleavages); (b) peptide mass error tolerance of 10 ppm; (c) fragment mass error tolerance of 0.02 Da; and (d) carbamido-methylation of cysteine (+57.02146 Da) as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine (+15.99492 Da) and biotinylation of lysine (+226.07759 Da) as variable modifications. Peptides and proteins were filtered at a 1% false-discovery rate (FDR) at the PSM level using percolator node and at the protein level using protein FDR validator node, respectively. For the MS1 level quantification of the peptides the Minora Feature Detector, using the program’s standard parameters, was used and all of the raw files from the two replicates were quantified  together. Unique and razor peptides both were used for peptide quantification, while protein groups were considered for peptide uniqueness. Identified protein and peptide spectral match (PSM) level data were exported as tabular files from Proteome Discoverer 2.2.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bioid, Interactome, Biosite, Lad, Nuclear lamin

### Affiliations
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905, USA

### Submitter
Akhilesh Pandey

### Lab Head
Dr Akhilesh Pandey
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905, USA


