### Accession
PXD013800

### Title
LARGE2 mediates O-glycosylation in HT-29 colorectal cancer cells

### Description
The O-glycosyltransferase LARGE2 attaches a laminin-binding matriglycan structure on alpha-Dystroglycan (α-DG) to mediate the interaction of different cell types with their laminin-containing basement membrane. We used HT-29 CRC cells, characterized by low endogenous LARGE2 gene expression, to ectopically express LARGE2 and to drive O glycosylation of its protein substrates. Immunoblot analyses had revealed that the addition of matriglycan-structures on LARGE2 substrate proteins substantially increased their molecular weight (MW). In order to take into account this shift in MW of candidate proteins, glycoprotein-enriched fractions from HT-29 cells with or without ectopic LARGE2 expression were separated by gel electrophoresis and subsequently fractionated in 6 different molecular weight windows (kDa: 0-25, 25-55, 55-75, 75-110, 110-160, 160<). Subsequently, samples were prepared for quantitative mass spectrometry analysis (qLC-MS/MS) analysis according to standard procedures. qLC-MS-MS analysis identified α-DG–related peptides within higher MW protein fractions only when LARGE2 was overexpressed. HT-29 cell secreted Laminin-2 was exclusively detected together with these high MW forms of α-DG, which demonstrated the affinity of Laminin towards the LARGE2-synthesized matriglycan structure on α-DG. Additional candidate proteins identified in this study need further experimental confirmation. Overall, we show that size fractionation after gel electrophoresis followed by quantitative mass spectrometry, performed separately on different MW windows, represents an elegant approach to reveal potential substrates of the O-glycosyltransferase LARGE2.

### Sample Protocol
Glycoprotein enrichment from Lysate of HT-29 cells with or without ectopic LARGE2 expression was performed with wheat germ agglutinin (WGA) beads according to standard procedures. Bound proteins were eluted with LDS sample buffer (NuPAGE, Thermo Fisher Scientific) containing 100 mM DTT for 10 min at 70 °C and alkylated with 55 mM CAA for 30 min at RT. WGA eluates were purified and fractionated into six fractions by SDS-PAGE (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and were subsequently subjected to in-gel tryptic digestion according to standard procedures. After drying in a centrifugal evaporator, the samples were stored at -20 °C until LC-MS/MS analysis.  Nano-flow LC-MS/MS measurement of peptides in eluates was performed using a nanoLC UltiMate 3000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a quadrupole-Orbitrap Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were desalted on a trap column (100 μm × 2 cm, packed in-house with Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ 5 μm resin; Dr. Maisch) in 0.1 % FA at 5 µl/min and separated on an analytical column (75 μm × 40 cm, packed in-house with Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ, 3 μm resin; Dr. Maisch) using a 22 min linear gradient from 4-32 % solvent B (0.1 % formic acid, 5 % DMSO in acetonitrile) in solvent A (0. 1% formic acid, 5 % DMSO in water) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent acquisition and positive ionization mode. MS1 spectra were acquired over a range of 360-1300 m/z at a resolution of 60,000 in the Orbitrap by applying an AGC of 3e6 or maximum injection time of 10 ms. Up to 10 peptide precursors were selected for fragmentation by higher energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD; 1.7 m/z isolation window, AGC value of 1e5, maximum injection time of 25 ms) using 25 % normalized collision energy (NCE) and analyzed at a resolution of 15,000 in the Orbitrap.

### Data Protocol
Peptide and protein identification and quantification was performed using MaxQuant (1) (version 1.6.0.16) by searching the tandem MS data against all human canonical and isoform protein sequences as annotated in the Swissprot reference database (42356 entries, downloaded 06.06.2018) using the embedded search engine Andromeda (2). Carbamidomethylated cysteine was set as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modification. Trypsin/P was specified as the proteolytic enzyme and up to two missed cleavage sites were allowed. Precursor tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm and fragment ion tolerance to 20 ppm. The minimum peptide length was set to seven and all data were adjusted to 1 % PSM and 1 % protein FDR. Intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) (3) was enabled within MaxQuant.   The Perseus software suite (4) (v. 1.6.2.3) was used to filter out contaminants, reverse hits and protein groups, which were only identified by site. Furthermore, only protein groups that were detected in at least two out of the three replicates were considered for the analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Colorectal cancer, O-glycosylation

### Affiliations
TU Munich, Proteomics and Bioanalytics
Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technical University of Munich, Germany

### Submitter
Svenja Wiechmann

### Lab Head
Dr Bernhard Kuster
Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technical University of Munich, Germany


