### Accession
PXD004671

### Title
A Stat6/Pten axis links cold exposure with T cell tolerance in adipose tissue

### Description
Obesity and type-2 diabetes are associated with tissue-inflammation and metabolic defects in fat depots. Foxp3+regulatory T(Treg) cells mediate T-cell tolerance, thereby controlling tissue inflammation. However, the molecular underpinnings how environmental stimuli interlink T-cell tolerance with adipose tissue function remain largely unknown. Here, we report that cold exposure or beta3-adrenergic receptor (ADRB3) stimulation induces T-cell tolerance in vitro and in murine and humanized models. Tolerance induction was verified by CD4+T-cell-proteomes revealing higher protein expression of Foxp3 regulatory networks. Specifically, Ragulator-interacting protein C17orf59, which limits mTORC1 activity, was upregulated by either ADRB3-stimulation or cold-exposure, and therefore might enhance Treg induction. By loss and gain-of-function studies, including Treg depletion and transfers in vivo, we demonstrated that a T-cell-specific Stat6/Pten axis links cold-exposure or ADRB3 stimulation with Foxp3+Treg induction and adipose tissue function. Our findings open new avenues in understanding tissue-specific T-cell tolerance and the design of precision concepts toward personalized immune-metabolic health.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysis of isolated cells was performed in LB buffer (50% (v/v) 2-2-2-trifluoroethanol (TFE) plus 2 mM dithiothreitol, 50% (v/v) 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) buffer) at 99°C for 10 min followed by sonication for 10 min (10 cycles high intensity, Bioruptor, Diagenode). Cell debris was removed after 10 min centrifugation (16,000 g at 4°C) and proteins in the lysate were alkylated for 30 min with 10 mM iodoacetamide in the dark. Next, the solution was centrifuged in a vacuum evaporator for about three hours at 45°C. Proteins were resolubilized in 10% (v/) TFE in 50 mM ABC and sonicated in a water bath for 5 min. Proteins were digested by adding 0.2 µg of LysC and 0.2 µg of Trypsin and incubation at 37°C overnight. The next day, the digest was stopped by adding 1% (v/v) TFE and the solution volume was reduced in a vacuum evaporator for about one hour at 45°C. Samples were finally desalted on SDB-RPS StageTips (3M, Empore, Neuss, Germany) and eluted as described (Kulak et al., 2014).

### Data Protocol
All data was analyzed using the MaxQuant software package 1.5.3.29 (Cox and Mann, 2008). The false discovery rate (FDR) cut-off was set to 1% for protein and peptide spectrum matches. Peptides were required to have a minimum length of 7 amino acids and a maximum mass of 4600 Da. MaxQuant was used to score fragmentation scans for identification based on a search with an initial allowed mass deviation of the precursor ion of a maximum of 4.5 ppm after time-dependent mass calibration. The allowed fragment mass deviation was 20 ppm. Fragmentation spectra were identified using the UniprotKB Mus musculus database (UniProt, 2015), based on the 2014_07 release, combined with 262 common contaminants by the integrated Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011). Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to arginine and lysine, also allowing cleavage before proline, and a maximum of two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification and N-terminal protein acetylation as well as methionine oxidation as variable modifications. Both ‘label-free quantification (MaxLFQ)’ and ‘match between runs’ with standard settings were enabled (Cox et al., 2014). Protein copy number estimates were calculated using the iBAQ algorithm (Schwanhausser et al., 2011).

### Publication Abstract
Obesity and type 2 diabetes are associated with metabolic defects and adipose tissue inflammation. Foxp3<sup>+</sup> regulatory T&#xa0;cells (Tregs) control tissue homeostasis by counteracting local inflammation. However, if and how T&#xa0;cells interlink environmental influences with adipocyte function remains unknown. Here, we report that enhancing sympathetic tone by cold exposure, beta3-adrenergic receptor (ADRB3) stimulation or a short-term high-calorie diet enhances Treg induction in&#xa0;vitro and in&#xa0;vivo. CD4<sup>+</sup> T&#xa0;cell proteomes revealed higher expression of Foxp3 regulatory networks in response to cold or ADRB3 stimulation in&#xa0;vivo reflecting Treg induction. Specifically, Ragulator-interacting protein C17orf59, which limits mTORC1 activity, was upregulated in CD4<sup>+</sup> T&#xa0;cells by either ADRB3 stimulation or cold exposure, suggesting contribution to Treg induction. By loss- and gain-of-function studies, including Treg depletion and transfers in&#xa0;vivo, we demonstrated that a T&#xa0;cell-specific Stat6/Pten axis links cold exposure or ADRB3 stimulation with Foxp3<sup>+</sup> Treg induction and adipose tissue function. Our findings offer a new mechanistic model in which tissue-specific Tregs maintain adipose tissue function.

### Keywords
T cell tolerance, Foxp3, Cold exposure

### Affiliations
Proteomics
Helmholtz Zentrum München German Research Center for Environmental Health Institute of Diabetes Research Group Immune Tolerance in Diabetes Heidemannstraße 1 80939 München

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Carolin Daniel
Helmholtz Zentrum München German Research Center for Environmental Health Institute of Diabetes Research Group Immune Tolerance in Diabetes Heidemannstraße 1 80939 München


