### Accession
PXD013766

### Title
Top Down Histone H4 - SUM159 Butyrate

### Description
Proteins physiologically exist and function as ‘proteoforms’ that arise from one gene but acquire additional function by further variation such as post-translational modification (PTM). When multiple PTMs coexist on single protein molecules top down proteomics becomes the only feasible method; however, most top down methods have limited quantitative capacity and insufficient throughput to truly address proteoform biology. Here we demonstrate that, with meticulous design and diligent consideration of statistics, top down proteomics is quantitative, reproducible, sensitive, and high throughput. The proteoforms of histone H4 are well-studied both as a challenging proteoform identification problem and due to their essential role in the regulation of all eukaryotic DNA templated processes, including gene expression. Much of histone H4’s function is obfuscated from prevailing methods due to combinatorial mechanisms. Starting from cells or tissues, after an optimized protein purification process the H4 proteoforms are physically separated by online C-3 chromatography, narrowly isolated in MS1 and sequenced with ETD fragmentation. With this method we achieve more than 30 replicates from a single 35mm tissue culture dish by loading 55ng of H4 on column. Parallelization and automation yield a sustained throughput of 12 replicates per day, operating continuously for weeks. We achieve reproducible quantitation (average biological Pearson correlations of 0.89) of hundreds of proteoforms (about 200-300) over almost six orders of magnitude and an estimated LLoQ of 0.001% abundance. We demonstrate the capacity of the method to precisely measure well-established changes with sodium butyrate treatment of SUM159 cells.

### Sample Protocol
Cell Lines – Sum 159 cells were cultured with F-12 Nutrient Media (Life Technologies), with 10% newborn calf serum, 100 U/ml penicillin and streptomycin, 10 mM HEPES, and 1 µg/ml hydrocortisone. Cells were passaged at 80% confluency and maintained at 37°C and 5% CO2. Sum159 cells were treated with 5 mM Sodium Butyrate for 4 hours. Cells were harvested by scraping and centrifugation at 500 RCF for 3 minutes, aspirating the supernatant media and washing with 4°C PBS twice. For this study, one 10 cm tissue culture dish was used per biological replicate, roughly 7.5 million cells.  High-throughput Histone Purification – Histones were purified according to previous work [31-32]. Briefly, cells were lysed and nuclei isolated with 4°C NIB (1mM DTT, 0.5 mM AEBSF, 5nM Microcystin, 10mM Sodium Butyrate, 0.3% NP-40 alternative) for 5 min. Nuclei were centrifuged at 600 RCF for 5 minutes and washed with detergent-free NIB. Non-histone proteins were precipitated with 0.4N H2SO4 for 2 hours at 4°C. To the supernatant, a saturated solution of TCA equal to 25% of the starting was added and incubated for 45 min at 4°C after which precipitated histones were centrifuged for 5 minutes at 30,000 RCF.   Off-line HPLC Histone Purification – Histones were dissolved in Buffer A (5% Acetonitrile, 0.2% Trifluoroacetic acid) and loaded on a C-18 column (HiCHROM 218TP54: Vydac 218TP 5µm C18, 250 x 4.6 mm) pre-equilibrated at 30% Buffer B (95% Acetonitrile, 0.188% Trifluoroacetic acid). Histones were separated by a linear gradient from 30%B to 60%B over 100 minutes. Fractions were collected every minute and H4 containing fractions were combined and evaporated to dryness in a speedvac (Thermo Scientific, model SPD131DDA) without added heat.  LC-MS/MS Analysis - A Thermo Scientific DIONEX UltiMATE 3000 was used for online liquid chromatography with Buffer A: 98% H2O, 2% ACN,0.1% FA and Buffer B: 2% H2O, 98% ACN, 0.1% FA. A linear gradient from 27%B to 30%B over 70 minutes at 200 nl/min was used to separate proteoforms of histone H4. A lab-made column of 15 cm, 100 μm ID and ZORBAX C3-300SB, 3.5 μm, 300 Å pores beads was used. Histone H4 samples were dissolved in Buffer A, and 1 µl of sample was injected per experiment, this results in around 50ng of histone H4 loaded onto the column. Ionization was achieved by a Nanospray Flex source with 1700V in positive ion mode. A Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Fusion Lumos was used for all data acquisition. The front-end ion transfer tube was set to 320°C and the ion funnel an RF of 80%. The orbitrap was used for both MS1 and MS2 analysis. For MS1, a scan window of 700-1400 m/z, 60,000 resolution setting, 5.0e5 AGC, 200 ms maximum injection time and 5 microscans was used. The resolution is sufficient for isotopic resolution of histone H4 precursors. An H4 proteoform specific targeted mass list was used to pick MS1 peaks (Supp. List “H4_Mass_List.csv”). All major H4 peaks are captured by this list. A data dependent top 20 decision method was used to select precursors for MS2. Isolation was performed by the quadrupole with a 1 m/z isolation window. ETD fragmentation was used with a 14 ms reaction time, 5.0e5 ETD reagent target and 200 ms maximum ETD reagent injection time. MS2 were acquired with 60,000 resolution, AGC of 5.0e5, 3 microscans and profile data type.

### Data Protocol
Data processing is performed by a custom analysis suite adapted from [42]. Briefly, theoretical MS2 fragment spectra are generated for all possible chosen PTM combinations. A 3.4 Da constraint in the precursor mass error constrains the proteoforms considered for each spectrum. This precursor mass tolerance resolves methylation states but intermingles acetylation and trimethylation. MS2 spectra are matched to the most abundant isotope in the theoretical spectra within 10 ppm error and checked for an unambiguous isotope pattern. A mixed integer linear optimization model is used to solve the optimal proportions of a simple mixture of a limited number of proteoforms to account for the spectrum. The proportion of the spectrum that a proteoform represents is multiplied by the precursor ion intensity to compute an incremental proteoform abundance. The final abundance of each proteoform is the integral of incremental proteoform abundance across the entire LC-MS analysis. Values are normalized to total percent of histone H4 and discrete and combinatorial values are obtained through marginalization of proteoform quantities. Proteoforms are denoted by angel brackets <>, while marginalized discrete PTMs and binary combinations are denoted by braces {}. For example, the relative abundance of {K16ac} is simply the sum of the relative abundances of all proteoforms containing K16ac. The relative abundance of the single molecule binary combination of K16ac and K20me2, {K16acK20me2}, is simply the sum of the relative abundance of all proteoforms containing both K16ac and K20me2, irrespective of the presence or absence of other PTMs. This is different from the singular proteoform containing only K16ac and K20me2, <K16acK20me2>, which is definitively not modified at all other sites. Statistical analysis and figure generation is achieved by use of R and Python programming languages and packages (matplotlib). Statistical significance is defined as p < 0.05 derived from Welch’s two-tail student’s t test and Pearson correlations are used to determine reproducibility.

### Publication Abstract
Proteins physiologically exist as "proteoforms" that arise from one gene and acquire additional function by post-translational modifications (PTM). When multiple PTMs coexist on single protein molecules, top-down proteomics becomes the only feasible method of characterization; however, most top-down methods have limited quantitative capacity and insufficient throughput to truly address proteoform biology. Here we demonstrate that top-down proteomics can be quantitative, reproducible, sensitive, and high throughput. The proteoforms of histone H4 are well studied both as a challenging proteoform identification problem and due to their essential role in the regulation of all eukaryotic DNA-templated processes. Much of histone H4's function is obfuscated from prevailing methods due to combinatorial mechanisms. Starting from cells or tissues, after an optimized protein purification process, the H4 proteoforms are physically separated by on-line C3 chromatography, narrowly isolated in MS1 and sequenced with ETD fragmentation. We achieve more than 30 replicates from a single 35-mm tissue culture dish by loading 55 ng of H4 on column. Parallelization and automation yield a sustained throughput of 12 replicates per day. We achieve reproducible quantitation (average biological Pearson correlations of 0.89) of hundreds of proteoforms (about 200-300) over almost six orders of magnitude and an estimated LLoQ of 0.001% abundance. We demonstrate the capacity of the method to precisely measure well-established changes with sodium butyrate treatment of SUM159 cells. We show that the data produced by a quantitative top-down method can be amenable to parametric statistical comparisons and is capable of delineating relevant biological changes at the full proteoform level.

### Keywords
Histone h4, Top-down

### Affiliations
Biochemistry, Baylor College of Medicine
BCM

### Submitter
Matthew Holt

### Lab Head
Dr Nicolas L. Young
Biochemistry, Baylor College of Medicine


