### Accession
PXD008310

### Title
FBXL13 regulates centrosome homeostasis and migration through ubiquitin- mediated proteolysis

### Description
Aberrant centrosome organization with ensuing alterations of microtubule nucleation enables tumor cells to proliferate and invade despite increased genomic instability. CEP192 is a key factors in the initiation process of centrosome duplication and in the control of centrosome microtubule nucleation. However, regulatory means of CEP192 have remained unknown. Here we report that FBXL13, a binding determinant of SCF (SKP1-CUL1-F-Box)-family E3 ubiquitin ligases, is enriched at centrosomes and interacts with the centrosomal proteins Centrin-2, Centrin-3, CEP152, and CEP192. Among these, CEP192 is specifically targeted for proteasomal degredation by FBXL13. Accordingly, induced FBXL13 expression downregulates centrosomal γ-tubulin, and disrupts centrosomal microtubule arrays. In addition, depletion of FBXL13 induces high levels of CEP192 and γ-tubulin at the centrosomes corresponding to defects in cell motility. Together, we characterize FBXL13 as a novel regulator of microtubule nucleation activity and highlight a role in promoting cell motility with potential tumor-promoting implications.

### Sample Protocol
LC-MS/MS sample processing was performed as described previously (Raducu et al, 2016a). In brief, 3xFlag Fbxl13 co-immunopurified material was eluted by competition using Flag peptide. The eluate was subjected to two rounds of chloroform-methanol precipitation as described (Wessel & Flügge, 1984). Samples were then resuspended in 6 M urea, 100 mM ammonium acetate pH ~8, and subjected to in-solution trypsin digestion and analysis by nano-liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry using a UHPLC 3000 system (Thermo) coupled to an Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo) as described(Fischer & Kessler, 2015). The raw MS data was converted into Mascot generic files using MSconvert(Kessner, Chambers et al., 2008. Searches were performed using Matrix Science software using the following parameters: the error tolerance was fixed at 20 ppm for precursor ions and at 0.5 Da for fragment ions. One missed trypsin cleavage was allowed. MS data was searched against the Homo sapiens UniProt-SwissProt database (UniProt_SwissProt 20151126, Homo sapiens 20,268 sequences), in which the false discovery rate (FDR) was estimated using a decoy database approach (Mascot) and set to 1%.

### Data Protocol
Searches were performed using Matrix Science software using the following parameters: the error tolerance was fixed at 20 ppm for precursor ions and at 0.5 Da for fragment ions. One missed trypsin cleavage was allowed. MS data was searched against the Homo sapiens UniProt-SwissProt database (UniProt_SwissProt 20151126, Homo sapiens 20,268 sequences), in which the false discovery rate (FDR) was estimated using a decoy database approach (Mascot) and set to 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Aberrant centrosome organisation with ensuing alterations of microtubule nucleation capacity enables tumour cells to proliferate and invade despite increased genomic instability. CEP192 is a key factor in the initiation process of centrosome duplication and in the control of centrosome microtubule nucleation. However, regulatory means of CEP192 have remained unknown. Here, we report that FBXL13, a binding determinant of SCF (SKP1-CUL1-F-box)-family E3 ubiquitin ligases, is enriched at centrosomes and interacts with the centrosomal proteins Centrin-2, Centrin-3, CEP152 and CEP192. Among these, CEP192 is specifically targeted for proteasomal degradation by FBXL13. Accordingly, induced FBXL13 expression downregulates centrosomal &#x3b3;-tubulin and disrupts centrosomal microtubule arrays. In addition, depletion of FBXL13 induces high levels of CEP192 and &#x3b3;-tubulin at the centrosomes with the consequence of defects in cell motility. Together, we characterise FBXL13 as a novel regulator of microtubule nucleation activity and highlight a role in promoting cell motility with potential tumour-promoting implications.

### Keywords
Ubiquitin fbxl13

### Affiliations
Facility Head, Discovery Proteomics Facility University of Oxford
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Roman Fischer

### Lab Head
Dr Roman Fischer
Facility Head, Discovery Proteomics Facility University of Oxford


