### Accession
PXD003208

### Title
Palaeoproteomic evidence identifies archaic hominins associated with the Châtelperronian at the Grotte du Renne.

### Description
The project aimed to characterize the protein composition from 3 Pleistocene bone specimens (AR-7, AR-16, AR-30). Analysed extracts concern standard ZooMS tryptic digests (AR-7, AR-16, AR-30) and additional palaeoproteomic extracts (AR-30A and AR-30B). The latter concern two biological duplicates. All extractions were performed at the Department of Human Evolution, MPI-EVA (Germany) under sterile conditions. Analyses took place on a Q-Exactive Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap MS.

### Sample Protocol
Between 10-30 mg of bone was sampled from Pleistocene-aged bone specimens from Grotte du Renne, Arcy-sur-Cure. Samples were gelatinized for 1 hour at 65°C in ammonium-bicarbonate buffer, and subsequently digested with trypsin overnight. Following, the same specimen was demineralized in 0.5M HCl, and re-extracted using the same procedure outlined above. Digestion was quenched by the addition of 5% TFA solution, with peptide extraction on C18 ZipTips (Thermo-Scientific). For AR-30A and AR-30B, bone specimens were demineralized in EDTA, gelatinized in ammonium-bicarbonate buffer at 65°C (fraction not included), and resuspended in Gu-HCL for 1 day at 4°C. Extracts were reducted, alkylated and digested with peptide extraction on C18 ZipTips (Thermo-Scientific). An extraction blank was included during all stages of sample processing.

### Data Protocol
.raw files were converted to .mgf files and searched in three fold. First, .mgf files were searched against a custom collagen type I database built de novo for this project and containing COL1 sequences for all relevant Mammalian genera. Second, .mgf files were searched against the reviewed human Swiss-Prot database (20,206 entries). For AR16, AR30A and AR30B, .mgf files were searched against the reviewed Swiss-Prot database with the addition of archaic-specific substitutions present for proteins identified in the second search. These three searched were all performed in PEAKS (v. 7) with common lab contaminants included. Spectral matches were accepted with an FDR=0.5%, protein matches were accepted with a cumulative -10lgP ≥ 20.0 and 2 unique peptides. De novo only hits were only inspected manually when ALC% ≥ 50.0. The extraction blank was search against the contaminant list as well as the reviewed human Swiss-Prot database.

### Publication Abstract
In Western Europe, the Middle to Upper Paleolithic transition is associated with the disappearance of Neandertals and the spread of anatomically modern humans (AMHs). Current chronological, behavioral, and biological models of this transitional period hinge on the Ch&#xe2;telperronian technocomplex. At the site of the Grotte du Renne, Arcy-sur-Cure, morphological Neandertal specimens are not directly dated but are contextually associated with the Ch&#xe2;telperronian, which contains bone points and beads. The association between Neandertals and this "transitional" assemblage has been controversial because of the lack either of a direct hominin radiocarbon date or of molecular confirmation of the Neandertal affiliation. Here we provide further evidence for a Neandertal-Ch&#xe2;telperronian association at the Grotte du Renne through biomolecular and chronological analysis. We identified 28 additional hominin specimens through zooarchaeology by mass spectrometry (ZooMS) screening of morphologically uninformative bone specimens from Ch&#xe2;telperronian layers at the Grotte du Renne. Next, we obtain an ancient hominin bone proteome through liquid chromatography-MS/MS analysis and error-tolerant amino acid sequence analysis. Analysis of this palaeoproteome allows us to provide phylogenetic and physiological information on these ancient hominin specimens. We distinguish Late Pleistocene clades within the genus Homo based on ancient protein evidence through the identification of an archaic-derived amino acid sequence for the collagen type X, alpha-1 (COL10&#x3b1;1) protein. We support this by obtaining ancient mtDNA sequences, which indicate a Neandertal ancestry for these specimens. Direct accelerator mass spectometry radiocarbon dating and Bayesian modeling confirm that the hominin specimens date to the Ch&#xe2;telperronian at the Grotte du Renne.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Q-exactive hybrid quadrupole-orbitrap ms, Homo sp.

### Affiliations
Postdoc
Department of Biology, University of Copenhagen
BioArCh, University of York, United Kingdom

### Submitter
Frido Welker

### Lab Head
Dr Matthew Collins
BioArCh, University of York, United Kingdom


