### Accession
PXD011722

### Title
Proteomic And Phosphoproteomic Study Of Placenta And Fetal Liver In Mice With Diet-Induced Obesity

### Description
Maternal obesity in mice negatively affects placental functionand maternal and fetal liver function. We performed a global proteomic analysis using a liquid-chromatography/mass-spectrometry system to investigate total and phosphorylated proteins in the placenta and fetal liver in a mouse model that combines maternal obesity with maternal androgen excess to identify changes in molecular pathways that might promote diseases in adulthood.

### Sample Protocol
The samples were homogenized in 300 μl lysis buffer (50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB; Fluka, Sigma Aldrich) and 2% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS)) with 1.4 mm ceramic spheres (FastPrep matrix D) using FastPrep®-24 instrument (MP Biomedicals, OH, USA). The protein concentration was determined using Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, USA) and the Benchmark Plus microplate reader (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, USA). The separate reference samples for liver and placenta were prepared by mixing the equal aliquots of each of the corresponding samples. Sample preparation for global proteomic analysis  Aliquots containing 25 μg of each experimental sample or reference sample were digested with trypsin using the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method. Briefly, protein samples were reduced with 100 mM dithiothreitol at 60°C for 30 min, transferred on 30 kDa MWCO Nanosep centrifugal filters (Pall Life Sciences, Ann Arbor, USA), washed with 8M urea solution and alkylated with 10 mM methyl methanethiosulfonate in 50 mM TEAB and 1% sodium deoxycholate. Digestion was performed in 50 mM TEAB, 1% sodium deoxycholate at 37°C in two stages: the samples were incubated with 250 ng of Pierce MS-grade trypsin (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, USA) for 3h, then 250 ng more of trypsin was added and the digestion was performed overnight. The peptides were collected by centrifugation, labelled using TMT 10-plex isobaric mass tagging reagents (Thermo Scientific) according to the manufacturer instructions. The labelled samples were mixed, sodium deoxycholate was removed by acidification with 10% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA).  The mixed labeled samples were fractionated on the AKTA chromatography system (GE Healthcare Life Sciences, Sweden) using the XBridge C18 3.5 μm, 3.0x150 mm column (Waters Corporation, Milford, USA) and 25 min gradient from 7% to 40% solvent B at the flowrate of 0.4 ml/min; solvent A was 10 mM ammonium formate in water at pH 10.00, solvent B was 90% acetonitrile, 10% 10 mM ammonium formate in water at pH 10.00. The initial 40 fraction were combined into 20 pooled fractions in the order 1+21, 2+22, 3+23 etc. The pooled fractions were dried on Speedvac and reconstituted in 20 μl of 3% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid for analysis.  Sample Preparation for phosphoproteomic analysis  Aliquots containing 450 μg of each experimental sample or reference sample were digested with trypsin using the FASP method as described above. The phosphopeptides were enriched using Pierce TiO2 Phosphopeptide Enrichment and Clean Up Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer protocol. The purified phosphopeptide samples were evaporated to dryness, reconstituted in 50 mM TEAB and labelled using TMT 10-plex isobaric mass tagging reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer instructions. The TMT-labelled phosphopeptide samples were mixed into corresponding sets and purified using Pierce C-18 Spin Columns (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer instructions. Purified samples were dried on Speedvac and reconstituted in 15 μl of 3% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid for analysis.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using Proteome Discoverer version 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Protein database for Mus musculus (June 2016, 16801 sequence) was downloaded from Swissprot. Mascot 2.3.2.0 (Matrix Science) was used as a search engine with precursor mass tolerance of 5 ppm and fragment mass tolerance of 0.5 Da. No missed cleavages were accepted. Mono-oxidation on methionine was set as a variable modification, methylation on cysteine and TMT-6 reagent modification on lysine and peptide N-terminus were set as a fixed modification. For phosphopeptide samples, phosphorylation on serine, threonine and tyrosine was added as a variable modification. Percolator was used for the validation of identification results, target false discovery rate of 1% was used as a threshold to filter confident peptide identifications. The phosphoRS processing node was used to localize the most probable phosphorylation sites during the data analysis for the phospho-enriched samples. Reporter ion intensities were quantified in MS3 spectra using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 at 0.003 Da mass tolerance with reporter absolute intensity threshold of 2000.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Obesity, Placenta, Phosphoproteomics, Mouse, Liver, Tandem mass tag

### Affiliations
Professor, Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden
Proteomics Core Facility, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden

### Submitter
Egor Vorontsov

### Lab Head
Dr Elisabet Stener-Victorin
Professor, Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden


