### Accession
PXD035353

### Title
The TRESLIN-MTBP complex couples completion of DNA replication with S/G2 transition

### Description
It has been proposed that ATR kinase senses the completion of DNA replication to initiate the S/G2 transition. In contrast to this model, we show here that the TRESLIN-MTBP complex prevents a premature entry into G2 from early S-phase independently of ATR/CHK1 kinases. TRESLIN-MTBP acts transiently at pre-replication complexes (preRCs) to initiate origin firing and is released after the subsequent recruitment of CDC45. This dynamic behavior of TRESLIN-MTBP implements a monitoring system that checks the activation of replication forks and senses the rate of origin firing to prevent the entry into G2. This system detects the decline in the number of origins of replication that naturally occurs in very late S, which is the signature that cells use to determine the completion of DNA replication and permit the S/G2 transition. Our work introduces TRESLIN-MTBP as a key player in cell cycle control independent of canonical checkpoints.

### Sample Protocol
Mass Spectrometry - whole proteome sample preparation Snap-frozen HeLa cell pellets were lysed in 20% [v/v] 2,2,2-trifluoroethanol in 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0 supplemented with 5 mM DTT and heated for 10 min at 95 °C. Lysates were sonicated in a Biorupter (Diagenode) for 15 min prior to addition of 25 mM chloroacetamide and incubated for 20 min. Samples were eluted in 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0 and digested with trypsin (1:50) overnight at 37 °C at 1500 rpm. Peptides were desalted and purified with styrene divinylbenzene-reversed phase sulfonate (SDB-RPS) StageTips prepared in 0.2% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Peptides were washed and eluted with 80% acetonitrile (ACN); 1% ammonia prior to vacuum-drying. Dried peptides were reconstituted in 2% ACN and 0.1% TFA. For deep proteome coverage, peptide samples from siTreslin (48h) and siCtrl HeLa cells were further fractionated into eight fractions by high pH reversed-phase fractionation as previously described (Kulak et al., 2017).  Mass Spectrometry - LC-MS analysis Nanoflow LC–MS/MS analysis of tryptic peptides was conducted on a quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive HF-X, ThermoFisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) (Kelstrup et al., 2018) coupled to an EASY nLC 1200 ultra-high-pressure system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) via a nano-electrospray ion source. Three hundred ng of peptides were loaded on a 50-cm HPLC-column (75 μm inner diameter, New Objective, Woburn, MA, USA; in-house packed using ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9-µm silica beads; Dr Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany). Peptides were separated using a linear gradient from 2 to 20% B in 55 min and stepped up to 40% in 40 min followed by a 5 min wash at 98% B at 350 nl per min where solvent A was 0.1% formic acid in water and solvent B was 80% ACN and 0.1% formic acid in water. The total duration of the run was 100 min. Column temperature was kept at 60 °C using an in-house-developed oven. The mass spectrometer was operated in ‘top 15’ data dependent mode, collecting MS spectra in the Orbitrap mass analyzer (60,000 resolution, 300–1,650 m/z range) with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3E6 and a maximum ion injection time of 25 ms. The most intense ions from the full scan were isolated with an isolation width of 1.4 m/z. Following higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 27, MS/MS spectra were collected in the Orbitrap (15,000 resolution) with an AGC target of 1E5 and a maximum ion injection time of 28 ms. Precursor dynamic exclusion was enabled with a duration of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Mass Spectrometry data analysis Raw files were processed with MaxQuant (Cox and Mann, 2008) (version 1.6.5.0). The integrated Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011) was used for peptide and protein identification at an FDR of less than 1%. The human UniProtKB database (October 2019) was used as forward database and the automatically generated reverse database for the decoy search. ‘Trypsin’ was set as the enzyme specificity. Search criteria included carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and acetyl (protein N-terminus) as variable modifications. A minimum of 7 amino acids were required for peptide identification. Proteins that could not be discriminated by unique peptides were assigned to the same protein group. Label-free protein quantification was performed using the MaxLFQ (Cox et al., 2014) algorithm and ‘match-between-runs’ was enabled. Proteins, which were found as reverse hits or only identified by site-modification, were filtered out prior to data analysis.

### Publication Abstract
It has been proposed that ATR kinase senses the completion of DNA replication to initiate the S/G2 transition. In contrast to this model, we show here that the TRESLIN-MTBP complex prevents a premature entry into G2 from early S-phase independently of ATR/CHK1 kinases. TRESLIN-MTBP acts transiently at pre-replication complexes (preRCs) to initiate origin firing and is released after the subsequent recruitment of CDC45. This dynamic behavior of TRESLIN-MTBP implements a monitoring system that checks the activation of replication forks and senses the rate of origin firing to prevent the entry into G2. This system detects the decline in the number of origins of replication that naturally occurs in very late S, which is the signature that cells use to determine the completion of DNA replication and permit the S/G2 transition. Our work introduces TRESLIN-MTBP as a key player in cell-cycle control independent of canonical checkpoints.

### Keywords
Cell cycle, Dna replication, Atr

### Affiliations
Max Delbrueck Center for Molecular Medicine
Center for Chromosome Stability, Institute for Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, 2200, Denmark

### Submitter
Fabian Coscia

### Lab Head
Dr Luis Toledo
Center for Chromosome Stability, Institute for Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, 2200, Denmark


