### Accession
PXD013008

### Title
Obscurin and Obsl1 functions for “Murine obscurin and Obsl1 have functionally redundant roles in sarcolemmal integrity, sarcoplasmic reticulum organization, and muscle metabolism.”

### Description
“Murine obscurin and Obsl1 have functionally redundant roles in sarcolemmal integrity, sarcoplasmic reticulum organization, and muscle metabolism.”

### Sample Protocol
Mus Musculus muscle tissue (depeleted of large structural proteins)was digested by trypsin and labelled with TMT 6 labels. the pooled experiment was fractionated on high pH reverse phase column and total of 12 fractions were run on LC-MS. Samples were analyzed by ultra high pressure liquid chromatography (UPLC) coupled with tandem mass spectroscopy (LC-MS/MS) using nano-spray ionization. The nanospray ionization experiments were performed using a Orbitrap fusion Lumos hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo) interfaced with nano-scale reversed-phase UPLC (Thermo Dionex UltiMate™ 3000 RSLC nano System) using a 25 cm, 75-micron ID glass capillary packed with 1.7-µm C18 (130) BEHTM beads (Waters corporation).  Peptides were eluted from the C18 column into the mass spectrometer using a linear gradient (5–80%) of ACN (Acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 375 μl/min for 1h. The buffers used to create the ACN gradient were: Buffer A (98% H2O, 2% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) and Buffer B (100% ACN, 0.1% formic acid). Mass spectrometer parameters are as follows;  an MS1 survey scan using the orbitrap detector (mass range (m/z): 400-1500  (using quadrupole isolation), 60000 resolution setting, spray voltage of 2400 V, Ion transfer tube temperature of 285 C, AGC target of 400000, and maximum injection time of 50 ms) was followed by data dependent scans (top speed for most intense ions, with charge state set to only include +2-5 ions, and 5 second exclusion time, while selecting ions with minimal intensities of 50000 at in which the collision event was carried out in A- high energy collision cell (HCD Collision Energy of 30%), and the fragment masses where analyzed in the ion trap mass analyzer (With ion trap scan rate of turbo, first mass m/z was 100, AGC Target 5000 and maximum injection time of 35ms), followed by B) Electron Transfer Dissociation (ETD Collision Energy of 25%, and EThcD setting active (SA Collision Energy of %25)), and the fragment masses where analyzed in the ion trap mass analyzer (With ion trap scan rate of turbo, first mass m/z was 100, AGC Target 5000 and maximum injection time of 35ms.

### Data Protocol
Peaks 8.5 (bioinformatic solutions). PTM: TMT6, Carbamydomethyl C

### Publication Abstract
Biological roles of obscurin and its close homolog Obsl1 (obscurin-like 1) have been enigmatic. While obscurin is highly expressed in striated muscles, Obsl1 is found ubiquitously. Accordingly, obscurin mutations have been linked to myopathies, whereas mutations in Obsl1 result in 3M-growth syndrome. To further study unique and redundant functions of these closely related proteins, we generated and characterized Obsl1 knockouts. Global Obsl1 knockouts are embryonically lethal. In contrast, skeletal muscle-specific Obsl1 knockouts show a benign phenotype similar to obscurin knockouts. Only deletion of both proteins and removal of their functional redundancy revealed their roles for sarcolemmal stability and sarcoplasmic reticulum organization. To gain unbiased insights into changes to the muscle proteome, we analyzed tibialis anterior and soleus muscles by mass spectrometry, uncovering additional changes to the muscle metabolism. Our analyses suggest that all obscurin protein family members play functions for muscle membrane systems.

### Keywords
Obsl1, Obscurin, Muscle metabolism, Sarcolemmal integrity, Sarcoplasmic reticulum organization

### Affiliations
University of California San Diego
Scientist

### Submitter
Majid Ghassemian

### Lab Head
Dr majid ghassemian
University of California San Diego


