### Accession
PXD024620

### Title
Identification of Mfn2 interacting proteins in homeostatic endothelial cells

### Description
Identification of Mfn2 interacting proteins in homeostatic endothelial cells using affinity purification-mass spectrometry analysis.

### Sample Protocol
HLMVECs were infected with lenti-GFP or lenti-GFP-Mfn2 virus for 72 h followed by immunoprecipitation using GFP-trap magnetic beads, with or without stimulation. Three replicates of each condition show similar pattern on Coomassie blue stained SDS-PAGE. Three replicates were digested on-bead with trypsin overnight, followed by peptide cleaning with C18 spin columns (Pierce). Samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using a Thermo Easy nLC 1200-QExactive HF.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed using Proteome Discoverer v2.1 - Sequest (no carbamidomethyl C), searched against a Unprot reviewed human database. Imported results into Scaffold v4 for further scoring and data visualization.Protein and peptide thresholds were set to 95%; with minimum peptides set to 2. Spectral counts were used for relative quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
Endothelial barrier integrity is ensured by the stability of the adherens junction (AJ) complexes comprised of vascular endothelial (VE)-cadherin as well as accessory proteins such as &#x3b2;-catenin and p120-catenin. Disruption of the endothelial barrier due to disassembly of AJs results in tissue edema and the influx of inflammatory cells. Using three-dimensional structured illumination microscopy, we observe that the mitochondrial protein Mitofusin-2 (Mfn2) co-localizes at the plasma membrane with VE-cadherin and &#x3b2;-catenin in endothelial cells during homeostasis. Upon inflammatory stimulation, Mfn2 is sulfenylated, the Mfn2/&#x3b2;-catenin complex disassociates from the AJs and Mfn2 accumulates in the nucleus where Mfn2 negatively regulates the transcriptional activity of &#x3b2;-catenin. Endothelial-specific deletion of Mfn2 results in inflammatory activation, indicating an anti-inflammatory role of Mfn2 in vivo. Our results suggest that Mfn2 acts in a non-canonical manner to suppress the inflammatory response by stabilizing cell-cell adherens junctions and by binding to the transcriptional activator &#x3b2;-catenin.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Ap-ms

### Affiliations
PROFESSOR OF MEDICINE AND PHARMACOLOGY, The University of Illinois at Chicago
UNC-Chapel Hill

### Submitter
Laura Herring

### Lab Head
Dr Jalees Rehman
PROFESSOR OF MEDICINE AND PHARMACOLOGY, The University of Illinois at Chicago


