### Accession
PXD034451

### Title
Inducible synthetic protein degradation system for phenotype control

### Description
Synthetic control of cell factory phenotypes is needed for redirecting resources from cell growth to production. To achieve that ClpXP proteasome was introduced to yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae under control of TetON induction. Growth essential (in synthetic defined medium) metabolic enzymes Acc1, Aro1, Hom3 were targeted to the ClpXP proteasome by introducing short ssrA tags. Inducing the ClpXP proteasome with doxycycline during exponential growth phase ceased the growth.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen cell pellets were lysed using 0.1% RapiGest in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Three cycles of sonication (1 cycle: 15 s sonication, 15 s on ice) (Cell disruptor, Sonifier, Branson) were applied to the lysate, followed by 15 min bead beating using Precellys Lysing Kit (KT0361-1-004.2). Cell lysate was transferred into a new tube after centrifugation (5 min, 5,000 g) and incubated at 80°C for 15 min. Benzonase (25 U, Merck) was added to the lysate and incubated for 30 min at 37°C. Cysteines were reduced using 10 mM of dithiothreitol (56°C, 30 min). The sample was cooled to 24°C and alkylated with 10 mM of iodacetamide (room temperature, in the dark, 30 min). Proteins were precipitated with TCA, and pellet was washed by acetone and dried. The proteins were digested in 50 mM HEPES (pH 8.5) using LysC (Wako) with an enzyme to protein ration 1:50 at 37°C for 4 h, followed by trypsin (Promega) with an enzyme to protein ratio 1:50 at 37°C overnight. TMT10plex™ Isobaric Label Reagent (Thermo Fisher) was added to the samples according the manufacturer’s instructions. Labelled peptides were cleaned up using OASIS® HLB µElution Plate (Waters). Offline high pH reverse phase fractionation was performed using an Agilent 1200 Infinity high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) system, equipped with a Gemini C18 column (3 μm, 110 Å, 100 × 1.0 mm, Phenomenex) (Reichel et al, 2016). The solvent system consisted of 20 mM ammonium formate (pH 10.0) as mobile phase (A) and 100% acetonitrile as mobile phase (B). After fragmentation peptides were separated using the UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano LC system (Dionex) fitted with a trapping cartridge (µ-Precolumn C18 PepMap 100, 5 µm, 300 µm i.d. × 5 mm, 100 Å) and an analytical column (nanoEase™ M/Z HSS T3 column 75 µm × 250 mm C18, 1.8 µm, 100 Å, Waters). The outlet of the analytical column was coupled directly to a QExactive plus (Thermo) using the proxeon nanoflow source in positive ion mode. The peptides were introduced into the mass spectrometer (QExactive plus, Thermo Fisher) via a Pico-Tip Emitter 360 µm OD × 20 µm ID; 10 µm tip (New Objective) and a spray voltage of 2.3 kV was applied. The capillary temperature was set at 320°C. Full scan MS spectra with mass range 375–1,200 m/z were acquired in profile mode in the FT with resolution of 70,000. The peptide match algorithm was set to “preferred” and charge exclusion “unassigned”, and charge states 1 and 5–8 were excluded. Isolation window was set to 1.0 and 100 m/z set as the fixed first mass. MS/MS data were acquired in profile mode (Strucko et al, 2018).

### Data Protocol
Acquired data were processed using IsobarQuant (Franken et al, 2015) and Mascot (v2.2.07). Searched against Uniprot S. cerevisiae CEN.PK113-7D proteome database. The following modifications were included into the search parameters: Carbamidomethyl (C) and TMT10 (K) (fixed modification), Acetyl (N-term), Oxidation (M) and TMT10 (N-term) (variable modifications). For the full scan (MS1), a mass error tolerance of 10 ppm and for MS/MS (MS2) spectra of 0.02 Da was set. Further parameters were set: Trypsin as protease with an allowance of maximum two missed cleavages: a minimum peptide length of seven amino acids; at least two unique peptides were required for a protein identification. The false discovery rate on peptide and protein level was set to 0.01. Raw data of IsobarQuant were loaded into R. Only proteins that were quantified with two unique peptides were used for downstream analysis. The output data from IsobarQuant were cleaned for potential batch effects with limma (Ritchie et al, 2015) and subsequently normalized with vsn (variance stabilization) (Huber et al, 2002). Missing values were imputed with the impute function (method = “knn”) from the MSNBase package (Gatto & Lilley, 2012). Under these conditions, a total of 3305 proteins were quantified and used to calculate differential protein abundances between tested strains. Differential abundance was performed with limma (Ritchie et al, 2015). Proteins were classified as “hits” with a false discovery rate (fdr) <= 5% and a fold change of at least 200% and as “candidates” with fdr <= 20% and a fold change of at least 100%. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE (Perez-Riverol et al, 2019) partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD020611.

### Publication Abstract
Engineered microbial cells can produce sustainable chemistry, but the production competes for resources with growth. Inducible synthetic control over the resource use would enable fast accumulation of sufficient biomass and then divert the resources to production. We developed inducible synthetic resource-use control over<i>Saccharomyces cerevisiae</i> by expressing a bacterial ClpXP proteasome from an inducible promoter. By individually targeting growth-essential metabolic enzymes Aro1, Hom3, and Acc1 to the ClpXP proteasome, cell growth could be efficiently repressed during cultivation. The ClpXP proteasome was specific to the target proteins, and there was no reduction in the targets when ClpXP was not induced. The inducible growth repression improved product yields from glucose (cis,cis-muconic acid) and per biomass (cis,cis-muconic acid and glycolic acid). The inducible ClpXP proteasome tackles uncertainties in strain optimization by enabling model-guided repression of competing, growth-essential, and metabolic enzymes. Most importantly, it allows improving production without compromising biomass accumulation when uninduced; therefore, it is expected to mitigate strain stability and low productivity challenges.

### Keywords
Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Clpxp proteasome

### Affiliations
EMBL
Aalto University, Espoo, Finland

### Submitter
Frank Stein

### Lab Head
Dr Paula Jouhten
Aalto University, Espoo, Finland


