### Accession
PXD009196

### Title
Exercise-induced molecular mechanisms for glycogen supercompensation in human skeletal muscle

### Description
A single bout of exercise followed by intake of carbohydrates leads to glycogen supercompensation in the prior exercised muscle. The molecular mechanisms underlying this well-known phenomenon remain elusive. Here we report that a single bout of exercise induces marked activation of glycogen synthase (GS) and AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) for several days beyond normalized muscle glycogen content in man. Acute muscle specific deletion of AMPK activity in mouse muscle abrogated the ability for glycogen supercompensation, providing genetic evidence that AMPK serves as essential driver for glycogen supercompensation. Muscle proteomic analyses revealed elevated glucose uptake capacity in the prior exercised muscle while key proteins in fat oxidation and glycolysis largely remained unchanged. The temporal order of these sustained cellular alterations induced by a single bout of exercise provide a mechanism to offset the otherwise tight feedback inhibition of glycogen synthesis and glucose uptake by glycogen, ultimately leading to muscle glycogen supercompensation.

### Sample Protocol
Human one-legged glycogen supercompensation regime  Nine healthy, untrained male volunteers participated in the study. The subjects gave written informed consent after having been informed of any possible risks and discomfort associated with the study. The study was approved by the regional ethics committee in Denmark (Journal number: H-4-2013-071) and performed in accordance with the Declarations of Helsinki II. All subjects underwent 3 clinical investigations (day 1, day 2 and day 5) during a 5 day glycogen supercompensation regime. The subjects were asked to refrain from physical activity and to eat a controlled eucaloric diet containing 60 E% carbohydrates (CHO) for 4 days leading up to the initial experiments. Upon arrival at the laboratory on day 1, the subjects performed one-legged knee extensor exercise for 1 hour at 80% of PWL interspersed by 5 min bouts at 90% of PWL every 10 min. This was followed by interval exercise until exhaustion containing 4 min bouts starting at 100% PWL followed by 1 min at 50% of PWL. This was continued until the subjects were unable to maintain a kicking frequency of 60 kicks/min during the 4 min interval. At this point exercise intensity was lowered by 10%. This procedure was continued until the subjects were unable to finish the 4 min interval at 60% of PWL. At this time the subjects were told to complete a final bout at 90% of PWL for 4 min. None of the subjects were able to complete this final exercise period. On average the time to exhaustion was 2 h 35 min ± 18 min (n=9). Upon cessation of exercise the subjects showered and rested in the supine position for 4 hours. Then a 120 min hyperinsulinemic-euglycemic clamp was initiated by a bolus insulin injection (9.0 mU/kg, Actrapid, Novo Nordisk, DK) followed by continuous insulin infusion (1.42 mU/kg/min insulin) reaching similar levels of plasma insulin around 100 µU/mL (day1: 106 ± 4.3, day 2: 111 ± 4.4, day 5: 119 ± 4.2 µU/mL (average concentration during the last 60 min, n=9)). At least 2 hours before the insulin clamp, catheters were placed in both femoral, one antecubital and one dorsal hand vein. A heat pad was placed around the lower part of the arm and hand in order to “arterialize” blood drawn from the hand vein. Substrate uptake/release across the legs was calculated by multiplying the arterial-venous (AV) difference in blood substrate concentration by femoral arterial blood flow (measured by Doppler ultrasound, Philips iU22, Santa Ana, CA). Blood glucose levels (measured by ABL 800 FLEX, Radiometer Medical, CPH, DK) were maintained at the euglycemic predefined target by continuously adjusting the glucose infusion rate (GIR) (20% glucose solution; Fresenius Kabi, Upsala, S). Concurrent measures of substrate AV differences and blood flow were performed every 20 min. Muscle biopsies from m. vastus lateralis were obtained under local anesthesia (3-5 ml of Xylocaine, 20 mg/ml) in the basal- and insulin-stimulated state (120 min) by use of the Bergström needle biopsy technique. Muscle specimens were frozen within 20 sec in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C for further analysis. A new incision was made for every biopsy and spaced 4-5 cm apart. This insulin clamp procedure in combination with basal and insulin stimulated muscle biopsies was repeated in the rested state (without prior exercise) on day 2 and day 5. The subjects arrived in the morning in the overnight fasted state at day 1, day 2 and day 5. Upon arrival in the morning the subjects were given a meal corresponding to 5% of their daily energy intake (~600-800 kJ). During the 5 day supercompensation regime the subjects were provided a predefined eucaloric diet containing 80E% carbohydrates, 10E% fat and 10E% proteins. All food items were handed out to the subjects and compliance to the diet regime was ensured by questionnaire survey. Proteomic Analysis Muscle was lysed by tip-probe sonication in 8M guanidine containing 100 mM Tris (pH 8.0), 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine, 40 mM 2-chloroacetamide and heated to 95°C for 5 min. The lysate was centrifuged at 20,000g for 20 min at 4°C and the supernatant diluted 1:1 with water. Proteins were precipitated with 4 volumes of acetone overnight at -30°C and washed with 80% acetone. Proteins were digested in 100 mM Tris pH 7.5 containing 10% 2,2,2-Trifluoroethanol overnight at 37°C with sequencing grade LysC (Wako Chemicals) and trypsin (Sigma) at an enzyme to substrate ratio of 1:50. The digests were acidified to 1% trifluoroacetic acid prior to purification by styrene divinyl benzene – reversed phase sulfonated solid phase extraction microcolumns.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were spiked with iRT peptides (Biognosys) and analysed on an Easy-nLC1200 coupled to a Q-Exactive HF-X in positive polarity mode. Peptides were separated using an in-house packed 75 μm x 50 cm pulled column (1.9 μm particle size, C18AQ; Dr Maisch) with a gradient of 2 – 35% acetonitrile containing 0.1% FA over 120 min at 300 nl/min at 60°C. The instrument was operated in data-independent acquisition (DIA) mode essentially as described previously [PMID: 29070702]. Briefly, an MS1 scan was acquired from 350 – 1650 m/z (120,000 resolution, 3e6 AGC, 50 ms injection time) followed by 20 MS/MS variable sized isolation windows with HCD (30,000 resolution, 3e6 AGC, 27 NCE). A spectral library was created by fractionating a pooled mix of peptides from all the samples on an in-house packed 320 μm x 25 cm column (3 μm particle size, BEH; Waters) with a gradient of 2 – 40% acetonitrile containing 10 mM ammonium formate over 60 min at 6 μl/min using an Agilent 1260 HPLC. A total of 12 concatenated fractions were analysed using the identical LC-MS/MS conditions above except the instrument was operated in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. Briefly, an MS1 scan was acquired from 350 – 1650 m/z (60,000 resolution, 3e6 AGC, 50 ms injection time) followed by 20 MS/MS with HCD (1.2 m/z isolation, 15,000 resolution, 1e5 AGC, 27 NCE). DDA data were processed with Andromeda in MaxQuant v1.6.0.9 against the human UniProt database (September, 2017) using all default settings with peptide spectral matches and protein false discovery rate (FDR) set to 1% [PMID: 19029910]. DIA data were processed with Spectronaut v11 using all default settings with precursor and protein FDR set to 1% and quantification performed at MS2 [PMID: 25724911]. All data was analyzed in Perseus [PMID: 27348712]. Data were Log2 transformed, median normalized and the ratio of the exercised leg to the rest leg calculated for each subject on each day. Differential abundance was determined with one-sample t-tests.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human skeletal muscle exercise glycogen

### Affiliations
The University of Sydney
The University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Benjamin Parker

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin Parker
The University of Sydney


