### Accession
PXD031788

### Title
A time-resolved multi-omics atlas of Acanthamoeba castellanii encystment

### Description
Encystment is a common response of most protists to stress. Although some signaling pathways regulating this process were reported, our knowledge remains limited. Here, we mapped the molecular changes occurring in the amoeba Acanthamoeba castellanii during the early steps of encystment. De novo analysis of the transcriptome identified more than 150,000 previously undescribed transcripts that were utilized for mass spectrometry-based proteomics analysis after triggering starvation. With this strategy, we identified thousands of protein sequences absent from the reference genome. These results revealed the regulation of expected biological processes, such as the shutdown of cell proliferation at transcript level followed by down-regulation of proteins. The phosphoproteome showed a quick regulation of phosphorylation sites involved in cytoskeleton remodeling and translation regulation, among other processes underlying A. castellanii encystment. To our knowledge, this work constitutes the first time-resolved molecular atlas of an encysting organism and a useful resource to further investigating amoebae encystment.

### Sample Protocol
In-solution protein digestion One milligram of protein extract was solubilized in 8 M urea, 100 mM Tris HCl pH 8.5, then disulfide bonds were reduced with 5 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP) for 30 minutes and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 30 minutes at room temperature (RT) in the dark. Protein samples were then incubated with rLys-C Mass Spec Grade (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) for 5 hours at 30°C for the first digestion (ratio 1:500). Then samples were diluted below 2 M urea with 100 mM Tris HCl pH 8.5 and Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) was added for the second digestion overnight at 37°C (ratio 1:100). Digestion was stopped by adding 5% of formic acid (FA) and peptides were desalted and concentrated on Sep-Pak light tC18 SPE cartridge (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Peptide were eluted using 50% acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1% FA. Purified peptides were lyophilized and kept at - 80 °C until further used. Phosphopeptide enrichment TiO2 phospho-enrichment was performed using a modified version of Mohammed protocol. A slurry of 10 mg/mL of TiO2 beads (Sachtopore-NP TiO2, 5 μm, 300 Å, Sachtleben, Duisburg, Germany) was freshly prepared and kept in 30% ACN,0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) until used. One milligram of dried tryptic peptides was re-suspended in TiO2 loading buffer: 80% ACN, 6% TFA, 40 mg/mL glycolic acid. Sample was sonicated to ensure a higher yield of resuspension. A 10:1 ratio (beads/peptides) was used for enrichment. Suitable TiO2 beads volume was equilibrated in loading buffer for 5 min at RT. Samples were mixed with beads and briefly sonicated. Incubation was performed under gentle agitation on a rocking device for 30 min at RT. After 1 min of centrifugation, supernatant was discarded. Beads were first washed in 80% ACN, 6 % TFA, gently vortex and centrifuge for 1 min (discarded supernatant). Beads were washed a second time with 50% ACN, 0.1% TFA, gently vortex and centrifuged (discarded supernatant). Phosphopeptides were eluted from TiO2 beads using 10 % NH4OH solution into a new tube containing 20% FA. Eluate fractions were lyophilized and then C18 stage-tipped for clean up until mass spectrometry analysis. Mass spectrometry analysis Tryptic peptides were analyzed on a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen) coupled with an EASY-nLC 1200 chromatography system (Thermo Scientific, Bremen). Sample was loaded and separated at 250 nL.min-1 flow rate on a home-made packed 50 cm nano-HPLC column (75 μm inner diameter) with C18 resin (1.9 μm particles, 100 Å pore size, Reprosil-Pur Basic C18-HD resin, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) and equilibrated in 97 % solvent A (H2O, 0.1 % FA) and 3 % solvent B (ACN, 0.1 % FA). Input sample peptides were eluted with a linear gradient from 3 to 22 % buffer B in 160 min. This was followed by a stepwise increase of buffer B to 50 % B in 70 min and finally to 90 % in 5 min. Phospho-peptides were eluted with a linear gradient from 3 to 13 % buffer B in 40 min. This was followed by a stepwise increase of buffer B to 37 % B in 110 min and finally to 75 % in 20 min. Mass spectra were acquired with a Top10 data-dependent MS/MS acquisition mode with the XCalibur 2.2 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen). Target values for the full-scan MS spectra were 3.106 charges in the m/z range 200-2000 with a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200. Fragmentation of precursor ions was performed by Higher-energy C-trap Dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy of 27 eV. MS/MS scans were performed at a resolution of 17,500 at m/z 200 with a target value of 1.10^6 and a maximum injection time of 20 ms. Charge state screening was enabled, and precursors with unknown charge state or a charge state of 1 and >7 were excluded. Dynamic exclusion was set to 35 s (Input sample) or 40 s (Phosphopeptides) to avoid repeated sequencing of identical peptides.

### Data Protocol
All data were searched using Andromeda with MaxQuant software (version 1.5.3.8) against a custom generated database constituted of the Uniprot A. castellanii strain Neff proteome and the Trinity database (129,654 entries after curation), usual known mass spectrometry contaminants and reversed sequences of all entries. Andromeda searches were performed choosing trypsin as specific enzyme with a maximum number of two missed cleavages. Possible modifications included carbamidomethylation (Cys, fixed), phosphorylation (Ser/Thr/Tyr, variable), oxidation (Met, variable) and Nter acetylation (variable). The mass tolerance in MS was set to 20 ppm for the first search then 6 ppm for the main search and 10 ppm for the MS/MS. Maximum peptide charge was set to seven. Five amino acids were required as minimum peptide length. The “match between runs” feature was applied for samples having the same experimental condition with a maximal retention time window of 0.7 minute. One unique peptide to the protein group was required for the protein identification. A false discovery rate (FDR) cutoff of 1 % was applied at the peptide and protein levels. The MaxLFQ, Maxquant’s label-free quantification, algorithm was used to calculate protein intensity profiles across samples. iBAQ feature was selected for further quantitative analysis. Computational analysis  The computational analysis of the proteome, the phosphoproteome and their integration with the transcriptome were done with R v4.0.3 (2020-10-10) on x86_64-apple-darwin17.0 (64-bit) running under macOS Big Sur 10.16. The corresponding scripts are available on Zenodo with the DOI 10.5281/zenodo.5869928 under the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International license. Functional annotation Transcript and protein functional annotations were retrieved from eggNOG-mapper v2.0 (http://eggnog-mapper.embl.de) with the default parameters using as input a protein fasta file containing all protein sequences corresponding to the transcriptome or the refined non-redundant fasta file utilized for MS search. For each gene in the transcriptome, we kept the annotation corresponding to the best scoring ortholog across all transcripts (Trinity IDs). GO term enrichments were performed using a hypergeometric test with the full transcriptome or the full proteome as background for modules or proteome/phospho enrichment, respectively (go-enrich function of the R package GOfuncR v1.10.0 with n_randsets=100). Genes from significant child-categories were removed with a FWER threshold of 0.1 (function refine). Statistical analysis of the proteome We used the MaxQuant “ProteinGroups.txt” table, removed proteins with less than 1 unique peptide or identified only with modified peptides, reverse hits and potential contaminants. LFQ intensities were log2-transformed and realigned using median subtraction. Missing values were replaced only for the protein groups that had no missing values in one condition in a minimum of 2 replicates. Values entirely absent in one experimental condition (treatment + time point) (under detection threshold) were replaced using the QRILC method (R package imputeLCMD v2.0 with tune.sigma = 1); values absent of one replicate only (missing at random) were replaced using the slsa method (R package imp4p v0.9). We performed an ANOVA, and paired t-test for each time point. P-values were corrected for multiple testing using Storey. The proteins significantly regulated (q-value of the ANOVA and one of the paired t-test ≤ 0.05) were clustered using hierarchical clustering (hclust function with method = “ward.D” applied on log2-transformed fold changes relative to T0, tree cut with k = 10). GO term enrichment per cluster was perform as for transcript modules (see paragraph “functional annotation”). Statistical analysis of the phosphoproteome We used the MaxQuant “Phospho (STY)Sites.txt” table. Phosphorylation sites on potential contaminant were removed as well as reverse hits, and we kept sites with a PEP ≤ 0.01 and a localization probability ≥ 0.75. Log2-transformed intensities were normalized per condition (treatment + time point) to conserve potential shift of phospho-peptide median signal. Missing value replacement and statistical analysis was performed as described for the proteome. Additionally, we performed ANOVAs to identify phosphorylation sites with time courses significantly different from the protein these belong to.  Combined analysis of the three data sets Each majority protein ID (keeping only the accessions with the highest number of unique peptides) was matched to the corresponding transcript with the highest sum of signal across all samples. This strategy resulted in gene relative expression values similar to using the sum of signal from all transcripts.

### Publication Abstract
The Hohenberg-Kohn theorem of density-functional theory establishes the existence of a bijection between the ground-state electron density and the external potential of a many-body system. This guarantees a one-to-one map from the electron density to all observables of interest including electronic excited-state energies. Time-Dependent Density-Functional Theory (TDDFT) provides one framework to resolve this map; however, the approximations inherent in practical TDDFT calculations, together with their computational expense, motivate finding a cheaper, more direct map for electronic excitations. Here, we show that determining density and energy functionals via machine learning allows the equations of TDDFT to be bypassed. The framework we introduce is used to perform the first excited-state molecular dynamics simulations with a machine-learned functional on malonaldehyde and correctly capture the kinetics of its excited-state intramolecular proton transfer, allowing insight into how mechanical constraints can be used to control the proton transfer reaction in this molecule. This development opens the door to using machine-learned functionals for highly efficient excited-state dynamics simulations.

### Keywords
Encystment, Time-resolved molecular atlas, Acanthamoeba castellanii

### Affiliations
Institut Pasteur
Laboratoire Ecologie et Biologie des Interactions, UMR CNRS 7267 Université de Poitiers ; UFR SFA; Pole Biologie Sante Bât. B36/B37 ; 1 Rue Georges Bonnet ; TSA 51106 86073 POITIERS Cedex 9, FRANCE

### Submitter
Magalie Duchateau

### Lab Head
Dr Ascel SAMBA LOUAKA
Laboratoire Ecologie et Biologie des Interactions, UMR CNRS 7267 Université de Poitiers ; UFR SFA; Pole Biologie Sante Bât. B36/B37 ; 1 Rue Georges Bonnet ; TSA 51106 86073 POITIERS Cedex 9, FRANCE


