### Accession
PXD036227

### Title
Chaperone-mediated autophagy promotes PCa survival during ARPI through selective proteome remodeling

### Description
Defining acute stress response mechanisms that mediate prostate cancer (PCa) treatment resistance will help improve therapeutic outcomes of patients treated with androgen receptor pathway inhibition (ARPI). ARPI causes abrupt environmental changes, subjecting PCa cells to acute metabolic stress. We identified the up-regulation of chaperone-mediated autophagy (CMA) in response to acute ARPI stress, which persisted in castration-resistant PCa (CRPC). CMA is a selective protein degradation pathway and a key stress response mechanism up-regulated under several stress stimuli, including metabolic stress. As mediator of selective protein degradation, CMA orchestrates cellular pathway changes mediating the cellular stress response. Broad-spectrum proteomic analysis identified CMA induced proteome remodeling acutely after ARPI stress. CMA sustained PCa growth and survival during ARPI, promoting metabolic reprogramming through the upregulation mTORC1 signaling and pathways associated with PCa biosynthesis and energetics. The upregulation of CMA promotes PCa cell proliferation after ARPI, and emergence of CRPC in-vivo. CMA inhibition compromised PCa metabolism, leading to ATP depletion and profound anti-proliferative effects on PCa cells, enhanced when combined with ARPI. CMA inhibition prevented in-vivo tumour formation, while also re-sensitizing enzalutamide-resistant cell lines in-vitro. The profound anti-proliferative effect of CMA inhibition was attributed to cell cycle arrest mediated through p53 transcriptional repression of E2F target genes. This study established CMA as an acute ARPI stress response mechanism, essential in alleviating ARPI induced metabolic stress to promote PCa growth and survival. CMA plays a critical role in the development of ARPI resistance in PCa.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from cell pellets using RIPA buffer, quantified by BCA assay and samples then further diluted with RIPA to 3mg/ml.  50µl aliquots were reduced (5µl 100mM DTT, 30min, 60°C), cooled and alkylated (5µl 200mM iodoacetamide, 30min RT in the dark). Clean up and digests were carried out by a variation of SP3 (Hughes et al, Nature Protocols, vol 14, Jan 2019, pp 68-85). Briefly, 20mg SeraMag Speedbeads (GE Healthcare) per sample were washed twice with water and mixed with the above lysate followed by addition of 90µl acetonitrile and vortexing 10min 800rpm RT to retain proteins on beads.  Beads were magnetically captured, supernatant was removed, and beads washed with 300µl 80% ethanol.  This wash was repeated two more times after which the beads were taken up in 50µl 50mM HEPES pH8, 2µg trypsin/LycC (ProMega) was added and the samples incubated overnight at 37°C, 1400rpm (Eppendorf Thermomixer).   Samples were placed on magnet, the resulting peptides transferred to a fresh Eppendorf, and protein concentrations determined for each sample using a Nanodrop/BCA assay.  A pooled sample was prepared by combining 4µl from each after which 10plex TMT labeling was carried out similar to vendor directions (Thermo).  Each 5mg TMT reagent tube was dissolved in 256µl acetonitrile and 25µl added to 25µg/40µl HEPES pH8 of individual samples according to a predetermined layout with the pooled sample designated with TMT(131) in each set.  Samples were incubated 1 hour at room temperature, after which 4µl of 5% hydroxylamine was added and samples further incubated 15min at RT.  The individual TMT labeled samples were then combined into each of their designated sets and dried with a centrifugal evaporator (Centrivap).  Each of the resulting multiplexed samples was redissolved in 200μL 0.2% TFA and desalted using a 50mg, 1cc Waters SepPak column (1ml acetonitrile/0.1% TFA followed by 1ml water/0.1% TFA conditioning; load sample; 2ml water/0.1% FA wash; 800μl 70% acetonitrile/0.1% FA elution; Centrivap dry) and reconstituted in 30µl 0.1% TFA. Approximately 90µg of each multiplexed sample underwent high pH fractionation using a Waters Acquity UPLC coupled with an Acquity Photodiode Array detector.  A 1mm BEH C18 column was used with 2mM ammonium formate pH 9.5 in both the water and acetonitrile buffers.  The gradient as % acetonitrile used was: 0-2min, 2%; 2-30min, 2-25%, 30-35min, 25-40%; 35-40min, 40-90%; 40-42min, 90-98%; 42-44min, 98%; 44-44.5, 98-2% at a flow rate of 0.1ml/min, total run time 50min.  Fractions were collected every minute from 3-43minutes and concatenated as follows: F1 (5, 17, 29); F2 (6, 18, 30); F3 (7, 19, 31) etc with 1-4 added to F9-12 respectively for a total of 12 fractions.  The concatenated samples were dried with a Centrivap and redissolved in 0.1% TFA to a final concentration of about 0.7µg/µl.

### Data Protocol
Analysis of peptides was carried out on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos MS platform (Thermo Scientific). Samples were introduced using an Easy-nLC 1200 system (Thermo) with an ES804A column (Thermo).  Prior to each sample injection, the analytical column was equilibrated at 650 bar with 6μL mobile phase A.  The injection volumes for all samples was 3µl and sample loading was in a total volume of 7μL at 650 bar.  Separations were done using a gradient of mobile phase A (water/0.1% formic acid) and B (80% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid) at 0.3µl/min as follows: 2%B, 0-4min; 2-28%B, 4-115min; 28-40% B, 115-130min; 40-95% B, 130-140min; 95%B 140-150min at 50 deg C.  Data acquisition (control software version 3.1.2412.25) was carried out using a data-dependent method with Synchronous Precursor Detection (SPS). The Lumos was operated with a positive ion spray voltage of 2000V and a transfer tube temperature of 325°C. The default charge state was set as 2. Survey scans (MS1) were acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120K, across a mass range of 375 – 1500 m/z, with RF lens setting of 30, an AGC target of 4e5, max injection time of 50ms in profile mode. Monoisotopic Peak Determination was set to peptide, an intensity threshold of 5e3, charge states 2-6 and dynamic exclusion set to 60 seconds, 10ppm with dependent scans set on single charge state per precursor.  For MS2 scans charge state 2, quadrupole isolation was used with a 1.2m/z window, CID activation with fixed 35% collision energy, 10 msec activation time and activation Q of 0.25 using the ion trap in rapid mode, scan range auto, AGC target 1e4 and max inject time 50 msec in centroid mode; similar parameters were used for charge state 3 and 4-6 except quadrupole isolation windows were 0.7 and 0.5 respectfully.  For charge state 2, Precursor Selection range was m/z 400-1200, exclusion mass widths were both 25ppm, and isobaric tag loss exclusion set to TMT.  For charge state 3 and 4-6 precursor selection ranges were 100-500 and 50-4000 respectfully with precursor ion exclusions of 25ppm and m/z 0.5.  For all charge states, MS3 was with SPS, n=10, isolation window m/z 1.3, with HCD activation 65%, Orbitrap detection at 50K resolution, scan range 100-500 and AGC target 1e5 and maximum injection time 105msec, centroid mode with parallelizable time turned off.   All data files were processed with Protein Discoverer 2.2.0.388. Spectrum files were recalibrated using 20ppm precursor mass tolerance and 0.6Da fragment tolerance with static peptide N-terminus and K TMT 6plex modification in addition to C carbamidomethyl modification. Searches were carried out using Sequest HT against the SwissProt TaxID=9606 (v2017-10-25) database with trypsin cleavage, maximum missed cleavage 2, minimum peptide length 5, precursor mass tolerance 10ppm, fragment mass tolerance 0.6Da with K,M,P oxidation and K TMT6plex as permitted peptide dynamic modifications, N terminal acetyl as dymanic protein modification, and with static carbamidomethyl C and peptide N terminus TMT6plex modifications.  Decoy database strict and relaxed FDR targets were 0.01 and 0.05 based on q value.  Unique+Razor peptides were selected and a co-isolation threshold of 75% with S/N cutoff of 10 used with total peptide amount normalization mode.  Ratios were versus the pooled arm (TMT131) in each set with quan roll up based on summed abundance with a maximum allowable fold change of 100 and no missing value imputation and p-values calculated using the background based ANOVA test.  Output was filtered for master protein and exported to Excel for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cma, Enzalutamide, Prostate

### Affiliations
Director, Vancouver Prostate Centre Chief Executive Officer, PC-TRiADD Distinguished Professor and Head, Department of Urologic Sciences, UBC BC Leadership Chair in Prostate Cancer Research
Vancouver Prostate Centre

### Submitter
Nicholas Nikesitch

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Gleave
Director, Vancouver Prostate Centre Chief Executive Officer, PC-TRiADD Distinguished Professor and Head, Department of Urologic Sciences, UBC BC Leadership Chair in Prostate Cancer Research


