### Accession
PXD014202

### Title
Identification of desuccinylase ScCobB2 and its desuccinylation substrates in Streptomyces coelicolor

### Description
As a recently discovered protein posttranslational modification in eukaryotes, lysine succinylation has attracted increasing interest due to its ability to regulate several critical cellular processes including catabolism, β-oxidation, and ketogenesis. Nevertheless, understanding of the regulation mechanism is still at an early stage due to the lack of identified specific desuccinylases in most microorganisms.Here, in the model soil bacteria Streptomyces coelicolor, we biochemically characterized a sirtuin-like protein ScCobB2 as a divergent desuccinylase. Based on it, we identified a total of 673 unique succinylated sites, of which 470 sites in 317 proteins were quantified by combining tandem mass tag labeling, antibody affinity enrichment, and LC−MS/MS analysis. Furtheranalyses of the quantitative succinylome revealed that at least 114 proteins representing two major pathways, carbon metabolism and protein biosynthesis, are obviously hypersuccinylated in ∆ScCobB2 cells. We experimentally examined the regulatory roles of ScCobB2 on 13 hypersuccinylated proteins, including glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase, aconitate hydratase, and several ribosomal proteins, the results of which suggested a high confidence in our quantitative data. This work provided the first discovery of a specificdesuccinylase in bacteria, and demonstrated it has pivotal regulatory role in multiple biological processes for S. coelicolor, laid the foundation for future research of succinylation regulation in other microorganisms.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction and trypsin digestion Wild-type andΔSccobB2 cells were grown and harvested followed the same procedures as describedin the above section(Determination of cellular succinylation levels).The collected cells were first frozen using liquidnitrogen,and then transferred to 50-mL centrifuge tubes for high intensity ultrasonication in lysis buffer(8Murea, 2mMEDTA, 5mMDTT, 1% Protease Inhibitor CocktailIII,3μM trichostatin A, and 50mM nicotinamide). Cell debris was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4°C for10min. Finally, the protein was precipitated with cold 15% trichloroacetic acid for 2h at -20 °C. After centrifugation at 4°C for10 min, the supernatant was discarded. The remaining precipitate was washed with cold acetone three times. The protein was redissolved in buffer (8M urea, 100mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), pH8.0), and the protein concentration was determined with a 2-D Quant kit (GE Healthcare) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with10mM DTT for 1 h at 37°C and alkylated with 20mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 45 min at room temperature in the dark. Then protein samples were dilutedbyadding100mMTEABtourea at a concentration less than 2 M. Finally, trypsin (Promega, WI, USA) was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion over night and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h digestion. TMT labeling and affinity enrichment After trypsin digestion, peptides were desalted by a StrataX C18 SPE column (Phenomenex)and vacuum-dried. Peptides were reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol with a 6-plexTMTkit (TMT-126for wild-type cell andTMT-128forΔScCobB2cell in this case). Briefly, one unit of TMT reagent (defined as the amount of reagent required to label 1 mg of peptide) was thawed and reconstituted in 24 μl acetonitrile (ACN).The peptide mixtures were then incubated for 2 h at room temperature, pooled, desalted, and dried by vacuum centrifugation. To enrich KSuc peptides, tryptic peptides dissolved in NETN buffer (100 mM NaCl, 1mM EDTA, 50mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH8.0) were incubated with pre-washed antibody beads(PTM Biolabs, China) at 4 °C over night with gentle shaking. The beads were was hed four times with NETN buffer and twice with ddH2O. The bound peptides were eluted from the beads with 0.1% TFA. The e luted fractions were combined and vacuum-dried. The resulting peptides were cleaned with C18 ZipTips (Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s instructions, followed by LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data was processed using MaxQuant with the integrated Andromeda search engine(v.1.4.1.2).Tandem mass spectra were searched against the UniProt Streptomyces coelicolor database(organismID,100226; 8,038sequences) concatenated with a reversed ecoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as the cleavageenzymeallowingupto4missingcleavages,5modificationsperpeptide, and5charges.Masserrorwassetto20ppmfor the firstsearch,5ppmfor the main search, and0.02Daforfragmentions.CarbamidomethylationonCyswasspecifiedas a fixed modification, and oxidation on Met, succinylation on Lys, and succinylation on proteinN-termini were specified as variable modifications. The false discovery rate thresholds for protein, peptide, and modification sites werespecifiedat1%.Minimumpeptidelengthwassetat7.AllotherparametersinMaxQuantweresettodefaultvalues.Thesitelocalizationprobabilitywassetas>0.75.

### Publication Abstract
As a recently discovered protein posttranslational modification in eukaryotes, lysine succinylation has attracted increasing interest due to its ability to regulate several critical cellular processes, including catabolism, &#x3b2;-oxidation, and ketogenesis. Nevertheless, understanding of the regulatory mechanisms is still at an early stage due to the lack of identified specific desuccinylases in microorganisms. Here, in the model soil bacterium <i>Streptomyces coelicolor</i>, we biochemically characterized a sirtuin-like protein <i>Sc</i>CobB2 as a divergent desuccinylase. Based on it, we were able to identify a total of 673 unique succinylated sites, of which 470 sites in 317 proteins were quantified by comparing the &#x394;<i>ScCobB2</i> to the wild-type succinylome <i>via</i> LC-MS/MS analysis. Further analyses of the quantitative succinylome revealed that at least 114 proteins representing two major pathways, protein biosynthesis and carbon metabolism, are obviously hypersuccinylated in &#x394;<i>ScCobB2</i> cells. We experimentally examined the regulatory roles of <i>Sc</i>CobB2 on 13 hypersuccinylated proteins, including glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase, aconitate hydratase, and several ribosomal proteins, the results of which suggested a high confidence in our quantitative data. This work provided the first discovery of a specific desuccinylase in bacteria and demonstrated it has pivotal regulatory roles in multiple biological processes of <i>S. coelicolor</i>, laying the foundation for future research of succinylation regulation in other microorganisms.

### Keywords
Post-translational modification; desuccinylase; sccobb2; lysine succinylation; succinylome

### Affiliations
Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences
Key Laboratory of Synthetic Biology, Institute of Plant Physiology and Ecology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200032, China.

### Submitter
Wei Zhao

### Lab Head
Dr Wei Zhao
Key Laboratory of Synthetic Biology, Institute of Plant Physiology and Ecology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200032, China.


