### Accession
PXD000498

### Title
The quantitative and condition-dependent Escherichia coli proteome

### Description
Measuring precise concentrations of proteins can provide insights into biological processes. Here we use efficient protein extraction and sample fractionation, as well as state-of-the-art quantitative mass spectrometry techniques to generate a comprehensive, condition-dependent protein-abundance map for Escherichia coli. We measure cellular protein concentrations for 55% of predicted E. coli genes (>2,300 proteins) under 22 different experimental conditions and identify methylation and N-terminal protein acetylations previously not known to be prevalent in bacteria. We uncover system-wide proteome allocation, expression regulation and post-translational adaptations. These data provide a valuable resource for the systems biology and broader E. coli research communities.

### Sample Protocol
The Escherichia coli K-12 strain BW25113 (genotype: F-, Δ(araD-araB)567, ΔlacZ4787(::rrnB-3), λ-, rph-1, Δ(rhaD-rhaB)568, hsdR514) was used to generate the proteome map for all 22 conditions. Additionally, the proteome for the glucose and LB condition was also determined for the strains MG1655 (genotype: F-, λ-, rph-1) (REF ) and NCM3722 (genotype: F+). Cell were lysed using 2% sodium deoxycholate buffers, reduced, alkylated and digested using Lys-C and trypsin. 1 ug of peptids were subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis using 3 h linear gradients and HCD fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw-files were imported into the Progenesis LC-MS software (v4.0, Nonlinear Dynamics Limited), which was used to extract peptide precursor ion intensities across all samples applying the default parameters. The generated mgf-files were searched using MASCOT against a decoy database (consisting of forward and reverse protein sequences) of the predicted proteome from E.coli (UniProt, download date: 2012/07/20). The database consists of 4431 E. coli proteins as well as known contaminants such as porcine trypsin, human keratins and high abundant bovine serum proteins (Uniprot), resulting in a total of 10388 protein sequences. The search criteria were set as follows: full tryptic specificity was required (cleavage after lysine or arginine residues, unless followed by proline); 2 missed cleavages were allowed; carbamidomethylation (C) was set as fixed modification; oxidation (M) was applied as variable modifications; mass tolerance of 10 ppm (precursor) and 0.6 Da (fragments). The database search results were filtered using the ion score to set the false discovery rate (FDR) to 1% on the peptide and protein level, respectively, based on the number of reverse protein sequence hits in the datasets.

### Publication Abstract
Measuring precise concentrations of proteins can provide insights into biological processes. Here we use efficient protein extraction and sample fractionation, as well as state-of-the-art quantitative mass spectrometry techniques to generate a comprehensive, condition-dependent protein-abundance map for Escherichia coli. We measure cellular protein concentrations for 55% of predicted E. coli genes (&gt;2,300 proteins) under 22 different experimental conditions and identify methylation and N-terminal protein acetylations previously not known to be prevalent in bacteria. We uncover system-wide proteome allocation, expression regulation and post-translational adaptations. These data provide a valuable resource for the systems biology and broader E. coli research communities.

### Keywords
Absolute quantiifcation, Ibaq, E. coli, Mass spectreomtry

### Affiliations
Biozentrum, University of Basel, 4056 Basel, Switzerland
Proteomics Core Facility

### Submitter
Alexander Schmidt

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Schmidt
Biozentrum, University of Basel, 4056 Basel, Switzerland


