### Accession
PXD015050

### Title
Proteomic and phosphoproteomic analyses of protein PKA catalytic-alpha-null mpkCCD cells and PKA catalytic-beta-null mpkCCD cells.

### Description
Protein Kinase A (PKA) is a widely studied protein that has been viewed by most investigators as a single entity, although its catalytic subunits are coded in the genome by two separate genes, PKA catalytic alpha (Gene symbol: Prkaca) and PKA catalytic beta Gene symbol: Prkacb).  At an amino-acid level, the two are 91.5 percent identical and the catalytic domains are virtually identical. (Footnote: A third entity PKA catalytic gamma, is not widely expressed and will not be considered here.) We have recently succeeded in using CRISPR-Cas9 to create disruptive mutations in both PKA genes (PKA double KO, or PKA dKO) in vasopressin-responsive kidney epithelial cells (mpkCCD cells). Here we carry out mass spectrometry based quantitative proteomics and phosphoproteomics separately in PKA catalytic-alpha and PKA catalytic-beta single knockouts address the issue of function difference between these two PKA catalytic subunits.

### Sample Protocol
The study utilized immortalized mpkCCD cells in which either Prkaca or Prkacb gene expression was deleted (“PKA-Calpha-null” and “PKA-Cbeta-null”) by introducing mutations using CRISPR-Cas9. Control cell lines (“PKA-intact”) were carried through the CRISPR-Cas9 protocol but did not show deletion of either PKA catalytic gene. We used three independent PKA-Calpha-null lines and three independent PKA-intact controls. Similarly, used three independent PKA-Cbeta-null lines and three different independent PKA-intact controls. Experiments with these lines were performed in duplicate giving 24 samples in total. Cells were cultured as described previously. Briefly, they were initially maintained in complete medium, DMEM/F-12 containing 2% serum and other supplements (5 μg/mL insulin, 50 nM dexamethasone, 1 nM triiodothyronine, 10 ng/mL epidermal growth factor, 60 nM sodium selenite, 5 μg/mL transferrin; all from Sigma). Cells were seeded on permeable membrane supports (Transwell) and grown in complete medium containing 0.1 nM 1-desamino-8-d-arginine-vasopressin (dDAVP, basal side only) for 4 d. Then, the medium was changed to simple medium (DMEM/F12 with dexamethasone, sodium selenite, and transferrin and no serum) with 0.1 nM dDAVP and maintained for 3 day.  Cells were washed three times with ice-cold PBS and lysed with Laemmli buffer (1.5% SDS, 10 mM Tris, pH 6.8, protease and phosphatase inhibitors). Samples were homogenized using a QIAshredder (Qiagen). Protein concentrations were measured using Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit. Protein lysates were reduced with 20 mM dithiothreitol for 1 hour at 25°C, and then alkylated with 40 mM iodoacetamide for 1 hour at 25°C in the dark. The samples were acetone precipitated prior to digestion with Trypsin (ThermoFisher) (1:50 wt/wt.) overnight at 37°C. The peptides were desalted using hydrophilic-lipophilic-balanced (HLB) extraction cartridges (Oasis) and quantified using Pierce™ Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay. For each replicate, equal amounts of each sample (250 μg of peptide) were labeled using TMT11Plex Mass Tag Labeling Kit (Thermo Scientific, Lot number UE283355) following the manufacturer’s instructions. A total of three labeling batches using the same TMT11 Plex Mass Tag kit were run to quantify all 24 samples. Each batch included a common pooled sample containing a mixture of all 24 experimental samples. We then fractionated the samples (12 fractions) using high pH reverse phase chromatography (Agilent 1200 HPLC System).After taking aliquots for total proteome, phosphopeptides were sequentially enriched following Sequential Enrichment from Metal Oxide Affinity Chromatography protocol (SMOAC, Thermo Scientific). Samples were then vacuum-dried and stored at -80°C until analysis.  The dried peptides were re-suspended with 0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile in LC-MS grade water (J.T. Baker) before mass spectrometry analysis. Total and phosphopeptides were analyzed using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 nano LC system connected to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos ETD mass spectrometer equipped with an EASY-Spray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were introduced into a peptide nanotrap at a flow rate of 5 μL/min. The trapped peptides were fractionated with a reversed-phase EASY-Spray PepMap column (C18, 75 μm × 50 cm) using a linear gradient of 4 to 32% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid (120 min at 0.3 μL/min). SPS-MS3 method is used for quantification.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectra were searched against the Mus musculus UniProtKB7 reference proteome (Proteome ID: UP000000589, release 2019_06, plus contaminant database) using MaxQuant8 1.6.7.0. Reporter ion MS3 with TMT11plex was specified as labeling type and carbamidomethyl (C) was configured as fixed modifications. Lot-specific TMT isotopic impurities correction factors were used as recommended in TMT product data sheets. Variable modifications included phospho (STY), oxidation (M), and acetyl (Protein-N-term). False discovery rate was controlled at 1% (target-decoy). Trypsin/P was set as the digestion enzyme with up to 2 missed cleavages allowed. Other parameters were set to the defaults.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pka catalytic subunit, Phosphoproteomics, Mouse, Kinase, Pka, Proteomics, Mpkccd, Kidney

### Affiliations
Epithelial Systems Biology Laboratory, Systems Biology Center, NHLBI, NIH

### Submitter
Kavee Limbutara

### Lab Head
Dr Mark A. Knepper
Epithelial Systems Biology Laboratory, Systems Biology Center, NHLBI, NIH


