### Accession
PXD020502

### Title
VAMP7 KO and ATG5 KO in axonal growth

### Description
VAMP7 is involved in autophagy and in exocytosis mediating neurite growth, two yet unconnected cellular pathways. Here we found that nutrient restriction and activation of autophagy stimulated axonal growth while inhibition led to multiple axons. VAMP7 KO neuronal cells showed impaired whereas ATG5 KO cells showed increased neurite growth. Secretomics identified that ER-phagy-related LC3 interacting region-containing proteins Atlastins and Reticulons were more abundant in ATG5 KO and less abundant in VAMP7 KO secretomes. The secretion of reticulon 3, LC3-II and P62 was impaired in VAMP7 KO cells. Treatment of neuronal cells with ATG5 or VAMP7 KO conditioned medium showed no effect thus the role of ATG5 and VAMP7 in neurite growth was cell autonomous. A nanobody directed against VAMP7 inhibited axonal growth induced by nutrient restriction. Furthermore, expression of the inhibitory Longin domain of VAMP7 impaired the subcellular localization of reticulon 3 in neurons. We propose that VAMP7-dependent unconventional autophagy-dependent secretion is an essential mechanism for axonal growth.

### Sample Protocol
or proteomic analysis, PC12 secretome and proteome was analyzed in three independent biological replicates for the secretome and two biological replicates for the total proteome. Each sample was run in three technical replicates. Samples were digested following a FASP protocol (Lipecka et al., 2016). Prior nanoLC-MS/MS analysis samples were re-suspended in 0.1% TFA in HPLC-grade water and injected in a nanoRSLC-Q Exactive PLUS (RSLC Ultimate 3000, Thermo Scientific, MA, USA). Peptides were loaded onto a µ-precolumn (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, cartridge, 300 µm i.d.×5 mm, 5 µm, Thermo Scientific, MA, USA) and were separated on a 50 cm reversed-phase liquid chromatographic column (0.075 mm ID, Acclaim PepMap 100, C18, 2 µm, Thermo Scientific, MA, USA).

### Data Protocol
The MS files were processed with the MaxQuant software version 1.5.8.30 and searched with Andromeda search engine against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot Rattus Norvegicus database database (release 03-2018, 8042 entries). To search parent mass and fragment ions, we set an initial mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and 0.5 Da respectively. The minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and strict specificity for trypsin cleavage was required, allowing up to two missed cleavage sites. Carbamidomethylation (Cys) was set as fixed modification, whereas oxidation (Met), N-term acetylation. The match between runs option was enabled with a match time window of 0.7 min and an alignment time window of 20 min. The false discovery rates (FDRs) at the protein and peptide level were set to 1%. Scores were calculated in MaxQuant as described previously (Cox and Mann, 2008). For statistical analysis we compared WT vs VAMP7 KO and ATG5 ko using Perseus

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Vamp7, Amphisomes, Axonal growth, Secretion, Neurons

### Affiliations
Necker proteomics, INSERM
Proteomics platform Necker, Université de Paris - Structure Fédérative de Recherche Necker, INSERM US24/CNRS UMS3633, Paris 75015, France.

### Submitter
Chiara guerrera

### Lab Head
Dr Chiara Guerrera
Proteomics platform Necker, Université de Paris - Structure Fédérative de Recherche Necker, INSERM US24/CNRS UMS3633, Paris 75015, France.


