### Accession
PXD019653

### Title
Cancer tissue classication using machine learning applied to MALDI MSI and high resolution H&E stained images

### Description
To identify a panel of m/z markers for the early detection of colorectal cancer (CRC). Identication of a molecular pattern that can distinguish the primary tumours of colorectal cancer with lymph node metastasis compared to those without. Using MALDI MSI data,we developed and validated a machine learning model that can be used for early screening of CRC. Our model yields high sensitivity and specicity in distinguishing normal tissue from the cancerous. Model described here, can be a used in clinical labs for early diagnosis of colorectal cancer.

### Sample Protocol
Here, we have developed a machine learning model to compare the proteomic changes between the tumour and normal tissues (or the dierent FIGO stages of CRC). 15 TMAs were analysed by MALDI MSI consisting of 564 tissue groups (286 normal, 278 tumour) from 302 unique patients in total.

### Data Protocol
The imaging dataset was uploaded and pre-processed into the SCiLS lab v2016b (Bruker Daltonik), baseline subtraction by TopHat and normalisation based on total ion count was performed. Based on the pathological annota- tions, region(s) of interest were dened and grouped together in three dierent classes, normal, with lymph node metastasis (LNM) and without LNM. MSI dataset was then exported as vendor-neutral data format imzML.

### Publication Abstract
Matrix assisted laser desorption/ionization mass spectrometry imaging (MALDI MSI) can determine the spatial distribution of analytes such as protein distributions in a tissue section according to their mass-to-charge ratio. Here, we explored the clinical potential of machine learning (ML) applied to MALDI MSI data for cancer diagnostic classification using tissue microarrays (TMAs) on 302 colorectal (CRC) and 257 endometrial cancer (EC)) patients. ML based on deep neural networks discriminated colorectal tumour from normal tissue with an overall accuracy of 98% in balanced cross-validation (98.2% sensitivity and 98.6% specificity). Moreover, our machine learning approach predicted the presence of lymph node metastasis (LNM) for primary tumours of EC with an accuracy of 80% (90% sensitivity and 69% specificity). Our results demonstrate the capability of MALDI MSI for complementing classic histopathological examination for cancer diagnostic applications.

### Keywords
Crc  colorectal cancer  machine learning maldi msi matrix assisted laser desorption/ionisation mass spectrometry imaging

### Affiliations
Strand Leader and Lloyd Sansom Chair  Biomaterials Engineering and Nanomedicine Future Industries Institute I Building X – X1-10 Mawson Lakes Campus I GPO Box 2471
Research associate

### Submitter
Parul Mittal

### Lab Head
Dr Prof Peter Hoffmann
Strand Leader and Lloyd Sansom Chair  Biomaterials Engineering and Nanomedicine Future Industries Institute I Building X – X1-10 Mawson Lakes Campus I GPO Box 2471


