### Accession
PXD001305

### Title
Rapid and Deep Proteomes by Faster Sequencing on a Benchtop Quadrupole Ultra-High-Field Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer

### Description
The faster sequencing speed available on the latest Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer is investigated and evaluated by four different acquisition methods and benchmarked across three generations of Q Exactive instruments. Also the instrument capabilities for offline high pH reversed-phase peptide fractionation and single-shot phosphoproteomics are evaluated.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa cells are grown and subsequently lysed and digested. Part of it is analyzed in a single analysis run, part is fractionated by high pH fractionation, and part is enriched by TiO2. All peptides were separated online with the mass spectrometer (Q Exactive, Q Exactive Plus, and Q Exactive HF). Different acquisition methods are compared across instruments, and in dilution series.

### Data Protocol
All raw LC-MS/MS data were analyzed by MaxQuant v. 1.4.1.4 using the Andromeda Search engine and searched against the human Swiss-Prot database without isoforms (May 2014 release with 20,213 protein sequences). Two analysis groups were made in MaxQuant enabling one combined analysis of all proteome and phosphoproteome data. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified as fixed modification for both groups. For the proteome data, variable modifications considered were oxidation of methionine, protein N-terminal acetylation, and pyro-glutamate formation from glutamine. The phosphoproteome data was additionally searched with the variable modification phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine. An experimental design was used where each raw file was considered an independent experiment; except for the fractionation studies where fractions were specified and each original sample were considered an experiment. The match between run feature and the second peptide option was disabled and everything else set to the default values, including the false discovery rate limit of 1% on both peptide and protein level. Phosphorylation sites were considered localized at a site localization probability above 75%.

### Publication Abstract
Shotgun proteomics is a powerful technology for global analysis of proteins and their post-translational modifications. Here, we investigate the faster sequencing speed of the latest Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer, which features an ultra-high-field Orbitrap mass analyzer. Proteome coverage is evaluated by four different acquisition methods and benchmarked across three generations of Q Exactive instruments (ProteomeXchange data set PXD001305). We find the ultra-high-field Orbitrap mass analyzer to be capable of attaining a sequencing speed above 20 Hz, and it routinely exceeds 10 peptide spectrum matches per second or up to 600 new peptides sequenced per gradient minute. We identify 4400 proteins from 1 &#x3bc;g of HeLa digest using a 1 h gradient, which is an approximately 30% improvement compared to that with previous instrumentation. In addition, we show that very deep proteome coverage can be achieved in less than 24 h of analysis time by offline high-pH reversed-phase peptide fractionation, from which we identify more than 140,000 unique peptide sequences. This is comparable to state-of-the-art multiday, multienzyme efforts. Finally, the acquisition methods are evaluated for single-shot phosphoproteomics, where we identify 7600 unique HeLa phosphopeptides in one gradient hour and find the quality of fragmentation spectra to be more important than quantity for accurate site assignment.

### Keywords
Orbitrap. q exactive hf. shotgun proteomics. hcd. hela. phosphoproteomics. single-shot analysis. high ph reversed-phase fractionation. parallel acquisition. deep proteome coverage

### Affiliations
NNF Center for Protein Research, University of Copenhagen
University of Copenhagen

### Submitter
Christian Kelstrup

### Lab Head
Dr Jesper V. Olsen
NNF Center for Protein Research, University of Copenhagen


