### Accession
PXD016407

### Title
Prevotella bryantii B14 proteins from in vitro cultivation under various short-chain fatty acids (SCFA)

### Description
P. bryantii B14 cells were cultivated separately in acetic (Acet), propionic (Prop), butyric (But), iso-butyric (iBut), valeric (Val), iso-valeric (iVal) and 2-methyl butyric acid (2MB) as well as in a mixture of all mentioned short-chain fatty acids (Mix). All 8 treatments were analyzed regarding their proteomes in order to understand the requirements and effects of each SCFA on the metabolism.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were harvested from 7 mL of in vitro culture after 29.5 h for 2MB and 8 h post-inoculation for all residual treatments. The following steps of cell washing, protein extraction, purification and digestion were performed as described in Tilloca et al. (2016). Purified peptides were analyzed using an EASY-nLC 1000 system coupled to a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were introduced into an EASY-Spray column PepMap RSLC (particle size 2 µm, 25 cm x 75 µm, C18. Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a gradient of solvent B (2-10-22-45-95%) over a time of 260 min (Rt: 1-100-180-235-245 min). The mobile phase consisted of solvent A (0.1 % formic acid) and solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid). The flow rate was 250 nL/min and the column temperature was set to 35°C. The peptides were ionized via electron spray ionization (ESI) before entering the Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) with a survey spectra range from 300 – 1,600 m/z in the Orbitrap mass analyzer and a resolution of 70,000 (m/z = 200). The second fragmentation was performed by high-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with a resolution of 17,500. The 10 most abundant peptide precursors in the linear ion trap were generated by data dependent tandem mass spectra. Internal calibration was performed for all samples using lock-mass ions from ambient air as demonstrated earlier by Tilloca et al. (2016).

### Data Protocol
The obtained mass spectra were analyzed by MaxQuant (v. 1.6.2.6) using the Uniprot database of P. bryantii B14 consisting of 3776 entries and enabling label-free quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs) are bacterial products that are known to be used as energy sources in eukaryotic hosts, whereas their role in the metabolism of intestinal microbes is rarely explored. In the present study, acetic, propionic, butyric, isobutyric, valeric, and isovaleric acid, respectively, were added to a newly defined medium containing <i>Prevotella bryantii</i> B<sub>1</sub>4 cells. After 8 h and 24 h, optical density, pH and SCFA concentrations were measured. Long-chain fatty acid (LCFA) profiles of the bacterial cells were analyzed via gas chromatography-time of flight-mass spectrometry (GC-ToF MS) and proteins were quantified using a mass spectrometry-based, label-free approach. Cultures supplemented with single SCFAs revealed different growth behavior. Structural features of the respective SCFAs were identified in the LCFA profiles, which suggests incorporation into the bacterial membranes. The proteomes of cultures supplemented with acetic and valeric acid differed by an increased abundance of outer membrane proteins. The proteome of the isovaleric acid supplementation showed an increase of proteins in the amino acid metabolism. Our findings indicate a possible interaction between SCFAs, the lipid membrane composition, the abundance of outer membrane proteins, and a modulation of branched chain amino acid biosynthesis by isovaleric acid.

### Keywords
Prevotella, Scfa

### Affiliations
University of Hohenheim
University of Hohenheim, Animal Science, Stuttgart, Germany

### Submitter
Jana Seifert

### Lab Head
Dr Porf. Jana Seifert
University of Hohenheim, Animal Science, Stuttgart, Germany


