### Accession
PXD036450

### Title
Diadenosine tetraphosphate as a cosubstrate for AMPylation mediated by FICD

### Description
Diadenosine polyphosphates (ApnAs) are noncanonical nucleotides that are ubiquitous across all forms of life. Due to their strong accumulation upon cellular stress, they are considered alarmones to signal homeostatic imbalance. Nonetheless, their cellular role is poorly understood. In this work, we assessed ApnAs for their usage as cosubstrate for protein AMPylation, a post-translational modification. In humans, AMPylation mediated by the AMPylator FICD with ATP as cosubstrate is a response to ER stress. Here, we demonstrate that Ap4A is proficiently consumed for AMPylation by FICD. By chemical proteomics using a new chemical probe, we identified new potential AMPylation targets. Interestingly, we found that AMPylation targets of FICD may differ depending on the nucleotide cosubstrate. These results may suggest that signaling at elevated Ap4A levels during cellular stress differs from when Ap4A is present at low concentrations allowing response to extracellular cues.

### Sample Protocol
Affinity purification assay. For protein enrichment, mixtures of 2 mg/mL HeLa KO cell lysate, 1 μM wt FICD and 200 μM N6-pATP or N 6-pAp4A in AMPylation buffer were prepared and incubated at 37 °C for 1 h. Then, MeOH was added quench the reaction and after centrifugation the pellet was dissolved in 4ST buffer (4% SDS, 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM TEA pH 7.4). For CuAAC, 0.1 mM TBTA, 1 mM CuSO4, 1 mM TCEP and 0.2 mM N3-(Arg)-PEG3-DB were added to each sample. The samples were incubated at 25 °C for 1 h and subsequently acetone was added. Upon overnight incubation at −20 °C, samples were centrifuged at 14,000 g and 4 °C for 10 min. The supernatant was removed and the dried pellet was dissolved in 0.8% SDS in 1x PBS and incubated with Pierce™ Streptavidin Agarose at 30 °C for 30 min. The beads were washed and afterwards, elution was realized with 0.8 mM biotin and 0.1% RapiGest SF tenside  in 50 mM NH4HCO3 at 37 °C for 10 min. Eluted samples were then treated for in-solution digestion and were desalted using uC18 Zip Tips before LC-MS/MS measurement. LC-MS/MS measurement of affinity purification samples. Samples were analyzed on a Q-Exactive HF Mass Spectrometer coupled to an EASY nLC 1200 UHPLC System equipped with a 50 µm x 15 cm C18 Acclaim PepMap RSLC column with 2 µm beads and 100 Å pore size. Peptides were eluted in a 90 min gradient at a flow rate of 300 nL/min starting from 5% ACN, 0.1% FA, to 30% ACN, 0.1% FA in 75 min followed by a washing step of 10 min at 80% ACN, 0.1% FA. Samples were measured in technical duplicates with a data-dependent acquisition method. MS1 survey scans from 350 to 1,400 m/z were acquired at a resolution of 120,000, an AGC target of 3e6 and a maximum injection time of 60 ms followed by isolation and HCD fragmentation of no more than 15 of the most intense precursor ions with a normalized collision energy of 28 eV. Fragment spectra were acquired at a resolution of 15,000, an AGC target of 1e5 and with a maximum injection time of 50 ms. The intensity threshold was set to 2e4 and dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s.  In vitro AMPylation assays. AMPylation assays were generally performed in AMPylation buffer containing the respective nucleotide and either 0.5 μM wt FICD or 0.5 μM FICD E234G.  For substrate AMPylation, recombinant BiP T229A and Bub3 were tested. Reaction mixtures of 0.25 μM enzyme and 2.5 μM substrate with the respective nucleotide in AMPylation buffer were prepared. Mixtures were incubated at 37 °C for 1 h, subsequently quenched with 1x SDS-PAGE loading buffer and boiled at 95 °C for 5 min. The assays were then resolved by SDS-PAGE. For LC-MS/MS peptide analysis the corresponding gel band was excised and subjected to an in gel tryptic digest. For full-length protein MS analysis, reaction mixtures of 1 μM of FICD E234G, 100 μM nucleotide in AMPylation buffer were prepared. The mixtures were incubated at 37 °C for 1 h and subsequently reactions were quenched with 10 mM EDTA at 0 °C. The samples were concentrated to achieve a concentration of 7.5 μM of FICD E234G.  LC-MS/MS measurement of in gel digested proteins. Samples were analyzed on the same LC-MS system described for affinity purification samples. Peptides were eluted in a 45 min gradient at a flow rate of 300 nL/min starting from 2.5% ACN, 0.1% FA, to 25% ACN, 0.1% FA in 30 min, to 32% ACN, 0.1% FA in 5 min followed by a washing step of 5 min at 75% ACN, 0.1% FA. Samples were measured in technical duplicates with a data-dependent acquisition method. MS1 survey scans from 350 to 1,600 m/z were acquired at a resolution of 120,000, an AGC target of 3e6 and a maximum injection time of 60 ms followed by isolation and HCD fragmentation of no more than 15 of the most intense precursor ions with a normalized collision energy of 28 eV. Fragment spectra were acquired at a resolution of 30,000, an AGC target of 1e5 and with a maximum injection time of 120 ms. The intensity threshold was set to 2e4. Precursor ions that had been selected for fragmentation were excluded from isolation for 5 s. LC-MS measurement and analysis of full-length proteins. For LC-MS measurement of full-length proteins, samples were separated on an analytical ProSwift™ RP-4H connected to a liquid chromatography system (Agilent, Infinity II 1260). Samples were resolved at a flow rate of 300 µL/min. A gradient of 5–25% solvent B (100% ACN) over 20 min was used, solvent A (0.1% FA in MQ). Mass spectra were collected on a 6546 QTOF mass spectrometer equipped with a dual AJS ESI source and operated in positive mode with an acquisition rate of 1,000 ms/spectra, 320 °C gas temperature, 8 L/min drying gas, 35 psi nebulizer, 350 °C sheath gas temperature and 11 L/min sheath gas flow. Fragmentor was set to 175 V, skimmer to 65 V, Vcap to 3,500 V and Nozzle Voltage was set to 1,000 V. Data were recorded by MassHunter (version 10.1.62, Agilent).

### Data Protocol
Data analysis and quantification of affinity purification assays. Raw files from LC-MS/MS measurements were analyzed using MaxQuant (version 2.0.3.0) with the andromeda search engine with default settings and match between runs and LFQ (minimum ratio count 2) enabled. For protein identification, the human reference proteome downloaded from the UniProt database (download date: 02.04.2019, https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/) and an integrated database of common contaminants were used. Oxidation and carbamidomethylation were selected as modifications. Identified proteins were filtered for hits only identified by site, reverse hits and potential contaminants at a false discovery rate (FDR) of ≤ 0.01. Further data processing was performed using Perseus software (version 1.6.14.0)  Identification of AMPylated peptide fragments. Raw data files were converted to Mascot generic format using ProteoWizard and subjected to a database search against the amino acid sequence of FICD wt or E234G, BiP or Bub3 using Mascot (version 2.5.1) as search engine. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine as well as AMPylation of serine/threonine/tyrosine (Delta mass of 329.053 Da) were set as variable modifications. For AMPylation, neutral losses according to the loss of one or more of the three characteristic reporter ions during MS acquisition were included. Reporter ion intensities of the three reporter ions (136.0623 Da, 250.0940 Da and 348.0709 Da) were quantified with a Mascot reporter ion quantification method at a tolerance of 10 ppm. Peptide ion tolerance for the database search was set to 10 ppm, fragment ion tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. A maximum of two missed tryptic cleavages was allowed. Putative peptide spectrum matches of AMPylated peptides as indicated from the Mascot database search were additionally filtered for the presence of at least two AMPylation reporter ions.  Data analysis of full-length protein measurements. Peaks were deconvoluted by MassHunter BioConfirm (version 10.0.10136.0, Agilent) with settings for maximum entropy. Mass steps were set 0.05 Da, limited m/z range was set to 600.00-2500.00 m/z and mass range was set to 35,000-50,000 Da. Baseline was subtracted by the factor 7.0 and searched adducts were protonated signals with peak signals to noise ≥30.0 counts, minimum charge state 5 and minimum protein fit score 8. Spectra were deconvoluted within a specific retention time range set to 15.5-17.5 min.

### Publication Abstract
Diadenosine polyphosphates (Ap<sub>n</sub> As) are non-canonical nucleotides whose cellular concentrations increase during stress and are therefore termed alarmones, signaling homeostatic imbalance. Their cellular role is poorly understood. In this work, we assessed Ap<sub>n</sub> As for their usage as cosubstrates for protein AMPylation, a post-translational modification in which adenosine monophosphate (AMP) is transferred to proteins. In humans, AMPylation mediated by the AMPylator FICD with ATP as a cosubstrate is a response to ER stress. Herein, we demonstrate that Ap<sub>4</sub> A is proficiently consumed for AMPylation by FICD. By chemical proteomics using a new chemical probe, we identified new potential AMPylation targets. Interestingly, we found that AMPylation targets of FICD may differ depending on the nucleotide cosubstrate. These results may suggest that signaling at elevated Ap<sub>4</sub> A levels during cellular stress differs from when Ap<sub>4</sub> A is present at low concentrations, allowing response to extracellular cues.

### Keywords
Diadenosine tetraphosphate, Post-translational modification, Ficd, Proteomics, Ampylation

### Affiliations
University of Konstanz
Organic Chemistry / Cellular Chemistry, Dept. of Chemistry, University of Konstanz (Germany)

### Submitter
Philip Saumer

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Marx
Organic Chemistry / Cellular Chemistry, Dept. of Chemistry, University of Konstanz (Germany)


