### Accession
PXD024001

### Title
Secretome & Cellular Proteome Analysis of Human Glioma LN229

### Description
Experimentalists most frequently rely upon reductionist methods to isolate and analyze discrete signaling compartments - including subcellular domains, organelles and protein-protein interactions. Amongst the systems-biology community, there is a growing need to integrate multiple datasets to resolve complex cellular networks. Provided is procedural framework to discover collaborative signaling networks across multiple proteomic experiments.

### Sample Protocol
LN229 Cellular Proteome. LN229 were grown in high glucose DMEM with 10% FBS in a controlled environment (5% CO2, 36.5°C). Cells were expanded to 5 - 150mm plates, passed every 3-4 days, and harvested at 80% confluency. Cell were rinsed with PBS, plates were scraped in the presence of 500uL of digestion buffer (1% deoxycholate, ammonium bicarbonate, pH8), heated (100°C, 5min) and incubated on ice. The sample was briefly homogenized by probe sonication. Following reduction and alkylation, proteins were digested with sequence-grade modified trypsin (Promega, 1:50, 36.5°C, 16hrs, overnight). Samples were acidified with TFA (2%) and centrifuged (12,000 RCF). Clarified supernatants were enriched using a commercial C18 solid phase extraction column (Isoelute). Peptides were dried and resuspended in 200uL, pH10, 20mM ammonium formate. Peptides were fractionated by off-line HPLC (pH10, 20mM ammonium formate, Agilent 1100 HPLC, 50uL/min) with a linear gradient, 10% to 40% acetonitrile/water (20mM ammonium formate) over 60mins. Peptides were monitored by UV absorbance detection (218 nm). Separations were conducted with a custom packed column (100 x 1mm, Waters XBridge C18, 5um); and eluates collected (1min/fraction) with a Gilson 203B fraction collector. Samples (total of 30) were resuspended in HPLC-MS sample buffer (pH2, 1% TFA, 1% acetic acid) in preparation for analysis. A total of 30 raw files are contained within this set.  LN229 Secretome: Condition media was collected from 4 – 150mm plates with cells at 80% confluency. Cells were rinsed twice with PBS and replaced with 15mL of serum-free DMEM, and incubated (24hrs). Conditioned media was collected, treated with protease inhibitor (complete Mini, Roche), and chilled (4°C). This media was distributed across 5 conical tubes (50mL) and diluted to 75% ethanol. Precipitated proteins were collected by centrifugation (8,000 RCF, 15mins), decanted, and solubilized with digestion buffer (as above). Sample preparation steps were carried out as above, except for the omission of pH10 off-line HPLC. Secretome data represents 4 HPLC-MS (biological replicate) runs.   Mass spectrometry and MaxQuant data analysis. Secretome and cellular proteome samples were analyzed using LTQ-ObitrapVelos (Thermofisher).

### Data Protocol
DDA acquisition parameters can be found within the instrumental Raw files. Datasets were searched with MaxQuant (v1.6.10.43). UniProt reference proteome (human, 9606, 15/05/2020). The complete set of parameters used for MaxQuant search can be found in the parameters.txt (combine -> txt -> parameters.txt). MaxQuant output combine files have been included.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Multi-p, Glioma, Multi-proteomic, Network analysis, Lc-ms/ms, Secretome

### Affiliations
Brandon University

### Submitter
Vincent  Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Vincent Chen, PhD
Brandon University


