### Accession
PXD020551

### Title
Effect of mitochEffect of mitochondrial complex III chronic inhibition on mitochondrial proteomic landscapeondrial complex III chronic inhibition on mitochondrial proteomic landscape

### Description
The mitochondria play a vital role in controlling cell metabolism and regulating crucial cellular outcomes. We previously demonstrated that chronic inhibition of the mitochondrial complex III in rats by Antimycin A (AA) induced pulmonary vasoconstriction. On the metabolic level, AA-induced mitochondrial dysfunction resulted in a glycolytic shift that was reported as the primary contributor to pulmonary hypertension pathogenesis. However, the regulatory proteins driving this metabolic shift with complex III inhibition are yet to be explored. Therefore, to delineate the mechanisms, we followed the rat lung mitochondrial proteomics. Rats treated with the complex III inhibitor, Antimycin-A for up to 24 days, showed a disturbed mitochondrial proteome with significant changes in 28 proteins (p<0.05). We observe a time-dependent decrease in the expression of key proteins that regulate fatty acid oxidation, the tricarboxylic acid cycle, electron transport chain, and amino acid metabolism, indicating diminished mitochondrial function. We also found a significant dysregulation in proteins that control protein import, and the clearance and detoxification of oxidatively damaged peptides via proteolysis and mitophagy. This could lead to the onset of mitochondrial toxicity due to the misfolded protein's stress. We conclude that chronic inhibition of the mitochondrial complex III attenuates mitochondrial function by disruption of global mitochondrial metabolism. This potentially aggravates cellular proliferation by initiating a glycolytic switch and thereby leading to pulmonary hypertension.

### Sample Protocol
To determine alterations in the mitochondrial proteome accompanying complex III inhibition, 50 µL of Membrane Solubilization Buffer (cat# 1862783, Thermo Scientific) was added to isolated mitochondria and incubated on ice for 30 minutes. 40 µL of supernatant (clarified) was collected and subjected to in-solution tryptic digestion. Sample volumes were adjusted to 100 µL with Membrane Solubilization Buffer, containing DTT (5mM final concentration). Following this, the samples were incubated at 56°C for 30 minutes and later brought to room temperature (10min). Again, they were incubated with 15mM acrylamide for 30 minutes (room temperature, protected from light). 6 volumes of pre-chilled 100% acetone were added to the samples and incubated (1 hour at -20°C). This precipitated the proteins. This was followed by centrifugation (16,000 g, 10 min, 4°C). Samples were then vortexed after the addition of 400 µL of pre-chilled 90% acetone. The samples were then centrifuged at 16,000 x g for 5 min at 4°C. The residual acetone was discarded, and the protein pellets air-dried (2-3 min). The protein pellet was resuspended in 50 µL of Digestion Buffer (Pierce MS Sample Prep Kit for Cultured Cells, cat# 84840, Thermo Scientific) and 2 µg of Lys-C was added to each sample and incubated (37°C, 2 hours, shaking at 300rpm). Subsequently, 50 µL of 50mM ammonium bicarbonate and 2 µg of trypsin was added to each sample and incubated (37°C, overnight, shaking at 300rpm). To halt the digestion, the samples were frozen at -80°C for 10 minutes. The samples were dried and resuspended in 15 µL 0.1%HFBA/4%FA (v/v), and incubated at room temperature for 15 minutes. The samples were desalted as previously described (PMID 28550165). The dried peptides were resuspended in 6 µl of 0.1% FA (v/v), sonicated for 1 min and 2.5 µl of the final sample was analyzed by mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were extracted from Xcalibur ‘RAW’ files, and charge states were assigned using the ProteoWizard 2.1.x msConvert script using the default parameters. Following this, the fragment mass spectra were searched against the Rattus SwissProt_2018_11 database using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.4). The default probability cut-off score was used here. The search variables that were utilized were: 10 ppm mass tolerance for precursor ion masses and 0.5 Da for product ion masses; digestion with trypsin; a maximum of two missed tryptic cleavages; variable modifications of oxidation of methionine and phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine. Cross-correlation of Mascot search results with X! Tandem was accomplished with Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.8.7; Proteome Software, Portland, OR, USA). The Scaffold program was used to determine the probability assessment of peptide assignments and protein identifications. Only peptides with ≥ 95% probability were considered. Reported peptide FDR rates from Scaffold ranged from 0.1-0.2%. Progenesis QI for proteomics software (version 2.4, Nonlinear Dynamics Ltd., Newcastle upon Tyne, UK) was used to execute ion-intensity based label-free quantification as previously described (PMID: 31018989)

### Publication Abstract
The mitochondria play a vital role in controlling cell metabolism and regulating crucial cellular outcomes. We previously demonstrated that chronic inhibition of the mitochondrial complex III in rats by Antimycin A (AA) induced sustained pulmonary vasoconstriction. On the metabolic level, AA-induced mitochondrial dysfunction resulted in a glycolytic shift that was reported as the primary contributor to pulmonary hypertension pathogenesis. However, the regulatory proteins driving this metabolic shift with complex III inhibition are yet to be explored. Therefore, to delineate the mechanisms, we followed changes in the rat lung mitochondrial proteome throughout AA treatment. Rats treated with AA for up to 24 days showed a disturbed mitochondrial proteome with significant changes in 28 proteins (<i>p</i> &lt; 0.05). We observed a time-dependent decrease in the expression of key proteins that regulate fatty acid oxidation, the tricarboxylic acid cycle, the electron transport chain, and amino acid metabolism, indicating a correlation with diminished mitochondrial function. We also found a significant dysregulation in proteins that controls the protein import machinery and the clearance and detoxification of oxidatively damaged peptides via proteolysis and mitophagy. This could potentially lead to the onset of mitochondrial toxicity due to misfolded protein stress. We propose that chronic inhibition of mitochondrial complex III attenuates mitochondrial function by disruption of the global mitochondrial metabolism. This potentially aggravates cellular proliferation by initiating a glycolytic switch and thereby leads to pulmonary hypertension.

### Keywords
Mitochodria, Quantitative proteomics, Antimycin a, Pulmonary vasoconstriction

### Affiliations
University of Arizona College of Medicine, Department of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology
University of Arizona

### Submitter
Paul Langlais

### Lab Head
Dr Ruslan Rafikov
University of Arizona College of Medicine, Department of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology


