### Accession
PXD033517

### Title
Identification of lncRNA CALA-dependent protein interaction partners of G3BP1 in the cytoplasm

### Description
We previously identified the stimuli-responsive lncRNA CALA to impact endothelial cell function and identified G3BP1 as a main interaction partner of CALA in the cytoplasm of human umblical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs). To uncover the role of the lncRNA CALA in G3BP1-RNPs in the cytoplasm, we purified the G3BP1 interactome in control and CALA-silenced HUVECs via anti-G3BP1 immunoprecipitation followed by mass spectrometry. We thereby uncover the basal G3BP1 protein interactome in HUVECs and additionally identify lncRNA-dependent protein interactions of G3BP1 in the cytoplasm of HUVEC.

### Sample Protocol
HUVECs were lysed using NE-PER extraction kit (Thermo Fisher) and cytoplasmic extracts were adjusted to 2 ml using 2x IP buffer (100 mM NaCl, 150 mM KCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 1 mM DTT, 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 0.05% NP-40, 2x protease inhibitor (Thermo Fisher)) and 80 U RiboLock (Thermo Fisher) were added. Dynabeads Protein G (Thermo Fisher) were washed with 1x IP buffer (50 mM NaCl, 75 mM KCl, 2.5 mM MgCl2, 0.5 mM DTT, 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 0.05% NP-40) and 50 µl of beads were incubated with 6 µg antibody of interest (G3BP1 (Cat# 13057-2-AP; Proteintech), IgG (Cat# 12-370; Millipore)) ON at 4°C and thoroughly washed with the same buffer again. Afterwards, 1 ml of lysate was incubated with 50 µl beads ON at 4°C. Beads were thoroughly washed in 1x IP buffer, followed by washing with 1x PBS.  Beads were supplemented with 6M GdmCl, 50mM Tris/HCl. Samples were supplemented with 10 mM TCEP and incubated at 95°C for 5 min. Reduced thiols were alkylated with 40 mM chloroacetamid and sample were diluted with 25 mM Tris/HCl, pH 8.5, 10% acetonitrile to obtain a final GdmCl concentration of 0.6 M. Proteins were digested with 1 µg Trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega) overnight at 37°C under gentle agitation. Digestion was stopped by adding trifluoroacetic acid to a final concentration of 0.5 %. Digestion was stopped by adding trifluoroacetic acid to a final concentration of 0.5 %. Peptides were loaded on multi-stop-and-go tip (StageTip) containing three  C18-disks and 3 SCX-disks. Purification and elution of peptides was performed as described in Rappsilber et al. (2007). Peptides  were eluted in wells of microtiter plates and peptides were dried and resolved in 1% acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid.   Liquid chromatography / mass spectrometry (LC/MS) was performed on Thermo Scientific™ Q Exactive Plus equipped with an ultra-high performance liquid chromatography unit (Thermo Scientific Dionex Ultimate 3000) and a Nanospray Flex Ion-Source (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded on a C18 reversed-phase precolumn (Thermo Scientific) followed by separation on a with 2.4 µm Reprosil C18 resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH) in-house packed picotip emitter tip (diameter 100 µm, 15 cm from New Objectives) using a gradient from 4% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid to 25 %  eluent B (99% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) for 30 min and an additional gradient to 50% for 5min with a flow rate 300 nl/min and washout with 99% B for 5 min.   MS data were recorded by data dependent acquisition. The full MS scan range was 300 to 2000 m/z with resolution of 70000, and an automatic gain control (AGC) value of 3*E6 total ion counts with a maximal ion injection time of 160 ms. Only higher charged ions (2+) were selected for MS/MS scans with a resolution of 17500, an isolation window of 2 m/z and an automatic gain control value set to E5 ions with a maximal ion injection time of 150 ms. MS1 Data were acquired in profile mode.

### Data Protocol
For data analysis MaxQuant 2.0.1.0 (Cox and Mann, 2008), Perseus 1.6.1.3 (Tyranova et al 2016) and Excel (Microsoft Office 2016) were used. N-terminal acetylation (+42.01) and oxidation of methionine (+15.99) were selected as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation (+57.02) on cysteines as a fixed modification. The human reference proteome set (Uniprot, September 2021, 78120 entries) was used to identify peptides and proteins with a false discovery rate (FDR) less than 1%. Reverse identifications and common contaminants were removed. Proteins were filtered to be at least identified 3 times (n=5) in one experimental group.  Missing values were replaced by lowest value of dataset. G3BP1 values wer used to normalize each sample. Significant interacting proteins were determined by student´s t-Test.   Rappsilber J, Mann M, Ishihama Y. Protocol for micro-purification, enrichment, pre-fractionation and storage of peptides for proteomics using StageTips. Nat Protoc 2, 1896-1906 (2007).  Cox J, Mann M. (2008) MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat Biotechnol. 26:1367-72. Tyanova S, Temu T, Sinitcyn P, Carlson A, Hein MY, Geiger T, Mann M, Cox J. (2016)The Perseus computational platform for comprehensive analysis of (prote)omics data. Nat Methods. 13:731-40.

### Publication Abstract
Besides transcription, RNA decay accounts for a large proportion of regulated gene expression and is paramount for cellular functions. Classical RNA surveillance pathways, like nonsense-mediated decay (NMD), are also implicated in the turnover of non-mutant transcripts. Whereas numerous protein factors have been assigned to distinct RNA decay pathways, the contribution of long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) to RNA turnover remains unknown. Here we identify the lncRNA <i>CALA</i> as a potent regulator of RNA turnover in endothelial cells. We demonstrate that <i>CALA</i> forms cytoplasmic ribonucleoprotein complexes with G3BP1 and regulates endothelial cell functions. A detailed characterization of these G3BP1-positive complexes by mass spectrometry identifies UPF1 and numerous other NMD factors having cytoplasmic G3BP1-association that is <i>CALA</i>-dependent. Importantly, <i>CALA</i> silencing impairs degradation of NMD target transcripts, establishing <i>CALA</i> as a non-coding regulator of RNA steady-state levels in the endothelium.

### Keywords
Lncrna-dependent protein/protein interaction

### Affiliations
Functional Proteomics, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main , Germany
Institute for Cardiovascular Regeneration, Centre for Molecular Medicine, Goethe University Frankfurt am Main, Germany

### Submitter
Ilka Wittig

### Lab Head
Dr Nicolas Jaé
Institute for Cardiovascular Regeneration, Centre for Molecular Medicine, Goethe University Frankfurt am Main, Germany


