### Accession
PXD003599

### Title
HVint validation by AP-MS analysis of HSV-1 VP26

### Description
Human herpesviruses are widespread human pathogens with a remarkable impact on worldwide public health. Despite intense decades of research, the molecular details in many aspects of their function remain to be fully characterized. To unravel the details of how these viruses operate a thorough understanding of the relationships between the viral protein components is key. Here, we have created HVint, a novel protein-protein intra-viral interaction database for herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1), which integrates data from five external sources. The coverage of the initial interactome was enlarged using evolutionary information, which integrates computational predictions for potential novel interactions in HSV-1. As an experimental validation for these predicted interactions, affinity purification mass spectrometry (AP-MS) was performed for the HSV-1 capsid protein, VP26. The VP26 interaction data provided experimental evidence supporting the interactions with pUL31 and pUL40, which were computationally predicted as direct partners. Other indirect interactions within the predicted network, such as pUL32 and pUL21, were also present in the AP-MS experiment. For access to the complete HVint network, we have developed a user-friendly and interactive web interface. Our approach demonstrates the power of computational predictions to assist in the design of targeted experiments for the discovery of novel protein-protein interactions.

### Sample Protocol
GFPVP26 and its interacting partners were reduced and alkylated with TCEP and chloroacetamide, respectively, separated by SDS-PAGE (~ 3 cm) using a 4 - 12% Bis-Tris NuPAGE gel, stained with Coomassie blue, and cut into gel slices. Extracted peptides from neighboring gel fractions were pooled (N = 4 fractions), desalted using SDB-RPS StageTips and analyzed by nanoliquid chromatography-tandem MS (nLC-MS/MS). Peptides (4 µl) were separated by reverse phase chromatography-nLC at a flow rate of 250 nL/min over a 90 min ACN gradient from 4 – 40% mobile phase B (A, 0.1% FA; B, 97% ACN in 0.1% FA) and ionized by ESI directly into the mass spectrometer (LTQ Orbitrap Velos equipped with an EASY-Spray ion source). The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent acquisition mode. Each acquisition cycle comprised a single full-scan mass spectrum (m/z = 350-1700) in the orbitrap (r = 30,000 at m/z = 400) followed by CID MS/MS of the top 20 most abundant ions, with dynamic exclusion enabled.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS fragmentation spectra were extracted and peptide spectrum matches were obtained using Proteome Discoverer (ver. 1.4)/SEQUEST (ver 1.3). PSMs were searched independently against the forward and reverse subset of the human UniProt-SwissProt database (2013-08) appended with herpesvirus sequences and common contaminants (22, 910 sequences). SEQUEST search parameters were defined as the following: full trypsin specificity, maximum of 2 missed trypsin cleavages, ion precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.5 Da, fixed modification of cysteine carbamidomethylation, variable modifications of methionine oxidation, and serine, threonine, and tyrosine phosphorylation. Database search results were analyzed in Scaffold (ver. 4.4, Proteome Software, Inc) using the LFDR algorithm and a refinement search using the X!Tandem algorithm, which specified the following additional modifications using the same search parameters as above: deamidation of glutamine and asparagine, acetylation of protein N-termini. The global peptide and protein FDR were controlled to ≤ 1%, estimated by reverse database search matches. Unweighted protein spectrum counts and respective summed precursor intensities based on the “Top3” method were exported to Excel and additional filtering of the protein identifications was performed. Briefly, protein groups with ≥ 10 spectra in at least one sample were retained. For proteins identified in both GFPVP26 and GFP controls, the spectral count fold enrichment was calculated for each protein as the ratio of the spectral counts in GFPVP26 and the averaged GFP samples. Viral proteins with an enrichment ratio of ≥ 5-fold were retained.

### Publication Abstract
Human herpesviruses are widespread human pathogens with a remarkable impact on worldwide public health. Despite intense decades of research, the molecular details in many aspects of their function remain to be fully characterized. To unravel the details of how these viruses operate, a thorough understanding of the relationships between the involved components is key. Here, we present HVint, a novel protein-protein intraviral interaction resource for herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) integrating data from five external sources. To assess each interaction, we used a scoring scheme that takes into consideration aspects such as the type of detection method and the number of lines of evidence. The coverage of the initial interactome was further increased using evolutionary information, by importing interactions reported for other human herpesviruses. These latter interactions constitute, therefore, computational predictions for potential novel interactions in HSV-1. An independent experimental analysis was performed to confirm a subset of our predicted interactions. This subset covers proteins that contribute to nuclear egress and primary envelopment events, including VP26, pUL31, pUL40, and the recently characterized pUL32 and pUL21. Our findings support a coordinated crosstalk between VP26 and proteins such as pUL31, pUS9, and the CSVC complex, contributing to the development of a model describing the nuclear egress and primary envelopment pathways of newly synthesized HSV-1 capsids. The results are also consistent with recent findings on the involvement of pUL32 in capsid maturation and early tegumentation events. Further, they open the door to new hypotheses on virus-specific regulators of pUS9-dependent transport. To make this repository of interactions readily accessible for the scientific community, we also developed a user-friendly and interactive web interface. Our approach demonstrates the power of computational predictions to assist in the design of targeted experiments for the discovery of novel protein-protein interactions.

### Keywords
Human, Interactome, Orbitrap velos, Protein interactions, Herpes simplex virus, Virology

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University
Molecular Biology, Princeton University

### Submitter
Todd Greco

### Lab Head
Dr Ileana Cristea
Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University


