### Accession
PXD023738

### Title
A workflow towards the reproducible identification and quantitation of protein carbonylation sites in human plasma

### Description
Protein carbonylation has been consistently used as a marker of excessive oxidative stress and studied in the context of multiple human oxidative stress related diseases. The variety of carbonyl post-translational modifications (PTMs) and their low abundance on easily accessible diagnostic tissues (e.g., plasma) challenges their reproducible identification and quantitation. However, the use of carbonyl-specific biotinylated derivatization tags (e.g., aldehyde reactive probe, ARP) allows targeting carbonyl PTMs and enriching proteins and/or peptides carrying these modifications that facilitate their characterization. In this study, an oxidized human serum albumin protein model (OxHSA) and plasma proteins from a healthy individual were derivatized with ARP, digested with trypsin, and ARP-derivatized peptides (ARP-peptides) were enriched using biotin-avidin affinity chromatography prior to RPC-TWIMS-MS/MS analysis. The present workflow highlights previously overlooked analytical challenges, shows the use of ARP specific fragment ions to improve identification reliability of ARP-peptide identifications, and displays an extensive validation of the reproducible recovery and relative quantitation of ARP-peptides. HSA was identified as the most heavily modified protein by a variety of direct amino acid oxidation products and adducts from reactive carbonyl species (RCS). Most RCS modification sites were identified in six HSA modification hotspots (Lys10, Lys190, Lys199, Lys281, Lys432, and Lys525).

### Sample Protocol
Covalently linked carbonyls from human plasma proteins and an oxidized human serum albumin protein model were derivatized with aldehyde reactive probe (ARP), a biotinylated, carbonyl-specific derivatization reagent. Proteins were digested with trypsin with a FASP procedure and peptide digest was processed with biotin-avidin chromatography. Peptides in the elution fractions were analyzed with LC-TWIMS-MS/MS with a Q-IMS-TOF instrument (Synapt G2-Si) in DDA mode.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS raw files were imported into PEAKS Studio 10.5 (Bioinformatics Solutions, Waterloo, Canada) and corrected for the lock mass with PEAKS Built-in loader using the signal at m/z 785.843 considering an error tolerance of 0.5 Da  . Tandem mass spectra were processed by a DeNovo procedure considering cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57.022 Da) and methionine oxidation (+15.9949 Da) as variable modifications. The results were searched against Human Swissprot protein database (accessed on 2019-04-04) and cRAP contaminants database (https://www.thegpm.org/crap) using a PEAKS DB procedure (first pass) considering the same two variable modifications. Peptides with at least one terminal trypsin cleavage site and up to three missed tryptic cleavage sites were considered for further data processing. All non-assigned tandem mass spectra were processed with a PEAKS PTM procedure (second pass) considering all targeted modifications (Table S1) as variable modifications and using the error and peptide specificity settings above for the PEAKS DB search. PEAKS PTM reduces greatly the search space and time by only considering proteins identified by the PEAKS DB search. However, this approach is not recommended for peptide samples that have been affinity-enriched. Therefore, tandem mass spectra recorded for samples containing derivatized plasma proteins were processed with an additional PEAKS DB (first pass) search considering all targeted modifications to cover also proteins represented only by derivatized and enriched peptides. All searches were repeated with carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification. Data sets were filtered in PEAKS Studio 10.5 by setting a 5% FDR at the peptide level (Table S2). The PSM identification results were exported as text tables and .pepXML summary. Finally, the raw files were converted with PEAKS Studio 10.5 and exported as .mzXML.

### Publication Abstract
Protein carbonylation, a marker of excessive oxidative stress, has been studied in the context of multiple human diseases related to oxidative stress. The variety of post-translational carbonyl modifications (carbonyl PTMs) and their low concentrations in plasma challenge their reproducible identification and quantitation. However, carbonyl-specific biotinylated derivatization tags (e.g., aldehyde reactive probe, ARP) allow for targeting carbonyl PTMs by enriching proteins and peptides carrying these modifications. In this study, an oxidized human serum albumin protein model (OxHSA) and plasma from a healthy donor were derivatized with ARP, digested with trypsin, and enriched using biotin-avidin affinity chromatography prior to nano reversed-phase chromatography coupled online to electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry with travelling wave ion mobility spectrometry (nRPC-ESI-MS/MS-TWIMS). The presented workflow addresses several analytical challenges by using ARP-specific fragment ions to reliably identify ARP peptides. Furthermore, the reproducible recovery and relative quantitation of ARP peptides were validated. Human serum albumin (HSA) in plasma was heavily modified by a variety of direct amino acid oxidation products and adducts from reactive carbonyl species (RCS), with most RCS modifications being detected in six hotspots, i.e., Lys10, Lys190, Lys199, Lys281, Lys432, and Lys525 of mature HSA.

### Keywords
Protein carbonylation, Human plasma, Aldehyde reactive probe (arp), Lc-twims-ms/ms, Biotin-avidin affinity

### Affiliations
Institute of Bioanalytical Chemistry, Faculty of Chemistry and Mineralogy, and Center for Biotechnology and Biomedicine, Universität Leipzig, Leipzig
PhD Student

### Submitter
Juan Camilo Rojas Echeverri

### Lab Head
Dr Ralf Hoffmann
Institute of Bioanalytical Chemistry, Faculty of Chemistry and Mineralogy, and Center for Biotechnology and Biomedicine, Universität Leipzig, Leipzig


