### Accession
PXD027480

### Title
The OTUD6B-LIN28B-MYC axis determines cell cycle progression in multiple myeloma

### Description
Deubiquitylases (DUBs) remove ubiquitin from proteins. In the context of cancer, their inhibition can induce the degradation of oncoproteins, that may otherwise be “undruggable”. Multiple myeloma (MM) is the second most common hematological malignancy with poor outcome and high sensitivity towards ubiquitin-proteasome-system (UPS) inhibitory therapies. However, the role of DUBs in MM pathophysiology and therapy has remained elusive. Starting from genetic screening for DUB dependencies in MM, we here identify OTUD6B as a central vulnerability in MM that drives the G1/S cell cycle transition by means of deubiquitylating and stabilizing LIN28B subsequent to LIN28B phosphorylation. LIN28B regulates miRNA biogenesis and exerts high expression in embryonic stem cells that becomes re-established in certain tumors, including MM. Binding of LIN28B at G1/S activates OTUD6B, which otherwise remains in a catalytically inactive state. As a consequence, stabilized LIN28B drives MYC expression via inhibition of let7 microRNAs, which in turn allows for a rapid transition of MM cells from G1 to S phase. Analyses of primary MM patient samples reveal a positive correlation of OTUDB6B expression with poor outcome, high MYC expression and MYC target gene induction, suggesting that high MYC levels in MM result from an activation of the OTUD6B-LIN28B nexus. Together, we here specify phosphorylation and cell cycle-dependent substrate binding as a means by which OTUD6B becomes activated to drive the G1/S transition via the LIN28B-MYC axis and nominate OTUD6B and LIN28B as actionable vulnerabilities in MM.

### Sample Protocol
Mass spectrometric analyses for the identification of OTUD6B substrates were performed both affinity-based (FLAG-purification of OTUD6B) and proximity-based (BioID2 purifications of OTUD6B). For FLAG-OTUD6B purification, 2e9 HEK293T cells were transfected with FLAG-EV or FLAG-OTUD6B. After cell lysis, OTUD6B was precipitated with anti-FLAG resin (FLAG-M2 agarose, Sigma) for 1.5 h at 4°C. After washing the beads 4 times with lysis buffer and once with TBS, elution was performed with 1 mg/mL 3xFLAG peptide (Sigma) in TBS for 10 min at room temperature. Finally, proteins were precipitated overnight with 10% TCA at 4°C, washed with acetone and subsequently dried. Samples were reduced by DTT and alkylated by chloroacetamide. Peptides were generated by in-gel trypsin digestion and dried down. For BioID2 purification of OTUD6B IF1 and IF2, 10 x 15 cm dishes of HEK293T cells were left untreated or transfected with myc-BioID2-EV, myc-BioID2-OTUD6B-IF1 or -IF2, respectively. After 24 h, cells were treated with 50 µM biotin for 16 h before collection. Cells were lysed in modified RIPA lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA, 1% Triton X-100, 0.1% SDS, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, protease inhibitors), passed three times through a 22 G and once through a 26 G syringe needle and incubated for 1 h on ice. Lysates were clarified and biotinylated proteins purified with strep-tactin superflow resin (IBA) for 3h at 4°C. Beads were washed two times with lysis buffer and once with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer at pH 8.5. Proteins bound to beads were reduced by DTT and alkylated by chloroacetamide. On-bead trypsin digestion was performed overnight at 37°C and peptides were dried down. Tryptic peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% FA and analysed by nanoLC-MS/MS on an Eksigent NanoLC-Ultra 1D+ system coupled to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a 100 min (FLAG-IP) or 50 min (BioID) linear gradient from 4% to 32% LC solvent B (0.1% FA, 5% dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) in ACN) in LC solvent A (0.1% FA in 5% DMSO). For FLAG-IP samples, MS1 spectra were recorded in the Orbitrap from 360 to 1300 m/z at a resolution of 60K (automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 3e6 charges, maximum injection time (maxIT) of 10 ms). After peptide fragmentation via higher energy collisional dissociation (normalized collision energy of 25%), MS2 spectra for peptide identification were recorded in the Orbitrap at 30K resolution via sequential isolation of up to 20 precursors (isolation window 1.7 m/z, AGC target value of 2e5, maxIT of 50 ms, dynamic exclusion of 35 s). BioID samples were measured as specified above with following modifications: MS1 maxIT was set to 50 ms. MS2 spectra were recorded at 15k resolution using an AGC target value of 1e5 and a dynamic exclusion of 20 s.

### Data Protocol
Peptide and protein identification and quantification for BioIDs were performed using MaxQuant 1.5.3.30 by searching the MS2 spectra against the human reference proteome supplemented with common contaminants. FLAG-IP raw data were searched using MaxQuant v1.5.6.5 and the SwissProt database. The match-between-runs and label-free quantification algorithms were enabled. Protein intensities were computed as the sum of the area-under-the-curve of chromatographic elution profiles of peptides assigned to the proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Deubiquitylases (DUBs) are therapeutically amenable components of the ubiquitin machinery that stabilize substrate proteins. Their inhibition can destabilize oncoproteins that may otherwise be undruggable. Here, we screened for DUB vulnerabilities in multiple myeloma, an incurable malignancy with dependency on the ubiquitin proteasome system and identified OTUD6B as an oncogene that drives the G1/S-transition. LIN28B, a suppressor of microRNA biogenesis, is specified as a bona fide cell cycle-specific substrate of OTUD6B. Stabilization of LIN28B drives MYC expression at G1/S, which in turn allows for rapid S-phase entry. Silencing OTUD6B or LIN28B inhibits multiple myeloma outgrowth in&#x2009;vivo and high OTUD6B expression evolves in patients that progress to symptomatic multiple myeloma and results in an adverse outcome of the disease. Thus, we link proteolytic ubiquitylation with post-transcriptional regulation and nominate OTUD6B as a potential mediator of the MGUS-multiple myeloma transition, a central regulator of MYC, and an actionable vulnerability in multiple myeloma and other tumors with an activated OTUD6B-LIN28B axis.

### Keywords
Bioid, Human, Otud6b, Orbitrap, Flag-ip

### Affiliations
Technical University of Munich, Freising, Germany
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technical University of Munich, Freising, Germany

### Submitter
Jana Zecha

### Lab Head
Dr Bernhard Kuster
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technical University of Munich, Freising, Germany


