### Accession
PXD034794

### Title
Ferritin-mediated iron detoxification mediates hypothermia survival in Caenorhabditis elegans and murine neurons.

### Description
How animals rewire cellular programs to survive cold is a fascinating problem with potential biomedical implications, ranging from emergency medicine to space travel. Studying a hibernation-like response in the free-living nematode Caenorhabditis elegans, we uncovered a regulatory axis that enhances the natural resistance of nematodes to severe cold. This axis involves conserved transcription factors, DAF-16/FoxO and PQM-1, which jointly promote cold survival by upregulating FTN-1, a protein related to mammalian ferritin heavy chain (FTH1). Moreover, we show that inducing expression of FTH1 also promotes cold survival of mammalian neurons, a cell type particularly sensitive to deterioration in hypothermia. Our findings in both animals and cells suggest that FTN-1/FTH1 facilitates cold survival by detoxifying ROS-generating iron species. We finally show that mimicking the effects of FTN-1/FTH1 with drugs protects neurons from cold-induced degeneration, opening a potential avenue to improved treatments of hypothermia.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were resolved by SDS-PAGE. The region of Coomassie Blue-stained gel containing FTNs, around 20 kDa marker, was cut out and subjected to over-night in-gel digestion with trypsin (Promega). Peptides resulting from proteolytic digestion were alkylated by adding 5 mM iodoacetamide, desalted using OMIX-SPE tips, and analyzed by liquid chromatography system (NanoElute) coupled to a TimsTOF Pro mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany).

### Data Protocol
PEAKS Studio 10.6, Parent mass error: 15 ppm, Fragment mass error tolerance: 0.03 Da, Enzyme trypsin, Max. missed cleavages 1, Variable modifications: N-acetylation (Protein N-term), Oxidation (M), Propionamide (C), Database: C. elegans - Swiss-Prot/Trembl (27,154 enries).

### Publication Abstract
How animals rewire cellular programs to survive cold is a fascinating problem with potential biomedical implications, ranging from emergency medicine to space travel. Studying a hibernation-like response in the free-living nematode Caenorhabditis elegans, we uncovered a regulatory axis that enhances the natural resistance of nematodes to severe cold. This axis involves conserved transcription factors, DAF-16/FoxO and PQM-1, which jointly promote cold survival by upregulating FTN-1, a protein related to mammalian ferritin heavy chain (FTH1). Moreover, we show that inducing expression of FTH1 also promotes cold survival of mammalian neurons, a cell type particularly sensitive to deterioration in hypothermia. Our findings in both animals and cells suggest that FTN-1/FTH1 facilitates cold survival by detoxifying ROS-generating iron species. We finally show that mimicking the effects of FTN-1/FTH1 with drugs protects neurons from cold-induced degeneration, opening a potential avenue to improved treatments of hypothermia.

### Keywords
Foxo, Neuroprotection, Ferroxidase, Cold, Daf-16, Ets-4, Iron, Pqm-1, Antioxidant, Ferritin heavy chain, Ferrous iron, Ftn-1, Fth1, Hibernation, Ros, Fe2+, Hypothermia

### Affiliations
University of Oslo, Department of Biosciences, Oslo, Norway
University of Oslo

### Submitter
Bernd Thiede

### Lab Head
Dr Rafal Ciosk
University of Oslo, Department of Biosciences, Oslo, Norway


