### Accession
PXD028123

### Title
Phosphoproteome of SARS-CoV-2 infected Human Nasal Epithelium

### Description
The nasal epithelium is the primary initial site of SARS-CoV-2 entry in the human body. Since much of the molecular detail defining coronavirus entry and replication was derived from non-nasal cell lines, it remains unclear how SARS-CoV-2 overcomes the physical nasal mucus and periciliary mucin layers to infect and spread through the nasal epithelium. Using air-liquid interface cultured primary nasal epithelial cells, we observed that SARS-CoV-2 attaches to motile cilia during the initial stage of infection. Depletion of cilia inhibited SARS-CoV-2, as well as respiratory syncytial virus and parainfluenza virus infection, suggesting a widely-used ciliary mechanism for respiratory viral entry. Using electron and immunofluorescence microscopy, we further observed that SARS-CoV-2 progeny virions attached to airway microvilli 24 hours post infection and triggered the formation of apically extended and highly branched microvilli that organize viral egress from the microvillar base back into the mucus layer, supporting a model of virus dispersion throughout airway tissue via mucociliary transport. Chemical perturbation of microvillus formation severely impaired viral egress and subsequent spread. Phosphoproteomic analyses indicate that virally-triggered microvillar branching is linked to the p21-activated kinase 1 and 4 (PAK1/4) signaling pathway and viral infection is impaired by PAK1/4 kinase inhibitors. Our work provides insight into the mechanisms by which SARS-CoV-2 and potentially many respiratory viruses penetrate the physical nasal epithelium barrier, a first line of defense against pathogens, thus revealing a new view of the motile cilia and microvilli as critical host factors required for viral entry and egress.

### Sample Protocol
HNE cells were infected with SARS-CoV-2 for 24, 36, 48 hours or with MOCK. Cells were harvested, lysed, reduce, and alkylated using 100 μl of lysis buffer (6M Guanidine Hydrochloride, 100 mM Tris- HCl pH 8.0, 10 mM TCEP, 10 mM CAA) and boiled 60ºC for 1 hour. Proteins were precipitated by adding 100 μl methanol, vortexed, 50 μl chloroform, vortexed, 100 μl water, vortexed, and centrifuged at 13,000g for 2 minutes. The top aqueous layer was removed, 200 μl of methanol was added, vortexed, and centrifuged at 13,000g for 3 minutes. Methanol was removed and dried proteins were resuspended using 200mM HEPES pH 8.5. Proteins were digested using Trypsin/Lys-C overnight at 37ºC 250 RPM. Sample was acidified using TFA and cleaned using stage tips. Stage tips were created using 5 layers of C18 filters packed into a P200 tip. The stage tips were activated using methanol, equilibrated twice with an equilibration buffer (5% ACN, 0.5% TFA). Samples were bound, washed twice with an equilibration buffer, and eluted using an elution buffer (50% ACN, 0.1% FA). Eluted samples were dried using a Speed-Vac and resuspended using Binding/Wash Buffer in High- Select Fe-NTA Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit (Thermo Scientific, A32992). The samples were enriched for phosphopeptides according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Samples were eluted and resuspended using Solution A (2% ACN, 0.1% FA) and were analyzed using the timsTOF Pro (Bruker Daltonics) (Meier et al., 2018), an ion-mobility spectrometry quadrupole time of flight mass spectrometer. Specifically, a nanoElute (Bruker Daltonics) high pressure nanoflow system was connected to the timsTOF Pro. Peptides were delivered to a reversed phase analytical column (10 cm x 75 μm i.d., Bruker 1866154). Liquid chromatography was performed at 50 °C and peptides were separated on the analytical column using a 48 min gradient (solvent A: 2% ACN, 0.1% FA; solvent B: 0.1% FA, in ACN) at a flow rate of 500 nl/min. A linear gradient from 2-35 % B was applied for 45 min, followed by a step to 95% B for 1.5 min and 3 min of washing at 95% B. The timsTOF Pro was operated in PASEF mode with the following settings: Mass Range 100 to 1700m/z, 1/K0 Start 0.85 V·s/cm2, End 1.3 V·s/cm2, Ramp time 100ms, Lock Duty Cycle to 100%, Capillary Voltage 1700, Dry Gas 3 l/min, Dry Temp 200°C, PASEF settings: 4 MS/MS, charge range 0-5, active exclusion for 0.04 min, Scheduling Target intensity 2,0000, Intensity threshold 500, CID collision energy 10eV.

### Data Protocol
For analysis, Bruker raw data files were processed using Byonic software (Protein Metrics, Inc) to identify peptides and proteins using the NCBI Homo sapiens refseq protein database. Data were searched with 20 ppm error tolerance for precursor and 40 ppm for fragment ions using QTOF/HCD fragmentation type. Besides standard variable modifications, we searched for S/T/Y phosphorylation and set 1 % FDR for protein identifications.

### Publication Abstract
How SARS-CoV-2 penetrates the airway barrier of mucus and periciliary mucins to infect nasal epithelium remains unclear. Using primary nasal epithelial organoid cultures, we found that the virus attaches to motile cilia via the ACE2 receptor. SARS-CoV-2 traverses the mucus layer, using motile cilia as tracks to access the cell body. Depleting cilia blocks infection for SARS-CoV-2 and other respiratory viruses. SARS-CoV-2 progeny attach to airway microvilli 24&#xa0;h post-infection and trigger formation of apically extended and highly branched microvilli that organize viral egress from the microvilli back into the mucus layer, supporting a model of virus dispersion throughout airway tissue via mucociliary transport. Phosphoproteomics and kinase inhibition reveal that microvillar remodeling is regulated by p21-activated kinases (PAK). Importantly, Omicron variants bind with higher affinity to motile cilia and show accelerated viral entry. Our work suggests that motile cilia, microvilli, and mucociliary-dependent mucus flow are critical for efficient virus replication in nasal epithelia.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Human nasal epithelium, Phosphoproteome

### Affiliations
Stanford University
Baxter Laboratory for Stem Cell Biology Department of Microbiology & Immunology Stanford University School of Medicine 269 Campus Drive Stanford, CA 94305-5175, USA

### Submitter
Janos Demeter

### Lab Head
Dr Peter K. Jackson
Baxter Laboratory for Stem Cell Biology Department of Microbiology & Immunology Stanford University School of Medicine 269 Campus Drive Stanford, CA 94305-5175, USA


