### Accession
PXD017731

### Title
Identification of Cytosolic Protein Targets of Catechol Estrogens in Breast Cancer Cells Using a Click Chemistry-based Workflow

### Description
Catechol estrogens (CEs) are known to be toxic metabolites and the initiators in the oncogenesis of breast cancers via forming covalent adducts with DNAs. CEs shall also react with proteins but their cellular protein targets remain un-explored. Here we reported the identification of protein targets of CEs in the soluble cytosol of estrogen-sensitive breast cancer cells by multiple comparative proteomics using liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) coupled with an improved click chemistry-based workflow. Multiple comparative proteomics composed of experimental pair (probe versus solvent) and two control pairs (solvent versus solvent and probe versus solvent without enrichment), were studied using stable isotope dimethyl labeling. The use of 4-hydroxyethynylestradiol (4OHEE2) probe with an amide-free linker coupled with on-bead digestion and re-digestion of the proteins cleaved from the beads was shown to greatly improve the recovery and identification of CEs-adducted peptides. A total of 310 protein targets and 35 adduction sites were repeatedly (n≥2) identified with D/H (probe/solvent) ratio >4 versus only one identified with D/H >4 from the two control pairs, suggesting that our workflow imposes only a very low background. Meanwhile, multiple comparative D/H ratios revealed that CEs may down-regulate many target proteins involved in the metabolism or detoxification, suggesting a negative correlation between CEs-induced adduction and expression of proteins acting on the alleviation of stress-induced cellular damages. The reported method and data shall provide opportunities to study the progression of estrogen metabolism-derived diseases and biomarkers.

### Sample Protocol
Protein mixture standards. A standard solution composed of adducted and non-adducted protein mixture was prepared by co-incubating human recombinant insulin (2 mg/mL) and human serum albumin (HSA) (2 mg/mL) in 100 µL phosphate buffer saline (pH 7.4) with 4OHEE2 (5 µg) for 24 h at 37°C. The reaction was stopped by 3 kDa cutoff to remove remaining probe molecules. Cell treatment and subcellular fractionation. MCF-7 cells were grown in Minimum Essential Medium (MEM) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) in an atmosphere of 5% CO2/ 95% air under saturating humidity at 37°C. Cells were seeded in a 10-cm plate at 1.0 x 106 cells/plate. After adhering overnight, the media were replaced with MEM lacking FBS and allowed to culture for 24 hours and then followed by the treatment of 3.2 µM 4OHEE2 (probe) or DMSO (vehicle solvent control) for 24 hrs. Cells were then washed twice with PBS buffer (pH = 7.4) and detached by trypsinization. Cells were collected by centrifugation (500 xg, 5 mins, 4°C) and lysed in CER lysis buffer containing 10 mM HEPES, 10 mM KCl, 1.5 mM DTT, 1 % triton X-100, 1x protease inhibitor and 5 % glycerol on ice. After 10 minutes, the soluble cytosol fraction of the lysate prepared from the probe-treated or solvent control cells (Figure 1) was collected by centrifugation at 3000 xg for 5 mins at 4°C, lyophilized via vacuum centrifugation, and then re-suspended in water and the content of total protein was quantified via the BCA assay (Pierce). Cell viability. Cells were seeded at a density of 15,000 cells/well in 96-well plates. The cells were allowed to attach overnight. After 0- (control) and 24-hr treatment with 4OHEE2 or DMSO (vehicle control) as described above, the cell viability of all four samples were measured by MTT assay. The MTT stock solution was diluted in serum free media to a final concentration of 0.5 mg/mL. Then, 100 µL reagent solution was added to each well and allowed to incubate for another 3 hour at 37°C with 5% CO2. The supernatants were carefully removed and 100 µL DMSO was added to each well to dissolve the precipitate. The plate was vigorously shaked for 5 minutes at room temperature. The UV absorbance at 570 nm and 690 nm (reference wavelength) were measured using SpectraMax® M2e Multi-mode Microplate Reader (Molecular Devices Inc., USA). The cell viability (% percentage) of the control (0-hr treatment) and 24-hr treatment was respectively calculated based on the optical density ratio between the cells treated with 4OHEE2 and the vehicle control.  The workflow. A schematic of the workflow was depicted in Figure 1 in which three comparative pairs: Exp (probe/solvent), Control 1 (solvent/solvent), and Control 2 (probe/solvent) were prepared from the probe-treated (probe) or vehicle control (solvent) cells. As shown, Exp and Control 1 were proceeded with click chemistry-based enrichment, enzyme digestion, followed by H/D dimethyl labeling; Control 2 was directly proceeded with enzyme digestion and the H/D labeling without click chemistry-based enrichment. On the other hand, the protein mixture standard was proceeded directly with click chemistry and affinity enrichment without cell treatment and H/D dimethyl labeling. Detailed procedures of each steps were described in the following section. Click chemistry-based enrichment.  Each protein solution (1 mg total protein) was added with the reagents at a final concentration of 6.25 mM (CR3, Azide-SS-biotin), 1 mM (CuSO4), 4 mM (THPTA), and 10 mM (L- Sodium ascorbate), respectively, with a total volume of 120 µL and gently mixed for 1 h at 37 C. Streptavidin beads were activated by 10x volume of phosphate buffer composed of sodium phosphate (20 mM) and sodium chloride (15mM, pH 7.4). Each protein solution (standard, solvent control or probe-treated) was added with a 2x volume of the activated beads at room temperature for 2 h. The remaining reagent was removed by 0.45 µm hydrophilic filter. On-Bead digestion by trypsin or Glu-C (used for the standard protein mixture) at 1:250 of enzyme:protein ratio was performed at room temperature for 18 h with constant shaking. The bead was washed with a 40x volume of the phosphate buffer and 10x volume of ammonia bicarbonate (50 mM, pH 8.0), and then reduced by DTT (100 mM in ammonia bicarbonate buffer, pH 8.0) at 50°C for 1 h and alkylated by IAM (250 mM) in the dark at room temperature for 30 min. The digests were eluted from the bead by centrifugation (3000 xg for 2 min). The supernatant was collected, desalted, dried, re-dissolved and re-digested by trypsin following the same procedure described above.

### Data Protocol
Data Analysis. The acquired raw data from each HILIC fraction were converted to mgf peak list by MSConvertGUI software (64-bit, proteowizard.sourceforge.net) and submitted to an in-house Mascot Sever (version 2.3, Matrix Science Ltd., London, UK) with default settings for Orbitrap to search against a SwissProt 2019/4 database composed of 559643 proteins of homo sapiens. For a standard search, a mass tolerance of ±10 ppm of precursor ions and ±0.8 Da of product ions, enzyme specification was trypsin, two allowable miss-cleavages, and a Mascot probability score (P < 0.05) were used. Ions carried +2, +3, +4  charges were considered. Carbamidomethyl (C) (+57.0214 Da), deamidated (NQ) (+0.984 Da), oxidation (M) (+15.995 Da), dimethyl (K) (+28.0313 Da), dimethyl (N-term) (+28.0313 Da), dimethyl:CHD2 (K) (+32.0564 Da), dimethyl:CHD2 (N-term) (+32.0564 Da) were chosen as variable modifications. Moreover, peptides identified with Mascot individual ion score less than 20 were excluded and the false discovery rate (FDR) was determined to be less than 1% by a search of the reversed protein database calculated from the Mascot decoy function. Each matched spectrum was further inspected manually to exclude spectra in which highly abundant product ions could not be matched with the theoretical masses of the product ions. Advanced search via Mascot, PEAKS Studio (Bioinformatic Solutions, version 7.5, Waterloo, Canada) or RAId (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/CBBresearch/Yu/raid/raid.html) search engine against a customized database composed of identified proteins described above were performed to identify conjugated peptides using additional variable modification settings for 4OHEE2+CR3 (CHK) (+470.198776 Da) or 4OHEE2+CR3 (-2Da) (CHK) (+468.183126 Da). A mass tolerance of ±10 ppm of precursor ions and ±0.8 Da (or 400 ppm for RAId) of product ions, two allowable miss-cleavage were still applied for the search. Modified peptides were identified with the score greater than 20 by Mascot and Peaks, or E-value < 0.01 by RAId. Mascot Distiller (version 2.6.1.0, Matrix Science Ltd., London, UK) was applied for quantification using the same search parameters as described above plus a cutoff threshold 0.8 for correlation and <0.35 for standard error. The D/H peptide ratios assigned from all fractions were merged. The peptide ratios corresponding to the same sequence identified as unique peptide (bold red) but generated under different parameter, including retention time, charge state, and fraction number were combined. The protein ratio was calculated based on the peptide ratio of different sequences assigned to the same protein. The output of the quantification results was exported in the comma separated values (CSV) format that allows users to easily inspect and manipulate the data. The experiment was repeated for three times. The average of protein ratio and standard deviation were calculated for proteins which were identified from at least two repeated experiments. For the PRM data (Table S3), three targeted product ion intensities were summed up for the light (H) and heavy (D) form, respectively, and the two summed-up values were divided to obtain the D/H ratio for the targeted precursor ion pair.

### Publication Abstract
Catechol estrogens (CEs) are known to be toxic metabolites and the initiators of the oncogenesis of breast cancers via forming covalent adducts with DNAs. CEs shall also react with proteins, but their cellular protein targets remain unexplored. Here, we reported the identification of protein targets of CEs in the soluble cytosol of estrogen-sensitive breast cancer cells by multiple comparative proteomics using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) coupled with an improved click chemistry-based workflow. Multiple comparative proteomics composed of an experimental pair (probe versus solvent) and two control pairs (solvent versus solvent and probe versus solvent without enrichment) were studied using stable isotope dimethyl labeling. The use of 4-hydroxyethynylestradiol (4OHEE2) probe with an amide-free linker coupled with on-bead digestion and redigestion of the proteins cleaved from the beads was shown to greatly improve the recovery and identification of CE-adducted peptides. A total of 310 protein targets and 40 adduction sites were repeatedly (<i>n</i> &#x2265; 2) identified with D/H (probe/solvent) ratio &gt;4 versus only one identified with D/H &gt;4 from the two control pairs, suggesting that our workflow imposes only a very low background. Meanwhile, multiple comparative D/H ratios revealed that CEs may downregulate many target proteins involved in the metabolism or detoxification, suggesting a negative correlation between CE-induced adduction and expression of proteins acting on the alleviation of stress-induced cellular damages. The reported method and data will provide opportunities to study the progression of estrogen metabolism-derived diseases and biomarkers.

### Keywords
Catechol estrogens, Proteomic, Affinity purification, Breast cancer cells, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
National Cheng Kung University
Department of Chemistry, National Cheng Kung University, Taiwan

### Submitter
Quynh-Trang Do

### Lab Head
Dr Shu-Hui Chen
Department of Chemistry, National Cheng Kung University, Taiwan


