### Accession
PXD036770

### Title
GTF2I dosage regulates neuronal differentiation and social behavior in 7q11.23 neurodevelopmental disorders

### Description
Copy number variations at  7q11.23 cause neurodevelopmental disorders with shared and opposite manifestations. Deletion leads to Williams-Beuren syndrome (WBS), while duplication causes 7q11.23 microduplication syndrome (7Dup). Converging evidence indicates GTF2I, from the 7q11.23 locus, is a key mediator of the cognitive-behavioral phenotypes associated with WBS and 7Dup. Here we integrate molecular profiling of patient-derived cortical organoids (COs) and transgenic mouse models to dissect 7q11.23 disease mechanisms. Proteomic and transcriptomic profiling of COs revealed opposite dynamics of neural progenitor proliferation and transcriptional imbalances, leading to precocious excitatory neuron production in 7Dup. The accelerated excitatory neuron production in 7Dup COs could be rescued by GTF2I knockdown. Transgenic mice with Gtf2i duplication recapitulated early neuronal differentiation defects and ASD-like behaviors. Remarkably,  inhibition of LSD1, a downstream effector of GTF2I, was sufficient to rescue ASD-like phenotypes. We propose that the GTF2I-LSD1 axis constitutes a molecular pathway amenable to therapeutic intervention.

### Sample Protocol
In all cases, sample preparation was performed according to the in-StageTip protocol. Briefly, samples were incubated in PreOmics lysis buffer (catalogue number P.O. 00001, PreOmics) for cysteine reduction and alkylation, followed by a protein denaturation step at 95 °C for 10 min. Then, proteins from each sample were processed by adding the Trypsin/LysC mix (Digestion buffer, PreOmics) at 1:50 enzyme-to-protein ratio, at 37 °C overnight. Tryptic peptides were eluted from the solid-phase extraction material and dried out completely with a SpeedVac centrifuge (Eppendorf). Finally, tryptic peptides were re-suspended in 5 µL of Load buffer (PreOmics) and analysed by LC-MS/MS using an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, cat. no LC140) connected to a Q-Exactive HF instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific) through a nano-electrospray ion source. In all cases, the nano-LC system was operated in one column set-up with an EasySpray PEPMAP RSLC C18 column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) kept at 45°C (constant temperature). Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid (FA) and solvent B was 0.1% FA in 80% Acetonitrile (CAN). Peptides were separated with a gradient of 3–30% solvent B over 64 min, followed by a gradient of 30–60% for 10 min and 60–95% over 5 min, at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. The Q-Exactive was operated in the data-dependent acquisition (DDA) to automatically switch between MS and MSMS mode. Spray voltage was set to 1.7 kV, s-lens RF level at 50, and heated capillary temperature at 275 °C. Selected target ions were dynamically excluded for 20 seconds and all experiments were acquired using positive polarity mode. MS spectra (from m/z 375-1550) were analysed in the Orbitrap detector with resolution R=60,000 at m/z 200. The 15 most intense peptide ions with charge states ≥2 were sequentially isolated to a target value of 3e6 (Top15). MS2 data was acquired at R=15,000 resolution and an ion target value of 1e5. Higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragment scans was acquired with optimal setting for parallel acquisition using 1.4 m/z isolation width and normalized collision energy of 28. The maximum allowed ion accumulation times were 20ms for full scans and 80ms for MSMS.

### Data Protocol
Acquired raw data were analysed using the integrated MaxQuant version 1.6.2.3 sing the Andromeda search engine  and Human Fasta Database downloaded from UniprotKB (74470 Entries) was used. Carbamidomethylation of Cysteine was set as a fixed modification. Enzyme specificity was set as carboxy-terminal to arginine and lysine as expected, using Trypsin and LysC as proteases. A maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed. Peptide identification was performed in Andromeda with an initial precursor mass deviation of up to 7 ppm and a fragment mass deviation of 20 ppm. False discovery rate (FDR) of all peptide was set to a maximum of 1% for the identifications. All proteins and peptides matching the reversed database were filtered out. The LFQ intensity calculation was enabled, as well as the match between runs (MBRs) feature

### Publication Abstract
Copy number variations at 7q11.23 cause neurodevelopmental disorders with shared and opposite manifestations. Deletion causes Williams-Beuren syndrome featuring hypersociability, while duplication causes 7q11.23 microduplication syndrome (7Dup), frequently exhibiting autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Converging evidence indicates <i>GTF2I</i> as key mediator of the cognitive-behavioral phenotypes, yet its role in cortical development and behavioral hallmarks remains largely unknown. We integrated proteomic and transcriptomic profiling of patient-derived cortical organoids, including longitudinally at single-cell resolution, to dissect 7q11.23 dosage-dependent and <i>GTF2I</i>-specific disease mechanisms. We observed dosage-dependent impaired dynamics of neural progenitor proliferation, transcriptional imbalances, and highly specific alterations in neuronal output, leading to precocious excitatory neuron production in 7Dup, which was rescued by restoring physiological <i>GTF2I</i> levels. Transgenic mice with <i>Gtf2i</i> duplication recapitulated progenitor proliferation and neuronal differentiation defects alongside ASD-like behaviors. Consistently, inhibition of lysine demethylase 1 (LSD1), a <i>GTF2I</i> effector, was sufficient to rescue ASD-like phenotypes in transgenic mice, establishing <i>GTF2I</i>-LSD1 axis as a molecular pathway amenable to therapeutic intervention in ASD.

### Keywords
Autism, Organoids, Transcriptomics, Neurodevelopment, Sociability, Gtf2i

### Affiliations
IEO
Fondazione Human Technopole

### Submitter
alessandro cuomo

### Lab Head
Dr Giuseppe Testa
Fondazione Human Technopole


