### Accession
PXD006863

### Title
TMT-FASP-LC-MS analysis of peritoneal dialysis effluent

### Description
Peritoneal dialysis (PD) is a modality of renal replacement therapy in which the high volumes of available PD effluent (PDE) represents a rich source of biomarkers for monitoring disease and therapy. Although this information could help guiding the management of PD patients, little is known about the potential of PDE to define pathomechanism-associated molecular signatures in PD. Here we present the utilization of a high-performance multiplex proteomics approach based on depletion of highly abundant plasma proteins and enrichment of low abundance proteins and quantitation using a combination of label-free and isobaric labeling strategies for PDE samples from PD patients (n=20), who received either standard PD fluid or a novel PD fluid (added alanyl-glutamine (AlaGln)) in an open-label, randomized, two-period, cross-over clinical trial.

### Sample Protocol
The complete volume of PDE after the 4 hours dwell of 40 peritoneal equilibtration tests of 20 patients receiving both treatments. The PDE was processed immediately following the end of the dwell and aliquoted samples were stored at -80°C until further analysis. The protocol was performed as previously reported (Lichtenauer et al., Electrophoresis 2014) with minor adaptations for clinical samples. CPLL Beads/Equalizer beads (ProteoMiner, BioRad, Hercules, CA, USA) were prepared according to the manufacturers’ protocol. Following centrifugation (250 × g, 30 min, 600 ml aliquots) 1 L of cell-free PDE was mixed with 250 µl CPLL bead solution (50 µl bead bed volume) and incubated on a roller mixer (overnight, 4°C). The beads were allowed to sediment for 30 min, 900 ml effluent was carefully aspirated and the beads were recovered and centrifuged (100 × g, 10 min). The supernatant was removed and the beads were recovered in 1 ml remaining effluent and transferred to Mini Bio-Spin chromatography columns (BioRad). Following four washing steps with washing buffer (5 min, 150 µl, 150 mM NaCl, 10 mM NaH2PO4, pH 7.4) and once with 200 µl deionized water proteins were eluted by four sequential elutions (15 min, 50 µl, 8 M urea, 2% CHAPS in 5% acetic acid) resulting in 200 µl protein solution (Fig. 1). Protein samples were precipitated (100% acetone, overnight, -20°C), washed twice (100% Ethanol) and resuspended in 150µl buffer (30 mM Tris, pH 8.5, 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4% 3-[(3-Cholamidopropyl) dimethylammonio]-1-propanesulfonate (CHAPS), 1 mM EDTA, 1 tablet of Complete Protease Inhibitor (Roche, Basel; Switzerland) and 1 tablet of phosphatase inhibitor (PhosSTOP, Roche) per 100 ml).  FASP was performed using a 30 kDa molecular weight cut-off ﬁlter (VIVACON 500; Sartorius Stedim Biotech, Goettingen, Germany) as described previously (Wisniewski et al., Nature Methods 2009). In brief, 50 µg of each sample was mixed with 180 μL of UA buffer (8 M urea in 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5)) in the ﬁlter unit and centrifuged (14000 × g, 15 min, 20°C). Following a second washing step with UA (200 μL) the proteins were alkylated (100 μL of 50 mM iodoacetamide, 30 min, RT). Following washing steps with UA (3x 100 μL) and TEAB buffer (3x, 50 mM, 100 μL) proteins were digested with trypsin (overnight, 37°C). Peptides were recovered using 40 μL of 50 mM TEAB buffer, followed by 50 μL of 0.5 M NaCl. Acidiﬁed tryptic peptides were concentrated and desalted using C18 spin columns (The Nest Group, Southborough, MA, USA).   TMT labeling was performed according to the instructions provided by the manufacturer for the 6plex isobaric labeling reagent set (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Pooled samples were concentrated and desalted with C18 microspin columns (5−60 μg, The Nest Group). Eluates were dried in a vacuum concentrator and reconstituted in 2 mM ammonia formate buffer, pH 10 before fractionation at basic pH.   Two-dimensional liquid chromatography was performed by reverse-phase chromatography at high and low pH. In the ﬁrst dimension, peptides were separated on a Gemini-NX C18 (150 × 2 mm, 3 μm, 110 Å, Phenomenex, Torrance, USA) using a 45 min gradient from 5 to 70% acetonitrile containing 20 mM ammonia formate buffer, pH 10, at a ﬂow rate of 100 μL/min, run on an Agilent 1200 HPLC system (Agilent Biotechnologies, Palo Alto, CA, USA). Seventy two time-based fractions were collected and pooled into 50 HPLC vials based on the UV-trace at 214 nm. Samples were acidiﬁed by the addition of 5 μL of 5% formic acid, solvent was removed in a vacuum concentrator, and samples were reconstituted in 5% formic acid for a single injection. Mass spectrometry was performed on a hybrid linear trap quadrupole (LTQ) Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientiﬁc) using the Xcalibur version 2.1.0 coupled to an Agilent 1200 HPLC nanoﬂow system (dual pump system with one trap-column and one analytical column) via a nano electrospray ion source using liquid junction (Proxeon, Odense, Denmark). Technical details of the nanoHPLC and MS conditions used in this study are described in detail elsewhere (Bennett et al., Journal of Proteomics 2011). In brief, the analyses were performed in a data-dependent acquisition mode using a top-10 high-energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) method for peptide identiﬁcation plus relative quantitation of TMT reporter ions. Dynamic exclusion for selected ions was 60 s. A single lock mass at m/z 445.120024 was employed The maximal ion accumulation time allowed for MS mode in the Orbitrap was 500 ms, and for HCD, the accumulation time was 200 ms, Automatic gain control (AGC) was used to prevent overﬁlling of the ion traps. In MS and MS2 modes, AGC was set to 106 and 105 ions, respectively. Peptides were detected in MS and MS2 mode at 30000 (at m/z 400) and 7500 resolution, respectively. The threshold for switching from MS to MS2 was 2000 counts.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw MS data ﬁles were processed with msconvert (ProteoWizard Library v2.1.2708) and converted into Mascot generic format (mgf) ﬁles. The resultant peak lists was searched against the human SwissProt database version v2013.01_20130110 (37398 sequences, including isoforms as obtained from varsplic.pl) with the search engines Mascot (v2.3.02, MatrixScience, London, U.K.) and Phenyx (v2.5.14, GeneBio, Geneva, Switzerland). Submission to the search engines was via a Perl script that performs an initial search with relatively broad mass tolerances (Mascot only) on both the precursor and fragment ions (±10 ppm and ±0.6 Da, respectively). High-conﬁdence peptide identiﬁcations were used to recalibrate all precursor and fragment ion masses prior to a second search with narrower mass tolerances (±4 ppm and ±0.025 Da). One missed tryptic cleavage site was allowed. Carbamidomethyl cysteine, N-terminal, and lysine-modiﬁed TMT 6plex were set as ﬁxed modiﬁcations, and oxidized methionine was set as a variable modiﬁcation. To validate the proteins, Mascot and Phenyx output ﬁles were processed by internally developed parsers. Proteins with ≥2 unique peptides above a score T1 or with a single peptide above a score T2 were selected as unambiguous identiﬁcations. Additional peptides for these validated proteins with score >T3 were also accepted. For Mascot and Phenyx, T1, T2, and T3 were equal to 16, 40, 10 and 5.5, 9.5, 3.5, respectively (p-value <10−3). Following the selection criteria, proteins were grouped on the basis of shared peptides, and only the group reporters are considered in the ﬁnal output of identiﬁed proteins. Spectral conﬂicts between Mascot and Phenyx peptide identiﬁcations were discarded. The whole procedure was repeated against a reversed database to assess the protein group false discovery rate (FDR). Peptide and protein group identiﬁcations were <0.1 and <1% FDR, respectively. Identified keratins (n=18) were only excluded from the results if containing the terms “hair” or “cuticular” as cytokeratins are markers of mesothelial cells lining the peritoneal wall.  TMT Semiquantitative Analysis The R software package Isobar (Breitwieser et al., J Prot Res 2011) was used to calculate protein ratios. Isobar is publically available under the LGPL license from the CeMM Web site (http://bioinformatics.cemm.oeaw. ac.at) and through Bioconductor (http://bioconductor.org/ packages/release/bioc/html/isobar.html). Isobar implements a signal intensity noise model to account for heteroscedasticity in TMT reporter ion ratios and calculates p values for each quantitated protein estimating technical and biological variability. The statistical framework of Isobar was described previously (Breitwieser et al., J Prot Res 2011). TMT reporter ions were extracted at the expected m/z ± 0.005 m/z, and intensities were corrected for isotopic impurities, as supplied by the manufacturer. All channels were normalized to equal sum of intensities. Protein identiﬁcations were grouped based on peptide matches from both samples. Protein ratios were calculated based on unique peptides. Proteins were denoted as signiﬁcantly regulated (in one sample) when the ratio p value was <0.05, and the protein also had a ratio >2.5 times the median absolute deviation from the median. For further analysis, proteins were selected that were signiﬁcant in one or both samples and showed the same direction of change with a ratio p value of <0.05 in both samples. A protein was also selected if there was a signiﬁcant change in one sample only.

### Publication Abstract
Peritoneal dialysis (PD) is a modality of renal replacement therapy in which the high volumes of available PD effluent (PDE) represents a rich source of biomarkers for monitoring disease and therapy. Although this information could help guide the management of PD patients, little is known about the potential of PDE to define pathomechanism-associated molecular signatures in PD.We therefore subjected PDE to a high-performance multiplex proteomic analysis after depletion of highly-abundant plasma proteins and enrichment of low-abundance proteins. A combination of label-free and isobaric labeling strategies was applied to PDE samples from PD patients (<i>n</i> = 20) treated in an open-label, randomized, two-period, cross-over clinical trial with standard PD fluid or with a novel PD fluid supplemented with alanyl-glutamine (AlaGln).With this workflow we identified 2506 unique proteins in the PDE proteome, greatly increasing coverage beyond the 171 previously-reported proteins. The proteins identified range from high abundance plasma proteins to low abundance cellular proteins, and are linked to larger numbers of biological processes and pathways, some of which are novel for PDE. Interestingly, proteins linked to membrane remodeling and fibrosis are overrepresented in PDE compared with plasma, whereas the proteins underrepresented in PDE suggest decreases in host defense, immune-competence and response to stress. Treatment with AlaGln-supplemented PD fluid is associated with reduced activity of membrane injury-associated mechanisms and with restoration of biological processes involved in stress responses and host defense.Our study represents the first application of the PDE proteome in a randomized controlled prospective clinical trial of PD. This novel proteomic workflow allowed detection of low abundance biomarkers to define pathomechanism-associated molecular signatures in PD and their alterations by a novel therapeutic intervention.

### Keywords
Plasma proteins, Biomarkers, Tmt, Peritoneal dialysis, Cytoprotection

### Affiliations
Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Medical University of Vienna, Austria
Medical University of Vienna

### Submitter
Klaus Kratochwill

### Lab Head
Dr Klaus Kratochwill
Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Medical University of Vienna, Austria


