### Accession
PXD027410

### Title
Proteomics reveals an increase in the abundance of glycolytic and ethanolic fermentation enzymes in developing sugarcane culms during sucrose accumulation

### Description
Sugarcane is an economically important crop contributing to the world’s sugar and ethanol production with 80% and 40%, respectively. In recent years, the growing demands for sugar and ethanol production has prompted the necessity to increase sugarcane productivity through conventional breeding programs. However, sugarcane breeders have encountered several difficulties to raise productivity, mainly due to its complex genetics. Sugarcane has a polyploidy genome, with many varieties being aneuploidy. Today, the majority of the planted sugarcane cultivars are complex hybrids derived mainly from crosses between Saccharum officinarum and S. spontaneum. Therefore, proteomics can provide some insight into deciphering gene regulation and changes in carbon metabolism and sucrose accumulation in the culms at different stages of plant development. The aim of this work was to compare the quantitative changes of proteins in sugarcane culms, during plant growth and sucrose accumulation. Total proteins were isolated from both, juvenile and maturing internodes at three stages of plant development. Label free shotgun proteomics was used for protein profiling and quantification. The internodes 5 (I5) and 9 (I9) of 4, 7 and 10 month-old-plants (4M, 7M and 10M, respectively) were harvested and used for proteomic analyses. To mimic field conditions of sucrose accumulation during sugarcane maturation, we stopped watering 10M plants for 10 days. An average of 1130 proteins, unique and differentially expressed across all ages were identified and quantified. Proteins were categorized within 27 functional groups, related to biological process. The patterns of expression for some categories, such as cellular amino acids, metabolic processes, secondary metabolic processes and translation were down-regulated in the immature internode (I5-10M), while up-regulated in the mature I9-10M. We observed an increase in the abundance of several enzymes of the glycolytic pathway and isoforms of alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH) and pyruvate decarboxylase (PDC), in the juvenile stages of development of I9. These changes in enzymes contents indicates that at the early stages of internode development, hypoxia is increasing the glycolytic and ethanolic fermentation pathways, in order to supply ATP for plant growth and NAD+ for mitochondrial respiration, which might be impaired by the low oxygen availability inside the culm.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted according to the protocol described by Hurkman and Tanaka (1986), with few modifications. Samples (1g) from the I5 and I9, collected from three individual plants at different ages, were pulverized to a fine powder in liquid nitrogen, using mortar and pestle. Samples were homogenized at 4°C for 30 min in 15 mL of extraction buffer (0.5 M TrisHCl, pH=7.5; 0.1 M KCl; 0.05 M EDTA; 0.7 M sucrose; 2 % v/v 2-mercaptoethanol; 2 mM PMSF; 1% w/v polyvinylpyrrolydone). An equal volume of buffer (10 mM TrisHCl, pH 8.0) saturated phenol was then added to the samples. After 30 min of shaking at 4°C, the phases were separated by centrifugation (10.000 g, 30 min, 4°C). The phenolic phase was recovered and extracted with an equal volume of extraction buffer. Proteins were precipitated from the phenolic phase by addition of 5 volumes of 0.1 M ammonium acetate in methanol and incubated, for 1 h at -20°C, followed by centrifugation (16,000 g, 30 min, 4ºC). The pellet was washed three times with ammonium acetate in methanol and once in 15 mL cold acetone (100%), incubated at -20°C for one hour, followed by centrifugation (16,000 g, 30 min, 4°C). The resulting pellet was dried and solubilized in 800 μL of TCT buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 10 mM DTT and 0.1% (v/v) Triton X-100). Complete protein solubilization was achieved by vigorously shaking with vortex. Protein extracts were desalinized by Amicon®Ultra-0.5 mL 3K-NMWL filter devices (Millipore). The protein concentration was determined using the Bradford assay (Bradford, 1976) and confirmed by SDS PAGE electrophoresis. Fifty micrograms of protein sample were denatured with 25 µL of 0.2 % RapiGest SF (Waters) at 80ºC, for 15 min; reduced with 2.5 µL of 100 mM dithiothreitol (GE Healthcare) at 60ºC, for 30 min; alkylated with 2.5 µL of 300 mM iodoacetamide (GE Healthcare) at RT for 30 min in the dark. Samples were then enzymatically digested with trypsin (Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin, Promega) at a 1:100 (w/w) enzyme: protein ratio. After digestion, 10 µL of 5 % trifluoroacetic acid was added to the digested mixture. The digested samples were then incubated at 37ºC for 90 min, in order to hydrolyse the RapiGest. After digestion, the mixture of peptides was desalted using the ZipTip Reversed-Phase ZipTip C18, according to the manufacturer (Millipore). The final volume of 50 μL was obtained by the addition of ammonium formate (20 mM pH 10) solution, containing the internal standard (β-phosphorylase at 1 pmol.μL-1), to the lyophilized desalted peptide sample.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra of the peptide fragments were acquired by reverse-phase ultraperformance liquid chromatography (2D Technology nanoACQUITY-Waters, Corp., Milford, USA). First dimension separation was achieved in an XBridge BEH130 C18 5µm 300 µm x 50 mm column (Waters, Corp., Milford, USA). Elution was performed using 5 different binary gradients with 20 mM pH 10 ammonium formate in acetonitrile, at 400 nL/min. Eluted peptides from the first dimension column were trapped in a Symmetry C18 5 µm 180 µm x 20 mm column (Waters, Corp., Milford, USA) and diluted, online, with acetonitrile containing 0.1 % formic acid, at a flow rate of 2 µL/min. Second dimension separation was performed in a HSS T3 1.8 µm 75 µm x 100 mm column (Waters, Corp., Milford, USA), using a binary gradient from 3 to 85 % of acetonitrile with 0.1 % formic acid, during 52 min, at a flow rate of 350 ɳL/min. Mass spectrometry acquisition was achieved in a Synapt G2 HDMS mass spectrometer equipped with an ion mobility cell and a nanolockspray source in the positive ion and ‘V’ mode (Waters, Corp., Milford, USA). The MS/MS fragment ions of GFP [Glu 1]-Fibrinopeptide B with a doubly-charged ion [M + 2H]2+=785,8426 m/z (Waters, Corp., Milford, USA) was used as lock mass, to obtain the final instrument calibration. Data-independent scanning (MSE) experiments were performed by switching between low (3 eV) and elevated collision energies (15-50 eV), applied to the trap ‘T-wave’ cell filled with argon. Scan time of 0.8 s were used for low and high energy scans from m/z 50 to 2000 (Silva et al., 2006). The raw data processing of protein identification and relative quantitative analyses were all performed using the ProteinLynx Global Server (PLGS 2.5.1). The processing parameters included: automatic tolerance for precursor and product ions, minimum of 3 fragment ions matched per peptide, minimum of 7 fragment ions matched per protein, minimum of 2 peptides matched per protein, 1 possible trypsin missed cleavage, carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine as variable modification, and a false positive discovery rate (FDR) below 1%. To identify and quantify the proteins, the intensities of the spectra were calculated by the stoichiometric method, according to the internal standard, by MSE analysis (Silva et al., 2006) and normalized using the PLGS auto-normalization function. The amount and sequence of the matched peptide and protein fmols were obtained, based on the ratio of its three most abundant peptides (“High Top 3” method) determined in each individual experiment (Silva e al, 2006), considering the data from 3 biological replicates for each sample, described as: I5-4M, I9-4M, I5-7M, I9-7M and I5-10M, I9-10M. The false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide and protein identification was determined based on the search of a reversed database, which was generated automatically using PLGS 2.5.1 by reversing the sequence of each entry. All protein hits were identified with a confidence of > 95%. Only those proteins identified in at least two out of 3 replicates performed for each biological sample, were regarded as having undergone a significant change. The sigmoid distribution (Geromanos et al., 2011), within the dynamic range spectra of the log-transformed data, was generated by the MassPivot Software (Murad and Rech, 2012), kindly supplied by André M. Murad. The predicted protein identifications were obtained with the embedded ion accounting algorithm of PLGS Software searching into the database for Saccharum spp (SUCEST) comprising of the transcript sequences from the sugarcane genome project (http://sucest-fun.org/) publicly available (Vettore et al., 2001), to which the sequence of rabbit phosphorylase (Uniprot entry: P00489) was appended as the internal standard to provide the ability to address technical variation and accommodate concentration determinations (Silva et al., 2006). The PLGS 2.5.1 expression data values of p < 0.05 and p > 0.95 were considered as statistically significant forlow or high abundance, respectively, considering the quantitative protein ratio between I9/I5.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sucrose accumulation, Glycolysis and ethanolic fermentation, Hypoxia, Saccharum spp

### Affiliations
ESALQ USP
ESALQ-USP

### Submitter
Thais Cataldi

### Lab Head
Dr Carlos Alberto Labate
ESALQ-USP


