### Accession
PXD006596

### Title
Translational repression of the Drosophila nanos mRNA involves the RNA helicase Belle and RNA coating by Me31B and Trailer hitch

### Description
The maternal mRNA nanos is required for anterior-posterior patterning in the early Drosophila melanogaster development. The nanos-mRNA is translationally repressed and deadenylated during the first two hours of embryogenesis. A stem-loop structure in the 3'-UTR of this RNA (SRE - Smaug recogniiton element) is bound by the Smaug protein which recruits a protein complex to the RNA to sequester its translation and intiate transcript degradation via the ccr4/not-complex. To analyse the composition of this repressor complex, biotinylated RNAs carrying two SRE stem-loops were used for an affinity purification of bound proteins. As a negative control an RNA was used that contained two point mutations in the SRE loop, that abolish binding of Smaug. Seven subunits were identified as components of the repressor complex. The main deadenylase in Drosophila, the ccr4/not-complex was also significantly enriched.

### Sample Protocol
Radiolabelled, biotinylated RNAs (10 nM) were incubated under conditions in which no translation takes place ('preincubation conditions'; 60% embryo extract, 26 mM Hepes-KOH pH 7.4, 81 mM potassium acetate, 1.6 mM magnesium acetate, 1.3 mM ATP, 1 mM DTT, 80 U/ml RNase inhibitor, 0.2 mg/ml 'short RNA') for 25 min at 25°C. The inclusion of 'short RNA' improved RNA stability and complex recovery. Aliquots (1 ml) were loaded on 5-45% sucrose gradients (12 ml per tube in TL buffer: 16 mM Hepes-KOH pH 7.4, 50 mM potassium acetate, 1 mM magnesium acetate, 0.8 mM ATP) and centrifuged for 3 h at 40,000 rpm, 4°C (Beckman SW40Ti). Gradients were harvested from the bottom in 20 fractions. Fractions 5-10 were pooled, frozen in liquid N2 and stored at -80°C. Pools from three gradients were combined and concentrated in Amicon centrifugal filters. Streptavidin beads (GE Healthcare; 30 μl packed volume) were blocked with TL buffer containing 0.1 mg/ml yeast RNA and 0.1 mg/ml methylated BSA and washed with TL buffer. Beads were incubated with equal amounts, based on trace-labeling of the RNA, of the concentrated pools and 0.1 mg/ml yeast RNA for 15 min at room temperature, pelleted and resuspended in 200 μl of TL buffer with yeast RNA as above. Beads were pelleted, resuspended in the same buffer and centrifuged through a 30% sucrose cushion in TL buffer (200 μl). They were washed once more with the same buffer in a fresh tube, once with wash buffer (50 mM Hepes-KOH pH 7.4, 150 mM KCl, 54 mM potassium acetate, 1 mM magnesium acetate, 30 μg/ml heparin, 0.1 mg/ml yeast RNA) and once with wash buffer without RNA. Proteins were eluted in 10 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 0.5% SDS at 80°C for 10 min. Streptavidin-purified repressor proteins from four preparations (twelve gradients) for each RNA were pooled and separated in an SDS-polyacrylamide gel. Each gel lane was cut in 12 pieces, and the proteins were in-gel digested with trypsin (Shevchenko et al. 2006). Disulfides were reduced with DTT and cysteines alkylated with iodoacetamide. Peptides were analyzed by LC/MS/MS on an U3000 RSLC Nano-HPLC system coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer equipped with a nano-electrospray ionization source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The samples were loaded onto a trapping column (Acclaim PepMap C8, 300 μm x 5 mm, 5 μm, 100Å) and washed for 15 min with 0.1 % trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) at a flow rate of 30 μl/min. Trapped peptides were eluted on the separation column (Acclaim PepMap C18, 75 μm x 250 mm, 2μm, 100Å), which had been equilibrated with 99% A (0.1 % formic acid). Peptides were separated with a linear gradient: 0-35 % B (100% acetonitrile, 0.08 % formic acid) in 90 min at 40°C and a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Full MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer (R = 60,000), MS/MS spectra (HCD, 30% normalized collision energy) were recorded in the linear trap for 5 s (most intense signals).

### Data Protocol
MS data were analyzed with MaxQuant 1.5.2.8 (Cox and Mann 2008) (RRID: SCR:014485). For protein identification, data were searched against the Uniprot proteome (www.uniprot.org) of D. melanogaster (20,042 protein entries; accessed 2015/01/19). The inverted sequences of all proteins were used for decoy analysis. Mass accuracy was set to 20 ppm and 0.5 Da for precursor and fragment ions respectively. Carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification and methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. The search included standard contaminating proteins, but these were omitted from the plots shown. Raw files from the analysis of 12 gel pieces of one lane each for WT and MUT were combined into one experiment for MaxQuant analysis. The resulting peptide intensities for each protein were multiplied with the number of peptide spectral Götze et al. 20 matches (PSMs) and normalized to the molecular weight of the protein. The calculated intensity values were plotted for proteins bound to SRE-containing RNA versus mutant RNA.  For estimation of the p value for SRE-dependent enrichment, the proteins were separated in 33 equally sized bins along the diagonal axis. The distance of each protein from the diagonal in each bin follows a normal distribution with a mean of 0 for all nonspecifically bound proteins. The distances were fitted against the normal distribution to obtain σ². To estimate p values for each protein enrichment, the σ²-values were fitted with the equation y=a·b-c·(bin-45). The squared differences to the model were multiplied with the number of proteins per bin to weight the data in the non-linear least square fit.

### Publication Abstract
Translational repression of maternal mRNAs is an essential regulatory mechanism during early embryonic development. Repression of the <i>Drosophila nanos</i> mRNA, required for the formation of the anterior-posterior body axis, depends on the protein Smaug binding to two Smaug recognition elements (SREs) in the <i>nanos</i> 3' UTR. In a comprehensive mass spectrometric analysis of the SRE-dependent repressor complex, we identified Smaug, Cup, Me31B, Trailer hitch, eIF4E, and PABPC, in agreement with earlier data. As a novel component, the RNA-dependent ATPase Belle (DDX3) was found, and its involvement in deadenylation and repression of <i>nanos</i> was confirmed in vivo. Smaug, Cup, and Belle bound stoichiometrically to the SREs, independently of RNA length. Binding of Me31B and Tral was also SRE-dependent, but their amounts were proportional to the length of the RNA and equimolar to each other. We suggest that "coating" of the RNA by a Me31B&#x2022;Tral complex may be at the core of repression.

### Keywords
Ccr4-not-complex, Nanos, Me31b, Trailer hitch, Translational repression, Deadenylation dead-box helicase, Smaug, Cup

### Affiliations
University Halle-Witenberg
Institute for Biochemistry and Biotechnology, Martin Luther University Halle-Wittenberg

### Submitter
Michael Götze

### Lab Head
Dr Elmar Wahle
Institute for Biochemistry and Biotechnology, Martin Luther University Halle-Wittenberg


