### Accession
PXD031224

### Title
RIPK3 is released into Extracellular Vesicles during Necroptosis through a Rab27 independent mechanism

### Description
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are important mechanisms used by cells to release biomolecules. A common necroptosis effector— mixed lineage kinase like (MLKL)--- was recently found to participate in the biogenesis of small and large EVs independent of its function in necroptosis. The objective of the current study is to gain mechanistic insights into EV biogenesis during necroptosis. We performed mass spectrometry-based proteomics on EVs released by healthy or necroptotic cells. Necroptosis increased the number of EVs released and altered the protein contents within the EVs. Comparing to EVs released by healthy cells, EVs released during necroptosis contained markedly higher number of unique proteins. Receptor interacting protein kinase 3 (RIPK3) and MLKL were among the proteins enriched in EVs released during necroptosis. Further, MEFs derived from mice deficient of Rab27a and Rab27b showed diminished basal EV release but responded to necroptosis with enhanced EV biogenesis as the wildtype MEFs.  In contrast, necroptosis-associated EVs was sensitive to Ca2+ depletion or  lysosomal disruption. Neither treatments affected the RIPK3-mediated MLKL phosphorylation. Our data suggests that necroptosis switches EV biogenesis from a Rab27a/b dependent mechanism to a lysosomal mediated mechanism.

### Sample Protocol
Isolate exosomes in 225 μL of ABC were lysed with 25 μL of the solubilization buffer consisting of 0.5% 4-hexylphenylazosulfonate (final surfactant concentration, 0.05%)27, 28. Samples were then reduced using 4 μL of 100 mM TCEP and alkylated with 4 μL of 500 mM 2-chloroacetamide solution and incubated at room temperature for 30 min. Proteins were digested using 2 μL of 0.3 μg/μL Trypsin solution and incubated at 37 C for 1 h. The surfactant was degraded with 5 min of UV using a 100 W mercury lamp (Nikon housing with Nikon HB-10101AF power supply; handle with caution). 2 μL of 10% TFA was added to samples, which were then vortexed and centrifuged at 20,000g for 2 min. Using a C18 ziptip, the samples were desalted according to the manufactures instructions. The samples were reconstituted in 25 µL of mobile phase solvent A (99.8% water and 0.2% formic acid). The peptide concentration was determined using NanoDrop operating at 280 nm.  Approximately 200 ng of peptide were loaded onto an Ion Optics column (25 cm x 75 µm, C18 1.6 µm) heated to 55 °C. The separation was performed using the following gradient: 0-60 min 2-17% B, 60-90 min 17-25% B, 90-100 min 37% B, 100-110 min 37-85% B, and 110-120 min 85% B using a flow rate of 400 nL/min and mobile phase B consisting of 99.8% ACN and 0.2% formic acid. Eluting peptides were directly ionized via electrospray ionization (CaptiveSpray) using a capillary voltage of 1500V, dry gas of 3.0 l/min, and dry temp of 180 °C. Ions measured from 100-1700 m/z using a timsTOF Pro Q-TOF (Bruker Daltonics) operating in PASEF mode29 with an ion mobility range (1/k0) of 0.60 to 1.60 Vs/cm2. For tandem MS, the following parameters were used: number of PASEF MS/MS scans (10); total cycle time (1.16 s); target intensity (20000); intensity threshold (2500); charge range (0-5); active exclusion on, release after 0.4 min, reconsider if current intensity 4x previous; isolation width (2 m/z for m/z < 700 and 3 m/z for m/z > 700); collisional energy (20-59 eV). The performance of the instrument (as well as validation of the peptide loading amount) was monitored periodically by running 200 ng of standard K652 digestion (Promega). Data were processed using MSFragger V15.0 software30. For searches, we used the reviewed Mus musculus (Mouse) UniProt sequences (https://www.uniprot.org, October 7, 2020) using a 1% false discovery rate. All searches were performed with carbamidomethyl (C) has a fixed modification and oxidation (M), protein N-terminal acetylation, and phosphorylation (STY) set as variable modifications. Match between runs was enabled. Otherwise, the MSFragger parameters were not changed from their default values.   For the IP analysis, samples were precipitated in 500 µL acetone overnight. After centrifugation (20,000g, 10 minutes, 4 °C), 30 µL of ABC was added to each along with 10 mM TCEP, 20 mM CA, and 1 µg trypsin. Samples were digested overnight at 4 °C. 2 µL of TFA (10%) was added to quench the digestion. Data were processed using MSFragger V15.0 as described above.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed using MSFragger V15.0 software30. For searches, we used the reviewed Mus musculus (Mouse) UniProt sequences (https://www.uniprot.org, October 7, 2020) using a 1% false discovery rate. All searches were performed with carbamidomethyl (C) has a fixed modification and oxidation (M), protein N-terminal acetylation, and phosphorylation (STY) set as variable modifications. Match between runs was enabled. Otherwise, the MSFragger parameters were not changed from their default values.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mlkl, Ripk3, Necroptosis, Proteomics, Sevs, Lysosomal exocytosis

### Affiliations
SMPH/SURGERY/VASCULAR SURGERY
uw madison

### Submitter
kyle brown

### Lab Head
Dr Bo Liu
SMPH/SURGERY/VASCULAR SURGERY


