### Accession
PXD021729

### Title
Tyrosine phosphoproteomics of patient-derived xenografts reveals ephrin type-B receptor 4 tyrosine kinase as novel therapeutic target in pancreatic cancer

### Description
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma is a recalcitrant tumor with minimal response to conventional chemotherapeutic approaches. Oncogenic signaling by activated tyrosine kinases has been implicated in cancers resulting in activation of diverse effector signaling pathways. Thus, discovery of aberrantly activated tyrosine kinases is of great interest in developing novel therapeutic strategies in treatment and management of pancreatic cancer. Patient-derived tumor xenografts (PDXs) in immunodeficient mice serve as potentially valuable preclinical model as it maintain the histological and molecular heterogeneity of the progenitor human tumor. Here, we employed high resolution mass spectrometry combined with immuno-affinity purification using anti-phosphotyrosine antibodies to profile tyrosine phosphoproteome across 13 pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma PDX models. This analysis resulted in identification of 1,219 tyrosine phosphorylated sites mapping on 724 proteins. The mass spectrometric analysis revealed widespread and heterogeneous activation of both receptor and non-receptor tyrosine kinases. Studies carried out in mice confirmed ephrin type-B receptor 4 (EphB4) as a potential therapeutic target based on the efficacy of human serum albumin-conjugated soluble EphB4 in mice bearing orthotopic xenografts. In summary, we present the comprehensive landscape of tyrosine phosphoproteome with EphB4 as a promising therapeutic target in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma.

### Sample Protocol
Processing of patient-derived xenografts for peptide preparation PDX tissues were pulverized in liquid nitrogen. The pulverized samples were lysed in urea lysis buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 9 M urea, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM ß-glycerophosphate) and sonicated for 30 seconds twice on ice. Cell lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 20,000× g at 15ºC for 15 min. Twenty-five milligram proteins from the each samples were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 60 min at 37ºC and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in dark. Proteins were diluted in 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0 to a final concentration of 2 M urea and incubated with TPCK-treated trypsin room temperature overnight with a gentle end-to-end shaking. Protein digests were acidified by adding 20% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 1% TFA and subjected to centrifugation at 2,000× g at room temperature for 15 min. The supernatant of protein digests (25 mg total) was loaded onto a Sep-Pak C18 cartridge (Waters, C# WAT051910) equilibrated with 0.1% TFA in order to desalt. Peptides were eluted with 40% acetonitrile with 0.1% TFA. Eluted peptides were lyophilized and subjected to immunoaffinity purification of tyrosine phosphorylated peptides.  Immunoaffinity purification of tyrosine phosphopeptides Immunoaffinity purification (IAP) of tyrosine phosphorylated peptides was carried out as previously described 27. Briefly, after lyophilization, about 25 mg of tryptic peptides was dissolved in 1.4 ml of IAP buffer (50 mM MOPS pH 7.2, 10 mM sodium phosphate, 50 mM NaCl) and subjected to centrifugation at 2,000 × g at room temperature for 5 min. Before IAP, P-Tyr-1000 beads were washed with IAP buffer twice at 4 ºC and the pH of the supernatant containing peptides was adjusted to ~7.2 by adding 1 M Tris Base. For IAP, the supernatant was incubated with P-Tyr-1000 beads at 4 ºC for 60 min and the beads were washed three times with IAP buffer and twice with cold ultrahigh pure water. Peptides captured by antibody were eluted twice from beads by incubating the beads with 0.15% TFA at room temperature for 15 min. Eluted peptides were desalted by STAGE tip and dried peptides were kept in -80ºC prior to LC-MS/MS experiment.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data analysis The acquired mass spectra were searched using Andromeda in MaxQuant software suite (version 1.5.1.3) against a UniProt human protein database including common MS contaminants. The search parameters included a maximum of two missed cleavages; carbamidomethylation at cysteine as a fixed modification; N-terminal acetylation, oxidation at methionine, phosphorylation at serine, threonine and tyrosine as variable modifications. Precursor tolerance was set to 10 ppm and MS/MS tolerance to ±0.02 Da. False discovery rate was set to 1% at the peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs), peptide and protein level. Label-free quantitation (LFQ) was used for quantitation of peptides based on precursor ion abundance. The phosphorylation site localization probability for each Ser/Thr/Tyr site was calculated and filtered at 75% cut-off.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Signaling, Pdx, Receptor tyrosine kinase, Ptyr, Cancer

### Affiliations
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic Rochester, MN 55905 USA
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905

### Submitter
Akhilesh Pandey

### Lab Head
Dr Akhilesh Pandey
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic Rochester, MN 55905 USA


