### Accession
PXD024796

### Title
Proximity biotinylation of CDK1 associated proteins in U2OS cells

### Description
BirA ligase tagged CDK1 and BirA alone were expressed in U2OS cells. Proximal proteins to CDK1 were labelled by incubating cells with Biotin for 24 hours and biotinylated proteins extracted using Streptavidin pulldown.

### Sample Protocol
Purified Proteins were eluted from streptavidin beads in 40 µl of 2× reducing sample buffer with 100 µM biotin for 10 min at 70°C. Eluted proteins were briefly subjected to SDS-PAGE (3 min at 200 V, 4–12% Bis-Tris gel, Life Technologies) and stained with InstantBlue Coomassie protein stain before being washed with ddH2O overnight at 4°C. Bands were excised and transferred to wells in a perforated 96-well plate, and in-gel tryptic digestion was performed as previously described (57). Peptides were desalted using 1 mg POROS Oligo R3 beads (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Beads were washed with 50 µl 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (FA) before the peptide solution was added. Beads were washed twice with 100 µl 0.1% (v/v) FA, and peptides were eluted twice with 50 µl 50% (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN) and 0.1% (v/v) FA. Peptides were dried using a vacuum centrifuge and resuspended in 11 µl 5% (v/v) ACN and 0.1% (v/v) FA. Peptides were analysed by liquid chromatography (LC)–tandem MS (MS/MS) using an UltiMate 3000 Rapid Separation LC (RSLC, Dionex Corporation) coupled to an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). Peptides were separated on a bridged ethyl hybrid C18 analytical column (250 mm × 75 μm inner diameter, 1.7 μm particle size, Waters) over a 1 h gradient from 8 to 33% (v/v) ACN in 0.1% (v/v) FA. LC–MS/MS analyses were operated in data-dependent mode to automatically select peptides for fragmentation by collision-induced dissociation (CID.

### Data Protocol
Quantification was performed using Progenesis LC–MS software (Progenesis QI, Nonlinear Dynamics; http://www.nonlinear.com/progenesis/qi-for-proteomics/). In brief, automatic alignment was used, and the resulting aggregate spectrum filtered to include +1, +2 and +3 charge states only. A .mgf file representing the aggregate spectrum was exported and searched using Mascot (one missed cleavage, fixed modification: carbamidomethyl [C]; variable modifications: biotinylation [B], oxidation [M]; peptide tolerance: ± 5 ppm; MS/MS tolerance: ±0.5 Da), and the resulting .xml file was re-imported to assign peptides to features. Three separate experiments were performed, and abundance values for proteins identified in the analysis were used to determine which proteins were enriched over twofold in cells expressing BirA-CDK1 relative to cells expressing BirA-empty vector control.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Proximity biotinylation, Lc-msms, Cdk1

### Affiliations
University of Manchester

### Submitter
Matthew Jones

### Lab Head
Dr Martin J Humphries
University of Manchester


