### Accession
PXD017037

### Title
Decoding altitude – activated regulatory mechanisms underlining apple peel coloration and ripening

### Description
Apple (Malus domestica Borkh) is an important fruit crop cultivated in a broad range of environmental conditions. Apple fruit, and specifically peel tissue, ripening is a physiological process whose molecular regulatory networks response to different environments are still not sufficiently investigated. In this study, the influence of low (20 m) and high (750 m) altitude environmental conditions in peel tissue was assessed by physiological measurements combined with global metabolite and protein expression profiling during apple fruit development and ripening. Although apple fruit ripening was unaffected by the different environmental conditions, however several key color parameters, such as redness and the color percentage index, were induced by high altitude. Consistent with this, increased level of anthocyanin and other phenolic compounds, including cyanidin-3-O-galactoside, quercetin-3-O-rhamnoside, quercetin-3-O-rutinoside and chlorogenic acid were identified in apple peel at high altitude. Also, high altitude environment, particularly, at the ripening period, up-accumulated various carbohydrates (eg., arabinose, xylose and sucrose) while repressed glutamic acid and several related proteins such as glycine hydroxymethyltransferase and glutamate–glyoxylate aminotransferase. Other processes affected by high altitude concerned the TCA cycle, the synthesis of oxidative/defense enzymes, and the accumulation of photosynthetic proteins. Finally, we constructed a metabolite-protein network depicting the impact of altitude on peel ripening. These data provide insights into physiological processes linked to apple peel ripening across different climatic conditions and will assist in efforts to improve apple fruit appeal and quality.

### Sample Protocol
The peel tissue protein pellets comprising 3 biological replicas of each conditions (140, 160 DAFB, low/high altitude) were resuspended in 8 M Urea/100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5 (UA), and the extracted proteins were processed according to the Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) protocol using spin filter devices with a 10 kDa cut-off (Sartorius, VN01H02) 36. Proteins on the filters were extensively washed through centrifugation at 14000 g with the UA solution, reduced with 100 mM DTT in UA for 30 minutes and subsequently alkylated with 10 mg mL-1 iodoacetamide in the urea solution for 30 minutes in the dark. Proteins on the top of the filters were washed three times with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and finally digested in a thermomixer overnight at 37 °C and with 300 rpm by adding 1 μg trypsin/LysC mix in 80 μL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution (Mass spec grade, Promega). Peptides were eluted by centrifugation and dried down completely by speed-vac-assisted solvent removal. Dried peptides eluates were reconstituted in 0,1 % (v/v) formic acid and 2% (v/v) acetonitrile in water and subjected to 1-minute sonicating water bath. Peptide concentration was determined by nanodrop absorbance measurement at 280 nm. Two technical replicas was analysed by LC-MS/MS for each sample. 2.5 μg peptides were pre-concentrated with a flow of 3 μL/min for 10 min using a C18 trap column (Acclaim PepMap100, 100 μm x 2 cm, Thermo Scientific) and then loaded onto a 50 cm long C18 column (75 μm ID, particle size 2 μm, 100Å, Acclaim PepMap100 RSLC, Thermo Scientific). The binary pumps of the HPLC (RSLCnano, Thermo Scientific) consisted of Solution A (2% (v/v) ACN in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid) and Solution B (80% (v/v) ACN in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid). The peptides were separated using a linear gradient of 4% B up to 40% B in 230 min with a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The column was placed in an oven operating at 35°C. The eluted peptides were ionized by a nanospray source and detected by an LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) operating in a data dependent mode (DDA). Full scan MS spectra were acquired in the orbitrap (m/z 300–1600) in profile mode with the resolution set to 60,000 at m/z 400 and automatic gain control target at 106 ions. The six most intense ions were sequentially isolated for collision-induced (CID) MS/MS fragmentation and detection in the linear ion trap. Dynamic exclusion was set to 1 min and activated for 90 sec. Ions with single charge states were excluded. Lockmass of m/z 445,120025 was used for continuous internal calibration. XCalibur (Thermo Scientific) was used to control the system and acquire the raw files.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were analyzed with MaxQuant (version 1.6.0.16) searching against the GDDH13_1-1_prot.fasta database (45.116 entries, downloaded at 02/10/2017 from the GDR). The search parameters covered a molecular weight ranging from 350 to 5.000 Da, with precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm, MS/MS fragment tolerance of 0.5 Da, a maximum of two missed cleavages by trypsin, and methionine oxidation, deamination of glutamine, asparagine and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation was set as fixed cysteine modification. Label-free quantification (LFQ) was performed in MaxQuant. The protein and peptide false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1%. The match-between-run function was enabled. Statistical analyses and data visualization were performed using Perseus (version 1.6.0.2). Proteins that the identification results were “potential contaminants”, “reverse” and “only identified by site” were filtered out. The LFQ intensities were transformed to logarithmic. Zero intensity was imputed i.e. replaced by normal distribution, assuming that the corresponding protein is present in low amounts in the sample. The three (3) biological replicas plus three (3) corresponding technical replicas were grouped for each treatment and a two-sided Welch’s T-test of the grouped proteins was performed using p value (<0.01) for truncation (Supplementary Table 3). Protein annotations were added from the text file downloaded from GDR site (Dated 02/10/2017).

### Publication Abstract
Apple (<i>Malus domestica</i> Borkh) is an important fruit crop cultivated in a broad range of environmental conditions. Apple fruit ripening is a physiological process, whose molecular regulatory network response to different environments is still not sufficiently investigated and this is particularly true of the peel tissue. In this study, the influence of environmental conditions associated with low (20&#x2009;m) and high (750&#x2009;m) altitude on peel tissue ripening was assessed by physiological measurements combined with metabolomic and proteomic analyses during apple fruit development and ripening. Although apple fruit ripening was itself not affected by the different environmental conditions, several key color parameters, such as redness and color index, were notably induced by high altitude. Consistent with this observation, increased levels of anthocyanin and other phenolic compounds, including cyanidin-<i>3-O</i>-galactoside, quercetin-<i>3-O</i>-rhamnoside, quercetin-<i>3-O</i>-rutinoside, and chlorogenic acid were identified in the peel of apple grown at high altitude. Moreover, the high-altitude environment was characterized by elevated abundance of various carbohydrates (e.g., arabinose, xylose, and sucrose) but decreased levels of glutamic acid and several related proteins, such as glycine hydroxymethyltransferase and glutamate-glyoxylate aminotransferase. Other processes affected by high altitude were the TCA cycle, the synthesis of oxidative/defense enzymes, and the accumulation of photosynthetic proteins. From the obtained data we were able to construct a metabolite-protein network depicting the impact of altitude on peel ripening. The combined analyses presented here provide new insights into physiological processes linking apple peel ripening with the prevailing environmental conditions.

### Keywords
Ripening, Anthocyanin, Metabolomics, Proteomics, Apple fruit, Peel tissue, Altitude

### Affiliations
Protein Analysis Laboratory
B.S.R.C. "Alexander Fleming",
Alexander Fleming Street 34
16672, Vari,
Greece
Laboratory of Pomology, Department of Agriculture,  Aristotle University of Thessaloniki,  University Campus, 54124, Thessaloniki, Greece.

### Submitter
Martina Samiotaki

### Lab Head
Dr Athanassios Molassiotis
Laboratory of Pomology, Department of Agriculture,  Aristotle University of Thessaloniki,  University Campus, 54124, Thessaloniki, Greece.


