### Accession
PXD024379

### Title
Proteomics analysis of YAP knockdown in mouse skeletal muscle

### Description
Obesity is a major risk factor underlying the development of metabolic disease and a growing public health concern globally. Strategies to promote skeletal muscle metabolism can be effective to limit the progression of metabolic disease. Here, we demonstrate that the levels of the Hippo pathway transcriptional co-activator YAP are decreased in muscle biopsies from obese, insulin-resistant humans and mice. Targeted disruption of Yap in adult skeletal muscle resulted in incomplete oxidation of fatty acids and lipotoxicity. Integrated ‘omics analysis including proteomics from isolated adult muscle nuclei revealed that Yap regulates a transcriptional profile associated with metabolic substrate utilisation. In line with these findings, increasing Yap abundance in the striated muscle of obese (db/db) mice enhanced energy expenditure and attenuated adiposity. Our results demonstrate a vital role for Yap as a mediator of skeletal muscle metabolism. Strategies to enhance Yap activity in skeletal muscle warrant consideration as part of comprehensive approaches to treat metabolic disease.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen tissue was tip-probe sonicated in 6 M guanidine chloride containing 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine and 40 mM chloroacetamide in 100 mM Tris pH 8.5. The lysate was incubated at 95°C for 5 min and centrifuged at 20,000 x g for 30 min at 4°C. Lysates were precipitated with 5 volumes of acetone overnight at -20°C. Protein pellets were centrifuged at 5,000 x g, 10 min at 4°C and washed with 80% acetone. Protein pellets were resuspended in 10% trifluoroethanol in 100 mM HEPEs pH 7.5, quantified with BCA and normalised to 20 µg/10 µl. The lysates were digested with 0.4 µg of Sequencing Grade Trypsin (Sigma) overnight at 37 °C. Peptides were acidified with 100 µl of 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and purified using styrenedivinylbenzene- reverse phase sulfonate microcolumns. The columns were washed with 100 µl of 99% ethyl acetate containing 1% TFA followed by 5% acetonitrile containing 0.2% TFA and eluted with 60% acetonitrile containing 1% ammonium hydroxide then dried by vacuum centrifugation.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were resuspended in 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA and loaded onto a 50 cm x 75 µm inner diameter column packed in-house with 1.9 µm C18AQ particles (Dr Maisch GmbH HPLC) using Dionex nanoUHPLC. Peptides were separated using a linear gradient of 5 – 30% Buffer B over 180 min at 300 nl/min (Buffer A = 0.1% formic acid; Buffer B = 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). The column was maintained at 50ºC using a PRSO-V1 ion-source (Sonation) coupled directly to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (MS). A full-scan MS1 was measured at 60,000 resolution at 200 m/z (350 – 1650 m/z; 50 ms injection time; 4e5 automatic gain control target) followed by data-dependent analysis of the most abundant precursor ions for MS/MS by HCD (1.4 m/z isolation; 30 normalized collision energy; 15,000 resolution; 28 ms injection time, 1e5 automatic gain control target, 2 s fixed cycle time).  Mass spectrometry data were processed using Andromeda/MaxQuant 68 and searched against the mouse UniProt database (June, 2019) using all default settings with peptide spectral matches and protein false discovery rate (FDR) set to 1%. First search mass tolerances were set to 20 ppm for MS1 and MS2 and following recalibration, a second search was performed with MS1 tolerance of 4.5 ppm and MS2 tolerance of 20 ppm. The data were searched with a maximum of 2 miss-cleavages, and methionine oxidation and protein N-terminus acetylation were set as variable modifications while carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification. The MaxLFQ algorithm was enabled including match between runs with default parameters 69. Data was post-processed via Log2 transformation and median normalization. Significantly regulated proteins were determined via t-tests and correct for multiple hypothesis testing using Benjamini-Hochberg FDR <5%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics, Yap, Skeletal muscle

### Affiliations
The University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Benjamin Parker

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin Parker
The University of Melbourne


