### Accession
PXD047542

### Title
Inhalation of ACE2-expressing lung spheroid cell exosomes provides prophylactic protection against SARS-CoV-2

### Description
We demonstrated that lung spheroid cell derived exosomes (LSC-Exo) carry the parental cell’s ACE2 that are able to target lung, intercept SARS-CoV-2 entry, confer protection against SARS-CoV-2 infection. This LSC-Exo prophylaxis paradigm would not be limited by viral evolution, showing great potential for emerged SARS-CoV-2 variants, including those that are yet to emerge.

### Sample Protocol
LSC-Exo and HEK-Exo were spiked with 200 fmol of bovine casein per ug of exosome lysate and were then supplemented with SDS to 5%. Samples were then reduced with 10 mM dithiolthreitol for 30 min at 80 °C and alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide for 45 min at room temperature and supplemented with a final concentration of 1.2% phosphoric acid and 328 μl of S-Trap (Protifi) binding buffer (90% methanol, 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB)). Proteins were trapped on the S-Trap, digested using 20 ng μl−1 sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) for 1 h at 47 °C, and eluted using 50 mM TEAB, followed by 0.2% formic acid (FA), and lastly using 50% acetonitrile, 0.2% FA. All samples were then lyophilized to dryness and resuspended in 12 μl 1% trifluoroacetic acid, 2% acetonitrile containing 12.5 fmol μl−1 yeast alcohol dehydrogenase.

### Data Protocol
Raw LC-MS/MS data files were processed in Proteome Discoverer 3.0 (Thermo Scientific) and then submitted to independent Sequest database searches against a Human protein database containing both forward (20260 entries) and reverse entries of each protein. Search tolerances were 2 ppm for precursor ions and 0.8 Da for product ions using trypsin specificity with up to two missed cleavages. All searched spectra were imported into Scaffold (v5.3, Proteome Software) and scoring thresholds were set to achieve a peptide false discovery rate of 1% using the PeptideProphet algorithm. Protein groups with at least 2 peptides were accepted. The normalization mode was selected as the total spectrum amount to correct experimental bias. The normalized total spectra counts were used for quantitative analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Exosomes

### Affiliations
South China University of Technology
(+86)19924307306

### Submitter
Zhenzhen Wang

### Lab Head
Professor Zhenzhen Wang
South China University of Technology


