### Accession
PXD017261

### Title
DIFFERENTIATION-DEPENDENT SUSCEPTIBILITY OF HUMAN MUSCLE CELLS TO ZIKA VIRUS INFECTION

### Description
Muscle cells are potential targets of many arboviruses, such as Ross River, Dengue, Sindbis, and Chikungunya viruses, that may be involved in the physiopathological course of the infection. During the recent outbreak of Zika virus (ZIKV), myalgia was one of the most frequently reported symptoms. We investigated the susceptibility of human muscle cells to ZIKV infection. Using an in vitro model of human primary myoblasts that can be differentiated into myotubes, we found that myoblasts can be productively infected by ZIKV. In contrast, myotubes were shown to be resistant to ZIKV infection, suggesting a differentiation-dependent susceptibility. Infection was accompanied by a caspase-independent cytopathic effect, associated with paraptosis-like cytoplasmic vacuolization. Proteomic profiling was performed 24h and 48h post-infection in cells infected with two different isolates. Proteome changes indicate that ZIKV infection induces an upregulation of proteins involved in the activation of the Interferon type I pathway, and a downregulation of protein synthesis. This work constitutes the first observation of primary human muscle cells susceptibility to ZIKV infection, and differentiation-dependent restriction of infection from myoblasts to myotubes. Since myoblasts constitute the reservoir of stem cells involved in reparation/regeneration in muscle tissue, the infection of muscle cells and the viral-induced alterations observed here could have consequences in ZIKV infection pathogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
Primary human muscle cells (i.e. adult muscle cells that persist in postnatal and adult muscle) were originally isolated from the quadriceps of a 5-day-old infant as previously described (‘‘CHQ5B’’cells)65. Three other primary muscle cell cultures (called ‘‘AB327C17’’, ‘‘AB723C15’’ and ‘‘KM45C19’’) from three other donors, were also used in one experiment to test the susceptibility to ZIKV infection. Cells were provided by the AFM Tissue Bank (Paris, France); informed consent was obtained from all patients prior to the tissue being donated to the tissue bank, in accordance with the French legislation on bioethics, and with the institutional approval of the Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital (Paris, France). CHQ5B cells, cultivated in Ham’s F-10 supplemented with 50mg/ml of gentamycin and 20% fetal bovine serum (FBS), were trypsinized when they reached half confluency. Differentiation of satellite cells into 11 myotubes was induced for 7 days in DMEM medium supplemented with 100mg/ml transferrin, 10 mg/ml insulin and gentamycin. ‘‘AB327C17’’, ‘‘AB723C15’’ and ‘‘KM45C19’’ were cultivated in DMEM supplemented with 25% 199 medium + 20% FCS + fetuin (25μg/mL) + ßFGF (0.5ng/mL) + EGF (5ng/mL). For some experiments, a human myogenic cell line, “LHCN-M2”, immortalized by expression of telomerase and cyclin-dependent kinase 4 was used. Three different low passage ZIKV strains were used in this study. Asian lineages Pf13 (GenBank: KX369547.1) and Bra16 (GenBank: KU991811.1) or in cell lines experiment the ZIKV isolate Rio-U1, African lineage Sen91 (GenBank : KF383039.1). All strains were amplified through a limited number of passages on C6/36 cells. For infections, cells were seeded in 24-well tissue culture plates in culture medium. Aliquots of virus were diluted at the appropriate MOI (0.1, 1, 10) in 200μl of medium supplemented with 5% FCS and added to the cells. Plates were incubated for 2 hours at 37°C. Unadsorbed virus was removed and then 1 ml of culture medium supplemented with 10% FCS was added to the cells, followed by incubation at 37°C until collection. CHQ5B cells were infected with ZIKV strain Pf13 or Sen91 at a MOI of 1. 24 hours and 48 hours p.i., cells were trypsinized, transferred into 1.5mL Eppendorf tube and centrifuged at 500G for 5 min at 4°C. Cells were resuspended in 100μL of 8M urea (pH 7.5) and stored at -80°C. Cells were subjected to ultrasound (Cup Horn, Sonics & Material) for 18 min at 4°C, with 2 sec pulse on and 2 sec pulse off, at the maximum amplitude. Samples were then centrifuged at 14.000G for 10 min at 4°C. Supernatants were collected and stored at -80°C before proteomic analysis.  Digestion of proteins Protein samples were solubilized in urea 8 M, Tris 100 mM pH7.5, then Disulfide bonds were reduced with 5 mM tris (2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) for 20 min at 23°C and alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Subsequently, LysC (Promega) was added for the first digestion step (protein to Lys-C ratio = 80:1) for 3h at 30°C. Then the sample was diluted to 1 M urea with 100 mM Tris pH 7.5, and trypsin (Promega) was added to the sample at a ratio of 50:1 for 16h at 37°C. Proteolysis was stopped by adding 1% formic acid. Resulting peptides were desalted using Sep-Pak SPE cartridge (Waters) according to manufactures instructions. LC-MS/MS of tryptic digest LC-MS/SM analysis of digested peptides was performed on an Orbitrap Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen) coupled to an EASYnLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded and separated at 250 nl.min-1 on a home-made C18 50 cm capillary column picotip silica emitter tip (75 μm diameter filled with 1.9 μm Reprosil-Pur Basic C18-HD resin, (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany)) equilibrated in solvent A (0.1 % FA). Peptides were eluted using a gradient of solvent B (ACN, 0.1 % FA) from 2% to 5% in 5 min, 5% to 18% in 150 min, 18% to 40% in 60 min (total length of the chromatographic run was 250 min including high ACN level steps and column regeneration). Mass spectra were acquired in data-dependent acquisition mode with the XCalibur 2.2 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen) with automatic switching between MS and MS/MS scans using a top-10 method. MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 70000 (at m/z 400) with a target value of 3 × 106 ions. The scan range was limited from 300 to 1700 m/z. Peptide fragmentation was performed using higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) with the energy set at 28 NCE. Intensity threshold for ions selection was set at 1 × 106 ions with charge exclusion of z = 1 and z > 7. The MS/MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 17500 (at m/z 400). Isolation window was set at 1.6 Th. Dynamic exclusion was employed within 45s.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched using MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.8) (with the Andromeda search engine) against a human database (20202 entries, downloaded from Uniprot the 2016.05.25), viral proteins were searched against polyprot Pf13_AHL43469 and NS protein 78788_AHL43469 and the ENV protein 78788_AHL43461. The following search parameters were applied: carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification, oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. The mass tolerances in MS and MS/MS were set to 5 ppm and 20 ppm respectively. Maximum peptide charge was set to 7 and 7 amino acids were required as minimum peptide length. A false discovery rate of 1% was set up for both protein and peptide levels. A match between run features was selected with a matched time window set at 1 min and alignment time window set at 20 min. Quantification was performed using the XIC-based LFQ algorithm with the Fast LFQ mode as described in a previous publication67. Unique and razor peptides, included modified peptides, with at least 2 ratio count were accepted for quantification. Statistical analysis of proteomics data For the statistical analysis of one condition versus another, proteins identified in the reverse and contaminant databases and proteins only identified by site were first discarded from the list. Then, proteins exhibiting fewer than 2 LFQ values or in at least one condition were discarded from the list to avoid misidentified proteins. After log2 transformation of the leftover proteins, LFQ values were normalized by median centering within conditions (normalizeD function of the R package DAPAR69). Remaining proteins without any LFQ value in one condition only have been considered as proteins quantitatively present in a condition and absent in another. They have therefore been set aside and considered as differentially abundant proteins. Next, missing values were imputed using the imp.norm function of the R package norm. Proteins with a log2 (fold-change) inferior to 1 have been considered as proteins which are not significantly differentially abundant. Statistical testing of the remaining proteins (having a log2 (fold-change) superior to 1) was conducted using a limma t-test70 thanks to the R package limma71. An adaptive Benjamini-Hochberg procedure was applied to the resulting p-values thanks to the function adjust.p of R package cp4p72 using a robust method73 to estimate the proportion of true null hypotheses among the set of statistical tests. The proteins associated to an adjusted p-value inferior to an FDR level of 1% have been considered as significantly differentially abundant proteins. Finally, the proteins of interest are therefore those which emerge from this statistical analysis supplemented by those which are considered to be absent from one condition and present in another. Statistical enrichment tests were used to highlight major biological processes that may be affected during the infection, using DAVID software35 by selecting the set of quantified proteins among all replicates as background. Biological processes related to up/down-regulated proteins in each condition have been compared to those of up/down-regulated proteins in non-infected samples. If not specified, statistical analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism 6. Nonparametric Mann-Whitney tests were used to test the differences between groups. Pvalues of less than 0.05 were considered significant.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Muscle differentiation virus infection proteomics

### Affiliations
Pasteur
Institut Pasteur

### Submitter
MARIETTE MATONDO 

### Lab Head
Dr mariette matondo
Institut Pasteur


