### Accession
PXD041466

### Title
proteome-Broad phosphorylation mediated by testis-specific serine/threonine kinases contributes to spermiogenesis and male fertility

### Description
To compare the difference of protein expression between wild type and dTSSK mutant Drosophila testis

### Sample Protocol
Frozen samples were lysed in lysis buffer (8M urea, 50mM ammonium bicarbonate, 1 mM dithiothreitol) with protease inhibitor added (10 mL/tablet, 05892791001, Roche) by disruption three times for 40 s using Tissuelyser (Jingxin), respectively. The suspension was sonicated on ice for 10 seconds, repeated thrice. The protein concentration of the lysates was determined using the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay. About 1mg of lysate was then reduced with 5mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 37°C for 2 hours, and alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide for 45 minutes in the dark. After diluting the concentration of urea to 1M with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC), trypsin (V5111, Promega) was added at a weight ratio of 1:50 and incubated for 16 hours at 37°C. The reactions were stopped by adding 20% formic acid (FA) until the pH was less than 2. The resulting peptides were desalted using Sep-Pak C18 (WAT054955, Waters) according to the manufacturer’s instructions and then dried under vacuum. Dried peptides were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid for LC-MS analysis. Peptides were separated and analyzed on an Easy-nLC 1000 system coupled to a Q Exactive HF

### Data Protocol
The raw data were processed using MaxQuant with integrated Andromeda search engine (v.1.5.4.1). The UniProt Drosophila melanogaster-taxonomy 7227 protein database were used for database searches of samples. False discovery rate (FDR) thresholds for peptide was specified at 1%. Minimum peptide length was set at 7. A paired Student’s t test was used to verify the significance of the differences between each comparison.

### Publication Abstract
Genetic studies elucidate a link between testis-specific serine/threonine kinases (TSSKs) and male infertility in mammals, but the underlying mechanisms are unclear. Here, we identify a TSSK homolog in Drosophila, CG14305 (termed dTSSK), whose mutation impairs the histone-to-protamine transition during spermiogenesis and causes multiple phenotypic defects in nuclear shaping, DNA condensation, and flagellar organization in spermatids. Genetic analysis demonstrates that kinase catalytic activity of dTSSK, which is functionally conserved with human TSSKs, is essential for male fertility. Phosphoproteomics identify 828 phosphopeptides/449 proteins as potential substrates of dTSSK enriched primarily in microtubule-based processes, flagellar organization and mobility, and spermatid differentiation and development, suggesting that dTSSK phosphorylates various proteins to orchestrate postmeiotic spermiogenesis. Among them, the two substrates, protamine-like protein Mst77F/Ser<sup>9</sup> and transition protein Mst33A/Ser<sup>237</sup>, are biochemically validated to be phosphorylated by dTSSK in vitro, and are genetically demonstrated to be involved in spermiogenesis in vivo. Collectively, our findings demonstrate that broad phosphorylation mediated by TSSKs plays an indispensable role in spermiogenesis.

### Keywords
Drosophila  proteome

### Affiliations
Shanghaitech university
Shanghaitech University

### Submitter
Xuedi Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Guanjun Gao
Shanghaitech University


