### Accession
PXD029004

### Title
The Eucalyptus grandis chloroplast proteome: leaf development and seasonal variations

### Description
Chloroplast is a subcellular compartment in which solar radiation is used to generate simple sugar compounds in a complex process named photosynthesis. It is very sensitive to environmental fluctuations and your development is intimately related with the development of the whole plant at different stages. Seasonal climate variations can also drive plant growth and development, favoring a metabolic adaptation of the life cycle with changes in the environment. The characterization of chloroplast proteome dynamics can contribute to a better understanding about the mechanisms involved in leaf development process and seasonal variations in this compartment. Therefore, the goal of this studied was to carried out an exploratory analysis of chloroplast alterations during leaf development and seasonal variations in Eucalyptus grandis chloroplast proteome.

### Sample Protocol
The chloroplast proteome was isolated, the proteins were extracted and the samples were quantified by Bradford method. Aliquots of proteins were separated by denaturing electrophoresis on a polyacrylamide gel containing sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS-PAGE). Prior to mass spectrometer analysis, the chloroplast proteins were in gel digested using trypsin and dessalted.

### Data Protocol
The identification of peptides and protein inferences were carried out through stringent searches of experimental data against the protein database Eucalyptus grandis on MaxQuant platform using dedicated search parameters. Data processing and statistical analysis were carried out using the Perseus software and Functional annotation of the differentially abundant proteins was carried out using Blast2GO platform.

### Publication Abstract
Chloroplast metabolism is very sensitive to environmental fluctuations and is intimately related to plant leaf development. Characterization of the chloroplast proteome dynamics can contribute to a better understanding on plant adaptation to different climate scenarios and leaf development processes. Herein, we carried out a discovery-driven analysis of the Eucalyptus grandis chloroplast proteome during leaf maturation and throughout different seasons of the year. The chloroplast proteome from young leaves differed the most from all assessed samples. Most upregulated proteins identified in mature and young leaves were those related to catabolic-redox signaling and biogenesis processes, respectively. Seasonal dynamics revealed unique proteome features in the fall and spring periods. The most abundant chloroplast protein in humid (wet) seasons (spring and summer) was a small subunit of RuBisCO, while in the dry periods (fall and winter) the proteins that showed the most pronounced accumulation were associated with photo-oxidative damage, Calvin cycle, shikimate pathway, and detoxification. Our investigation of the chloroplast proteome dynamics during leaf development revealed significant alterations in relation to the maturation event. Our findings also suggest that transition seasons induced the most pronounced chloroplast proteome changes over the year. This study contributes to a more comprehensive understanding on the subcellular mechanisms that lead to plant leaf adaptation and ultimately gives more insights into Eucalyptus grandis phenology.

### Keywords
Eucalyptus, Leaf development, Proteomics, Season, Chloroplast

### Affiliations
Department of Technology, Proteomics, UNESP, Brazil

### Submitter
Amanda Baldassi

### Lab Head
Dr Tiago Santana Balbuena
Department of Technology, Proteomics, UNESP, Brazil


