### Accession
PXD025883

### Title
LC-MS/MS analysis of NGF proteins  purified from cerebrospinal fluid

### Description
The aim of the project is to develop and validate a new method to measure proNGF in the cerebrospinal fluid of living patients, and to use it as a biomarker of Alzheimer’s disease (AD). This method, a novel proNGF immunoassay, is based on molecular size separation by capillary electrophoresis and is performed with Simple Wes: this technique produces different immunoreactive peaks whose area can be calculated to search for a quantitative relation with AD. Our  purpose was to confirm and validate by mass spectrometry analysis the presence of NGF in the selected peaks

### Sample Protocol
Eight cerebrospinal fluid samples from Alzheimer’s disease patients were pooled. Mab αD11 (Cattaneo 1988) was conjugated and crosslinked to Protein G Sepharose. In details, in a unique vial, an amount of Protein G Sepharose enough to obtain 20 µL of for each sample was washed by sodium tetraborate 0.1M pH 9. 2 µg of Mab αD11 for sample were added to the resin and incubated overnight at 4°C on a rotating wheel. The resin was washed, resuspended in sodium tetraborate 0.1M pH 9 containing 20 mM DMP (marca e nome esteso), and then incubated on a rotating wheel at room temperature. The resin was washed, resuspended in Tris-HCl 50 mM pH 7.5 and incubated 2 hours at room temperature, in order to quench the reaction. The resin was then washed in PBS and aliquoted in different vials to perform immunoprecipitation. 260 µL of the cerebrospinal fluid pool, 10 µg of recombinant human NGF, 10 µg of recombinant human proNGF, and 3 µL of 1:100 commercial human serum, were immunoprecipitated overnight. The resins were washed, resuspended in Laemli buffer, boiled and then loaded on a precast gel (Bio-Rad criterion, 4–12% BIS-Tris, 12+2). EZWay Protein-Quick Blue staining solution (K14050) was used to stain the gel. The bands detected in the lane corresponding to the cerebrospinal fluid pool were analyzed in Mass Spectrometry. The Coomassie stained bands were cut, destained with a solution containing 50mM bicarbonate ammonium (AMBIC) and acetonitrile (1:1) solution, incubated with 10 mM dithiothreitol at 56°C for 45min, washed, incubated with 55 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 30 min, dried with acetonitrile and then in a Speed Vac and, finally, treated with 12.5ng/Ll tryspin (Promega Corporation, WI, United States) in 25 mM AMBIC over-night at 37°C. The peptide mixture obtained was analyzed by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) analysis using with an Ultimate 3000 HPLC (Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific) on-line with an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid (Thermo Fisher Scientific, CA, United States) mass spectrometer. Peptides were desalted on a trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and then separated onto a 45-cm-long silica capillary (Silica Tips FS 360-75-8, New Objective, MA, United States), packed in-house with a C18, 1.9μm size particle (Michrom BioResources, CA, United States). A 60 min gradient was applied using buffer A (95% water, 5% acetonitrile, and 0.1% formic acid) and B (95% acetonitrile, 5% water, and 0.1% formic acid): B buffer was increased from 5% to 30% in 35 min, then to 80% in 5 minutes, and finally the column was washed and equilibrated again for the following run. MS spectra were acquired in the orbitrap at 120k while MS/MS spectra were acquired in the linear ion trap.

### Data Protocol
Spectra were analyzed using the Proteome Dicoverer 2.4 (Thermo) software using human and rat databases downloaded from Swiss Prot (https://www.uniprot.org/). Parameters used for the searches were: 10 ppm and 0.6 Da tolerance for precursor and fragment ions, respectively, specific tryptic cleavage with two missed cleavages allowed, fixed cysteine carbamidomethylation, and variable methionine oxidation. Percolator node was applied to obtain protein identification at 0.01 FDR.

### Publication Abstract
The discovery of new biomarkers for Alzheimer's disease (AD) is essential for an accurate diagnosis, to conceive new strategies of treatments, and for monitoring the efficacy of potential disease-modifying therapies in clinical trials. proNGF levels in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) represent a promising diagnostic biomarker for AD, but its validation was hampered by the absence of a reliable immunoassay. In the literature, proNGF is currently measured in postmortem brain tissue by semiquantitative immunoblot. Here we describe the development and validation of a new method to measure proNGF in the CSF of living patients. This method, based on molecular size separation by capillary electrophoresis, is automated and shows a 40-fold increase in sensitivity with respect to the proNGF immunoblot, largely used in literature, and is robust, specific, and scalable to high-throughput. We have measured proNGF in the cerebrospinal fluid of 84 living patients with AD, 13 controls, and 15 subjective memory complaints (SMC) subjects. By comparing the proNGF levels in the three groups, we found a very significant difference between proNGF levels in AD samples compared with both controls and SMC subjects, while no significant difference was found between SMC and controls. Because of the development of this new immunoassay, we are ready to explore the potentiality of proNGF as a new biomarker for AD or subgroups thereof, as well as for other neurodegenerative diseases.

### Keywords
Cerebrospinal fluid, Ngf, Alzheimer, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Istituto superiore di sanità
Istituto superiore di Sanità

### Submitter
Serena Camerini

### Lab Head
Dr Serena Camerini
Istituto superiore di Sanità


