### Accession
PXD035008

### Title
Targeting Campylobacter adhesion in the fight against antimicrobial resistance (J4-9299)

### Description
Campylobacter spp. cause food-borne illnesses worldwide due to contaminated food and cross-contamination. This is at least partly the result of Campylobacter resistance in the food production chain, as modern food production facilitates the emergence and spread of resistance through intensive use of antimicrobials and international trade in raw materials and food products. The biofilm 'lifestyle' of Campylobacter contributes to this spread as it enables them to withstand stress in the environment both outside and inside the host. Campylobacter adhesion and biofilm formation has major implications for the food industry, where biofilms can be persistent sources of contamination. In our study, we described how the proteome of C. jejuni is affected by the deletion of the luxS gene on the planktonic cell type of C. jejuni, which is the first step of biofilm formation. In C. jejuni, the presence of the luxS gene has been associated with several phenotypes, including intercellular signalling, motility, biofilm formation, host colonisation, virulence, autoagglutination, cellular adherence and invasion, oxidative stress and chemotaxis. Deletion of the luxS gene is associated with a reduction or absence of the above properties compared to wild type (Elvers and Park, 2002; Guerry et al., 2006; He et al., 2008; Jeon et al., 2003; Quiñones et al., 2009; Plummer et al., 2011; Plummer, 2012; Reeser et al., 2007).

### Sample Protocol
The same amount of sample mass was used for sample preparation with three biological replicates. Protein purification followed the protocol of Distler et al. (2016) and was performed using Nanosep microcentrifuges (Pall, USA) with 30k centrifugal filters (Omega), with slight modifications to the modification in enzymatic digestion. Lys-C enzyme (New England Biolabs, USA) was used at a ratio of 1:100 (mass of Lys-C enzyme: mass of sample proteins) and incubated for 2 h at 37 °C. Then 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) was added to dilute the urea concentration to 1 M and the added trypsin (New England Biolabs, USA) was allowed to work at a ratio of 1:25 (mass of trypsin enzyme: mass of sample proteins) for 16 h at 37 °C. To stop proteolysis, we added 20% acetonitrile and 10% formic acid. Peptides were separated by nano liquid chromatography (Thermo Scientific Ultimate RSLC 3000) coupled in line a Q Exactive mass spectrometer equipped with an Easy-Spray source (Thermo Fischer Scientific). Peptides were trapped onto a C18 PepMac100 precolumn (300µm i.d.x5mm, 100Å, ThermoFischer Scientific) using Solvent A (0.1% Formic acid, HPLC grade water). The peptides were further separated onto an Easy-Spray RSLC C18 column (75um i.d., 50cm length, Thermo Fischer Scientific) using a 60 minutes linear gradient (15% to 35% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile)) at a flow rate 200nl/min. The raw data were acquired on the mass spectrometer in a data-dependent acquisition mode (DDA). Full-scan MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap (Scan range 350-1500m/z, resolution 70,000; AGC target, 3e6, maximum injection time, 50ms). The 10 most intense peaks were selected for higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) fragmentation at 30% of normalized collision energy. HCD spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap at resolution 17,500, AGC target 5e4, maximum injection time 120ms with fixed mass at 180m/z. Charge exclusion was selected for unassigned and 1+ ions. The dynamic exclusion was set to 20 s.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were searched using SEQUEST HT within Proteome discoverer PD1.4 (Thermo Fischer Scientific, version 1.4.0.288) against a database containing 1632 proteins of which we used 467 manually annotated and reviewed by UniProtKB curator entries combining sequences from Campylobacter Jejuni (Uniprot release from 21-09-16) and common contaminants. During database searches, cysteines (C) were considered to be fully carbamidomethylated (+57,0215, statically added), methionine (M) to be fully oxidised (+15,9949, dynamically added), and all N-terminal residues and lysine (K) to be acetylated (+42,0106, dynamically added). Two missed cleavages were permitted. Peptide mass tolerance was set at 50 ppm and 0.02 Da on the precursor and fragment ions, respectively. Protein identification was filtered at false discovery rate (FDR) below 1 %.

### Publication Abstract
Azoles are commonly used for the treatment of fungal infections, and the ability of human fungal pathogens to rapidly respond to azole treatment is critical for the development of antifungal resistance. While the roles of genetic mutations, chromosomal rearrangements, and transcriptional mechanisms in azole resistance have been well-characterized, very little is known about post-transcriptional and translational mechanisms that drive this process. In addition, most previous genome-wide studies have focused on transcriptional responses to azole treatment and likely serve as inaccurate proxies for changes in protein expression due to extensive post-transcriptional and translational regulation. In this study, we use ribosome profiling to provide the first picture of the global translational response of a major human fungal pathogen, <i>Candida albicans</i>, to treatment with fluconazole (Flu), one of the most widely used azole drugs. We identify sets of genes showing significantly altered translational efficiency, including genes associated with a variety of biological processes such as the cell cycle, DNA repair, cell wall/cell membrane biosynthesis, transport, signaling, DNA- and RNA-binding activities, and protein synthesis. We observe both similarities and differences among the most highly represented gene categories (as defined by gene ontology) that are regulated by fluconazole at the translational vs transcriptional levels. Importantly, however, very few genes that are translationally regulated by fluconazole are also controlled transcriptionally under this condition. Our findings suggest that <i>C. albicans</i> possesses distinct translational mechanisms that are important for the response to antifungal treatment, which could eventually be targeted by novel antifungal therapies. IMPORTANCE Azoles are one of the most commonly used drug classes to treat human fungal pathogens. While point mutations, chromosomal rearrangements, and transcriptional mechanisms that drive azole resistance have been well-characterized, we know very little about the role of translational mechanisms. In this study, we determined the global translational profile of genes that are expressed in the major human fungal pathogen <i>Candida albicans</i> in response to fluconazole, one of the most widely used azole drugs. We find both similarities and differences among the most highly represented categories of genes regulated by fluconazole at the transcriptional and translational levels. Interestingly, however, many of the specific genes that are regulated by fluconazole at the translational level do not appear to be controlled by transcriptional mechanisms under this condition. Our results suggest that distinct <i>C. albicans</i> translational mechanisms control the response to antifungals and could eventually be targeted in the development of new therapies.

### Keywords
Luxs, Planktonic cells., Campylobacter jejuni

### Affiliations
Department of Food Science and Technology, Biotechnical Faculty, University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia
University of Ljubljana, Biotechnical Faculty, Department for Food Science and Technology, Jamnikarjeva 101, 1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia

### Submitter
Blaž Jug

### Lab Head
Dr Anja Klančnik
Department of Food Science and Technology, Biotechnical Faculty, University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia


