### Accession
PXD005751

### Title
Muscle stems cell LC-MS -  Common and Distinctive Functions of the Hippo Effectors Taz and Yap in Skeletal Muscle Stem Cell Function

### Description
Abstract Hippo pathway downstream effectors Yap and Taz play key roles in cell proliferation and regeneration, regulating gene expression especially via interaction with Tead transcription factors. To investigate their role in skeletal muscle stem cells, we analysed Taz in vivo and ex vivo in comparison to Yap. Taz was expressed in activated satellite cells. siRNA knockdown or constitutive expression of wildtype or constitutively active TAZ mutants showed that TAZ promoted proliferation, a function that was shared with YAP. However, at later stages of myogenesis, TAZ also enhanced myogenic differentiation of myoblasts, whereas YAP inhibits such differentiation. Functionally, while muscle growth was mildly affected in Taz (gene symbol Wwtr1-/-) knockout mice, there were no overt effect on regeneration. However, conditional knockout of Yap in satellite cells of Pax7Cre-ERT2/+ : Yapflox/flox : Rosa26Lacz mice produced a marked regeneration deficit. To identify potential mechanisms, microarray analysis showed many common Taz/Yap targets, but Taz also regulates some genes independently of Yap, including myogenic genes such as Pax7, Myf5 and Myod1. Proteomic analysis of Yap/Taz revealed many common binding partners, but Taz also interacts with proteins distinct from Yap, that are mainly involved in myogenesis and aspects of cytoskeleton organization. Neither TAZ nor YAP bind members of the Wnt destruction complex but both extensively changed expression of Wnt and Wnt-cross talking genes with known roles in myogenesis. Finally, TAZ operates through Tead4 to enhance myogenic differentiation. In summary, Taz and Yap have overlapping functions in promoting myoblast proliferation but Taz then switches to promote myogenic differentiation.

### Sample Protocol
Mass Spectrometry  C2C12 cells were grown in DMEM (D5761) with 10% FBS and 4mM glutamine. Proliferating C2C12 cells were at 50% cell density. Confluent cultures were differentiated for 72h in DMEM, 2% horse serum, 4mM glutamine.   For immunoprecipitation, 80,000 C2C12s were seeded per 10cm dish. The following day, fresh medium was added 1h prior to addition of 1:5 diluted TAZ or YAP encoding retroviral supernatant. The next day, cells were re-plated transduction confirmed by GFP. Cells were washed on ice with PBS, and collected in lysis buffer (150mM NaCl, 20mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 1% Triton x100) with 1mM sodium orthovanadate, protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma, p8340) and PMSF. Lysates were incubated for 1h on ice and centrifuged at 14,000 RPM at 4˚C for 5 min and supernatant incubated at 4˚C with anti-Flag M2 agarose beads (Sigma). Beads were washed three times with washing buffer (150mM NaCl; 20mM Tris-HCL pH 7.5). Sample preparation/mass spect were as described Turriziani B, Garcia-Munoz A, Pilkington R et al. On-beads digestion in conjunction with data-dependent mass spectrometry: a shortcut to quantitative and dynamic interaction proteomics. Biology (Basel). 2014;3:320-332].

### Data Protocol
The data was analused using Excell, LFQ values were averaged and TTEST was used to stimate significance. Ratio between samples LFQ average was calculated and used to identify specific proteins. STRING, Panther and ractome were used to analyse the data as described in accepted manuscript  Common and distinctive functions of the Hippo effectors Yap and Taz in muscle stem cell function  Congshan Sun1, Vanessa De Mello2, Abdalla Mohamed2, Huascar P. Ortuste Quiroga1, Amaya Garcia-Munoz3, Abdullah Al Bloshi2; Annie. M Tremblay4, Alexander von Kriegsheim3, Elaina Collie-Duguid5, Neil Vargesson2, David Matallanas3, Henning Wackerhage2,6 and Peter S. Zammit1,* Stem cells SC-16-0413.R1

### Publication Abstract
Hippo pathway downstream effectors Yap and Taz play key roles in cell proliferation and regeneration, regulating gene expression especially via Tead transcription factors. To investigate their role in skeletal muscle stem cells, we analyzed Taz in vivo and ex vivo in comparison with Yap. Small interfering RNA knockdown or retroviral-mediated expression of wild-type human or constitutively active TAZ mutants in satellite cells showed that TAZ promoted proliferation, a function shared with YAP. However, at later stages of myogenesis, TAZ also enhanced myogenic differentiation of myoblasts, whereas YAP inhibits such differentiation. Functionally, while muscle growth was mildly affected in Taz (gene Wwtr1<sup>-/-</sup> ) knockout mice, there were no overt effects on regeneration. Conversely, conditional knockout of Yap in satellite cells of Pax7<sup>Cre-ERT2/+</sup> : Yap<sup>fl</sup> &#xb0;<sup>x/fl</sup> &#xb0;<sup>x</sup> :Rosa26<sup>Lacz</sup> mice produced a regeneration deficit. To identify potential mechanisms, microarray analysis showed many common TAZ/YAP target genes, but TAZ also regulates some genes independently of YAP, including myogenic genes such as Pax7, Myf5, and Myod1 (ArrayExpress-E-MTAB-5395). Proteomic analysis revealed many novel binding partners of TAZ/YAP in myogenic cells, but TAZ also interacts with proteins distinct from YAP that are often involved in myogenesis and aspects of cytoskeleton organization (ProteomeXchange-PXD005751). Neither TAZ nor YAP bind members of the Wnt destruction complex but both regulated expression of Wnt and Wnt-cross talking genes with known roles in myogenesis. Finally, TAZ operates through Tead4 to enhance myogenic differentiation. In summary, Taz and Yap have overlapping functions in promoting myoblast proliferation but Taz then switches to enhance myogenic differentiation. Stem Cells 2017;35:1958-1972.

### Keywords
Yap, Muscle, Taz

### Affiliations
Systems Biology Ireland, University College Dublin
Systems Biology Ireland, School of Medicine  Conway Institute; Belfield; Dublin 4; Ireland.

### Submitter
David Matallanas

### Lab Head
Dr David Matallanas
Systems Biology Ireland, School of Medicine  Conway Institute; Belfield; Dublin 4; Ireland.


