### Accession
PXD000673

### Title
Psychroflexus torquis 1D LC/MS

### Description
Proteorhodopsin has been an ongoing hot topic for the past decade. However the complete physiological role of this extremely widely distributed protein remains mysterious. In this study we aim to give an insight to the physiology of a proteorhodopsin-containing sea ice bacteria – Psychroflexus torquis using gel-free label-free proteomic approach for the first time. We also addressed the life strategy that used by this organism to successfully inhabit extreme sea ice environment.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were grown on modified marine agar; consist of 5g of proteose peptone (Oxoid, Adelaide, SA, Australia), 2g of yeast extract (Oxoid), 15g of agar, and relevant amount of sea salt (Red Sea) in 1L of distilled water. In order to achieve four different salinities, 17.5g, 35g, 52.5g and 70g of sea salt were added respectively to achieve target salinity. For each salinity, cultures were exposed to three light conditions: bright light (20-30 μmol photons m-2 s-1); dim light (3-4 μmol photons m-2 s-1) and complete darkness (0 μmol photons m-2 s-1). 100μL working culture (6.0 log CFU ml-1) was used to inoculate and incubated aerobically at 5oC for 3weeks. The biomass was then harvest for protein extraction and trypsin digestion. The separation of peptides utilized a Surveyor Plus HPLC system fitted in line with an LTQ-Orbitrap XLmass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). Aliquots of peptide samples were loaded at 0.05 mL/min onto a C18 capillary trapping column (Peptide CapTrap, Michrom BioResources) controlled by an Alliance 2690 separations module (Waters). Peptides were then separated on an analytical HPLC column packed with 5 μm C18 media (PicoFrit Column, 15 μm i.d. pulled tip, 10 cm, New Objective) using four linear gradient segments controlled using a Surveyor MS Pump Plus (ThermoFisher Scientific) at 200 nl/min The solvent series included initially 5% acetonitrile in 0.2% formic acid (solvent A) shifting up to 90% acetonitrile in 0.2% formic acid (solvent B). The 4 stage process where solvent B gradually replaced solvent A comprised: 0-10% solvent B over 7.5 min; 10-25% solvent B over 50 min, 25-55% B over 20 min and then 55-100% solvent B over 5 min. This process was followed by re-equilibration of the column with solvent A for 15 min. The LTQ-Orbitrap was fitted with a dynamic nanoelectrospray ion source (Proxeon) containing a 30 μm inner diameter uncoated silica emitter (New Objective). The LTQ-Orbitrap XL was controlled using Xcalibur 2.0 software (ThermoFisher Scientific) and operated in data-dependent acquisition mode whereby the survey scan was acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolving power set to 60,000 (at 400 m/z). MS/MS spectra were concurrently acquired in the LTQ mass analyser on the seven most intense ions from the FT survey scan. Charge state filtering, where unassigned and singly charged precursor ions were not selected for fragmentation, and dynamic exclusion (repeat count, 1; repeat duration, 30 s; exclusion list size, 500), was used. Fragmentation conditions in the LTQ were 35% normalized collision energy, activation q of 0.25, 30 ms activation time, and minimum ion selection intensity of 500 counts.

### Data Protocol
The acquired MS/MS data were converted to .mzXML pleak list files from .RAW files using the msConvert command in Proteowizard. The MS/MS data was searched against the proteome of P. torquis ATCC 700755T (NCBI accession code CP003879) employing X!Tandem running in the open source Computational Proteomics Analysis System environment. For searches parent ion tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment ion mass tolerances of 0.5 Da were used, and enzyme cleavage was set to trypsin, allowing for a maximum of two missed cleavages. Amino acid residue alterations were also accounted for including: S-carboxamidomethylation of cysteine residues specified as a fixed modification; and cyclisation of N-terminal glutamine to pyroglutamic acid, deamidation of asparagine, hydroxylation of proline and oxidation of methionine specified as variable modifications. Proteins identifications were assessed by the Peptide Prophet and Protein Prophet algorithms. Protein identifications were filtered by assigning a Protein Prophet probability > 0.95 and by accepting only peptides with charge states of +1, +2, and +3 because charge states ≥  4 were not a good fit to Peptide Prophet models. This filtration constrains the protein false discovery rate to < 1%. Spectral counting was used to determine relative protein abundance taking into account the number of amino acid residues. In order to acquire the maximum coverage of proteins, spectra obtained from all samples were pooled together in this study. Filtration removed 6.4% peptides with a total of 743361 peptide spectra matched to 2598 protein identifications with 1936 proteins possessing two or more unique peptides.

### Publication Abstract
The extremely psychrophilic proteorhodopsin-containing bacterial species Psychroflexus torquis is considered to be a model sea-ice microorganism, which has adapted to an epiphytic lifestyle. So far, not much is known about proteorhodopsin-based phototrophy and associated life strategies of sea ice bacteria, although it has been previously shown that P. torquis can gain growth advantage from light using a proteorhodopsin proton pump, the activity of which is influenced by environmental salinity. The comprehensive quantitative proteomic study performed here indicated that P. torquis responds to changing salinity and illumination conditions. Proteins in the electron-transfer chain were down-regulated at a suboptimal salinity level, TonB-dependent transporters increased in abundance under supra-optimal salinity and decreased under suboptimal salinity. In addition, several anaplerotic CO2 fixation proteins and three putative light sensing proteins that contain PAS and GAF domains became more abundant under illumination. Furthermore, central metabolic pathways (TCA and glycolysis) were also induced by both salinity stress and illumination. The data suggest that P. torquis responded to changes in both light energy and salinity to modulate membrane and central metabolic proteins that are involved in energy production as well as nutrient uptake and gliding motility processes that would be especially advantageous during the polar summer ice algal bloom.

### Keywords
1d lc/ms, Proteorhodopsin, Psychroflexus torquis, Salinity, Sea ice

### Affiliations
Food Safety Centre
Food Safety Centre, Tasmanian Institute of Agriculture, University of Tasmania, Sandy Bay, Hobart, Tasmania, Australia

### Submitter
Shi Feng

### Lab Head
Dr John Philip Bowman
Food Safety Centre, Tasmanian Institute of Agriculture, University of Tasmania, Sandy Bay, Hobart, Tasmania, Australia


