### Accession
PXD042578

### Title
Human liver LC-MSMSProteomic research on new urinary biomarkers of renal disease in canine leishmaniosis: survival and monitoring response to treatment

### Description
The objective of our study was to search for survival biomarkers (SB) and treatment response monitoring biomarkers (TRMB) in the urinary proteome of dogs with renal disease secondardy to canine leishmaniosis (CanL),

### Sample Protocol
By cystocentesis, five millilitres of urine was obtained from each fasting patient. Samples were immediately centrifuged (5 minutes at 200 g). Then, supernatant protein was quantified by the pyrogallol red colorimetric method (gernon, RAL®, Barcelona, Spain) in the Saturno 100 automatic analyser (Crony® Instruments, Roma, Italy). After that, samples were frozen at -80 °C until molecular analysis. Prior to analysis, samples were thawed, adjusted and tryptically digested (porcine Trypsin Gold, Mass Spectrometry Grade; Promega) following the cited protocol (González et al., 2022). 1.1. UHPLC–MS/MS analysis and data processing After digestion, a suspension of urinary peptides remained, which were separated by UHPLC (Agilent 1290 Infinity II System; Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA) coupled to MS/MS with an Agilent Jet Stream Dual Electrospray Ionization and Agilent 6550 Quadrupole Time of Flight (AJS-Dual ESI-Q-TOF; Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA). Samples were analysed in duplicate, and Software Spectrum Mill MS Proteomics Workbench; Rev B.04.01 (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA) was used to evaluate the MS data obtained. An identification search was performed with the UniProt database (https://www.uniprot.org/) using Canis lupus familiaris information. This method, its autovalidation, and data processing were performed with the same technique previously described in other studies (Gaitskell-Phillips et al., 2021; González et al., 2022).

### Data Protocol
To normalize and perform logarithmic conversion of MS data, an analysis software, Qlucore Omics Explorer version 3.6 Lund Sweden (https://qlucore.com), was used. Variance filtering was also applied to suppress low variance variables, which were not significant (Bourgon et al., 2010). Afterwards, the obtained data were represented using a Volcano plot for an initial evaluation of its distribution, where its average rate of change or fold change against its p-value after logarithmic conversion was depicted. For the representation of a more restricted number of variables, a heatmap was used, which represents significant proteins and arranges the individuals by groups, organizing the proteins by hierarchical clustering based on their analytical relationship (Eisen et al., 1998). Furthermore, a box plot was used to depict the relative amounts between groups of the most discriminating variables based on the Benjamini‒Hochberg method (p-value <0.1)(Tamhane et al., 1996; Viskoper et al., 1989). Finally, the most significant proteins represented in the box plot were used to perform a functional enrichment analysis to determine the relationship between variables through the g:Profiler web server (https://biit.cs.ut.ee/gprofiler/)(Raudvere et al., 2019), pre-setting its statistic (g:SCS P < 0.05) with the Benjamini‒Hochberg false discovery rate method (Tamhane et al., 1996; Viskoper et al., 1989) and using the established categories of the Gene Ontology databases (GO): the GO Cellular Component (GO:CC), GO Molecular Function (GO:MF), and GO Biological Process (GO:BP)(http://geneontology.org/)(Mi et al., 2019).

### Publication Abstract
The objective of our study was to search for survival biomarkers (SB) and treatment response monitoring biomarkers (TRMB) in the urinary proteome of dogs with renal disease secondary to canine leishmaniosis (CanL), using UHPLC-MS/MS. The proteomic data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD042578. Initially, a group of 12 dogs was evaluated and divided into survivors (SG; n&#xa0;=&#xa0;6) and nonsurvivors (NSG; n&#xa0;=&#xa0;6). A total of 972 proteins were obtained from the evaluated samples. Then, bioinformatic analysis reduced them to 6 proteins like potential SB increased in the NSG, specifically, Haemoglobin subunit Alpha 1, Complement Factor I, Complement C5, Fibrinogen beta chain (fragment), Peptidase S1 domain-containing protein, and Fibrinogen gamma chain. Afterwards, SG was used to search for TRMB, studying their urine at 0, 30, and 90&#xa0;days, and 9 proteins that decreased after treatment were obtained: Apolipoprotein E, Cathepsin B, Cystatin B, Cystatin-C-like, Lysozyme, Monocyte differentiation CD14, Pancreatitis-associated precursor protein, Profilin, and Protein FAM3C. Finally, enrichment analysis provided information about the biological mechanisms in which these proteins are involved. In conclusion, this study provides 15 new candidate urinary biomarkers and an improved understanding of the pathogenesis of kidney disease in CanL.

### Keywords
Plasma, Lc-msms, Urinary proteome; canine leishmaniosis; biomarker; survival; miltefosinei.e. human, Liver

### Affiliations
UNIVERSIDAD DE EXTREMADURA
Animal Medicine Department, University of Extremadura, 10003 Cáceres, Spain

### Submitter
FERNANDO JUAN  PEÑA VEGA 

### Lab Head
Dr Javier Duque
Animal Medicine Department, University of Extremadura, 10003 Cáceres, Spain


