### Accession
PXD010737

### Title
β-TrCP and Casein Kinase II mediated degradation of cyclin F controls timely mitotic progression

### Description
Orderly progressions of events in the cell division cycle are necessary to ensure the replication of DNA and cell division.  Checkpoint systems allow the accurate execution of each cell cycle phase.  The precise regulation of the levels of cyclin proteins is fundamental to coordinate cell division with checkpoints, avoiding genome instability.  Cyclin F has important functions in regulating the cell cycle during the G2 checkpoint; however, the mechanisms underlying the regulation of cyclin F are poorly understood.  Here, we observe that cyclin F is regulated by proteolysis through β-TrCP.  β-TrCP recognizes cyclin F through a non-canonical degron site (TSGXXS) after its phosphorylation by Casein Kinase II.  The degradation of cyclin F mediated by β-TrCP occurs at the G2/M transition and this event is required to promote mitotic progression and favours the activation of a transcriptional programme required for mitosis.

### Sample Protocol
Analysis of immunoprecipitated endogenous cyclin F material was essentially performed as described previously (Adam et al., 2011). In brief, immunoprecipitated cyclin F was separated by SDS-PAGE, visualized by Coomassie staining, and gel bands were excised and destained overnight in 50% methanol, 5% acetic acid in water. Proteins were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol and then alkylated using 20 mM iodoacetamide. Proteins were digested with 1 μg elastase or trypsin in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate overnight at 37⁰C, and resulting peptides were extracted from the gel with 50% acetonitrile, 5% acetic acid in water. Peptide material was analysed on an Acquity nano UPLC system (Waters) equipped with a 25 cm C18 column, 1.7 µm particle size (Waters) online coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Scientific) as described (Adam et al., 2011).

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data was processed and analysed using PEAKS software as described previously (Davis et al., 2017). MS1 tolerance was set to 5ppm, MS2 to 0.5Da. Chymotryptic, tryptic and elastase proteolytic specificity were considered. We considered carbamidomethylation (fixed), phosphorylation, deamidation and ubiquitination as modifications. Peptide FDR was set to 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Orderly progressions of events in the cell division cycle are necessary to ensure the replication of DNA and cell division. Checkpoint systems allow the accurate execution of each cell-cycle phase. The precise regulation of the levels of cyclin proteins is fundamental to coordinate cell division with checkpoints, avoiding genome instability. Cyclin F has important functions in regulating the cell cycle during the G2 checkpoint; however, the mechanisms underlying the regulation of cyclin F are poorly understood. Here, we observe that cyclin F is regulated by proteolysis through &#x3b2;-TrCP. &#x3b2;-TrCP recognizes cyclin F through a non-canonical degron site (TSGXXS) after its phosphorylation by casein kinase II. The degradation of cyclin F mediated by &#x3b2;-TrCP occurs at the G2/M transition. This event is required to promote mitotic progression and favors the activation of a transcriptional program required for mitosis.

### Keywords
Mitotic progression, Cyclin f, Ck2

### Affiliations
Discovery Proteomics Facility, Target Discovery Institute, University of Oxford
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Roman Fischer

### Lab Head
Dr Roman Fischer
Discovery Proteomics Facility, Target Discovery Institute, University of Oxford


