### Accession
PXD013587

### Title
The structure and oxidation of the eye lens chaperone αA-crystallin

### Description
Structural impact of the intramolecular disulfide bond on human αA-crystallin

### Sample Protocol
bis(sulfosuccinimidyl)suberate (BS3) cross-linker (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) was freshly dissolved to a stock concentration of 129 mg/mL (226 mM) in PBS, 1 mM EDTA. The BS3 stock solution was serially diluted to achieve different molar cross-linker:αA-crystallin ratios. αA-crystallin was diluted to a final concentration of 33 µM in a total volume of 50 µl in PBS, 1mM EDTA and 16 µl of the BS3 stock solution or dilutions thereof were added upon continuous vortexing of the protein solution. The reaction mixture was incubated at 20 °C for 1 h and subsequently quenched by the addition of 10 µl of freshly prepared saturated ammonium bicarbonate solution (2.7 M) in H2O. After an additional incubation period of 1 h, sample loading buffer was added and 10 µg of total protein were applied to a 4-12 % NuPAGE gel (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The gel was run at a constant voltage of 200 V using MOPS-SDS-running buffer (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) until the dye front reached the end of the gel. Excised gel bands of monomer, dimer and oligomer for both αAred and αAox were digested with trypsin (Thermo Fischer Scientific), following previously established protocols81. Briefly, proteins were first reduced with 10 mM DTT (Sigma-Aldrich) for 30 min at 37°C in a shaker and alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) (Sigma-Aldrich) for 20 minutes at room temperature, followed by trypsin digestion overnight at 37°C. Digested peptide were desalted using C18-StageTips82,83 for LC-MS/MS analysis. Mass spectrometry – LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a “high/high” acquisition strategy. The peptide separation was carried out on an EASY-Spray column (50 cm × 75 μm i.d., PepMap C18, 2 μm particles, 100 Å pore size, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Mobile phase A consisted of water and 0.1% v/v formic acid. Mobile phase B consisted of 80% v/v acetonitrile and 0.1% v/v formic acid. Peptides were loaded at a flow rate of 0.3 μL/min and eluted at 0.2 μL/min using a linear gradient going from 2% mobile phase B to 40% mobile phase B over 109 min, followed by a linear increase from 40% to 95% mobile phase B in 11 min. The eluted peptides were directly introduced into the mass spectrometer. MS data were acquired in the data-dependent mode with 3 s acquisition cycle. Precursor spectrum was recorded in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 120,000. The ions with a precursor charge state between 3+ and 8+ were isolated with a window size of 1.6 m/z and fragmented using high-energy collision dissociation (HCD) with collision energy 30.  The fragmentation spectra were recorded in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 15,000. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with single repeat count and 60 s exclusion duration.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometric raw files were processed into peak lists using MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.30), and cross-linked peptides were matched to spectra using Xi software (version 1.6.745). Search parameters were MS accuracy, 3 ppm; MS/MS accuracy, 10ppm; enzyme, trypsin; cross-linker, BS3; max missed cleavages, 4; missing mono-isotopic peaks, 2; fixed modification, carbamidomethylation on cysteine; variable modifications, oxidation on methionine; fragments, b and y ions with loss of H2O, NH3 and CH3SOH. FDR was estimated using XiFDR on 5% residue level.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Disulfide bond, Domain swapping, Small heat shock protein, Αa-crystallin, Cryo-electron microscopy

### Affiliations
The University of Edinburgh
1.Wellcome Centre for Cell Biology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH9 3BF, United Kingdom 2.Bioanalytics, Institute of Biotechnology, Technische Universität Berlin, Gustav-Meyer-Allee 25, 13355 Berlin, Germany

### Submitter
Juan Zou

### Lab Head
Dr Juri Rappsilber
1.Wellcome Centre for Cell Biology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH9 3BF, United Kingdom 2.Bioanalytics, Institute of Biotechnology, Technische Universität Berlin, Gustav-Meyer-Allee 25, 13355 Berlin, Germany


