### Accession
PXD009639

### Title
Proteome-transcriptome analysis and proteome remodeling in mouse lens epithelium and fibers

### Description
Epithelial cells and differentiated fiber cells represent distinct compartments in the ocular lens. While previous studies have revealed proteins that are preferentially expressed in epithelial vs. fiber cells, a comprehensive proteomics library comparing the molecular composition of epithelial vs. fiber cells is essential for understanding lens formation, function, disease and regenerative potential, and for efficient differentiation of pluripotent stem cells for modeling of lens development and pathology in vitro. To compare protein composition between the lens epithelium and fibers, we employed tandem mass spectrometry (2DLC/ MS) analysis of micro-dissected mouse P0.5 lenses. Functional classifications of the top 525 identified proteins into gene ontology categories by molecular process and subcellular localization, were adapted for lens. Expression levels of both epithelial and fiber proteomes were compared with their temporal and spatial mRNA levels using E14.5, E16.5, E18.5, and P0.5 RNA-Seq data sets. During this developmental time window, multiple complex biosynthetic and catabolic processes generate the molecular and structural foundation for lens transparency. As expected, crystallins showed a high correlation between their mRNA and protein levels. Comprehensive data analysis confirmed and/or predicted roles for transcription factors (TFs), RNA-binding proteins, translational apparatus including ribosomal heterogeneity and initiation factors, microtubules, cytoskeletal and membrane proteins in lens formation and maturation. Our data highlighted many proteins with unknown function in the lens that were preferentially enriched in epithelium or fibers, setting the stage for future studies to further dissect the roles of these proteins in fiber cell differentiation vs. epithelial cell maintenance. In conclusion, the present proteomic datasets established reference mouse lens epithelium and fiber cell proteomes, provided quantitative analyses of protein and RNA-Seq data, and probed the major proteome remodeling required to form the mature lens fiber cells.

### Sample Protocol
LENS SAMPLES Seventy-four frozen postnatal day 0.5 (P0.5) lens epithelia and fibers, as well as 22 whole lenses were used for protein isolation separately. The three samples were dispersed by adding 0.25, 1.0, and 1.0 ml of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer respectively, followed by 3 x 5 seconds probe sonication (60 Sonic Dismembrator, Fisher Scientific) with 30 seconds of cooling on ice between each sonication step. Samples were then further homogenized using a 1 ml Tenbroeck tissue grinder (Wheaton), and protein concentrations were determined using bovine serum albumin as a standard (BCA assay, Thermo Scientific). One hundred microgram portions of each sample were then trypsinized overnight at 37C with agitation at an enzyme:substrate ratio of 1:25 following reduction and alkylation in dithiothreitol/iodoacetamide in the presence of ProteaseMax detergent as recommended by the manufacturer (ProMega). Trifluoroacetic acid was then added to a final 1% concentration, and samples were centrifuged at 14000 g for 10 minutes. The supernatant was removed, and samples were dried by vacuum centrifugation. 50 ug portions were then dissolved in 21 ul of 10 mM ammonium acetate, pH 9.0 (buffer A) in preparation for two-dimensional liquid chromatography/mass spectrometric analysis (2D-LC/MS).  LC AND MASS SPECTROMETRY Forty-eight microgram (20 ul) portions of digests from epithelia, fibers, and whole lenses from P0.5 mice were separated by 2D-LC/MS using two rounds of reversed phase chromatography using an automated nanoflow liquid chromatography method. The first-dimension separation was performed at pH 9.0 in buffer A with peptides eluted from the first-dimension column using 14, 17, 20, 22, 24, 26, 28, 30, 40, and 90% acetonitrile concentrations, and the second-dimension separation was performed in 0.1% formic acid in buffer A. The 10 second-dimension separations were performed with 100 minutes of data collection using an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) with an extra 20 minutes for column washing and re-equilibration for a total of 20 hours analysis time for each digest. Data was collected using Orbitrap profile survey scans between 375-1500 m/z at a resolution of 120000, a user defined m/z = 445.12 polysiloxane ion lock mass, 50 ms maximum injection time (MIT), and automatic gain control (AGC) = 400000, and 3 seconds dwell time. Data-dependent MS2 scans were triggered using a minimum intensity of 5000, MIPS filter set for peptides, charge states from +2 to +7, exclusion of isotopic peaks, and dynamic exclusion set at a repeat count of 1, duration of 60 s, and +/- 10 ppm mass tolerance. Peptides were isolated using the quadrupole at a 1.6 m/z isolation width, fragmented by collision induced dissociation (CID) at a setting of 35%, q activation = 0.25, MIT = 300 ms, AGC =50000, and rapid scan rate in the ion trap in centroid mode.

### Data Protocol
DATA ANALYSIS Ten raw files from each of the three 2D-LC/MS analyses were loaded into MaxQuant (version 1.6.10) for peptide identification and MS1 feature detection. The first-dimension fractions were combined for each biological sample. Default parameters were used with two exceptions: iBAQ (intensity-based absolute quantification) quantification was turned on and matching between runs was turned off. The protein database was a canonical reference proteome for mouse (UP000000589) with 22276 sequences downloaded from www.UniProt.org (version 2017.12) using software available at https://github.com/Delan-Huang/Reference_Proteome_Manager.git. There were 840,765 total MS2 scans acquired. Of those, 182145 had PSMs passing the 1% false discover rate (FDR). The parsimonious number of identified proteins was 5633 across the three samples at a 1% FDR. Protein relative abundance estimates were based on iBAQ values. Proteins were ranked by decreasing iBAQ values, and relative abundances were expressed as percentages of the sum of all iBAQ values within each sample. In order to categorize and interpret results, the rich annotations available for mouse Swiss-Prot (reviewed) proteins were downloaded from UniProt.org. In-house scripts parsed a variety of annotation information (GO terms, gene names, keywords, and pathways) from the flat text format files and annotations were matched to the identified proteins. The annotations of interest were added to the main MaxQuant proteinGroups table to facilitate filtering proteins by annotation information and enable manual categorizations.   ANNOTATIONS OF ABUNDANT PROTEINS IN LENS EPITHELIUM AND FIBERS  The top 525 abundant proteins in lens epithelium and lens fiber were classified into 26 lens functional categories, based on knowledge and literature in the field. The functional categories were further merged into 8 larger groups: nucleus and DNA, protein synthesis, membrane, cytoskeleton, signaling, mitochondria, degradation and recycling, and metabolism.

### Publication Abstract
Epithelial cells and differentiated fiber cells represent distinct compartments in the ocular lens. While previous studies have revealed proteins that are preferentially expressed in epithelial vs. fiber cells, a comprehensive proteomics library comparing the molecular compositions of epithelial vs. fiber cells is essential for understanding lens formation, function, disease and regenerative potential, and for efficient differentiation of pluripotent stem cells for modeling of lens development and pathology in vitro. To compare protein compositions between the lens epithelium and fibers, we employed tandem mass spectrometry (2D-LC/MS) analysis of microdissected mouse P0.5 lenses. Functional classifications of the top 525 identified proteins into gene ontology categories by molecular processes and subcellular localizations, were adapted for the lens. Expression levels of both epithelial and fiber proteomes were compared with whole lens proteome and mRNA levels using E14.5, E16.5, E18.5, and P0.5 RNA-Seq data sets. During this developmental time window, multiple complex biosynthetic and catabolic processes generate the molecular and structural foundation for lens transparency. As expected, crystallins showed a high correlation between their mRNA and protein levels. Comprehensive data analysis confirmed and/or predicted roles for transcription factors (TFs), RNA-binding proteins (e.g. Carhsp1), translational apparatus including ribosomal heterogeneity and initiation factors, microtubules, cytoskeletal [e.g. non-muscle myosin IIA heavy chain (Myh9) and &#x3b2;B2-spectrin (Sptbn2)] and membrane proteins in lens formation and maturation. Our data highlighted many proteins with unknown functions in the lens that were preferentially enriched in epithelium or fibers, setting the stage for future studies to further dissect the roles of these proteins in fiber cell differentiation vs. epithelial cell maintenance. In conclusion, the present proteomic datasets represent the first mouse lens epithelium and fiber cell proteomes, establish comparative analyses of protein and RNA-Seq data, and characterize the major proteome remodeling required to form the mature lens fiber cells.

### Keywords
Mouse lens, Transcription factors, Rna-seq, Transcriptome, Proteome, Differentiation, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences Albert Einstein College of Medicine Bronx, NY 10461, USA
OHSU

### Submitter
Phillip Wilmarth

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Ales Cvekl
Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences Albert Einstein College of Medicine Bronx, NY 10461, USA


