### Accession
PXD022024

### Title
2DE images and LC-MS/MS of smooth and rough strains of Salmonella Gallinarum

### Description
Antigens of SG002, field isolated Salmonella Gallinarum in Korea, were tested against antiserum of SG002 and SR2-N6 (rough mutant of SG002) using 2DE western blotting. Different blots obtained were analyzed using LC-MS/MS. Outer membrane protein extracts of SR2-N6 were also tested against the antiserum of SR2-N6 using 2DE western blotting. Spots were analyzed with LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
Total bacterial proteins were extracted via cell lysis with 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4% CHAPS (3-[(3-cholamidopropyl)dimethylammonio]-1-propanesulfonate), and 2.5% dithiothreitol (DTT) and quantified with the Bradford protein assay. OMPs were extracted using the previously described sodium lauroyl sarcosine (SLS) method, with some modifications. Briefly, the cultured bacteria were centrifuged and the pellet was washed with 50 mM Tris-HCl. After centrifugation, lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl and 150 mM NaCl) was added, and the cells were lysed by ultrasonication. The supernatant was ultracentrifuged at 100,000 ×g for 1 hour. Pellets were resuspended in 2% SLS and 50 mM Tris-HCl, and then incubated at room temperature for 40 min. After another ultracentrifugation step, pellets were stored by adding 1% Triton X-100 to the lysis buffer.

### Data Protocol
2D-gel electrophoresis of total proteins or OMPs was performed using isoelectric focusing (pH 3-10 for whole bacteria or pH 4-7 for OMPs) and 14% SDS-PAGE gels, and separated proteins were electrotransferred to nitrocellulose membranes for western blotting (ProteomeTech, Seoul, Korea) (13). Membranes were incubated with anti-SR-N6 (1:10,000 dilution) and anti-SG002 (1:5,000 dilution) serum samples. LC-MS/MS was performed as described below. The analysis was performed using a nano ACQUITY UPLC and LTQ-Orbitrap-mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron, San Jose, CA). One of the mobile phases for LC separation was 0.1% formic acid in deionized water, and the other was 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. The flow rate was 0.5 μl/min, and the transfer tube temperature was set to 160°C. The MS/MS data were interpreted using SEQUEST software (Thermo Quest, San Jose, CA, USA), and the generated peak lists were compared using the MASCOT program (Matrix Science Ltd., London, UK).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Salmonella gallinarum, Antibody, Outer membrane protein

### Affiliations
Seoul National University
Laboratory of Poultry Medicine, Seoul National University, Seoul, Republic of Korea

### Submitter
Namhyung Kim

### Lab Head
Dr Hyuk-Joon Kwon
Laboratory of Poultry Medicine, Seoul National University, Seoul, Republic of Korea


