### Accession
PXD002391

### Title
Proteomics Study of Molecular Mechanisms Involved in Early Pregnancy Loss

### Description
To identify the proteins and molecular signaling pathways that contribute to EPL, we performed proteomics and bioinformatics analysis of the placental villi in women who have undergone EPL and in normal pregnant women.

### Sample Protocol
The placental villi of both groups were immediately submerged in liquid nitrogen after being weighted, and the tissues were then ground to powder. Then, the placental villi were lysed in lysis buffer (8 M urea in PBS [pH 8.0], 1×cocktail, 1 mM Phenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride (PMSF)), and the lysates were centrifuged at 12,000 g at 4°C for 15 min. The supernatants were collected and the protein concentrations were measured by Nanodrop 2000 at an absorbance of 280 nm. Then, the supernatants were mixed; 100 μg of protein was incubated with 10 mM dithiothreitol at 55°C for 1 h, and alkylated with 25 mM indole acetic acid at room temperature in the dark. The proteins were then digested with trypsin/Lys-C Mix at 37°C overnight (protease:protein ratio of 1:25). Thereafter, protein digests extracted from EPL group and control group were labeled with 0.8 mg TMT6-131 or TMT6-130, respectively. Equal amounts of labeled protein digests from both groups were mixed for mass spectrometry (MS).

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data were searched against the human FASTA database from UniProt (released on Dec 1, 2014) using the Thermo Scientific Proteome Discoverer software suite 1.3 with the SEQUEST search engine. The parameter settings were as follows: full trypsin specificity, two missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation (C) and TMT 6-plex (K and peptide N-terminal) as the static modification, oxidation (M) as the dynamic modification, precursor ion mass tolerances were set at 20 ppm for all MS data acquired using an Orbitrap mass analyzer, and the fragment ion mass tolerance was set as 20 mmu for all MS/MS spectra acquired.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bioinformatics analysis, Placental villi, Proteomics analysis, Early pregnancy loss

### Affiliations
National Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology & Department of Immunology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences
National Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology & Department of Immunology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences 

### Submitter
Wei Ge

### Lab Head
Dr Wei Ge
National Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology & Department of Immunology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences


