### Accession
PXD024276

### Title
Trastuzumab modulates the protein cargo of extracellular vesicles released by ERBB2+ breast cancer cells

### Description
Cancers overexpressing the ERBB2 oncogene are aggressive and associated with a poor prognosis. Trastuzumab is a ERBB2 specific recombinant antibody employed for the treatment of these diseases since it blocks ERBB2 signaling causing growth arrest and survival inhibition. While the effects of Trastuzumab on ERBB2 cancer cells are well known, those on the extracellular vesicles released from these cells are scarce. This study focused on ERBB2+ breast cancer cells and aimed to establish what type of EVs they release and whether Trastuzumab affects their morphology and molecular composition. To these aims, we performed immunoelectron microscopy, immunoblot, and high-resolution mass spectrometry analyses on EVs purified by differential centrifugation of culture supernatant. Here we show that EVs released from ERBB2+ breast cancer cells are polymorphic in size and appearance, and that ERBB2 is preferentially associated with large (120 nm) EVs. Moreover, we report that Tz induces the expression of a specific glycosylated 50 kDa isoform of the CD63 tetraspanin and modulates the expression of 51 EVs proteins, including TOP1. As these proteins are functionally associated with organelle organization, cytokinesis, and response to lipids, we suggest that Tz may influence these cellular processes in target cells at distant sites via modified EVs.

### Sample Protocol
Semples were lysed, reduced and alkylated in 120 ul 6M Guanidine, 10 mM TCEP, 4 mM CAA, 100 mM Tris pH 8. Then proteins were extracted with PAC method [1]. Briefly, 4 ul of carboxyl coated magnetic beads were added to each sample and proteins were induced to aggregate on the beads with the addition of 70% ACN. The beads washed with 1 ml ACN and 1 ml 70% Ethanol were digested O.N. at 37°C with 0,7 ug trypsin and 0,3 ug LysC. Digested samples were loaded onto StageTips [2].  Resulting peptides were analyzed by a nano-UHPLC-MS/MS system using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC coupled to an Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific Instrument) in positive ionization mode. Elution was performed with an EASY spray column (75 μm x 50 cm, 2 μm particle size, Thermo Scientific) at a flow rate of 250 nl/min with a 200 min non-linear gradient of 5-45% solution B  (80% ACN, 20% H2O, 5% DMSO and 0.1% FA). MS scans were performed in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 60000 between 375 and 1,500 m/z using a maximal ion injection time of 50 ms. The automatic gain control was set to 1,000,000 ions. The analysis were done in data-dependent acquisition mode with alternating MS and MS/MS experiments. A maximum of 10 MS/MS experiments were triggered per MS scan. MS/MS spectra were acquired in the linear ion trap (rapid scan mode) after collision induced dissociation (CID) fragmentation at a collision energy of 35 % and an AGC target of 10,000. Dynamic Exclusion was set at 30 sec.

### Data Protocol
Data processing was performed by MaxQuant [3] software version 1.6.10.43. A false discovery rate was set at 0.01 for the identification of proteins and a minimum of 6 amino acids was required for peptide identification. Andromeda engine was used to search MS/MS spectra against Uniprot human database (release UP000005640_9606 April 2019). Algorithm MaxLFQ  was chosen for the protein quantification with the activated option ‘match between runs’ to reduce the number of the missing proteins. The intensity values were extracted and statistically evaluated using the ProteinGroup Table and Perseus software [4] version 1.6.8.0.

### Publication Abstract
Cancers overexpressing the ERBB2 oncogene are aggressive and associated with a poor prognosis. Trastuzumab is an ERBB2 specific recombinant antibody employed for the treatment of these diseases since it blocks ERBB2 signaling causing growth arrest and survival inhibition. While the effects of Trastuzumab on ERBB2 cancer cells are well known, those on the extracellular vesicles (EVs) released from these cells are scarce. This study focused on ERBB2<sup>+</sup> breast cancer cells and aimed to establish what type of EVs they release and whether Trastuzumab affects their morphology and molecular composition. To these aims, we performed immunoelectron microscopy, immunoblot, and high-resolution mass spectrometry analyses on EVs purified by differential centrifugation of culture supernatant. Here, we show that EVs released from ERBB2<sup>+</sup> breast cancer cells are polymorphic in size and appearance and that ERBB2 is preferentially associated with large (120 nm) EVs. Moreover, we report that Trastuzumab (Tz) induces the expression of a specific glycosylated 50 kDa isoform of the CD63 tetraspanin and modulates the expression of 51 EVs proteins, including TOP1. Because these proteins are functionally associated with organelle organization, cytokinesis, and response to lipids, we suggest that Tz may influence these cellular processes in target cells at distant sites via modified EVs.

### Keywords
Extracellular vesicles, Breast cancer, Proteomic analysis, Top1, Electron microscopy, Trastuzumab, Cd63., Her2

### Affiliations
Gaslini Children's Hospital
Ist. G. Gaslini

### Submitter
Andrea Petretto

### Lab Head
Dr Andrea Petretto
Ist. G. Gaslini


