### Accession
PXD015975

### Title
Host-defence peptides caerin 1.1 and 1.9 stimulate TNF-alpha-dependent apoptosis in human cervical cancer HeLa cells

### Description
TNFα pathway has been recognised as one of the most important signalling pathways characterising molecules with anti-cancer activity, due to it closely relates to cell survival as well as apoptosis. Isolated from the glandular secretion of Australian tree frogs, the genus Litoria, host-defence caerin peptides have been previously shown to have multiple biological activities, including anti-proliferation of several cancer cell lines, though the mechanism remains unclear. In this study, we used multiple immunoassays, confocal microscopy in conjunction with TMT-labelling quantitative proteomics to investigate the anti-proliferative activities of caerin 1.1 and 1.9 against cervical cancer HeLa cells. The proteins of cells and cell growth environment post the treatments were comparatively analysed, respectively. We found that both caerin 1.1 and 1.9 highly inhibited HeLa cell proliferation with a significant additive effect. The PPI analysis confirmed that the interactions among the significantly regulated proteins were highly intensive. Besides translation, folding and localisation of proteins and RNA processing, apoptosis process was significantly enriched post the treatments. The apoptosis process was resulted by TNFα signalling, confirmed by the elevated levels of CASP3 and CASP9. Moreover, EGFR1 and androgen receptor pathways appeared inhibited. The activation of TCR pathway derived from the quantitation results further implies the likelihood of recruiting more T cells to the cell growth environment post the treatment and more sensitive to T cell mediated killing of Hela cells.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction from cell growth environment To study change in cell-growing environment in response to peptide treatment, excretory/secretory proteins (ESPs) were collected and analysed. Approximately 1 ml cell culture mixture (containing both cells and supernatant) with or without the treatments (the concentration of the peptides was 5 µg/ml) was collected and centrifuged at 1,000 × g, 4°C for 5 min, to separate cells and supernatant. The supernatant about 0.5 cm above the pellet was collected and further centrifuged at 4°C, 12,000 × g for 15min, while the pellet cells were collected for further proteomic analysis. After the centrifugation, the supernatant was collected, lyophilised and subjected to in-solution digestion as described elsewhere [11]. Briefly, 500 μg protein in 100 μl lysis buffer (8M urea, 0.8M NH4HCO3, pH 8.0) were reduced with 100 mM DTT at 37 °C, and subsequently alkylated with 100 mM IAA at room temperature (RT) in the dark, followed by the incubation with the addition of 100 mM DTT at RT. The urea concentration was reduced by diluting the mixture with MilliQ water, then the proteins digested with sequencing grade modified trypsin at 1:50 enzyme‐to‐substrate ratio. After 4 h of digestion at 37 °C, samples were diluted 1:4 with 50 mM NH4HCO3, 1 mM CaCl2 and another aliquot of the same amount of trypsin was added to the samples and incubated at 37 °C overnight. The digested samples were desalted on Sep-Pak C18 columns (Waters, Milford, MA) and lyophilised for TMT labelling.    Cell lysis and sample preparation Cells were washed with 1 mL of cold PBS and counted, about 1×106 cells were lysed with 300 μl of lysis buffer (8M urea, 0.8M NH4HCO3, pH 8.0) supplemented with 10 μl of protease inhibitor cocktail (80-6501-23, GE Healthcare, Little Chalfont, UK). The samples were then sonicated for 30 min on ice, and then centrifuged at 12,000× g at 4 °C for 15 min. The supernatants were collected, and protein concentration in the cell lysates was measured using the Pierce BCA protein assay on a NanoDrop 2000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Then, 500 μg of protein was used for in-solution digestion as described above. Tryptic peptides were desalted on Sep-Pak C18 columns and lyophilised.  TMT-6plex labelling for LC-MS/MS TMT-labelling was carried out using the TMT 6plex labelling kit according to the manufacturer's protocol. In brief, tryptic peptides resulting from 100 μg of protein per channel were used in the labelling. The TMT labelling reagents were dissolved in 41 μL acetonitrile per vial and added to the samples. For cell protein extracts, TMT-126, 127, 128 and 129 were used to label untreated, caerin 1.1, 1.9 and 1.1/1.9 treatments, respectively. For ESPs in cell environment, TMT-127, 128, 129, 130 were used to label untreated, caerin 1.1, 1.9 and 1.1/1.9 treatments, respectively. The reaction was incubated for 1 h at RT and quenched by 5% hydroxylamine. The labelled samples from the same biological replicate were mixed and desalted using Sep-Pak C18 columns and dried using a SpeedVac.   uHPLC tandem QTof MS/MS analyses  TMT labelled peptides from cells or cell growth environment were resuspended in 25 μL of 0.1% formic acid in MilliQ water and analysed by a QTOF X500R mass spectrometer (AB SCIEX, Concord, Canada) equipped with an electrospray ion source attached to an ExionLC liquid chromatography system (AB SCIEX, Concord, Canada). A 20 µL sample of each sample was injected into a 150 mm × 2.1 μm Agilent AdvanceBio Peptide Mapping column (Agilent Technologies, Mulgrave, VIC, Australia) equipped with a Fast Guard column for mass spectrometry analysis. Linear gradients of 5-60% solvent B over a 50min period at a flow rate of 400 µL/min, followed by a gradient from 60% to 80% solvent B over 10 min and 80% to 95% solvent B in 5 min were used for peptide elution. Solvent B remained at 95% for a 1 min period for washing the column after which it was decreased to 5% for equilibration prior to the injection of the subsequent sample. Solvent A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in MilliQ water while solvent B contained 0.1% formic acid in 100% acetonitrile. The ion spray voltage was set to 5500 V, the declustering potential was set to 100 V, the curtain gas flow was set at 30, ion source gas 1 was set at 40, the ion source gas 2 was set at 50 and spray temperature was set at 450°C. The mass spectrometer acquired the mass spectral data in an Information Dependant Acquisition mode. Full scan TOFMS data was acquired over the mass range 350-1400 and for product ion ms/ms 50-1800. Ions observed in the TOF-MS scan exceeding a threshold of 100 cps and a charge state of +2 to +5 were set to trigger the acquisition of product ion. The data was acquired using SCIEX OS software (AB SCIEX, Concord, Canada).

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification The LC-MS/MS data were converted using msconvert [13] and imported to the PEAKS studio (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, ON, Canada, version 7.0). The database of human proteome used was downloaded from Uniprot (http://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000005640) containing 70,613 entries. De novo sequencing of peptides, database search and characterising specific PTMs were used to analyse the raw data; false discovery rate (FDR) was set to ≤ 1%, and [-10*log(P)] was calculated accordingly where P is the probability that an observed match is a random event. The PEAKS used the following parameters: (i) precursor ion mass tolerance, 0.1 Da; (ii) fragment ion mass tolerance, 0.1 Da (the error tolerance); (iii) tryptic enzyme specificity with two missed cleavages allowed; (iv) monoisotopic precursor mass and fragment ion mass; (v) a fixed modification of cysteine carbamidomethylation; and (vi) variable modifications including TMT, lysine acetylation, deamidation on asparagine and glutamine, oxidation of methionine and conversion of glutamic acid and glutamine to pyroglutamate.  For the validation of quantification results, peptides with confidence ≥ 99% were used in PEAKS Q module. The mass error tolerance was set to 20ppm, and the peptide score threshold (-10lgP) was 20. The results of differentially expressed proteins were validated sequentially by the following criteria, the proteins must contain at least one unique high confident peptide, the proteins have a p values < 0.05 and FDR ≤ 1%, and the fold change of proteins ≥ 1.5. A protein was included in the analysis when it was confidently identified in at least two biological replicates.

### Publication Abstract
Host defense caerin 1.1 and 1.9 peptides, isolated from the glandular secretion of Australian tree frogs, the genus <i>Litoria</i>, have been previously shown to have multiple biological activities, including the inhibition of human papillomavirus (HPV) 16 early protein E7 transformed murine as well as human cancerous cell proliferation both <i>in vitro</i> and <i>in vivo</i>. However, the mechanism underlying their anti-proliferative activities against HPV18+ cervical cancer HeLa cells remains unknown. This study comparatively investigated the anti-proliferation on HeLa cells by caerin 1.1, 1.9, and their mixture, followed by confocal microscopy examination to assess the cellular intake of the peptides. Tandem mass tag labeling proteomics was employed to reveal the proteins that were significantly regulated by the peptide treatment in cells and cell growth environment, to elucidate the signaling pathways that were modulated. Western blot was performed to confirm the modulation of the pathways. Both caerin 1.1 and 1.9 highly inhibited HeLa cell proliferation with a significant additive effect compared to untreated and control peptide. They entered the cells with different magnitudes. Intensive protein-protein interaction was detected among significantly upregulated proteins. Translation, folding and localization of proteins and RNA processing, apoptosis process was significantly enriched post the treatments. The apoptotic signaling was suggested as a result of tumor necrosis factor-&#x3b1; (TNF-&#x3b1;) pathway activation, indicated by the dose-dependent elevated levels of caspase 3 and caspase 9. The epidermal growth factor receptor and androgen receptor pathways appeared inhibited by the peptides. Moreover, the activation of T-cell receptor derived from the quantitation results further implies the likelihood of recruiting more T cells to the cell growth environment post the treatment and more sensitive to T cell mediated killing of HeLa cells. Our results indicate that caerin 1.1 and 1.9 mediate apoptotic signals of HeLa cells and may subsequently enhances adaptive T cell immune responses.

### Keywords
Western blot, Proteomics, Tmt labelling, Confocal microscopy, Tnfα signalling pathway, Hela cell, Caerin peptide, Apoptosis

### Affiliations
University of the Sunshine Coast
Genecology Research Centre, University of the Sunshine Coast, Maroochydore DC, QLD 4558, Australia

### Submitter
Tianfang Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Tianfang Wang
Genecology Research Centre, University of the Sunshine Coast, Maroochydore DC, QLD 4558, Australia


