### Accession
PXD015599

### Title
Identification of Bona Fide Targets of AMPylating Fic-enzymes by Substrate Mediated Covalent Capture

### Description
Many pathogenic bacteria utilize posttranslational modifications to manipulate central components of the host cell functions. Often, the released enzymes belong to the large Fic-family, causing target modification with nucleotide monophosphates. Due to the lack of a generic method for the identification of the Fic-family’s cellular targets, we have established a new approach by combining synthetic thiol-reactive nucleotide derivatives (TReNDs) with recombinantly produced Fic-enzymes containing strategically placed cysteines in their active sites, thereby producing reactive binary FicTReND probes for covalent substrate capture. The binary probes successfully capture their targets from complex lysates and permit their identification by mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
The proteins eluted from the beads after immunoprecipitation experiments were diluted with 0.1 M triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and 1% sodium deoxycholate (SDC, Sigma), were reduced in presence of 10 mM dithiotreithol (Sigma Aldrich) for 30 min at 60°C followed by cysteine alkylation with 20 mM iodo acetamide (Sigma Aldrich) for 30 min at 37°C in the dark and enzymatic degradation with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) over night at 37°C. Digestion was quenched with 1% formic acid (FA), precipitated SDC was removed by centrifugation for 5 min at 14,000 g and the supernatant was dried in a vacuum centrifuge.

### Data Protocol
Acquired DDA LC-MS/MS data for the IP samples were searched with the Andromeda algorithm integrated in the MaxQuant software (v 1.6.2 ,Max Plank Institute for Biochemistry) against a reviewed human protein sequence database (Uniprot, EMBL, release Nov 2017, 20241 entries) supplemented with protein sequences of the used FIC. Label free quantification was enabled. Carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification for cysteine residues and the oxidation of methionine, pyro-glutamate formation at glutamine residues at the peptide N-terminus as well as acetylation of the protein N-terminus were allowed as variable modifications. Only peptide with a high confidence (false discovery rate < 1% using a decoy data base approach) were accepted as identified.

### Publication Abstract
Various pathogenic bacteria use post-translational modifications to manipulate the central components of host cell functions. Many of the enzymes released by these bacteria belong to the large Fic family, which modify targets with nucleotide monophosphates. The lack of a generic method for identifying the cellular targets of Fic family enzymes hinders investigation of their role and the effect of the post-translational modification. Here, we establish an approach that uses reactive co-substrate-linked enzymes for proteome profiling. We combine synthetic thiol-reactive nucleotide derivatives with recombinantly produced Fic enzymes containing strategically placed cysteines in their active sites to yield reactive binary probes for covalent substrate capture. The binary complexes capture their targets from cell lysates and permit subsequent identification. Furthermore, we determined the structures of low-affinity ternary enzyme-nucleotide-substrate complexes by applying a covalent-linking strategy. This approach thus allows target identification of the Fic enzymes from both bacteria and eukarya.

### Keywords
Post-translational modifications, Ampylation, Fic enzymes, Host-pathogen interactions

### Affiliations
University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf
Institute of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine
Mass Spectrometric Proteomics
University Medical Center Hamburg Eppendorf Center for Experimental Medicine, Institute of Biochemisry and Signaltransduction Hamburg Germany

### Submitter
Christoph Krisp

### Lab Head
Dr Azmelt tyen
University Medical Center Hamburg Eppendorf Center for Experimental Medicine, Institute of Biochemisry and Signaltransduction Hamburg Germany


