### Accession
PXD017400

### Title
Interactome analysis of chloroplast ClpC1 chaperone in Arabidopsis thaliana

### Description
The chloroplast stromal CLP protease system is essential for growth and development, consisting of a proteolytic core complex that interacts with ClpC1, ClpC2, or ClpD AAA+ chaperones. In this study, an in vivo ClpC1 substrate trap with a C-terminal STREPII affinity tag was generated, and MS/MS analysis identified many proteins that were highly enriched compared to the ClpC1 WT control.

### Sample Protocol
ClpC1 WT and ClpC1 trap seeds were grown on half MS plates, after which transgenic lines containing C1-strepII or C1trap-strepII were selected for. These seeds were transferred to soil, and rosette leaf tissue was taken after 5 weeks. Three biological replicates were performed for both WT and trap genotypes. Samples were frozen and ground before vortexing with extraction buffer. Following centrifugation, supernatants were aliquoted or affinity purified on IBA StrepTactinXT high capacity beads. Eluates were separated by SDS-PAGE, with each lane being cut into 6 sections. Gel sections underwent tryptic digestion before MS analysis using a Thermo QExactive interfaced with a nanoLC system.

### Data Protocol
The acquisition cycle consisted of a survey MS scan in the Orbitrap with a set mass range from 350 to 1800 m/z at the highest resolving power (100,000) followed by five data-dependent MS/MS scans acquired in the LTQ. Dynamic exclusion was used with the following parameters: exclusion size, 500; repeat count, 2; repeat duration, 30 s; exclusion time, 180 s; exclusion window, ±6 ppm. Target values were set at 5 x 10 5 and 10 4 for the survey and tandem MS scans, respectively. Mass window for precursor ion selection was set at 2 m/z with monoisotopic peak selection and the FTMS preview option was used. MS survey scans in the Orbitrap were acquired in one microscan. Fragment ions spectra were acquired in the LTQ as an average of two microscans. Peak lists (in .mgf format) were generated from RAW files. Recalibrated files were searched with MASCOT v2.2 against ARAPORT 11 including a small set of typical contaminants and the decoy. Three parallel searches (Mascot p-value less than 0.01 for individual ion scores; precursor ion window 700 to 3500 Da) were carried out: (i) Full tryptic (6 ppm) with variable M-oxidation, Gln to pyro-Glu (N-termQ), N-term protein acetylation, W-oxidation and fixed Cys-carbamido-methylation, 2 missed cleavages (in Mascot PR or PK does not count as missed cleavage), (ii) Semi-tryptic (3 ppm) with variable M-oxidation, N-term acetylation, Gln to pyro-Glu (N-termQ), W-oxidation and Fixed Cys-carbamido-methylation, 2 missed cleavages, and (iii) error-tolerant, full tryptic only (3 ppm) with variable M-ox and Fixed Cys-carbamido- methylation (no missed cleavage).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Clpc1 arabidopsis interactome chloroplast chaperone

### Affiliations
Plant Biology Section, School of Integrative Plant Science, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York, United States
Cornell University

### Submitter
William Comstock

### Lab Head
Dr Klaas van Wijk
Plant Biology Section, School of Integrative Plant Science, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York, United States


