### Accession
PXD021924

### Title
Glucocorticoid receptor triggers a reversible drug-tolerant dormancy state with acquired therapeutic vulnerabilities in lung cancer

### Description
The glucocorticoid receptor (GR) regulates gene expression throughout the human genome in a cell-type-specific manner, governing various aspects of homeostasis. The influence of this transcriptional regulator is seen in multiple pathologies, including cancer. Pharmacological activation of the GR is frequently used to alleviate side-effects caused by therapy for patients with various non-lymphoid solid  (i.e. non-hematologic) cancers; however, prior studies have shown that this treatment might also have anti-proliferative action on cancer cells. Nonetheless, the molecular underpinnings of glucocorticoid action and its direct effectors in non-lymphoid solid cancers remain elusive. Here, we study the molecular mechanisms of glucocorticoid response in non-lymphoid solid cancers models, focusing on lung cancer. Activation of the GR induces reversible cancer cell dormancy in which cells are tolerant to large array of anti-cancer drugs. This state transition is accompanied by induction of growth factor survival signalling (IGF-1R) and acquired vulnerability to inhibitors of this pathway, both in vitro and in vivo. The observed phenotype is dependent on a single GR target gene - CDKN1C, which encodes for a cell cycle inhibitor protein p57. We have discovered an upstream distal enhancer of CDKN1C, which through GR-induced chromatin looping regulates the expression of this key gene, as confirmed in human tumour specimens. Furthermore, we demonstrate that the SWI/SNF complex composition fine-tunes the GR transcriptional activity at the CDKN1C locus, allowing for precise regulation of cell dormancy induction. Collectively, we show that SWI/SNF-facilitated regulation of CDKN1C underlines GR-induced reversible drug-tolerant state in cancer cells. These insights illustrate the importance of GR signalling in non-lymphoid solid cancer biology, particularly in lung cancer, and warrant caution for use of glucocorticoids in treatment of anti-cancer therapy related side-effects.

### Sample Protocol
Rapid Immunoprecipitation of endogenous proteins (RIME) Following hormone deprivation and treatment with hydrocortisone (2,75 μM) for two hours, RIME experiments were performed as previously described (Mohammed et al., 2016). The following antibodies were used: anti-GR (12041, Cell Signalling Technology), anti-p57 (sc-56341, Santa Cruz Biotechnology), anti-rabbit IgG (sc-2027, Santa Cruz Biotechnology), and anti-mouse IgG (sc-2025, Santa Cruz Biotechnology). Tryptic digestion of bead-bound proteins was performed as described previously (Stelloo et al., 2018). LC-MS/MS analysis of the tryptic digests was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer equipped with a Proxeon nLC1000 system (Thermo Scientific) using the same settings, with the exception that the samples were eluted from the analytical column in a 90-min linear gradient. Phosphoproteomic analysis After hormone depravation cells were treated with 2,75 μM hydrocortisone or left untreated (Veh) for 48 hours. For protein digestion, frozen cell pellets were lysed in boiling Guanidine (GuHCl) lysis buffer as previously described (Jersie-Christensen et al., 2016). Protein concentration was determined with a Pierce Coomassie (Bradford) Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific), according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Aliquots corresponding to 1,1 mg of protein were digested with Lys-C (Wako) for 2 hours at 37°C, enzyme/substrate ratio 1:100. The mixture was then diluted to 2 M GuHCl and digested overnight at 37°C with trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich) in enzyme/substrate ratio 1:100. Digestion was quenched by the addition of TFA (final concentration 1%), after which the peptides were desalted on a Sep-Pak C18 cartridge (Waters, Massachusetts, USA). From the eluates, aliquots were collected for proteome analysis, the remainder being reserved for phosphoproteome analysis. Samples were vacuum dried and stored at -80°C until LC-MS/MS analysis or phosphopeptide enrichment. Phosphorylated peptides were enriched from 1 mg total peptides using High-Select Fe-NTA Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit (Thermo Scientific), according to the manufacturer’s instructions, with the exception that the dried eluates were reconstituted in 15 μl of 2% formic acid. Prior to mass spectrometry analysis, the peptides used for proteome analysis were reconstituted in 2% formic acid. Peptide mixtures were analysed by nanoLC-MS/MS on an Q Exactive HF-X Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer equipped with an EASY-NLC 1200 system (Thermo Scientific). Samples were directly loaded onto the analytical column (ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 μm, 75 μm × 500 mm, packed in-house). Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid/water and solvent B was 0.1% formic acid/80% acetonitrile. Samples were eluted from the analytical column at a constant flow of 250 nl/min. For single-run proteome analysis, a 4h gradient was employed containing a linear increase from 7% to 30% solvent B, followed by a 15-minute wash, whereas for single-run phosphoproteome analysis a 2h linear gradient (from 4% to 22% solvent B, followed by a 15-minute wash) was used.

### Data Protocol
Rime raw data were analysed by Proteome Discoverer (PD) (version 2.3.0.523, Thermo Scientific) using standard settings. MS/MS data were searched against the Swissprot database (released 2018_06) using Mascot (version 2.6.1, Matrix Science, UK) with Homo sapiens as taxonomy filter (20,381 entries) for the GR-RIME experiment, whereas Sequest HT was used for the p57-RIME experiment. The maximum allowed precursor mass tolerance was 50 ppm and 0,6 Da for fragment ion masses. Trypsin was chosen as cleavage specificity allowing two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation (C) was set as a fixed modification, while oxidation (M) and deamidation (NQ) were used as variable modifications. False discovery rates for peptide and protein identification were set to 1% and as additional filter Mascot peptide ion score>20 or Sequest HT XCorr>1 was set. The PD output file containing the abundances was loaded into Perseus (version 1.6.1.3) [02] LFQ intensities were Log2- transformed and the proteins were filtered for at least 66% valid values. Missing values were replaced by imputation based on the standard settings of Perseus, i.e. a normal distribution using a width of 0,3 and a downshift of 1,8. Differentially expressed proteins were determined using a t-test. The comparison between the pooled cell lines of the GR-RIME experiment was IgG corrected. Proteome data (RAW files) were analysed by PD (version 2.3.0.523, Thermo Scientific) using standard settings. MS/MS data were searched against the human Swissprot database (20417 entries, release 2019_02) using Sequest HT. The maximum allowed precursor mass tolerance was 50 ppm and 0,06 Da for fragment ion masses. Trypsin was chosen as cleavage specificity allowing two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation (C) was set as a fixed modification, while oxidation (M) and deamidation (NQ) were used as variable modifications. False discovery rates for peptide and protein identification were set to 1% and as additional filter Sequest HT XCorr>1 was set. The PD output file containing the abundances was loaded into Perseus (version 1.6.1.3) [02]. LFQ intensities were Log2-transformed and the proteins were filtered for at least two out of three valid values in one condition. Missing values were replaced by imputation based on the standard settings of Perseus, i.e. a normal distribution using a width of 0,3 and a downshift of 1,8. Differentially expressed proteins were determined using a t-test (threshold: p ≤ 0,05 and [x/y] ≥ 1,5 | [x/y] ≤ -1,5). Phosphoproteome data (RAW files) were analysed by MaxQuant (version 1.6.1.0) using standard settings (Cox et al., 2014). MS/MS data were searched against the human Swissprot database (20,417 entries, release 2019_02) complemented with a list of common contaminants and concatenated with the reversed version of all sequences. The maximum allowed mass tolerance was 4,5 ppm in the main search and 20 ppm for fragment ion masses. False discovery rates for peptide and protein identification were set to 1%. Trypsin/P was chosen as cleavage specificity allowing two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation (C) was set as a fixed modification, while oxidation (M), deamidation (NQ) and phosphorylation (S,T,Y) were used as variable modifications. LFQ intensities were Log2-transformed in Perseus (version 1.6.5.0), after which the phosphosites were filtered for at least two valid values (out of 3 total) in both conditions. Missing values were replaced by imputation based a normal distribution using a width of 0,3 and a downshift of 1,8. Differentially regulated phosphosites were determined using a t-test (threshold: p ≤ 0,05 and [x/y] ≥ 1,5 | [x/y] ≤ -1,5. These differential phosphosites were combined with on/off (3 out of 3 total present/missing) phosphosites. For the cytoscape analysis the app PhosphoPath was used. Data was loaded into the PhosphoPath plug-in and processed as described in the manual (Raaijmakers et al., 2015).

### Publication Abstract
The glucocorticoid receptor (GR) regulates gene expression, governing aspects of homeostasis, but is also involved in cancer. Pharmacological GR activation is frequently used to alleviate therapy-related side-effects. While prior studies have shown GR activation might also have anti-proliferative action on tumours, the underpinnings of glucocorticoid action and its direct effectors in non-lymphoid solid cancers remain elusive. Here, we study the mechanisms of glucocorticoid response, focusing on lung cancer. We show that GR activation induces reversible cancer cell dormancy characterised by anticancer drug tolerance, and activation of growth factor survival signalling accompanied by vulnerability to inhibitors. GR-induced dormancy is dependent on a single GR-target gene, CDKN1C, regulated through chromatin looping of a GR-occupied upstream distal enhancer in a SWI/SNF-dependent fashion. These insights illustrate the importance of GR signalling in non-lymphoid solid cancer biology, particularly in lung cancer, and warrant caution for use of glucocorticoids in treatment of anticancer therapy related side-effects.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-msms, Protein p57, Lfq, Lung cancer, Glucocorticoid receptor, Rime, Proteome, Phosphoproteome, Cdkn1c

### Affiliations
The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
Mass spectrometry/Proteomics Facility, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Liesbeth Hoekman

### Lab Head
Dr Maarten Altelaar
Mass spectrometry/Proteomics Facility, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands


