### Accession
PXD028025

### Title
Protein metabolism drives feed efficiency in the liver and white muscle of efficient and inefficient Chinook salmon (Oncorhynchus tshawytscha) farmed in saline water

### Description
Understanding the molecular mechanisms of feed efficiency is an important step toward sustainability of salmonids aquaculture. In this study, the liver and white muscle proteomes of efficient (EFF) and inefficient (INEFF) Chinook salmon (Oncorhynchus tshawytscha) farmed in sea water were investigated by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) approach. In total, 2,746 liver and 702 white muscle quantified proteins were compared between 21 EFF and 22 INEFF fish. Protein synthesis was enriched in both liver and white muscle of the EFF group while conversely, pathways related to protein degradation (amino acid catabolism and proteolysis, respectively) were the most affected processes in the liver and white muscle of INEFF fish. The SOM in the INEFF group was significantly higher than EFF fish showing INEFF fish probably was the dominant group. The INEFF group (dominant) suffered stress and shifted to consume energy through protein catabolism. As the first study, the results provide a preliminary picture of the fundamental molecular landscape of feed efficiency in Chinook salmon farmed in sea water

### Sample Protocol
Samples of the white muscle and liver (~ 20 mg of wet tissue) from each fish were individually homogenised for 15-20 seconds in Eppendorf tubes containing denaturation buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, in 40 mM Tris, pH 8) plus EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche, Basel, Switzerland) using Tissue Tearor Homogenizer (Biospec Products, Oklahoma, USA). Protein samples were quantified using the Pierce A660 nm assay, reduced and, alkylated by standard methods then digested according to the SP3 method using 30 µg protein and 1.2µg trypsin/LysC.

### Data Protocol
DIA- MS/MS data were searched against a NCBI Chinook salmon protein sequence database (txid 74940; comprising 74,180 entries at 26/08/2019 to generate a spectral library. DIA-MS data was then used for quantitation of relative protein abundance by targeted re-extraction of peptide data from the spectral library using Spectronaut software (v14)

### Publication Abstract
Understanding the molecular mechanisms that underlie differences in feed efficiency (FE) is an important step toward optimising growth and achieving sustainable salmonid aquaculture. In this study, the liver and white muscle proteomes of feed efficient (EFF) and inefficient (INEFF) Chinook salmon (Oncorhynchus tshawytscha) reared in seawater were investigated by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). In total, 2746 liver and 702 white muscle proteins were quantified and compared between 21 EFF and 22 INEFF fish. GSEA showed that gene sets related to protein synthesis were enriched in the liver and white muscle of the EFF group, while conversely, pathways related to protein degradation (amino acid catabolism and proteolysis, respectively) were the most affected processes in the liver and white muscle of INEFF fish. Estimates of individual daily feed intake and share of the meal within tank were significantly higher in the INEFF than the EFF fish showing INEFF fish were likely more dominant during feeding and overfed. Overeating by the INEFF fish was associated with an increase in protein catabolism. This study found that fish with different FE values had expression differences in the gene sets related to protein turnover, and this result supports the hypothesis that protein metabolism plays a role in FE.

### Keywords
Proteomics., Chinook salmon, Efficient fish, Feed efficiency, Growth performance

### Affiliations
University of Tasmania
Proteomics facility, Central Science Laboratory, University of Tasmania

### Submitter
Richard Wilson

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Richard Wilson
Proteomics facility, Central Science Laboratory, University of Tasmania


