### Accession
PXD015827

### Title
Starvation-specific NSPs in Leishmania mexicana parasites by quantitative proteomics

### Description
Using a combination of BONCAT technique and iTRAQ 3-plex quantitative proteomics MS, we profiled the de novo protein synthesis in the starving L. mexicana parasites in a temporally resolved manner. This approach uniquely integrates the high specificity of the BONCAT technique for the NSPs with the high sensitivity and multiplexed quantitation capability of the iTRAQ quantitative proteomics MS. Proof-of-concept experiments identified over 250 starvation-specific NSPs in the parasite and quantified the relative changes in abundance of these proteins as a function of duration of starvation.

### Sample Protocol
The iTRAQ 3-plex labelled tryptic peptides were separated on an ekspertTM nanoLC 425 with low micro gradient flow module (Eksigent) using a YMC-Triart C18 column (12nm, S-3µm, 150 x 0.3mm ID, 1/32"; Part number: TA12S03-15H0RU). A C-18 trap column (Trap-YMC-Triart 12nm S-5µm, 5 x 0.5mm ID, 1/32"; Part number: TA12S05-E5J0RU) was used prior to the main separating micro-flow column. 5µL of sample peptides were separated by mobile phase A (0.1% formic acid in water) and mobile phase B (0.1% formic acid in ACN) at a flow rate of 5µL/minute over 87 minutes. The gradient used was the following, 3% B to 5% B (0 to 2 minutes), 5% B to 30% B (2 to 68 minutes), 30% B to 35% B (68 to 73 minutes), 35% B to 80% B (73 to 75 minutes), at 80% (75 to 78 minutes), 80% B to 3% B (78 to 79 minutes), at 3% B (79 to 87 minutes). The MS analysis was performed on a TripleTOF 5600 system (Sciex) in high-resolution mode. The MS acquisition time was set from gradient time 0 to 85 minutes and the MS1 spectra were collected in the mass range of 400 to 1600 m/z with 250ms accumulation time per spectrum. Further fragmentation of each MS spectrum occurred with a maximum of 30 precursors per cycle and 33ms minimum accumulation time for each precursor across the range of 100 to 1500 m/z with ion selection +2 to +5, 500 cps intensity threshold and dynamic exclusion for 15sec. The MS/MS spectra were acquired in high sensitivity mode and the collision energies were increased by checking the ‘adjust CE when using iTRAQ reagents’ box in the acquisition method.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification and quantification, the wiff files from the Sciex TripleTOF 5600 system were imported into MaxQuant (version 1.6.3.4) with integrated Andromeda database search engine. The MS/MS spectra were queried against L. mexicana sequences from UniProt KB (8,524 sequences). Database search employed the following parameters: Reporter ion MS2 with multiplicity 3plex iTRAQ, trypsin digestion with maximum 2 missed cleavages, oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N-termini as variable modifications, carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification, maximum number of modifications per peptide set at 5, minimum peptide length of 6, and protein FDR 0.01. Appropriate correction factors for the individual iTRAQ channels for both peptide N-terminal labelling and lysine side-chain labelling as per the iTRAQ Reagent Multiplex Kit were also configured into the database search. The proteinGroups.txt file from the MaxQuant search output was processed using Perseus software (version 1.6.2.3). Potential contaminants, reverse sequences and sequences only identified by site were filtered off. Only proteins with at least 2 unique peptides identified were retained. For each identified protein, ratios of the AHA labelled Reporter Intensity Corrected vs. control sample from the corresponding replicate experiment was calculated yielding the fold change (FC). The FCs obtained for each protein were transformed into log2 scale, and volcano plots were generated.

### Publication Abstract
Adaptation to starvation is integral to the Leishmania life cycle. The parasite can survive prolonged periods of nutrient deprivation both in vitro and in vivo. The identification of parasite proteins synthesised during starvation is key to unravelling the underlying molecular mechanisms facilitating adaptation to these conditions. Additionally, as stress adaptation mechanisms in Leishmania are linked to virulence as well as infectivity, profiling of the complete repertoire of Newly Synthesised Proteins (NSPs) under starvation is important for drug target discovery. However, differential identification and quantitation of low abundance, starvation-specific NSPs from the larger background of the pre-existing parasite proteome has proven difficult, as this demands a highly selective and sensitive methodology. Herein we introduce an integrated chemical proteomics method in L. mexicana promastigotes that involves a powerful combination of the BONCAT technique and iTRAQ quantitative proteomics Mass Spectrometry (MS), which enabled temporally resolved quantitative profiling of de novo protein synthesis in the starving parasite. Uniquely, this approach integrates the high specificity of the BONCAT technique for the NSPs, with the high sensitivity and multiplexed quantitation capability of the iTRAQ proteomics MS. Proof-of-concept experiments identified over 250 starvation-responsive NSPs in the parasite. Our results show a starvation-specific increased relative abundance of several translation regulating and stress-responsive proteins in the parasite. GO analysis of the identified NSPs for Biological Process revealed translation (enrichment P value 2.47e-35) and peptide biosynthetic process (enrichment P value 4.84e-35) as extremely significantly enriched terms indicating the high specificity of the NSP towards regulation of protein synthesis. We believe that this approach will find widespread use in the study of the developmental stages of Leishmania species and in the broader field of protozoan biology.

### Keywords
Newly synthesised proteins, Starvation, Leishmania, Boncat, Itraq

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry, Durham University, Durham, DH1 3LE, UK
Durham University

### Submitter
Kalesh Karunakaran

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Kalesh Karunakaran
Department of Chemistry, Durham University, Durham, DH1 3LE, UK


