### Accession
PXD040918

### Title
Human limbal epithelial cell-derived exosomes cargo profile and their regulatory roles in limbal stromal cells in diabetic and non-diabetic cornea

### Description
Limbal stem cells including epithelial and stromal/Mesenchymal stem cells that contribute to sustained corneal homeostasis, maintain their ability to act as self-renewal progenitor cells by virtue of their limbal niche and intercellular communication. Extracellular vehicles (EVs), including exosomes (Exos), are important paracrine mediators through their cargo transfer for intercellular communication in various stem cell niches. Previously we have shown the differential cargos and regulatory roles of limbal stromal cell (LSC)-derived Exos, in limbal epithelial cells (LEC) in normal (N) and diabetic (DM) limbal niche. In the present study, to have a comprehensive knowledge of reciprocal LEC-LSC crosstalk, we investigated the proteomics and miRNA profile of exosomes derived from LEC and their regulatory roles in LSC in N and DM limbus. Our study showed wound healing and proliferation rates in primary N-LSC were significantly enhanced upon treatment by normal LEC-derived Exos (N-Exos), but not by diabetic Exos (DM-Exos). Further, N-Exos treated LSC showed downregulation of  keratocyte markers, ALDH3A1 and lumican, but not keratocan, and upregulation of MSC markers, CD105, CD90, and CD73 compared to the DM-Exos treated LSC. Using next generation sequencing (NGS) and proteomics analysis, we revealed some miRNAs and proteins in the Exos that affect the cellular crosstalk and the function of the cornea. We also documented differences in DM vs. normal LEC-derived Exo’s cargos. Overall, DM-Exos have less effect on LSC proliferation, wound healing, and stem cell maintenance than N-Exos, likely by transferring their cargo proteins and/or regulatory miRNAs targeting cell cycle, ERK/MAPK, TGF-β, EMT, PI3K-Akt-mTOR signaling molecules. This suggests that the small RNA and protein cargo differences in DM vs. N LEC-derived Exos could contribute to the disease state. Our study revealed a complex contribution of Exos to health and diabetic state of corneal homeostasis and suggests the potential of EV therapeutics for diabetic cornea regenerative medicine

### Sample Protocol
Exosomes were isolated from individual non-diabetic (n=5) and diabetic (n=5) human primary LEC culture supernatants. The Exo lysates were prepared, reduced, alkylated, and digested after the addition of lys-C and trypsin proteinases, as previously described. Peptides were then labeled using 10-plex TMT isobaric tags. Labeled samples were mixed, desalted, and then loaded onto a fused silica capillary packed in-house with bulk C18 reversed phase resin (length, 25 cm; inner diameter, 75 μM; particle size, 1.9 μm; pore size, 100 Å; Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany). The peptides were separated using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The 140-min water–acetonitrile gradient was delivered at a flow rate of 300 nL/min (Buffer A: water with 3% Dimethyl Sulfoxide (DMSO) and 0.1% formic acid, Buffer B: acetonitrile with 3% DMSO and 0.1% formic acid). Peptides were ionized, introduced into the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and analyzed by tandem mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS proteomics data were acquired using the synchronous precursor-selection-based MS3 method to minimize reporter ion interference. Database searching and the extraction of TMT reporter ion intensity was performed using the Proteome Discoverer software. Comparison of TMT data across samples was performed using MS Stats to identify proteins that were differentially expressed between the two conditions, and a p-value was calculated between two groups in a t-test. Pathway analysis was used to profile the molecular activities of the differentially expressed genes (DEG)/proteins cargos.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cornea, Diabetes, Exosomes

### Affiliations
The Smidt Heart Institute, Cedars Sinai Medical Center Cedars-Sinai Medical Center  6David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center

### Submitter
Aleksandr Stotland

### Lab Head
Dr Mehrnoosh Saghizadeh
The Smidt Heart Institute, Cedars Sinai Medical Center Cedars-Sinai Medical Center  6David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA


