### Accession
PXD019451

### Title
Type 2 diabetes risk gene Dusp8 is a gatekeeper for hypothalamic Jnk signaling and insulin sensitivity

### Description
Recent genome-wide association studies (GWAS) identified Dusp8, a dual-specificity phosphatase targeting MAP kinases, as type 2 diabetes risk gene. Here, we unravel Dusp8 as gatekeeper in the hypothalamic control of glucose homeostasis in mice and humans. Male but not female Dusp8 loss-of-function mice, either with global or CRH neuron-specific deletion, had impaired systemic glucose tolerance and insulin sensitivity when exposed to high-fat diet (HFD). Mechanistically, we found impaired hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal (HPA) axis feedback, blunted sympathetic responsiveness, and chronically elevated corticosterone levels driven by hypothalamic hyperactivation of Jnk signaling. Accordingly, global Jnk1 ablation, AAV-mediated Dusp8 overexpression in the mediobasal hypothalamus, or metyrapone-induced chemical adrenalectomy rescued the impaired glucose homeostasis of male Dusp8 KO mice, respectively. This sex-specific and rheostatic role of murine Dusp8 in governing hypothalamic Jnk signaling, insulin sensitivity and systemic glucose tolerance was consistent with fMRI data in human volunteers that revealed an association of the DUSP8 rs2334499 risk variant with hypothalamic insulin resistance in men. In summary, our findings suggest GWAS-identified gene Dusp8 as novel hypothalamic factor that plays a functional role in the etiology of type 2 diabetes.

### Sample Protocol
500µg of protein was heated for 5 min at 95 °C, and sonicated (Diagenode Bioruptor Plus, high intensity, 10x 30s ON / 30s OFF) in 4% SDC (sodium deoxycholate), 100 mM Tris pH 8.5. After alkylation and reduction with 10 mM tris-(2-carboxyethyl)-phosphin-hydrochlorid (TCEP), 40 mM 2-chloroacetamide (CAA), proteins were digested over night with 1:100 (enzyme:protein) LysC and Trypsin at 37 °C.  25 µg of digested peptides were acidified by adding one sample volume of 2% TFA (v/v) in Isopropanol and desalted on SDBRPS stage tips for total proteome analysis (Kulak et al.2014). The rest was used for phosphopeptide enrichment using the Easyphos method (Humphrey et al. 2018).

### Data Protocol
For MS analysis peptides were loaded onto a 50-cm column at 60 °C with a 75 µM inner diameter, packed in-house with 1.9 µM C18 ReproSil particles (Dr. Maisch GmbH). Peptides were separated by reversed-phase chromatography using a binary buffer system consisting of 0.1% formic acid (buffer A) and 80% ACN in 0.1% formic acid (buffer B). For protoeme analysis 500 ng of peptides of were separated on a 120 min gradient at a flowrate of 350 nl/min on an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). MS data were acquired on a Thermo Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer equipped with a FAIMS Pro frontend. Raw mass spectrometry data were processed with MaxQuant version 1.6.14.0 using default settings if not stated otherwise.

### Publication Abstract
Recent genome-wide association studies (GWAS) identified DUSP8, encoding a dual-specificity phosphatase targeting mitogen-activated protein kinases, as a type 2 diabetes (T2D) risk gene. Here, we reveal that Dusp8 is a gatekeeper in the hypothalamic control of glucose homeostasis in mice and humans. Male, but not female, Dusp8 loss-of-function mice, either with global or corticotropin-releasing hormone neuron-specific deletion, had impaired systemic glucose tolerance and insulin sensitivity when exposed to high-fat diet (HFD). Mechanistically, we found impaired hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis feedback, blunted sympathetic responsiveness, and chronically elevated corticosterone levels driven by hypothalamic hyperactivation of Jnk signaling. Accordingly, global Jnk1 ablation, AAV-mediated Dusp8 overexpression in the mediobasal hypothalamus, or metyrapone-induced chemical adrenalectomy rescued the impaired glucose homeostasis of obese male Dusp8-KO mice, respectively. The sex-specific role of murine Dusp8 in governing hypothalamic Jnk signaling, insulin sensitivity, and systemic glucose tolerance was consistent with functional MRI data in human volunteers that revealed an association of the DUSP8 rs2334499 risk variant with hypothalamic insulin resistance in men. Further, expression of DUSP8 was increased in the infundibular nucleus of T2D humans. In summary, our findings suggest the GWAS-identified gene Dusp8 as a novel hypothalamic factor that plays a functional role in the etiology of T2D.

### Keywords
Type2 diabetes, Leptin, Jnk, Dusp8

### Affiliations
Max Planck of Biochemistry
Helmholtz-Diabetes Center

### Submitter
Natalie Krahmer

### Lab Head
Dr Natalie Krahmer
Helmholtz-Diabetes Center


