### Accession
PXD014506

### Title
Chemotaxis in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma metastasis: An unexpected role of N-WASP in response of cells to self-generated gradients and LPA receptor trafficking

### Description
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma is one of the most invasive and metastatic cancers and has a dismal 5-year survival rate.  Here we show that N-WASP is required for the metastatic process, with roles in both chemotaxis, steering cells out of primary tumours, and matrix remodelling, allowing them to escape.  Lysophosphatidic acid, a signalling lipid abundant in blood and ascites fluid, is both a mitogen and chemoattractant for PDAC cells.  Pancreatic cancer cells efficiently break LPA down as they respond to it, setting up a self-generated gradient that directs cells out of the tumour. N-WASP depleted cells are unable to respond to LPA gradients and show altered RhoA activation, leading to a loss of cell contractility and traction forces, and reduced metastasis in vitro and in vivo.  N-WASP couples LPA receptor signalling to RhoA via the endocytic adapter SNX18, and promotes sensitivity by preventing receptor degradation and promoting recycling of the LPA receptor back to the cell surface.  Coordinated by N-WASP, the LPA-LPAR signalling loop promotes RhoA-mediated contractility and force generation. Perturbing this pathway chemically, or by CRISPR deletion severely impairs invasion through complex 3D environments or peritoneal explants, and impairs remodelling of fibrillar collagen.  We thus reveal N-WASP as a central controller of a chemotactic loop between PDAC cells and microenvironmental conditions that drives metastasis.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were stimulated or not with LPA (sigma) during 15 or 60 minutes, collected in ice-cold lysis buffer (100mM NaCl, 25mM Tris-HCl pH7.5, 5mM MgCl2, 0.5% NP-40 supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Pierce) and centrifuged at 4C for 15 minutes. 1.5mg of protein were mixed with pre-equilibrated beads (Chromotek, GFP-Trap®) fallowing the manufacturer instructions and incubated 2h at 4C. Purified proteins from triplicate biological replicates were digested with Lys-C (Alpha Laboratories) and trypsin (Promega) on beads as previously described 8. Tryptic peptides were separated by nanoscale C18 reverse-phase liquid chromatography using an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled online to an Orbitrap Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) via nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher scientific). Peptides were separated on a 20 cm fused silica emitter (New Objective) packed in house with reverse phase Reprosil Pur Basic 1.9 µm (Dr. Maisch GmbH). For the full scan a resolution of 60,000 at 250 Th was used. The top ten most intense ions in the full MS were isolated for fragmentation with a target of 50,000 ions at a resolution of 15,000 at 250 Th. MS data were acquired using the XCalibur software (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The MS Raw files were processed with MaxQuant software 9 version 1.5.5.1 and searched with Andromeda search engine 10, querying UniProt 11 Mus musculus (20/06/2016; 57258 entries). Database was searched requiring specificity for trypsin cleavage and allowing maximum two missed cleavages. Methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were specified as variable modifications, and Cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification. The peptide, protein and site false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1 %. The common reverse and contaminant hits (as defined in MaxQuant output) were removed. Only protein groups identified with at least one uniquely assigned peptide were used for the analysis. For label-free quantification, proteins quantified in all 3 replicates in at least one group, were measured according to the label-free quantification algorithm available in MaxQuant 12. Significantly enriched proteins were selected using a t-test analysis with a 5% FDR.

### Publication Abstract
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma is one of the most invasive and metastatic cancers and has a dismal 5-year survival rate. We show that N-WASP drives pancreatic cancer metastasis, with roles in both chemotaxis and matrix remodeling. lysophosphatidic acid, a signaling lipid abundant in blood and ascites fluid, is both a mitogen and chemoattractant for cancer cells. Pancreatic cancer cells break lysophosphatidic acid down as they respond to it, setting up a&#xa0;self-generated gradient driving tumor egress. N-WASP-depleted cells do not recognize lysophosphatidic acid gradients, leading to altered RhoA activation, decreased contractility and traction forces, and reduced metastasis. We describe a signaling loop whereby N-WASP and the endocytic adapter SNX18 promote lysophosphatidic acid-induced RhoA-mediated contractility and force generation by controlling lysophosphatidic acid receptor recycling and preventing degradation. This chemotactic loop drives collagen remodeling, tumor invasion, and metastasis and could be an important target against pancreatic cancer spread.

### Keywords
Cancer invasion, Cancer cell signalling, Receptor trafficking, Chemotaxis, Pancreatic cancer metastasis, Cell migration

### Affiliations
CRUK Beatson Institute, Switchback Road, Glasgow G61 1BD, UK.
Proteomics

### Submitter
Sergio Lilla

### Lab Head
Dr Sara Rossana Zanivan
CRUK Beatson Institute, Switchback Road, Glasgow G61 1BD, UK.


