### Accession
PXD011286

### Title
Real-time visualization of drug resistance acquisition by horizontal gene transfer reveals a new role for AcrAB-TolC multidrug efflux pump

### Description
In our study, we obtained evidence showing that, in the presence of tetracycline, AcrAB-TolC multidrug efflux pump was required for production of protein encoded by a conjugative plasmid acquired by bacterial conjugation. We then address the role of AcrAB-TolC multidrug efflux pump on the level of protein synthesis activity in the presence of tetracycline, which inhibits protein translation by targeting ribosomal 16S rRNA and competing with binding of the anticodon-stem loop of an A-site tRNA. We used a quantitative TMT-nanoLC-mass spectrometry approach to obtained the protein relative abundance ratio before and after incubation with tetracycline, and so in wild-type(MG1655, K12) and AcrAB-TolC mutant strains (ΔacrA, ΔacrB and ΔtolC).

### Sample Protocol
Wild-type, ΔacrA, ΔacrB and ΔtolC Escherichia coli strains were grown separately in LB at 37°C to an A600 comprised between 0.7 and 0.9, Tc 10 µg/ml was added or not, and cells were incubated for 3 hours at 37°C without shaking. Then the equivalent number of cells as 10 ml at A600 0.8 was harvested and washed twice with 1 ml Tris 50 mM pH 7.5. Pellets were frozen and kept at -80°C. After resuspension in 1 ml Tris 50 mM pH 7.5, cells disruption was carried out using TissueLyser II (QIAGEN) and 0.1 mm glass beads (Sigma-Aldrich). 1 % Foscholine was added and the samples were incubated for 90 min at 4°C on a rotating wheel. Cell debris was removed by ultracentrifugation for 1 hour at 4°C at 150000 g. Supernatants were transferred to low binding tubes (Eppendorf) and proteins were quantified using BCA Protein Assay Kit (Pierce). Then the samples were treated by a classical TMT protocol and fractionated. The 9 fractions were analyzed in triplicate by nanoLC-MSMS operating in DDA TOP15 acquisition mode.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified by database searching using SequestHT with Proteome Discoverer 2.2 software (Thermo Scientific) against the Swissprot E coli database (2018-04 release, 4301 sequences). Precursor mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance was set at 0.02 Da, and up to 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Oxidation (M), acetylation (Protein N-terminus) and TMT labeled peptides in primary amino groups (+229.163 Da K and N-ter) were set as variable modification, and Carbamidomethylation (C) as fixed modification. Peptides and proteins were filtered with a false discovery rate (FDR) at 1% using percolator and proteins were identified with 1 unique peptide in rank 1. Protein quantitation was performed with reporter ions quantifier node in Proteome Discoverer 2.2 software with integration tolerance of 20 ppm, peptide and protein quantitation based on summed abundance ratios and ANOVA (individual proteins) hypothesis test. The purity correction factor were applied according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Proteins functional annotation was performed with GO (Gene ontology).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Antibiotic resistance acquisition by horizontal gene transfer acrab-tolc multidrug efflux tc-induced inhibition of protein synthesis escherichia coli  tmt-nanolc-ms

### Affiliations
CNRS UMS3444 Protein Science Facility
Protein Science Facility, SFR BioSciences CNRS UMS3444, Inserm US8, UCBL, ENS de Lyon, 50 Avenue Tony Garnier, 69007Lyon, France.

### Submitter
Frederic DELOLME

### Lab Head
Dr Frederic DELOLME / Christian LESTERLIN
Protein Science Facility, SFR BioSciences CNRS UMS3444, Inserm US8, UCBL, ENS de Lyon, 50 Avenue Tony Garnier, 69007Lyon, France.


