### Accession
PXD021554

### Title
The Impacts of Surgery and Intracerebral Electrodes in C57BL/6J Mouse Kainate Model of Epileptogenesis: Seizure Threshold, Proteomics, and Cytokine Profiles

### Description
ntracranial electroencephalography (EEG) is commonly used to study epileptogenesis and epilepsy in experimental models. Chronic gliosis and neurodegeneration at the injury site are known to be associated with surgically implanted electrodes in both humans and experimental models. Currently, however, there are no reports on the impact of intracerebral electrodes on proteins in the hippocampus and proinflammatory cytokines in the cerebral cortex and plasma in experimental models. We used an unbiased, label-free proteomics approach to identify the altered proteins in the hippocampus, and multiplex assay for cytokines in the cerebral cortex and plasma of C57BL/6J mice following bilateral surgical implantation of electrodes into the cerebral hemispheres.

### Sample Protocol
The hippocampal lysates were processed for proteome analysis, as described previously (Tse et al., 2020). For digestion, 15ml (approximately 100mg) of homogenate was diluted to 160ml of ammonium bicarbonate in LoBind tubes. The proteins were denatured using 10ml of 1% (w/v) RapiGestTM SF surfactant (Waters, Manchester, UK) in 25mM ammonium bicarbonate followed by incubation at 80oC for 10 min. Samples were reduced by adding 10ml of 60mM dithiothreitol and incubated at 60oC for 10 min and alkylated by adding 10ml of 180mM iodoacetamide and incubated at room temperature in the dark for 30 min. Trypsin (Sigma, U.K) was reconstituted in 50mM acetic acid to a concentration of 0.2mg/ml. Digestion was performed by the addition of 10mL of trypsin to the samples followed by incubation at 37oC overnight. Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was added to each sample for acidification, and the samples incubated at 37oC for 45 min. Samples were centrifuged at 17,000 x g for 45 min and the supernatant transferred to a LoBind tube. The centrifugation step was repeated, and 10ml of supernatant was transferred to a total recovery vial for LC-MS analysis. Pre- and post-acidification digest were analyzed by SDS-PAGE to confirm complete digestion.  All peptide separations were carried out using a nanoAcquity UPLC™ system (Waters MS Technologies, Manchester, UK), as previously described (Tse et al., 2019). For each analysis, 1µl of sample digest was loaded onto a trapping column (C18, 180mm x 20mm, Waters), using partial loop injections for 3 minutes at 5ml/min with an aqueous solution containing 0.1% (v/v) TFA and 2% (v/v) acetonitrile. The sample was resolved on an analytical column (nanoAcquity UPLC™ HSS T3 column, C18 150mm x 75mm inner diameter, 1.8mm, Waters) using a mobile gradient phase composed of a cocktail of aqueous (A) and organic (B) solvents. Solvent A contained 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in HPLC grade water and solvent B contained 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in HPLC grade acetonitrile. Separations were performed by applying a linear gradient of 3% to 40% solvent  B over 90 min at 300nl/min followed by a washing step (5 min at 99% solvent B) and an equilibration step (15 min at 3.8% solvent B). An equivalent to 500ng of protein for each sample was injected.

### Data Protocol
For each peptide, the signal intensity was divided by the arithmetic mean of the PRTC as the normalization factor before further analysis. MetaboAnalyst 4.0 (Chong, et. al., 2018) was used for data analysis. Upon finding data integrity to be satisfactory (no peptide with more than 50% missing replicates, positive values for the area), missing value estimation was imputed using Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) method. Non-informative values that were near-constant throughout the experiment conditions were detected using interquartile range (IQR) estimation method and were deleted. Data transformation was performed based on Generalized logarithm transformation (glog) to make individual features more comparable. The control and treatment samples were compared by t-test with the adjusted P- value (FDR) cutoff of 0.05. Fold change (FC) analysis with threshold of 2 was performed to compare the absolute value of change between control and treatment values. A volcano plot was created to combine the Fold change and the t-test analysis.  The PCA analysis was performed using the prccomp package and pairwise score plots were created to provide an overview of the various separation patterns among the most significant components. Partial least squared (PLS) regression was then performed using the plsr function provided by R pls package to predict the continuous and discrete variables. A PLS-DA model was built to classify and cross-validate PLS using the caret package.  The uniport protein ids that were up/down regulated  with the P -values less than 0.05  were used to retrieve the corresponding KEGG ids using the “Retrieve/ID mapping” tool of UniProt (accessible at http://www.uniprot.org/uploadlists/). KEGG ids were then used to retrieve biological pathway association of the proteins. Enrichment analysis was performed using The Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery (DAVID) 6.8 Tools (Huang, et. al., 2009).

### Publication Abstract
Intracranial electroencephalography (EEG) is commonly used to study epileptogenesis and epilepsy in experimental models. Chronic gliosis and neurodegeneration at the injury site are known to be associated with surgically implanted electrodes in both humans and experimental models. Currently, however, there are no reports on the impact of intracerebral electrodes on proteins in the hippocampus and proinflammatory cytokines in the cerebral cortex and plasma in experimental models. We used an unbiased, label-free proteomics approach to identify the altered proteins in the hippocampus, and multiplex assay for cytokines in the cerebral cortex and plasma of C57BL/6J mice following bilateral surgical implantation of electrodes into the cerebral hemispheres. Seven days following surgery, a repeated low dose kainate (KA) regimen was followed to induce <i>status epilepticus (SE)</i>. Surgical implantation of electrodes reduced the amount of KA necessary to induce SE by 50%, compared with mice without surgery. Tissues were harvested 7 days post-SE (i.e., 14 days post-surgery) and compared with vehicle-treated mice. Proteomic profiling showed more proteins (103, 6.8% of all proteins identified) with significantly changed expression (<i>p</i> &lt; 0.01) driven by surgery than by KA treatment itself without surgery (27, 1.8% of all proteins identified). Further, electrode implantation approximately doubled the number of KA-induced changes in protein expression (55, 3.6% of all identified proteins). Further analysis revealed that intracerebral electrodes and KA altered the expression of proteins associated with epileptogenesis such as inflammation (C1q system), neurodegeneration (cystatin-C, galectin-1, cathepsin B, heat-shock protein 25), blood-brain barrier dysfunction (fibrinogen-&#x3b1;, serum albumin, &#x3b1;2 macroglobulin), and gliosis (vimentin, GFAP, filamin-A). The multiplex assay revealed a significant increase in key cytokines such as TNF&#x3b1;, IL-1&#x3b2;, IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, IL-10, IL12p70, IFN-&#x3b3;, and KC/GRO in the cerebral cortex and some in the plasma in the surgery group. Overall, these findings demonstrate that surgical implantation of depth electrodes alters some of the molecules that may have a role in epileptogenesis in experimental models.

### Keywords
Traumatic brain injury, Blood-brain barrier, Epilepsy, Neuroinflammation, Intracerebral electrodes, Proinflammatory cytokines, Seizure threshold.

### Affiliations
Biomedical Sciences , Iowa State University
Iowa State University 

### Submitter
Maryam Sayadi

### Lab Head
Dr Thimmasettapp Thippeswamy
Biomedical Sciences , Iowa State University


