### Accession
PXD007043

### Title
Cross-linking MS data of CtNup82-Y complex

### Description
XL-MS Data of the in vitro reconstituted CtNup82-Y complex.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were crosslinked by incubation with 0.5 mM or 2 mM of H12/D12 isotope-coded di-succinimidyl-suberate (DSS, Creative Molecules).

### Data Protocol
MS data was analyzed with xQuest and xProphet software tools. For further analysis Crosslinks with a xQuest linear discriminant score of at least 25 and an estimated false discovery rate lower than 5% were used.

### Publication Abstract
Nucleocytoplasmic transport occurs through nuclear pore complexes (NPCs), which are formed from multiple copies of ~30 different nucleoporins (Nups) and inserted into the double nuclear membrane. Many of these Nups are organized into subcomplexes, of which the Y-shaped Nup84 complex is the major constituent of the nuclear and cytoplasmic rings. The Nup82-Nup159-Nsp1 complex is another module that, however, is only assembled into the cytoplasmic ring. By means of crosslinking mass spectrometry, biochemical reconstitution, and molecular modeling, we identified a short linear motif in the unstructured N-terminal region of Chaetomium thermophilum Nup145C, a subunit of the Y-complex, that is sufficient to recruit the Nup82 complex, but only in its assembled state. This finding points to a more general mechanism that short linear motifs in structural Nups can act as sensors to cooperatively connect pre-assembled NPC modules, thereby facilitating the formation and regulation of the higher-order NPC assembly.

### Keywords
Ctnup82-y complex, Cx-ms

### Affiliations
Structural and Computational Biology Unit, European Molecular Biology Laboratory (EMBL), Heidelberg, Germany
UCSF

### Submitter
Alexander von Appen

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Beck
Structural and Computational Biology Unit, European Molecular Biology Laboratory (EMBL), Heidelberg, Germany


