### Accession
PXD022212

### Title
ZEB2 protects the heart from ischemic damage

### Description
infarct size and subsequent deterioration in function. The identification of factors that enhance cardiac repair by the restoration of the vascular network is, therefore, of great significance. Here, we show that the transcription factor Zinc finger E-box-binding homeobox 2 (ZEB2) is increased in stressed cardiomyocytes and induces a cardioprotective cross-talk between cardiomyocytes and endothelial  cells to enhance angiogenesis after ischemia. Single-cell sequencing indicates ZEB2 to be enriched in injured cardiomyocytes. Cardiomyocyte-specific deletion of ZEB2 results in impaired cardiac contractility and infarct healing post-myocardial infarction (post-MI), while cardiomyocyte-specific ZEB2 overexpression improves cardiomyocyte survival and cardiac function. We identified Thymosin 4 (TMSB4) and Prothymosin  (PTMA) as main paracrine factors released from cardiomyocytes to stimulate angiogenesis by enhancing endothelial cell migration, and whose regulation is validated in our in vivo models. Therapeutic delivery of ZEB2 to cardiomyocytes in the infarcted heart induces the expression of TMSB4 and PTMA, which enhances angiogenesis and prevents cardiac dysfunction. These findings reveal ZEB2 as a beneficial factor during ischemic injury, which may hold promise for the identification of new therapies.

### Sample Protocol
Conditioned medium was separated based on protein size (Centrifugal Filters, Ultracel -3K and 30K, #Amicon Ultra, #UCF800324 and #UCF803024). Mass spectrometry was performed on fraction 3kDa-30kDa. For mass spectrometry; 2M Urea, 100mM Tris-HCl and 10mM TCEP (end concentration) were added to the supernatants. Samples were incubated at 56C for 30 min followed by adding 50mM CAA and incubation of 5 min at RT. 0,2 microgram Trypsin was added and incubated overnight at 37C on a shaker. The following day, supernatants were concentrated on zip-tip (C18), washed with 0,1% formic acid and eluted with 80% acetonitile/0,1% formic acid. Samples were vacuum concentrated, taken up in 0,1% formic acid and loaded on a 1,9 micron C18 column coupled to a Proxeon nano-LC system. Samples were measured on the LTQ-Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid; Thermo Fisher Scientific mass spectrometer, using a 200 min gradient and HCD fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed with the Maxquant software version 1.5.2.8 (Cox and Mann, 2008) oxidation of methionine set as variable modifications, and carbamidomethylation of cysteine set as a fixed modification. The Rat protein database of UniProt was searched with both the peptide as well as the protein false discovery rate set to 1%.

### Publication Abstract
The disruption in blood supply due to myocardial infarction is a critical determinant for infarct size and subsequent deterioration in function. The identification of factors that enhance cardiac repair by the restoration of the vascular network is, therefore, of great significance. Here, we show that the transcription factor Zinc finger E-box-binding homeobox 2 (ZEB2) is increased in stressed cardiomyocytes and induces a cardioprotective cross-talk between cardiomyocytes and endothelial cells to enhance angiogenesis after ischemia. Single-cell sequencing indicates ZEB2 to be enriched in injured cardiomyocytes. Cardiomyocyte-specific deletion of ZEB2 results in impaired cardiac contractility and infarct healing post-myocardial infarction (post-MI), while cardiomyocyte-specific ZEB2 overexpression improves cardiomyocyte survival and cardiac function. We identified Thymosin &#x3b2;4 (TMSB4) and Prothymosin &#x3b1; (PTMA) as main paracrine factors released from cardiomyocytes to stimulate angiogenesis by enhancing endothelial cell migration, and whose regulation is validated in our in vivo models. Therapeutic delivery of ZEB2 to cardiomyocytes in the infarcted heart induces the expression of TMSB4 and PTMA, which enhances angiogenesis and prevents cardiac dysfunction. These findings reveal ZEB2 as a beneficial factor during ischemic injury, which may hold promise for the identification of new therapies.

### Keywords
Angiogenesis, Zeb2, Ischemic injury, Cardiomyocytes

### Affiliations
University Medical Center Utrecht
Dept. Molecular Cancer Research



Hubrecht Institute, Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences (KNAW) and University Medical Centre, Utrecht, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Harmjan Vos

### Lab Head
Dr Eva van Rooij
Hubrecht Institute, Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences (KNAW) and University Medical Centre, Utrecht, The Netherlands


