### Accession
PXD006735

### Title
Remodeling of the Streptococcus mutans proteome in response to LrgAB and external stresses

### Description
This project investigates the changes in proteome profiles that occurred in the same set of S. mutans wild-type and lrgAB mutant samples used in our recently published RNA-seq study. To this end, mass spectrometry-based label-free quantitative proteomics, a technology known to enable comprehensive identification and quantification of complete bacterial proteomes, was adapted to study changes in S. mutans intracellular protein levels in response to aeration, heat, and vancomycin stress. Furthermore, the degree of correlation between S. mutans protein abundance profiles and gene expression changes was determined. Further understanding of these combined “-omics” data at the cellular or molecular level will enhance our knowledge of Cid/Lrg-mediated cellular responses of S. mutans to adverse environments. Furthermore, these “-omics” data will serve as a valuable resource that can be mined to help clarify the role of the S. mutans stress response and physiological activity to its dynamic survival in the oral cavity.

### Sample Protocol
The identical set of bacterial cultures analyzed in our recently-published RNA-seq work were also used in this present study. Briefly, wild type strain UA159 (designated “WT” in all subsequent figures and tables) and ΔlrgAB (designated “AB” in all subsequent figures and tables) overnight cultures were each diluted 1:50 in 50 ml sterile BHI broth and grown to mid-exponential growth phase (OD600 = 0.4) under four different environmental conditions (anaerobic, (control); aerobic, (a); heat stress, (h); and vancomycin, (v) stress), as follows: For anaerobic growth, including heat and vancomycin stress conditions, sterile mineral oil was placed on top of the cultures. For aerobic growth, each culture was grown in a 250-ml conical flask at a 1:5 volume to flask ratio, and incubated at 115 rpm and 37°C. For heat stress growth, cultures were incubated at 40°C. For vancomycin growth, cultures were supplemented with 1 µg/ml vancomycin and incubated at 37°C. An aliquot (5 ml) of each culture was previously used for the RNA-seq experiment 7, and the rest (45 ml) of the culture was subjected to the mass spectrometry experiments in this study.  Biological pentaplicates (i.e. n=5 replicates per S. mutans strain per growth condition, including the n=3 replicates analyzed previously by RNA-seq) of each S. mutans culture were processed for protein extraction according to Fujiki et al. with the following modifications: Samples were ground into fine powder in liquid nitrogen and agitated in extraction buffer (0.1 M Tris-HCl pH 8.8, 10 mM EDTA, 0.2 M DTT, 0.9 M sucrose) with an equal volume of phenol (pH 8.0) for 2 hours at room temperature. The phenol phase was precipitated by adding five volumes of 0.1 M ammonium acetate in methanol. After washing twice with 0.1 M ammonium acetate in methanol and twice with 80% acetone, the dried pellet was dissolved with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer. The mixtures were incubated on ice before centrifugation at 4°C for 20 minutes at 12,000 ×g, separating the proteins into soluble and insoluble phases. The insoluble phase was incubated with protein buffer (8 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 2% ASB-14 (amidosulfobetaine)) for at least one hour with occasional vortexing. The proteins were quantified using an EZQ Protein Quantitation Kit (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) and SoftMax Pro Software v5.3 (Molecular Devices, Downingtown, PA, USA).

### Data Protocol
Raw MS/MS data files were processed using a thorough database search, considering biological modification and amino acid substitution against a nonredundant Streptococcus mutans database with decoy sequences (4,064 entries) using Scaffold Q+S (Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR, USA) and MASCOT 2.4 (Matrix Science Inc., Boston, MA, USA). The following parameters were used for all the searching: Peptide tolerance at 10 ppm, tandem MS tolerance at ±0.01 Da, peptide charges of 2+ to 5+, trypsin as the enzyme, allowing one missed cleavage, Carbamidomethyl (C) as fixed modifications, and oxidation (M) and phosphorylation (S, T, Y) as variable modifications. Peptide and protein were filtered using Scaffold Q+S with strict peptide and protein probabilities, 0.9 and 0.95, respectively. Peptide probability was applied to filter peptide assignments obtained from MS/MS database searching results using predictable false identification error rate. Protein probability was used to filter proteins with the null hypothesis that the database matching is random and consideration of the peptide probability for all the peptides apportioned to that protein. For protein quantification, only MS/MS spectra were normalized by spectral abundance factor (NSAF).

### Publication Abstract
The Streptococcus mutans Cid/Lrg system represents an ideal model to study how this organism withstands various stressors encountered in the oral cavity. Mutation of lrgAB renders S. mutans more sensitive to oxidative, heat, and vancomycin stresses. Here, we have performed a comprehensive proteomics experiment using label-free quantitative mass spectrometry to compare the proteome changes of wild type UA159 and lrgAB mutant strains in response to these same stresses. Importantly, many of identified proteins showed either a strikingly large fold-change, or were completely suppressed or newly induced in response to a particular stress condition. Notable stress proteome changes occurred in a variety of functional categories, including amino acid biosynthesis, energy metabolism, protein synthesis, transport/binding, and transcriptional/response regulators. In the non-stressed growth condition, mutation of lrgAB significantly altered the abundance of 76 proteins (a fold change&#x2009;&gt;1.4, or&#x2009;&lt;0.6, p-value&#x2009;&lt;0.05) and several of these matched the stress proteome of the wild type strain. Interestingly, the statistical correlation between the proteome changes and corresponding RNA-seq transcriptomic studies was relatively low (rho(&#x3c1;)&#x2009;&lt;0.16), suggesting that adaptation to a new environment may require radical proteome turnover or metabolic remodeling. Collectively, this study reinforces the importance of LrgAB to the S. mutans stress response.

### Keywords
Environment stress, Label-free proteomics, Streptococcus mutans

### Affiliations
University of Florida
Interdisciplinary Center for Biotechnology Research, University of Florida

### Submitter
Jin Koh

### Lab Head
Dr Jin Koh
Interdisciplinary Center for Biotechnology Research, University of Florida


