### Accession
PXD033204

### Title
Region-specific alterations in the developing synaptosomal proteome in the absence of MET signaling

### Description
The neocortex and striatum were harvested from conditional Met null male mice (Metfx/fx/nestincre) and wild type littermates at postnatal day 14. Synaptosomes were generated and prepared from each region for quantitative proteomic analyses using isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ).

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were digested with trypsin, peptides were labeled with iTRAQ reagents, and quantitative analyses were performed following 2D LC-MS/MS on a Q Exactive or Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were searched against a database containing the Mus musculus subset of the UniprotKB protein database using Spectrum Mill (Agilent). Excel files containing protein-level information include quantified proteins after applying FDR thresholds using Spectrum Mill autovalidation (<1% FDR) and after filtering to include proteins that were identified with at least 2 unique peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Alterations in the expression of genes encoding proteins involved in synapse formation, maturation, and function are a hallmark of many neurodevelopmental and psychiatric disorders. For example, there is reduced neocortical expression of the MET receptor tyrosine kinase (MET) transcript and protein in Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) and Rett syndrome. Preclinical in vivo and in vitro models manipulating MET signaling reveal that the receptor modulates excitatory synapse development and maturation in select forebrain circuits. The molecular adaptations underlying the altered synaptic development remain unknown. We performed a comparative mass spectrometry analysis of synaptosomes generated from the neocortex of wild type and Met null mice during the peak of synaptogenesis (postnatal day 14; data are available from ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD033204). The analyses revealed broad disruption of the developing synaptic proteome in the absence of MET, consistent with the localization of MET protein in pre- and postsynaptic compartments, including proteins associated with the neocortical synaptic MET interactome and those encoded by syndromic and ASD risk genes. In addition to an overrepresentation of altered proteins associated with the SNARE complex, multiple proteins in the ubiquitin-proteasome system and associated with the synaptic vesicle, as well as proteins that regulate actin filament organization and synaptic vesicle exocytosis/endocytosis, were disrupted. Taken together, the proteomic changes are consistent with structural and functional changes observed following alterations in MET signaling. We hypothesize that the molecular adaptations following Met deletion may reflect a general mechanism that produces circuit-specific molecular changes due to loss or reduction of synaptic signaling proteins.

### Keywords
Striatum, Proteomics, Synaptosomes, Neocortex, Itraq, Met

### Affiliations
Vanderbilt university
Vanderbilt University Proteomics Core; Children’s Hospital Los Angeles, University of Southern California

### Submitter
Kristie Lindsey Rose

### Lab Head
Dr Kristie Lindsey Rose, Kathie Eagleson, Pat Levitt
Vanderbilt University Proteomics Core; Children’s Hospital Los Angeles, University of Southern California


