### Accession
PXD002210

### Title
iTRAQ of NTHi phasevarions - iTRAQ quantitative mass spec of proteins differentially regulated by biphasic switching of modA methyltransferase alleles in the human pathogen non-typeable Haemophilus influenzae

### Description
iTRAQ quantitative mass spec of proteins differentially regulated by biphasic switching of modA methyltransferase alleles in the human pathogen non-typeable Haemophilus influenzae

### Sample Protocol
10ug OMP preps in duplicate. Samples buffer exchanged into 0.25M TEAD and 0.05% SDS. Samples reduced with TCEP, alkylated with MMTS and trypsin digested. Samples were then labelled, SDS removed by SDS removal column and dried. Samples were then resuspended in 0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitril. 20ul sample was injected into a peptide trap and desalted. Peptides were eluted with 90% acetonitrile 0.1% fomic acid in a linear gradient over 100mins. The elutant was subject to positive ion nanoflow electrospray analysis in an information dependent acquisition mode (IDA). A TOFMS survey scan was acquired (m/z 400 - 1500, 0.25 second) with the ten most intense multiply charged ions in the survey scan subject to MS/MS analysis. Spectra were accumulated for 200ms in the mass range m/z 100-1500 with the total cyle time 2.3secs

### Data Protocol
Experimental ms/ms data were subjected to ProteinPilot V4.2b (AB Sciex) using the Genbank file from NCBI for the strains of interest

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Haemophilus; phasevarion

### Affiliations
Griffith University, Institute for Glycomics, Queensland, Australia
Griffith University

### Submitter
John Atack

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Jennings
Griffith University, Institute for Glycomics, Queensland, Australia


