### Accession
PXD005949

### Title
Large-scale HDMSE mapping of the normal sputum proteome

### Description
Severe asthma is a collection of disease entities with varying pathophysiological characteristics that result in symptoms of cough, wheeze and breathlessness, with frequent exacerbations. To address the problem of phenotypic difference and heterogeneity, the Unbiased Biomarkers for the Prediction of Respiratory Disease Outcomes (U-BIOPRED) project was set up as a public-private partnership within the framework of the Innovative Medicines Initiative (IMI), engaging academia, the pharmaceutical industry and patient groups. The goal of this investigation was to identify proteomic fingerprints in induced sputum that characterize patients with severe asthma and to determine whether subgroups of severe asthmatics can be identified. Furthermore, we were interested in elucidating the biological pathways that showed differences between subgroups. This dataset is a description of the normal sputum proteome.

### Sample Protocol
Sputum samples were thawed to room temperature before taking 100-µl aliquots for extraction of lipids using a semi-automated Bligh-Dyer protocol (Bligh and Dyer, 1959) on a robotic liquid handling platform (Freedom EVO 100; TECAN, Männedorf, Switzerland). Briefly, each sample was made up to a volume of 800 µl with 0.9% saline solution before adding 2 ml of methanol (MeOH) and 1 ml of dichloromethane (DCM) and 10 µl of anti-oxidant (5 mg ml-1 butylated hydroxytoluene in MeOH). Samples were centrifuged at 1000 x g for 10 min at 10°C to produce protein pellets which were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C. In preparation for analysis, the frozen protein pellets were thawed to room temperature, dissolved in 150µl of 50% trifluoroethanol, 50mM ammonium bicarbonate and heated at 60°C for 30 min. A pool for quality control was prepared with equal protein amounts from 40 different sputum samples (including healthy participants and participants with a diagnosis of asthma). Pool samples were processed and analysed in parallel in batches containing 11 analytical samples and one pool. Dissolved protein pellets were reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin. Peptide samples were filtered using a 10KDa cut-off ultrafiltration device (Millipore) and the filtrate lyophilised in-vacuo. Samples were dissolved in 3% acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) in preparation for reverse phase clean-up, performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions using C18 spin tips (Protea Biosciences). Following elution, peptides were lyophilised and stored at -80°C prior to analysis.  Mass spectrometry Peptide extracts were re-suspended in buffer A, (3% ACN, 0.1% Formic acid (v/v) and the concentration measured using a Direct Detect System (Millipore). An internal standard mixture of E. coli ClpB Hi3 standard (Waters), yeast enolase (ENO) and yeast alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH) was added to a final concentration in 20µl of 250ng/µl sputum peptide, 12.5 fmol/µl ClpB, 12.5 fmol/µl  ENO, and 8.75 fmol/µl ADH (serum was 25% more concentrated).  Samples were analysed in duplicate via LC-IMS-MSE on a Waters Synapt G2S high definition mass spectrometer coupled to a nanoAcquity UPLC system. 4µl of peptide extract was injected onto a C18 BEH trapping column (Waters) and washed with buffer A for 5 min at 5µl/min. Peptides were separated using a 25cm T3 HSS C18 analytical column (Waters) with a linear gradient of 3-50% ACN + 0.1% formic acid over 50 minutes at a flow rate of 0.3µl/min. Eluted samples were sprayed directly into the mass spectrometer operating in MSE mode. Data were acquired from 50 to 2000 m/z using alternate low and elevated collision energy (CE) scans. Low CE was 5V and elevated CE ramp from 15 to 40V. Ion mobility separation was implemented prior to fragmentation using a wave velocity of 650 m/s and wave height of 40V. The lock mass Glu-fibrinopeptide, (M+2H)+2, m/z = 785.8426) was infused at a concentration of 100 fmol/µl at a flow rate of 250 nl/min and acquired every 60 sec.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using a custom package (Regression tester) based upon executable files from ProteinLynx Global Server 3.0 (Waters). The optimal setting for peak detection across the dataset was determined using Threshold inspector (Waters) and these thresholds were applied: low energy = 100 counts; high energy = 30 (for serum this was set to 25) and a total energy count threshold of 750. Database searches were performed using regression tester and searched against the Uniprot human reference database (20/11/2014) with added sequence information for internal standards. A false positive rate of 4% was applied. Data was further filtered for protein quantitation by only considering proteins that were identified in at least two replicates. By using the replication of protein assignments across different injections, the false positive rate is minimized, since chemical noise is random in nature and does not tend to replicate across injections. Quantity was estimated in absolute amounts using the Hi 3 method32, 41.  The ion accounting output files40 were compiled and summary information generated from search log files using custom Python scripts.  Information contained in ion accounting files were collated into a single .csv document using a custom Python script.  Data filtering and normalisation Protein identifications collated from the ion accounting files were further quality filtered by allowing only identifications with the following criteria: identification in at least two separate samples (not including replicate injections), a process that required at least three high quality unmodified peptides using the Hi3 method, and 2 peptides with at least 4 fragment ions for each protein.  All other protein identities were removed.  Proteins were first ranked according to coverage across the samples, and then each protein entry was ranked according to the order in which they were run. QC information was added for each sample (batch information, protein concentration, ion counts). Inforsense software (ID Business Solutions, Guildford, UK) was applied to generated heat maps for the top 150 proteins using both ‘top 3 peptide intensity sum’ (a proxy for concentration) and peptide concentrations (expressed in fmol) on column calculated from internal standards. Sample-wise correlation plots were created using Inferno RDN (http://omics.pnl.gov/software/infernordn)42. Heat maps and correlation plots were inspected for poor samples or injections; those with very low or no ID’s and/or poor correlation were removed from the dataset. Samples were analysed in duplicate and the average intensity values used for analysis.  For the purpose of quality control, several analyses were performed. Replicate injections were inspected for consistency in quantitation. To achieve this, an average of the two injections ‘top 3 peptide intensity sum’ was used and a distance matrix calculated by taking the Euclidian distance between the two injections as a function of the average of the injections. These values were visualised in a heat map, enabling rapid inspection of duplicates with high variance, which likely indicated a technical issue between injections (e.g. sprayer dropout, or failure to inject the correct volume).  In order to uniformly remove suspect injections from the dataset, we created the following universal rule: for samples with >2-fold between-injection difference in average intensity of proteins, the following rule (Rule 1) was applied: “report injection one intensity values for proteins, unless protein was only quantified in injection two, then include this value for increasing coverage”.

### Publication Abstract
Analysis of induced sputum supernatant is a minimally invasive approach to study the epithelial lining fluid and, thereby, provide insight into normal lung biology and the pathobiology of lung diseases. We present here a novel proteomics approach to sputum analysis developed within the U-BIOPRED (unbiased biomarkers predictive of respiratory disease outcomes) international project. We present practical and analytical techniques to optimize the detection of robust biomarkers in proteomic studies. The normal sputum proteome was derived using data-independent HDMS<sup>E</sup> applied to 40 healthy nonsmoking participants, which provides an essential baseline from which to compare modulation of protein expression in respiratory diseases. The "core" sputum proteome (proteins detected in &#x2265;40% of participants) was composed of 284 proteins, and the extended proteome (proteins detected in &#x2265;3 participants) contained 1666 proteins. Quality control procedures were developed to optimize the accuracy and consistency of measurement of sputum proteins and analyze the distribution of sputum proteins in the healthy population. The analysis showed that quantitation of proteins by HDMS<sup>E</sup> is influenced by several factors, with some proteins being measured in all participants' samples and with low measurement variance between samples from the same patient. The measurement of some proteins is highly variable between repeat analyses, susceptible to sample processing effects, or difficult to accurately quantify by mass spectrometry. Other proteins show high interindividual variance. We also highlight that the sputum proteome of healthy individuals is related to sputum neutrophil levels, but not gender or allergic sensitization. We illustrate the importance of design and interpretation of disease biomarker studies considering such protein population and technical measurement variance.

### Keywords
Human, Sputum, Label free, Data independent

### Affiliations
Centre for Proteomic Research, Biological Sciences, University of Southampton
Centre for Proteomic Research, University of Southampton

### Submitter
Paul Skipp

### Lab Head
Dr Paul J S Skipp
Centre for Proteomic Research, Biological Sciences, University of Southampton


