### Accession
PXD018893

### Title
Proteomic analysis of cerebrospinal fluid in epileptic and healthy dogs

### Description
This study included four dog groups (group A: 10 healthy dogs, group B:  9 dogs with idiopathic epilepsy receiving antiepileptic medication-AEM, group C: 8 dogs with idiopathic epilepsy without AEM administration and group D: 7 dogs with seizures due to structural brain abnormalities). The epileptic dogs were allocated into these 3 groups after a diagnostic investigation that included laboratory testing, thoracic radiographic and abdominal ultrasonographic examination, brain imaging, CSF routine and proteomic analysis. The purpose of the current study was to investigate and compare the proteomic profile among the four groups of dogs.

### Sample Protocol
Relative quantification of proteins in canine cerebrospinal fluid samples was performed using Tandem Mass Tag (TMT)-based shotgun methods previously described (Horvatić et al. 2019). In brief, total protein concentration was determined using BCA assay. An amount of 35 µg of total CSF proteins from all individual samples and internal standard (pool of all samples) was diluted using 0.1 M triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) and subsequently reduced (20 mM DTT, 60 min, 55°C), alkylated (30 mM IAA, 30 min, room temperature in the dark) and acetone-precipitated (6 volumes, overnight,-20°C). Protein pellets were collected by centrifugation, dissolved in 0.1 M TEAB and digested using trypsin Gold (Promega; 1:35 w/w, at 37°C overnight). Peptides were labelled with freshly prepared TMT six plex reagents (Thermo Scientific). Differentially TMT-modified samples were combined with the internal standard into the new tube, aliquoted, dried and stored at -20°C for further analysis.  LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using the Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Dionex) and Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) as described elsewhere (Horvatić et al. 2019). After desalting on the trap column, TMT-labelled peptides were separated on the analytical column (PepMap™ RSLC C18, 50 cm x 75 μm) using linear gradient 5-45% mobile phase B (0.1% formic acid in 80% ACN) over 120 min at the flow rate of 300 nL/min. Ionisation was achieved using nanospray Flex ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). MS was operating in positive ion mode using DDA Top8 method with parameters set as follows: full scan MS spectra range from m/z 350.0 to m/z 1800.0, resolution of 70000, injection time 120 ms, AGC target 1x10E6, isolation window± 2.0 Da and the dynamic exclusion 30 s. For HCD fragmentation, resolution was set to 17500 and AGC target to 2x10E5.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analysed using Proteome Discoverer software (version 2.3., Thermo Fisher Scientific) with SEQUEST algorithm implemented. Database search against Canis lupus familiarisNCBInr FASTA files (downloaded 13/10/2016, 41787 entries) was performed according the following parameters: two trypsin missed cleavage sites, precursor and fragment mass tolerances of 10 ppm and 0.05 Da, respectively; carbamidomethyl (C) fixed peptide modification, oxidation (M) and TMT sixplex (K, peptide N-terminus) dynamic modifications. Proteins with at least two unique peptides and 5% FDR were selected as reliably identified. Internal standard was used to compare data between TMT experiments.

### Publication Abstract
This prospective study included four dog groups (group A: healthy dogs, groups B: dogs with idiopathic epilepsy under antiepileptic medication (AEM), C: idiopathic epilepsy dogs without AEM administration, D: dogs with structural epilepsy). The purpose of the study was to compare the proteomic profile among the four groups. Samples were analyzed by a quantitative Tandem Mass Tags approach using a Q-Exactive-Plus mass-spectrometer. Identification and relative quantification were performed using Proteome Discoverer, and data were analyzed using R. Gene ontology terms were analyzed based on Canis lupus familiaris database. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD018893. Eighteen proteins were statistically significant among the four groups (P&#xa0;&lt;&#xa0;0.05). MMP2 and EFEMP2 appeared down-regulated whereas HP and APO-A1 were up-regulated (groups B, D). CLEC3B and PEBP4 were up-regulated whereas APO-A1 was down-regulated (group C). IGLL1 was down-regulated (groups B, C) and up-regulated (group D). EFEMP2 was the only protein detected among the four groups and PEBP4 was significantly different among the epileptic dogs. Western blot and SPARCL immunoassay were used to quantify HP abundance change, validating proteomic analysis. Both, showed good correlation with HP levels identified through proteomic analysis (r&#xa0;=&#xa0;0.712 and r&#xa0;=&#xa0;0.703, respectively). SIGNIFICANCE: The proteomic analysis from CSF of dogs with epileptic seizures could reflect that MMP2, HP and APO-A1 may contribute to a blood-brain barrier disruption through the seizure-induced inflammatory process in the brain. MMP2 change may indicate the activation of protective mechanisms within the brain tissue. Antiepileptic medication could influence several cellular responses and alter the CSF proteome composition.

### Keywords
Epilepsy, Proteomics, Dogs, Tmt, Cerebrospinal fluid

### Affiliations
University of Zagreb, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine
VetMedZg Laboratory,Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia     Institute of Biodiversity, Animal Health & Comparative Medicine, College of Medicine, Veterinary Medicine and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK

### Submitter
Anita Horvatic

### Lab Head
Dr Peter David Eckersall
VetMedZg Laboratory,Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia     Institute of Biodiversity, Animal Health & Comparative Medicine, College of Medicine, Veterinary Medicine and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK


