### Accession
PXD017103

### Title
Hypoxia response in barley - proteomics analysis

### Description
Hypoxia stress (<1% oxygen) followed by reoxygenation, is accompanied by formation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and nitric oxide (NO), which act as signaling molecules, but also cause nitro-oxidative stress. The NO concentration is regulated by phytoglobins (formerly hemoglobins) in the NO cycle. To understand how changes in phytoglobin expression affect plant metabolism under hypoxia, we studied the proteome and metabolome of barley (Hordeum vulgare L., cv. Golden Promise) plants without (WT) or with (HO) overexpression of phytoglobins.  WT plants were more susceptible to hypoxia than HO. The chlorophyll a+b content was lowered by 50% and biomass by 30% in WT24, compared to WT, while HO plants were unaffected. We observe increase in ROS production during hypoxia treatment in WT seedlings had that was not observed in HO seedlings. But most importantly we identified and quantified 9694 proteins out of which 1107 changed significantly in abundance in at least one of the four comparisons – HO/WT andHO24/WT24) (giving genotype differences), WT24/WT and HO24/HO giving treatment differences. The main proteome changes between genotypes shown that many proteins were downregulated in HO24/HO but not in WT24/WT, such as ion transporters, Ca2+ signal transduction, and proteins related to protein degradation. We also identified and quantified 1470 metabolites, and the abundance of >500 changed significantly. Hypoxia had a much larger overall effect on the metabolome than overexpression of phytoglobin. The metabolites that have the biggest influence on the differences between treatments were selected for further analysis, among them many amino acids, putrescine and metabolites taking part in glycolysis.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen leaves (0.45 g) were ground in liquid nitrogen, and proteins were extracted using extraction buffer: 2% (w/v) sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), polyvinyl polypyrrolidone (PVPP), 0.1 M triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB, pH 8.5), protease inhibitors (Complete™, EDTA free protease inhibitor cocktail, Roche) and phosphatase inhibitors (PhosSTOP™, Roche). The homogenate was incubated at 80oC for 10 min and then sonicated in ice bath for 2×15 s with a 30 s break, vortexed at RT for 30 min, and centrifuged 2 times for 15 min with 10 000 g and 20 000 g. Samples were prepared in three biological repetitions. Protein digestion was carried out using the SDC-FASP protocol as described in (Wang et al., 2018). A total of 100 µg protein was mixed with 200 µl 1% (w/v) SDC solution in 0.1 M TEAB, pH 8.5 and dialyzed in Microcon spin filter (10 000 g for 15 min at room temperature). Alkylation of free cysteines was performed on the filter membrane using 100 µl 0.05 M iodoacetamide in 1% SDC, 0.1 M TEAB solution, incubated for 30 min in dark at room temperature. To remove iodoacetamide, samples were centrifuged at 10 000 g for 15 min and washed twice with 1% SDC solution. Digestion of proteins was carried out in 50 µl of trypsin solution in 1% SDC, 0.1 M TEAB, pH 8.5 with an enzyme: protein ratio of 1:50 (w/w). Samples were incubated for 6 h at 37oC. The peptides were collected by centrifugation and the filter was additionally washed with 1% SDC solution and combined with the peptide solution. SDC was removed from the samples by ethyl acetate extraction from the acidified solution using the phase transfer method (Masuda et al., 2008). Peptide samples were dried using a vacuum centrifuge and dissolved in 50 µl of 0.2 M TEAB. The pH of the solution was checked and adjusted to 8.0. The peptide concentration was determined by Qubit Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides (20 µg) were labeled with TMT 10 plex, using 8 tags (127C, 127N, 128C, 128N, 129C, 129N, 130C and 130N) according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Three replicates of above four treatments were labeled with three series of the TMT tags: 127C, 127N, 128C, 128N for replicate one; 129C, 129N, 130C and 130N for replicate two; 127C, 127N, 128C and 128N for replicate three of each treatment. After labeling, replicates one and two and replicates two and three were mixed into two sets of TMT labels and desalted with Poros®20 R2 reversed phase microcolumns.

### Data Protocol
TMT labelled samples were analyzed by 2D-LC-MS, using high pH reverse phase (RP) fractionation as a first dimension followed by low pH RP chromatography, coupled to MS. For high pH RP fractionation samples were separated on an Ultimate3000 HPLC system (ThermoScientific) using ACQUITY CSH C18 1.7 µm column (300 µm x 100 mm) (Waters) with a linear gradient from 2 to 60 % of buffer B in 1 h. Buffer A was H2O, 20 mM ammonium formate, pH 9; buffer B was 80% acetonitrile (ACN), 20% buffer A. 10 subfractions were collected (6 min per fraction) and combined into 5 fractions, thus fraction 1 contained subfractions 1 and 6, etc. The fractions were dried out in a speed-vac and resolubilized in 2% ACN, 98% H2O, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Full fraction volume after resolubilization was injected on the second dimension LC-MS on a Ultimate3000 RSLCnano HPLC system connected to a QExactive HF MS system (ThermoScientific). Samples were loaded on a cartridge precolumn PepMap 100 5*0.3 mm (ThermoScientific) in 2% ACN, 98% H2O, 0.1% TFA at 10 ml/min and then separated on a 1 m length 150 µm ID column, home-packed with InertSil ODS-3 2 µm sorbent (GLSciences) (Kovalchuk et al., 2019). Separation was performed with a gradient of ACN, 0.1% FA (buffer B) in H2O, 0.1% FA (buffer A) from 4 to 32% buffer B in 2 h at 0.7 µl/min at 55oC.  MS analysis was carried out in a DDA mode with 1 MS1 scan, followed by TOP20 MS2 scans. MS1 parameters were 120000 resolution, 3e6 AGC target, maximum IT 100 ms, scan range 300 to 2000 m/z. MS2 parameters were 60000 resolution, 2e5 AGC target, maximum IT 108 ms, isolation window 1.2 m/z, isolation offset 0 m/z, fixed first mass 110 m/z, (N)CE 30, minimum AGC 8e3, exclude unassigned and 1, 6-8 charges, preferred peptide match, exclude isotopes ON, dynamic exclusion 40 s. Raw MS/MS data were processed using Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo Scientific) and searched using the Mascot search engine. The two fractionated TMT sets were searched through the processing workflow in batch mode, followed by a multiconsensus workflow combining the files. The Mascot parameters for protein identification were defined as follows: database – NCBI (NCBI Resource Coordinators, 2018), Hordeum vulgare protein database (updated on 18 October, 2018); precursor mass tolerance – 20 ppm; fragment mass tolerance – 0.05 Da; digestion – trypsin with two missed cleavages allowed; fixed modification: Carbamidomethyl (C), TMT6plex (K) and TMT6plex (N-term); variable modification: methionine oxidation (M). The Percolator was used for peptide validation. Protein quantification was performed using the Reporter Ion Quantifier node (processing workflow) to estimate the peak intensity of the reporter ions, followed by the use of the Peptide and Protein Quantifier (consensus workflow) node embedded in Proteome Discoverer 2.1, where protein abundance is calculated as the average of the three most abundant distinct peptides identified for the protein. A cut-off value of at least one unique peptide per protein was applied.

### Publication Abstract
Overexpression of phytoglobins (formerly plant hemoglobins) increases the survival rate of plant tissues under hypoxia stress by the following two known mechanisms: (1) scavenging of nitric oxide (NO) in the phytoglobin/NO cycle and (2) mimicking ethylene priming to hypoxia when NO scavenging activates transcription factors that are regulated by levels of NO and O<sub>2</sub> in the N-end rule pathway. To map the cellular and metabolic effects of hypoxia in barley (<i>Hordeum vulgare</i> L., cv. Golden Promise), with or without priming to hypoxia, we studied the proteome and metabolome of wild type (WT) and hemoglobin overexpressing (HO) plants in normoxia and after 24 h hypoxia (WT24, HO24). The WT plants were more susceptible to hypoxia than HO plants. The chlorophyll a + b content was lowered by 50% and biomass by 30% in WT24 compared to WT, while HO plants were unaffected. We observed an increase in ROS production during hypoxia treatment in WT seedlings that was not observed in HO seedlings. We identified and quantified 9694 proteins out of which 1107 changed significantly in abundance. Many proteins, such as ion transporters, Ca<sup>2+</sup>-signal transduction, and proteins related to protein degradation were downregulated in HO plants during hypoxia, but not in WT plants. Changes in the levels of histones indicates that chromatin restructuring plays a role in the priming of hypoxia. We also identified and quantified 1470 metabolites, of which the abundance of &gt;500 changed significantly. In summary the data confirm known mechanisms of hypoxia priming by ethylene priming and N-end rule activation; however, the data also indicate the existence of other mechanisms for hypoxia priming in plants.

### Keywords
Barley, Lc-ms/ms, Hypoxia

### Affiliations
University of Southern Denmark
Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark, Campusvej 55, DK-5230 Odense M, Denmark

### Submitter
Adelina Rogowska-Wrzesinska

### Lab Head
Dr Adelina Rogowska-Wrzesinska
Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark, Campusvej 55, DK-5230 Odense M, Denmark


