### Accession
PXD046499

### Title
Proteome of Corynebacterium glutamicum at different pH values

### Description
Recently, we established Corynebacterium glutamicum as a suitable production host for various bacteriocins including garvicin Q (GarQ). Here, we establish secretion of GarQ by C. glutamicum via the Sec translocon. At neutral pH, the cationic peptide is efficiently adsorbed to the negatively charged envelope of producer bacteria limiting availability of the bacteriocin in culture supernatants. Using a reporter strain and proteomic analyses, we identified HtrA, a protease associated with secretion stress, as another potential factor limiting GarQ production.

### Sample Protocol
Bioreactor cultivations were carried out with Corynebacterium glutamicum ATCC13032 in order to obtain proteome samples. The cultivations were conducted in a four-fold parallel bioreactor setup with a filling volume of 1 L each. Ample oxygen supply was guaranteed by using an oxygen controller set to 30 % dissolved oxygen and using a cascade of stirrer speed, gas flow and oxygen concentration in inlet air. The pH-value was controlled using 4 M KOH and 6 M H3PO4. Cultivations were carried out in biological duplicates. The preculture strategy started with streaking out cryo culture on a BHI agar plate. Three 500 mL shake flasks containing 50 mL 2xTY media were inoculated with a colony each and incubated at 30 °C with a shaking frequency of 250 rpm and a shaking diameter of 25 mm. After 8 hours of incubation, 9 1000 mL shake flasks each containing 90 mL of fresh 2xTY media were each inoculated with 10 mL of culture broth and incubated at identical conditions. After 16 h of incubation, the cells were centrifuged at 4 °C, 4000 x g for 10 min, washed once with 0.9 % NaCl, centrifuged again and resuspended in 0.9 % NaCl. The bioreactors were inoculated to an optical density at 600 nm of 1.5. Throughout the course of the cultivation, proteome samples were obtained both during the exponential and stationary growth phase. For each sample, technical triplicates were taken. For each replicate, 1.6 mL culture broth were added to a proteome vial and centrifuged for 5 minutes at 4 °C and 21500 x g. The supernatant was decanted and added to a fresh proteome vial. Both pellet and supernatant were then frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80 °C.  The cell pellets were suspended in lysis buffer containing 50 Mm potassium phosphate buffer (pH 8.0), 2mM EDTA, 2mM DTT and supplemented with complete protease inhibitor cocktail (1697 498, Roche Applied Science, Basel, Switzerland). Cell suspensions were disrupted in a Precellys System (Bertin Instruments, Montigny-le-Bretonneux FRANCE) using 0.1–0.2mm glass beads and 2 glass beads with 5 mm diameter 3× for 30 s at maximum frequency. The supernatant containing protein fractions were collected and frozen at –20 °C until analysis. Concentrations of proteins in crude extracts were measured using a Bradford assay (B6916, Sigma Aldrich, USA) with BSA as standard. The resulting crude extracts were then applied for untargeted LC-MS/MS measurements according to previously described methods (Voges and Noack 2012) and using an Infinity 1260 HPLC (Agilent Technologies) coupled to a Q-ToF 6600 mass spectrometer (Sciex, Darmstadt, Germany).  A maximum of 50 μl of the resulting crude extracts (up to 100 μg total protein) could readily be used for tryptic digestion. Crude extract were digested together with 1 μg trypsin in a total volume of 100 μl for 5 h at 42 °C as recommended by the supplier (T7575, Sigma Aldrich). Peptide solutions were diluted 1:2 with MilliQ H2O (Millipore, Merck KGaA) prior to LC–MS measurements. With injected sample volumes of 10 μL, on column protein amounts of up to 5.0 μg were applied. Peptide mixtures were separated by reversed phase HPLC prior to ESI-MS-TOF measurements (RP column at 21 °C: 150×2.1mmAscentis Express® Peptide ES-C18 2.7 μm (53307-U, Sigma Aldrich); equilibration: 3% B (12min); gradient B: 3–40% (70 min), 40% (8 min), 40–60% (1min), 60% (10min); flow: 0.2ml min−1; A: 0.1% (v v−1) formic acid, B: acetonitrile+0.1% (v v−1) formic acid). The TripleTOF6600 was operated with CUR: 35, GS1: 50, GS2: 50, IS: 5500, TEM: 450, DP:120. During the elution under the above-specified parameters, the variable width Q1 windows were monitored in a non-scheduled manner. SWATH window width was calculated with SWATH Variable Wondow Calculator_V1.0. Autosampler setting were ±6°C and injection volume was 10 µL.

### Data Protocol
Data acquisition and peak integration was carried out using the software PeakView 2.1 (Sciex), while protein identification was done with the software ProteinPilot 5.1 (Sciex). Marker View software (Sciex) was used for t-test analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Bacteriocins are ribosomally synthesized antimicrobial peptides, that either kill target bacteria or inhibit their growth. Bacteriocins are used in food preservation and are of increasing interest as potential alternatives to conventional antibiotics. In the present study, we show that Lactococcus petauri B1726, a strain isolated from fermented balsam pear, produces a heat-stable and protease-sensitive compound. Following genome sequencing, a gene cluster for production of a class IId bacteriocin was identified consisting of garQ (encoding for the bacteriocin garvicin Q), garI (for a putative immunity protein), garC, and garD (putative transporter proteins). Growth conditions were optimized for increased bacteriocin activity in supernatants of L. petauri B1726 and purification and mass spectrometry identified the compound as garvicin Q. Further experiments suggest that garvicin Q adsorbs to biomass of various susceptible and insusceptible bacteria and support the hypothesis that garvicin Q requires a mannose-family phosphotransferase system (PTS<sup>Man</sup>) as receptor to kill target bacteria by disruption of membrane integrity. Heterologous expression of a synthetic garQICD operon was established in Corynebacterium glutamicum demonstrating that genes garQICD are responsible for biosynthesis and secretion of garvicin Q. Moreover, production of garvicin Q by the recombinant C. glutamicum strain was improved by using a defined medium yet product levels were still considerably lower than with the natural L. petauri B1726 producer strain.Collectively, our data identifies the genetic basis for production of the bacteriocin garvicin Q by L. petauri B1726 and provides insights into the receptor and mode of action of garvicin Q. Moreover, we successfully performed first attempts towards biotechnological production of this interesting bacteriocin using natural and heterologous hosts.

### Keywords
Corynebacterium glutamicum, Ph

### Affiliations
Forschungszentrum Jülich
Institute of Bio- and Geosciences, IBG-1: Biotechnology, Forschungszentrum Jülich, Germany

### Submitter
Valentin Steier

### Lab Head
Dr Marco Oldiges
Institute of Bio- and Geosciences, IBG-1: Biotechnology, Forschungszentrum Jülich, Germany


