### Accession
PXD012785

### Title
Quantitative temporal proteomic analysis of vaccinia virus infection reveals regulation of histone deacetylases by an interferon antagonist

### Description
Vaccinia virus (VACV) has numerous immune evasion strategies, including multiple mechanisms of inhibition of IRF-3, NF-κB and type I interferon (IFN) signaling. Here, we used highly multiplexed proteomics to quantify >8,000 cellular proteins and ~80% of viral proteins over seven time points spanning the whole course of VACV infection. This identified multiple novel viral targets, including putative natural killer cell ligands and IFN-stimulated genes. The class II histone deacetylase HDAC5 was selectively degraded early during VACV infection. Use of cell lines in which HDAC5 was overexpressed or knocked out showed that HDAC5 restricted replication of both VACV and herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1). By generating a protein-based temporal classification of VACV gene expression, we identified the early protein C6, a multifunctional IFN antagonist, as the factor that targets HDAC5 for proteasomal degradation. Our approach thus identifies both a novel restriction factor and a viral mechanism of innate immune evasion.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were washed twice with PBS and 250 l lysis buffer was added (6 M guanidine/50mM HEPES pH 8.5). Cell lifters (Corning) were used to scrape cells in lysis buffer, which was removed to an eppendorf tube, vortexed extensively and then sonicated. Cell debris was removed by centrifuging at 21,000 g for 10 min twice. Half of each sample was kept for subsequent analysis by immunoblot where required. For the other half, dithiothreitol (DTT) was added to a final concentration of 5 mM and samples were incubated for 20 min. Cysteines were alkylated with 14 mM iodoacetamide and incubated for 20 min at room temperature in the dark. Excess iodoacetamide was quenched with DTT for 15 min. Samples were diluted with 200 mM HEPES pH 8.5 to 1.5 M guanidine followed by digestion at room temperature for 3 h with LysC protease at a 1:100 protease-to-protein ratio. Samples were further diluted with 200 mM HEPES pH 8.5 to 0.5 M guanidine. Trypsin was then added at a 1:100 protease-to-protein ratio followed by overnight incubation at 37°C. The reaction was quenched with 5% formic acid and then centrifuged at 21,000 g for 10 min to remove undigested protein. Peptides were subjected to C18 solid-phase extraction (SPE, Sep-Pak, Waters) and vacuum-centrifuged to near-dryness. In preparation for TMT labelling, desalted peptides were dissolved in 200 mM HEPES pH 8.5. Peptide concentration was measured by microBCA (Pierce), and 25 g of peptide was labelled with TMT reagent. TMT reagents (0.8 mg) were dissolved in 43 μl anhydrous acetonitrile and 3 μl was added to peptide at a final acetonitrile concentration of 30% (v/v). Sample labelling was as indicated in ‘PRIDE submission Soday et al.docx’. Following incubation at room temperature for 1 h, the reaction was quenched with hydroxylamine to a final concentration of 0.3% (v/v). TMT-labelled samples were combined at a 1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1 ratio. The sample was vacuum-centrifuged to near dryness and subjected to C18 SPE (Sep-Pak, Waters). An unfractionated single shot was analysed initially to ensure similar peptide loading across each TMT channel, to avoid the need for excessive electronic normalisation. As all normalisation factors were >0.5 and <2, data for the WCL2, WCL3 and wt_C6L_MG singleshot experiments were analysed with data for the corresponding fractions to increase the overall number of peptides quantified. TMT-labelled tryptic peptides were subjected to HpRP fractionation using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a 2.1 mm internal diameter (ID) x 25 cm long, 1.7 µm particle Kinetix Evo C18 column (Phenomenex). Mobile phase consisted of A: 3% acetonitrile (MeCN), B: MeCN and C: 200 mM ammonium formate pH 10. Isocratic conditions were 90% A / 10% C, and C was maintained at 10% throughout the gradient elution. Separations were conducted at 45°C. Samples were loaded at 200 µl/min for 5 min. The flow rate was then increased to 400 µl/min over 5 min, after which the gradient elution proceed as follows: 0-19% B over 10 min, 19-34% B over 14.25 min, 34-50% B over 8.75 min, followed by a 10 min wash at 90% B. UV absorbance was monitored at 280 nm and 15 s fractions were collected into 96-well microplates using the integrated fraction collector. Fractions were recombined orthogonally in a checkerboard fashion, combining alternate wells from each column of the plate into a single fraction, and commencing combination of adjacent fractions in alternating rows. Wells prior to the start or after the stop of elution of peptide-rich fractions, as identified from the UV trace, were excluded. This yielded two sets of 12 combined fractions, A and B, which were dried in a vacuum centrifuge and resuspended in 10 µl MS solvent (4% MeCN / 5% formic acid) prior to LC-MS3. For all experiments, 12 set ‘A’ fractions were used.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were processed using a Sequest-based software pipeline for quantitative proteomics, “MassPike”, through a collaborative arrangement with Professor Steve Gygi’s laboratory at Harvard Medical School. MS spectra were converted to mzXML using an extractor built upon Thermo Fisher’s RAW File Reader library (version 4.0.26). In this extractor, the standard mzxml format has been augmented with additional custom fields that are specific to ion trap and Orbitrap mass spectrometry and essential for TMT quantitation. These additional fields include ion injection times for each scan, Fourier Transform-derived baseline and noise values calculated for every Orbitrap scan, isolation widths for each scan type, scan event numbers, and elapsed scan times. This software is a component of the MassPike software platform and is licensed by Harvard Medical School.  A combined database was constructed from (a) the human UniProt database (26th January, 2017), (b) the VACV strain WR UniProt database (29th July, 2018), (c) common contaminants such as porcine trypsin and endoproteinase LysC. The combined database was concatenated with a reverse database composed of all protein sequences in reversed order. Searches were performed using a 20 ppm precursor ion tolerance (Haas et al., 2006). Product ion tolerance was set to 0.03 Th. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (229.162932 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (57.02146 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (15.99492 Da) was set as a variable modification.  To control the fraction of erroneous protein identifications, a target-decoy strategy was employed (Elias and Gygi, 2007, 2010). Peptide spectral matches (PSMs) were filtered to an initial peptide-level false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% with subsequent filtering to attain a final protein-level FDR of 1% (Kim et al., 2011; Wu et al., 2011). PSM filtering was performed using a linear discriminant analysis, as described (Huttlin et al., 2010). This distinguishes correct from incorrect peptide IDs in a manner analogous to the widely used Percolator algorithm (Kall et al., 2007), though employing a distinct machine learning algorithm. The following parameters were considered: XCorr, ΔCn, missed cleavages, peptide length, charge state, and precursor mass accuracy. Protein assembly was guided by principles of parsimony to produce the smallest set of proteins necessary to account for all observed peptides (Huttlin et al., 2010).  Proteins were quantified by summing TMT reporter ion counts across all matching peptide-spectral matches using ”MassPike”, as described (McAlister et al., 2012; McAlister et al., 2014). A minimum one unique or shared peptide per protein was used for quantitation. Briefly, a 0.003 Th window around the theoretical m/z of each reporter ion (126, 127n, 127c, 128n, 128c, 129n, 129c, 130n, 130c, 131n, 131c) was scanned for ions, and the maximum intensity nearest to the theoretical m/z was used. The primary determinant of quantitation quality is the number of TMT reporter ions detected in each MS3 spectrum, which is directly proportional to the signal-to-noise (S:N) ratio observed for each ion (Makarov and Denisov, 2009). Conservatively, every individual peptide used for quantitation was required to contribute sufficient TMT reporter ions (minimum of ~1250 per spectrum) so that each on its own could be expected to provide a representative picture of relative protein abundance (McAlister et al., 2012). Additionally, an isolation specificity filter was employed to minimise peptide co-isolation (Ting et al., 2011). Peptide-spectral matches with poor quality MS3 spectra (more than 9 TMT channels missing and/or a combined S:N ratio of less than 250 across all TMT reporter ions) or no MS3 spectra at all were excluded from quantitation. Peptides meeting the stated criteria for reliable quantitation were then summed by parent protein, in effect weighting the contributions of individual peptides to the total protein signal based on their individual TMT reporter ion yields. Protein quantitation values were exported for further analysis in Excel.  For protein quantitation, reverse and contaminant proteins were removed, then each reporter ion channel was summed across all quantified proteins and normalised assuming equal protein loading across all channels. For further analysis and display in figures, fractional TMT signals were used (i.e. reporting the fraction of maximal signal observed for each protein in each TMT channel, rather than the absolute normalised signal intensity). This effectively corrected for differences in the numbers of peptides observed per protein. For all TMT experiments, normalised S:N values are presented in ‘Soday et al proteins.xlsx’.

### Publication Abstract
Vaccinia virus (VACV) has numerous immune evasion&#xa0;strategies, including multiple mechanisms of inhibition of interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF-3), nuclear factor &#x3ba;B (NF-&#x3ba;B), and type I interferon (IFN) signaling. Here, we use highly multiplexed proteomics to quantify &#x223c;9,000 cellular proteins and &#x223c;80% of viral proteins at seven time points throughout VACV infection. A total of 265 cellular proteins are downregulated &gt;2-fold by VACV, including putative natural killer cell ligands and IFN-stimulated genes. Two-thirds of these viral targets, including class II histone deacetylase 5 (HDAC5), are degraded proteolytically during infection. In follow-up analysis, we demonstrate that HDAC5 restricts replication of both VACV and herpes simplex virus type 1. By generating a protein-based temporal classification of VACV gene expression, we identify protein C6, a multifunctional IFN antagonist, as being necessary and sufficient for proteasomal degradation of&#xa0;HDAC5. Our approach thus identifies both a host&#xa0;antiviral factor and a viral mechanism of innate immune evasion.

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics; tandem mass tag; systems virology; poxvirus; interferon; host-pathogen interaction; immune evasion; innate immunity; restriction factor; histone deacetylase

### Affiliations
Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, University of Cambridge, Hills Road, Cambridge, CB2 0XY, UK
University of Cambridge

### Submitter
Michael Weekes

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Weekes
Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, University of Cambridge, Hills Road, Cambridge, CB2 0XY, UK


