### Accession
PXD044145

### Title
In planta expression of human polyQ-expanded huntingtin fragment reveals mechanisms to prevent disease-related protein aggregation.

### Description
We have Q67 worms with overexpression of SPP construct or without overexpression of SPP construct. We compare whole proteome from control group with worms overexpressing of SPP construct

### Sample Protocol
Synchronized adult C. elegans were lysed in urea buffer (8 M urea, 2 M thiourea, and 10 mM Hepes (pH 7.6)) by utilizing glass-bead disruption technique. Subsequently, the samples were cleared by centrifugation at 13000 rpm for 10 minutes. The supernatant was collected and protein concentration was measured with the Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher). The supernatants underwent a reduction process using 5 mM dithiothreitol for 1 hour, followed by alkylation with 40 mM chloroacetamide (CAA) for 30 minutes. Then, the urea concentration was diluted to 2 M, and trypsin was added in a 1:100 (w/w) ratio for overnight digestion. Next day, the samples were cleared with acidification followed by centrifugation in maximum speed for 5 minutes. Stage tip extraction was used for cleaning up peptides. Samples were analyzed by the CECAD Proteomics Facility on an Orbitrap Exploris 480 (Thermo Scientific, granted by the German Research Foundation under INST 1856/71-1 FUGG) mass spectrometer equipped with a FAIMSpro differential ion mobility device that was coupled to an Vanquish neo in trap-and-elute setup (Thermo Scientific). Samples were loaded onto a precolumn (Acclaim 5µm PepMap 300 µ Cartridge) with a flow of 60 µl/min before reverse-flushed onto an in-house packed analytical column (30 cm length, 75 µm inner diameter, filled with 2.7 µm Poroshell EC120 C18, Agilent). Peptides were chromatographically separated with an initial flow rate of 400 nL/min and the following gradient: initial 2% B (0.1% formic acid in 80 % acetonitrile), up to 6 % in 4 min. Then, flow was reduced to 300 nl/min and B increased to 20% B in 50 min, up to 35% B within 27 min and up to 95% solvent B within 1.0 min while again increasing the flow to 400 nl/min, followed by column wash with 95% solvent B and reequilibration to initial condition. The FAIMS pro was operated at -50V compensation voltage and electrode temperatures of 99.5 °C for the inner and 85 °C for the outer electrode. MS1 scans were acquired from 399 m/z to 1001 m/z at 15k resolution. Maximum injection time was set to 22 ms and the AGC target to 100%. MS2 scans ranged from 400 m/z to 1000 m/z and were acquired at 15 k resolution with a maximum injection time of 22 ms and an AGC target of 100%. DIA scans covering the precursor range from 400 - 1000 m/z and were acquired in 60 x 10 m/z windows with an overlap of 1 m/z. All scans were stored as centroid.

### Data Protocol
Samples were analyzed in DIA-NN 1.8.1 (Demichev 2020). A Swissprot C. elegans canonical database (UP1940, downloaded 04/01/23) was used for library building with settings matching acquisition parameters and the match-between-runs function enabled. Here, samples are directly used to refine the library for a second search of the sample data. DIA-NN was run with the additional command line prompts “—report-lib-info”. Further output settings were: filtered at 0.01 FDR, N-terminal methionine excision enabled, maximum number of missed cleavages set to 1, min peptide length set to 7, max peptide length set to 30, min precursor m/z set to 400, max precursor m/z set to 1000, cysteine carbamidomethylation enabled as a fixed modification, heuristic protein inference activated. Afterwards, DIA-NN output was further filtered on library q-value and global q-value <= 0.01 and at least two unique peptides per protein using R (4.1.3). Finally, LFQ values calculated using the DIA-NN R-package. Afterwards, analysis of results was performed in Perseus 1.6.15 (Tyanova 2016) by filtering for data completeness in at least one replicate group followed by FDR-controlled t-tests.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Caenorhabditis elegans, Protein aggregation, Huntington’s disease

### Affiliations
CECAD Research Center
University of Cologne, Germany

### Submitter
Prerana Wagle

### Lab Head
Dr David Vilchez
University of Cologne, Germany


