### Accession
PXD042353

### Title
The sex-specific factor SOA establishes X chromosome dosage compensation in Anopheles mosquitos

### Description
The Anopheles mosquito is one of thousands of species in which sex differences play a central role in their biology, as only females need a blood meal in order to produce eggs. Sex differentiation is regulated by sex chromosomes, but their presence creates a dosage imbalance between males (XY) and females (XX). Dosage compensation (DC) can re-equilibrate the expression of sex-chromosomal genes, but because the molecular mechanisms providing DC have only been studied in a few model organisms, key questions about its evolutionary diversity and functional necessity remain unresolved. Here, we reveal the DC pathway in the malaria mosquito Anopheles gambiae. We identified SOA, a previously uncharacterized gene, whose expression is sufficient to induce a global upregulation of X-linked genes. Sex-specific alternative splicing prevents the production of a functional SOA protein in females. The male SOA isoform encodes a DNA-binding protein that recognizes the promoters of X chromosomal genes through a CA repeat sequence. Male mosquitos lacking SOA exhibit a chromosome-wide downregulation of the X, which is compatible with viability, but causes a developmental delay. Thus, our molecular analysis of the first DC master regulator in a non-model organism elucidates the evolutionary steps leading to the establishment of a chromosome-specific fine-tuning mechanism.

### Sample Protocol
Bound proteins eluted by heating beads in 30 µl 1×LDS Buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) supplemented with 100 mM DTT for 10 min at 70 °C and 1400 rpm in a thermomixer (Eppendorf). Proteins were subsequently run on a 4-12% NOVEX NuPage gel (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 8 min at 180 V in 1x MOPS buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Proteins were fixed and stained with 0.25% Coomassie Blue G-250 (Roth) in 10% acetic acid (Sigma) / 43% ethanol (Roth). The gel lane was minced and destained with a 50% ethanol / 50 mM ammoniumbicarbonate (ABC) pH 8.0 solution. Proteins were reduced in 10 mM DTT / 50 mM ABC pH 8.0 for 1h at 56°C and then alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide / 50 mM ABC pH 9.0 for 45 min at room temperature in the dark. Proteins were digested with MS-grade trypsin (Sigma) overnight at 37°C. Peptides were extracted from the gel using twice a mixture of 30% acetonitrile (VWR) and 50 mM ABC pH 8.0 solution followed by two times with pure acetonitrile, which was ultimately evaporated in a concentrator (Eppendorf) and loaded on an activated self-made C18 mesh (AffiniSep) StageTips. Peptides were separated on a 25 cm self-packed column (New Objective) with 75 µm inner diameter filled with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ (Dr. Maisch GmbH). The EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo) was mounted to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo) and peptides were eluted from the column in an optimized 90 min gradient from 2 to 40% acetonitrile / 0.1% formic acid solution at a flow rate of 200 nl min-1. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent acquisition mode with one MS full scan and up to 10 MS/MS scans using HCD fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry raw data were searched against Anopheles_gambiae.AgamP4.pep.all (15,125 entries) with the Andromeda search engine of the MaxQuant software suite 1.6.5.0. Cys-carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification and Met-oxidation and protein N-acetylation were considered as variable modifications. Match between run option was activated. Prior to further processing, proteingroups marked with reverse, only identified by site or with less than 2 peptides (1 of them unique) were removed.

### Publication Abstract
The Anopheles mosquito is one of thousands of species in which sex differences play a central part in their biology, as only females need a blood meal to produce eggs. Sex differentiation is regulated by sex chromosomes, but their presence creates a dosage imbalance between males (XY) and females (XX). Dosage compensation (DC) can re-equilibrate the expression of sex chromosomal genes. However, because DC mechanisms have only been fully characterized in a few model organisms, key questions about its evolutionary diversity and functional necessity remain unresolved<sup>1</sup>. Here we report the discovery of a previously uncharacterized gene (sex chromosome activation (SOA)) as a master regulator of DC in the malaria&#xa0;mosquito Anopheles gambiae. Sex-specific alternative splicing prevents functional SOA protein expression in females. The male isoform encodes a DNA-binding protein that binds the promoters of active X&#x2009;chromosomal genes. Expressing male SOA is sufficient to induce DC in female cells. Male mosquitoes lacking SOA or female mosquitoes ectopically expressing the male isoform exhibit X&#x2009;chromosome misregulation, which is compatible with viability but causes developmental delay. Thus, our molecular analyses of a DC master regulator in a non-model organism elucidates the evolutionary steps that lead to the establishment of a chromosome-specific fine-tuning mechanism.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Quantitative Proteomics
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB)
Ackermannweg 4, 55128 Mainz, Germany

### Submitter
F Butter

### Lab Head
Dr Falk Buttter
Ackermannweg 4, 55128 Mainz, Germany


