### Accession
PXD030632

### Title
Nitrifying biorector dismantling LC-MSMS

### Description
we studied the functional composition of a packed-bed nitrifying bioreactor inoculated with a co-culture of Nitrosomonas europaea (ATCC 25978) and Nitrobacter winogradskyi (ATCC 25391) after 840 days of operation.

### Sample Protocol
A frozen 2 mL pellet, wet mass ca. 125 mg, was dissolved in 1 mL 6M guanidine HCl (in K2HPO4 buffer 20mM (pH 7.5)). Samples were lysed by ultrasonication (3 x 20 sec, amplitude 40%, 1 cycle, in between 1 min on ice) (Imlab, Boutersem, Belgium). The concentration of the samples was measured using the Bradford method (Bio-Rad Pro-tein Assay, Bio-Rad, Temse, Belgium) following precipitation with acetone (1:4 v/v cold acetone and incubation at -20°C for 1h). LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using a nanoElute UHPLC (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) connected to a QTOF-MS instrument (Impact II, Bruker Daltonics) via a CaptiveSpray nanoflow electrospray source (Bruker Daltonics). Samples where run in random order to be able to identify potential batch effect. Two µg of tryptic di-gest (in 4% acetonitrile/solvent A) was injected onto a trapping column setup (300 µm x 5 mm, C18 PepMap 300, 5 µm, 300Å ; Bruker Daltonics) using a flow rate of 200 µL/min. Subsequently, peptides were separated using a C18 Reprosil AQ, 1.9µm, 120 Å, 0.075 x 400 mm column operated at 40°C (Bruker Daltonics) at flow rate of 0.2 µL/min. Gradient conditions were: 2%-35% solvent B for 100 min; 35%-95% solvent B for 10 minutes; 95% solvent B held for 10 minutes (solvent A, 0.1% formic acid in wa-ter; solvent B, 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile). Drying gas flow and temperature of the CaptiveSpray were set to 4 l/min and 180°C, respectively, and nebulizer gas pressure was set to 0.4 bar. MS acquisition rate was set to 2Hz and data have been acquired over a 150-2200 m/z mass range. In all the full-scan measurements, a lock-mass (m/z 1221.9906, Hexakis (1H, 1H, 4H-hexafluorobutyloxy)phosphazine) (Bruker Daltonics) was used as internal calibrator. Instant Expertise software (Bruker Daltonics) was used to select as many as possi-ble of the most intense ions per cycle of 3 sec. MS/MS accumulation depended on the MS1 level. Threshold (per 1000 summation) absolute was 2500 cts (spectral rate of 2Hz). Peptide fragmentation was performed with nitrogen gas on the most abundant and at least doubly charged to five charged ions detected in the initial MS scan. Active exclusion was performed after 1 spectrum for 0.50 min unless the intensity of the pre-cursor ions was more than 3 times higher than in the previous scan.

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS spectra were searched against the All entries database in SwissProt using the Mascot v2.6.0 algorithm (http://www.matrixscience.com/) with the following settings: database: swissprot_2019_03; enzyme: trypsin; variable modifications: oxida-tion (M); fixed modifications: carbamidomethyl (C); missed cleavages: 1; taxonomy: Bacteria (Eubacteria) or an in-house combined Nitrosomo-nas.ATCC19718/Nitrobacter.ATCC25391 database when specified; instrument type CID: ESI-QUAD-TOF; peptide tolerance: 15ppm; MS/MS tolerance: 0.02Da; peptide charge: 1+, 2+ and 3+; minimum peptide length: 5;  peptide decoy: ON; adjust FDR [%]: 1; ion score cut-off: 15; ion score threshold for significant peptide IDs: 35; percola-tor: ON. Proteins identified with only one peptide were rejected for data interpretation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bioreactor, Nitrification, Denitrification

### Affiliations
Microbiology Unit, SCK CEN
SCK CEN

### Submitter
Felice Mastroleo

### Lab Head
Dr Natalie Leys
Microbiology Unit, SCK CEN


