### Accession
PXD016079

### Title
Comparative Differential Cuproproteomes of Rhodobacter capsulatus

### Description
In this study, we achieved a global view of Cu-responsive changes in the prokaryotic model organism Rhodobacter capsulatus using label-free quantitative differential proteomics. Semi-aerobically grown cells under heterotrophic conditions in minimal medium (~ 0.3 M Cu, optimal for growth) were compared with cells grown similarly but supplemented with either 5 M Cu or with 5 mM of the Cu-chelator bathocuproine sulfonate. Mass spectrometry based bottom-up proteome analyses of unfractionated cell lysates identified with high confidence 2430 of the 3632 putative proteins encoded by the genome.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation, protein extraction and digestion    A urea/thiourea lysis/extraction and Lys-C/trypsin digestion method was used as protocol (A): 100 mg wet cell pellets were resuspended in a freshly prepared lysis buffer containing 6 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and HALTTM protease (Thermo Scientific, Inc). Cells were disrupted completely by multiple rounds of sonication on ice, extracts were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (Sigma, Inc.) at room temperature for one hour, and alkylated in the dark with 20 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma, Inc.) at room temperature for 30 min. The reduced and alkylated proteins were first digested with Lys-C (lysyl endopeptidase, WAKO Pure Chemical Industries, Osaka, Japan) for three hours, then diluted 10-fold with 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.5) buffer and further digested overnight at 37 °C with mass spectrometry (MS) grade trypsin (Promega, Inc.) at an enzyme to protein ratio of ~ 1 to 50 (w/w). The tryptic peptides thus generated were acidified with 5 % formic acid to pH ≤ 3, and desalted using Poros Oligo R3 reverse-phase micro-columns, made of P200 pipet tips pre-plugged with C18 disc material (3M Empore, Bioanalytical Technologies) and packed with Poros Oligo R3 matrix (Applied Biosystems, Inc). Purified peptides were lyophilized and stored at - 80 °C until mass spectral analysis. An alternative protocol (B) for extract preparation and digestion with trypsin, in the presence of the ProteaseMAXTM enhancer (Promega Inc.), was also used (Supplementary Data). In tests, the urea/thiourea extraction and Lys-C/trypsin digestion protocol (A) yielded ~ 40% more protein identifications than protocol (B) and was opted for all quantitative analyses, while data from both extraction methods were combined for qualitative identifications.  Nano LC-MS/MS analyses  A nano-LC-MS/MS coupled to either a Thermo Q-Exactive or to a Thermo Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer was used for data collection. For quantitative analyses, only the data obtained using the higher sensitivity Q-Exactive MS and the more efficient urea/thiourea extraction protocol (A) were opted. However, for defining R. capsulatus whole proteome, all protein identifications derived from both protocols A/Q-Exactive and B/Orbitrap Velos were combined. The Orbitrap Velos Pro MS parameters are described in the Supplemental Data.   The Q-Exactive Orbitrap MS was coupled to an Easy-nLCTM 1000 nano liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) for analyzing protein digests. Samples were loaded in buffer A (0.1% formic acid) onto an 18 cm fused silica capillary column (75 μm internal diameter), packed in-house with reversed-phase Repro-Sil Pur C18-AQ 3 m resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany). Elution was performed with a 120 min linear gradient from 2 to 30 % buffer B (100% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid), followed by a 15 min linear gradient from 30 to 90% buffer B, with a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min. At the end of the gradient, the column was washed for an additional 5 min with 90 % buffer B. The Q-Exactive MS was operated (Thermo Xcalibur, version 2.2) in the data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode with dynamic exclusion enabled (repeat count: 1, exclusion duration: 20 sec). Full MS spectrum scans (m/z 350–1600) were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 (at 200 m/z), and the fifteen most intense ions were selected for MS/MS with high-energy collision dissociation (HCD) at a normalized collision energy of 22 at a resolution of 17,500 (at 200 m/z). Lock mass calibration was implemented using polysiloxane ions 371.10123 m/z and 445.12000 m/z, and the automatic gain control (AGC) targets of full MS and MS/MS scans were 1 × 106 and 5 × 104, respectively. Unassigned charge states and singly-charged species were rejected.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant version 1.5.5.1 (www.coxdocs.org) (40) was used for raw MS data analysis. MS/MS spectra were searched by the Andromeda search engine (41) against the R. capsulatus strain SB1003 FASTA database (UniprotKB, 3632 entries; www.uniprot.org; date of last modification 2010) as well as for reverse database and common contaminants, both being defaults within the MaxQuant software. Methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were assigned as variable modifications, and carbamidomethyl-cysteine was used as a fixed modification. Full trypsin digestion (K/R) was specified with two missed cleavages allowed. The minimum peptide length was set to seven amino acids. For matching between runs, the retention time alignment window was set to 20 min, and the match time window to 1 min. The matching option was used only among sample runs for a given LC-MS instrument (i.e., runs analyzed by the Q-Exactive MS were not matched with Orbitrap Velos Pro MS runs).  MS/MS fragment mass tolerance was 20 ppm and other search parameters in MaxQuant were set to default values.   For each protein identified, the acceptance criteria included false discovery rate (FDR) = 0.01, minimum number of peptides = 1, and minimum number of MS/MS spectra = 1.  Samples prepared using both lysis protocols (A,B) coupled with nLC-MS/MS instruments (i.e., A/Q-Exactive and B/Orbitrap Velos), with all biological and technical replicates were grouped together to generate a highly redundant data set with high reliability for the identified proteins. The experimental design for the quantitative aspect of this study used for each of the three Cu conditions [Cu-excess (+Cu), Cu-depleted (+BCS) and Cu-sufficient control (CTRL)] three independent biological replicates, yielding a total of nine samples. Samples were lysed/digested in parallel using protocol (A) and analyzed by at least three technical replicates on the Q-Exactive.  Thus, each Cu growth condition was represented by a minimum of nine nLC-MS/MS runs.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lfq (label free quantification), Rhodobacter capsulatus, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
University of Pennsylvania
University of Pennsylvania, Department of Biology

### Submitter
Nur Selamoglu

### Lab Head
Dr Fevzi Daldal
University of Pennsylvania, Department of Biology


