### Accession
PXD022565

### Title
Transfection with Glucuronidase A affects general proteome pattern in Giardia lamblia trophozoites

### Description
Giardia lamblia is an important causative agent of persistent diarrhea in humans, domestic animals, and cattle. Basic research is usually performed with the strain WBC6 and includes genetic manipulations such as transfections. Here, we investigate how transfection with a plasmid causing stable expression of a foreign gene affects the whole proteome pattern. Using shotgun mass spectrometry, we compare the proteomes of untransfected trophozoites to trophozoites transfected with Escherichia coli glucuronidase A (GusA). Besides GusA, which is detected in the transfected trophozoites only, the proteomes of untransfected and transfected trophozoites differ by 132 differentially expressed proteins. In particular, transfection induces antigenic variation. Since transfection causing stable expression affects the proteome pattern, transfection experiments should take into account this effect. Due to a unique peptide panel, GusA is an example for a suitable internal standard for experiments involving transfected cells.

### Sample Protocol
Giardia lamblia were transfected with the plasmid pPAC-V-GusA and selection of transgenic trophozoites were performed by culturing cells in medium containing 100 µM puromycin until drug-resistant cells were visible after about 8 days post transfection. Cells were grown to confluence and then passaged once in the same medium. Before shotgun mass spectrometry analysis, the untransfected cultures were routinely passaged two times, the GusA-transfected cultures in absence of puromycin. Pellets were washed three times with ice-cold PBS, counted, and stored at −80 °C until use. Cell pellets were lysed in 100 μL 8M urea/100 mM Tris/HCl pH8/cOmplete™ protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche Diagnostics, Rotkreuz, Switzerland) by incubation for 15 min at room temperature followed by 15 min in an ultrasonic water bath. Protein concentration was determined by BCA assay, followed by reduction and alkylation of proteins with 10 mM DTT for 30 min at 37°C and 50 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at 37°C in the dark. Proteins were precipitated at -20°C by addition of 5 volumes cold acetone and incubation at -20°C overnight. All liquid was carefully removed and the pellet dried in ambient air for 15 min before reconstitution of proteins to a concentration of 1mg/ml in 8 M urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0. An aliquot corresponding to 10 μg protein was digested by trypsin (1:50 trypsin/protein ratio) for 6 hours at 37°C after dilution of urea concentration to 1.6M with 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0 and 2 mM CaCl2. The digests were acidified with TFA (1%) and analyzed by LC-MS/MS. Three repetitive injections of an aliquot corresponding to 500 ng protein digest were analyzed on an EASY-nLC 1000 coupled to a QExactive HF mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher, Reinach, Switzerland). Peptides were trapped on an Acclaim PepMap100 C18 pre-column (3μm, 100 Å, 300 μm x 5 mm, ThermoFisher, Reinach, Switzerland) and separated by backflush on a C18 column (3μm, 100 Å, 75μm x 15 cm, Nikkyo Technos, Tokyo, Japan) by applying a 60 min gradient of 5% acetonitrile to 40% in water, 0.1% formic acid, at a flow rate of 400 nl/min. Peptides of m/z 400-1400 were detected with resolution of 60’000 applying an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 1E06 and a maximum ion injection time of 50 msec. A top fifteen data dependent method for precursor ion fragmentation with a stepped 27% normalized collision energy was applied with the following settings: precursor isolation width of 1.6 m/z, resolution 15’000, AGC of 1E05 with a minimum target of 1E03, maximum ion time of 110 ms, charge exclusion of unassigned and 1+ ions, peptide match on, and dynamic exclusion for 20 sec, respectively.

### Data Protocol
The MS data for each strain consisted of three biological replicates, with three technical replicates each. All MS data were processed by MaxQuant (version 1.6.14.0) with matching between runs for the same strain activated, but not between different strains, in order to avoid over-interpretation of the data. Fragment spectra were interpreted against a recent Giardia protein sequence database in FASTA format (GiardiaDB-47_GintestinalisAssemblageAWB_AnnotatedProteins), supplemented by the two protein sequences of GusA and Pac from Swissprot database (accession numbers P05804 and P13249). The trypsin cleavage rule allowed amide bond cleavage after lysine and arginine but not if a proline follows and up to three missed cleavage sites, fixed carbamidomethylation modification of cysteines, variable oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N-termini. Precursor and fragment mass tolerances were set to 10 and 20 ppm, respectively. Peptide spectrum matches, peptide and protein group identifications were filtered to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) based on reversed database sequence matches, and a minimum of two razor or unique peptides were required to accept a protein group identification.  Protein identifications considered as contaminations (e.g. trypsin) as well as proteins identified only by site were removed for statistical validation. The normalized label-free quantification (LFQ) protein group intensities as calculated by MaxQuant and a top3 approach were used for relative proteome quantifications. For top3, peptide intensities were median-normalized to the global median, then missing peptide imputation was done per sample by drawing values from a gaussian distribution of width 0.3x sample standard deviation centered at the sample distribution mean minus 1.8x sample standard deviation if there were at least two peptide intensities in a group, otherwise a Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE) method was applied, followed by summation of the three most intense peptides per protein group to a surrogate of the real protein abundance, named iTop3. For LFQ values, we imputed with the same left-censored method as for peptides if there was a single missing protein LFQ value in the three biological replicates. Any remaining missing values were again imputed by the MLE method. In order to perform statistical tests, missing iTop3 or LFQ values were further imputed at the protein level using the MLE method, and the final imputed LFQ or iTop3 values were called iLFQ or iiTop3, respectively.  Differential expression tests were performed by applying the (Welch-) Student's t-test (unequal variance). Log2-fold changes and adjusted p-values (FDR-controlled Benjamini and Hochberg correction) were reported. Furthermore, a check was performed by repeating the imputation cycle and significance testing 20 times. Protein groups with a persistent reporting of differential expression were considered as true differentially expressed between the two groups. A log2-fold change of at least one and a corrected p-value of ≦0.05 were required to be considered as significant. Statistical testing and imputation were made with a home-made R script run under R-Studio.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Giardia lamblia</i> is an important causative agent of persistent diarrhea in humans, domestic animals, and cattle. Basic research is usually performed with the strain WBC6 and includes genetic manipulations such as transfections. Here, we investigate how transfection with a plasmid causing stable expression of a foreign gene affects the whole proteome pattern. Using shotgun mass spectrometry, we compare the proteomes of untransfected trophozoites to trophozoites transfected with <i>Escherichia coli</i> glucuronidase A (GusA). Besides GusA, which is detected in the transfected trophozoites only, the proteomes of untransfected and transfected trophozoites differ by 132 differentially expressed proteins. In particular, transfection induces antigenic variation. Since transfection causing stable expression affects the proteome pattern, transfection experiments should take into account this effect. Due to a unique peptide panel, GusA is an example for a suitable internal standard for experiments involving transfected cells. Data are available <i>via</i> ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD022565.

### Keywords
Controls and standards in proteomic experimental procedures; model organisms; reverse genetics; untargeted proteomics

### Affiliations
Institute of parasitology Vetsuisse University of Bern
Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry Core Facility, Department for BioMedical Research (DBMR), University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland

### Submitter
Manfred Heller

### Lab Head
Dr Norbert Müller
Institute of parasitology Vetsuisse University of Bern


### SDRF

