### Accession
PXD004781

### Title
Multiplexed temporal quantification of the human plasma peptidome

### Description
The plasma peptidome contains the entire complement of low molecular weight endogenous peptides derived from secretion, protease activity and post-translational modifications and is a rich source of biomarkers and novel bioactives. To examine the utility of peptidomics we have examined the effects of exercise on the peptidome because exercise is thought to convey many of its physiological benefits via the blood stream.  Deep peptidomic analysis was achieved using 2D LC-MS/MS with multiple fragmentation methods and included identification of post-translational modifications and multiplexed temporal quantification. We show the plasma peptidome is subject to transient changes during exercise on a time-scale of minutes that is rapidly reversible during recovery. Known peptide hormones were acutely regulated including insulin, glucagon, ghrelin, bradykinin, cholecystokinin, secretogranins and many others. Acute regulation of proteases and post-translational modifications including glycosylation were observed. These data reveal the power of peptidomic quantification to temporally quantify bioactive peptides, biomarkers and proteolytic activity during pathophysiological processes.

### Sample Protocol
Human subjects and sample collection Four healthy male volunteers (age: 26 - 28; BMI: 23.3 – 223.8 kg/m2, VO2 max: 41.6 – 47.3 ml/kg/min, Wmax: 280 - 295 W) abstained from strenuous exercise for 2 days prior to the experiment. They reported to the laboratory in the overnight fasted state and rested in the supine position for 30 min. A venous catheter was inserted in a forearm vein and a blood sample was obtained. Venous blood was obtained in heparinised syringes and quickly transferred to Eppendorf tubes containing 30µl 200mM EDTA /1500µl blood. Following warm up subjects exercised for 6 min at 77% of Wmax and then to exhaustion at 87-88% of Wmax, which occurred after 9-11 min total exercise time following warm up. A second blood samples was collected in the last minute of exercise followed by three additional samples taken at 1, 2 and 5 h post-exercise. The study was approved by the regional ethics committee in Denmark (Journal number: H-1-2012-006) and carried out in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki II. Written informed consent was obtained from each subject.  Peptidomic sample preparation Two hundred microliters of plasma was mixed 1:1 with 8 M urea, 20 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) in 50 mM 4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acids (HEPES), pH 8.0 and incubated at room temperature for 5 min. The mixture was diluted 1:1 with 20% trichloroacetic (TCA) and incubated for a further 5 min to precipitate proteins. The precipitate was centrifuged at 16,000 x g for 10 min and the supernatant containing peptides were desalted with hydrophilic-lipophilic balance solid-phase extraction (HLB-SPE) columns (Waters, MA). Peptides were eluted with 50% acetonitrile, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and dried by vacuum centrifugation. Peptides were resuspended in 40 µl of 100 mM HEPES and adjusted to pH 8.0. Peptides were labelled with 10-plex tandem mass tags (TMT; Thermo Scentific, CA) for 90 min at room temperature, quenched with 2 µl of 5% hydroxylamine and acidified to 2% formic acid (FA). The peptides from each TMT 10-plex experiment were combined and concentrated by HLB-SPE followed by removal of excess unreacted TMT reagent and fractionation with hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography (HILIC) as previously described [PMID 21127490].   Liquid chromatography – tandem mass spectrometry Each fraction was analysed on a Dionex 3500RS nanoUHPLC coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer with Tune v2.0.1258 in positive mode. Peptides were separated using an in-house packed 75 μm x 40 cm pulled column (1.9 μm particle size, C18AQ; Dr Maisch, Germany) with a gradient of 2 – 30% acetonitrile containing 0.1% FA over 120 min at 250 nl/min at 55°C. An MS1 scan was acquired from 350 – 1550 (120,000 resolution, 5e5 AGC, 100 ms injection time) followed by MS/MS data-dependent acquisition with HCD and detection in the Orbitrap (60,000 resolution, 2e5 AGC, 120 ms injection time, 40 NCE, 2.0 m/z quadrupole isolation width) and, EThcD and detection in the orbitrap (60,000 resolution, 2e5 AGC, 120 ms injection time, calibrated charge-dependent ETD reaction times [2+ 121 ms; 3+ 54 ms; 4+ 30 ms; 5+ 20ms; 6+ 13 ms; 7+; 10 ms], 25 NCE for HCD supplemental activation, 2.0 m/z quadrupole isolation width).

### Data Protocol
All data was processed with Proteome Discoverer (v2.1) using the Byonic node (v1.0.334) [PMID; 23255153] against the UniProt human database (November 2015, 46,949 entries). The precursor MS, HCD MS/MS and EThcD MS/MS tolerance were set to 20 ppm with no enzyme searching. The peptides were searched with oxidation of methionine set as variable modification and TMT tags on peptide N-terminus / lysine set as a fixed modification. A precursor isotope off set was enabled (narrow) to account for incorrect precursor monoisotopic reporting (+/- 1.0 Da). All data was searched as a single batch with PSM FDR set to 1% using a target decoy approach in Byonic. Quantification was performed with the reporter ion quantification node in Proteome Discoverer set at 10 ppm and corrected for isotopic impurities. Only spectra with <50% co-isolation interference was used for quantification with an average signal-to-noise filter of >10.

### Publication Abstract
Exercise is extremely beneficial to whole body health reducing the risk of a number of chronic human diseases. Some of these physiological benefits appear to be mediated via the secretion of peptide/protein hormones into the blood stream. The plasma peptidome contains the entire complement of low molecular weight endogenous peptides derived from secretion, protease activity and PTMs, and is a rich source of hormones. In the current study we have quantified the effects of intense exercise on the plasma peptidome to identify novel exercise regulated secretory factors in humans. We developed an optimized 2D-LC-MS/MS method and used multiple fragmentation methods including HCD and EThcD to analyze endogenous peptides. This resulted in quantification of 5,548 unique peptides during a time course of exercise and recovery. The plasma peptidome underwent dynamic and large changes during exercise on a time-scale of minutes with many rapidly reversible following exercise cessation. Among acutely regulated peptides, many were known hormones including insulin, glucagon, ghrelin, bradykinin, cholecystokinin and secretogranins validating the method. Prediction of bioactive peptides regulated with exercise identified <i>C</i>-terminal peptides from Transgelins, which were increased in plasma during exercise. <i>In vitro</i> experiments using synthetic peptides identified a role for transgelin peptides on the regulation of cell-cycle, extracellular matrix remodeling and cell migration. We investigated the effects of exercise on the regulation of PTMs and proteolytic processing by building a site-specific network of protease/substrate activity. Collectively, our deep peptidomic analysis of plasma revealed that exercise rapidly modulates the circulation of hundreds of bioactive peptides through a network of proteases and PTMs. These findings illustrate that peptidomics is an ideal method for quantifying changes in circulating factors on a global scale in response to physiological perturbations such as exercise. This will likely be a key method for pinpointing exercise regulated factors that generate health benefits.

### Keywords
Plasma, Exercise, Peptidomics, Peptidome

### Affiliations
The University of Sydney
The University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Benjamin Parker

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin Parker
The University of Sydney


