### Accession
PXD013840

### Title
Phosphoproteomic analysis of CD2 signaling reveals an AMPK-dependent targeted granule secretion in human cytotoxic T cells

### Description
The in-depth analysis of co-stimulatory signaling enhancing the activity of cytotoxic T cells represents a major approach towards the development of immunotherapies. Here we describe that CD2 co-stimulation plays a critical role in the functioning of human cytotoxic T cells (CTLs). We found that CD2 promotes the formation of functional immune synapses by orchestrating the polarization of lytic granules towards the synaptic interface. To broadly explore the CD2 signaling network, we undertook an analysis of protein phosphorylation in CD2-stimulated CTLs, which revealed 549 unique CD2-regulated phosphorylation events in 373 proteins. CD2 stimulation elicited an intricated network of signaling events participating in the regulation of T cell metabolism, vesicular trafficking, autophagy, cell polarity and cytoskeleton organization. We further show that a functionally critical node of this network is the AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK), which regulates granule polarization at the CTL synapse. Polarized trafficking of granules is driven by the concerted action of TAK1/LKB1/CamKK2 kinases, which locally activate AMPK enriched on CTL lysosome membranes, illustrating a novel functional cross-talk between vesicular compartments in CTLs. Our results thus establish CD2 signaling as key for regulating targeted granule secretion in CTLs and reveal an AMPK-dependent mechanism to explain how AMPK-activating drugs boost anti-tumour CTL activity.

### Sample Protocol
B cells were washed twice in ice-cold PBS and incubated on rocking platform in 3-4 mL of freshly prepared biotinylation/oxidation solution (1 mM periodate, 100 uM aminooxy-biotin, 10 mM aniline) for 30 min at +4°C. Then cell suspension was quenched by 1% glycerol. Cell pellets were washed in 5% FCS-PBS and in PBS-CaCl2-MgCl2, then were lysed in 3-4 mL of 0.5% lauryl maltoside lysis buffer (150 mM NaCl, 10 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6). Lysates were supplemented with 5 mM iodoacetomide with protease inhibitors (Roche) and left shaking for 30 min at +4°C. Subsequently, lysates were centrifuged at 2800 xg for 5 min and twice at 16000 xg for 10 min to eliminate nuclei, and then left shaking with high affinity streptavidin agarose resin (Pierce ThermoFisher) at +4°C for 2 h. Streptavidin agarose was pelleted at 1000 xg for 1 min, and washed using Snap Cap columns (Pierce ThermoFisher) 20 times with lysis buffer, then 20 times with PBS/SDS buffer (0.5% SDS). Agarose pellets were reduced in PBS/SDS with 100 mM DTT for 20 min at RT in the dark, washed 3 times with UC buffer (6M Urea, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5), alkylated in 20 mM iodoacetamide for 20 min in the dark, and washed 17 times with UC buffer and 3 times with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0. Agarose beads were frozen in 50 μL of ammonium bicarbonate buffer. Surface proteomes and phosphoproteomic samples were analysed on a MS platform consisting of Orbitrap Fusion Lumos and Ultimate 3000 (both Thermo Fisher Scientific) as described earlier. Peptides were separated on an EASY spray column (ES803, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and analysed on a Dionex Ultimate 3000/Orbitrap Fusion Lumos platform (both Thermo) as described earlier8. For TMT labelled peptides we used the MultiNotch MS3 method9 for generating spectra for identification and quantitation of phosphopeptides with parameters as deposited in the data acquisition method.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS was analysed in Proteome Discoverer version 2.2 (TMT-phospho data) and Progenesis QI (LFQ, surface proteomes). Proteins were identified with Sequest HT against the UPR human database (retrieved 31-Jan-2018). Mass tolerances were set to 10 ppm for precursor and 0.5 Da fragment mass tolerance. TMT10plex (N-term, K) and phosphorylation (STY) were set as dynamic modifications, alkylation (C) as static modification

### Publication Abstract
Understanding the costimulatory signaling that enhances the activity of cytotoxic T cells (CTLs) could identify potential targets for immunotherapy. Here, we report that CD2 costimulation plays a critical role in target cell killing by freshly isolated human CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells, which represent a challenging but valuable model to gain insight into CTL biology. We found that CD2 stimulation critically enhanced signaling by the T cell receptor in the formation of functional immune synapses by promoting the polarization of lytic granules toward the microtubule-organizing center (MTOC). To gain insight into the underlying mechanism, we explored the CD2 signaling network by phosphoproteomics, which revealed 616 CD2-regulated phosphorylation events in 373 proteins implicated in the regulation of vesicular trafficking, cytoskeletal organization, autophagy, and metabolism. Signaling by the master metabolic regulator AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) was a critical node in the CD2 network, which promoted granule polarization toward the MTOC in CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells. Granule trafficking was driven by active AMPK enriched on adjacent lysosomes, revealing previously uncharacterized signaling cross-talk between vesicular compartments in CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells. Our results thus establish CD2 signaling as key for mediating cytotoxic killing and granule polarization in freshly isolated CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells and strengthen the rationale to choose CD2 and AMPK as therapeutic targets to enhance CTL activity.

### Keywords
Cd2, Granule secretion, Phosphoproteome

### Affiliations
University of Oxford
Discovery Proteomics Facility University of Oxford

### Submitter
Roman Fischer

### Lab Head
Dr Roman Fischer
Discovery Proteomics Facility University of Oxford


