### Accession
PXD029311

### Title
The potential of remdesivir to affect function, metabolism and proliferation of in vitro heart and kidney models

### Description
Here, we performed an in vitro toxicity assessment for remdesivir at clinically relevant concentrations around the cmax of 9 µM using H9c2 rat cardiomyoblasts and neonatal mouse cardiomyocytes (NMCM) as heart models and rat NRK-52E cells and human RPTEC/TERT1 cells as kidney models. Due to the tendency of nucleoside analogs for mitochondrial toxicity, we focused on metabolic changes and mitochondrial function. Additionally, we analyzed the functionality of NMCM and determined early proteomic changes.

### Sample Protocol
Briefly, neonatal mouse cardiomyocytes (NMCM) and human renal proximal tube epithelial cells (RPTEC/TERT1) that were treated with either DMSO (control) or remdesivir [9 µM] or antimycin A [0.2 µM] were lysed with 1% SDS buffer containing 50 mM Tris-Cl, 150 mM NaCl, pH 7.8 with complete mini. Sample cleaning and proteolysis (trypsin) were performed using the S-Trap mini protocol as previously described (Hentschel et al. 2021).

### Data Protocol
Precursor-based label-free protein quantification was performed with the Proteome Discoverer 2.3 (Thermo Scientific) software. In both data sets, for each protein, the ratios i.e. remdesivir/DMSO and antimycin A/DMSO were calculated using the normalized and scaled abundances. Furthermore, log2-fold change and t-test p-values were determined by the Proteome Discoverer

### Publication Abstract
Remdesivir is a prodrug of a nucleoside analog and the first antiviral therapeutic approved for coronavirus disease. Recent cardiac safety concerns and reports on remdesivir-related acute kidney injury call for a better characterization of remdesivir toxicity and understanding of the underlying mechanisms. Here, we performed an in vitro toxicity assessment of remdesivir around clinically relevant concentrations (C<sub>max</sub> 9&#xa0;&#xb5;M) using H9c2 rat cardiomyoblasts, neonatal mouse cardiomyocytes (NMCM), rat NRK-52E and human RPTEC/TERT1 cells as cell models for the assessment of cardiotoxicity or nephrotoxicity, respectively. Due to the known potential of nucleoside analogs for the induction of mitochondrial toxicity, we assessed mitochondrial function in response to remdesivir treatment, early proteomic changes in NMCM and RPTEC/TERT1 cells and the contractile function of NMCM. Short-term treatments (24&#xa0;h) of H9c2 and NRK-52E cells with remdesivir adversely affected cell viability by inhibition of proliferation as determined by significantly decreased <sup>3</sup>H-thymidine uptake. Mitochondrial toxicity of remdesivir (1.6-3.1&#xa0;&#xb5;M) in cardiac cells was evident by a significant decrease in oxygen consumption, a collapse of mitochondrial membrane potential and an increase in lactate secretion after a 24-48-h treatment. This was supported by early proteomic changes of respiratory chain proteins and intermediate filaments that are typically involved in mitochondrial reorganization. Functionally, an impedance-based analysis showed that remdesivir (6.25&#xa0;&#xb5;M) affected the beat rate and contractility of NMCM. In conclusion, we identified adverse effects of remdesivir in cardiac and kidney cells at clinically relevant concentrations, suggesting a careful evaluation of therapeutic use in patients at risk for cardiovascular or kidney disease.

### Keywords
Nucleoside analogue, Covid-19, Remdesivir, Cardiotoxicity, Mitochondrial toxicity, Nephrotoxicity

### Affiliations
Leibniz – Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften - ISAS - e.V.
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften – ISAS – e.V. Otto-Hahn-Straße 6b 44227 Dortmund, Germany  P: +49 (0)2 31.13 92-100 F: +49 (0)2 31.13 92-200 albert.sickmann@isas.de www.isas.de  twitter.com/isas_Leibniz

### Submitter
Laxmikanth Kollipara

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Albert Sickmann
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften – ISAS – e.V. Otto-Hahn-Straße 6b 44227 Dortmund, Germany  P: +49 (0)2 31.13 92-100 F: +49 (0)2 31.13 92-200 albert.sickmann@isas.de www.isas.de  twitter.com/isas_Leibniz


