### Accession
PXD009275

### Title
Proteogenomic analysis of magnesium stress on cellulase activity in Bacillus licheniformis YNP5-TSU from biofilm associated proteins_sample13

### Description
During second generation biofuel production, optimization of cellulase activity is vital for synthesizing the end-product of anaerobic fermentation, bio-ethanol. The slightest change in pH, temperature, dissolved oxygen, carbon utilization, and addition or removal of essential supplements can reduce the secretion of necessary enzymes to degrade cellulosic biomass; resulting in a loss of free glucose. Determining the ecological effects of certain key media components is essential to understand how the bacterial or fungal colony will respond to a fluid cellulolytic environment. For our experiment a custom cellulosic media was designed to enhance the industrially important and recently isolated thermophile, Bacillus licheniformis YNP5-TSU. After several attempts to simplify the carboxymethylcellulose (CMC) media composition, impaired biofilm maturation and parallel declined cellulase activity was noticed. This negative artifact occurred during flask fermentation only when magnesium sulfate was removed from broth media. To analyze the shift in enzymatic gene expression, biofilm associated proteins were extracted and quantified through TMT10plex mass tag isobaric labeling of both magnesium sufficient (4.0mM MgSO4) and magnesium depleted media after 24hrs and 48hrs incubation periods. Raw data generated from nanoLC-MS/MS using an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer identified over 2,000 proteins from both control and magnesium depleted samples when searched against the whole genome sequence of Bacillus licheniformis YNP5-TSU (NCBI accession number MEDD00000000). After statistical normalization and false discovery rate were calculated, 140 upregulated/downregulated expressed proteins were shown with 2σ significance to be effected by magnesium concentrations. In a closer look through STRING protein co-expression webs, over 15 were directly related to biofilm and cellulase activity, with fold changes as high as 5.78. Through this proteomic study of Bacillus licheniformis YNP5-TSU we are able to provide significant evidence that; (1) biofilm maturation and cellulase production are highly correlated and (2), their optimization is dependent upon by the addition of magnesium, an essential mineral for growth.

### Sample Protocol
Single colonies of Bacillus licheniformis YNP5-TSU were incubated in both YNP5 CMC control broth (1.0% M9 minimal salts (Sigma-Aldrich, CA, USA), 1.0% casamino acids (Sigma-Aldrich, CA, USA), 1.0% CMC (Acros Organics, NJ, USA) ,0.05% MgSO4 (Sigma-Aldrich, CA, USA)) and YNP5 CMC experimental broth (1.0% M9 minimal salts (Sigma-Aldrich, CA, USA), 1.0% casamino acids (Sigma-Aldrich, CA, USA) and 1.0% CMC (Acros Organics, NJ, USA) lacking MgSO4. Bacillus biofilm proteins were extracted at 24hrs and 48hrs from samples (in triplicate) that were incubated at 45°C in Erlenmeyer baffled 250ml flasks at 50rpm in a New Brunswick Scientific™ I 24 rotary shaker. These 24hr and 48hr top biofilm layers were removed and ground into a dry powder with mortar and pestle after addition of liquid nitrogen. Then, 1.0g of this powdered sample was transferred into a phenol (pH 8.0) and dense sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) buffer (30% sucrose, 2% SDS, 5% β-mercaptoethanol (v/w) in 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.0). Following incubation at 4 °C for 2 h, solution was centrifuged at 16,000g at 4 °C for 15 min. The upper phenol phase was transferred to 0.1 M ammonium acetate in methanol overnight at −20 °C. The next day sample was centrifuged again at 16,000g for 15 min at 4 °C. The pellet was collect and again, added to 500µl methanol where upon a second centrifugation was air-dried and suspended in 30µls of a 500 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) buffer. To quantify and the amount of extracted biofilm protein from each sample, a Qubit® 3.0 Fluorometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, CA, USA) was used. Samples were standardized so each contained 600µg/mL; replicates with a higher concentration were diluted with 500 mM TEAB buffer accordingly. To visualize uniform concentrations, protein band intensity was observed by loading 10µg of sample onto precast Criterio TGX 10% polyacrylamide gels (Bio-Rad, CA, USA). Proteins were labeled using the TMT10plex Mass Tag Isobaric Labeling Protocol (Thermo Scientific, CA, USA) where 100µg from each sample (in triplicate) were transferred into a new tube and adjusted to a final volume of 100µL with 100mM TEAB. After several steps of centrifugation (8,000g at 10min), addition of idoacetamide (9mg, 375mM), and cold acetone wash (pre-chilled, -20°C, 6x volume), proteins were digested with trypsin (2.5µg per 100µg protein) supplied with TMT10plex Mass Tag Labeling Kit #90110 (Thermo Scientific, CA, USA). Cells incubated in YNP broth media for 24hrs with 4mM MgSO4 were labeled: 127C, 128N, 126 and 48hrs: 130C, 128C, 129N.  Cells incubated in YNP5 broth media with no MgSO4 for 24hrs were labeled: 128C, 130N, and 127N and 48hrs: 131, 127C, 129C.

### Data Protocol
After combining samples, hpRP chromatography was carried out using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 HPLC system with micro fraction collection and UV detection (Sunnyvale, CA) reported previously by Yang and colleagues. During this process TMT 10-plex tagged tryptic peptides were reconstituted in buffer A (20 mM ammonium formate pH 9.5 in water), and loaded onto an XTerra MS C18 column (3.5 µm, 2.1x150 mm) from Waters, (Milford, MA) with 20 mM ammonium formate (NH4FA), pH 9.5 as buffer A and 80% acetonitrile (ACN)/20% 20 mM NH4FA as buffer B. The LC was performed using a gradient from 10-45% of buffer B in 30 minutes at a flow rate 200 µL/min. Forty-eight fractions were collected at 1 minute intervals and pooled into a total of 12 fractions based on the UV absorbance at 214 nm and with multiple fraction concatenation strategy. All of the fractions were dried and reconstituted in 100 µL of 2% ACN/0.5% formate (FA) for nanoLC-MS/MS analysis. NanoLC-MS/MS analysis was carried out at the Functional & Comparative Proteomics Center, USDA-ARS, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, using an Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) mass spectrometer equipped with nano ion source using high energy collision dissociation (HCD) similar to previous reports. The Orbitrap is coupled with the UltiMate3000 RSLCnano (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA).  Each reconstituted fraction (8 L) was injected onto a PepMap C-18 RP nano trap column (3 µm, 75 µm  20 mm, Dionex) with nanoViper Fittings at 20 L/min flow rate for on-line desalting and then separated on a PepMap C-18 RP nano column (3 µm, 75µm x 15cm), and eluted in a 120 min gradient of 5% to 38% ACN in 0.1% formic acid at 300 nL/min., followed by a 7-min ramping to 95% ACN-0.1% FA and a 7-min hold at 95% ACN-0.1% FA. The column was re-equilibrated with 2% ACN-0.1% FA for 20 min prior to the next run. The Orbitrap Fusion is operated in positive ion mode with nano spray voltage set at 1.6 kV and source temperature at 275 °C. External calibration for FT, IT and quadrupole mass analyzers was performed. An internal calibration was performed using the background polysiloxane ion signal at m/z 445.120025 as the celebrant. The instrument was operated in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode using FT mass analyzer for one survey MS scan for selecting precursor ions followed by Top 3 second data-dependent HCD-MS/MS scans for precursor peptides with 2-7 charged ions above a threshold ion count of 10,000 with normalized collision energy of 37.5%.  MS survey scans at a resolving power of 120,000 (fwhm at m/z 200), for the mass range of m/z 400-1600 with AGC =3e5 and Max IT = 50 ms, and MS/MS scans at 50,000 resolution with AGC=1e5, Max IT = 120ms and with Q isolation window (m/z) at 1.6 for the mass range m/z 105-2000. Dynamic exclusion parameters were set at 1 within 50s exclusion duration with ±10 ppm exclusion mass width. All data was acquired under Xcalibur 3.0 operation software and Orbitrap Fusion Tune 2.0 (Thermo-Fisher Scientific).   All MS and MS/MS raw spectra from each set of TMT10-plex experiments were processed and database searched using Sequest HT software within Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (PD 1.4, Thermo). The Bacillus licheniformis YNP5-TSU protein fasta_OHAIR_protein containing 4,522 sequence entries was used for database searches. The default search settings used for 10-plex TMT quantitative processing and protein identification in PD 2.1 searching software were: two mis-cleavages for full trypsin with fixed Carbamidomethyl of cysteine, fixed 10-plex TMT modifications on lysine and N-terminal amines and variable modifications of methionine oxidation and deamidation on asparagine and glutamine residues. Identified peptides were filtered for a maximum 1% FDR using the Percolator algorithm in PD 1.4. Peptide confidence was set to high. The TMT10-plex quantification method within PD 1.4 was used to calculate the reporter ratios with a mass tolerance ±10 ppm without applying isotopic correction factors. Only peptide spectra containing all reporter ions were designated as “quantifiable spectra” and used for peptide/protein quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Yellowstone national park, Cellulase, Bacillus, Biofilm, Magnesium, Thermophiles

### Affiliations
USDA-ARS

### Submitter
Ted Thannhauser

### Lab Head
Dr Theodore Thannhauser
USDA-ARS


