### Accession
PXD012501

### Title
Thylakoid protein phosphorylation in Physcomitrella patens

### Description
Physcomitrella patens is a model plant representing the group of mosses, which diverged from vascular plant ancestors early after land colonization. To investigate the unique characteristic of the composition and post-translational regulation of Physcomitrella patens photosynthetic apparatus, we have separated the thylakoids protein complexes in their subunits composition by means of two-dimensional large-pore Blue-Native/sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (2D lpBN/SDS-PAGE), followed by protein in-gel tryptic digestion of single spots. To identify the kinase responsible for phosphorylation of the major thylakoid protein complex photosystem II, a mutant line lacking the ortholog of kinase STN8 in the model angiosperm Arabidopsis thaliana has been generated and the identified thylakoid protein phosphorylation pattern have been compared with the WT moss.

### Sample Protocol
P. patens WT (Gransden 2004 Ecotype) and stn8 KO protonema tissues were grown on minimum PpNO3 media in controlled conditions: 24°C, 16 h light/8 h dark photoperiod and a light intensity of 45 µmol photons m-2 s-1 (Control Light, CL, Philips TL-D 36W/840 light source), and analyzed after 11 days of growth. To analyze (reversible) phosphorylation of thylakoid proteins, plates were dark acclimated over-night before being exposed to 2 h of low light (LL, 7-10 µmol photons m-2 s-1, Osram PowerStar HQI-BT 400 W W/D Pro daylight).   Thylakoids were extracted from 11 days old protonema tissues grown in minimum media light-treated. Collected protonema tissue was grinded with a potter homogenizer in a few milliliters of buffer P1 (50 mM Hepes/KOH (pH 7.5), 330 mM sorbitol, 5 mM MgCl2, 5 mM ascorbate, 10 mM sodium fluoride) and filtered through a 20 µm nylon cloth to remove cell debris. The filtrate was centrifuged (3400 g, 5 min, 4°C) and the pellet containing the chloroplasts was re-suspended in buffer P2 (50 mM Hepes/KOH (pH 7.5), 5 mM MgCl2, 10 mM sodium fluoride). Thylakoids were pelleted (3400 g, 5 min, 4°C), washed with buffer P3 (50 mM Hepes/KOH (pH 7.5), 100 mM sorbitol, 10 mM MgCl2, 10 mM sodium fluoride) and finally re-suspended in a small volume of the same P3 buffer. Thylakoids were frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80 for later use.   Thylakoid extracts were used as starting material either for (i) denaturing SDS-PAGE or (ii) large pore Blue Native (lpBN)-PAGE, followed by a second dimension of denaturing SDS-PAGE (2D lpBN-SDS-PAGE). In the first case, after solubilization in Laemmli buffer, thylakoid extract from WT and stn8 KO lines were fractionated in SDS-PAGE, the gel band including STN8 protein (at around 48 kDa) was cut, subjected to in-gel tryptic digestion and the eluted peptides analyzed in ESI-nLC-MS/MS to verify the absence of STN8 protein accumulation in selected stn8 KO lines. For the second approach, thylakoids were first solubilized with 1% n-Dodecyl β-D-Maltoside (β-DM) at a final Chl concentration of 0,5 µg Chl/µl and separated in a lpBN gel system. After electrophoresis, lanes were cut and solubilized with Laemmli buffer prior to the second dimension SDS-PAGE (2D-lpBN-SDS-PAGE). The gels were then stained with ProQ Diamond, detecting phospho-proteins, and Sypro Ruby, detecting total proteins, according to manufacturer’s instructions (Invitrogen – Molecular Probes). A total of 72 spots were excised and in-gel digested with trypsin to be analyzed in tandem mass spectrometry. The gel pieces were cut in about 1 cubic mm pieces, washed in MilliQ H2O and subsequently shrunk completely by incubating and removing 100% acetonitrile (ACN) for 10 min, for three times in a raw. Subsequently, the gel pieces were incubated in 25 mM Dithiothreitol (DTT)/100 mM NH4HCO3 for 30 min at 56°C in a Thermomixer (Eppendorf) and, after shrinking as above, alkylated for 20 min with 55 mM of iodacetamide (IAA)/ 100 mM NH4HCO3 at 22°C in the dark. The gels pieces were washed alternating 100% ACN and 100 mM NH4HCO3 for two times in a raw and finally completely shrunk as described above. For protein digestion 0,1 µg of trypsin (Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin V5111, Promega, Madison) was added in 10 µl of 40 mM NH4HCO3/10% ACN and samples were incubated at 4°C until the gel pieces were completely re-hydrated and, after adding 20 µl of  40 mM NH4HCO3/10% CAN, subsequently incubated at 37°C with 600 rpm shaking in the Thermomixer (Eppendorf) for 13-14 hours. The tryptic peptides have been extracted by an equal volume of 100% ACN and incubating for 15 min at 37°C. The supernatant has been collected in a new Eppendorf and the gel pieces have been incubated two times for 15 min with 50% ACN/5% formic acid (FA) to collect the remaining peptides. The supernatants have been pooled and dried in a speed-vac for 3 hours. Finally, the samples were dissolved in 2% FA and analyzed by nLC-ESI MS/MS. For the mass spectrometry analysis of spots, the peptides samples were separated on a C18 precolumn (5 × 0.3 mm, PepMap C18, LC Packings) and a C18 nanocolumn (15 cm × 75 μm, Magic 5 μm, 200 Å C18, Michrom BioResources, Sacramento, CA) with a flow rate of 300 nL/min using 0.1% FA, 2% ACN as a buffer A and 0.1% FA, 80% ACN as a buffer B. The gradient was 8 to 43% B for 13 min, followed by 2 min increase to 100% and 5 min of 100% B. The mass spectrometer used was a Q-Exactive (Thermo Fisher Scientific), with resolution set to 120000 and scan range 300 to 2000 m/z for MS1 and resolution 17500 with scan range 200 to 2000 m/z for MS2. Dynamic exclusion window was set to 10 s and up to 10 masses with m/z ≥2+ were selected for MS2 for every MS1 scan.

### Data Protocol
The resulting spectra have been analyzed through Mascot (v.2.6.1) using Proteome Discover 2.2 (Thermo Scientific) and the embedded ptmRS algorithm to validate the identified phosphorylations. The variable modifications for soluble extract were Met oxidation, protein N-term acetylation, Ser, Thr and Tyr phosphorylation. Cys carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification. Posterior error probabilities was evaluated by validating PSMs with Mascot identity threshold for strict and relaxed significance and allowing only PSMs with medium or high confidence. The MS/MS spectra were matched against a custom P. patens database based on Uniprot entries (www.uniprot.org) manually updated for the known subunits of PSII, PSI, ATPase and cytb6f complexes. For each subunit sequence, the original Uniprot protein sequence was compared with the one retrieved in the last genome annotation (v3.3) from Phytozome (https://phytozome.jgi.doe.gov/pz/portal.html) and with A. thaliana sequence. Uniprot sequences identified as incomplete from this approach were then substituted with the full-length sequence from Phytozome

### Publication Abstract
In all eukaryotes, protein phosphorylation is a key regulatory mechanism in several cellular processes, including the acclimation of photosynthesis to environmental cues. Despite being a well-conserved regulatory mechanism in the chloroplasts of land plants, distinct differences in thylakoid protein phosphorylation patterns have emerged from studies on species of different phylogenetic groups. Here, we analyzed thylakoid protein phosphorylation in the moss <i>Physcomitrella patens</i>, assessing the thylakoid phospho-protein profile and dynamics in response to changes in white light intensity. Compared with Arabidopsis (<i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i>), parallel characterization of wild-type <i>P</i> <i>patens</i> and the knockout mutant <i>stn8</i> (depleted in SER/THR PROTEIN KINASE8 [STN8]) disclosed a moss-specific pattern of thylakoid protein phosphorylation, both with respect to specific targets and to their dynamic phosphorylation in response to environmental cues. Unlike vascular plants, (1) phosphorylation of the PSII protein D1 in <i>P</i> <i>patens</i> was negligible under all light conditions, (2) phosphorylation of the PSII core subunits CP43 and D2 showed only minor changes upon fluctuations in light intensity, and (3) absence of STN8 completely abolished all PSII core protein phosphorylation. Further, we detected light-induced phosphorylation in the minor light harvesting complex (LHC) antenna protein LHCB6, which was dependent on STN8 kinase activity, and found specific phosphorylations on LHCB3. Data presented here provide further insights into the appearance and physiological role of thylakoid protein phosphorylation during evolution of oxygenic photosynthetic organisms and their colonization of land.

### Keywords
Physcomitrella patens; moss; thylakoids; photosynthesis; photosystem ii; stn8 kinase; protein phosphorylation; n-terminal acetylation; nlc-msms

### Affiliations
Institute of Biosciences and Bioresources, National Research Council of Italy, Sesto Fiorentino (FI)
Molecular Plant Biology, Department of Biochemistry, University of Turku

### Submitter
Andrea Trotta

### Lab Head
Dr Eva-Mari Aro
Molecular Plant Biology, Department of Biochemistry, University of Turku


