### Accession
PXD035944

### Title
The tomato chloroplast stromal proteome compendium elucidated by leveraging a plastid protein-localization prediction Atlas

### Description
Tomato (Solanum lycopersicum) is a model species for studying fruit development, wounding, herbivory, and pathogen attack. Despite tomato’s world-wide economic importance and the role of chloroplasts as metabolic hubs and integrators of environmental cues, little is known about the stromal proteome of tomato. Using a high-yielding protocol for chloroplast and stromal protein isolation, MudPIT nano-LC-MS/MS analyses, a robust in-house protein database (the Atlas) for predicting the plastid localization of tomato proteins, and rigorous selection criteria for inclusion/exclusion in the stromal proteome, we identified 1,254 proteins of the tomato stromal proteome. We provide one of the most robust stromal proteomes available to date with empirical evidence for 550 and 105 proteins not previously described for tomato plastids and the Arabidopsis stroma, respectively. The relative abundance of tomato stromal proteins was determined using the exponentially modified protein abundance index (emPAI). Comparison of the abundance of tomato and Arabidopsis stromal proteomes provided evidence for the species-specific nature of stromal protein homeostasis. The manual curation of the tomato stromal proteome classified proteins into ten functional categories resulting in an accessible compendium of tomato chloroplast proteins. After curation, only 88 proteins remained as unknown, uncharacterized or as enzymes with unknown functions. The curation of the tomato stromal proteins also indicated that tomato has a number of paralogous proteins, not present in Arabidopsis, which accumulated to different levels in chloroplasts. As some of these proteins function in key metabolic pathways or in perceiving or transmitting signals critical for plant adaptation to biotic and abiotic stress, these data suggest that tomato may modulate the bidirectional communication between chloroplasts and nuclei in a novel manner. The stromal proteome provides a fertile ground for future mechanistic studies in the field of tomato chloroplast-nuclear signaling and are foundational for our goal of elucidating the dynamics of the stromal proteome controlled by the solanaceous-specific, stromal, and wound-inducible leucine aminopeptidase A of tomato.

### Sample Protocol
Chloroplasts were isolated from 5-wk-old tomato plants (Solanum lycopersicum UC82b). Five independent chloroplast preparations were made using leaves from 27-h, dark-adapted plants using a high-yielding chloroplast and stromal protein isolation method (Bhattacharya et al. 2020). Soluble proteins (110 μg) from 5 biological replications were precipitated with four vol of acetone for 16 h at -20oC and pelleted at 15,000 g for 30 min at 4°C. The pellet was manually dislodged and washed with 1 mL methanol to remove residual water. The sample was centrifuged at 15,000 g for 15 min at 4°C. The protein pellet was air-dried and stored at -20°C until use. Acetone protein pellets were resuspended in 100 µL trypsin solution (10 µg/mL trypsin, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8), 10% acetonitrile) and incubated at 37oC overnight. In addition, stromal proteins (100 μg/lane) were fractionated by 12% SDS-PAGE. the 50- to 75-kDa proteins was excised and discarded. The proteins in remaining gel fragments were separated into three fractions based on mass, gel pieces were minced, and destained in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate in 50% acetonitrile at RT for 30 min. After destaining, gel pieces were dehydrated in 100% acetonitrile for 50 min at RT. Gel pieces were dried using a SpeedVac for 15 min at 30°C and stored at -20°C until use. The gel protein samples were soaked with sufficient volume of trypsin solution (10 µg/ml trypsin, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate) and incubated overnight at 37oC. After trypsin digestion, five acetone-precipitated and three gel-extracted stromal protein samples were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS.  A MudPIT approach was employed to analyze the trypsin-treated samples by 2D-nanoLC/MS/MS analysis. 2D-nanoLC was performed online using the nanoAcquity UPLC in an At-Column Dilution configuration. The first-dimension LC mobile phases were 20 mM ammonium formate (pH 10) (mobile phase A) and acetonitrile (mobile phase B) and was achieved with five-min elutions off a NanoEase trap column (Waters) using five stepwise increases in acetonitrile (13%, 18%, 21.5%, 27%, and 50% acetonitrile). A final flushing step with 80% acetonitrile was used. Each fraction was then analyzed online using a second dimension LC gradient. The second dimension nano-UPLC method has been described (Drakakaki et al. 2012). Orbitrap Fusion MS method was based on a data-dependent acquisition (DDA) survey. The MS-acquired data from 1 to 69 min over a 70-min gradient. The nanoESI source was used with spray voltage at 2000 V, sweep gas at 0, and ion transfer tube temperature at 275 oC. Orbitrap mass analyzer was used for MS1 scan with resolution set at 60,000. MS mass range was 300-1800 m/z. AGC target for each scan was set at 500,000 with maximal ion injection time set at 100 ms. Precursor ions with intensity 10,000 or higher were selected for MS2 scans, which were performed with the Ion-Trap mass analyzer in the rapid scan mode. The sequence of individual MS2 scans was from the most- to least-intense precursor ions using the top-speed mode and a cycle time of 4 sec. Precursor ions apex peak detection was enabled, using an expected peak width of 10 sec and Desired Apex Window set to 30%. The minimum peak intensity threshold was set to 1e4. Higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with 25-35% normalized activation energy was used for fragmentation. The quadrupole was used for precursor isolation with 2 m/z isolation window.  MS2 mass range was set to auto/normal with the first mass set at 120 m/z. Maximal injection time was 100 msec with the AGC target set at 10,000. Ions were injected for all available parallelizable time. A 120-sec exclusion window was applied to all abundant ions to avoid repetitive MS2 scanning on the same precursor ions using 10 ppm error tolerance. Charge states from 2 to 8 were selected for MS2 scan and undetermined charge states were excluded. All MS2 spectra were recorded in the centroid mode.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS files were processed and analyzed using Proteome Discoverer version 2.1. Sequest HT search engine was used to match all MS data to a tomato protein database (ITAG 2.4 annotation release) or the in-house tomato Atlas and concatenated target/decoy databases were used for determining false discovery rates (Elias et al. 2005). The search parameters were the following: trypsin with two missed cleavages, minimal peptide length for six amino acids, MS1 mass tolerance 20 ppm, MS2 mass tolerance 0.6 Da, and Gln→pyro-Glu (N-term Q), oxidation (M), and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. Only proteins with 1% FDR cut-off were considered in the final result.   All identified proteins (1% FDR) were manually annotated. Peptide spectral matches (PSMs) and frequency of detection in tomato eight stromal samples were the first criteria for inclusion/exclusion of the tomato chloroplast soluble proteome. Proteins that were detected once with 1 PSM, identified with a single peptide or sporadically identified (in less than 40% of the samples analyzed) were removed from consideration. The exceptions were proteins that had empirical evidence for residence within the chloroplast based on the tomato literature or Arabidopsis orthologs identified in the Plant Proteome Database (PPDB; http://ppdb.tc.cornell.edu/), the Plastid Protein Database (plprot; http://www.plprot.ethz.ch/), and Subcellular Localization Database for Arabidopsis (SUBA4; http://suba.live/). The PPDB database was filtered for chloroplast-localized proteins with empirical evidence for localization within the chloroplast. The plprot database describes proteins localized in all plastid forms and was filtered for Arabidopsis homologs. SUBA4 was filtered for proteins with experimentally validated localizations within Arabidopsis plastids. Proteins that were predicted to be chloroplast localized by more than two or more localization algorithms were also retained. Gene names were based on the tomato literature, Sol Genomics database, updated with recent NCBI annotations, and, when appropriate, Arabidopsis thaliana orthologs, which were identified by the program Eggnog (Huerta-Cepas et al. 2019). Data from the primary literature and/or The Arabidopsis Information Resource site (TAIR; https://www.arabidopsis.org/) and Mercator and MapMan BIN ontologies (http://www.plabipd.de/portal/mercator-sequence-annotation/) were used for protein curation.

### Publication Abstract
Tomato (<i>Solanum lycopersicum</i>) is a model species for studying fruit development, wounding, herbivory, and pathogen attack. Despite tomato's world-wide economic importance and the role of chloroplasts as metabolic hubs and integrators of environmental cues, little is known about the stromal proteome of tomato. Using a high-yielding protocol for chloroplast and stromal protein isolation, MudPIT nano-LC-MS/MS analyses, a robust in-house protein database (the Atlas) for predicting the plastid localization of tomato proteins, and rigorous selection criteria for inclusion/exclusion in the stromal proteome, we identified 1,278 proteins of the tomato stromal proteome. We provide one of the most robust stromal proteomes available to date with empirical evidence for 545 and 92 proteins not previously described for tomato plastids and the Arabidopsis stroma, respectively. The relative abundance of tomato stromal proteins was determined using the exponentially modified protein abundance index (emPAI). Comparison of the abundance of tomato and Arabidopsis stromal proteomes provided evidence for the species-specific nature of stromal protein homeostasis. The manual curation of the tomato stromal proteome classified proteins into ten functional categories resulting in an accessible compendium of tomato chloroplast proteins. After curation, only 91 proteins remained as unknown, uncharacterized or as enzymes with unknown functions. The curation of the tomato stromal proteins also indicated that tomato has a number of paralogous proteins, not present in Arabidopsis, which accumulated to different levels in chloroplasts. As some of these proteins function in key metabolic pathways or in perceiving or transmitting signals critical for plant adaptation to biotic and abiotic stress, these data suggest that tomato may modulate the bidirectional communication between chloroplasts and nuclei in a novel manner. The stromal proteome provides a fertile ground for future mechanistic studies in the field of tomato chloroplast-nuclear signaling and are foundational for our goal of elucidating the dynamics of the stromal proteome controlled by the solanaceous-specific, stromal, and wound-inducible leucine aminopeptidase A of tomato.

### Keywords
Leucine aminopeptidase, Solanum lycopersicum, Proteomics, Redox, Stroma, Lumenal proteins, Protein homeostasis, Chloroplast

### Affiliations
Department of Botany and Plant Sciences, University of California, Riverside, CA 92521
University of California, Riverside

### Submitter
Linda Walling

### Lab Head
Dr Linda L. Walling
University of California, Riverside


