### Accession
PXD004186

### Title
Qualitative and quantitative analysis of Bothrops jararaca venom  gland proteome

### Description
While cellular transcripts encode rich information that provide key features to understand the molecular basis of snake venom variation, their presence/ abundance does not necessary imply/correlate in the translation of a functional (protein) product. In this study we carried out an analysis of the venom gland proteome of Bothrops jararaca taking into account two distinct phases of its ontogenetic development (i.e. newborn and adult specimens) and the marked sexual dimorphism recently reported on its venom proteome. Proteomic data analysis showed wider dynamic range for toxins when comparing to non-toxins and a dynamic proteome rearrangement in cellular proteins upon B. jararaca development. Differentially expressed proteins covered a number of biological pathways related to protein synthesis, including proteins related to transcription and translation, which were found to be significantly higher expressed in the newborn venom gland. Our results showed that the variation in the expression levels of cellular proteins gives rise to an even higher variation in the dynamic range of the expressed toxins. Upon ageing, the molecular constraints related to protein synthesis together with ecological traits would likely have an impact on the toxin repertoire, which, in the case of B. jararaca species, would enable the species to deal with different prey types during its lifespan.

### Sample Protocol
- Venom gland samples B. jararaca specimens were obtained from the Herpetology Laboratory, Instituto Butantan, São Paulo, Brazil. Twelve animals were used, among which 6 newborns (up to 45 days old; 3 males and 3 females) and 6 wild caught adults (3 males and 3 females), from different geographic regions of São Paulo State, Brazil. The venom was extracted and 3 days later the animals were sacrificed by CO2 inhalation. The venom glands were carefully dissected, frozen in liquid nitrogen and kept at -80°C until use. All animal work has been conducted in agreement with the Ethical Principles in Animal Research, adopted by the Brazilian College of Animal Experimentation and was approved by the Ethical Committee for Animal Research of Butantan Institute (protocol n° 1371/15).  -Protein extraction and quantitation Three milliliters of lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES, 200 mM NaCl, 2% CHAPS, pH 7.5) containing the HALTTM protease Inhibitor cocktail (Thermo Fisher, USA) and 5 mM EDTA (final concentration) were added to each venom gland pool and the samples were subjected to homogenization using a tissue homogenizer Polytron PT3100 (Kinematica AG, Switzerland) using 18 000 rpm cycles for 30s in ice bath. Homogenates were clarified by centrifugation at 14 000 x g for 10 min, at 4°C to remove debris and the clear supernatant clear was carefully removed. Due to the low amount of proteins obtained from individual newborn venom glands (data not shown), we chose to pool the 6 pairs of newborn venom glands (3 male + 3 female) whereas a total of 6 venom glands was used for the adult comparison: a male sample (a pool of 3 venom glands derived from 3 male individuals) and a female sample (a pool of 3 venom glands derived from 3 female individuals). Protein concentrations were determined using the Bradford reagent (Sigma, USA) and bovine serum albumin (Sigma, USA) as a standard.  - In-solution trypsin digestion and reductive isotopic dimethylation labeling  The in-solution trypsin digestion was performed according to the protocol described by Kleifeld et al., 2011 with slight modifications. Briefly, a solution of 6 M guanidine hydrochloride (GuHCl) was added to a sample of 100 μg of protein from each venom gland sample to a final concentration of 3 M GuHCl, followed by the addition of 5 mM DTT (final concentration). The mixture was incubated at 65°C for 60 min. Iodoacetamide was then added to a final concentration of 15mM and the samples were incubated for 60 min at room temperature, in the dark. To quench the excess of IAA, DTT was added to a final concentration of 15 mM. Clean-up of samples was performed by the addition of ice cold acetone (8 volumes) and methanol (1 volume), followed by the incubation of samples for 3h at -80° C. After centrifugation at 10 000 x g for 10 min, protein pellets were washed twice with one volume of ice cold methanol and then resolubilized with NaOH solution (final concentration of 2.5 mM), followed by the addition of 50 mM HEPES buffer, pH 7.5 to a final volume of 100 uL. Trypsin (Proteomics grade; Sigma, USA) was added at 1:100 ratio (enzyme/substrate) and protein samples were incubated at 37°C for 18h. Tryptic peptides were differentially labeled via stable-isotope dimethyl labeling, as previously described (Boersema et al., 2009). In brief, tryptic peptides were submitted to reductive dimethylation with either light or heavy formaldehyde, as follows: newborn venom gland peptides (light) vs. adult venom gland peptides (heavy); adult female venom gland peptides (light) vs. adult male venom gland peptides (heavy). Tryptic peptides (pH 7.0) from each sample were incubated overnight at 37 °C with either light or heavy sodium cyanoborohydride (NaBH3CN, light, or NaBD3CN, heavy) to a final concentration of 20 mM followed by the addition of formaldehyde 12CH2O (light) or 13CD2O (heavy) to a final concentration of 40 mM, resulting in mass differences of +28.031300 Da and +36.075670 Da for the light and heavy-labeled samples, respectively. The reaction was terminated by adding 1 M Tris (pH 6.8; to a final concentration of 200 mM) to each sample and the mixture was incubated for 2 h at 37 °C. Samples were then combined at 1:1 ratio into two pools: (i) newborn + adult and (ii) adult female + adult male. After desalting using C-18 cartridges (3M EmporeTM SPE Extraction disks, USA) peptide samples were dried in a SpeedVac and redissolved in 50 uL of 0.1% formic acid prior to nanoflow liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry (LC−MS/MS) analysis.

### Data Protocol
-Proteomics data processing  Mass spectrometric (RAW) data were analyzed with MaxQuant software (version 1.5.0.1.2; Cox and Mann, 2008). A False Discovery Rate (FDR) of 1% was required for both protein and peptide identifications. LTQ-Orbitrap Velos raw data were searched against a target database restricted to the taxonomy ‘Serpentes’ (UniProt release 09_2015; 58,895 sequences appended with 15,276 sequences derived from the translation of cDNAs encoding tissue proteins and toxins from B. jararaca venom gland (Junqueira-de-Azevedo et al., 2015). This database was also combined with the sequences of 245 common contaminants and concatenated with the reversed versions of all sequences. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and at least two missed cleavages were allowed; cysteine carbamidomethylation was selected as fixed modification whereas methionine oxidation, glutamine/asparagine deamidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were selected as variable modifications. Multiplicity was set to 2 to account for the two labeling states that were used (light and heavy dimethyl labeling at peptide N-terminus and lysine side chains). Peptide identification was based on a search with an initial mass deviation of the precursor ion of 7 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm. For protein quantification, a minimum of two ratio counts was set and the ‘Re-quantify’ and ‘match between runs’ functions were enabled. As is observed from complex proteomes such as vertebrates, peptides can be shared between homologous proteins or splice variants, leading to “protein groups”. For each protein group in the MaxQuant’s ‘proteinGroups.txt’ file, the first protein entry was selected as representative.  - Bioinformatic analysis All the light and heavy peptide intensities were log2-transformed and quantile-normalized using the ‘preprocessCore’ library in R scripting and statistical environment (Ihaka and Gentleman, 1996) to correct for intra-experimental variation. Protein identifications in which light or heavy singletons were found were not considered for further analysis. Statistical analyses were performed using the ‘limma’ package in R/Bioconductor (Simth 2004). After fitting a linear model to the data, an empirical Bayes moderated t-test was used for the comparisons (Female x Male and Newborn x Adult), and P values were adjusted for multiple testing with the Benjamini-Hochberg method. Proteins with an adjusted P-value < 0.05 and log2(fold change) > 1 and <-1 were considered to be differentially expressed. Differentially expressed proteins resulting from both comparisons were clustered and displayed as heatmap figures using the ‘pheatmap’ package in R. Prior to the generation of the heatmaps, the median of light and heavy peptide intensities were log2-transformed and normalized (z-score) in R. The distance measure used for clustering was set to ‘euclidean’ for all rows. Correlations between replicates were also calculated in R using Pearson correlation coefficient. Identified proteins were annotated according to the information associated to their main functions available under gene ontology (GO) categories at the UniProt database (GO - Molecular function or GO - Biological process) using the ‘Retrieve/ID mapping’ tool (http://www.uniprot.org/uploadlists/). In cases were no annotation was found, a BLASTP search was performed using the Blast2GO software (Conessa et al., 2005), selecting the top-hit (i.e, e-value alignment ≤ 10-3) and transferring the corresponding annotations. Proteins were further manually allocated into one out of the nine ‘major’ categories: general metabolism, inhibitor, protein degradation, protein secretion, protein transport/sorting, PTM/processing, structural, transcription/translation and vesicular trafficking.

### Publication Abstract
We carried out an analysis of the venom gland proteome of Bothrops jararaca taking into account two distinct phases of its ontogenetic development (i.e., newborn and adult) and the marked sexual dimorphism recently reported on its venom proteome. Proteomic data analysis showed a dynamic rearrangement in the proteome landscape of B. jararaca venom gland upon development and gender-related changes. Differentially expressed proteins covered a number of biological pathways related to protein synthesis, including proteins associated with transcription and translation, which were found to be significantly higher expressed in the newborn venom gland. Our results suggest that the variation in the expression levels of cellular proteins might give rise to an even higher variation in the levels of the expressed toxins. Upon aging, the venom gland proteome repertoire related to the protein synthesis together with ecological traits would have an impact on the toxin repertoire, which, in the case of B. jararaca species, would enable the species to deal with different prey types during its lifespan. Proteomic data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD004186.

### Keywords
Bothrops jararaca, Venom variability, Venom gland proteome, Snake venom proteome

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Functional Proteomics  -

Department of Science and Technology -
Federal University of São Paulo (UNIFESP), Sao Jose dos Campos-SP, Brazil
Functional Proteomics Laboratory  - Department of Science and Technology, Federal University of Sao Paulo (UNIFESP), Sao Jose dos Campos, Sao Paulo, Brazil

### Submitter
Andre Zelanis

### Lab Head
Dr André Zelanis
Functional Proteomics Laboratory  - Department of Science and Technology, Federal University of Sao Paulo (UNIFESP), Sao Jose dos Campos, Sao Paulo, Brazil


