### Accession
PXD020879

### Title
Whole proteome analysis of mesonephric-derived cancers describes new potential biomarkers

### Description
Mesonephric carcinomas (ME) and Female Adnexal Tumors of probable Wolffian Origin (FATWO) are thought to derive from remnants of the Wolffian/mesonephric ducts – anlages of the male reproductive tract. Mesonephric-like carcinomas (MLC) show identical morphology to ME of the cervix, but occur in the uterus and ovary without convincing mesonephric remnants. ME, MLC and FATWO are challenging to diagnose due to their morphologic similarities to Müllerian tumors, resulting in a lack of evidence-based and tumor-specific treatment regimens. In order to identify potential diagnostic biomarkers, we performed whole proteomic analysis on 9 ME/MLC and 56 endometrial carcinomas (EC). ME and MLC proteomes showed significant overlap with few distinguishing protein markers.

### Sample Protocol
Unbiased whole proteome analysis was performed on formalin fixed and paraffin embedded (FFPE) samples of pooled ME/MLC and EC using single-pot solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation (SP3) clinical proteomics, as described in: Hughes CS, McConechy MK, Cochrane DR, Nazeran T, Karnezis AN, Huntsman DG, et al. Quantitative Profiling of Single Formalin Fixed Tumour Sections: proteomics for translational research. Sci Rep. 2016 10 7;6:34949.

### Data Protocol
Acquired spectra were searched against Uniprot human reference proteome (20247 sequences, 2018/08/03) using Sequest HT algorithm through the Proteome Discoverer suite (v2.1.1.21, Thermo Scientific). Precursor and fragment ion tolerance were set to 20ppm 0.8 Da respectively. Dynamic modifications included Oxidation (+15.995 Da, M), Acetylation (+42.011 Da, N-Term), and static modification included Carbamidomethyl (+57.021 Da, C) and TMT (+229.163 Da, K, N-Term).  Peptide-to-spectrum (PSM) identification false discovery rate (FDR) was calculated using Percolator by searching the results against a decoy sequence set, only PSMs with FDR< 5% were retained in the analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Mesonephric carcinomas (MEs) and female adnexal tumors of probable Wolffian origin (FATWO) are derived from embryologic remnants of Wolffian/mesonephric ducts. Mesonephric-like carcinomas (MLCs) show identical morphology to ME of the cervix&#xa0;but occur in the uterus and ovary without convincing mesonephric remnants. ME, MLC, and FATWO are challenging to diagnose due to their morphologic similarities to M&#xfc;llerian/paramesonephric tumors, contributing to a lack of evidence-based and tumor-specific treatments. We performed whole-proteomic analysis on 9 ME/MLC and 56 endometrial carcinomas (ECs) to identify potential diagnostic biomarkers. Although there were no convincing differences between ME and MLC, 543 proteins showed increased expression in ME/MLC relative to EC. From these proteins, euchromatic histone lysine methyltransferase 2 (EHMT2), glutathione S-transferase Mu 3 (GSTM3), eukaryotic translation elongation factor 1 alpha 2 (EEF1A2), and glycogen synthase kinase 3 beta were identified as putative biomarkers. Immunohistochemistry was performed on these candidates and GATA3 in 14 ME/MLC, 8 FATWO, 155&#xa0;EC, and normal tissues. Of the candidates, only GATA3 and EHMT2 were highly expressed in mesonephric remnants and mesonephric-derived male tissues. GATA3 had the highest sensitivity and specificity for ME/MLC versus EC (93% and 99%)&#xa0;but was absent in FATWO. EHMT2 was 100% sensitive for ME/MLC &amp; FATWO&#xa0;but was not specific (65%). Similarly, EEF1A2 was reasonably sensitive to ME/MLC (92%) and FATWO (88%)&#xa0;but was the least specific (38%). GSTM3 performed intermediately (sensitivity for ME/MLC and FATWO: 83% and 38%, respectively; specificity 67%). Although GATA3 remained the best diagnostic biomarker for ME/MLC, we have identified EHMT2, EEF1A2, and GSTM3 as proteins of interest in these cancers. FATWO's cell of origin is uncertain and remains an area for future research.

### Keywords
Tmt, Mesonephric

### Affiliations
gsc
Canada's Michael Smith Genome Sciences Centre, BC Cancer Agency, Vancouver V5Z 1L3, Canada.

### Submitter
Gian Luca Negri

### Lab Head
Dr Gregg Morin
Canada's Michael Smith Genome Sciences Centre, BC Cancer Agency, Vancouver V5Z 1L3, Canada.


