### Accession
PXD017863

### Title
Pla2g6-dependent cytokine signaling in MIN6 cells

### Description
Analysis of MIN6 murine beta cell line transfected with Pla2g6 RNAi and treated with pro-inflammatory cytokines TNF-alpha, IL-1beta and IFN-gamma.

### Sample Protocol
Extracted proteins were dissolved in 50 mM NH4HCO3 containing 8 M urea and 10 mM dithiothreitol. After incubating for 1 h at 37 ºC with shaking at 800 rpm, 400 mM iodoacetamide was added to a final concentration of 40 mM, and the mixture incubated for another hour at the same conditions. The reaction mixture was then diluted 8 folds with 50 mM NH4HCO3, and 1 M CaCl2 was added to a final concentration of 1 mM. Proteins were digested for 5 h at 37 ºC using trypsin at 1:50 enzyme:protein ratio. Digested peptides were desalted by solid-phase extraction using C18 cartridges (Discovery, 50 mg, Sulpelco) and dried in a vacuum centrifuge.  Peptides were analyzed on a Waters NanoAquity UPLC system with a custom packed C18 column (70 cm × 75 μm i.d., Phenomenex Jupiter, 3 μm particle size, 300 Å pore size) coupled with a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide separation was carried out with a gradient of water (solvent A) and acetonitrile (solvent B) both containing 0.1% formic acid (1-8% B in 2 min, 8-12% B in 18 min, 12-30% B in 55 min, 30-45% B in 22 min, 45-95% B in 3 min, hold for 5 min in 95% B and 99-1% B in 10 min). Eluting peptides were directly analyzed by nanoelectrospray ionization and full-MS scans were collected over 400–2000 m/z at a resolution of 35,000 at 400 m/z. The top 12 most intense parent ions were submitted to high-energy collision induced dissociation (HCD) fragmentation (2.0 m/z isolation width; 30% normalized collision energy; 17,500 resolution at 400 m/z), before being dynamically excluded for 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed with MaxQuant software (v.1.5.5.1) by matching against the mouse reference proteome database from Uniprot Knowledge Base (downloaded August 14, 2018). Searching parameters included protein N-terminal acetylation and oxidation of methionine as variable modifications, and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues as fixed modification. Mass shift tolerance was used as the default setting of the software. Only fully tryptic digested peptides were considered, allowing up to two missed cleaved sites per peptide. Quantification of proteins was done using the intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) method.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lipid signaling, Pancreatic beta cells, Phospholipase a2, Cytokines, Mulit-omics

### Affiliations
Biological Sciences Division, Pacific Northwest National Laboratory
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory

### Submitter
Ernesto Nakayasu

### Lab Head
Dr Ernesto Nakayasu
Biological Sciences Division, Pacific Northwest National Laboratory


