### Accession
PXD022478

### Title
Chronic pain susceptibility is associated with anhedonic behavior and alterations in the accumbal ubiquitin-proteasome system

### Description
It remains unknown why upon similar acute/subacute painful conditions, pain persists in some individuals while in others it resolves. Genetic factors, mood, and functional alterations, particularly involving the mesolimbic network, appear to be key. In order to explore potential susceptibility/resistance factors, we screened a large population of rats with a peripheral neuropathy, and we isolated a small subset (<15%) that presented high thresholds (HT) to mechanical allodynia (reduced pain manifestation). The phenotype was sustained over 12 weeks and was associated with higher hedonic behavior when compared with low threshold subjects (LT). The nucleus accumbens (NAc) of HT and LT animals were isolated for proteomic analysis by Sequential Window Acquisition of All Theoretical Mass Spectra (SWATH-MS). Two hundred and sevety-nine proteins proteins displayed different expression between LT and HT animals/subjects.

### Sample Protocol
Experimental subjects and neuropathic pain model An initial population of 72, 2-month old males SD animals (Charles River Laboratories) was used. Animals were pair-housed in standard plastic cages with food and water available ad libitum, in a room with controlled temperature (22 ºC ± 1 ºC) and humidity (55-60%), 12-hour light/dark cycle (lights on at 8 AM). All procedures involving animals were approved by the respective local organizations, and the experiments were performed according to the European Community Council Directive 2010/63/EU guidelines. The spared nerve injury (SNI) model was used in all experiments. Surgical procedures were performed under deep anesthesia obtained with an i.p. 1.5:1.0 mixture of ketamine (Imalgene, 100 mg.mL-1; Merial) and medetomidine (Dormitor, 1 mg.mL-1; Orion Pharma) at a dose of 1 mg.kg-1. Protein quantification by SWATH-MS Animals were perfused transcardially with ice-cold sodium chloride 0.9% (NaCl) under deep sodium pentobarbital anesthesia (200 mg.kg-1 i.p.; Eutasil, Ceva Saúde Animal). Brains were collected and the left and right NAc macrodissected and immediately frozen (−80 ºC) until use. Samples from LT and HT were thawed and ultrasonicated (in 130W Ultrasonic Processor with the following settings: 60% amplitude, 1 second on/off cycles, for 1-minute total sonication) in 200 µL of 50 mM of Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, with protease and phosphatase inhibitors. Samples were then centrifugated at 5,000 x g for 5 min at 4 ºC and supernatants were collected. To improve the extraction yield, pellets were resuspended in 100 µL of fresh buffer and subjected to an additional step of sonication. After centrifugation, the supernatants were collected. Samples were quantified using the 2D-Quant Kit (GEHealthcare), and 100 g of each sample were subjected to trypsin digestion using the Short-GeLC for subsequent quantitative analysis by SWATH-MS. Prior to electrophoresis, 1µg of the MBP-GFP was added to each sample to account for sample processing variation, and samples were denatured, reduced, and alkylated with acrylamide. In addition to the individual replicates, pooled samples (one per condition) were created to be used in information-dependent acquisition (IDA) experiments to build a specific protein library for SWATH-MS analysis. These pooled samples were spiked with the recombinant protein and digested using the same condition of the individual replicates. Samples were analyzed on a Triple TOF™ 5600 System (AB Sciex®) in two modes: IDA of the pooled samples and SWATH acquisition of each individual sample. Peptides were resolved by liquid chromatography (nanoLC Ultra 2D. Eksigent®) on a MicroLC column ChromXP™ C18CL (300 µm ID × 15 cm length. 3 µm particles. 120 Å pore size. Eksigent®) at 5 µL.min-1 with a multistep gradient: 0-2 min gradient from 2% to 5% mobile phase B; 2-45 min linear gradient from 5% to 28% B; and 45-46 min gradient from 28% to 35% B. Mobile phase A corresponding to 0.1% formic acid (FA) with 5% DMSO and mobile phase B to 0.1% FA and 5% DMSO in Aconitate hydratase (ACN). Peptides were eluted into the mass spectrometer using an electrospray ionization source (DuoSpray™ Source. AB Sciex®) with a 25 µm internal diameter (ID) hybrid PEEK/stainless steel emitter (AB Sciex®). The IDA experiments were performed for each of the three fractions of the pooled samples, and the mass spectrometer was set to scanning full spectra (350-1250 m/z) for 250 ms followed by up to 100 MS/MS scans (100–1500 m/z from a dynamic accumulation time – minimum 30 ms for precursor above the intensity threshold of 1000 – in order to maintain a cycle time of 3.309 s). Candidate ions with a charge state between +2 and +5 and counts above a minimum threshold of 10 counts per second were isolated for fragmentation, and one MS/MS spectrum was collected before adding those ions to the exclusion list for 25 seconds (mass spectrometer operated by Analyst® TF 1.7. AB Sciex®). The rolling collision was used with a collision energy spread of 5. For SWATH-MS based experiments, the mass spectrometer was operated in a looped product-ion mode [3] and the same chromatographic conditions used as in the IDA run described above. A set of 60 windows (see supplementary table S1) of variable width (containing 1 m/z for the window overlap) was specifically constructed for the samples being analyzed, covering the precursor mass range of 350-1250 m/z. A 200 ms survey scan (350-1500 m/z) was acquired at the beginning of each cycle for instrument calibration, and SWATH-MS/MS spectra were collected from 100–1500 m/z for 50 ms resulting in a cycle time of 3.254 s from the precursors ranging from 350 to 1250 m/z. The collision energy for each window was determined according to the calculation for a charge +2 ion centered upon the window with variable collision energy spread (CES) according to the window.

### Data Protocol
A specific library of precursor masses and fragment ions was created by combining all files from the IDA experiments and used for subsequent SWATH processing. Libraries were obtained using ProteinPilot™ software (v5.1. AB Sciex®) using the following parameters: i) search against a database composed of the Rattus norvegicus Uniprot’s Reference Proteome (UP000002494, downloaded in March 2018) and the sequence of the recombinant protein MBP-GFP (used as IS); ii) acrylamide alkylated cysteines as fixed modification; iii) trypsin as digestion type. An independent False Discovery Rate (FDR) analysis using the target-decoy approach provided with Protein Pilot software was used to assess the quality of the identifications, and positive identifications were considered when identified proteins and peptides reached a 5% local FDR. Data processing was performed using SWATH™ processing plug-in for PeakView™ (v2.0.01. ABSciex®). After retention time adjustment using the MBP-GFP peptides, up to 15 peptides with up to 5 fragments each were chosen per protein, and quantitation was attempted for all proteins in the library file that were identified from ProteinPilot™ searches. Peptides’ confidence threshold was determined based on an FDR analysis using the target-decoy approach, and those that met the 1% FDR threshold in at least three biological replicates and with at least 3 transitions were retained. Peak areas of the target fragment ions (transitions) of the retained peptides were extracted across the experiments using an extracted-ion chromatogram (XIC) window of 3.5 minutes with 100 ppm XIC width. The levels of the NAc proteins were estimated by summing all the transitions from all the peptides for a given protein that met the criteria described above and normalized to the total intensity of each sample.

### Publication Abstract
It remains unknown why on similar acute/subacute painful conditions, pain persists in some individuals while in others it resolves. Genetic factors, mood, and functional alterations, particularly involving the mesolimbic network, seem to be key. To explore potential susceptibility or resistance factors, we screened a large population of rats with a peripheral neuropathy and we isolated a small subset (&lt;15%) that presented high thresholds (HTs) to mechanical allodynia (reduced pain manifestation). The phenotype was sustained over 12 weeks and was associated with higher hedonic behavior when compared with low-threshold (LT) subjects. The nucleus accumbens of HT and LT animals were isolated for proteomic analysis by Sequential Window Acquisition of All Theoretical Mass Spectra. Two hundred seventy-nine proteins displayed different expression between LT and HT animals or subjects. Among several protein families, the proteasome pathway repeatedly emerged in gene ontology enrichment and KEGG analyses. Several alpha and beta 20S proteasome subunits were increased in LT animals when compared with HT animals (eg, PSM&#x3b1;1, PSM&#x3b1;2, and PSM&#x3b2;5). On the contrary, UBA6, an upstream ubiquitin-activating enzyme, was decreased in LT animals. Altogether these observations are consistent with an overactivation of the accumbal proteasome pathway in animals that manifest pain and depressive-like behaviors after a neuropathic injury. All the proteomic data are available through ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD022478.

### Keywords
Neuropathic pain; allodynia; proteomic screening; nucleus accumbens; resistance; proteasome

### Affiliations
Life and Health Sciences Research Institute (ICVS) ICVS/3B’s – PT Government Associate Laboratory
​Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology – University of Coimbra

### Submitter
Sandra Anjo

### Lab Head
Dr Hugo Almeida
Life and Health Sciences Research Institute (ICVS) ICVS/3B’s – PT Government Associate Laboratory


