### Accession
PXD013402

### Title
SWATH-proteomics analysis of ibrutinib mechanism of action in neutropenia and acute myeloid leukemia initiating mutated granulocyte-colony stimulating factor receptor

### Description
Neutrophil production and function are primarily determined by granulocyte colony stimulating factor receptor (G-CSFR). G-CSFRs associated mutations (mostly localized in the transmembrane and cytoplasmic domains of the receptor) have been reported with several distinct hematological abnormalities as well as malignancies, e.g. severe congenital neutropenia (SCN), acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and chronic neutrophilic leukemia (CNL). Ibrutinib, a small molecule Bruton’s tyrosine kinase (BTK) inhibitor, is FDA approved and clinically used against B-cell related leukemia. In our previous published work (Dwivedi et al., Leukemia.2019;33:75–87), we have shown ibrutinib’s efficacy in the mutated G-CSFRs based leukemia model systems (mouse and human). However, the signaling mechanism of ibrutinib’s efficacy is not explored yet. Here, we present a unique SWATH-based label free quantitative proteomics analysis of the normal and mutated G-CSFRs signaling post ibrutinib treatment, using 32D cell-line-based in vitro model system.

### Sample Protocol
Generation of G-CSFR expressing stable 32D cell line. 32D cells were cultured in IMDM supplemented with 2 mM L-glutamine, 10% FBS  and 100 IU/ml penicillin as well as 100 mg/ml streptomycin. Since 32D cells are IL3 dependent, the culture medium was also supplied with recombinant murine IL3 (Miltenyi). MSCV-IRES-GFP EV (empty vector), CSF3R-WT, CSF3R-Q741x (truncation mutant) retrovirus were produced using 293T cells. The transfection experiment was performed with 9 mg retroviral vector and 9 mg retroviral packaging/envelope plasmid (pCL-Eco) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Virus containing supernatant was collected at 48 and 72 hours. 32D cells were transduced by incubation in the supernatant overnight. The transduced cells were sorted for GFP and CD114 expression at 48 hours post the second transduction. The lower GFP expressing 32D cell population were collected for further analysis. Ibrutinib treatment and G-CSF induction. Stably growing transduced 32D cells (WT and Q741x G-CSFRs expressing) were washed twice with cold PBS by spinning at 1200 rpm for 4 min/ 4°C and serum starved for 6 hours at 37°C and 5% CO2 at the cell confluence of 1 million per ml. After starvation, the half of cells from each group (WT and Q741x) were treated with 100 nM of ibrutinib for 1 hour at 37°C and 5% CO2 and other half left untreated. Post drug treatment, all cell groups were stimulated with 40 ng/ml of G-CSF for 15 min at 37°C and 5% CO2. Cell lysis and in-gel trypsin digestion. Ten million cells were lysed in 500 ml of the lysis buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl, 150 mM Sodium Chloride, 2 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA, Complete Mini Protease Inhibitor Cocktail Tablet, 10 mM Sodium fluoride, 1 mM Sodium orthovanadate, 1 mM beta-glycerophosphate, 1% NP-40, 1% Tween-20, 10% Glycerol, 2.5 mM Sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM PMSF). The protein estimation was performed using 660 nm assay. Twenty-five micrograms of cell lysate were run in each well using 4-12% Bis Tris gel (Invitrogen) gradient SDS-PAGE gel was used for protein separation at 125 V for 15 min. The gel was fixed overnight in the fixing solution (50% ethyl alcohol, 10 % acetic acid solution in water). Post-fixation, the gel bands were excised and sliced into small pieces for subsequent in-gel tryptic digestion. Mass spectrometry. Nano LC-ESI-MS/MS analysis was performed by a TripleTof 5600+ mass spectrometer (Sciex; Concord, Ontario, Canada) coupled with a nanoLC-ultra nanoflow system (Eksigent) in data dependent acquisition (DDA) or data independent acquisition (DIA) modes. Approximately 2.5 mg of extracted peptides from the in-gel digestion were loaded on to column trap (Eksigent Chrom XP C18-CL-3 μm 120 Å, 350 μm x 0.5 mm) at 2 μL/min in 0.1% formic acid for 15 min to desalt and concentrate the sample via Eksigent NanoLC-AS-2 autosampler. The desalted samples were further directed to Acclaim PepMap100 C18 LC column (75 μm x 15 cm, C18 particle sizes of 3 μm, 120 Å) (Dionex) for chromatographic separation. The peptides elution was carried out at a flow rate of 300 nL/min using a variable mobile phase (MP) gradient from 95% phase A (0.1% formic acid) to 40% phase B (99.9% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid) for 70 minutes, from 40% phase B to 85% phase B for 5 minutes, and then keeping 85% phase B for 5 minutes. The internal MS parameters used during the gradient run were ion source gas 1 (GS1), ion source gas 2 (GS2) and curtain gas (CUR) at 13, 0 and 35 respectively. Furthermore, interface heater temperature and ion spray voltage were maintained at 150 °C and at 2.6 kV respectively. Data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. MS was operated in positive ion mode set for 1,929 cycles for 90 minutes gradient duration, where each cycle performed 1 time of flight (TOF) scan type (250 ms accumulation time, 350–1250 m/z window with a charge state of 2+ to 4+) followed by information dependent acquisition of the most 50 intense candidate ions. The minimum MS signal was set to 150 counts. High sensitivity mode was used for each MS/MS scan with an accumulation time of 50 ms and a mass tolerance of 100 ppm. Former MS/MS-analyzed candidate ions were excluded for 12 sec after its first occurrence to reduce the redundancy of the identified peptides. The DDA data (.wiff) was recorded by Analyst-TF (v.1.7) software. Data-independent acquisition (DIA) mode. A mass window width of 8 m/z with overlapping of 1 m/z for 57 transmission windows was used during data independent acquisition. MS scan was set to 1,715 cycles, with each cycle performing 1 TOF-MS scan type (250 ms accumulation time, across the 350–750 precursor mass range) acquired in every cycle for a total cycle time of ~3.15 s. A 50 ms per SWATH window width was used to collect MS spectra from 100–1250 m/z. Resolution for MS1 and SWATH-MS2 scan were 30,000 and 15,000, respectively. The rolling collision energy with the collision energy spread of 15 was applied. The DIA data (.wiff) was recorded by Analyst-TF (v.1.7) software.

### Data Protocol
Spectral library generation and manual curation. A total of 12 DDA data from various 32D treated cell samples were used for spectral library generation. Protein Pilot v.5.0, revision 4769 (Sciex) was used to perform a merged search of 12 DDA files against SwissProt Mus musculus database with an automated false discovery rate and the searching parameters as followed: alkylation on cysteine by iodoacetamide, tryptic digestion, TripleTOF 5600 instrument, gel-based ID special factors, ID focus on biological modification, thorough ID search effort, and detected protein threshold [unused ProtScore (Conf)] >0.05 (10%). The Protein Pilot software based standard target-decoy database searching method was applied to estimate false discovery rates (FDR) at the peptide spectrum match (PSM), peptides and protein levels. At the same time, a non-linear fitting method was used to determine both global and local FDR from the decoy database searching. A manual inspection of unique peptide and proteins (with <1% FDR) was performed and an original spectral library was generated with the Protein Pilot search result (.group) using SWATH Acquisition MicroApp v.2.0.2133 in PeakView software v.2.2 (Sciex). The global 1% FDR from fit at the protein level was applied to import proteins for spectral library generation. Further, manual curation (in excel) of the spectral library was performed to remove the source of inconsistency in targeted proteomic experiment as follows; (i) any peptide with modification, except carboxamidomethyl (CAM) of cysteine; (ii) any peptide with missed cleavage; (iii) any peptide that not terminated by lysine or arginine (which considered as non-tryptic peptides); (iv) any peptide that identified as contamination or reversed sequences. This curated spectral library was further used for SWATH data extraction. SWATH-MS analysis. SWATH data extraction was executed as described in our previous publication7. In brief, 12 DIA files (2.5 μg/injection as described in earlier section) was processed by SWATH Acquisition MicroApp (Sciex) using 5 min extraction window and the parameters as follows: 6 transitions/peptide, 10 peptides/protein, excluding shared peptides, peptide confidence >99%, FDR <1%, and XIC width of 0.05 Da. FDR calculation involved in SWATH data analysis was performed at the peptide level by the standard target-decoy analysis. This method is built-in the SWATH Acquisition MicroApp. Data preprocessing, visualization and statistical analysis. Data was preprocessed by quantile normalization and missing values were replaced by zero. Data visualization, functional annotation, statistical analysis and network visualization were performed by Excel, R packages, g:Profiler8 and Enrichment Map (a Cytoscape plugin application)9. Overall, p-value < 0.05 after Benjamini-Hochberg correction was considered statistically significant.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
G-csfr, 32d, Swath, Btk inhibitor

### Affiliations
UC Proteomics Laboratory, Department of Cancer Biology, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio 45267 USA
University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio

### Submitter
Somchai Chutipongtanate

### Lab Head
Dr Kenneth D. Greis
UC Proteomics Laboratory, Department of Cancer Biology, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio 45267 USA


