### Accession
PXD012684

### Title
LC-MSMS of Hordeum vulgare epidermis containing  haustoria from Blumeria graminis f.sp. hordei

### Description
Blumeria graminis f.sp. hordei is an obligate biotrohic fungal pathogen causing powdery mildew in barley. As for other biotrophic fungi, haustorial structures are at the centre of the biotrophic interaction and molecular exchanges, delivering fungal effectors or virulence factors, and taking nutrient from the host. Haustoria are originiated by the fungus, following successful penetration of the initial penetration peg through the plant cell call. Haustorial structures mainly of fungal origin, but they are surrounding by a plant component, the extrauhaustorial membrane and matrix (EHM and EHMx) forming the extrahuastorial complex (EHMc). The plant protein make-up of the plant  extrahaustorial components remained unexplored, and this is a first study trying to describe plant proteome associated with haustoria using samples enriched for these structures. Therefore, proteomes of  haustoria enriched samples from the epidermis of barley leaves infected with Blumeria graminins f.sp. hordei, the causing agent of barley powdery mildew,  were compared to infected epidermis and un-infected epidermis to identify haustoria associated plant proteins. Haustoria were enriched from infected epidermis by digesting epidermal cell walls with cell wall degrading enzymes prior to enrichment for haustorial structures. Proteins identified in these samples were compared to infected and uninfected epidermis samples using a non-targeted label free semi-quantitation method.

### Sample Protocol
Hordeum vulgare cv. golden promise primary leaves were infected with Blumeria graminis f.sp hordei isolate DH14. Epidermis was harvested from 5 days post infection primary leaves, after epiphytic fungal material was removed. Epidermis was also harvested from uninfected primary leaves of the same age. A third haustoria enriched sample was prepared by incubating infected epidermis with a cocktail of cell wall degrading enzymes. Epidermis samples were ground to a fine powder and precipitated in TCA/Acetone, 0.07% B-mec, before resuspension in urea buffer. Haustoria enriched samples were vortexed as oppose to being ground. Proteins were digested in solution with a two-step tryptic digest in the presence of urea. Tryptic peptides were concentrated using C18 packed pipette tips. Peptides were separated by reverse phase chromatography and were converted to gas-phase ions by electrospray ionisation for analysis on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion (Q-OT-qIT, Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
MS/MS outputs were submitted to an in house Mascot database vs 2.6.2 (Matrix Science; http://www.matrixscience.com)(Perkins et al., 1999) The data was searched separately against both the 2017 barley proteome (generated from the genome published by the International Barley Genome Sequencing Consortium) and the version 4. B.graminis proteome. Validated proteins were identified based upon at least two valid peptides, with a threshold of P 0.05, a percolator score 13, and at least 2 peptides, while the false discovery rate was always below 1%. A semi-quantitative approach known as spectral counting was performed to identify proteins that were significantly increased or decreased between samples. Spectral counting was achieved by comparing the significant protein matches between samples. If a protein was not identified in a biological replicate, the significant protein match value was set to 0. Qualifying proteins were identified in at least two biological replicates and required a log2 fold change of at least ±1.

### Publication Abstract
Powdery mildews are biotrophic pathogens causing fungal diseases in many economically important crops, including cereals, which are affected by <i>Blumeria graminis</i>. Powdery mildews only invade the epidermal cell layer of leaf tissues, in which they form haustorial structures. Haustoria are at the center of the biotrophic interaction by taking up nutrients from the host and by delivering effectors in the invaded cells to jeopardize plant immunity. Haustoria are composed of a fungal core delimited by a haustorial plasma membrane and cell wall. Surrounding these is the extrahaustorial complex, of which the extrahaustorial membrane is of plant origin. Although haustoria transcriptomes and proteomes have been investigated for <i>Blumeria</i>, the proteomes of barley epidermis upon infection and the barley components of the extrahaustorial complex remains unexplored. When comparing proteomes of infected and non-infected epidermis, several classical pathogenesis-related (PR) proteins were more abundant in infected epidermis. These included peroxidases, chitinases, cysteine-rich venom secreted proteins/PR1 and two thaumatin-like PR5 protein isoforms, of which TLP5 was previously shown to interact with the <i>Blumeria</i> effector BEC1054 (CSEP0064). Against expectations, transient <i>TLP5</i> gene silencing suggested that TLP5 does not contribute to resistance but modulates susceptibility towards <i>B. graminis</i>. In a second proteomics comparison, haustorial structures were enriched from infected epidermal strips to identify plant proteins closely associated with the extrahaustorial complex. In these haustoria-enriched samples, relative abundances were higher for several V-type ATP synthase/ATPase subunits, suggesting the generation of proton gradients in the extrahaustorial space. Other haustoria-associated proteins included secreted or membrane proteins such as a PIP2 aquaporin, an early nodulin-like protein 9, an aspartate protease and other proteases, a lipase, and a lipid transfer protein, all of which are potential modulators of immunity, or the targets of pathogen effectors. Moreover, the ER BIP-like HSP70, may link ER stress responses and the idea of ER-like properties previously attributed to the extrahaustorial membrane. This initial investigation exploring the barley proteomes of <i>Blumeria</i>-infected tissues and haustoria, associated with a transient gene silencing approach, is invaluable to gain first insight of key players of resistance and susceptibility.

### Keywords
Barley, Cereals, Biotrophic plant pathogen, Haustorium pl. haustoria, Hordeum vulgare, Extrahaustorial complex, Plant disease, Extrahaustorial membrane, Epidermis, Powdery mildew, Blumeria graminins f.sp. hordei, Fungus, Extrahaustorial matrix, Biotic stress

### Affiliations
Royal Holloway, University of London
RHUL

### Submitter
Sebastien Lambertucci

### Lab Head
Dr Laurence Bindschedler
Royal Holloway, University of London


