### Accession
PXD033600

### Title
Exploring the conversion of different Xylans by the marine Bacteroidetes Flavimarina sp. Hel_I_48

### Description
Bacteroidetes have multiple polysaccharide utilization loci (PUL) which are specific for the decomposition of polysaccharides. The marine Bacteroidetes strain Flavimarina sp. Hel_I_48 encodes two separate PULs which target xylose-containing polysaccharides. We elucidated the specificity of these two PULs by correlating proteome data with biochemical activities of the encoded carbohydrate active enzymes. Proteomics revealed that one PUL targets glucuronoxylans whereas the other PUL targets arabinoxylans.

### Sample Protocol
Flavimarina sp. Hel_I_48 was grown to late exponential phase in modified MPM medium containing 0.1 % BX, PAX, CPX, RAX, WAX or apple pectin as sole carbon source. Triplicates of 50 mL cultures were harvested at 4000 x g, 20 min and 4 °C. Cells were resuspended in 50 mM TEAB buffer containing 4 % SDS and incubated at 95 °C and 600 rpm for 5 min. Samples were cooled to room temperature before being placed in an ultrasonic bath for 5 min. Cell debris was removed via centrifugation at 14.000 x g and 4 °C for 10 min.  Protein concentration was measured using the BCA Pierce Protein assay kit. 25 µg protein per sample were loaded on a 10 % 1D-SDS polyacrylamide gel and separated at 120 V for 90 min. Gel were fixed with a 40 % ethanol/ 10 % acetic acid solution and stained over-night using Coomassie G-250. According to the observed bands, each sample was divided into 10 subsamples, de-stained using 30 % Acetonitrile in 200 mM (NH4)2CO3 and digested for 16 h using trypsin. Peptides were separated and measured by reverse phase C18 column chromatography on a nano ACQUITY-UPLC online-coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap Classic mass spectrometer

### Data Protocol
Spectra were searched against a target-decoy protein sequence database including sequences and reverse sequences of Flavimarina sp. Hel_I_48 and common laboratory contaminants using MaxQuant. Only proteins that could be detected in at least two of three replicates were classed as identified. % riBAQ (relative intensity based absolute quantification); relative protein abundance in % of all proteins in the same sample) values were manually calculated from iBAQ values.

### Publication Abstract
Marine Bacteroidetes that degrade polysaccharides contribute to carbon cycling in the ocean. Organic matter, including glycans from terrestrial plants, might enter the oceans through rivers. Whether marine bacteria degrade structurally related glycans from diverse sources including terrestrial plants and marine algae was previously unknown. We show that the marine bacterium Flavimarina sp. Hel_I_48 encodes two polysaccharide utilization loci (PULs) which degrade xylans from terrestrial plants and marine algae. Biochemical experiments revealed activity and specificity of the encoded xylanases and associated enzymes of these PULs. Proteomics indicated that these genomic regions respond to glucuronoxylans and arabinoxylans. Substrate specificities of key enzymes suggest dedicated metabolic pathways for xylan utilization. Some of the xylanases were active on different xylans with the conserved &#x3b2;-1,4-linked xylose main chain. Enzyme activity was consistent with growth curves showing Flavimarina sp. Hel_I_48 uses structurally different xylans. The observed abundance of related xylan-degrading enzyme repertoires in genomes of other marine Bacteroidetes indicates similar activities are common in the ocean. The here presented data show that certain marine bacteria are genetically and biochemically variable enough to access parts of structurally diverse xylans from terrestrial plants as well as from marine algal sources.

### Keywords
Algal blooms, Marine polysaccharides, Flavimarina, Xylan, Bacteroidetes, Marine bacteria

### Affiliations
University of Greifswald, Department Pharmaceutical Biotechnology
University of Greifswald, Institute of Biochemistry, Department of Biotechnology and Enzyme Catalysis

### Submitter
Irena Beidler

### Lab Head
Dr Uwe T. Bornscheuer
University of Greifswald, Institute of Biochemistry, Department of Biotechnology and Enzyme Catalysis


