### Accession
PXD017118

### Title
Genome-wide identification of Dickeya solani genes regulated in response to potato (Solanum tuberosum L.) and bittersweet nightshade (Solanum dulcamara L.) tissues

### Description
The purpose of this study was to identify and characterize the D. solani genes that are differentially expressed in the early stages of infection of S. tuberosum (model for primary crop host) and S. dulcamara (model plant for alternative non-crop host) by a process of a random mutagenesis of D. solani IPO2222 genome using Tn5 transposon and a promotorless gusA reported gene. This was done as an initial step to better understand the mechanisms used by D. solani to colonize (primary and alternative) plant hosts. The aim of this study was also to associate the identified bacterial genes with phenotypes including ecological fitness and virulence in host plants. The implications of the findings are discussed.

### Sample Protocol
Solanum dulcamara and Solanum tuberosum were treated with Dickeya Solani.  Next proteins were extracted from plants samples and prepared for protein identification according to FASP methodology. Extract received for mass spectrometry analysis were liophilized and disolved in minimal volume of 8M urea Tris buffer (UA in FASP metodology). Next samples were processed according to standard FASP protocol (J. Wisniewski, Max Planck Institute). 10 kDa microcones were used in both experimetns.Samples were analyzed with the TripleTof 5600+ mass spectroemter (Sciex), and 200micro LC system (Exigent)was used for chromatographic LC separation.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry analysis was run with Analyst TF software, and the raw data were analysied with ProteinPilot 4.5 software. The database for analysis was downoaded fron Uniprot (05.2019).

### Publication Abstract
<i>Dickeya solani</i> is a Gram-negative bacterium able to cause disease symptoms on a variety of crop and ornamental plants worldwide. Weeds including <i>Solanum dulcamara</i> (bittersweet nightshade) growing near agricultural fields have been reported to support populations of soft rot bacteria in natural settings. However, little is known about the specific interaction of <i>D. solani</i> with such weed plants that may contribute to its success as an agricultural pathogen. The aim of this work was to assess the interaction of <i>D. solani</i> with its crop plant (<i>Solanum tuberosum</i>) and an alternative (<i>S. dulcamara</i>) host plant. From a collection of 10,000 Tn5 transposon mutants of <i>D. solani</i> IPO2222 carrying an inducible, promotorless <i>gusA</i> reporter gene, 210 were identified that exhibited plant tissue-dependent expression of the gene/operon into which the Tn5 insertion had occurred. Thirteen Tn5 mutants exhibiting the greatest plant tissue induction of such transcriptional units in <i>S. tuberosum</i> or <i>S. dulcamara</i> as measured by qRT-PCR were assessed for plant host colonization, virulence, and ability to macerate plant tissue, as well as phenotypes likely to contribute to the ecological fitness of <i>D. solani</i>, including growth rate, carbon and nitrogen source utilization, motility, chemotaxis toward plant extracts, biofilm formation, growth under anaerobic conditions and quorum sensing. These 13 transcriptional units encode proteins involved in bacterial interactions with plants, with functions linked to cell envelope structure, chemotaxis and carbon metabolism. The selected 13 genes/operons were differentially expressed in, and thus contributed preferentially to <i>D. solani</i> fitness in potato and/or <i>S. dulcamara</i> stem, leaf, and root tissues.

### Keywords
Plant extract, Fasp, Ms/ms, Protein id

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Mass Spectroemtry, Intercollegiate Faculty of Biotechnology, University of Gdansk and Medical University of Gdansk
University of Gdansk

### Submitter
Paulina Czaplewska

### Lab Head
Dr Paulina Malgorzata Czaplewska
Laboratory of Mass Spectroemtry, Intercollegiate Faculty of Biotechnology, University of Gdansk and Medical University of Gdansk


