### Accession
PXD018660

### Title
Chimeric design of Pyrrolysyl-tRNA synthetase/tRNA pairs and canonical synthetase/tRNA pairs for genetic code expansion

### Description
An orthogonal aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase/tRNA pair is a key prerequisite for site-specific incorporation of unnatural amino acids. Due to its high codon suppression efficiency and full orthogonality, the pyrrolysyl-tRNA synthetase/pyrrolysyl-tRNA pair is currently the ideal system for genetic code expansion in both eukaryotes and prokaryotes. There is a pressing need to discover or engineer other fully orthogonal translation systems that allow unnatural amino acids with distinct scaffolds and functionalities to be incorporated into a wide range of living organisms efficiently. Here, through rational chimera design by transplanting the key orthogonal components from the pyrrolysine system, we create multiple chimeric tRNA synthetase/chimeric tRNA pairs, including chimera histidine, phenylalanine, and alanine systems. We further show that these engineered chimeric systems are orthogonal and highly efficient with comparable flexibility to the pyrrolysine system. In addition, the chimera phenylalanine system can incorporate a group of phenylalanine, tyrosine and tryptophan analogues efficiently in both E. coli and mammalian cells. These aromatic amino acids analogous exhibit unique properties and characteristics, including fluorescence, post-translation modification. To our knowledge, most of these molecules have never been shown to be incorporated with fully orthogonal pairs. Therefore, these chimera pairs offer the potential for incorporation of de novo unnatural amino acids into target proteins for a variety of applications.

### Sample Protocol
For the LC-MS/MS analysis, the protein band was cut from the gel and sent to digestion with trypsin overnight. Trypsin digested peptides were analysed by LC-MS/MS on a Thermo Scientific Q Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer in conjunction with a Proxeon Easy-nLC II HPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and Proxeon nanospray source. The digested peptides were loaded into a 100-micron x 20mm Magic C18 100Å 5U reverse phase trap where they were desalted online before being separated with a 75-micron x 100mm Magic C18 200Å 3U reverse phase column.  Peptides were eluted using a 120 min gradient with a flow rate of 300 nL/min. An MS survey scan was obtained for the m/z range 300-1800, MS/MS spectra were acquired using a top 10 method, where the top 10 ions in the MS spectra were subjected to High Energy Collisional Dissociation (HCD).  An isolation mass window of 2 m/z was for the precursor ion selection, and normalized collision energy of 30 eV was used for fragmentation. A 40 seconds duration was used for the dynamic exclusion

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS raw files were processed with MaxQuant software1 (version 1.6.14.0) with the embedded Andromeda search engine2. Using site 39 for example, the searching was against the α- GFP database, which consists of 20 peptides contain site 39 in α- GFP, KIRHNIEDGSVQLADHYQQNTPIGXGPVLLPDNHYLSTQSALSKDPNEK (X means 20 natural amino acids). A fixed modification was indicated for cysteine carbamidomethylation. N-acetylation of protein and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications. The maximum modification was set to 5 per peptide. Trypsin/P specificity was required for the digestion mode and the maximum allowed missed cleavages was set to 2. First search peptide tolerance was set to 20 ppm and main search peptide tolerance was 10 ppm. Peptides with a minimum of 7 amino acids and a maximum charge of 7 were considered. The required FDR was set to 0.01 at peptide and protein levels. Other parameters followed the default settings. Peptides with MS/MS counts > 1 were considered to calculate the fidelity of desired amino acids incorporation with chimeric system. For UAA validation in this study, L-dopa, 6-Cyano-Trp and 7-Cyano-Trp were set as variable modification followed same parameters above. The spectra of peptides were displayed by pLabel software (version 2.4)3 with default parameters.

### Publication Abstract
An orthogonal aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase/tRNA pair is a crucial prerequisite for site-specific incorporation of unnatural amino acids. Due to its high codon suppression efficiency and full orthogonality, the pyrrolysyl-tRNA synthetase/pyrrolysyl-tRNA pair is currently the ideal system for genetic code expansion in both eukaryotes and prokaryotes. There is a pressing need to discover or engineer other fully orthogonal translation systems. Here, through rational chimera design by transplanting the key orthogonal components from the pyrrolysine system, we create multiple chimeric tRNA synthetase/chimeric tRNA pairs, including chimera histidine, phenylalanine, and alanine systems. We further show that these engineered chimeric systems are orthogonal and highly efficient with comparable flexibility to the pyrrolysine system. Besides, the chimera phenylalanine system can incorporate a group of phenylalanine, tyrosine, and tryptophan analogues efficiently in both E. coli and mammalian cells. These aromatic amino acids analogous exhibit unique properties and characteristics, including fluorescence, post-translation modification.

### Keywords
Genetic code expansion, Chimeric design

### Affiliations
Life Sciences Institute, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310058, China
Life Sciences Institute, Zhejiang University

### Submitter
Wenlong  Ding

### Lab Head
Dr Shixian Lin
Life Sciences Institute, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310058, China


