### Accession
PXD036517

### Title
In vivo PDX CRISPR/Cas9 screens reveal mutual therapeutic targets to overcome heterogeneous acquired chemo-resistance

### Description
Resistance towards cancer treatment represents a major clinical obstacle, preventing cure of cancer patients. To gain mechanistic insights, we developed a model for acquired resistance to chemotherapy by treating mice carrying patient derived xenografts (PDX) of acute lymphoblastic leukemia with widely-used cytotoxic drugs for 18 consecutive weeks. In two distinct PDX samples, tumors initially responded to treatment, until stable disease and eventually tumor re-growth evolved under therapy, at highly similar kinetics between replicate mice. Notably, replicate tumors developed different mutations in TP53 and individual sets of chromosomal alterations, suggesting independent parallel clonal evolution rather than selection, driven by a combination of stochastic and deterministic processes. Transcriptome and proteome showed shared dysregulations between replicate tumors providing putative targets to overcome resistance. In vivo CRISPR/Cas9 dropout screen in PDX revealed broad dependency on BCL2, BRIP1 and COPS2. Accordingly, venetoclax re-sensitized derivative tumors towards chemotherapy, despite genomic heterogeneity, demonstrating direct translatability of the approach. Hence, despite presence of multiple resistanceassociated genomic alterations, effective rescue treatment for polychemotherapyresistant tumors can be identified using functional testing in preclinical models.

### Sample Protocol
Murine bone marrow containing PDX ALL was thawed and human cells were enriched by FACS based on GFP expression and washed thoroughly in PBS twice. Cells were lysed in 1% SDC buffer, incubated (15 min, on ice), boiled (5 min, 95 °C), sonicated for 20 cycles and boiled (5 min, 95 °C). Proteins were digested with LysC (1:100 ratio) and Trypsin (1:100 ratio) for 16 hours at 37°C and reaction was stopped using 5:1 2-propanol/1% TFA. Resulting peptides were de-salted on equilibrated styrenedivinylbenzenereversed phase sulfonated (SDB-RPS) StageTips, washed once in isopropanol/1% TFA and twice with 0.2% TFA, eluted with 60 μl elution buffer (80% ACN, 1.25% NH4OH) and dried under vacuum. The dried peptides were resuspended in loading buffer (3%ACN, 0.3% TFA) and subjected to mass spectrometry (MS).

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using Maxquant version 1.5.5.2. The MS/MS spectra were searched for tryptic peptides using a targetdecoy approach with a reverse database from the reference Uniprot Human (version 2016) proteome and list of potential contaminants by the build in Andromeda search engine. Settings were adjusted as follows: max. of two missed cleavages allowed, minimum peptide length of seven amino acids, Carbamidomethyl of cysteine (C) as fixed modification, oxidized methionine (M), acetylation (protein N-term) as variable modification, false discovery rate of less than 1% at the levels of peptide and protein identification. The proteins were assigned to the same protein groups if two proteins could not be discriminated by unique peptides. The label-free quantification was performed with the MaxLFQ algorithum requiring a minimum ratio count of two. Match between run feature was enabled for identification of peptide across runs based on mass accuracy and normalized retention times. After filtering of artefacts, such as reverse hits and contaminants, Perseus software was used to analyze Maxquant output tables.

### Publication Abstract
Resistance towards cancer treatment represents a major clinical obstacle, preventing cure of cancer patients. To gain mechanistic insights, we developed a model for acquired resistance to chemotherapy by treating mice carrying patient derived xenografts (PDX) of acute lymphoblastic leukemia with widely-used cytotoxic drugs for 18 consecutive weeks. In two distinct PDX samples, tumors initially responded to treatment, until stable disease and eventually tumor re-growth evolved under therapy, at highly similar kinetics between replicate mice. Notably, replicate tumors developed different mutations in TP53 and individual sets of chromosomal alterations, suggesting independent parallel clonal evolution rather than selection, driven by a combination of stochastic and deterministic processes. Transcriptome and proteome showed shared dysregulations between replicate tumors providing putative targets to overcome resistance. In vivo CRISPR/Cas9 dropout screens in PDX revealed broad dependency on BCL2, BRIP1 and COPS2. Accordingly, venetoclax re-sensitized derivative tumors towards chemotherapy, despite genomic heterogeneity, demonstrating direct translatability of the approach. Hence, despite&#xa0;the presence of multiple resistance-associated genomic alterations, effective rescue treatment for polychemotherapy-resistant tumors can be identified using functional testing in preclinical models.

### Keywords
Pdx, Leukemia, Chemoresistance, Proteome, Drug resistance

### Affiliations
German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg
Dept Proteomics and Signal Transduction, MaxPlanck Institute of Biochemistry

### Submitter
Ashokkumar Jayavelu

### Lab Head
Dr Ashok Kumar Jayavelu
German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg


