### Accession
PXD022625

### Title
The RNA helicase Dbp7 promotes domain V/VI compaction and stabilization of inter-domain interactions during early 60S assembly

### Description
Early pre-60S ribosomal particles are poorly characterized, highly dynamic complexes that undergo extensive rRNA folding and compaction concomitant with assembly of ribosomal proteins and exchange of assembly factors. Pre-60S particles contain numerous RNA helicases, which are likely regulators of accurate and efficient formation of appropriate rRNA structures. Here we reveal binding of the RNA helicase Dbp7 to domain V/VI of early pre-60S particles in yeast and show that in the absence of this protein, dissociation of the Npa1 scaffolding complex, release of the snR190 folding chaperone, recruitment of the A3 cluster factors and binding of the ribosomal protein uL3 are impaired. uL3 is critical for formation of the peptidyltransferase center and is responsible for stabilizing interactions between the 5’ and 3’ ends of the 25S, an essential pre-requisite for subsequent pre-60S maturation events. Highlighting the importance of pre-ribosome remodeling by Dbp7, our data suggest that in the absence of Dbp7 or its catalytic activity, early pre-ribosomal particles are targeted for degradation.

### Sample Protocol
Isolated pre-ribosomal proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE, and each lane was cut into 21 slices. All gel slices were reduced, alkylated, and then digested with modified trypsin. The resulting peptides were extracted from the gel and vacuum-dried.  Dried peptides were dissolved in 2% acetonitrile (ACN) containing 0.1% formic acid (FA) and analyzed using a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) coupled with an Ultimate 3000 RSLC system (Dionex). Peptides were loaded on a reverse-phase C18 pre-column (Dionex, 5 mm long, 0.3 mm inner diameter), and desalted for 3 minutes using buffer A (0.1% FA). After 3 minutes, the pre-column was switched online with a self-made analytical column (30 cm long, 75 μm inner diameter, packed with 1.9 μm ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ beads (Dr. Maisch GmbH)). Trapped peptides were separated with a linear gradient of 5–45% buffer B (80% FA and 0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The total run time was 58 min. Both the pre-column and the column were maintained at 50°C. The Q Exactive HF was operated in a data-dependent acquisition manner where one full MS scan across the 350-1600 m/z range was acquired at a resolution setting of 60,000 FWHM (full width, half maximum) to select up to 30 most abundant peptide precursors. Precursors were fragmented by Higher Collision Energy Dissociation (HCD) with nitrogen at a normalized collision energy setting of 28%, and their product ion spectra were recorded at resolution of 15,000 FWHM with the maximum ion injection time of 60 ms.

### Data Protocol
The MS raw files were processed by MaxQuant (version 1.6.5.0)74 and MS/MS spectra were searched against UniProt S. Cerevisiae database (downloaded on Feb 2019 with 9731 entries) using default settings. Trypsin was used for protein digestion with up to two mis-cleavages. Methionine oxidation and cysteine carbamidomethylation were defined as variable and fixed modifications, respectively. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% for both peptide and protein identifications. Subsequent data analysis was conducted with Perseus (version 1.6.2.3)75. After removing all decoy hits and potential contaminant entries, proteins identified only with modified peptides were filtered out. The remaining proteins' intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) values were log2-transformed and median-normalized. Subsequently, the iBAQ differences between input and elute samples were calculated without any imputation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ribosome biogenesis, Small nucleolar rna, Rna helicase, Ribosomal protein.

### Affiliations
MPI for Biophysical Chemistry
Max-Planck-Institute for Biophysical Chemistry Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Group  University Medical Center Goettingen Bioanalytics Institute for Clinical Chemistry

### Submitter
Kuan-Ting Pan

### Lab Head
Dr Henning Urlaub
Max-Planck-Institute for Biophysical Chemistry Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Group  University Medical Center Goettingen Bioanalytics Institute for Clinical Chemistry


