### Accession
PXD016498

### Title
Deciphering Tissue-based Proteome Signatures Revealed Novel Subtyping and Prognostic Markers for Thymic Epithelial Tumors

### Description
Thymic epithelial tumors (TETs) belong to a group of tumors that rarely occur, but have unresolved mechanisms and heterogeneous clinical behaviors. Current care of TET patients demands biomarkers of high sensitivity and specificity for accurate histological classification and prognosis management. In this study, 90 fresh-frozen tissue samples were recruited to generate a quantitative and systematic view of proteomic landscape of TETs by data independent acquisition mass spectrometry (DIA-MS) leading to discovery of novel classifying molecules among different TET subtypes.

### Sample Protocol
A typical proteomic sample preparation process consisting of tissue homogenization, protein denature, alkylation, digestion and peptide purification using a 96-well C18 plate was applied.

### Data Protocol
For spectral library, 14 samples were analyzied in a 62 min elution time using Orbitrap Fusion in data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. DIA analysis was carried out for 90 samples using the same LC system and mass spectrometer as they were for DDA analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Thymic epithelial tumors (TETs) belong to a group of tumors that rarely occur, but have unresolved mechanisms and heterogeneous clinical behaviors. Current care of TET patients demands biomarkers of high sensitivity and specificity for accurate histological classification and prognosis management. In this study, 134 fresh-frozen tissue samples (84 tumor, 40 tumor adjacent, and 10 normal thymus) were recruited to generate a quantitative and systematic view of proteomic landscape of TETs. Among them, 90 samples were analyzed by data-independent acquisition mass spectrometry (DIA-MS) leading to discovery of novel classifying molecules among different TET subtypes. The correlation between clinical outcome and the identified molecules was probed, and the prioritized proteins of interest were further validated on the remaining samples (n&#xa0;=&#xa0;44) via parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) as well as immunohistochemical and confocal imaging analysis. In particular, two proteins, the cellular mRNA deadenylase CCR4 (carbon catabolite repressor 4)-NOT (negative on TATA) complex subunit 2/9 (CNOT2/9) and the serine hydroxymethyltransferase that catalyzes the reversible interconversions of serine and glycine (SHMT1), were found at dramatic low levels in the thymic epithelia of more malignant subtype, thymic squamous cell carcinoma (TSCC). Interestingly, the mRNA levels of these two genes were shown to be closely correlated with prognosis of the TET patients. These results extended the existing human tissue proteome atlas and allowed us to identify several new protein classifiers for TET subtyping. Newly identified subtyping and prognosis markers, CNOT2/9 and SHMT1, will expand current diagnostic arsenal in terms of higher specificity and prognostic insights for TET diagnosis and management.

### Keywords
Thymic epithelial tumors, Who classification, Targeted proteomics, Molecular profiling, Protein classifiers

### Affiliations
Bavarian Center for Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry
Lab of Proteomics, Shanghai Center for Systems Biomedicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 800 Dongchuan Road, Shanghai, 200240, China.

### Submitter
Chen Meng

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Wei Yan
Lab of Proteomics, Shanghai Center for Systems Biomedicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 800 Dongchuan Road, Shanghai, 200240, China.


