### Accession
PXD005670

### Title
Mouse female gonad quantitative MS

### Description
We constructed a comparative proteome profile of female mouse fetal gonads at specific time points (11.5, 12.5, and 13.5 days post coitum), spanning a critical window for initiation of meiosis in female germ cells. We identified 3666 proteins, of which 473 were differentially expressed.

### Sample Protocol
Tandem mass tag (TMT) Labeling—TMT Label Reagents were equilibrated to room temperature (RT), each aliquot was resuspended in 41 μl anhydrous ACN and 42 μl was added to 100 μg peptides dissolved in 200 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB).After 60 min reaction time at RT, 8 μl 5% hydroxylamine was added to each tube and samples incubated for 15 min. The aliquots were then pooled and solvent was removed under vacuum.Strong cation exchange (SCX) fractionation—The TMT labeled peptide mixture was resuspended in SCX chromatography Buffer A (10 mM NH4COOH, 5% ACN, pH 2.7) and loaded onto a cation ion exchange column (1 mm ID × 10 cm packed with Poros 10S, DIONEX, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) and chromatographed on the UltiMate® 3000 HPLC systems at a flow rate of 50 μl/min. The following linear gradient conditions were used,with Buffers A and B: 0 to 56% Buffer B (1 M NH4COOH, 5% ACN, pH 2.7) for 20 min; 56 to 100% B for 1 min; 100% B for 5 min; 100 to 0 % B for 1 min; 0 % B for 20 min before the next run. Effluents were monitored at 214 nm based on the UV light trace and 6 fractions collected every 2 min.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were processed with MaxQuant software (version 1.2.2.5) using the IPI (International Protein Index) mouse proteome database (version 3.83). A common contaminants database was also included for quality control. The reverse strategy was used to estimate the false discovery rate (FDR). Enzyme specificity was set to be Trypsin/P (no Prestriction) and the maximum missed cleavage sites permitted were two. The minimum peptide length required was six. Except for TMT labels, carbamidomethyl was set as a fixed modification. Variable modifications were Oxidation (M) and Acetyl (Protein N-term). Mass tolerance for precursor ions and fragment ions were both set to 20 ppm.The site, peptide and protein FDR values were all set to 0.01. Protein quantification was calculated by combining MaxQuant identification results with a local modified Libra algorithm . For identification of differentially expressed (DE) proteins among groups,the cutoffs of fold change and Q values were set to 2 and 0.01, respectively, using the SAM (Significance Analysis of Microarrays) algorithm performed by J-expression.

### Publication Abstract
Generation of haploid gametes by meiosis is a unique property of germ cells and is critical for sexual reproduction. Leaving mitosis and entering meiosis is a key step in germ cell development. Several inducers or intrinsic genes are known to be important for meiotic initiation, but the regulation of meiotic initiation, especially at the protein level, is still not well understood. We constructed a comparative proteome profile of female mouse fetal gonads at specific time points (11.5, 12.5, and 13.5 days post coitum), spanning a critical window for initiation of meiosis in female germ cells. We identified 3666 proteins, of which 473 were differentially expressed. Further bioinformatics analysis showed that these differentially expressed proteins were enriched in the mitochondria, especially in the electron transport chain and, notably, 9 proteins in electron transport chain Complex I were differentially expressed. We disrupted the mitochondrial electron transport chain function by adding the complex I inhibitor, rotenone to 11.5 days post coitum female gonads cultured in <i>vitro.</i> This treatment resulted in a decreased proportion of meiotic germ cells, as assessed by staining for histone &#x3b3;H2AX. Rotenone treatment also caused decreased ATP levels, increased reactive oxygen species levels and failure of the germ cells to undergo premeiotic DNA replication. These effects were partially rescued by adding Coenzyme Q10. Taken together, our results suggested that a functional electron transport chain is important for meiosis initiation. Our characterization of the quantitative proteome of female gonads provides an inventory of proteins, useful for understanding the mechanisms of meiosis initiation and female fertility.

### Keywords
Mouse, Gonad, Ms, Female, Pgc

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Department of Histology and Embryology, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, 210029, P.R. China.
Nanjing medical university

### Submitter
hao zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Ran Huo
State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Department of Histology and Embryology, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, 210029, P.R. China.


