### Accession
PXD036795

### Title
Characterization of a cyanobacterial exoproteome reveals a novel zinc acquisition system used by primitive bacteria 

### Description
Zinc can be limiting in many environments and bacteria have developed acclimation responses to counteract this deficiency. In most bacteria, the acclimation response to zinc limitation is controlled by Zur, a transcriptional regulator of the FUR family. Several proteins that take part in this response are present in the cytoplasm and the cell envelope. However, little is known about the involvement of proteins present in the extracellular space in the response to Zn limitation and whether the protein composition of this space might be also regulated by Zur. Therefore, in order to get an insight into these issues, a comparative analysis of the exoproteomes of the cyanobacterium Anabaena sp. PCC7120 (WT) and its Δzur derivative strain (referred as "MN" in the present dataset) was carried out using SWATH-MS analysis.

### Sample Protocol
80 ml cultures of wild type Anabaena sp. PCC7120 and the Δzur mutant (a deletion-insertion mutant with a C.S3 cassette interrupting zur/furB gene (Napolitano et al., 2012) were set up in duplicate in erlenmeyer flasks at an optical density at 750 mm (OD750) of 0.15. Cells were obtained by gentle centrifugation at room temperature of precultures grown to late exponential phase and suspensions were prepared in BG11 supplemented with 8.8 mM NaHCO3 (Δzur strain was supplemented with 2 µg·ml-1 streptomycin and 2 µg·ml-1 spectinomycin). Cultures were incubated for 12 days 28ºC under illumination (30 μmol of photons m−2 s−1 with agitation. After this period, cultures were in the late exponential phase of culture (OD750=1-1.3). Cultures were sequentially filtered through 0.45 and 0.22 µm filters MCE filters (Filter-Lab®). The flow through fraction was immediately frozen at -80ºC and lyophilized. Lyophilized material was resuspended in 2.5 ml of buffer A (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5 and Complete™ EDTA free protease inhibitor cocktail) and dialyzed against 3 L of buffer A, performing 2 O/N steps. After dialysis, the sample was transferred to 15 ml tubes, frozen at -80ºC and lyophilized. Samples were resuspended in 800 µl of buffer containing 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5; 1 mM PMSF, 1 mM EDTA, 2% SDS and a cocktail of protease inhibitors and were centrifuged at 20000 g for 2 min to eliminate particles. The supernantants were subjected to precipitation with trichloroacetic acid (TCA)/acetone. The precipitated extracts were resuspended in 20 µl of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate with 0.2% Rapidgest (Waters) and the amount of proteins was quantified using Qubit system. An amount of proteins equivalent to 10 µg, was incubated with 4.5 mm DTT for 30 min at 60˚C and then with 10 mm chloroacetamide, 30 min in darkness at room temperature. Trypsin treatment was performed at 37˚C ON in a ratio 1:40 (trypsin:protein). Digestion was stopped by addition of formic acid. A mixture of SCIEX synthetic peptides was also added to each sample to a final concentration of 50 femtomol/µL, for posterior normalization of chromatograms necessary for SWATH processing. A volume equivalent to 1 µg of protein was injected in LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry analysis was carried out at the Proteomics Service of the Instituto de Bioquímica Vegetal y Fotosíntesis (Seville, Spain). The analyses were performed in a triple quadrupole TOF hybrid mass spectrometer (5600 plus, Sciex), equipped with a nano electrospray source coupled to an Eksigent model 425 nanoHPLC. Analyst TF 1.7 was the software used to control the equipment, as well as for the acquisition and processing of data. Peptides were first loaded onto a trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, 5 µm, 100 Å, 100 µm id × 20 mm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) isocratically in 0.1% formic acid/2% acetonitrile (v/v). ) at a flow rate of 3 μL/min for 10 min. Subsequently, they were eluted on a reverse phase analytical column, Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, 3 µm, 100 Å, 75 µm id × 150 mm, Thermo Fisher Scientific, coupled to a PicoTip emitter (F360-20-10-N- 20_C12 from New Objective). Peptides were eluted with a linear gradient of 2-35% (v/v) of solvent B in 60 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. As solvents A and B, formic acid 0.1% (v/v) and acetonitrile with formic acid 0.1% (v/v) were used, respectively. The source voltage was selected at 2600 V and the heater temperature remained at 100ºC. Gas 1 was selected at 15 psi, gas 2 to zero, and the curtain to 25 psi. For the construction of the spectral library needed for SWATH analysis and for the comparison of the composition of Anabaena wild type exoproteome with the previously obtained from Oliveira (Oliveira et al., 2015) and Hahn (Hahn et al., 2015), the acquisition was carried out with a data-dependent acquisition (DDA) method, consisting of a TOF-MS Scan between 400-1250 m/z, accumulation time of 250 ms, followed by 50 MS/MS (230 -1500 m/z), accumulation time of 65 ms and with a total 3.54 s cycle time.  Protein identification was performed using the ProteinPilot™ software (version 5.0.1, Sciex) with the Paragon™ Algorithm. The search was conducted against the UniProt proteome Nostoc sp. PCC7120 FASTA (15/07/2021) combined with the SCIEX contaminants database Automatically generated reports in ProteinPilot were manually inspected for false discovery rate (FDR); cut-off proteins with only proteins identified at an FDR ≤1% were considered for subsequent analyses. For the quantitative comparison of Anabaena wild type and Δzur exoproteomes SWATH analysis was performed using three technical replicates of each biological replicate using a data-independent (DIA) acquisition method. Each sample (1 μg of protein) was analyzed using the SWATH-MS acquisition method using a LC-MS equipment, AB Sciex, model 5600. The method consisted of repeated acquisition cycles of time-of-flight mass spectrometry (TOF MS)/MS scans (230–1500 m/z, 60 ms acquisition time) of 60 overlapping sequential precursor isolation windows of variable width (1 m/z overlap) covering the 400–1250 m/z mass range from a previous TOF MS scan (400–1250 m/z, 50 ms acquisition time) for each cycle with 3.68 s total cycle time. Autocalibration of the equipment and chromatographic conditions were controlled by an injection of a standard Pepcalmix (Sciex), between the replicates. SWATH-MS spectral alignment was performed using the PeakView 2.2 software (Sciex) with the MicroApp SWATH 2.0 using the spectral library generated through DDA method (1% FDR). Normalization of protein intensity was performed with MarkerView software (version 1.2.1.1, AB Sciex). The R package limma v3.54.1 (Ritchie et al., 2015) was used to assess the differential expression of exoproteins. Briefly, normalized data were log2-transformed, median centered and the three technical replicates averaged before fitting the data to a linear model (lmFit, robust method), and using moderated t-statistics with Limma's empirical Bayes method to analyze differential expression. The p-values were adjusted for multiple hypothesis testing using Benjamini-Hochberg FDR correction. Proteins were classified as differentially expressed if the adjusted p-value (q-value) was less than 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Zepa, Zur, Exoproteome, Anabaena

### Affiliations
University of Zaragoza
Instituto de Bioquímica Vegetal y Fotosíntesis, CSIC, and Universidad de Sevilla, Seville, Spain.

### Submitter
Cristina Sarasa Buisán

### Lab Head
Dr Ignacio Luque
Instituto de Bioquímica Vegetal y Fotosíntesis, CSIC, and Universidad de Sevilla, Seville, Spain.


