### Accession
PXD007146

### Title
INA complex liaises the F1Fo-ATP synthase membrane motor modules - Atp23 pulldown dataset

### Description
The F1Fo-ATP synthase translates a proton flux across the inner mitochondrial membrane into a mechanical rotation, driving anhydride bond formation in the catalytic portion. The complex's membrane-embedded motor section forms a proteinaceous channel at the interface between Atp9 ring and Atp6. To prevent unrestricted proton flow dissipating the H+-gradient, channel formation is a critical and tightly controlled step during ATP synthase assembly. Here we show that the INA complex (INAC) acts at this decisive step promoting Atp9 ring association with Atp6. INAC binds initially to newly synthesized mitochondrial-encoded Atp6 and Atp8 in complex with maturation factors. INAC association is retained until the F1-portion is built on Atp6/8 and loss of INAC causes accumulation of the free F1. An independent complex is formed between INAC and the Atp9 ring. We conclude that INAC maintains assembly intermediates of the F1Fo-ATP synthase in a primed state for the terminal assembly step – channel and motor module formation.

### Sample Protocol
Atp23-containing protein complexes immunopurified from wild type and ina22Δ mitochondria in biological triplicates were subjected to in-solution digestion as described previously (Morgenstern, M. et al. Definition of a High-Confidence Mitochondrial Proteome at Quantitative Scale. Cell Rep. 19, 2836–2852 (2017)). Peptides derived from in-solution digestion were analyzed using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system coupled to an Q Exactive instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) as described previously (Morgenstern, M. et al. Definition of a High-Confidence Mitochondrial Proteome at Quantitative Scale. Cell Rep. 19, 2836–2852 (2017)). Peptides were eluted using a 180 min gradient (0.1% formic acid/86% acetonitrile: 4% from 0-5 min, 4-39% from 5-140 min, 39-54% from 140-155 min, 54-95% from 155-160 min, 95% for 5 min followed by a 15 min equilibration phase).

### Data Protocol
For protein identification and label-free quantification, raw files were processed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.12) and Andromeda. The Saccharomyces Genome Database (SGD; www.yeastgenome.org) was used for the database search. Database searches were performed with mass tolerances of 4.5 ppm for precursors and 0.5 Da for fragment ions. 'trypsin/P' was set as enzyme specificity and 'Max. missed cleavages' was set to 3. Acetylation of protein N-termini and oxidation of methionine were considered as variable and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues as fixed modification. The options 'requantify', 'match between runs' (match from and to), 'iBAQ' and 'LFQ' were enabled. 'LFQ min. ratio count' was set to 1, 'LFQ min. number of neighbors' and 'LFQ average number of neighbors' were set to 3 and 6, respectively. Proteins were identified based on at least one unique peptide with a length of seven amino acids and a maximum mass of 4,600 Da. For protein quantification, only unique peptides were considered and 'Min. ratio count' was set to 1. False discovery rates on protein level and for peptide spectrum matching were set to 0.01. For analysis of output tables, Perseus (version 1.5.6.0) was used. LFQ ratios from Atp23 pulldown experiments were determined as follows: three out of three valid LFQ intensity values were required for at least one of the two compared experiments. Missing values were then imputed using standard settings. P values were calculated using a one-sided student’s t test (n=3).

### Publication Abstract
The F<sub>1</sub>F<sub>0</sub>-ATP synthase translates a proton flux across the inner mitochondrial membrane into a mechanical rotation, driving anhydride bond formation in the catalytic portion. The complex's membrane-embedded motor forms a proteinaceous channel at the interface between Atp9 ring and Atp6. To prevent unrestricted proton flow dissipating the H<sup>+</sup>-gradient, channel formation is a critical and tightly controlled step during ATP synthase assembly. Here we show that the INA complex (INAC) acts at this decisive step promoting Atp9-ring association with Atp6. INAC binds to newly synthesized mitochondrial-encoded Atp6 and Atp8 in complex with maturation factors. INAC association is retained until the F<sub>1</sub>-portion is built on Atp6/8 and loss of INAC causes accumulation of the free F<sub>1</sub>. An independent complex is formed between INAC and the Atp9 ring. We conclude that INAC maintains assembly intermediates of the F<sub>1</sub> F<sub>0</sub>-ATP synthase in a primed state for the terminal assembly step-motor module formation.

### Keywords
Interaction proteomics, Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Affiliations
AG Warscheid
Biologie II
Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg
Schänzlestr. 1
79104 Freiburg
Germany

Department of Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics, Institute of Biology II, Faculty of Biology and BIOSS Centre for Biological Signalling Studies, University of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany

### Submitter
Friedel Drepper

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Bettina Warscheid
Department of Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics, Institute of Biology II, Faculty of Biology and BIOSS Centre for Biological Signalling Studies, University of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany


