### Accession
PXD024232

### Title
Proteome profile of Methicillin-Resistant Staphylococcus aureus Membrane-Derived Vesicles grown in presence of sub-MIC dosage of Vancomycin

### Description
Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) has evolved numerous antimicrobial resistance mechanisms and is identified as a serious public health threat by the World Health Organization and U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The glycopeptide vancomycin (VAN) remains a cornerstone of therapy for severe MRSA infections despite increasing reports of therapeutic failure in hospitalized patients with bacteremia or pneumonia. Here we examined the effectiveness of MVs-derived methicillin-resistant SA (MRSA) to counteract vancomycin (VAN). We found that supplementation of a typical MIC assay using bacteriologic and tissue-mimicking media with purified MVs attenuated MRSA susceptibility to VAN but no other examined cell-wall targeting antibiotics. In addition, the purified MVs protected MRSA challenged with sub-therapeutic dosage of VAN against the host’s innate immune system. Additionally, the proteome of MV peptides from VAN exposed MRSA was characterized to determine if protein expression was altered.

### Sample Protocol
The bacterial membrane vesicles (MVs) were isolated by a procedure described earlier with slight modifications (Askarian, Lapek Jr et al. 2018, Joshi, Singh et al. 2020). Overnight culture of the methicillin resistant S. aureus MRSAUSA300 was inoculated into BHI broth supplemented with/without sub-therapeutic vancomycin (0.5 mg/L). The culture was grown overnight (16-17 h) for MVs isolation. For proteomic analysis, pooled MVs underwent an extra fractionation step with density gradient centrifugation using Optiprep (Sigma-Aldrich) as previously described (Askarian, Lapek et al. 2018). Thereafter, 200 μl aliquots (total of 25 fractions) were sequentially collected and subjected to SDS-PAGE followed by Coomassie Blue staining. Fractions showing the same protein profile on Coomassie stained gel were pooled. The vesicles were then precipitated by adding 15% TCA in acetone (-20 °C) at a final 4:1 ratio. The sample were mixed well and incubate on ice at 4 °C  for overnight.  Next day, the sample was centrifuged (21,000 x g, 4˚C, 30 minutes) and the obtained protein pellet were subjected to another centrifugation (21,000 x g, 4˚C, 15 min).

### Data Protocol
Raw data was analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 2.2

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Mrsa, Vancomycin, Mvs

### Affiliations
Research group for Host-Microbe Interaction Department of Medical Biology Faculty of Health Sciences UiT- The Arctic University of Norway 9037 Tromsø NORWAY
University of Tromsø

### Submitter
Jack-Ansgar Bruun

### Lab Head
Dr Mona Johannessen
Research group for Host-Microbe Interaction Department of Medical Biology Faculty of Health Sciences UiT- The Arctic University of Norway 9037 Tromsø NORWAY


