### Accession
PXD024968

### Title
Proteomic analyses of mouse brain tissues

### Description
Next-generation proteomics of brain tissues from mices to decipher the molecular players involved in the response to a specific drug.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were loaded on a SDS-PAGE gel for a short electrophoretic migration, excised from a single polyacrylamide band, digested by trypsin, and the resulting peptides were analyzed by  Q-Exactive HF tandem mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were analyzed by MASCOT, the results were then parsed with IRMA, spectral counts were then compared.

### Publication Abstract
Creatine transporter deficiency (CTD), a leading cause of intellectual disability is a result of the mutation in the gene encoding the creatine transporter SLC6A8, which prevents creatine uptake into the brain, causing mental retardation, expressive speech and language delay, autistic-like behavior and epilepsy. Preclinical <i>in vitro</i> and <i>in vivo</i> data indicate that dodecyl creatine ester (DCE) which increases the creatine brain content, might be a therapeutic option for CTD patients. To gain a better understanding of the pathophysiology and DCE treatment efficacy in CTD, this study focuses on the identification of biomarkers related to cognitive improvement in a Slc6a8 knockout mouse model (Slc6a8-/y) engineered to mimic the clinical features of CTD patients which have low brain creatine content. Shotgun proteomics analysis of 4,035 proteins in four different brain regions; the cerebellum, cortex, hippocampus (associated with cognitive functions) and brain stem, and muscle as a control, was performed in 24 mice. Comparison of the protein abundance in the four brain regions between DCE-treated intranasally Slc6a8-/y mice and wild type and DCE-treated Slc6a8-/y and vehicle group identified 14 biomarkers, shedding light on the mechanism of action of DCE. Integrative bioinformatics and statistical modeling identified key proteins in CTD, including KIF1A and PLCB1. The abundance of these proteins in the four brain regions was significantly correlated with both the object recognition and the Y-maze tests. Our findings suggest a major role for PLCB1, KIF1A, and associated molecules in the pathogenesis of CTD.

### Keywords
Cerebellum, Brain, Mouse, Brain stem, Proteomics, Cortex, Hippocampus

### Affiliations
CEA-Marcoule, ProGénoMIX platform, DRF-Li2D, 30207 Bagnols-sur-Cèze, France
Li2D

### Submitter
Jean ARMENGAUD

### Lab Head
Dr Jean ARMENGAUD
CEA-Marcoule, ProGénoMIX platform, DRF-Li2D, 30207 Bagnols-sur-Cèze, France


