### Accession
PXD018806

### Title
Tandem Mass Tag proteomics in CHCHD10 patient cells

### Description
Mutations in CHCHD10, coding for a mitochondrial intermembrane space protein, are a rare cause of autosomal dominant amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). Mutation-specific toxic gain of function or haploinsuffuciency models have been proposed to explain pathogenicity. To decipher the metabolic dysfunction associated with the haploinsufficient p.R15L variant we conducted a TMT labelling experiment. Fibroblasts with the CHCHD10 p.R15L variant (hereafter referred to as ‘patient’), were compared to the same cells expressing wild-type CHCHD10 cDNA (hereafter called ‘rescue’) under nutrient stress, in which galactose was substituted for glucose.

### Sample Protocol
Fibroblasts were grown to 90% confluency in 15 cm dishes to lead to a minimum of 2  106 cells per condition. Cells were rinsed 2-3 times with 1x PBS to remove cell culture media and pelleted at 600  g. Cells were lysed with lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES, 1% SDS, 150 mM NaCl). The lysate was centrifuged at 16,000  g for 10 minutes at 4 C. Protein concentration was determined in the supernatant by BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, #23227). 100 g of protein was transferred into a new tube and the final volume was adjusted to 100 L with 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB). 5 L of 200 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine) (TCEP) was added and samples were incubated at 55 C for 1 hour. 5 L of 375 mM iodoacetamide was added to the mix and let stand for 30 minutes protected from light at room temperature. 600 L of pre-chilled acetone (-20 C) was added and the mix was put at -20 C over-night to precipitate. Samples were centrifuged at 8000  g for 10 minutes at 4 C. The tubes were carefully inverted to decant the acetone and let dry for 30 min at room temperature. Samples were digested, labelled and analysed by mass spectrometry on an Orbitrap (Thermo Scientific) at the Institute de Recherches Cliniques (IRCM) de Montreal. The isobaric labelling of the peptides was performed using 10-plex TMT reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Assignment of samples: Pat Glc 1 : Tag 126 Pat Glc 2 : Tag 127N OE Gal 1 : Tag 127C Pat Glc 3 : Tag 128N OE Gal 2 : Tag 128C Pat Gal 1 : Tag 129N OE Gal 3 : Tag 129C Pat Gal 2 : Tag 130N OE Glc 1 : Tag 130C OE Glc 2 : Tag 131

### Data Protocol
Differentially expressed proteins were identified by performing Welch’s t-statistic test, comparing patient cells with rescue cells in glucose and galactose. Values were normalized by subtraction of the mean from the log2 values of the comparison ratios.

### Publication Abstract
Mutations in CHCHD10, coding for a mitochondrial intermembrane space protein, are a rare cause of autosomal dominant amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Mutation-specific toxic gain of function or haploinsufficiency models have been proposed to explain pathogenicity. To decipher the metabolic dysfunction associated with the haploinsufficient p.R15L variant, we integrated transcriptomic, metabolomic and proteomic data sets in patient cells subjected to an energetic stress that forces the cells to rely on oxidative phosphorylation for ATP production. Patient cells had a complex I deficiency that resulted in an increased NADH/NAD+ ratio, diminished TCA cycle activity, a reorganization of one carbon metabolism and an increased AMP/ATP ratio leading to phosphorylation of AMPK and inhibition of mTORC1. These metabolic changes activated the unfolded protein response (UPR) in the ER through the IRE1/XBP1 pathway, upregulating downstream targets including ATF3, ATF4, CHOP and EGLN3, and two cytokine markers of mitochondrial disease, GDF15 and FGF21. Activation of the mitochondrial UPR was mediated through an upregulation of the transcription factors ATF4 and ATF5, leading to increased expression of mitochondrial proteases and heat shock proteins. There was a striking transcriptional up regulation of at least seven dual specific phosphatases, associated with an almost complete dephosphorylation of JNK isoforms, suggesting a concerted deactivation of MAP kinase pathways. This study demonstrates that loss of CHCHD10 function elicits an energy deficit that activates unique responses to nutrient stress in both the mitochondria and ER, which may contribute to the selective vulnerability of motor neurons.

### Keywords
Human, Mitochondria, Fibroblasts, Galactose

### Affiliations
Human Genetics McGill University Faculty of Medicine
McGill University

### Submitter
Isabella Straub

### Lab Head
Dr Eric Shoubridge
Human Genetics McGill University Faculty of Medicine


