### Accession
PXD030237

### Title
Phosphoproteomcs of the folliculin negative cancer cell line UOK257  +/- lentiviral rescue construct

### Description
In Birt-Hogg-Dubé (BHD) syndrome, germline mutations in the Folliculin (FLCN) gene lead to an increased risk of renal cancer. To address if FLCN is involved regulating cellular signaling pathways via protein and receptor phosphorylation we determined comprehensive phosphoproteomic profiles of FLCN-POS and FLCN-NEG human tumor cells (UOK257). UOK257 misses the folliculin (FLCN) gene, whereas UOK 257-2 harbours a lentiviral rescue of the FLCN gene. Experiment performed in duplicate. This data set is linked to PXD021346 that describes phosphoproteomics results for human renal tubular epithelial cells (RPTEC/TERT1).

### Sample Protocol
UOK257 cells (5 mg protein) were lysed in lysis buffer (9 M urea, 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM beta-glycero- phosphate) and were sonicated followed by centrifugation. Dithiotreitol (DTT) ( 4 mM, 30 min at 55°C) was added, followed by, iodoacetamide (10 mM,15 min in the dark). The solution was then diluted to 2 M Urea via the addition of 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0 and digested with trypsin (Promega) at a final concentration of 5 µg/ml overnight (room temperature). The digests were then acidified with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 0.1% and desalted using (500mg) Oasis HLB columns (Waters). Columns were equilibrated in 0.1% TFA. Subsequently, bound peptides were washed twice with 0.1% TFA, eluted in 0.1 % TFA/80% ACN and lyophillized . pTyr peptides (5 mg) were enriched using pTyr-1000 beads (Cell Signaling Techniologies) according to the protocol of the manufacturer with volumes proportionally scaled-down. Eluted phosphopeptides were desalted using a STAGE tip containing SDB-XC material (3M). Global phosphopeptide enrichement was performed from 200 µg peptides using IMAC cartridges on a BRAVO Assaymap liquid handler (Agilent) according to the protocol of the manufacturer. The IMAC elution solvent was 5% NH4OH in 30% ACN. Phosphopeptides (pTyr and IMAC) were dried in a vacuum centrifuge and dissolved in 20 µl 0.5% TFA/4% ACN prior to injection; 18 µl was injected using partial loop injection. Lysate (1 µg ) was diluted from the desalted digest to 0.1 µg / µl and 10 µl was injected for single-shot analysis.  LC-MS/MS  Peptides were separated by an Ultimate 3000 nanoLC-MS/MS system (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a 50 cm × 75 μm ID Acclaim Pepmap (C18, 1.9 μm) column. After injection, peptides were trapped at 3 μl/min on a 10 mm × 75 μm ID Acclaim Pepmap trap at 2% buffer B (buffer A: 0.1% formic acid (Fischer Scientific), buffer B: 80% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) and separated at 300 nl/min in a 10–40% buffer B gradient in 120 min (140 min inject-to-inject) at 35°C. Eluting peptides were ionized at a potential of +2 kVa into a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany). Intact masses were measured from m/z 350-1400 at resolution 120.000 (at m/z 200) in the Orbitrap using an AGC target value of 3E6 charges and a maxIT of 100ms. The top 15 for peptide signals (charge-states 2+ and higher) were submitted to MS/MS in the HCD (higher-energy collision) cell (1.4 amu isolation width, 26% normalized collision energy). MS/MS spectra were acquired at resolution 15000 (at m/z 200) in the Orbitrap using an AGC target value of 1E6 charges, a maxIT of 64 ms and an underfill ratio of 0.1%. This results in an intensity threshold for MS/MS of 1.3E5. Dynamic exclusion was applied with a repeat count of 1 and an exclusion time of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Phosphopeptide identification MS/MS spectra were searched against a Swissprot reference proteome (downloaded January 2021, canonical and isoforms, 42383 entries) using MaxQuant 1.6.10.43. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Cysteine carboxamidomethylation (Cys, +57.021464 Da) was treated as fixed modification and serine, threonine and tyrosine phosphorylation (+79.966330 Da), methionine oxidation (Met,+15.994915 Da) and N-terminal acetylation (N-terminal, +42.010565 Da) as variable modifications. Peptide precursor ions were searched with a maximum mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and fragment ions with a maximum mass deviation of 20 ppm. Peptide, protein and site identifications were filtered at an FDR of 1% using the decoy database strategy. The minimal peptide length was 7 amino-acids and the minimum Andromeda score for modified peptides was 40 and the corresponding minimum delta score was 6 (default MaxQuant settings). Identifications were propagated across samples with the match between runs option checked. Label-free phosphosite quantification was done using the phosphosite intensities.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Flcn, Imac, Phosphoproteomics, Folliculin, Label free, Single shot, Ptyrip

### Affiliations
Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Medical Oncology, Cancer Center Amsterdam, OncoProteomics Laboratory, Amsterdam, Netherlands
Amsterdam UMC

### Submitter
Sander Piersma

### Lab Head
Dr Connie Jimenez
Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Medical Oncology, Cancer Center Amsterdam, OncoProteomics Laboratory, Amsterdam, Netherlands


