### Accession
PXD023512

### Title
Identification of interacting proteins of lncRNA HIF1α-AS1

### Description
LncRNA Hypoxia-inducible factor 1α-antisense 1 (HIF1α-AS1) is located on the antisense strand of the important Hypoxia-inducible factor 1α (HIF1α) gene, but being transcribed in antisense direction along the HIF1α promoter. Here we used the 3’end biotinylated HIF1a-AS1 RNA and a control RNA for RNA Pulldown and searched for interacting proteins in nuclear extracts of human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC).

### Sample Protocol
The RNA pulldown assay was performed similar to Leisegang et al. 2017. For proper RNA secondary structure formation, 150ng of 3’end biotinylated HIF1α-AS1  or control RNA was heated for 2 min at 90°C in RNA folding buffer (10 mM Tris pH 7.0, 0.1 M KCl, 10 mM MgCl2), and then put on room temperature for 20 min. E7 HUVECs were used per sample. Isolation of nuclei was performed with the truCHIP™ Chromatin Shearing Kit (Covaris, USA) according to the manufacturers protocol without shearing the samples. Folded Bait RNA was incubated in nuclear cell extracts for 3h at 4°C. After incubation, samples were UV crosslinked. Afterwards, Streptavidin M-270 Dynabeads (80 µL Slurry, Thermo Fisher) were incubated with cell complexes for 2h at 4°C. After 4 washing steps with the lysis buffer of the truCHIP chromatin Shearing Kit (Covaris, USA), beads were put into a new Eppendorf tube.   Beads were resuspended in 50 mM ammoniumhydrogencarbonate and 1 µl RNAse A. Supernatant was reduced and alkylated with DTT and chloracetamid, respectively. Remaining Beads were resuspended in 20 µl 6M Guanidinhydrochlorid (GdmCl), 100 mM Tris/HCl, pH 8.5, 10 mM DTT and incubated at 95°C for 5 min. Reduced thiols were alkylated with 40 mM chloroacetamid and sample were diluted with 25 mM Tris/HCl, pH 8.5, 10% acetonitrile to obtain a final GdmCl concentration of 0.6 M. Proteins of both fractions were digested with 1 µg Trypsin/LysC (sequencing grade, Promega) overnight at 37°C under gentle agitation. Digestion was stopped by adding trifluoroacetic acid to a final concentration of 0.1 %. Peptides were loaded on multi-stop-and-go tip (StageTip) containing three a stack of three C18-disks. Both fraction  were eluted in wells of microtiter plates and peptides were dried and resolved in 1% acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid. Liquid chromatography / mass spectrometry (LC/MS) was performed on Thermo Scientific™ Q Exactive Plus equipped with an ultra-high performance liquid chromatography unit (Thermo Scientific Dionex Ultimate 3000) and a Nanospray Flex Ion-Source (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded on a C18 reversed-phase precolumn (Thermo Scientific) followed by separation on a with 2.4 µm Reprosil C18 resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH) in-house packed picotip emitter tip (diameter 100 µm, 15 cm long from New Objectives) using an gradient from mobile phase A (4% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) to 40 % mobile phase B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) for 60 min followed by a second gradient to 80% B for 30 min with a flow rate 400 nl/min. Run was finished by washout with 99% B for 5 min and reequilibration in 1% B. MS data were recorded by data dependent acquisition Top10 method selecting the most abundant precursor ions in positive mode for HCD fragmentation. The Full MS scan range was 300 to 2000 m/z with resolution of 70000, and an automatic gain control (AGC) value of 3E6 total ion counts with a maximal ion injection time of 160 ms. Only higher charged ions (2+) were selected for MS/MS scans with a resolution of 17500, an isolation window of 2 m/z and an automatic gain control value set to E5 ions with a maximal ion injection time of 150 ms. Selected ions were excluded in a time frame of 20 s following fragmentation event. Fullscan data were acquired in profile and Fragments in centroid mode by Xcalibur software.

### Data Protocol
For data analysis MaxQuant 1.5.3.30 (Cox et al. 2008) and Perseus 1.5.4.1 were used. The enzyme specificity was set to Trypsin, missed cleavages were limited to 2.  Following variable modifications were selected: at N-terminus acetylation (+42.01), oxidation of methionine (+15.99), as fixed modification carbamidomethylation (+57.02) on cysteines.  Human reference proteom set from Uniprot (Download 4/2015, 68506 entries) was used to identify peptides and proteins. False discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1%. Protein group file was uploaded to Perseus and data set was cleaned from reverse identifications and common contaminants. Data were Log2 transformed. Identification were filtered for 4 valid values in at least one group. To enable calculation of ratios between sample and control, missing values were replaced from normal distribution. Positive hits from p-values (p<0.05) of students t-test between experimental groups were highlighted.   Leisegang, M. S. et al. Long Noncoding RNA MANTIS Facilitates Endothelial Angiogenic Function. Circulation 136, 65–79; 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.116.026991 (2017). Cox J, Mann M. (2008) MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat Biotechnol. 26:1367-72.

### Publication Abstract
DNA:DNA:RNA triplexes that are formed through Hoogsteen base-pairing of the RNA in the major groove of the DNA duplex have been observed in vitro, but the extent to which these interactions occur in cells and how they impact cellular functions remains elusive. Using a combination of bioinformatic techniques, RNA/DNA pulldown and biophysical studies, we set out to identify functionally important DNA:DNA:RNA triplex-forming long non-coding RNAs (lncRNA) in human endothelial cells. The lncRNA HIF1&#x3b1;-AS1 was retrieved as a top hit. Endogenous HIF1&#x3b1;-AS1 reduces the expression of numerous genes, including EPH Receptor A2 and Adrenomedullin through DNA:DNA:RNA triplex formation by acting as an adapter for the repressive human silencing hub complex (HUSH). Moreover, the oxygen-sensitive HIF1&#x3b1;-AS1 is down-regulated in pulmonary hypertension and loss-of-function approaches not only result in gene de-repression but also enhance angiogenic capacity. As exemplified here with HIF1&#x3b1;-AS1, DNA:DNA:RNA triplex formation is a functionally important mechanism of trans-acting gene expression control.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Lncrna, Interacting proteins

### Affiliations
Functional Proteomics, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main , Germany
Insitute for Cardiovascular Physiology, Goethe University, Frankfurt, Germany

### Submitter
Ilka Wittig

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Leisegang
Insitute for Cardiovascular Physiology, Goethe University, Frankfurt, Germany


