### Accession
PXD020211

### Title
Saliva peptidome correlates with oral cancer prognosis

### Description
Protease activity has been associated with pathological processes that can lead to cancer development and progression. However, understanding the pathological unbalance in proteolysis is challenging since changes can occur simultaneously at protease, their inhibitor and substrate levels. In this work we combined peptidomics, proteomics and peptidase predictions for studying proteolytic events in saliva associated with oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) prognosis. Our results suggest that cleavage products differentially abundant in the saliva of patients with (N+) or without (N0) nodal metastasis exhibit potential of prognostic value in oral cancer and were are able to discriminate N+ and N0 patients whereas reduced protein levels of peptidase inhibitors might disturb the proteolytic balance in saliva of OSCC patients with poor prognosis

### Sample Protocol
For peptidomics, 1mL of saliva was centrifuged at 500 x g for 10 minutes, 4°C, then the supernatant diluted to 30 mL in ice-cold PBS pH 7.4 containing 1mM PMSF and 5mM EDTA. Ultracentrifugation at 110,000 x g, 4°C, was performed for 1 hour for recovery of the saliva soluble fraction. Two methods for peptide extraction were evaluated. In the first protocol, HCl-SPE, samples were acidified with HCl to pH 2, following centrifugation at 12,800 x g, for 20 min, at 4℃. The supernatant was recovered and peptides purified by solid-phase extraction (Sep-Pak C18, 500 mg; Waters). The second method was based on the enrichment of the peptidome by ultrafiltration (UF-SPE) upon a 3kDa-cutoff. First, urea and dithiothreitol (DTT) were added to the samples at the final concentrations of 4M and 10mM, respectively. After centrifugation at 12,800 x g, for 20 min, at 4℃, the clarified supernatant was transferred to Amicon Ultra-15 MWCO 3kDa tubes (Merck Millipore), to proceed with filtration at 4,000 x g, at 4℃, for approximately 90 min. The filtered solution was acidified with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to 0.5% final concentration, submitted to solid-phase extraction (as performed in the first method) and then vacuum dried. Peptides were solubilized in 0.1 % formic acid and quantified using Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay (Thermo Scientific). Endogenous saliva peptides were analysed using the EASY-nLC II coupled to the LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer. Approximately 750 ng were resolved using the analytical column PicoFrit C18 (20 cm x 75 µm id, 5 µm; New Objective) at a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min. A round of gradient optimization was performed using the following ramps of phases A (0.1% formic acid in water) and B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile): Method 1 (M1), 10-30% B over 27 min, then 30-45% B in 5 min; Method 2 (M2) 2-20% B over 25 min, then 20-30% B in 7 min; Method 3 (M3) 2-30% B over 27 min, then 30-45% in 5 min. All ramp configurations were followed by identical washing and conditioning steps. Eluting peptides were analysed by the mass spectrometer operating in positive mode. The minimum charge state of peptides ions selected for MS/MS analysis was set to +1. Precursor ions (m/z 300-1,600) were scanned in the Orbitrap with resolution defined to r=60,000 and 1E6 target ions. Up to 20 most intense ions (5E4 target ions) were isolated through a 3 Da window and activated by collision induced dissociation (CID), with normalized collision energy of 35%, activation Q=0.25 and activation time of 10 ms. Product ions were detected by the ion trap operating in the normal scan rate. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with an exclusion list of up to 500 ions, an exclusion duration of 60 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Peptidomics data was processed via de novo sequencing-assisted database searching using PEAKS Studio X (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc, Canada). Search parameters included unspecific proteolysis (“no enzyme” mode) and mass error tolerance of 10 ppm and 1 Da for precursor and product ions, respectively. Oxidation of methionine residues (+15.99 Da) and acetylation of proteins N-termini (+42.01 Da) were allowed as variable modifications. Peptide sequences matching the Human UniProt database (93,599 protein sequences, 36,574,184 residues, release June 2018) were obtained at 1% FDR for both proteins and peptides. Label-free quantitative data were generated by the PEAKS Q module using normalized precursor intensity extracted using a 10-ppm tolerance and a 2-min retention time window. Differential endogenouspeptides were assessed by two group comparison (N0 vs N+) using one-way ANOVA (p-value≤0.05) using Perseus v1.2.7.4.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Protease inhibitors, Oral cancer, Proteolysis, Oral squamous cell carcinoma, Peptidome

### Affiliations
Postdoctoral researcher at Brazilian National Biosciences Laboratory (LNBio), CNPEM, Campinas, Brazil
National Laboratory of Biosciences, CNPEM, Campinas,Brazil

### Submitter
Leandro Neves

### Lab Head
Dr Adriana Franco Paes Leme
National Laboratory of Biosciences, CNPEM, Campinas,Brazil


