### Accession
PXD000962

### Title
Secretome of Bjerkandera adusta

### Description
The secretome of the white-rot fungus Bjerkandera adusta produced in synthetic Kirk medium was compared to that supplemented with an aqueous phenol-rich extract of olive mill residues (ADOR). Distinct changes in the protein composition of oxidoreductases, namely diverse class- II peroxidases and aryl alcohol oxidases were found.  In the secretome produced in ADOR- supplemented medium (ASC) 157 different proteins were identified, whereas only 59 were secreted in cultures without ADOR supplementation (Kirk medium culture; KM). Peptide sequence analysis done by LC-MS turned out that the number of peroxidases produced in ASC was more than doubled (from 4 to 11) compared to KM. Two short manganese peroxidases (MnP1 & MnP6) and one versatile peroxidase (VP1) represented 29% of the relative abundance (NSAF) in ASC. Two of them (MnP1 & VP1) also detected in KM displayed a relative abundance (NSAF) of only 3%. Further peroxidases present in ASC were one lignin peroxidase (LiP2), one generic peroxidase (GP) and three dye-decolorizing peroxidases (DyPs). The relative abundance of DyPs and aryl alcohol oxidases (AAO) were lower in ASC in comparison to KM. In addition to peptide sequence analysis, the secretion of Mn2+-oxidizing peroxidases as well as AAOs were followed by enzyme measurement. The Mn2+-oxidizing activity increased nearly 30-fold (from 10 to 281 U l-1) after ADOR addition. Two enzymes responsible for that activity were successfully purified (BadVPI and BadVPII). To prove a potential involvement of these enzymes in the degradation of aromatic compounds, BadVPI was tested for its ability to degrade the recalcitrant dehydrogenated polymer (DHP, synthetic lignin). These results show that natural phenol-rich materials act as secretome-stimulating additives. Applying these substances enables us to investigate fungal degradation and detoxification processes and gives more insight into the complexity of fungal secretomes, e.g. of. white-rot fungi.

### Sample Protocol
ASC and KM were harvested with increasing MndP activity (Day 6 after ADOR addition) and a volume of 100 ml was concentrated to 10 ml by centrifugation (Vivaspin20, 10 kDa cut-off, Sartorius, Göttingen, Germany). Induced cultures were run in six parallels (ASC 1-6) and controls were done in duplicates (KM 1-2). The secretomes of B. adusta were measured by LC–MS analysis. Therefore, the protein lysates were reduced (2.5 mM DTT for 1h at 60°C) and alkylated (10 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at 37 ºC). Proteolytic cleavage was performed overnight using trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) in a ratio of 1:20 at 37 °C. Peptides were desalted and purified using ZipTip-C18 tips (Millipore, Billerica, MA). Proteolytically cleaved peptides were separated by a linear gradient of solvent B (100% acetonitrile) from 2% up to 25% for 60 min with a flow rate of 300 nl min-1. The LC was coupled to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) via the TriVersa NanoMate (Advion Biosciences, Norwich, UK). The Q Exactive was operated in data-dependent mode with MS scans acquired at a resolution of 70,000, an ion- target value of 3e6 and maximum ion-injection time for the MS scan was set to 120 ms. Up to 10 most abundant isotope patterns with charge ≥2 from the survey scan were selected for MS/MS. An isolation window of 3 m/z and higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with normalized collision energies of 27.5% was applied. The maximum ion-injection time for the MS/MS scans was set to 120 ms with an ion- target value of 2e5. Repeated sequencing of peptides was kept to a minimum by dynamic exclusion of 30 s. Raw data from the MS instrument were processed using a Proteome Discoverer (Thermo Scientific, v1.3.0.339).

### Data Protocol
MS data were searched against a concatenated database of (i) the genome-sequenced B. adusta v1.0 (14,296 protein sequence entries, downloaded from the JGI database (http://genome.jgi.doe.gov/programs/fungi/index.jsf)) (Ruiz-Dueñas et al., 2013), and (ii) B. adusta peroxidases (43 protein sequence entries) using the SEQUEST algorithm. Enzyme specificity selected to trypsin with up to two missed cleavages allowed using 10 ppm precursor mass tolerance and 20 mmu MS/MS tolerances. Only peptide hits with an XCorrelation score >2 and FDR <1% were assigned as identified. Only proteins with ≥2 peptides per protein were considered for abundance comparison. The relative abundance of the selected proteins was calculated based on the normalized spectral abundance factor (NSAF). The NSAF for a protein k is the number of spectral counts (SpC) identifying a protein, k, divided by the protein’s length (L), divided by the sum of SpC.L−1 for all N proteins in the experiment (Zybailov et al., 2006). The proteins were further classified according to Enzyme Commission numbers (EC number).

### Publication Abstract
The secretome of the white-rot fungus Bjerkandera adusta produced in synthetic Kirk medium was compared to that supplemented with an aqueous phenol-rich extract of dry olive mill residues (ADOR). Distinct changes in the protein composition of oxidoreductases, namely diverse class-II peroxidases and aryl alcohol oxidases were found. In the ADOR-supplemented medium (ASC), 157 distinct proteins were identified by the secretome analysis, whereas only 59 of them were identified without ADOR supplementation (Kirk medium culture; KM). Proteome analysis indicated that the number of peroxidases produced in ASC was more than doubled (from 4 to 11) compared to KM. Two short manganese peroxidases (MnP1 and MnP6) and one versatile peroxidase (VP1) represented 29% of the relative abundance (NSAF) in ASC. Two of them (MnP1 and VP1) were also detected in KM at a relative abundance (NSAF) of only 3%. Further peroxidases present in ASC were one lignin peroxidase (LiP2), one generic peroxidase (GP) and three dye-decolorizing peroxidases (DyPs). The relative abundance of DyPs and aryl alcohol oxidases (AAO) were lower in ASC in comparison to KM. In addition to peptide sequence analysis, the secretion of Mn(2+)-oxidizing peroxidases as well as AAOs were followed by enzyme measurement. The Mn(2+)-oxidizing activity increased nearly 30-fold (from 10 to 281Ul(-1)) after ADOR addition. Two enzymes responsible for that activity were successfully purified (BadVPI and BadVPII). To prove a potential involvement of these enzymes in the degradation of aromatic compounds, BadVPI was tested for its ability to degrade the recalcitrant dehydrogenated polymer (DHP, synthetic lignin). These results show that natural phenol-rich materials act as secretome-stimulating additives. Applying these substances enables us to investigate fungal degradation and detoxification processes and gives more insight into the complexity of fungal secretomes, e.g. of white-rot fungi.

### Keywords
Fungi, Lc-ms/ms, Secretome

### Affiliations
Technische Universität Dresden Internationales Hochschulinstitut Zittau Juniorprofessur für Bioanorganische Chemie
Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ

### Submitter
Nico Jehmlich

### Lab Head
Dr Christiane Liers
Technische Universität Dresden Internationales Hochschulinstitut Zittau Juniorprofessur für Bioanorganische Chemie


