### Accession
PXD026713

### Title
Dynamic maps of protein-protein-metabolite complexes of Arabidopsis Thaliana seedlings

### Description
The project aimed to create dynamic maps of protein-protein-metabolite complexes of Arabidopsis thaliana seedlings using PROMIS (PROtein–Metabolite Interactions using Size separation).  The approach involves using size exclusion chromatography (SEC) to separate complexes, followed by LC-MS-based proteomics and metabolomics analysis of the obtained fractions. Co-elution is used to reconstruct the protein-metabolite interactions (PMIs) networks. PROMIS strongly progresses understanding protein-small molecule interactions due to its non-targeted manner, cell-wide scale, and generic nature, making it suitable across biological systems. Combining PROMIS with mashing learning approach SLIMP  “supervised learning of metabolite-protein interactions from multiple co-fractionation mass spectrometry datasets” allows computing a global map of metabolite-protein interactions in vivo.

### Sample Protocol
Protein pellets were resuspended in 50 µL urea buffer (6 M urea, 2 M thiourea in 40 mM ammonium bicarbonate). Reduction of cysteines, alkylation and enzymatic digestion using LysC/Trypsin Mix (Promega Corp., Fitchburg, WI) was performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Digested proteins were desalted on Finisterre C18 SPE Columns (Teknokroma, Spain. Dried peptides were resuspended in MS loading buffer (3% ACN, 0.1 % FA) and measured with Q Exactive HF (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Hennigsdorf, Germany) coupled to an reverse-phase nano liquid chromatography ACQUITY UPLC M-Class system (Waters). The gradient ramped from 3.2% to 76% CAN. Gradient started from 3.2% ACN and increased to 7.2% ACN in next 20 min, then to 24.8% ACN over 70 min and to 35.2% ACN over next 30 min, followed by a 5 min washout with 76% ACN. The MS was run using a data dependent top-N method that fragmented the top 12 most intense ions per full scan. Full scans were acquired at a resolution of 120,000 with an AGC target 3e6, maximum injection time 50 ms, scan range 300 to 1600 m/z. Each dd-MS2 scan was recorded in profile mode at a resolution of 15,000 with an AGC target of 1e5, maximum injection time 100 ms, isolation window 1.2 m/z, normalized collision energy 27 and the dynamic exclusion lasted for 30 sec.

### Data Protocol
Raw proteomics files were analyzed using MaxQuant software with Andromeda- an integrated peptide search engine. Peptides were identified with Arabidopsis TAIR database (Version 10, The Arabidopsis Information Resource,  www.Arabidopsis.org) using default orbitrap settings. Moreover, maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed and threshold for peptide validation was set to 0.01 using a decoy database. In addition, methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation was considered as variable modification while cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification. In the analysis, following options were selected: “label-free quantification” and “match between runs” and the minimum length of peptide was set to at least seven amino acids. In the further analysis, only proteins with equal or more than two unique peptides were considered. Moreover, contaminants, i.e. keratins were removed.

### Publication Abstract
Long intergenic noncoding RNAs (lincRNAs) are a large yet enigmatic class of eukaryotic transcripts that can have critical biological functions. The wealth of RNA-sequencing (RNA-seq) data available for plants provides the opportunity to implement a harmonized identification and annotation effort for lincRNAs that enables cross-species functional and genomic comparisons as well as prioritization of functional candidates. In this study, we processed &gt;24 Tera base pairs of RNA-seq data from &gt;16,000 experiments to identify &#x223c;130,000 lincRNAs in four Brassicaceae: Arabidopsis thaliana, Camelina sativa, Brassica rapa, and Eutrema salsugineum. We used nanopore RNA-seq, transcriptome-wide structural information, peptide data, and epigenomic data to characterize these lincRNAs and identify conserved motifs. We then used comparative genomic and transcriptomic approaches to highlight lincRNAs in our data set with sequence or transcriptional conservation. Finally, we used guilt-by-association analyses to assign putative functions to lincRNAs within our data set. We tested this approach on a subset of lincRNAs associated with germination and seed development, observing germination defects for Arabidopsis lines harboring T-DNA insertions at these loci. LincRNAs with Brassicaceae-conserved putative miRNA binding motifs, small open reading frames, or abiotic-stress modulated expression are a few of the annotations that will guide functional analyses into this cryptic portion of the transcriptome.

### Keywords
Ligand, Protein-protein complexes, Protein-metabolite complexes

### Affiliations
Max-Planck-Institut für Molekulare Pflanzenphysiologie
Max Planck Institute of Molecular Plant Physiology 
Wissenschaftspark 
Am Mühlenberg 1
14476 Potsdam-Golm 


### Submitter
Ewelina Sokolowska

### Lab Head
Dr Aleksandra Skirycz
Max-Planck-Institut für Molekulare Pflanzenphysiologie


