### Accession
PXD024418

### Title
Expression Signature and Regulatory Role of miRNAs in Hepatocellular Carcinoma-Induced Cancer Associated Fibroblasts

### Description
The study aims to assess the influence of soluble factors from HCC on MSCs and to investigate the regulatory effect of miRNAs in human adipose- MSCs (hA-MSCs) cultured in HCC microenvironment.The results suggest an interaction between tumor cells and the surrounding stromal components and provide evidence to the direct generation of CAF phenotype upon exposure of hA-MSCs to Huh-7 cancer microenvironment, favoring cancer progression. This might shed the light on the fate of hA-MSCs use in therapy in HCC. hA-MSCs modulation may be achieved via dysregulation of miR17-5P and 615-5p expression. These data suggest that miRNAs may present a new target for HCC treatment.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from the cells, the lysate was precipitated and then quantified using BCA method (Pierce, Rockford IL). Proteins were reduced, alkylated before endopeptidase digestion. Digested peptides solution was acidified using 100% formic acid to a final pH of 2.0. The resultant peptide mixture was cleaned using stage tip. Nano-LC MS/MS analysis was performed using TripleTOF 5600 + (AB Sciex, Canada) interfaced with Eksigent nanoLC 400 autosampler with Ekspert nanoLC 425 pump

### Data Protocol
Mascot generic format (mgf) files were generated from the raw file using a script supplied by AB Sciex. MS/MS spectra were searched using X Tandem in Peptide shaker (version 1.16.34) against Homo sapiens (Swiss-prot/TrEMBL database containing 176507 proteins) with target and decoy sequences. Precursor mass and fragment mass were identified with an initial mass tolerance of 20 ppm and 10 ppm, respectively. Peptides of a minimum 6 amino acids and a maximum of two missed cleavages were adjusted for the analysis. Modifications settings were applied as follows; fixed modification was carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.02146 amu), while oxidation at methionine (+15.995), acetylation of protein N- terminal and K (+42.01 amu), and pyrrolidone from carbamidomethylated C (-17.03 amu) as variable modification. To assure high-quality result, the false discovery rate (FDR) was kept at 1% at the protein level.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Lc-msms, Hepatocellular carcinoma

### Affiliations
Proteomics and metabolomics unit, Basic research department, Children's Cancer Hospital, 57357 Cairo, (CCHE-57357), Egypt

### Submitter
Ali Anwar

### Lab Head
Dr Sameh Magdeldin
Proteomics and metabolomics unit, Basic research department, Children's Cancer Hospital, 57357 Cairo, (CCHE-57357), Egypt


